Symplegades Antrum, OR THE Rumpant Story; Impartially relating their
Tyrannical dealings, and Clymacterical Downfall.

TOGETHER With a Congratulation of his most Sacred Majesty in his most Happy
REIGN.

By John Mullinax Dr. in Physic.

^et, Straw, Wat-Tiler, Cromwell prognatus eodem
On^, incastarunt funeribus Patriam.
^^^DON, (...)

To the Illustrious and Victorious George Duke of Albemarle, Earl of
Thorington, Baron of Teese, Beauchampe, etc. General of his Majesty's Forces,
Master of the Horse, Privy Counselor, and Knight of the most Noble Order of
the Garter, etc.
MAy it please your Grace, to vouchsafe your benign and serene Aspect upon
these my rude and bold Addresses, because Almighty God has made your gracious
Excellency a wonderful Instrument in his hand for this most happy and blessed
Change, which (...) mercy, the settlement of his (...) restoring of Parli^^^^^
(...) ^^berty and Property of the Subject, and the Reformation of the
Protestant Religion, for which blessing the Almighty God be for ever glorified;
Your Grace receive your just Honor, and Praise, and the three Kingdoms be
for ever happy, under his most Excellent and most Gracious Majesty's Reign and
Government.

So prays in all humble acknowledgment Your Graces most humble and faithful
Servant J.M.D. Mae.

Symplegadis antrum, suppositum caudae, OR, The Rumpant Story.
BRave Albion white, when ruled by a King
And Parliament, a stately glorious thing:
Triumphs at home, Conquers abroad, a sting
To Rebels, but to Subjects true, a spring
Of Peace, and Justice, Mercy, Truth and B^essing;
Beloved, enjoyed, obeyed, beyond expressing.
These three Estates in Love and Justice, being
All in their Order, and all in one agreeing,
Did make us happy, then we gladly sing,
Grace to our Parliament, Glory to our King.
Sole Monarchy proves Tyranny, Sans Law,
Sole Aristocracy by force does draw:
And sole Democracy which the people choose,
Proves Oligarchy, which all good men refuse.
These three being justly balanced was our glory,
The best of Governments. In every story
The King has his Prerogative and Rights,
The Lords their Honors, Powers and Delights,
The People Privilege by Parliament,
God long had blessed us with this Government.
When these divided, then our sins did bring
A dismal Judgment on us and our King,
Black, bloody Civil war, with every string
Of Treasons trouble; Viper-like we sting
Our Mothers bowels, the foot, and breast, aspiring
To rule the head, and power so desiring.
Then Privilege Prerogative out drive,
The Royal Head, with Breast and Foot did strive.
Religion, Law, and Libertie's pretended
By both, 'twixt these our blessed Peace is ended.
England like Jeshuron, fat and full, was kicking,
Gods best and blessed of Governments despising:
Unruly murmuring, Changes affecting,
Provoke Gods Justice to our sins correcting.
Our sins were ripe for Judgment, few repenting,
In Court, in City, in Country, few relenting.
State, Churchmen proud, Sabbath profannesse suffering,
And Superstition made God abhor the offering,
Like Eli's sons; the Scots the War beginning,
Our Church is punished for our Nations sining.
Some weary of a good and blessed King,
Would see a change in that Republic thing.
Plots laid before, In The House they are undermining,
New seeming Saints cry out for new refining.
They cried the Church had need of great reforming,
When underhand against King and Church they are storming.
H^d they been Papists, then their Pope declaring
Ou^ King an Heretic, might have made them daring.
But Protestants, a purer knick to bring
Seditions strange, in the Church, in the State, toth' King.
The War's begun, those sores are tender things,
Sharp, Deep and Dangerous, 'twixt Parlaments and Kings.
Brave men on both sides, and success attending,
Now this, then that, God did expect our mending.
Militia and Array, these two contest,
A seven years Civil war does us molest.
In these three Kingdoms some on both sides fighting,
Bellona brings War, Thunder and Lightning.
Blame neither side, but lay it on our sins,
The which all trouble, war, and ruin brings.
How many years without dividing we
Were happy in this Civil Trinity?
This three in one, and one in three, did make
England of all Gods blessings to partake.
Let Us never more by Factions sad divide
This one from three, our God be still their guide.
Let Us never take our sweet and blessed King
From our great Parliament him counselling.
Let Us never set two Houses up more high
Against our King, his Crown and Dignity.
The Cursed'st Act that ever were done before,
These Black Divisions brought unto our Door.
Blood, Murder, Treason, Rapine, and the Rest,
In Kingdoms three, and in the Churches breast:
No tongue can tell, fit only for Oblivion.
Let Us live, and love, obey, hate new Division.
Muse weep the rest, only pray God for healing,
For by this worst of War, and cursed dealing,
The Foot's dismemberd, and the Head out driving,
The Breasts go forth, the monstrous Rumps us riding.
Some Things of Forty Eight I shall declare,
The Years before do pass my Ferry Fare.
Brave Prentises of London they Petition
In Forty Eight, the Rump call's this Sedition.
And they are abused, Imprisoned, some in the Tower,
To Terrify the rest, by Rumpish power.
Brave Marmaduke Sir Langdale does surprise
Barwick, Sir Philip Musgrave Son's Disguise
Does take Carlisle, some stir at Edmond's Bury,
A brave Petition then does come from Surrey.
Brave Kent does joy the King, but then is slain
Sir Nicholas Kemish, and some Loyal Train.
The Navy, some Revolt, and Maidstone fight,
Pomfret surpised by Morris, does them fright.
Brave Earl of Norwich is at Bow with his Forces,
The Rump had basely voted no Addresses.
These now were nulled, Francis Lord Villers slain,
Prince Charles upon the Sea, does Sail again.
Scotch Hamilton's Army at Preston beaten is,
Treaty in the I Will of Wight, our hope of bliss.
But O brave Colchester stands out till all
Valor's overcome, by famin's sadning Fall.
Brave Lucas good Sir Charles is shot to Death,
And Sir George Lisle does also lose his breath
Against promised Life, though Fairfax was abused,
Nol often this breach of faith had sadly used.
Army Remonstrance comes from Winsor Castle,
Nol now for power most cunningly does wrestle.
Rebellious Army Traitorously advance
To London, their own Interest to inhance.
The King's Concessions gave some satisfaction,
So Voted in that time of sad Distraction.
Thank Prinne for that, the People are deluded,
Those Honest Members now they are Secluded,
Imprisoned against Law, Religion, Reason,
And then the Rump does Vote the Highest Treason.
From Wight to Hurst, to Windzor the King is brought,
How much deceived by Nol, when sold for naught.
Now by their Army does the Rumpish stream
Vote in themselves all Power to be Supreme.
Though Few in the House, the major part did vote
An ordinance, to cut. King Charles his Throat.
No writs must longer run in the King's name,
The Term's adjourned, they care not now for shame.
The Scotch Commissioners declare dissent,
The Agreement of the People some present.
That term they give, although throughout the land
Thousands for one did scorn to set their hand.
The Rump thinks All their own, are basely proud,
Yet sure Kings blood toth' Heavens cries aloud.
Seven Things like Heads, and Horns, this Rumpish thing,
No Head, All Tail, unto three Kingdoms bring.
Their own House first, like Serpents Vipering,
The Rumpish part the Major part out fling,
The I Will of Wight's Concessions Ravelling,
By their proud Army all things levelling.
About four hundred of their house protesting,
With many Lords, and all good men detesting
Their black designs, then Holiness professing,
They Cheat the City next, and so progressing,
They Cheat the Presbyterians, who not perceiving,
Their dark deep Plots, are caught in their deceiving.
Vote the King's Trial, and then set up a Court
Of Lawless Bloody men, them to support.
Base Rhadamantus, Bradshaw's Priests are praying,
With Jezabel Fast, whiles they their King betraying.
The Scotch Commissioners from their Parliament,
Now Charge the Rump, with breach of Covenant.
Ambassadors come from Holland, full of Grief,
The States desire to save King Charles his life.
But they that now are heightened in Rebellion,
Change Laws, and Oaths, and so must change Religion.
The Lamb's brought forth, the Charge is drawn, producing
False Witnesses, the Sects are all Rejoicing.
The King's at Bar, Traitors of the Bench, him Greeting
In his own Courts, Injustice makes the meeting.
The Law's arraigned, a Juncto base is sitting,
The Jesuits Designs, them always fitting.
Before they hear him, his death subscribe, and seal,
Persians, Jews, Turks, come show a parallel.
The power of that Court the King denying,
He must not speak, they Sentence pass for dying.
Our Pilate washed in's own King's blood, Murdering
Blessed Charles, who like his Savior suffering.
Like to the Lamb of God, this Lamb is pardoning
His Foes, so dies the Rump, their hearts are hard'ning.
Thy Palace was thy Calvary, blessed King,
There thou our Martyr, Thy Royal Head a Spring
Of Wisdom's Goodness, for pure Conscience dying,
Until Revenged, Kings bloud's a sin still crying.
Black Forty eights Ter deno Jani sadning
All Christians hearts, the Rumpish Sects are bathing
Themselves in our dear Princes blood, flattering
Their false proud Hopes, never to see a scattering.
The Scaffold Charles his Olivet ascending,
Where Saints and Angels Glory sing, Transcending.
They Traitorously thus murder Charles our King,
At his own House, the House of Banqueting.
At one sad blow, three Kingdoms Murdering,
All that was sacred, Laws and Faith disordering.
They never thought of Justice, for to bring
Themselves to Judgment, and make this Charles our King.
But God's the God of Kings, his righteous Judging,
Made us submit, and mourn, and leave our Grudging.
How can my Subjects live, Justice expecting,
So our Blessed Charles Their King, they thus rejecting?
No Law made these a Court, to Try our King,
Of all Injustice now the Rump's the Spring.
The Law of Thieves, the Sword that lawless Thing,
All our black Miseries to pass did bring.
Those Courts of Justice were of their own making,
His Life, his Lands, his Laws, his Power Taking.
Good God, where is Justice now? Thine own Anointed,
Our Hopes, our Hearts, our Head, our Law's disjoynted.
The well built Pillars, of three Kingdom's down,
They Cull and take, the power and the Crown.
King, Nobles, Commons, and the Clergy then,
Become a Sacrifice, to these bloody Men.
That God, Heavens, Earth, and Men, should see this thing,
All silent be, my Muse he is silencing.
Priests of the Ignatian brood this Rump stir up,
Others deluded do also fill the Cup.
Catilines and Scylla's, and base Marius plots,
Are nothing to these Demogorgons knots.
Such Saints of base and mean extraction do
That Is fit for Villains, and for Devils too.
England Repent and Mourn, A woeful Thing
'S committed in thee, Murdering Charles thy King.
Religion is pretended for this Act,
And God's Grand Justice for this cursed Fact.
God will be Just, Great Charles his Royal Suffering
'S a Sacrifice, three Kingdoms Royal Offering.
We prayed for Justice True, this Charles to see,
Their Common Wealth's our Common Misery.
O God forgive thy People truly Mourning
For this Grand sin, though some were hardened spurning
At thy Grand patience, Thy Act of Mercy Great,
And Full Oblivion, we humbly Lord Entreat.
Thousands were Innocent of this Grand dissembling,
Whose Souls in humbling sorrow have been trembleing.
These Men the worst of Murderers Fame does Sing,
The Best of Kings, Blessed Charles our Royal King.
All those that in this sin are still persisting,
And so thy Gracious Mercy still Resisting.
Bring them to Justice Lord, their Souls yet save,
For none but Devils Damnation of them Crave.
In Man's Grand Justice give them mercy Great,
And for that Cursed Fact, Repentance meet.
We do believe, that thou art God forgiving,
If we Repent, and change our wicked living.
The Rump then Vote their Lords an useless thing,
It Is just with God they suffer with their King:
Some Lords most coldly out from their House going,
Whilst Rump and Armed Sects are us undoing.
They Vote the House of Lords a dangerous thing,
And burdensome the Office of a King.
When they were then more burdensome than both,
Customs, Excize, and Taxes, made us loathe
Their Government; they new Delinquents made,
For to keep up their stinking Rumpish trade.
Brave Reinoldson Lord Mayor, would not proclaim
Their Act against Kingly Government and Name.
Sequestered and Imprisoned in the Tower,
This was the Justice of that Rumpish power;
They do the greatest Treason, yet make Laws,
That all is high treason done against their Cause.
The Crown, the Jewels, Hangings, and the rest
Of the Kings Goods are sold, not to the best.
Both they themselves, and eke their Army buy
And City friends, King Charles his Treasury.
They kiss, betray, and kill, and yet are praising
Their own base Acts, all Subjects true upbraiding.
Three Kingdoms, Justice, Law, and Power rending,
And yet Lay-Priests, Lay-Prelats, them commending,
The people never chose them such a thing,
A Commonwealth against Law, and against their King.
High Courts of cruel, foul injustice making,
Who by proud Tyrants power, share partaking.
Both Witness, Judge, and Jury too, did buy
Themselves the Estates of those they doomed to dye.
Flusht with Kings blood, then Lords and Priests they slay,
All but themselves, they always did betray.
How many suffer Death, none Death deserving,
The Rumpish stinking power for preserving?
Duke Hamilton, Earl Holland next condemning,
And brave Lord Capel dies, His King Commending.
The Earl of Norwich gets a Reprieve,
And Sir John Owen's voted for to Live.
And Dorislaus is in Holland slain,
Vengeance begins, for blood their cause did stain.
The Royal Issue, stately and Princely things,
Are still preserved by God the King of Kings,
Gracious and blessed Elizabeth, God up taking,
With Charles his soul, the heavenly Quire up making.
Great York he scapes, God carries him away;
Brave Gloucester young, God finds for him a day
To get from their base terms, before this time
Prince Charles was safe abroad, God has the prime
Care, Rule, and Government of Princes Royal,
Which kept our hearts still up, and kept us loyal.
Of what extract or Gentry were these men?
That such stupendous acts performed then.
Of what Religion were these bloody minded?
Although Religion is in all things pretended,
The worst of Treason's acted by new Saints,
For true ones hated all those juggling paints.
Such medley, made ingredients were, in the Rump,
As if from Phlegeton Designs they pump.
Now that my Muse some service due has done
To blessed Charles, their acts she will over run.
Twelve years these Traitors keep out Charles their King,
A Commonwealth they out of Kingdoms bring,
And Churches out of Churches gathering,
Their sins on Providence still fathering.
Perjured Hypocrisy pretends the things
Agree, to fear God and to kill their Kings.
Their wild Religious zeal, all bordering
On Schism, Faction, Falsehood, all disordering.
All but themselves from heaven banishing,
And now themselves below are vanishing.
Kingdoms confounders, who by Tub-prating,
And Jerobohams Calves were always stating
Their own base interest, by Taxes rating
The sadned people, and all their states partaking.
Lay-Prelats and Lay-Priests, a worser thing
Than those of Rome, the Gospel now did sting.
Religion's mangled, and the Sects are mingling
Their false opinions, and with some truths are jingling,
The lowest of the people Priests becoming,
Tinkers and Tailors, the Pulpits Cobblers thumming.
Weavers and Bakers, Brewers and Draymens fling,
Base upstart Lords, base newfound Gentry spring.
Base Counselors, Projectors, and Committees,
Like Pharaohs Frogs in the Church, in the Towns, in Cities.
Base Sequestrators, and base deciming,
Old Theeving, newly called Plundering.
Base Rumpant Dragons, that were still a tearing
Our states and souls, and all our Laws outwearing.
Not one good Law they made, but all made running
Their own base byasse, by their power and cunning.
Base turn coat Priests, base Lawyers Laws abusing
For their most unjust Fees, base powers choosing;
Pleading, defending, all is done by Law, all is just,
When as they knew all done by will and lust.
Kings blood-suckers, to raise themselves and bring
All theirs on high, the wheel is now turning.
Profane Church-robbers, base buyers, and base sellers,
All unjust getters, and mony-changing tellers.
Such creatures did make up this Rumpish power;
Instead of whips, with scorpions they devour.
One piece of Justice of the Rumps Committee,
The which was brought to pass in a grand City.
A Trunk of Plate and Money there was found,
The which was worth about two thousand pound.
This was good provender, by the Arms the Plate
Was known, a precious booty for the State.
The Knight was dead some years before the War
Began, this Trunk gave to his Daughter fair,
His only child, there put for to be kept
From those to whom all is fish that comes to net.
The Committee often meet, the case is pleaded,
Some honest men among them interceded,
The child was not at age, the Lady good
That hid it no Malignant, her husband stood
For Parliament, how then can this be plunder?
Yet if some men do lose the Gold, it is wonder.
Two chief ones plead (the gold was sure their aim)
No matter whose it is, to us it came
By Providence, now we will surely pay
Our Soldiers, and will then make others pray.
We Will finger some, spend some in Feasts, and then
The rest we will pay the State, and they our men.
What color must we use? it is not pretense
But Justice we will show before it go hence.
Though that the Knight was dead some years before
The war began, that will not quit this score.
For had the Courtier Knight lived till now,
He would have been Malignant we avow.
Shall we lose so much gold, and so much plate?
This feeling Providence will please the State.
This Knight was often at Court, a Servant just
Toth' King, and would be faithful to that trust:
Was of great power in this same Country, let us
Sequester Gold and Plate, God will forget us.
The fewer honest men out. Voted are,
The State gets some, two fat ones get their share,
He that discovered it gets none: it is just,
These cheat the Ladies, keep the gold from rust.
Some friends did buy the condemned plate again,
Sure such Committees never rid Charles his Wain.
In every City and in every Town,
Such self-Committee men were often sent down:
Unto account the Rump durst not them call,
Cause guilty of the same, and fear a fall;
For Thieves by the accusing one another,
Do break their own necks, and do lose their power.
The Reason, Justice, and the state of the Cause,
The Money, Gold, and Plate, how strong it draws?
Full many such Examples we can tell,
But none like this, of all, it bears the Bell.
One cries Ka me to day, and I Will to morrow
Ka thee, come hang up carking care and sorrow.
Let Conscience never wake; some Office on
This Knave, that Fool a gift confer upon.
This place for one, that money, and this Manor,
The land they gave, but could not give the Honor.
Be sure prefer our Chaplain Priests they cry,
They preach our Cause, defend our Piety.
No statute now Mortmain, the Rump's the giver,
What is the stomach, when so bad's the Liver?
In many Garrisons men of no Religion,
Prating and speaking, approved by every Wigeon.
What women then were those that made the men
To make the House of God, of Thieves a Den?
And Scripture for this wickedness to bring,
Which Satan certainly did now bring in.
No man could find the true Religion pure
Scarce in the land, new Saints made it obscure.
So was their Charity and Justice too,
By false opinions Religion to undo.
Their Scotch grand Covenant they justly brook,
Some Ignorant, some Innocent, it took,
Good God forgive them all that cannot keep
Those snaring bonds, but do repent and weep.
Allegiance, Supremacy, nor Protestation,
No Oaths, nor Covenants for Reformation
Did bind this lawless Rump, so sweet is power,
Though false, usurpt, yet falls in Gods just hour.
Just Oaths are sacred unto sacred men,
But naught binds Changelings who are now and then.
That Covenant's put out by the new Engagement,
As Purgatory puts out Hels inragement.
As one Grand story of a Safe Committee
My Muse has told, so of the Engagements pity.
Two godly Ministers that durst not engage
With diverse others, did the Rump inrage.
God brings the Plague, th'Ingaging Minister's gone,
The other two are left in the Town alone.
God brings the Plague, these two good Ministers then
The Censers take, and Incense burn, like men
Of God, both fast, and preach, and pray to God,
To sanctify his just and heavy rod.
Lackworth for non-Ingaging turns them out,
And all their Families for to rove about.
Most of the Country dare not take them in,
Thanks therefore unto those that help did bring.
The Town's without a Priest, the plague's oppressing,
This worse than Prelacy the Priests suppressing.
Oh tell it not in Romish Gath, it is well
That by no Protestants but Sects this fell.
How many Towns and Cities sadly loose
Their faithful Angels, 'cause they this refuse?
Most holy men, that Pill they durst not take,
But must their people, and their friends forsake.
All godly ones, that vain Enchantment hate,
Oaths against Oaths, but now what cares the State?
Yet for their Livings, many after in
Did come and take it, sure it was their sin.
Though some were cozened, and others did for fear,
Yet peace of Conscience sure is very dear.
In all three Kingdoms some they did repent,
And for their own Kings blood they did relent.
Study revenge, and venture all again
In England, Scotland, Ireland, and the Main.
King Charles proclaimed in Scotland, there first owned,
And then in Ireland, most longed to see him Crowned.
Ormond and Inchequin do both appear,
But yet success does not attend them there.
The fault not theirs, the time it was not come,
To reckon for King Charles his Martyrdom.
Cromwell is sent to use his juggling there,
By Money, or Deceit, so every where
He conquers all, and then again returns
By blood, revenge, for power his spirit burns;
Pleads Providence and Mercy, God's in all,
Rides on successful to his deadly fall.
The powder blast in Tower-street did tell,
The Act of new Engagement came from hell.
Gallant Montrosse he sadly is defeated,
And of his life, not Honor, sadly cheated.
Against all Oaths, and Covenants, Nol enters
Then Kingly Scotland, where his blood he venters.
Gods Justice by this Rod them punishing
For brave Montresse, and yielding up their King.
Gods ways are just, though secret; he is more filthy
Yet he must punish them that are less guilty.
His hand's in all the Treasons and the blood,
And yet pretends his heart is holy, good.
Thus by Gods hand, the wicked they are made
To punish wickedness, that cursed trade.
As Tamberlain did Bajazet, so he
For blood by blood paies home their treachery,
For after quarter, at Dunbar he slayes
Thousands, and then lifts up his hands and prays.
When Papists conquer Papists, then they sing
Te Deum; bad cause when prosper'd is a thing
Too high for men to dive into; admire
Those things in which it is dangerous to aspire.
An enemy in straights turns desperate mad
To dye or conquer, ventures all he had.
The Scots leave Edenbourgh, Noll buys the Castle,
Money's a bait, more cursed was that Rascle;
Some men are good at buying and at selling,
No conscience speaks when they are money telling,
With courage and with valor some are brave
For war, as any Royal Prince can have;
Some for Religion also zealous are,
Cromwell out-vyes them all, that is very rare;
The other Garrisons do mercy cry
To Cromwell, though they curse his victory.
King Charles most solemnly was crowned at Schoon
In Scotland, enters England August Moon,
Comes in with his, like Lambs, doing no harm,
Not for provision; then the Rump does storm;
Nolls Gold's in Leaselyes heart. To Woster comes
King Charles, and's Scots, and there beats up his Drums,
Some Welch-men fear their fortunes for to try,
Base Mackworth does deny him Shrewsbury.
Now Love and Gibbons dye, the Heavens thundering
The Rump is harder than Rocks, men are wondering.
Oh that thy love had tempered more thy zeal,
Blessed Christopher, thy parts they did reveal
Great gifts of Grace, thy Ministry was sound,
Sweet, powerful, plain, and yet in all profound.
Thou art betrayed by those that Fast with thee,
And humbly seek the Lord pretendingly.
And by some of thine own coat art betrayed,
And yet of their injustice not afraid.
The Court, th'Atturney, Death does not thee fright,
Thy Faith and Covenant to deny, that is right.
Gibbons is trapt to be thy grand Compeer,
To dye with thee, to go to Heaven dear.
Loves dearest friends, some small reprieves did get,
This his temptation, his wife and children yet
Often Petition, the Babe unborn did cry
Pity my Father, do not let him dye.
Thy Ministry and life was very dear,
Thou dyest in the Rumps terrorem, not in fear.
Thanks learned Hales that did overthrow the Charge,
Though that thy time to study it was not large.
Thou stood condemned by those cruel men,
Though not by God, nor thy own conscience, then
The High Court thou did not fear, nor the long Sword.
Scaffold nor Axe, supported by Gods Word,
Only for writing to brave Massey, gone
To Scotland, for to fetch King Charles to's home.
Some Priests were bold and stout, yet some did turn.
Some Preached worse than Love, yet would not burn.
God did provide for Loves posterity,
Though some are slackned with timidity.
Noll comes from Scotland with his Red-coats Tyrod;
Whom Satan drives, let him not be admired;
The King is kept in play, does not advance,
By Scottish cheats, but not by ignorance;
The Rump now scorn the Kings Just Rights to yield;
At fatal Woster Noll he wins the Field,
And yet Great Charles our King he has the Honor
That Is braver than success, God was his Banner;
The Kings preserved by Gods most sacred hand,
The King of Kings conveyes him out of the Land.
So great a Miracle sure was never seen,
Since Christ; the Rump they had such envious spleen,
Malice, and power, successes, and what not,
Blessed God thou sav'dst the King, though not the Scot;
My Muse is here amazed, what had he done,
Young Crowned Charles, such hazards for to run?
But that our God makes him a Saint most fit
To rule for God, when on our Throne he is set.
How strict was their cursed search? the Mercy more,
In thy escape, Great King thy God adore.
Noll up to London comes, the sects him praise,
Such blood can never True Just Honor raise.
Septembers third does twice give Noll the day,
And yet Septembers third takes Noll away,
To reckon for Kings blood, Rebellion, Treason,
Though Needam's Interest lie, it is Gods best season,
As yet Noll serves the Rump, but also sees
His time to pay them justly all their Fees.
God's just, when he in justice home does pay
Traitors with Treason, Rebels Rebels slay.
Such men to prosper both by Sea and Land,
In all three Kingdoms severe was Gods just hand,
They do behead brave Earl of Derby true,
Who died a Christian, though some lived the Jew,
Sir Tim. Fetherston Haugh at Chester eke
Beheaded is, and Bembo stout and meek
At Shrewsbury; more of the Royal Train
At Woster, and besides murdered and slain,
Brought up like Hogs in droves, starved, beaten, then
Beyond Sea sent, like slaves, and not like men.
The Hollander's twice beaten by the Rump,
And eke the French, now both no more are Trump.
Dunkirk is also by the Spaniard taken,
By the help of the Rump, though after that forsaken,
Blake worsted by the Dutch, yet after worsted,
Some think that they should not of all be trusted;
For in the Levant Seas our English Fleet
Destroyed by the Dutch, for them it was most meet,
The Dutch are Protestants, and should be kind,
But that in this great Art they were purblinde.
Spain first did own the Rump for their own ends,
But Spain to King and Princes made amends,
In France Prince C^n^y, Cardinal and King.
At wars, the Cardinal owns the Rumpish thing,
Against Calling and Religion of Rome,
What policy is there we cannot doom?
They here make peace, forsake their Princely friends
Mazarine's back Game, yet God has secret ends,
To make our Charles the Protestants Protector,
And of Romes fallacy the Grand Rejector.
How many seals were broke Treason committing?
Each one the others knavery out witting;
The Rumps Grand breeches were of Nols devising,
By them set up he sees himself uprising;
Nol fasts and prays whiles they to pass did bring
His black designs against Gospel, Law, and King.
God hates the Traitor, and the Treason too,
Consulted wickedness will it self undo.
Those Taskmasters exacted Brick and Straw,
Pretend Religion, and yet break the Law.
The Armies Agitators still did mock
At three Grand Pees the which they said did lock
England in slavery, against which they cry,
Popery, Praelacy, and Presbytery,
But three Grand l's have far a worser sting,
Jannisaries the Great Turk strangling,
Jesuits by Popish Figs Kings poisoning,
Independents their own Kings Head off chopping,
From such, Good Lord deliver us, we pray,
And Charles our Sovereign King both night and day.
Kings-Arms in the Churches made the people pray
For Charles, whose Father they did lately stay,
In The Courts, in the Ships, Exchange, his Picture down,
His power and state they take and sell the Crown
What hurt's in the Arms? but that by them remembering
We prayed for Blessed Charles his Sons returning;
Both Root, and Branch, and Name, this Rump out flings,
And war's proclaimed against Charles the best of Kings,
The higher that they soar, the lower falling,
Tyrants at last God to account is calling.
How many for their own base Interest
Did serve this Rump for gain, others oppressed?
Some suffered, still waiting this blessed day,
For which all loyal hearts did sing and pray.
Beggars to Lordships came, serving this Rump,
But into Rags they will change their Velvet Jump.
Set such on horseback, proudly will they ride,
Till Power, and Law, and States, they all bestride,
But now they stink, it is just this Rumpish State
In twelve sad years stould have a Rumpish fate.
Those lewd pretenses that the Rump did bring,
The people cry, they said, go kill your King,
All Is done by Providence, they still did say,
Are now proved lies; God save the King we pray,
We bless Just Providence, that in wisdom Ruling
To the best of blessings changed these Changlings doing.
Let Us ever bless our Gracious God most wise,
That has brought home the just light of our eyes.
God's just in all, Traitors by Treason judging,
The Rumpish Army against the Rump still grudging.
Of such base Compounds were this Rumpish Power,
Which made themselves themselves for to devour;
Nothing contents that Army proud, success
Did make them bold, they scorned for to address,
They never thought of change, dreamed here to dwell,
Sure made a Covenant with Death and Hell.
Widows and Fatherless prayed, that they might sing,
A Welcome-home to Charles, our Lord, the King.
Such were the keepers of our Liberties,
Knaves still invisible grounds of miseries.
Sans mercy and against Law they Tried our King,
His Queen they banished, and that Princely thing,
And all the rest by Treason still kept from us,
Against Oaths and Covenant, and Great Nolls Grand Promise;
The Army still did change all Government,
Their souls did still to Judgment them present,
But Noll he cheats them all, chief Rule intending,
And still Religion, Law, in his pretending;
Traitors turned out, God's just, his Judgments rare,
Of the next Change, my Muse will now declare.
First Noll that juggling Saint them out did fling
A brave Grand Rebel, an Hypocrite mocking,
Soldier enough successful, bold and daring,
A politic Nose, ambitious, no man fearing,
Sans Legal Writs he pricks a Parliament,
Called Bare-bones Juncto, these must represent
The people, who never did them call,
Or Power give, by these Noll seeks for all;
They vote themselves a Parliament, because
Under that title they might break the Laws.
Sects bad enough, Compounds of all together,
Spoil Marriage-Rites, some went they knew not whither
The Marriage-knot to tie, yet these not fitting
Nolls secret ends, he takes them off from sitting.
Noll and his Cubs do cry, they are false, pretending
That they, when he, our property was rending,
Then lifts up hands and eyes, and by lay preaching,
And falser prayers, his Saints and Soldiers cheating.
But something else did in the bottom lie,
That Juncto's wisdom could not this descry.
A single person, something like a King,
Nolls craft, and crew, and power, to pass did bring,
Protector, or Projector rather, levelling
All to his lusts, a while sits proudly revelling
The Feather in his Cap, the Title King
He calls, and yet the Power still usurping;
Five years he ruled, not reigned, himself protecting
By Power and Sword, all lust men else rejecting;
In his own craft God still was him defeating,
He would and would not, so he lived by cheating.
Calls three Mock-Parlaments, breaks up the thing
Of his own m^king, cause he would be King;
A pack of knaves were some, some could not give
Up our Grand Laws, whiles Charles his Son did live.
Nolls fit to rule, but no just Title having,
Makes him unjust, and made him always craving
Of all Religions that made for his supporting,
Made all opinions stirrup his usurping;
A Coach-box favor God him once was giving,
On Michaelmas day, to change his wicked living.
State Secretary in the Coach does sit,
Protector in the Coach box, where is his wit?
Sometimes such frollicks mad into his brain
Were whymsied by his spirit, or his Train;
But this one Act was like their Actions all,
One draws another, now Noll gets the fall,
Yet God had mercy, though that Noll had none,
Noll had some virtues, mercy he lackt alone;
One of his three Mock-Parlaments was sitting
When as their Head at the horse heels was flitting.
Some part of the Army Nol abroad does send,
For Gold, to Hispaniola, keeps to mend
The rest, worms Lambert out, and others trembling
Obey, yet most do hate his base dissembling.
His Major Generals, Semi-dragons sting
The Land, Nols Bashaws then deserved the string.
For moneys sake the Jews he in would bring,
Cause they fore him had murdered Christ their King.
He then pleads for the Jews the Scripture Text
For their Conversion, though with his own he is vexed.
He does Divines call up from several places,
To color that design, his Chaplains faces
Are not so braz'd as his, he turns the Jew,
He gets the Gold, and then forsakes that crew.
Still money lacks, for that his conscience bends
His power and sword, and valor thereto tends,
It must be had, if that the Gods deny,
The Acheron he will force, and Devils try,
Makes Churches stables, a Sacrilegious thing,
This was the Reformation Nol did bring.
Brave man, where does thy spirit sadly rumble?
How in this world did thy aspirings tumble
Things upside down? Valor with Counsel swayd
Is good, grand Nol makes all the world afraid.
How many seem to bless when as they curse?
Nol cares not, so that he have power and purse.
How did his Parlaments and himself agree?
How did his several speeches made to three
Concur? and with his Recognition more,
Prays, and protests, and swears, makes up the score.
He prospers every where, by Sea and Land,
Makes Holland's Trump to gravel in the Sand,
Although at St. Domingo there is a loss,
Yet at Jamaica does the Spaniard cross,
Success at home, and eke success abroad,
Makes his Aspirings not to fear the Rod,
At Sancta Cruze the Spanish Fleet's attempted
Silver's brought home, at Eriff they are borned.
What shall we say? count not Success a God,
It is some times Gods just and heavy Rod
Some Levellers before were of Nols breeding,
Burford Breakfast, Nol Doctors them with bleeding;
Stout Lilbourn John opposed all, and stands
For Law, and pleads against all these men's commands,
He suffers much, still discontented that
He Is not set up, and does he cares not what;
Lilbourn lies here, whom many thought was mad,
He dyed a Quaker, buried at Bedlam sad,
This Mock-King Noll of new found Lords a House
Sets up, some scarce fore this, not worth a Louse.
The Royal Ministers Noll out did fling
From Means and Office, both prohibiting
From teaching School, and eke from Chaplains being,
So buries them alive, these acts God seeing
Some Obadiah's in a Cave them feed,
Preserved from Ahab though the Church did bleed.
Who for the Churches good no seed is sowing,
The Churches God takes him away with blowing
Thus Civil Prelates silence Priests; a thing
Prodigious, strange, an Antichristian string.
With Kings and states, abroad by force or cunning
Noll makes his peace most men by Craft out running,
In most Agreements Noll was still disgracing
Our Royal Princes, Traitors still are placing
Themselves in others Rights, he domineers
And Trophies of our slavery up rears,
Without Divinity, Divines up setting,
That worshipped his Calves, and praised his getting,
Abroad a Devil, most men so him thinking,
At home worse then a Machavil he is stinking.
Into a black base Instrument Noll Changes
Our Laws, and over Kingdoms three Noll Ranges,
Upon Intelligence abroad, much spends,
At home he Rackt us almost to our ends;
A Saint in show, grand Holiness pretending
Great outward parts and Gifts, but never mending,
By which he cosens good men, by power and threats
Inslaves the rest, and both sides sweetly cheates,
Never did Machavil bring to pass such things,
By seeming Holiness against the best of Kings.
The Brewer makes the Dray-man Knight, a thing
Prodigious, proud, low men made Lords to string
Noll to the Crown, here is seen a fiery nosed King
And fat a Queen, the Levellers did sing.
Hangs a great Room, as badges of his Ruling,
That strangers they might see his hold and footing;
What Justice, Goodness, or what religious thing
Could we expect, from him that killed his King?
But God does Justice, and his power shows,
How he in time dissemblers overthrowes.
Once Sworn, Proclaimed, again sworn at's Installing,
Base Herod's Conscience always fears a falling.
Plots and makes Treason, and thereby others killing,
Nol and his Officers their Coffers filling,
A damned Toleration he admitting,
Thinks that the way to make him faster fitting.
After blessed Hewets death, Nol no way thriving,
Septembers third the wind away him driving.
Good people cried God's just, this dismal thing,
And stormy wind, makes way for Charles our King.
I cannot pass blessed Hewits martyrdom,
Without some service offered at his Tomb.
O he within! Anagram most clear,
For this our blessed, holy Martyr dear:
Without is sorrow, for without is sin,
He Is above both, for O he is within!
The O is ours, but the within is his,
The loss is ours, but his within is bliss.
While we are out forgive us Lord our sin,
With Saints and Martyrs, that we may get in.
Within the Temple of eternal rest,
Within with Christ, Kings, Priests, and with the best
Of Prophets too, of Martyrs, Saints, and those
With whom the world's not worthy for to close.
Within the highest Court of Righteousness,
Where Christ has clothed him with his faithfulness.
Where he shall never dye again, because.
He pleaded not at Summum Jus his laws.
It was his honor that he thus should dye,
His Master-like, by Judge and Jury high.
He mounts the Scaffold, claspes the block, and smiles
At the keen Axe, 'cause free from Satan's wiles,
His conscience clear, his face most bright did shine,
Fitted for Angels was this blessed Divine.
A Doctor here, for Learning, Grace, and Love,
A Martyr there received in Heaven above.
Preaching, and praying, his last acts of Grace
Are changed to praising before Gods blessed face.
Since Christ till Charles, such justice has not bin
King, Priests, and Saints, thus murtherd never was seen.
Thanks base O. P. H. C. B. Hangman, Axe,
Although in the Church you make a Parallax.
Our stars of highest magnitude are gone,
And still you daringly keep out the Son.
God of his Grace has changed his Scene to joy,
Above the Court, the Attorney, and the annoy
Of lawless, high injustice, spectators all
Might see his glory when you made him fall.
Let us repent, for why within he is,
There let him rest safe in eternal bliss.
His dearest Lady, and his children dear
Have lost a Husband, and Father here;
His Church their Pastor, humble, meek, and holy,
Who dyed for Truth, and not for Treasons folly.
But see how God injustice does repay,
Nol never had rest from that great Martyrs day.
He now rejoices safe within in glory,
Let after Ages still record his story.
So let him rest, till God reveal, of men,
Counsels and hearts, both how they die, and when.
For that pretended Treason more do dye,
To make up Nols account of cruelty.
Cheap Side, Tower Hill, and the Exchange, do show
That Nol he had no mercy here below.
Drawn Hanged and Quartered, is the English Law
For Traitors, God will these men by Justice draw,
For why, he is Just, to dire account will bring
For blood of Nobles, Priests, and of their King.
Repentance may prevent the curse of Hell,
If God have mercy on their souls, it is well.
My Muse never heard of Olivers repenting,
Nor any of those Rump suitors relenting.
Kings blood, and Princes, Nobles and Priests blood crying
Might raise those winds that stormed it at his dying.
The Protestants abroad Nol still was couzening,
With Protestants at home Nol still was juggling.
We fast and pray for poor Waldenses suffering,
Who cheats those Saints of Englands pious offering?
Nol and his crew, which made us daily sing,
God send us home just Charles our gracious King.
Whilst Nol Protector thus did lie a dying,
Non-lustrious Joan does mourn and keeps a crying
How shall I rule this grand unruly thing?
My Lord is dead, they did betray the King
Not so, good Dame, Nol's Sects and Army did,
That which both Gods and man's Laws did forbid.
A sad Catastrophe, the people scorning,
From throne to kitchen, who pays for all the mourning?
White Hall had many Masters, yet not the right,
At last God turns black Traitors in sad plight.
Nol thought all sure, but see the Serpents lurking,
Where fraud and power keeps Tyrants up usurping.
For good Queen Dick, that honest useless thing,
By Nols kin and his crew, (just is the King
Of Kings, alive is buried) though Grace is pardoning,
Mushromes, repent, and keep your hearts from hardening.
Lest stormy winds roaring, and trees up blowing,
Do send you where the Styx is ever flowing.
God gives us just examples to take heed
Of treason, traitors shall have traitors meed.
The people weary of Nols grand oppressing,
To Dick proclaimed, do make their low addressing,
Some flatter, some design, some hope th'amending
Of burdens great, before their fatal ending.
But Dick's turned out, and Hal from Ireland coming,
Both want their Fathers valor, and his cunning.
Dicks honest Parliament good things were doing,
The title's naught, the Army's them out-throwing,
Thus Agitators, armed Priests, do bring
Confusion, for of all they were the spring.
Those Agitators were of Nols devising,
Backed all his projects, still themselves up rising.
Grand-Satans Jesuits by their Popes false dealing,
Brewed all our miseries, kept us still from healing.
Against true Religion, and settlement still burning:
Content with none, all Governments out-turning.
These rise against Dick, and all their ways reproving,
Against God, and King, and Laws, the Army moving.
Confusion brings confusion, God is just,
The wickeds honor sin lays in the dust.
The Rump before their time again now rising,
Though six years buried, stink, yet still devising
New Treasons, troubles, by the Army called in,
The Army cast them out before, great is their sin.
They now resolve, the Nation once more muzling,
But yet brave Cheshire threats their cruel nuzling,
Brown, Booth, and Middletons Welsh-men cry the King
Something too late, Lambert them all is conquering.
Though some men faild, yet thousands good men pray,
And gladly wished St. George an happy day.
Now new Sequestring, some that before did stand
For the long Parliament, just is Gods blessed hand.
Brave, stout, and valiant Massey scapes the Tower,
Comes in again, and scorns this Rumpish power,
And is preserved by God, that he might bring
Our blessed Charles, our Sovereign Lord the King.
Gods time is best, he is faithful to his trust.
Though for his sake blessed Love is laid in the dust,
Kings Rights are still preserved by our God,
God sanctify that twelve years heavy Rod.
Lambert receives his token from the Rump,
And's Captains Orderd thanks, now he is Trump,
But little blood was shed, then new Committees.
Chester's dis-franchiz'd, spoiled amongst the Cities.
Both Ministers and others are suspected,
Imprisoned, and Estates are new sequestered,
But they that called them in, do turn their faces,
And now resolve to occupy their places.
Lambert his time comes to return in play,
God shortens this, for his true Saints did pray.
The Rumpish rage and fury nine out turn,
Lambert and's Captains vow the Rump to burn,
They armed come to the House, to stop their meeting,
Like to their soldiers, Rumpish soldiers greeting.
Lental of several Parlaments was the Speaker,
Of all our Laws and Statutes the great breaker;
He Is once again sent back, for to consider,
Or else to count his money, judge you whether.
The Army set them up, and pulls them down,
And help them to destroy the Royal Crown.
Lambert and Fleetwood, and the Officers praying,
Both fast and feast, and still intend betraying;
Now all consult, and in amaze, and cry,
What Counsel's best? resolve to live or dye.
The Head is gone, and eke the politic Nose,
Six things like Parlaments we stabbed, and rose
Against the present power; what, shall we have
A single person, who shall be the knave?
Coxcombs of safety let us settle now,
Hark, rouse your spirits, the Northern winds do blow.
Now London fasts and prays, in one prostrating
Their humbled souls, and bold by now declaring
For a Free Parliament, out-vy the cheating
Of Wallingford-house-saints, though Vanes repeating
This new Committee of slavery, down would have
Our Colleges and Churches, so inslave
Us worse, the bottom of the headless Rump
Worse than the rest, only fit for the stump.
Against these Saints, whoever dare to clash
In his hearts blood, their hands they swear to wash.
Proclaim for peace, and yet more blood devising,
All still resolve against Charles a constant rising;
The grand blind Cobbler guilty of former blood,
Begins new broils in the City, amazed we stood;
Brave Prentises petitioned against this might,
Stand up for King, for Laws, for Cities Right,
Some pinioned are, others are sadly slain,
Cobbler kills Cobbler, this blood sure cries amain;
Brave Common Council stand for Cities cause,
Cobblers indicted for murdering the Laws.
Patience abused, returns to rage and fury,
God will be Judge, whoever is the Jury.
How did blessed Londons God preserve us then
From mutinies, confusion, even when
The knife was at the throat? our hands did itch
To give blind halting Cobbler one true stitch.
Now more Committees, and more Sequestrators,
And more cursed raking who should be our Stators.
Thus one destroies another, as unjust,
A guilty conscience will not a brother trust.
God uses Instruments of his own appointing,
And makes his way for Blessed Charles Anointing.
We Protestants are, and Popish Monks we hate,
Yet one brave Monk preserves both King and State;
Forgive him all the rest, for this is more
Than all the Monks could ever do before;
Great George the best of Monks sees all their raking
Of Church and State, resolves to stop their taking.
God said Amen, bids George march on and bring
Justice, Peace, Truth and Mercy, with our King.
The Game was hard, the stakes were great, the sting
Of safety vows Monk on his back to fling.
This Northern blast out-blows the Fasts and Prayers
Of Fleetwood's, Lambertonians Kings betrayers;
They now resolve, Lamberts flusht Army sing
Before their time Victoria, conquering;
In their proud lust and Arm of flesh boasting
All Is their, and then into the North they are posting;
But he that sits in Heaven laughs to see
Their pride, Now stops their twelve years tyranny.
Fifty brave Troops of Horse, and desperate Foot,
Experienced valor, and brave General to it;
And all our Sects in's March they bravely cry
Triumph unto your Lordship Victory;
Rakers, Quakers, Shakers, all come in,
And help to fill the measure of their sin,
From Monks, Priests, Friars, Scotch Presbyters they cry
Deliverance is sure, we will fight or dye.
This man of no Religion, like Noll, has all,
That do pretend, this hastens much his fall.
Poor Monk has Horse more fitter for to run
Than fight, say they, we will the Scots overcome;
Hang Tything Priests, we will pray our selves, and preach,
Thy brandisht sword, Lord Lambert, that us teach,
We Will College Lands, and Churches take, Priests all,
Instead of Tithes, to us for bread shall call;
We Will make the City bow, and take their Treasure,
Their Wives and Widows, Orphans at our pleasure.
This Monk had fought at Land, conquered at Sea,
Leads a new dance, and thus begins the plea.
Soft fire makes sweet Malt, says George, still having
God on his side, and his protection craving.
Shall now the Commonwealth be bafled thus?
Must every knave sit Majesty in Pus?
Will nothing them content, King nor Protector,
Nor Parliament, Committees nor Projector?
Committee of Dangers must they now us rule,
These Gallimaufrees worse than Rumpish stool.
Monk sends Commissioners to that short Committee,
Letters and Messengers to brave London City.
Brave Scots assist and lend him money too,
What then was in the dark is open now.
My muse amazed, does hear the Kirk are praying
For Monk, the Sects for Lambert now are saying
Their Mattens, the Rumpish Wealthsmen they are calling.
On God, to keep their power now from falling.
The Presbyterians they the Lord are seeking
The King abroad, our God humbly beseeching.
The King and Kirk their prayers Heaven hearing,
Monk's blessed, and now begins our hopes and chearing.
God hears at last, and his own time is best,
They Are Gods own Instruments that bring us rest;
The Monk keeps on his hood, and by fair treating
Preventeth blood, though they intended cheating.
At Portsmouth now the Rump does rise, a thing
Stupendous, great, but sure no more Rising,
Except to Judgment, George marches on, he is wise,
Revives three Kingdoms hopes, and does devise
Our good; our God from Heaven now protecting
Zerubbabel, and all his ways directing.
'Twixt hopes and fears we cried this Monk's a blessing
To bring Grand Charles, and free us from oppressing;
Destroy this Rump, they cried, this monstrous thing,
As George did once the Dragon and the sting;
He saved one Virgin once, but thou art saving
Three Kingdoms George; now this brave Monk still having
God on his side, Charles in his heart, he is Trump,
By time and wisdoms patience starves the Rump;
He marches on, to London's City coming,
Joins Scottish Bag-pipes with the English drumming.
Welcome to the City George, the power being,
Whilst in Commission, Monk is still obeying;
To the House he goes, and begs the House up filling,
Protesting that all Countries so were willing;
The Rump forsworn, had forced an oath, abjuring
The Royal Race, no oaths them fore-conjuring,
Grow proud and high, guilt, fear, and sad despairing,
Doubts and black Jealousies do make them dating;
They vow the Cits shall pay for their declaring,
The Gates shall down by George, the walls defacing.
The Gates pulled down, the City cries, amazing
What Monk is this, the people all are gazing;
What ayls thee George? the Popish Monks did never
Pull down our City Gates, and thus dissever
Great London; but sure we must a little smart,
London in all these times has had a part;
Our sins were great, but blessed be our God,
That in this hurly burly stopped blood,
If this be all, great London stir no more,
Honor thy King, thy God fear and adore.
Still George is honest, for mercy interposing,
Preserved from blood, next night there comes a closing;
What would you have brave Citizens, says he?
What shall I do for your grand Liberty?
Free Parliament, said they, my Lord we crave,
That you the Kingdom and the City save;
Free Parliament, says George, all Guild Hall shouting,
The City-bonfires, showed, the Rump was routing.
Some Quakers often foretold the Cities burning,
Cry now, into sad Ashes London's turning.
Free us, says London, from this gross deluding,
Bring in those members which the Rump secluding,
Eleven years kept out, Great George takes off
The force, the Members sit, the Rump does scoff,
Some guilty souls stay from the House, these make
Brave Monk our General, now the Rump does quake,
Monk's bravely feasted, but he still does work
How to prevent the Rumpish Serpents lurk.
The guilty Sectaries, now they sadly cry,
Monk cheats us all with Scotch Presbytery.
In one months time the secluded Members bring
More good to the Nation, than the Rump sitting
Twelve years; the House of Lords were lacking
To settle Law, but now the Rump is packing.
Middleton and Brown, and Chester's Booth restore,
Free Parliament procure, so that the door
Upon necessity this hinge they move,
Our hopes begin to settle, our hearts to love.
How gladly did the people all rejoice
For King and Laws to God lift up their voice?
In all these times some Churchmen still were acting
Above their sphere, Church Power still contracting.
Thus Noll had Triers, Nyes Prelates, worser things
Than Bishops far, having both pride and stings,
Dubbed Lay-men-Priests, State humor thereby fitting
Great Noll's grand Hierarchy, the powers flitting;
These much cried out by others, often said,
Noll was chief Magistrate, he must be obeyed;
Yet in that little sudden change, some men
Who spoke against the rest, get power then.
Into Church Livings Presbyters admit
Judges of Titles make themselves, and sit
Archbishop-like, others in the Country make
Just thirty one, of their Clerks Fees partake.
Thus all get power, the Churches Right invade,
Most drive their own designs, and get a Trade;
The House of Commons alone, they could not make
A Law, yet these from them this power take.
True Churchmen prayed that they again might see
Church Power fixed by Law and Majesty.
The Bishops settled were by several Kings
And Parlaments, and Ancient Laws, the Springs
Of Government, these voted down, for Reasons
Which to their adverse party seemed Treasons.
Nolls Independents cheated us each hour,
The Presbyterians now have got short power,
Sit by no Law, but of necessity;
I will not blame in this their Piety.
Who would think this, but that the Churches power
Is very sweet, since all men it devour?
Is it not just that God unsettle all
Again, and make us sensible of our fall,
Since it is true that Civil Rule does come
From Monarchy, as beams come from the Sun?
Church Government from Christ, the Churches King,
And Primitive Bishops down from him they bring,
Constant in preaching, faithful in governing.
Their great laborious works their praises sing.
But Prelacy, as Lords the King did make,
And did again their power from them take.
Bishops and Presbyters Christ's true Ministry,
Councils and Synods his Authority,
Lord Priest, Lord Cardinal, Lord Pope a string
Of Antichrist, when set above the King,
Let Scripture and the first times History
Declare, God will take off the Romish Mystery,
Set pride and Interest aside, and cry,
Sol in occasu, love knits in piety.
Rome laughs at all, the Sects do daily cry,
It Is Pride and Covetousness rules our Ministry.
Those better Members then they did present
A Council of State, until the Parliament
Did meet, who do with prudence rule; the Rump
By Lamberts escape again thought to be Trump;
But Ingoldsby and's soldiers take them napping,
And so preserve us from the Sects entrapping;
Some fly and get away, 'cause Guilt was seizing
Upon their souls, but some lie hid, still fearing.
Thus God works for us, and prevents those men,
Whose Arms and lust still changed, and changed again.
Some bite their nails, some scratch their heads, and sing
A Palinode, recanting every thing.
Some their oppressed stomachs up would bring,
Cause now is the time, God's judging for the King
Whose blood they shed, Lands bought, and broke the hedge
Of Government, God give them mercy on the Sledge.
His friends triumph, his foes their hands do wring,
The Papists mourn, the Sects are sad, trembling.
Rebels and Regicides now may have their swing.
True Subjects cry, we hate proud Levelling.
The people, they their Parlaments are choosing,
Most Rumpish men, the people still refusing.
The bent, and strength, and voice oth' Nation sing,
Choose such a Parliament that may bring our King.
God orders Providence for the self-same thing.
Monk with the Parliament our Charles does bring.
Foul poisonous Serpents, and that Rumpish sting,
That picked our purse, and sucked our blood, forcing
Subjection by that proud and bloody thing,
Are all afraid oth' Parlaments sitting.
Why should Free Parliament such terror bring?
But Conscience guilt into their souls did fling.
State-cheaters base, and all base Treasurers cry,
We must cast up account before we dye.
We Houses bought and built, and purchased Land,
Then for a cipher, now they will a figure stand.
God's just at last, though some years suffering sin,
The wickeds reckoning day it will come in.
The Rump's thrice roasted, if we can repent,
Our sad and black account we may prevent.
Gods time is best, to which we all subscribe,
All faithful Subjects, and true Levies Tribe.
We often prayed, and sighed, and groaned to see
Our God take off Egyptian misery.
When shall our Moses come, and Aarons too,
To judge these Traitors, and our snares undo?
Was ever people thus oppressed? blessed God
We murmr not at thy Divine blessed Rod,
But prayed for justice, and for King and Laws,
That might throw down this stinking sinking cause.
Grudge not at Pharaohs, or the Egyptians Plush,
God did preserve us in the burning bush.
As all the plagues in that Grand Rump did share,
So all our blessings in this settling are,
Bless God that did our Princes all preserve
From dangers great, at home, abroad, to serve
Him in their Generations, holy, just,
To rule by Law, and not by will and must.
Gods blessed Providence ruling here and there,
Protects the just and innocent every where.
Say no man did it, but the King of Kings,
To fit them for most glorious blessed things.
The Rump is burnt, the Tragedy is ending,
God bless King Charles for still his Faiths defending;
So let his enemies perish all, we sing,
God has brought home our Sovereign Lord the King.
Religion's come, with Laws and Liberty,
Peace, plenty, Justice, and Prosperity;
King Charles his glory now does fully shine
In this our Charles, and in the blessed Trine.
Our Rampant Lion's come, whom but to name
'S joy to his friends, and to his foes their shame;
And with him those two Royal Gracious Springs
Of Mercy, Truth and Peace, and all blessings.
My Muse is weary of this Rumpish story,
Only refresht to sing King Charles his glory.
If any take offense, it is because
They Are guilty of the wrong to King and Laws.
To sing King Charles his welcome, Heaven inspire
My cheerful Muse, and kindle all her fire.
Amen and Amen.
AN HUMBLE ELOGIVM, and Joyful Acclamation, FOR The Welcome home of our
Sovereign Lord the KING, CHARLES By the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland: Defender of the Ancient, Catholic, Apostolic, Protestant
Faith, which was professed by the Ancient, Primitive Church, Sealed with the
blood of many Kings and Princes, Nobles and Bishops, and other Faithful Saints,
Crowned with the glory of Martyrdom. And who is in all Causes, and over all
Persons, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, next and immediately under Christ,
supreme Governor, in these his Majesty's Realms and Dominions.
Nunquam libertas Gratior extat
Quam sub Rege pio.
Regis ad exemplum.
(...).
PYerian Sisters, sacred, three times three:
Olympic Joves most Royal Progeny,
You that frequent the Heliconian Spring,
And on Parnassus Hill, do sit and sing,
Send down a quil from Angel Gabriels wing,
To write the welcome home of Charles our King,
Assist me now with your Seraphick skill,
Englands most joyful Triumph to fulfill.
How all things did concur from Heavens high,
To wait upon great Charles his Majesty.
In The Heavens above the glorious Angels sing,
In The air the birds with joy exalt the wing,
The winds blew fair, the seas were calm, each thing
Joy'd here below ith'earths most peaceful spring.
Blessed May King Charles his month, hence flourishing
Then born, then owned, and then proclaimed King.
Thus Heavens, air, seas, and earth, ships, loyalling
All strive to kiss the hand now royalling.
All in their order and in their nature bring,
A joyful welcome home to Charles our King.
The Lords and Commons sit, our gracious King
Prevents them all, his mercy offering
A gracious pardon, like God himself forgiving
The greatest sinners, that were ever living,
If they repent, return, his Goodness leading
The Parliament to think on ways of healing,
Most blessed letters and blessed Proclamation
That ever came unto a troubled nation,
Mercy, it from the God of mercy springs,
It makes men like unto the King of Kings.
That wondrous star that at his birth did shine
One thousand six hundred thirty, Mays twenty nine
Gods Sabbaths eve, did then unite in blood
All Europes princely families great and good
In this blessed Prince, great British Majesty
And also the great Saxon royalty,
Both Danes and Normans race, that German Prince
Elector Palatine increast his glory hence,
Swede, Pole, and most of Christian Princes do
Acknowledge their Alliance him unto.
This on the Fathers side is wondrous glory,
For this Great Charles, who now is the whole worlds story,
The Spanish Austrian, on the Mothers side,
Burbones of France, they herein sweetly glide;
The Medices of Florence they come in,
And now the Prime of Aurange more than bin;
These with our Roses, Lillies do entwine,
Which make King Charles his welcome more Divine.
Englands great splendour, that frees us from oppressing,
Christ's Faith's defender, and so Gods gracious blessing.
One thousand six hundred and thirtieth year
Mayes twenty nine, the stars type does appear.
Last Tuesday in each month he fasts, retiring,
Consults with God, and all his ways admiring.
First Tuesday in this May he is owned as King
By the Parliament, a blessed happy thing;
Next Tuesday in this May proclaimed our King,
Both Parliament and City flourishing;
Last Tuesday, nine and twentieth of this May,
Our glorious King appears, his own Birthday.
For one black Tuesday, three are very clear,
All welcoming King Charles his coming here.
The Winds thought it their Honor, for to come
And blow King Charles, and his Royal Brothers home,
From Hollands Hague, the Seas rejoiced much more,
To bring our King and Princes to our shore.
Brave Mountagues great Ships are now turned Royal,
For why, King Charles has made them truly loyal.
He Is come, he is come, the doubling echoes cry,
Dovers white Rocks receive his Majesty.
Brave Monck receives him first, conducts and brings
Charles to his Courts where is Ancestors sat Kings.
The seat of Kings Archbishops Canterbury
Sing Sabbath praises, make his soul most merry;
Then Rochester, from thence to London comes
With Princes, Nobles, Gentry, Soldiers, Drums,
Fair Virgins all in white sweet flowers strowing,
And all the people, old and young, God praising.
He mounts the steed upon Black Heath to see
His people Joy in this prosperity.
Our God the humble soul, is recompencing,
On's own Birthday his Triumphs here commencing.
On's own Birthday the Lord Mayer banqueting
Princes, and Nobles, with Joy refresh the King.
On's own Birthday the Ministers presenting
Gods Sacred Book, the King with Joy accepting;
Like to his stately Princely brothers royal
Oth' right hand stands St. Paul, Religion, loyal;
Learning oth' left, the blew caps Psalms did sing.
Religion, Learning, Mercy, bless our King.
Gods word, Gods Providence, books fit for Kings,
And's Fathers Solitudes, and sufferings
(...), and experience
Books fit for Princes, full of excellence.
These teach the greatest Princes God to fear,
To Rule the Church for Christ, and to appear
For Justice, Truth, and Peace, and for the Laws,
The which makes God appear for Princes cause.
God does expect return of Mercy lent,
God bless King Charles, Law, Church, and Parliament.
Quite through the City rides our gracious King,
And's Princely Brothers, God bless them, all did sing.
All men were gallant, and the Conduits running,
Our waters turned to wine by Charles his coming.
Up to White Hall the Parliament him greeting,
Three Kingdoms joyful, happy, blessed meeting,
The view of Nations, Councels, states, and things
Abroad, makes him the best of Europes Kings,
Charles will protect us with his wings, and eke
His sword and scepter will true Subjects keep.
The House of Lords his name eternizing,
The House of Commons their allegiance bring,
Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Lords, Barons sing,
All true born Gentry kneel unto their King.
Great George shall Joseph be, and have the ring,
And second Chariot of our gracious King,
We Will Abrech cry, and bow the knee, and sing
Brave Monk has brought Lords, Commons, and the King.
We joy'd in Monk his morning star to be,
Much more in him to whom George bows the knee.
The City makes triumphant flourishing,
Allen Lord Mayor's Chain purple Glorying,
The Aldermens Gold Chains and scarlet bring,
Their due obedience unto Charles our King.
Brown leads the Horse, gallant in Marshalling,
Robinson the foot, all to proclaim the King.
Brave Londons Companies in order sitting,
To tender their allegiance just and fitting.
Sweet little babes Hosanna cry that day,
De King, de King, God bless King Charles they pray.
The Merchants brave, the Tradesmen praises sing,
The Virgins dance, young men their Caps up fling,
Old men and Matrons gravely pray and sing,
'Cause they before they dye might see their King;
The Trumpets sound, the Music tunes each string,
The Canons roar, the Bonfires blaze, Bells ring,
The Wine's drawn forth, feasting and banqueting,
Belconies, streets and shops, all cry the King,
If such a Diapason for the King
At his proclaiming, what will his presence bring?
Now Charles is come, beyond expression we
Rejoice in this our Royal Trinity;
We Are all overcome with joy, and cannot show,
But with obedience in Allegiance bow.
Depths of Affection makes us truly loyal,
Mounts all our hearts to joy in him, most Royal,
We Are all Seraphickly inflamed to see
The Angels bring our King, and Liberty.
Now God himself preserve our Gracious King,
Christ keep his soul, Angels protection bring.
Now Charles is come, all Englands Bells did ring;
England's all voices, which did bravely sing;
England's all flaming Bonfires, for her King;
England's all Music, striking every string;
England's all Joy, no true man murmuring;
England's all Peace, good men it furthering;
England's all Happiness, England's all flourishing;
England's all glory, King Charles them nourishing.
Thus England's London, and her Parliament,
Their faithful Joy unto King Charles present.
Least witches, wizards, sects, or divelish thing,
Juggling Astrologers, blast his blessed settling;
Our tears as waves, our prayers as winds did bring,
Our hearts as ships and sails to Charles our King,
For his return, and now our Lands we cry,
Our goods, and lives, are his, that he thereby
May settle Church, and state, all in Gods fear;
God is the author of his happiness here.
Maugre fanatic rage, the Heavens bring
Our Prince a Saint, our Charles a Sovereign King.
How are the Pulpits turned the City round?
How do they now King Charles his praise refound?
Sure too much fire was in them heretofore,
But now Gods Providence, they do adore.
Thy Kingdom come, was Treason for to pray,
Yea for to think in that black Rumpish day.
It Was Treason, to be Honest, Just, and True,
To keep our Oaths, and Covenants most due.
No more Sedition, let any man now teach
But truly, purely, gravely Gods Word preach.
The Heads of Isreal's Tribes and Princes bring
At thirty years old, good David, Judahs King,
To Isreal's Throne, and then all covenanting,
Before the Lord they there anoint him King.
The Jebusites him scorn, most basely railing,
The Philistims him threat, most basely raging;
He conquers all by righteous valor, reigning
Full forty years Judahs and Isreal's King.
We Will make the Parallel blessed Charles in thee
Three Kingdoms glory to posterity.
Our Tribes and Princes, Lords and Commons bring
At thirty years old, Allegiance to our King;
Jebusites and Philistims do show their sting,
But Charles in Gods Name all is conquering,
By brave Monks conduct, and our covenanting;
Before the Lord God will anoint him King;
Since David's gone, and Solomon's Reigning,
Twice forty years let us pray God bless our King;
Our Gospel, true Allegiance we will bring
To Charles the Second our Sovereign Lord the King.
God fitted David by humble suffering,
In a strange Nation, under a strange King,
Betrayed at home, abroad he is traveling,
The mysteries of other States unravelling;
When Gods time's come, he is then brought home, made King,
Rules much for God, settles each holy thing.
As Moses Law commands, no Worship new
Sets up, but what the Lord injoyns that is true.
In this, Great Charles, thou art the Parallel,
Rule much for God and Christ, all shall be well.
The Law's reformed, the Gospels glad tiding
Of Truth and Peace here settled by our King,
Prerogative and Privilege agreeing,
Just Liberty and Property all seeing,
The Paroxisms of Church and State compiling,
Both Paul and Barnabas, Charles is reconciling,
Like Moses, from the Mount of God descends
Our blessed Charles, and all true Saints makes friends,
Confirms the Tables, Gospel and the Law,
And by his good Examples does us draw.
Oppress no conscience, Fundamentals holding,
Oblige just Interests, mercy them enfolding;
Impose no Ceremonies that are found oppressing,
All new Religions stop Gods sacred blessing,
Make Service most Divine, the Rule's Gods Word,
So says our Articles, and so the Lord;
It is most fit and glorious for Kings
Of Haeresie and Faction, to break the springs,
TO Reform the Church, proud Antichrist dispelling,
Then Christ in Grace will in our Church be dwelling.
Profaneness punished, and false worshipping,
Religion advanced, and each holy thing
That Is truly Protestant, here flourishing,
No Romish Serpents Relics nourishing,
All Popelings banished, Gospel Bishops sing
Glory to God, and Grace unto our King.
Thus good Kings do for God, his sacred Word
'S their Rule for Life, and reign they would Gods Sword.
Peace, Mercy, Truth and Justice this will bring,
And then three Kingdoms joy in Charles our King.
No Power but the Power Omnipotent
Could extricate us from that cursed Rent
The Rump here made, and from that grand confusion,
Both in the State, and in the Church delusion,
Their Blood and Treason pillars of black smoke,
To drive from hence, our God we did invoke,
God heard, and without any precious blood
Has changed the cruel sword for all our good;
In Kingly Power and Authority,
Does shine the eternal Gods blessed Majesty.
In these sad times our Church was rent, dividing
Sect against Sect, each one the other sleighting;
Of Discipline were diverse names declaring
Division, and worser Sects all these out daring;
Report does tell, that all these Christ are preaching,
And yet their own Thoughts and Opinions teaching;
Some Truth may be in most, by Truths composing,
King Charles, like God, with Gospel Saints is clozing.
Satan sowed Tares when as the Priests were sleeping,
But now King Charles will keep the Church from weeping.
A King of Providence, and of Prayers a King,
A King of Mercy, a great experienced King,
A King of Promise, God him always making,
The Churches Nursing Father, of Grace partaking,
A King of valor, Christ's true Faith's Defendor,
Both just and merciful, our glorious splendor,
A King of wonders, preserved for this thing,
Both Church and State in Gods Name governing;
For this all Providence did him bring,
For this God bless our Sovereign Lord the King.
Worsters Deliverance, that wonderful thing,
Mercies Deliverance, from Popery's sting,
Beyond the Seas God still preserved our King,
At home, Sects, Army, gone sans blood or string,
From Heaven sanctified by suffering,
Whilst he in Gods fear still is governing.
True Priests, true Saints, their Hallelujah sing,
Blessed be God, that blessed has our King;
The Lord make Charles his love and true delight,
No man to wrong, and every man to right
Exceeding great's the Example of a King,
It does on his a powerful influence bring.
Blessed Constantine first Christian Emperor King,
With Orthodox Divines his Court did spring.
Augustus Court is stored with men of learning,
He Is learned himself, and therefore those preferring;
But drunk Tiberius Court with sots is filling,
Debauching Healths Tricongius knighted swilling.
Religious Court Religious men will sing,
Constantine and Augustus Charles our King.
We sadly read of Amaziahs halting,
And also of wise Solomon's revolting,
Of Rehoboams rashness, by respecting
Young States-mens Counsels, Sages grave rejecting;
Of Jeroboams Calves the Tribes dividing
Pretends Religion for his wicked siding;
Of Uzzahs mis-lead Zeal, and of Uzziah
Becoming Priest, the blood of Zachariah,
Son of Jehoiada High Priest, most Royal,
From these God bless our King, and keep us loyal.
God give Great Charles King David's perfect heart,
King Solomon's wisdom, God to him impart,
Josiahs Holiness, in each Religious thing,
And Hezekiahs comforts to our King.
Blessed King Jehosaphats success and honor,
Blessed Moses meekness, and blessed Joshuahs valor.
Edward the sixth, most glorious Piety,
Elizabeth's most blessed Prosperity.
King James his Learning, and King Charles his Grace,
God give to Charles, and to the Royal Race.
A blessed, holy, glorious Martyred King
At's death a private oath Remembering
Showed excellent grace, an oaths a sacred thing
Where Gods called in, and God expects performing
Of serious Vows, and sacred Oaths, once made
In time of trouble performance must be had,
The just, and holy God he hates the breaking
Of oaths and vows, true saints their oaths are keeping,
If the oath, were false for shame let never be spoken
If the oath were true, why should it ere be broken.
Brave London feasts both King, and Parliament
And both the royal Princes, and do present
A Cupboard of Plate, in that great City lie
Best Subjects hearts and greatest Treasury;
Thy great Imperial Chamber Charles it is,
Whilst thou grantst them their royal liberties,
The feast was great, their hearts are far more royal,
Their Love, their Faith, their Duty, now is loyal.
Time, Truth, and Fame, their several speeches make
Pardon great sir, for there was some mistake.
In England born, the Scots first crowned him King
Brave Ireland also their allegiance bring.
Great Monarch live, we humbly wait and pray
To see thy happy, blessed, Crowning day.
When Charles shall leave this mortal Crown, Lord bring
Him that immortal Crown, where Angels sing.
Of Charles the Martyrs Race in Heaven now glorying,
Let England never want a gracious King.
Thus all true Subjects pray for Charles our King,
Pardon great Sir my Muses warbleing.
FINIS.

