DUCTOR ad ASTRONOMIAM and GEOGRAPHIAM. vel usus GLOBI, Celestis quam
Terrestris. In Libris sex, viz. Astron. and Geogr. Rudime^. Astro^. and Geogr.
Proble^. Nautica. Proble^. Astrologica. Proble^. Gnomonica. Proble^. Sphaeric.
Triang. Proble^.


Per Josephum Moxon.

LONDINI, Sumptibus Josephi Moxon.



A TUTOR to ASTRONOMY and GEOGRAPHIE: Or an Easy and speedy way to know the
Use of both the GLOBES, Celestial and Terrestrial. In six BOOKS. The First
teaching the Rudiments of Astronomy and Geography. The 2. Showing by the Globes
the solution of Astronomical and Geographical Probl. The 3. Showing by the
Globes the solution of Problemes in Navigation. The 4. Showing by the Globes
the solution of Astrological Problemes. The 5. Showing by the Globes the
solution of Gnomonical Problemes. The 6. Of Spherical Triangles.
More fully and amply then has ever been set forth either by Gemma Frisius,
Metius, Hues, Wright, Blaew, or any others that have taught the Use of the
Globes: And that so plainly and methodically that the meanest Capacity may at
first reading apprehend it; and with a little Practice grow expert in these
Divine Sciences.

By Joseph Moxon.

Whereunto is added the Ancient Poetical Stories of the Stars: showing Reasons
why the several shapes and forms are pictured on the Celestial Globe.
Collected from Dr Hood. As also a Discourse of the Antiquity, Progress and
Augmentation of Astnonomie.

Psalm. 111. 2. The Works of the Lord are great: sought out of them that have
pleasure therein.

Job. 26. 13. By his Spirit he has garnished the Heavens: His hand has framed
the crooked Serpent.

LONDON, Printed by Joseph Moxon: and fold at his Shop on Cornhill, at the
sign of Atlas. 1659.

A Catalogue of Books and Instruments, Made and sold by Joseph Moxon, at his
shop on Corn-hil, at the Sign of Atlas.
GLobes of all sizes; Celestial and Terrestrial.

Spears, according to the Ptolemean Tychonean Copernican
Systeme

The Catholic Planisphere, called Blagrave's Mathematical Jewel; made very
exactly on Past-boards; about 17. inches Diameter. And a Book of the Use of it
newly set forth by I. Palmer M. A.

The Spiral Line.

Gunters Quadrant and Nocturnal; Printed and pasted, etc. Stirrups Universal
Quadrat. Printed and Pasted, etc,

Sea-Plats, Printed on Paper, or Parchment, and Pasted on Boards.

Wrights Corrections of Errors, in the Art of Navigation. The third Edition,
with Additions.

Vignola, or the Complete Architect, useful for all Carpenters, Masons,
Painters, Carvers, or any Gentlemen or others that delight in rare Building.

A new Invention to raise Water higher then the Spring. With certain Engines to
produce either Motion or Sound by the Water: very useful, profitable and
delightful for such as are addicted to rare curiosities: by Isaac de Cause.

A Help to Calculation By J. Newton.

A Mathematical Manuel, showing the use of Napiers bones, by J. Dansie.

A Tutor to Astrology, with an Ephemeris for the Year 1659. intended to be
Annually continued, by W. E.

Also all manner of Mathematical Books, or Instruments, and Maps whatsoever,
are sold by the foresaid Joseph Moxon.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
IFormerly Printed a Book of the Use of the Globes, Entitled A Tutor to
Astronomy and Geography: The Book was Composed by William Blaew, but the Title
was mine own; and therefore I hope I may be the bolder to use it when and where
I list. The sale of that Impression had almost persuaded me to have Printed it
again: But when I considered it wanted many necessary Problemes, both in
Astronomy, Navigation. Astrology, Dyalling, and the whole Doctrine of Triangles
by the Globe; And also that the Examples throughout that Book were made for the
City of Amsterdam; which by the general sale of the Book I found rendered it
less acceptable then it would have been if they had been made for London; And
when I considered that to add so many Problemes, and alter all the Examples
would both Metamorphose that Book, and be as Laborious a work to me as if I
should write a new one; Then I resolved to take this Task upon me; which at
length with Gods Assistance I have finished; And now expose it to thy
acceptance.

The Globes is the first Study a Learner ought to undertake: for without a
competent knowledge therein he will never be able to understand any Author
either in Astronomy, Astrology, Navigation, or Trigonometry: Therefore my aim
has been to make the Use of then very plain and easy to the meanest
Capacities: In prosecution of which Design, I doubt the Learneder sort may be
apt to Censure me guilty of Prolixity, if not Tautology: Because the Precepts
being plain, they may account some of the Examples Useless. But I desire them
to consider that I write not to expert Practitioners, but to Learners; to whom
Examples may prove more Instructive then Precepts. Besides, I hope to encourage
those by an ample liberal plainness to fall in love with these Studies, that
formerly have been disheartened by the Crabbed brevity of those Authors that
have (in Characters as it were) rather writ Notes for their own Memories, then
sufficient Documents for their Readers Instructions.

The Globes for which this Book is written are the Globes I set forth about
four years ago: which as I told you in my Epistle to the Reader of Blaew's Book
differs somewhat from other Globes, and that both the Celestial and the
Terrestrial; mine being the latest done of any, and to the accomplishing of
which, I have not only had the help of all or most of the best of other Globes,
Maps, Plats; and Sea-drafts, of New Discoveries that were then extant, for the
Terrestrial Globe, but also the Advice and directions of diverse learned and
able Mathematicians both in England and Holland for Tables and Calculations
both of Lines and Stars for the Celestial: upon which Globe I have placed
every Star that was observed by Tycho Brahe one degree of Longitude farther in
the Ecliptic then they are on any other Globes: So that whereas on other
Globes the places of the Stars were correspondent with their places in Heaven
58. Years ago, when Tycho observed them, and therefore according to his Rule
want about 47. minutes of their true places in Heaven at this Time: I have set
every Star one degree farther in the Ecliptic, and Rectified them on the Globe
according to the true place they will have in Heaven in the Year 1671.

On the Terrestrial Globe I have inserted all the New Discoveries that have
been made, either by our own or Foreign Navigators, and that both in the
East, West, North, and South, parts of the Earth. In the East Indies we have by
these later Times many spacious Places discovered, many Islands inserted, and
generally the whole Draft of the Country rectified and amended, even to the
Coast of China, Japan, Giloli, etc. In the South Sea between the East and West
Indies are scattered many Islands, which for the uncertain knowledge former
Times had of them are either wholely left out of other Globes, or else laid
down so erroneously that little of credit can be attributed unto them:
California is found to be an Island, though formerly supposed to be part of the
main Continent, whose North West shore was imagined to thrust it self forth
close to the Coasts of Cathaio, and so make the supposed Straits of Anian. The
Western Shoars of the West Indies are more accurately discribed then formerly,
as you may see if you compare my Terrestrial Globe with the Journals of the
latest Navigators: And if you compare them with other Globes you will find 5,
6, yea 7, degrees difference in Longitude, in most Places of these Coasts.
Magellanica which heretofore was thought to be part of the South Continent
called Terra Incognita is now also found to be an Island. All that Track of Land
called Terra Incognita I have purposely omitted, because as yet we have no
certainty whether it be Sea or Land, unless it be of some parts lately found
out by the Dutch; who having a convenient Port at Bantam in Java, have from
thence sent forth Ships Southwards, where they have found several very large
Countries; one whereof they have called Hollandia Nova, another Zelandia Nova,
another Anthoni van Diemans Land; and diverse others; some whereof lies near our
Antipodes; as you may see by my Terrestrial Globe. Again, Far to the Northwards
there are some New Discoveries, even within 6. degrees of the Pole: The Drafts
to the North Eastwards I have laid down even as they were discribed by the
Searchers of these Parts, for a Passage into the East Indies. And also the
Discoveries of Baffin, Capt. James, and Capt. Fox, (our own Country men that
attempted the finding a passage that way into the South Sea.

I also told you what difference there is in several Authors about placing
their first Meridian, which is the beginning of Longitude; that Ptolomy placed
it at the Fortunate Islands, which Mr Hues page 4. chap 1. in his Treatise of
Globes proves to be the Islands of Cabo Verde, and not those now called the
Canary Islands; because in his Time they were the furthest Places of the
Discovered World toward the Setting of the Sun: Others placed it at Pico in
Teneriffa; Others at Corvus and Flora; because under that Meridian the Compass
had no Variation, but did then duly respect the North and South; Others for
the same Reason began their Longitude at St Michaels; and others between the
Islands of Flores and Fayal: And the Spaniards of late by reason of their great
Negotiation in the West Indies, have begun their Longitude at Toledo there, and
contrary to all others account it Westwards.

Therefore I seeing such diversity among all Nations, and as yet a Uniformity
at home, chose with our own Country men to place my First Meridian at the I Will
Gratiosa, one of the Isles of the Azores.

By the different placing of this first Meridian it comes to pass that the
Longitude of places are diversely set down in different Tables: For those Globes
or Maps that have their first Meridian placed to the Eastwards of Gratiosa have
all places counted Eastward between the first Mertdian and the Meridian of
Gratiosa in fewer degrees of Longitude: And those Globes and Maps that have
their first Meridian placed to the Westwards, have all Places counted Eastwards
from the Meridian of Gratiosa and their first Meridian in a greater number of
degrees of Longitude, and that according as the Arch of Difference is.

I have annexed a small Collection out of Dr Hood, which declares the Re son why
such strange Figures and Forms are pictured on the Caelestial Globe: and
withal the Poetical Stories of eevery Constellation.

I also thought good to add at the latter end of this Book a small Treatise,
entitled The Antiquity, Progress, and Augmentation of Astronomy. I may without
Partiallity give it the Encomium of a Pithy, Pleasant, and Methodical piece: It
was written by a Learned Author; and is worthy the Perusal of all Ingenuous
Lovers of these Studies.

Joseph Moxon.

Encomiastic Achrosticon Authoris.
ITs now since Atlas reigned thousands of Years,
OF whom it is Fabl'd, Heavens he did Uphold,
SO Ancient Authors write: But it appears
Excel he others did, for we are told
PRoject he did the Sphere: and for his Skill
HE had therein, his Fame will Flourish still.
MUst we not also Praise in this our Age
OUr Authors skill, and Pains, who does engage
X Thousand Thanks, not for this Book alone
OF his, But for the Globes he makes there is none
NOw extant made so perfect: This is known
The Contents of the First Book.
Chap. 1. WHat a Globe is. fol. 4 2. Of the two Poles. 4 3. Of the Axis. 4 4.
Of the Brazen Meridian. 4 5. Of the Horizon. 5 6. Of the Quadrant of Altitude.
6 7. Of the Hour-Circle, and its Index. 6 8. Of the Nautical Compass, or Box
and Needle. 7 9. Of the Semicircle of Position. 7
Chap. 2. Of the Circles Lines, etc. described upon the superficies of the
Globe; beginning with the Terrestrial Globe; and 7 1. Of the Equator. 7 2. Of
the Meridians. 8 3. Of the Parallels. 8 4. Of the Ecliptique, Tropicks, and
Polar Circles. 8 5. Of the Rhumbs. 9 6. Of the Lands, Seas, Islands, etc.
Discribed upon the Terrestrial Globe, 9 7. Longitude. 10 8. Latitude. 11
Chap. 3. Of the Celestial Globe, or the Eighth Sphere, represented by the
Celestial Globe: its motion, and of the Circles, Lines, Images, Stars, etc.
described thereon. 11 1. Of the eight Sphere. 11 2. Of the Motion of the eighth
Sphere. 12 3. Of the Equinoctial. 13 4. Of the Ecliptic. 15 5. Of the Poles of
the Ecliptic. 15 6. Of the Axis of the Ecliptic. 16 7. Of the Colures, and
Cardinal Points. 16 8. Of the Tropic. fol. 16 9. Of the Circles Arctick and
Antarctick. 17 10. Of the Images called Constellations, drawn upon the
Celestial Globe. 17 11. Of the number of the Stars. 19 12. Of the Situation of
the Stars. 20 13. Of the Magnitudes of the Stars. 20 The proportion of the
Diameters of the fixed Stars; Compared with the Diameter of the Earth. 21 The
proportions of the fixed Stars Compared with the Globe of the Earth, 22 14. Of
the Nature of the Stars. 23 15. Of Via Lactea, or the Milky way. 23

The Contents Of the Second Book.
Prob. 1. SOme Advertisements in Choosing and Using the Globes. 35 To find the
Longitude and Latitude of Places, on the Terrestrial Globe. fol. 37 Prob. 2.
The Longitude and Latitude being known, to Rectify the Globe fit for use. 38
Prob. 3. To find the Place of the Sun in the Ecliptic, the day of the Month
being first known. 39 Prob. 4. To find the Day of the Month, the Place of the
Sun being given. 40 Prob. 5. The Place of the Sun given, to find its
Declination. 40 Prob. 6. The Place of the Sun given, to find us Meridian
Altitude. 41 Prob. 7. The Suns Place given, to find the Hour of Sun Rising, and
the length of the Night and Day. 42 Prob. 8. To find the Hour of Sun Set. 42
Prob. 9. To find how long it is Twilight in the Morning and Evening. 43 Prob.
10. The Suns Place given, to find its Amplitude; And also to know upon what
point of the Compass it Rises. 44 Prob. 11, The Hour of the Day given to find
the Height of the Sun. 45 Prob. 12. The Altitude of the Sun, and Day of the
Month given, to find the Hour of the Day. fol. 46 Prob. 13. How to know
whether it be Before or After Noon. 47 How to take Altitudes by the Quadrant,
Astrolabe, and Cross-staff. 47 To take Altitudes by the Astrolabe. 50 To take
Altitudes by the Cross-staff. 51 Prob. 14. To observe with the Globe the
Altitude of the Sun. 52 Prob. 15. To find the Elevation of the Pole^ by the
Meridian Altitude of the Sun, and Day of the Month given. 53 Prob. 16. To take
the Altitude of any Star above the Horizon; by the Globe. 54 Prob. 17. By the
Meridian Altitude of any Star given, to find the Height of the Pole. 54 Prob.
18. Another way to find the Height of the Pole by the Globe; if the Place of
the Sun be given: and also to find the Hour of the Day, and Azimuth, and
Almicanter of the Sun, 56 Prob. 19. To observe by the Globe the Distance of two
Stars. 57 Prob. 20. How you may learn to give a guess at the number of degrees
that any two Stars are distant from one another; or the number of degrees of
Altitude the Sun or any Star is Elevated above the Horizon: only by looking up
to Heaven, without any Instrument. 58 Prob. 21. The Day of the Month, and
Altitude of any Star given, to find the Hour of the Night, 59 Prob. 22. The
Place of the Sun, and Hour of the Day given, to find its Azimuth in any
Latitude assigned. 60 Prob. 23. The Place of the Sun, and Hour of the Day
given, to find the Almicantar of the Sun. 61 Prob. 24. The Place of the Sun
given, to find what Hour it comes to the East, or West, and what Almicantar it
then shall have. 61 Prob. 25. To know at any time what a clock it is in any
other Part of the Earth. 62 Prob. 26. To find the Right Ascension of the Sun,
or Stars. 63 Prob. 27. To find the Declination of the Sun, or Stars. 64 A Table
of the Right Ascensions and Declinations of 100. Select fixed Stars; Calculated
by Tycho Brahe, for the Years 1600, and 1670. As also their Difference of Right
Ascensions and Declinations, in 70. Years. 65 Prob. 28. The Place of the Sun or
any Star given, to find the Right Descension, and the Oblique Ascension, and
the Oblque Descension. fol. 71 Prob. 29. Any Place on the Terrestrial Globe
being given, to find its Antipodes. 72 Prob. 30. To find the Perecij of any
given Place, by the Terrestrial Globe. 73 Prob. 31. To find the Antecij of any
given Place, upon the Terrestrial Globe. 73 Prob. 32. To find the Longitude and
Latitude of the Stars, by the Celestial Globe. 73 Prob. 33. To find the
Distance between any two Places on the Terrestrial Globe. 74 Prob. 34. To find
by the Terrestrial Globe upon what point of the Compass any (...) Places are
situate one from another. 75 Prob. 35. To find by the Celestial Globe the
Cosmical Rising and Setting of the Stars. 76 Prob. 36. To find by the
Celestial Globe the Acronical Rising and Setting of the Stars. 77 Prob. 37. To
find by the Celestial Globe the Heliacal Rising, and Setting of the Stars. 78
Prob. 38. To find the Diurnal and Nocturnal Arch of the Sun, or Stars, in any
given Latitude. 79 Prob. 39. To find the Azimuth and Almicantar of any Star. 81
Prob. 40. To find the Hour of the Night, by observing two known Stars in one
Azimuth, or Almicantar. 81 Prob. 41. The Hour given that any Star in Heaven
comes to the Meridian, to know thereby the Place of the Sun, and by consequence
the Day of the Month, though it were lost. 82 Prob. 42. The Day of the Month
given, to find in the Circle of Letters on the Plain of the Horizon, the Day of
the Week. 83 Prob. 43. The Azimuth of any Star given, to find its Hour in any
given Latitude. 84 Prob. 44. How you may learn to know all the Stars in Heaven,
by the Celestial Globe. 84 Prob. 45. How to hang the Terrestrial Globe in such
a position that by the Suns shining upon it you may with great delight at once
behold the demonstration of many Principles in Astronomy, and Geography. 89
Prob. 46. To know by the Terrestrial Globe in the Zenith of what Place of the
Earth the S^^ is. 91 Prob. 47. To find in what different Places of the Earth
the Sun has the same Altitude, at the same time. 92 Prob. 48. To find the
length of the Longest and shortest Artificial Day or Night. 95 Prob. 49. To
find how much the Pole is Raised, or Depressed, where the longest Day is an
Hour longer or shorter then it is in your Habitation. 96 Prob. 50. The Suns
Place given, to find what alteration of Declination he must have to make the
Day an Hour longer, or shorter: And in what number of Days it will be. 97
Prob. 51. Of the difference of Civil and Natural Days, commonly called the
Equation of Civil Days. And how it may be found by the Globe. 99 Prob. 52. How
to find the Hour of the Night, when the Moon shines on a Sun Dyal, by help of
the Globe. 101 Prob. 53. To find the Dominical Letter, the Prime, Epact, Easter
Day, and the rest of the Moveable Feasts, for ever. 102 Prob. 54. The Age of
the Moon given, to find her place in the Ecliptic according to her mean
motion. 104 Prob. 55. Having the Longitude and Latitude, or Right Ascension and
Declination of any Planet, or Comet, to place it on the Globe, to correspond
with its place in Heaven. 105
The Contents Of the Third Book.
Prob. 1. THe Suns Amplitude and difference of Ascension given, to find the
Height of the Pole, and Declination of the Sun. 108 Prob. 2. The Suns
Declination and Amplitude given, to find the Poles Elevation. 108 Prob. 3. The
Suns Declination and Hour at East given, to find the Height of the Pole. 109
Prob. 4. The Declination of the Sun and his Altitude at East given, to find the
Height of the Pole. 110 Prob. 5. By the Suns Declination and Azimuth at 6, of
the Clock given, to find the Height of the Pole, and Almicantar at 6. 11^ Prob.
6. By the Hour of the Night and a known Star Observed Rising or Setting, to
find the Height of the Pole. fol. 112 Prob. 7. Two Places given in the same
Latitude, to find the Difference of Longitude. 112 Prob. 8. Two Places given in
the same Longitude, to find the difference of Latitude. 113 Prob. 9. Course and
Distance between two Places given, to find their difference in Longitude and
Latitude. 113 Prob. 10. To find how many Miles are contained in a Degree of any
Parallel. 114 Prob. 11. The Rhumb you have sailed upon, and the Latitudes you
departed from, and are arived to, given, to find the Difference of Longitude,
and the number of Leagues you have Sailed. 114 Prob. 12. The Longitudes and
Latitudes of two Places given, to find Course, and Great Circle distance
between them. 116 Prob. 13. The Latitude you departed from, and the Latitude
you are arrived to, and the number of Lagues you have sailed given, to find the
Rhumb you have sailed on, and difference of Longitude. 116 Prob. 14. To find by
the Globe the Variation of the Needle; commonly called the Variation of the
Compass. 117 Prob. 15. To keep a Journal by the Globe. 118 Prob. 16. To Steer
in the Night by the Stars. 119 Prob. 17. How to platt on the Globe a New Land,
never before Discovered. 119 Prob. 18. Seeing two known points or Capes of
Land, as you sail along, how to know the distance of your Ship from them. 120
Prob. 19. Of Tides, and how by help of the Globe you may in general judge of
them. 121
The Contents Of the Fourth Book.
Prob 1. To Erect a Figure of the 12 Houses of Heaven. 123 Prob. 2. ^o Erect a
Figure of Heaven according to Campanus. 128 Prob. 3. To find the length of a
Planetary Hour. 129 Prob. 4. The length of a Planetary Hour known; to find what
Planet Reigns any given Hour of the Day, or Night. fol. 131 Prob. 5. To find
Part of Fortune by the Globe. 132 Prob. 6. To find in what Circle of Position
any Star, or any degree of the Ecliptic is. 133 Prob. 7. To find the Right
Ascensions, the Oblique Ascensions, and the Declinations of the Planets. 133
Prob. 8. How to Direct a Figure, by the Globe. 134 Prob. 9. Of Revolutions: and
how they are found by the Globe. 135 Prob. 10. How a Figure of Heaven may be
erected by the Revolution thus found. 135
The Contents Of the Fifth Book.
Prob. 1. HOw by one position of the Globe to find the distance of the Hour
lines on all manner of Planes. fol. 143 Prob. 2. To make an Equinoctial Dyal.
147 Prob. 3. To make an Horizontal Dyal. 149 Prob. 4. To make an Erect Direct
South Dyal. 153 Prob. 5. To make an Erect Direct North Dyal. 156 Prob. 6. To
make an Erect Direct East Dyal. 156 Prob. 7. To make an Erect Direct West Dyal.
159 Prob. 8. To make a Polar Dyal. 159 Prob. 9. To make Erect South Dyals,
Declining Eastwards, or Westwards. 160 Prob. 10. To make a North Erect Dyal
declining Eastwards or Westwards. 163 Prob. 11. To make Direct Reelining or
Inclining Dyals. 164 Prob. 12. To make Declining Reclining, or Declining
Inclining Dyals. 164 Prob. 13. To make a Dyal upon a Declining Inclining Plane.
168 Prob. 14. To find in what Place of the Earth any manner of Plane that in
your Habitation is not Horizontal, shall be Horizontal. 171 Prob. 15. To make a
Dyal on the ^e^ling of a Room, where the Direct Beams of the Sun never come.
175 Prob. 16. To make a Dyal upon a solid Ball or Globe, that shall show the
Hour of the Day without a Gnomon. 178 Prob. 17. To make a Dyal upon a Glass
Globe, whose Axis shall cast a shadow upon the Hour of the Day. 180
The Contents Of the Sixth Book.
Of the Parts and Kinds of Spherical Triangles. fol. 183 Prob. 1. The Legs of
a Right Angled Spherical Triangle given; to find the Hypothenusa, and the two
other Angles. 184 Prob. 2. A Leg and the Hypothenusa given, to find the Rest.
187 Prob. 3. The Hypothenusa and an Angle given, to find the Rest. 187 Prob. 4.
A Leg and Angle adjoining given, to find the Rest. 188 Prob. 5. A Leg and the
Angle opposite given, to find the Rest. 188 Prob. 6. The Angle given, to find
the Sides. 189 Prob. 7. Oblique Triangles. The three Sides given, to find the
Angles. 190 Prob. 8. Two Sides and the Angle contained between them given, to
find the Rest. 193 Prob. 9. Two Sides and an Angle opposite to one of them
given, to find the Rest. 194 Prob. 10. Two Angles and the Side comprehended
between them given, to find the Rest. 194 Prob. 11. Two Angles and a Side
opposite to one of them given, to find the Rest. 195 Prob. 12. Three Angles
given, to find the Sides. 196 Prob. 13. How to let fall a Perpendicular that
shall divide any Oblique Spherical Triangle into two Right Angled Spherical
Triangles. 198 The Poetical Stories of the Constellations in Heaven. 200
The First BOOK. Being the first RUDIMENTS of Astronomy and Geography. Or A
Description of the Lines, Circles, and other Parts of the GLOBE.
PRAEFACE.
THe Students of all Arts and Sciences have ever proposed a Maxim, whereon (as
on an allowed Truth) the whole Science has dependence: and by so much the more
demonstrable that Maxim is, so much the more of Excellency the Science may
claim.

This of Astronomy and Geography comes not behind any; for herein we shall only
admit (with the Ancients) that the Form of the visible World is Spherical:
Neither shall we beg our Ascertion any farther then Occular Appearance will
demonstrate: every Man's Ey being his Judge, if he be either on a Plain field,
or at Sea, where nothing can hinder a free inspection of the Horizon.

Upon good grounds therefore they ascerted the Spherical form of the Whole: and
also concluded the Parts to be Round: I mean, very entire Subsistence, as the
Stars, Planets, and the Earth. In the Celestial Bodies (as the Stars and
Planets) this is also visible; and therefore un-controullable: But that the
Earth is Round proves with the unskilful matter of dispute; they frequently
objecting with S. Austine the words of the Scripture, which say, He has
stretched forth the corners of the Earth; not considering whether those words
were spoken as alluding to the amplitude of Gods Omnipotence; or that the
Corners were meant Capes of Land, which indeed are stretched forth into the
Sea. But that the Earth is Round is proved by diverse certain and infallible
Reasons,

As first, By the Navigations of our Age, Diverse able and honest Mariners
having Sailed and continued an Easterly Course, have at length arrived (without
turning back) to the same place from whence they set forth: witness
Magellanicus, Sr. Francis Drake, Tho. Cavendish, Oliver vander Noort, W.
Schouten, etc.

Secondly, By the length of degrees in every Parallel; for it is found by Daily
observation that the degrees of every Parallel upon the Earth, hold the same
proportion to the degrees of the Equinoctial, as the degrees of the same
Parallel upon an Artificial Globe or Sphere do to the degrees of the greatest
Circle of the same: This Argument alone is sufficient: yet take one more from
Visible Appearance: And that is this: The shadow which the Earth and Water
together make in the Eclipse of the Moon is always a part of a Circle;
therefore the Earth and Water which is the Body shadowing must also be a
Circular or round Body; for if it were three square, four square, or any other
form, then would the shadow which it makes in the Moon be of the same fashion.

Besides, Of all figures the Sphere or Globe is most perfect, most Capacious,
and most entire of it self, without either joints or Angles; which form we may
also perceive the Sun, Moon, and Stars to have, and all other things that are
bounded by themselves, as Drops of Water, and other liquid things.

But there is another frequent Argument against the Globulus form of the Earth;
and that is, That it seems impossible that the Earth should be round, and yet
also Inhabible in all Places: For though we that inhabit on the top of the
Earth go with our heads upwards; yet those that inhabit underneath us must
needs go with their Heads downwards, like Flies on a Wall or Ceeling; and so be
in danger of falling into the Air.

For Answer hereunto, first, You must understand that in the Center of the
Earth there is an Attractive and drawing power, which draws all heavy
substances to it: by virtue of which Attractive power, things though loosed
from the Earth will again incline and cling to the Earth, and so much the more
forcibly, by how much the heavier they are; as a bullet of Lead let fall out of
the Air, inclines toward the Earth far more violently and swiftly then a
bullet of the same bigness of Wood, or Cork.

Secondly, you must understand that in respect of the whole Universe there is
no part either upper or under, but all parts of the Earth are alike incompast
with Heaven; yet in respect of the Earth, it is Heaven, which we take for the
upper part; and therefore we are said to go with our heads upwards, because our
head (of all the parts of our body) is nearest to Heaven.

Now that this Attractive power lies in the Center of the Earth, is proved by
this Argument: If the Attractive power were not in the Center, a Plumb-line let
fall would not make Right Angles with the Superficies of the Earth; but would
eb Attracted that way the Attractive virtue lies, and so make unequal Angles
with the Superficies: But by so many Experiments as has yet been made, we find
that a Plumb-line continued, though never so deep, yet it alters no Angles with
the Superficies of the Earth; and therefore undoubtedly the Attractive power
lies in the very Center, and no where else.

CHAP. I.
I. What a Globe is.
A Globe according to the Mathematical Definition, is a perfect and exact round
Body contained under one surface.

Of this form (as has been proved) consists the Heavens and the Earth: and
therefore the Ancients with much pains Study and Industry, endeavoring to
imitate as well the imaginary as the real appearances of them both, have
Invented two Globes; the one to represent the Heavens, with all the
Constellations, fixed Stars. Circles, and Lines proper thereunto, which Globe
is called the Celestial Globe; and the other with all the Sea Coasts, Havens,
Rivers, Lakes, Cities, Towns, Hills, Capes, Seas, Sands, etc. as also the
Rhumbs, Meridians, Parallels, and other Lines that serve to facilitate the
Demostration of all manner of Questions to be performed upon the same: and this
Globe is called the Terrestrial Globe.

II. Of the two Poles.
Every Globe has two Poles, the one North, the other South. The North Pole is
in the North point of the Globe: The South Pole in the South point.

III. Of the Axis.
From the Center of the Globe both ways, proceeds a line through both the
Poles, and continues it self infinitely; which is called the Axis of the World;
and is represented by the two wyers in the Poles of the Globe: Upon these two
wyers the Globe is turned round, even as the Heavens is imagined to move upon
the Axis of the World.

IIII. Of the Brazen Meridian.
Every Globe is hung by the Axis at both the Poles in a Brazen Meridian, which
is divided into 360, degrees; (or which is all one) into 4 Nineties: the first
beginning at the North Pole, is continued from the left hand toward the right
till the termination of 90 degrees, and is marked with 10, 20, 30, etc. to 90.
from whence the degrees are numbered with 80, 70, 60, etc. to 0. which is in the
South Pole: from whence again the degrees are numbered with 80, 70, 60, etc. to
0, and lastly, from 0 the degrees are numbered with 10, 20, 30, to 90. which is
again in the North Pole.

This Brazen Meridian is of great use; for by help of it you may find the
Latitude of all Places, the Declination of all the Stars, etc, and rectify the
Globe to any Latitude.

V. Of the Horizon.
The Horizon is a broad wooden Circle, encompassing the Globe; having two
notches in it; the one in the North the other in the South point: The notches
are made just fit to contain the Brazen Meridian that the Globe is hung in: In
the bottom or under Plane of the Horizon there stands up a rop or (as it is
called) a Bed, in which there is also a notch, into which notch the Brazen
Meridian is also let, so lo, as that both it and the Globe may be divided into
two equal halfs by the upper Plane of the wooden Horizon. These Notches are as
gages to keep the Globe from inclining more to the one side of the wooden
Horizon then the other.

Upon the upper Plane of the Horizon is several Circles delineated: as first,
the inner Circle, which is a Circle divided into twelve equal parts, viz. into
twelve Signs; every Sign having its name prefixed to it; as to the Sign of
is the word Aries; to the word Taurus, etc. every Sign is again divided into
30 equal parts, which are called Degrees, and every tenth degree is marked with
10, 20, 30.

Next to the Circle of Signs is a Calendar or Almanac, according to the Old
style used by us here in England, each Month being noted with its proper Name;
as January, February, March, etc. and every day distinguished with Arithmetical
figures, as 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. to the end of the Month.

The other Calender is a Calender of the New style; which is in a manner all
one with the Old; only in this Calender the month begins ten days sooner then
they do in the other: and to this Calender (because it was instituted by the
Church of Rome) there is annexed the Festival days Celebrated by the Romish
Church.

The two other Circles are the Circles of the Winds; the innermost having their
Greek and Latin names; which by them were but twelve; and the outermost having
the English Nanes, which for more preciseness are two and thirty.

The use of the upper Plane of the Horizon is to distinguish the Day from the
Night; the Rising and Setting of the Sun, Moon, or Stars, etc. and for the
finding the Azimuth, and Amplitude, etc.

VI. Of the Quadrant of Altitude.
The Quadrant of Altitude is a thin brass plate, divided into 90. degrees; and
marked upwards with 10, 20, 30, 40, etc. to 90. It is rivetted to a Brass Nut,
which is fitted to the Meridian; and has a Screw in it, to screw upon any
degree of the Meridian. When it is used it is screwed to the Zenith. Its use is
for measuring the Altitudes, finding Amplitudes, and Azimuths, and discribing
Almicantaraths. It would sometimes stand you in good steed if the Plate were
longer by the breadth of the Horizon then 90. degrees; for then that length
being turned back will serve you instead of an Index, when the Nut is screwed
to the Zenith, to cut either the degrees or Days of either Style, or the
Points of the Compass in any of those Circles concentrical to the innermost
edge of the Horizon, which the Ey cannot so well judge at.

VII. Of the Hour Circle, and its Index.
The Hour Circle is a small Brazen Circle, fitted on the Meridian, whose Center
is the Pole of the world: It is divided into the 24 hours of the Day and Night,
and each hour is again divided into halfs and quarters, which in a Revolution
of the Globe are all pointed at with an Index, which to that purpose is fitted
on the Axis of the Globe.

The use of the hour Circle is for showing the Time of the several mutations
and Configurations of Celestial Appearances.



VIII. Of the Nautical Compass, or Box and Needle.
Just under the East point of the Horizon, upon the undermost Plane, is
sometimes fixed a Nautical Compass, whose North and South line must be Parallel
to the North and South line of the Horizon. The use of it is for setting the
Angles of the Globe correspondent to the Angles of the World.

IX. Of the Semicircle of Position.
This is a Semicircle made of Brass, and divided into 180. degrees, numbered
from the Equinoctial on either side with 10, 20, 30, etc. to 90. at the two
ends there is an Axis, which is fitted into the two hole, of two small studs
fixed in the North and South points of the upper Plane of the Horizon: upon
this Axis it is moved up and down, according to the intent of your operation.

The use of this Circle of Position is, for the finding the twelve Astrological
Houses of Heaven; and also for finding the Circle of Position of any Star or
Point in Heaven.

Thus much may serve for the lineaments Circumjacent to the body of the Globe.
The next discourse shall be

CHAP. II.
Of the Circles, Lines, etc. discribed upon the Superficies of the Globe;
beginning with the Terrestrial Globe; and

I. Of the Equator.
THe Equator is a great Circle, encompassing the very middle of the Globe
between the two Poles thereof, and divides it into two equal parts, the one the
North part, and the other the South part. It is (as all great Circles are
divided into 360. equal parts, which are called Degrees. Upon this Circle the
Longitude is numbered, from East to West: and from this Circle both ways, viz.
North and South the Latitude is reckoned. It is called the Equator, because
when the Sun comes to this line (which is twice in one year, to wit, on the
tenth of March, and the eleventh of June) the Days and Nights are equated, and
both of one length.

II. Of the Meridians.
There are infinite of Meridians, for all places lying East or West from one
another have several Meridians; but the Meridians delineated upon the
Terrestrial Globe are in number 36. so that between two Meridians is contained
ten degrees of the Equator. From the first of these Meridians (which is divided
into twice 90 degrees) accounted from the Equator toward either Pole) is the
beginning of Longitude, which upon our English Globes is at the I Will Gratiosa,
one of the Isles of the Azores, and numbered in the Equator Eastwards, with 10,
20, 30, etc. to 360. round about the Globe, till it end where it began.

They are called Meridians, because they divide the Day into two equal parts:
for when the Sun comes to the Meridian of any Place, it is then Midday, or full
Noon.

III. Of the Parallels.
As the Meridians are infinite, so are the Parallels; and as the Meridian lines
delineated upon the Globe are drawn through no more then every tenth degree of
the Equator, so are the Parallels also delineated but upon every tenth degree
of the Meridian; lest the Globe should be too much filled with superfluity of
lines, which might obscure the small names of Places. The Parallel Circles run
East and West round about the Globe, even as the Equator; only the Equator is a
great Circle; and these are every one less then other, diminishing gradually
till they end in the Pole. The Parallels are numbered upon the Meridian with 10,
20, 30, etc. to 90. beginning in the Equator, and ending in the Pole.

They are called Parallels; because they are Parallel to the Equator.

IIII. Of the Ecliptic, Tropicks, and Polar Circles.
These Circles though they are delineated upon the Terrestrial Globe, yet they
are most proper to the Celestial; and therefore when I come to the Celestial
Globe, I shall define them unto

V. Of the Rhumbs.
The Rhumbs are neither Circles nor straight lines, but Helispherical or Spiral
lines: They proceed from the point where we stand, and wind about the Globe
till they come to the Pole; where at last they loose themselves. They represent
the 32 winds of the Compass.

Their use is to show the bearing of any two places one from another: that is
to say, upon what point of the Compass any shore or Land lies from another.

There are many of them described upon the Globe, for the better directing the
ey from one shore to the other, when you seek after the bearing of any two
Lands. Some of them (where there is room for it) have the figure of the
Nautical Card drawn about the Center or common intersection, and have (as all
other Cards have) for the distinction of the North point, a Flowerdeluce
pictured thereon.

They were first called Rumbs by the Portugals; and since used by Latin
Authors, and therefore that name is continued by all Writers that have occasion
to speak of them.

VI. Of the Lands, Seas, Islands, etc. Described upon the Terrestrial Globe:
The Land described upon the Globe is bounded with an irregular line, which
runs turning and winding into Creeks and Angles, even as the shore which it
represents (does) For the better distinction of Lands, etc, this line is
cullered close by one side thereof with diverse Cullers, as with red, yellow,
green, etc. these cullers distinguish one part of the Continent from the other;
and also one Island from another. That side of the line which incompasses the
Cullers, is the bounds of the Land; the other side of the line which is left
bare without Cullers, is the limits of the Water.

The Land is either Continents, or Islands.

A Continent is a great quantity of Land, not interlaced or separated by the
Sea, in which many Kingdoms and Principalities are contained; as Europe, Asia,
Africa, America.

An Island is a part of the Earth, environed round with Waters; as Britain,
Java, S. Laurence Isle, Barmudas, etc.

These again are sub-divided into Peninsula, Istmus, Promontorium.

A Peninsula is almost an Island; that is, a track of Land which being almost
encompassed round with Water, is joined to the firm Land, by some little
Istmus; as Molacca in the East Indies, etc.

An Istmus is a little narrow neck of Land, which joyneth any Peninsula to the
Continent; as the Straits of Dariene in Peru, and Corinth in Greece.

Promontorium, is some high Mountain, which shoots it self into the Sea, the
utmost end of which is called a Cape, as that great Cape of Good Hope, and Cape
Verde in Africa.

The Water is either Ocean, Sea, Straits, Creeks, or Rivers.

The Ocean is that general collection of all Waters, which invironeth the
whole Earth on every side.

The Sea is a part of the Ocean; to which we cannot come, but through some
Strait, as Mare Mediterraneum, Mare Balticum, and the like.

These two take their names either from the adjacent places, as the British
Ocean, the Atlantic Sea, etc. or from the first discovere as Mare
Magellanicum; Davis, and Forbishers Staits; etc. Or from some remarkable
accident, as Mare Rubrum, from the red color of the Sands; Mare Aegeum, Pontus
Euxinus, and the like.

A Strait, is a part of the Ocean restrained within narrow bounds, and opening
a way to the Sea; as the Straits of Gibralter, Hellespont, etc.

A Creek is a crooked shore, thrusting out as it were two arms to embrace the
Sea, as Sinus Adriaticus, Sinus Persicus etc.

A River is a small branch of the Sea, flowing into the Land; as Thames, Tiber,
Rhine, Nilus etc.

Now that these Lands, Islands, Towns, Seas, Rivers, etc. may at the first
search be found upon the Globe, all Geographers have placed them thereon
according to Longitude, and Latitude,

VII. Longitude.
The Longitude is an Arch of the Equator, comprehended between the first
Meridian and the Meridian of the Place you inquire after. It is numbered on the
Equator from the West to the Eastwards, with 10, 20, 30, to 360. degrees, till
it end where it began.

VIII. Latitude.
The Latitude is an Arch of the Meridian, comprehended between the Equator and
the place enquired after. It is numbered on the Meridian, from the Equator both
ways, viz. North and South, till it come to the Poles, or 90 degrees.

Thus much may serve for the description of the Terestrial Globe: I therefore
come to treat of the Celestial.

CHAP. III.
Of the Celestial Globe, or the Eighth Sphere, represented by the Celestial
Globe: its motion, and of the Circles, Lines, Images, Stars, etc. described
thereon.

I. Of the eighth Sphere.
THe eighth Sphere which is the starry Heaven, is represented by the Celestial
Globe, because upon the Convexity of it all the Stars and visible appearances
are placed according to the order that they are situated in the concavity of
the eighth Sphere. It is called the eighth Sphere, because between it and us
are contained seven other Heavens, or Spears; as 1. the Moon, 2. Mercury, 3.
Venus, 4. the Sun, 5. Mars, 6. Jupiter, 7. Saturn. and eighthly the starry
Heaven. The ancients have made the Systeme of the world to consist of 2 other
Spears, called the Chiristiline Heaven, and the Primum Mobile, or first Mover:
as in the following figure is represented.

A figure wherein may be seen the Composition of the whole frame of the World.


II. Of the Motion of the eighth Sphere.
There has bin attributed to the eighth Sphere a twofold motion; the one
called its Diurnal Motion, which is made from East to West upon the Poles and
Axis of the World: And the other called its Second motion; which is made from
West to East upon the Poles and Axis of the Ecliptic.

The Diurnal motion is caused by the violent Motion of the Primum Mobile; for
in 24 hours it carries along with it, not only the eighth Heaven or Orb of
fixed Stars, but the Orbs of the Sun, the Moon, and all the rest of the
Planets. It is called the Diurnal Motion because it is finished in one Day.

The second Motion is unproperly attributed to the eighth Sphere; it being
indeed the Motion of the Equinoctial; tho Authors sometimes carelessly mention
the one instead of the other. Therefore in the next Section, where I treat of
the Equinoctial, I shall at large explain unto you the nature of this
mis-called Second Motion.

III. Of the Equinoctial.
The Equinoctial upon the Celestial Globe, is the same line formerly called the
Equator upon the Terrestrial; only with this difference, that the Equator
remains fixed upon the Terrestrial Globe, but the Equinoctial upon the Celestial
Globe is moveable; (or at least must be imagined to move) contrary to the
Diurnal motion from West to East, upon the Poles of the Ecliptic: I say
imagined to move, because in the Heavens it does really move, tho on a material
Globe it would be inconvenient to make a moveable Equinoctial, and therefore it
has one fixed: which for this and the next age will sufficiently serve,
without much deviation from the truth it self.

Now that the difference between the Equator upon the Terrestrial Globe, and
the Equinoctial upon the Celestial, may be proved; and the motion of the
Equinoctial be the better understood; I shall only bring this example,

All places that were formerly under the Equator, do and will keep the same
Longitude, and remain still under the Equator: as may be proved by comparing
the Ancient and modern Geographers together: but those Stars that were formerly
under the Equinoctial, do not keep the same Longitude, nor remain under the
Equinoctial: because the Equinoctial (as aforesaid) has a motion from West to
East, upon the Poles of the Ecliptic. But the Stars being fixed in their one
Sphere, like knots in wood, and therefore move not, are by the Precession of
the Equinox left behind the Equinoctial Colure, and so are caused to alter
their Longitude; as by comparing the Observations of ancient and modern (...)
together, it will appear: for about 346 years before Christ, the first Star in
the Rams horn was by the Egyptian and Grecian Astronomers observed to be in the
Equinoctial Colure: and 57 years ago, when Tycho observed, it was found to be
in 27 degrees 37 minutes of. So that in about 2000 years it is moved forwards
28 degrees, and will according to Tycho's opinion, finish its Revolution in
25412 years: According to which motion, I have Calculated this following Table,
for finding the Degrees and Minutes of the Equinoctial motion, answerable to
any number of years within the said Revolution.

ye. degrees. m years. degrees. m. 1 0 0 100 1 25 2 0 1 200 2 50 3 0 2 300 4 15 4 0 3
400 5 40 5 0 4 500 7 5 6 0 5 1000 14 10 7 0 5 2000 28 20 8 0 6 3000 42 30 9 0 7
4000 56 40 10 0 8 5000 70 50 20 0 17 10000 141 40 40 0 34 20000 283 20 60 0 51
25000 354 10 80 1 8 25412 360

This Table may be of use for finding the Equinoctial position of any Star, for
any year either past, present, or to come. Its use is very easy, for if you
desire to know the motion of the Equinox for any number of years, you need but
seek your number in the Collumn of years, and against it you have the degrees
and minutes of the Equinoctial motion.

But tho the Stars have this motion one way, viz. in Longitude, yet do they not
at all alter their Latitudes; because the motion of the Equinoctial is made
upon the Poles of the Ecliptique.

IIII Of the Ecliptique.
The Ecliptique is a great Circle, lying oblique or aslope from the
Equinoctial, making an Angle of 23 degrees with it: It cuts the Equinoctial
into two equal parts, and is cut by the Equinoctial in two opposite points,
viz., and. It divides the Globe into two equal parts, called Hemisphears; the
one the Northern and the other the Southern Hemisphear. It is divided into 12
equal parts, which are called the twelve Signs, every part being noted with
the Character of the Signs belonging unto it; as unto Aries,: to Taurus,: to
Gomini, (...); and so of the rest. From every one of these 12 divisions proceed
both ways viz. North, and South, Circles of Longitude, into the Poles of the
Ecliptique. Each of these twelve Signs is divided into 30 equal parts, which
are called degrees; and are numbered upon every tenth degree with 10, 20, to 30,
and upon may new Celestial Globe, for more preciseness, every degree is again
divided into halfs.

It is called the Ecliptique as being derived from the Greek word: (...) which
signifies to want light, because in and about it happen all the defects and
Eclipses both of the Sun and the Moon.

It is also called the Way of the Sun, because the Sun goes always under it,
passing through it in all his Annual Course.

V. Of the Poles of the Ecliptic.
There are two Poles of the Ecliptic, the one the North Pole, the other the
South Pole; and are called North or South according to their position next the
North or South Pole of the World. Each it distant from its correspondent Pole
of the World 23 degrees 30 minutes.

As on the Terrestrial Globe all the Meridians discribed thereon meet in the
Pole of the World, so on the Celestial all the Circles of Longitude drawn
through the twelve Signs meet in the Poles of the Ecliptic.

VI. Of the Axis of the Ecliptic.
Through the two Poles of the Ecliptic is imagined to pass a straight line,
through the Center of the Plain of the Ecliptic; which is called the Axis of
the Ecliptic, upon which the second motion of the Ecliptic is performed: even
as the Diurnal motion is performed upon the Axis of the World.

VII. Of the Colures, and Cardinal Points.
There are two great Circles cutting one another at right angles in the Poles
of the World, which are called the Colures. Each Colure receives an additional
name from the point in the Ecliptic that it Cuts; as the one passes from Pole
to Pole through the beginning of and, which being two Equinoctial Signs, name
therefore that Colure the Equinoctial Colure: The other passes through the
beginning of and, which are Solsticial Signs, and therefore names that the
Solsticial Colure.

These Colures by intersecting one another, divide themselves into four
Semi-circles; and these Semi-circles divide the Ecliptic into four equal
parts. viz. in,,, and,

The points of the Ecliptic that these intersections pass through, are called
the four Cardinal points, and are of great use in Astronomy; for according to
the Suns approach to any of them, the Season of the year is altered into
Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter: as shall be showed hereafter.

VIII. Of the Tropicks.
There are two smaller Circles Parallel to the Equinoctial, which are called
the Tropicks; the one called the Tropic of Cancer, the other the Tropic of
Capricorn: they are distant from the Equinoctial 23 degrees 30 minutes; and
therefore are the bounds of the Ecliptic. They receive their names from the
Celestial Sign that they are joined unto; as the one the Tropic of Cancer,
because it touches the Sign of Cancer; the other the Tropic of Capricorn,
because it touches the Sign of Capricorn.

IX. Of the Circles Arctick and Antarctick.
About the Poles of the World are two small Circles described; the one called
the Arctick, the other the Antartick: That in the North is called the Arctick
Circle: that in the South the Antarctick Circle.

They have the same distance from the Poles of the World that the Tropicks have
from the Equinoctial Circle, (viz. 23 degrees 30 minutes) and that the
Ecliptic has from the Poles of the World; and therefore run through the Poles
of the Ecliptic.

X Of the Images called Constellations, drawn upon the Celestial Globe.
Here I think fit to be beholding to Dr. Hood. for the pains he has taken in
his comment upon the Images and Constelations. He says, The stars are brought
into Constellations, for instructions sake: things cannot be taught without
names, to give a name to every star had been troublesome to the Master, and for
the Scholar; for the Master to devise, and for the Scholar to remember: and
therefore the Astronomers have reduced many stars into one Constellation, that
thereby they may tell the better where to seek them; and being sought, how to
express them.

All the Constellations formerly notified by the Ancients were in number 48.
twelve whereof we call the twelve Signs of the Zodiac, viz. 1 Aries,. 2
Taurus,. 3 Gemini,. 4 Cancer,. 5 Leo,. 6 Uirgo,. 7 Libra,. 8 Scorpio,. 9
Sagittarius,. 10 Capricorn,. 11 Aquarius,. 12 Pisces.. One and twenty more are
Placed in the North Hemisphear, and are called 1 Ursa minor, 2 Ursa Major, 3
Draco, 4 Cepheus, 5 Boots, 6 Corona Septentri, 7 Hercules, 8 Lyra, 9 Cygnus,
10 Cassiopeia, 11 Perseus, 12 Auriga, 13 Serpentarius, 14 Serpens Ophiuchi, 15
Sagitta, 16 Aquila, 17 Delphinus, 18 Equiculus, 19 Pegasus, 20 Andromeda, 21
Triangulum. The other 15 are situated in the South Hemisphear, and called 1
Cetus, 2 Orion, 3 Eridanus, 4 Lepus, 5 Canis Major, 6 Canicula, 7 Argo Navis, 8
Hydra, 9 Crater, 10 Corvus, 11 Centaurus, 12 Lupus, 13 Ara, 14 Corona Austrina,
15 Pisces Austrina. Besides there are 2 other Constellations in the North
Hemisphear, viz. Antinous, and Coma Berenices: which because they were not
specified by the Ancients are here inserted apart.

Now the Astronomers did bring them into these figures, and not into other,
being moved thereto by these three reasons: first these Figures express some
properties of the stars that are in them; as those of the Ram to be hot and
dry; Andromeda chained, betokens imprisonment: the head of Medusa cut off,
signifies the loss of that part: Orion with his terrible and threatening
gesture, imports tempest, and terrible effects: The Serpent, the Scorpion,
and the Dragon, signify poison: The Bull, insinuates a melancholy passion:
The Bear infers cruelty, etc. Secondly, the stars, (if not precisely yet
after a sort) do represent such a Figure, and therefore that Figure was
assigned them: as for example, the Crown, both North, and South; the Scorpion
and the Triangle, represent the Figure which they have. The third cause, was
the continuance of the memory of some notable men, who either in regard of
their singular pains taken in Astronomy, or in regard of some other notable
deed, had well deserved of man kind.

The first Author of every particular Constellation is uncertain; yet are they
of great antiquity; we receive them from Ptolomte, and he followed the
Platonicks; so that their antiquity is great. Moreover we may perceive them to
be ancient by the Sciptures; and by the Poets. In the 38 Chapter of Job there
is mention made of the Pleiades, Orion, and Arcturus, and Mazzaroth, which some
interpret the 12 Signs: Job lived in the time of Abraham, as Syderocrates
makes mention in his Book de Commensurandis locorum distantiis.

Now besides all this, touching the reason of the invention of these
Constellations, the Poets had this purpose, viz. to make men fall in love with
Astronomy: And to that intent have to every Costellation invented strange
conceited stories, (as you may read at the latter end of this Book) therein
imitating Demosthenes, who when he could not get the people of Athens to hear
him in a matter of great moment, and profitable for the Commom-wealth, he began
to tell them a tale of a fellow that sold an Ass; by the which tale, he so
brought on the Athenians, that they were both willing to hear his whole
Oration, and to put in practice that whereto he exhorted them. The like intent
had the Poets in of those Stories: They saw that Astronomy being for commodity
singular in the life of man, was almost of all men utterly neglected: Hereupon
they began to set forth that Art under Fictions; that thereby, such as could
not be persuaded by commodity, might by the pleasure be induced to take a view
of these matters: and thereby at length fall in love with them. For commonly
you shall note this, that he that is ready to read the Stories, cannot content
himself therewith, but desires also to know the Constellation, or at leastwise
some principal Star therein.

There are in Heaven yet twelve Constellations more, posited about the South
Pole, which were added by Frederic^ Ho^tmanno, inhabiting on the Island Sumatra
who being accommodated with the Instruments of that immortal Tycho, has
observed the Longitude and Latitude of those Stars, reduced them into
Constellations, and named them as follows, 1 The Crane, 2 The Phoenix, 3 The
Indian, 4 The Peacock, 5 The Bird of Paradise, 6 The Fly. 7 The Camelion. 8 The
South Triangle, 9 The Flying Fish, 10 Dorado, 11 The Indian Fowl, 12 The
Southern Serpent.

XI. Of the Number of the Stars.
Although in Heaven there be a very great number of visible Stars, which for
their multitude seem innumerable; yet no wise man will from thence infer that
they are impossible to be counted: for there is no Star in Heaven that may be
seen, but its Longitude and Latitude may with meet Instruments for that purpose
be exactly found; and being once found, it may have a name allotted it, which
with its Longitude and Latitude may be Catalogized either for the memory of the
Observer, or the knowledge of Posterity. Now therefore if any one Star may be
observed, they may all be observed; and then may they all have Names given
them; which tho to the ignorant it seem uncredible, yet to the sons of God, (as
Josephus call Astronomers) who herein participate of their fathers knowledge,
it is easy to number the Stars, and call them all by their Names Psalm. 97, 4.

But tho all the Stars in Heaven may be numbered and named, yet have not the
Ancient Astronomers thought fit to take notice of more then 1025 of the
chiefest that are visible in our Horizon, they being sufficient for any purpose
that we shall have occasion to apply them unto. Yet of late the industry of
Frederick Houtman aforesaid, has added to the Catalogue 136 Stars, with their
Longitude Latitude and Magnitude, and given Names unto them: which upon my New
Globes I have also ascerted, as may be seen about the South Pole thereof. So
that with these 1025, observed by the Ancients, and these 136, the whole number
of the Catalogue is 1161.

Some other Stars of late have been also observed by Bai^rus, among the several
Constellations aforesaid; but none of any Considerable Magnitude, and therefore
I think fit to pass them by, and come to their situation in Heaven, according
to Longitude and Latitude.

XII. Of the Situation of the Stars:
The Stars are Situate in Heaven according to their Longitude and Latitude As
the Longitude of any Place upon the Terrestrial Longitude of the Stars
Globe is an Arch of the Equator, Comprehended between the first Meridian and
the Place. So the Longitude of any Star upon the Celestial Globe is an Arch of
the Ecliptic, contained between the first point of and the Star inquired
after. But yet because the Ecliptic is divided into twelve Signs, the
Longitude of a Star is therefore (in the most Customary account) an Arch of the
Ecliptic comprehended between the Semicircle of Longitude passing through the
beginning of the Sign the Star is in, and the Semicircle of Longitude passing
through the Center of the Star.

The Latitude of a Star is either North or South: North, if on Latitude of the
Stars
the North side of the Ecliptic; South, if on the South side of the Ecliptic.
As the Latitude of any Place upon the Terrestrial Globe is an Arch of the
Meridian, contained between the Equator and the Parallel of the Place, So is
the Latitude of any Star upon the Celestial Globe an Arch of a Semicircle of
Longitude, comprehended between the Equinoctial and the Star inquired after.

XIII. Of the Magnitudes of the Stars:
For the better distinction of the several sizes of Stars, they are divided
into six several Magnitudes. The biggest and brightest Stars are called Stars
of the first Magnitude: Those one degree inferior in light and bigness are
called Stars of the Second Magnitude, Those again one degree inferior to the
Stars of the second Magnitude, are called Stars of the Third Magnitude, and so
the Stars gradually decrease unto the sixth Magnitude, which is the smalest,
some few obscure Stars only excepted, which for their Minority and dimness are
called Nebula. These several Magnitudes of the stars are expressed on the Globe
in several shapes, as may be seen in a small Table placed on the Globe for that
purpose.

Now for your further satisfaction and delight, I have inserted a Collection of
D. Hoods, wherein is expressed the measure of The meas^res^ of the severa Stars
every Magnitude, and the proportion it has, first, to the Diameter, and
secondly, to the Body of the Earth.

The greatness of any thing (says he) cannot be better expressed then by
comparing it to some common measure, whose quantity is known: The common
measure whereby Astronomers express the greatness of the Stars, is the Earth;

Sometimes they compare them with the Diameter of the Earth, sometimes with the
Globe thereof: The Diameter according to their account which allow but 60 miles
to a degree, contains 6822 8/11 miles; and the whole soliditie of the Globe
contains 165, 042, 481, 283. miles and 79/137. According to Ptolome, who
allotteth to every degree 62 miles, the Diameter contains 7159 miles 1/11,
and the whole soliditie of the Globe, has 192, 197, 184, 917, 473/1331 miles.

The proportion of the Diameters of the fixed Stars; Compared with the Diameter
of the Earth.
The Diameter of a fixed Star of the first Magnitude compared with the Diameter
of the Earth has such proportion to it, as 19 has to 4: therefore it
contains the Diameter of the Earth 4 times and.

The Diameter of a Star of the second Magnitude is unto the Diameter of the
Earth as 269 is to 60: therefore it contains it 4 times.

The Diameter of a fixed Star of the third Magnitude is unto the Diameter of
the Earth as 25 unto 6: therefore it contains it 4 times.

The Diameter of a fixed Star of the fourth Magnitude is unto the Diameter of
the Earth as 19 unto 5: therefore it contains it 3 times.

The Diam. of a fixed Star of the fifth Mag, is unto the Diameter of the Earth,
as 119 unto 36. therefore it contains it 3 11/36 times.

The Diam. of a fixed Star of the sixth Mag. is unto the Diame^ of the Earth,
as 21 unto 8; therefore it contains it times.

As for the proportions of the cloudie and obscure Stars, they are not
expressed because they are but few, and of no great account in respect of their
smalness.

The proportions of the fixed Stars compared with the Globe of the Earth, are
as follow.
A Star of the first Magnitude is to the Globe of the Earth, as 6859, to 64.
therefore it contains the Globe of the Earth 107 times.

A Star of the second Magnitude is to the Globe of the Earth, as 19465109 is to
216000. therefore it contains it 90 times.

A Star of the third Magnitude is to the Globe of the Earth, as 15625 is unto
216: therefore it contains it 72 times.

A Star of the fourth Magnitude is to the Globe of the Earth as 6850 is unto
125: therefore it contains the Globe of the Earth 54 11/12 times.

A Star of the fifth Magnitude is to the Globe of the Earth, as 1685159: is
unto 46656: therefore it contains the Globe of the Earth 36 times.

A Star of the sixth Magnitude is to the Globe of the Earth, as 9261 is unto
512: therefore it contains the Globe of the Earth 18 1/10 times.

I confess all this may seem matter of incredulity to those whose understanding
is swayed by their visual sense; but if they be capable to consider the vast
distance of those Huge Bodies, (the Stars) from the face of the Earth, and also
the diminutive quality of Distance, their reason will be rectified, and their
incredulity turned into an acknowledgement of the unspeakable wisdom of
Almighty God; and they will say with the Psalmist, Great is our Lord, Great is
his Power, his Wisdom is infinite. Psalm. 147. 5.

The distance of the Stars therefore from the Earth, is according to M. John
Dee's Computation, 20081 Semidiameters of the Earth. The Semidiameter of the
Earth contains of our common miles 3436 4/11, Such miles as the whole Earth
and Sea round about is 21600: allowing for every degree of the greatest Circle
60 miles: so that the distance of the Stars from the Earth is in miles
69006540. Now as M. Dee says, (almost in these same words) if you weigh well
with your self this little parcel of fruit Astronomical; as concerning the
bigness and distance of the Stars, etc. and the Huge massiness of the Starry
Heaven, you will find your Consciences moved with the Kingly Prophet to sing
the confession of Gods Glory; and say, The Heavens Declare the Glory of God,
and the firmament shows forth the works of his Hands.

XIIII. Of the Nature of the Stars.
To many of the Principal Stars there is in Planetical Characters prefixed
their Planetical Natures. The Astrologers make great use of them for knowing
the nature of the Stars: for those Stars that have the character of adjoined
are said to be of the nature of: those that have adjoined, are of the nature
of: and so of the rest. If a Star have the characters of two Planets adjoined,
that Star participates of both their Natures, but most of that Planets whose
character is first placed.

The use Astronomers make of those characters, is for knowing that culler of
any Star; as if a Star have adjoined, it is of the culler of; if, it is the
culler of, etc.

The fixed Stars are known from the Planets by their continual twinkling; for
the Planets never twinckle, but the fixed Stars do.

XV. Of Via Lactea, or the Milky way.
This subject because it is already so fully handled by Dr. Hood, that more
then he has written cannot well be said, either of his own oppinion or other
men's, I think fit therefore to give you his own words: which are as follow.

VIA LACTEA* or Circulus Lacteus; by the Latins so called; and by the Greeks,
Galaxia; and by the English, the Milky way. It is a broad white Circle that is
seen in the Heaven: In the North Hemisphear, it begins at Cancer, on each
side the head thereof, and passes by Auriga, by Perseus, and Cassiopeia, the
Swan, and the head of Capricorn, the tail of Scorpio, and the feet of Centaur,
Argo the Ship, and so unto the head of Cancer. Some in a sporting manner, do
call it Watling street; but why they call it so, I cannot tell; except it be in
regard of the narrowness that it seems to have, or else in respect of that
great High way that lies between Dover and S. Albons, which is called by our
men Watling street.

Concerning this Circle there are sundry opinions: for there is great
difference among some writers, both touching the place, matter, and efficient
cause thereof. Aristotle dissenteth from all other, both Philosophers and
Poets, in the place, matter, and cause of this Circle; saying, that it is a
Meteor engendered in the Air, made of the vapors of the earth, drawn up thither
by the heat of the Sun, and there set on fire. But his opinion is of all men
confuted.

First, touching the place, it cannot be in the Air; for whatsoever is in the
Air, is not seen of all men, at all times, to be under one and the same part of
Heaven. If we see it in the South, they that are in the West shall see it under
the East side of the Heaven; and they that are in the East, shall see it in the
West part of the Heaven; but this Circle is of all men seen always under the
same part of Heaven, and to be joined with the same Stars; therefore it cannot
be in the Air.

Again, for the matter, it cannot be made of that which Aristotle names (i.
e.) the vapors of the earth, because of the long continuance of the thing, and
that without any alteration: for it is impossible that any Meteor made of
vapors drawn up from the water, or exhalations from the earth, should last so
long; as may be seen in blazing Stars; which though they have continued long,
as namely, 16. months, some more, some less; yet at the length they have
vanished away: whereas this Circle has continued from the beginning unto this
day. Besides, put case it were made of these exhalations, Whence will they
infer the uniformity thereof? The Comets do alter diversely, both in the fashion
of their blazing, and also in their several quantities; whereas in this Circle,
there is nothing but the same part, always of one form and of one bigness. In
the e^^cient cause therefore he must needs err: for if it be neither in the
Air, nor made of the exhalations of the earth, it cannot be caused by the Sun;
for the one is the place and the other the matter, wherein, and whereupon the
Sun shows his power.

All other, (besides Aristotle) agree in the place, but dif^er in the efficient
cause thereof: and they are either Philosophers, or Poets. Both these affirm
that it is in the Firmament (i. e.) in the eight Sphere; but they disagree in
the cause thereof.

The Philosophers (and chiefly Demecritus) affirm the cause of the thing, to
be the exceeding great number of Stars in that part of Heaven, whose beams
meeting together so confusedly, and not coming distinctly to the ey, causes us
to imagine such a whiteness as is seen. But the best opinion is this, that this
Milky way is a part of the Firmament, neither so thin as the other parts
thereof are, not yet so thick as the Stars themselves. If it were as thin as
the other parts of the Heaven besides the Stars, then could it not retain the
light, but the light would pass through it and not be seen: If it were as thick
as the Stars, then would the light be so doubled in it, that it would glister
and shine, as the Stars themselves do: but being neither so thin as the one,
nor so thick as the other, it becomes of that whiteness we see.

Bla^u says, This Lactean whiteness and clearness arises from a great number
of little Stars, constipated in that part of Heaven: flying so swiftly from the
sight of our eyes, that we can perceive nothing but a confused light: this the
Tubus Diopticus (more lately found out) does evidently demonstrate to us: by
the benefit of which little Stars (otherwise inconspicuous to our eyes) are
there clearly discerned.

About the Southern Pole are seen two white spots, like little clouds, colured
like the via Lactea. One of which is trebble the Latitude of the other; some
Mariners call them Nubecula Magellani.

This Milkie way is discribed on the Globe between two tracks of small Pricks,
running through the Images mentioned in the beginning of this Section.

Thus have you the definition of the Globes; with the description of all the
lines, Circles, etc. described thereon. I shall now explain unto you the
meaning of Several words of Art, which in the use of them you will meet with,
and then come to the Use it self.

And first, what is meant by the word Horizon.

When I spoke of the Horizon before, I only mentioned the wooden Horizon or
frame about the Globe; which because it represents the Mathematical Horizon, is
therefore called the Horizon: but the word Horizon is to be considered more
particularly, two manner of ways: as

First, the Natural Horizon.

Secondly, the Mathematical Horizon.

The Natural Horizon is that Appearent Circle which divides the Visible part of
Heaven from the invissible; it extends it self in a straight line from the
Superficies of the Earth, every way round about the place you stand upon, even
into the very Circumference of the Heavens. It is onley discerned at Sea, or on
plain ground, that is free from all hindrances of the sight as Hills, Trees,
Houses, etc.

The Mathematical Horizon (which indeed is meant in this Treatise, so often as I
shall have occasion to name the word Horizon) is a great Circle which divides
that part of Heaven which is above us, from that which is under us, precisely
into two equal parts: whose Poles are the Zenith and Nadir. In this Circle the
Azimuths or Verticle Circles are numbered: and by this Circle our Days and
Nights are measured out unto us: for while the Sun is above the Horizon it is
day; and when it is under the Horizon it is Night.

This Circle is represented unto us by the upper Plain of the wooden Horizon:
Therefore so often as you are directed to bring any degree or Star etc. to the
Horizon, it must be understood that you must turn the Globe till the degree or
Star come just to the upper inner edge of the wooden Horizon.

The Zenith, and Nadir, are two points opposite to one another. The Zenith is
that point in Heaven which is directly over our Zenith.
Heads: and the Nadir is that point in Heaven which is directly Nadir.
under our feet.

The Azimuths or Verticle Circles are great Circles passing through the Zenith,
and Nadir, whose Poles are the Zenith and Azimuths, or Verticle Circles.
Nadir. And as the Meridians cut the Equator, and all Parallels to the Equator
at Right Angles, so the Azimuths cut the Horizon and all Almicanthars at Right
Angles also. The Azimuths (as the Meridians) are infinite; and are numbered by
degrees from the East and West point toward the North and South in the
Horizon: as also is the Amplitude.

The Almicanthars are Circles Parallel to the Horizon, Almicanthars, or Circles
of Altitude.
whose Poles are the Zenith and Nadir. They are also called Circles of
Altitude, because when the Sun Moon or any Star, is in any number of degrees
above the Horizon, it is said to have so many degrees of Altitude, which
degrees of Altitude are numbered upon the Verticle Circle from the Horizon
upwards, toward the Zenith. The Almicanthars are also infinite: as Parallels,
Meridians and Azimuths are.

The Amplitude is the number of degrees contained between Amplitude.
the true East or West point in the Horizon, and the rising or setting of the
Sun, Moon, or Stars. etc.

The Declination is the number of degrees that the Sun, Moon, Declination.
or any Star, is distant from the Equinoctial, toward either Pole: and has a
double Denomination, viz. North Declination, and South Declination: for if the
Sun Moon or Star swarve toward the North Pole, they are said to have North
Declination; if toward the South Pole, South Declination.

The Right Ascension is the number of degrees of the Equinoctial (accounted
from the first point of Aries) which comes Right Ascension.
to the Meridian with the Sun Moon or Star, or any other point in Heaven
proposed.

The Oblique Ascension is the number of degrees of the Equinoctial Oblique
Ascension.
which comes to the East side of the Horizon with the Sun Moon or any Star.

The Oblique Descension is the degrees of the Equinoctial Oblique Descension.
which comes to the West side of the Horizon with the Sun Moon or any Star.

The Ascensional Difference is the number of degrees after Ascensional
Difference.
subtraction of the Oblique Ascension from the (...) (...) ^scension, ^.

So many degrees as you are said to sail toward the Pole, you Raise the Pole.
Depress the Pole.
are said to Raise the Pole; and so many degrees as you sail from the Pole, you
are said to Depress the Pole.

Course, is the point of the Compass you sail upon; as if you sail Course.
East-wards, it is an Easterly Course, if West, a Westerly Course etc.

Distance is the number of leagues you have sailed from any Distance.
Place, upon any Course.

A Zone is a space of Earth contained between two Parrallels. Zone.
The ancient Geographers made five Zones in the Earth. Two Frozen, Two
Temperate, and one Burnt Zone.

The two Frozen Zones are those parts of the Globe, comprehended Frozen Zones.
between the North Pole and the Arctick Circle, and the South Pole and the
Antarctick Circle; by the Ancients called inhabitable; because the Sun being
always far remote from them, shoots its beams Obliquely upon them, which
Oblique beams are so very weak, that all their Summer is but a continued
Winter, and the Winter (as they thought impossible to be at all endured.

The Temperate Zones are the space of Earth contained between the Arctick
Circle and the Tropic of, and the Antarctick Temperate Zones.
Circle and the Tropic of: by the Ancients called Temperate and Habitable;
because they are composed of a sweet Mediocrity, between outrageous Heat and
extremity of Cold.

The Burnt Zone is the space of Earth contained between the Tropic of, and the
Tropic of, called by the Ancients Unhabitable; Burnt Zone.
because in regard the Sun never moves out of this Zone but darts its Beams
perpendicularly upon it, they imagined the Air was so unsufferable Hot, that it
was impossible for any to inhabit in this Zone. So that as you see they held
the two Temperate Zones only habitable; and the two Frozen Zones and one Burnt
Zone, altogether unpossible to be inhabited. But their Successors either
animated by industry, or compeld by necessity, have apparently confuted that
Assertion; for at this time many thousands can witness that their bloods are
not so greasy as to be melted in the Scortching heat of the one, or so watery
as to be congealed in the Icy frosts of the other.

The Ancients have yet otherwise divided the Earth into four and twenty
Northern Climates, and four and twenty Southern Climates.
Climates: so that in all there is eight and forty Climates. The Climates are
altered according to the half hourly increasing of the longest days; for in
the Latitude where the longest days are increased half an hour longer then
they are at the Equator (viz. longer then 12 hours) the first Climate begins;
and in the Latitude where they are increased an whole hour longer then in the
Equator, the second Climate begins; where the days are increased three half
hours longer then in the Equator, the third Climate begins; and so onwards, the
Climates alter according as the longest day increases half an hour, till you
come to find the longest day 24 hours long

Now the Ancients (in those times) knowing no more then nine Habitable
Climates, gave names only to nine. The first they called Dia Meroes, after the
name of a famous Inland Island, which is situate about the middle of that
Climate, and is now called Gueguere. The second Climate they called Dia Syenes,
after the name of an eminent City in Egypt, lying about the midst of that
Climate. The third Dia Alexanderas, after the name of the Metropolitan City of
Egypt. The fourth Dia Rhodes. The fifth Dia Romes. The sixth Dia Ponton. The
seventh Dia Boristheneos, The eighth Dia Ripheos. The ninth Dia Daniam.

These names belong only to the Climates on the North side of the Equator. But
those on the South side (in regard of the small Discoveries those Ages had on
that side the Equator) were distinguished only by the addition of the word Anti,
to the same Southerly Climate: as the first Southern Climate (which is that
Climate that lies as many degrees to the Southward as the first does to the
Northward) they called Anti Meroes. The second Anti Syenes. The third Anti
Alexanderas: and so on to the ninth.

In every Climate is included two Parallels, which are of the Parallels.
same nature with the Climates, save only that as the Climates alter by the
half hourly increasing of the longest day, the Parallels alter by the quarter
hourly increasing of the longest day.

Furthermore, in respect of the Horizon, we find the Sphere constituted into a
threefold Position: as first, into a Direct Sphere, Secondly, a Parallel
Sphere, Thirdly, an Oblique Sphere.

A Direct Sphere has both the Poles of the World in the Direct Sphere.
Horizon, and the Equinoctial transiting the Zenith. In a Direct Sphere all the
Circles Parallel to the Equator make right angles with the Horizon, and are
also divided into two equal parts by the Horizon: and in a Direct Sphere the
Sun Moon and Stars are always twelve hours above the Horizon, and twelve hours
under the Horizon, and consequently make twelve hours Day, and twelve hours
Night.

It is called a Direct Sphere because all the Celestial Bodies, as Sun Moon and
Stars etc. by the Diurnal Motion of the Primum Mobile, ascend directly above,
and descend directly below the Horizon.

They that inhabit under the Equator have the Sphere thus posited; as in the
Island Borneo, Sumaira, Celebes, St. Thomas a great part of Africa, Peru in the
West Indies: etc. as you may see by the Globe it self; if you move the Brazen
Meridian through the notch in the Horizon, till the Poles thereof touch the
Horizon. As in this Figure.



A Parallel Sphere has one Pole of the World in the Zenith, the other in the
Nadir, and the Equinoctial line in the Horizon. Parallel Sphere.


In a Parallel Sphere all the Circles Parallel to the Equinoctial are also
Parallel to the Horizon, and in a Parallel Sphere from the 10th of March to the
11th of September (the Sun being then in the Northorly Signs and consequently
on the North side the Horizon) there is six Months Day in the North, and six
Months Night in the South: and contrarily from the 11th of September to the
10th of March, (the Sun being then in the Southerly Signs, and therefore on
the South side the Horizon) there is six Months Day in the South, and six
Months Night in the North.

It is called a Parallel Sphere, because the Sun Moon or Stars in a Diurnal
Revolution of the Heavens, neither ascend higher or descend lower, but always
move Parallel to the Horizon.

The Earth is thus Posited under both the Poles, viz. in 90 degrees of
Latitude; as may be seen by the Globe, if you turn the Brazen Meridian till
either of the Poles be elevated 90 degrees above the Horizon. As in this figure.



An Oblique Sphere has the Axis of the World neither Direct Oblique Sphere.
nor Parallel to the Horizon, but lies aslope from it.

In an Oblique Sphere all the Celestial Bodies, as Sun Moon or Stars etc. have
(in respect of the Horizon) Oblique and unequal Ascensions and Descensions, and
all the lines Parallel to the Equator make unequal Angles with the Horizon, and
are cut by the Horizon into unequal parts; for those lines toward the elevated
Pole, have a greater portion of a Circle under the Horizon then above it: only
the Equator because it has the same Center with the Horizon, does divide the
Horizon into two equal parts, and is also divided into two equal parts by the
Horizon.

Hence is follows that when the Sun is in any part of the Ecliptic that
declines toward the elevated Pole, the Days in the elevated Hemisphear shall
be longer then the Nights: and when the Sun is in any part of the Ecliptic
that declines toward the Depressed Pole, the Nights shall be longer then the
Days. But when the Sun is in the Equinoctial, (because whether the Pole be
either Raised or Depressed) equal portions remain both above and under the
Horizon, therefore the Days are of the same length with the Nights, and the
Nights with the Days.

Also in an Oblique Sphere, all those Stars that have as great or greater
number of degrees of Declination then is the elevated Poles Complement of
Latitude to 90, never set or come under the Horizon, and those Stars that have
the same Declination about the Depressed Pole never rise.

It is called an Oblique Sphere, because all the Circles of the Sphere move
Obliquely about the Horizon.

The Earth is thus Obliquely posited to all those Nations that inhabit under
any degree of Latitude either North or South-wards between the Equator and
either Pole: as may variously be seen by the Globe, when the Axis lies not on
the Horizon, nor the Equator is Parallel to the Horizon. As in this following
Figure.



Moreover all Places have their Antipodes, Peraeci and Antae^i.

The Antipodes of any Place is the opposite degree on the Antipodes.
Globe. As if a Perpendicular were let fall from the Place you stand on,
through the Center of the Earth, and continued till it pass quite through the
Superficies of the Earth, on the other side; then in the point where the
Perpendicular cuts the Superficies of the Earth on the other side, is the
Antipodes of that Place.

The Inhabitants of any two Places that are in Antipodes to each other, go with
their Feet directly against one another: and have a contrariety in the Seasons
of the Year, and Risings, and Settings, of the Sun Moon Stars, and all other of
the Heavenly Bodies: so that when with us it is Spring, with them it is Autumn;
when with us the Sun Rises, in our Antipodes it Sets; and therefore their
Morning is our Evening, their Noon our Midnight, their Evening our Morning; and
their Longest Day our shortest.

The Periaeci of any Place is that point in the same Parallel which comes to
the Meridian with the Antipodes. Periaeci.


In the Periaeci of any Place, there happens not that Contrariety of Seasons in
the Year, that does in the Antipodes; nor in the Length of Days: for the Days
in both Places are of equal length: but in the times of the Day, there is the
same contrariety, for (though their Spring be our Spring, and therest of their
Seasons of the year the same with ours, yet) their Morning is our Evening,
their Night our Day, etc.

The Antaeci of any Place is the point under the same Meridian that is distant
from the Equator on the South side so many degrees Antaeci.
as your Place is distant from the Equator on the North side.

In the Antaeci there happens not that contrariety in the Days as does in the
Antipodes, but in the Seasons of the Year there is the same contrariety; for in
our Antaeci their Morning is our Morning, their Noon our Noon, their Night our
Night: but herein is the Difference, their Spring is our Fall, their Summer our
VVinter, etc. and their Longest Day our shortest: as in the ^ntipodes.

The Second Book. Showing the Practical Use of the GLOBES. Applying them to the
Solution of Astronomical and Geographical Problems.
PRAEFACE.
Some Advertisements in Choosing and Using the GLOBES.
1. SEE the Papers be well and neatly pasted on the Globes: which you may know,
if the Lines and Circles discribed thereon meet exactly, and continue all the
way even and whole: the lines not swerving out or in, and the Circles not
breaking into several Arches; nor the Papers either come short, or lap over one
the other.

2. See that the Culler be transparent, and ly not too thick on the Globe; lest
it hide the superficial Descriptions.

3. See the Globe hang evenly between the Meridian and Horizon, not inclining
more to one side then the other.

4. See the Globe swim as close to the Meridian and Horizon as conveniently it
may; lest you be too much puzzeld to find against what point of the Globe any
degree of the Horizon or Meridian is.

5. See the Equinoctal line be one with the Horizon, when the Globe is set in a
Parallel Sphere.

6. See the Equinoctal line cut the East and West point of the Horizon, when
the Globe is set to an Oblique Sphere.

7. See the Degrees marked with 90. and 00, hang exactly over the Equinoctial
line of the Globe.

8. See that exactly half the Meridian be above the Horizon, and half under the
Horizon: which you may know if you bring any of the Decimal Divisions to the
North Side of the Horizon, and find their Complement to 90. inth South.

9. See that when the Quadrant of Altitude is placed at the Zenith, the
Beginning of the Graduations reach just to the superficies of the Horizon.

10. See that while the Index of the Hour Circle (by the motion of the Globe)
passes from one hour to the other, 15. degrees of the Equator pass through the
Meridian.

11. If you have a Circle of Position, see the Graduations agree with those of
the Horizon.

12. See that your wooden Horizons be made substantial and strong; for (besides
the Inconveniences that thin wood is subject unto, in respect of warping and
shrinking) I have had few Globes come to mending that have not had either
broken Horizons, or some other notorious fault, occasioned through the
sleightness of the Horizons.

In the Using the Globes.
KEep the East side of the Horizon always toward you, unless your Proposition
requires the turning of it: which East side you may know by the Word East,
placed on the outmost verge thereof. For then have you the graduated side of
the Meridian always toward you; the Quadrant of altitude before you, and the
Globe divided exactly into two equal parts.

So often as I name to, at, of, or under the Meridian, or Horizon, I mean the
East side of the Meridian, and Superficies of the Horizon: because the East
side of the Meridian passes through the North and South points, both of the
Globe and Horizon; and agrees just with the middle of the Axis: And the
Superficies of the Horizon divides the Globe exactly into two equal parts.

It you happen to use the Globes on the South side the Equator, you must draw
the wyers out of either Pole, and change them to the contrary Poles; putting
the longest wire into the South Pole. And because on the other side the Equator
the South Pole is elevated, therefore you must elevate the South Pole of the
Globe above the Horizon; according to the South Latitude of your Place; as
shall be showed hereafter.

In the working some Problems it will be required that you turn the Globe to
look on the West side thereof: which turning will be apt to jog the Ball, so as
the degree that was at the Horizon or Meridian, will be moved away, and thereby
the Position of the Globe altered. To avoid which inconvenince you may make use
of a Quill, thrusting the Feather end between the Ball and the Brazen Meridian,
and so wedge it up, without wronging the Globe at all, till your Proposition be
answered.

PROBLEM I.
To find the Longitude and Latitude of Places, on the Terrestrial Globe.

SEek the Place on the Terrestrial Globe, whose Longitude and Latitude you
would know, and bring that Place to the Brazen Meridian; and see how many
degrees of the Equator is cut by the Meridian, from the first general Meridian,
(which on my Globes pass through Gratiosa, one of the Isles of the Azores,) for
that number of degrees is the Longitude of the Place.

Example.
I desire to know the Longitude of London, and close to the name London I find
a small mark 0 thus, (which small mark is in some Globes and Maps adorned with
the Picture of a Steeple, etc.) therefore I do not bring the word London to the
Meridian, but that small mark; for that always represents the the Town or City
sought for: And keeping the Globe steady in this Position, I examine how many
degrees of the Equator are contained between the Brazen Meridian, and the first
general Meridian; which I find to be 24. degrees. 00. min. Therefore I say the
Longitude of London is 24. degrees 00. min.

For the Latitude.
See on the Brazen Meridian how many degrees are contained between the Equator
and the mark for London; which in this Example is 51: therefore I say London
has 51 degrees North Latitude.

PROBLEM II.
The Longitude and Latitude being know, to Rectify the Globe fit for use.

1. WHen you rectify the Globe to any particular Latitude you must move the
Brazen Meridian through the notches of the Horizon till the same number of
degrees accounted on the Meridian from the Pole (about which the Hour-Circle
is) toward the North point in the Horizon (if in North Latitude, and toward
the South if in South Latitude) come just to the edge of the Horizon.

Example.
By the former Proposition I found the Latitude of London to be 51 degrees
North Latitude: therefore I count 51 degrees from the Pole downwards toward my
right hand, and turn the Meridian through the notches of the Horizon till those
51 degrees comes exactly to the uppermost edge of the North point in the
Horizon; and then is the Meridian rectified to the Latitude of London.

2. Next rectify the Quadrant of altitude, after this manner, Screw the edge
of the Nut that is even with the graduated edge of the thin Plate, to 51
degrees of the Brazen Meridian, accounted from the Equinoctial on the Southern
side the Horizon, which is just the Zenith of London: and then is your Quadrant
Rectified.

3. Bring the degree of the Ecliptic the Sun is in that day, to the Meridian:
which you shall learn to know by the next Problem, and then turn the Index of
the Hour Circle to the hour 12. on the South side the Hour Circle, and then is
your Hour Circle also rectified fit to use, for that Day.

4. Lastly If you will rectify the Globe to correspond in all respects with
the Position and Situation of the Sphere, you must set the four Quarters of
the Horizon. viz. East, West, North, and South, agreeable with the four
quarters of the World; which you may do by the Needle in the bottom of the
Horizon; for you must turn the Globe so long till the Needle point just to the
Flower de luce. Next you must set the Plain of the wooden Horizon parallel to
the Horizon of the World; which you may try by setting a common Level on the
four Quaters of the Horizon. And then positing the degree of the Ecliptic the
Sun is in, to the Height above, or depth below the Horizon, the Sun has in
Heaven, (as by the 11th Problem) your Globe is made Correspondent in all
points with the frame of the Sphere, for that particular Time, and Latitude.

PROBLEM III.
To find the Place of the Sun in the Ecliptic, the Day of the Month being
first known.

SEek the Day of the Month in the Circle of Months upon the Horizon, and
right against it in the Circle of Signs is the degree of the Ecliptic the Sun
is in.

Example.
Imagine the Day to be given is May 10. therefore I seek on the Horizon in the
Circle of Months, for May, and find the Months divided into so many parts as
there is Days in the Month; which parts are marked with Arithmetical figures,
from the beginning of the Month to the end, and denote the number of the Day
of the Month that each Division represents: therefore among the Divisions I
seek for 10, and directly against it in the Circle of Signs, I find 29.
degrees. Therefore I say May 10. the Suns Place is in 29. degrees of.

But note, that if it be Leap Year, instead of the 10. of May you must take the
11. of May: because February having in a Leap Year 29. Days, the 29. of
February must be reckoned for the first of March, and the first of March for
the second of March; the second of March for the third of March; and so
throughout the year.

The Leap Year is caused by the six od hours more then 365. days that are
assigned to every common Year: so that in a Revolution of 4. Years, one Day is
gained, which is added to February; and therefore February has every fourth or
Leap Year 29. Days.

PROBLEM IIII.
To find the Day of the Month, the Place of the Sun being given.

AS in the last Problem it was your task to find on the Horizon the Day of the
Month first, so now you must first seek the Sign and degree the Sun is in,
and against it in the Circle of Months you shall see the Day of the Month: As
against 29. you have May 10.

PROBLEM V.
The Place of the Sun given, to find its Declination.

HAving by the third Problem found the Suns Place on the Plain of the Horizon,
you must seek the same degree in the Ecliptic, on the Globe; then bring that
degree to the Brazen Meridian; and the number of degrees intercepted between
the Equinoctial and the degree just-over the degree of the Ecliptic the Sun is
in, is the Declination of the Sun for that Day: and bears its Denomination of
North or South, according to its Position either on the North or South side the
Equinoctial.

Example.
By the third Problem aforesaid, of May 10. I find 29. the Suns Place;
Therefore I seek in the Ecliptic Line on the Globe for 29. and bring it to the
East side of the Brazen Meridian, which is the graduated side; and over 29. I
find on the Brazen Meridian 20. degrees. 5. min. (numbered from the Equinoctial:)
and because is on the North side the Equinoctial, therefore I say, The Sun has
May 10. North Declination 20. degrees 5. min.

PROBLEM VI.
The Place of the Sun given, to find its Meridian Altitude.

THe Globe rectified, Bring the degree of the Sun to the Meridian, (or which is
all one, the degree of the Ecliptic the Sun is in;) and the number of degrees
contained between the Horizon and the Suns Place in the Meridian, is the number
of degrees that the Sun is Elevated above the Horizon at Noon, or (which is all
one) the Meridian Altitude of the Sun.

Example.
To know what Meridian Altitude the Sun has here at London, May 10. I bring
the Suns Place (found by the third Problem) to the Meridian, and count on the
Meridian the number of degrees contained between the Horizon and the degree
just over the Suns Place; which in this Example I find to be 58* Therefore I
say the Suns Meridian Altitude May 10. is here at London 58 degrees.

PROBL. VII.
The Suns Place given, to find the Hour of Sun Rising, and the length of the
Night and Day.

THe Globe and Hour Index rectified, Seek the degree the Sun is in on the
Globe, and bring that degree to the Eastern Side of the Horizon; and the Index
of the Hour Circle will point at the Hour of Sun Rising.

Example.
To know the Hour of Sun Rising here at London, May 10. The Suns Place (as
before) is 29. Therefore the Globe being rectified (as before) I seek 29.
degrees on the Globe, and bring that degree to the East Side of the Horizon;
and looking on the Index of the Hour Circle, I find it point at 4. a clock and
part of an hour more toward 5; therefore I say May 10. the Sun rises here at
London at (which is 12. minutes) after 4 a clock in the Morning.

If you double 4 hours 12. minutes, it gives you the length of the Night, 8
hours 24. minutes. And if you substract the length of the Night 8. hours 24.
minutes, from 24. hours, the length of Day and Night; it leaves the length of
the Day 15. hours 36. minutes.

PROB. VIII.
To find the Hour of Sun Set.

TUrn the Place of the Sun to the West side of the Horizon, and the Index of
the Hour Circle shows on the Hour-Circle the hour of Sun set; which on the 10th
of May aforesaid, is (...) parts of an hour after (...) 7. a clock at Night,
Viz. the Sun Sets at 48. minutes past 7. a clock.

PROB. IX.
To find how long it is Twilight in the Morning, and Evening.

TWilight is that promiscuous and doubtful light which appears before the
Rising of the Sun in the Morning, and continues after the setting of the Sun in
the Evening: It is made by the extension of the Suns beams into the Vapors of
the Air, when the Sun is less then 18. degrees. below the Horizon: for the Sun ere
it Rises, and after it Sets, shoots forth its Beams through the Air, and so
illuminates the Vapors of the Air; which illumination does by degrees
enlighten the Horizon, and spreads through the Zenith, even into the West, ere
the Sun Rises; and also continues above the Horizon, afte^ the Sun sets.

Now though it be Twilight when the Sun is 18. degrees below the Horizon; yet
the duration of Twilight (is alterable both in respect of Time) and Place: for
at such Time at the Sun is farthest distant from any Place, the Twilight shall
be greater, then when it is nearest. And in respect of Place, All Places that
have great Latitude from the Equator, have longer Twilight than those that are
nearer to the Equator: for as Authors say, under the Equator there is no
Twilight; when again in many Climes both Northward and Southward, the Nights
are indeed no Nights but only (as it were) a little overspread with a cloudy
Shade; and is either increased or diminished according to the ^autation of
Meo^erological Causes.

Therefore to know the beginning of Twilight in the Morning here at London, May
10; you must (having the Globe rectified) turn the degree of the Ecliptic
which is opposite to the Place of the Sun till it be elevated 18. degrees in
the Quadrant of Altitude above the Horizon in the West; So shall the Index of
the Hour-Circle point at the Hour that Twilight begins: Then subtract the Hour
and Minute that Twilight begins from the Hour and Minute of Sun Rising, if in
the Morning, or substract the Hour of Sun set from the Hour of Twilight, if at
Night; and the remainder is the length of Twilight.

Example.
The Globe Quadrant and Hour-Index being rectified, as before; and the Suns
place given, 29. I seek the opposite degree on the Globe, after this manner* I
bring 29. to the Meridian, and observe what degree of the Ecliptik the opposite
part of the Meridian cuts; and because I find it cuts 29. therefore I say 29.
is opposite to 29. Having found the opposite degree, I bring it into the West,
and also the Quadrant of Altitude, and join 29. to 18. degrees (accounted
upwards on the Quadrant) so shall 29. be depressed 18. degrees in the East Side
the Horizon: Then looking what Hour the Hour-Index points at in the
Hour-Circle, I find it to be, 1. Hor. 8. Min. which shows that Twilight begins
at 8. Minutes past 1. a clock in the Morning.

And if you substract 1. Hour 8. Minutes, from 4. Hours 11. Minutes, the time
of Sun Rising, found by the 7th. Problem, it leaves 3. Hours 3. Minutes for
the length of Twilight: And if you double 1. Hour 8. Minutes, the beginning of
Twilight, it makes 2. Hours 16. Minutes for the intermission of Time between
Twilight in the Evening, and Twilight in the Morning. So that May 10. absolute
Night is but 2. Hours 16. Minutes long, here at London.

The reason why you bring the degree opposite to the Suns Place to the West,
is, because the Quadrant containing but 90. degrees will reach no lower then
the Horizon; but this Problem requires it to reach 18. degrees beneath it:
therefore by this help, you have the Proposition Answered, as well as if the
Quadrant did actually reach 18. degrees below the Horizon. This shift you may
have occasion to make in some other Problemes.

If you would know when Twilight ends after Sun set; you shall find it by
bringing the degree of the Ecliptic opposite to the Place of the Sun to 18.
degrees of the Quadrant of Altitude, on the East side the Horizon; for then
shall the Index of the Hour-Circle point at 10. Hours 52. Minutes: which shows
that it continues Twilight till 52. Minutes past 10. a clock at Night, May 10.
here at London.

PROB. X.
The Suns Place given, to find its Amplitude; And also to know upon what point
of the Compass it Rises.

THe Globe etc. rectified: Bring the Suns Place to the East Side the Horizon;
and the number of degrees intercepted between the East point of the Horizon and
the Suns Place, is the number of degrees of Amplitude that the Sun has at its
Rising; and bears its denomination either of North or South, according to its
inclination to either point in the Horizon.

Or, if you would know upon what point of the Compass the Sun Rises, Look but
in the Circle of Winds; and against the Place of the Sun you have the name of
the point of the Compass upon which the Sun Rises.

Examples of both.
May 10. the Suns Place is 29. There^^re ^ the Globe being rectified; I bring
29. to the East side the Horizon, and find it touch against 33, degrees 20.
Minutes from the East point toward the North: Therefore I say the Sun has
North Amplitude 33, degrees 20. Minutes.

And to know upon what point of the Compass the Sun rises; I keep the Globe to
its Position, and look in the Circle of Winds, in the outmost verge of the
Horizon, and find the Suns Place against the Wind named North East and by East;
Therefore I say May 10. here at London the Sun rises upon the North East and
by East point of the Compass.

PROBL. XI.
The Hour of the Day given, to find the Height of the Sun.

THe Globe etc. Rectified. Turn about the Globe till the Index of the
Hour-Circle point (in the Hour-Circle) to the Hour of the Day: Then bring the
Quadrant of Altitude to the Suns Place in the Ecliptic, and the degree on the
Quadrant which touches the Suns Place, shall be the number of degrees of the
Suns Altitude.

Example.
May 10. here at London; At 53. Minutes past 8. a clock in the Morning, I would
know the Height of the Sun above the Horizon. Therefore I turn about the Globe
till the Index of the Hour-Circle come to 53: Minutes past 8. a clock (which is
almost 9.) in the Hour-Circle: And keeping the Globe to this Position, I bring
the Quadrant of Altitude to the Suns place, viz. (...) 29. (found by the third
Problem) and because the Suns Place touches upon 40. degrees of the Quadrant,
therefore I say May 10. 53. Minutes past 8. a clock in the Morning, here at
London, The Sun is just 40. degrees above the Horizon; or which is all one,
has 40. degrees of Altitude.

PROB. XII.
The Altitude (...) Sun, and Day of the Month given, to find the Hour of the
Day.

AN Hour is the 24th. part of a Day and a Night, or the space of time that 15.
degrees of the Equator takes up in An Hour defined.
passing through the Meridian; for the whole Equator which contains 360.
degrees, passes through the Meridian in 24. Hours, therefore 15. degrees which
is the 24th. part of 360, pass through in one Hour. These Hours are Vulgarly
divided into halfs, quarters, and half quarters; but Mathematically into
Minutes, Seconds. Thirds, Fourths, etc. A Minute is the 60th. part of an Hour,
so that 60, minutes make an Hour, 30, half an Hour, 15. a quarter of an Hour: A
Second is the 60th Minutes, Seconds, and Thirds, etc. defined.
part of a Minute: a third is the 60th part of a Second: a Fourth is the 60th
part of a Third: and so you may run on to Fifths, Sixths, Sevenths, etc. if you
please. 12. of these Hours make a Day, and 12. more make a Night: so that Day
and Night contain 24. hours as aforesaid* which are Volgarly numbered from Noon
with 1, 2, 3, to 12, at Night* and then begin again with 1, 2, 3, till 12 at
Noon: But by Astronomers they are Numbered from Noon with 1, 2, 3, etc. to 12.
at Night; and so forward to 13, 14, 15, till 24; which is just full Noon the
next Day. Yet in this Treatise I shall mention the Hours as they are Vulgarly
co^^ted, viz. from (...). after noon, to 12. at Night, and call the Hours after
Midnight by 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. in the Morning, to 12. at Noon again, the next
Day. But to the operation.

The Globe, etc. Rectified, Bring the Place of the Son to the Number of degrees
of Altitude accounted upon the Quadrant of Altitude, and the Hour-Index shall
point at the Hour in the Hour-Circle: yet herein respect must be had to the
Fore or After noons Elevation; as shall be showed in the next Problem.

Example.
May 10. The Sun is elevated 40. degrees above the Horizon, here at London:
Therefore having found the Place of the Sun, by the third Problem, to be ^29.
I move the Globe and Quadrant till I can join the 29. degree of (...) to the
40. degrees, upon the Quadrant of Altitude; and then looking on the Hour-Circle, I
find the Index point at 53. Minutes past 8. a clock, for the Fore noon
Elevation; and at 3. hours 7. Minutes for the After noons Elevation. Therefore
if it be Fore-noon, I say, It is 53. Minutes past 8. a clock in the Morning.
But if it be After noon I say, It is 7. Minutes past 3. a clock in the After
noon.

PROB. XIII.
How to know whether it be Before or After Noon.

HAving made one Observation, you must make a Second a little while after the
First; and if the Sun increase in Altitude, it is Before Noon: but if it
decrease in Altitude, it is After Noon.

Example.
The Sun was at 8. hor. 53. Min. elevated 40. degr. above the Horizon: A little
while after (suppose for examples sake aquarter of an hour,) viz. at 9. hor. 8.
Min. I observe again the height of the Sun, and find it 42. degrees high; so
that the Altitude is increased 2. degrees; Therefore I say, It is Fore-Noon:
But if the Sun had decreased in Altitude, I should have said it had been
Afternoon.

How to take Altitudes by the Quadrant, Astrolabe, and Cross-staff.
There are diverse Instruments whereby Altitudes may be taken: but the most in
use are the Quadrant, Astrolabe, and Cross-staff. A Quadrant is an Instrument
comprehended between two Straight lines making a Right Angle, and an Arch
discribed upon the Right Angle, as on the Center, containing 90. degrees, which
is a quarter of a Circle: and therefore the Instrument is called a Quadrant.
See this Figure.



A prepresents the Center; upon which is fastened a Plumb-line, A B the one
side, A C the other side, upon which the Sights are placed: B C the Arch or
Quadrant, which is divided into 90. equal parts, and numbered from B to C. D one
Sight, E the other Sight: F the Plumbet fastened to the Plumb-line.

When by this Instrument you would observe the height of the Sun, you must turn
the Center A to the Sun, and let the beams thereof dart in at the hole in the
first Sight D, through the hole in the second Sight E; so shall the Plumb-line
ly upon the degree in the Limb, of the Suns Elevation: As if the plumb-line ly
upon the 20th degree, then shall the Altitude be 20. degrees; if on 25. the
Altitude shall be 25. degrees: and so for any number of Degrees the thread or
Plumb-line lies on, the same number of Degrees is the Altitude of the Sun.

But if it be a Star whose Altitude you would observe; you must hold up the
Quadrant, and join the Limb to your Cheek bone, and turn the Center toward the
Star: then winking with one Ey, look through the holes of the Sights with the
other Ey, till you can see the Star through those holes; so shall the
Plumb-line (as before in the Sun) hang upon the degree in the Limb of the Stars
Elevation.

Another sort of Quadrants is made with a moveable Index, as is represented in
this Figure.



A is the Center, A Band A C the two sides, B C the Limb, D E two Sights fixed
upon a moveable Index or Label; F G two other Sights, for observing the Horizon.

When by this Quadrant you would observe an Altitude, the side B A must be
parallel to the Horizon, and the Index must be moved till the Object (be it
either the Sun Moon or any Star) be seen through the holes or slitts of the
Sights placed on the Index; for then the Arch D B shall be the Elevation
required. You may know when the side B A is parallel to the Horizon, by
observing the parting of Heaven from the Earth through the Sights on the Side B
A.

To take Altitudes by the Astrolabe.
The Astrolabe is a round Instrument, flat on either side, upon one of the
flats or Plains is discribed a Circle as B C D E, divided into 360, equal parts
or degrees, numbered from the line of Level B A C, with 10, 20, 30, etc. to 90.
in the Perpendicular D C. Upon the perpendicular is fastened a Ring as F, so as
the Instrument hanging by it, the line of Level may hang parallel to the
Horizon. Upon the Center is a moveable Label or Ruler, as G H, whereupon is
placed two Sights as I K.



If you desire further instructions for making this Instrument, you may peruse
Mr Wright in his Division of the whole Art of Navigation, annexed to his
Correction of Errors: where he also shows the use of it at large; which in
brief is as follows.

You must hold the Astrolabe by the Ring in your left hand, and turning your
right side to the Sun, lift up the Label with your right hand, till the beams
of the Sun entering by the hole of the uppermost Vane or Sight, does also pierce
through the hole in the nethermost Vane of Sight; and the degrees. and part of degrees.
that the Label lies on is the height of the Sun above the Horizon.

But if it be a Star you would observe; you must use the Astrolabe as you were
directed to use the Quadrant, holding it up to your Cheek bone, and looking
through the Sights, etc.

To take Altitudes by the Cross-staff.
This Instrument consists of a Staf about a yard long, and three quarters of an
inch square: Upon it is fitted a Vane, (or sometimes two, or three,) so as it
may slide pretty stiff upon the Staff, and stand at any of the Divisions it is
set to.



The making is taught by Mr Wright, aforesaid: But the use is as follows.

You must put that end of the Cross-staff which is next 90. degrees to your
Cheek bone, upon the outter corner of your Ey, and holding it there steady, you
must move the Vane till you see the Horizon joined with the lower end thereof,
and the Sun or Star with the higher end; then the degree and part of degree
which the Vane cutteth upon the Staff, is the height of the Sun or Star.

Some of these ways for taking Altitudes have been formerly taught by others,
that have treated upon the Use of Globes: and therefore because some would be
apt to think this Treatise uncompleat if I did not show these ways also, I
have thought fit to insert them: Yet the same things may be performed by the
Globe alone, without troubling your self with multiplicity of Instruments; if
your Globe be made with a hollow Axis; for then if the Globe stand Horizontal,
you shall by Observing the Object through the Axis have the degree of
Elevation, noted by the superficies of the Horizon.

PROB. XIV.
To observe with the Globe the Altitude of the Sun.

PLace the Globe so that the upper plain of the Horizon may stand parallel to
the Plain of the Horizon of your Place; as was taught by the Second Problem;
then turn the North Pole toward the Sun, and place it higher or lower, by
moving the Meridian through the notches of the Horizon, till the beams of the
Sun pierce quite through the Axis of the Globe: So shall the arch of the
Meridian comprehended between the Pole and the Horizon, be the number of
Degrees that the Sun is elevated above the Horizon.

Example.
March 20. just at noon, here at London, I would observe the Meridian Altitude
of the Sun. Therefore placing the Horizon Horizontal, as by the Second
Problem: I turn the North Pole toward the Sun, and move it with the Meridian
upwards or downwards, either to this side or that, till I can fit it to such a
Position that the Sun Beams may dart quite through the Axis of the Globe; which
when it does, I look on the Meridian and find 42. degrees 25. min. comprehended
between the Pole and the superficies of the Horizon; Therefore I say the
Meridian Altitude of the Sun March 20. here at London, is 42. degrees 25. min.

PROB. XV.
To find the Elevation of the Pole, by the Meridian Altitude of the Sun, and
Day of the Month given.

THe Day of the Month is March 20. By the 4th Prob. you may find the place of
the Sun to be 10. Therefore bring the Place of the Sun to the Meridian, and
elevate it above the Horizon the same number of degrees it has in Heaven; so
shall the arch of the Meridian comprehended between the Pole and the Horizon,
be the elevation of the Pole, in your Place.

Otherwise.
The Day of the Month given is March 20. so that by the fourth Prob. you have
the Suns Place 10; and by the fifth, the Declination of the Sun 3. 55. North:
therefore the Declination being North, and you on the North side the Equator;
you must substract 3. 55. from the Meridian Altitude 42. 25. and there remains
38, 30. for the height of the Equinoctial above the Horizon; but if your
Declination had been South, you must have added 3 55. to the Meridian Altitude,
and the Sum would have been the Elevation of the Equinoctial. Having the
Elevation of the Equinoctial, you may easily have the Elevation of the Pole;
for the one is always the Complement of the other to 90. Thus the Height of
the Equinoctial 38. 30. subtracted from 90. leaves 51. 30. for the Elevation of
the Pole, here at London. And thus it follows, that the Latitude of any Place
from the Equinoctial, is always equal to the Elevation of the Pole: for
between the Zenith and the Equinoctial is contained the Complement of the
Height of the Equinoctial above the Horizon to 90.

PROB. XVI.
To take the Altitude of any Star above the Horizon; by the Globe.

THe Horizon of the Globe set parallel to the Horizon of the World, as before:
Turn the North Pole toward the Star, and when you can see the Star through the
Axis, the Northern notch of the Horizon will cut the degree of Elevation on the
Meridian.

Example.
April 19. at 11. a clock at Night, I would observe the Altitude of Spica
Virgo: Therefore I set the Horizon parallel to the Horizon of the World, as by
the Second Problem, and turn the Northern Pole till it point toward the Star:
Then looking in at the South Pole of the Globe through the Axis, I shall see
the Star, and have on the Meridian the Question resolved. But if it point not
exactly, then I move the North Pole upwards or downwards, either to the right
hand, or to the left, according as I may find occasion, till I can see the Star
through the Axis: and then the edge of the notch in the Horizon cuts 28.
degrees 57. min. on the Brazen Meridian. Therefore I say April 19. at 11. a
clock at Night, here at London, the Altitude of Spica (...) is 30. degrees
above the Horizon.

PROB. XVII.
By the Meridian Altitude of any Star given, to find the Height of the Pole.

Join the Star to the Meridian, and place it to the Altitude observed; so shall
the number of degrees intercepted between the Pole and the Horizon, be the
Elevation of the Pole.

Example.
Spica Virgo is observed to have 28. degrees 57. min Meridian Altitude;
therefore I bring Spica Virgo to the Meridian, and raise it or depress it
higher or lower as I find occasion, till it is just 28. degrees 57. min. above
the Horizon: Then I count the number of degrees between the Pole and the
Horizon, and find them 51. Therefore I say the Elevation of the Pole is here at
London 51. Yet note, If the Star whose Altitude you observe have fewer number
of degrees of Declination from the Pole, then the Elevation of the Pole, you
may be apt to mistake in its coming to the Meridian; for those Stars never set;
and therefore are twice Visible in the Meridian in 24. hours, once above the
Pole, and once under the Pole.

If your Star have greater Altitude then the North Star, it is above the Pole;
but if it have less, it is below the Pole: so that if you know but whether it
be above or below, it is enough; for so you may accordingly raise it to the
Altitude on the Meridian it has in Heaven, and join it to the Meridian either
above or beneath the Pole, as the Star is placed in Heaven: and then the arch
of the Meridian comprehended between the Pole and the Horizon, is the Elevation
of the Pole, as aforesaid.

Otherwise.
Having the Meridian Altitude of the Star, you must find its Declination by the
27. Problem: and if the Declination be South, and you on the North side the
Equator, you must ad the Declination to the Meridian Altitude, and the sum of
both makes the Altitude of the Equinoctial: But if the Declination be North,
and you on the North side the Equator, you must substract the Declination from
the Meridian Altitude, (as was taught by the 15. Prob. in the Example of the
Sun) and the remainder is the Altitude of the Equinoctial Then (as was taught
by the 15 Problem aforesaid) substract the Altitude of the Equinoctial from
90, the Remainder is the Elevation of the Pole in your Place.

Example.
By the last Problem the Meridian Altitude of Spica Virgo was 28 degrees 57
min, and the Declination of Spica by the 27th Problem is found 9. degrees 33.
min. South: therefore because the Declination is South, I ad 9. degrees 33.
min. to the Meridian Altitude, which makes 38. degrees. 30. min. for the Elevation
of the Equinoctial: which 38. degrees. 30. min. subtracted from 90. leaves 51.
degrees 30. min. for the Elevation of the Pole here at London.

PROB. XVIII.
Another way to find the Height of the Pole by the Globe; if the Place of the
Sun be given: and also to find the Hour of the Day, and Azimuth, and Almicantar
of the Sun.

THis must be performed by help of a Spherick Gnomon, (as Blaew calls it,)
which is a small Pin or Needle fixed perpendicularly into a small Basis with an
hollow concave bottom, that it may stand upon the convexity of the Globe.
Therefore the Horizon of the Globe being set parallel to the Horizon of the
World, (as by the Second Problem) the Spherick Gnomon must be set exactly upon
the Place of the Sun; and then turning the Globe about (upon its Axis) either
from East to West, or contrarily from West, to East; or else by the Meridian,
through the notches of the Horizon, till the Spherick Gnomon cast no shadow on
any side thereof; you have on the Meridian in the North point of the Horizon
the number of degrees that the Pole is elevated above the Horizon.

Example.
Imagine the four Quarters of the Horizon of the Globe correspond with the four
Quarters of the Horizon of the World; and the Plain of the Horizon of the Globe
is parallel to the Plain of the Horizon of the World: The Suns Place is 29,
which I find on the Globe, and place the Spherick Gnomon thereon; Then at a
guess I move the Globe both on its Axis, and by the Meridian, (as near as I
can) so as the Spherick Gnomon may cast no shadow; yet if it do, and the shadow
fall toward the North Pole; then I elevate the North Pole more, till the
shadow falls just in the middle of it self: but if the shadow fall downwards,
toward the South Pole, then I depress the North Pole: If the shadow fall on
the East side, I turn the Globe on its Axis more to the West; and if the shadow
fall to the West, I turn the Globe more into the East: and the degree of the
Meridian which the North point of the Horizon touches, is the degree of the
Poles Elevation: which in this Example is 51. the Latitude of the City of
London.

By this Operation you have also given the Hour of the Day in the Hour-Circle,
if you keep the Globe unmoved: and the Azimuth, and Almicantar, if you apply
but the Quadrant of Altitude to the Place of the Sun, as by the 22, and 23.
Problemes.

PROB. XIX.
To observe by the Globe the Distance of two Stars.

YOu must pitch upon two Stars in the Meridian; and observe the Altitude of one
of them first, and afterward the Altitude of the other: Then substract the
lesser Altitude from the greater, and the remainder shall be the distance
required.

Example.
March 7. at 11. a clock at Night here at London, I see in the Meridian the two
Stars in the foremost Wheels of the Wagon, in the Constellation of the Great
Bear, called by Seamen the Pointers, (because they always point toward the
Pole Star.) Therefore to observe the distance between these two Stars, I first
observe (as by the last Problem) the Altitude of the most Northern to be 77.
degree 59. minutes, and set down that number of Degrees and minutes with a Pen
and Ink on a Paper, or with a piece of Chalk or a Pencil on a Board: and
afterward I observe the Altitude of the other Star which is under it, as I did
the first, to be 83. degrees. 21. min. and set that number of degrees and minutes
also down, under the other number of degrees and minutes: Then by substracting
the lesser from the greater, I find the remainder to be 5. degrees 22. min.
which is the distance of the two Stars in the Great Bear, called the Pointers.

PROB. XX.
How you may learn to give a guess at the number of degrees that any two Stars
are distant from one another; or the number of degrees of Altitude the Sun or
any Star is elevated above the Horizon: only by looking up to Heaven, without
any Instrument.

BEtween the Zenith and the Horizon is comprehended an Arch of a Circle
containing 90. degrees; so that if you see any Star in or near the Zenith, you
may know that Star is 90. or near 90. degrees high; and by so much as you may
conceive it wants of the Zenith, so much you may guess it wants of 90. degrees
above the Horizon. By this Rule you may guess at an Arch of Heaven containing
90. degrees, or at an Arch of Heaven containing 45. degrees; if by your
imagination you divide the whole Arch into two equal parts, for then shall each
of them contain 45. degrees; And if by your imagination you divide the Arch of
90. into 3. equal parts, each division shall contain an Arch of 30. degrees,
etc. But this way is a little too rude for guessing at Stars elevated but few
degrees, or for Stars distant but few degrees from one another. Therefore that
you may learn to guess more precisely at Distances in Heaven, you may either
with a Quadrant, Astrolabe, or the Globe; find the exact distance of any two
known Stars that are but few degrees asunder, and by a little revolving the
distance of those Stars in your fancy, you may at length so imprint their
distance in your memory, that you may readily guess the distance of other Stars
by the distance of them.

Example.
You may find either by the Globe, Quadrant, or As^rotabe, (for they all agree)
3. degrees comprehended between the first Star in Orions Girdle, and the last;
therefore by a little (...)nating upon that distance, you may imprint it in
your fancy for 3. degrees, and so make it applicable to other Stars, either of
the same distance, or more, or less: And the Pointers (by the last Problem)
are distant from one another 5. degrees and almost an half: These are always
above our Horizon, and therefore may always stand as a Scale for five and an
half degrees; So that by these for 5 degrees, and those in Orions Girdle for 3.
degrees, and others observed, either of greater or lesser distance, you may
according to your own Judgment shape a guess, if not exactly, yet pretty near
the matter of Truth, when you come to other Stars. Thus you may exercise your
fancy upon Stars found to be 10. or 15. degrees asunder, or more, or less; and
with a few experiments of this nature enure your Judgment to guess distances,
and enable your memory to retain your Judgment.

This way of guessing will be exact enough for finding the Hour of the Night by
the Stars, for most common Uses; or the Hour of the Day, by guessing at the
Altitude of the Sun; if after you have guessed at the Altitude, you shall work
as was taught by Prob. 12. for the Hour of the Day: and as shall be taught in
the next Problem, for the Hour of the Night.

PROB. XXI.
The Day of the Month, and Altitude of any Star given, to find the Hour of the
Night.

THe Globe, Quadrant, and Hour Index rectified: Bring the Star on the Globe to
the same number of Degrees on the Quadrant of Altitude that it has in Heaven:
So shall the Index of the Hour-Circle point in the Hour-Circle at the Hour of
the Night.

Example.
March 10. the Altitude of Arcturus is 35. degrees above the Horizon, here at
London: Therefore having the Globe, Quadrant and Hour Index rectified, I bring
Arcturus on the Globe to 35. degrees on the Quadrant of Altitude: And then
looking in the Hour-Circle, I find the Index point at 10. a clock; which is the
Hour of the Night.

PROB. XXII.
The Place of the Sun, and Hour of the Day given, to find its Azimuth in any
Latitude assigned.

THe Globe, etc. rectified to your Latitude: Turn the Globe till the Index of
the Hour-Circle come to the given hour; and bring the Quadrant of Altitude to
the Place of the Sun: so shall the number of degrees contained between the East
point of the Horizon and the degree cut by the Quadrant of Altitude on the
Horizon, be the number of degrees of the Suns Azimuth, at that time.

Example.
May 10. at 53. minutes past 8. a clock in the Morning, I would know the
Azimuth of the Sun: Therefore (the Globe being first rectified) I turn about
the Globe till the Index of the Hour-Circle point to 53. minutes past 8. a
clock, or which is all one, within half a quarter of an hour of 9; then I move
the Quadrant of Altitude to the degree the Sun is in that Day, and there let it
remain till I see how many degrees is contained between the North point and the
Quadrant; which in this Example is 108. degrees. 25. min. And because this distance
from the North, exceeds 90. degrees; therefore I substract 90. degrees from the
whole, and the remains is 18. degrees 25. min. for the Azimuthal distance of
the Sun from the East point toward the South. But if it had wanted of 90.
degrees from the North point, then should the Complement of 90. have been the
Azimuthal distance of the Sun from the East point.

PROB. XXIII.
The Place of the Sun, and hour of the Day given, to find the Almicantar of the
Sun.

THe Almicantars of the Sun is upon the matter the same thing with the Altitude
of the Sun: only with this distinction. The Almicantars are Circles parallel to
the Horizon, discribed by the degree of the Quadrant of Altitude upon the
Zenith as its Center, by turning the Quadrant round about the Globe till it
comes again to its first Place: But the Altitude is an Arch of the Vertical
Circle, comprehended between the Horizon and any point of the Globe assigned.
Their agreement consists in this; When the Sun or any Star ha^^ any known
Almicantar, they are said to have the same number of degrees of Altitude; As if
the Sun be in the 20th Almicantar; he has 20 degrees of Altitude; if in the
30th Almicantar, he has 30. degrees of Altitude, etc. Now because the
Operation is the same for finding the Altitude and Almicantar, I shall refer
you to the 11th Problem; which shows you how to find the Altitude or Height;
and by consequence the Almicantar.

PROB. XXIV.
The Place of the Sun given, to find what Hour it comes to the East, or West,
and what Almicantar it then shall have.

THe Globe, Quadrant, and Hour Index rectified, Bring the Quadrant of Altitude
to the East point in the Horizon, if you would know what hour it comes to the
East; or to the West point, if you would know what hour it comes to the West:
Then turn about the Globe till the place of the Sun come to the Quadrant of
Altitude; and the Index of the Hour Circle shall point at the hour of the Day:
which on the Day aforesaid will be 7. hor. 7 min. in the Morning, that the Sun
comes to the East, and 4 hor. 53. min. after noon, that the Sun comes to
the West. And if you then count the number of degrees from the Horizon upwards
on the Quadrant of Altitude, it will show you the Almicantar of the Sun for
that time; which will both Morning and Evening be 15, degrees. 30. min. as was
taught you by the last Problem.

PROB. XXV.
To know at any time what a clock it is in any other Part of the Earth.

THe difference of Time is reckoned by the access and progress of the Sun: for
the Sun gradually circumvolving the Earth in 24. hours, does by reason of the
Earths rotundity enlighten but half (...) at one and the same moment of Time;
as shall be showed hereafter: so that hereby it comes to pass, that when with
us here in England it is 6. a clock in the Morning, with those that have 90.
degrees of Longitude to the Westward of us, it is yet Midnight: with those that
have 180. degrees of Longitude from us, it is Evening; And with those that have
90. degrees of Longitude to the Eastwards, it is Noon. So that those to the
Eastward have their Day begin sooner then ours: But to the Westward their Day
begins after ours. Therefore that you may know what Hour it is in any Place of
the Earth, of what distance soever it be, you must first Bring the Place of
your own Habitation to the Meridian, and the Index of the Hour Circle to 12. on
the Hour Circle; Then bring the other Place to the Meridian, and the Arch of
the Hour Circle comprehended between the hour 12. and the Index, is the
difference in Time between the two Places.

Example.
London in England, and Surat in the East Indies: First I bring London to the
Meridian, and turn the Index of the Hour-Circle to 12; then I turn the Globe
Westward, because London ^s Westward of Surat, till Surat come to the Meridian;
and see at what Hour the Index of the Hour Circle points, which in this Example
is 5. hor. 54. minutes: And because Surat lies to the Eastward of us so many
degrees, therefore as was said before, their Day begins so much before ours: So
that when here at London it is 6. a clock in the Morning, at Surat it will be
11. a clock 54. minutes; when with us it is 12. a clock, with them it will be 5
a clock 54. minutes afternoon.

If you would know the difference of Time between London and Jamaica; Working
as before, you may find 5. hor. 15. min. But Jamaica is to the West of London;
therefore their Day begins 5. hor. 15. min. after ours: so that when with us it
is Noon, with them it will be but three quarters of an hour past 6. a clock in
the Morning: and when with them it is Noon, with us it will be one quarter past
5. a clock after Noon, etc.

Or you may yet otherwise know the difference of Time, if you divide the number
of Degrees of the Equinoctial that pass through the Meridian while the Globe is
moved from the first Place to the second, by 15. so shall the product give you
the difference of hours and minutes between the two Places: as you will find if
you try either of these Examples, or any other.

PROB. XXVI.
To find the Right Ascension of the Sun, or Stars.

THe Right Ascension of any point on the Globe is found by bringing the point
proposed to the Meridian, and counting the number of degrees comprehended
between the Vernal Colure, and the Meridian.

Example, for the Sun.
June 1. I would know the Right Ascension of the Sun: His Place found, as by
the third Problem, is 20. Therefore I bring 20. to the Meridian; and then the
Meridian cuts the Equinoctial in 79. degrees 15. minutes, accounted from the
Vernal point: Therefore I say the Right Ascension of the Sun June 1. is 79.
degrees. 15. Minutes.

Example, for a Star.
I take Capella, alias Hircus, the Goat on Auriga's sholder, and bring it to
the Meridian; and find the Meridian cut the Equinoctial (counting as before
from the Vernel point) in 73. degrees 58. minutes: Therefore I say, the Right
Ascension of Hircus is 73. degrees 58. min. Do the like for any other point of
the Globe proposed.

PROB. XXVII.
To find the Declination of the Sun, or Stars.

THe Declination of any point on the Globe is found by bringing the point
proposed to the Meridian, and counting the number of degrees comprehended on
the Meridian between the Equinoctial and the point proposed: and bears its
Denomination of North or South, according as it is situate on the North or
South side the Equinoctial.

Example, for the Sun.
June 1. I would know the Declination of the Sun. His Place found, as before,
i^ 20. Therefore I bring 20. to the Meridian; and find 23. degrees 8. min.
comprehended on the Meridian between the Equinoctial and 20. and because is on
the North side the Equinoctial; Therefore I say, June 1. The Sun has North
Declination 23. degrees 8. minutes.

Example, for a Star.
I take Hircus aforesaid, and bring it to the Meridian, and find 45. degrees
40. minutes comprehended on the Meridian between the Equinoctial and the Star
Hircus. And because Hircus is on the North side the Equinoctial; Therefore I
say, Hircus has North Declination 45. degrees 40. min. Do the like for any
other point on the Globe proposed.

But Note, The Right Ascension and Declination of the Sun alters daily; for in
twelve Months he runs through every degree of Right Ascension, and in three
Months to his greatest Declination: But the Right Ascension and Declination of
the Stars is scarce perceiveable for some Years: Yet have they also an
alteration of Right Ascension and Declination: For, those Stars that have but
few degrees of Right Ascension, will in process of Time have many; and those
Stars between the Tropic that have North Declination, will in length of Time
have South Declination; and the contrary (as shall be more fully showed
hereafter:) For, the Stars moving upon the Poles of the Ecliptic go forwards
in Longitude one whole Degree in 70 Years (as has been showed before, Book 1.
Chap. 3. Sect. 3.) and so alter both their Right Ascension, and Declination; as
may be seen by this following Table of Right Ascensions and Declinations of
100. of the most eminent fixed Stars, Calculated by Tycho Brahe, for the Years
1600. and 1670. which I have inserted; partly, because by it you may see the
differences of their Right Ascensions and Declinations in 70 Years; and partly
to Accomodate those that may have occasion to know their Right Ascensions and
Declinations nearer than the Globe can show them.

A Table of the Right Ascensions and Declinations of 100. Select fixed Stars;
Calculated by Tycho Brahe, for the Years 1600, and 1670. As also their
Difference of Right Ascensions and Declinations, in 70. Years.
1600 Differentia. 1900 Names of the Stars. R. Asc. Declin. R. As. Decl. R.
Asc. Declin. Scedir, in Casssopeae. 4 36 54 21 N 1 22 34 S 5 58 54 55 The Pole
Star. 5 47 87 9 N 3 59 34 S 9 46 87 43 Southern in the whales tail. 5 51 20 12
S 1 17 34 N 7 8 19 38 Cassiopeae's Belly. 8 21 58 33 N 1 27 34 S 9 48 59 7
Girdle Andromeda. 11 50 33 32 N 1 23 33 S 13 13 34 5 Knee of Cassiopeae. 15 3
58 7 N 1 35 33 S 16 38 58 40 1. in horn. 22 56 17 19 N 1 23 31 S 24 19 17 50
Whales belly. 22 59 12 16 S 1 15 31 N 24 14 11 45 2. in horn. 23 10 18 50 N 1
22 31 S 24 32 19 31 South foot of Andromeda. 24 55 40 23 N 1 29 30 S 26 24 40
53 In the Knot in the line. 25 22 0 50 N 1 18 30 S 26 40 1 20 * Star in head.
26 23 21 33 N 1 25 30 S 27 38 22 3 * In the wtales jaw. 40 25 2 29 N 1 15 25 S
41 40 2 54 Caput Medusae 40 38 39 22 N 1 37 25 S 42 15 39 47 * In Persons side.
44 2 48 22 N 1 28 21 S 45 30 48 43 * In the Pletades. 50 57 22 49 N 1 29 21 S
52 26 23 10 In the Nostrils of. 59 16 14 37 N 1 25 17 S 60 41 14 54 North Ey
of. 61 21 18 14 N 1 24 17 S 62 45 18 31 Aldebaran. 63 16 15 38 N 1 26 15 S 64
43 15 53 Hircus, Capella. 71 49 45 30 N 1 49 10 S 73 38 45 40 * Orions foot,
Rigel. 73 51 8 43 S 1 15 9 S 75 7 8 33 North Horn. 75 16 28 12 N 1 37 8 S 76 53
28 20 Orions left sholder. 75 58 5 55 N 1 19 3 S 77 17 6 3 Belly of the Hare 77
48 71 6 S 1 5 7 N 78 53 20 59 1. In Orions Girdle 77 58 (...) 39 S 1 17 7 N 79
15 0 32 Uppermost in Orions face 78 21 9 36 N 1 22 7 S 79 41 0 43 South Horn.
78 26 20 51 N 1 31 7 S 79 57 20 58 2. In Orions Girdle. 79 1 1 30 S 1 17 6 N 80
18 1 24 Last in Orions Girdle. 80 10 2 12 S 1 16 5 N 81 26 2 7 Auriga's right
Sholder. 82 40 44 50 N 1 55 4 S 84 35 44 54 Orions right Sholder. 83 26 7 16 N
1 22 4 S 84 48 7 20 * Foot. 93 38 16 40 N 1 28 2 N 95 6 16 38 Great Dog Sirius.
96 53 16 11 S 1 7 4 S 98 0 16 15 Head of Castor, the first Twin. 107 9 32 41 N
1 44 11 N 108 53 32 30 The little Dog, Procyon. 109 37 6 12 N 1 20 12 N 110 57
6 0 Head Pollux, second Twin. 110 13 28 55 N 1 34 12 N 111 47 28 43 * In the
Stern of the 117 39 23 11 S 1 4 15 S 118 43 23 26 Praesepe 124 20 21 2 N 1 28
19 N 125 48 20 43 Northern Ass Ship. 124 58 22 51 N 1 30 20 N 126 28 22 31
Southern Ass 125 27 19 35 N 1 27 20 N 126 54 19 15 The Heart of Hydra. 137 1 6
57 S 1 15 25 S 138 16 7 22 South of 3. in neck 146 22 18 42 N 1 28 28 N 147 50
18 14 Lions Heart, Basiliscus. 146 45 13 53 N 1 53 28 N 148 8 13 25 North of 3.
in neck 148 33 25 23 N 1 23 29 N 150 1 24 54 Middle of 3. in neck 140 (...) 21
50 N 1 50 29 N 150 51 21 21 First lowest in (...) Vrsa Man. 159 12 58 31 N 1 37
32 N 160 49 57 59 First upper in Dubbe 159 37 63 54 N 1 41 32 N 161 18 63 22 *
back. 163 10 22 43 N 1 27 34 N 164 37 22 9 Lions tail. 172 9 16 49 N 1 19 34 N
173 28 16 15 following lowest in Ursa Major. 173 3 55 57 N 1 23 34 N 174 26 55
23 Uppermost following in. 178 50 59 15 N 1 20 34 N 180 10 58 41 Girdle (...).
188 53 5 37 N 1 18 34 N 190 11 5 3 Rump Ursa Major, Aliot. 189 1 58 10 N 1 19
33 N 190 10 57 37 Vindemiatrix,. 190 36 13 8 N 1 17 33 N 191 53 12 35 Spica.
196 4 9 1 S 1 19 32 S 197 23 9 33 Middle tail Ursa Major. 196 54 57 3 N 1 3 32
N 197 57 56 31 End Tail Urs. Major. 202 54 51 22 N 1 2 31 N 203 56 50 51
Arcturus. 209 23 21 18 N 1 11 29 N 210 34 20 49 Left Sholder of Boots. 214 2
40 3 N 1 2 27 N 215 4 39 36 South Scale. 217 14 14 18 S 1 23 27 S 218 37 14 45
North Scale. 223 54 7 50 S 1 21 24 S 225 16 8 14 * Northern Crown. 229 26 28 6
N 1 5 21 N 230 31 27 45 * Serpents neck. 231 12 7 46 N 1 15 21 N 232 27 7 25
Northern of 3. * in front. 235 34 18 38 S 1 28 19 S 237 2 18 57 Lest hand
Ophiucus. 238 25 2 37 S ^1 23 18 S 239 48 2 55 Heart (...). Antares, 241 18 25
26 S 1 32 16 S 242 50 25 42 Right Should* Hercules. 243 15 22 27 N 1 5 15 N 244
20 22 12 Left knee of Ophiucus. 243 49 9 39 S 1 23 15 S 245 12 9 54 Right knee
of Ophiucus. 251 50 15 7 S ^0 50 10 S 252 40 15 17 Head of Hercules. 254 6 14
55 N 1 8 8 N 255 14 14 47 Left Sholder of Hercules. 254 40 25 22 N 0 52 8 N 255
32 25 14 Head of Ophiucus. 259 5 12 56 N 1 11 7 N 260 16 12 49 Right Sholder of
Ophiucus. 260 56 4 49 N 1 13 5 N 262 9 4 44 * head of the Dragon. 266 52 51 37
N 0 35 2 N 267 27 51 35 * Lyrae. 275 52 38 28 N ^0 50 4 S 276 42 38 32 Most
Eastern in Head. 281 32 21 35 S 1 31 8 N 283 3 21 27 Vultures tail. 281 47 13
20 N 1 13 8 S 283 0 13 28 In the Swans Beak. 288 40 27 10 N 1 1 11 S 289 41 27
21 * in Vulture. 292 49 7 54 N 1 17 13 S 294 6 8 7 In the Swans North wing. 293
10 44 12 N 0 48 14 N 293 58 44 26 Upper horn. 289 57 13 40 S 1 25 16 N 300 22
13 24 Lower horn. 299 39 15 57 S 1 27 17 N 301 6 15 40 In the Swans breast. 302
1 39 1 N 0 53 18 S 302 55 39 19 Left hand of. 306 32 10 53 S 1 16 19 N 307 48
10 34 Swans Tail. 306 57 43 53 N 0 51 20S 307 49 44 14 In the Swans South wing
307 31 32 30 N 1 0 21 S 308 31 32 51 Left Sholder. 317 37 7 15 S 1 21 26 N 318
58 6 49 1. In tail. 319 28 18 21 S 1 26 26 N 320 54 17 55 In Cepheus Girdle.
320 46 68 50 N 0 22 26 S 321 8 69 16 In Pegasus mouth. 321 10 8 5 N 1 18 26 S
322 28 8 31 2. in tail. 321 16 17 51 S 1 25 27 N 322 41 17 24 Right Sholder of.
326 19 2 13 S 1 20 29 N 327 39 1 44 Fomahant,. 338 46 31 39 S 1 25 31 N 340 11
31 8 Scheat. P^gasus. 241 9 25 56 N 1 12 32 S 342 11 26 28 Marchab, Pegasus.
341 15 13 5 N 1 15 32 S 342 30 13 37 Mouth of Southern fi^h. 344 9 1 7 N 1 17
33 S 345 26 1 40 Head of Andromeda. 356 59 26 54 N 1 17 34 S 358 16 27 28 *
Cassiopeae's chair. 357 5 56 58 N 1 15 34 S 358 20 57 32 End of Pegasus wing.
(tail. 358 14 12 58 N 1 16 34 S 359 30 13 32 Northern in the wh^les 359 49 11 1
S 1 18 34 S 1 7 10 27

The Use of this Table.
The first Collumne on the left hand is the names of the Stars. The Second
Collumne shows the degrees and minutes of Right Ascension, for the Year 1600.
The third the Declination for the same Year. The fourth shows whether the
Declination be North or South; N stands for North, S for South. The fifth shows
the difference in degrees and minutes of Right Ascension of the Stars, between
the Years 1600* and 1670. The sixth shows the Difference of Declination; and
whether it be North, or South. The seventh shows the Right Ascension in degrees
and minutes, for the Year 1670. The eighth shows the D^clination in degrees and
minutes for the same Year.

By this Table you may perceive the fixed Stars increase in Right Ascension,
till they come to the Vernal Colure; from whence the number of their Right
Ascension is reckoned: and by the Collumne of their Difference of Right
Ascension, you may see how much they increase in 70. Years* And if you would
know how much they increase for any other number of Years, you must find what
proportion they have to 70, and the same proportion the Difference of the Right
Ascension of the Stars will have to the Difference in the Table.

Example.
I would know the Difference of Right Ascension the Pole Star will have in 35.
Years. I find in the fifth Collumne the Difference of Right Ascension of the
Pole Star to be 3. degrees 59. min. Therefore by the Rule of Proportion. I say,
If 70. Years give 3. degrees 59. min. 35. Years shall give 1. degree 59* min:
and so proportionably for any other number of Years.

Though this Rule serves for finding the Difference of Right Ascension of any
Star; Yet it will not serve for finding the Difference of any Stars
Declination. For the Stars on the North side the Equinoctial between the
Hyemnal and Solsticial Colures, and on the South side the Equinoctial between
the Solsticial and Hyemnal Colures, increase in Declination. But the Stars on
the South side the Equinoctial between the Hyemnal and Solsticial Colures, and
on the North side the Equinoctial between the Solsticial and Hyemnal Colures,
Decrease in Declination: as you may yet more plainly see by the Globe, if you
bring 66 degrees. of the Meridian to the North side of the Horizon, and screw the
Quadrant of Altitude to 66 degrees in the Zenith, and Declination of the Pole
of the Ecliptic; and bring the Hyemnal Colure to the Meridian; for so shall
the Pole of the Ecliptic be joined with the center of the Quadrant of
Altitude, and the Ecliptic with the Horizon; and all the Circles that the
several degrees on the Quadrant make in a Revolution from West to East upon the
Poles of the Ecliptic, represent the great Revolution of every Star that each
degree on the Quadrant cuts. And thus demonstratively will be represented the
progress of the fixed Stars through every degree of Longitude, and by
consequence the alteration of their Right Ascension, and Declination. For,
Imagining that degree of the Quadra^t of Altitude to be the Star, which just
reaches the Star; you may by turning about the Quadrant, see how Obliquely the
Star (or the degree representing the Star) either moves about, or cuts the
Equinectial, and all Circles parallel to the Equinoctial; and thereby observe
it sometimes to incline in motion to, and other times to decline in motion from
the Equinoctial. But how long time it will be ^re the Star inclines to, or
declines from the Equinoctial, you may know by finding the distance of
Longitude in degrees it has from either the Solsticial or Hy^mnal Colure; and
with respecting the foregoing Rules in its Position, you may by the Table in
Book 1, Chap. 3. Sect. 3. satifie your self.

Example.
The most Northerly Star in the Girdle of Orion does yet decrease in
Declination. But I would know how long it shall decrease; Therefore by the 32.
Problem, I find the Longitude of that Star to be for the Year 1670. 77. degrees.
51. min. which subducted out of 90, (the distance of the Solsticial Colure from
the Equinoctial,) leaves 12. 9, for the distance of that Star from the
Solsticial Colure. Therefore by the Table aforesaid, I find what number of
Years answers to the motion of 12. degrees. 9. min. And because I cannot find
exactly the same number of degrees and minutes in the Table, I take the number
nearest to it; which is 14. degrees 10. minutes, and that is the motion of the
Ecliptic in 1000. Years. But because this 14. degrees 10. minutes is 2.
degrees 1. minute too much, I seek 2. degrees, 1. min. in the Table, and the
number of Years against it I would subduct from the number of Years against 14,
degrees, 10. min. and the remainder would be the number of Years required: But 2.
degrees. 1. min. I cannot find neither, therefore I must take the number of degrees
and minutes nearest to it, which is 2. degrees. 50. min. and that yields 200.
Years; which subducted out of 1000. leaves 800. Years. But because this is also
too much by the motion of 49. min. Therefore I seek for 49. min. in the Table,
and subduct the number of Years against it from 800, and the remainder would be
the number of Years required. But 49. min. is not in the Table neither,
Therefore I take the nearest to it, which is 51. min. and that yields 60.
Years; which subducted out of 800. leaves 740. But this is likewise too much by
the motion of two min. Therefore I seek 2. min. in the Table, but cannot find
it nearer then 2, and against it I find 3. Years, which 3. Years I subduct out
of 740, and the Remainder is 737. the number in Years required. You may if you
please for exactness, subduct for the min. 8. Months; so have you 736, Years
4. Months, for the Time that the most Northerly Star in the Girdle of Orion
will decrease in Declination after the Year 1670. which will be till An. Dom.
^406. after which time it will increase in Declination for 12706. Years
together, till it come to have 47. degrees 8. min. of Declination: at which
time it will be in or very near the place of the most Southerly Star of the
Southern Crown; and that Star in its place.

And thus the Pole Star is now found to increase in Declination, and will yet
this 421 Years: after which time it will decrease in Declination for 12706
Years together, till it come to be within 42. degrees 42. minutes of the
Equinoctial, in the void space now between Draco and Lyra; at which time Lyra
will be almost as near the Pole, as the Pole Star now is; and then the most
proper to be the Northern Pole Star: And the last Star in the Stalk of the
Doves mouth will be then very near the Southern Pole, and therefore most fit to
be the Southern Pole Star.

PROB. XXVIII.
The Place of the Sun or any Star given, to find the Right Descension, and the
Oblique Ascension, and the Oblique Descension.

BRing the Place of the Sun or the Star to the Meridian under the Horizon, and
the degree of the Equator that comes to the Meridian with it is the Degree of
Right Descension.

For the Oblique Ascension.
Bring the Place of the Sun or the Star to the East side the Horizon, and the
degree of the Equator cut by the Horizon, is the Degree of Oblique Ascension of
the Sun or Star.

For the Oblique Descension.
Bring the Place of the Sun or Star to the West side the Horizon, and the
degree of the Equinoctial cut by the Horizon is the Degree of Oblique
Descension. They need no Examples.

PROB. XXIX.
Any Place on the Terrestrial Globe being given, to find its Antipodes.

BRing the given Place to the Meridian, so may you (as by the first Problem)
see its Longitude and Latitude; then turn about the Globe till 180. degrees of
the Equator pass through the Meridian; and keeping the Globe to this Position,
number on the Meridian 180. degrees from the Latitude of the given Place: and
the point just under that degree is the Antipodes.

Example.
I would find the Antipodes of Cuida Real, an Inland Town of the West Indies,
which lies upon the River Parana, an Arm of Rio de la Plata: Therefore I bring
Cuida Real to the Meridian, and find (as by the first Problem) its Latitude
23. 50: South; and its Longitude 333. degrees: Then I turn about the Globe till
180. degrees of the Equator pass through the Meridian; and keeping the Globe to
that position, I number so many degrees North Latitude as Parana has South,
viz. 23, 50, and just under that degree I find Lamoo, a Town lying upon the
Coast of China, in the Province of Quancij: Therefore I say Lamoo is just the
Antipodes of Cuida Real.

Another way.
Bring the given Place to the North or South point of the Horizon, and the
point of the Globe denoted by the opposite point of the Horizon, is the
Antipodes of the given Place.

PROB. XXX.
To find the Perecij of any given Place, by the Terrestrial Globe.

BRing your Place to that side the Meridian which is in the South notch of the
Horizon, and follow the Parallel of that Place on the Globe till you come to
that side the Meridian which is in the Northern notch of the Horizon; and that
is the Perecij of your Place.

PROB. XXXI.
To find the Antecij of any given Place, upon the Terrestrial Globe.

BRing your Place to the Meridian, and find its Latitude by the first Problem;
If it have North Latitude, count the same number of degrees on the Meridian
from the Equator Southwards; But if it have South Latitude, count the same
number of degrees from the Equator Northwards: and the point of the Globe
directly under that number of degrees is the Antecij of your Place.

PROB. XXXII.
To find the Longitude and Latitude of the Stars, by the Celestial Globe.

THe Quadrant of Altitude will reach but 90. degrees, as was said Prob. 9.
Therefore if the Star you enquire after be on the North side the Ecliptic, you
must elevate the North Pole 66 degrees above the North side the Horizon: If on
the South side the Ecliptic, you must elevate the South Nole 66 degrees above
the South side the Horizon: Then bring the Solsticial Colure to the Meridian on
the North side the Horizon, and screw the Quadrant of altitude to the Zenith,
which will be in 23 degrees from the Pole of the World: So shall the Ecliptic
ly in the Horizon, and the Pole of the Ecliptic also ly under the Center of
the Quadrant of Altitude (as was showed Prob. 27.) Now to find the Longitude of
any Star, do thus Turn the Quadrant of Altitude about till the graduated edge
of it ly on the Star; and the degree in the Ecliptic that the Quadrant touches
is the Longitude of that Star.

Example, for a Star on the North side the Ecliptic.
I would know the Longitude of Marchab, a bright Star in the wing of Pegasus: I
find it on the North side the Ecliptic, Therefore I elevate the North Pole,
and placing on the North side the Meridian, I screw the Quadrant of Altitude to
the Zenith, as aforesaid: Then laying the edge of the Quadrant of Altitude upon
that Star, I find that the end of it reaches in the Ecliptic to 18. 56.
Therefore I say, the Longitude of Marchab is. 18. 56.

For the Latitude of a Star.
The Degree of the Quadrant of Altitude that touches the Star is the Latitude
of the Star.

Example.
The Globe and Quadrant posited as before, I find 19. degrees. 26. min. (accounted
upwards on the Quadrant) to touch Marchab aforesaid: Therefore I say, the
Latitude of Marchab is 19. degrees. 26. min.

And thus by elevating the South Pole and placing the Globe and Quadrant of
Altitude as aforesaid, I shall find Canicula have 15. degrees 57. min. South
Latitude, and 21. degr. 18. min in, Longitude.

PROB. XXXIII.
To find the Distance between any two Places, on the Terrestrial Globe.

THis may be performed either with the Quadrant of Altitude, or with a pair of
Compasses: with the Quadrant of Altitude, (...): Lay the lower end thereof to
one Place, and see what degree reaches the other Place, for that is the number
of degrees between the two Places. If you multiply that number of Degrees by 60
the Product shall be the number of English Miles between the two Places.

Example.
I would know the distance between London and the most Easterly point of
Jama^ca; I lay the lower end of the Quadrant of Altitude to Jamaica, and
extending the other end toward London, I find 68. degrees. comprehended between
them: Therefore I say 68 is the number of degrees comprehended between London
and Jamaica.

If you would find the Distance between them with your Compasses, you must
pitch one foot of your Compasses in the East point of Jamaica, and open your
Compasses till the other foot reach London; and keeping your Compasses at that
Distance apply the feet to the Equinoctial line, and you will find 68 degree
comprehended between them: as before.

If you multiply 68. by 60, is it gives 4110. English miles.

If you multiply it by 20, it gives 1370. English Leagues.

If you multiply it by 17, it gives 1199. Spanish Leagues.

If you multiply it by 15, it gives 1054 Dutch Leagues.

PROB. XXXIV.
To find by the Terrestrial Globe upon what point of the Compass any two Places
are situate one from another.

FInd the two Places on the Terrestrial Globe, and see what ^umb passes through
them; for that is the point of the Compass they bear upon.

Example.
Bristol and Bermudas are the Places: I examine what Rhumb passes through them
both: and because I find no Rhumb to pass immediately through them both,
Therefore I take that Rhumb which runs most Parallel to both the Places; which
in this Example is the tenth Rhumb counted from the North toward the left
hand; and is called as you may see by this following Figure West South West;
Therefore I say Bermudos lies situate from Bristol West South West; and by
contraries Bristol lies cituate from Bermudas East North East.



PROB. XXXV.
To find by the Celestial Globe the Cosmical Rising and Setting of the Stars.

WHen any Star Rises with the Sun, it is said to Rise Cosmically.

And when any Star Sets when the Sun Rises, it is sa^d to Set Cosmically.

To find these, Rectify the Globe to the Latitude of your Place, and bring the
Place of the Sun to the East side the Horizon; and the Stars then cut by the
Eastern Semicircle of the Horizon, Rise Cosmically; and those Stars cut by the
Western Semicircle of the Horizon, Set Cosmically.

Example.
November. 9. I would know what Stars Rise and Set Cosmically* here at London.
The Suns Place found, as by the third Problem is (...) 27. Therefore I bring
(...) 27. to the East side the Horizon, and in the Eastern Semicircle I find
Rising with the Sun the right Wing of Cygnus, the Star in the end of Aquila's
tail, Serpentarius and Centaurus: Therefore these Constellations are said to
the Cosmically. In the Western Semicircle of the Horizon I find Setting
Andromeda, the Triangle, Taurus, Orion, (anis Major, and Argo Navis; Therefore
I say, these Constellations Set Cosmically.

PROB. XXXVI.
To find by the Celestial Globe the Acronical Rising and Setting of the Stars.

THe Stars that Rise when the Sun Sets, are said to Rise Acronically. And,

The Stars that Set with the Sun, are said to Set Acronically.

To find these, Rectify the Globe to the Latitude of your Place, and bring the
Place of the Sun to the West side the Horizon; and the Stars then cut by the
Eastern Semicircle of the Horizon, Rise Acronically: And those Stars cut by
the Western Semicircle of the Horizon, Set Acronically.

Example.
November 9. I would know what Stars Rise and Set Acronically here at London.
The Suns Place as before, is (...) 27. Therefore I bring (...) 27. to the West
side the Horizon; and in the Eastern Semicircle I find Rising the Southern
Fi^h, Fomahant, Ce^us, Taurus, Auriga, and the Feather in Castor's Cap.
Therefore these Constellations are said to Rise Acronically. In the Western
Semicircle of the Horizon I find Setting the Lions tail, Virgo, Scorpio, and
Sagittarius, Therefore I say, these Constellations Set Acronically.

PROB. XXXVII.
To find by the Celestial Globe the Heliacal Rising, and Setting of the Stars.

WHen a Star formerly in the Suns Beams gets out of the Suns Beams it is said
to Rise Heliacally. And.

When a Star formerly out of the Suns Beams, gets into the Suns Beams, it is
said to set Heliacally.

A Star is said to be in the Suns Beams, when it is made inconspicuous by
reason of its neerness to the Suns Light. The Bigger Stars are discernable more
near the Suns Light, then the Lesser are: For, Stars of the first Magnitude may
(according to the received Rules of ancient Authors) be seen when the Sun is
but 12. degrees below the Horizon but Stars of Second Magnitude cannot be seen
unless the Sun be 13. degrees below the Horizon: Stars of the third Magnitude
require the Sun to be 14. degrees below the Horizon ere they can be seen; of
the fourth Magni^ude 15. degrees. of the fifth Magnitude 16. degrees of the
sixth Magnitude 17 degrees; the Nebulous ones 18. degrees. Yet this Rule is not
so certain but that either clear or cloudy weather may alter it. Read more of
this subject in Mr Palmer on the Plamsphear. Book 4. Chap. 20

Now to find the Time that any Star shall Rise Heliacally. Do thus Rectify the
Globe and Quadrant of Altitude to your Latitude. Then bring the given Star to
the East side the Horizon, and turn the Quadrant of Altitude into the West
side, and see what degree of the Ecliptic is elevated so many degrees above
the Horizon as the Magnitude of the Star you enquire after requires, according
to the foregoing Rules; for the opposite degree of the Ecliptic is the degree
the Sun shall be in when that Star Rises Heliacally. Having the degree of the
Ecliptic the Sun is in, you may find the Day of the Month, by the 4th
Problem.

Example.
I would know when Cor Leonis shall Rise Heliacally here at London: Therefore I
Rectify the Globe and Quadrant of Altitude for London, and bring Cor Leonis to
the East side the Horizon, and turn the Quadrant of Altitude into the West; and
because Cor Leonis is a Star of the first Magnitude, therefore I see what
degree of the Ecliptic is elevated in the West side the Horizon 12. degrees on
the Quadrant of Altitude, and find 9. degrees. Now the degree of the Ecliptic
opposite to 9. is (...) 9. Therefore I say, when the Sun comes to (...) 9.
degrees (which by the 4th Problem I find is August. 23.) Cor Leonis shall Rise
Heliacally.

For the Heliacal Setting.
The Globe, etc. Rectified, as before: Bring the Star to the West side the
Horizon, Then see what degree of the Ecliptic is elevated on the Quadrant of
Altitude so many degrees as the Stars Magnitude requires; for when the Sun
comes to the opposite degree of the Ecliptic that Star shall set Heliacally.

Example.
I would know when Bilanx a Star in the Beam of the Scales, will Set Heliacally
here at London. The Globe and Quadrant Rectified, I bring Bilanx to the West
side the Horizon, and turn the Quadrant of Altitude into the East; Then I
examine what degree of the Ecliptic is elevated 13. degrees of the Quadrant of
Altitude (because Bilanx is a Star of the second Magnitude) and find 4.
opposite to 4. is (...) 4. Therefore I say, When the Sun comes to (...) 4.
(which by Problem 4. will be October 18) Bilanx shall set Heliacally.

PROB. XXXVIII.
To find the Diurnal and Nocturnal Arch of the Sun, or Stars, in any given
Latitude.

THe Semi-Diurnal Arch is the number of degrees of the Equator that passes
through the Meridian whiles the Sun or any Star is ascending above the East
side the Horizon to the Meridian. To know the number of degrees it contains,
Rectify the Globe to the given Latitude, and bring the Place of the Sun or
Star to the East side the Horizon, and note what number of degrees of the
Equinoctial is then cut by the Meridian: Then remove the Place of the Sun or
Star to the Meridian, and see again what number of degrees of the Equinoctial
is then cut by the Meridian, and substract the former from the latter, and the
remainder shall be the number of degrees of the Sun or Stars Semi-Diurnal Arch.
But Note, If the Equinoctial point pass through the Meridian while the Sun or
Star is turned from the East side the Horizon to the Meridian, then you must
substract the number of degrees of the Equinoctial cut by the Meridian when the
Sun or Star is at the East side the Horizon from 360. degrees, and to the
remainder ad the number of degrees of the Equinoctial that comes to the
Meridian with the Place of the Sun or Star, and the Sum of them both is the
number of degrees of the Sun or Stars Semi-diurnal Arch; which being doubled is
the number of degrees of the whole Diurnal Arch: and which being subtracted
from 360, given the Nocturnal Arch.

Example, of the Sun.
Having Rectified the Globe, I would May 10. know the Diurnal Arch of the Sun:
His Place found by Prob. 3. is 8 29. Therefore I bring 29. to the Fast side the
Horizon, and find then at the Meridian 299. degrees 30. min. of the
Equinoctial; then I turn the Place of the Sun to the Meridian, and find 56.
degrees. 30. min. of the Equinoctial come to the Meridian with it. Here the
Equinoctial point passes through the Meridian while the Sun moves between the
Horizon and the Meridian; Therefore as aforesaid, I substract the first number
of degrees and minutes viz. 299. degrees. 30. min. from 360. degrees, and there
remains 60* degr. 30. min. for the number of degrees and minutes contained
between the degree of the Equinoctial at the Meridian and the Equinoctial
point; and to this 60. degrees. 30. min. I ad the second number of degrees and
minutes, viz. 56. degrees. 30. min. the number of degrees and minutes between the
point and the degrees. of the Equinoctial at the Meridian, and they make together
117. degrees, for the Suns Semi diurnal Arch; By doubling of which, you have
234. degrees, for the Suns Diurnal Arch; And by substracting 234. (the Diurnal
Arch) from 360. you have 126. degrees, for the Suns Nocturnal Arch.

Example, for a Star.
I take Sirius, a bright Star in the Great Dogs mouth. The Globe rectified, as
before; I bring Sirius to the East side the Horizon, and find then 29. degrees
30 minutes of the Equinoctial at the Meridian, then I turn Sirius to the
Meridian and find 97. degrees 38 minutes of the Equinoctial come to the
Meridian with it: Therefore I substract the first number viz. 29. degrees 30.
minutes, from the second, 97. 38, and the remains is 68. degrees 8 minutes, for
the Semi-diurnal Arch of Sir^us.

His Nocturnal Arch you may find as before.

PROB. XXXIX.
To find the Azimuth and Almicantar of any Star.

THis Problem is like the 22, and 23. Problemes, which show the finding the
Azimuth and Almicantar of the Sun; only, whereas there you were directed to
bring the degree of the Sun to the Quadrant of Altitude, you must now bring the
Star proposed to the Quadrant of Altitude; and by the Directions in those
Problemes the resolution will be found.

PROB. XL.
To find the Hour of the Night, by observing two known Stars in one Azimuth, or
Almicantar.

Rectify the Globe Quadrant and Hour Index. Then find the two known Stars on
the Globe; and if the two Stars be in one Azimuth, turn about the Globe and
Quadrant of Altitude till you can fit the two Stars to ly under the graduated
edge of the Quadrant of Altitude: so shall the Index of the Hour-Circle p^int
at the Hour of the Night. If the two Stars be in one Almicantar, Turn the Globe
forward or backward till the two Stars come to such a Position that by moving
the Quadrant of Altitude, the same degree on it will ly on both the Stars; so
shall the Index of the Hour-Circle point at the Hour of the Night.

PROB. XLI.
The Hour given that any Star in Heaven comes to the Meridian, to know thereby
the Place of the Sun, and by consequence the Day of the Month, though it were
lost.

BRing the Star proposed to the Meridian, and turn the Index of the Hour-Circle
to the Hour given, Then turn about the Globe till the Index point at the Hour
of 12, for Noon; and the Place of the Sun in the Ecliptic shall be cut by the
Meridian.

Example.
March 7. at 11, aclock at Night the Pointers come to the Meridian of London.
Therefore I place the Pointers on the Caelestial Globe under the Meridian, and
turn the Index of the Hour-Circle to 11. past Noon, afterward I turn back the
Globe till the Index point to 12. at Noon; Then looking in the Ecliptic, I
find the Meridian cuts it in 26. 45. minutes; Therefore I say, when the
Pointers come to the Meridian at 11. a clock at Night, the Place of the Sun is
26. 45. Having thus the Place of the Sun, I may find the Day of the Month by
the fourth Problem; and so either know the Day that the Pointers come to the
Meridian at 11. a clock at Night, or at any other Hour given.

The Day of the Month might also be found by the Declination and the Quarter
of the Ecliptic the Sun is in, given: For the Meridian will cut the degree of
the Suns Place in the Ecliptic in the Parallel of Declination: So that having
respect to the Quarter of the Ecliptic, you will find the Suns Place; and having
the Suns Place, you may as aforesaid find the Day of the Month.

PROB. XLII.
The Day of the Month given, to find in the Circle of Letters on the Plain of
the Horizon, the Day of the Week.

THe seven Days of the Week were by the Idolatry of the ancient Roman
Heathenish Times Dedicated to the Honor of seven of their Gods, which we call
Planets. The first is the most eminent, and therefore doubtless by them set in
the first Place, called Dia Solis, or the Suns Day: The second Dia Luna, the
Moons Day: The third Dia Martis, the Day of Mars: by us called Tuesday: The
fourth Dia Mercurius, Mercuries Day: by us called Wednesday; from Woden, an
Idol the Saxons Worshipped, to whose Honor they Dedicated that Day, and is by
all those Germain Nations still called Wodensdagh: The fifth Dia Jovis, Jupiter
or Joves Day: which doubtless the Saxons (from whom probably we receive it)
called Donder-dagh, because Jupiter is the God of Thunder; and we either by
corruption or for shortness, or both, call it Thursday: The sixth Dia Veneris,
the Day of Venus: but the Saxons transferring her Honor to another of their
Goddesses named Fria, called it Fridagh: and we from them call it Friday: The
seventh is Dia Saturnis, Saturus Day.

The same Day of the Month in other Years happens not on the same Day of the
Week, therefore the Dominical Letter for one Year is not the same it is the
next: Now because you cannot come to the knowledge of the Day of the Week
unless you first know the Sundaies Letter, therefore have I in Prob. 5^
inserted a Table of Mr Palmers, by which you may find the Dominical or Sundaies
Letter for ever; and having the Dominical Letter you may in the Circle of
Letters on the Horizon find it near the day of that Month, and count that for
Sunday, the next under it for Monday, the next under that for Tuesday, and so
in order, till you come to the Day of the Month.

Example.
I would know what Day of the Week June 1. Anno 1658. Old Style, falls on; I
find by the Table aforesaid the Dominical Letter is C, then I look in the
Calender of Old Style for June 1. and against it I find Letter E, which because
it is the second Letter in order from C, therefore it is the second Day in
order from Sunday, which is Tuesday.

PROB. XLIII.
The Azimuth of any Star given, to find its Hour in any given Latitude.

THe Hour of a Star is the number of Hours that a Star is distant from the
Meridian. To find which, Rectify the Globe and Quadrant of Altitude, and bring
the Star proposed to the Meridian, and the Index of the Hour-Circle to 12. Then
place the lower end of the Quadrant of Altitude to the given Azimuth in the
Horizon, and turn the Globe till the Star come to the graduated edge of the
Quadrant of Altitude; so shall the Index of the Hour-Circle point at the Hour
of the Star. Only this caution you must take; If the Star were turned from the
Meridian toward the Eastern side of the Horizon, you must substract the number
of Hours the Index points at from 12. and the remainder shall be the Hour of
the Star. But if the Star were turned from the Meridian toward the West side
the Horizon, the Hour the Index points at is (without more ado) the Hour of
the Star.

PROB. XLIV.
How you may learn to know all the Stars in Heaven, by the Celestial Globe.

Rectify the Globe, Quadrant, Hour-Index and Horizon, as by Prob. 2. Then turn
about the Globe till the Index of the Hour-Circle point at the Hour of the
Night on the Hour-Circle. Then if every Star on the Globe had a hole in the
midst, and your Ey were placed in the Center of the Globe; you might by keeping
your Ey in the Center and looking through any Star on the Globe see its Ma^ch
in Heaven: that is, the same Star in Heaven which that Star on the Globe
represents: for from the Center of the Globe there proceeds a straight line
through the Star on the Globe, even to the same Star in Heaven. Therefore those
Stars that are in the Zenith in Heaven, will then be in the Zenith on the
Globe; those that are in the East in Heaven, will be in the East on the Globe;
those in the West in Heaven, in the West on the Globe; and those Stars that are
in any Altitude in Heaven, will at the same time have the same Altitude on the
Globe; So that if you see any Star in Heaven whose Name you desire to know, you
need but observe its Azimuth and Altitude, and in the same Azimuth and Altitude
on the Globe, you may find the same Star: and if it be an eminent Star, you
will find its Name adjoined to it.

Example.
December 10. at half an hour past 9. a clock at Night, here at London, I see
two bright Stars at a pretty distance one from another in the South; I desire
to know the Names of them; Therefore having the Globe rectified to the Latitude
of London, and the Quadrant of Altitude screwed to the Zenith, the Hour-Index
also Rectified, and the Horizon posited Horizontally, as by Prob. 2. I observe
the Altitude of those Stars in Heaven, (either with a Quadrant, Astrolabe,
Cross-staff, or the Globe it self, as has been showed Prob. 13, 16.) to be,
the one 78. degrees, the other 42, degrees above the Horizon. Therefore having
their Altitudes, I count the same number of degrees as for the first 78. upon
the Quadrant of Altitude upwards, and turn it into the South, under the
Meridian, and see what Star is under 78. degrees, for that is the same Star on
the Globe which I saw in Heaven. Now at the first examination of the Globe you
may see that that Star is placed in the Ey of that After time which is called
Caput Medusa, and indeed, that being the only Star of Note in that
Constellation, bears the Name of the whole Constellation. The other Stars about
it you may easily know by their Situation. As, Seeing two little Stars to the
Westwards of that Star in Heaven, you may see on the Globe that the hithermost
is in the other Ey of Caput Medusa, and the furthermost in the Hair or Snakes
of the same Asterisme. Looking a little to the Southwards of those Stars in
Heaven, you may see two other small Stars a little below those in the Eyes;
Therefore to know those also, you may look on the Globe, and see that there is
one on the Nose, and another Star in the Cheek of Caput Medusa

In like manner for the second Star in the Meridian, which is 42 degrees above
the Horizon: If you move the Quadrant of Altitude (as before) to the South or
Meridian, and count 42 degrees upon the Quadrant of Altitude, you will find a
Star of the second Magnitude in the Mouth of the Whale: Therefore you may say,
that Star in Heaven is in the Mouth of the Whale: and because close to it on
the Globe is written Menkar, Therefore you may know the name of that Star in
Heaven is Menkar.

In the South East and by South 56 degrees above the Horizon, I ^ee a very
bright Star in Heaven; therefore I bring the Quadrant of Altitude to the South
East and by South point in the Horizon, and find under 56 degrees of the
Quadrant of Altitude a great Star, to which is prefixed the name Occulus
Taurus; Therefore I say, the name of that Star in Heaven is Occulus Taurus.

In the South East in Heaven you may see three bright Stars ly directly in a
straight line from one another, the middlemost whereof is 25. degrees or
thereabouts above the Horizon, therefore bring the Quadrant of Altitude to the
South East point of the Horizon, and about 25 degrees above the Horizon you
will see the same great Stars on the Globe, in the Girdle of Orion: Therefore
those Stars are called Orions Girdle.

At the same time South East and by East you have about 10 degrees above the
Horizon the brightest Star in Heaven, called Sirius, in the Mouth of the Great
Dog; Canicula a bright Star in the Little Dog East and by South, about 25
degrees above the Horizon: Cor Leonis just Rising East North East: you have
also at the same time on the East side the Horizon, the Twins, Auriga, the
Great Bear; and diverse other Stars, eminent both for their splendour and
Magnitude.

In the West side the Horizon you have South West and by West about 4 degrees
above the Horizon a bright Star in the Right Leg of Aquarius: and all along to
the Southwards in Cetus the Whale, you have other eminent bright Stars: More
upwards toward the Zenith you have a bright Star in the Line of the two
Fishes: Higher yet, you have the first Star in, an eminent Star, because the
first in all Catalogues that we have cognizance of; and therefore probably in
the Equinoctial Colure when the Stars were first reduced into Constellations:
yet more near the Zenith you have a bright Star in the Left Leg of Andromeda:
From thence toward the North, you find other very eminent bright Stars in
Cassiopea, Cepheus, Ursa Minor, in the Tail whereof is the Pole Star: and
Draco: Hecules: where you turn back, to Lyra, Cygnus, Pegasus, the Dolphin,
etc. all which, or any other, you may easily know by their Altitude above the
Horizon, and the point of the Compass they bear upon.

Thus knowing some of the most eminent Fixed Stars, you may by the Figure of
the rest come to the knowledge of them also. For Example, Looking toward the
North North East in Heaven, you may see seven bright Stars constituted in this
Figure; Therefore looking toward the same Quarter on the Globe, you may
(without taking their Altitude) see the same Stars lying in the same Figure in
the hinder parts of the Great Bear; from whence you may conclude, that those
Stars in Heaven are situate in the hinder parts of the Asterisme called Ursa
Major.



Yet nevertheless you may see some Stars of Note in Heaven, which you shall not
find on the Globe, and those in or near about the Ecliptic: They are called
Planets, and cannot be placed on the Globe, unless it be for a particular Time,
with Black Lead, or some such thing that may be rubbed out again: Because they
having a continual motion always alter their Places. Of those there are five
in number, besides the Sun and Moon, which are also Planets, though they show
not like Stars. These five are called Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury;
yet Mecury is very rarely seen: because he never Rising above an Hour before
the Sun, or Setting above a Hour after, for the most part has his light so
overspread with the dazelling Beams of the glittering Sun, that sometimes when
he is seen he seems rather to be a More in the Suns Beams, then a Body endowed
with so much brightness as Stars and Planets seem to be.

Now there are diverse ways (by some of which you may at all times) know those
Planets from the Fixed Stars: as first, Their not twinkling, for therein they
differ from fixed Stars; because they most commonly do twinkle, but Planets
never; unless it be Mars; and yet he twinkles but very seldom neither.

Secondly, They appear of a considerable Magnitude, as sometimes appears
greater ly far then a Star of the first Magnitude; and many times bigger then
he. They are both glittering Stars, of a bright Silver collure; but most
radient, especially when she is in her Perigeon. appears like a Star of the
second Magnitude; and is of a Copperish colloure. shows like a Star of the
third Magnitude, and is of a Leaden Color; and he (of all the others,) is
most difficult to be known from a fixed Star; partly because of his minority,
and partly because of the slowness of his motion. is very seldom seen (as
aforesaid) unless it be in a Morning when he Rises before the Sun, or in an
Evening when he Sets after the Sun: He is of a Pale Whitish Color, like Quick
silver, and appears like a Star of the third Magnitude. He may be known by the
Company he keeps, for he is never above 29. degrees distant from the Sun.

Thirdly, The Planets may be known from fixed Stars by their Azimuths and
Altitudes observed: (as has been taught before) for if when you have taken the
Azimuth and Altitude of the Star in Heaven you doubt to be a Planet, and you
find not on the Globe in the same Azimuth and Altitude a Star appearing to be
of the same Magnitude that that in Heaven appears to be, you may conclude that
that in Heaven is a Planet. Yet notwithstanding it may happen that a Planet may
be in the same degree of Longitude and Latitude in the Zodiac that some
eminent fixed Star is in; as in the degree and minute of Longitude and Latitude
that Cor Leonis, or the Bulls Ey, or Scorpions heart is in, and so may eclipse
that Star, by being placed between us and it: But that happens very seldom and
rarely; but if you doubt it* you may apply your self to some other of the
precedent and subsequent Rules here set down for knowing Planets from fixed
Stars.

The fourth way is by shifting their Places; for the Planets having a continual
motion, do continually alter their Places: as moves about half a degree in a
day: a whole degree; but and move very slowly; not moving above 5. minutes, and
seldom above 2. minutes. Yet by their motions alone the Planets may be known to
be Planets, if you will precisely observe their distance from any known fixed
Star in or near the Ecliptic as on this Night, and the next Night after
observe whether they retain the same distance they had the Night before; which
if they do, then are they fixed Stars; but if they do not then are they
Planets: yet this Ca^^on is to be given you in this Rule also, That the Planets
sometimes are said to be Stationary, as not altering 1. minute in Place,
forwards, or backwards in 6. or 7. days together. Therefore, if you find cause
to doubt whether your Star be a Planet, or a fixed Star, you may for the help
of your understanding confer with some of the former Rules, unless you are
willing to wait 8 or 9 days longer, and so by observation of its motion
resolve your self, Or,

Fifthly, you may apply your self to an Ephemeris for that Year, and see if on
that day you find any Planet in the degree and minute of the Zodiac you see
the Star you question in Heaven; and if there be no Planet in that degree of
the Zodiac, you may conclude it is no Planet, but a fixed Star.

PROB. XLV.
How to hang the Terrestrial Globe in such a position that by the Suns shining
upon it you may with great delight at once behold the demonstration of many
Principles in Astronomy, and Geography.

TAke the Terrestrial Ball out of the Horizon, and fasten a thread on the Brazen
Meridian to the degree of the Latitude of your Place; by this thread hang the
Globe in a place where the Suns Beams may have a free access to it; Then direct
the Poles of the Globe to their proper Poles in Heaven, the North Pole to the
North, and the South Pole to the South; and with a thread fastened to either
Pole, brace the Globe, so, that it do not turn from his position: then bring
your Habitation to the Meridian; so shall your Terrestrial Globe be Rectified
to correspond in all respects with the Earth it self; even as in Prob. 44. the
Celestial Globe does; the Poles of the Globe, to the Poles of the World; the
Meridian of the Globe, to the Meridian of the World; and the several Regions on
the Globe made Correspondent to the same Regions on the Earth: So that with
great delight you may behold,

1. How the counterfeit Earth (like the true one) will have one Hemisphear Sun
shine light, and the other shadowed, and as it were dark. By the shining
Hemisphear you may see that it is Day in all Places that are situate under it;
for on them the Sun does shine; and that it is Night at the same time in those
Places that are situate in the shadowed Hemisphear; for on them the Sun does
not shine; and therefore they remain in darkness.

2. If in the middle of the enlightened Hemisphear you set a Spherick Gnomon
Perpendicularly, it will project no shadow, but shows that the Sun is just in
the Zenith of that Place; that is, directly over the heads of the Inhabitants
of that Place: and the point that the Spherick Gnomon stands on, being removed
to the Meridian, shows the Declination of the Sun on the Meridian for that Day.

3. If you draw a Meridian line from one Pole to the other, in all Places under
that line, it is Noon: in those Places situate to the West, it is Morning; for
with them the Sun is East: and in those Places situate to the East, it is
Evening; for with them the Sun is West.

4: Note the degree of the Equator where the enlightened Hemisphear is parted
from the shadowed; for the number of degrees of the Equator intercepted between
that degree and the Meridian of any Place, converted into Hours (by accounting
for every 15. degrees 1. Hour) shows, if the Sun be Eastwards of that Place,
how long it will be ere the Sun Rises, Sets, or comes to the Meridian of that
Place: or if the Sun be Westward of that Place, how long it is since the Sun
Rose, or Set, or was at the Meridian of that Place.

5. The Inhabitants of all Places between the enlightened and shadowed
Hemisphear, behold the Sun in the Horizon: Those Westwards of the Meridian
Semicircle drawn through the middle of the enlightened Hemisphear behold the
Sun Rising: Those in the East, see it Setting.

6. So many degrees as the Sun reaches beyond either the North or South Pole,
so many degrees is the Declination of the Sun, either Northwards or Southwards:
and in all those Places comprehended in a Circle described at the termination
of the Sunshine, about that Pole, it is always Day, till the Sun decrease in
Declination: for the Sun goes not below their Horizon: as you may see by
turning the Globe about upon its Axis: and a the opposite Pole at the same
distance, the Sunshine not reaching thither, it will be always Night, till
the Sun decrease in Declination: because the Sun Rises not above their Horizon.

7. If you let the Globe hang steady, you may see on the East side of the
Globe, in what Places it grows Night; and on the West side the Globe how by
little and little the Sun encroaches upon it; and therefore there makes it Day.

8. If you make of Paper or Parchment a narrow Girdle, to begirt the Globe just
in the Equinoctial, and divide it into 24. equal parts, to represent the 24.
hours of Day and Night, and mark it in order with I, II, III, etc. to XII. and
then begin again with I, II, III, etc. to the other XII. you may by placing one
of the XIIs. upon the Equinoctial under the Meridian of your Place, have a
continual Sun-Dyal of it, and the hour of the Day given on it, at once in two
places; one by the parting the enlightened Hemisphear from the shadowed on the
Eastern side, the other by the parting the enlightened Hemisphear from the
shadowed on the Western side the Globe. Much more might be said on this
Problem: But the Ingenuous Artist may of himself find out diversities of
Speculations: therefore I forbear.

PROB. XLVI.
To know by the Terrestrial Globe in the Zenith of what Place of the Earth the
Sun is.

THis may be performed by the former Problem in the Day time, if the Sun
shines: but not else. But to find it at all times, do thus. Bring the Place of
your Habitation to the Meridian, and the Index of the Hour-Circle to 12; Then
turn the Globe Eastwards, if Afternoon, or Westwards, if Before Noon, till the
Index of the Hour-Circle pass by so many Hours from 12. as your Time given is,
either before or Afternoon: so shall the Sun be in the Zenith of that Place
where the Meridian intersects the Parallel of the Suns Declination for that Day.

Example.
May 10 at of an hour past 4. a clock After Noon* I would know in what Place of
the Earth the Sun is in the Zenith. My Habitation is London. Therefore I bring
London to the Meridian, and the Index of the Hour-Circle to 12. and because it
is After Noon: I turn the Globe Eastwards, till the Index passes through 4
hours and 3 quarters, or (which is all one) till 70 degrees 15 minutes of the
Equator pass through the Meridian. Then I find by Prob. 5. the Suns Declination
is 20. degrees 5. minutes which I find upon the Meridian, and in that Place
just under that degree and minute on the Globe, the Sun is in the Zenith: which
in this Example is in the North East Cape of Hispaniola.

Having thus found in what Place of the Earth the Sun is in the Zenith. Bring
that Place to the Meridian, and Elevate its respective Pole according to its
respective Elevation; so shall all Places cut by the Horizon have the Sun in
their Horizon: Those to the Eastwards shall have the Sun Setting; those to the
Westward shall have it Rising in their Horizon: those at the Intersection of
the Meridian and Horizon under the Elevated Pole, have the Sun in their Horizon
at lowest, but Rising; those at the Intersection of the Meridian and Horizon
under the Depressed Pole, have the Sun in their Horizon at highest, but
Setting. Thus in those Countries that are above the Horizon it is Daylight,
and in those but 18 degrees below the Horizon, it is Twilight: But in those
Countries further below the Horizon it is at that time dark Night: And those
Countries within the Parallel of the same number of degrees from the Elevated
Pole that the Suns Declination is from the Equinoctial, have the Sun always
above the Horizon, till the Sun have less Respective Declination then the
Elevated Pole; and those within the same Parallel of the Depressed Pole have
the Sun always below their Horizon, till the Sun inclines more toward the
Depressed Pole; As you may see by turning about the Globe; for in this
position, that portion of the Globe intercepted between the Elevated Pole, and
the Parallel Circle of 20. degrees 5. minutes from the Pole does not descend
below the Horizon: neither does that portion of the Globe intercepted between
the Depressed Pole and the Parallel Circle within 20. degrees 5. minutes of
that Pole, ascend above the Horizon.

PROB. XLVII.
To find in what different Places of the Earth the Sun has the same Altitude,
at the same time.

FInd by the former Problem in what Place of the Earth the Sun is in the
Zenith, and bring that Place on the Globe to the Zenith, and on the Meridian
[there] screw the Quadrant of Altitude, and turn it about the Horizon,
describing degrees of Almicantars thereby, as by Prob. 23. and all those
Countries in any Almicantar on the Globe shall have the Sun Elevated the same
number of degrees above their Horizon. Thus those Countries in the tenth
Almicantar shall have the Sun Elevated 10. degrees above their Horizon; those
in the 20th Almicantar shall have the Sun Elevated 20 degrees above their
Horizon; those in the 30th, 30. degrees etc. So that you may see, when the Sun
is in the Zenith of any Place, All the Countries or Cities in any Almicantar
have the Sun in one height at the same time above their Horizon. But to find
in what different Places the Sun has the same height at the same time, as
well Before or After Noon, as at Full Noon; and that in Countries that have
greater Latitude then the Suns greatest Declination, (and therefore cannot have
the Sun in their Zenith,) requires another Operation.

Therefore, Elevate its respective Pole according to your respective Latitude;
and let the Degree of the Brazen Meridian which is in the Zenith represent your
Habitation, and the degree of the Ecliptic the Sun is in represent the Sun:
Then bring the Sun to the Meridian, and the Index of the Hour-Circle to 12, and
turn the Globe Eastwards, if Before Noon, or Westwards, if After Noon, till the
Index point to the Hour of the Day: Then place the lower end of the Quadrant of
Altitude to the East point of the Horizon, and move the upper end (by sliding
the Nut over the Meridian) till the edge of the Quadrant touch the place of the
Sun: Then see at what degree of the Meridian the upper end of the Quadrant of
Altitude touches the Meridian and substract that number of Degrees from the
Latitude of your Place, and count the number of remaining degrees on the
Meridian, on the contrary side the degree of the Meridian where the upper end
of the Quadrant of Altitude touches the Meridian, and where that number of
degrees ends on the Meridian, in that Latitude and your Habitations Longitude,
has the Sun the same height at the same time.

Example.
May 10. at 53. minutes past 8. a clock in the Morning I would know in what
Place the Sun shall have the same Altitude it shall have at London, London's
Latitude found by Prob. 1. is 51 degrees Northwards: And because the Elevation
of the Pole is equal to the Latitude of the Place (as was showed Prob. 15.)
Therefore I Elevate the North Pole 51 degrees, so shall 51 degrees on the
Meridian be in the Zenith: This 51 degrees on the Meridian represents London.
The Suns Place found by Prob. 3. is 29. Therefore I bring 29 to the Meridian,
and the Hour Index to 12. on the Hour Circle: Then I turn the Globe Eastwards
(because it is before Noon) till the Index point at 8. hours 53 minutes on the
Hour-Circle, and place the lower end of the Quadrant of Altitude to the East
point in the Horizon, and slide the upper end either North or Southwards on the
Meridian till the graduated edge cut the degree of the Ecliptic the Sun is in:
Then I examine on the Meridian what degree the upper end of the Quadrant of
Altitude touches; which in this example, I find is 38 degrees. Therefore I
substract 38 from 51 Londons Latitude, and there remains 13. Then counting on
the Meridian 13. degrees backwards, from the Place where the Quadrant of
Altitude touched the Meridian, I come to 25 on the Meridian, Northwards.
Therefore I say, In the North Latitude of 25 degrees, and in the Longitude of
London (which is in Africa, in the Kingdom of Numidia) the Sun May 10. at 53.
minutes past 8. a clock in the Morning has the same Altitude above the Horizon
it has here at London.

The Quadrant of Altitude thus applied to the East point of the Horizon makes
right angles with all points on the Meridian, even as all the Meridians
proceeding from the Pole, do with the Equator: therefore the Quadrant being
applied both to the East point, and the Suns Place, projects a line to
intersect the Meridian Perpendicularly in equal degrees; from which
intersection the Sun has at the same time equal Height, be the degrees few or
many; for those 5. degrees to the Northwards of this intersection, have the Sun
in the same height that they 5 degrees to the Southwards have it: and those
10, 20, 30. degrees, more, or less, to the Northwards, have the Sun in the same
height that they have that are 10, 20. 30. degrees more or less to the
Southwards: So that this Prob. may be performed another way more easily, with
your Compasses, Thus: Having first rectified the Globe, and Hour Index, Turn
about the Globe till the Hour Index point to the Hour of the Day; Then pitch
one foot of your Compasses in the Suns Place, and extend the other to the
degree of Latitude on the Meridian, which in this example is 51 degrees North;
then keeping the first foot of your Compasses on the degree of the Sun, turn
about the other foot to the Meridian, and it will fall upon 25. as before.

Blaew commenting upon this Problem, takes notice how grossly they ere that
think they can find the height of the Pole at any Hour of the Day, by the Suns
height: because they do not consider that it is impossible to find the Hour of
the Day, unless they first know the height of the Pole.

PROB. XLVIII.
To find the length of the Longest and Shortest Artificial Day or Night.

THe Artificial Day is that space of Time which the Sun is above the Horizon of
any Place: and the Artificial Night is that space of Time which the Sun is
under the Horizon of any Place. They are measured in the Hour Circle, by Hours
and Minutes.

There is a constant unequallity of proportion in the Length of these Days and
Nights; which is caused both by the alteration of the Suns Declination, and the
difference of the Poles Elevation.

Those that inhabit on the North side the Equator have their longest Day when
the Sun enters; and those that inhabit on the South side the Equator, have
their longest Day when the Sun enters. But to know how long the longest Day is
in any North or South Elevation, Raise the North or South Pole according to the
Elevation of the Place, and bring for North Elevation, or for South Elevation
to the Meridian, and the Index of the Hour Circle to 12. Then turn the Globe
about till for North Elevation, or for South Elevation, come to the West side
the Horizon and the number of Hours and minutes pointed at on the Hour Circle,
doubled, is the number of Hours and minutes of the Longest Day.

The length of the Night to that Day is found by substracting the length of the
day from 24. for the remainder is the length of the Night.

The shortest Day in that Latitude is the length of the shortest Night, found
as before. And the longest Night is of the same length with the longest Day.

Example.
I would know the length of the longest Day at London. Therefore I Elevate the
North Pole 51 degrees, and bring to the Meridian, and the Index of the Hour
Circle to 12. Then I turn to the Western side the Horizon, and find the Index
point at 8. hours 18. minutes, which being doubled makes 16. hours 36. minutes,
for the length of the longest Day here at London.

PROB. XLIX.
To find how much the Pole is Raised, or Depressed, where the longest Day is an
Hour longer or shorter then it is in your Habitation.

Rectify the Globe to the Latitude of your Place; and make a prick at that
point of the Tropic which is at the Meridian; I mean at the Tropic of, if
your Habitation be on the North side the Equator; or, if your Habitation be on
the South side the Equator: And if you would know where the longest Day is just
an hour longer then it is at your Habitation, turn the Globe to the Westward
till 7 degrees of the Equato^ pass through the Meridian, and make there another
prick on the Tropic: Then turn about the Globe till the first prick come to
the Horizon; and move the Meridian through the notches of the Horizon till the
second prick on the Tropic come to the Horizon; so shall the arch of the
Meridian contained between the Elevation of your Place, and the Degree of the
Meridian at the Horizon, be the number of Degrees that the Pole is Elevated
higher then it is in your Latitude.

Example.
I would know in what Latitude the longest Day is an Hour longer then it is at
London. Therefore I Rectify the Globe to 51 degrees. and where the Meridian cuts
the Tropic of I make a prick; then I note what degree of the Equator is at the
Meridian, and from that degree on the Equator count 7 degrees to the Eastwards,
and bring those 7 degrees to the Meridian also; and again where the Meridian
cuts the Tropic of I make another prick, so shall 7 degrees of the Tropic be
contained between those (...) pricks. Then I turn the Globe about, till the
first prick comes to the Horizon, and (with a Quill thrust between the Meridian
and the Ball) I fasten the Globe in this position: Afterward I move the
Meridian through the (...) of the Horizon, till the second prick rises up to
the Horizon, and then I find 56 degrees of the Meridian cut by the Superficies
of the Horizon: Therefore I say, In the Latitude of 56 degrees, the longest Day
is an Hour longer then it is here at London.

But if you would know in what Latitude the Days are an Hour shorter, you must
make your second prick 7 degrees to the Westwards of the first, and after you
have brought the first prick to the Horizon, you must depress the Pole till the
second prick descends to the Horizon: so shall the degree of the Meridian at
the Horizon, show in what Elevation of the Pole the Days shall be an Hour
shorter.

By this Problem may be found the Alteration of Climates: for (as was said in
the Definition of Climates, Book 1. fol. 28.) Climates alter according to the
half-hourly increasing of the Longest Day: therefore the Latitude of 56 degrees
having its Days increased an whole Hour) is distant from the Latitude of
London by the space of two Climates.

PROB. L.
The Suns Place given, to find what alteration of Declination be must have to
make the Day an Hour longer, or shorter: And in what number of Da^es it will be.

Rectify the Globe to the Latitude of the Place, and b^ing the Suns place to
the East side the Horizon, and note against what degree of the Horizon it is:
then bring one of the Colures to intersect the Horizon in that degree of the
Horizon, and at the point of Intersection make a prick in the Colure; and
observe what degree of the Equator is then at the Meridian: Then turn the Globe
Westward, if the Days shorten; but Eastwards, if they lengthen, till 7 degrees
of the Equator pass through the Meridian, and where the Horizon intersects the
same Colure, make another prick in the Colure: Afterward bring the Colure to
the Meridian, and count the number of degrees between the two pricks, for so
many degrees must the Suns Declination alter to lengthen or shorten the Day an
Hour.

Example.
The Suns Place is 10. I would know how much he must alter his Declination
before the Day is an Hour longer here at London. Therefore I rectify the Globe
to the Latitude of London, and bring 10. to the East side the Horizon, and find
it against 24 degrees from the East point: therefore I bring one of the Colures
to this 24 degrees, and close by the edge of the Horizon I make a prick with
black lead, in the Colure: then keeping the Globe in this position, I look what
degree of the Equator is then at the Meridian, and find 250, and because the
Days lengthen, I turn the Globe Eastwards, till 7 degrees from the foresaid
250 pass through the Meridian: then keeping the Globe in this position I make
another prick in the Colure, and bringing this Colure to the Meridian, I find a
little more then 5 degrees of the Meridian contained between the two pricks:
therefore I say, when the Sun is in 10. degrees, he must alter his Declination
a little more then 5 degrees, to make the Day an Hour longer.

Now to know in what number of Days he shall alter this Declination, you must
find the Declination of the two pricks on the Colure as you found the Suns
Declination by Prob. 5. and the Arch of the Ecliptic that passes through the
Meridian while the Globe is turned from the first pricks Declination to the
second pricks Declination, is the number of Ecliptical degrees that the Sun is
to pass while he alters this Declination: and the degree of the Ecliptic then
at the Meridian is (with respect had to the Quarter of the Year) the place the
Sun shall have when its Declination shall be altered so much as to make the Day
an Hour longer

Thushaving the Suns first place given, and its second place found* you may by
finding those two places on the Plain of the Horizon, also find the number of
Days comprehended between them, as you are taught by the fourth Problem.

This Problem thus wrought for different Times of the Year, will show the
falacy of that Vulgar Rule which makes the Day to be lengthned or shortened an
Hour in every Fifteen Days: when as the lengthning or shortning of Days keeps
no such equality of proportion: for when the Sun is near the Equinoctial points
the Days lengthen or shorten very fast: but when he is near the Tropical
points, very slowly.

PROB. LI.
Of the Difference of Civil and Natural Days, commonly called the Equation of
Civil Days. And how it may be found by the Globe.

THe Civil Day is that space of Time containing just 24. Hours, reckoned from
12 a clock on one Day to 12 a clock the next Day; in which space of Time the
Equinoctial makes upon the Poles of the World a Diurnal Revolution. The Natural
Day is that space of Time wherein the Sun moves from the Meridian of any Place
to the same Meridian again. These Days are at one time of the Year longer then
at another; and at all Times longer then the Civil Days. There is but small
discrepancy between them, yet some there is, made by a twofold Cause. For
first, The Suns Apparent motion is different from his true motion; He being
much slower in his Apogeum then he is in his Perigeum: For when the Sun is in
his Apogeum he scarce moves 58 minutes from West to East in a Civil Day, but
when he is in his Perigeum he moves above 61 minutes in a Civil Day: and
therefore increases his Right Ascension more in equal Time.

The second Cause is the difference of Right Ascensions answerable to equal
parts of the Ecliptic: for about and the differences of Right Ascensions are
far greater then about and: for about and the Right Ascension of 10. degrees is
but 9. degrees 11. minutes; but about and the Right Ascension of 10 degrees
will be found to be 10. degrees 53. minutes, as by the Globe will appear.

But because of the smalness of the Globes graduation* you cannot actually
distinguish to parts near enough for the solution of this Problem, if you
should enquire the difference in length of two single Days; it will be
requisite to take some number of Days together; Suppose 20. Therefore find by
Prob. 3. the Places of the Sun for the beginning and ending of those Days you
would compare; and find the Right Ascensions answerable to each place in the
Ecliptic; and also the differences of Right Ascensions answerable to the Suns
motion in each number of Days: Then compare the differences of Right
Ascensions together; and by substracting the lesser from the greater, you will
have the number of degrees and minutes of the Equator that have passed through
the Meridian more in one number of Days then in the other number of Days:
which degrees of the Equator converted into Time, is the number of minutes that
the one number of Days is longer then the other number of Days.

Example.
I would know what difference of Time there is in the length of the first 20.
Days of December, and the first 20, Days of March. I find by Prob. 3. the
Suns place December 1, is (...) 19. 45. at the end of 20 Days. viz. on the 21
Day his place is (...) 10. 11. The Suns place March 1. is 21. 16. at the 20.
Days end, viz. March 21, his place is 11. 3. I find by Prob. 26. the Right
Ascension answerable to 19. 45 is 258. 10. 10. 11 280. 25. 21. 16 352. 00. 11.
3 9. 40. and the difference of Right Ascensions contained between the first Day
in each Month, and the 21 of the same Month, by substracting the lesser from
the greater is for 258. 10. And for 352. 00. 280. 25. 9. 40. 22. 15 17. 40.

But note, because the Vernal Colure, where the degrees of Right Ascension
begin and end their account, is intercepted is the Arch of the Suns motion from
the first to the 21. of March, therefore instead of substracting the lesser
number of degrees of Right Ascension from the greater, viz. 9. 40 from 35. 2. I
do for finding the difference of the Right Ascensional arch of the Suns motion
in those 20 Days, sustract the foresaid 352 degrees from 360, and the remains
is 8. which is the difference of Right Ascension from 21, 16. to the
Equinoctial Colure: to which 8 adding 9 degrees 40 minutes, the Right Ascension
from the Equinoctial Colure. to 11. 3. it makes 17 degrees 40. minutes for the
difference of Right Ascensions between 21, 16. and 11. 3 Then I find the
difference of this Difference of Right Ascension, by substracting the less from
the greater, viz. 17. 40. from 22. 15. and the remains is 4. degrees 35.
minutes, for the number of degrees and minutes of the Equator that pass through
the Meridian in the first 20 Days in the Month of December more then in the
first 20 Days of the Month of March: which 4. degrees 35. minutes converted
into Time, gives 19. minutes, that is, a quarter of an Hour and 4 minutes that
the first 20 Days of December aforesaid, are longer then the first 20 Days of
March.

PROB. LII.
How to find the Hour of the Night, when the Moon shines on a Sun Dyal, by help
of the Globe.

Rectify the Globe, and find by Prob. 54. or an Ephemeris, the Moons place at
Noon: Bring it to the Meridian, and the Index of the Hour Circle to 12. and
turn about the Globe till the Index of the Hour Circle points to the same Hour
the shade of the Moon falls on, on the Sun Dyal. Then by Prob. 3. find the Suns
place at Noon, and see how many degrees of Right Ascension are contained
between the Suns place and the degree of the Equator at the Meridian, when the
Index of the Hour Circle is brought to the Hour the Moon shines on in the Sun
Dyal; for those number of degrees converted into Time, shall be the Time from
Noon, or the Hour of the Night. Only note, Respect must be had to the motion of
the Moon from West to East, for so swift is her mean motion, that it is
accounted to be above 12. degrees in 24. Hours; that is 6 degrees in 12 Hours,
3 degrees in 6 Hours, etc. and this also converted into Time, as aforesaid, you
must add proportionably to the Time found from Noon; and the sum shall give you
the true Hour of the Night.

Example.
Here at London, I desired to know the Hour of the Night January 6. this
present Year 1658. The Moons place found by an Ephemeris, or for want of an
Ephemeris, by Prob. 54. is in 21. degree 22, minutes; Therefore I rectified the
Globe to Londons Latitude, and brought 21. 22. minutes to the Meridian, and the
Index of the Hour Circle to 12. then by Prob. 3. I found the Suns place in 26.
degrees 46. minutes, and by Prob. 26. I found his Right Ascension to be 300
degrees; Then I turned about the Globe, till the Index of the Hour Circle
pointed at 10 Hours, and at the degree of the Equator at the Meridian I made a
prick; then I counted the number of degrees of the Equater contained between
the foresaid 300 degrees. and this prick and found them 111 degrees which converted
into Time, by allowing 15 degrees for an Hour, gives 7 hours, 25 minutes, Time
from Noon: which if the Moons motion were not to be considered, should be the
immediate Hour of the Night: But by the Rule aforesaid, the Moons motion from
West to East, in 7 hours 25 minutes is 3 degrees 42 minutes, and this 3 degrees
42 minutes being converted into Time, is 14 minutes more, which being added to
7 hours 25 minutes: make 7 hours 39 minutes, for the true Hour of the Night.

PROB. LIII.
To find the Dominical Letter, the Prime, Epact, Easter Day, and the rest of
the Moveable Feasts, for ever.

THough these Problemes cannot be performed by the Globe, because of the
several changes, and irregular accounts that their Rules are framed upon, yet
because they are of frequent and Vulgar use, and for that the solution of many
other Questions will have dependency on the knowledge these; Therefore I have
thought fit here to inserte this Table of Mr Palmers, by which you may find
them All.

I shall not insist upon the Reasons of the several changes of Letters, and
Numbers, Himself having already very learnedly handled that subject, in his
Book of the Catholic Planisphear, Book 1. Chapter 11. (to which I refer you)
Neither shall I need to give you any other Instructions for finding what is
here proposed, then what himself has given in his fourth Book, Chapter 66, and
part of 67. Therefore take it as he there delivers it.

An Example, shall serve here instead of a Rule. For the Year 1657. I would
know all these: wherefore I seek the Year 1657. in the Table of the Suns Cycle,
and over against it, I find 14. for the Year of the Cycle of the Sun, and D for
the Dominical Letter. And note here, that every Leap-year has 2 Dominical
Letters (as 1660, has A G) and the first (viz. A) serves that Year till
February 25, and the second (G) for the rest of the Year. And note that these
Letters go always backwards when you count forwards (as B A, then G F, etc.
not F G, and, then A B) as you may see by the Table.

Then in the Table of the Cycle of the Moon, I have for the Year 1657. the
Prime 5. the Epact 25. Those had, I go to the Table for Easter, and seek there
in the first rank the Prime 5, and under it in the middle rank stands E; that
is not my Dominical Letter; therefore I seek not backward, but always forward
in the middle rank, till I come to my Dominical Letter D. and under it I find
in the third rank March 29. upon which Easter day falls this Year 1657. The
rest of the moveable Feasts may be had by their distances from Easter, which
are always the same. Only for Advent Sunday, remember that the next Sunday
after November 26 is Advent Sunday. Read Book 1. 11. and that will sufficiently
instruct you with this Example.

To find the Age of the Moon.
Remember first that the Epact begins with March, which must be here accounted
the first Month: Then if you add to the Epact the number of the Month
current, and the number of the day of the Month current, the sum or the excess
above 30, is the Moons age.

Example. January 20. 1656. According to the account of the Church of England,
(who begin the Year with March 25. which was the Equinoctial day about Christ
time) the Epact is 14. January is the 11th Month, and the 20th day is
proposed; now add 14. 11. and 20. together, they make 45. out of which I take
30. and there remains 15, the Moons age.

PROB. LIVE.
The Age of the Moon given, to find her place in the Ecliptic according to her
mean motion.

THis Problem may be performed exact enough for Common uses by the Globe, but
in regard it only shows the Moons place in the Ecliptic according to her meat
motion, it will often fail you some few degrees of her true Place. The work is
thus,

First set figures to every twelth degree of the Equinoctial, accounted from
the Equinoctial Colure, marking them with 1, 2, 3, 4. etc. to 30 which will end
where you began viz. at the Equinoctial Colure again: so shall the Equinoctial
be divided into 30 equal parts, representing the 30 Days of the Moons Age
These figures (to distinguish them from the degrees of the Equator) were best
be writ with Red Ink.

When you would enquire the Moons Place, Elevate the North Pole 90 degrees,
that is, in the Zenith, so shall the Equator ly in the Horizon: Then bring the
Equinoctial Colure against the Day of the Month in the Horizon, so shall the
Moons Age written in Red figures, stand against the Sign and degree in the
Horizon that the Moon is in at that Time.

Example.
September 28. 1658. I would know the Moons place in the Ecliptic, she being
then 12 Days old. Therefore I Elevate the North Pole 90 degrees above the
Horizon, and turn the Globe about till the Equinoctial Colure come to September
28. in the Circle of Days on the Horizon; then looking against what Sign and
degree of the Ecliptic Circle in the Horizon the 12th division in Red figures
stands, I find 9. which is the Sign and degree the Moon is in, according to
her mean Motion.

This Problem may be applied to many Uses: for, having the Moons Place you may
find the Time of her Rising, Southing, Setting, and Shining etc. by working
with her, as you were taught to work with the Sun, in several foregoing
Problemes, proper to each purpose.

PROB. LV.
Having the Longitude and Latitude, or Right Ascension and Declination of any
Planet, or Comet, to place it on the Globe, to correspond with its place in
Heaven.

PLanets and Comets cannot be placed on the Globe so as their places will long
retain correspondence with their places in Heaven; Because as was said Chap.
44. they have a continual motion from West to East upon the Poles of the
Ecliptic: yet never-the-less you may by having their Longitude and Latitude,
or Right Ascension and Declination, for any set Time, place a Mark for them on
the Globe, either with Ink if your Globe be Varnisht, for then you may with a
wet finger wipe it off again; or with Black-lead, if it be not Varnisht, and
then you may rub it out again with a little White Bread: which Mark for that
Time, will as effectually serve you to work by, as any of the Fixed Stars
placed on the Globe will do.

Therefore if the Longitude and Latitude of any Planet, or Comet, be given; Do
thus, Elevate the North Pole, if the Latitude given be North; but if the
Latitude given be South, Elevate the South Pole 66 degrees; and place the Pole
of the Ecliptic in the Zenith, and over it screw the Quadrant of Altitude: so
shall the Ecliptickly in the Horizon; and the Quadrant of Altitude being turned
about the Horizon shall pass through all the Degrees of Longitude: Then find
the point of given Longitude in the Ecliptic, and bring it to the Quadrant of
Altitude, and hold it there: Then count upwards on the Quadrant of Altitude the
number of degrees and minutes of given Latitude, and at the point where the
number ends, close to the Quadrant of Altitude, make a small Prick, and that
Prick shall represent the Planet or Comet you were to place on the Globe.

If it be the Right Ascension and Declination of a Planet or Comet that is
given; you must find the degree and minute of Right Ascension on the
Equinoctial, and bring it to the Meridian, and keep the Globe there steady;
then find the degree and minute of Declination on the Meridian, and under that
degree and minute on the Globe make a Prick, and that Prick shall represent the
Planet, or Comet, as aforesaid,

If it be or that this Prick is to represent, it may stand on the Globe
sometimes a Week or a Fortnight, without much difference from the Planets place
in Heaven. But if the Prick were to represent the other Planets, you must (in
regard of their swift motion) alter it very often, especially for the Moon; for
so swift is her motion, that in every two Hours she alters about a degree in
Longitude.

Having thus placed this Mark on the Globe, you may find out the Time of its
several Positions, and Aspects, if you work by it as you are directed to work
by the Sun, in the several respective Problemes throughout this Book.

The End of the Second Book.
The Third BOOK, Being the Practical Use of the GLOBES. Applied to the Solution
of Problemes In the Art of NAVIGATION.
PRAEFACE.
BEcause the Art of Navigation consists as well in the knowledge of Astronomical
and Geographical Problemes, as in Problemes merely Nautical; Therefore I must
desire the Artist to seek in the last Book such Problemes as are only
Astronomical or Geographical. For my Design is here to collect such Problemes
as are only used in the Art of Navigation, some few particulars excepted, as
for finding Latitude, Longitude, Course; Distance, etc. Which though they are
handled in than Book, yet for their exceeding Vtility in the Art of Navigation,
and for that what there is given, cannot always be had to work by; therefore
in this Book I have mentioned diverse other Observations, which being made or
had, you may by the Rules proper for each Observation find what shall be
proposed.

PROB. I.
The Suns Amplitude and Difference of Ascension given, to find the Height of
the Pole, and Declination of the Sun.

ELevate the Pole so many degrees as the Difference of the Suns Ascension is,
and screw the Quadrant of Altitude to the Zenith, and bring the first point of
to the Meridian, then number on the Quadrant of Altitude upwards the complement
to 90. of the Suns Amplitude, and move the Quadrant of Altitude till that
number of degrees cuts the Equator; So shall the Quadrant cut in the Horizon
the degree of the Pole Elevation; and in the Equator the degree of the Suns
Declination.

Example.
The difference of Ascension is 27. degrees 7. minutes. Therefore I Elevate the
Pole 27. degrees 7. minutes above the Horizon, and screw the Quadrant of
Altitude to 27. degrees 7. minutes, which is in the Zenith: then I bring the
first point of to the Meridian, and number on the Quadrant of Altitude upwards
56. degrees 40. minutes, the Complement of the Suns Amplitude, and bring that
degree to the Equator; then I see in what degree of the Horizon the Quadrant
cuts the Horizon, and find 51, which is the Elevation of the Pole: then looking
in what degree of the Equator the Quadrant of Altitude cuts the Equator, I find
20 degrees, 5 min. which is the Declination of the Sun at the same Time.

PROB. II.
The Suns Declination and Amplitude given, to find the Poles Elevation.

ELevate the Pole so many degrees as the Complement of the Suns Amplitude is;
and screw the Quadrant of Altitude in the Zenith, and bring the first point of
to the Meridian: Then count on the Quadrant of Altitude to the Degree of the
Suns Declination, and bring that degree to the Equinoctial; and the degree of
the Equinoctial cut by that degree of the Quadrant of Altitude, is the degree
of the Poles Elevation.

Example.
The Suns Amplitude is 33. degrees 20. minutes, his Declination is 20 degrees 5
minutes, his Complement of Amplitude to 90. is 56 degrees 7 minutes. Therefore
I Elevate the Pole 56. degrees 7 minutes above the Horizon, and screw the
Quadrant of Altitude to 56 degrees 7 minutes which is in the Zenith: Then I
bring the first point of to the Meridian, and number on the Quadrant of
Altitude upwards 20. degrees. 5 min. for the Suns Declination, this 20th degree 5
minutes, I bring to the Equinoctial, and find it cut there 51. degrees, for the
Height of the Pole.

PROB. III.
The Suns Declination and Hour at East given, to find the Height of the Pole.

ELevate the Pole so many degrees as the Suns Declination is, and screw the
Quadrant of Altitude in the Zenith: Then convert the Hours or minutes past 6.
given into degrees; by allowing 15 degrees for every Hour of Time, and for
every minute of Time 15 minutes of a Degree; and number those degrees or
minutes in the Horizon from the East Southwards; so shall the Degree of the
Quadrant of Altitude cut by the Equator be the Complement of the height of the
Pole.

Example.
The Suns Declination is 20 degrees. 5 min. Therefore I Elevate the Pole 20 degrees
5 minutes, and also screw the Quadrant of Altitude to ^0 degrees 5 minutes
which is in the Zenith: the Hour the Sun comes to be at East is 8 a clock 53
minutes, that is, 1 Hour 7 minutes after 6. Therefore I convert 1 Hour 7
minutes into Degrees, as before, and it gives 16 degrees 50 minutes; which
number of degrees and minutes I count from the East point Southwards, and
thither I bring the Quadrant of Altitude: Then I look in what degree of the
Quadrant of Altitude, the Equator cuts, and find 38, which is the Complement of
the Poles Height, viz. 51 degrees for the Height of the Pole.

In this Problem the Declination of the Sun and Elevation of the Pole bears
the same Denomination of either North or South, for when the Declination and
the Elevation are different the Sun cannot come to the East point.

PROB. IIII.
The Declination of the Sun and his Altitude at East given, to find the Height
of the Pole.

ELevate the Pole to the Complement of the Suns Altitude, and screw the
Quadrant of Altitude to the Zenith: Then bring the Equinoctial point to the
Meridian, and number on the Quadrant of Altitude the degrees of the Suns
Declination, and bring that degree to the Equinoctial, and note the degree it
cuts; for its Complement to 90 is the Height of the Pole.

Example.
May 10. The Suns Declination is 20 degrees 5 minutes; His Altitude at East is
25 degrees 55 minutes here at London: I enquire the Height of the Pole.
Therefore I substract 20. 5 min. from ^0 the remains is 69 degrees. 55 min. for its
Complement; wherefore I bring 69 degrees. 55 min. of the Meridian to the Horizon;
and to 69 degrees. 55 min. which is in the Zenith, I screw the Quadrant of Altitude
then I bring to the Meridian, and count on the Quadran: of Altitude upwards 20
degrees. 5 min, and move it about the Equinoctial till those 20 degrees. 5 min. touch
the Equinoctial, which I find to be in 38 degrees, Therefore I substract those
38 from 90, and the remains is 51 degrees, Therefore I say the Pole here at
London is Elevated 51 degrees.

The Declination and the Elevation is always the same, either North or South,
for when they alter their Denomina ions the Sun at East can have no Altitude,
neither can it indeed reach the East point: and therefore in this example,
because the Declination of the Sun is North, it is the North Pole that is
Elevated here at London.

To perform the same otherwise, with a pair of Compasses.
Take off with your Compasses from the Equator or Quadrant of Altitude the
number of degrees of Altitude observed, and place one foot at the beginning of
on the inner edge of the Horizon, and extend the other directly upwards toward
the Zenith: Then move the Brazen Meridian through the notches of the Horizon
till the other point of your Compasses (respecting the Zenith) reach the
Parallel of the Suns Declination: So shall the number of degrees on the
Meridian be the number of degrees that the Pole is Elevated above the Horizon;
and is either North or South according as the Suns Declination is: as before.

This may yet otherwise be performed with the Quadrant of Altitude, by taking
the Nut off the Meridian, and laying the edge of its Index (specified in Chap.
1. Sect. 6. of the first Book) exactly on the East line of the Horizon: for
when that lies straight between the point of East on the outer Verge of the
Horizon, and the beginning of in the inner Verge of the Horizon, then shall the
upper end of the Quadrant of Altitude point directly to the Zenith: and if then
you turn the Meridian through the notches of the Horizon till the Suns Altitude
on the Quadrant of Altitude cut the Parallel of Declination, you will have on
the Meridian the height of the Pole: as before.

PROB. V.
By the Suns Declination and Azimuth at 6. of the Clock given, to find the
Height of the Pole, and Almicantar at 6.

ELevate the Pole so many degrees as the Suns Azimuth is at 6. and screw the
Quadrant of Altitude in the Zenith, and bring the first point of to the
Meridian: Then number on the Quadrant of Altitude upwards the Complement of the
Suns Declination, and bring that degree to the Equator: So shall the degree of
the Horizon cut by the Quadrant of Altitude be the Complement of the Poles
Elevation; and the degree of the Equator cut by the Quadrant of Altitude shall
be the Almicantar of the Sun at 6. of the clock.

Example.
The Suns Azimuth at 6 is 12 degrees: Therefore I Elevate the Pole 12, and
screw the Quadrant of Altitude to 12 degrees which is in the Zenith: Then I
bring the first point of to the Meridian; The Suns Declination is 20 degrees 5
minutes. Therefore I number on the Quadrant of Altitude 69 degrees. 55 min. which
is the Complement of 20 degrees. 5 min. to 90. this 69 degrees. 55 min. on the Quadrant
of Altitude I bring to cut the Equator, and find when 69 degrees. 55 min, cuts the
Equator, that the Quadrant of Altitude cuts the Horizon, in 38 degrees. which is
the Complement of the Poles Elevation: and at the same time the Quadrant of
Altitude also cuts the Equator in 15 degrees which is the Almicantar or
Altitude of the Sun at 6. a clock.

PROB. VI.
By the Hour of the Night and a known Star Observed Rising or Setting, to find
the Height of the Pole.

Rectify the Hour Index, by Prob. 2. of the former Book; and turn the Globe
Westwards till the Hour Index points at the Hour of the Night; fasten the Globe
there, and turn the Meridian through the notches of the Horizon till the know^
Star come to the East side the Horizon, if the Star be Rising, (...) the West
if it be Setting; so shall the degrees of the Poles El^vation be cut by the
Horizon under the Elevated Pole; and (...) North or South according as the
Elevated Pole of the Globe (...)

PROB. VII.
Two Places given in the same Latitude, to find (...) Difference of Longitude.

BRing the first Place to the Meridian, and note the number of degrees of the
Equinoctial that comes to the Meridan with it; then Bring the other place to
the Meridian and note the number of degrees of the Equator that comes to the
Meridian with it: and by substracting the lesser number from the greater you
have the difference of Longitude, This needs no Example.

PROB. VIII.
Two Places given in the same Longitude, to find the Difference of Latitude.

BRing the Places to the Meridian, and the degrees of the Meridian over the two
Places is the Latitudes of them both, and by substracting the lesser number of
degrees from the greater you will have the difference of Latitude.

PROB. IX.
Course and Distance between two Places given, to find their Difference in
Longitude and Latitude.

SEek the Rhumb you have failed upon, as in Prob, 34, of the last Book, and
upon that Rhumb make a mark for the Place you departed from; then with your
Compasses take off from the Equinoctial the number of Leagues you have failed
upon that Rhumb, by allowing a degree for every 20. Leagues and place one foot
of your Compasses upon that mark, and where the other foot falls on that Rhumb
make a second mark; then by bringing the first mark to the Meridian, you will
see on the Meridian the Latitude of that mark, and in the Equator the Longitude
as in Prob. 2. of the last Book: and by bringing the second mark also to the
Meridian, you will as before, find the Longitude and Latitude of the second
mark also. Then by substracting the lesser Latitude from the greater Latitude,
and the lesser Longitude from the greater Longitude, you will have the
difference remaining, both of Longitude and Latitude you are arived into.

PROB. X.
To find how many Miles are contained in a Degree of any Parallel.

EVery Degree of the Equinoctial contains 20. English Leagues and every League
3. English Miles: But in every Parallel to the Equinoctial, the Degrees
diminish more and more even to the Pole, where they end in a point. Therefore a
Degree in any Parallel cannot contain so many Miles as a Degree in the
Equinoctial. Now that you may know how many Miles are contained in a Degree of
any Parallel to the Equinoctial. Do thus, Measure with your Compasses the width
of any number of Degrees in any given Parallel; suppose (for Examples sake) 10.
Degrees in the Parallel of 51; Examine in the Equator, how many Degrees of the
Equator they will make, and you will find 6. Therefore 1. Degree in the Equator
making 60 Miles 6. Degrees makes 360, to which add for the (...) part 12 Miles,
makes ^72 Miles, to be the Measure of 10 Degrees in the Parallel of 51. So that
by dividing 372. by 10. you have ^7 Miles for the length of a Degree, from East
to West in the Parallel of 51 Degrees.

PROB. XI.
The Rhumb you have sailed upon, and the Latitudes you de^arted from, and are
arived to, given, to find the Difference of Longitude, and the number of
Leagues you have Sailed.

FIrst seek the Rhumb you have sailed on, and pass it through the Meridian till
it cuts in the Meridian the Latitude you departed from; and keeping the Globe
there sted^y make a mark close by the Meridian, under that Latitude and in that
Rhumb on the Globe, and note in the Equinoctial the degree of Longitude at the
Meridian: then pass that Rhumb through the Meridian again, till it cuts in the
Meridian the Latitude you are arived to; and in that Rhumb and Latitude make on
the Globe another mark, and examine in the Equinoctial the Longitude of the
second mark; for the difference between the first and second mark, is the
difference of Longitude. Then open your Compasses to one Degree of the
Equinoctial, and by measuring along in the Rhumb count how many times that
Distance is contained between the two points in that Rhumb: for so many times
20. Leagues is the Distance you have sailed.

Example.
I sail upon the North West Rhumb from the Latitude of 1^* degrees, into the
Latitude of 30. degrees 40. minutes. Therefore I find the North West Rhumb* and
turn the Globe through the Meridian till this Rhumb cut the Meridian in the
first Latitude, viz. in 10. degrees and directly under 10. degrees upon the
Rhumb I make a prick, and also find 10 degrees 3 minutes, of the Equator at the
Meridian, for the Longitude of the First Place. Then I turn the Globe again
through the Meridian, till the same Rhumb cut the Meridian in the second
Latitude. viz in 30 degrees 40 minutes, and directly under those 30 degrees 40
minutes upon the same Rhumb, I make another prick, which represents the Place I
am arrived to: I examine the Longitude of this prick, as before, and find it 32
degrees 10 minutes. Therefore I substract the first Longitude, viz. 10 degrees
3 minutes from the second Longitude, viz. 32 degrees 10 minutes, and there
remains 22 degrees 7 minutes, for the Difference of Longitude.

Then for examining the Distance I open my Compasses to 1. degree on the
Equinoctial and measure upon the Rhumb how often that Distance is contained
between the two pricks, and find 29, that is, 29 degrees 15 minutes, which
multiplied by 2^. gives 585, for the number of Leagues failed upon that R^umb.

The reason why I open the Compasses no wider then to 1 degree, is because the
Rhumbs being Circular or (...) lines the distance on them may be measured more
exactly by often counting that 1 degree in them the^ if the (...) had bin
op^red to many degrees. Thus if the Compasses had been opened wide enough to
reach between the two pricks aforesaid. I should not have had above 583 Leagues
for the distance between the two Places: neither is there indeed more great
Circle distance between them; But I sailed upon a Rhumb, that is, I follow^d
the Course of a Circular winding line, and so fetched a Compass about to come to
these two pricks; and therefore I have in truth sailed 585. Leagues. For the
segment of a Rhumb between two Places is always greater then a straight line
drawn betwixt them; yea sometimes by half or more in Places near either Pole.

Note, If you be not very curious in opening your Compasses to this small
distance, you may in often turning them about upon the Rhumb commit error in your
measuring: therefore when you have taken the Distance of one degree, try if you
neither gain or loose any thing in measuring 10, or 20. degrees of the
Equinoctial by them: for then your Compasses are opened to a width exact enough
for your purpose.

PROB. XII.
The Longitudes and Latitudes of two Places given, to find Course, and Great
Circle distance between them.

FInd on the Globe the Longitudes and Latitudes given, and make pricks to
either Longitude and Latitude: If any Rhumb pass from one place to the other,
that is (without more a do) the Rhumb sought. But if no Rhumb pass through;
Take the Rhumb that runs most Parallel to the two pricks: for that shall be the
Rhumb or the nearest Rhumb that these two pricks Bear on. An Example of this,
see in Prob. 34. of the Last Book: And the Great Circle Distance between these
two pricks, you may find as by Prob, 33. of the same Book.

PROB. XIII.
The Latitude you departed from, and the Latitude you are arrived to, and the
number of Leagues you have sailed given, to find the Rhumb you have sailed on,
and difference of Longitude.

MAke a prick on the Globe in the Latitude you departed from: then open your
Compasses to the number of Leagues you have sailed, by taking for every 20.
Leagues 1. degree of the Equator, half a degree for 10 Leagues, a quarter of a
Degree for 5 Leagues, and so proportionably for any other number of Leagues:
Place one foot of your Compasses in the prick made for the Latitude you
departed from, and extend the other toward the Latitude you are arived to, and
discribe an occult Arch; Turn the Globe till this occult Arch come to the
Latitude on the Meridian, and where the Latitude cuts this occult arch make
another prick to represent the Latitude you are arived to; so shall the Rhumb
passing through those two pricks (or that is most Parallel to those two pricks)
be as in the last Prob. the Course or the Rhumb those two pricks Bears on.

The difference of Longitude you may find as by Prob. 11.

PROB. XIV.
To find by the Globe the Variation of the Needle; commonly called the
Variation of the Compass.

OBserve by a Compass whose wire is placed just under the Flower deluce, what
point of the Compass the Sun Rises or Sets on, Morning, or Evening: Then
examine by Prob: 10. of the second Book, what degree of the Horizon the Sun
Rises or Sets on by the Globe also; and if the Rising or Setting be the same,
both on the Globe and Compass, there is no Variation in your Place, But if
there be difference between the Rising or Setting by the Compass and the Globe,
then is there Variation in your Place.

If the point the Sun Rises upon in the Compass be nearer the North point, then
the point the Sun Rises upon by the Globe, the Variation is Westwards.

If the point the Sun Sets upon in the Compass be nearer the North then the
point it Sets upon by the Globe, the Variation is Eastwards.

If the point the Sun Sets upon in the Compass be further from the North point,
then the point the Sun Sets upon by the Globe, the Variation is Westwards.

If the point the Sun Rises upon in the Compass be further from the North point
then the point the Sun Rises upon by the Globe, the Variation is Eastwards. And
so many degrees as there is between the point of Rising or Setting found by the
Compass, and the point of true Rising or Setting found by the Globe, so many
degrees is the Variation from the North toward the East, or West point.

Otherwise, when the Sun has Altitude.
Having the Altitude of the Sun; find by Prob. 22. of the second Book, its
Azimuth: Then examine by a Compass whether the true Azimuth found by the Globe,
agree with the Azimuth found by a Nautical Compass: If they agree there is no
Variation: But if the Azimuth of the Compass before Noon be nearer the North
then the true Azimuth found by the Globe, the Variation is Westwards.

If the Azimuth by the Compass Afternoon be nearer the North, the Variation is
Eastwards.

If the Azimuth by the Compass Afternoon be further from the North, the
Variation is Westwards,

If the Azimuth by the Compass before Noon be further from the North, the
Variation is Eastwards.

And this Variation shall be as aforesaid so many degrees as there is between
the Azimuth Observed by the Compass, and the true Azimuth, Observed by the
Globe.

PROB. XV.
To keep a Journal by the Globe.

BY some of these foregoing Problemes you may Daily (when Observations can be
made find both the Longitude and Latitude on the Globe of the Places you are
arived to, and also the Way the Ship has made, and make pricks on the Globe in
their proper Places for every Da^^s Journey, so truly and (...) naturally that
if you kept your reckoning aright you may be sure you cannot miss any thing of
the truth it self; and that with less trouble and greater advantage, then
keeping a Book of every Days Reckoning.

PROB. XVI.
To Steer in the Night by the Stars.

Rectify the Globe and Hour Index as by Prob. 2. of the last Book, and turn
about the Globe till the Index of the Hour Circle points to the Hour of the Day
or Night: Then turn the Globe till the Difference of Longitude between the
Place you depart from, and the Place you sail to pass through the Meridian and
if any Star in the Latitude of the Place you sail To come to the Meridian, or
near the Meridian with the degree of the difference of Longitude, that Star is
at that time in or near the Zenith of that Place you sail to: and by finding
the same Star in Heaven, as by Prob, 44. of the last Book you may direct your
ship toward that Star, and fail as confidently (says Mr Blagrave) as if
Mercury were your Guide. But because this Star moves from the Zenith of this
Place you must often examine what Star is come to the Zenith, and so often
charge the Star you Steer by, as the length of your Voyage may require.

PROB. XVII.
How to platt on the Globe a New Land, never before Discovered.

THese two following Problemes are 2. Chapters of Mr Wrights, delivered by him
as follows.

It may sometimes fall out in new Discoveries, or when your Ship by means of a
Tempest is driven out of her right Course, that you shall come to the sight of
some Isle, Shoald, or new Land, whereof the Mariner is utterly ignorant: And to
make some relation of the same. or to go unto it some other time, if you desire
to set it down on your Globe in the true place, you may do it after this
manner: So soon as you have sight thereof, mark it well first with your
Compass, observing diligently upon which Point thereof it lies, And secondly,
you must there take the height of the Sun, or of the Pole Star, as you were
taught Prob. 13. of the second Book, that you may know in what Point your Ship
is, and that point you must call the First Point; which being so done, your
Ship may sail on her Course all that day, till the day following, without
losing her Way: and the next day mark the Land again, and see upon what Point
it lies; and then take your height, and with it cast your Point of Traverse
once again; and that you may call your second Point. Then take a pair of
Compasses, and placing one foot upon the First Point, and the other upon the
Rhumb toward which the Land did Bear, when you Cast your First Point: set also
one foot of another pair of Compasses in the second Point, and the other foot
upon the Rhumb upon which the Land lay when you cast your second Point; and
these two Compasses thus opened, you must move by their Rhumbs, till those two
feet of both Compasses do meet together, which were moved from the foresaid two
Points: and where they do so meet together, there may you say is the Land which
you Discovered; which Land you may point out with the In lets and Out-lets, or
Capes and other Signs, which you saw thereupon. And by the graduation you may
see the Latitude thereof; that thereby you may find it, if a any time after you
go to seek for it.

PROB. XVIII.
Seeing two known Points or Capes of Land, as you sail (...)long, how to know
the distance of your Ship from them*

PItch one foot of one pair of Compasses upon one of the two foresaid Capes,
and the other foot upon the Rhum^ which in this Compass points toward that
Cape. (...) in like manner shall you do with another pair of Compasses, placing
one foot thereof upon the other known Cape, (...) the other foot upon the
Rhumb, which stretches toward (...) said second Cape; and moving the two
Compasses (so opened) by these two Rhumbs off from the Land, the very same
Point where the two feet which came from the two Capes do meet, you may affirm
to be the very Point where your Ship is. And then measuring by the degrees of
the Equinoctial, you may see what distance there is from the said Point to
either of the foresaid Capes, or to any other place, which you think good, for
it is a very easy matter, if you know the point where your Ship is,

PROB. XIX.
Of Tides, and how by help of the Globe you may in general judge of them.

DIvide the Equinoctial into 30 equal parts, as was directed in Prob. 54. of
the last Book. These 30. equal parts represent the 30. days of the Moons Age.

Then on the North and South point of the Compass in the outmost Verge of the
Horizon, Write with red Ink 12. From the North Eastward, viz. at the Point
North and by East, Write 11. At the next point to that the same way, viz. North
North East, Write 10. At the next, viz. North East and by North, Write 9. And
so forward to every point of the Compass; rebating of the last hour till you
come to 12. in the South; where you must begin again to mark that Semicircle
also in the same order you did the last. In this Circle is then represented the
Points of the Compass the Sun and Moon passes by every Day; and the Figures
annexed represent the twice 12. hours of Day and Night.

Having thus prepared your Globe and Horizon, you may by having the Moons Age,
and the point of the Compass on which the Moon makes full Sea at any Place
given, find at what Hour of Day or Night it shall be high Tide in the same
Place. Thus,

It is a known Rule that a North and South Moon makes high water at Margarate.
Therefore Bring the first point of to the North or South point in the Horizon,
and Elevate the North Pole into the Zenith: Then count in the Equinoctial the
Days of the Moons Age numbered in red figures; and the Hour and minutes written
in red figures annexed to the names of the Winds) that stands against the
Moons Age shall be the Hour of High Tide on that Day or Night at Margarate.

The End of the Third Book,
The Fourth BOOK, Showing the Practical Use of the GLOBES: Applying them to the
Solution of Astrological Problemes.
PRAEFACE.
THe Practice of Astrology is grounded upon a twofold Doctrine. The first, for
erecting a Figure of Heaven, placing the Planets in it, finding what Aspects
they bear each other, and in what Places they are constituted, etc. and this we
call the Astronomical part of Astrology.

The second is, how to judge of the events of things by the Figure erected: and
this is indeed the only Astrological part.

The first of these I shall briefly handle; because what therein is proposed
may be performed by the Globe, both with speed, ease, delight, and
demonstration. The second I shall not meddle with, but refer you to the whole
Volumnes already written upon that Subject.

PROB. I.
To Erect a Figure of the 12 Houses of Heaven.

BEfore you erect a Figure of the 12 Houses of Heaven it will be requisite you
place the Planets,, and, according to their Longitude and Latitude upon the
Globe, as was directed in Prob. 55. of the second Book: for then, as you divide
the Houses of your Figure by the Circle of Position, you may by inspection
behold in what Houses the Planets are situated, and also see what fixed Stars
they are applying to, or separating from. But to the matter.

There is disagreement between the Ancient and Modern Astrologers, about
erecting a Figure of Heaven. Mr Palmer in his Book of Spherical Problemes Chap.
48. mentions four several ways, and the Authors that used them; whereof one of
them is called the Rational way used by R^giomontanus; and now generally
practiced by all the Astrologers of this Age. This way the face of Heaven is
divided into twelve parts, which are called the twelve Houses of Heaven
numbered from the Ascendent or angle at East downwards, with 1, 2, 3, etc, As
in the following Figure.

In a Direct Sphere, viz. under the Equator these twelve Houses are twelve
equal parts: but in an Oblique Sphere they are unequal parts, and that more or
less according to the quantity of the Spears obliquity.

These twelve Houses are divided by 12. Semi-Circles of Position; which are
Semi-Circles passing from the two intersections of the Horizon and Meridian
through any Star, degree, or point in the Heavens.

Four of these Houses are named Cardinals. The first and most eminent of these
Cardinals is the first House, or the Angle of East, called the Ascendent; where
the Semicircle of P^sition is the same with the Eastern Semicircle of the
Horizon. The second Cardinal is the tenth House, or the Angle of South; called
Medium Caeli, or Culmen Caeli; where the Semicircle of Position is the same
with the Semicircle of the Meridian above the Horizon. The third Cardinal is
the seventh House, or the Angle of West; called the Descende^^; where the
Semicircle of Position is the same with the Western Semicircle of the
Horizon. The fourth Cardinal is the fourth House, or Angle of North; called
Imum Caeli; where the Semi Circle of Position is the same with the Semicircle
of the Meridian under the Horizon.

The degrees and minutes of the Ecliptic upon the Cusps of these four Houses
(that is, upon the beginning of these Houses) are found all at once only by
bringing the Rising degree of the Ecliptic to the Horizon: (for the Horizon
represents the Cusp of the Ascendent:) and then shall the Meridian cut the
degree of the Ecliptic on the Cusp of the tenth House. The Western Semicircle
of the Horizon shall cut the degree of the Ecliptic on the Cusp of the Seventh
House: and the Semicircle of the Meridian under the Horizon shall cut the
degree of the Ecliptic on the Cusp of the fourth House.

If you have the day of the Month, you may by Prob. 3. of the second Book find
the Suns Place; and if you have the Hour of the Day you may by first rectifying
the Globe, as by Prob. 2. of the same Book, turn about the Globe till the Index
of the Hour-Circle point to the same Hour in the Hour-Circle, and you will then
at the Eastern Semicircle of the Horizon have the degree of the Ecliptic that
is Rising, and by Consequence (as aforesaid) all the Cardinal points in their
respective places.

Now to find what degree of the Ecliptic occupies the Cusps of the other eight
Houses of Heaven; Do thus, The Globe rectified, as aforesaid, Move the
Semicircle of Position upwards till 30 degrees of the Equator shall be
contained between it and the Eastern Semicircle of the Horizon; so shall the
Semicircle of Position cut in the Ecliptic the degree and minute of the
Ecliptic on the Cusp of the twelfth House; and its opposite degree and minute
in the Ecliptic shall be the Cusp of Opposite degrees and minutes of the
Ecliptic possess the Cusps of opposite Houses.
the sixth House, (for you must note that if you have but the degree and minute
of the Ecliptic upon the Cusps of six of the Houses, the opposite degrees and
minutes of the Ecliptic shall immediately possess the Cusp of every opposite
House.)

Then move the Circle of Position over 30. degrees more of the Equinoctial, so
shall the degree of the Ecliptic cut by the Circle of Position be the degree
of the Ecliptic, upon the Cusp of the eleventh House; and its opposite degree
in the Ecliptic shall be upon the Cusp of the fifth House. The degree of the
Ecliptic upon the Cusp of the tenth and fourth Houses was found as before.
Then remove the Circle of Position to the Western side of the Meridian, and let
it fall toward the Horizon till 30. degrees of the Equator are contained
between the Meridian and it, so shall the degree of the Ecliptic cut by the
Semicircle of Position be the degree of the Ecliptic on the Cu^p of the Ninth
House; and the opposite degree of the Ecliptic shall be upon the Cusp of the
third House. Let the Semicircle of Position fall yet lower, till it pass over
30. degrees more of the Equator, so shall the degree of the Ecliptic cut by
the Semicircle of Position be the degree of the Ecliptic on the Cusp of the
eighth House; and the opposite degree of the Ecliptic shall be upon the Cusp
of the second House. The degrees of the Ecliptic on the Cusp of the seventh
House, and Ascendent, were found as before.

Example.
I would erect a Figure of Heaven for July 27. 5. hours o^ minutes Afternoon,
1658. in the Latitude of London, viz. 51 degrees, North Latitude.

I first place the Planets,, and, on the Globe, as by Prob. 55. of the Second
Book was directed: yet not exactly as I find them in the Ephemeris, for that
shows only their place in the Ecliptic at Noon: Therefore I consider how many
degrees or minutes each Planets motion is in a whole Day or 24. Hours, by
substracting the Ecliptical degrees and minutes of the Planets place that Day
at Noon from the Ecliptical degrees and minutes of the Planets place the next
Day at Noon: or contrarily if the Planet be Retrograde: for the remains of
those degrees and minutes is the motion of the Planet that Day; Therefore
proportionably to that motion I place the Planet forward in the Ecliptic: (or
backward if it be Retrograde:) As if the Sun should move forward 1 degree, that
is 60 minutes in a whole Day, or 24 Hours, then in 12 hours he should move 30
minutes, in 6 hours 15 minutes, in 4 hours 10 minutes, in 1 hour 2 minutes, and
so proportionably for any other space of Time: which I consider before I place
the Planets on the Globe.

Having thus placed the Planets on the Globe, I Elevate the North Pole 51
degrees above the Horizon, and find the Suns place by Prob. 3. Book 2. to be in
14. degrees 9. minutes, Therefore I bring 14. degrees 9. minutes to the
Meridian, and the Index of the Hour-Circle to 12. Then I turn the Globe
Westwards, because it is Afternoon, till the Index point to 5. Hours afternoon,
and with a quill I fasten the Globe in this position: Then I examine what
degree of the Ecliptic is at the Ascendent or Horizon, and find (...) 27. 47.
to which Sig^^ degree and minute (...) 27, 47. is opposite, and therefore, as
aforesaid upon the Cusp of the Seventh House: Lifting up the Circle of Position
till it pass over 30 degrees of the Equator from the Horizon upwards I find
(...) 7. 5. cut by it in the Ecliptic, which is the Sign degree and minute
upon the Cusp of the twelfth House, and its opposite Sign degree and minute is
(...) 7. 5. which is upon the Cusp of the sixth House: Then lifting up the
^ircle of Position again till it pass over 30 degrees more of the Equinoctial,
I find cut by the Circle of Position (...) 21. 18. which is the Sign degree
and minute upon the Cusp of the eleventh House; and its opposite Sign degree
and minute is 21. 18. which is upon the Cusp of the fifth House: (...) 3. ^0.
is at the Meridian, which is the Cusp of the tenth House, and the Sign degree
and minute opposite to it is 3. 20. which is on the Cusp of the fourth House.
Then taking the Semicircle of Position off its Poles, I place it on the West
side the Meridian, and let it fall toward the Horizon till it pass over 30
degrees of the Equator from the Meridian, and find the Circle of Position cut
the Ecliptic in 1. 9. which is the Sign degree and minute on the Cusp of the
ninth House; opposite to 1. 9. is (...) 1. 9. therefore 1. 9. is upon the Cusp
of the third House: Letting the Circle of Position fall yet lower till it
passes over 30 degrees more of the Equator, I find it cut the Ecliptic in 6.
47. which is the Sign degree and minute upon the Cusp of the eighth House; and
its opposite Sign degree and minute is 6, 47. which is upon the Cusp of the
second House. So have you a Figure of the Face of Heaven: which if you have
future use for, you may set down the several charracters in the proper places
of a Figure, as they are on the other side the leaf,

PROB. II.
To Erect a Figure of Heaven according to Campanus.

REgiomontanus as aforesaid makes the beginning of every House to be the Semi
Circle drawn by the side of the Semi Circle of Position according to the
succession of every 30th degree of the Equator from the Horizon But Camp (...)
make it to be the Semicircle drawn by the side of the Semicircle (...)
Position according to the succession of every 30th degree of (...) Prime
Verticle, or East Azimuth; which is represented by the Quadrant of Altitude
placed at the East point.

The four Cardinals are the same, both according to Regiomontanus, and
Campanus: but the other eight Houses differ: Therefore when you would find them
according to Campanus; Rectify the Globe and Quadrant of Altitude, and bring
the lower end (...) the Quadrant of Altitude to the East point in the Horizon:
Then count from the Horizon upwards 30 degrees o^ the Quadrant (...) Altitude,
and bringing the Circle of Position to those 30 degree^ examine where the
Circle of Position cuts the Ecliptic, which (...) the aforesaid time is in
(...) 29. 40 for that degree and minute upon the Cusp of the twelfth House, and
its opposite degree (...) minute in the Ecliptic viz. 29. 40. is upon the Cusp
of (...) sixth House: Lift up the Circle of Position 30 degrees high^ upon the
Quadrant of Altitude (viz. to 60 degrees) and (...) Circle of Position will cut
the Ecliptic in (...) 15. degrees for the Cusp of the eleventh House, and its
opposite degree and minute in the Ecliptic viz. 15. is upon the Cusp of the
first House. The degree and minute of the Ecliptic on the Cusp (...) the Tenth
and Fourth Houses is at the Meridian.

Then transfering the Circle of Position to the West side of the Meridian and
the Quadrant of Altitude to the West point in the Horizon, Let the Semicircle
of Position fall 30 degrees from the Meridian on the Quadrant of Altitude, and
it will cut in the Ecliptic 16 degrees, for the Cusp of the ninth House, and
its opposite degree and minute in the Ecliptic viz. 16. is upon the Cusp of
the third House: Let fall the Circle of Position 30 degrees lower on the
Quadrant of Altitude, and it will cut the Ecliptic in (...) 2 degrees, for the
Cusp of the eight House, and its opposite degree viz. 2. degrees is on the Cusp
of the second House: The Cusps of the Seventh and Ascendent is the same with
Regiomontanus viz. (...) 27. 47, and 27. 47. The Figure follows.



PROB. III.
To find the length of a Planetary Hour.

AStrologers divide the Artificial day (be it long or short) into 12 equal
parts, and the Night into 12 equal parts: These parts they call Planetary
Hours. The first of these Planetary Hours takes its denomination from the
Planetary Day; and the rest ^re named orderly from that Planet according to the
succession of the Planetary Orbs: As if it be Monday that is, the Moons day,
(as by Prob. 42, of the second ^ook) the Planet reigning the first Hour shall
be^^, the Planet ruling the second Hour shall be, the third Planetary Hour
shall be (...), the fourth (...), the fifth, the sixth, the seventh: Thee begin
again with (...) for the eight Planetary, (...) for the ninth and so through
the whole Day and Night, till the Sun Rise again the next Day.

The length of this Planetary Hour is found by the Globe, thus: The Globe
rectified; Bring the Suns place to the East side the Horizon and make a prick
at the degree of the Equator that comes to the Horizon with it. Then remove the
Suns place to the Meridian, and count the number of degrees of the Equator
comprehended between that prick and the degree now at the Horizon; and divide
that number of degrees and minutes by 6. because there is 6 Planetary H^urs
past since Noon; and the Q^^tient shall show the number of d^g^^^s and minutes
that pass through the Meridian in one Planetary Hour.

Example.
J^ly 27. 1658. I would know the length of the Planetary (...) here at Lonaon:
I Rectify the Globe, and bring the Sun* place viz (...). 50. to the Eastern
side the Horizon and find 115 degrees of the Equator come to the Horizon with
it; to this 115 degrees I make a prick: Then I turn the Suns place to the
Meridian and find 22^ degrees of the Equator at the Horizon, Therefore I either
count the number of degrees between the pricks and the degree of the Equator at
the horizon, or else sub^^r^ct the (...) from the greater but both ways I find
111 deg^ees of the Equator to pass through the Meridian (or the Horizon in six
Planetary Hours Therefore dividing 111. by 6. I (...) (...). degrees ^0 minutes
of the Equator to pass through the M^^^^^an in one Planetary Hour: which 18.
degrees 30 minutes reduced into Time yields 72. minutes, by accounting for
every 15. degrees one Hour for 1. degree 4. minutes, and for half a degree
(...). minutes of Time and so proportionably* so that the le^g^h of a Planetary
Hour, July 27 is 1 co^^on Hour and ^4 minute, here at London.

PROB. IV.
The length of a Planetary Hour known, to find what Planet Reigns any green
Hour of the Day, or Night.

THe Globe Rectified as in the last Problem, Turn about the Globe till the
Index of the Hour Circle points to the Hour of the Day in the Hour Circle. Then
count the number of degrees comprehended between the degree of the Equator at
the Horizon and the prick in the Equator, made as in the last Problem, and
reduce that number of degrees into minutes of Time, by re^koning 4. minutes of
Time for every degree of the Equator. Reduce also the number of degrees and
minutes that pass through the Meridian in one Planetary Hour into minutes by
allowing (as aforesaid 4. minutes for every degree, and then divide the (...)
(...) by the second and the Quotient shall be the number of (...) (...) since
Sun Rising Having the number of Planetary Hours since Sun Rising R^ckon the
first Planetary H^ur by the ^ame of that Planet that bears the denomination of
the Day the second Planetary Hour by the Planet succeeding that in order ^he
th^^d by the next in order and so for all the rest (...) you come to the last
Planet viz. (...); and then begin again with (...), and so (...) (...) etc.
(...) you have (...) so many Planets as there are Planetary Hours si^ce
M^^^^ing. and that Planet the number ends on shall be the Planet Reigning that
Planetary Hour.

Example.
July 27. 1658. aforesaid, I would know what Planet Rules at 5 a clock past
Noon: The length of the Planetary Hour this Day ^ound by ^he last Problem* is
1. hour 14. minutes* Therefore the Globe Rectified. I bring the Index of the
Hour Circle to the Hour of the Day viz. 5 a clock in the Hour-Circle, and then
count the number of degrees between the Prick made, as by the last Problem and
the degree of the Equator at the Horizo^; and find them 187. which I reduce
into minutes, by allowi^g for every degree 4 minutes; and that gives 748
minutes. This (...) minu^es I divide by the minutes contained in one Planetary
Hour this Day, viz. by 72. and find 10. hours 8. minutes; which shows there are
10. Planetary Hours and 8. minutes past and gone since Sun Rising. Therefore
being the Planet after whose name the Day is called viz. Dia Martis, is as
aforesaid, the Ruler of the first Planetary Hour: From him I count the Planet
succeding, which is for the second Hour; from I count the Planet succeding,
which is for the third Hour, and so on to, and: and then I begin the Round
again with,,, and, till I come again to, which is the tenth Planetary Hour
since Sun Rising* and the minutes remaining being 8. shows that there is 8.
minutes past since she began to Reign.

PROB. V.
To find Part of Fortune by the Globe.

COunt the number of degrees and minutes contained between the Suns place and
the Moons place, beginning at the Suns place and counting according to the
succession of Signs till you come to the Moons place: and having found that
number of degrees and minutes, add them to the number of degrees and minutes
Ascending, reckoned from the first point of. If the sum exceed 360, east away
360, and the remainder shall be the number of degrees and minutes from the
first point in (...), in which Part of For^^ne falls. But if it do not exceed
360, you have already the number of degrees and minutes from the first point of
in which you must place Part of Fortune.

Example.
I would find the place of Part of Fortune for the time of ou^ Figure: I seek
the two pricks representing and (...), and find in 14. 9. and in 19. 44.
therefore counting from the Suns place to the Moons place according to the
succession of Signs, I find 95. degrees 35. minutes, contained between them:
This 95. degrees 35. minutes I add to 267. degrees 47. minutes, the degree and
minute contained between the first point of and the Ascendent; and they make
together 363. degrees 22. minutes. This exceeds 360. therefore I cast away 360.
and the remains are 3 degrees 22. minutes, for the place in the Ecliptic of
Part of Fortune, reckoned from the first point of * Therefore this character
which represents Part of Fortune, I set in its proper place of the Figure, as I
did the Planets.

PROB. VI.
To find in what Circle of Position any Star, or any degree of the Ecliptic is.

CIrcles of Position are numbered from the Horizon upwards, upon the Quadrant of
Altitude placed at the East or West point of the Horizon, Therefore when you
would find what Circle of Position any Star or degree of the Ecliptic is in,
Rectify the Globe and Quadrant of Altitude, and bring the lower end of the
Quadrant of Altitude to the East or West point of the Horizon, and lift up the
Circle of Position till it come to the Star or degree of the Ecliptic
proposed: and the number of degrees the Circle of Position then cuts in the
Quadrant of Altitude is the number of the Circle of Position that the Star or
degree of the Ecliptic is in. If the Star or degree of the Ecliptic be under
the Horizon, turn the Globe about till 180, degrees of the Equator pass through
the Meridian, then will the Star or degree of the Ecliptic be above the
Horizon: Lift up then the Circle of Position (as before) to the Star or degree
of the Ecliptic and the number of degrees of the Quadrant of Altitude the
Circle of Position cuts on the East side, is the number of Circles of Position
the Star was under the Horizon on the West side: Or so many degrees as the
Circle of Position cuts on the Quadrant of Altitude in the West side the
Horizon is the number of the Circles of Position the Star or degree of the
Ecliptic was under the Horizon on the East side.

PROB. VII.
To find the Right Ascensions, the Oblique Ascensions, and the Declinations of
the Planets.

EXamine the Right Ascensions and Declinations of those pricks made to
represent each Planet, in Prob. 1. of this Book; and work by them as you were
directed to work by the Sun, in Prob. 26, 27, 28. of the second Book,

PROB. VIII.
How to Direct a Figure, by the Globe.

TO Direct a Figure is to examine how many degrees of the Equinoctial are moved
Eastwards or Westwards, while any Planet or Star in one House comes to the Cusp
or any other point of any other House.

When you would Direct any Promittor to any Hylegiacal point examine the degree
of the Equator at the Meridian; then turn about the Globe till the Promittor
come to the Hylegiacal point, and examine again the degree of the Equator at
the Meridian: and by substracting the lesser from the greater you will have the
number of Degrees that passed through the Meridian whiles the place of the
Promittor was brought to the Hy^^g^^cal point: and that number of degrees shall
be the Arch of D^rection.

Example.
I would Direct the Body of the Moon in our Figure aforesaid to Medium C^^^, or
the tenth House: I find by the Globe 20^. degr^es 30. minutes of the Equator at
the Meridian with the ^eath House and turning the Globe till the prick made to
represent the Moon come to the Meridian. I find 227, degrees 20, minutes of the
Equator come to the Meridian with it. Therefore I (...) the lesser from the
greater viz. 2^3 degrees 3* minutes from 227. degrees 2^. minutes, and have
remaining 2^* degrees 50 minutes.

This (...). degrees 50. minutes shows that 23. Years 1^. Months must expire
ere the Effects promised by the Moons present position shall opperate upon the
signification of the (...) House.

If the Body of the Moon had been Directed to any other point the^ (...)
Meridian or Horizon; you must have Elevated the Circle of (...) (...) the point
proposed; and have under-propped it to that (...), and (...)* have turned about
the Globe till the prick (...) the Moon, had come to the Circle of Position;
and then (...) degrees of the Equator that should have passed through the
Meridian whiles this motion was making, should be the number of degrees of
Direction; and signify in Time as foresaid,

PROB. IX.
Of Revolutions: and how they are found by the Globe.

BY Revolution is meant the Annual Conversion of the Sun to the same place he
was in at the Radix of any Business. When you would find a Revolution by the
Globe, first find the Right Ascension of M^d Heaven at the ^^adix of the
Business, as by Prob* 26. of the second Book you were directed to find the
Right Ascer^^on of the (...); and (...) add 87 degrees for every Y^a^ since the
Radix: Then substract 360 so o^^ as you can from the whole and the R^m^^^s
shall be the Right Ascension o^ Mid H^aven for the A^^^al Revolu^^on.

I^ y^u (...) the number of degrees of the Equator contained between the R^ght
A^cension of the Mid H^aven and the Right Ascension of the Sun, and convert
that number of degrees (...) Time by allowing for every 15. degrees 1 Hour of
Time it will show, if the Suns place be on the Western side of the Meridian the
number of Hours and minutes Afternoon the Revolution shall h^ppen on, but if on
the East side the Meridian, the number of Hours and minutes Before-noon the
Revolution shall happen on.

PROB. X.
How a Figure of Heaven may be erected by the Revolution thus found.

SEek the degree of Right Ascension of Mid Heaven, and bring it to the
Meridian, so shall the four Cardinal points of the Globe be the same with the
four Cardinal points in Heaven at the time of the Revolution. The other H^^^ses
are (...) by the Circle of Position: as in the first Problem of this Book*

The End of the Fourth Book.
The Fifth BOOK, Showing the Practical Use of the GLOBES: Applying them t^ the
Solution of Gnomonical Problems
PRAEFACE
DYals are of two sorts, Pendent, and Fixed. Pende^ are such as are hung by the
hand, and turned toward the Sun; that by its Beams darting through small
Pin-holes made for that purpose, the hour of the Da^ may be found. These are of
two sorts, Universal, and P^^ticular.

Universal Dyals are those commonly called Equi^oc^^^ or Ring-Dyals: They are
used by Seamen and Tr^vellers, that often shift Latitudes.

Particular are such as are made and only serve for Particular Latitudes. Of
these sorts are the several Dya^^ discribed on Quadrants, Cilinders, etc.

Fixed Dya^s shall be the matter of this discourse; and they are such as are
made upon fixed Planes, and show the Hour of the Day by a Style or Gnomon made
Parallel to the Axi^ of the World.

Of the several Kinds of Dyal Plains: and how you may know them.
A Plain in Dyalling is that flat whereon a Dyal is discribed.

There is some disagreement among Older and Later Authors in the naming of
Plains: for some name them according to the Great Circle in Heaven they ly in:
and others according to the situation of the Poles of the Plains. Thus they
which name them according to the Great Circle in Heaven their Plains ly in,
call that an Horizontal Plain, which others call a Vertical Plain; those
Vertical, which others will call Horizontal; and those Polar, which others call
Equinoctial.

However they be called it matters not, so you can but distinguish their kinds,
which with a little consideration you may easily learn to do: For remembering
but upon what grounds either the Order or Later Authors gave the Plains their
Names, upon the same grounds you may also learn to know them. I confess both
ways admit of some just exception against for in the Older Rule a Plain about
the Pole, is called an Equinoctial Plain; when as to a sudden apprehension it
would sound more significant to call it a Polar Plain, as Later Authors do:
Again, Later Authors call an Horizontall Plain a Vertical Plain; when as it
sounds more significant to call it an Horizontal Plain, as Older Authors do
because it lie flat upon the Horizon: But I shall give you the names according
to both Rules, and leave you to your liberty to accept of which you please.

First therefore, you have an Equinoctial Plain otherwise called a Polar Plain.
This Plain has two Faces, upper, and under: These two Faces ly in the Plain of
the Equinoctial: the upper Face beholding the Elevated Pole, the under Face the
depressed Pole.

2. An Horizontal Plain, otherwise called a Vertical Plain: it lies in the
Plain of the Horizon, directly beholding the Zenith.

Erect Plains, otherwise called Horizontal Plains are the sides of Walls, and
these are of seven sorts, viz 1. Erect Direct Vertical, North or South, 2.
Erect Direct, East or West. 3. Erect Vertical Declining. 4. Erect Inclining
Direct. 5. Erect Inclining Declining. 6. Erect Reclining Direct. 7. Erect
Reclining Declining.

3. Erect Vertical, North or South Direct, otherwise called Direct North or
South Horizontals, behold the North or South Directly, and ly in the East or
West Azimuth.

4. Erect Direct East or West, otherwise called Direct East or West
Equinoctials, behold the East or West Directly, and lies in the Plain of the
Meridian, having its Poles in the Equinoctial.

5. Erect Vertical Declining Plains, otherwise called Declining Horizontals, do
not behold the North or South Directly, but swerves from them so much as the
Azimuth Parallel to their Plains swerves or Declines from them.

6. Erect Inclining Direct Plains, have the upper side of their Plains
Inclining or coming toward you, and their Plains do exactly behold either the
East, West, North, or South.

7. Erect Reclining Direct Plains, have the upper side of their Plains
Reclining or falling from you, and their Plains exactly beholding either the
East, West, North, or South.

8. E^^ct Reclining Declining, or Erect Inclining Declining Plains are those
Plains which are either Inclining or Reclining, but (...) behold the East,
West, North or South, Directly but (...) or Decline more or less from them.

9. Polar Plains are Parallel to the Axis of the World, and to the M^ridians
that cuts the East and West, or North and South, points of the Horizon.

All these kinds of Plains have two Faces; the one beholding the North Pole
with the same respect that the other beholds the South Pole; except the
Equinoctial Plain, which, because neither Pole is Elevated, has but one Face:
yet that one contains as many Hour lines as two other Faces.

These two Faces or Plains will receive just 24. hour lines, for the 24
Hour Lines of Day and Night: for so much as the one side or Face wants or
exceeds 12. the other side shall either exceed or want of 12.

Every Dyal Plain is Parallel to the Horizon of some Country or other in the
World: therefore a Dyal made for any Horizon in the World may be set to such a
Position that it will show you the Hour of the Day in your own Habitation: At
least for so long as the Sun continues upon that Plan^.

All Plains may be aptly demonstrated by the Globe, by setting it correspondent
to all the Circles in Heaven, as by Prob. 2. of the second B ok: for if you
imagine the Globe in that Position were pressed flat into the Plain of any
Circle, that Flat shall represent a Dyal plain, which shall be called after the
name of that Circle it is pressed into.

Thus if the Quadrant of Altitude be applied to any degree of Azimuth, and you
imagine the Globe were pressed flat to the edge of the Quadrant of Altitude, so
much as that Azimuth Declines from the East, West, North, or South, in the
Horizon, so much shall that flat on the Globe be said to Decline either from
the East, West, North, or South. Or if you imagine the Globe were pressed flat
down even with the Plain of the Horizon, that flat shall represent an
Horizontal Plain; because as was said before, the Plain lies in that Circle
called the Horizon.

The Style or Gnomon is that straight wyre that casts the shadow upon the Hour
of the Day: it is always placed Parallel to the Axis of the World.

There are several ways to find the situation of all Plains; but the readiest
and speediest is by a Clinatory. The Clinatory is made of a square board, as A
B C D, of a good thickness, and the larger the better; between two of the sides
is discribed on the Center A a Quadrant as E F divided into 90 equal parts or
degrees, which are figured with 10, 20, 30, to 90; and then back again with the
Complements of the same numbers to 90: between the Limb and the two
Semidiameters is made a Round Box, into which a Magnetical Needle is fitted;
and a Card of the Sea Compass, divided into 4 Nineties, beginning their numbers
at the East, West, North, and South points of the Compass, from which points
the opposite sides of the Clinatory receives their Names of East, West, North,
or South. Upon the Center A whereon the Quadrant was discribed is fastened a
Plumb-line, having a Plumbet of Lead or Brass fastened to the end of it, which
Plumb-line is of such length that the Plumbet may fall just into the Grove G H
below the Quadrant, which is for that purpose made of such a depth that the
Plumbet may ride freely within it, without stopping at the sides of it. See the
Figure annexed.

With this Clinatory you may examine the situation of Plains* As if your Plain
be Horizontal; it is Direct: and then for the true scituating your Dyal you
have only the true North and South line to find: which is done only with
setting the Clinatory flat down upon the Plain, and turning it toward the
right or left hand, till you can bring the North point of the Needle to hang
just over the Flower-de-luce: for then if you draw a line by either of the
sides Parallel to the Needle, that line shall be a North and South line. Put
herein respect must be had to the Variation of the Compass in the Place you
make your Dyal: for if the North point of the Needle swerves from the North
point of the World, then have you not a true North and South line. But if in
your Place there be no Variation of the North point of the Needle from the
North point of the World (as now it happens here at London) then the line drawn
by the side of the Clinatory (as aforesaid) shall be a true North and South
line.

But admit there be Variation, Having by Prob. 19. of the third Book found the
number of degrees of this Variation toward the East, or West, count the same
number of degrees from the North point in the Card either to the Eastwards or
Westwards, and note the degree in the Card terminating at that number, for that
degree shall be the North point; and its opposite degree the South point: 90.
degrees from it either way shall be the East and West points.

Therefore, whereas before you were directed to turn the Clinatory till the
North point of the Needle point to the Flower-de-luce on the said you m^st now
turn (or move) the Clinatory till the North point of the Needle ^arg just over
the degree of Variation thus sound; and then a line drawn as aforesaid, by the
side of the Clinatory Paral^el to the Needle shall be a North and South line or
(to speak more properly* a Meridional line.

You may fi^d a M^ridian li^e several other ways; as first; If the Sun shine
just at Noon, hold up a Plumb-line so as the shadow of it may fall upon your
Plain; and that shadow shall be a Meridian li^e.

Secondly, on the backside the Clinatory discribe a Circle, and draw a line
through the Center to both sides the Circumference; cross this line with an
other line at R^ght Angles in the Center, so shall the Circle be divided into
four equal parts. These four parts you must ma^k with East, West, North, South
and divide each of them into 90. degrees. In the Center of this Plain erect a
straight wire prependicularly: when you would find a Meridian line examine by
the tenth Prob. of the second Book the Amplitude of the Suns Rising or Setting
from the East or West points, and waiting the just Rising or Setting that Day,
turn the Instrument about till the shadow of the wire falls upon the same
degree from the East or West the Amplitude is of, for then the North and South
line in the Instrument will be the same with the North and South line in Heaven.

Thirdly by the Suns Azimuth: Find the Azimuth of the Sun by Prob. 22. of the
second Book: and at the same instant turn the Instrument till the shadow of the
wire fall upon the degree on the Instrument opposite to the degree of the Suns
Azimuth* so shall the Meridional line of the Instrument agree with the
Meridional line in Heaven.

You may the same way work by the Azimuth of any Star. Only, whereas the shadow
of the wire should fall upon the opposite degree aforesaid: Now you must place
a Sight or Perpendicular upon that opposite degree, and turn the Instrument
about till the wire at the Center, the Sight in the opposite degree of the
Stars Azimuth, and the Star in Heaven, come into one straight line, so shall
the Meridian line of the Instrument agree with the Meridional line in Heaven.

Fourthly It may be found by any Star observed in the Meridian, if two
Perpendiculars be erected in the Meridian line of your Instrument; for then by
turning the Instrument till the two Perpendiculars and the Star come into a
straight line, the Meridian line of your Instrument will be the same with the
Meridian line in Heaven. See more ways in Mr. Palmer on the Planisphear Book
4. Chap. 9:

If your Plain either Recline or Incline, apply one of the sides of your
Clinatory Parallel to one of the Semi-diameters of the Quadrant to the Plain,
in such sort that the Plumb-line hanging at liberty may fall upon the
Circumference of the Quadrant, for then the number of degrees of the Quadrant
comprehended between the side of the Quadrant Parallel to the Plain, and the
Plumb-line shall be the number of degrees of Reclination, if the Center of the
Quadrant points upwards, or Inclination if the Center points downwards.

If your Reclining or Inclining Plain Decline, draw upon it a line Parallel to
the Horizon, which you may do by applying the backside of the Clinatory, and
raising or depressing the Center of the Quadrant till the Plumb-line hang just
upon one of the Semi-diameters, for then you may by the upper side of the
Clinatory draw an Horizontal line if the Plain Incline, or by the under side if
it Recline. If it neither Incline or Recline, you may draw^ an Horizontal line
both by the upper and under sides of the Clinatory. Having drawn the Horizontal
line, apply the North (...)^ of the Clinatory to it, and if the North end of
the Needle (...) directly toward the Plain, it is then a South Plain. If the
(...) point of the Needle points directly from the Plain, it is a Nor^^ plain:
but if it points toward the East, it is an East Plain: if toward the West a
West Plain. If it do not point directly (...) East, West, North, or South, then
so many degrees as the (...) declines from any of these four points to any of
the other of (...) four points, so many degrees is the Declination of the
Plain, (...) respect (as aforesaid) had to the Variation of the Compass.

Or if you find the Azimuth of the Sun by its Altitude observed just when its
beams are coming on or going off you^ Plain, that Azimuth shall be the Azimuth
of your Plain.

Or you may erect a wire Perpendicularly on your Plain, and wait till the
shadow of that wire comes to be Perpendicular with the Horizon, which you may
examine by applying a Plumb-line to it, for then the shadow of the Plumb-line
and the shadow of the Perpendicular will be in one: then taking the Altitude of
the Sun you may by Prob. 22. of the second Book find its Azimuth, and thereby
know in what Azimuth the Plain of your Dyal lies: for the Azimuth your Plain
lies in is distant from the Azimuth of the Sun just 90. degrees.

PROB. I.
How by one position of the Globe to find the distances of the Hour Lines on
all manner of Plains.

YOu may have Meridian lines drawn from Pole to Pole through every 15. degrees
of the Equinoctial, to represent the Horary motion of the Sun both Day and
Night; and when the Pole of the Globe is Elevated to the height of the Pole in
any Place and one of these Meridian lines be brought to the Brazen Meridian,
all the rest of the Meridian lines shall cut any Circle which you intend shall
represent the Plain of a Dyal in the number of degrees on the same Circle that
each respective Hour-line is distant from the Noon-line point in the same
Circle.

Thus if you should enquire the distance of the Hour Lines upon an Horizontal
Plain in Londons Latitude; The Pole of the Globe as aforesaid) must be Elevated
51 degrees, and one of the Meridian lines (you may choose the Vernal Colure) be
brought to the Brazen Meridian, which being done, you are only to examine in
the Horizon (Because it is an Horizontal Plain) at what distance from the
Meridian (which in Horizontals is the Noon-line) the several Meridians drawn on
the Globe intersect the Horizon, for that distance in degrees shall be the
distance on a Circle divided into 360. degrees that each respective Hour-line
must have from the Meridian or a Noon line chosen in the same Circle; and lines
drawn from the Center of that Circle through those degrees shall be the Hour
lines of an Horizontal Plain.

If it be an Erect Direct South Dyal you enquire after; Keeping the Globe in
its former position, apply the Quadrant of Al^^tude to the Z^^^^h, and its
lower end to the East point o^ the Horizon* for then as was showed in the
Preface) by imagining the Globe to be pre^^t to the graduated edge of the
Quadra^^ Altitude, that (...) (...) be a South Plain and the number of (...)
grees the M^ridi^^s cuts in the Quadrant of Altitude numbe^ from the Z^ai^h
downwards shall be the number of degree that each (...) line shall be distant
from the Meridian or (...) line in a Circle of 360. degrees, and lines drawn
from the Co^^ter of that (...) through those degrees shall be the Hour (...) of
half the D^y: the Hour lines for the other half of the Day (...) of the same
(...) from the Noon-line, with these; only they must be p^^ced on the other
side the Noon line.

If your Plain be not Direct but declines East or West* (...) must number the
Declination Eastwards or Westwards re^pectively in the degrees of the Horizon
and (the Quadrant (...) Altitude screwed to the Zenith, (as aforesaid) bring
the lower end of the Quadrant of Altitude to the said degrees of Declination,
and the number of degrees cut by the Meridians in the Quadrant of Altitude
numbered downwards, is the number of degrees that the Hour Lines are distant
from the Noon line in a Circle of 360, degrees: And lines drawn from the Center
of that Circle through those degrees be the Hour lines of half the Day. And if
you turn about the Quadrant of Altitude upon the Zenith point till the lower
end of it come to the degree of the Horizon opposite to the degree of
Declination found before, the Meridian lines on the Globe (as before) shall cut
the Quadrant of Altitude in the number of degrees (counted downward) that each
Hour-line is distant from the other side the Noon-line: And lines drawn from
the Center of that Circle through those degrees shall be the Hour Lines of the
other half of the Day,

If your Plane Decline, and also Recline or Incline, you must use the
Gnomonical Semicircle, discribed in Prob. 12* which must be Elevated on the
Quadrant of Altitude when it is set to the Declination (as by the former Rule)
according to the complement of Reclination, or Inclination: But if your Plane
be Direct, and Recline, or Incline, it must be set to the Meridian, and the
Meridians on the Globe shall cut that Semi Circle in the number of degrees
counted from the Quadrant of Altitude if the Plane Declines, or from the Brazen
Meridian, if it be Direct, that the several Hour lines are distant from a line
Perpendicular to an Horizontal line, in a Circle divided into 360 degrees; And
lines drawn from the Center through those degrees shall be the Hour Lines of
such Reclining or Inclining Planes.

If your Plane be an East or West, either Direct or Declining; or an
Equinoctial Plane (for they are upon the matter all one) you may better
conceive how they are to be made, then make them by the Globe. And for the help
of your fancy herein, take Mr Blagraves conceit, who in his Book 6. Chap. 8.
very properly demonstrates the Rules for projecting the Hour Lines on these
Planes. He proposes to take 12. wyers bowed into exact Circles, all of equal
Diameter, and set together at equal distance one from another in two opposite
points, as in two Poles, and to have a straight line to pass from one Pole to
another, as an Axis. These 12 Wyers shall represent 24 Meridional Semi-Circles,
Or indeed they may represent the Globe it self, containing 24 Meridional
Semi-Circles to be discribed on the Globe, as aforesaid; And if you place the
Horizon of the Globe Horizontal, and the North and South points of the Globe
toward the North and South points in Heaven, and bring one of these Wire
Meridians directly under the Brazen Meridian, and the Axis of this Wyer-Globe
in the Plain of the Horizon, and fasten a Thread in the middle of the Axis, that
thread drawn from the middle of the Axis by every one of these wyers shall, if
prolonged till it touch an East and West line drawn directly under or over the
points Zenith or Nadir, point out on that East and West line the distances of
each Hour-line from the 12 a clock line; And lines drawn at Right Angles
through that East and West line* shall be the Hour lines of an East or West
Plane, or of an Equinoctial Plane.

The moving this thread from wire to wire represents the motion of the Sun,
which as it passes over all the Meridians causes the shadow of that Meridional
Semi Circle which it is directly over* and the Axis, and the Meridional
Semicircle directly opposite to the upper Meridional Semicircle to fall all
into one straight line: And upon what point in the East and West line
(mentioned before) that shadow-line shall fall is marked ^ut by the application
of the thread as aforesaid: and is an Hour-line on any of the foresaid Planes.

If you understand this Problem rightly, you do already know how to draw the
Hour lines upon all manner of Planes, and need no further Instructions; yet
partly fearing a raw Student should not clearly understand these Rules, and
partly doubting) because other Authors have been more Copious upon this
Subject) that I should be censured to be too sparing of my pains, if I should
lightly touch so eminent a Doctrine as Dyalling is: Therefore I shall more
distinctly handle Dyalling by the Globe, according to the way or Method that
other Authors have used, and that after so plain a manner as possibly my Genius
can devise.

PROB. II.
To make an Equinoctial Dyal.

DIscribe a Circle, on a square board or Plane as B C E D, and through A the
Center thereof draw a straight line Parallel to one of the sides, as B E; Cross
that straight line with another straight line as C D at Right Angles, so shall
the Circle be divided into 4 equal parts: Divide each of these four equal parts
into 90. degrees; as in the Figure. This Circle shall represent the Horizon.

Erect a wire exactly perpendicular to the Center of the Plane; and that wire
shall be the Gnomon or Style of the Dyal.

Then Elevate one of the Poles of your Globe into the Zenith, and bring the
Equinoctial Colure to the Meridian. And because in every hours Time 15 degrees
of the Equator passes through the Meridian in Heaven, therefore turn the Globe
till 15 degrees of the Equator pass through the Meridian of your Globe; so
shall the Colure pass by 15 degrees of the Horizon also. Therefore from the
Center of your Plane draw straight lines through 15* degrees from one of the
Semidiameters both ways: and those straight lines shall be two Hour Lines:
Then turn the Globe till 15 degrees more of the Equator pass through the
Meridian, and you will find as before, the Colure pass by 15 degrees more of
the Horizon: therefore on your Plane number 15. degrees further beyond both the
former lines, and from the Center draw straight lines through both those 15.
degrees, and they shall be two Hour lines more. For all the other Hour lines
turn the Globe till 15. degrees of the Equator at a time pass through the
Meridian, as before, and you will find that for every 15. degrees of the
Equator that passes through the Meridian, the Colure will pass through 15.
degrees of the Horizon: therefore those Hour lines must be drawn from the
Center according to the succession of every 15 degrees on your Plane, Having
drawn the Hour lines, you may set figures to them, beginning to number your
Hour lines from one of the Diameters, marking it with XII, and the next Hour
line to the left hand with I, and the next II, the next III, etc. to XII. and
begin again with I, II, III, etc. till you come to the other XII, where you
began: and then your Dyal is finished. See the Figure.



This is an Universal Dyal, and serves in all Latitudes: therefore when you
place it you must set one of the XIIs downwards, and the Axis Parallel to the
Axis of the World.

But note, Both faces of this Dyal ought to be divided, and the Gnomon must
appear on both sides like the stick in a Whirligig, which childeren use; or
else you must turn it upside down, so often as the Sun passes the Equinoctial.

PROB. III.
To make an Horizontal Dyal.

DIscribe a Circle on your Plane, as C B D E, and through the Center A of that
Circle draw a Meridian line, as B E; cross that line at Right angles with
another line, as C D; so shall your Circle be divided into four equal parts:
Divide each of these four parts into 90. degrees; so shall the whole be divided
into 360. These 360 degrees represent the 360 degrees of the Horizon, which a
Meridian line drawn through the place of the Sun runs through in every 24.
Hours: The motion of which Meridian line through the degrees of the Horizon is
Regular in a Parallel Sphere; for in equal Time it moves an equal Space
throughout the whole Circle, viz. it will pass through 15. degrees of the
Horizon in one Hours Time, (or which is all one) whiles 15. degrees of the
Equator passes through the Meridian; as was showed in the last Problem: But in
an Oblique Sphere its motion through the Horizon is Irregular, and that more or
less according to the more or less Obliquity of the Sphere: For far Northwards
or Southwards you may see this Meridian line pass through 40, 50, yea 60.
degrees of the Horizon in one Hours time, viz, whiles 15. degrees of the
Equator passes through the Meridian: but in an other Hours time you will scarce
have 4 or 5 degrees pass through the Horizon whiles 15 degrees of the Equator
passes through the Meridian.

But that you may know the motion of the Sun (represented by this Meridian
line) through the Horizon in all Latitudes; Elevate the Pole to the Elevation
of your Place, and choose instead of a Meridian line drawn through the Place of
the Sun the Vernal Colure to be your Meridian line; both because it is most
visible; and because from thence the degrees of the Equator are begun to be
numbered, so that what so ever decimal degree of the Equator you light on at the
Meridian, or else where, you will find its number from that Colure already set
down to your hand, without either adding to, or substracting from it. Bring
this Colure therefore to the Meridian, and the Index of the Hour Circle to 12.
in the Hour Circle. Then turn the Globe Westwards, and so often as 15 degrees of
the Equator passes through the Meridian, so often you must examine what degrees
of the Horizon the Vernal Colure cuts; and those degrees and minutes so cut by
the Vernal Colure must be found in the Circle C B D E, beginning your account
or reckoning at B toward D, and marked with Pricks: through which Pricks you
must draw lines from the Center A, and those lines shall be the Hour lines
after noon. Then bring the Colure to the Meridian again to find the Fore-noon
Hour Lines, and turn the Globe Eastwards, and so often as 15 degrees of the
Equator passes through the Meridian, so often you must examine what degrees of
the Horizon the Vernal Colure cuts; and those degrees and minutes so cut by the
Vernal Colure must be found in the Circle C B D E, beginning your reckoning from
B toward C, and marked with Pricks: through which Pricks you must draw lines
from the Center A, and those lines shall be the Fore-noon Hour Lines.

These Hour Lines must be marked from the Meridian line, viz. the line A B,
which is the 12 a clock line toward D, with I, II, III etc. till you have
numbered to the Hour of Sun set (found by Prob. 7. of the second Book) the
longest Day, and from the Meridian line toward C with XI, X. IX, etc. till you
have numbered to Sun Rising the longest Day.

The Style must be placed in the Center and Elevated so many degrees above the
Plane, as the Pole is elevated above the Horizon of the Place,

Example of the whole.
I would make an Horizontal Dyal for Londons Latitude: Therefore I E evate the
North Pole 51 degrees above the Horizon, and bring the Vernal Colure to the
Meridian, and the Index of the Hour Circle to 12 on the Hour Circle; And
turning the Globe Westwards till the Index points to 1 a clock or till 15 degrees
of the Equator pass through the Meridian; I find the Colure cut the Hori in 11.
4 from the Meridian. 2 24. 15 3 38. 4 4 53. ^6 5 71. 6 6 90.

These are the distances of the Hour lines from Noon till 6 at Night: and to
these distances on the Plane (counting from B toward D,) I make pricks; and
from the Center I draw lines through these Pricks; and these lines are the Hour
lines from 12 to 6 Afternoon. But the Sun in the longest Day shines till past 8
at Night, as you may find by Prob. 48. of the second Book, therefore here wants
the two Evening Hour lines; which though they may be found after the same way I
found the former, (viz. by continuing the turning of the Globe Westwards) yet
that I may the sooner reduce my work to the Plane I Count the number of degrees
between the 6 a clock line and the 5 a clock line in the Circle on the Plane;
for the same number of degrees counted from D toward E is the distance of the
7 a clock Hour line from the 6 a clock Hour line; and the number of degrees
contained between the 6 a clock Hour line and the 4 a clock Hour line is the
distance of the 8 a clock Hour line from the 6 a clock Hour-line.



Or I need not draw the 7 and 8 a clock Hour lines, till I have drawn the
forenoon Hour lines: for then by laying the edge of a Ruler (that will reach
through the opposite side of the Plane) to the Morning 7 and 8 a clock Hour
lines, I may by the side of that Ruler draw lines from the Center through the
opposite side of the Plane, and those lines shall be the 7 and 8 a clock Hour
lines Afternoon.

Having thus all the Afternoon Hour lines, I bring the Vernal Colure to the
Meridian again; so shall the Index again point to 12. Therefore, as before I
turned the Globe Westwards, so now turning it Eastwards, till the Index points
to 11 a clock, or till 15 degrees. of the Equator pass through the Meridian, I find
the Colure cut the Hori. in 11. 40 from the Meridian. 10 24. 15 9 38. 4 8 53.
36 7 71. 6 6 90.

These are the distances of the Hour lines from Noon to 6. a clock in the
Morning: and these distances I seek in the Circle of the Plain (counting from
the Noon line B toward C) and mark them with Pricks; through which pricks (as
before) I draw lines from the Center to the outside the Plane: and those lines
shall be the Hour lines.

Or having the distance of all the Afternoon Hour Lines, I have also the
distance of all the forenoon Hour lines from the Meridian; as you may see by
comparing the two former Tables. For the 1 a clock Hour line Afternoon is
equidistant from the Meridian or Noon line with the 11 a clock Hour line before
Noon, viz. they are both 11 degrees 40 minutes distant from the Noon line, and
the 2 a clock Hour line Afternoon is from the Noon line equidistant with the 10
a clock Hour line Beforenoon; for they are both 24. degrees 15. minutes distant
from the Meridian or Noon line: and so all the other Morning Hour lines are
distant from the Noon line by the same space that the same number of Afternoon
Hour lines (told from the Meridian on the contrary side the Noon line) are
distant from the Meridian.

Whence it follows, that since (as aforesaid) the same number of Hour lines
after 6 at Night, and before 6 in the Morning have the same distance from the 6
a clock line that the same number of Hour lines before 6 at Night and after 6
in the Morning have from the 6 a clock line; and since the same number of Hour
lines before Noon are equidistant from the Meridian or Noon line by the same
space of degrees that the same number of Hour lines Afternoon are; It follows
(I say) that having found the distance of the six Hour lines either before or
after Noon, you have also given the distance of all the other Hour lines.

If you will have the half Hour lines placed on your Dyal you must turn the
Globe till the Index points to every half Hour in the Hour Circle, as well as
to the whole, and examine the degrees of the Horizon cut by the Vernal Colure,
as you did for the whole Hours; and in like manner transfer them to your Plane.

Having thus drawn all the Hour lines I count from the Noon line 51 degrees,
the Elevation of the Pole here at London; and from the Center A I draw a
straight line, as A F through these 51 degrees, for the Gnomon or Style, and
prolong it to the farthest extent of the Plane: From this Gnomon or Style I let
fall a Perpendicular upon the Noon line, as F G: (this Perpendicular is called
the Substile, and this Perpendicular and its Base (which is the Noon line) and
Hypothenusa (which is the Gnomon) shall make a Triangle, which being erected
upon the Base, so as the Substile may stand Perpendicular to the Plane, the
Hypothenusa A F shall be the Gnomon, and be Parallel to the Axis of the World;
and cast a shadow upon the Hour of the Day.

PROB. IIII.
To make an Erect Direct South Dyal.

DRaw on your Plane an Horizontal line as C A D, as was showed in the Preface:
in the middle of this line (as at A) discribe as on a Center the Semicircle C
B D: from the Center A let fall a Perpendicular, which shall divide the
Semicircle into two Quadrants each of which Quadrants you must divide into 90
degrees, Then Rectify the Globe, Quadrant of Altitude, Colure and Hour Index*
thus, Elevate the Pole of the Globe to the Latitude of your Place, and screw
the Quadrant of Altitude to the Zenith, Then bring the Vernal Colure to the
Meridian, and the Index of the Hour Circle to the Hour of 12. in the Hour
Circle; so shall your Globe, Quadrant of Altitude, Colure and Hour Index be
Rectified. And ^^us you must always Rectify them for the making of most sorts
of Dyals by the Globe. Then to make an Erect Direct South Dyal, Bring the lower
end of the Quadrant of Altitude to the West point of the Horizon; And turn the
Globe Westwards till the Index points to all the Hours Afternoon; and examine
in what numbers of degrees from the Zenith the Colare cuts the Quadrant of
Altitude when the Index points to each Hour: for a line drawn from the Center A
through the same number of degrees reckoned from the Perpendicular A B (which
is the 12 a clock line) toward D on the Plane, shall be the same Hour lines
the Index points at.

Thus in our Latitude, viz. 51 degrees, the Vernal Color being brought to the
Meridian and the Index to 12; If you turn the Globe Westwards, till the Index
points to 1 a clock, or till 15 degrees. of the Equator pass through the Meridian,
the Colure will cut the Quadrant of Altitude in 9. 18 counted from the Zenith.
2 19. 15 3 32. 5 4 48. 0 5 67. 4 6 90.

And these are the distances of the Afternoon Hour lines; which you must
transfer to the East side of your Plane, viz, from B toward D; and draw lines
from the Center A through these distances; and these lines shall be your
Afternoon Hour lines.

Note (once for all) when the Colure goes off that Circle you examine the Hour
distances in, the Sun will shine no longer upon that Plane; As in this example
the Colure goes off the Quadrant of Altitude at 6 a clock, therefore the Sun
will not shine longer then till 6 a clock upon this Plane.

The Hour lines before Noon have the same distance from the Meridian that the
Afternoon Hour lines have, as was showed in the last Problem: Only they must
be drawn on the West side the Noon line, and counted from B toward C.

Otherwise.
You may reduce all Verticals into Horizontals; if you Elevate the Pole of the
Globe to the Complement of the Latitude of your Place, and bring the Vernal
Colure to the Meridian under the Horizon, and the Index of the Hour Circle to
12; and turn the Globe Westwards; for as the Index passes through every Hour on
the Hour Circle, the Colure shows in the Horizon the distance of the several
Afternoon Hour lines from the Meridian, or 12 a clock line, in the Circle on
your Plane, numbered from B to D: and lines drawn from the Center through these
distances on your Plane shall be the Afternoon Hour lines of your Dyal.

Example.
Londons Latitude is 51 degrees, Its Complement to 90. is 38. Therefore I
Elevate the Pole 38 degrees above the Horizon, and bring the Vernal Colure to
the Meridian under the Horizon, and the Index of the Hour Circle to 12 on the
Hour Circle. Then Turning the Globe Westwards, till the Index of the Hour
Circle points to 1 a clock, or till 15 degrees. of the Equator pass through the
Meridian, I find the Colure cut the Horizon in 9 18 from the Intersection of
the Meridian and the Horizon: as in the former Table. 2 19 15 3 32 5 4 48 0 5
67 0 6 90

And these are the distances of the 6 Hour lines from the Merid.



By this Example you may see that it is easy to reduce Verticals into
Horizon^als: and Horizontals into Verticals: for this Erect Direct South Dyal
is an Horizontal Dyal to those People that Inhabit 90 degrees from us, viz. in
the South Latitude of 38 degrees.

Then make a Triangle, whereof the Noon line shall be Base: from it count the
Complement of the Poles Elevation, viz. 38 degrees, and through them draw the
line A F, from the Center A which shall be Hypotenusa; Then ^et fall a
Perpendicular upon the Noon line A B, so is your Triangle made. If this
Triangle be erected Perpendicularly upon the Base or Noon line, The Hypotenusa
A F shall stand Parallel to the Axis of the World, and cast a shadow upon the
Hour of the Day.

PROB. V.
To make an Erect Direct North Dyal.

IF the Erect Direct South Dyal were turned toward the North; and the line C A
D were turned downwards, and the line marked with 7 be now marked with 5, and
the line 8 with 4, the line 5 with 7, and the line 4 with 8, then have you of
it a North Erect Direct Dyal.

All the other Hour lines in this Dyal are useless, because the Sun in our
Latitude shines on a North Face the longest Day only before 6 in the Morning,
and after 6 at Night.

PROB. VI.
To make an Erect Direct East Dyal.

THese sorts of Dyals may better be demonstrated then made by the Globe; unless
the Axis of your Globe were accessible, as in the Wyer-Globe, specified in
Prob. 1. Therefore when you would make an East, or West Dyal, or a Polar Dyal.

Provide a square Board, as A B C D, draw the straight line e f upon it
Parallel to the sides A C, and B D. and just in the middle between them: Cross
this straight line at Right Angles with another straight line, as g h, quite
through the Board.

Upon this Board with a little Pitch or Wax fasten the Semicircle of Position,
so as both the Poles thereof may ly in the line g h, and the middle of the
Semicircle marked co may ly upon the line e f, so shall i be the Center of the
Semicircle of Position: In this Center make a small hole through the Board fit
to receive a Wire or a Nail. So may you with this Circle of Position thus
fitted, and the side C D applied to a line of Contingence elevated to the
Height of the Equinoctial, draw line, from the Center through every 15 degrees
of the Circle of Position, and by continuing them intersect the line of
Conti^gence in the points from whence the Hour lines of an East or West Dyal is
to be drawn:

Example.
I would make an Erect Direct East Dyal for Londons Latitude. Therefore I
fasten a Plumb-line a little above the place on the Wall where I intend to make
my Dyal, and wait till it hangs quietly before the Wall: then if the line be
rubbed with Chalk (like a Carpenters line) I may by holding the Plumber end
close to the Wall, and straining it pretty stif, strike with it a straight line
as Carpenters do. This line shall be a Perpendicular as E F: I choose a
convenient point in this Perpendicular, as at G, for a Center; whereon I
discribe an occult Arch as H I: this Arch must contain the number of degrees of
the Elevation of the Equinoctial counted between H and I, (which in our
Latitude is 38,) Therefore in a Quadrant of the same Radius with the occult
Arch I measure 38 degrees, and set them off in the Plane from H in the
Perpendicular to I: Then from I to the Center G in the Perpendicular, I draw
the pricked line I G, and this line shall represent the Axis of the World: I
cross this Axis at Right Angles with the line G K and draw it from G. to K, so
long as I possibly can: this line shall be the Contingent-line. I find a
convenient place in this Contingent line as, at VI, to which I apply the side
of the Board C (...) D, so as that the point (...) may ly just upon VI in the
Contingent line; And having a thread fastened in the Center of the Semicircle of
Position, I draw that thread straight over the first 15. degrees of the Circle
of Position, numbered from 0 toward h, and where the thread cuts the Contingent
line I make a mark, for that mark shall be the mark for the 7 a clock line.
From thence I remove the thread to 30. degrees of the Semicircle, and draw it
through the Contingent line, and where it cuts the Contingent line, there shall
be the mark for the 8 a clock line, From thence I remove the thread to 45.
degrees of the Semicircle and draw it through the Contingent line, and where
it cuts the Contingent line there shall be the mark for the 9 a clock line.
From thence in like manner I remove the thread to 60. and 75. and where the
thread cuts the Contingent line shall be the mark for 10 and 11 a clock lines:
The 12 a clock line cannot be drawn on this Plane, as you may see, if you apply
the thread to 90 degrees, for though you should draw it out never so far yet
would it never touch the Contingent line: because it is Parallel to the line g
h, and lines Parallel never meet.

But because in our Latitude the Sun Rises before 4. in the Morning, therefore
two Hour Lines are yet wanting, viz. 5, and 4, which I may find either by
applying the thread first to 15, and next to 30 degrees from 0 toward g in the
Semicircle, and so marking where it cuts the Contingent line, as before: Or
else by transfering the distance of the same number of Hour lines from the 6 a
clock line already drawn on the side e (...) to the side e g, as in Prob. 2. of
this Book is more fully showed.

Having thus marked out on the Contingent line the distances of each Hour; I
draw a line Parallel to the Contingent line, and draw lines from every Hour
marked on the Contingent to cross the Contingent line at Right Angles and
continue each line to the line Parallel to the Contingent; and these lines
shall be the Hour lines of an East Plane. To these Hour Lines I set Figures as
in the Scheam may be seen.

The Style D K of this Dyal (as well as of others) must stand Parallel to the
Axis of the World: it must be also Parallel to all the Hour lines, and stand
directly over the 6 a clock line, and that so high as is the distance between
the Center of the Semicircle of Position and the point where the 6 a clock
line cuts the Contingent line: Or (which is all one) at such a height as when
it is laid flat down upon the Plane it may just reach the 3 a clock line,

PROB. VII.
To make an Erect Direct West Dyal.

AN Erect Direct West Dyal is the same in all respects with an Erect Direct
East Dyal; Only as the East shows the Fore-noon Hours, the West shows the
Afternoon Hours.

Thus if you should draw the East Dyal on any transparent Plane, as on Glass,
Horn, or an Oyled Paper, on the one side will appear an East Dyal, and on the
other a West. Only the Figures as was said before (must be changed); for that
which in the East Dyal is 11, in the West must be 1: that which in the East
Dyal is 10, in the West must be 2: that which in the East Dyal is 9 in the West
must be 3. etc.

PROB. VIII.
To make a Polar Dyal.

POlar Dyals are Horizontal Dyals under the Equinoctial: They are of the same
kind with East and West Dyals; Only whereas East and West Dyals have but the
Hour lines of half the longest Day discribed on them, these have all the Hour
lines of the whole Day; and are marked on both sides the Noon line: as in the
following Figure.

The Style of this Dyal must stand over the Noon line, Parallel to the Plane;
for then it will also be Parallel to the Axis of the World: and its height
above the Plane must be the distance between the Center i of the Semicircle
and the point in the Contingent line cut by the Noon-line. But I have inserted
the Figure, which alone is sufficient Instructions.

PROB. IX.
To make Erect South Dyals, Declining Eastwards, or Westwards.

DRaw on your Plane an Horizontal line, and on it discribe a Semicircle, as
you were taught in Prob 4.

Then Rectify the Globe, Quadrant of Altitude Colure and Hour Index* as by the
same Problem: and bring the lower end of the Quadrant of Altitude to the
degree of Declination from the East or West point, according is your
Declination is Eastwards or Westwards; for then the Quadrant of Altitude shall
represent a Plane declining from the South E^stwards, or Westwards accordingly.
Then tu^n the Globe Eastwards, till the Index of the Hour-Circle points to all
the Hours before Noon, and examine in what number of degrees from the Zenith
the Colure cuts the Q^^drant of Altitude, when the Index points to each Hour,
For a line drawn from the Center A through the same number of degrees reckoned
from the Perpendicular A B, which is the 12 a clock line toward Con the Plane,
shall be the same Hour Lines the Index points at.

Example.
I would make an Erect Dyal declining from the South toward the East 27.
degrees: The Globe, Quadrant of Altitude, Vernal Colure, and Hour Index
Rectified, as before, I bring the lower end of the Quadrant of Altitude to 27.
degrees counted from the East point of the Horizon toward the North: Then I
turn the Globe East-wards till the Index points to 11 a clock, or till 15. degrees.
of the Equator pass through the Meridian, and find the Colure cut the Quadrant
of Altitude in 9.43 counted from the Zenith. 10 19.0 9 25.57 8 35.10 7 45.56 6
60.15 5 79.45

And these are the distances of the Fore-noon Hour Lines, which I seek in the
West side of the Plane, viz. from B toward C; and through these distances I
draw lines from the Center, and these lines shall be the Fore-noon Hour Lines.

Now herein is a difference between Declining Dyals, and Direct Dyals: For
having found the distances of the Hour lines for one half of the Day, be it
either for Before Noon or After Noon in a Direct Dyal, you have also found the
distances for the other half Day; because, as was said Prob. 3. Equal number of
Hours have equal distance from the Noon line: But in Declining Dyals it is not
so: Because the Sun remaining longer upon that side of the Plane which it
declines to, then it does upon the contrary side, there will be a greater
number of Hour lines upon it, and by consequence the distance of the Hour lines
less then on the contrary side of the Plane.

Therefore for finding the After Noon Hour lines, I turn about the Quadrant of
Altitude upon the Zenith point till the lower end of it come to the degree of
the Horizon opposite to that degree of Declination that the Quadrant of
Altitude was placed at when I sought the Fore Noon Hour lines, viz, to 27.
degrees counted ^om the West toward the South, and bring the Ver^al Colure
again to the Meridian, and the Index (as before) to 12. Then, turning the Globe
Westwards till the Index poin^s to 1 a clock, or till 15 degr. of the Equator
pass through the Meridian, I find the Colure cut the Quadrant of Altitude in
11.20 counted from the Zenith. 2 26.47 3 49.20 4 75.52

And these are the distances of the After Noon Hour lines; which dista^^^^ I
seek in the East side of the Plane, viz. from B toward D (as before) and so
drawing lines from the Center A through these distances, I have all the
Afternoon Hour lines also drawn on my Plane.

You may note, that this Plane is capable to receive no more Hour lines After
Noon then 4. for when the Colure goes off the Quadrant of Altitude, the Sun
goes off these kind of Planes.

To these Hour lines I set their numbers, as you may see i^ the Figure.

Then to find both the distances of the Substilar line from the 12 a clock
line, and the Elevation of the Style above the Plane, Bring the Colure to the
number of degrees of the Planes Declination, counted in the Horizon from the
South point toward the East point, and the Quadrant of Altitude to the degrees
of the Planes Declination, counted in the Horizon from the East point toward
the North so shall the Quadrant of Altitude and the Colure cut each other at
Right Angles; and the number of degrees comprehended between the Colure and the
Zenith in the Quadrant of Altitude, shall be the number of degrees between the
Substyler line and the 12. a clock line, which in this Example is 19. degrees
45. minutes: And the number of degrees comprehended between the Quadrant of
Altitude and the Pole, counted in the Colure, shall be the number of degrees
that the Style is to be Elevated above the Plane; which in this Example is 33.
degrees 40. minutes. Wherefore for the distance of the Substyler line from the
12 a clock line, I count in the Circle from the 12 a clock line in the contrary
side of the Plane, viz. in the West side, because the Plane declines toward
the East 19. degrees 45* minutes, as at D, and through that number of degrees
and minutes from the Center A, I draw the line A G, which shall be the
Substyl^r line: And from the Substylar line (either way) I number 33. degrees
40. minutes, the Elevation of the Style above the Plane, and through those
degrees and minutes I draw from the Center A, the line A F, for the Style or
Gnomon; Then I let fall the Perpendicular F G upon the Substyle A G: So is
there a Triangle made, which if it be erected Perpendicularly upon the Substyle
A G, the Style A F shall be Parallel to the Axis of the World, and cast a
shadow upon the Hour of the Day.

Here you may see that in Declining Dyals the Style does not stand at the same
Elevation above the Plane, that it does in Erect Direct Dyals; neither does it
stand over the 12 a clock line; but swerves from it toward the Quarter of
Declination.

PROB. X.
To make a North Erect Dyal declining Eastwards, or Westwards.

AS in Prob. 5. an Erect Direct North Dyal has the same Delineation that an
Erect Direct South Dyal has, and differs only in the placing the Figures of
the Hour lines: So a North Erect Dyal that declines Eastwards, or Westwards,
differs from a South Erect Dyal that Declines Eastwards, or Westwards, the same
number of degrees, only in placing the Hour lines at the same distance on the
contrary side of the Plane, and by transposing the Figures of 11 for 1: 10 for
2: 9 for 3. etc.

Thus, if you draw upon Glass, Horn, or an Oyled Paper, the South Dyal
Declining Eastwards, as in the foregoing Problem, and place it to its due
situation, the back side of it shall be a North Dyal declining toward the
West so many degrees as the foreside Declines toward the East; and the only
difference in it will be the Figures of the Hour lines; as was said before.

PROB. XI.
To make Direct Reclining, or Inclining Dyals.

DIrect Reclining or Inclining Dyals are the same with Erect Direct Dyals that
are made for the Latitude of some other Places: The Latitude of which Places
are either more then the Latitude of your own Place, if the Plane Recline, or
less if the Plane Incline; and that in such a proportion as the arch of
Reclination or Inclination of your Plane is.

Thus a Direct South Dyal Reclining 10. degrees in Londons Latitude, viz. 51
degrees, is an Erect Direct Dyal made for the Latitude of 61 degrees: And a
Direct South Dyal Inclining 10. degrees in the Latitude 51 degrees is an Erect
Direct Dyal in the Latitude of 41 degrees: and is to be made according to the
Directions in Prob. 4.

PROB. XII
To make Declining Reclining, or Declining Inclining Dyals.

THe distances of the Hour lines either for a Declining Reclining Plane, or a
Declining Inclining Plane may most easily be found upon the Plane of the
Horizon, That is (as some Authors call it) by the Horizontal Dyal, by changing
the Circles of the Globe one into another: So as the Plane of the Horizon may
serve to represent the Dyal Plane; Yet this way not being natural, because you
must admit one Circle to be another, and that in Young Learners might sometimes
breed a little difficulty, Gemma Frisius, Metius, and Blaew has prescribed a
thin Brass plate to be made equal to a Semicircle of the Equinoctial, and
divided from the middle point of it either way into 90 degrees, which may not
unproperly be called a Gnomonical Semicircle. This Semicircle must be bowed
close to the Body of the Globe into a Semi-Circular form, and so set to any
Reclination, or Inclination, and then it will represent a Reclining or
Inclining Plane: And by the motion of the Colure through the several degrees of
this Semicircle the distances of the Hour lines may be found: Thus,

The Globe, Quadrant of Altitude, Colure, and Hour Index, Rectified; as by
Prob. 4. Bring the lower end of the Quadrant of Altitude to the degree in the
Horizon of the Planes Declination, if your Plane be a South Declining Recliner,
and count on the Quadrant of Altitude from the Zenith downwards the number of
degrees of Reclination, or Inclination, and to that number of degrees bring the
middle of the Gnomonical Semicircle, and let the ends of ^t cut the Horizon on
either side in the degrees of the Planes Azimuth, so shall the Gnomonical
Semicircle represent a Reclining Plane. And so often as 15. degrees of the
Equator passes through the Meridian, so often shall you enquire what degrees of
the Gnomonical Semicircle the Colure cuts; for so many degrees asunder must
the several respective Hour lines of a Reclining Declining Plane be in a
Semicircle divided into 180. degrees.

But if your Plane be a South Declining Recliner, or a North Declining
Incliner; Bring the Quadrant of Altitude to the degree of the Horizon opposite
to the degree of the Planes Declination, (because the upper side of the Plane
lies beyond the Zenith) counted from the South point in the South Recliners,
and from the North point in North Incliners.

Then find the height of the Style, and place of the Substyle: thus, Keep your
Gnomonical Semicircle in its position: But turn the Quadrant of Altitude about
on the Zenith point till the lower end of it comes to the degree of the Horizon
opposite to the degree it was placed at before, and turn about the Globe till
the Colure cut the Quadrant of Altitude above the Horizon in the number of
degrees the Plane Reclines from the Zenith; so shall the Colure cut the
Gnomonical Semicircle at Right Angles; Then count the degrees contained
between the middle of the Gnomonical Semicircle and the Colure, for that
number of degrees is the distance of the Substyle from a Perpendicular line in
the middle of your Plane, and must be placed Westwards of the said
Perpendicular, if your Plane decline from the South East-wards; or Eastwards,
if your Plane decline from the South Westwards. Then observe how many degrees
are contained between the Semicircle and the Pole; for that number of degrees
is the number of degrees that the Style is to be Elevated above the Substyle.

Example.
Here at London I would make a Dyal upon a Plane Declining from the South
Eastwards 30. degrees, and Reclining from the Zenith 20. degrees; Londons
Latitude is 51 degrees: Therefore, Having on the Plane discribed a Semi Circle,
etc. as was directed Prob. 4. I Rectify the Globe, Quadrant of Altitude,
Colure, and Hour Index, as by the same Problem* and bring the lower end of the
Quadrant of Altitude to 30. degrees from the North point of the Horizon toward
the West, because that is the degree opposite to the degree of the Planes
Declination, viz* to 30 degrees from the South Eastwards, And I bring the
middle of the Gnomonical Semi Circle to 20. degrees of the Quadrant of Altitude
counted from the Zenith downwards toward the Horizon, and the ends of the
Gnomonical Semi Circle to the degrees of Azimuth the Plane lies in in the
Horizon, viz. to 30. degrees from the East point Northwards, and to 30. degrees
from the West point Southwards, so shall 11. degrees 10. minutes of the
Gnomonical Semi Circle be comprehended between the Quadrant of Altitude and the
Brazen Meridian: These 11. degrees 10. minutes shows that the 12 a clock line
is distant from the Perpendicular A B 11. degrees 10. minutes: and because the
Plane Declines to the Eastwards, therefore the 12 a clock line must stand on
the West side the Plane 11. degrees 10, minutes. Then to find all the Fore Noon
Hour lines, I turn the Globe East-wards till the Index points to 11 a clock, or
till 15, degr. of the Equator pass through the Meridian, and find the Colure
cut the Gnomonical Semicircle in 15. 8 counted from the middle of the
Gnomonical Semi Circle. 10 18. 56 9 22. 37 8 26. 52 7 32. 37 6 42. 5 5 62. 43

And these are the distances of the Fore Noon Hour lines; to which distances
you may set Pricks on the West side the Semi Circle of the Plane, viz. from B
to C.

The After Noon Hour lines are found by bringing the Colure again to the
Meridian, and the Index of the Hour Circle to 12. for then turning the Globe
Westwa^s till the Index points to 1 a clock, or till 15 degr. of the Equator
pass throug the Meridian, I find the Colure cut the Gnomon, Semicircle in 5.
45 counted from the middle of the Gnomon. Semicircle. -- -- 2 2. 54 3 20. 52 4
64. 36

And these are the distances of the Afternoon Hour Lines; and must all but the
1 a clock Hour-line be pricked down at their respective distances on the East
side the Plane, viz. from B to D: But because the Colure comes not to the
middle of the Gnomonical Semicircle before the first 15. degrees of the
Equator pass thr^ugh the Meridian after 12. therefore the 1 a clock must stand
5* (...) ^5. (...) on the West side of the Plane: And for this cause I (...)
^^^tinction with a line between the 1 a clock and the 2 a clock, in the
foregoing Table. Then I draw lines from the Center A through every one of these
pricks in the Semicircle, and they shall be the Hour lines of this Declining
Reclining Plane.

Having drawn the Hour Lines, I remove the Quadrant of Altitude to the degree
of the Horizon opposite to the degree it was at before, viz. to 30. degrees
from the South Westwards, which is so much as the Plane declines Eastwards; But
I let the Gnomonical Semi Circle stand as it did: And turning about the Globe
till the Colure cut the Quadrant of Altitude in 20. degrees counted from the
Horizon upwards, viz. the degrees of Reclination, I find 18. degrees 40.
minutes contained between the middle of the Gnomonical Semi Circle and the
Brazen Meridian, which is the distance of the Substyle from the Perpendicular;
And I find the Gnomonical Semi Circle cut the Colure in 13. degrees 49. minutes
from the Pole, which is the Height that the Style must be raised over the
Substyle; Therefore I prick off in the Semi Circle on the Plane, the distance
of the Substyle 18. degrees 40. minutes from the Perpendicular Westwards;
because this Plane declines Eastwards: And from the Center A, I draw through
that prick the line A E, which shall be the Substyle, and from this Substyle
(either way) I count in the Semi Circle on the Plane 13* degrees 49. minutes,
and there make a Prick: Then from the Center A, I draw through that Prick the
line A F, to represent the Style or Gnomon: Then I let fall the Perpendiculer F
G upon the Substyle A G; So is a Triangle made; which if it be erected
Perpendicularly upon the Substyle A G, the Style A F shall be Parallel to the
Axis of the World, and cast a shadow upon the Hour of the Day.

Having made this Dyal, you have made four several Dyals, whereof this is one:
And his opposite, viz. North Declining Westwards 30. degrees Inclining to the
Horizon 70. degrees is another. The South Declining Westwards 30. degrees
Reclining from the Zenith 20. degrees is another: And his opposite, viz. North
Declining Eastwards 30. degrees Inclining to the Horizon 70. degrees is the
other.

PROB. XIII.
To make a Dyal upon a Declining Inclining Plane.

THe Precepts for making these Dyals are delivered in the foregoing Problem:
Therefore we shall at first come to an Example.

I would make a Dyal upon a Plane in Londons Latitude Declining from the South
Westwards 25. degrees and Inclining toward the Horizon by the space of an Arch
containing 14. degrees. Having first discribed on the Plane a Semi Circle, as
was directed Prob. 4. I rectify the Globe, Quadrant of Altitude, Colure, and
Hour Index, as by the same Problem, and bring the lower end of the Quadrant of
Altitude to the degree of the Planes Declination, viz. to 25. degrees counted
from the South Westwards, and the ends of the Gnomonical Semi Circle to the
degree of Azimuth the Plane lies in, viz. to 25. degrees from the West
Northwards, and the middle of the Gnomonical Semi Circle to the degree of the
Planes Inclination, viz. 14. degrees counted from the Zenith downwards on the
Quadrant of Altitude, Then counting the degrees of the Gnomonical Semi Circle
contained between the middle of the same and the Brazen Meridian, I find 5.
degrees 30. minutes: These 5. degrees 30. minutes shows the distance of the 12
a clock line from the Perpendicular; Therefore I number in the Semi Circle
discribed on the Plane, from the Perpendicular Westwards, (Because the middle
of the Gnomonical Semi Circle lies Westwards on the Globe) from the Meridian*
And for finding all the Fore-Noon Hour-distances I turn the Globe East-wards
till the Index points to 11 a clock, or till 15 degr. of the Equa. pass throug
the Meridian, and find the Colure cut the Gnomon, Semicircle in 20. 5 counted
from the middle of the Gnomon. Semicircle. 10 36. 57 9 56. 24 8 76. 31

And these are the distances of all the Fore Noon Hour lines; to which several
distances I make pricks on the West side the Semi Circle on the Plane, viz.
from B to C.

The After Noon Hour lines are found by bringing the Colure again to the
Meridian, and the Index of the Hour Circle to 12. For then turning the Globe
Westwards till the Index points to 1 a clock, or till 15. degrees of the
Equator pass through the Meridian, I find the Colure cut the Gnomonical
Semicircle in 6. 20 counted from the middle of the Gnomonical Semi Circle. 2
18. 2 3 28. 45 4 39. 56 5 52. 30 6 67. 19 7 84. 13

And these are the distances of the After Noon Hour lines, which I also prick
down at their respective distances from the Perpendicular Eastwards, viz. from
B toward D on the Plane; and by drawing lines from the Center A through all
the Pricks, I have all the Hour lines that this Plane will admit of.

Having drawn the Hour lines, I remove the lower end of the Quadrant of
Altitude to the degree of the Horizon opposite to the degree it was at before,
viz. to 25. degrees from the North Eastwards, which is so much as the
Declination is Westwards; but I let the Gnomonical Semi Circle stand as it did,
and turn about the Globe till the Colure cut the Quadrant of Altitude in 14.
degrees counted from the Horizon upwards, which is the Inclination of the
Plane: Then I find 24. degrees 3. minutes comprehended between the middle of
the Gnomonical Semi Circle and the Brazen Meridian, which is the distance of
the Substyle from the Perpendicular: and this distance I count Westwards on the
Plane* because the middle of the Semi Circle lies Westwards on the Globe and
draw the line A G through it for the Substyle: And I find the Gnomonical Semi
Circle cut the Colure in 48. degrees 5. minutes* for the Height that the Style
must be Elevated over the S^bstyle: Therefore I make a prick on the Plane 48.
degrees 5 minutes distant from the Substyle, and through that prick I draw the
line A F to represent the Style or Gnomon; Then I let fall the Perpendicula^ F
G upon the Substyle A G, so is there a Triangle made; which if it be erected
Perpendicularly upon the Substyle A G, the Style A F shall be Parallel to the
Axis of the World, and cast a shadow upon the Hour of the Day.

Having made this Dyal you have also four Dyals made; as well as in the former
Problem: For this is one* and its opposite viz. North declining Eastwards 25.
degrees Reclining 76. degrees is another; The South declining Eastwards 25.
degrees inclining 14* degrees is another; and its opposite, viz. North
declining Westwards 25. degrees Reclining 76. degrees is another;

PROB. XIV.
To find in what Place of the Earth any manner of Plane that in your Habitation
is not Horizontal, shall be Horizontal.

IT was said in the Preface that all manner of Planes however situate are
Parallel to some Country or other on the Earth: Therefore all manner of Planes
are indeed Horizontal Planes; and the distances of the Hour lines to be
^^scribed on them may be found as the distances of the Hour lines of the
Horizontal Dyal in Prob. 3. It rests now to learn in what place of the Earth
any Plane that is not Horizontal in your Habitation shall become Horizontal:
And for help of your understanding herein, Take these following Rules.

1. If your Plane be Erect Direct North, or South, it shall be an Horizontal in
the same Longitude at 90. degrees distance on the Meridian, (counted from the
Zenith of your Place,) through the Equinoctial. See an Example of this in Prob.
3. where I have reduced an Erect Dyrect Dyal* to an Horizontal. Thus an Erect
Plane under the Pole is an Horizontal under the Equator; and an Erect Direct in
80. degrees North Latitude is in the same Longitude an Horizontal at 10.
degrees South Latitude: An Erect Direct in 70. degrees North Latitude, is in
the same Longitude, an Horizontal at 20. degrees South Latitude: and so to any
other degrees of Latitude (as aforesaid) till you come to 45. degrees Latitude*
where an Erect is an Horizontal, and an Horizontal an Erect* Only as the Hour
lines of the Horizontal (being (...) downwards) are numbered from the right hand
toward the left, in the Erect Direct Dyal they are numbered from the left hand
toward the Right.

2. If your Pla^^ be Erect Declining, it shall be an Horizontal Plane at that
point on the Globe which is against the degree of Declination, found in the
Horizon.

But note, If your Plane declines Westwards, the Sun comes sooner to the
Meridian of it, then to the Meridian of the Place where it becomes an
Horizontal Plane; and that by so many Hours or minutes as the degrees of the
difference of Longitude between the two Places converted into Time amounts to.
If it declines Eastwards, the Sun comes so much later to the Meridian of it:
And for this Cause (though the making this Dyal be the same with an Horizontal
Dyal for another Place, yet in Respect of Time) there will be a difference
between them.

Example.
I would make the South Dyal Declining East 27. degrees, as in Prob. 9. by the
Plane of the Horizon: First I seek in what Place of the Earth it shall become
an Horizontal Plane: Thus, I Elevate the Pole of the Globe 51 degrees above the
Horizon, and bring the Vernal Colure to the Meridian, then I count from the
South point in the Horizon Eastwards 27. degrees, and on the point on the Globe
directly against those 27. degrees I make a prick for the Place where a Plane
that declines 27. degrees from the South Eastwards at London shall be
Horizontal; or which is all one, this Declining Plane at London shall ly in the
Horizon of that Prick: This Prick for distinction sake we shall hereafter call
the Horizontal Place: Then by Prob. 1. of the Second Book, I examine the
Latitude and Longitude of this Horizontal Place, and find Latitude 33. 40.
South; and Longitude from the Colure 33. degrees, which is the difference of
Longitude between London and the Horizontal Place: which being converted into
Time by allowing for every 15. degrees 1. hour of Time, gives 2 hours 12.
minutes that the Sun comes sooner to the Meridian of the Horizontal Place, then
to the Meridian of the Plane at London: so that when it is 12 a clock there, it
will be but 9. a clock 48. minutes here; when 12 a clock here, it will be 2 a
clock 12. minutes There, etc.

Having thus found in what Longitude from London and Latitude this Plane is
Parallel to the Horizon, I seek the distances of the Hour Lines upon the Planes
of the Horizon Thus, I Elevate the Pole of the Globe to the Height of the Pole
in the Horizontal Place, viz. 33. degrees 40, minutes, and bring the Horizontal
Place on the Globe to the Meridian, and the Index of the Hour Circle to 12.
Then I examine the degree of the Horizon the Colare cuts, and find it 19 from
the South Westwards. This 19 degrees respresents the Meridian line of the
Horizontal Place: And also the Substylar line here at London; Therefore this 19
degrees I count from the Perpendicular A B of the Plane, and from the Center A
draw the line A G through them; Because from this line on the Plane all the
Hour lines must be numbered, and not (as all along hitherto) from the
Perpendicular of the Plane, Then turning the Globe East-wards till the Index of
the Hour Circle points to 11 a clock, or till 15. degr. of the Equator pass
through the Meridian, I find the Colure cut the Horizon in 10. 2 from the
Meridian. 10 0. 45 9 6. 12 8 15. 25 7 26. 11 6 40. 30 5 60. 0

And these are the distances of the Forenoon Hour lines: which distances I
transfer by pricks to the Plane. But as in Prob. 9. I sought the distances from
the Perpendicular on the Plane, so now in this Case (as was said before) I seek
them from the Substyle, and through these pricks I draw lines from the Center,
as in other Dyals, and these lines shall be the Fore Noon Hour lines.

To find the Afternoon Hour distances, I bring the Horizontal Place on the
Globe again to the Meridian, and the Index of the Hour Circle to 12. and
turning the Globe Westwards till the Index points to 1 a clock, or till 15
degr. of the Equator pass through the Meridian, I find the Colure cut the
Horizon i^ 31. 5 counted from the Meridian. 2 46. 32 3 68. 5 4 95. 37

And these are the distances of all the Afternoon Hour lines; which I also
transfer to the Plane, counting them from the Substyle, and draw lines from the
Center A through these distances; and these lines shall be all the Afternoon
Hour lines.

Then from the Substyle I count the degrees and minutes of the Latitude of the
Horizontal Place, viz. 33. degrees 40. minutes, and through these degrees and
minutes I draw the line A F from the Center A, for the Style: Then from the
Style I let fall the Perpendicular F G upon the Substyle, so is there a
Triangle made; which if it be erected Perpendicularly upon the Substyle A G,
the Style A F shall be Parallel to the Axis of the World, and cast a shadow
upon the Hour of the Day.

3. If your Plane be a Direct Recliner, Seek in the Longitude of your Place the
Complement to 90. of your Planes Reclination* For there a Direct Recliner
becomes an Horizontal Plane.

4. If your Plane be a Declining Recliner: The Globe and Quadrant of Altitude
Rectified, Bring your Habitation on the Terrestrial Globe to the Meridian, and
the Quadrant of Altitude to the Declination, as by the second Rule in this
Problem; and count upwards on the Quadrant of Altitude the Reclination, and
there make a prick on the Globe by the side of the Quadrant of Altitude, for at
that prick on the Globe the Declining Recliner shall become an Horizontal
Plane. Then examine the Latitude of that prick as by Prob. 1. of the second
Book, and the difference of Longitude, as by Prob. 9. of the third Book: And
convert the difference of Longitude into Time, by allowing for every 15.
degrees 1. hour: Time, for every degree 4, minutes Time, and so proportionably,
so shall you know what Hours and Minutes the Sun comes sooner or later to the
Meridian of your Habitation then to the Meridian of that Place where it becomes
an Horizontal Plane: Sooner, if the Globe were turned Eastwards; but Later if
it were turned Westwards.

Having thus found out where this Plane becomes Horizontal, make your Dyal to
this Plane, as by the second Rule in this Problem: Find also the Style as is
there directed.

5. If your Plane be a Declining Incliner, The Globe and Quadrant of Altitude
Rectified, Bring the Colure to the Meridian, and the Quadrant of Altitude to
the degree of the Horizon opposite to the degree of the Planes Declination, and
count upwards on the Quadrant of Altitude the degrees of Inclination, and make
a (...) there; For in the (...) of that prick (found as by (...) (...), of the
Second Book) that Declining In(...) shall become an Horizontal Plane. Then find
the Latitude and difference of Longitude of this (...)* by the (...) (...) and
make a ^yal to that (...) by the second (...) in this Problem. Find also the
Style as therein is directed.

PROB. XV.
To make a Dyal on the Ceeling of a Room, where the Direct Beams of the Sun
never come.

FInd some convenient place in the Transum of a Window to place a small round
piece of Looking-Glass, about the bigness of a Groat, or less; so as it may ly
exactly Horizontal: The point in the middle of this Glass we will mark A, and
for distinctions sake (with Mr Palmer) call it Nodus: Through this Nodus you
must draw a Meridian line on the Floor, Thus: Hang a Plumb line in the Window
exactly over Nodus, and the shadow that that Plumb line casts on the Floor just
at Noon will be a Meridian line; Or you may find a Meridian line otherwise, as
by the Preface. Having drawn the Meridian line on the Floor: find a Meridian
line on the Ceeling, thus: Ho^d a Plumb line to the Ceeling, over that end of
the Meridian line next the Window; If the Plumbet hang not exactly on the
Meridian line on the Floor, remove your hand on the Ceeling one way or other,
as you see cause till it do hang quietly just over it: and at the point where
the Plumb line touches the Ceeling make a mark, as at B; that mark B shall be
directly over the Meridian line on the Floor: then remove your Plumb line to
the other end of the Meridian line on the Floor, and find a point on the
Ceeling directly over it, as you, did the former point, as at C, and through
those two points B and C on the Ceeling strain and strike a line blackt with
Small Cole or any other Culler (as Carpenters do,) and that line B C on the
Ceeling shall be a Meridian line, as well as that on the Floor: Then examine
the Altitude of the Equinoctial, as by Prob. 6. of the Second Book you did the
Meridian Altitude of the Sun; and fasten a string just on the Nodus, and remove
that string in the Meridian line on the Ceeling till it have the same Elevation
in a Quadrant, that the Equinoctial has in your Habitation; and through the
point where the string touches the Meridian line in the Ceeling shall a line be
drawn at right Angles with the Meridian, to represent the Equinoctial line.
Thus in our Latitude the Elevation of the Equator being 38 degrees; I remove
the string fastened to the Nodus forwards or backwards in the Meridian line of
the Ceeling, till the Plumb line of a Quadrant, when one of the sides are
applied to the string, falls upon 38 degrees: and then I find it touch the
Meridian line at D in the Ceeling: therefore at D I make a mark and through
this mark strike the line D E (as before I did the Meridian line) to cut the
Meridian line at Right Angles: This line shall be the Equinoctial line.

Then I place the Center of the Semicircle of Position upon Nodus, and
under-prop it so that the flat side of it may ly Parallel to the string when it
is strained between the Nodus and the Equinoctial, and also so as the string
may ly on the division of the Semicircle marked o, when it is help up to the
Meridian line in the Ceeling: Then removing the string the space of 15. degrees
in the Circle of Position to the Eastwards, and extending it to the Equator on
the Ceeling, where the string touches the Equator there shall be a point
through which the 1 a clock Hour-line shall be drawn: and Removing the string
yet 15. degrees further to the Eastwards in the Semicircle of Position, and
extending it also to the Equator, where it touches the Equator there shall be a
point through which the 2 a clock Hour-line shall be drawn: Removing the string
yet 15. degrees further to the Eastwards in the Semicircle of Position, and
extending it to the Equator, there shall be a point through which the 3 a clock
Hour-line shall be drawn: The like for all the other Afternoon Hour lines; so
often as the string is removed through 15. degrees on the Semicircle of
Position, so often shall it point out the Afternoon distances in the Meridian
line on the Ceeling.

The situation of the Semicircle of Position cannot conveniently be shown in
this Figure, unless it be drawn by the Rules of Perspective; Neither if it were
would it suit with the other demonstrations, expect they were drawn by the same
Rules also; which to do would be hard for young Learners to understand:
Therefore I have left out the Semicircle of Position in this Figure and refer
you for a demonstration thereof to the sixth Problem; For even as the lines
drawn through every 15, degrees of the Semicircle there, denote in a
Contingent line the distance of any Hour line from the Meridian line, even so a
line drawn through every 15. degrees of the Semicircle of Position posited (as
aforesaid) point out in the Equinoctial line on the Ceeling the distance of
each respective Hour line from the Meridian line,

Having thus found out the points in the Equator through which the Afternoon
Hour Lines are to be drawn, I may find the Fore-Noon Hour distances also the
same way, viz. by bringing the string to the several 15. degrees on the West
side the Semicircle of Position; or else I need only measure the distances of
each Hour distance found in the Equator from the Meridian line on the Ceeling;
for the same number of Hours from 12 have the same distance in the Equinoctial
line on the other side the Meridian both Before and Afternoon: The 11 a clock
Hour distance is the same from the Meridian line with the 1 a clock distance on
the other side the Meridian, the 10 a clock distance the same with the 2 a
clock distance, the 9 with the 3, etc. And thus the distances of all the Hour
lines are found out on the Equator.

Now if the Center of this Dyal lay within doors, you might draw lines from
the Center through these pricks in the Equator, and those lines should be the
Hour lines, as in other Dyals: But the Center of this Dyal lies without doors
in the Air, and therefore not convenient for this purpose: So that for drawing
the Hour lines you must consider what angle every Hour line in an Horizontal
Dyal makes with the Meridian; that is, at what distance in degrees and minutes
the Hour lines of an Horizontal Dyal cut the Meridian; which you may examine as
by Prob. 3. for an Angle equal to the Complement of the same Angle must each
respective Hour-line make with the Equator on the Ceeling.

Thus upon the point marked for each Hour distance in the Equinoctial line on
the Ceeling, I discribe the Arches I, II, III, IIII, as in the Figure, and
finding the distance from the Meridian of the Hour Lines of an Horizontal Dyal
to be according to the third Problem. Thus The 1 a clock Hour-line 11.40 whose
Complement 90. is 78.20 2 24.15 65.45 3 38.4 51.56 4 53.36 36.24 I measure in a
Quadrant of the same Radius with those arches already drawn from the
Equinoctial line for the 1 a clock Hour 78.20 2 65.45 3 51.56 4 36.24 and
transfer these distances to the Arches drawn on the Ceeling: For then straight
lines drawn through the mark in the Arch, and through the mark in the Equator,
and prolonged both ways to a convenient length, shall be the several
Hour Lines (a foresaid;) And when the Sun shines upon the Glass at Nodus, its
Beams shall reflect upon the Hour of the Day.

PROB. XVI.
To make a Dyal upon a solid Ball, or Globe, that shall show the Hour of the
Day without a Gnomon.

THe Equinoctial of this Globe, or (which is all one) the middle line must be
divided into 24 equal parts, and marked with 1, 2, 3, 4 etc to 12. and then
beginning again with 1, 2, 3, etc. to 12. Then if you Elevate one of the Poles
so many degrees above an Horizontal line as the Pole of the World is Elevated
above the Horizon in your Habitation, and place one of the 12s directly to
behold the North, and the other to behold the South: when the Sun shines on it
the Globe will be divided into two halfs, the one enlightened with the
Sunshine, and the other shadowed: and where the enlightened half is parted from
the shadowed half, there you shall find in the Equinoctial the Hour of the Day;
and that on two places on the Ball; because the Equinoctial is cut in two
opposite points by the light of the Sun.

A Dyal of this fort was made by Mr John L^^k, and set up on a Composite
Column at Leaden Hall Corner in London, in the Majoralty of Sr John Dethick
Knight. The Figure whereof I have inserted, because it is a pretty piece of
Ingenuity, and may perhaps stand some Lover of Ar^ in stead, either for
Imitation, or help of Invention.



PROB. XVII.
To make a Dyal upon a Glass Globe, whose Axis shall cast a shadow upon the
Hour of the Day.

FIrst divide the Equinoctial of your Globe into 24 equal parts; and having a
Semicircle cut out of some Brass plate, or thin Wood to the same Diameter your
Globe is of, or a very little wider: Apply this Semicircle to the Globe, so as
the upper edge of each end of the Semi Circle may touch the Poles of the Globe,
and the middle of the Semi Circle may at the same edge cut through some
division made in the Equinoctial: for then a line drawn by the edge of the Semi
Circle thus posited shall be a Meridian line; The same way you must draw
Meridian lines through every division of the Equinoctial, and set figures to
them, beginning with 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. to 12, and then beginning again with 1,
2, 3, 4, etc. to 12, again. This Globe being made of Glass, and having an Axis
of Wire passing through ^t from Pole to Pole, will be an Horizontal Dyal all
the World over; if its Axis be set Parallel to the Axis of the World in the
same Place; and one of the Meridians marked 12 be set so as it may directly
behold the North point in Heaven, and the other the South point in Heaven; for
then the Axis of the Globe shall cast a shadow upon the Hour of the Day.

And if you divide the upper half of the Glass Globe from the under half, when
the Axis stands Parallel to the Axis of the World, by a Circle drawn round
about the Globe, that Circle shall represent the Horizon; and the Meridian
lines drawn on the Globe shall be the Hour lines, and have in the Horizontal
Circle the same distance from the 12 a clock line that the same respective Hour
line was found to have, as by Prob. 3. of this Book.

But because the shadow of this Axis will not be discerned through the Glass
Body; therefore you may with Water and white Lead ground together, lay a Ground
on the Inside of the under half of the Glass to the Horizontal Circle (as
Looking-glass makers do their Looking Glasses with Tinfoil) for then the shadow
will appear.

Such a Glass Globe Dyal has the Lord Robert Titchborn standing in his Garden
supported by Atlas.

The End of the Fifth Book.

The Sixth BOOK. Showing the Practical Use of the GLOBES: Applying them to the
Solution of Spherical Triangles.
PRAEFACE.
THe Solution of Spherical Triangles is to know the length of its Sides, and
the width of its Angles. These have already by many learned Men been taught, to
be performed by a Canon of Sines and Tangents; and also by many Instruments
some serving as Tables of Sines and Tangents, such as are the Sectors, Scales,
the Spiral line, etc. and others serving to represent the Globe; such as be the
Mathematical Jewel, Astrolabium Catholicum, and several other Projections of
the Sphere. But none has as yet taught the Solution of Spherical Triangles by
the Globe it self; though it be the most natural, and most demonstrative way of
all, and indeed ought first to be learnt before the Learner enters upon any
other way.

To this Authors of Trigonometry agree, for the most of them in their Books
give Caution that the Learner be already sufficiently grounded in the
Principles of the Globe: For those Lines or Circles which either in Tables or
other Instuments your force your Imagination to conceive represents your Line
or Circle in question, those Lines and Circles I say, you have Actually and
Naturally discribed on the Globe, and therefore may at a single Operation, or
perhaps only by a sudden inspection, have an Answer annexed, according as the
nature of your Question shall require: and that more Copiously then by Tables
of Sines and Tangents: For therein you find but one Question at once resolved:
but by the Globe you have always two resolved together.

Of the Parts and Kinds of Spherical Triangles. THEOREMS.
1. ALL Spherical Triangles are made of six parts; Three Sides, and three
Angles. The Sides are joined together at the Angles, and measured by degrees of
a Great Circle, from one end to the other. The Angles are the distance of the
two joined sides: and they are also measured by an Arch of a Circle, discribed
on the Angular point. If any three of these parts be known, the rest may be
found.

2. All Spherical Triangles are either Right Angled, or Oblique Angled. A Right
Angle contains 90. degrees: An Oblique Angle either more, or less.

3. If a Spherical Triangle have one or more Right Angles; it is called a Right
Angled Spherical Triangle. But if it have no Right Angle; it is called an
Oblique Angled Spherical Triangle.

4. If an Oblique Spherical Triangle have one Angle greater then a Right Angle:
it is called an Obtuse Angled Spherical Triangle: But if it have no Angle
greater, it is called an Accute Angled Spherical Triangle.

5. In Right Angled Triangles the sides including the Right Angle are called
Legs: And the side opposite to the Right Angle is called Hypothenusa. Thus the
sides A B and A C in the following Triangle are called Legs; and the side B C
is called Hypothenusa.



6. In a Right Angled Spherical Triangle one of the Legs are called Base; the
other Perpendicular: Thus the Leg B A is Base; and the Leg C A Perpendicular.
But the Terms may be varied: for the Base may be made Perpendicular, and the
Perpendicular Base. Also One of the adjacent Angles is called the Angle at the
Base; the other the Angle at the Perpendicular: Thus the Angle B is called the
Angle at the Base: the Angle C the Angle at the Perpendicular.

PROB. I.
The Legs of a Right Angled Spherical Triangle given; to find the Hypothenusa,
and the two other Angles.

THe Base of a Right Angled Spherical Triangle shall in this following Treatise
be always placed on a Meridian, the Perpendicular on the Equator, the
Hypothenusa on the Quadrant of Altitude, and the Angle at the Base shall be
measured in an Arch of the Horizon.

Elevate the Equinoctial into the Zenith, so shall the Poles of the Globe ly in
the North and South points of the Horizon.

Then count from the Equinoctial on the first Meridian, if you use the
Terrestrial Globe; or on the Vernal Colure, if you use the Celestial, because
they are divided from the Equinoctial either way into 90. degrees; and because
from thence the degrees of the Equinoctial are begun to be numbered: Count (I
say) from the Equinoctial the number of degrees the Base contains, and there
make a prick: Then count in the Equinoctial from the first Meridian the number
of degrees the Perpendicular contains, and make there a second Prick: Bring
that second Prick to the Brazen Meridian, so shall the first Meridian be
separated from the Brazen Meridian by the quantity of an Arch equal to the
measure of the Perpendicular: Then having the Quadrant of Altitude screwed in
the Zenith, turn it about till the side of it cut the Prick made in the first
Meridian; so shall the Triangle be represented on the Globe. The Base shall ly
on the first Meridian between the Equinoctial and the Quadrant of Altitude, the
Perpendicular in the Equinoctial between the first Meridian and the Brazen
Meridian; and the Hypothenusa on the Quadrant of Altitude between the Zenith
and the first Meridian: and the number of degrees between each of these
respective Arches shall be the measure of each respective Side. For the Angles;
The Right angle is known to be 90. degrees, by the second Theorem in the
Preface. The measure of the Angle at the Perpendicular is numbered between the
East point in the Horizon and the graduated edge of the Quadrant of Altitude:
But to find the Angle at the Base you must turn the Triangle, making the
Perpendicular Base, and the Base Perpendicular.

Example.
Having the two Legs given A B 79. degreee 15. minutes, and C A 23. degrees 8
minutes, I would find the measure of the Hypothenusa C B, and the Angles B C.

The Equinoctial Elevated, as before, I make A B Base, and C A Perpendicular,
counting in the first Meridian from the Equinoctial 79. degrees 15. minutes,
and there I make a prick: Then I number in the Equinoctial from the first
Meridian 23. degrees 8. minutes, the length of the Perpendicular, and there I
make a second Prick: This prick I bring to the Brazen Meridian, so is the first
Meridian separated from the Brazen Meridian so many degrees and minutes as is
the length of the Perpendicular C A; Then I screw the Quadrant of Altitude to
the Zenith, viz. directly over the Equinoctial, and move it about till the edge
of it touch the Prick made in the first Meridian: So is the Triangle made on
the Globe: And the number of degrees and minutes of the Quadrant of Altitude
comprehended between the first Meridian and the Zenith is the measure of the
Hypothenusa C B; which in this Example is 80. degrees 8. minutes: The number of
degrees in the Horizon comprehended between the Equinoctial and the Quadrant of
Altitude is the measure of the Angle C, 85. degrees 44. minutes: the Angle A is
a Right Angle, 90. degrees: And to find the Angle B, turn the Triangle, (all
but the Letters;) Thus: As before A C was Base, so now I make B A Base; and as
before A B was Perpendicular, so now C A shall be Perpendicular: so is your
Triangle turned.



Now, as before I counted 79. degrees 15. minutes from the Equinoctial on the
first Meridian, which was the length of that Base, so now I count 23. degrees
8. minutes on the first Meridian, which is the length of this Base, and there
(as before) I make a Prick: and as before I counted 23. degrees 8. minutes on
the Equinoctial from the first Meridian, which was the length of that
Perpendicular; so now I count 79. degrees 15. minutes on the Equinoctial, which
is the length of this Perpendicular; and there I make a prick on the
Equinoctial: Then I bring this Prick (as before) to the Brazen Meridian, so
shall the first Meridian be distant (as before) from the Brazen Meridian so
many degrees and minutes as is the length of this Perpendicular, viz. 79.
degrees 15. minutes: Then Having the Quadrant of Altitude screwed to the
Zenith, I turn it about till the edge of it touch the Prick made in the first
Meridian at 23. degrees 8. minutes distant from the Equinoctial; so is the
Triangle Turned: And so shall the Arch of the Horizon comprehended between the
Equinoctial and the Quadrant of Altitude be the measure of the Angle C in the
former Triangle, (but now made B) 23. degrees 30. minutes: you also see again
the measure of the Hypothenusa B C 80. degrees 8. minutes on the Quadrant of
Altitude, counted between the Zenith and the first Meridian.



PROB. II.
A Leg and the Hypothenusa given, to find the Rest.

EXample. The Leg given shall be C A in the former Triangle 23. degrees 8.
minutes, The Hypothenusa C B 80. degrees 8. minutes. The Equinoctial and
Quadrant of Altitude Rectified, as by the last Problem; Number the Leg C A 23.
degrees 8. minutes on the Equinoctial from the first Meridian, and there make a
prick; Bring this Prick to the Brazen Meridian; Then number on the Quadrant of
Altitude the Hypothenusa B C 80. degrees 8. minutes from the Zenith toward the
Horizon, and make there on the edge of the Quadrant of Altitude another prick:
Then turn the Quadrant of Altitude about till the prick made on the edge of it
touch the first Meridian; so shall the Triangle be made: The arch of the
Equinoctial comprehended between the first Meridian and the Brazen Meridian,
shall represent A C the Perpendicular; the arch of the Quadrant of Altitude
comprehended between the Zenith and the First Meridian, shall represent B C the
Hypothenusa; and the arch of the first Meridian comprehended between the
Equinoctial and the Quadrant of Altitude shall represent B A the Base; which
was one Leg sought, and is (as you will find) 79. degrees 15. minutes: The
Angle C you will find in the Horizon 85. degrees 44. minutes: The angle A is
the Right Angle 90. degrees: And to find the Angle B you must turn the
Triangle, as you were directed in the former Problem.

PROB. III.
The Hypothenusa and an Angle given, to find the Rest.

THe Hypothenusa given shall be B C of the Triangle in Prob. 1. 80. degrees 8.
minutes, The Angle given shall be C 85. degrees 44 minutes: The Globe and
Quadrant of Altitude Rectified, as by Prob. 1. Count the given Angle 85.
degrees 44. minutes on the Horizon from the Equinoctial, and there place the
Quadrant of Altitude: Then turn about the Globe till the first Meridian touch
80. degrees 8. minutes of the Quadrant of Altitude counted from the Zenith
downwards, so shall the Triangle be made on the Globe: The Arch of the Equator
comprehended between the first Meridian and the Brazen Meridian shall show the
length of the Perpendicular C A 23. degrees 8. minutes; the Arch of the first
Meridian comprehended between the Equinoctial and the Quadrant of Altitude
shall show the length of the Base A B 79. degrees 15 minutes; the Right Angle
made at the Interfection of the Brazen Meridian with the Equinoctial is 90.
degrees: and to find the measure of the Angle B you must turn the Triangle, as
you were directed Prob. 1.

PROB. IIII.
A Leg and Angle adjoining given, to find the Rest.

IN the Triangle of Prob. 1. The Leg given shall be C A 23. degrees 8. minutes,
the Angle adjoining shall be C 85. degrees 44 minutes: The Globe and Quadrant
of Altitude Rectified, as by Prob. 1. I turn about the Globe till the first
Meridian be distant from the Brazen Meridian 23. degrees 8. minutes, the length
of the Leg C A: Then I count in the Horizon from the Equinoctial 85. degrees
44. minutes, the measure of the Angle C; so is the Triangle made on the Globe.
The Arch of the first Meridian comprehended between the Quadrant of Altitude
and the Equinoctial shall show the length of the Base A B 79. degrees 15.
minutes; The Arch of the Quadrant of Altitude comprehended between the Zenith
and the first Meridian shall show the length of the Hypothenusa C B 80. degrees
8. minutes; The Right Angle made at the Intersection of the Equinoctial and the
Brazen Meridian is 90. degrees: And to find the measure of the Angle B, you
must turn the Triangle, as you were directed Prob. 1.

PROB. V.
A Leg and the Angle opposite given, to find the Rest.

IN the Triangle of Prob. 1. the Leg given shall be A B 79. degrees 15.
minutes, the Angle opposite shall be C 85. degrees 44. minutes, The Globe and
Quadrant of Altitude Rectified, as by Prob. 1. I bring the Quadrant of Altitude
to 85. degrees 15. minutes of the Horizon, the measure of the Angle C: Then I
turn the Globe till 79. degrees 15. minutes of the first Meridian (which is the
measure of the Leg A B) touch the Quadrant of Altitude, so is the Triangle made
on the Globe. The Arch of the Equinoctial comprehended between the first
Meridian and the Brazen Meridian shows the length of the Leg C A 23. degrees 8.
minutes; the Arch of the Quadrant of Altitude comprehended between the Zenith
and the first Meridian, shall show the length of the Hypothenusa C B 80.
degrees 8. minutes: The Right Angle made at the Intersection of the Equinoctial
and the Brazen Meridian is 90. degrees: And to find the measure of the Angle B,
you must turn the Triangle, as you were directed in Prob. 1:

PROB. VI.
The Angle given, to find the Sides.

IN this Case you must turn the Angles into Sides, making an Oblique Triangle
on the Globe, whose Sides shall be equal to the given Angles: so shall the
Angles of this Triangle found, be the measure of the Sides required.

Example.
In the Triangle of Prob. 1. The Angle A is 90. degrees, the Angle B 23.
degrees 30. minutes, the Angle C. 85. degrees 44. minutes: The Globe and
Quadrant of Altitude Rectified, as by Prob. 1. I set the Right Angle A 90.
degrees on the Brazen Meridian, between the Pole and the Equinoctial; For the
Angle B I number downwards on the Quadrant of Altitude 23. degrees 30. minutes,
which shall be the side representing that Angle: for the Angle C I number on
the first Meridian from the Pole toward the Equinoctial 85. degrees 44.
minutes, which shall be the side representing that Angle: Then I turn the Globe
and Quadrant of Altitude till I can join the 23. degrees 30. minutes counted
before on the Quadrant of Altitude and this 85. degrees 44. minutes counted in
the first Meridian together; So is a Triangle made on the Globe; whose sides
being equal to the Angles given, shall have its Angles equal to the sides
required: Thus the Arch of the Equinoctial comprehended between the first
Meridian and the Brazen Meridian shall be found 23. degrees 8. minutes, the
measure of the side A C: The Arch of the Horizon contained between the nearest
Pole and the Quadrant of Altitude shall be found 79. degrees 15. minutes, the
measure of the side B A: And to find the Hypotenusa B C, you have now Data's
enough, either to find it as by some of the former Problemes; or else you may
find it by turning the Triangle as by Prob. 1.

These Cases of Right Angled Spherical Triangles may be wrought otherways by
the Globe, If you alter its Position; making the North or South points of the
Horizon, Zenith; or else the Poles of the World, or the Poles of the Ecliptic;
and use the Circle of Position instead of the first Meridian or Circles of
Longitude: But these Instructions together with a little Practice, are (I
judge) sufficient; Therefore I shall refer Varieties to the Studies of the
Industrious Studient.

Of Oblique Triangles. PROB. VII.
The three Sides given, to find the Angles.

ELevate the Pole of the Globe above the Horizon to the Complement of one of
the given Sides and screw the Quadrant of Altitude in the Zenith, so shall that
given Side be comprehended between the Pole and the Quadrant of Altitude; Then
count from the Pole upon the first Meridian the measure of the Second Side, and
there make a prick; Count also from the Zenith upon the Quadrant of Altitude
downwards the measure of the third Side, and make there on the edge of the
Quadrant of Altitude another prick; Then turn the Globe and Quadrant of
Altitude till you can join these two pricks together; so shall your Triangle be
made on the Globe: And then the number of degrees of the Equinoctial
comprehended between the first Meridian and the Brazen Meridian shall be the
measure of the Angle at the Pole: The Arch of the Horizon comprehended between
the Quadrant of Altitude and the intersection of the Brazen Meridian with the
Horizon on that side the Pole is elevated, shall be the measure of the second
Angle: And for finding the third Angle, you must turn the Triangle, as by Prob.
1.

Example.
In the Triangle A B C annexed, The Side A B contains 38. degrees 30. minutes,
the side B C 25. degrees, and the side A C 60. degrees; I would measure these
Angles; I place one of these sides upon the Meridian, viz. A B 38. degrees 30
minutes, the Complement of 38. degrees 30. minutes is 51 degrees 30. minutes;
Therefore I Elevate the Pole 51. degrees 30. minutes above the Horizon, so
shall the Zenith be distant from the Pole 38. degrees 30. minutes; here I screw
the Quadrant of Altitude and count downwards on it the measure of the side B C
25. degrees, and there I make a prick: Then from the Pole I count on the first
Meridian 60. degrees, the measure of the side A C, and there I make another
prick: Then I turn the Globe and Quadrant of Altitude backwards or forwards
till these two pricks are joined together; so shall the Triangle A B C be made
on the Globe: The arch of the Brazen Meridian comprehended between the Pole and
Zenith shall represent the side A B; the Arch of the Quadrant of Altitude
comprehended between the first Meridian and the Brazen Meridian shall represent
the side B C; and the Arch of the first Meridian comprehended between the Pole
and the Quadrant of Altitude shall represent the side A C; The Pole shall
represent the Angle A, the Zenith the Angle B; and the intersection of the
first Meridian with the Quadrant of Altitude shall represent the Angle C. The
Angle at the Pole is measured in the Equator; for the degrees comprehended
between the first Meridian and the Brazen Meridian being 17. degrees 15.
minutes shows 17. degrees 15. minutes to be the measure of the Angle A. The
Angle at the Zenith is measured in the Horizon; for the degrees comprehended
between the Intersection of the Brazen Meridian with the Horizon on that side
the Pole is Elevated being 142. degrees 42. minutes, shows that 142. degrees
42. minutes is the measure of the Angle B, Thus two angles are found; the third
is wanting: which I find thus,



I turn the Triangle, placing either A or C in the Zenith. Example: I place A
at the Zenith, which before was at the Pole; so shall C be at the Pole, and B
at the Intersection of the first Meridian and the Quadrant of Altitude, and the
side A C shall be comprehended between the Pole and Zenith: The side A C
contains 60. degrees; its Complement to 90 is 30. degrees; therefore I Elevate
the Pole of the Globe 30. degrees above the Horizon; so shall 60. degrees be in
the Zenith; therefore to 60. degrees I screw the Quadrant of Altitude and count
on it downwards the measure of the other side next the Zenith, viz. 38. degrees
30. minutes; and there I make a prick: Then from the Pole on the first Meridian
I count the measure of the last side, viz. 25. degrees, and there I make
another prick: Then I turn the Globe and Quadrant of Altitude (as before) till
these two pricks join; so is the Triangle altered on the Globe: For the Arch of
the Brazen Meridian comprehended between the Pole and Zenith which before was
38. degrees 30. minutes, is now 60. degrees; the Arch of the Quadrant of
Altitude Comprehended between the first Meridian and the Brazen Meridian, which
before was 25 degrees, is now 38. degrees 30. minutes; and the Arch of the
first Meridian comprehended between the Quadrant of Altitude and the Pole,
which before was 60. degrees is now 25. degrees. Thus the Angle C being now at
the Pole, its measure is found in the Equinoctial, viz. that Arch comprehended
between the first Meridian and the Brazen Meridian, which is 25. degrees 24.
minutes; and the measure of the Angle A, which is now in the Zenith, having its
sides, the one an Arch of the Brazen Meridian, the other an Azimuth, (or which
is all one) an Arch of the Quadrant of Altitude, is measured in the Horizon, as
all Azimuths are, and found 17. degrees 15. minutes, as before.

PROB. VIII.
Two Sides and the Angle contained between them given, to find the Rest.

EXample. In the former Triangle I have given the sides A B, 38. degrees 30.
minutes, A C, 60. degrees, and the Angle A 17. degrees 15. minutes.

The Method I have hitherto used is to place the given side upon the Meridian
between the Pole and Zenith; but because the Angle at the Pole in this Example
falls out so large that the Quadrant of Altitude will not reach the first
Meridian; therefore I shall use another way to work this Problem as well.

I Elevate the Pole of the Globe to the Com-plement of one of the given sides;
suppose the side A B, which being 38. degrees 30. minutes, its Complement to
90. degrees is 51. degrees 30. minutes, so shall the Zenith be distant from the
Pole 38. degrees 30. minutes, the measure of the side A B: The other side is
60. degrees, this 60. degrees I count from the Pole in the first Meridian, and
there I make a prick: The Angle given is 17. degrees 15. minutes; this I count
in the Equinoctial from the first Meridian, and this degree and minute in the
Equinoctial I bring to the Brazen Meridian, so shall the first Meridian be
separated from the Brazen Meridian 17. degrees 15. minutes: Then I screw the
Quadrant of Altitude to the Zenith, and bring the side of it to the prick made
in the first Meridian: so shall the Triangle be made on the Globe. Then to find
the unknown side B C, I count the number of degrees on the Quadrant of Altitude
comprehended between the Zenith and the first Meridian, and find 25. degrees,
which is the measure of the side B C: To find the measure of the Angle B, I
count the number of degrees contained between the Intersection of the Meridian
with the Horizon on that side the Pole is Elevated and the Quadrant of
Altitude, and find 142. degrees 42. minutes, which is the measure of the Angle
B: And to find the Angle C I turn the Triangle, as in Prob. 7.

PROB. IX.
Two Sides and an Angle opposite to one of them given, to find the Rest.

EXample. In the Triangle in Prob. 7. the Sides given are A B 38. degrees 30.
minutes, and A C 60. degrees: The Angle given opposite to A C is B 142. degrees
42. minutes: I Elevate the Pole to the Complement of one of the given sides;
suppose A B, which being 38. degrees 30. minutes, its Complement to 90. degrees
is 51. degrees 30. minutes; so is the Zenith distant from the Pole 38. degrees
30. minutes: To this 38. degrees 30. minutes I screw the Quadrant of Altitude,
and count in the Horizon from the Intersection of the Meridian with the Horizon
on that side the Pole is Elevated the measure of the given Angle B, viz. 142
degrees 42. minutes, and to this number of degrees and minutes of the Horizon I
bring the edge of the Quadrant of Altitude, then I count in the first Meridian
from the Pole the measure of the side A C 60. degrees; and there I make a
prick, and turn about the Globe till that prick come to the edge of the
Quadrant of Altitude, so is the Triangle made on the Globe. The degrees of the
Quadrant of Altitude comprehended between the first Meridian and the Zenith
being 25. degrees, is the measure of the side B C: The degrees of the
Equinoctial comprehended between the first Meridian and the Brazen Meridian
being 17. degrees 15. minutes, is the measure of the Angle A; and for finding
the measure of the Angle C, I turn the Triangle, as in Prob. 7.

PROB. X.
Two Angles and the Side comprehended between them given, to find the Rest.

EXample. In the Triangle of Prob. 7. the Angles given are A 17 degrees 15.
minutes, and B 142. degrees 42. minutes, the side comprehended between them is
A B 38 degrees 30. minutes, I Elevate the Pole to the Complement of the side A
B which being 38. degrees 30. minutes, its Complement to 90 degrees is 51.
degrees 30. minutes, so is the Zenith distant from the Pole 38. degrees 30.
minutes; to this 38. degrees 30. minutes I screw the Quadrant of Altitude, and
count in the Horizon from the Intersection of the Meridian with the Horizon on
that side the Pole is Elevated the measure of the given Angle B, viz. 142.
degrees 42. minutes, and to this number of degrees and minutes of the Horizon I
bring the edge of the Quadrant of Altitude; then I turn about the Globe till
the first Meridian is distant from the Brazen Meridian 17. degrees 15. minutes
of the Equinoctial, which is the measure of the other given Angle; So shall the
Triangle be made on the Globe: and the Arch of the Quadrant of Altitude
comprehended between the first Meridian and the Zenith shall be the measure of
the side B C 25. degrees, and the Arch of the first Meridian comprehended
between the Pole and its Intersection with the Quadrant of Altitude shall be
the measure of the side A C 60. degrees: The measure of the Angle C is found by
turning the Triangle, as in Prob. 7.

PROB. XI.
Two Angles and a Side opposite to one of them given, to find the Rest.

EXample. In the Triangle of Prob. 7. the Angles given are A 17. degrees 15
minutes, and B 142. degrees 42. minutes, the side given is B C 25. degrees,
being the side opposite to the Angle A; the Angle A is made at the Pole of the
Globe, and measured in the Equator: Therefore I separate the first Meridian
from the Brazen Meridian 17. degrees 15. minutes, so does the Pole represent
the Angle A; the Angle B is made at the Zenith, and measured in the Horizon;
therefore I count in the Horizon 142. degrees 42. minutes, and there I make a
prick, to this prick I bring the edge of the lower end of the Quadrant of
Altitude, (not minding to what degrees of the Meridian the upper end of it is
placed) Then I count from the upper end of the Quadrant of Altitude 25. degrees
downwards the measure of th e side B C and there I make a prick, and keeping
the lower end of the Quadrant of Altitude to the prick made in the Horizon, I
slide the upper end of it forwards or backwards till the prick on the Quadrant
of Altitude come to the first Meridian, so shall the Triangle be made on the
Globe: Then the Arch of the Brazen Meridian comprehended between the Pole and
the upper end of the Quadrant of Altitude shall be the measure of the side A B
38. degrees 30. minutes; and the Arch of the first Meridian comprehended
between the prick on the Quadrant of Altitude and the Pole shall be the measure
of the side A C 60. degrees; But the Angle C you must find by turning the
Triangle; as in Prob. 7.

In the working this Problem I would have placed the given fide B C 25.
degrees upon the Brazen Meridian between the Pole and Zenith; but then the
Angle B (being so Obtuse) would have had that side which would be intersected
by the Quadrant of Altitude (viz. the first Meridian under the Horizon, which
the Quadrant of Altitude cannot reach.

PROB. XII.
Three Angles given, to find the Sides.

THis Triangle is taught to be resolved by Mr Palmer on the Planisphear; Book
3. Chap. 19.

It is to be known (says he) That if you go to the Poles of the three great
Circles whereof your Triangle is made, these Poles shall be the Angular points
of a second Triangle; and the two lesser sides of this second Triangle shall be
equal to the two lesser Angles of your first Triangle: the greatest side of the
second Triangle shall be the supplement of the greatest Angle of the first
Triangle (that is, shall have as many degrees and minutes as the greatest Angle
of the first Triangle wanted of 180. degrees (see Pitiscus Trigonometry Lib. 1.
Prop 61.

This second Triangle therefore (all whose sides are known from the Angles of
the first) you shall resolve by Prob. 7. And having by that Problem found the
Angles of this second Triangle, know that the two lesser Angles of the second
Triangle shall be several and respectively equal to the two lesser sides of the
first Triangle, (and the least Angle to the least side, the middle Angle to the
middle side) and the greatest Angle of this second Triangle being subtracted
out of 180. degrees, shall leave you the greatest side of your first Triangle.

Example. If the Angles be given 142. degrees 42. minutes, 17. degrees 15.
minutes, and 25. degrees 24. minutes; and the sides be enquired. Draw by aim a
rude Scheam of this first Triangle, writing in the Angle A 17 degrees 15.
minutes, in B 142. degrees 42. minutes, in C 25. degrees 24. minutes; supposing
the sides yet unknown: then draw under this by aim also, a Scheam of the second
Triangle, setting his Base Parallel with the Base of the first and making the
Base of the second shorter then the Base of the first. Set also B at the
Vertical Angle, and A C at the Base; as in the first Triangle. Then say,

Because A in the first Triangle is 17, degrees 15. minutes, therefore in the
second Triangle B C (which subtendeth A) shall be 17. degrees 15. minutes: and
because C in the first Triangle is 25. degrees 24. minutes, therefore in the
second Triangle the side A B which subtendeth C) shall be 25. degrees 24.
minutes; and because B the greatest Angle in the first Triangle, is 142.
degrees 42. minutes, therefore in the second Triangle the side A C (which
subtendeth B) shall be the complement thereof to 180. degrees, viz. 37. degrees
18. minutes: Write now upon the sides of this second Triangle the quantities of
the sides, so is your second Triangle ready to be resolved, as by Prob. 7.
Whereby you shall find the Angles of the second Triangle, as I have expressed
them in the Scheam. A 25. degrees, C 38. degrees 30. minutes, B 120. degrees.

N^w lastly, I say these Angles of the second Triangle thus found, give me the
sides of the first Triangle, which I seek, in this manner.

In the second Triangle. In the first Triangle. A is 25. degrees Therefore B C
is 25. degrees C is 38. 30. A B 38. 30. B is 120. 00. A C 60. 00.

Complement of 120. degrees to 180. And thus by all the Angles given, we have
found out all the sides, which was required.



Having then the Angles of your first Triangle given, and his sides now found;
you shall find his situation on the Globe thus Place him as in Prob. 7. A B
38. degrees 30. minutes between the Pole and Zenith, A C 60. degrees in the
first Meridian separated from the Brazen Meridian 17. degrees 15. minutes of
the Equinoctial, B C 25. degrees on the Quadrant of Altitude, counted from the
Zenith when its lower end is applied to the 142. degrees 42. minutes of the
Horizon: you shall say, Because the East point of the Horizon is the Pole of
the Arch A B, therefore at the East point of the Horizon shall stand the Angle
C, which A B subtendeth: Next follow the 142. degrees 42. minutes of Azimuth
which makes B C of your Triangle to the Horizon, and from thence number in the
Horizon toward the East point 37, degrees 18. minutes, the Complement of the
Angle A to 180. degrees, and number yet further 52. degrees 42. minutes beyond
the East point to make up 90, and there is the Pole of the Arch B C: Therefore
there shall stand the Angle A, which B C subtendeth. Then count in the Equator
from the first Meridian 90. degrees, which will end under the Horizon, and
there make a prick; for there is the Pole of the Arch or side A C. Therefore at
that prick shall stand the Angle B, which A C subtendeth.

Here you see your second Triangle made by the Poles of the first adjoining to
the East point of the Globe: only the side A B is wanting: To get that, make a
prick upon the Globe against the 52. degres 42. minutes from the East point of
the Horizon found before, to represent the Angle A: Then turn about the Globe
and Qudrant of Altitude till that prick and the prick made before for the Angle
B are both at once cut by the side of the Quadrant of Altitude, and you will
find 25. degrees 24. minutes of the Quadrant of Altitude comprehended between
the two pricks, for the measure of the side A B

PROB. XIII.
How to let fall a Perpendicular that shall divide any Oblique Spherical
Triangle into two Right Angled Spherical Triangles.

THis Problem is much used when an Oblique Triangle having two sides and an
Angle given is to be solved by the Cannon of Sines and Tangents: but by the
Globe it may be solved without it, as was showed Prob, 8, 9. Yet because
letting fall a Perperdicular is so frequent in all Authors that treat of
Trigonometry, I have inserted this Problem also.



In the Oblique Triangle of the fromer Problemes there is given the sides A B
38 degrees, and B C 25. degrees, and the Angle C 25. degrees 24. minutes; It is
required to let fall a Perpendicular as B a from the Angle B. upon the Base A
C; and to know both the measure of this Perpendicular, and the parts it divides
the Base into.

Therefore Elevate the Pole of the Globe above the Horizon so much as is the
measure of the Angle C, which in this Example is 25. degrees 24. minutes, and
bring the intersection of the first Meridian with the Equinoctial to the East
point of the Horizon; so shall the Angle at the East point of the Horizon
comprehended between the Horizon and the first Meridian be equal to the Angle
C: then count in the first Meridian from the East point of the Horizon the
measure of the side B C 25. degrees, and having the Quadrant of Altitude
screwed to the Zenith bring the graduated edge of it to these 25. degrees, so
shall the Arch of the Horizon comprehended between the East point and the lower
end of the Quadrant of Altitude be the number of degrees that the Perpendicular
falls upon the Base, counted from the Angle C to a, which in this Example is 21
degrees, and the Arch of the Quadrant of Altitude comprehended between the
Horizon and the first Meridian is the measure of the Perpendicular B a 11.
degrees.

And thus by letting fall this Perpendicular you have two Right angled
Spherical Triangles made, the one B a C, wherein is found C a, 21 degrees, B C
25. degrees B a 11. degrees C 25. degrees 24. minutes, and a the Right Angle:
There remains only the angle B unknown; which you must find by turning the
Triangle, as was taught Prob. 1. The other Right angled Spherical Triangle
made, is B a A, wherein is found A a (Complement of 21 2/4 degrees to 60
degrees (the whole Base before given) 38 degrees, A B 38. degrees 30. minutes,
B a 11. degrees, and a the Right Angle; which is more then enough to find the
Angl^. A and B; as was showed in the Preface. Theorem 1.

The End of the Sixth Book
Here follows the Ancient STORIES of the several STARS, and CONSTELLATIONS.
Showing the Poetical Reasons why such Various Figures are placed in HEAVEN.
Collected from Dr HOOD. And First, Of the Northern Constellations.
1. URSA MINOR. This Constellation has the pre-eminence, because it is nearest
of all the rest unto the North Pole; And is called of the Greeks (...)
whereupon the Pole is called the Pole Arctick, for that it is near unto that
Constellation. It is also called Helice minor, because of the small revolution
which it makes round about the Pole: or rather of Elice, a Town in Arcadia,
wherein Calysto the great Bear, and mother to the less, was bred. It is called
Cynosura, because this Constellation, though it carry the name of a Bear, yet
it has the tail of a Dog: Last of all, it is termed Phoenice, because that
Thales, who first gave the name to this Constellation, was, a Phoenician: And
therefore the Phoenicians being taught how to use it in their Navigations, did
call it by the name of the Country wherein Thales was born. It consists of 7.
stars, which the Latins call Septemtriones; because by their continual motion,
those seven stars do as it were wear the Heavens. The Spaniards call them all
Bosina, that is, an Horn; because they may be very well brought into that form;
whereof that which is in the end of the tail, is called the Pole Star, by
reason of the neareness thereof unto the Pole of the world* for it is distant
(according to the opinion of most) from the true Pole, but 23. degrees. 30. min.
The Arabians call it Alrukaba: And of the Scythians it is said to be an Iron
nail, and is worshipped by them as a God. The two stars that are in the
sholders of the Bear, are called Guards, of the Spanish word Guardare, which is
to behold; because they are diligently to be looked unto, in regard of the
singular use which they have in Navigation.

The reason why this Constellation was brought into the Heavens, is diversely
set down, and first in this manner: Saturn having received of the Oracle that
one of his Sons should banish him out of his kingdom, determined with himself
to kill all the men children that he should beget: whereupon he gave command to
Ops his wife, being then great, that she should show him the child so soon as
ever it was born: But she bringing forth Jupiter, and being greatly delighted
with his hair, gave the child unto two Nymphs of Crete, dwelling in the mount
Dicte; whereof this was one, and was called Cynosura; the other was Helice.

Jupter, after that (according to the Oracle) he had bereft his Father of the
kingdom, in recompense of their pains and courtesy, translated them both into
the Heavens, and made of them two Constellations; the Lesser Bear, and the
Greater Bear.

Othersome say that it was Arcas, the son of Calysto; and they tell the tale on
this manner. Calysto a Nymph of singular beauty, daughter to Lycaon King of
Arcadia, induced by the great desire she had of hunting, became a follower of
the Goddess Diana. After this, Jupiter being enamored with her beauty and out
of hope, by reason of her profession, to win her love in his own person,
counterfeited the shape of Diana, lay with Calysto, and got her with child; of
whom was born a son, which was called Arcas. Diana, or rather Juno, being very
much offended here-with, turned Calisto into a Bear. Arcas her son at the Age
of fifteen, hunting in the woods by chance lighted upon his mother in the shape
of a Bear: who knowing her son Arcas, stood still, that he might come near unto
her, and not be afraid: but he fearing the shape of so cruel a Beast, bent his
bow of purpose to have slain her: Whereupon Jupiter to prevent the mischief,
translated them both into Heaven, and of them made two several Constellations:
unto the lesser Bear, there belongs but one star unformed.

2. URSA MAYOR, the Greater Bear, called also of the Greeks Arctos, and Helice,
consists of 27. stars: Among the which, those seven that are in the hinder
part and tail of the Bear, are most observed; the Latins call them Pla^strum;
and of our men they are called Charles Wayn; because the stars do stand in such
sort, that the three which are in the tail resemble the Horses, and the other
four which are in the flank of the Bear, stand (after a manner) like the Wheels
of a Wagon, or Chariot; and they are suposed by some to be greater then the
Sun. The reason of the Translation of this Constellation into the Heaven, is at
large set down in the other Constellation, and therefore needs not here to be
repeated. This Constellation was first invented by Nauplius, the Father of
Palamedes the Greek: and in great use among the Grecians; and this is to be
noted both in this and the former Constellation, that they never set under the
Horizon, in any part of Europe: which though it fall out by reason of their
situation in the Heavens; yet the Poets say, that it came to pass through the
displeasure and hatred of Juno; who for that she was by Calisto made a
Cuckquean, and they notwithstanding (as she took it) in dispight of her, were
translated into Heaven, requested her brother Neptune, that he should never
suffer those Stars to set within his Kingdom: To which request Neptune
condiscended; so that in all Europe they never come near unto the Sea, or touch
the Horizon. If any one marvel, that (seeing she has the form of a Bear) she
should have a tail so long; Imagine that Jupiter fearing to come too nigh unto
her teeth, laid hold on her tail, and thereby drew her up into heaven; so that
she of her self being very weighty, and the distance from the Earth to the
Heaven very great, there was great likelihood that her tail must stretch. The
unformed stars belonging to this Constellation are eight.

3 DRACO, the Dragon, of some named the Serpent; of others the Snake, by the
Arabians, Aben; and by Junctinus Florentinus, Vrago; because he windeth his
tail round about the Ecliptic Pole; it contains 31. stars. This was the
Dragon that kept the Golden Apples in the Orchard of the Hesperides, (now
thought to be the Islands of Cape de Virde) and for his diligence and
watchfulness, was afterward translated into heaven: Yet others say that he
came into Heaven by this occasion; when Minerva withstood the Giants fighting
against the Gods; they to terrify her, threw at her a mighty Dragon; but she
catching him in her hands, threw him presently up into Heaven, and placed him
there, as a memorial of that her resistance. Others would have it to be the
Serpent Python, whom Apollo slew, after the Deluge.

4. CEPHUS, contains in him 11. stars, and has two unformed. This was a King
of the Aethiopians, and Husband unto Cassiopeia, and father of Andromeda, whom
Perseus married. He was taken up into Heaven, with his wife and daughter, for
the good deeds of Perseus his son in law; that he and his whole stock might be
had in remembrance for ever. The Star which is in his right shoulder, is called
by the Arabians Alderahiemin; i. e. his right Arm.

5 BOOTS, the driver of the Oxen (for so I suppose the name to signify,
rather then an Herdsman; for he has not his name because he has the care of
any Cattle, but only because he is supposed to drive Charles his Wain, which is
drawn by 3. Oxen) he is also called Arctophilax, the keeper of the Bear, as
though the care of her were committed to him. This Constellation consists of
22 Stars. Some will have Boots to be Areas, the Son of her who before was
turned into the Great Bear; and they tell the Tale thus: Ly^aon the Father of
Calisto, receiving Jupiter into his house as a guest, took Arcas his daughters
son, and cut him in pieces; and among other Services, set him before Jupiter to
be eaten: for by this means he thought to prove if his guest were a God, as he
pretended to be. Jupiter perceiving this heinous fact, overthrew the table,
fired the house with lightning, and turned Lycaon into a wolf: but gathering,
and setting together again the limbs of the child, he committed him to a Nymph
of Aetolia to be kept: Arcas afterward coming to man's estate, and hunting in
the woods, lighted at un-awares upon his mother, transformed by Juno into the
shape of a bear, whom he persued into the Temple of Jupiter Lycaeus, whereunto
by the law of the Arcadians, it was death for any man to come. For as much
therefore as they must of likelihood be both slain. Calysto by her son, and he
by the Law; Jupiter to avoid this mischief, of mere pity took them both up
into heaven. Unto this Constellation belongs but one star unformed, and it is
between the legs of Boots, and by the Grecians it is called Arcturus, because
of all the stars near the great Bear named Arctos, this star is first seen near
her tail in the evening. The Poetical invention is thus.

Icarus the father of Erigone, having received of the God Bacchus a Flagon of
wine, to declare how good it was for mortal men, traveled therewith into the
Territories of Athens, and there began to carouse with certain shepherds: they
being greatly delighted with the pleasantness of the wine, being a new kind of
liquor, began to draw so hard at it, that ere they left off, they were past one
and thirty; and in the end, were fain to lay their heads to rest. But coming
unto themselves again, and finding their brains scarce in good temper, they
killed Icarus, thinking indeed that he had either poisoned them, or at the
leastwise made their brains introxicate. Erigone was ready to die for grief,
and so was Mera, her little dog. But Jupiter to allay their grief, placed her
father in Heaven, between the legs of Arctophilax.

6. CORONA BOREA, the Northern garland, consists of eight stars; yet Ovid
says, that it has nine. This was the Garland that Venus gave unto Ariadne,
when she was married unto Bacchus, in the Isle Naxus, after that Theseus had
forsaken her: which Garland, Bacchus placed in the Heaven, as a token of his
love. Novidius will have it to be the Crown of the Virgin Mary.

7. ENGONASIS: This Constellation has the name, because it is expressed under
the shape of a man kneeling upon the one knee, and is therefore by the Latins
called Ingeniculum. It contains 29. stars, and wants a proper name, because
of the great diversity of opinions concerning the same. For some will have it
to be Hercules, that mighty Conqueror, who for his 12. labors was thought
worthy to be placed in the heaven. and nigh unto the Dragon whom he overcame.
Others tell the tale thus: That when the Tyta^s fought against the Gods, they
for fear of the Giants, ran all unto the one side of the heaven: whereupon the
Heaven was ready to have fallen, had not Hercules together with Atlas set his
neck unto it, and stayed the fall: and for this desert, he was placed in the
Heaven.

8 LYRA, the Harp, it contains 10. stars; whereof thus goes the Fable. The
River Nilus swelling above his banks, overflowed the Country of Egypt; after
the fall whereof there were left in the fields diverse kinds of living things,
and amongst the rest a Tortois^; Mercury, after the flesh thereof was consumed,
the sinews still remaining, found the same, and striking it, he made it yield a
certain sound; whereupon he made an Harp like unto it, having 3. strings and
gave it unto Orpheus the son of Cassiopea. This Harp was of such excellent
sound, that Trees, Stons Fowls, and wild Beasts are said to follow the sound
thereof. After such time therefore that Orpheus was slain by the women of
Thrace, the Muses by the good leave of Jupiter, and at the request of Apollo,
placed this Harp in Heaven. Novidius will have it to be the Harp of David,
whereby he pacified the evil spirit of Saul. This Constellation was afterward
called Vultur Cad^ens, the falling Grype: and Falco, the Falcon; or Timpanum,
he Timbrel.

9 OLOR, or Cygnus, the Swan, called of the Caldaeans Adigege: it has 17.
stars: of this Constellation the Poets Fable in this manner. Jupiter being
overtaken with the love of Laeda, the wife of Tyndarus King of Oebalia, and
knowing no honester way to accomplish his desire, procured Venus to turn her
self into an Eagle, and himself he turned into the shape of a Swan: Flying
therefore from the Eagle, as from his natural enemy, that earnestly pursued
him, he lighted of purpose in the lap of Leda, and, as it were, for his more
safety, crept into her bosom. The woman not knowing who it was under that
shape, but holding (as she thought) the Swan fast in her arms, fell a sleep:
In the mean while Jupiter enjoyed his pleasure; and having obtained that he
came for, betook him again unto his wings; and in memorial of his purpose
(attained under that form) he placed the Swan among the stars.

Ovid calls this Constellation Milvius, the Kite, and tells the tale thus.
The Earth being greatly offended with Jupiter, because he had driven Saturn his
father out of his Kingdom, brought forth a monstrous Bull, which in his hinder
parts was like a Serpent; and was afterward called the Fatal-Bull; because the
Destinies had thus decreed, that whosoever could slay him, and offer up his
entrails upon an Altar, should overcome the eternal Gods. Briarens that mighty
Giant, and ancient enemy of the Gods overcame the Bull, and was ready to have
offered up his entrails according to the decree of the Destinies: But Jupiter
fearing the event, commanded the Fowls of the Air to snatch them away: which
although to their power, they endavoured, yet there was none of them found so
forward and apt to that action as the Kite, and for that cause he was
accordingly rewarded with a place in Heaven. Some call this Constellation (...)
that is, the Bird: others call it Vultur^^ volans, the Flying Grype: It is also
called Gallina, the Hen. Unto this Constellation do belong two unformed stars.

10. CASSIOPEIA, She consists of 13. Stars. This was the Wife of Cepheus, and
mother of Andromeda, whom Perseus married, and for his sake was translated into
Heaven, as some write. Others say that her beauty being singular, she waxed so
proud, that she preferred her self before the Nereides, which were the Nymphs
of the Sea: for which cause, unto her disgrace, and the example of all others
that in pride of their hearts would advance themselves above their betters, she
was placed in the Heaven with her head as it were downwards, so that in the
revolution of the Heavens, she seems to be carried headlong.

11. PERSEUS, he has 26. Stars. This was the Son of Jupiter, whom he in the
likeness of a Golden shower begat upon Danae, the daughter of Acrisius. This
Perseus coming unto man's estate, and being furnished with the Sword, Hat, and
Wings of his brother Mercury, and the Shield of his sister Minerva, was sent by
his foster-father Polidectes, to kill the Monster Medusa, whom he slew; and
cuting off her head, carried it away with him: But as he was hastening homeward,
flying in the Air, he espied Andromeda the daughter of Cepheus and Cassiopeia,
for the pride of her mother, bound with a Chain unto a Rock, by the Sea side
there to be devoured by a Whale: Perseus taking notice and pity of the case,
undertook to fight with the Monster, upon condition that Andromeda might be his
Wife; to be short, he delivered Andromeda, married her, and returning homeward
unto the Isle Seriphus* he found there his Grandfather Acrisius, whom by
mischance, and unadvisedly, he slew with a quoit: (or as Ovid reports, with
the terrible sight of the horrible head of Medusa, not knowing that it was his
Grandfather: but afterward understanding whom he had slain, he pined away
through extreme sorrow: whereupon Jupiter his Father pitying his grief, took
him up into Heaven and there placed him in that form wherein he overcame
Medusa, with the sword in one hand, and the head of Medusa in the other, and
the Wings of Mercury at his Heels. This Constellation, because of the
unluckiness thereof, is called by Astrologers Cacodemon, (i. e.) Unlucky, and
Unfortunate. For (as they say) they have observed it, that whatsoever is born
under this Constellation, having an evil Aspect, shall be stricken with sword,
or loose his Head. Novidius says that it is David with Goliath his head in the
one hand, and his sword in the other. The unformed Stars belonging unto this
Constellation, are three.

12. AURIGA, the Waggoner, or Carter: he consists of 14. Stars; the Arabians
call him Alaiot; the Greeks Heniochus, i. e. a man holding a bridle in his
hand, and so is he pictured. Eratostenes affirms him to be Ericthonious King
of Athens, the son of Vulcane: who having most deformed feet, devised first the
use of the Wagon or Chariot, and joined horses together to draw the same, to
the end that he sitting therein, might the better conceal his deformities. For
which invention, Jupiter translated him into the Heavens.

In this Constellation there are two other particular Constellations to be
noted; whereof the one consists but of one Star alone, which is in the left
shoulder of Auriga, and is called Hircus, or Capra the Goat; the Arabians call
it Alhaioth: The other consists of two little Stars a little beneath the
other, standing as it were in the hand of Auriga; this Constellation is ^called
Haedi, the Kids. The tale is thus; Saturn (as you heard before) had received of
the Oracle, that one of his sons should put him out of his Kingdom, whereupon
he determined to devour them all: Ops by stealth conveyed away Jupiter, and
sent him to Melissus King of Crete, to be nourished: Melissus having two
daughters, Amalthaea and Melissa, committed Jupiter unto their Nursery;
Amalthaea had a Goat that gave suck unto two Kids, so that by the milk of this
Goat, she nourished Jupiter very well. To requite this her care and courtesy,
Jupiter (after he had put his Father out his Kingdom) translated her Goat and
her two Kids, into Heaven; and in remembrance of the Nurse, the Goat is called
Capra Amalthaea. Novidius says, that when Christ was born, and his birth made
manifest by the Angels unto the Shepherds, one of them brought with him for a
Present, a Goat and two young Kids; which in token of his good will, were
placed in Heaven.

13. OPHIUCHUS, or SERPENTARIUS, That is, the Serpent-bearer. This
Constellation has no proper name, but is thus entitled, because he holds a
Serpent in his hands. It contains 24. Stars. Some say that it is Hercules,
and report the tale on this manner Juno being a great enemy to Hercules, sent
two snakes to kill him as he lay sleeping in his Cradle: but Hercules being a
lusty Child (for Jupiter had spent two days in begetting him) without much ado
strangled them both: In memorial of so strange an event, Jupiter placed him in
the Heavens, with a Serpent in his hands,

14. SERPENS, the Serpent of Ophiuchus, which consists of 18. Stars. Some say
that it is one of the Serpents that should have slain Hercules in his Cradle.
Novidius says, it is the Viper that bit Paul by the hand. Others deliver the
tale in these words; Glaucus the son of Minos King of Crete, was by misfortune
drowned in a Barrel of Honey: Minos his father craved the help of Aesculaptus
the Physician: and that he might be driven per* force to help the child, he
shut him up in a secret place, together with the dead carcass: whiles
Aesculapius stood in a great maze with himself what were best to be done, upon
a sudden there came a Serpent creeping toward him; the which Serpent he slew
with the staff which he had in his hand. After this there came another Serpent
in, bringing in his mouth a certain herb, which he laid upon the head of the
dead Serpent, whereby he restored him unto life again. Aesculapius using the
same her^, wrought the same effect upon Glaucus. Whereupon (after that)
Aesculapius (whom some affirm to be Ophiuchus) was placed in the Heaven, and
the Serpent with him.

15. SAGITTA, or Telum; the Arrow or Dart. This was that Arrow wherewith
Hercules slew the Eagle or Grype that fed upon the Liver of Promotheus, being
tied with chains to the top of the mount Caucasus; and in memorial of that
deed, was translated into Heaven. Others will have it to be one of those Arrows
which Hercules at his death gave unto Phyloctetes, upon which the Destiny of
Troy did depend. The whole Constellation contains five Stars.

16. AquILA, the Eagle, which is called Vultur Volans, the flying Grype: It
has in it 9. Stars. The Poetical reason of this Constellation, is this;
Jupiter transforming himself into the form of an Eagle, took Ganimides the
Trojan Boy, whom he greatly loved, up into Heaven, and therefore in sign
thereof (because by that means he performed his purpose) he placed the figure
of the Eagle in the Heaven. There belong unto this Constellation 6. Stars
(before time) unformed, but now brought into the Constellation of Antinous. But
whereupon that name should come, I know not, except it were that some man
devised it there to curry favor with the Emperor Adrian, who loved one
Antinous Bithynicus so well, that he builded a Temple in his honor at Mantinea.

17. DELPHINUS, the Dolphin: It contains 10. Stars; yet Ovid in his second
Book de Fastis, says that it has but nine. Neither did the ancient
Astronomers attribute unto it any more, according to the number of the Muses;
because of all other Fishes, the Dolphin is said to be delighted with Music.
The tale goes thus concerning this Constellation. When Neptune the God of the
Sea greatly desired to match with Amphitrite, she being very modest and
shame-faced, hid her self: whereupon he sent many messengers to seek her out,
among whom, the Dolphin by his good hap, did first find her; and persuaded her
also to match with Neptune: For which his good and trusty service, Neptune
placed him in the Heaven.

Others say, that when Bacchus had transformed the Mariners that would have
betrayed him, into Dolphins, he placed one of them in Heaven, that it might be
a lesson for others to take heed how they carried any one out of his way,
contrary both to his desire, and their own promise. Novidius refers this
Constellation unto the Fish which saved Jonas from drowning.

18. EQUICULUS, is the little Horse, and it consists of 4. Stars. This
Costellation is named almost of no Writer, saving Ptolomeus, and Alphonsus, who
follows Ptolomy, and therefore no certain tale or History is delivered
thereof, by what means it came into Heaven.

19. EquuS ALATHS, the Winged Horse, or Pegasus, it contains 20. Stars. This
Horse was bred of the blood of Medusa, after that Perseus had cut off her head,
and was afterward taken and tamed by Bellerophon, whiles he drank of the River
Piren^ by Corinth, and was used by him in the conquest of Chimera: After which
exploit, Bellerophon, being weary of the earthly affairs, endeavored to fly up
into Heaven: But being amazed in his flight, by looking down to the earth, he
fell from his horse; Pegasus notwithstanding continuing his course, (as they
feign) entered into Heaven, and there obtained a place among the other
Constellations.

20. ANDROMEDA, She consists of 23. Stars; but one of them is common both
unto her, and Pegasus, This was the daughter of Cepheus and Cassiopeia, and the
Wife of Perseus: the reason why Minerva, or Jupiter placed her in the Heavens,
is before expressed. Novidius refers this Constellation unto Alexandria the
Virgin, whom S. George through the good help of his horse, delivered from the
Dragon.

21. TRIANGULUM, the Triangle, called also Delt^ton, because it is like the
fourth letter of the Greeks Alphabet D, which they call Delta; it consists of
four stars. They say it was placed in Heaven by Mercury, that thereby the head
of the Ram might be the better known. Others say, that it was placed there in
honor of the Geometricians, among whom, the Triangle is of no small
importance. Others affirm, that Ceres in times past requested Jupiter that
there might be placed in Heaven some Figure representing the form of Sicilie,
an Island greatly beloved of Ceres, for the fruitfulness thereof: now this
Island being triangular, (at her request) was represented in the Heaven under
that form.

Thus much concerning the Constellations of the Northern Hemisphear. Now follow
the Poeical Stories of the Constellations of the Southern Hemisphear.

Secondly, Of the Southern Constellations.
1. CETUS, the Wha^^, it is also called the Lion, or Bear of the Sea. This is
that monstrous fish that should have devoured Andromeda, but being overcome by
Perseus, was afterward translated into Heaven by Jupiter, as well for a token
of Perseus his manhood, as for the hugeness of the fish it self. This
constellation consists of 22. Stars.

2. ORION, this has 38. Stars. The Poetical reason of his translation into the
Heaven, shall be shown in the Scorpion, amongst the Zodietical Constellations.
The Ancient Romans called this Constellation Jugala; because it is most
pestiferous unto Cattle, and as it were the very cutthroat of them. There are
bright Stars in his girdle, which we commonly call our Ladies yard, or wa^d.
Novidius, applying this sword of Orion unto Scripture, will have it to be the
sword of Saul, afterward called Paul, wherewith he persecuted the Members of
Christ: which after his conversion was placed in Heaven. In his left shoulder
there is a very bright Star, which in Latin is called Bellatrix, the Warrior,
in the foeminine gender. I cannot find the reason except it be this; that Women
born under this Constellation shall have mighty tongues. The reason of the
Ox-hide which he has in his hand, may be gathered out of the next story.

3. FLUVIUS, the River; it comprehends 34. Stars. It is called by some
Eridanus, or Padus; and they say that it was placed in Heaven in remembrance of
Phaeton, who having set the whole World on fire by reason of misguiding of his
father Phoebus his chariot, was slain by Jupiter with a thunderbolt, and
tumbling down from Heaven, fell into the River Eridanus, or Padus, which the
Italians call Po. Others say that it is Nylus, and that that Figure was placed
in the Heaven because of the excellency of that River, which by the Divines is
called Gihon; and is one of the Rivers of Paradise. Others call it Flumen
Orionis, the flood of Orion; and say, that it was placed there, to betoken the
Offspring from whence Orion came: for the tale is thus reported of him.

Jupiter, Neptune, and Mercury, traveling upon the earth in the likeness of
Men, were requested by Hyreus to take a poor lodging at his House for a Night:
they being overtaken with the evening, yielded unto his request; Hyreus made
them good cheer, killing an Ox for their better entertainment: The Gods seeing
the good heart of the old man, willed him to demand what he would in recompense
of his so friendly cheer. Hyreus and his Wife being old, requested the Gods to
gratify them with a Son. They to fulfill his desire, called for the hide of the
Ox that was slain, and having received it, they put it into the Earth, and made
water into it all three together, and covering it, willed Hyreus within ten
months after to dig it out of the Earth again; which he did, and found therein
a Man-child; whom he called Ourion, ab Urina, of piss; although afterward by
leaving out the second letter, he was named Orion. At such time therefore as he
was placed in Heaven, this flood was joined hard to his heels, and the Ox hide
wherein the Gods did piss, was set in his left hand, in memorial of his
Offspring.

4. LEPUS, the Hare, which consists of 12. stars. This Constellation was
placed in Heaven between the legs of Orion, to signify the great delight in
hunting which he had in his life time. But others think it was a frivolous
thing, to say that so notable a fellow as Orion would trouble himself with so
small and timorous a beast as the Hare: and therefore they tell the tale thus.

In times past there was not a Hare left in the Isle D^r^s: a certain youth
therefore of that Island, being very desirous of that kind of beast, brought
with him from another Country thereabout, an Hare great with young; which when
she had brought forth, they in time became so acceptable unto the other
Countrymen, that every one almost desired to have and keep a Hare. By reason
whereof, the number of them grew to be so great, within a short space after,
that the whole Island became full of Hares, so that their Masters were not able
to find them meat: whereupon the Hares breaking forth into the fields, devoured
their Corn. Wherefore the inhabitants being bitten with hunger, joined together
with one consent, and (though with much ado) destroyed the Hares. Jupiter
therefore placed this Constellation in the Heavens as well to express the
exceeding fearfulness of the beast, as also to teach men this lesson; that
there is nothing so much to be desired in this life, but that at one time or an
other it brings with it more grief then pleasure. Some say, that it was
placed in Heaven at the request of Ganimedes, who was greatly delighted with
hunting the Hare.

5. CANIS MAYOR, the Great Dog, it consists of 18. Stars. It is called Sirins
Canis, because he causes a mighty drought by reason of his heat. This is the
Constellation that gives the name unto the Canicular or Dog Days; whose
beginning and end is not alike in all places, but has a difference according
to the Country and Time: as in the Time of Hypocrates the Physician, who lived
before the time of Christ 400, years, the Canicular days began the 13. or 14.
of July. In the time of Avicenna, the Spaniard, who lived in the year of our
Lord 1100. the Canicular days began the 15, 16, or 17. of July. In our Country,
they begin about S. James-tide, but we use to account them from the 6. of July,
to the 17. of August; which is the time when the Sun begins to come near
unto, and to depart from this Costellation.

Novidius will have it to be referred to Tobias Dog; which may very well be,
because he has a tail; Tobias Dog had one; as a certain fellow once concluded,
because it is written that Tobias his Dog fawned upon his Master, therefore it
is to be noted (said he) that he had a tail. The Poets say, that this is the
Dog whom Jupiter set to keep Europa, after that he had stolen her away, and
conv^ied her into Crete, and for his good service was placed in Heaven. Others
say, that it was one of Orion his Dogs. There belong unto this Constellation
11. Stars unformed.

6. CANIS MINOR; the Lesser Dog; this of the Greeks is called Procyon, of the
Latins Ante Canis; it contains but two Stars. Some say, that this also was
one of Orions Dogs, Others rather affirm it to be Mera, the Dog of Origone, or
rather of Icarius her father, of whom mention is made in the Constellation of
Boots, and Virgo. This Dog of mere love to his Master, being slain, as is
aforesaid, threw him self into the River Anygrus, but was afterward translated
into Heaven with Origone. Among the Poets there is great dissension which of
the two should be the Dog of Origone; some saying one, and some the other, and
therefore they do many times take the one for the other.

7. ARGO NAVIS, the Ship Argo, which comprehends 41. Stars; this is the Ship
wherein Jason did fetch the Golden Fleece from Colchis, which was afterward
placed in Heaven as a memorial, not only because of the great Voyage, but also,
because (as some will have it) it was the first Ship wherein any man sailed.
Their reason why this Ship is not made whole is, that thereby men might be put
in mind not to despair, albeit that their Ship miscarry in some part now and
then. Some avouch it to be the Ark of Noe. Novidius says it is the Ship
wherein the Apostles were, when Christ appeared unto them walking on the Sea.
In one of the Oars of this Ship, there is a great Star, called Canopus, or
Canobus, which the Arabians called Shuel, as it were a bone-fire, because of
the greatness thereof. It is not seen in Italy, nor in any Country on this side
of Italy. Some say that Canobus the Master of Menelaus his Ship, was
transformed into this Star.

8. HYDRA, the Hydre; that has 25. Stars, and two unformed.

9. CRATER, the Cup, or standing piece; that has seven Stars. Some say that
this was the cup wherein Tagathon, that is, the chief God, mingled the stuff
whereof he made the souls of Men.

10. CORVUS, the Crow; this has seven Stars. These 3. Constellations are to be
joined together, because they depend upon one History, which is this. Upon a
time Apollo made a solemn feast to Jupiter, and wanting water to serve his
turn, he delivered a cup to the Crow (the bird wherein he chiefly delighted)
and sent him to fetch water therein: The Crow flying toward the River, espied
a Fig Tree, fell in hand with the Figs, and abode there till they were ripe: In
the end, when he had fed his fill of them, and had satisfied his longing, he
bethought himself of his errand, and by reason of his long delay, fearing a
check, he caught up a snake in his bill, brought it to Apollo, and told him
that the snake would not let him fill the Cup with water. Apollo seeing the
impudency of the bird gave him this gift, that as long as the Figs were not
ripe upon the Tree, so long he should never drink: and for a memorial of the
silly excuse that he made, he placed both the Crow, Cup, and Snake* in Heaven.

11. CENTAURUS, the Centaure, which comprehends 37. Stars. Some say, that
this is Typhon, others call him Chiron, the Schoolmaster of those three
excellent men, Hercules Achiles, and Aesculapius; unto Hercules he read
Astronomy, he trained up Achilles in Music, and Aesculapius in Physic: and
for his upright life he was turned into this Constellation. Yet Virgil calls
Sagit^arius by the name of Chiron. In the hinder feet of this Constellation,
those stars are set which are called the Crosiers, appearing to the Mariners as
they fail toward the South Sea, in the form of a cross, whereupon they have
their name. The four stars which are in the Garnish of the Centaures Spear, are
accounted by Proclus as a peculiar Constellation, and are called by him
Thyrsilochus, which was a Spear compassed about with vine leaves: but they are
called by Copernicus and Clavius, and other Astronomers, the stars of his
Target. It should seem that they were deceived by the old translation of
Ptolome, wherein Scutum is put for Hasta, i. e. the Target, for the Spear, as
it is well noted by our Countryman M. R. Record, in his Book entitled The
Castle of knowledge.

12 LUPUS, the Wolf, or the beast which the Centaure holds in his hand,
contains 19. stars; the Poetical reason is this, Chiron the Centaure being a
just man, was greatly given the worship of the Gods: for which thing, that it
might be notified to all posterity, they placed him by this beast, which he
seems to stick and thrust through with his Spear, (as it were) ready to kill
for sacrifice.

13. ARA, the Alter, it is also called Lar, or Thuribulum, i. e, a Chimney with
the fire, or a Censor. It consists of seven stars, and is affirmed of some
Poets, to be the Alter whereon the Centaure was wont to offer up his sacrifice.
But others tell the tale thus, When as the great Giants called the Tytans,
labored as much as might be to pull Jupiter out of Heaven, the Gods thought it
good to lay their heads together, to advise what was best to be done: Their
conclusion was, that they should all with one consent join hands together to
keep out such fellows: and that this their league might be confirmed, and
thoroughly ratified; they caused the Cyclops, (which were workmen of Vulcan) to
make them an Altar: about this Altar all the Gods assembled, and there swear,
that with one consent they would withstand their enemies; afterward, having
gotten the victory, it pleased them to place this Altar in Heaven, as a
memorial of their League, and a token of that good which unity does breed.

14. CORONA AUSTRINA, the South Garland, it has 13. Stars. Some say that it is
some trifling Garland which Sagittarius was wont to wear, but he cast it away
from him in jest, and therefore it was placed between his legs: others call it
the Wheel of I xion, whereupon he was tormented for that great courtesy he
would have offered unto Juno, thinking indeed to have gotten up her belly: but
Jupiter seeing the impudency of the man, tumbled him out of Heaven (where by
the license of the Gods he was sometime admitted as a guest) into Hell, there to
be continually tormented upon a Wheel. The Figure of which Wheel was afterward
placed in Heaven, to teach men to take heed how they be so saucie to make such
courteous proffers unto other men wives. The Greeks call this Constellation by
the name of Uraniscus, because of the Figure thereof: For it represents the
palate or roof of the mouth, which they call Uraniscus.

15. The last is PISCIS AUSTRINUS, or Notius, the South Fish, which
comprehends 11. Stars besides that which is in the mouth thereof, belonging
to the water, which runs from Aquarius, and is called by the Arabians
Fomahant. The reason why this Fish was placed in the Heaven, is uncertain: yet
some affirm, that the daughter of Venus going into a water to wash her self,
was suddenly transformed into a fish; the which fish was afterward translated
into Heaven. The unformed Stars belonging unto this Constellation are six.

Thus much concerning the Constellations of the Northern and Southern
Hemisphears; now follow the Poetical Stories of the Zodiatical Constellations.

Thirdly, Of the Zodietical Constellations:
1. ARIES, the Ram, it is called by the Greeks (...), it contains in it 13.
Stars, which were brought unto this Constellation by Thyestes, the son of
Pelops, and brother of Atreus. This is the Ram upon which Phrixus, and Hell
his sister, the children of Athamas did sit, when they fled from their
stepmother Ino, over the Sea of Hellespont: which Ram was afterward for his
good service, translated into Heaven by Jupiter. Others say, that it was that
Ram which brought Bacchus unto the spring of water, when through drought he was
likely to have perished in the desert of Lybia. Novidius will have this to be
the R^m which Abraham offered up in stead of his son Isaac. The Star tha^ is
first in the head of the Ram, is that from whence our ^ater Astronomers do
account the Longitude of all the rest, and it is distant from the head of
Aries, in the tenth Sphere, 27. degrees 53. minutes. The unformed Stars
belonging unto this Constellation, are five.

2. TAURUS, the Bull, which consists of 23. stars. This was translated into
Heaven in memorial of the rape committed by Jupiter on Europa the daughter of
Agenor, King of Sidon; whom Jupiter in the likeness of a white Bull stole away,
and transported into Candia. Others say, That it was (...) the daughter of
Inacus: whom Jupiter loved, and turned into the form of a Cow, to the intent
that Juno coming at unawares, should not perceive what a part he had played:
Jupiter afterward in memorial of that crafty conveyance, placed that Figure in
Heaven; The reason why the Poets name not certainly whether it be a Cow or a
Bull, is because it wants the hinder parts; yet of the most of them it is
called a Bull. In the Neck of the Bull there are certain stars standing
together in a cluster, which are commonly called the seven Stars; although
there can hardly he discerned any more then six. These are reported to be the
seven daughters of Atlas, called Atlan^iades, whereof six had company with the
immortal Gods, but the seventh (whose name was Merope) being married unto
Sysiphus a mortal man, did herefore withdraw and hide her self, as being
ashamed that she was not so fortunate in matching her self as her sisters were.
Some say, that that star which is wanting is Electra, the eldest daughter of
Atlas, and that therefore it is so dim, because she could not abide to behold
the destruction of Troy; but at that time and ever since, she hid her face. The
reason why they were taken up into Heaven, was, their great pity toward
their father, whose mishap they bewailed with continual tears. Others say, that
whereas they had vowed perpetual virginity, and were in danger to lose it, by
reason of Orion, who greatly assailed them, being overtaken, with their love;
they requested Jupiter to stand their friend; who translated them into stars,
and placed them in that part of Heaven. The Poets call them Pleiades, because
when they rise with the Sun, the Mariners may commit themselves to the Sea.
Others will have them to be so termed a pluendo; because they procure rain.
Others give them this name, of the Greek word (...), because they be many in
number. They be also called Vergiliae, because they rise with the Sun in the
Spring time: likewise Athoraiae, because they stand so thick together. Our
men^call them by the name of the seven Stars, or Brood Hen. The Astronomers
note this as a special thing concerning these stars, that when the Moon and
these stars do meet together, the eyes are not to be meddled withal, or cured
if they be sore: their reason is, because they be of the nature of Mars and the
Moon.

Moreover, there be five stars in the face of the Bull, representing the form
of the Roman letter V, whereof one (which is the greatest) is called the Bull's
Ey. They be called Hyades, and were also the daughters of Atlas, who so long
bewailed the death of Hyas their brother, slain by a Lion, that they died for
sorrow, and were afterward placed in Heaven for a memorial of that great love
they bare to their brother. The ancient Romans call the Bul's Ey, Parilicium,
or Palelicium; of Pales their goddess; whose feast they celebrated after the
conjunction of this star and the Sun. The unformed stars belonging unto this
Constellation, are eleven.

3. GEMINI, the Twins; it consists of 18. stars. The Poets say they are
Castor and Pollux, the sons of Leda, brethren most loving, whom therefore
Jupiter translated into Heaven. Some say that the one of them is Appollo, and
the other Hercules: but the most affirm the former. The unformed stars of this
Constellation are seven, whereof one is called Tropus, because it is placed
next before the foot of Castor.

4. CANCER, the Crab, it has 9. Stars. This is that Crab which bit Hercules by
the heel as he fought with the Serpent Hydra i^ the Fen Lerna, and for his
forward service, was placed in Heaven by Juno, the utter enemy of Hercules. In
this Constellation, there are Stars much spoken of by the Poets; although they
be but small; whereof one is called the Crib, other two are the two Asses,
whereof one was the Ass of Bacchus, the other of Vulcan, whereon they rode to
battle, when as the Giants made war with the Gods; with whose braying and
strange noise, the Giants were so scared upon the sudden, that they forsook the
field, and fled. The Gods getting the victory, in tryumphing manner translated
both the Asses, and their manger into Heaven. The unformed stars of this
Constellation are four. It is called animal re^rogradum, for when the Sun
comes into his Sign, he makes Retrogradation.

5. LEO, the Lion; it has 27. Stars, this is that Lion which Hercules overcame
in the wood of Nemaea and was placed in Heaven in remembrance of so notable a
deed. Novidius says, this was one of the Lions which were in the den into
which Daniel was cast, and was therefore placed in Heaven, because of all other
he was most friendly unto Daniel. In the breast of this Constellation is that
notable great Star, the light whereof is such, as that therefore it is called
by Astronomers (...) or Regulus i. e. the Victroy, or little King among the
rest. The unformed Stars belonging to the Lion are eight; whereof three make
the Constellation which is now called Coma Berenices, that is, the hair of
Berenice. This Constellation was first found out and invented, by Canon the
Mathematician, but described by Calimachus the Poet. The occasion of the Story
was this, P^olomeus Evergetes having married his sister Berenice, was shortly
after enforced to depart from her, by reason of the wars he had begun in Asia:
whereupon Berenice made this vow, that if he returned home again in safety, she
would offer up her hair in Venus Temple. P^olome returned safe; and Berenice,
according to her vow, cut off her hair and hung it up. After certain days, the
hair was not to be found; whereupon Ptolome the King was greatly displeased:
but Canon, to please the humor of the King, and to curry favor with him,
persuaded him that Venus had conveyed the hair into Heaven. Canon attributes
seven Stars unto it, but Ptolome allotteth it but three, because the other be
insensible,

6. VIRGO, the Virgin, it has 26. Stars. This is affirmed to be Justice, which
among all the Gods sometime living upon the Earth, did last of all forsake the
same, because of the wickedness that began to multiply therein, and chose this
place for her seat in Heaven.

Others say, that it was Astraea, the daughter of Astraeus, one of the Giants
that were called Titans, who fighting against the Gods, Aftraea took their
parts against her own Father, and was therefore after her death commended unto
the Heavens, and made one of the 12. Signs.

Others say, that it was Erigone, the daughter of Icarius, who for that her
father was slain by certain drunken men, for very grief thereof did hang her
self: but Jupiter taking pity of the Virgin for her natural affection,
translated her into Heaven.

In her right wing there is one Star of special note, which by the Astronomers
is called Vindemeator (i. e.) the gatherer of Graps. This was Ampelos the son
of a Satyr and a Nymph, and greatly beloved of Bacchus, unto whom in token of
his love, Bacchus gave a singular fair Vine, planted at the foot of an Elm,
(as the manner was in old time.) But Ampelos in Harvest gathering Graps, and
taking little heed to his footing, fell down out of the Vine, and brake his
neck. Bacchus in memorial of his former affection, translated him into Heaven,
and made him one of the principal Stars in this Constellation. There is another
great Star in the hand of the Virgin, called of the Latins Spica, of the
Greeks Stachus, of the Arabians Azimech (i. e.) the Ear of Corn: whereby they
signify, that when the Sun comes to this Sign, the Corn waxes ripe.
Albumazar the Arabian, and Novidius, take this Constellation for the Virgin
Mary. The unformed Stars in this Constellation, are six.

7. LIBRA, the Balance, it contains 8 Stars. Cicero calls it Jugum the
Yoke, and here it is to be noted, that the Ancient Astronomers that first set
down the number of the Constellations contained in the Zodiac, did account but
eleven therein, so that the Sign which now is called Libra, was heretofore
called (...), that is to say, the Claws of the Scorpion, which possesses the
space of two whole Signs. But the latter Astronomers, being desirous to have
12. Signs in the Zodiac, called those eight whereof the Claws of the Scorpion
do consist, by the name of Libra; not that there was any Poetical Fiction to
induce them thereto, but only moved by this reason, because the Sun joining
with this Constellation, the Day and the Night are of an equal length, and are
(as it were) equally poyzed in a pair of Balance. Yet (as I remember) some
will have this to be the Balance wherein Justice, called also Astraea, weighed
the deeds of mortal men, and therein presented them unto Jupiter. It has 9.
unformed Stars appertaining unto it.

8. SCORPIO, the Scorpion; called of the Arabians, Alatrab; of Cicero, Nepa. It
consists of 21, Stars. The Fiction is thus. Orion the son of Hyreus greatly
beloved of Diana, was wont to make his boast, that he was able to overcome what
beast soever was bred upon the Earth: The Earth being moved with this speech
brought forth the Scorpion, whereby Orion was stung to death. Jupiter thereupon
(at the request of the Earth,) translated both the Scorpion, and Orion into
Heaven; to make it a lesson for ever for mortal men, not to trust too much unto
their own strength* and to the end he might signify the great enmity between
them, he placed them so in the Heaven, that whenever the one arises, the
other sets; and they are never both of them seen together above the Horizon
at once: Gulielmus Postellus will have it to be the Serpent which beguiled Eve
in Paradise. The unformed Stars about this Scorpion are three.

9. SAGITTARIUS, the Archer. It has thirty one Stars. Touching this Sign,
there are among the Poets many and sundry opinions. Some say that it is Crocus,
the son of Puphen^, that was nurse unto the Muses. This Crocus was so forward
in learning of the liberal sciences, and in the practice of feats of activity,
that the Muses entreated Jupiter that he might have a place in Heaven. To whose
request Jupiter inclining, made him one of the 12. Signs: And to the end that
he might express the excellent qualities of the Man, he made his hinder parts
like unto a Horse, thereby to signify his singular knowledge in Horse-manship:
and by his Bow and Arrow, he declared the sharpness of his Wit. Whereupon the
Astrologers have this conceit, that he that is born under Sagittarius, shall
attain to the knowledge of many Arts, and be of prompt wit, and great courage.
Virgil affirms this to be Chiron the Centaur, who for his singular learning
and Justice, was made the Master of Achilles. At which time Hercules coming to
visit him (for he had heard both of the worthiness of the Schoolmaster, and of
the great hopes of the Scholar) brought with him his quiver of Arrows dipped
in the blood of the Serpent Hydra; but Chiron being desirous to see his shafts,
and not taking heed of them, being in his hand, let one of them fall upon his
foot, and being greatly tormented, not only by the anguish of the poison
working in the wound, but much more because he knew himself to be immortal, and
his wound not to be recovered by medicine, he was enforced to make request unto
the Gods, that he might be taken out of the World, who pitying his case, took
him up into Heaven, and made him one of the 12. Signs.

10. CAPRICORNUS, the Goat, it consists of 28. Stars. The Poets say, that
this was Pan, the God of the Shepherds, of whom they faign in this manner: The
Gods having war with the Giants, gathered themselves together into Egypt,
Typhon the Giant pursued them thither, whereby the Gods were brought into a
quandary, that well was he that by changing his shape might shift for himself,
Jupiter turned himself into a Ram: Apollo became a Crow: Bacchus, a Goat: Diana
lurked under the form of a Cat: Juno transformed her self into a Cow: Venus
into a Fish: Pan leaping into the River Nilus, turned the upper part of his
body into a Goat, and the lower part into a Fish. Jupiter wondering at his
strange device, would needs have that Image and Picture translated into Heaven,
and made one of the 12. Signs. In that the hinder part of this Sign is like a
Fish, it betokens that the latter part of the month wherein the Sun
possesses this Sign, inclines unto Rain,

11. AQUARIUS, the Waterman. It has 42. Stars, whereof some make the Figure of
the Man: other some the Waterpot; and some, the stream of water that runs
out of the pot. This is feigned to be Ganimedes the Trojan, the son of Oros,
and Callirhoe whom Jupiter did greatly love for his excellent favor and
beauty, and by the service of his Eagle carried him up into Heaven, where he
made him his Cup bearer, and called him Aquarius. Others notwithstanding think
it to be Deucallon the son of Prometheus whom the Gods translated into Heaven,
in remembrance of that mighty deluge which happned in his time, whereby mankind
was almost utterly taken away from the face of the earth. The unformed stars
belonging unto this Sign are three.

12. PISCES, the Fishes: these, together with the line that knitteth them
together, contain 24. Stars. The Poets say that Venus and Cupid her son coming
upon a certain time unto the River Euphrates, and sitting upon the bank
thereof, upon a sudden espied Typhon the Giant, that mighty and fearful enemy
of the Gods coming toward them; Upon whose sight, they being stricken with
exceeding fear, lept into the River, where they were received by two Fishes,
and by them saved from drowning. Venus for this good turn, translated them into
Heaven. Gulielmus Postellus would have them to be the two Fishes wherewith
Christ fed the 5000. men. The unformed stars of this Constellation, are four.

Thus have I briefly run over the Poetical reasons of the Constellations: It
remains now that I speak of the Milky way.

VIA LACTEA, or Circulus Lacteus; by the Latins so called; and by the Greeks
Galaxia; and by the English the Milkey way. It is a broad white Circle that is
seen in the Heaven, in the North Hemisphere, it begins at Cancer, on each
side the head thereof, and passes by Auriga, by Perseus, and Cassiopeia, the
Swan; and the head of Capricorn the tail of Scorpio, add the feet of Centaur,
Argo the Ship, and so unto the head of Cancer. Some in a sporting manner do
call it Wa^ling street; but why they call it so, I cannot tell; except it be in
regard of the narrowness that it seems to have; or else in respect of that
great high way that lies between Dover and S. Albons, which is called by our
men, Watling street.

Ovid says, that it is the great Causey, and the high way that leads unto
the Palace of Jupiter; but he alleges not the cause of the whiteness: belike
he would have us imagine that it is made of white Marble.

Others therefore allege these causes: Jupiter having begotten Mercury of
Mai^^ the daughter of Atlas, brought the child when he was born, to the breast
of Juno lying a sleep: But Juno awaking threw the child out of her lap, and
let the milk run out of her breast in such abundance that (spreading it self
about the Heaven) it made that Circle which we see. Others say, that it was not
Mercury, but Hercules; and that Juno did not let the milk run out of her
breast; but that Hercules sucked them so earnestly, that his mouth run over, and
so this Circle was made.

Others say; that Saturn being desirous to devour his children, his wife Ops
presented him with a stone wrapped in a clout, instead of his child: This stone
stuck so fast in Saturn his throat as he would have swallowed it, that without
doubt he had there-withall been choked, had he not been relived by his wife,
who by pressing the milk out of her breasts saved his life: the milk that
missed his mouth (whereof you must suppose some sufficient quantity) fell on
the Heavens, and running along made this Circle.

Dr HOOD Commenting upon Constellations, says; The Stars are brought into
Constellations, for Instruction sake, things cannot be taught without names: to
give a name to every Star had been troublesome to the Master and for the
Scholar; for the Master to devise, and for the Scholar; to remember: and
therefore the Astronomers have reduced many Stars into one Constellation, that
thereby they may tell the better where to seek them; and being sought, how to
express them. Now the Astonomers did bring them into these Figures, and not
into other, being moved thereto by these three reasons: first these Figures
express some properties of the Stars that are in them; as those of the Ram to
to be hot and dry; Andromeda chained betokens imprisonment, the head of
Medusa cut off signifies the loss of that part: Orion with his terrible and
threatening gesture, imports tempest and terrible effects: The Serpent, the
Scorpion, and the Dragon, signify poison: The Bull insinuates a melancholy
passion: The Bear infers cruelty, etc. Secondly, the Stars, (if not
precisely, yet after a sort) do represent such a Figure, and therefore that
Figure was assigned them: as for example, the Crown, both North and South: the
Scorpion, and the Triangle, represent the Figures which they have. The third
cause was the continuance of the memory of some notable men, who either in
regard of their singular pains taken in Astronomy, or in regard of some other
notable deed, had well deserved of Mankind.

The first author of every particular Constellation is uncertain; yet are they
of great antiquity; we receive them from Ptolomie, and he followed the
Platonick^; so that their antiquity is gre^a* Moreover we may perce^ve them to
be ancient by the Scriptures, and by the Poets. In the 38. Chapter of Job there
is mention made of the Pleiades, Orion, and Aucturus, and Mazzaroth, which some
interpret the 12. Signs: Job lived in the time of Abraham, as Syderocrates
makes mention in his Book de Commensurandis locorum distantiis.

Now besides all this, touching the reason of the invention o^ these
Constellations, the Poets in setting forth those Stories, (...) this purpose,
to make men fall in love with Astronomy: When Demosthenes could not get the
people of Athens to hear him in a matter of great moment, and profitable for
the Commonwealth, he began to tell them a tale of a fellow that sold an Ass;
by the which tale he so brought on the Athenians, that they were both willing
to hear his whole Oration, and to put in practice that whereunto he exhorted
them. The like intent had the Poets in these Stories: They saw that Astronomy
being for commodity singular in the life of man, was almost of all men utterly
neglected: Hereupon they began to set forth that Art under these Fictions; that
thereby such as could not be persuaded by commodity, might by the Pleasure be
induced to take a view of these matters, and thereby at length fall in love
them. For commonly note this, that he that is ready to read the Stories, cannot
content himself therewith, but desires also to know the Constellation, or at
leastwise some principal Star therein.

FINIS.
A Discourse OF THE Antiquity, Progress, AND Augmentation OF ASTRONOMY.
FIRST it seems not to be doubted, but Articl. I.
that there was some kind of observation of Bodies Celestial, as soon as
Observation Celestial, from the beginning of the world* though rude and
in-artificial.
there were Men: considering that the spectacle which the Heavens constantly
present, is both so glorious, and so useful, that men could not have eyes to
see, and not fix them attentively and considerately thereupon. For, among other
Apparences, when they saw the Sun daily to change the places of its rising and
setting; at certain times of the Year: to approach nearer to the Earth in its
Diurnal arch, and at others again to mount up to a height much more sublime and
remote from it: and that his coming nearer to the Earth made Winter, and his
remove higher made Summer: we say, when they beheld these things; doubtless,
they could not but seriously remark and consider this vicissitude, according to
which they might expect the Season would be more hard, or mild, to them in this
lower Region of the World. Again, so admirably various did the Moon appear, in
her several shapes and dresses of light, that she could not but invite men's
eyes, and engage them to frequent Speculations: specially when she assumed
those various faces or apparences, at set and certain Times; in respect whereof
it came to pass, that every Nation measured their times and Seasons, by those
her constant and periodical circuits; and this, because those periods succeeded
much more frequently, than the Erections and Depressions of the Sun. To these,
we may add that beautiful show of the Nightly Stars, undergoing likewise their
Variations, according the variety of Seasons; and more particularly that bright
star of Lucifer, rising sometimes later, sometimes earlier, and sometimes not
at all before the Sun, and the like. But, what we shall principally note, is
only this; that though Mankind was long, before they came to make inquiries
into the Causes of these Celestial changes and variations, restrained to set
periods: yet they observed them from the very first Age, and not only admired,
but also accommodated what they observed, to the uses of their Lives and their
Successors. Here it might not be fruitless, to remember, that PROMETHEUS, who
was imagined to have framed the first Man, was also imagined to have given him
an erected Figure, and sublime Countenance; to the end he might the more
advantageously advance his eyes to the Heavens, and contemplate the glory and
motions of the Celestial Lights. But, because this is too General, and rude a
way of observation; and it is our business to look back into those times
wherein men first made such Observations of Sydereral bodies, as gave hem the
hint and occasion of reducing them to Method, and founding the principles of
the Art, or science of Astronomy, thereupon: we must have recourse to the
monuments in Sacred Writ, for the understanding of that obscure matter.

And indeed, the light we expect from Sacred Leaves, would Articl. II. Sacred
records examined, and Moses found to b the First Astronomer there spoken of.
soon be clear enough to discuss all the darkness, wherein the Original of
Astronomy seems involved; could we but from them deduce the least evidence for
that which the learned Antiquarie among the Jews, Josephus affirms of the Sons
of Seth; viz. that they invented the science of the Heavens, before the Flood,
and engraved the same on two Pillars, the one of Brick, the other lib. 1. Ant.
c. 3.
of Stone, that so it might be preserved in the one, in case the fury of the
Deiuge to come, should demolish and deface the other: or if there remained to
us any the most slender testimony of the Reason he there gives, of the so great
Longevity of men in those cap. 4.
days; namely, that the duration of their lives was sufficiently long, to
perfect the knowledge of Astronomy, which requires full 600 Years, at the
least, to the observation of all the Varieties of Celestial motions: Whereupon
He notes, that the Great Year (as they call it) does consist of six hundred
common Years; the vulgar opinion being, that the Celestial Motions do
continually vary,

Donec consumpto, Magnus qui dicitur, Anno, Epigram. de etat, Anim.

Rursus in(...) antiquum redeant vaga sidera cursum,
Qualia praeteriti steterant ab origin mundi.
Again, the business might be deduced from not long after the Flood, if in
Scripture we could find but the least word from whence might be argued the
truth of what the same Author writes; namely that the Egyptians were taught
Astronomy, by Abraham. Probable enough it is, we confess, that Berosus and
others, quoted as well by Josephus, as Eusebius, had read some such thing in
some Books of the old Rabbis: but that the same should be fetched from Holy
Writ, is most improbable, therein being no mention at all of any such thing.
Besides, there are pious and learned Doctors, and among them Salianus, who will
not allow it to be so much as probable, that Abraham should instruct the
Egyptians in Astronomy: because of the very small time of his stay among them in
Egypt. It is written indeed, that Abraham came from Ur of the Chaldeans: but
not that he received Genesis 11.
Astronomy from the Chaldeans, or that he delivered it from them to the
Egyptians. And therefore they conclude, that what Josephus said of Abraham's
reading Astronomy in Egypt, may with more probability be imputed to his
Great-grand child, Joseph. Concerning Him, therefore, we read (in truth) that
he was singularly favorable to the Priests in Egypt, at such time, as all the
rest of the people mortgaged their lands to the King, for bread, during that
woeful and long Famine. For, He excepted the Lands belonging to the Priesthood,
and (as the Text says) assigned them certain portions out of the public
Granaries; Genesis 47.
so that from hence may be proved (what Aristotel tells us, from other
Authority) that amongst the Egyptians, the most ancient Nation, the Priests
were exempted from labor, and left to 1. Polit. cap. and 1 Metaph. cap. 1.
the easy imploiment of their minds: and that this gave them occasion to invent
and constitute the Mathematiques: and yet for all this, it is not written,
either that Joseph taught those Egyptian Priests the Mathematiques, or that
they taught them to him. And, perhaps that Favor He showed the Priests, was an
argument not only of the Respect and Veneration, born them by the King and all
his people; but also of his particular Gratitude toward them; in that He, who
had been bred up only to Sheppardry and Country employments, and was wholly
ignorant of all Arts and Sciences, at his first coming among them being
afterward advanced to the height of a Courtier, and luster of a Favorite, had
bin instructed by them in something more noble and sublime. And truly, the
Divine Moses, not long after admitted into the same Court, is not delivered so
much to have erudited any others, as to have been himself learned in all the
Wisdom of the Egyptians. Nevertheless, considering that this Wisdom of the
Egyptians, Act. ^7
doubtless contained the Mathematiques; and that Astronomy was ever esteemed
the best and noblest part of them: this Erud^tion of Moses seems to be the most
Ancient monument of the Science of the Stars, that can be found in Holy Writ.

Astronomy, you see, is of great Antiquity, even upon the Records of Divinity;
and might be proved of much greater, could we but evince (what some allege)
that the History of Job was penned by Moses, as living a good while after him.
Because Job there mentions Arcturus, Orion, and the Hyades, or watery
Constellation: and therefore it must be, that before Cap. 9.
that time the Stars had been ranged and dispossed into certain Asterisms
according to some certain method or artificial Theory then in use. But, be the
time of his life never so uncertain, yet we may certainly observe from the
History thereof; that it seems Job, being an Alien to the Hebrews, derived his
knowledge of God from that which in Scripture is called, Coelorum Exercitus,
the Host of Heaven. Forasmuch, as the Invisible things of God are not so well
learned from any visible things of Nature, or the effects of his Wisdom and
Power, as from the Celestial Orders and therefore Synesius justly calling
Astronomy [(...)] a truly-venerable Science; he says, that it advances de
done ad Poeon.
the mind to something of greater both Antiquity and Nobility, viz. ineffable
Theology. That we may be breef, and only touch upon that sentence in the Book
of Wisdom that God gave to Solomon, among other of Natural Science, to
understand the cap. 7.
Course of the Year and the Dispositions of the Stars: if any thing in Sacred
Writ does expressly prove the Antiquity of Observations Astronomical, and the
founding or erecting any settled Art thereupon; it must be that, of which the
Holy Prophets complaind Esa. 47.
in their days; viz. that there were Chaldaeans, who at Babylon, did
contemplate the Stars, and compute the Months, that from them they might
foretell things to come. For, from hence we understand, that the observation of
the Motions of Heavenly bodies was a certain professed Art; and of great
Antiquity, among the Chaldeans.

In the Second place, we are to revolve the Records of Ethnic Articl, 3.
Ethnic monuments likewise revolved; and first those of Fabulous times:
according to which Coelus is found the most ancient Astronomer: lib. 3.
Authors, to see if among them we can find the time of the Nativity of
Astronomy.

Look we therefore back, first, into the remains of that part of Time, which is
called Obscure, or Fabulous; because possibly enough something of truth,
concerning our enquiry, may be found wrapped up in the darksome shrouds of
Fables. And begin we at the most ancient of Heathen Gods, Coelus, in Greek
(...) who, as Diodorus Siculus delivers, was so named, because of his high
devotion to, and delight in the observation of the Stars. This eminent person
being the Father of many Sons as Ailas, Saturnus, the Titanes, and among those
especially Hyperion and Japetus; it is lawful for us to conjecture, that led
by his example, his whole family were addicted to the same Study, For seeing,
that Coelus lived in Mauritania, not and after him his Senns. 1. Atlas, who
taught Astromy to his Son.
far from the Ocean; and thence extended his Kingdom not only over all Africa,
but also into a considerable part of Europe: it is well known that his Son
Atlas, who succeeded him in the same Dominions, is allowed to have given his
name to the highest Mountain of that Country; only because he had made his
observations of the motions of the Heavens and Stars, from the top thereof.
For, the Ancients in those days, as the vulgar now in ours, imagined the arch
of the Heavens to be so little distant from the tops of great Mountains; as
that by how much the higher any man ascended on those hills, by so much the
more clearly and distinctly might he behold Celestial objects. To this,
Diodorus, Pliny, and others add; that Atlas lib. 3. lib. 2. cap. 8.
was feigned to support Heaven on his Shoulders, only because He had framed a
Sphere, wherein the whole Heavenly machine was strongly represented: and
Clemens Alexandrinus observes, Astrom. 1.
that Hercules, being both Vates and Physicus, a Prophet and Philosopher, was
reported to come and relieve Atlas (his great Uncle) by taking the vast Burden
of Heaven upon his own Shoulders; because He succeeded him in that difficult
task the Study, or science of Celestial bodies. Of Hesperus, the Son
Hisperus.
of Atlas, it is recorded, that while he was busy in speculating the Stars, on
the top of the same mountain, he was snatched away by the violence of some
disease, and could never be found: and that thereupon, the common people, in
respect of his piety and justice, gave his name to the most beautiful and
resplendent Star, which is also called Vesperugo, being Venus, while she is in
the West. As for his Sisters, called both Atlantiades, and And Daughters, the
Atlantides and Pleiades, from one of whom came Mercury. 1. Astron.
Pleiades; these likewise gave their name to that glomeration of Stars, which
are visible in the back of Taurus: and of one of them, named Maia, was born the
Famous Mercurius, said to have brought the Science of the Stars first into
Egypt. Whence Marcilius, writing of the Astronomy of the Egyptians, Says of
Mercury Tu Princeps, Authorque, sacri, Cyllenie, tanti. etc.


Though we well know, that the Ethiopians, allowing the Egyptians to be no
other, but one of their Colonies, sent abroad to find room to subsist in,
contend; that they recieved Astronomy from them: as first Diodorus, and after
Lucian have observed. lib. 3. lib. de Astrol. 5. Tusculan.
Here it is well worthy our commemoration, what Cicero says, as of Atlas and
Promotheus, so also Cepheus, a King of the Ethiopians: viz. Neither had Atlas
been believed to have sustained Heaven, nor Prometheus to have been chained on
Caucasus: nor Cepheus with his Wife, Son-in Law, and Daughter, to have been
Stellified: had not their Divine cognition of Celestial bodies first
occasioned the perpetuation of their Names in the disguise of Fables.

To return to Saturn, another Son of Coelus; He, leaving 2. Saturn, who
delivered the same to his Son.
Africa, and reigning only in Italy, Sicily and Crete; may be thought to have
prosecuted his Fathers studies, no less than the former: and we have this
argument for it, that the Slowest of all the Planets bears his name, to this
very Day; probably, bacause he was the first, who understood the motion and
course of that Planet, which was by the Greeks called (...) from (...) Time,
forasmuch as of all the Celestial Circuits none was found so diuturn. And of
his Sons, since Pluto addicted himself intierly to Husbandry, Neptune to
Navigation; we may conceive, that Jupiter, applying his mind to nobler cares,
succeeded his Father in the Study of the Heavens: as also that he chose Jupiter.
Olympus, accounted the highest mountain, to make his observations upon: so
that in process of time, he came therefore to be called Olympius; and the name
of that mountain to be transferred upon Heaven it self; whose orders and laws
He well understanding, was thereupon said to have the Dominion of Heaven.
Certain it is, that the Grecians ascribed the Original of this noblest Science,
partly to the Gods themselves, and partly to ancient Hero's: which Achilles
Tatius seasonably alluding Isagog. ad Phoen.
unto, introduces old Aeschylus attributing to God, that He showed the risings
and settings of the Stars, and distinguished Winter, Summer, and the other
Seasons; and Ovid Fathers the same wholly upon Jupiter. Perque Hiemes,
Aestusque, and in aequales Autumnos, 1. Metamorph.

Et breve Ver, spatijs exegit quatuor Annum.


Besides, it is in the Fiction, that Jupiter took his Father, Saturn, bound
him, and precipitated him into Hell. Now this seems to intimate, that Jupiter
having imposed his own name upon one of the most eminent and illustrious of the
Planets, gave that of his Father to another of them, that was more remote,
situate in the deepest part of the Aetherial spaces, and of the slowest
progress: though all this while we are not ignorant, that those names were
fixed upon those Planets a long time after: since more anciently the Planet
Jupiter was called Phaeton, and that of Saturn, Phoenon. For, we may collect
very near as much from Lucian, who by Tartarus understands the immense
Altitude, or Profunditie of the Aetherial Region: and so denies that Saturn was
either exiled by Jupiter into Hell, or cast into bonds; as common heads were
persuaded to believe.

As for Hyperion; Diodorus has a tradition, that he being 3. Hyperion.
of the progeny of old Coelus, demonstrated the courses of the Sun and Moon:
and therefore called the Sun, Helios, after the name of his Son; and the
Moon, Selene, after that of his Daughter.

Last of all comes Japetus, who also was the Son of Coelus, 4. Japetus: from
whom came Prometheus, who followed the same study. in Eccles. 7.
but performed nothing worthy commendation in the advance of his Fathers
Speculations: but Promotheus, whom he begat, was therefore imagined to have
been chained on the hill Caueasus, and to have his heart perpetually torn by a
hungry Eagle or Vultur; Because (as Servius expounds the riddle) with restless
care, and solicitude of mind, he constantly excruciated himself with observing
the Stars, and studying their Ascensions and Declinations. We shall not insist
upon what follows in the same Author, namely that this Prometheus was the
first, who introduced Astrology to the Assyrians (not far from Caucasus:) it
being more useful for us now to observe, that He was imagined to have stolen
Fire from Heaven, for the inanimation of Man, for no other reason, but because
he infused this Heavenfetch't Knowledge into the breasts of men, and inflamed
their souls with the desire and love thereof. For, as to the remainder; for as
much as Belus was the same with Jupiter, among the Assyrians, as Diodorus
testifies: it is He rather, who was accounted both the most sacred of their
Dieties, and the Inventor lib. 2. lib. 37, o. 10.
of this Sideral Science; as Pliny affirms.

It is not needful for us here to examine many other of the ancient
Traditions, accounted likewise among the Fabulous; as, in so did Phaeton,
particular, the Fable of Phaeton, which has this Mythology, that in his life
time he had made a considerable progress toward the discovery of the Suns
Annual course; but dying immaturely, he left the Theory thereof imperfect. That
other of Bellerophon, whom Interpreters maintain to have been carried up to
Heaven, not by a flying horse, but a studious and contemplative mind, eager in
the the quest of Syderal mysteries. That of Doedalas, who indeed, by Doedalus,
Icarus,
the same towering speculations, as by the artifice of wings mounted up to the
Northern part of Heaven; while his less ingenious Son, Icarus, falling short
in his attempt of imitating his Fathers sublime flight (as not so well
understanding the demonstrations of the reasons of his Theory) flaggd very low
in his Studies: and fell from the true and apodicticall cognition of Celestial
motions and vicissitudes: with many other the like, recounted by Lucian; as
that of Endymion, the favorite of the Moon; of Tiresias, the Prophet, etc. Yet
one thing there is, de Astrol. in Isagog.
mentioned as well by Lucian, as Tatius; which we cannot well pass by; which
falling under the account of Heroical times, seems to come somewhat near to
that which is called Historical. And that is the notable Centention that arose
betwixt Atreus Atreus and Thyestes.
and Thyestes about supreme dominion. For when by the public Consent and Vote
of the Argives, the Kingdom was to be his of the two, who should give the most
eminent testimony of Science: it came to Atreus share to be King: because,
though Thyestes showed them the sign Aries, in Heaven (for which he was
honored with a golden Ram) yet had Aireus declared a thing more excellent:
while discoursing about the variety of the Suns rising, he made it appear, that
the Sun and the World (i. e. the Starry Orb) were not carried the same, but
quite contrary ways; and consequently, that that part of the Heavens which was
the West or Occident of the Starry Orb, was the very rising, or Orient of the
Solary. Hence that verse of Euripides, (...)
Qui Astrorum enim contrariam ostendi viam.


To the same times likewise are we to refer the Institution of Hercules and
Iphitus.
the Olympic Games, by Hercules; which after a long interruption were renewed
by Iphitus. For, inasmuch as those sports cap. 18.
were instituted for no other end (as may be assured from Censorius) but that
their celebration might put men in mind of that Intercalation of a month and
half, that was to be made constantly every fourth Year, in respect of those
four times eleven, or 44. Days, by which the mo^ion of the Moon anticipated
that of the Sun; and the four times six hours, or one whole Day, by which the
circuit of the Sun exceded 365 Days: manifest it is, that Hercules could not
understand this, without having first exactly observed the Motions of Sun and
Moon. Hither also belongs that which is reported of Orpheus, who must Orpheus.
needs have attentively observed the seven Planets, if it be true, as Lucian
averrs, that he represented their Harmony by his Sevenstringed de Ast^ol
Harp: which the Grecians thereupon designed in Heaven, by some Stars, that to
this Day retain the name of Lyra. So likewise does what Sophocles says of
Palamedes, Palamedes.
who pointed out the several Asterisms, and particularly (...)
Vrsum volutam, gel^dum and occasum Canis.


And lastly, what Homer recounts, that in those times were well known (besides
Boots and the Bear, or Wain) Homer.
(...). Odyss. E.

Pleiades, atque Hyades, roburque ipsum Orionis.


We have now struggled through the Darkness of Fabulous Times, and are advanced
as far as to discern the twilight of Articl. 4.
Historical. An here, the first thing we clearly perceive, is that Secondly,
those Historical times; according to which the antiquity of Astron.
Observations belongs either to the Egyptians, or Babylonians.
the whole controversy about the Antiquity of Astronomical Observations, lies
betwixt the Egyptians and the Assirians, or Babylonians. For, as to the
Grecians, though some have thought they might put in also for a claim to the
honor of being the Anthors of this admirable Science; yet by the Verdict even
of Plato himself, they are to lay by the presence of Competition, For, says
He, the first who made Syderal inspections, was a Barbarian; a more ancient
Nation than ours bred those men, in Epinom.
who first devoted their minds to that Study, in respect of the Summer-like
serenity and perspicuity of the Air, such as Egypt enjoyes, and Syria, where
all the Stars are, clearly visible and no Clouds or Mists to obscure the
beautiful face of Heaven. And certainly, if we except what we newly mentioned,
the Institution of the Olympic Games by Hercules, and the restoration of them
after some Intermission, by Iphytus, which happened about 800. Years before
Christ; and some places in the writings of Homer, and more especially of
Hesiod, who lived near upon the same time, or not long before; we shall find
that the Grecians can produce no Monuments of their Observations of the
Heavens, more ancient than those of Thales, who flourisht, full 600. Years
before Christ; and who yet borrowed his knowledge of Aetherial Matters from
Egypt. It being manifest therefore, that the Egyptians, or their Priests, are
the only men, that ought to be admitted to a Dispute with the Assirians or
Babylonians, or their Philosophers, concerning the Antiquity of Observations;
and that their several Pleas seem equally reasonable. Truly, it is no easy
matter to determine the difference, so as to place the Laurel on their heads
to whom it does of right belong. For, albeit Josephus assigns the Honor to
the Chaldaeans, and 1. Antiq. 8.
others again stand firmly for the Egyptians: yet Plato, Diodorus, in Epinom.
2. lib. de Astrolog. Isagog.
Lucian, Achilles Tatius, and others allege such quotations for each party,
as seem to have no other, but the authority of the parties themselves. Nor
ought that to seem strange; since both sides equally allege the convenience
of their vast Companies, and the serenity of the sky; since they both boast
themselves the Original Nation and allow their Competitors to be only Colonies;
since both glory in fabulous beginnings, which we cannot trace or discuss; and
both recur to egregious falsehoods about the time when their Ancestors first
made Celestial Scrutenies. For, the Chaldaeans (as we find on the Register of
Diodorus) affirm, that their Nation applied themselves to loc. citat.
these Studies, from times of incredible Antiquity viz. of four hundred and
three thousand Years: And the Egyptians (as Cicero de Divi^at.
observes) talk of Observations of four hundred thousand and seventy Years
standing. Unless you shall please to consigne the Victory to the Egyptians,
because they put a value only themselves by Auction. As if it were not enough
for them to boast those four hundred nine thousand Years (mentioned by
Laertius) in which from the time of V^lcan, the Son of Nilus, to that of
Alexander of Macedon, there happened of Eclipses of the Sun in praefat.
three hundred seventy three, and of the Moon eight hundred thirty two. These
considerations premised, we cannot indeed deny, but the Egyptians had some
Observations, some ages before Thales and other Grecians traveled among them:
but, when we would enquire more precisely into the time, when those
Observations first begun; we find our selves at a loss, and brought back again
into the cimmerian obsurity of Fabulous Times.

Now forasmusch as, though Pliny writes, that Epigenes found lib. 9. c. 56.
no Observations among the Babylonians of above seven hundred and twenty Years
antiquity, and those engraven on artificial Tyles or Slates; and the most
ancient Eclipses deduced from them, were transmitted to Ptolomy, about the same
Number of Years before in Almagest. lib. 4. cap 6.
Christ: and that by the great Hipparchus. And to the same Time belongs what
Berosus and Critodemus say, that in their Days, there were extant no
Observations of more than four hundred and thirty Years as may be found also in
Pliny: forasmuch, we say, as we have brought some considerable Monuments of
Observations much elder than that time; yet shall not concede beyond what the
Chaldeans themselves professed, when they testified to Callisthenes (who went to
them upon no other errand, by the persuasion of Aristotel, as Simplicius
relates) that they had in lib. 2. de Coe lo, and comment. 46.
nothing of that kind among them beyond a thousand nine hundred and Three Years
past: which Years seem to commense at Ninus, the Son of Belus, and first King
of the Assyrians. It is clear, that the Antiquity of Observations arises to
(but not above) one thousand and ninety Years before Alexander the Great.

But, alas! after all this great ado, What did the Observations Articl. 5. Yet
neither of of them observed any thing considerable; at to the designation of
Times: but corrupted what they had observed, to the introduction of Astrology
Judicial.
themselves amount to? Why truly, for ought we can gather from all that is
extant concerning them, those of the Egyptians amounted to nothing at all: and
those of the Chaldeans to very little. For the Egyptians, we confess, are said
to have observed the rising of the Dog Star, and some other, no very difficult
apparences: but we have no remains delivered down to us, of that or any other
particular they observed, with the exact designation of the Time, as they
ought. And from the Chaldaeans we have as little, besides those Eclipses
mentioned in Ptolomy. But, when I speak of the Egyptians, I except Ptolomy
himself and some others, who lived and studied at Alexandria, about there
hundred Years before the Nativity of our Savior; or after Alexander: as
Timocharis, Eratosthenes, Hipparchus: for all these were either Grecians, or to
be accounted among Grecians, in respect of the language they used and wrote in,
rather than among the ancient Egyptians, by whose Inventions even Ptolomy
himself (one of their own Country men, without dispute) was very little, or
nothing at all assisted in his Study of Astronomy. But, what concerns as well
the Egyptians, as Chaldeans; their Observations are to be distinguished
(according to the division vulgarly received into (1.) Astronomical, and (2)
Astrological: the former relating to the Motions, Magnitudes, Distances, and
proportion of the Stars; the Latter to the Effects of them, which they
conjectured were dependent on the Virtues and Influences of Heavenly Bodies,
as well in the affections of the Air, as in the actions and affairs of Mankind.
For, both Nations being wonderfully prone to Supersttition, and surprised with
excess of Admiration at the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, when they first
beheld them; and observing ever now and then some Stars that moved in Courses
contrary to the West, they began presently to think, that those apparences
happened not without natural Causes; and that it remained only on Man's part, to
Study how those events might come to be fore-known, which those apparences did
portend. Hereupon, having attributed the most powerful Virtue to the five
wandering Stars (as Diodorus loc. citat.
testifies particularly of the Chaldaeans) as understanding them to be the
Proclaimers of the will and purposes of the Gods; because they sometimes arose,
and sometimes set in various places of the Heavens; because they varied their
magnitude and color: therefore they conceived, that they ought to adress their
Studies and Disquisitions principally to these varieties. And, because they
imagined, that the higher the place was, from whence they should observe these
Wandering Stars, the more clearly and distinctly might they be discerned; they
builded Structures of vast altitude; and particularly that immense Tower at
Babylon, described by Herodotus, from the highest area whereof (where lib. 1.
stood also the Temple of Belus) they might exactly behold and observe the
rising and setting of the Stars, and other Syderal occurrences They took notice
likewise, that those five Planets did keep almost the same Course, as the Sun
and Moon; and thereupon they pointed out the Zodiac, imagining that there must
be some eminent virtue in that part of the Heavens, because all the Planets
kept constantly to it. And this Zodiac they divided into 12. parts, or Signs;
because the Moon run it over 12. times, and the Sun only once, in one Year: and
according to the number of the Days, during which the Sun was in passing
through one Sign, they distinguished each Sign again into 30. parts, which we
call Degrees. I shall not recount to you, how they would have Twelve Principal
Dieties belonging to these 12. Signs, whereof each had his particular regiment
over his proper Sign and Month dependent thereupon: nor how they substituted
thirty of the fixed Stars, to assist the Planets, and called them Concelling
Gods: nor how they placed 12. Stars always visible in the North, for government
of the Living; and as many more in the South, always visible, for the
government of the Dead, there gathered together; with many other the like
dreams and ridiculous absurdities. But the thing I think most worthy your
notice, is, by what rude kind of artifice they distinguished the Zodiac into
12. Signs; as we find it described, concerning the Chaldaeans, by Sextus
Empiricus, ad Astrolog. 1. in Somn. 21.
and concerning the Egyptians, by Macrobius.

The manner this. They took a vessel with a small hole in the bottom, and
filling it with Water, suffered the same to distill Drop by Drop into another
Vessel, placed beneath to receive it; and this from the moment of the rising
of some one Star or other, observed in one Night, until the Moment of its
rising again the next Night following. The Water fallen down into the Receiver,
they divided into ^2. equal parts, and having two other smaller vessels in
readiness each of them fit to contain one twelfth part of the Water, they again
poured all the Water into the upper Vessel, and strictly marking the rising of
some one Star in the Zodiac, they at the same Moment gave the Water leave to
distill into one of the smaller Vessels, and so soon as that was filled,
observing likewise another rising Star, they put under another small Vessel;
and so alternately shifting the small vessels, they noted, if not in one Night,
yet in many, the twelve Stars, by which they might discriminate the whole
Zodiac into twelve equal parts. Now with what Art and exactness these Ancients
measured out the Heavens, may be conjectured from this one example. I might
adferr another foppery of the Chaldaeans, from the same Empiricus, who relates;
that taking it for granted, that the future fortunes of Men did depend on their
particular Horoscope, or Sign rising at their Birth, when they had a mind to
divine in this Kind; Two of their wise men agreed together in the calculation
of the Nativity of the Person proposed: the one stood by the Mother in Travel,
the other on some high place near at hand; and as he that was below gave the
Sign, that the Infant was then newly come into the World, the other above took
care to observe the Sign, that was just then newly risen. ibid. cap. 20.
But, it will be of more use for us to hear what Macrobius tells of the
Egyptians. They, when they would know the Diameter of the Sun, had in readiness
a Vessel of Stone, hollowed to the form of an Hemisphere, exactly made, with a
style or Gnomen erected in the middle, and twelve Horary Lines drawn within.
And on the very Day of the Equinox, observing the Moment, when the upper Limbus
of the Sun first showed it self above the Horizon; they marked that place on
the brim of the Vessel, on which the Gnomen cast its shadow. Then again marking
that place on which the shadow ended, when the lower Limbus of the Suns body
appeared just above the edge of the Horizon; they measured the space or
distance betwixt the two marks of the Shadows, and found it to be the ninth
part of an hour, or the hundred and eight part of the Hemisphere, and
consequently the two hundred and sixteenth part of the whole Circuit: and from
thence they deduced, that the Diameter of the Sun was the two hundredth and
sixteenth part of its whole Orb; (which, in truth, is the 700th near upon) or
did contain one Degree and an hundred Minutes; which yet is no more than half
a degree, or 31. Minutes, at most. To this we might super-ad, that it was the
practice of elder times, to commensurate the Diameter of the Sun by an
Hydrologie, or Vessel of Water; collecting the same from part of the Water
flowing down the whole Day, which had dropped until the Sun was wholly risen;
as is insinuated by Plutarch, and deduced from Capella: but Cleomedes has at
large declared, that this way of measuring by Water falling slowly and equally
from Vessel to Vessel, was an Invention of the Egyptians. Now the reason, why
we touch upon these particulars, was only to satisfy, that (as we said before)
no great matter in Astronomy was ever observed either by the Egyptians, or by
the Babylonians.

And, if you desire any further Argument thereof; Pray take this. They were
very far from suspecting that the Fixed Stars had any motion proper to
themselves; or that they had any Eccentricity (excepting only that the
Egyptians thought Venus and Mercury to move round about the Sun, as their
center; as is affirmed by Macrobius, and some others) or that the Sun had any
Apogaeum at all, with many other Particulars fully as considerable. Which
doubtless must be the reason, why they invented no Hypotheses, by which they
might regulate themselves, in making their Caluclations of the various motions
of the heavenly bodies. And Peter Ramus not long since complaind, that we have
not our Astronomy free from the trouble of Hypotheses; such as the Interpreters
of Aristotel themselves, and Proclus on Timaeus have recorded the Egyptians and
Babylonians to have had amongst them: while, incroth, he complaind, that we had
not our Astronomy as rude wild and imperfect, as theirs was. For, however some
Hypotheses are more simple (and so more easy) than other-some: yet it is
absolutely impossible, that Astronomy should consist without some or other.
Hereupon, they could observe, indeed, that the Planets were one while Direct in
their Progress, another while Retrogarde, and then again Stationary; that they
in their wanderings sometimes inclined toward the North, and sometimes
deflected again toward the South: but all that while, they could neither
comprehended the reasons of those various apparences, nor calculate them by
numbers. The most they could do, was darkly to represent those motions, by
certain Hieroglyphics, as in particular by the windings and flexures of
Serpents; and the motion of the Sun, by only a Beetle rolling his pill of dung
backward: as we may read in Clemens Alexandrinus: and then came Eudoxus, who
having learned that variety of motions among them, was the first who invented
Hypotheses of various Orbs, for the Solution of the Phenomena.

Again, they were very far from attaining the determinate places of the Fixed
Stars, according to Longitude and Latitude; or according to their Right
Ascension, and Declination: so that neither could they define the true places
of the Planets, by Comparation to the Fixed Stars, nor (consequently) design
any Observations with due exactness. And truly, this was the Cause why
Hipparchus met with no Observations, either of the Egyptians or Babylonians, by
which he could receive the least help or advantage, toward his composing either
Hypotheses, or Tables, to represent the motions of the Five errant Stars: and
Ptolomy was the first, who partly by the benefit of Observations left him by
Hipparchus, and partly by those he made himself, became able to attempt such a
Work; as stands recorded in his Almagest. There were only the Eclypses, which
both these Nations had set down: as observed in their Commentaries: and those
only so, as that from Past, they might be able to conjecture something of what
were to Come. Not from the motions of Sun and Mon, exactly calculated by the
help of Tables; but having learnd from common experience, that every
ninetneenth Year, Eclypses did return again upon the same Day, for the most
part: thereupon they endeavored to praedict what Eclipses would happen, and
the time when; and this after they had perceived not any Anomaly in the Sun,
but some certain Inequality in the Moon, which reducing to a medium, they
concluded that the Moon did every Day run through thirteen Degrees, and a
little more than one sixth part of a degree; as Geminus delivers of the
Chaldaeans. But in their predictions of Lunar Eclipses, they were somewhat more
confident; as well because these Eclipses usually uturn, for the three Ages next
succeding, within the compass of the same Days; as because it is very rare, in
respect of the greatness of the Earths shadow, but the Moon, either in the
whole, or some part of her, more or less, falls into it: but, because (as to
Solary Eclypses) the Moon is both so small, and has so large a Parrallax, as
that she does not for the most part intercept the light of the Sun from the
Earth; therefore was it (as Diodorus witnesses specially of the Babylonians)
that they durst not determine Eclypses of the Sun to come, to any certain
time; but if they predicted any, with limitation of time, they always (to save
their credit, in case of failing) annexed this Condition, If the Gods be not
prevailed upon, by Sacrifices and Prayers, to avert them.

Truth is, these Astronomers were also Priests, and it was their interest to
cast in this Proviso. For, being ambitious to be reputed interpreters of the
Will of the Gods to the People, and so both knowing in things to come, and
skillfull in such Ceremonies, wherewith their respective Deities were most
attoned and delighted: unwilling to be thought able to predict nothing, and as
unwilling again to be found erring in their chief predictions, they wrapped up
all in Mysteries, and amused the vulgar with superstitious opinions and rites.
The Egyptians, in a great part of their sacred Worship, had recourse to the
Astrological Books of their Mercurius (one of the Order of the Fixed Stars; a
second, of the Conjunction of Sun and Moon; a third and fourth, of their
rising.) which with what ceremonious Pomp they used to carry about with them,
in a kind of solemn Procession, you may find amply described by Clem.
Alexandrinus. Nor is it lib. 6. stromat.
strange that those Priests accounted so sacred and knowing, should also be
esteemed for Prophets. Further, you meet with no mention of the Five Errant
Stars, all this while; and the reason seems to be, because they attributed an
energie of them only as they were referrable to the Inerrant or Fixed, and
particularly, as they possessed this or that part of some Sign in the Zodiac,
and together with it had their rising, or setting. For, so much did they
ascribe to the Zodiac, as that the Babylonians, and (in imitation of them, the
Persians and Indians) thought, that each decimal of degrees, or thirds of the
Signs, (and the Egyptians came as low as to each single degree) could not be
varied in the rising, but some eminent variation most happen, especially in
him, who should be borne at that time. And hereupon was it, that the Egptians
made that great Circle of Gold (described in Diodorus) of a cubit in thickness,
and three hundred sixty five cubits in circumference (plundered at last by
Cambyses) that upon each cubits space might be inscribed each Day of the Year,
365. Days in the whole round, and also what Stars did rise, what set upon each
Day, nay the very hour of their respective rising and setting, and what they
did signify: and whereas others used to assign the form of some Animal or
other, to each ten degrees; they assigned one to each single degree, and so
made their harsolations or conjectural predictions accordingly. For Example; to
the first degree of Aries they assigned the figure of a Man, holding a Sicle or
hook in his right hand, and a Sling in his left; to the second, a Man with a
Dogshead, his right hand stretched forth, and a staff in his left; and so of the
rest; then annexing the signification to each, they determined, that he, who
should have the first degree of Aries for his Horoscope, should be some part of
his life a Husbandman, and the rest of it a Soldier; that he, who should be
born under the second, should be contentious, quarrelsom, and envious; and so
of the rest, all which Scaliger has fully deduced from Aben Ezra. In a Word;
what ever knowledge either the Egyptians or Chaldeans had of the Stars; certain
it is, they referred it wholly to Astronomantie, or Divination by Stars: and
therefore among them there flourisht, no true and genuine Astronomy, but a
spurious and false, one i. e. Astrology Divinatory, or the fraudulent Art of
Fortune-telling by the Heavens.

Berosus (whom we formerly mentioned) coming into Greece, a little after the
death of Alexander, is discovered to have brought with him nothing sollid
touching Astronomy, but only Judicial Astrology^; lib. 9. cap. 7. lib. 9. cap.
37.
for which, as a thing new, and strange to the people, he was highly esteemed,
as Vitruvius and Pliny remark. And Eudoxus, who had returned out of Egypt
before that, well knew what sort of Astrology this was (the principal
Contrivers and Founders of which are said to have been Petosires, Necepsus,
Esculapius) 2. de divinat.
but he highly contenmed it as Cicero remembers, and brought home no other
fruit of his tedious Travells, beside a list of some Eclipses, and the
varieties of the motions of the wandering Stars, by which he first essaied to
compose accommodate Hypotheses, as we have formerly hinted. Nay, Plato himself,
who was Companion to Eudoxus, for thirteen Years together, in Egypt: professed:
in Epinom.
that he could attain nothing sollid and satisfactory touching those Stars, and
therefore placed all his hope only in the sagacity and industry of the
Grecians, such as he knew Eudoxus to be. For, having first recounted what ever
he knew concerning them; he says, It is to believed that the Grecians make
more perfect whatsoever they receive from Barbarians; and therefore is it fit,
we allow the same, touching the argument of which we have discoursed. Truth is,
it is difficult to find out the way, how all these Apparences, so involved in
obscurity may be explicated: nevertheless there is great hope that things of
that sort will be better and more advantageously handled, than they were
delivered to us by Barbarians.

From the Egyptians and Chaldeans, therefore (as Astronomy Articl. 6. And after
them to the Grecians among whom the most ancient mention of Astron. is in
Hesiod.
her self, while young and rude) we come to the Graecians: and the most antique
record of Syderal Observations to be found among them, seems to be that of
Hesiod; who in his Book of Weeks and Days teaches Husbandmen the most
opportune times of reaping, sowing, and other labors of Agriculture, from the
rising and setting of the Pleiades, and Hyades, and Arcturus, the Dog Star, and
Orion: (...).
Donec Pleiades, quae and Atlantiades, exoviuntur, etc.
And I cannot tell, whether it were that book, or some other, that Pliny meant,
when speaking of Hesiod, he says, Hujus quoque, nomine extat Astrologia, there
is extant an Astrology of his. However, we are here to remark two things, in
order to our more exact disquisition; the First is, that the Ancient Greeks
principally attended to these risings and settings, as well that they might
distinguish the several Seasons of the Year, as that they might foreknow Rain,
Winds and other dispositions of the Air, usually attending those Seasons. And
hereupon, Thales, Anaximander, Democritus, Euctemon, Meton, Eudoxus, and Ex Gem
Ptol. and aliis.
many others, composed certain Parapegmata, Tables, (as Ephemerides, or
Diaries) in which they inscribed each Day of the Year, with the particular
Stars rising or setting on each Day, and what mutations of the Air each one did
portend. Such a Darapegme as these, was composed likewise by Julius Caesar
himself, for the Horizon of Kome; in allusion where to he might justly own,
what Lucan said for him, lib. 10.
Nec meus Eudoxi fastis superabitur Annus.


And, him doubtless, did Ovid translate into his Fasti; promising lib. 1.
in the beginning, that he would sing of the Stars and Signs, that rose and
again descended under the Earth. But, to keep close to the Grecians; among
them, he was held a great Astrologer, who had discovered and observed only
these risings and settings here spoken of; and so of whom that might be spoken,
which Catullus said of Conon, Omnia qui magni dispexit lumina Mundi,
Stellorumque ortus comperit, atque obitus.


For, before the Advent of Berosus, this was the only [(...)] Praesignification
or Divination by the Stars, the Grecians had among them: unless what Hesiod
hints, in his in ^^ebns.
(...),
Primum prima dies, and quarta and septima sacra, etc.
where he points out, what Days of the Moon were accounted Lucky, and what
Unlucky.

The Second observable is; that among the Grecians, and indeed among diverse
other Nations, beyond all Memorials of either Traditions or books, the Stars
were reduced to certain Images, or Constellations, and denominated accordingly
(as their names yet shows) as it pleased the fancies of Husbandmen, Shepherds,
Matiners and the like, who used to be vigilant and gizing upon the Heavens in
clear Nights. Though there have been some Constellations added of latter times,
as that of the lesser Wain, by Thales, which Lacrtius and Tatius recite out of
Eb. 1. de vit. (...) de Com. (...)
Callimachus, who also took the same elsewhere, and that of Berenices Hair,
removed into Heaven by Conon, as Catullus relates. Cleostratus likewise (as we
have it from Hyginus) found lib. 2. A (...). lib. 2. cap 8.
out the Kidds: though, (which Pliny moreover attributes to him,) his invention
of the Signs in the Zodiac, is so to be understood, as that he taught men
through what Signs the Sun and other Planets passed. But (that we may couch
also upon this) at first, the Grecians had only Eleven Signs in their Zodiac;
and it was long after ere they came to add the twelfth, in imitation of the
Egyptians, who (as may be collected from Servins, in 1. Geog. l. 8.
Marcianus, and others) instead of the Claws of the Scorpion, placed Libra,
the place destined to Augustus, by Virgil, -- Ipse tibi jam brachia contrahit
ardens Scorpius. -- 1. Georg.



They added the Twelfth, we say, to the end, that as the whole Compass of the
Zodiac was divided into Dodecatemoria (as they call them) twelve equal parts,
so it might consist also of twelve Signs. Albeit, being (as it were)
necessitated to make use of such Signs, as had been brought up, rather by
chance, than Art; those 12. Signs were not exactly proportionate to the 12.
Divisions of the Zodiac, but took up more space some, than others as in
particular, Leo possessed more room than Cancer; Taurus than Gemini. I say, than
Gemini, which though composed of Castor and Pollux; in so little space as is
allowed them, it is impossible the one should rise, when the other Sets, and
both in the East: but this Empiricus interprets of the two 1. adven. Physic.
Hemisphears. I omit to insist upon this, that all Nations had not the same
Constellations: as among the Egyptians was no Bear, no Cepheus, no Dragon; but
other forms or representations, as Tatius reports; and shall add only, that
Eudoxus seems to have been the first, who partly out of the Egyptian Figures,
partly out of the Grecian, furnished the whole Zodiac with Images resembling
the Asterismes, (as men had fancied, at least) and caused them to be drawn on a
Globe, or solid Sphere. For, Aratus (upon whose Poem, intitul'd (...),
Apparences, there have been so many Commentaries set forth, as that no fewer
than forty have been extant in Greek; besides those of Cicero, Germanicus,
Avienus, and other Latin Interpreters.) did no more, but only express in verse,
what Eudoxus had said before in prose, of this argument; as Hipparchus Bythinus
demonstrates. I know not, whether it would be seasonable for me, lib. 1. in
Arat. ^han^.
here to advertise, that it is no wonder Aratus erred so grossly in many
particulars; considering that (as is written in his life) he Living with
Antigonus Gonata, in the quality of his Physician, and Nicander in the quality
of his Astrologer; and both were good at Poetry: Antigonus commanded the
Physician to give him a trial of his Poesy, upon an Argument in Astrology;
and the Astrologer to give another of his, upon something in Physic: delivering
to the one, the Book of Eudoxus; and to the other, all that was extant of
Treacles, Antidotes, or Counterpoisons. So each wrote of what he did not well
understand. One thing I shall not, forget; and that is, that the Phenomena of
Euclid, who lived near about the same time, and taught at Alexandria (as in the
Memorials of Pappus) were quite of another kind; lib. 7.
being indeed no other, but certain Principles of Astronomy, concerning the
figure of the World, and the Circles of the Sphere, and chiefly, that of the
Zodiac.

But, to return back to the more primitive Greeks; I remember and next of
Thales Milesius.
I said, that Thales Melesius was accounted the First, who after old Hesiod and
Homers Days, enquired into the Order of the Stars. And, certainly He was the
Man, who among the Grecians may challenge the Palm; as to Antiquity; for,
Apuleius calls him, ut antiquissimus, sic peritissimus Astrorum Contemplator,
and Eudemus in Laertius attesteth, that this was lib. 1.
the Opinion of most, adding moreover, that Xenophanes and Herodotus highly
admired him, for that he had first predicted the Eclypses and Conversions of
the Sun; and that Heraclitus and Democritus witnesses as much. And whereas
Apuleius further subjoyns, that he found out the motions and oblique tracts of
the Syderal Lights: Pliny ascribes that to Auaximander, a Disciple of Thales
Milesius, (whence he was said Rerum fores aperuisse, to have opened the Doors
of Celestial matters) and Diodorus to one Oenopides Chius: which Thales could
not yet be ignorant of the Obliquity of the Zodiac, when he had written of the
Solstices, and Equinoxes, and had conversed a long time with the Egyptians in
their own Country, as Laertius remembers. Further, it is delivered to us, that
among others, he predicted that notable Eclipse of the Sun, which happened in the
time of the war betwixt the Meads and Lydians; which he could not do by any
other reason, but only because, coming newly out of Egypt, he had learned, that
Eclipses generally return upon the same Day after the space of nineteen Years;
and having taken notice of one, that fell out 19. Years before, he concluded
that there would be one at such a time. Nor is there reason why any should
think, that otherwise his whole life might be sufficient to observe all the
motions of the Sun and Moon, as from thence to be able to invent all things
necessary for the calculation of the times of their Several Eclipses. Moreover,
it in vit. Dionys.
does not appear, how by any other way, but that Helicon Cyzicenus came
afterward to foretell that Eclipse of the Sun (mentioned in Plutarch) for
which he was so much admired by Dyonisius, and rewarded with a Talent of Gold.
Nor likewise, how Sulpitius Gallus could foretell that other of the Moon.
which as most opportunely predicted to the Roman Army, then ready to join
battle with the Persian, is so higly celebrated, not only by Plutarch and
Pliny, but also by Valerius, Quintilian, and other Historians: for other Rule
for the calculation of future Eclipses, there was none before Hipparchus, who
invented Hypotheses and Tables fit for that purpose. Besides, what Laertius
imputed to Anaximander, Plinius as confidently imputes to one Anaximenes, an
Auditor of his: (namely that he should be the Inventor of that Gnomon, by which
the Conversions of the Sun, or the Solstices and Equinoxes, were indicated, and
that he set up such a one at Lacedemon.) Near upon the same then of Pythagoras,
and his Disciples.
time was it, that Pythagoras is said to have first discoursed (though
Phavorinus, in Laertius, confers that honor upon Parmenides,) that Lucifer and
Vesper was one and the same Star of Venus, Now, whether may we conceive, that
he borrowed this of the Egyptians, from whom being taught, that not only Venus,
but Mercury also, were carried round about the Sun, as their Center, so that
one and the same might be both Morning and Evening Star: possibly, from thence
he might take the hint of his Conjecture, that the Sun was the Center of not
only those two, but of the other Planets also, and consequently of the whole
World: and moreover that the Earth it self, as one of the Planets, moved about
the Sun? For truly, this was an eminent and constant Tenent in his School; as
may be understood not only from Aristotle in the general, but also from
Laertius in particular of 2. de coelo. 13. de Arenar, number.
Philolaus, and from Archimed of Aristarchus, both Pythagorus his Disciples:
that we may not rehearse all those many passages in Plutarch, concerning this
memorable particular; nor name those, who held, that the Earth was not so much
moved about the Philolaus, Aristarehus, Timaeus.
Sun as daily turned rouud upon an Axis of its own; as Timaeus, a Pythagorian
also, who is therefore by Synesius esteemed, after de don. ad paeon. in Timaeun.
Plato, the most excellent Astronomer.

Furthermore, in the next Age after Thales, or near upon, comes Cleostratus
(the same who was believed to have deprehended. After these succeeded
Cleostratus.
the Signs of the Zodiac) and he, seriously remarking that the Intercalation,
which as we said, was wont to be made every fourth Year, celebrated with the
Olympic Games, did indeed restore the motion of the Sun to the same Day again;
but did not restore the motion of the Moon till the eight Year, or two
Olympiades, in which the intercalatory Days amounted to ninety Days, or three
months: He, we say, thereupon interduced, instead of the Tetacteris, or space
of four Years, the Octaeteris, or space of eight Years, which completely past,
the New Mons, and Full-Moons would return again on the same Days. But, when
in short time men had perceived, that this Institution failed them, in
exactness of computation; and that sundry ways had bin attempted to cure this
uncertainty: at length rises up Meton, somewhat more ancient than Eudoxus; and
he demonstrateth from Meron. etc.
the New Mons, and Full-Moons Eclyptical, that they did not return upon the
same Days, till after full nineteen Years: and thereupon he became the Author
of the Enneadecaeteris, or Period, or Cycle of 19. Years. In respect of which
discovery, together with the Heliotrope, or Sun Dial he made at Athens, and
some other the like Inventions, he was in eminent esteem among the Athenians.
But as concerning that Period; Callippos, familarly acquainted with Aristotle,
discovering it to be too long, by the fourth part of a Day; inferred, that from
four Periods one whole Day ought to be detracted: and so erected a new Period,
or Cycle of Sixty six Years, or four times nine, at the end of which one Day
was to be cut off; and this was called the Callippik Period, and remained in
use for a long time together. After him succeeded Hipparchus, who detecting
this Period, to be yet too long; demonstrateth that after four Callippik
Periods, or three hundred and four Years, there would remain one whole Day too
much. And in truth, the experience of many succeding Ages declared, that to
this detraction of Hipparchus, nine or ten Years over and above were to be
expected. However, it is worthy our notice, that the Period of Meton, together
with the Conection of it, applied by Callippus, was of long use in the Church
under the name of the Golden-Number: though wanting the Application of
Hipparchus his Correction: also, a mistake of about four Days, relating to the
New and Full Moons, crept into the account, even from the time of the Nicene
Council; which was one of the two main causes of the Reformation of the
Calendar in the eighty second Year of the last Age.

And now we have an opportunity to speak more expressly of Articl. 7. Eudoxus,
who first discovered the necessity of manifold Spheres.
Eudoxus, so frequently mentioned. This man, well understanding, after his
return out of Egypt, that not only the Sun and Moon, but also the five Errant
Stars, did keep their courses round in the Zodiac; and so, as that as well the
Sun and Moon, as those wandering Stars did sometimes vary their latitude, or
deviate from the Ecliptic Line in the middle of the Zodiac; (for, he thought
that the Sun was also extravagant, as well as the rest; and again, that the
other Planets did not only go forward, but were also some times upon their
retreat backward; and sometimes made a hault or stood still: we say, pondering
all these various motions in his mind, and casting about what might be the
reasons thereof in nature; he at last imagined to himself, that besides the
Aplanes or Sphere of Fixed Stars, which being supreme, carried all the rest
toward the West, there ought also to be allowed three other Spears, as well to
the Sun, as to the Moon, and four to each one of the other Errant Stars; of
which one, and that the highest, should follow the Impression of the Fixed
Stars, or rather of the Primum Mobile; the next to that should move counter to
the First, or toward the East; the third make the deviation from the Ecliptic,
or middle of the Zodiac; and the fourth, or lowest, cause in the Stars their
Direction, Station and Retrogradation, and that by a certain Vibration, or
Waving to and again. So that he supposed in all, twenty seven Spears, and all
those Concentricall, that the Superior might carry on the Inferior, and these
might be turned round within those. Afterward, Callippus adjoined two Spears
to the Sun, two to the Moon, and one a piece to Mars, Venus, and Mercury: and
so made thirty three. And Aristotle, to all the Spears, which did not follow
the motion of the Aplanes, or Primum Mobile (excepting only the Lunar Spears)
added as many more, which he called the Revolvent ones, to the end he might
conform them to the motion of the Inerrant Sphere, or Primum Mobile: and so in
the whole he constituted Fifty six Spears; for as much, at least, as we can
collect from his own context. Now all these, and even Plato himself likewise,
thought that the Moon was the lowest of all the Planets; next to her, the Sun;
and above the Sun the five wandering Stars: Nor indeed does it appear, that
Archimedes himself Living a whole Age or two after them, represented the
Planets in any other, than this very order, in that so famous Sphere of his In
which though Claudian tells us, that no more was represented, but only the
motions of the Sun and Moon; Percurrit proprium mentitus Signifer annum, in
Epigram.

Et simulata novo Cynthia mense redit:


Yet Cicero adds other motions, when speaking of Archimedes, he says; when he
collected together the motions of the 2. de divinat.
Moon, Sun, and five wandering Stars; he did the same as that God, who in
Platoes Timaeus framed the World, that one and the same Conversion might
regulate sundry motions, most different each from other in slowness and
swiftness. But, Hipparchus afterward finding, that as well the Sun, as the Moon
and the other five Stars did come sometimes nearer to the Earth, and sometimes
again mounted up farther from it; and plainly perceiving that that particular
appearance could not possibly be explicated by those Spears, that were all
Concentrical to the Earth: therefore, wholly rejecting them, he resolved, that
the motions of the Planets were to be accounted Eccentrick; and though he could
not himself determine each particular, he yet demonstrated the way, in which
Ptolomy afterward insisting, accomplished the Invention. But, before we
advance further, we are to commemorate two or three Persons of note, by whose
Observations both Hipparchus and Ptolomy profited very much. One was
Timocharis, who, about three hundred Years before Christ, among other things
relating to the Fixed Stars, observed that that Star which is called Spica
Virginis, does antecede the point of the Atumnal Equinox, by eight degrees. And
with him are we to join Arist^ll^s, whose Observations of something about the
Fixed Star; Ptolomy made great use of, in order to his demonstrating that the
Fixed Stars never change their latitude. Afterward (scarce in Age) succeeded
Eratosthenes, who being Library Keeper to Ptolomy Evergeta the fomer, persuaded
him to set up the Armillae in the Porticus of Alexandria; which Hipparchus and
Ptolomy Prolom. lib. 1. cap. 11.
afterward made use of; and himself, among other things observed, that the
Obliquity of the Zodiac was of twenty three degrees, and fifty one minutes;
which account Hipparchus and Ptolomy constantly adhered to.

Now that we may at length remember the great Hipparchus, Articl. 8.
Hipparchus, who first observed the places of the Fixed Stars, according to Long.
and Latitude.
who florish't near upon an hundred and forty Years before Christ: truly, we
find it no easy task to recount, how highly Astronomy was beholding to him.
For, in the first place, examining that foresaid Observation of Timocharis,
with some others; albeit he could not conceive them to be in all points exact,
yet because himself had found that Spica Virginis did not antecede the
Equinoctial point by more than six degrees, and the other Stars in the like
Proportion: he thence understood, that the Fixed Stars also were moved Eastward
according to the Zodiac; and thereupon wrote a Book of the Transgression of
the Solstices and Equinoxes. And, being that in his time, as not long ago in
Tycho Brahes, there appeared a certain New Star, he therefore came to doubt (to
speak the language of Pliny lib. 2. cap. 26.
concerning him) whether the like happened often, or not; and whether those
Stars, that were thought to be fixed, had also some certain motion peculiar to
themselves. Wherefore (as the same Pliny goes on) he attempted a task of
difficulty sufficient even for the Gods themselves, namely to number the Stars
for Posterity, and reduce the heavenly Lights to a rule, so that by the help of
Instruments invented, the particular place of each one, together with its
magnitude, might be exactly designed: and whereby men might discern, not only
whether they disappeared, or newly appeared, but also whether they removed
their Stations; as likewise, whether their magnitude increased, or diminished;
Leaving Heaven for and Inheritance for the Wits of succeding Ages, if any were
found acute and industrious enough to comprehended the mysterious orders
thereof. And this was the first time when the places of the Fixed Stars were
observed and marked out according to Longitude and Latitude: and that Catalogue
of the Fixed Stars, which he composed, is the very same, which Ptolomy afterward
inserted into his Almagest. In the lib. 7. cap.
next place, he denoted was positions sundry Stars had in respect each of
other; whether they were posited in a right Line; or in a triangular form; or
in quadrate or square, etc. as is manifest even from Ptolomy himself. Further,
though the motions of ibid cap. 1.
Sun and Moon were already in some measure known; he yet made that knowledge
much more exact. For, He did not only much correct the Callippick Period,
formerly spoken of, but also, He also corrected the Callippick Period, and
predicted future Eclipses, for 600. Years together.
having collected a long Series of Eclipses (namely, from the time of those
Babylonish ones, in the Days of Mardocempades, down to those observed by
himself, for full six hundred Years together.) and remarking, that neither the
like Eclipses did return on the same Days, after the space of every nineteen
Years, nor that after some recurses of ten Novennales, or ten times nine Years,
any such Eclipses happened at the times supposed; and that the cause thereof
consisted both in the various Latitude of the Moon, and the anticipation of her
Nodi, or Knotts, and her Eccentricicy, by reason whereof her motions to her
Apogeium were found to be sometimes slower, and those to her Perigeium more
speedy: therefore, we say, He comprehended and gave Reasons for all these
difficulties, and composed certain Hypotheses, and according to them, certain
Tables, by which he could safely and exactly calculate and predict what
Eclipses were to follow, how great they were, and when. And this was it, which
Pliny remembered, when having spoken of Thales, and Sulpitius Gallus, he comes
to mention Hipparchus. After these (says He) Hipparchus foretold the courses
of both Luminaries, for six hundred Years to come; comprehending the months,
Days and hours of Nations, and the Scituations of Places, and turns of People:
his age testifying, that he did all these great things, only as he was partaker
of Natures Councels. For, it must be, that Hipparchus, besides the precise
times, when such or such Eclipses were to be visible to the Horizon of Rhodes,
or Alexandri^, pointed forth also some Countries, and principal Cities,
together with the Designation of the Months in use among them; as also the very
Days and hours when each Eclipse would happen; and other praedictions succeding
to Rome, in the Days of Pliny.

Again, it is well worthy our recital, that Hipparchus laboring with long
desire both to constitute Hypotheses, and reduce into Tables the motions of the
other Planets, or five wandering Stars; and yet not being able to furnish
himself either from the Egyptians, or from his Country men the Grecians, with
any competent Observations respective to those Planets, (for while the places
of the Fixed Stars remained unknown, it was impossible any such could be made)
and again those he had himself made, were of a much shorter time, than was
requisite for the establishing any thing certain and permanent in that sort: He
therefore only digested such Observations as he had recorded by him, into the
best order and method he could devise; and so left them for their use and
improvement, who should come after him, in case any were found capable of
understanding and advancing them. And at length, by good fortune, it so fell
out, that those his Observations came into the hands of Ptolomy; who comparing
them with his own, and finding them judicious and exact, thereupon first began
to erect both Hypotheses, and Tables of Motions fit for those Planets: yet not
without much timerousness and diffidence; because his Observations being but
few, nor of sufficient time, he durst not promise himself any certainty of his
Tables for any considerable space, or number of Years. But, for more assurance
let us hear his own ingenious Confession in that point. The Time (says He)
from whence Almagest. lib. 9 cap 2.
we have the Observations of the Planets set down, is so vastly short, in
comparison of the greatness of Celestial vicissitudes, as that it renders all
predictions, that are for any great number of Years to come, infirm and
uncertain. And therefore I judge that Hipparchus (that zealous lover of truth)
considering this difficulty, and withal receiving not so many true Obsertions
from the Ancients, as he bequeathed to us, undertook indeed the business of the
Sun and Moon, and demonstrated that it might be performed, by equal and
circular motions: yet, as for that of the Planets, those Commentaries of his,
which have come into our hands, clearly shows, that he attempted it not: but
collecting all his own Observations concerning them together, into one order
and method, for their more commodious use, resigned them to the industry of
after times; having first demonstrated, that they were not congruous to those
Hypotheses, which the Mathematicians of those Days made use of. And, for
Others; sure I am, that either they demonstrated nothing at all, or else only
attempted the business, and left it unfinisht. But, Hipparchus being eminently
knowing in all kinds of learning, conceived, that he ought not (as others had
done before him) to attempt, what he should not be able to accomplish. So that
we see, Ptolomy was the first, who from true Observations, reduced the Motions
of the Planets into Hypotheses and Tables correspondent.

But before we speak more particularly of him, who lived Articl. 9.
about an hundred and thirty Years after Christ; forasmuch as in the space of
time betwixt Hipparchus and Ptolomy, these studies Betwixt Hipparchus and
Ptolemy, came Sosigenes, of Alexandria, by whose help Jul. Caesar endeavored
the reformation of the Calendar.
so florisht at Alexandria, as that Julius Caesar returning thence, brought
along with him that Sosigenes, by whose assistance he endeavored the
restitution of the Calendar, and so may be thought to have propagated the Study
of Astronomy among the Romans: let us reflect a little upon that time, and see
what care they then had of Celestial matters. In the first place, we are to lay
aside the Commemoration of Sulpitius Gallus (of whom more then once before, as
one that falls not under this account, concerning whom we may not yet forget,
what Cato is induced by Cicero, saying. While we saw that Gallus dye, that
familiar friend of thy Father, O Scipio, who was restless in measuring Heaven
and Earth; I say, while we saw him dying even in that Study. How often did Day
oppress him, when he had set himself to observe and describe something in the
Night? and how often did Night oppress him, when he had begun his Speculations
in the Morn? How was he delighted, when he had a long time before predicted to
us Eclipses of the Sun and Moon? etc. For he was a man clearly singular, and in
an Age when so great ignorance and neglect of good Arts tyrannized over men's
minds, being himself studious and inquisitive, could not but have borrowed his
skill either from Egypt or Greece, where having obtained a Series of Eclipses,
and the way of deducing them through the circuit of of nineteen Years (as we
said before) he became able to calculate them, so as Cicero relates For, as to
the rest; how great do you think was the ignorance and neglect, nay even
contempt of studies of this nature among the Romans? Why, truly so great, as
that Virgil could not dissemble it, in the Poesy attributed to Anchisa,
according to which the Romans should indeed come to rule the World; but yet
should yield to others, in learning to know the Stars, and describe the
Heavens. -- Caelique meatus
Describent radio, and surgentia sidera dicent. 6. A^nl.



And Cato himself is cited by Agellius to have left in writing that it was not
lawful to write what is in a Table kept by the High Priest, how often scarcity
of Provision would happen, how lib. 2. c 28.
often the light of the Sun, or Moon should be darkened: so far, says Gellius,
did Cato contemn the Science of Astronomy, and thought it useless either to
know, or foretell the Eclipses of Sun and Moon. Furthermore, though from times
as high as Numa, the Romans made several Intercalations; yet they took all
their art of that Sort, from the Greeks: and Pliny remarks, that in France,
Spain and Africa, there was no one man, who could so much as tell the Rising of
the Stars. Nevertheless we are not to 1. Meteor 7. Pythias Massiliensis, a
Gaul. and contemporary to Alex. of Maced.
forget, that among the Gauls was one Pythias, the Philosopher (as Cleomedes
calls him) of Masilia, who about the time of Alexander of Macedon, found the
proportion of the Gnomon to the Solsticial shadow, to be the same at Massilta,
as Strabo tells us Hipparchus had observed it at Byzantium; who first attempted
the Northern Ocean, and discovered the utmost Thule, in which Cleomedes
cohaerently proves the Summer Tropic to be the same with the Polar, or
greatest of always apparent ones: and who (as from his Book, de Oceano, may
be inferred) was excedingly curious to find out what was the Position of
Heaven, respective to the variety of Countries and Climates. But, not so lib.
7. cap. 60.
soon to digress from the Romans; Pliny delivers, that in those first times of
Romes being a Commonwealth, the Invention of Dialls was very raw and
imperfect: for that they had only the risings and settings named, out of twelve
Tables. That after some Years, they added the Meridian, and by the indication
of a certain column, the last hour: nor that neither, but only in clear
weather, even as long as till the first Punick war. Afterward they advanced
so far, as to make one, or two Sun Dialls; but not with lines exactly
correspondent to the hours, until about an Age after, when Q. Marcus Philippus
ordered the busi Quintus Marcius Philippus, etc.
ness more diligently and succesfully. And, because the hours of the Day
remained yet uncertain in dark and cloudy weather, Nasica Scipio began to
divide the Hours of Day and Night equally Nasica Scipio, Romans.
by Water distilling from Vessel to Vessel, and called it The Dial within
Doors, in the Year Urbis conditae DXCV. And till then, says Pliny, Populi
Romani indiscreta lux fuit. And thus much of Hipparchus, and some Astronomers
betwixt him and the Prince of them all, Ptolomy.

And of him, so great is his name, all we need to say, is only, Articl. 10.
that He was the very Founder of the Art, or Science of Astronomy. Prolemy, the
true Founder of Astronomy in one entire structure.
For, though Hipparchus had indeed, as it were hewn out the Stones and Beams
fit for so noble a Structure, and prepared good part of the Materials; yet was
it Ptolomy alone who put them into Order and Form, and by adding many admirable
Inventions of his own, by infinite labor and cost, erected that so famous
Building, worthily called (...), the great Co-ordination, Construction, or
Composition; which consisting of no less than thirteen Books, contains all the
Doctrine, that could then be advanced, concerning the Sun, Moon, and as well the
Fixed, as wandering Stars. And, albeit one Day teaches another, and that (as
Himself had truly foretold) there came others after him, who saw good cause
for the Castigation and Correction of many things delivered in that Work: yet,
in the general, the Art he had instituted, remained firm and constant, and was
afterward embraced, not only by the Alexandrians, but also by all the
Arabians, Latins and others, who devoted themselves to the service of Urania,
ever since. For, that the Study of her Celestial mysteries continued in great
esteem and Veneration, at Alexandria, for some Ages after his desease, may be
undeniably attested, not only from hence, that (among others) both Theon, and
Who next resigned it to Theon and Pappus, both Alexandrians.
Pappus, named Alexandrians, were eminent therein; of which the one put forth
eminent Commentaries upon Ptolomies Works, and the other, among sundry
excellent pieces, of which his sixth Book of Mathematical Collections is one,
observed, that about four hundred Years from Christ, the Obliquity of the
Ecliptic was not so great, as Erathosthenes, Hipparchus and Ptolomy had
conceived: but near upon the same we discover it to be in our Days: we say,
that this is not the only Monument that is extant of the flourishing of
Astronomy at Alexandria, long after Prolomy had given it so great a Reputation
there; but there remains another as fresh and lively, which is the memorialls
of those Patriarchs of the Alexandrine Church, to whose judgment the
determination of that great dispute about the true time of Easter, was thought
fit to be wholly referred, as well by the Nicene Council, as by diverse learned
Bishops afterward, and by Holy Leo himself, then Pope. Now, among these
Patriarchs were Theophilus, Cyrillus and Proterius, whose advice and directions
were thought necessary, in regard that the Controversies raised about the
Celebration of Easter, about the time of the Veneral Equinox, about the
Full-Moon next following, and about constituting certain constant Rules
respective to them; could not be better composed, than by the definitive
sentence of these Prelates, who Living at Alexandria, where Astronomy was in
such Height, had the advantage of others, in point of knowing those things
which were requisite to the finding out of the truth. But, of the Arabians, who
in the Study of Astronomy succeeded the Alexandrians, and translated into their
own language, the Great Composition of Ptolomy, which they called Almagestum;
the First, and most worthy to be remembered, was Albategnius otherwise and long
after. to Albategnius, then to
called Mahometes Aractensis, born of a Family of the Dynastae of Syria; He
about 800, Years after Christ, made diverse Celestial Observations, partly at
Aracta, and partly at Antioch: and found, both that the Apogeium of the Sun,
since the Days of Ptolomy, was advanced to the following Signs; and that the
Stars did regress toward the East, one degree, not in the space of a hundred
Years, as Ptolomy also had designed; but of somewhat less than seventy; as also,
that the Obliquity of the Ecliptic, according to Pappus his Theory, was less
(viz. above 23. degr. 35. minutes) with many other particulars concerning
as well the Fixed Stars, as the Planets: whereupon he both corrected Ptolomy in
many things, and composed new Tables, and wrote a Book entitled, De Scientia
Stellarum. After him, within 2 or 3 Ages following, succeeded Alphraganus,
Arzachel, Alphraganus and other Arabians.
Almeon, and other Arbians; among whom, (as being already tainted with that
superstition which had corrupted the simplicity of Astronomy, with Astrological
Fooleries) some certain Jews, as ambitiously affecting the glory of Divination
as the others, intermixed themselves.

After them, for a long time, the Worship of Urania lay neglected, Articl. 11.
Alphonsus, K. of Castile; who made and named the Alphonsine Tables.
nor did Astronomy receive any the least (considerable) advantage by
Observators; till near about four hundred Years since, Alphonsus King of
Castile and Lion, being himself also touched with the curiosity of Astrological
predictions, and discovering that the Tables as well of Ptolomy, as Albategnius
were not exactly agreeable with the Celestial motions; set himself to the
composing of new ones; and to that purpose convocated as many Arabians and
Jews, as were eminent in those Days for Astronomy; employing them about
Observations necessary to so great a Work, and comparing with them those of
their Predecessors, that so they might be the more exact in the performance of
their task proposed. And very memorable it is, that (as has been credibly
reported) He spent four hundred thousand pieces of Gold on that undertaking: a
munificence truly worthy the Heroic mind of so great a Prince, and which well
deserves to be had in perpetual commemoration by all lovers of Learning: but
somewhat unhappily employed, in respect the Persons set a Work were not so
strict in studiously and constantly observing, as scrupulosly computing,
directing their calculations not so much to what themselves and others had
really observed, as to certain traditional, mysteries, or Caballistical dreams:
that we may pass by their heedlesness, which Regiomontanus detecting,
perceived, that they had mistaken the true places of the Fixed Stars, by very
near two whole degrees; as accounting the numbers of Ptolomy, as if they had
bin constituted by him from the beginning of the Years of Christ. Which
considered, we have the less reason to wonder, if the Tables composed by them,
called from the Kings name, the Alphonsine, and sometimes from the place, where
they were made the Toletane Tables (whence also He, who was President of that
assembly of Astronomers, is said to have been one Isaac Chanter of the Toletun
Synagogue) have been found, ever since the time of K. Alphonsus, to disagree
with the Heavens, and to require the review and castigation of some new and
more faithful hands. Thence forward Astronomy lay neglected, and after whom,
the Science lay neglected. till, Georg. Peurbaechius and Ioh. Regiomontanus
arose, and again caltivated the same.
almost buried in oblivion, (only Thebitius an Arabian, and Prophalius a Jew,
observed in the mean time some small matters, about the motion of the Fixed
Stars, and the obliquity of the Ecliptic,) until about two hundred Years
since, Georgius Peurhacchius, and Joh. Regiomontanus, his disciple, seemed to
revive it. For, these worthy men delivered it cut of the double cloud of
ignorance and vanity, which the Arabians and Jews had raised, to the
Observation of its luster; and kindled the Light thereof afresh in Germany:
reducing Ptolomy, providing Instruments, and making not a few faithful
Observations: though they were not so happy, as to bring their design to that
perfection they hoped and had proposed to themselves; both of them dying in the
middle and flower of their Age.

Animated by their example, Nicholaus Copernicus (a Borussian born, and Canon
of the Cathedral Church of Warmes, situate near Articl. 12. Then followed the
m^st accute Nich. Coper.
Fruemburgh, in the same Country) about the beginning of the last Age,
seriously addressed himself to the Illustration of Astronomy; nicus, who
revived the doctrine of Pythagoras, concerning the Earths motion.
and reviving the long neglected Systeme of the World excogitated by
Pythagoras, he made many good Observations, in order to the composing of new
Tables But, forasmuch as he could not determine any thing concerning the Fixed
Stars, besides their Promotion Eastward, which they appeared to have made since
Ptolomy's time; he therefore composed some Canons of their motions, and those
as exact as possibly he could: yet both those, and the Prutenick Tables that
were built upon them, were incorrespondent to the motions of the Heavens,
though less incorrespondent than the Alphonsine. Nevertheless, the man is to be
highly commended, both for his sublime perspicuity, and modesty, in that
foreseeing his Canons would need correction, he was wont frequently to exhort
and encourage that ingenious young man, Georgius Joachimus Rheticus, deeply
enamoured of the beauties of Astronomy, to apply himself principally to the
Restitution of the Fixed Stars, and chiefly of those, which were in the Zodiac,
or near it, and with which the Planets might be most conveniently compared:
because, without their restitution, it was impossible either to attain to the
true places of the Planets, or to atcheive any thing of Moment or certainty,
toward the advance of Astronomy.

And then at last enters that Noble Dane, Tycho Brahe, upon Articl. 13. And
last of All, the noble Tycho Brahe, who out-did all the rest in discoveries and
inventions.
the Theater of Astronomy. Who, as by in the impulse of his Genius, being
addicted to beholding and noting the Stars, even almost as soon as he saw the
light of them; was so much the more spurred on by that advice of Copernicus,
published in the Works of George Joachim newly mentioned, by how much the more
clearly he discerned the impossibility of determining the true and proper place
of that famous New Star, (appearing in the Constellation of Cassiopeia, from
the beginning of November, in the Year M. D. LXXII. for above sixteen months
together) without the restitution of the Fixed Stars to theirs. For, He plainly
perceived, that most, if not all the Errors, which had bin found in Astronomy
even from its first foundation or original, took their rise chiefly from hence,
that the Fixed Stars really were not in those places, in which they were
supposed to be, by Observators; But some of them were much nearer, and others
again as much farther off; and this, whether because Hipparchus in the
beginning had not with due exactness consigned all the Fixed Stars to peculiar
places, which indeed he had designed by the Sextant's of degrees (and truly it
is very difficult at once to invent any thing of Moment, and perfect the
invention) or whether because the Transcribers of Ptolomy, out of carelessness,
or ignorance, had corrupted the Original Text in many places; or whether the
additions afterward made, in respect of the Stars progress to the following
Signs, had occasioned any mistake and imperfection in that Theory; or whether
by any other unhappy cause whatever. Now, in Order to this great Work, of
rectifying those fundamental Errors, it pleased Fate, that about the very same
time, that truly generous and never enough commendable Prince William
Landgrave of Hassia, had zealously devoted his mind and industry to the same
care, of restoring the Fixed Stars to their true mansions: but yet the honor he
aimed at, was decreed only for the incomparable Tycho; who in an Heriocal
bravery of Soul, had now resolved with himself to enterpise no less than the
Instauration of the whole Science of Astronomy from its very fundamentals; and
so to spare neither labor, nor cost (especially while he was so happy, as to
have good part of his expenses defraied by the liberal contributions of that
eminent Mecenas, Frederick the II. King of Denmark, who thereby recorded his
name in immortal Characters on the leaves of Fame) that should be necessary to
the making all Sorts of Observations requisite. As soon therefore as he had
furnished himself with that Astronomical College, or Tower for Observations,
built by him in the Island of Huenna, to that purpose assigned him by the King,
and furnished that Heavenly Citadel by him called Uraniburg, with store of
exquisite and magnificent Instruments Mathematical, he begun (having provided
himself of sundry learned and competent Coadjutors) exactly to observe the
Altitude of the Pole, in that place, by the Circum-polary Stars. By which
understanding likewise the Altitude of the Equator, he pointed out the
Equinoctial points, by the passing of the Sun through them: and attending
besides to the middle parts of Taurus and Leo, he found out the Apogeium of the
Sun, and the Eccentricity of it, and deduced its Course from the point of the
Vernal Equinox. Moreover, from Venus, in the Day time compared with the Sun,
and in the Night with the Fixed Stars; he endeavored to search out the right
Ascensions, and Declinations of the Fixed Stars: which the Ancients had
performed, but fallaciously, by using the Moon, not Venus, to that purpose. And
his success was as exquisite as his care in this, that he constituted that
bright Star which is in the top of Aries, and ranged the chief of those in
order along the Zodiac: and then advancing to enquire or rather find out the
distances of the rest as well from them, as each from other, he defined both the
right Ascensions and Declinations of all; prescribed their several Longitudes
and Latitudes, and added to the Catalogue of the Ancients about 200. other
Stars, wholly by them omitted. Because the Ancients, Living in an Horizon much
more Southern, had observed and set down near upon 200. Stars, that are
invisible in the Danish Horizon, which is highly Northern: and Tycho again
collected about 200. more than they could discern; and as being somewhat small,
he intermixed them among others of greater magnitude. Further, having in the
mean space, always observed the passings of all the Planets through the
Meridian, and their several distances from the chief Fixed Stars nearest to
them: he laid such sollid foundations, as by them might be exactly known not
only the true places of each, but also their several Motions. So that he came
very near the height of his noble hopes of building the whole Theory of
Astronomy a new from the very ground, and of erecting complete and everlasting
Tables for Calculation thereupon: but, alas! prevented by an immature death, He
could not accomplish his design. It was very much, however, that He went so
far, as ^o have recorded and bequeathed to Posterity such excellent
Observations, by which Kepler was soon after enabled to compose an entire
Theory, and make the Tables called the Rudolphine; and by which, and others
afterward contriveable, whatever can be desired in these Tables, may be fully
supplied and perfected. And this among the rest deserves singular
commendations, that He left us the Fixed Stars re-installed in their true
mansions: wherein He alone, in few Years practice, performed and finished that
prodigiously great Work, which no man, from the Days of Hipparchus, had either
attempted, or in any measure advanced.

I pass by many other admirable discoveries of his; as that he was the first,
who demonstrated all Comets to be carried freely through the Etherial Spaces;
that Refractions ought to be carefully considered and allowed for, and how;
that he perceived that the Latitude of the Moon ought to be augmented by more
than a Quadrant, or fourth part, than had been conceived; that He almost
demonstrately convinced the Latitudes of the Fixed Stars to be varied; that he
excogitated an Hypothesis, which all those, who cannot allow of the
Ptolomaicall, or fear to allow the Copernican, may well adhere to and defend;
with many other things, as difficult in their Invention, as excellent in their
use. And observe only how vastly he transcended all that went before him, in
point of exactness and certainty. As for Instruments Mathematical, it is well
known, He made such, as for the condition of their matter, for the Vastness of
their magnitude, for the variety of forms, for the care of their elaboration,
for the preciseness of their divisions, and for the facility in using; as the
World had never the like before. Again, so prodigious was his and his
Coadjutors subtility, diligence, industry; that whereas the Observations of
Hipparchus, Ptolomy, and all others before him, had bin marked out only by the
Sixth or at most by the twelfth parth of degrees; he designed all his by the
sixtieth parts of degrees, called Minutes, or Scruples, and very often also by
subdivisions of Minutes. So that we may well demand what comparison can be made
betwixt that gross way found out by Erastothenes, and approved and followed
afterward by Hipparchus and Ptolomy, for the Observation of the Obliquity of
the Zodiac; and that most fine and exact one invented by Tycho? His being, by
a division of the Meridian into 83, parts, and the Interval of the Tropicks
deprehended to take up 11. of them, it appeared that the distance of one
Tropic from the Equator, amounted to 5. of thoseparts and an half, or, by a
reduction of them again to degrees, of 23. degr. 51. Min. and: and theirs,
being by an hollowed Hemispear of Stone, with a Gnomon erected in the middle,
as we have formerly described it; and to what degree of subtility and exactness
this way of commensuration could arrive, the meanest Novice in Astronomy may
soon judge. That Quadram likewise of Ptolomy, so much admired by ancient
Authors; Pray, How vastly short did it come of the perfection of the least that
Tycho used? And the same may be said of his Rules; for, that those Armillae,
set up by Pt^lo^y in the entrance of Alexandria had any thing in them
comparable to those erected by Tycho, in his Uraniburg, cannot in the lest
measure be argued from the other Instruments then in use. It is not necessary,
we should here again review those machinaments, or engines, which the old
Egyptians and Babylonians made use of, either in discerning the Signs of the
Zodiac, or taking the Diameter of the Sun: or those, which Aristarchus and
Archimedes used, for commensurating the same Diamater. Only we cannot but
wonder, by the by, how Aristarchus, having aimed so near the white of truth, in
the matter of the Suns Diameter, and determining it to be the 720th. part of
the Circle, or half a degree; as is delivered de Acenar. number.
by Archimed: should yet err so widely in his Book of Magnitudes and Distances,
as to make the Diameter of the Moon (which in truth; is very near as great as
that of the Sun) to be the 180th. part of the Circle, or 2. degr. when he
called it the Fifteenth part of a Sign; which mistake of his was long since
taken notice of by Pappus. Nor is there any necessity, why we should survey
those Instruments, that Albateginus, Peurbacchius, Regiomontanus, Copernicus,
and other more modern Astronomers used: considering, that besides the Rules
made by Regiomontanus (which Bernardus Waltherus, his disciple, preserved, and
had recourse to, in his Observations of the Suns Altitude) they came so short
of the least of Tychoes, in point of exact reasoning, and amplitude, that they
deserve rather to be perpetually forgotten, than remembered to competition.
However it is seriously to be wished, that the Observations made by those
incomparable Instruments of His, may ly no longer concealed from the World (for
by singular Providence, they have been hitherto preserved, as Gassendus
attesteth, in the Life of Tycho) but soon be brought to Light. And this as well
for sundry weighty Considerations there alleged by Gassendus; as for this,
that not all the Stars, of which Tyeho has given a copious Catalogue, in his
Progymnasmata, may be found reduced to congruous Calculation (in as much as
they do not exactly correspond with the Heavens) and that various Catalogues
have been pretended from the same, which are very much different each from
other: for all the difficulties hereupon depending may soon be removed, and all
mistakes rectified, by having recourse to the Fountain, or Original
observations, which! will clearly declare, what has bin already corruptly
deduced, and what may be at length carefully and demonstratively deduced from
them.

And, in the mean while, if Hipparchus his memory be so highly and (indeed)
justly precious among learned men, for his great merrits in excogitating and
framing Instruments, whereby to take the dimensions, distances, motions etc. of
Heavenly bodies: certainly, that of our Tycho ought to be as highly esteemed by
us and all Posterity; since he alone, for so many Ages together was found, that
durst not only imitate him in those sublime inventions; but so imitate, as very
much to exceed him. For my part, truly; since Hipparchus may rightfully be
called Atlas the Second: I shall do but justice to name Tycho, Hercules the
Second, who releived his Predecessor, long languishing and ready to faint under
so prodigious a burden; which doubtless was the Reason, why Kepler called him,
the Modern Hipparchus.

And thus have we in a short Relation, rehearsed to you, what we could gather
together, concerning the Original, Progress, and Advance of Astronomy, from the
highest of times, of which there remain any Authentic memorials, down to the
decease of Tycho Brahe, the Noble and the Great. As for what Additions this
excellent Science has received, by the industry of Astronomers in this present
Age, by the help of the Telescope, whose Invention may seem to have been
unhappily deferred too long, as being deferred till some Years after Tychoes
death: they may be easily summed up. For, all that our Days can justly
challenge the honor of discovering, is (1.) the spotts in the Sun: (2.) the
inequality of the superficies of the Moon: (3.) Venus shifting her apparences,
as does the Moon: (4.) Mercury and Jupiter, in some Proportion, doing the like:
(5.) Jupiter with a kind of bound about him, and guarded with four lesser
Stars, as Attendants: (6.) Saturn triple-bodied: (7.) the Gallaxy fully beset
with small Stars: and (8.) diverse pale assemblies of very small Stars, seeming
to be only little white clouds in the Welkin; with some other particulars
lately remarked. Now, if you please to add this to the former summary: you have
the whole (though brief) Story of Astronomy, from its very infancy to that
augmented state it now has attained to: I wish I might have said, to its Full
growth and Perfection. But, alas! that is reserved for Posterity.


