THE Acts of the Witnesses OF THE SPIRIT.

In Five Parts.

By LODOWICK MVGGLETON: One of the Two Witnesses, and True Prophets of the only
High, Immortal, Glorious God, Christ Jesus.

Left by him to be published after's death.

In the latter days two Bright Stars shall arise, raising up men being dead in
their sins, which shall resist the Beast, and the Waters of the Dragon,
testifying and preaching the Law of the Lamb, and the Destruction of
Antichrist, and shall diminish his Waters; but they shall be weakened in the
Bread of Affliction, and they shall rise again in stronger force; and after
Truth shall be revealed, and the Lamb shall be known: After this shall be but a
small Space.

Fox in his Book of Marters.

LONDON: Printed in the Year of our Lord God, 1699.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY
TO all True Christian People that do or shall hereafter come to believe in
this Third and Last Spiritual Commission, is this ensuing Treatise directed,
with love and peace to you be multiplied: It being a Legacy left you by the
Lords last True Porphet, for your further establishment in Truth: As also it is
left for a Convincement of the Seed of Reason, when he is in the dust; that by
these Acts they may see how he has been slandred, reproached, and belied,
persecuted and imprisoned without a Cause.

For how many Lying Reports has been not only flung upon them, but also upon
the True Believers of them; saying, That we own neither God nor Devil, Heven or
Hell; and all because they see us use no outward glittering show in fruitless
Forms of Worship; whilst we worship an invisible Spiritual, yet personal God,
in Spirit and Truth, which the World knows nothing of.

For this we know and affirm, that the Doctrine of this Commission of the
Spirit is of as great purity and power, as to Godliness, as ever any was, and
as they were themselves, ever kept innocent from the breach of the Morral Law,
as to Act; Even so the Fruits of their Doctrine is of the like efficacy in the
knowing seed of Faith, by which they have dominion over Sin, as in respect of
Act.

And although this last Prophet in his Answer to the Nine Assertions, has showed
his great mercy and clemency to some corrupt Natures, yet it is but to such who
act not so far; as the breach of the Morral Law; as to borrow Money, and not to
pay it again; or to be passionate and hasty natured, overcome with Strong
Drink, or the like, and though these are evil, yet reach but to the Borders of
the Law, being Frailties in Nature, which disturb the peace of the Mind, for in
such things, as the Apostle James says, We offend all: But where there is true
Faith, it prevents the Act; as this Prophet says in one place, among many his
Words are these, Faith, says he, overcomes all Sin, Death and Hell, within a
man's self, and that none but such shall be admitted into the Kingdom of
Heaven. And the Prophet Reev^s Doctrine is thus, saying, All those that are led
by the Voice of the holy Spirit of Jesus, do work Righteousness in their bodies
whereby they die unto Sin. Again, says he, in another place, The Light of
Christ in man does convert from the Ruling Power of Sin. And in a Third Place,
which is not yet printed says, That they that are led by the Spirit of Faith,
are kept from the commiting of sin: I do not say, says he, that they have no
Motion to sin, but the Spirit of Faith purifies their hearts, giving them power
against those Motions, that they commit not the Act; and from hence it is, that
all that are born of God, know the Voice of God, and has this Power over Sin,
as I have declared, said he.

These Doctrines of the Prophets are absolute and possitive, and do give great
light into several Scriptures, as Matt. Chap. 5. ver. 28. 1 John chap. 3. ver.
9. and ver. 15. in these places we are to distinguish between the Motion and
the Action of Sin: This may also give light into Romans chap. 7. how that Paul
spoke there as to his state by Nature, as also of the strife and strugle
between the two Seeds of Faith and Reason, until the Law of Faith was
quickened, and power by it attained, and then had he dominion over Sin, as
Chap. 8. and so came to have peace with God, and with his own Conscience, and
Assurance of Eternal Life.

And from hence comes the Grounds of true Worship, and flows forth all
spiritual Praise, as David said, O how sweet is thy Law: This sweet Law is the
Law of Faith; and he or she that is truly possessed hereof, can seal to those
words of the Prophet Reeve, which says, That he that is born of God, his
Language and Practice is such as speaks forth the Power of Godliness, to the
confounding of all glittering Tongue Hipocrites, and Faithless Formalists

Now let all True Believers know, that under every Commission this is made the
ordinary way of Life and Salvation; yet to prevent an objection, this is
confessed by us: That though there is this power in Faith, as aforesaid yet the
Lord for the Trial of his Creature, may suffer some of his Chosen Ones to fall
in the time of a Commission; and for the pr^ise of his Free Grace may grant
them our Repentance, or s^^ and Free Pard^n; for thus writes the Prophet Reeve
in a Writin^ not yet printed.

The Lord, says he, leaves some to their own strength, through which he rebels
against the Light that is in him, to the wounding of his own Soul; to the end
that he may learn, that the power, by which he is preserved from the (...) of
Sin, and so from eternal ruin, is not in himself, but in the Living God that
made him. Therefore the Scripture here and there p^i^teth f^rth one that the
Lord has left for a seas n to manif^st his Prer^gative Power ov^r his
Creatures, and afterward does his God head Spirit move him to a second Free
Pard^n, wherein he raises that Soul to a high^r and greater measure of Grace,
Wisdom and Humility than it had before; which fulfils that Saying of Paul,
Where Sin abounded, there Grace did superabound. And this was fulfilled both by
David and Paul.

Here we see that if an Elect V^ss^l should once fall after his knowledge and
belief in Truth, that his second Pardon does raise him to a higher degree of
Grace, Wisdom and Humility then he had before: This by the Prophet is made a
true Trial to know whether a repentance or conversion from the Act of Sin
committed be real or fained; as also that a second fail or relapse will prove
dangerous; because it is rare to find a Third Pardon, and a Third increase of
Grace to that Pardon.

Thus it is made clear that the Doctrine of this Commission of the Spirit it
has power of Purity in it, and n ne that is truly born of God can dispute
against it, but rather fear to offend, as the Prophet Reeve says, That a true
born Saint is afraid of his own evil thoughts, much more of evil words or deeds
against God or man.

Again we see by this Book of the Acts, that these two Prophets were jointly
chosen of God, and made equal in Power and Authority; for the Prophet Reeve
says, That his Fellow Witness had as great power as he had himself: And
further said, That he was the Lords last High Priest: If this be granted, then
it must follow, that there can be no Salvation to such as shall reject him, or
his Writings, although they pretend to own John Reeve.

Moreover the mighty sufferings that these Prophets have undergone for their
Testimony sake are admirable; yet notwithstanding all opposition, providence
preserved them so, as that they both died in their Beds in peace; and not only
so, but this last Prophet lived to see the downfall of many of his great
Enemies, and of his Persecutors and Judges.

Now to come to a conclusion of this Epistle: When the Prophet had wrote this
Book of the Acts, he kept it by him, not letting any to see it; but about two
Weeks before he died, it was put into the hands of one of us, that was his true
Friend, and ancient Acquaintance; in order to be printed after his death: Which
now with the assistance of some Friends, through providence it is perfected,
and is recommended to the whole household of Faith, which I doubt not, but it
will be accepted of being a true Copy from the Original, there being nothing
here printed but what is really his own; only you are to know that there are
some things omited that are of a Temporal account, as a dispute with Mr. Leader
concerning Eclipses and the hight of the Visible Heavens; with some other
particulars which, things are left out, because of the greatness of the Charge,
for all cannot be Printed that is Written, for it is evident that although there is
above a Hundred Sheets of theirs in print, yet is it not past a Third part of
what is Written by them two Witnesses, for in the Year 1682 Mr. Delamaine did
Transcribe so many of their Works, and bound up in a Book as contained 1052
pages in Folio, in which Book, and in what is printed almost all the Scripture
has been Interpreted that are of concernment to Salvation, But whether it may
enter into the Heart of any that are Rich to be stirred up to Print the same,
or whether the Powers of the Nation may permit it We leave to Providence.

But before I conclude, it is Requisite to give you an Acompt of the Prophets
Death and Burial which was thus upon the First of March, 1697. the Prophet was
taken with an Illness and Weakness, upon which he said these Words, Now has
God sent Death unto me: And presently after was helped to Bed, and though he kept
his Bed, yet we could not perceive that he was Sick, only Weak and he lay as if
he slept, but in such quietness, as if he was nothing concerned with either
Pain or Sickness.

So that it was mere Age that took him away, which was the 14th day of March,
he then departed this Life with as much peace and quietness as ever any man
did, being about 88 Years of Age, so that he had that Blessing, to come to the
Grave in a full Age, like as a Shock of Corn comes in at its Season. Upon the
16th day his Corpse was removed to Larsimus Hall, and on the 17th day was from
thence Attended on with two hundred forty eight Friends accompanying him to
Bethleham Churchyard, where he was Buried by his Fellow-VVitness, which was
according to his own appointment.

And thus was the Lord's Last Prophet brought to his Grave in peace, without
noise, or without tumult, though thousands of Spectators beheld it, and there
they are both to remain until the coming of their Lord, their King, and their
Redeemer the Lord Jesus Christ, the High and Mighty God, and our God, and
blessed are they that know their Voice, and wait for that day, and are not
offended with these things. Farewell.

T. T.

ERRATA.
PAge 18. verse 3. leave out the last single I. p. 95. v. 22. for yet and do,
read to p. 100. v. 5. for Reason read Religion. p. 103. in the Contents, for
Argument read Arraignment. p. 112. v. 25. for that read they. p. 128. v. 17.
for Reported read Reproached. p. 140. v. 11, for makes read make. Idem v. 12.
for probably read possibly. p. 147. v. 19. for Law read Love. p. 251. v. 19.
for said read saved.

The Acts of the Witnesses, etc.
The First Part.
CHAP. I. The Prophet shows first, That Moses and the Prophets did record
strange and wonderful things; As also their Revelations, which we are bound to
believe.
1. THERE is, and has been Recorded many and several wonderful strange Things
and Deeds of the righteous Fathers, as, Noah, Lot, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
and of their Faith in God.

2. And also, how wonderfully God did appear unto them, and strengthen them in
their time, when they were upon the Eearth. These things are Recorded by the
Revelation of Moses, as God revealed it to him.

3. Also Moses declared his own Birth, and how he was preserved from being
drowned: These things did he declare, and how God appeared unto him and chose
him and Aron for that great Work, to lead that great People through the
Wilderness, and to be a Lawgiver.

4. Which was the first visible appearance of God upon Earth, that is Recorded,
for all Generations to come. For tho God did appear in a wonderful manner unto
Enock, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and several other righteous Men; yet
we could never have known it, had not Moses, by his Revelation, left it upon
Record.

5. How could the Generations to come have known any thing of the Creation of
the World, and how God made Man in his own Image and Likeness.

6. Or that there ever was the Man Adam, or Cain, that slew his Brother Abel;
or that the World was ever drowned, except eight Persons, if it had not been
revealed by Moses.

7. So that we have nothing but Moses's bare Word for it; for we did not live
in his time, to see the Wonders he wrought, nor hear him speak.

8. Yet we are bound to believe his Record, and Revelation, and Acts he did:
And blessed and happy were all those that did believe him when he was upon
Earth, when they saw his Acts, and heard him speak.

9. And more blessed are these now, that understand and believe, which have not
seen his Wonders he wrought in his time, not heard him speak forth those
Revelations God revealed unto him concerning the Creation of the World as
aforesaid.

10. Also we read in Scripture of many wonderful Acts that was wrought and done
by the Prophets, in the time of the Law, after Moses.

11. As Samuel, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Eljah, Elisha, and several other Prophets, in
the time of the Law; their wonderful Acts are recorded in Scripture.

12. Besides the Revelation they declared as from God, which the Ages following
did not see nor hear, yet many did truly believe, and does truly belive, and
are by Faith satisfied, as those that did both hear and see.

13. So that the Scriptures Record, is a Record of spiritual and heavenly
Things, and of some of those wonderful and powerful Acts of Moses, and the
Prophets, and the righteous Fathers, manifesting their great Faith in God and
being in favor with God.

14. Which I, by Faith, have found their Record true, and so have many more of
the seed of Faith found their Record and Revelations to be true.

CHAP. II. The Prophet makes a Rehearsal of the Acts of the Apostles in the new
Testament, and of the Lord Christ, and how that they were written for the
Comfort of the Seed of Faith: After which he enters upon the third Record, and
shows the cause of his writing some of the most principal Acts of the Witness
of the Spirit under this third Record.
1. ALSO we find written in the New Testament many wonderful Acts and Miracles,
acted by the Lord Christ, and his Apostles; as Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John
does declare concerning Christ; that if all the things Christ spoke and Acts he
did were written, the World would not contain the Volume.

2. That is, the verge of a Man's understanding could not retain the
particulars, so as to tell it to his Friend, the particulars would be so many.

3. So likewise, the Acts of the Apostles; that Book has little else in it,
but wonderful Acts wrought by the power of Faith in the Apostles.

4. And these things were written for the seed of Faith, that they might have
Comfort in believing the Record that is given of the Apostles, how God
strengthened them in Faith and Power, as by the power of Faith to work Miracles.

5. Because they were chosen of God to bear Record on Earth, to the Blood of
the New Testament, or, New Covenant.

6. Thus did the Apostles bear Record on Earth to the Blood, as the Prophets
did bear Record on Earth to the Water, which signifies the Law of Moses, and
the Blood signifies the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

7. The Scriptures are a Record, that shows many wonderful Acts that Christ
and his Appostles did when on Earth, besides the heavenly Revelation.

8. And it is very comfortable to the Seed of Faith, true Belivers, to read of
the Acts of the Prophets, and of the Apostles, as it is of their Doctrine,
Revelation, Prophesies, Interpretations; or, Epistles.

9. These Things, I having experience of, and seeing it has been the Practice
of some of the Prophets and Apostles to leave a Record behind them, for after
Ages to peruse, of some of the most remarkable Acts, done by them when they
were upon Earth, as a remarkable Remembrance to their Prophesies and Epistles.

10. So, likewise I being one of the two last Prophets and Witnesses of the
Spirt, being the Third and last Record from God on Earth.

11. I thought it convenient and expedient to leave some Record on Earth,
behind me, of some of the most remarkable Acts and Passages that has been done
and acted by us, and to us, the Witnesses of the Spirit, since we were chosen
of God in the Year 1651.

12. That I may leave it as a Legasy to the Seed of Faith after me, who shall
happen to Read and Believe those Writings of ours after I am gone.

13. They may know by the Doctrine therein declared, who, and what we were, and
what God we believed in.

14. Also I thought it necessary to write of those Acts my self, rather then
any other, being acted in my sight and perfect knowledge, as other Profits have
done before me, as Moses and others.

CHAP. III. Of the Birth, Parentage, and Trade; of the two Witnesses, and how
the Profits Nature led them sorth to all Sobriety, hateing Drunkeness, and of
their inclining to the Principles of those Called Puritans, and of their being
persuaded from judging Cases of Concience before they new the truth.
1. BUT before I write of the Acts, I shall give the Reader a little to
understand what we were before God did choose us two, to be his two last
Prophets and Witnesses of the Spirit.

2. And of some Experince I had, and Working within me before I was Chosen of
God, little expecting God would have chosen me for such a great Work.

3. As for John Reeve, he was born in Wiltshire, his Father was Clerk to a
Deputy of Ireland, a Gentleman as we call them by his place, but fell to decay.

4. So he put John Reeve Apprentice here at London, to a Tailor by Trade. He
was out of his Apprentiship before I came aquainted with him, he was of an
Honest, Just Nature, and Harmless.

5. But a Man of no great Natural Wit, or Wisdom, no Subtilty, or Policy was
in him, nor no great store of Religeon he had, but what was Traditional, only
of an Innocent Life.

6. I knew him many years before God spoke to to him by Voice of Words to the
hearing of the Ear, three Mornings together, as is declared in the Commission
Book, called a Trancesendant Spritual Treatise, the first Book he writ.

7. And I Lodwick Muggleton was born in Bishop gate-street, near the Earl of
Devonshire's House, at the corner House called Walnut-Tree-Yard.

8. My Fathers name was John Muggleton, he was a Smith by Trade, that is a
Farrier, or Horse-Doctor, he was in great Respect with the Postmaster in King
James' time, he had three Children by my Mother, two Sons and one Daughter, I
was the youngest and my Mother loved me.

9. But after my Mother died, I being but young, my Father took another Wife;
so I being young was Exposed to live with Srangers in the Country, at a
distance from all my Kindred* I was a Stranger to my Fathers House after my
Mother was dead.

10. But it came to pass when I was grown to 15 or 16 Years of age, I was (...)
Apprentice to one John Quick, a Tailor, he made Livery Gowns, and all sorts of
Gowns for Men, he made Gowns for several Aldermen, and Livery Men of their
Company in London.

11. And he lived in this Walnut-Tree-Yard, and knew my Father and Mother very
well; he was a quiet peaceable Man, not crewel to Servants, which liked me very
well.

12. For my Nature was always against Cruelty, I could never endure it, neither
in my self, nor in others, living peaceably in my Apprentiship.

13. I took my Trade well; and pleased my Master better then any of his other
Servants, for they were bad Husbands, and given to Drunkenness, but my Nature
was inclined to be sober, hating Drunkenness and Lust in the time of my Youth.

14. But when my time of Service was pretty far expired, I grew to more
understanding, and hearing in those days a great talk amongst the vulger
People, and especially, amongst Youth, Boys, and young Maids, of a people
called Puritans; some of these Puritans came to talk and discourse with my
Master, though he was no Religious Man.

15. But I being ignorant, did perceive they pleaded more for Righteousness,
and were better versed in the Scriptures then he was, so that I liked in my
self their Discourse upon the Scriptures, and pleaded for a Holy keeping of the
Sabbath Day, which my Master did not do, nor I his Servant.

16. But I not knowing my Right Hand from my Left in Religion at that time;
yet, methoughts I had a Love for those People called Puritans, and could not
endure my Companions should speak Evil of them.

17. And when young Boys as I was, and young Maids would speak Evil, and lay
many Slanders upon those People called Puritans, as if they had been the
wickedest People in the World, with many Scoffs and Jears.

18. Yet all this while my Heart did not close with their Reproaches, but
rather was inclined to love those People, and to think the better of them,
thinking in my self, Oh! that I might be so happy as them, yet I knew not what
Happiness was, nor what Condemnation was, for I knew nothing by my self, why I
should be Condemned.

19. But the Seed of God lay hidden in my Heart, which kept me from speaking
Evil of things I knew not, even from my Childhood, which many others of my Age
did.

20. Like unto those Children that mocked the Prophet Elisha, which two she
Bares did tare in pieces; so many of these mockers of Religion, in that my time
did come to great Poverty and Destruction in this World, but the God of Truth
preserved me, though I knew him not.

21. Also I was smitten with the Plague in that great sickness after King James
dyed; it was not extreme tedious to me, for the sore broke, and I recovered
quickly, and has not had half a days sickness since, not this forty Years and
more.

22. I never bestowed Sixpence in Physic in my Life for my self, but what the
Kitchen would afford, as Water Gruel, Broth, or such like, and I have had my
Health, and has been as perfect in Nature from all Distempers and Diseases, as
any Man in the World ever since.

CAP. IV. How the secret providence of God prevented the Expectation of the
Prophet in his choice of a Wife, and in his desire of Riches, of the Prophet's
Zeal for the Law, and a Righteous Life.
1. AFter this it came to pass my time of Service grew near out, and my Nature
had a great desire to be rich in this World, that I might no more be Servant to
any Man, and I thought the Trade of a Tailor would not gain much Riches, I
having little to begin with; and withal, I thought I should be too much subject
to the humors of People to please them, which I had experience of in my
Apprentiship.

2. So I went to work in a Brokers Shop in Hownsditch, who made Clothes to
sell, and did lend Money upon Pawns, called a Pawn-broker, and the Brokers Wife
had one Daughter alive; and after I had been there a while, the Mother saw that
I was a good Husband, and knew how to manage that way, being a Workman better
than they, and that I was a civil and sober young Man, not given to Drunkenness
nor no Debauchery.

3. She was willing to give her Daughter unto me to Wife, and I loved the Maid
well, and thought my self too inferior for her, because she had something to
take too, and the Only Child; and I having nothing, yet the Mother being well
persuaded of my good natural Temper, and of my good Husbandry, and that I had
no poor Kindred came after me to be any Charge or Burden to her Daughter.

4. Those things considered, she thought I might be a convenient Match for her
Daughter; so she seeing there was some kind of Affection between her Daughter
and me, she proposed unto me, that she would give me a Hundred Pound with her
to set up, which thing I axcepted on in my Mind, but told I was not yet a
Freeman of London.

5. So she urged me to be made Free as soon as I could, also she urged me to be
made sure to her Daughter before the Father-in-law and her self.

6. So the Maid and I were made sure by Promise before her Mother and Father-in
Law, and before I was made Free; and I was resolved to have the Maid to Wife,
and to keep a Brokers Shop, and lend Money upon Pawns, and grow Rich as others
did.

7. And the Maids Mother had Five Hundred Pounds more then what she promised
me, which her Husband knew not of, for he was a kind of a Distracted
Harebrain'd Man; his Name was Richardson, there is many alive at this Day that
knew them; but for the Daughter I should have had to Wife, she is alive at this
Day, and is worth Seven Hundred Pound a Year.

8. But the secret Providence of God prevented my expectation and desire of
being Rich in this World, in an unlawful way against the Checks of my own
Conscience.

9. But it came to pass in the 22d. Year of my Life, not being quite out of my
Apprenticeship, yet sure to the Maid, I went to work as a Journey-man, and
happened to work with a Puritan in Thomas Apostle London. His name was William
Reeve, John Reeves's Brother.

10. He was a very zealous Puritan at that time, and many others of that
Religion came to him, and disputed with me about the unlawfulness of lending
Money upon Pawns, because they pleaded it was Usury and Extortion, and did
allege many places of Scripture against it.

11. And I used all the Arguments of Reason I could for it, because I had a
great desire to be Rich, and considering I was engaged to this Maid, and that
her Mother would not let me have her to Wife, except I would keep a Brokers
Shop and lend Money, so that I was in great strait, and much perplexed in Mind.

12. For I loved the Maid, and desired to be Rich, but these Puritan People
being well versed in the Scripture words, and zealous for Righteousness,
threatened great Judgments, and danger of Damnation hereafter.

13. They overpowered my Natural Knowledge and civil Practices in me, and made
me afraid of eternal Damnation, and they pressed the Scriptures so hard upon
me, which exceedingly perplexed my Mind, reasoning in my self, that if I did
lend Money upon Usury and Extortion, I should be damned, and if I would not,
then I should not have the Maid to Wife.

14. So that the love of the Maid, and the fear of the loss of my Soul did
struggle witin me, and dispute within me like two distinct Spirits, even as a
Woman in Travail with two natural Sons in the Womb, so that I was in a great
strait which I should cleave unto.

15. So after much dispute and reasoning in my self, it came to this result, I
considered the Riches of this World, and the Love I had to the Maid, and I
weighed it in my Mind, and was loath to forsake it.

16. Then I considered my Soul was of more value, and what would it avail me to
be rich in this World for a Moment, and to loose my Soul, for I was extremely
fearful of eternal Damnation, thinking my Soul might go into Hell Fire without
a Body, as all People did at that time.

17. And after much struggling in my Mind, I came to this resolution in my self,
that rather then I would loose my Soul, or be damned to Eternity, I would loose
the Maid. And that way that would have made me Rich, and that I would be
zealous of the Law of God, as afterward I was.

18. Here the two Seeds of Faith and Reason did work in me, but I knew them not
by Name nor Nature at that time, nor many Years after.

19. But as I did fear, it came to pass, for the Maids Mother seeing my Mind so
changed, and so zealous of the Laws of the Scriptures, and that I would not
keep that way, as I thought to do before.

20. She would not let her Daughter have me to her Husband, so the Maid was
persuaded by her Mother.

21. And my Zeal to save my Soul, persuaded my Mind to let her go, so we parted.

22. Thus I forsook the World and a Wife, which I loved in the days of my
ignorance, for zeal to the Law of God, which I thought to be Truth, and the
true way, and so it was.

23. But I did not know it till many years after; but the Lord God of Truth had
respect unto my Person and Zeal at that time, and prevented me from falling
into that Snare of being rich in this World.

CAP. V. The Prophet shows his Care, his Fear, and Zeal in the Law of God, and
of the working of his Thoughts, and height of the Puritan Religion.
1. SO after I had parted with the Maid, and that way that did offend my
Conscience, I was resolved to live so upright to the Law of God, and so just
between Man and Man, that I thought in time I might procure favor with God,
and to attain assurance of my Salvation.

2. For I was fully possessed that there was really Salvation to be attained unto
by my Righteousness, and that there was a real Damnation to all those that were
unrighteous, or did not demean themselves so strictly as I did.

3. For I was exceeding fearful of Hell and eternal Damnation: The very
Thoughts of it made my Spirit many times fail within me.

4. But by Prayer, and my Righteous Practices, I did many times recover some
Hope and Peace again.

5. All this while I did suppose my Soul might go into Hell without a Body, and
that Millions of Souls were in Hellfire without Bodies; and that the Devil
being a Bodily Spirit did torment those Souls that came there, and that the
Devil had liberty to come out of Hell to Tempt People here on Earth, and go
there again, but no Soul that he had gotten there could come out of Hell more.

6. These things wrought in my Mind exceeding great Fear, and stirred me up to a
more exceeding Righteousness of Life, thinking thereby that my Righteous Life
would have cast out those tormenting Fears, but it did not.

7. Yet, notwithstanding, I did continue in my Zeal, and was earnest in the
Puritant Religion and Practice; neither did I know how to find Rest any where
else; neither did I hear any Preach in those Days but the Puritan Ministers,
whose Hair was cut short.

8. For if a Man with long Hair had gone into the Pulpit to preach, I would
have gone out of the Church again, tho he might preach better than the other.

9. But we Puritans being Pharisaically minded were zealous of outward
Appearance, and of outward Behavior, for we minded that more than their
Doctrine.

10. For we took it for granted, that God was a Spirit without a Body, and that
Christ Jesus his Son had a Body in form like Man, and that he did mediate to
God his Father, who was a Spirit without a Body, and that for Christ's sake,
this Spirit without a Body, did hear us, and speak Peace unto us.

11. Also I believed that the Devil was a Spirit without a Body, and could
assend out of Hell, when God did give him leave, and sugest evil Thoughts of
Lust, Theft, Murder, and Blasphemy against God; not thinking that these
Thoughts and Motions did arise out of Man's own Heart, but from a Devil, a
Spirit without a Body, without Man.

12. Also I thought, those Souls which God did Save were carried up to Heaven
without Bodies, and should be with God, who was a Spirit without a Body, and
that we should see Christ Jesus in Heaven, with his Body, with our Spirits that
were Saved without Bodies, till the Resurrection, and then Body and Soul should
be United together again.

13. Also we did believe, that the wicked Spirits should be cast into Hell Fire
without Bodies, where the Devil and his Angels, being Spirits without Bodies,
should Torment the Souls of the Wicked till the Day of Resurrection; and then
those Wicked Souls should be United to their Bodies again, and be Tormented
Body and Soul together, with the Devil and his Angels, who were Spirits without
Bodies in Hell Fire for ever and ever.

14. And we did believe that the Angels of God were Ministering Spirits without
Bodies, as God was a Spirit without a Body, so were they, and could minister
Comforts unto Men without Bodies.

15. And we did believe our own Souls to be Immortal, and could not Die, but
did subsist the good Spirits with God in Heaven without Bodies, and the wicked
Souls did subsist in Hell without Bodies.

16. These were some of the Fundamental Principles of Faith and Religion, we
Zealous Puritans did believe and practice; and there is no better Faith in the
World to this day in the generality of Professors of Religion.

17. These Things was I very well versed in, and I grew in great Experience and
Knowledge in the Letter of the Scriptures, and had a good Gift of Prayer, and
was very strong in Disputes, because my Mind was extremely perplexed with the
fear of Hell, notwithstanding my exact life to the Letter of the Law.

18. But the fear of Hell wrought in me much Experience, so that I did exceed
several other Men in that Knowledge which was in those days; and though I was
judged a very godly knowing-Man, and a happy Man by others, yet I could not
judge so of my self, but the fear of Hell was often rising up in me.

19. For I never Conceited well of my own Knowledge, but thought the Knowledge
of other Men did far exceed me, because they seemed to be better satisfied in
their Minds than I was.

20. Yet I thought in my self, that in time, by my Prayers and Righteousness,
and exact Walking and hearing of Preaching, that I might heal that Wound in my
Soul which was made, and I knew not for what.

21. For I never had committed any Sin that I knew of that did trouble my
Conscience.

22. Yet the fear of Hell produced many deep Sighs and Groans even from the
bottom of my Heart, for fear God had made me a Reprobate before I was Born,
because he did not answer my Prayers, nor speak Peace to my Soul;
notwithstanding my earnest Desires and Zeal for him I knew not at that time.

23. Yet many times I had great Refreshments of Soul, and as I thought,
Communion with God, whereby my Hope was increased for a Season, but it was
quickly lost again; so that the Troubles of my Mind did continue still many
years.

24. Yet at some times I had Elevasions in my Mind, and Raptures of Joy, that I
thought I should never be moved again.

25. But a while after all was lost again, and Doubting took place in my Soul;
but since, I saw the cause of those Raptures and fears of Hell were both
groundless.

CHAP. VI. After the Prophet has given a Description of his Marriage, of his
Wives, and of his Children, from the Twenty sixth year of his Life to the
Thirty Eighth, he then shows the alteration of the Religion in the Puritan
People, and of the Confusion that was amongst them.
1. AFter this, it came to pass in the Twenty sixth year of my Life, I took a
Wife that was of my own Mind and Religion. She was a Virgin of about 19 years
of Age, and I had by her Three Daughters in three years and an half's time.

2. The first Daughter I had by her was named Sarah, after her Mother's Name:
She is yet alive, and is become the most experimental and knowing'st Women in
Spiritual Things of that Sex in London; but I shall say no more of her here,
because I shall have occasion to speak of her hereafter.

3. Also my youngest Daughter Elizabeth, which I had by my Wife Sarah, is now
living, but the second Daughter died; when three years and an half was expired
my Wife Sarah died also.

4. After this, my Children being young, I put them forth to Nurse in the
Country, and lived a single Life, and followed my Trade, and lived very well.

5. Only the Spirit of fear of Hell was still upon me, but not so extreme as it
was the year before.

6. After this, in the Thirty second year of my Life, I took another Virgin to
Wife; Her Name was Mary, she was about nineteen years old, and I had by her
three Children, two Sons and one Daughter; the eldest died at three years old,
and the youngest was a Daughter and she died three days after she was born, and
my Wife Mary died five days after.

7. I had only one Son living by her, and I had her to Wife a matter of six
years; and that Son lived until John Reeve and I was chosen of God; and about a
year and an half afterward, being about nine years old, he died; so all the
Children of my second Wife died.

8. After my Wife Mary died, I was then about Thirty eight years old; but at
the time when I was Married to my Wife Mary, about six years before, there was
Raising of Arms by the Parliament against the King.

9. And generally the Puritans were all for the Parliament, and most of my
Society and Acquaitance in Religion did fall away from that way we did use, and
declined in Love one toward another, and every one got a new Judgment, and new
Acquaitance, and new Discipline.

10. Some of them turned to Presbytery, and would have Elders; and some turned
Independants, and would not let none work to them but their own People that was
in Church Fellowship; others fell to be Ranters, and some fell to be mere
Atheists.

11. So that our Puritan People were so divided and scattered in our Religion,
that I knew not which to take too, or which to cleave unto, for I was
altogether at a loss, for all the Zeal we formerly had was quite worn out.

12. And to join with any of these new Disciplines I could not, except I would
play the Hypocrite for a Livelihood, which my Heart always hated,
notwithstanding my Kindred by my first Wife Sarah, where all Puritans and
Zealous in Religion.

13. And I had a great stroke of Work of them, and they were a great Generation
of them, and most of them pretty Rich in this World; and most of them went into
Church Fellowship, so that I lost several of them because I could not join in
Church Fellowship.

14. For thought I, there is no more satisfaction to be found in Church
Fellowship than before, for none could serve God and be more Zealous for God
and for Righteousness than we were before.

15. So that going into Church Fellowship would not satisfy my Soul, as to my
Salvation, no more than before.

16. For satisfaction of Mind, as to another Life, was always my Aim and End
that I strove after, but could not attain to it as yet.

17. So I being at a great loss in my Mind, what to do, I had lost my Friends
and Relations because I could not follow them in Church Fellowship, and I had
no freedom in my self so to do.

18. For I had seen the utmost Perfection and Satisfaction that could be found
in that way, except I would do it for Loaves, but Loaves was never my aim, but
a real rest in my Mind I always sought after, but could find it no where.

CHAP. VII. The Prophet shows his great dissatisfaction and loss in Religion,
even almost to Despair, yet in the Conclusion, resolves to hold his Integrity,
to do Justly, and keep from actual Sin, but mind Religion no more, but left
Happiness and Misery to Gods disposal.
1. SO I seeing these Puritans of my Acquaintance they had no Comfort nor Peace
of Mind, as to a Life to Come, that were in Church Fellowship than before, nor
so much.

2. Then I saw several of them that were Zealous before toward God, and
Righteousness toward Man; and now they had left that Zeal, and turned Ranters,
not only in Judgment but in Practice, to the Destruction both of Soul and Body.

3. When I saw this, that neither the Righteous could find Peace in the Days of
their Righteousness, but were afraid of Hell; nor those that turned from their
Righteousness to actual Wickedness, I thought I must needs go to Hell.

4. Yet they said all was well and quiet with them, so that I was as David was,
almost like to have slept, and to have said in my Heart, sure there is no God:
But all things comes by Nature, because the Righteous could find no Peace in
their Righteousness, as I could not; nor the Wicked were not troubled for their
Sins.

5. But when I went into the Sanctuary of my Mind, I considered the visible
things of Nature, I could not conceive how this vast Element we see could make
it self; or, how the Sun, Moon, and Stars could give Being to themselves.

6. How could the Beasts of the Field, the Fouls of the Air, the Fish of the
Sea: I could not imagine how these things could give Being to themselves, nor
how they should come by Nature, nor how they should Create one another. Then
thought I, Man might as well Create himself, and come by Nature as those Things.

7. So I thought there must needs be some Original Cause, or, supreme Power,
that gave Being to these Things, and has placed a Law of Order in all Things,
suitable to its Nature.

8. This supreme Power that made those Things; That Power that is the Cause of
Causes we call God; but what he is in himself I knew not at that time; But
these Thoughts preserved me from saying in my Heart, as the Fool does, there is
no God. Many of my Acquaintance did say in their Hearts, and Tongues both, That
there is no God, but Nature only.

9. But notwithstanding I did not know that God that made all things, and Man
in his own Image and Likeness, yet I considered that innocence of Heart, and a
just upright Spirit, was good in it self, if there were no God to Reward it

10. And that Unrighteousness and Lust after his Neighbors Wife, and not to be
of an upright Spirit, it was Wickedness in it self, if there were no God to
punish it.

11. Therefore I was loath to let go my Integrity, but kept close to it; for as
I had been Innocent from my Childhood to this Day, I was resolved to keep to it
to the end, if there were nothing after Death, yet would I keep my Heart
upright, and would do nothing to wound my Consience.

12. For I never had no Guilt of actual Sin that did ever trouble me.

13. So with this Resolution I did resolve to live in, to do just between Man
and Man, and to keep from all actual Sin, as I ever had been, and not to mind
any Religion more, for I saw all profession of Religion in all Men was vain and
unsatisfactory to all Men, as it was to me.

14. So I gave over all public Prayer, and Hearing and Discourse about
Religion; and lived an honest and just natural Life: And I found more Peace
here then in all my Religion, and if there were anything, either of Happiness
or Misery after Death, I left it to God, which I knew not, to do what he would
with me.

15. But I was in good Hope at that time, that there was nothing after Death,
but all Happiness and Punishment was in this Life: For I saw a temporal
Punishment follow Wickedness in this Life to many.

16. And I saw Prosperity to those that were Righteous, even in this Life; so
that I was in good Hopes all Punishments and Happiness would end in this Life.

17. So I was resolved to keep myself as I always had done, unspotted of the
World, and not to defile my Conscience: And I had a great deal of peace of Mind
in this Condition. And in this Condition did I continue some three Years, until
I was about forty years old, and in the year 1650.

CHAP. VIII. The Prophet gives a Description of John Tannye and John Robins,
being counted greater than Prophets, and sets forth their Appearance and
wonderful Actions.
1. AFter this it came to pass, in the year 1650. I heard of several Prophets
and Prophetess that were about the Srteets, and declared the Day of the Lord,
and many other wonderful Things, as from the Lord.

2. Also, at the same time I heard of too other Men that were counted greater
than Prophets, to wit, John Tannye, and John Robins.

3. John Tannye, he declared himself to be the Lord's High Priest, and that he
was to act over the Law of Moses again: Therefore he Circumcised himself
according to the Law.

4. Also he declared that he was to gather the Jews out of all Nations, and
lead them to Mount Olives to Jerusalem; and that he was King of Seven Nations:
With many other strange and wonderful Things.

5. And as for John Robins, he declared himself to be God Almighty; and that he
was the Judge of the Quick and of the Dead; and that he was that first Adam
that was in that innocent State; and that his Body had been Dead this Five
Thousand, Six Hundred and odd Years, and now he was risen again from the Dead;
And that he was that Adam Melchisadick that met Abraham in the Way; and
received Tithes of him.

6. Also he said, he had raised from the Dead that same Cain that killed Abel;
and that he had raised that same Judas that betrayed Christ; and now they were
Redeemed to be happy.

7. Also he said he had raised several of the Prophets, as Jeremiah, and
others; and that he had raised the same Benjamin, Jacob's Son, that had been
Dead so many Thousand Years, now he was raised again.

8. I saw all those that was said to be raised by John Robins, and they owned
themselves to be the very same Persons that had been Dead for so long time.

9. Also I saw several others of the Prophets that was said to be raised by
him, and they did own they were the same; for I have had Nine or Tenn of them
at my House at a time, of those that were said to be raised from the Dead.

10. For I do not speak this from Hearsay from others, but from a perfect
Knowledge, which I have seen and heard from themselves.

11. Also they declared unto me, That their God John Robins was to gather out
of Englad and else where, an Hundred and Forty Four Thousand Men and Women, and
lead them to Jerusalem to Mount Olivet, and there to make them happy: And that
he would feed them with Manna from Heaven: And that he would divide the
Red Sea, and that they should go through upon dry Land.

12. Also he said, that those Prophets he had raised should be their Leaders,
and on Joshua's Garment should be the Moses Man that should be chief under his
God John Robins: And that all the Leaders should have Power by the clap of
their Hands, and a stamp of their Foot to destroy any that did oppose them.

13. Also I have seen one of his Prophets, that should have this Power, to
kneel down and pray to John Robins, as unto God Almighty; with such high and
Heavenly Expressions which was mavelous unto me to hear.

14. Those Things, and many more lying Signs and Wonders did he show to some;
as presenting the appearance of Angels, burning shining Lights, Half-Moons and
Stars in Chambers and thick Darkness, where it was Light to the Fantasies of
People, when they covered their Faces in the Bed.

15. They said he presented Serpents, Dragons, and his Head in a flame of Fire,
and his Person rideing upon the Wings of the Wind.

16. Also his Prophets had Power from him to damn any that did oppose, or speak
evil of him, they not knowing he was neither false nor true, for this Rule he
went by.

17. That he, or, she that would speak evil of Things they knew not, they would
as soon speak evil of a true Prophet as a false Prophet.

18. So his Prophets gave Sentence of Damnation upon many, to my Knowledge, for
speaking evil of him, they not knowing him, whether he was true or false.

19. And I saw afterward that his Sentence was true upon them, for they would
have said as much to the true Christ as they did to him: So I saw his Sentance
was true and efectual upon those he condemned, notwithstanding he himself was
false.

20. For this was observed, that the Elect Seed would be preserved from
speaking Evil of things they knew not. That belongs only to the Seed of the
Serpent to speak Evil of things he does not know: For who upon Earth did know,
at that time whether he was False or True: I say none, not one.

CHAP. IX. Of the Prophets Application conserning these wonderful things, and
of his Qualification.
1. NOW this John Robins's knowledge in the Scriptures was more at that time
than any Man in the World.

2. These things had I perfect Knowledge of, yet was I quiet and still, and
heard what was said and done, and spoke against nothing that was said or done.

3. But showed Kindness and Mercy to all of them, Marvelling in myself what the
Ephect of these things would be.

4. And one of his Prophets came to my House very often, and he told me all
things that was done amongst them; and he had a very high Language, and very
knowing in the Scriptures, and spoke as an Angel of God.

5. And my natural Temper was always merciful to Strangers; and this place of
Scripture run much in my Mind: Forget not to entertain Strangers, for some in
entertaining of Strangers have entertained Angels. So I never let him go
without Eating and Drinking.

6. And if I had nothing in the House to Eat, if I had but Eighteen Pence I
would give him one Shilling of it; and if I had but Twelve Pence, I would give
him Six Pence of it.

7. This I did many times, though I had need enough myself, for I had Three
Children to maintain at that time: Two Daughters by my Wife Sarah, and one Son
by my Second Wife Mary, then alive.

8. All these things never moved me to rejoice, in any Hope of any Happiness or
Deliverance to any better Condition then I was then in, or to be in any worse
Condition after Death, then I was in at present.

9. But I kept close to my Integrity of Heart: That is, I would do nothing that
should condemn my Conscience, but would do what I could to justify my
Conscience.

10. Tho I looked for no Reward hereafter, yet I would do well, that Sin might
not ly at the Door of my Conscience.

11. And these things working in my Mind kept me from actual Sin, and from the
Pollutions of the Flesh.

12. Yet all this while was I as one without God in this World, as to my
knowledge of him; I had none that was true.

13. But the Lord God of Truth, had Respect unto my Person, and to the
upriteness of my Heart, but I knew it not all that time; as will more plainly
appear in the following Discourse.

CHAP. X. The Prophet here shows of a Melancholy that came upon him, and
afterward of Two Motions arising in him, and speak as Two living Voices.
1. AFter this, in the beginning of the Year 1651. and in the Year of my Life
41. and better.

2. In the beginning of the year it came to pass upon a Day in the Month called
April, I being silent, all alone, my Children being all abroad, there fell upon
me a great Melancholy upon my Spirit, and I knew not for what; yet I was
pressed exceedingly in my Heart with Fear.

5. So I began to cast about in my Mind, what I had done that I should thus
fear: So I called to mind all my former Righteousness and Zeal which I had
left, thinking in myself that might be the Cause of this Fear.

4. Reasoning in myself whether I had best turn again to my former Practice of
Religion, or not.

5. There did arise in me an Answer to that; and said, No, For thou know
when thou did worship in that Zeal thou had no Peace, but was often
tormented with fear of Hell, so to no purpose to turn or go back to Aegipt
again.

6. Then did two Motions arise in me, and speak in me, as two lively Voices; as
if two Spirits had been speaking in me, one answering the other, as if they
were not my own Spirit.

7. But I knew afterward they were the two Seeds strove in me for mastery.

8. So my old Fears of Hell rose in me, as it did formerly, when a Puritan.

9. So I began to reason in myself, what I should do to escape being damned to
Eternity, for I dreaded the Thoughts of Eternity; for I did not so much mind to
be saved, as I did to escape being damned.

10. For I thought, if I could but ly still in the Earth for ever, it would be
as well with me, as it would be if I were in eternal Happiness; for I believed
the Soul was mortal many years before, which Belief yielded me much Peace of
Mind: And was in hope God would never raise me again.

11. For I did not care whether I was Happy, so I might not be Miserable. I
cared not for Heaven so I might not go to Hell, but I could not be sure I
should go to Heaven, nor certain I should escape Hell which was a great
perplexity to my Mind, not knowing which way to help myself out of Gods Hands.

12. Now this place of Scripture of Paul in the Romans pressed hard upon me,
What if God willingly make thee a Vessel of Wrath, fited for Destruction: And
that saying, What art thou; O Man! that replyest against God?

13. Shall the thing that is formed, say unto him that formed it, why have thou
made me thus: And that saying, Shall not the Potter have Power over the Clay,
of the same Lump, to make one Vessel to Honor, and another to Dishonor.

14. These things pressed hard upon my Soul, even to the wounding of it. Then I
replied against this, and said in my Heart, That God did seem to be more cruel
than Man, for Man made Vessels of Honor and Dishonor of dead senceless Clay,
that is neither capable of Honor nor Dishonor, nor capable of Pain, nor of
Misery; nor of Joy or Happiness, Oh! that I had been as the Clay I tread upon,
rather than a living Man.

15. But God made Vessels of Wrath, to bear eternal Torments, of living
sensible Creatures, not giving any reason why; but it was his prerogative Will
so to do, and who shall hinder him.

16. The apprehension of this sunk deep into my Heart, and brought forth deep
Sighs and Groans.

17. And it was answered me again; saying, that God has a Prerogative Power
above and over all Life because he gave Life to Man and all Creatures else. And
as a Man has a prerogative Power over dead Clay, so has God a prerogative
Power over all Life, to make what Life he will a Vessel of Wrath for the
manifestation of his own Power and Glory.

18. For if all Life were made to be happy, or all Mankind saved, then where
would Gods Honor appear, But because the greatest part of Mankind are made
Vessels of Wrath to bear eternal Torments, therefore it is that God's Redeemed
ones shall praise him.

19. So that there is a particular People to be saved, but my Fear was that I
was none of the Redeemed.

20. And it was said within me, do thou consider the nature of a prerogative
Power, that is above all Law; who shall dispute with a prerogative Power that
is above all Law, and can do what it will with living Creatures, even as the
Potter does what he will with the dead Clay.

CHAP. XI. The Prophets further Reasoning in himself how hardly God dealt with
him; and of his Reasoning against Adam: And shows how a contrary Seed; or,
Voice in him repeld his Arguments.
1. WHen I considered this, I wished in myself I had never been born, then had
I not been sensible neither of Joy nor Sorrow: I did not so much seek after
Heaven as to be freed from Hell.

2. Again, I Reasoned in myself wishing that I had dyed in my Infancy: I
thought, if I were a Vessel of Wrath, my Torments would be the less, than now I
am grown to maturity of Age.

3. But the Answer said to this, Though thy Torment be less than others, yet it
is Eternal: This Eternity struck a deep Fear in me, which made me almost
despair.

4. Again I reasoned in myself, saying in my Thoughts, That God dealt something
hardly with me, that he should save Adam, which brought me, and all Mankind
into this Condemnation; so that I must be damned for original Sin, which I
received from my first Parents.

5. And that God should save him that brought me into this Condition, and
Condemn me that could no way avoid it, neither by Prayer toward God, nor by
Righteousness toward Man.

6. So that right or wrong, I must be damned by God's prerogative Will, and
which way to help myself I could not tell.

7. Then I reasoned in my Heart with Anger against Adam, saying within myself,
God made him upright, and gave him Power to stand, but he did not, but did fall
from that Innocence and Uprightness, and so corrupted his Seed: And so by this
means do I come to be damned.

8. Then was I answered in myself, as it were with a Voice without me, saying,
How will thou help thyself if God will save Adam and condemn thee; shall not a
prerogative Power do what he will?

9. Then was brought to my Mind that saying, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have
I hated: Before the Children had done either Good or Evil, that the Purpose of
God, according to Election might stand: So that it is not of him that wills,
nor him that runeth, but God that shows Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, and
whom he will he hardens.

10. In this I saw that a prerogative Power and Will of God is not to be
contended with.

11. These Scriptures and Arguments upon them, come so powerfully upon my
Spirit, that my Heart failed me, and my Hope begun to turn to Despair.

CHAP. XII. The Prophet raises Arguments more, to give him some Hope that he
might escape Hell; but another mosttional Voice gave Answer, which quite
frustrated all his Hopes again:
1. AFter a while I recovered another Argument or two, which I thought might
give me some Hope to escape Hell: Which was this, I said in my Heart, There can
be no Hell till the Day of Judgment, and except God does raise me and others
again I cannot be damned; hoping there would be no Resurrection at all, then
should I ly still in the Earth for ever.

2. Then Answer was made me to this: Do thou think that God would be so
unrighteous as to deceave Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Moses and the Prophets,
and Apostles, and all righteous Men that believed and put their Trust in God in
hope of the Resurrection? And if God does not raise them again, then God has
made them suffer great Sufferings, and loss of the Lives of many of them, in
hope of the Life to come, and of the Reward hereafter; which if there be no
Resurrection of the Dead after this natural Death.

3. And if God does not raise them again they cannot enjoy any such thing as
eternal Happiness. Then to what purpose did God spoke those Words, and make
such glorious Promises to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and to the Prophets and
Apostles.

4. That he would be the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob; for God is not the God of the Dead but of the Living, for all live unto
him.

5. For said I, in my Heart, if God do not raise Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
again in the Resurrection, then perhaps God may not raise me, which would have
gladed my Heart that I could have been sure God would never have raised the
Dead.

6. But the Answer said to me, That God is powerful, and has Power to fulfill
his Promise he has made unto Man, in that he can and will raise Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and the rest, at the last Day, and will give them the
Inheritance he promised them in this Life. Consider, said the motional Voice,
what an infinite prerogative Power can do.

7. Because God does not raise the Dead daily as he does other visible Wonders:
And in this visible Creation thou does think that God cannot raise the Dead
when they are turned to Dust, because thou never did read he did.

8. But this know, That God can do that which he never did, when his time
appointed is come: For there is a necessity that God should raise the Dead; and
that there is a Day; or, Time prefixed in God's Will, which none knows; no,
not the Angels in Heaven, but himself only.

9 Also the Resurrection of the Dead is the last great Work God has to do: And
he has power to do this his last Work, to put an End to this World, as he had
power to Create this World, and make a Beginning of it.

10. So that God will perform his Promise in the Resurrection to all the
Righteous, in that he will give them everlasting Life in another Kingdom above
the Stars, and he will execute that Damnation upon the Seed of the Serpent,
wicked unbelieving persecuting Reprobates, here upon this Earth, where they
acted all their Wickedness, to Eternity.

11. And that none that have lost their Lives for his Promise sake; but it
shall be given them Life everlasting that day: Which if God do not raise them
again, then is he the God of the Dead, and not of the Living.

12. Then was Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob their Faith vain: The Prophets and the
Apostles Faith vain, and their Condision, in believing God would raise them
again, and he does it not; their Condision is worse than the Wicked: Which
thing I was afraid to think of.

13. Also I was afraid to question, or doubt of Gods Prerogative Power in
raising the Dead at the last Day, or performing his Promise to Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, and the rest of the Seed of the Lord: But I could have been glad if
there had been no Resurrection at all, neither of the Righteous nor Unrighteous.

14. But thought I, what is that to me, if I be raised to Hellfire. Then I
reasoned in myself, saying, It is above Five Thousand Years since the Creation
of this World, and perhaps it may last Five Thousand Years more; then shall I
ly still in the Earth a great while before I am raised: So that I shall escape
the Torments of Hell for a long time, thinking to have Hope in this Argument.

15. But I was thrown out here immediately, and my Hope cut off; for the Answer
said, What if it should be Five Thousand Years before thou art raised again,
consider it will not be a quarter of an Hours time before thou art raised again

16. For there is no time to the Dead, all time is to the Living; for it will
not be thought a quarter of an Hour by Adam the first Man, when he is raised
from the Dead; he shall not think he has been in the Grave one quarter of an
Hour.

17. Then I conceived if a Man slept a sound Sleep three Days, that is no time
to him; Time is known to him that was awake that three Days.

18. So this yielded me no Comfort, but increased my Fears of Hell the more.

19. One Argument more I had arising in me, thinking to have got some Ease and
Hope here: Thought I, this World has been so many Thousand Years already, and
may be as many more, for ought I know.

20. And there has been many Millions of People since the Creation, more than
can be numbered, and more than be numbered has been drowned in the Sea and
other places.

21. Sure, said I in myself, God cannot remember every particular Person since
the Creation thereof: Thought I, perhaps God may forget me, and not raise me
again, then shall I ly still and be quiet, and be as happy, never to be as
those that are raised to eternal Joys.

22. But the Answer to this speak, with a strong motional Voice, saying, How
will thou know whether any is missing when God does raise the Dead? How can
thou tell whether any particular Person is wanting by Sea or Land that is not
raised.

23. But however, said the Voice, if there be any wanting that is not raised,
God will be sure to raise thee.

24. Then had I no more to say, nor to plead for myself, but must yield and
submit to the prerogative Will of God; if he would save me he might, if he
would damn me he might, I could no ways prevent his Will.

25. And this was my Resolution, seeing the Case in matter of Salvation so with
me, that it lay in God's prerogative Will only, I was resolved to seek after
him in Forms of Worship no more.

26. But as I had been always kept innocent and upright in Heart toward that
God I knew not, and Just between Man and Man, and never had committed any
deadly Sin to trouble my Conscience, so I was resolved to keep myself free from
Sin to the end of my Life.

27. Thinking that if I were damned merely by Gods prerogative Will, my Torment
would be the more easy.

28. Here a secret Voice said, Tho thy Torment may be easier than others, yet
it is eternal.

29. This Word Eternity caused my Heart to fail within me, yet I resolved in
myself to live justly, and get as good a Livelihood as I could in this World,
and let God do what he would with me after Death.

30. All this Dispute which I have written before, and a great deal more, it
was in one Day.

CHAP. XIII. The Prophets submitting to Gods prerogative Power; immediately
wrought in him Peace and Quietness of Mind, even to all admiration in Wisdom
and ravishing Excellencies.
1. IN the next place I shall give the Reader a little account of the Ephects
of this Dispute, as follows.

2. When I had done this I was quiet and still in my Mind, but very Melancholy,
and faint and sickly with the Trouble of my all Day in this Dispute which was
in my Mind.

3. Neither could I quiet my Thoughts until I did submit to God's prerogative
Power.

4. There was abundance more of motional Voices spoke in me that Day, besides
what I have here set down, but these were the most remarkable to be taken
notice of by the Reader; yet it was a blessed Day to me, as it will appear
hereafter by that which follows.

5. After this, that very same Night the Windows of Heaven were opened to me,
and the Fountains of the Water in Heaven were broken up, and the Water of Life
run down from Heaven upon me.

6. And the Spirit of Faith in my Heart here on Earth did arise up with sweet
Waters of Peace, so that I said in myself, as Peter did in another Case, It is
good for me to be here for I was in the Paradise of Heaven, within Man upon
Earth; neither could I desire any better Heaven.

7. Then was the Scriptures opened unto me, so swiftly, and more swiftly than
my Understanding could receive it; and the Waters of Life run down from the
understanding of the Scriptures abundantly: And the knowldge of the Scriptures
flowed in upon my Understanding faster than I could receive it, and yet I
thought my Mind was very swift.

8. Then was no saying of Scripture too hard for me to understand: Then I saw
that the assurance of eternal Life, here on this side of Death: it lay in
understanding the Scriptures.

9. Then I marvelled no longer at the Fathers of Old, in their expressing their
Faith in God, and depending upon Gods Promises to them.

10. Also I saw the Excellency of the Prophets Prophesies; Neither did I wonder
any more at Paul's Expressions, when he was wrapped up into the third Heaven, and
saw things unutterable.

11. Neither could I utter the Revelations of the Scriptures as was poured upon
me at that time, nor the Joy and Peace I received from the Revelation of the
Scriptures.

12. For it brought unto my Mind all my Experience I had formerly, and showed
what did uphold me at that time, even a single upright Heart before God and Man.

13. Then the assurance of eternal Life cast out all Doubts and Fears of
Condemnation; neither did I ever doubt of that more after that day.

14. Then I praised the Scriptures highly, which I had laid aside several years
before.

15. Then did I see it was not in vain to submit to Gods prerogative Will, and
to wait in patience.

16. Here was that saying of Scripture fulfilled in me, Isaiah 42.16. And I
will bring the Blind by a Way that they knew not; I will lead them in Paths
they have not known; I will make Darkness Light before them. Though this
Scripture was fulfilled in Christ's time, yet it was fulfilled in me now.

17. For I was led by a Faith now, which I did not know: That was by the
Revelation of Faith. This was a Path I did not know: for I never knew what
Revelation was before.

18. Also this Revelation of Faith, it made that Darkness of the immagination
of Reason be light before me, to see the Truth of those Sayings of Scripture,
Matt. 4.16. The People that sat in Darkness saw great Light; and to them which
sat in the Region and Shadow of Darkness Light is sprung up.

19. This Scripture also was fulfilled in me at that time, for I sat in
Darkness, and in the Shadow of Death but the Day before.

20. But in the Evening the Light of Faith sprung up in my Soul, and the
Revelation of it took me, as it were, by the Hand, from place to place in
Scripture, and showed me the meaning of it.

21. Also it led me to that place of Scripture, Luke 1.79. To give Light to
them that sat in Darkness, and to guide our Feet into the way of Peace.

22. Here did I see that the Day before I sat in Darkness and in the Shadow of
Death, but now the Light of Life is risen in me, and gave me Revelation to
guide my Feet in the Path of Peace, where no Fear nor Doubt should ly in my
Way, never to stumble more.

23. These, and many more, places of Scripture was set before me, and the Light
of them shined clear about my Understanding, and gave me the Interpretation of
all Scripture, and all Questions in Spiritual Things that could arise out of
the Heart of Man, was easy to me to answer.

CHAP. XIV. Of the time of the Prophets Revelation, his Satisfaction in it, and
his Resolution to fit still now, and be quiet from Disputes about Religion. Yet
shows that Providence ordered it otherways. Of the Prophet Reeve's Revelation
of the Raven and Dove.
1. THis Revelation aforesaid was upon me Six Hours; it began about nine of the
Clock at Night, and about twelve of the Clock I got a little Sleep, 'till three
of the Clock in the Morning; then it came upon me again, and lasted 'till six
of the Clock in the Morning: And so it did in like manner for four Nights
together, six Hours in a Night.

2. And I never was without motional Voices opening the Scriptures all Day
long, when I was alone, for a long time after*

3. So that I was so well satisfied in my Mind as to my eternal Happiness, so
that I was resolved now to be quiet and still, and not to meddle no more with
Religion, but to let every one go on in their own way, for I looked at no Bodies
Peace and Happiness but my own.

4. So now I thought to get as good a Living as I could in this World, and live
as comfortably as I could here, for I knew all things would be well with me
hereafter: Thinking that this Relvelation should have been benificial to no
body but myself.

5. For I loved for to be private and still, for my Nature could never endure
to be public. So I thought all was well now I had attained my Desire.

6. But when I thought to be most Secure and most Private; in a little time
after, it made me the most public. I not thinking that this Revelation was a
Preparation for God to choose me to be a Commissioner of the Spirit, to declare
the Mystery of the true God, and the Interpretation of the Scriptures which is
Life and Salvation unto Men; whereby I was made the most public Man in the
World in spiritual Things.

7. This Revelation continued with me all one from April to January in the Year
1651. and in the year of my Life 41. And in the same year John Reeve came often
to my House.

8. And he hearing me speak such high Revelation, and giving such
Interpretation of Scripture, he was so taken with my Language that his Desires
were extreme earnest unto God, which he knew not at that time, that he might
have the same Revelation as I had.

9. His Desires were so great, that he was troublesome unto me, for I could not
follow my Business quietly for his asking me Questions, for if I went out of
one Room into another, he would follow me to talk to me.

10. So that I was weary of his Company, yet I was loath to tell him so,
because I knew he did it out of Innocence of his Heart, and Love to the Things
which I spoke.

11. Thus, as aforesaid; John Reeve continued, and came almost every Day to my
House most part of that Summer and Winter. And in the Month of January 1651.
about the middle of the Month, John Reeve had the Revelation of the Scriptures
in a large measure.

12. So he came to me very joyful the next Morning, and said, Cousin Lodowick,
now, says he, I know what Revelation of Scripture is as well as thee. Said I,
Let me hear what Scripture is opened unto you.

13. He answered, and said, as he was thinking of several things; there f^^^'d
q^iet stilness upon his Mind, and immediately there was presented to his
Understanding this place of Scripture, Genesis, viij. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. verses;
Concerning Noah's Ark with the Raven and Dove.

14. Of which Scripture this was the Interpretation.

15. This Raven and Dove which Noah sent forth of the Ark, says he, was a Tipe
of the Two Seeds in every Man, and the Ark was a Tipe of the Body of Man.

16. For there is two Motions always speaking in Man. Now, says he, the Body
of Man signifies the Ark of God; or, the Ark of Noah.

17. The Raven that is sent forth of the Ark signifies the Motions of Reason in
Man; for the Motions of Reason goes out of Man, walking through dry Places,
seeking Rest but can find none.

18. Also it was the Reason of Man that took Christ, when on Earth, up into an
exceeding high Mountain, and showed him all the Kingdoms of the World.

19. This Reason in Man is that Raven that goes forth of the Ark, the Body of
Man, to and fro, and takes Comfort in nothing but earthly Things.

20. For as soon as ever the Tops of the Mountains of the Earth did appear, the
natural Raven never returned into the Ark again, as you may see in the 5th.
Verse.

21. So is it with the Reason of Man; That Raven when it goes forth by its
motions out of Body of Man the Ark: It goes to and fro the Earth.

22. For the Reason of Man cannot endure to be enclosed or confined, but will
be flying upon the Mountains of the Earth, or in the Air. Therefore it is
called the Prince of the Air, which rules in the Hearts of the Children of
Disobedience.

23. Now what Rules in the Children of Disobedience Hearts but the Spirit of
Reason, the Raven, which goes out of the Ark, the Body of Man, and lives upon
the Mountains of earthly Things.

24. Also the Dove that Noah sent forth of the Ark signified the Seed of Faith.

25. And when Faith sends forth her motions out of the Ark, her Body, they are
innocent as a Dove, humble, meek and low.

26. And when she finds the Flood, and Waters of Trouble of Persecution upon
the Face of the Earth, the Dove enters into her Ark, her Body, again, and is
quiet and still till the Waters of Trouble be abated.

27. For the Dove cannot fly upon the top of the Mountains of earthly things,
as Reason the Raven can.

28. The Seed of Faith, the Dove can find no Rest there but when the Waters of
Trouble are abated, and the dry Land appears, and the Olive Trees of Joy and
Gladness are to be seen.

29. Then the Dove, the Seed of Faith, can go out of its Body, the Ark, and
fetch an Olive Branch of Peace and Joy in its Mouth, and return into its Body
the Ark again, and there remain until it is turned out of the Ark by Death.

CHAP. XV. Showing how John Reeve's Revelation gave him Satisfaction, and full
Resolution to sit still and be quiet, never meddling about Religion more: But
contrary to the Resolutions of them both, a little while after, where made the
greatest medlers of Religion of all the World.
1. TO this purpose, as aforesaid, did John Reeve declare his first Revelation,
with a many more Expressions which he uttered at that time with great Joy of
Heart, he not thinking in the least, nor I neither, that it was a Preparation
for God to choose him, nor me neither, to be his two last Prophets and Witnesses
of the Spirit.

2. For, said he unto me at that time, Cousin Lodowick, now I am satisfied in
my Mind, and know what Revelation is, I am resolved now to meddle no more with
Religion, nor go forth after any upon that account.

3. But to get as good a Livelihood as I can in this World, and let God alone
with what shall be hereafter.

4. Now he had been with John Robins not many Weeks before he knew, or had
Revelation himself.

5. For John Robins Knowledge and Language overpowerd John Reeve, before he had
this Revelation: Therefore he said, now he would not go forth after any, upon
that account, no more.

6. Thus, when he thought to be most quiet, and not to meddle with any about
Religion; and so was I also then, a little while after we were made the
greatest Medlers in Religion of all Men in the World.

7. Because our Faces were against all Men's Religion in the World, what Sex or
Opinion soever, as will appear hereafter, by our Writings and Speakings.

8. John Reeve, nor I, little thought at that time that this Revelation we had
given us did prepare us for a greater Work than for the Peace of our own Minds.

9. But it proved that God prepared us for a Commission, and that he did intend
to choose us two to be his last Prophets and Witnesses of the Spirit, as will be
seen, as follows.

10. For after John Reeve had this first Revelation aforementioned, it did
continue and increase exceedingly, that it grew very high in him for two Weeks
together.

11. And at the two Weeks end God speak unto him by Voice of Words, to the
hearing of the Ear, three Mornings together* as is more largely set down in his
first Book he wrote, Called A Trancendant Spiritual Treatis.

12. Where the Words of God, as he spoke to him, are set down plainly, as they
were spoken to him, the 3d. 4th. and 5th. Days of February. 1651. and in the
year of John Reeve's Life 42. and in the year of my Life 41.

13. Thus I have given the Reader a little hint, whereby he may see the ground
of things, and the rise how these wonderful things came to pass.

14. Also what we were at first, and how we were acted out in the time of our
Lives, and of the Experience I had in the Days of my Ignorance, and of my
Dispute with God and my own Soul.

15. And of that great Revelation I had before John Reeve had any; and of the
Ravelation John Reeve had, before God spoke to him in the year 1651.

16. And now in the Treatis following I shall only speak of some of the most
remarkable Acts and Passages which has been acted and dun by us since we
received our Commission from God.

17. That after Ages may see some of the Acts of the two Witnesses of the
Spirit, as well as their Writings and their Doctrine now in this last Age. As
they have read of some of the wonderful Acts of Moses and the Prophets, and the
Acts of the Apostles. So there will be some remarkable Acts of the Witnesses of
the Spirit left upon Record; Which is as follows.

The End of the First Part.
The Second Part.
CHAP. I. Of the Commission given the Prophet Mugleton's Children, blessed by
the Prophet Reeve; the great Wisdom given unto Sarah Mugleton.
1. THE first Morning God spoke to John Reeve, he came to my House, and said
Cousin Lodowick, God has given thee unto me for ever: And the Tears ran down
both sides his Cheeks amain.

2. So I asked him what was the matter, for he looked like one that had been
rissen out of the Grave; he being a fresh colored Man the day before: And the
Tears ran down his Cheeks apace.

3. So he told me the same Words as is written in his first Book; and said unto
me, That God had given him a Commission and that he had given Lodowick Mugleton
to be his Mouth: And said, at the same time was brought to his Mind that
saying, That Aaron was given to be Moses's Mouth.

4. But, said he, what my Message is, he could not tell: But, said he, if God
do not speak unto me the next Morning, I will come no more at thee.

5. Which I was in good Hopes he would not, for I was willing to be quiet.

6. Also he said at the same time, Cousin Lodowick, Thy Children are all
blessed, but especially thy Daughter Sarah, she shall be the Teacher of all the
Women in London.

7. She heard him say these Words, as she stood upon the Stairs, for she was
afraid of him, that he would rather have condemned her; because he never did
love her so well as he did the youngest Daughter.

8. But he spoke not then for Affection, but as the Revelation moved him.

9. And she was the first Person he blessed to Eternity, after God spoke to him
the first Morning.

10. It was the more marvelous, because it was never heard this many Ages, that
a poor Man should have that Power to Bless and Curs Men and Women to Eternity.

11. And she believed him, and did grow exceedingly in Experience, and in
Disputes with Religious People; and they marvelled that one so young should
have such Knowledge and Wisdom to answer Questions: So that she did afterward
indeed become the Teacher of all Women in London, in matters of Faith and
Religion.

12. And she was employed by John Reeve, at the first, to carry Letters to any
that he did send unto.

13. And there were several Persons came afterward to my House, more to
discourse with her than us.

14. She was at that time about fourteen Years of Age, when this Blessing was
given her by John Reeve: And this was the first Morning.

15. But I was in good hopes God would not speak to him no more, for I was
loath to be public: I would gladly have sat still and be quiet, and not to
contend with People about Religion.

16. But the second Morning God spoke unto him, and told him what he should do,
as is set down in the Book aforesaid.

17. John Reeve said unto me the second Morning, If thou will not obey to go
along with me, I must pronounce thee Cursed to Eternity, as God did me, had not
I obeyed him.

18. Then said I, In case they will not obey me when I speak unto them, I have
no Power to curse them, if they will not go along with me or you.

19. Yea, said he, but you have, as much Power as I have, for you are given to
be my Mouth, as Aaron was given to be Moses 's Mouth.

20. So I went with him to one Thomas Turner his House, and said unto him, Mr.
Turner, You must go with us to John Tauny, else you must be cursed to Eternity.

21. But Thomas Turner was willing to go with us, but his Wife was exceeding
Wrath and Fearful, that her Husband would be brought into Trouble by it.

22. And she said, if John Reeve came again to her Husband, That she would run
a Spit in his Guts, so John Reeve cursed her to Eternity.

23. For she looked with Wrath and Fear, as if she had newly risen out of the
Grave.

CHAP. II. The Transactions of the second Morning, and how Thomas Turner went
with the Prophets to John Tauny's, and of John Reeve's Message to him; and how
John Tauny and his Design perished and came to nothing.
1. BUT Thomas Turner went with us to John Tauny, and John Reeve delivered his
Message to him to this ephect. Said he,

2. God has not chosen you to be the Lord's high Priest, as you declared your
self to be; neither is the Law of Moses to be acted over again, as you pretend
to do, notwithstanding you have circumcised your self to fit you for that Work.

3. Neither are you, being of the Tribe of Rubin, ever to be chosen high
Priest, for your Father Rubin lost that Birthright of the Priesthood, by going
up to his Father's Couch.

4. But the Priesthood was confirmed upon the Tribe of Levy, and to his Seed
for ever.

5. And here is my fellow Witness of the Tribe of Levy; which you know your
self he is of that Tribe, and God has chosen him high Priest in the last Age,
and the last that God will ever choose to the end of the World.

6. And as Aaron was the first high Priest that God chose to be Moses 's mouth,
so Lodowick Mugleton is the last high Priest that God has chose to be my
mouth, by Voice of Words to the hearing of the Ear.

7. Besides, said he, you are not fit to be the Lord's high Priest, because you
stuter, or stamer in your Speech.

8. Which God never chose none to be high Priest but perfect men in Nature,
which you are not.

9. Also he said, You pretend to be King of seven Nations, and to gather the
Jews, in all parts of the Earth, together, and to lead them to Jerusalem, and
to mount Olivet, and to make them Kings of all the Earth: And that you must
follow John Robins with Sword and Spear.

10. These, and several other things did he speak to John Tauny; and told him
that there should never any such things come to pass, as he pretended unto; and
charged him to lay all these things down, upon the pain of eternal Damnation,
and gave him about a Months time to lay it down.

11. But he did not, but afterward went further on to prosecute that Design,
and made Tents for every Tribe, and the Figures of every Tribe upon the Tent,
that every Tribe might know their own Tent.

12. So John Reeve seeing this, he wrote the Sentance of eternal Damnation upon
John Tauny for his Disobedience of the Lord's Commission, and left it at his
Lodging; for he would not be spoken with at that time.

13. Because he had shut himself up for nine Days, and he would speak with none
for that time: But he received it afterward of the Man where he lodged; and
after a while he and his great Matters perished in the Sea.

14. For he made a little Bote to carry him to Jerusalem, and going to Holland,
to call the Jews there, he and one Captain James were cast away and drowned; so
all his Power came to nothing.

CHAP. III. Of the Transactions of the Third Morning, and of the Message of the
Prophet Reeve to John Robins.
1. THE Third Morning God spoke to John Reeve, as it is written in that Book
aforesaid; where it is said, Go thou to Lodowick Mugleton, and he shall bring
thee to such a Woman, namely Dorcas Boose, and she shall bring you to John
Robins, Prisoner in New Bridewell, and deliver my Message when thou come
there.

2. So we went to this Dorcas Boose, and said unto her, You must go with us to
New Bridewell, for we have a Message from God to declare to John Robins: She
was willing to go, but her Husband made a little Demur: Then said I to her
Husband, If you will not let her go, I must pronounce you cursed to Eternity.

3. So he was willing to let her go, for he was some Kin by Marriage to John
Reeve and me both: The Woman was a true Beleiver of this Commission afterward.

4. So we Three went to New Bridewell, and asked for John Robins; and the
Keeper opened the Gate, and said, Who would you speak with? John Reeve said,
with John Robins.

5. The Keeper said, You shall not speak with him.

6. Then said John Reeve to the Keeper, Thou shall never be at Peace.

7. So he shut the little Gate upon us; and as we stood a little while without
the Gate there came a Woman, a Disciple of John Robins to come out* Says the
Keeper to the Woman, There is two or three without would speak with your Lord,
show them the other Way.

8. So the Keeper let the Woman out, and the Woman said unto John Reeve, Would
you speak with my Lord? Yea, says he, I would speak with thy Lord: Says the
Woman, He is the same, and will be the same for ever. Thou says right, said
he, he is the same, and will be the same for ever. Meaning the same false
Christ for ever.

9. So the Woman went and showed us the place where John Robins was: And she
said, Knock at that Window, and my Lord will look out.

10. So the Woman parted from us; then John Robins put by a Board of the
Window, and looked out; and John Reeve put off his Hat, and held it under his
Arm, and said, Art thou John Robins? He said to John Reeve, Put on your Hat: He
said, I put it not off to thee, but to him that sent me.

11. Stand thou (...), and hear the Message of the Lord to thee: He answered,
and said, I will not, except you put on your Hat: This he said three times.
Said John Reeve the third time.

12. I put not my Hat off to thee, but to him that sent me. Therefore I charge
thee to stand still, and hear the Message of the Lord to thee. After the third
time John Robins said, speak on.

13. Then John Reeve spoke, and said, Thou may remember, I was with thee
about Six or Eight Months ago, and thou did declare unto me, That thou were
Adam Melchisadick that met Abraham in the way, that received the Tithes of the
Spoil, and that gave Abraham Bread and Wine.

14. Also thou said to me, that thou wast the first Adam in state, and that
thou were the God and Father of the Lord Jesus Christ; and that thou knew
the Names of all Angels, and their Natures: And that thou had Power over all
Voices: And that thou wast the Judge of the Quick and the Dead: And that Christ
was a weak and imperfect Savior, and afraid to die, but thou wast not afraid to
die.

15. Also thou did deceave many People, in that thou made them bring in
their Estates, and then gave them leave to abstain by degrees from all kind
of Food, that should have preserved and strengthed their Natures: But thou
did feed them with windy things, as Aples, and other Fruit that was windy;
and they drank nothing but Water.

16. So that thou had full Power over their Bodies, Souls and Estates; and
some were starved under thy Diet and dyed. Therefore look what measure thou
has measured to others must be measured again to thee.

17. That Body of thine, which was thy Heaven, must be thy Hell; and that proud
Spirit of thine, which said was God, must be thy Devil.

18. The one shall be as Fire, and the other as Brimstone, burning together to
all Eternity: This is the Message of the Lord unto thee.

19. John Robins pulled his Hands off the Grates, and laid them together, and
said, It is finished, the Lord's Will be done. These were all the Words he
spoke; I was both an Eyewitness and Ear-Witness of it.

20. After this it came to pass, that about two Months after, John Robins did
write a Letter of Recantation of all his great matters unto General Cromwell,
and so obtained his Liberty out of Prison.

21. And one of our Acquaintance went to him, and asked him how he could do so:
And he answered and said, That after those two Men had passed Sentence upon
him, he had a burning in his Throat, as if he should be burned to Ashes; and
that he had a Voice within him, which bid him deny those things he had declared
of himself before, and he should have his Liberty.

22. And said afterward, he should come forth with a greater Power; but he
never came forth more with any Power at all, to his dying Day.

23. Thus these two great Heads, John Tauny was the Head of that Mystery Babel,
the atheistical Ranters and Quaquers Princsiple: And John Robins was the Head
of all false Christ's, false Prophets, and false Prophetesses, that were in the
World at that Day; and there were many.

24. Now John Robins was that Man of Sin spoken of in Thesalonians: Neither
will there come any so high after him to the end of the World.

25. Thus the Reader may see that these two Powers were brought down in these
two days Messages from the Lord.

CHAP. IV. When the transcendant Treatis was wrote many People more offended
with the Doctrine than the Commission. Of the Letter sent to the Ministers, and
when: How the Children mocked John Reeve, called him Prophet, Prophet, and
followed him slinging Stones at him; and how a Woman hearing this followed the
Prophet to his House, and was converted to the Faith. Of Sentence given upon
one Penson, and its Effets.
1. AFter this there came a many People to Discourse with us, and asked
Questions about many things, in matters of Religion, and we answered them to
all Questions whatsoever could arise out of the Heart of Men; and some few were
satisfied and believed.

2. And many despised it, calling it Blasphemy, Delusion, and Lys; and we gave
the Sentance of eternal Damnation upon all those that blasphemed against the
Holy Ghost.

3. After this, in the year 1652. John Reeve wrote that Book called, A
transcendant spiritual Treatis, wherein is declared the Words God spoke unto
him three mornings together, to the hearing of the Ear, and his Message to John
Tauny and to John Robins: Which is more largly set down, with several
Interpretations of Scripture, concerning the true God, and right Devil.

4. Never so clearly made manifest by any, as now in that Treatis.

5. Many People were more offended at the Doctrine therein than at the
Commission.

6. After this John wrote a Letter to several Ministers in London, and about
London; which was afterward printed, forbiding them to preach any more after
the receipt of this Epistle, upon pain of Damnation to Eternity.

7. These Epistles were given to the most eminent Presbiterian and Independent
Ministers in London, and about London: For they were in Power at that time.

8. After this it came to pass in the same year, that as John Reeve was going
through Pauls-Church-Yard, one that he had given the Sentence of Damnation
upon, said unto some Boys, There goes the Prophet that damns People.

9. The Boys hearing this run after him, calling him, Prophet, Prophet, and
threw Gravel and little Stones at him; so he made have into Paul's, and the Boys
left him: And a Woman, named Elizabeth More, seeing the Boys cast Stones at
him, and calling him Prophet, she followed him into Paul's, keeping a distance
from him, to see where he would go: So she followed him, and he came to my
House in great Trinity-Lane, London.

10. And she desired to speak with him, being a Prophet, for she had a great
respect for Prophets: So she told those things she had seen, and she became a
true Beleiver of this Commission of the Spirit.

11. After this, it came to pass in the same year, that I Lodowick Mugleton
having occasion to go into Hounds-Ditch to see my Master's Son where I was
Prentice, as I went through the Minories, London; there I met with one Morgan
Guilliam, a Man that had been Prentice with my Master.

12. And he would needs have me drink with him, that he might have some talk
with me, for he said, he heard strange Things of me: So I went in with him into
the Alehouse to drink, and there followed, of his Acquaintance, a Neighbor of
his, a Gentleman, as we call them: His Name was Penson, and he sat down in our
Company.

13. So Morgan began to tell me, that he heard that John Reeve and your self do
say, That you have Power to Bless and Curse Men, that do oppose you, to
eternity? He desired me to tell him whether these things were true or no.

14. So I told him the Words that God spoke to John Reeve, three Mornings
together, as is set down in that Book aforesaid: But when I repeated those
Words, I have put the two edged Sword of my Spirit into thy Mouth, that whoever
I pronounce blessed through thy Mouth, is blessed to eternity; and whoever I
pronounce cursed through thy Mouth, is cursed to eternity.

15. Then did he begin to fear, and said, for God's sake, Lodowick do not say
so: Upon that, this mr. Penson said it was Blasphemy, and that it was the Devil
that spok those Words.

16. Whereupon I did pronounce this Penson cursed, and damned both in Soul and
Body, from the Presence of God, elect Men and Angels, to eternity.

17. Whereupon, this Penson, his Spirit was struck into his Body, so that he
could not speak for a Season.

18. And the Woman of the House hearing me give this Sentence upon him, and
seeing him in that Condition, she was troubled in her Spirit and grew sick, and
went up to Bed: And an old Man her Father, being there, and seeing this, he
railed exceedingly at me, and grinded his Teeth at me.

19. So in a little Season after this Penson had recovered himself again, and
said unto me, Will thou say I am damned to eternity? yea, said I, thou art.
Then he rose up, and with both his Fists smote upon my Head; and after I had
received a few Blows; my Friend Morgan stood between us, and bare off the Blows.

20. And said, For God's sake. Lodowick, let us be gone, else we shall be
killed: So he paid for the Drink, and we departed out of the House, and went to
another a little distance off.

21. And immediately after came in the Woman's Husband, and finding her not
well, he asked what was the matter, and they told him all that was don: He
asked where the Man was? They answered, They went down that way.

22. So he found Morgan and I together: The Man knowing him, asked If he knew
me, Morgan answered, He did know me, and said, He did not speak ever a Word to
your Wife, or to her Father; but that which he spoke, it was to mr. Penson,
which did abuse him, and smote him on the Head with his Fists, and your Father
kicked at him with his Feet, and he did nothing to them again,

23. So the Man went away quiet and satisfied, and comforted his Wife, that the
Man said nothing against her to be troubled.

24. But it came to pass that this Penson was sick immediately after, and in a
Week; or Ten Days after he dyed, much troubled in his Mind, and tormented.

25. Insomuch that his Friends and Relations sought to apprehend me for a
Witch, he being a rich Man; but they could not tell how to state the matter, so
they let it fall.

CHAP. V. Of one Jeremiah Maunte, a great Friend to this Commission: And of a
damned Man and his Fury; and how John Reeve entreated the People that he might
ly down and expose himself to his Fury, with the ephects of that Submission:
And of one James Barker his Hipocricy to get the Blessing of John Reeve; and
how he was cursed by Lodowick Mugleton, with the Ephects of that Curse.
1. ALSO thus it came to pass in the same year, that one Jeremiah Maunt, a
young Gentleman, hearing that God had spoke to John Reeve, and that he had
damned several of his Acquaintance, he came to us to discourse about those
things; and when he had heard an Answer to all his Objections he submitted
unto us, and did belive the Voice that God spoke to John Reeve, that it was the
Voice of God, and that the Lord Jesus Christ was the true God.

2. Also there was one Captain Clark of his Acquaintance that did truly believe
in this Commission of the Spirit.

3. Also this Jeremiah Maunte was the greatest Friend to this Commission, and
showed the greatest Love to it of any all the days of John Reeve's Life.

4. But he and Captain Clark, their Acquaintance many of them were of the
Ranters People; who were at that time very high in Imagination, like
Capernahum, exalted in their Knowledge up to Heaven, as they thought; but this
Commission of the Spirit brought them down to Hell in a short time.

5. These Ranters were the most Company we had at that time, and they to have
discourse with us, did use to club their Twelve Pence a piece every Week, that
they might have Discourse with us.

6. And it came to pass that one of those Ranters kept a Victualing House, and
sold Drink in the Minories, London: And they would spend their Money there.

7. So John Reeve, and myself came there, to discourse with them, but there
came in many more than was appointed, to discourse with us; and many of them
despised our Declaration, and the Voice of God to John Reeve, calling it
Blasphemy, the Voice of the Devil, and such like.

8. So John Reeve gave Sentence of eternal Damnation upon many of them, for
this their Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost; we being the Witnesses of the Holy
Spirit that sent us.

9. But one of them being more offended at his Damnation than all the rest, he
was moved with such Wrath and Fury, that he would be revenged of John Reeve,
and would fall upon him to beat him, so that five or six Men could hardly keep
him off, his Fury was so hot.

10. Then John Reeve said unto the People standing by: Friends, said he, I pray
you stand still on both sides the Room, and let there be a space in the middle.

11. And I will lay down my Head upon the Ground, and let this furious Man
tread upon my Head, and do what he will unto me.

12. Our Friends, and the rest, were loath to venture, lest this furious Man
should tread upon his Head and spoil him: But John Reeve entreated the People
to let it be so.

13. And the People were persuaded, and did stand of a Row on both sides, and a
vacant Place in the middle.

14. So John Reeve pulled off his Hat, and laid his Face flat to the Ground,
and the People stood still; and John Reeve, said, with his Face to the Ground,
Now let the Man do what he will unto me.

15. So the Man came running with great Fury, and when he came near him, lifting
up his Foot to tread on his Neck, the Man started back again, and said, No, I
scorn to tread upon a Man that lies down to me. And the People all marvelled
at this thing.

16. After this it came to pass, in the same place in the Minories, London,
that several Ranters and Astrologers did come to talk with us: And one
Astrologer being more knowing in that Art than the rest, would fain himself to
be humble, and desirous to be saved, and would endeavor to get the Blessing of
John Reeve.

17. The Man's name was James Barker; he was a Gun-Smith, by Trade, but very
skillful in the art of Astrology: There were many more People talking with John
Reeve at that time.

18. So this James Barker came near to him, and desired him to tell him what it
was that God spoke unto him three Mornings together: For, said he, I have heard
much of you by others, but now he was glad he had that opertunity to speak with
him himself.

19. So John Reeve related to him all the words God spoke: And when this Barker
had heard it, he said, He did verily believe it was the Voice of God that spoke
unto him: And further said, that he did desire him to give him the Blessing.

20. John Reeve answered, and said, If thou do truly believe it was the Voice
of God that gave me this Power: He said, he did believe it. Whereupon John
Reeve did pronounce him one of the blessed of the Lord, both in Soul and Body
to eternity.

21. Immediately after he had got the Blessing he departed from him into
another Chamber, and said unto some of the Company; I have got the Blessing of
John Reeve, but, if any of you will but lay a quart of Sack with me, I will go
to John Reeve again, and call him a false Prophet, and say, it was the Devil
that spoke to him three Mornings together, and see if he will curse me again.

22. There were several Men that heard him, said unto him, That he dared not do
it: He said, But he would, if any one of them would lay with him.

23. So one Captain Clark, a Friend of ours, was afraid to lay with him without
my concent; so he came to me, which sat at a distance from John Reeve, (and
knew nothing of it,) and whispered me in the Ear, telling me what Barker had
said; then, said I, Do you lay a quart of Sack with him to prove him.

24. And when Barker saw that he would lay with him indeed, he began to repent,
and was loath to stand to his word: But the Company seeing him begin to flinch,
they scoffed and geer'd him, and said, We thought you durst as well he hanged
as do it.

25. Yet rather than he would be geer'd for not performing his Words, and
loosing a quart of Sack besides, He said, he would do it.

26. So he, with the Company, came toward John Reeve: (And Barker came with
his Hat off, and put it under his Arm) saying these Words, mr. Reeve, you have
declared me one of the Blessed of the Lord, both in Soul and Body to eternity:
But said he, I do verily believe that you are a false Prophet, and that it was
the Devil that spoke unto you three Mornings together, that gave you that Power
to bless and curse Men to eternity. These were all the Words he spoke.

27. So I came to him, and said, Barker, Thou have acted the part of a
Hipocrite, both with God and with Man, and with thy own Soul.

28. Thou lyedst against thy own Heart, when thou said to John Reeve thou
did believe it was the Voice of God that spoke to him, and that he had Power
to give a Blessing to whoever believed; whereupon thou did ask him to bless
thee? He said, If thou do truly believe what I have said; thou replyedst,
Thou did believe, and said, else why should I ask a Blessing of you.

29. Whereupon he gave this Blessing both of Soul and Body to eternity: And
this I say, though thou out of thy Dissemulation and Hipocricy of thy Heart
has got the Blessing of John Reeve, so that he cannot curse thee again.

30. But I gave not my Consent unto it. Therefore for this thy Hipocricy of thy
Heart, I do pronounce thee, Cursed and Damned both in Soul and Body, from the
Presence of God, elect Men and Angels, to eternity.

31. And not only so, But thou art cursed in thy Estate in this World; For Sins
of this nature are to be punished with a double Curse.

32. He was exceeding wrath and angry at me, more for cursing his Estate than
for his eternal Damnation, he was so mad at that: So that he knew not whether
he had best fight me, or take the Law of me as a Witch, if he did not prosper.

33. But my Words and Curse came to pass upon him, even in this Life, as many
can witness; even a poor miserable beggarly Fellow.

34. Notwithstanding he was as cunning a subtle Serpent as most Men in the
World: But at last a Lawyer which he had cheated followed the Law so close upon
him, that he seaised upon all his Goods, and took them away, and put him into
Prison besides; and there he lay some years, and dyed there miserably poor:
Which was the last End of him.

35. Thus I saw the Ephects of that Curse upon him, even in this Life; and in
the Life to come, I am sure he shall endure those eternal Torments for that Act
of Hipocrisy.

CHAP. VI. What the Ranters God was: And how them and their God was damned by
this Commission: And of the Resolution of Three of the most desperatest to
Curse the Prophet Reeve and Mugleton's God.
1. AFter this, it came to pass, at another Meeting of the Ranters in
Aldersgate Street, London.

2. There was many Ranters that heard what was done by James Barker; so they
consulted among themselves why they might not damn us as we did them.

3. Now those that were to damn us, were three of the most desperatest
atheistical Ranters, that had ever been in our Company as yet.

4. And they thought nothing too hard for them; but two of those Ranters which
had been often in our Company, and had seen the Passages that passed with, and
upon those we had condemned: That their God they worshipped was damned with
them; for they had no other God but a Spirit without a Body, which they said
was the Life of every thing.

5. So that the Life of a Dog, Cat, Toad, or any venomous Beast, was the Life
of God: Nay, that God was in a Table Chair, or Stool.

6. This was the Ranters God, and they thought there was no better God at all.

7. This God did we damn with their Persons, these two Men that had seen many
condemned by us: The one his Name was Proudlove, a notable Ranter, the other
his Name was Remington.

8. So this Proudlove he consulted with those three desperate Men which knew
nothing of us: So they asked him what they must do, he said, this you must do.

9. You must curse them and their God, and perhaps you may bring down their
Power.

10. They said they were willing to do that, and that was but a small matter to
curse them and their God: They made nothing of that.

11. So the Time appointed came, and there was prepared a good Dinner of Pork,
and the three came ready prepared to curse us and our God.

12. So Proudlove and Remington went from us to those Men, and Remington said
unto them, If you three will go up and curse them and their God you shall have
a good Dinner of Porke.

13. Then one, the stoutest of the Three, said unto him, pray tell me what is
their God that we must curse?

14. Remington answered and said, That the Lord Jesus Christ is their God, and
they own no other Father or God but he: And now if you will go in, they be
there, and curse them and the Lord Jesus Christ, their God, you shall have a
good Dinner of Porke.

15. When they heard this, the most stoutest Man of them smote his Hand on his
Breast, and said; If that be their God, I will never do it, if I might gain the
whole World: And said, That he was sorry and troubled that he should conceive
such a thing in his Heart. So said the other Two, We will do no such
Wickedness. So they departed without their Dinner of Porke.

16. But he that repented himself could not be at quiet in his Mind until such
time he had asked us Forgiveness.

17. So we forgave him his Sin for that, and he remained very kind to John
Reeve all his days, tho he did not believe that we were the two last Prophets
and Witnesses of the Spirit.

18. Also this Remington was called to an account by John Reeve, as one in this
Plot; and he told the truth, how Proudlove laid the Plot, and that he did but
go with him, being an old Acquaintance: So we forgave Remington, and gave
Proudlove the Sentence of Condemnation to Eternity.

CHAP. VII. Of the Dispute with Mr. Leader, a New England Merchant; and of the
Prophet's convincing him how that God had a Body; and how God is worshipped in
Spirit and Truth with Bodies, and that there is no Spirit without a Body.
1. AFTER this in the Year 1653, there came a certain Man, a Merchant, and a
great Travellor into many parts of the World; and he was a religious Man, but
had somewhat declined the outward Forms of Worship, because he could find no
Rest there.

2. So he applied his Heart more to Philosophy and the knowledge of Nature more
than Religion, for he thought he had seen the utmost of Religion, and that
there was nothing in it.

3. Indeed he was a great Philosopher, and a very wise Man in the things of
Nature: His Name was Richard Leader.

4. It came to pass when he came out of New England, being persecuted there,
because he could not submit to their forms of Worship; and when he came into
Old-England again, he heard there were two Prophets now risen up, who called
themselves, The two Witnesses, etc.

5. So he enquired where he might speak with these Prophets; so he was brought
unto us, and he was very sober in his talk, and he propounded his Questions
with great Moderation.

6. The first Question was concerning God: Whether God that created all things
could admit of being any Form of himself.

7. We answered, and said, That God made Man in his own Image and Likeness: And
if Man have a Form, then God must needs have a Form himself, even in the form
of Man, else them Words of Moses are not true, That God made Man in his own
Image, and breathed into him the Breath of Life, and he became a living Soul.

8. Mind, the Form of Man was the Image and Likeness of God, before God
breathed into him the Breath of Life.

9. Therefore God must needs be in the form of a Man from Eternity: Therefore
it was that God said, Let us make Man after our own Image and Likeness. This
was the true Sense and Meaning of Moses, and it is dangerous for any Man to
deny it.

10. Besides, said we, there is no Spirit can have any Being without a Body,
neither God, Angels, nor Man: And further, that God that is a Spirit without a
Body is no God at all.

11. For we that are men that have Bodies, have power over all Spirits
whatsoever that have no Bodies: For it is the dark Imagination of Reason in man
that has created to it self Spirits without Bodies, which is none of God's
Creation.

12. When he heard this he considered the things of Nature, that no Spirit
could have any being without its Body.

13. Then he marvelled, and said, Where have we been all this while, that took
God for a Spirit without a Body: Oh! how have we been in the dark.

14. But, said he, does not Christ say, God is a Spirit, and God will be
worshipped in spirit and truth: And Christ said, His Words were Spirit and Life.

15. We answered, and said, Can a Man worship God in Spirit and Trust without a
Body? He said, No. Then said I, neither can God accept of any Man's worship
except he has a Body of his own: For God has a Body of his own, as Man has a
Body of his own; only God's body is spiritual and heavenly clear as Christial,
brighter than the Sun, swifter than Thought, yet a body.

16. But Man's body is earthly, and made of the Earth, in the image and
likeness of God's own body, only Man's body is of the Earth earthly, and God's
body is the Lord from Heaven heavenly: Yet Man's body is the image of God as
well as his Soul as Moses did truly mean as he spoke.

17. For this I say, that if Man's Body and Soul had been spiritual in its
Creation, then when Man's Thoughts do assend up to Heaven, his body would
assend with it, in the twinkling of an Eye.

18. For the Thoughts of Man are swift; and if his body, which is earthly, do
but put on Immortality, then his body would assend with his Thoughts up into
the Air, and so to Heaven.

19. These immortal bodies can do, and at the last day these vile bodies of
ours that does truly believe, shall be made like unto his own glorious body.

20. For now our bodies are natural bodies, but when these natural bodies shall
rise spiritual bodies, then shall Immortality take place; and these vile bodies
of ours, that are now mortal, yet made in the image of God's own glorious body,
shall be spiritual and heavenly bodies, even like unto his glorious body.

21. And because God's body is spiritual and heavenly, and cannot be seen by
the natural sight of the Eye, therefore it was that Christ said, God is a
Spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and truth.

22. Observe, For as a Man cannot worship in spirit and truth without a body,
neither is that any God at all that has no body of its own; neither is a
Spirit without a body of its own any Object of Faith or Worship, for a Spirit
without a body has no substance: And as for those words of Christ being Spirit
and Life, consider they were spoken from a body.

23. For this I say, no words whatsoever can be spoken of any Spirit that has
no body: For those words God spoke to Moses and the Prophets, they were from
the body of God: And those words Christ spoke, that was spirit and life, was
from his body when on Earth: And those words he spoke to Paul after he was
assended up to Heaven, it was from his own body.

24. So that, without Controversy, no Spirit can speak at all, or has any
being without a body: And this is the very Cause that Men find so little
Comfort in worshipping and beleiving in such a God that is a spirit without a
body.

25. Also we declared unto him the nature of God, showing that there can be no
form without a nature, for it is the nature that gives the form.

26. Also we showed unto him the Person and Nature of Angels, and the Person
and Nature of the right Devil, and the rice of the two Seeds, and the secret
Mysteries how God became Flesh, and how the Devil became Flesh, and many other
things which satisfied his mind.

27. So that he became a true Beleiver of this Commission of the Spirit, and
showed Kindness unto John Reeve all the days of his Life, likewise his Brother
George Leader became a true beleiver.

28. This Mr. Richard Leader grew very mighty in Wisdom and Knowledge, both in
natural and spiritual Wisdom, so that every great Man of his Acquaintance did
submit unto his Wisdom, and loved him for his Knowledge; so he continued in it
all his Life, but about a year or two after John Reeve dyed he dyed at
Barbados.

CHAP. VIII. Of one Mr. Cooper a great Disputant; and how convinced: And how a
true Ministry is known from a false. Of his Conversion: And how he passed
Sentance of Damnation upon Fifteen of his Companions: And of his trouble for so
doing without Commission: And of a Minister's censoring him to be bewitched.
1. AFTER this, in the same year, it came to pass that a certain man, a
Silk-Weaver, his name was Cooper: He being acquainted with one Mrs. White, who
was a beleiver of this Commission of the Spirit: She lived in Duning hill-Ally
near More-fields.

2. This Man was very desirous that she would tell him how he might speak with
these two Prophets; for he had a great desire to see us, and speak with us; so
she directed him where.

3. So when the Man came and found us both together, the Man desired to drink
with us, thinking in himself that he could talk and discourse better over a Cup
of Drink than otherway, because it was his Custom so to do.

4. For he thought himself very strangly armed with Questions, thinking it
impossible for us to answer, because he could find none that ever he had
talked withal, Ministers, nor other to do it,

5. So we went with him to drink, and he propounded his Questions concerning
the true God, and the right Devil, and how the Devil came to be; and how a Man
may know the History of the Scripture to be true, seeing they did contradict
themselves in many places, with several other things.

6. Unto which we gave him a full Answer unto whatsoever he asked, so that he
could not make any Reply against anything we said.

7. Also we showed him the power of the Commission of Moses, and the power of
the Commission of Christ and his Apostles, and the power of our Commission in
this Age.

8. And that every Commission had power to bless and curs Men to eternity, and
that he was no true Minister of Christ which had not power to bless and curs.

9. For if a Man pretend to be a Minister of the Gospel, and cannot say to him
that beleiveth in him to be a true Minister, and the Doctrine he preaches to
be true, is bessed to eternity.

10. And say to that Person as dispiseth and persecuteth the Person of this
Minister, and his Doctrine, is cursed Soul and Body to eternity: If he have not
Power to do this, he is no true Minister of Christ, neither did Christ send him
to preach unto the People.

11. These things stuck upon the Man's Mind exceedingly, and he was much
affected in Love toward us; and he was elevated in his Mind, as if he would
get up to Heaven immediately.

12. And he thought himself so strong now that he could drive all People before
him.

13. So he departed from us, elevated in his Mind: He went among his own
Company, and those of his own Trade, and he talked amongst them of things he
had heard, and that he had been with two Prophets.

14. But his Company laughed him to scorn: But he in his elevation and zeal to
what he had heard, ga^e Sentance of Damnation to eternity upon fifteen of his
Companions.

15. Some were angry at him and some laughed and scoffed at him, and said he
was bewitched.

16. It came to pass that the next Day after he had given Sentance upon those
fifteen Persons he fell sick, yet he held to what he had said the Day before.

17. So that his Wife, and some of them he had damned said, the Man was
bewitched, and would needs send for the Minister of the Parish to pray with
him, and give his Judgment whether he was bewitched, or no.

18. But when the Minister came, the Man would not let him pray for him.

19. So the Minister gave his Judgment, that the Man was absolutely bewitched:
But after three or four days the Man got up, and was well again, and told us
what the Minister had said, and confessed that he damned fifteen Men, which was
the cause of that Trouble in his Mind.

20. Because he did it without a Commission, not but that I do believe they
will be all damned as I said; but my Trouble was for giving Sentance without a
Commission.

21. For at that time no Beleiver gave Sentance upon any Dispiser, but us two
only: But in that he confessed his Fault he was forgiven by us.

CHAP. IX. Of one Captain Stasy, a friend to the two Witnesses, and of their
Dispute with a Minister, proving that God was in the form of a Man: And of the
Minister's Blasphemy, and John Reeve's passing the Sentance upon him, and that
he should never see any other God but that Sentance: And how John Reeve was
threatened with a Warrant from Cromwell, or the Council of State: And how John
replied, that if they despised as the Priest had done, that he would pronounce
them damned.
1. AFter this it came to pass in the year 1653. there was one Captain Stasy in
the Parliament's Service, that came to talk with us; he was a wise and moderate
Man, able to hear and bear Words, but did not believe what we said.

2. But he heard us gladly, and liked many things which we spoke, insomuch that
he invited us to Dinner at the Inn where he quartered.

3. So we went, there was of his Acquaintance a Minister, as they are called, a
Cambridge Scholar, and with him an Excise Man; his Name was Ebb, and the
Priest's Name was Goslin, and there was with them two Soldiers.

4. These Men being at Dinner with us, Captain Stasy put the Priest upon
Discourse and Dispute with us.

5. So we disputed with him concerning God; and when we came to prove by
Scripture, that God was a form like Man, according to those Words in Geneses,
God made Man in his own Image and Likeness the Priest pleaded, that was
Holiness and Righteousness.

6. We showed him that Holiness and Righteousness had no Form nor Image without
a Body, nay it is nothing at all in it self, but as it is acted forth by a Body.

7. For it is a Body that acts holy good and righteous Things, therefore it
is we call such a Man a Holy Man, a good Man, a righteous Man: Now if God made
Man in his own Image an holy upright Man, could he be said to Be Man except he
had a Body.

8. Neither could them Words be proper to say, God made Man in his own Image
and Likeness, if Man was made with a Body to act holy and righteous Things, and
God that made him had never a Body himself.

9. How then could Man be said to be made in the Image and Likeness of God,
whenas there is no likeness at all between them, for the one has a Person,
Form and Body, and the other has none.

10. And if you say Holiness and Righteousness is the Image and Likeness of
God, We pray will you show us the Form and Likeness of the Image of Holiness
and Righteousness distinct of it self from a Body.

11. Then where ever we see Holiness and Righteousness distinct of it self,
then we shall know God, and that Holiness and Righteousness is the Image and
Likeness of God without a Body.

12. And when we see this we will worship Holiness and Righteousness for God
without a Body; if you can show us the form of it by it self.

13. Then the Priest grew angry, and called it Blasphemy, to say God was a Form
or Person, and said we were Deceavers; with many other railing Speeches.

14. Whereupon John Reeve pronounced him cursed and damned both Soul and Body,
from the Presence of God, elect Men and Angels, to eternity.

15. And further said, that he should never see any other God in the Life to
come, but the Sentance he had passed upon him.

16. Then the two Soldiers were very angry to see the Priest damned, and they
would have fallen upon us to beat us, and one of them took up a great Stool to
knock John Reeve on the Head.

17. But Captain Stasy held him, and persuaded him; then they said they would
have a Warrant for us, either from General Cromwell, or the Council of State,
or from the Parliament.

18. John Reeve answered, and if General Cromwell, the Council of State, or
Parliament should despise those things we declare as you have done, and as this
Priest has done, I would pronounce them damned as I do you.

19. So with a great many words more, at that time, between them and us, and
Threatenings wherewith they threatened us. we parted.

20. And Captain Stasy seemed to be sorry that they were no more Civil; but he
was glad the Priest was damned, because he was a great Enemy to the Clergy.

The End of the Second Part.
The Third Part. From the Year 1653 to the Year 1665.
CHAP. I. Showing how five Men got a Warrant from the Lord Mayor and brought
the two Witnesses before him: Of their Accusation: Of their Examination: And of
their Answer to it with boldness:
1. BUT a little while after this, as is aforesaid, it came to pass that these
Men did get a Warrant from the Lord Mayor of London, because we lived in the
City of London, it was under his Jurisdiction.

2. So this Priest and the two Soldiers, and Ebb the Exciseman, and another
Salseman, his Name was Chandler, a damned Man, he lived near me in great
Trinity Lane.

3. These five joined all together to prosecute us, and having a Warrant from
my Lord Mayor they came to my House, and they brought the Marshal of the City
of London and his Men to apprehend us and bring us before the Lord Mayor.

4. And they came up to the Chamber where John Reeve and I was, and the Marshal
and his Men took us before the Lord Mayor to be examined.

5. And when we came before him there were several Accusations against us,
besides what these five Men did accuse us of.

6. First, that Book entitled, A Transcendant Spiritual Treatis; the Lord
Mayor had this Book in his Hand. Secondly there was a Pamphlet by one Needham,
sent to the Lord Mayor of his own Damnation.

7. And several Letters we had sent to the Presbyterian Ministers in London and
about London, to lay down their Preaching, (because they had no Commission from
God to preach) upon the receipt of this Letter, upon pain of eternal Damnation.
These Letters were in the Lord Majors Hands also.

8. And there came one Minister forty Miles to accuse us before the Lord Mayor,
he came rideing all Night, and came in great Fury and Rage, at the very time
the Lord Mayor called for us to examine us.

9. But the Lord Mayor did not mind this rageing Priest at all, notwithstanding
his great Jorny.

10. But he minded these five Men that Joined in the Warrant, and set them
together by themselves, and us two by our selves.

11. The Lord Majors Examination of us the two Witnesses, and our Answer to
him, as follows.

12. He asked the Accusars what they had to say against these two Men; one of
them answered and said, that John Reeve did say, That he was their God.

13. The Lord Mayor said to John Reeve, Did you say so? He answered and said,
No. What did you say? said the Lord Mayor.

14. Said John Reeve. These Men desired to have Discourse with us about
Spiritual Matters, and when I had declared the Truth to them, they called it
Blasphemy, Delusion, and Lies.

15. Whereupon I did pronounce the Sentance of eternal Damnation upon them, in
that they had sinned against the Holy Ghost, which the Scriptures says, shall
never be forgiven, in this World, nor in the World to come.

16. And that they should see no other God in the World to come, but that
Sentance which I had passed upon them; This I did say, and this his Clerk set
down.

17. Another of the Accusers said that John Reeve should say? That General
Cromwell, the Counsel of State, and the Parliament were all damned.

18. Did you say so? said the Lord Mayor, No, said John Reeve.

19. What did you say? said the Lord Mayor.

20. John Reeve answered, that we were in a place where one Captain Stasy
invited us, and these Men, being Strangers to us, they would needs propound
Questions to us, concerning God and the Scriptures, because this Minister was
among them; and he was the greatest Blasphemer of Truth of all of them.

21. Whereupon I pronounced him, for his Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, and
for Preaching without a Commission from God, cursed and damned, both in Soul
and Body, from the Presence of God, elect Men, and Angels, to eternity.

22. Upon this he and the rest of them said, They would fetch a Warrant from
General Cromwell, the Counsel of State, or from the Parliament, to prosecute us.

23. And I said, That if General Cromwell, the Counsel of State, or the
Parliament, should despise those things we have declared, and sin against the
Holy Ghost, as these Men did, That General Cromwell, the Counsel of State, and
the Parliament, would be all damned as you are? This I did say.

24. This was set down by the Clerk.

25. Then said the Mayor, You are accused for denying the Three Persons in the
Trinity: You say there is but one Person, Christ Jesus, you deny the Father.

26. No, said John Reeve, we own the Trinity more than any Men, both Father,
Son, and Spirit, are all but one Person and one God Christ Jesus, as is
declared in that Book in your Hand.

27. Then the Mayor said, Here is several Notes from the godly Ministers which
you have forbid to preach the Gospel, upon pain of Damnation.

28. Said John, We do own these Notes sent unto them, and if any of them
Ministers we sent these Letters unto have preached publicly since the receipt
of them, they are damned to eternity, because they preach and are not sent of
God: Neither do they know the true God, nor can they preach the truth unto the
People.

29. These Words were set down by the Clerk.

30. Then said the Lord Mayor unto John Reeve, What was it that God spoke unto
you?

31. John related the Words God spoke unto him three Mornings together; the
same Words that are written in that Book in your Hand.

CHAP. II. Showing John Reeve's Answer to the Lord Maior's Questions, and John
Reeve's Question to the Mayor, what his God was, with the Maior's Answer: And
John's Replycation to it. Of the two Witnesses Commitment to Newgate.
1. THE Lord Mayor answered John Reeve, and said, He did believe it was the
Devil that spoke to him.

2. Then to this I answered and said, Sir, you have sinned against the Holy
Ghost, and will be damned.

3. The Mayor clapped his Hand upon his Breast and said, God forbid.

4. Yea, said I, but you have, then said John Reeve to the Mayor, Sir, you say
you do believe it was the Devil that spoke unto me; I pray Sir tell me what
your God is.

5. The Lord Mayor lift up himself, and laid his Hand on his Breast: Oh! says
he, my God is an infininite incomprehensible Spirit.

6. What, said I, without a Body or Person?

7. Said the Mayor, God has no Body or Person at all.

8. Why, said I, has God that made man in his own Image, who has a Body and
Person, and has made all other Creatures with Persons; and shall he that made
them have no Body or Person of his own?

9. Does not the Scriptures say, That Christ was the express Image and
Brightness of his Father's Person; and had not Christ, a Body or Person in form
like Man, Sin excepted?

10. The said the Mayor unto me, must I believe you?

11. Yea, said I, That you must, or you will be damned.

12. Then there was a Gentlewoman in the Court called out, and said, Mr. Reeve,
pray tell me what the Devil is?

13. John answered with a loud Voice, and said, Thy own Soul is the Devil.

14. Then one of the Officers said unto the Woman, I think he has met with you
now.

15. Then the Lord Mayor asked the Accusers if they would be bound in 40 l.
Band a piece to prosecute against these two Men, they said, They would; so the
Clark bound them to prosecute.

16. Then the Lord Mayor called for the Act of Parliament, which was newly made
against Blasphemy: So the Mayor read this Passage in it, That if any man should
say that he is God, and that God is no where else, shall be guilty of
Blasphemy, and shall suffer six months Imprisonment. without Bail or mean prise.

17. Then said I unto him; Sir, What have you to do with this Act, you are a
temporal Magistrate, and ought to judge of temporal Things between man and man.

18. And you are to do Justice between Man and Man, in all moral and temporal
Affairs, which concerns you to be the Judge of, and you will do well to keep
there, for you are not to Judge of Blasphemy against God; nor those that made
this act neither.

19. Why, said the Mayor, must I believe you?

20. Yea, said I, That you must, else you will be damned.

21. For God has chosen us two to be the Judge of Blasphemy against God, and
has given us power to pronounce Sentance of Damnation upon all those that do
Blaspheme against that God which is a Person, which you do deny.

22. Why, said he again, must I believe you?

23. Yea, said I, else you will be damned.

24. Many things more than what is here written was spoke at that time, but
these were of most concernment to take notise of.

25. And when this Dispute and Examination was ended, the Lord Mayor asked if
we would put in Bail? and we said No.

26. So he gave order to his Clark to make our Mittimus, and send us to
Newgate; and he went away out of the Court into another Chamber, and the Clark
carried the Mittimus into him to set his hand to it: So that he came no more
into the Court.

27. For John Reeve intended to give the Sentance of eternal Damnation upon
him, both Body and Soul, in the open Court, it being full of People.

28. But he came no more out until we were led away by the Marshal and his Men
to Newgate, there to remain Prisoners till the nex Sessions.

29. This Commitment was the fifteenth Day of September, 1653.

CHAP. III. Showing how the Prisoners brought Irons: Required Money of the two
Witnesses, they having none, took one of their Cloaks for a Pledge. How long
they were Prisoners: The Bordes were their Bed. And of the Wickedness of some
of the Prisoners, which had a Design to have hanged them; and how Providence
preserved them.
1. NOW we being Prisoners in Newgate Goal, I shall speak of some Passages that
hapend there.

2. As soon as ever the Keeper had put us in, and shut the Gate upon us, the
Prisoners brought to each of us a pair of Irons to put on our Legs, except we
would lay them down three Shillings and Six Pence a piece.

3. Also they said, they must have Money for Garnish, which did amount to five
Shillings a piece in all.

4. I said we have no Money about us, but however, if they pleased, they might
put the Irons upon our Legs* and I held out my Leg for them to be put on: I was
very free to wear them for Truths Sake, though it was a thing unusual; for it
was the first time that ever I was in Prison before in all my Life.

5. The Prisoners seeing us so willing, they said they would trust us for Tenn
Shillings, upon this condition, that we would give them one of our Cloaks for a
Pledge; we said do, take which you will.

6. So they looked on John Reeve's Cloak, and said it was not worth Tenn
Shillings: Then they looked upon my Cloak, and took it off my back, and said,
This will do, this is a good Cloak, it is good fine Cloth; said they, We will
keep this Cloak till you pay Tenn Shillings.

7. And in Five Days after my Daughter Sarah brought Tenn Shillings, and I gave
it them, and sent my Cloak home by my Daughter; for I durst not keep it there,
for fear I should loose it; though I had need enough of it, for the Weather was
cold at that time, for it was the 15th. of September 1653 we were committed, and
we were there Prisoners until the 17th. of October.

8. And the Bordes was our Bed; we had no Sheets, only a poor Flock-Bead upon
the Ground, and one thin Blancket at top; and we paid seven Groats a Week for
this Lodging, and thought our selves very well used in a Prison, which thing we
was never acquainted with before.

9. But we were more perplexed with the Prisoners within, than with the
Imprisonment it self.

10. For there were three Highway-Men, and they were very malicious against us,
especially one of them, that if I went to the Grate when any came to speak with
us, he would lay his Leg in the dark for me to stumble at, and strike me in the
Neck with his Fists, thinking to throw me down.

11. And if I were but walking in the Hall he would come and drive me out, and
strike at me, and say, You Rogue, you damned Folks: And so it was with the Boys
that were Prisoners: that when I went to the Grates to speak with any, they
would snatch off my Hat, and paun it for half a Duzen of Drink: So the Boys did.

12. And I gave them Sixpence every time they did it, to please them.

13. So that other Prisoners said it was not fit I should be so abused, and
wished me to complain to the Keeper, and he would punish them.

14. No, said I, It is not for Prisoners to complain of prisoners.

15. And when these three notable Thieves saw they could not provoke me, no
ways, so much as to say why do you so?

16. Then they thought upon another way, and wrote a Letter to John Reeve with
the Sentance of Damnation to us both; thinking to have provoked John Reeve to
have given Sentance of Damnation to Eternity upon them, that they might have
had wherewith to have done him a Mischief.

17. But he gave them no Answer at all.

18. When they saw this would not do, they came into our Room where we lay,
with a Rope in their Hands, to measure how high the beam was, that they might
hang John Reeve in the Room.

19. And as it happened there was four condemned Men in Newgate at that time,
and these Men were our greatest Friends to protect us from the Violence of
other Prisoners.

20. And these two that lay in our Room, they pulled out those Men by Head and
Sholders, that came to measure the beam: Those condemned Men had great Respect
for us, because we gave them many times Victuals and Money.

21. Also we gave seven Prisoners, at one time, twelve Pence a piece, so that
we found Favor in their Eyes for the Loves sake.

22. There was one Prisoner that begged at the Grate, and when he was drunk, he
would trouble John Reeve to bless him: So one day, when he was very drunk, he
broke into John Reeve, and kneeled down upon his Knees before him, and held his
Hands together and said, for Jesus Christ sake John Reeve bless me, for I am a
wicked Sinner.

23. And John went from him, and prayed him to be quiet, but he was so much the
more earnest for him to bless him.

24. He was so troublesome to John Reeve that he could not tell how to be
delivered from him; 'till one of them that lay in our Room came and pulled him
out by Head and Shoulders, and turned him down Stairs.

25. Those convicted and condemned Men were made under Keepers, which did help
the uper Keeper to shut up the Prisoners every Night: These were the Preservers
of us from the Violence of the Prisoners all the while we were in Newgate.

26. And while we were in Newgate, John Reeve wrote a Letter to the Lord Mayor,
Alderman Fooke, who committed us to Prison: And one Jeremiah Mount, a Friend to
us, got it Printed, at his own Charge, against the Day of Trial.

27. There was in it, the Sentance of Damnation upon the Lord Mayor; and they
were given to the Recorder Steel, and several other Officers in the Court:
That Letter was Printed in the year 1653. and in the Third year of our
Commission.

28. There is many Beleivers of this Commission of the Spirit that has them
Letters in Print at this Day; but none will part with them at any Rate, not now.

CHAP. IV. Of the Two Witnesses being brought to their Trial: How John Reeve
would not suffer the Mayor, a damned Man, to speak: How the Jury brought them
in guilty; and of the Recorder's Sentance upon them. And of several other
Transactions.
1. AND when the day of Trial came, we were brought before the Court, and the
Accusers stood all Five before us; but the Court asked the Accusars not one
Question, neither did the Accusars speak one Word before the Court.

2. But when the Lord Mayor, the chief Judge of that Court, began to speak
against us.

3. John Reeve said, with a loud Voice, That he would not hear a damned Man
speak, neither will answer to anything; But, Mr. Recorder, we will hear you.

4. So the Lord Mayor sat down, and said never a word more.

5. Then John Reeve called to the Recorder for our Examination before the Lord
Mayor, for that will show all things, and that we will stand to.

6. But there was no Examination could be produced by the Lord Mayor,
notwithstanding John Reeve called for it three times, but they gave no Answer
at all; therefore no need for the Witnesses to accuse us, for the Examination
answered to all that the Accusars could say against us.

7. But the Court waved them, and tried us only by that book John Reeve first
printed; in which book Christ is proved to be the only God: So they judged it
Blasphemy to deny the Trinity of Persons.

8. Therefore the Recorder asked John Reeve what Father it was that Christ
prayed unto in his Agony?

9. John Reeve answered, and said, It was to his representitive Power in Moses
and Elias that he prayed unto; as you may see, said he, when he said Ely, Ely,
Lama sabatheny; my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. You may see that the
Jews knew the Hebrew Language; for the Jews said he called for Elias, let him
come and save him if he will have him.

10. So that it is clear, that Christ prayed in his Agony, to his
representitive Power in Elias.

11. Then said the Recorder, Mr. Reeve, Mr. Reeve, You have spoke enough; let
Aaron speak.

12. Said John Reeve, Scoff on Mr. Recorder.

13. Truly Friend, said the Recorder, I do not scoff.

14. Then said I, I can say no more to that one Question than he has said
before, but if you have anything else to ask I will answer you.

15. But he asked never a Question more, nor spoke a word more, because the
Examination which they would not produce in the open Court had fully answered
to all things they could object against us.

16. But commanded us to withdraw; and the Jury laid their Heads a little
together and brought us in guilty of Blasphemy and execrable Opinions.

17. So the Recorder gave Sentance upon us, That we should be sent to Old
Bridewell, and be kept Prisoners there for six Months, without Bail or maine
Prise.

18. So there we remained full six Months.

19. And while we were Prisoners in Old Bridewell, Jeremiah Mount got that
Epistle to the Ministers printed, which are yet to be seen, and will be to the
end of the World by some.

20. After this, while we were Prisoners there, we wrote a Remonstrance of all
the Transactions that had passed, that was remarkable, from the day of our
Commission 1651. to this our time of being Committed Prisoners in Old Bridewell.

21. And this Remonstrance was directed to General Cromwell, and Jeremiah Mount
got that printed at his own Charge also. This Remonstrance is yet to be seen
with some, and will remain in the hands of some to the end of the World.

22. This Jeremiah Mount was a great Friend to us in the time of our
Imprisonment, and so was John Brunte and his Wife, and one Richard Russell:
There was very few Beleivers of us at that time, this was in the year 1653. It
was a year of great and many Troubles to us both, but especially to me.

23. And about the Month of April, in the year 1654. after our seven Months
Imprisonment we came forth of Prison.

24. And after this John Reeve wrote Letters to several Men; as to Esquire
Penington, William Sedgwick, Minister, and to the Earl of Pembrooke.

25. And some of them sent Answers to him again; but none of these Letters are
in print.

26. Also John wrote that Spiritual and heavenly Treatis, Entitled, Adivine
Lookinglass: And he got it printed in the Year 1656. Jeremiah Mount was at the
greatest part of that Charge.

27. But the Printer being knavish and covetous, quite spoiled it in the Press;
he hudled it up so close together, for want of more Paper, that no body had any
Delight to read it through, so that it never yielded the Money it cost printing.

CHAP. V. Of John Reeve's traveling to Maidstone in Kent, where he met with
Enemies, and gave them the Sentance, upon which they got a Warrant against him:
Of the Notice he had and departed. Of his Treatis, Called, Joyful News from
Heaven: After the writing of which he died.
1. AFTER this John Reeve went to Maidstone in Kent, to see some Friends there.

2. There was but Four Beleivers in that Country at that time.

3. And he going to visit them, having never been in that Country before; after
he had been three days there he met with Enemies enough.

4. But they falling in Discourse with him, they despised his Doctrine and
Commission; so he gave Sentance of Damnation to eternity upon one or two of
them.

5. And they stur'd up others to persecute him, so they got a Constable to
apprehend him, but having notice of it, he departed out of those Coasts in
have, and over heated his Blood with traveling to the Waterside, which was
Sixteen Miles: And he went upon the Water at Gravesend, at Night, when he was
all in a Sweat, and cooled himself too soon.

6. So he surfited his Blood, and drove him into a Consumption, which killed
him: He lived almost two Years afterward, but in a sick wasting Condition.

7. That surfit he got then, was absolutely the Cause of his Death, else he
might have lived many years longer.

8. Yet, notwithstanding his Sickness, he wrote that excellent Piece, a Book
called, Joyful News from Heaven; or, The Mortality of the Soul.

9. This he did in the time of his Sickness; and just as it was in the Press,
to be printed, he saw the first Sheet printed, but his Eyes were dim that he
could not see the print, not to read, for he died in two days after.

10. There was at that time three Sisters that were true Beleivers, which he
did often resort unto: The one was Mrs. Frances, the eldest, the second Mrs.
Roberts, the third Mrs. Boner.

11. This Mrs. Frances closed up his Eyes; for he said unto her, Frances, close
up mine Eyes, lest my Enemies say, I died, A staring Prophet.

12. And she did so, and he gave up the Ghost, and said not one word more.

13. And she took and cut one Look of his Hair to keep, for a Memorial of one
of the two last Prophets that God will ever send while this World endures.

14. He had a fine Head of Hair, it was black, waveing over his Shoulders.

15. So he was buried in Bethlahem Churchyard.

16. He dyed about the latter end of July, in the year 1658 in the seventh year
of our Commission, and in the Forty Ninth year of his Life.

17. Thus I have given a true Account, to be upon Record of some of the most
remarkable Acts and Passages, and Sufferings, which we the Witnesses of the
Spirit has acted and suffered in this Seven Years of our Commission.

18. Only for God's Cause, in Obedience unto the Voice of God, that spoke to
John Reeve the Third, Forth, and Fifth days of February, in the year 1651.

CHAP. VI. Of Laurance Claxton, what Books he wrote of his exalted Pride: The
Beleivers complain of him: The Prophet forbad him for writing any more: How he
humbled himself: The Prophet forgave him: And of his Death.
1. AFTER John Reeve was dead, there was one Laurance Claxton who had been a
Preacher of the Ranters that came to believe this Doctrine and Commission of the
Spirit.

2. And he owned it some little time before John Reeve dyed, and afterward he
asked me to give him leave to write in the vindication and justification of
this Commission of the Spirit.

3. And I gave my Consent, whereby several of his Acquaintance in
Cambridge-shire, were brought to the Faith of this Commission.

4. The first Book he wrote, the Title of it is, Look about you, for the Devil
that you fear is in you. It is in print at this Day.

5. The second Book he wrote; the Title is called, The Quakers Downfall: Which
is in print at this Day.

6. The third Book he wrote, the Title is called, A Dialogue between Faith and
Reason: Which is in print at this Day.

7. The forth Book he wrote, is called, A Wonder of Wonders: Which is in print
at this Day.

8. After this he grew so Proud, and Lording over the Beleivers, saying, That
no body could write in the vindication of this Commission, now John Reeve was
dead, but he: And to that purpose he wrote another Book Entitled, The lost
Sheep found: It is in print to this Day.

9. Wherein he had proudly exalted himself into John Reeve's Chair, exalting
John Reeve and himself, but quite excluded me in all the Book.

10. So many of the Beleivers complained to me of his lording over them, and
that he had excluded me quite in this last Book.

11. Whereupon I read the Book over, and found the Report was true.

12. Whereupon I put him down, for ever writing any more, and I wrote to the
Beleivers in Cambridge shier, and else where, that he was put down for his
Pride and Covetousness, for ever writing any more upon that account.

13. And the Beleivers did obey my Voice every where.

14. He continued thus, four Years after John Reeve dyed, until the year 1661.
and in a while after Laurance Claxton humbled himself to me, and acknowledged
his Fault, and I forgave him, and took him into my Favor, but tied him not to
write any more.

15. So he continued several years afterward, justifying his Faith and
Confidence, in this Commission of the Spirit.

16. But it came to pass, when the Fire destroyed the City of London he, to
get a Livelihood, did engage to help Persons of Quality to borrow Money, to
build their Houses again.

17. But the Persons that had the Money did run away, and left Claxton in the
Lurch; the Debt was one hundred Pounds.

18. So he only was Arrested, and put in Ludgate Goal, for this Money: He lay
there a whole year, and dyed there.

19. But he gave a very good Testimony of his Faith in the true God, and in
this Commission of the Spirit, and of that full assurance of eternal Happiness
he should enjoy, to eternity after his Death.

2. Insomuch that all the Prisoners marvelled, and were sorry they had opposed
him so when he was alive.

CHAP. VII. Showing how the Prophet caused, The Divine Looking-Glass to be
Reprinted: Of the Prophets printing a Book of the Interpretation of the 11th.
of the Revelations: And, The Quakers Neck broken: Of his Travels to Nottingham;
and the Transactions that passed there: And then to Chesterfield.
1. THE first thing I did after Claxton was put down, I caused the Divine
Looking-Glass to be new printed 1661. Which was done very handsomely, and is now
to be seen.

2. After this I wrote a Book containing Twenty four Sheets of Paper;
Entitled, The Interpretation of the 11th. Chapter of the Revelations by St.
John, and got it printed in the same year 1662. Which is yet to be seen: Never
was such a thing extant in the World before.

3. After this I wrote a Book called, The Neck of the Quakers broken,
containing Tenn Sheets of Paper; and got it printed in the same year 1663.
Which is yet to be seen.

4. After this it came to pass, that several in the North Country, hearing and
seeing these Books, had a great desire to see me, and especially one Ellin
Sudbury at Notingham, and one Dorothy Carter of Chesterfield in Darbyshier.

5. These and others were very desirous to see me, but they could not tell how,
for they thought it would be too much Charge and Labor for them to come to
London to me so far; for they were loath to put me to so much Charge to come to
them; yet Ellin Sudbury, her desiers were so strong, that she could not be
satisfied except she did see me: So she wrote a Letter unto me, that I would
come into those Parts; and that the Sosiety should bare the Charge.

6. Now I marvelled what that Society should be, but it was the Beamonists
mixed with the Quakers; as I found afterward: But this being in the Winter, I
sent word I would come and see her in Summer.

7. And accordingly it came to pass, that one Thomas Hudson, a Friend of ours
at London, had occasion to see his own Relations in Lancashire, and Notingham,
and Chesterfield being in his way, he was willing to travel with me, to see
those Friends we had never seen before.

8. And when we came to Notingham, Elin Sudbury was glad to see us, and so was
her Husband also, but at that time he was upon the Beamonist score; so there
came several of the Beamonists People to discourse with me, and some of the
Speakers of them, and Mr. Sudbury he thought they would be able to dispute with
me, though he could not.

9. But he saw they were more weak than himself, to maintain their Principles
of Religion; so that he disliked them, and said, That their was no true
knowledge of the Scriptures amongst them: Also he heard me pass the Sentence of
Damnation to eternity, on four of them.

10. And one of these was very much troubled, and asked Elin Sudbury, whether
she did believe he was damned, because I had passed the Sentance upon him, only
to ensnare her, she being but weak, and had never heard such a thing before.

11. But I, to free her from that Bondage in her Mind, for I knew she had not
Confidence enough, at that time to say she did believe he was damned: And if
she should say no, then she would loose the assurance of her own Happiness, in
beleiving me to be a Prophet of the Lord, and had Power to give Sentance of
Blessedness to one, and Cursedness to the other; So I knew the Woman was in a
strait what to say, and he urged her for an Answer.

12. But I said, she shall not give you her Judgment at all, to ensnare her
Mind: I have passed the Sentance upon you, and I do believe without doubting,
That you are the Seed of the Serpent, and will be damned to eternity, and it
matters not if all the People in the World, should believe to the contrary, yet
my Faith shall be stronger than all to keep you down.

13. Then they grew angree, and threatened to prosecute me, but could not tell
how to state a ground of Prosecution.

14. After Thomas Hudson and I went from thence to Chesterfield, which was
Twenty Miles further, to Dorothy Carter's House, a Widow; she had one
Daughter, her Name was Elizabeth, that was a true Beleiver; and a young Maid
that was Servant to Dorothy Carter, her Name was Elizabeth Smith, a true
Beleiver also.

15. And there was in that Town, a Man, his Name was Edward Fewterer, a
Surgeon, that was a true Beleiver also: These Four were glad to see me, for
they had never seen me before.

16. But the Professors of Religion, in that Town, hearing of me, there came
several to dispute with me; but some of them blasphemed, and despised what I
said, whereupon I pronounced the Sentence, of eternal damnation upon Four, or
Five Men there.

17. And they being enraged at it, they thought to prosecute us both; and they
went to the Mayor and Aldermen of the Town, to see what could be done unto us.

18. And the Mayor and Aldermen said, they could not tell what to do in it,
seeing there was no Law against any Man for saying a Man is damned; but if you
bring them before the Mayor, and if they cannot give a good Account where there
Habitation is, they may be set in the Stocks for Vagabonds if they stay in the
Town any more than so many days: But we did not know this till afterward.

19. And while they were ploting this Mischief; we not thinking of it, Thomas
Hudson was to go Fifty Miles further, so Edward Fewterer and I took Horse, and
went a matter of Fifteen Miles, on the Way with Mr. Hudson: Upon this, the
Quakers reported, that I fled away from Chesterfield, to Bake-well, for fear of
a whiping, when as we did not know there was any Mischief intended against us.

20. Besides Edward Fewterer and I, came back again to Chesterfield the same
Night; but none sought after me as I heard of, and in two days afterward, I
departed from Chesterfield to Notingham again.

And as I stayed there Three days more, there was a Conspiracy amongst those I
had passed Sentance of Damnation upon, how to apprehend me.

22. For every place in the Country, where I had any that believed, and that
was a Friend to me, there was a many Enemies that sought to do me harm, only
they had no Law on their side; but I being of Mr. Sudbury's Acquaintance, and
at his House, the Mayor or Sheriffs would do nothing in it.

23. And it came to pass afterward, that the Sheriff's Wife came to be a true
Beleiver unto this day, her Name is Mary Barker.

24. So after Three days, I departed for Notingham to London, to my own House:
This was in the Year 1663.

CHAP. VIII. The Prophet travels into Cambridge shire and Kent: And of his
Marriage to his Third Wife, and of his Second Jorney into Darby-shire; and of
his being brought before the Mayor of Chesterfield: Of his Examination by the
Priest, and of his Commitment.
1. AFTER this I traveled into Cambridge-shire, to see several Friends there,
and they were very joyful to see me at Cambridge, and the Countries round
about; for there were a many of Beleivers in that Country.

2. I stayed there but a matter of Three Weeks, and then returned to London
again: And a little while after, I traveled into Kent to visit some Friends.

3. And there was one John Martine, a Tanner, at East-Malin in Kent, which did
truly believe in this Commission of the Spirit, and so did his Wife: He had Two
Sons and one Daughter; his eldest Son Thomas did not believe, but his youngest
Son John, and his Daughter Mary were both true Beleivers; and his Daughter Mary
was very zealous and strong in the belief of it.

4. And it came to pass, a while after this John Martin dyed, and I going
thither again afterward, I took his Daughter Mary to Wife with her Mothers
Consent, and I married her according to the Law of England, as I did my other
two Wives before.

5. I had been a Widdower Sixteen years, before I took this Maid to Wife, she
was Twenty Five years of Age when I married her, and I was about Fifty Three
years old when I took her to Wife: She was of a good meek innocent and just
Nature, besides the strong Faith and Zeal she had in this Commission of the
Spirit; so that she was very suitable, both i^ spiritual, and temporal
Qualifications unto my Nature.

6. After this, it came to pass, the same year that I was married, great
Troubles did befall me, both upon a Spiritual and Temporal Account, as may be
understood in the following Relation.

7. It came to pass, that one Richard Hatter, a true Beleiver, had some
Business at Law, at the Assizes at York: He had a mind to go by Notingham and
Chesterfield, to see those Friends there; and if I would go with him, he would
bear me Company so far.

8. Now these Friends, had greatly desired me to come down into the Country to
see them; so I was glad of his Company, and we jornyed together; but Mr. Hatter
stayed But one Night at Notingham, and went his way and left me there at Mr.
Sudbury's, and I stayed there a few days: And in that time there came several
Quakers, Beamonites, and Indipendants, religious Men and Women, to discourse
and dispute with me.

9. But several of them despised, and blasphemed against what I said, whereby I
gave Sentance of eternal Damnation, in that they had sinned against the Holy
Ghost, a Sin which God will not forgive: Which made them very angry, and spread
it abroad the Country, where ever I was known. And after a few days I went form
Notingham to Chesterfield.

10. And in the middle of the way, there is a Market Town, called Mansfield,
and there I used to bait my Horse and myself, and that Town is full of Quakers;
and when I did Inn there, the Quakers and others, they would press into the
Room where I was, to see me and talk with me: And they being an obstinate, and
stiffnecked People against a personal God, many of them came under the Sentence
of Damnation at Mansfield, and they had reported it at Chesterfield, before I
could come there.

11. And when I came to Dorothy Carter's House; after I had been two or three
days there, came several Persons to speak with me in that Town, being a Market
Town, and they were wicked Dispisers of a personal God.

12. And several of them were damned, at Mansfield and Chesterfield, and about
twelve: But these at Chesterfield were most of them Independants, and they
consulted with the Priest of the Parish, with the Mayor and Aldermen of the
Town to persecute me; and the Quakers were glad the Independent People did so.

13. So the Priest being a more subtle Serpent than all the Beasts of the
Field, he consulted the Mayor and Aldermen, to send a Constable for me, before
them, and he would examine me, and see what Words he could get out of me, to
have Matter to accuse me of, For, said he, we can do nothing to him for saying
a Man is damned.

14. So the Constable was commanded to fetch me before the Mayor, and he came
where I was, and said I must go before the Mayor.

15. I asked him if he had any Warrant for me; he said, No, then I said, I will
not go: Said he, I can command Aid; then he commanded the Man of the House,
where my Horse was at grass, but the Man was loath to do it, but he commanded
him in the Kings Name to aid him.

16. So the Man took hold of one Arm, and the Constable by the other, and led
me to the Hall, where the high Priest sat, for he was one of the Commissioners
of the Ecclesiastical Court, with the Mayor and Aldermen of the Town, and the
Town Clarke, and all the Officers of the Town, were gathered together against
me.

17. My Examination before them was as follows; the Priest's Name was John
Gupe, the Majors Name John Allwood, the Recorders Name was Needham, and the
Constables Name was Slater, and the Aldermen, one was Clarke, and another his
Name was Pinder; the rest I did not know their Names.

18. The first thing the Priest asked was, what I came into that Country for.

19. I said, I came to visit some Friends at Notingham, and Chesterfield, and
that I was sent for: He asked me where I lived. I said at London, and what
Trade I was of, I said, a Tailor by Trade, and that I lived in Trinity Lane,
and had fined for most Offices in the Parish were I lived.

20. Then he waved that, because he thought I was no Housekeeper, but a Lodger,
that has no certain abiding place, but as a Vagabond that goes to and fro and
has abideing every where, So when he saw he could do nothing here then he
asked me whether I did believe the Three Persons in the Trinity, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost.

21. I answered, No, I did believe there was three Names, or Titles, of Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, but one Person, the Lord Jesus Christ.

22. He rejoiced at this before the Mayor, and said, this was enough, and
caused the Recorder to set it down, the same words.

23. Then he asked me if I was one of the Two Witnesses spoken of in the 11th.
of the Revelations.

24. I answered and said, I was one of those Two Witnesses of the Spirit,
spoken of in the 11th. of the Revelations; then he commanded the Recorder to
set these words down.

25. Again, he asked me, if I had power to damn and to save.

26. I answered, and said, I had power to give Sentance of Damnation upon those
that despised my Doctrine that I declare, and to pronounce the Sentance of
Salvation upon those that truly believe it.

27. And that you may know that I have Power, I do pronounce you Cursed and
Damned both Soul and Body from the presence of God, elect Men and Angels to
eternity.

28. Then was the Priest struck dumb for a season, and when he had recovered
himself to his Senses again, he said to the Recorder, set that down, but did
not mention a word that the Priest was damned.

29. Then said the Mayor, Mr. Mugleton, we do not believe you, we do believe
the Apostles.

30. I answered, and said, That will do you but little good now.

31. Those words the Recorder was commanded to set down.

32. There were many more Words and Circumstances in the Examination, but these
were the main things they made a Charge against me.

CHAP. IX. Showing that the Prophet proved before the Priest, Mayor, and
Aldermen, that Christ was the only God. The Priest made no Replycation against
it, but fauning upon him with fine Words, to ensnare him against the
Government: The Prophet's Wisdom discovered it. Of his Commitment.
1. BUT this I observed, that after I had given the Sentance of Damnation upon
the Priest, he was very meek and moderate, and asked me Questions in the
Scriptures concerning Christ being the only God.

2. And I opened unto him the First of John, In the beginning was the Word, and
the Word was with God, and the Word was God, and the Word became Flesh, and
dwelt amongst us.

3. Now, said I, was not Christ the Word become Flesh, and that Word that
became Flesh was God: And did any other God dwell among Men but Christ.

4. And is it not said in Scripture, That in him all the fullness of the Godhead
dwelt bodily, Not a part, or a piece of the Godhead, but all the fullness dwelt
bodily in him.

5. Again, does not the Scripture say, Great is the Mystery of Godliness, God
manifest in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, believed on in
the World, received up into Glory.

6. Now was not this Christ manifest in the Flesh? Was not he preached unto the
Gentles, and believed on in the World? And was not he received up into Glory?
So that Christ must needs be God become Flesh, and God manifest in Flesh.

7. Also, was not this Jesus Christ that Alpha and Omega, the First and the
Last, the Beginning and the End, he that was Dead and is Alive for ever more.

8. Here you see the Alpha and Omega was dead; And was not the Alpha and Omega
God? And you see by the Scripture that the Alpha and Omega was dead: And was
there any Alpha and Omega that dyed but Jesus Christ? And was there any Alpha
and Omega that quickened out of Death to Life again, but Christ? Therefore he
is said to be a quickening Spirit.

9. Therefore it must needs be, that Christ is God become Flesh, and manifest
in Flesh; and he it was that dwelt among Men; and he was in the Person of a
Man, in all things like unto Man, Sin excepted.

10. So that God is but one Person in Form, like a Man, and not Three Persons,
as Men do vainly imagine.

11. But when he heard these sayings of mine, he replied nothing against it,
but seemed to faun upon me, and speak softly unto me, tempting me* And asked me
secretly what I thought of this present Power, that he might have had some what
to accuse me of, that the Law would have taken hold of.

12. But I answered him, and said, That I never was concerned with no temporal
Powers, neither did I meddle with them at all.

13. So when the Priest saw he could get nothing out of me, concerning the
Government of the Nation, then he applied to the things before mentioned.

14. And he caused the Recorder to read over the Examination before the Mayor;
the things were but few.

15. First, denying the Three Persons in the Trinity: Secondly, That I said I
was one of those two Witnesses spoken of in the 11th. of the Revelations.

16. Thirdly, That I said I had power to damn and save: And Fourthly, that I
said their beleiving the Scriptures would do them little good now.

17. Those were the chief things I was charged with. Then the Priest asked me
if I would be Prisoner that Night at the Constables House, at my own charge, or
at the Town charge.

18. If I had said at the Town charge, then I must have lain in the Cage all
Night; but I answered and said, At my own Charge.

19. But I said to the Mayor, Do you not take Bail in these cases? The Mayor
said, Yes: But the Priest, before the Mayor had perfectly spoken, said, if you
can put in Bail that are not excommunicated Persons.

20. Then Dorothy Carter, my Friend, being a Widow, would have been Bail, with
one of her Sons, and she pressed at the Door to come in, but the Priest thrust
her out, and said, She was an excommunicated Person, neither should the Mayor
accept of her.

21. And I had never a Friend more in that Town, but one Edward Fewterer, but
he was not in the way at that present, so could not procure Bail.

22. But was committed into the Constables Hands that Night; and as soon as
ever I was committed Prisoner into his Hands, to be sent to Darby Goal the
next Morning, being Sixteen long Miles from Chesterfield.

23. Then the Baylies of the Town seezed upon my Horse for the Lord of the
Manor* and sent me to the Goal upon their own Horse.

24. But I was more troubled for the Horse than for myself, because my Friend
John Brante at London, was engaged for the Horse, else pay four Pounds.

25. But my Friend Dorothy Carter, she went to the Earl of Newcastle, he being
Lord of the Manor; and she told him what these Baylies had done.

26. So the Earl sent for them, and was angry with them, and did reprove them,
and said, Will you take away a Man's Horse before he be Convicted and
Condemned? I charge you, said he, that the Horse be put to Grass, and that no
Saddle be put upon his Back, and let the Owner pay for his Meat, if he be quit,
or otherwise.

27. So it was done, according to his Command.

CHAP. X. The Priest gave that Character of the Prophet, of a wise and sober
Man The Prophet, gave the like Character on Pendor. Of a Dispute between the
Prophet, and two of the Officers of the Town and the Keeper of the Person, and
the Sheriff's Men. The Prophet proves Three Records on Earth to answer the
Three Records in Heaven* All this in the Goal.
1. NOW I shall speak of something of my Imprisonment in Darby Goal, which is as
follows.

2. For all the Priest's Malice toward me, yet he could say to the Aldermen,
when I was gone, That this Man was the soberest, wisest Man of a Phanatick that
ever he talked with; for he thought I had been like the Quakers.

3. This did one of the Aldermen tell me, for he was as Nicodemas, his Name was
Pendor; he came to me by Night, for he had a great desire to talk with me
alone, so that Night I was in the Constables House he had his desired
Oppertunity.

4. And when I was Prisoner in Darby Goal, there came the Sheriff's Men, and
Two of the Officers of the Town, and the Keeper of the Prison, to talk with me.

5. The Officers of the Town came to me, thinking themselves wise and knowing
enough in the Scriptures, especially one of them, for to talk or dispute with
me.

6. But the Sheriff's Men came on purpose to ensnare me, if they could; so one
of them, the most surly angriest Man of them, asked me, saying, Have you taken
the Oath of Allegance and Supremacy.

7. I answered and said, That Prophets do not use to swear: Did you ever read
in Scripture that Kings have been subject to Prophets Words, and those Kings
were happy that were obedient to the voice of Prophets.

8. Why, said he, are you a Prophet?

9. Yea, said I, that I am a Prophet.

10. Then said he, do you go to Church to hear our Ministers. At that time
there was a Law to persecute Men that did not come to Church, which caused him
to ask that Question.

11. I answered him, and said, That it is not the practice of Prophets to go to
Church to learn of your Ministers, the Ministers ought to hear Prophets and
learn of them.

12. For Prophets were always above Bishops and Ministers.

13. When he heard me answer him so confidently, and with Authority as from
Heaven, he said no more.

14. And when the Officers of that Town heard me answer him so positive, they
were the more afraid to enter into a Dispute with me.

15. Yet one of them being more Atheistical, being of the Saduce Spirit, upon
whose Wisdom and Knowledge they all depended upon; he was a moderate Man, and
asked his Questiens moderately, as you shall hear.

16. Says he, Mr* Mugleton, you say there is is Three Commissions, or Records to
be acted upon this Earth, and you say your Commission is the Commission of the
Spirit, and the last: Now, says he, if you could prove this by Scripture, I
should be satisfied.

17. I answered, and said unto him, will you believe me, if I do prove it by
Scripture, here before these People.

18. Then said he, truly I think I shall believe you, if you prove it by
Scripture.

19. Then the Keeper, and all the Men, were silent, and speak not a word, none
but he and I.

20. Then said I, you shall not be troubled with any more Scriptures than that
in the Epistle of John, the 5th. Chapter, and such Scriptures as do allude to
the same purpose; where it is said, There is Three that bare Record in Heaven,
the Father, Word, and Spirit, and these Three are one: And there are Three that
bare Record on Earth, the Water, Blood, and Spirit, and these Three agree in
one.

21. Said I, here you see that there is Three Records to be upon Earth,
answerable to the Three Records in Heaven; and as the Three Records in Heaven
were but one God, though called Father, Word, and Spirit.

22. So likewise the Three Records on Earth, of Water, Blood, and Spirit, are
said yet do agree in one, as the Scripture says, do you believe this?

23. He answered, and said, he did, and so they said all.

24. Then, said I, you see this one God in Heaven is called Father, Word, and
Spirit, yet but one God; yet said to be Three that bare Record in Heaven, yet
but one God.

25. Said I, how will you interpret this Scripture.

26. He answered and said, he knew not how, but desired me to unfold it.

27. Then said I, these Three that bare Record in Heaven, it was spoken in
relation to the Three Records on Earth.

28. For this one God bearing Three Records in Heaven, would have signified but
little unto Mankind, had there not been Three Records on this Earth given unto
Men, to declare unto Men the Three Records in Heaven.

29. That Men might understand that one true God that is in Heaven,
demonstrated by Three Titles, of Father, Word, and Spirit.

30. Which God cannot be known, but by the Three Records on Earth, and those
Three Records on Earth must be acted by Men, that Men and Women may come to
know that one true God in Heaven, which is distinguished by Father, Word, and
Spirit, and be saved.

31. For it is Life eternal to know the true God, and he is to be known no
other way, but by these Three Records on Earth, of Water, Blood, and Spirit;
and these Three Records on Earth are acted by Men, be they not, said I. He
said, yea.

CHAP. XI. Showing the Interpretations of the Two past Records on Earth, of
Water and Blood, being undeniably unfolded.
1. THEN, said I, will you interprit who those Men were and are, that have
acted the Records of Water and Blood and Spirit upon Earth?

2. He answered and said, No, he could not, but desired me to interprit it.

3. Then, said I, the Interpretation is thus; the Record of Water upon the
Earth it was Moses and the Prophets under the Law.

4. They worshipped God with diverse Ceremonies of Tipes and Offerings of Bulls
and Goats, and sprinkled upon the Alter their Blood, and upon the Flesh of the
Leapers, and other distempered Persons that were unclean, and much Washings and
Purifyings with clear Water, was used under the Worship of the Law.

5. Which was the Record of Moses and the Prophets, it being set up by Moses
and practiced by the People of the Jews many Generations: And this Record of
Moses upon Earth is that Record of Water, answering and bearing Testimony to
that one God the Father and Creator of all things both in Heaven and Earth.

6. This is the Interpretation of the Record of Water upon Earth, and this
agrees with the Record of God the Father in Heaven.

7. Now you must understand that the Record of Water upon Earth, it was acted
by Men, as Moses and the Prophets, and the high Priests, in the time of the
Law: They all cried with one accord, This is Truth.

8. The Interpretation of the Record of the Blood upon Earth, it was Jesus
Christ and his Apostles, In that Christ came to fulfill the Law, and he is said
to be the end of the Law to every one that beleives, and to lay down his Life
for many.

9. Now, in laying down his Life, is understood that he shed his own precious
Blood: Therefore it is said, his Soul was heavy unto Death and he power'd out
his Soul unto Death; and except you eat my Flesh and drink my Blood you have no
Life in you.

10. That is, no Man has the Assurance of eternal Life, abideing in him,
except he does truly believe that Flesh of Christ that was Crucified upon the
Cross, to be the Flesh of God.

11. That is, the Word became Flesh and dwelt amongst Men, and that Blood of
Christ that was power'd out unto Death, to be the Blood of God: Except this be
believed there can be no eternal Life abideing in Man.

12. For this Blood of Christ does purge the Conscience from dead Works, to
serve the living God: So that Christ which is manifest in Flesh, as the
Scripture says, did pass through Blood.

13. And his Apostles, after he had given them a Commission, as in the Second
of the Acts, they bare Testimony and Record on the Earth, that Jesus was the
Christ.

14. And they did witness, that he shed his Blood, and was put to Death by the
Jews, and did rise again and assend up into Heaven, in that same Body he
suffered Death in.

15. For which Record of theirs they were put to Death, and their Blood was
shed, and so were many Beleivers in their Commission put to Death, and passed
through Blood, for bearing Record to this Jesus which they had crusified, to be
the Son of God.

16. And this Record on Earth was acted by Men, who lost their Lives for their
Record; therefore it is called the Record of Blood upon Earth.

17. Answerable to the Record in Heaven, in that the Word became Flesh; and
Christ is that Word that bare Record in Heaven, and became Flesh, and shed his
Blood: And those that bare Record unto him, their Blood was shed also.

18. So that the Blood of Christ, and the Blood of the Apostles, and the Blood
of Saints, is that Record of Blood on Earth: And this Record of Blood on Earth,
it was acted by Men, by Christ, his Apostles, and Saints.

19. This is the true Interpretation of the Second Record of Blood here upon
Earth, is it not said I.

20. They all rejoiced, and said it was true so far, and that they never heard
the like.

21. Now the Interpretation of the Third Record of the Spirit upon Earth: You
see, said I, that there is to be Three Records upon Earth, as there is Three in
Heaven: Now you see there is but Two acted upon Earth as yet, to wit, Water and
Blood.

22. Now the Water Record was to witness to God the Father, the Blood Record
witnessed to Christ the Son, and you see they were Men like your selves, that
did bear these Records on Earth, of Water and Blood.

23. Likewise, you see, that these Two Records on Earth, they did witness to
one God in Heaven: Did they not? said I. He answered, and said, They did. Yet,
said I, you see they differ one from the other in point of Worship,
notwithstanding they did agree to bear Record to one God in Heaven.

24. Now, said I, as these Two Records of Water and Blood were acted upon Earth
by Men, so likewise must the Record of the Spirit upon Earth he acted by Men
also.

25. And not as People do vainly imagiin, That the Two former Records were
acted by Moses and the Prophets, and the High Priests, which were Men: And the
Record of the Blood was acted upon this Earth by Christ and his Apostles and
Saints, which were Men.

26. But you cannot conceive the Record of the Spirit upon Earth is to be acted
by Men, as the other Two were: But you conceive that God does act this Record
upon Earth himself, only by inspiring his Spirit into every Man's Heart secretly
giving the Knowledge of himself.

27. Two answered, and said, Indeed this was their Belief

28. But, said I, the Record of the Spirit upon Earth must be acted by Men, as
the other Two were, else them Words be not true, That there is Three that bare
Record on Earth.

29. For if God which is in Heaven does act the Record of the Spirit himself,
and Men acted the other Two, then there is but Two Records on Earth, and Four
Records in Heaven.

30. When they heard this, they rejoiced, and said to the Man that disputed
with me, Mr. Benet, We think you have met with one that is two hard for you
now.

CHAP. XII. The Interpretation of the Third Record on Earth, the Record of the
Spirit, and who it is acted by.
THEN, said I, The Record of the Spirit upon Earth must be acted by Men, as the
other Two were. Now, said I, there must be Witnesses of the Spirit upon Earth,
as there was Witnesses of Water and Blood.

2. And some Men must be the chief Teachers or Commissioners, as he did Moses
and the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles; these were chosen of God, and happy
was it for those that believed them in their time.

3. Now, said I, God chose John Reeve and myself by Voice of Words, to the
hearing of the Ear, to be his Two last Prophets and Witnesses of the Spirit,
and he gave us Understanding of his Mind in the Scriptures above all the Men in
the World at this Day.

4. And this I know to be true, and many that can witness the same: I spoke not
this out of any Pride of Heart, but out of perfect Knowledge, for true
Knowledge is never proud.

5. For I would make nothing of the greatest learned Man that is upon the
Earth, if he will dispute of the Scripture in the English Tongue: And not
persecute with a Sword of Steel, to overthrow him by the Scriptures, that there
is but one true God in the person of a Man, who made Man in his own Image and
likeness, as the Scriptures says; And not Three Persons, and one God, as all
Profesers of Reason do own at this Day.

6. Also we being the third Record of the Spirit upon Earth, we use no outward
visible Forms of Worship, But do Worship God in Spirit, and Truth, as Christ
said.

7. So that every Record on Earth, does differ, one from another, in Point of
Worship.

8. For it is not proper, for every Record, to Act one and the same thing, over
and over again: And as there is a difference in the Three Titles called Three
Records in Heaven, of Father* Word, and Spirit; Now these are Three Distinct
Titles, yet but one God.

9. So it is with the Three Records on Earth, of Water, Blood, and Spirit:
These be Three distinct Records, And Three distinct Persons; the head of these
Three distinct Records. And there is Three distinct differances, in there
visible Worships; yet they all Three agree in one.

10. In witnessing to that one Jesus Christ to be the very true God, and
Savior of all those that believe in that the Word was God, And God was that
Word, And the Word became Flesh, and Dwelt among Men: He that is called the
Alpha and Omega, the First and the Last; The Beginning and the End; He that was
Dead and is Alive for Evermore.

11. This one God, does all the Three Records agree, to witn^ss unto this one
God, though differing all of them in their Several dispensations, of outward
Worship as afore^aid.

12. For every Record Acts his part upon this Earth, suitable to the Three
Titles in Heaven; Moses and the Prophets, their parts in the dispensation of
Water, as being under the Title of God the Father and Creator of all things.

13. Christ and the Apostles, Acted their Commission of the Blood, under the
Title of a Redeemer by his own Blood, And he was that Word made Flesh, And
Dwelt among Men.

14. And now we the Witnesses of the Spirit, do Act a Spiritual Record on
Earth, which is to Worship God in Spirit, and Truth, Answerable to the Title of
Spirit in Heaven.

15. In Witnessing to that one Personal God, though Three Titles, of Father,
Word, and Spirit; yet but one Personal God.

16. So that the Three Records on Earth, do agree in one, though they differ in
their outward dispensations of worship as aforesaid; so that we the Witnesses
do Act our part on Earth under the Title of the Holy Spirit in Heaven;
therefore our Worship is Spiritual, and Invisible in the Heart only.

17. And now you see, I have proved by Scripture; that the Commission of the
Spirit is now Extant upon the Earth; and Acted by Men like yourselves, even by
John Reeve, And myself; and those that believe our Doctrine.

18. Said I, do you believe me now, I have proved by Scripture, that I am one
of the Two last Prophets, and Witnesses of the Spirit or last Record on Earth.

19. He answered and said, that he could not gain say any thing that I had
spoken, but did aprove, of what I had said better than of any that ever he
heard in his life, but said he could not venture his Salvation upon my Words.

20. Then said the Sheriffs Men, and the Keeper of the Prison, Now Mr. Benet,
you have met with your Match, One that has Answered you all things.

21. Then said Mr. Benet, suffer me to ask you one question more.

22. What is that said I.

23. Why says he; I have been a long time of the Oppinion, that the Soul of
Man is mortal and does dye, But I cannot satisfy myself in it.

24. I answered and said; your Oppinion was true, for the Soul of Man is Mortal
and does Dye, For nothing does Live, but the Soul, for it is the Soul that Eats
and Drinks, and Walks, and Talks; And the Soul that Lives and Dies, For
nothing can be said to Dye but Life, for if the Body be Dead, the Soul or Life
is Dead also: For the Body and Soul is all one being: And if one be Alive, both
are Alive, And if one be Dead, both are Dead.

25. For both Body and Soul, came into the World together, For the Soul is
begotten by Generation, as well as the Body; so that they go both Body and
Soul, out of the World together; For that Life that is begot by Procuration
must Dye, which all Souls are; and not by Infusion from God, but by that very
Law that said Increase and Multiply.

26. Therefore the Soul or Life of Man, and all things else, that is begotten
by Generation must Dye as well as their Bodies.

27. When he heard this, He was very much taken with my answer, and seemed very
Respective to me, and so did the Sheriffs Men; they showed themselves very
Civil.

28. This dispute was upon the Sunday before the Assizes: For that began on the
Monday following, a matter of Four Hours in the Afternoon, this dispute was.

CHAP. XIII. The Prophets Argument. And Examined by the Judge: And he Required
of the Judge to take Bail, the Judge granted it: The Mayor, Aldermen and
Recorder that Committed him, saw their Folly and Madness, and were ashamed of
themselves: How the Prophet had the Love of all the Prisoners. Of his Printing
of the whole Book of the Revelation, etc.
1. AFTER this dispute aforesaid, upon the Wednesday following being the last
Day of the Assizes, I was called before the Bar: And when I came before the Bar.

2. The Judge asked me, if I would be Tried by this Note of Examination.

3. I answered no, and said, I thought your Honor would have excepted of Bail
for my appearance the next Assizes; For Mrs. Carter had delivered the Judge a
writing, to that purpose, of mine, the Day before; and the Judge, his Name was
Terral.

4. The Judge, answered and said; that he would take Bail, but had said to her,
he would see the Man: So when I asked him at the Bar to take Bail, the Judge
said, he would; and asked me who they were.

5. And I said, one is Richard Sudbury; He asked where he Lived; I said at
Notingham; he asked what Trade; I said an Iron-monger. Then Richard Sudbury was
called, and the Judge asked him, whether he would be bound for my Appearence
the next Assizes; He said, he would; then the Judge Commanded him to be set
down for one.

6. Then said the Judge; There must be another, then said, I, there is one
Edward Fewterer; where Lives he, said the Judge, I said at Chesterfield; what
Trade, said the Judge, I said a Surgeion, then the Judge Commanded Edward
Fewterer to be called, then the Judge asked him, whither he would be bound in
two Hundred Pound Bond, for this Man's appearance, He said, he would.

7. Then speak one of the Aldermen of the Town; If it shall please your Honor;
Mr. Fewterer is not Capable to be his Bail; why said the Judge; said he,
Because he is an Excommunicated Person; said the Judge, What was he
Excommunicated for; said he, For not coming to Church. Said the Judge, How long
has he been Excommunicated: He said, but last Sunday; Push, said the Judge,
that Signifies nothing, Except it was for the cause of Adultry; set him down to
be Bail.

8. Then the Mayor, Recorder, and Aldermen, all of them were Ashamed and vexed,
they could do me no further Mischief, than Imprisonment.

9. And when I was Bailed out of Prison, the Mayor and Constable, and the rest
were afraid I would trouble them.

10. The Mayor for Committing me to Prison, without any Accusers, and denying
to take Bail for me, and for not binding some over for to Prosecute against me,
which things he did not, but was in danger to pay Five Pound a Day for false
Imprisonment.

11. And the Constable, was like to suffer for Apprehending me, without a
Warrant.

12. I was Councelled to sue them at the Law; and so I would, if they had put
in any Indictment against me, but they were afraid; And did nothing but let it
fall.

13. So I was quit, only it put me to a great deal of Charge, but seeing they
put no Indictment against me, I let it pass, and fall.

14. Dorothy Carter, and Mr. Sudbury, were great Friends in this business, both
in Purss and Person; because I was taken at her House, and she brought me from
Darby Goal, to her own House again on Horse back, which is 16 long Miles.

15. I had the Love of all the Prisoners, on that side I was put; and they
said, they thought themselves Blessed for mysake

16. For they were every one of them, that were with me, freed without any
punishment, only the Fees of the Prison. I was in Prison in Darby Goal but nine
Days, but this falling out so quickly after I was Married to my Wife Mary, it
was some grief to her, but being delivered so quickly, she was pacified the
better.

17. This was a Year of great Trouble to me, both upon a Spiritual Account, as
before Written; and upon a Temporal, which I shall not mention.

18. This was in the 13th. year of my Commission, and in the 54 year of my
Life, and in the year of the Lord 1664.

19. After this, I Wrote a Book, containing 32 sheets of Paper, Called the
Interpritation of the whole Book of the Revelations of Saint John, the bigest
volum of all the Books that were written by us.

20. Also, I wrote a Letter after that to Thomas Tailor, a Quaker, Containing
two sheets of Paper; And in the year 1665, I got them both Printed; they are
yet to be seen by many.

The End of the Third Part.
The Fourth Part. From the Year 1665 to the Year 1670.
CHAP. I. The Prophets Travels into Kent: Of Judge Twisden; and of the
Prophet's Letter to him. Of the increase of Beleivers,
1. AFTER this I traveled into Kent, to see my Wife's Friends, and there I had
like to have been apprehended by the Judge of the Town, his Name was Twisden:
But I having intilligence of his wicked Intent, I escaped away out of his
Coasts.

2. And I wrote a Letter to him, forbiding him for persecuting any Man for his
Conscience: For though he was made a Judge of the Law in temporal Matters, yet he
was not the Judge of Conscience, nor of Spiritual Matters.

3. Therefore I advised him to meddle with those Things he knows, as the Laws
of the Land, and not with those Things that belongs to God, as the Conscience
does.

4. For God only is the Judge of spiritual Things, and them whom he does choose,
least you bring your self under the Sentance of eternal Damnation: This Letter
is large, but not in Print, but is yet to be seen in Writing.

5. He was netled in his Mind at it, but knew not how to help himself; so he
brought the Letter in his Hand to my Wife's Mother's House, and asked her, if
she thought he should be ever the worse, if he did persecute me; on purpose to
ensnare her, because she did not go to Church, and was under his Power; for he
was the cruelest Devil to all Prophessors of Religion, that did not conform to
Worship as he did, that was in all that Country: Also he would have had a Book
of her, that he might have done me the more Mischief; but I charged her,
before, to let him have none, nor none in that Town should let him have one.

6. Also, I told him, in the Letter, that if he would send to me at London, and
send Money, I would let him have half a Dozen of Books, several, but without
Money he should have none, for they cost a great deal of Moneys Printing: But
he never sent for any, but threatened my Mother, that if ever I came there any
more to deceave People, as he called it, that he would do great Matters to me:
So he went his way, and never came there more, as I heard of.

7. Now by this time there was many Men and Women that did believe in this
Commission of the Spirit; and the Doctrine of the true personal God was received
by several Persons of Quality, so that many were aded to the Faith: Some I
shall name.

8. First, One Mrs. Field, who lived in Wales; she was counted a Lady in that
Country; and one Mrs. Sharte, a Draper's Wife in Cannon-street: This Sarah
Sharte, she sent for me several times, to speak with her, but the Messenger
missed of me so often, that she thought herself forsaken of God, that she could
not speak with me.

9. For she had kept her House several years of a Weakness she had in her Body,
so that she could not go forth, nor come to me herself: So she seeing none of
them she sent could meet with me, she grew out of patience, and could not sleep
'till she had seen me.

10. So she desired her Husband, to go himself in the Morning betimes, before I
was gone out; so he did, and he engaged me to come to his Wife about Two of the
Clock in the Afternoon, the same Day, for she had a great Desire to speak with
me.

11. So at the time appointed I went, and she was glad to see me, who had
desired it a long time: And when she had seen me, and had discoursed with me
about spiritual and heavenly Things, concerning God, his Form, and Nature: The
right Devil, his Form and Nature: The Person and Nature of Angels: The Place
and Nature of Hell: The Place and Nature of Heaven: The Rice of the Two Seeds,
and of the Fall of Adam.

12. And how every Man came to have two Voices; or Motions, speaking in Man:
These were all heavenly Secrets, and hiden from the World, which I declared
unto her, so that she was very well satisfied in her Mind; and she desired that
I would come often to her, which I did always when she sent for me, not else:
And she was a true Beleiver afterward, and lived in the full Assurance of her
eternal Happiness after Death, all the Days of her Life.

13. And she had a Kinswoman, a Virgin, that waited upon her, by reading of the
Books her Aunt had of mine by stelth; she became a true Beleiver, her Name was
Ann Lo; and in process of time this Ann Lo married one William Hall, a true
Beleiver of this Commission of the Spirit.

14. And she did grow in Wisdom and Knowledge, in spiritual and heavenly
Knowledge and Experience, and strong in Faith, more than her Aunt before her;
and she was a great preserver of me, from the Hands of my Enemies, when the
King's Messengers sought after me; as will more appear hereafter.

CHAP. II. Of one Captain Wildye, an honorable Man: And of one Mrs. Cowlye, of
her Faith, and Obedience of her Husband, and of her Son, a University Scholar;
and of his Convinement by the Prophet, both as to the Ministry, Law, and
Physic.
1. ALSO there was one Captain Wildye, he was one of the Masters of
Trinity-House, an honorable Place: For that Trinity-House is a Court for the
ordering of Shiping, and Seamen: This Captain Wildye became a very true
Beleiver of this Commission of the Spirit, and he showed a great deal of
Charity to several poor Beleivers of this Faith, more than any particular
Person in his time.

2. Also he was the occasion of bringing to this Faith one Ann Cowlye, a
Gentlewoman at Mile-End-Green. She was carried through several Principles of
Religion, as Independent, Quaker, and Virgin-Life-People: She was zealous in
all things she clave unto, being very desirous to be saved, and afraid to be
damned.

3. She was in the Principle of a Virgin-Life, and would not let her Husband
know her in Twelve years before she saw me, notwithstanding she had born
several Children by this Man, and had one Son and one Daughter living by him.

4. But after she came to be acquainted with me, I convinced her both by
Scripture and Reason, of the unlawfullness of a married Wife, to live a
Virgin-Life, and that she could not possibly have Peace as to another Life in
that Practice: And I advised her to give herself up to her Husband, else I
could not give Judgment of Blessedness upon her to Eternity.

5. She being troubled at this saying of mine, was forced to yield to her
Husband, which thing, she thought an Angel from Heaven could not have persuaded
her to do.

6. But the Words of a Prophet was of great Power, whose Word she could not
resit, but obeyed his Voice, and had Peace of Mind, and the Blessing of
eternal Life in her Self; and she grew very zealous for the Commission of the
Spirit, and contended for the Faith very much; and this thing wrought upon her
by the Word of a Prophet.

7. This caused her Husband to believe also; and he was a very Wife and Prudent
Man of the Independent People, who had been a Preacher among them; he became a
very knowing Man in the Faith, also his Son and his Daughter became both true
Beleivers of this Commission of the Spirit.

8. His Son, John Cowlye was well bread, he was brought up at the University of
Cambridge, his Learning cost his Father many hundred Pounds, and when he was to
receave some Benefit or Livelihood for the future, for all the cost past; the
Benefice was, to be ordained a Minister, or a Doctor of Physic, or a Lawyer:
These Three be the most honorable Things in this World.

9. But when he came to speak with me I convinced him of the Unlawfullness of
all the Three, for any Saint, or Gods Elect to undertake that Practice.

10. The Seed of the Serpent were the fitest Men to take them Practices upon
them, because all the Kingdoms of this World is given into the Hands of the
Seed of the Serpent, as the Devil said to Christ.

11. And these Three sorts of Men are reputed by the Seed of the Serpent, the
most honorable Men of all, and are reverenced and subjected unto, both by
Princes and common People, yet the greatest Cheats that is in this World, as
will appear.

12. First, I showed him how dangerous a thing it was to take upon him to be a
Minister of Christ, without a Commission from God, it would be counted by him
spiritual High Treason: For Ministers are in more Danger of eternal Damnation
than any other Men, for going to Preach, and are not sent of God.

13. For when they shall say in the Conscience at that Day, Lord, we have
preached in thy Name, and prayed in thy Name, and cast out Devils in thy Name.

14. The Answer of God in the Conscience, will say, Depart from me you workers
of Iniquity, I know you not: And why did not God know them, because he did not
send them. So that preaching and praying as a Minister, without a Commission
from Christ, is counted but a Work of Iniquity.

15. And as for the Doctors of Physic, they are the greatest Cheats, upon a
natural Account, that is in the World: They cheat the People of their Money,
and of their Health; for they are in the original, but atheistical Witches; and
it would be good if there were never a Doctor of Physic in the World, People
would live longer, and live better in Health.

16. For God never appointed any Doctor of Physic, but he appointed Nature to
preserve Nature.

17. But through the wicked intemperate Life of Man it has brought a necessity
of Doctors of Physic.

18. But those People that go to a Doctor of Physic to get Health, he goes to
a Witch to seek his Health, even as a Man that is troubled in Mind seeks unto
a Witch that has a Familier Spirit for satisfaction, as did King Saul.

19. But when the Conscience of the Doctor of Physic shall be opened at the
last Day, he shall say, Lord, we did not think that there were any God at all,
but Nature only; therefore our Minds fed upon Gold and Silver that grows in
the Earth, that we might Cloth our selves in rich Apparel, that might make us
honorable among great Men of the Earth, and reverenced by the Poor; not
thinking, in the least, that there was any better Heaven hereafter, or any
Punishment after Death for practiseing this Cheat, that is Autherised by the
Powers of the Nations.

20. And though we have done a great deal of Hurt, yet, Lord, we have done some
good; we have cast out many Devils in Drunkards and Whoremasters, and Whores,
who by their Wickedness have procured that Pox which no righteous Man could
cure; we have made them leave off that Practice by our Medicines and Advice,
and from Drunkenness, and have lived a sober Life afterward, and many divilish
Diseases have we cast out by our Spirits of Witchcraft, which we have given
them to drink.

21. But the Answer in the Conscience will say, Inasmuch as you fhrsake me, the
living God and creator of all things, and said, in your Hearts, There is no
God, then you gave your selves up to natural Witchcraft, diving into the nature
of the Planits and Stars, and into the Spirit of the Herbs of the Field, so
that you became absolute Witches your selves, and you have caused Thousands of
Men and Women to be bewitched by you, both in their Bodies, Souls and Estates.

22. Therefore depart from me you atheistical workers of Iniquity, into utter
Darkness, where is weeping and knashing of Teeth for evermore.

23. And as for the Lawyers, they keep the Keys of the Knowledge of the Law,
and will neither enter into Truth and Honesty themselves, nor suffer others to
enter in that would.

24. For no Man can do anything in his own Cause, but as his Lawyer instructs
him; for he is sworn when he enters into that Practice, he has a Commission to
keep the knowledge of the Law from his Clyant, so that the Clyant being
ignorant how to proceed in Law, Step by Step, the innocent Clyant his Clause is
many times put off and neglected by his Lawyer, to the great Discontent and
further Charge of the innocent and just Cause.

25. And as for the Poor, that can have no Law at all, tho his Cause be ever so
just, no Judge will hear him, nor no Lawyer will give him any Council, except
he has Moneys in his Hand; nor no Judge will do the Poor any Justice, except
he go in the way of the Law, and that the Poor cannot do.

26. So that if the Birthright of the Poor be ever so great, or just, it must
be lost, for want of Moneys to fee Lawyers: Besides, where Moneys is to be had,
let a Man's Cause be never so unjust, yet Lawyers will undertake it, though
they know certainly that their Clyant will be overthrown, before they took it
in hand: This is Wickedness in a high degree, so contrary to the Law written in
Man's Heart. To do as he would be done unto.

27. But the Government of this World has brought a necessity of the use of
Lawyers; but it is not expedient that any Saint should take that Practice upon
them, there is enough of them in the World, it being the Devil's Kingdom.

28. But when the Book of Conscience, the Law written in the Lawyer's Heart, is
opened, at the last Day, what can they plead for themselves.

29. They will say, Lord, we thought, because it was the Government of the
Nation, and that learning of the Knowledge of the Law it made us rich and
honorable among Men; it made us Companions for the wise and great Men of the
World; the Knowledge of the Law, it made us Atornies, Counselors and Sarjants
at Law; honorable Places, and by degrees we came to be Judges of the Land.

30. So that Kings and Princes have asked Council at our Lips, we have Clothed
our selves with fine Scarlet and white Robes, signifying Justice and Mercy to
the People: We have been as Gods upon the Earth, and we have done justice to
some in all our Degrees, tho we have failed in others, therefore hope for Mercy.

31. But the Answer in the Conscience will say, In as much as you have fed upon
Riches and Honor all your Days, and have not walked by the Law written in your
Hearts, To do as you would have been done unto, had you been in their
Condition, and they in yours; but you have the Penny of this World, Riches and
Honor, your Hearts Delight: Therefore depart you wicked Lawyers, workers of
Iniquity, into utter Darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of Teeth for ever
more.

32. This I know will come to pass in these Three sorts of Men, in that Day
when God shall raise the Dead.

33. When the young Man heard these Things, he left all Preferment that way,
for Truths sake, and became a steadfast and true Beleiver, and he being a
Scholar was mighty able to oppose the Learned.

34. Also there was one Robert Phare, he was Governor of the City of Cork in
Ireland, he was inclineable to be a Quaker; but after he saw me, and had read
our Writings, he became a true Beleiver of this Commission of the Spirit, and
so did the Lady his Wife: She became the chief Champion in this Faith of all
the Women in that Nation.

35. Also he had Four Sons and Daughters that were true Beleivers: He was the
cause of many Persons of Value in that Kingdom of Ireland, that did truly
Believe, as one Captain Moss and his Wife, and Doctor Moss, his Son; and
Captain Gaill, and Major Denson, and George Gamble, and Mr. Rogers, Merchant.
And several more, which I omit to name, because it would be too tedious, that
were true Beleivers in that Kingdom of Ireland.

36. After this it came to pass that I wrote a Book in answer to George Fox,
Quaker; containing Twelve sheets and a half of Paper, and got it Printed in the
Year 1668. and in the Seventeenth year of my Commission, and in the year of my
Life 58.

37. This Book caused the Quakers to be exceedingly angry at me, and several
Speakers of them to write cursed Letters unto me, and some of them came to
discourse with me, and a woeful Ephect did befall some of them a little while
after, as is expressed in the Writing following.

The Copy of Thomas Lo, a Quaker's Letter, Dated London 16th. of the 7th.
Month 1668.
LOdowick Muggleton, having seen some of thy Writings, more especially thy Book
Entitled A Lookinglass, which I have looked in, and do clearly see thy wicked,
abominable, and antichristian Spirit; and can do no less than cry, Oh! thou
Blasphemer, thou Enemy of God, and of all Righteousness; thou Son of Perdition
and Child of the Devil, how have thou Labored to pervert the right Way of God,
in speaking of the blessed Truth.

And, Oh! thou Seed of the Serpent, and old Sorserer, how have thou belyed,
slandered, wickedly and falsely accused and condemned the just? And now, be it
known unto thee, That thy false Judgment, and wicked Envy, both in speaking and
writing against the Servants of the living God, is returned back upon thy own
Head; and thee, with it, will God in his Fury and Indignation sink in the Pit
of Darkness, from whence it has risen: And in the great and mighty Power of
God and Christ, I Reprove, Judge, and Condemn thee, which shall stand upon thy
Head; and thy Power, thou boasts so of shall not reverse it: Oh! ignorant
Sot, how can thou consider thy Blasphemies, and not be ashamed This is a
Testimony in the Power and Spirit of God, against thee, and all thy Wickedness,
by a Servant of Jesus Christ, who am a Witness of the Spirit and Power of God,
with many others.


CHAP. III. The Prophets Answer to Thomas Loe's Letter: His Sentance, with the
Ephects of it. The Prophet's Dispute with George Whitehead and Josiah Cole:
With his Sentance passed upon them both.
1. WHO ever may read this Letter, let them understand thus much, that I never
saw the Man, nor he me; but he reading the Book aforesaid, he was moved by the
Light within him to send this cursed Letter unto me: Whereupon, after I had
read it, I sent him an Answer to it, with the Sentance of eternale Damnation
for his cursed Blasphemy. The Bearer staid for it 'till it was written, he being
a Quaker, would not go without it.

2. But it came to pass that the same Night that this Thomas Lo received his
Sentance, in answer to his curled Letter, he went to Bed sick, and never did
rise more till he was carried to the Grave, which was almost Three Weeks after.
Which is a clear Testimony that the Curse of God, the Man Christ Jesus, by his
Messenger does take hold of the Quakers People, and more especially of their
Ministry.

3. Because they are the absolute Spirit of Antichrist in this last Age, which
teaches the People to deny both Father and Son to become Flesh, and that the
Father, nor the Son has no Person of his own distinct from Man, but denies a
personal God in form like Man, his own Image.

4. For which Cause has the Wrath of this God overtaken several of these
desperate Quakers, even of their Ministers or Preachers has been cut off this
Earth, that they might not deceive People no more, nor incumber the Earth with
their wicked Antichristian Spirit, which defieth the living God, who is in the
form of Man, who made Man in his own Image.

Lodowick Muggleton.


5. Upon the Sickness and Death of this Thomas Lo, Quaker, after the Sentance
sent him, it caused several to discourse with me about it, therefore I shall
relate some of the most remarkable Passages, and the Persons I discoursed with
upon the 17th. Day of October 1668. The Persons discoursed withal were George
Whitehead and Josiah Cole, both Speakers of the Quakers.

6. Eirst, The Words Cole spoke unto me are these (says he) Thou say God is
in form of a Man, and thou say his Hand is not much biger than thine or
mine, and thou see what a little this Hand will hold: Yet (says he) God is
said to have measured the Waters in the hollow of his Hand, and behold the
Nations are as a drop of a Bucket.

7. I answered, and said, Do you believe God to be so big to hold the Waters in
the hollow of his Hand? That is spoken in Relation to his great Wisdom, Power,
and Dominion, as he is a Creator, not relating to the bigness of his Hand, but
to the greatness of his Power, being infinite.

8. An earthly King may be said to be King of many Kingdoms, and that he has
brought the People of those Kingdoms to Obedience to his Law: By the strength
of his own Arm, for Power, or Strength is the right Hand of an earthly King.

9. Yet the King does not hold all the People under his Arm, nor in the hollow
of his Hand, but the People may be said to be under his Hand, and that he holds
them in the hollow of his Hand, because his Power and Laws does protect them,
and keep them within Bounds, for a prerogative Power is great, but the Hand of
a King is no biger than the Hand of another Man, that has no Power at all.

10. So it is Gods prerogative Power that is above all Law, in seting Bounds to
the Waters, and keeping the Waters within Bounds in the deep Places of the
Earth; and so may be said, that God does hold the Waters in the hollow of his
Hand, that is, they are confined to a little place of his Power in his Creation.

11. Also I said, that I that am but a mortal Man has Power over such a great
God whose Hand is so big; for that God, whose Hand is much biger than thine or
mine, I have Power to Condemn. This was passed by, and no Reply made by them.

12. Then spoke Whitehead, and said, He did hear that I had cursed a Man, and
he changing his Aparel, came afterward and did procure a Blessing, and that
this Man, or some other, did smite a Pewter Pot upon my Head.

13. This, I said, was false, for never did any Man strike me over the Head
with a Pot, in all my Life; it was that reprobate Pope, that damd'd Devil, that
has reported that he was Blessed after he was Cursed: It is a false Report,
and he has reported it several times amongst the Ranters and Quakers,

14. This Pope was a Ranter then, when he was Cursed, which was about fifteen
Years ago, in John Reeve's time, and he is a worse Ranter now than he was then,
and that you Quakers know very well, and what a wicked lustful Life he lives
now in, and yet you will rather believe the damned Devil, and wicked lustful
Person than believe me, who have been kept innocent from the breach of any Law,
from my Childhood to this Day.

15. But I know, you Quakers, being of the same Nature and Seed of the Serpent,
as those Jews were in Christ's time, who desired of Pilate, that a Thief and a
Murderer should be delivered from Death rather than Jesus, the Savior of all
them that believe in him.

16. So is it with you for you had rather believe this Pope, this notable
Sinner, than to believe me, who am the Prophet of the most High God, the Man
Christ Jesus in Glory, and have Power given of God, as Moses had, to set Life
and Death before you; but I know you do say in your Hearts, tho not with your
Lips, as those Jews did by Christ, Away with this Muggleton, let us have Pope,
that wicked lustful Man, that we might hear and inquire of him.

17. Then said Josiah Cole, Thou say thou art an Ambassador in God's steed,
and thou stand in his stead; said he, I would willingly do anything that I
might be saved.

18. Then I answered him, and said, I will tell thee what I will say unto thee,
if thou will but deny, and forsake the Quakers Principles, and believe me, I
will assure thee thou shall as certainly be saved as ever any Prophet or
Apostle ever was.

19. Then Cole fell into a Fit, and waited upon his own Thoughts, what to
answer, and I waited for his Answer.

20. But George Whitehead perceived that Cole was in a strait, he came unto
me, and spied a Knot of Ribon upon my Coat Sleeve, and said unto me, Why do
thou wear this Vanity, and touched the Ribon with his Fingers.

21. I answered and said, I know a piece of Ribon is a great Sin in a Quaker's
Eye; But, said I, Why do thou wear silk Buttons on both thy Coats? He said,
they were necessary. I said, No, thou might wear Hooks and Eyes, Clapses or
Eyletholes: That was past by.

22. But then I will tell thee why I do wear Ribon, it is on purpose that I
might not be taken, or thought to be a Quaker, for I do hate the Quakers
Principle.

23. With that Whitehead said, Thou hate all Righteousness; and spoke as if
he himself, Cole and Fox, and others of the Quakers were writing a Book against
me, to make me manifest, which in a little time after it was set forth by
William Pen, a Quaker: And further said, that they would post me up, and he
slighted my Power and my God, and said, he would trample my God and my Power
under his Feet as Dirt, and taped his Foot upon the Ground.

24. Whereupon I did pronounce George Whitehead cursed and damned Soul and
Body, to Eternity, and that God within him, which he trusted in, was cursed
also; and so I ceased Discourse with him.

25. All this while Cole was in his Fit, and said not one word, but immediately
after he uttered these words; says he, I have heard of several thou have
cursed; but said he, I did not believe, had I not heard or seen, I could not
have believed that a Man could have spoken so presumptiously.

26. Then said I, dare you say that I speak presumptiously, to George
Whitehead; he said, he did believe it was Presumption.

27. Then said I, on the contrary, I do believe that thou art the Seed of the
Serpent and wilt be damned; and now see whose Faith will be strongest, yours or
mine; for my Faith shall keep you down for ever.

28. Under what? said Cole.

29. Under eternal Damnation, said I.

30. Then said he, Do thou ground thy Sentance upon my Belief?

21. Yea, said I, I do, for you believe I speak presumptiously, and I do
believe you to be the Seed of the Serpent, and will be damned to eternity.

32. Then said he, Do thou judge this to be a final Sentance upon me? said I,
Yea, what should it else be?

33. With that Josiah Cole rose up with great zeal for his God within him, and
said, I told thee before that I would try thee and thy God, saying that they
were seting forth a Writing against me, and withal Cole pronounced many Curses
upon me, with his Eyes dazzled with the Witchcraft Power in him, being disturbed
with my Words, it got up into his Head.

34. So that Whitehead and he both came near me with great Threatenings and
Judgments upon me, being both so full of Curses: Cole cursed me into utter
Darkness, Pit of Darkness, Chains of Darkness, blackness of Darkness; and that
he would trample that God of mine, that was in the form of Man, under his Feet,
as Dirt, and stamped his Foot upon the Ground, as the other Devil did: Cole's
Curses were much what like Thomas Lo, his Curses in his Letter to me.

35. But when Cole had done cursing, I said these Words unto him, That this
Sentance that I had passed upon him should stick by him for ever, and that he
should never put it out of his Mind, neither should he grow Mad nor Distracted
to forget it, but should be sensible all the Days of his Life.

36. And when my God, whom you trampled under your Feet, shall raise you again
at the last Day, which will not seem to you a quarter of an Hours time, you
shall remember afresh my Words, what I said unto you in this Life to eternity.

37. Many more Words was between us at that time, but these were the Words and
Passages of most concernment at that time, and a final Judgment and Sentance of
eternal Damnation that I gave that Day upon Josiha Cole, and George Whitehead,
Speakers of the Quakers.

CHAP. IV. Of Cole's being sick unto Death immediately after the Sentance of
his Testimony against the Prophet: Of his Death: The Quakers God described;
with the nature of Reason, and the Law that is written in it. Of William Pen's
blasphemous Letter to the Prophet.
1. NOW in some Four or Five Days time after our Dispute, I heard that Josiah
Cole was sick, and going out of the Body: For the Quakers do not believe that
their Souls do die, but slips out of the Body.

2. This caused the Quakers People to visit him very much, to know of him,
whether Muggleton's Words had taken place in him, wondering that he should go
out of the Body so sudenly after Muggleton's Sentance, as Thomas Lo did after
his Sentance. But he denied very stiffly that my Words had no Power over him,
but that he had left me in Chains of Darkness.

3. Nevertheless he grew worse and worse, so that the Quakers were not
satisfied except he would go to the Peal in St. John's Street at their
Meeting Place, and give his Testimony against Muggleton before the People, to
satisfy the ignorant Quakers, else they would judge that his Power in Lo and
him was greater than the Ministry of the Quakers.

4. So they led him by the Arms to the place aforesaid, and Josiah Cole wrote
his Testimony, as follows, exactly word for word. For as much as I have been
informed that Lodowick Muggleton has vaunted concerning my departure out of
the Body, because of his pretended Sentance of Damnation given against me, I am
moved to leave this Testimony concerning him behind me; namely, that he is a
Son of Darkness, and Coe-worker with the Prince of the bottomless Pit, in which
his Inheritance shall be for ever, and the Judgment I passed on him when
present with him, stands sealed by the Spirit of the Lord, by which I then
declared to him, that in the Name of that God who spans out the Heavens with
his Span, and measures the Waters with the hollow of his Hand, I bind thee hear
on Earth, and thou art bound in Heaven, and in the Chain under Darkness, to the
judgment of the great Day thou shall be reserved: And thy Faith and Strength
thou bosteth of, I defy and trample under Foot. And I do hereby further declare
the said Lodowick to be a false Prophet, in what he said to me at that time,
who told me, that from thenceforth I should be always in fear of Damnation,
which should be a Sign to me that I was damned; which Fear I was never in, so
that his Sign given by himself did not follow his Prophecy, which sufficiently
declares him to be a false Prophet.

Josiah Cole.



5. This was given forth word for word by Josiah Cole, about Three Hours before
his departure out of the Body, the Fifteenth of the Eleventh Month 68.

6. Whoever does read this last Testimony of Josiah Cole, may easily see that
the Curse I pronounced upon him by Commission, received from the Man Christ
Jesus, the only wise God, blessed for ever, in the form of a Man, whom he
despised and trampled under his Feet as Dirt.

7. For this very Sin, did this Curse of this God pronounced by me take Ephect
upon him and Thomas Lo, immediately after their cursed Blasphemy against the
true God.

8. I was zealous in giving Sentance upon them, in that I heard the true God
was trampled under their Foot as Dirt.

9. As for their Reproaches, Lies, Slanders, and Judgments threatened against
me, I did not matter: For this I know the Quakers do believe, that Lo and
Cole's Souls is not dead, but slipped out of their Bodies, and gone you know not
where, and into a Power you know not what.

10. But I said their Souls is where you laid their Bodies, they both came into
this World together, they both despised the Truth together, they, both Bodies
and Souls received Judgment and Condemnation together, and both dyed together,
and were both Soul, and Bodies buried together, and shall both rise again
spiritual dark Bodies and Souls together.

11. Every Seed its own Body; that Seed of Reason which was their Life, which
they thought was the divine Nature of God, but it was the Nature of the Devil
and Serpent.

12. And the Law written in their Hearts, which you Quakers call the Light of
Christ, or Christ in you; which is no other Christ or Light but the Law written
in your Hearts. And the Light of the Law, which does accuse and excuse the
Conscience of every Man, you call the Light of Christ, yea Christ himself.

13. For this Light of the Law written in your Hearts, is that which does cause
your Thoughts to accuse when you do evil, and to excuse when you do well: And
when God shall raise them again, that Seed of Reason shall rise and bring a
spiritual dark Body with it: And that Law which was written in their Hearts here
in this Life, shall quicken again in that new dark spiritual Body.

14. And then shall they and you, dispisers of a personal God, know that your
own Souls, which you thought was the Life of God, but it was the Life of the
Devil, and that your selves were Devils, and that Law written in your Hearts,
which you in this Life called the Light of Christ, and that was no other God or
Christ but this Light within you.

15. But when this Law does quicken again, as I said before, it will prove the
only and alone Devil to torment you to eternity; because you made the Light of
this Law in your Hearts to be your only God; and by this Light of the Law you
do fight against the true personal God, who created Man in his own Image and
Likeness, and has trampled him under your Feet as Dirt.

16. These things may seem strange, and as a Riddle unto you, and as a thing
impossible, but with God all things is possible, which his own Will moves him
unto.

17. And this I say, as it was possible for God to write the Law in the Angels
Natures, and by his secret Determination suffer one of these Angels to become
very Man, and so the Angels Seed and Nature having conjunction with the Seed
and Nature of Eve, which was of Adams Nature, and so by Generation the Law
comes to be written in every Man's Heart; in that ever Man and Woman that is
born into this World is partaker of the Angel's Nature of Reason, and so comes
to have this Law written in every Man's Heart.

18. Man finds it there accusing of him, but knows not how it came written there.

19. So it is as strange for you Quakers to believe, that God will raise your
Souls again that were dead, how they should quicken out of Death, by the Power
of that God that made all Souls to live at the first: In as much as he made all
things by the power of his word in the Beginning.

20. So by the same power of his word he shall quicken the Souls of Men and
Women again, out of Death to Life again at the last day; and the Law that was
written in them shall quicken also, and be alive again in you, to torment you to
eternity.

21. For the Law and your Souls shall never part one from the other; for as the
Law is secretly written in your Hearts, but originally in the Reprobate: So by
Gods secret Decree, and Power he will revive that Law again in that Reprobate
Seed of Reason, as in Thomas Lo, Josiah Cole, George Whitehead, William Pen,
and many of you Speakers of the Quakers, and others of your Brethren, who are
under the Judgment and Sentance of this Commission of the Spirit: You shall
find my words to be true upon you, and over you, to eternity; neither shall you
be delivered from it.

22. For if I had but any thought of Compassion toward you in my Mind, it was
answered me, That there is a necessity, that there should be Enmity between the
Seed of the Woman and the Seed of the Serpent, which hardened my Heart against
all Dispisers of a personal God in the form of Man.

Lodowick Muggleton.

23. After this, in the same year, came another thundering Letter, from a Lion
like Quaker, being a learned Man brought up at the University; his Name is
William Pen: Here is the Copy of it verbatim.

LOdowick Muggleton, having had a deep and serious Sense of thy insulting
Spirt, over the Death of that valiant and painful Servant of the most high God,
Josiah Cole, as if it were the ephect of thy solely Curse; who, alas, for these
Twelve Years, has in these Nations and Isles abroad, in all Straits,
Difficulties, and hard Sufferings, been an incessant Labourer for the Lord, and
so impared his Health, that within these Twelve Months, or little more, have I
known him Five times sick, and Three even unto Death, before he had ever seen
thy Face: I say being sensible of thy Vaunts. And it now being laid upon me.

Therefore once more I come in the Name, and Authority of that dreadful
Majesty, which fills Heaven and Earth, to speak on this wise; Boast not, thou
Enemy of God, thou Son of Perdition, and Confederate with the unclean croking
Spirits reserved under Chains to eternal Darkness, for in the everlasting
glorious Light thou dispiseth thou art seen Araigned, Tried, Condemned and
Sentanced for a lying Spirit, and false Prophet, who having counterfited the
Commission and Sceal of that God whom the Heaven cannot contain, has bewitched
a few poor silly Souls: But their Blood, Oh! Muggleton, lies at thy Door, and
the Wrath of the Almighty is kindled against thee, and his eternal Power in his
Servants the Quakers came, whom thou have past thy envious Curse, shall
suddenly grind thee to Powder, and as formerly, so again, on the behalf of the
God of the Quakers whom I worship.

I boldly challinge thee, with thy Six foot God, and all the Host of
lucepherian Spirits, with all your Commissions, Curses, and Sentances, to touch
or hurt me; practice your Skill and Power, behold I stand in a holy Defiance of
all your Enmity and Strength: And this know, Oh Muggleton, with thy God art
chained, by the Spirit of the Lord, and on you I trample in his everlasting
Dominion; and to the bottomless Pit are you sentanced, from whence you came,
and where the endless Worm shall know and torture your imaginary Soul to
eternity.

Written, Signed, and Sealed, by Commission received about the First Hour of
the Eleventh Morning of the Twelfth Month 1668. from the glorious Majesty of
the most high God, who fills Heaven and Earth, that lives in his Servant.

William Pen, junior.


CHAP. V. The Answer of Lodowick Muggleton to William Pen, Quaker, his proud
presumptious and blasphemous Letter.
1. WIlliam Pen, I have perused your proud, presumptious, blasphemous Letter
against the true God; how has your Learning lifted up your Heart with Pride,
to fight against the true God, and to bid him Defiance to his Face, and let him
stand forth and see, if he can deliver himself from your bodiless God, that
gave you a Commission, as you say.

2. You know that Reeve and myself have declared in all our Writings, that the
Lord Jesus Christ is our God, and that the Worlds were made by him, and that
nothing was made in the Beginning, but what was made by him, as the Scripture
says.

3. This Man Christ Jesus was in the form of Man, a spiritual, heavenly and
glorious Body, before this World was.

4. And in the Beginning this glorious, spiritual Body made Man in his own
Image and Likeness, the Form of Man, else Moses's Words were not true; do you
disprove it if you can.

5. Only the Man Adam, his Body was earthly, and made of the Earth, but God's
Body was spiritual and heavenly, yet in Form like Adam: And Adam was a Man,
which none can deny that owns the Scriptures.

6. And in process of time this God became Flesh, and dwelt among Men, and that
he took upon him the Form of a Servant, and was in all things like unto Man,
Sin excepted, and made himself capable to be put to Death, by the Seed of the
Serpent, his own Creatures; his Blood was poured out unto Death, for the
Redemption of the Seed of Adam, to make good that Promise to Adam in Paradise,
That the Seed of the Woman should break the Serpent's Head: Which was fulfilled
when he suffered Death upon the Cross.

7. And when he quickened out of Death into Life again, then was that Saying
fulfilled, Oh Death, I will be thy Death, Oh Grave, I will be thy Victory: And
that other Saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the First and the Last, he that was
dead, and behold I am alive for ever more.

8. This Alpha and Omega was Christ, and he was God; and this Christ was the
Lord from Heaven, a quickening Spirit: And was there any other God, or Alpha or
Omega that dyed but Christ, and did any quicken out of Death to Life again but
he; and did any God become Flesh and dwell with Man but Christ.

9. And was not Christ in the form of Man, when on Earth; did not he retain the
same form when he assended up to Heaven, and does retain the same Form now he
is glorified; and is in the same Glory which he had before this World was.

10. Oh Pen! How is it that you cannot understand that Eternity did become
Time, and Time is become Eternity again: That is, that spiritual and glorious
immortal Body of God that was eternal before Man was made; but in the fullness
of time this glorious immortal Body became a pure mortal Body, even Jesus
Christ, capable to dye, so eternity became Time: And in that he quickened out
of Death into Life again, Mortality became Immortal again, and Time became
Eternity again.

11. This great Mistory, That God became Flesh is hid from the Eyes of the Seed
of the Serpent, such as William Pen the Quaker is, and revealed unto us
unlearned Men.

12. And this is that God that Reeve and Muggleton has declared in our
Writings, and this God we received our Commission from, and that Power to Bless
and Curse to Eternity.

13. This God you have proudly and blasphemously defied and trampled under your
Feet as Dirt; also you have boldly challenged the true and living God, that is
in the form of Man, to touch or hurt you, and stand in a holy Defiance of me
and my God's Strength, and that me and my God is chained, and on me and my God
you trample, and to the bottomless Pit you have sentanced us both, me and my
God: And if this be not high Blasphemy, Pride and Presumption against the
living God, there never was any.

14. Oh Pen! did you never read how Goliath defied the living God, the God of
Israel; and how David flung a Stone into his Forehead, and slew him, for
defying the living God, the God of Israel: For David knew the God of Israel was
in the form of a Man, but Goliath his God was the same God as the Quakers God
is, a bodiless God, so vast and so bigg that he cannot be confined, neither to
the vast Heavens above, nor in this vast Earth below, but he must fill the Air
also, and all Places at one and the same time. This is the Heathens God, and
the Quakers God also.

15. Did you never read of Corath and his Company, Captains of Rebellion and
Conspiracy against Moses and Aaron, and against God that chose them to teach
the People; neither would God suffer any other Men to do it but them he chose;
therefore it was the Earth clave and swallowed them all up alive.

16. Now, you Pen, and many of you Quakers have practiced the same thing
against Reeve and Muggleton, whom the God of Heaven has chosen in particular,
and no other Man upon Earth at this Day, to set Life and Death before Men.

17. Now has not you, and your Captain Teachers of the Quakers, Railed,
Reviled, Reported, and Condemned Reeve and Muggleton, and our God the Man
Christ Jesus in Glory, because we had our Commission from him to open Hels
Mouth, and swallow up such Rebels as you are, into those eternal Torments,
where the Worm of Conscience shall never dye, nor the Fire of Hell never go
out, for your dispising the living God in the form of a Man; which you Quakers
have done, and are more guilty than any People in the World.

18. Neither are you sensible of the great Ephects that this Commission God
gave to Reeve and Muggleton has wrought: How many of your valiant Captains,
and mighty Men of War have fallen by the two edged Sword of the Spirit put into
my Mouth, even the Commission God put upon me.

19. Do not you miss many of your Captains and Leaders of the Quakers? What is
become of William Smith, Samuel Hutton, Thomas Tailor, Richard Farnesworth, and
many more I could name here of late Years: Do you not miss Thomas Lo, and
Josiah Cole? These were valiant Men, like your self, to reproach and defy the
living God.

20. Are you not sensible how the Curse of God took hold of them sudainly after
they had defied the living God in the form of a Man.

21. And now, last of all, you come like Goliath the Philistian, with a
Commission from a great bodiless God, that can neither be found, neither in
Heaven, nor in Earth, nor no place else, signed and sealed, to defy the living
God that made Man in his own Image and Likeness.

22. As, first, you have proudly challenged me and my six foot God, with our
Commissions, to touch or hurt you. Secondly, You say you stand in a holy
Defiance of all our Strength. And Thirdly, You say, Know, Oh. Muggleton with
thy God art chained, and on you I trample, and to the bottomless Pit are you
sentanced, where the endless Worm shall know and torture your Soul to eternity.

23. For those wicked, proud, presumptious, blasphemous Speeches, not only
against me, but against the living God, as your two Brethren did before you:
Therefore in obediance to my Commission from the true God, I do pronounce
William Pen, Quaker, cursed and damned, both Soul and Body, from the presence
of God, elect Men and Angels, to eternity.

24. I thought good to leave this upon Record, that the Age to come may be
instructed, and take heed how they despise Prophets, and that God that sent him.

Written by Lodowick Muggleton, one of the two last Prophets and Witnesses of
the Spirit, unto the high and mighty God, the Man Christ Jesus in Glory, March
the 16th. 1668.

CHAP. VI. Of the Prophets Travels into Cambridge, Leicester, Notingham, and
Darbyshire, to visit Friends there.
1. AFTER this it came to pass, in the Year 1669. and in the year 1670. In
these two years I had a great deal of trouble, both upon a spiritual and a
temporal Account, but in the beginning of the year 1669. in the Month of April,
before my Troubles began, I had a desire to travel into several Countries to
visit Friends there.

2. And there was one James Whitehead who lived in Brantry in Essex, a true
Beleiver, and a Man of an Estate in this World; he was of the Independent
People before he came to believe in this Commission of the Spirit, he had a
desire to visit Friends of this Faith in other Countries, because he had never
seen them, so he was willing to bear me company.

3. I went this Jorny in secret, and let no Beleiver in London know of it, but
my Wife only.

4. I appointed James Whitehead to meet me at Ware, and so he did, and we went
from thence to Cambridge, and we stayed there three Days with Friends at
William Dickmson's House, for I had many Friends in that Town and Country
about, and they were very glad to see us, and entreated us kindly.

5. So we departed after three Days from thence to Leicestershire, which was
forty Miles from Cambridge, and in two days we came to some Friends in
Leicestershire, where were several Beleivers which I had never seen before.

6. And we lodged at one John Hall's House, a Farmer, where was kind
Entertainment, both for our selves and Horses; and the Mother of this John Hall
was a true Beleiver and she had three Sons that were true Beleivers of this
Commission of the Spirit; but they knew nothing of my Jorny beforehand.

7. But they entreated us exceeding kindly, and was exceedingly rejoiced to see
us, because they had never seen us before, though much desired; and coming upon
them unawares, they having no Inteligence, it did amuse them the more.

8. Also there was one John Sadington, a true Beleiver, had a Sister hard by
there, named Lidiah Brooks, that did truly believe, and she rejoiced to see me,
because she never saw me before, nor none of them there, tho they had heard of
me, by the hearing of the Ear, the Towns name was Arnsby in Leicestershire.

9. We stayed there but two Days and departed, and jornyed toward Notingham,
there we came unawares to Mr. Sudbury's and his Wife, and Mary Parker, a
Sheriff's Wife of that Town: There were but those three Beleivers in that Town,
and they kindly received us with much affection.

10. And James Whitehead departed from thence in two Days, and left me there,
for to meet him at Chesterfield in Darbyshire, which was twenty Miles from
Notingham, because he was to go forty Miles further about other business, and
was to call at Chesterfield as he came back.

11. Likewise he was to see if he could enquire in his Jorny for one Thomas
Tomkinson, a true Beleiver, and a great Writer in the vindication of this
Faith; he lived at Sladehouse in Staffordshire.

12. He did in his Jorny enquire for Sladehouse, and the Name of our Friend,
but could not hear, neither of the place, nor of the Man, nor could not hear
that any knew Sladehouse, or Thomas Tomkinson, he not traveling within twelve
Miles of the place.

13. So he missed of him, which was a greet Trouble to us all when he came back
to Chesterfield, and told it to us, we were much troubled.

14. For I did fully expect he had found him, because he stayed two Days longer
than was intended.

15. But it was an exceeding great Trouble to him that he should miss of the
Sight of us, being so near; and many more in that Country had an earnest Desire
to see me, for I had not then ever been in that Country.

16. And when it was too late, he did hear by one Alexander Delamaine, a true
Friend at London, and a great writer in vindication of this Commission of the
Spirit, for as soon as ever he heard that I had stolen away out of London into
the Country, and none in London knew of it; for it was above a Week afterward
before he heard I was gone, for he heard from some in the Country where we had
been.

17. So he sent Thomas Tomkinson word by the Post, that I and my Friend were
some where in those parts of the Country: so Tomkinson went immediately to
Bakewell, a Market Town, where one of our Friends saw me at Chesterfield, his
Name was William Newcome, a Bookseller, who lived at Darby, but was every
Saturday at Chesterfield Market, and at Bakewell Market on the Monday.

18. And he told our Friend Tomkinson, that I and my Friend Mr. Whitehead
departed from Chesterfield that Monday morning, and that he saw us take leave
of Mrs. Carter and her Daughter, as also Elizabeth Smith, and other Friends at
Chesterfield, for to go by Notingham, and from thence, on Tuesday, they said
they would go for London, the same way they came, and call of the same Friends.

19. And when our Friend Tomkinson heard this; and that it was too late to meet
with us, neither at Chesterfield nor Notingham neither, he was exceedingly
troubled, and lift up his Voice and wept, and could not tell who to be angry
with, himself, or with us.

20. So that he could not be passified in his own Mind, 'till Patience had
possessed his Soul, until he heard from me the Cause of that Misfortune.

21. For I depended wholly that Mr. Whitehead would have found him out; but it
was such a cross Rode that no Letter could be sent unto him but from London,
except it were on purpose, so that I made no question but my Friend would have
brought him along with him to Chesterfield, for he enquired, but could not hear
of the Place nor of the Man.

22. So all Intents were frustrated, which caused trouble of Mind to us all,
for no People have greater Love to one another than those of this Faith.

23. We were in this jorny, going and coming, and at Friends Houses about five
Weeks.

CHAP. VII. The Prophet's House searched for Books: The Sercher's Civility: The
Prophet acknowledges their Kindness, and after sent them a Gratuity. A second
search for Books, where several were taken. Of a great Rebellion that hapened
upon the Prophet's Absence.
1. AFTER this, in the same year 1669. I wrote two Books, the one of them was
an Answer to Esquire Penington, a Quaker, who wrote a Book against me: And the
other Book was the Interpretation of the Witch of Endor, and other Witches; and
in the Winter I did endeavor to get them printed, and had agreed with two
several Printers.

2. But it came to pass that the Answer to Penington was taken in the Press,
through some Neglect of the Printer, when half a Sheet had been printed; but
the Searcher of the Press, he being a violent Man, he made a great ado about
it, and troubled the Printer, and put him to the Charge of Seven Pounds, and me
Five Pounds, to pacify the matter; But the Interpretation of the Witch of Endor
escaped in the other Printer's Hands, and is now in Print, and gives great
Satisfaction to many in that Point.

3. After this, it came to pass, in the year 1670. before Midsumer, there came
Fourteen Men to search my House, for unlicensed Books; these Men were informed
by the Printer, but they would not connfess who sent them: There was Three or
Four of the King's Messengers, and the Warden of the Stationer's Company, and
Printers and Booksellers.

4. The Warden was very surly, when my Wife asked what he would have: He bid
her open the Door, else he would break it open: She said, She would not, unless
he would tell his Business: So he made no more ado, pulled the Hatch, and
wrenched open the Spring-Lock, and came running up Stairs so sudainly that no
Door in the House could be locked.

5. And being so many of them, they ran into every Room in the House, and they
came into the uper Rooms where I was, and there they seized upon Ten
Poundsworth of Books, and were binding them up to carry away.

6. I said, I hope you are civil Gentlemen, there is nothing in the Books that
is against King or State, and some of them were printed before the King came
into England; and if you will be pleased to ask what Money you will for your
Pains and Civility, I will give it you.

7. Then said one of them, Do you think we will be bribed? Then said I, Who is
the chief among you, that I may appeal to him for Relief when you have taken
them away. Said they, here is Mr. White, the Warden of the Stationers Company,
he has the Warrant, and is chief, and he lives in St. John's on
Clarkinwell-Green: Then said I, take them away, and I helped them to Strings to
ty them fast.

8. And when they saw this, that I was so fair, and gave them goodly Words, not
in the least charging them with Folly or Unrighteousness, they went from me
into another Room, and whispered among themselves, and said one to another,
These Books are most of them against the Quakers, and some Printed long ago, we
had best only take one a piece single, and one bound altogether, and leave the
rest till we have read them over, to see what is in them: So they agreed thus
among themselves.

9. Then Mr. White, the Warden came to me, and said, Mr. Muggleton, you shall
see that we will be civil; we will only take one of these bound altogether,
and of each single; and let the rest be forthcoming when we shall call for them.

10. I thanked him for his Civility: So they departed away at that time, only
one of them, took one of the Books bound altogether under his Coat, more than
was agreed by themselves, and it was well I escaped so: And about Four or Five
Days after I sent a Letter to Mr. White the Warden, praising him, and the
Gentlemen with him, for their Kindness and Civility; and withal I sent him Two
Guinea Pieces of Gold by my Wife, to drink with the Gentlemen; and prayed him
to accept of them, and if I were a Man of Ability I would have given a great
deal more.

11. For civil Kindness ought to be respected, for I know you had Power to have
taken them away; and that if you would be pleased to send but one of those
Books bound, again by my Wife, that I might know by that you have accepted of
that small Token of my Love for your civil Usage.

12. The Letter was more large, but Mr. White read the Letter twice, and said
to my Wife. Indeed one of the Men did take a Book under his Coat, but said, he
shall restore it again, for it is your Husband's; and as for the Two Guinea's,
said he, let them alone 'till you hear further from me, for it does not ly
altogether in my Power to accept of them; So he would not receive the Two
Guineas.

13. So my Wife brought them again, and I waited, expecting to hear from him,
but did not; for I perceived he had turned the Power over to the King's
Messengers, as I found afterward; for I heard, by one that belongs to the Law,
that saw my Name in a Warrant in the Office, to take my Person, and to bring me
before the Council of State, so he gave me Intilligence of it.

14. So I went from my own House, and lodged at a Friends House in Waping Three
Quakers of a Year, and a Week after I was gone came the King's Messenger with
his Warrant, but I being not at home, he lost his Labor: He came Three times,
and saw he could do no good, he gave over coming for a long time.

15. After this, in the same year; (no sooner out of one Trouble, but into
another) about the Month of October, a little before the Parliament sat, there
came Eight or Tenn Men of the Stationers, and other Officers to my House, to
search for Books.

16. But it hapened that my Wife was newly gone out, else they would have taken
away many Books, to a considerable Value; but she being not at home, went away
very angry, saying they would take some other Course; but after this I took and
got all the Books out of my House: By this means I prevented them from taking
away any more for many years.

17. These Troubles, and many more, I went through in the year 1670. and in the
year of my Life 60. And in the 19th. year of my Commission.

18. And while I was in these Troubles, and absent from my own House, even as a
Prisoner, for Three Quarters of a year, there did arise a great Rebellion and
Conspiracy amongst the Beleivers, of me, which was like the Conspiracy and
Rebellion of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, against Moses and Aaron.

19. The Heads of this Rebellion were these, William Medgate, the elder,
Scrivner; Thomas Burton, a Flax Man Mr. Witall, Brewer; Walter Bohanan,
Scotchman.

20. These drew a many Beleivers to side with them for a Season: Some of these
Rebels, Two of them I did excommunicate, and the other Two I gave Sentance of
Damnation to eternity.

21. And gave Charge to all those that sided with them in their Conspiracy, not
to Trade, nor Eat, nor Drink with those Men any more, upon the pain of being
Excommunicated out of my Presonce; which the People did obey, and were settled
in Peace again.

22. Likewise one of these Conspiritors, namely Thomas Burton, came and humbled
himself, and acknowledged his Fault, and I forgave him, and received him into
my Favor again.

23. There is the whole Relation left upon Record in Writing, in a Volume by it
self: Which is as follows.

24. William Medgate, in his Rebellion, sent unto me Nine Assertions, as he
calls them, being contrary to all Truth, as he says, and against all sober
Reason, being verbatim, as follows.

1. That God takes no Notice of his Saints, nor does not mind them at all.

2. That you are not to mind God at all, but by the Prophet only.

3. You must pin your Faith upon the Prophet's Sleeve, or else you can have no
true Peace.

4. Although the Saints give Sentance against Blasphemy, if the Party comes to the
Prophet he can take it off.

5. Although a Man have a corrupt Nature, and defraud and deceive all Men, yet if
the Prophets Love be in him, he will uphold him.

6. Tho false Worship be an Idol, yet with the Prophet's Leave he may go to
that Worship blameless.

7. To whom the Prophet gives the Blessing it shall support him, although his Life
and Conversation be wicked.

8. If the Prophet should disown the Commission of the Spirit, all those that
beleives it should be damned.

9. And lastly, That after the Blessing is given to any by the Prophet, yet
though they walk contrary to the Commission, yet they shall be damned but to
the Graves Mouth.

William Medgate.

CHAP. VIII. The Three first Assertions Answered.
1. NOW these Assertions seemed very strange to many of the Beleivers, as they
were laid down together, but being interpreted apart, they became easy to the
understanding of all, as may appear: As First, of God's taking no Notice of his
Saints.

2. For if God did take Notice of all Actions, there would be a present ephect
of Blessing and Cursing, as in times past; neither can either Saint or Devil
prove he does take any Notice of him at all, but as he does vainly imagine,
because his Thoughts does sometimes accuse him, when he does evil, and excuse
him when he does well.

3. But thus far I do acknowledge, that God does take notice and mind
particular Saints here on Earth; that is, when God has any Work to do for a
particular Saint, or any particular Devil, then God takes particular notice of
Saint or Devil, if it be one or more, according to the pleasure of his Will.

4. But no Man now upon Earth, can truly say that God has minded, or taken
notice of him, but my self only: Also I do acknowledge that God does take
notice and mind every particular Saint, and every particular Devil, in the
Original, as will appear thus.

5. God has written the Law in every Man's Heart, both Saint and Devil, and
this Law is God's Watchman, and stands in God's Place and Stead, both to acquit
and condemn the Conscience of every Man; and where this Law does acquit, God
does acquit, and where this Law does condemn, God condemns, yet God's Person
minds it not, but leaves the whole Power to the Law, to justify or condemn;
only God's Power is to be seen, and to be taken notice of, when he shall raise
the Man again, and that Law in his Heart shall quicken again by Gods Power, and
shall stand as God, to judge, to justify, or condemn the Conscience of every
Man.

6. So that if a Man have not true Faith in his Heart to justify his Person in
the sight of God, while on Earth, to free him from that Law of Sin and Death
written in his Heart, then in the Resurrection that Law written in his Heart
shall quicken again, and shall stand as God and Judge, to condemn him to
eternity.

7. Therefore I may say unto you Rebels, as God did unto Cain, If thou do
well, shall not thou be rewarded, and if thou do Evil Sin lies at the Door
of thy Conscience; for the Law said in his Heart, Thou shall not kill: And
shall not your Act of Rebellion ly at the Door of your Consciences, as sure as
Cain's Murder lay at the Door of his Conscience.

8. Therefore it was that Paul did thank God, that he was delivered from the
Law of Sin and Death, and so does every Man that is delivered from that Law
written in his Heart: And John says, If thy Heart condemn thee not, then have
thou Confidence to the Throne of Grace, but if thy Heart condemn thee, God is
greater than thy Heart, and knows all things: That is, if the Law written in a
Man's Heart do condemn a Man worthy of eternal Damnation, God is greater than
this Law, and knows how to raise you again, and to condemn you to eternal
Torments.

9. Thus in the Original, God takes notice, and minds Saints and Devils here
on Earth, by the Law written in their Hearts; and if the Saints grow in Faith,
Love and Knowledge of the true God, then is Conscience justified in the Sight
of God, because the Prophet and Messenger of God justifies the Saints Faith to
be true Faith.

10. But if the Prophet does not justify a Man's Faith to be a true Faith, nor
him to be a true Saint, neither will God do it, and that Man's Heart will
condemn him also.

11. For it is a true Prophet, or true Minister that makes a Saint, one or
more, for a Saint cannot makes a true Prophet, nor true Minister, but a
Prophet may make a wicked Sinnor a glorious Saint, as I have done several: As
Christ, he could make simple ignorant Men Apostles, but Apostles could not make
him their Christ, so that no Prophet no Saint.

12. They may be elected Vessels, but not Saints, for no Man can probably be
said to be a Saint, except they come actually to believe in a true Prophet,
true Apostle, or true Minister of Christ.

13. And further, I say, whoever does not stand in Awe, and Fear to offend that
Law of Conscience, as if God himself did stand by and take notice of all his
Actions, so he does well, because God's Eye is over him, else not: I say all
such a Man's Doings is but Eye Service, and respected of God no more than the
cuting of a Dogs Neck, and that Man is in the depth of Darkness; but such a
Man, if he does Evil, then he desires God to take no notice of that, but to
blot it out of his Remembrance; as if God were beholding to Man to do well,
when as there is a Blessing in Well doing, and a Curse in Evil doing.

14. For this I say, if there were no God to reward the Good, nor punish the
Evil, yet could I do no otherways than I do; for I do well, not because I
expect any Reward from God, and I refrain from Evil, not for fear God should
see me, or seeing me, will punish me, or that his Person does take notice or
mind me in it at all; but I do well, and refrain from Evil, to please the Law
written in my Heart, so that I might not be accused in my own Conscience, by
that Law written in my Heart, as God has placed for a Watchman, to tell me when
I do well, and when I do ill.

15. So I being justified by Faith in my own Conscience, and being not
condemned by the Law written in my Heart, I have Confidence to the Throne of
Grace. Neither do I refrain from Evil, for fear God seeing me, and so to punish
me; but I refrain from Evil, because the Law in my Heart sees all my doings,
and that Watchman God has set there to watch me will tell God of all my
Doings, and that Law will be the only Accuser of Conscience.

16. So that God needs not to trouble himself to watch over every Man and
Woman's Actions himself, but has placed his Law, a Watchman in every Heart, as
above said.

17. Thus in the Original, God takes Notice by his Law: Not that I do own the
Law written in Man's Heart to be the very God, as the Quakers do, but God is a
distinct Person of himself, and distinct from this Law: And no other ways does
God mind or take notice, now at this time, but by this Law.

18. And to that Second Assertion, how the Saints are not to mind God at all,
it is plain, and is Truth also, as by Scripture appears, how that he that
receives a Prophet in God's Name, receives him that sent him: And seeing God
does not come to treat with Men himself, he sends his Prophet or Ambassador in
his stead, and he is empowered by him to make Peace between God and Man, upon
such Articles as the Prophet and the People can agree on: And thus.

19. Whoever beleives the Prophet's Report shall be saved, and he that does not
believe his Prophet's Report shall be damned. Therefore it is said by Esau, who
has believed our Report, and to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed. So that
God has placed the whole Power in the Prophet, to determine upon Life and
Salvation, as if God was present himself, and if the People do not agree with
the Prophet while he is in the way, how shall a Man make his Peace with God.

20. For God will say to such that shall think to come to him, and despise the
Prophet; If you would not receive the Prophet whom I sent, you will not receive
me, if I should come my self.

21. So that God does not expect that you should come unto him, but unto the
Prophet only; neither does he own your coming unto him; for he will say, you
should have minded my Prophet, and have believed him, and have made your Peace
with him, and then I would have accepted of you; for it will be said to you as
it was unto Dives, They have Moses and the Prophets, etc.

22. So it will be said to you, if you believe not my last Prophet whom I sent;
he has spoken unto you, and has declared Life and Salvation unto you, and if
you will not believe him on Earth, you will not believe if God himself should
come from Heaven and speak unto you.

23. So that there is a necessity that Men should believe the Prophet only:
These Things are common Practices with the Kings of the Earth: Would a King be
well pleased with that Man that rejects his Ambassador? For does not an
Ambassador stand in the King's place, and what he does the King does, etc.

24. Why should you that are Men think it strange to mind the Prophet only:
Were not all those People blessed that minded the Prophets only, as Moses and
Aaron, Elijah and Elisha, and those that did not mind the Prophets only, were
they not cursed.

25. So likewise whoever minds the Prophet now alive only, shall have true
Peace with God; and whoever does not, shall never have true Peace with God, nor
perfect Peace in his own Soul; for this is God's way, and that Honor he has
put upon Prophets for all their Sufferings, therefore it is said, How beautiful
are the Feet of such as bring glad Tideings of Peace and Salvation? And whoever
receives a Prophet shall receive a Prophet's Reward? Which Reward is no less
than the Blessing of everlasting Life; and if so, sure such a Prophet ought to
be Received while on Earth, to be minded only, seeing that he that receives him
receives God; and in this Sense People ought to mind the Prophet only, and no
other ways.

26. And as to the Third Assertion, my Answer is this, I say it is impossible
for any Man or Woman to have true Peace, except they do pin their Faith upon
the Prophet's Sleeve. Why? why because the Prophet represents the place of God,
nay God himself; and he that does believe a Prophet's Report, he believes in
God; for such a one rests his Soul only upon the Prophet's Words: Now if a
Prophets Word's be Truth, then a Man that believes rests his Soul upon the
Truth; and this is seting the Seal that he is true.

27. And so it may be said, a Man pins his Faith upon the Prophet's Sleeve,
that if he be true my Faith is true, if he be false, my Faith is false also;
and if he be a false Prophet, then he shall be damned, and he that believes him
will be damned also.

28. For if a Man be saved by pining his Faith upon a true Prophet's Sleeve, so
by pining his Faith upon a false Prophet a Man is damned; this must and is
ventured by some: For this I say, there is no Man upon Earth, that professes
the Christian Religion, but he has either a true Faith, or a false Faith, and
he pins his Faith upon either a true Minister, or a false Minister's Sleeve;
and he loves one Teacher better than another, and here he pins his Faith, and
has Peace so long as his Faith holds there.

29. But when his Faith fails, the Pin looseneth and falls quite out, so
their Faith and that Preacher is parted, and that Peace he had in that Faith is
lost, and another Faith sought after; for no Man in the World can live but by a
true Faith, or a false Faith, so that all Men in the World does or must pin
their Faith upon some Man's Sleeve or other, or else there can be no Peace at
all.

30. But when their Faith fails, the Peace they had in that Faith is lost,
and another Faith sought after, which Faith pitches upon the dead Letter of the
Scriptures, which yields no Peace at all without an Interpretor.

31. Thus all Men in the World must and do pin their Faith upon some Man's
Sleeve or other, else there can be no Peace at all to the Mind of Man; and in
this sense the Saints must pin their Faith upon the Prophets Sleeve, else they
can have no true Peace at all.

CHAP. IX. The Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Assertions answered.
1. TO this Fourth Assertion, I say, Who made any of you Saints, but the
Prophet only? For as I said before, no Prophet, no Saint; for though Men and
Women be elected in the Seed, in God's electing Power, and may be saved by
Election, yet they cannot properly be called Saints, as aforesaid, because he
must first come actually to believe in a true Prophet, or true Minister of
Christ; for a Saint cannot make a Prophet, but a Prophet can make a wicked Man
a Saint, as I have done several.

2. Furthermore, who gave any Saint, in these our Days, power to give Sentance
upon any Man for Blasphemy, was it not the Prophet now alive.

3. God gave the Saints no such Power, neither did John Reeve give any such
Power to any Saint all his Days of his Life, neither did any Saint give
Sentance upon any all his Days.

4. Now seeing the Saints receive their Power to give Sentance for Blasphemy,
from the Prophet now alive, and not from God; sure then there is a Power in
that Prophet to take off that Sentance that any Saint shall give, in case the
Party so sentanced comes unto the Prophet, and the Prophet deserns him capable
of true Sorrow for his rash Speeches, the Prophet can take off that Sentance
that any Saint has given, and shall have perphect peace of Mind, as if no
Sentance at all had been passed upon him.

5. There has been an Example of this both in John Reeve's time, and since;
for it came to pass that John Reeve had passed the Sentance upon a Man for
writing blasphemous Words upon the Marjant of the Commission Book, and when the
Man read the Sentance he was exceedingly troubled all that Night, so that no
Rest could be found: So that he came in the Morning, with the Sentance in his
Hand, and besought us with Tears, upon his Knees, to take this Writing again,
for, said he, I have done foolishly, and spoken rashly before he had
considered; with several other Words of Repentance.

6. So John Reeve, seeing his Sorrow for this Sin, he took the Writing from the
Man again; and the Man was settled in Peace of Mind, as at first.

7. Now if the Prophet Reeve had Power to take off his own Sentance for
Blasphemy, then much more can he take off the Sentance that any Saint shall
give against Blasphemy.

8. Another Example since it, was so; That Claxton gave Sentance of Damnation
upon Mrs. Masson; and he was, at that time, as knowing a Saint counted by the
Beleivers, as ever any of you were; yet when her Husband caused her to apply
her self unto the Prophet: I understanding the Cause, I took off that Sentance
he had given her; and not only so, but for that and other Things, I took away
his Power also, so that no Sentance of his afterward should be of any Value to
any Man.

9. So that Prophets have a prerogative Power, as God, above the Power of
Saints; because the Power of a Saint is at the second hand, subordinate to the
Power of a Prophet; and therefore a Prophet has power to take off that
Sentance, where and on whom he pleases, etc.

10. And as to the Answer of the Fifth Assertion, this I say, Who should uphold
a corrupt natured Man but a Prophet, in case a corrupt natured Man do believe
the Prophet, then the Prophet's Faith shall uphold him from the Sensure and
Judgments of those that looks upon their own Natures to be more pure and
incorrupt, as to his Happiness in the Life to come, the Prophets Love being in
him, he will uphold him.

11. And whereas you say, defraud and deceive all Men, to this I say, I do not
uphold no Man to defraud nor deceive any Man; it was always contrary to my
Nature, to uphold any such Practice in any Saint or Devil, because I never did
practice any such Things my self; not in the Days of my Ignorance.

12. But in case some Men's Natures are so corrupt, as to practice such Things,
and yet are true Believers, what shall the Prophet do with such Men, shall he
cast them out of the Kingdom of Heaven for ever, because his Nature is corrupt,
surely no?

For this was not the Practice of Christ when on Earth: But this I do allow and
tolerate every Saint, that if they cannot freely forgive the Defraud and
Deceivings of such natured Men, they may take the Law of them: The Law is open
to Right him self that is deceived, or else let them trust such Men no more.

13. But this I say, I think you Fault Finders are the least defrauded, or
deceived by those corrupt natured Men of any: Prophets cannot give Men honest
Hearts, that are not honest by nature; and if they be honest by nature,
Prophets cannot give them Money to uphold their Honesty.

14. Neither can a Prophet change corrupt Natures, for if the Prophet could I
would have changed yours, and have made you more Merciful to forgive the
Trespass of your Brother of your own Faith, and not to rake up the Sins of
others, and lay them as a Charge against the Prophet, as if he were the cause
of their Defraud and Deceit, because I uphold them in Peace of Mind, concerning
the Life to come, my Faith being in him it shall uphold him, so that the fear
of eternal Death shall not surprise him.

15. Also, if I could have changed your corrupt Nature, I would never have
suffered it to have broken forth into Rebellon, as it has done, but would have
upheld you in Peace of Mind, and Hope of eternal Life, notwithstanding your
Nature is corrupt enough; yet while my Love was in you I did uphold you in
peace of Mind, but now my Love is taken from you, through your Rebellion, your
Peace, Hope, and Assurance, will weather and dye in you: And in this Sense will
he uphold corrupt natured Men if his Love be in him.

16. The Sixth Assertion answered, which says, Though false Worship be an Idol,
yet with the Prophets Leave he may go to that Worship blameless: As to this, I
never did forbid any Believer of this Commission of the Spirit from going to
Church, neither did John Reeve in his time, they all went to Church, or to
Meetings; John Reeve, nor I never laid any Injunction upon any Believer, not to
go to Church.

17. But since I wrote the Book of the whole Revelation, I had occasion to
write concerning Worship, and the Believers reading of it, their Eyes were
opened to see it was Idolatry to worship as the Nation does, so that many of
them refrained from it, and they found much Peace in it; but some could not
refrain, because of Persecution; but those that did refrain had much Peace in
themselves, and were better beloved with me, than the other which did go to
Church: So that they that did go to Worship, they had Shame and Trouble, and
Doubting in themselves; and I let them bear their own Sin, and never reproved
them for it.

18. And because I did not advise, nor command them to the contrary, they were
the more encouraged; but had not that Peace in themselves as those had that did
refrain, not because of my Dislike, but because of their own Peace of
Conscience: But having no Command from us to the contrary, some few took leave,
that were in high Places, which could no ways uphold their Honor and
Livelihood, except they went sometimes to Church.

19. Now those not being forbid by the Prophet, they were not disobedient to
the Prophet, nor to God, but to their own Souls, they brought Guilt upon their
Conscience and Fear upon their Mind; yet by the Prophets winking at them as God
did in the Days of old at there Ignorance, and not accuseing them of Evil, but
continueing his Law in them; the Prophet Remembering their former Faith and Love
to John Reeve: They are blameless as to the fear of Eternal Damnation, and why,
because the Prophet did never forbid them, nor never did Condemn them for any
thing they had done in that Nature.

20. And in this Sense they are blameless of the Prophet and blameless of God,
for a Prophets Power is unlimited as God's Power is: None is to call a Prophet
to an Account but God only, for if the Prophet will Wink at the faileings of
some upon consideration of the Snares great Men are in, and of other good they
do, and the Prophet will not Wink at others that are not under such Snars of
this World, nor can do no Good to others of their own Faith, who shall againsay
it, none but Rebels.

21 They will undertake to be more Righteous then the Prophet, they would make
all the Lords People Holy, if they where in the Prophets place, by Reproving
and Exhorting and Judging the People, some for going to worship an Idol, and
others for defraud and deceit, but if we were in his place, we would give
Righteous Judgment upon all according to demerit, without respect of persons,
this is Corath, Dathan, and Abiram like, the practies of Rebels.

22. And in this Sense those that go to worship an Idol may be said to be
blameless of the Prophet, and no other ways.

CHAP. X. The Seventh, Eighth, and Ninth Assertions Answered.
1. HOW should Men that do Evil after the Blessing is given be supported, if
the Prophet should not support him, suppose some that are under the Blessing
may borrow Money of his Brethren of the same Faith, and never pay them again,
others perhaps are passionate, hasty natured, which wounds their own Souls,
others may sometimes be drunk, others of a hasty wrashful Nature as you are.

2. Those things are all Evil, the one as well as the other, and perhaps some
of this Faith to whom the Prophet has given the blessing are guilty of those
things; now to whom shall they apply them selves too, to be supported; in the
trouble of his Mind he has borrowed Money, but cannot pay it again, so his
Credit is lost, he can borrow no more there, neither will he forgive him
freely, but looks upon him, though he be of his own Faith, but a paltry
deceitful Man, and will have no more Dealing with him: This is Punishment
enough where an honest Heart is.

3. And where shall such a Man be supported but by the Prophet, for his
Brethren will not support him, and the World Condemns him for a base Cheat, and
his own Conscience Condemns him and makes him ashamed and where shall he go; he
cannot go to God for Relief, but to a Man like him self, a Prophet.

4. And to this Prophet he can appeal unto, and be supported under his Blessing
he once gave him, for a Prophets Word is as the Word of God him self, in case
the Man's Faith be in it: For who has need of Support but such, for legal
Righteous Men need no Support, neither of God nor of the Prophet; for it has a
Blessing in it self, in the very deed doing.

5. Therefore it is said that Christ did Justify the Ungodly but not the legal
Righteous Man, but rather Condemn him, as the Proud Pharise, who bosted of his
Righteousness, and did thank God that he was not like the Publican who deceived
all Men he dealt with.

6. And in this Sense it may be said, that the Prophet does uphold a Man,
though his Life and Conversation be counted Wicked by Rebels, yet his Faith
being steadfast shall be upholden by the Prophet.

7. As to the Eighth Assertion, my Answer is; suppose Christ when he was taken
and carried before Pilate, and when he was examined by him whether he was the
Christ, the King of the Jews, if Christ for fear of Death should have denied,
and said, No, I am not the Son of God, etc. If this should have been said by
Christ, then he would have proved a False Christ, and his Faith, a False Faith.

8. And so, those that Believed him, their Faith would be False and vain, and
the assurance of Eternal Life in them would have perished, for a False Christ
will be Damned, then all that Believe in that False Christ will be Damned also.

9. For it is by Faith that Men are saved; now if a Man's Faith be pitched upon
the true Christ, and hold out to the end, he shall be saved, because the Christ
he Believed in shall be saved.

10. But if a Man have Faith in the true Christ for a while, and afterward his
Faith whither and grow coul'd, and not hold out, this Man may perish to
Eternity, yet the Christ saved.

11. Furthermore if the Prophet now alive should disown the Commission of the
Spirit; that is, if he should deny and disown that God spoke to John Reeve, and
that God did not Choose us two Jointly to be his Two last Prophets that God will
ever send to the end of the World, now if it where possible the Prophet should
disown this, but it is not possible, which way then can those that have
believed in us possibly be saved, but must be Damned.

12. For a False Prophet will be Damned: And again, if a true Faith Justify a
Man, being pitched upon a true Prophet, then a False Faith pitched upon a False
Prophet, it whithers and dies, and Condemns the Heart of Man.

13. If it should be objected, that we believe John Reeve, that God spoke to
him, and we believe his Writings, and that he Dyed in that Faith: But if the
Prophet now alive should disown John Reeve, that God spoke to him, etc. yet we
shall be saved, by believing in John Reeve's Writings now he is Dead.

14. This is just like the Faith of all the World that believes the Prophets
and Apostels that are Dead, many hundred Years before they where Born, but
would not have believed them when they where alive: No more then their Fathers
did: For it is the Nature of Reason to believe dead Prophets rather then living
Prophets, and it is the Nature of Faith to believe live Prophets rather then
dead Prophets, for a living Faith believes a living Man, but a dead Faith
believes a dead Man, and thus the Seed of reason deals by me.

15. But to this I say, this Faith will not save you, nor do you little good in
the Day of Trouble, why, because God did not choose John Reeve Singular, but God
chose us two Jointly, so that there could be no separation but by Death, and
seeing God has Honored me to be the longer Liver, he has given me a double
Power, as he did to the Prophet Elisha when Ely's Mantle fell upon him.

16. So that God has seated and established the Commission wholly upon me, so
that the Prophet now alive does stand in God's place, and does Represent his
Person to make Peace with Men, neither can any Man have true Peace in his Soul
but by casting himself by Faith wholly upon the Prophet that is now alive.

17. Now if it where possible for this live Prophet to disown the Commission of
the Spirit, (but it is not possible) then should he be found a false Prophet
and will be Damned, then all that believes him will be Damned, also this must
be ventured by all Men and Women that are saved by Faith in a Commission.

18. But as Christ spoke many hard Words which made many forsake him: So
likewise the Prophet has spoken many hard Words as those Assertions where by
some that where his Disciples were offended at him, and forsook the Prophet
and followed him no more; this has been the practice of some in all
Commissions.

19. But Woe will be to all that set the Hand of Faith to the Plow of Obedience
to the Prophet and look back as Lots Wife did, or draw back unto perdition,
whose Faith does not hold out to the end that they might be said.

20. And in this Sense, if the Prophet should disown the Commission of the
Spirit, all those that believed him would be Damned.

21. As to the Ninth Assertion, in answer thereunto, behold the Power of a
Prophets blessing, that though a Man walk contrary to the Commission his Faith
is in: Yet the Condemnation of his Conscience, it shall not Reach unto
Eternity, but unto the Graves Mouth; why because the Rememberance of the
Prophets blessing is in him and does uphold him, else his Sin might make him
despair of Eternal happiness, and fear Eternal Torments.

22. Also the Prophet cannot call back his blessing again though the Man does
walk contrary to the Commission, whereby his own Conscience is Wounded and the
Prophet Dishonored: Yet the Man keeping to the Prophets blessing, not Rebeling
against him, the Prophets Faith and Love abideing in him will uphold him so
that the fear of Eternal Death shall not surprise him.

23 So that all his Condemnation he has in his Conscience, and disgrace he
has received in this World, it shall end in Death, and shall never be
remembered in the Resurrection; all his misdeeds shall be buried in the Grave
and never rise again and that Faith he had in the Prophets blessing, and the
Prophets blessing shall be raised again to the Glorious Estate of Saints and
Angels.

24. And there shall be no Remembrance in the Resurrection of any Failings on
this side of Death, but the Faith he had in the Prophet's Blessing only, shall
uphold him, and free him from eternal Torments; and this is more than any legal
righteous Man can attain unto, though his Nature be ever so pure.

25. So that a Prophet's Blessing is of no small weight, nor of any small
concernment, but as the Blessing of Almighty God; for whoever receives a
Prophet that is true, receives God, and what is the Blessing of a Prophet but
everlasting Life.

26. And shall not this support and uphold a Man above all the Frailties of
Nature.

27. And in this Sense, he that keeps the Prophet's Blessing, tho he be subject
to many Frailties of Nature, which is contrary to the Commission, yet his
Condemnation of Concience shall extend no further than the Graves Mouth.

28. Thus I have given Answer to all those Nine Assertions which
VVilliam-Medgate has drawn up as a Charge against me saying they are contrary
to all Truth and against all Sober Reason.

The End of the Forth Part.
The Fifth Part.
CHAP. I. Of one Sr. John James's Opression of Widow Brunt, and of her Death:
The Prophet left her Executor, and how he would not sell his Birthright, but
Arrested Sr. John James's Tenants: Of his great Troubles and Trials.
1. AFter this it came to pass, that in the Year 1675, and 1676, that great
Troubles did pursue me, both upon a Natural and a Spiritual Account, through
the Envy of wicked Men, as will appear by what does follow.

2. There was a certain rich Man, being covetous and cruel, he was a Knight,
his Name was called Sr. John James; he through his cruelty and covetousness did
take away a matter of 30 Foot long, and 4 Foot broad, and a brick Wall that
closed in this parcel of Ground, and a Pump that stood in this Ground, to
considerable Vallue; the Woman's Name was Deborah Brunt, and this he let to
another Tenant of his, to make his Yard wider.

3. Also, this Knight did let another part of his Yard to a Timber-Merchant,
and this Tenant of his did stop up the Light of the poor Widow's House with his
Timber, insomuch that it was a great Hindrance and Loss to the Widow, in that
no Tenant would live in it: This rich Man did, and she could no way deliver
herself, but her Right was clearly taken from her for ever, for this rich Man
had stated it upon his Two Tenants, and they enjoyed it for a Season.

4. It came to pass, in a while after, this Widow Brunt dyed, and I was her
Executor; and I performed her Will in every particular, according to the Laws
of England; and I knowing this rich Man had taken away these Things before
mentioned, from the poor Widow, that was her Right; which Widow I had been as a
Father unto several Years before, and did more for her than her Husband could
do for her, had he lived.

5. So that, I thought in myself; I would not, like prophain Esau, to sell my
Birthright for a Mess of Pottage, but would gain that the poor Widow had lost
wrongfully; whereupon, I did, according to Law, arest these two Tenants for
Trespass and Damage.

6. The Men I went to Law withal were Three, one was Denis Swenye, a notable
wicked Devil, the others were Charles Mall, and William Pick; they were Three
inveterate Devils, being encouraged by this rich man: Yet notwithstanding I
proceeded on in the Law, and when they saw they were in danger to be
overthrown, they used all ways possible to defer the Cause.

7. And when they Saw that would not do, but that I would bring it to Trial.
They consulted together, and Summoned me into the Spiritual-Court; thinking to
have me Excomunicated, that I might not have the benefit of the Law against
them; But I spent Money in that Court, and kept off their Excomunication, and
proceeded in the Common Law toward a Trial.

8. And when they Saw that would not do, then they Conspired, and Consulted
with the Wardens of the Company of Stationers, to Search my House for
Unlicenced Books; upon which the Wardens, brought many Booksellers and
Printers, and Three of the Kings Messingers with them; and because my Wife
denied to let them come up Stairs, they Immediately with a Weapon, they had,
broke open Four Doors that were Locked and Boulted, Contrary to the Laws of
England, and they took away Four Hundred Books great and small from me, of a
considerable Value.

9. After they had done this, they Consulted with the Bishop of London, to put
me into the Spiritual Court, and Sue me there for Blasphemy, and get me
Excomunicated, that I might not have the Benefit of the Law against them,
neither for breaking open my House, and Stealing away my Goods.

10. And for that purpose, they got the Lord Chief Justice Rainsfords Warrant
for to take me; he was a deadly Enemy to me, as will appear in that he would
have taken away my Life, if he could, but I defended the Spiritual-Court from
being Excomunicated, and from his Warrant being Executed, or Served upon me,
until these two Trials in the Common Law, against these two Tenants of the rich
Mad were ended.

11. I was forced to be absent from my own House, for above a Quarter of a
Year: I was Entertained by that ever honored, and true Believer, that young
Widow, Ann Hall, I was Entertained by her as an Angel of God, when other
Believers durst not; I was kept at her House in Obscurity from Friends, and
Enemies, not knowing where I was, yet I Employed my Lawyers to manage my
Business in both Courts, and in my absence they overthrew my Adversaries, in
the two Causes aforementioned, in the Common Law, and I received again, that
which the rich Man had taken away, with some of my Charges again.

12. But the Wardens of the Stationers Company, because they could not catch
me, though they hunted after me as Bloodhounds, but could not find me out to
Serve their Warrant upon me; then they pressed hard in the Spiritual-Court to
get me Excomunicated, they fearing I might Overthrow them in the common Law,
for breaking open my House, and taking my Goods, for they had committed an
absolute Burglary and Felony, by the Laws of England.

13. But I being pressed so hard upon, in the Spiritual-Court, that it came to
this Resultation in the Court, that if I did not Personally appear the next
Court Day, then I should be Excomunicated, and being advised by him that
managed my Business in that Court, to appear, he saying he thought there would
be no Danger.

14. Now by his words I was persuaded to appear though against my own Mind, for
I did fear I should be Trappan'd, and as I feared it came to pass, and it
proved of woeful Consequence to me; as will appear by what does follow.

15. To omit many Circumstances, I shall Record the Heads, and Substance of the
whole matter, and as I did appear in the Spiritual-Court, to prevent my self of
being Excomunicated; The Court had little to say unto me, only asked me, if I
did own that Libel, which they knew I denied by my Procter before.

16. This was only to Deliver me into the Temporal Magistrates Hand; for the
Wardens, the Lord Mayor, the Lord Chief Justice, together, with the
Spiritual-Court, were agreed together to Proceed against me this way;
otherwise they could never have catched me while they Lived, nor have brought
me under their Law.

17. Therefore the Wardens Merne, and Clark they got the Lord Chief Justice of
England's Warrant, with a Constable ready, and as soon as I was Discharged in
the Spiritual-Court at Docters-Commons, that curssed Court is merely to betray
People into the Hands of their Enemies, and to ruin the Estates of the Poor
People, for it is of no more Consequence for the good of the Nation, then to
throw Stones against the Wind.

18. For the Wickedness and Envy of the Ignorant People is such, because they
cannot be revenged of the Innocent, and Just, by the Temporal Laws of the Land,
then they Cite the Innocent, (that cannot Bow Down to their Worship) into the
Spiritual Court, which I have had great Experance of this curssed Court, which
did betray me into the Hands of wicked envious Magistrates, as will appear.

19. For as soon as I was coming out of the Court the Constable served the Lord
Justice Rainsford's Warrant upon me: Then was I delivered into the Hands of
Satan, to be plain, into the Hands of Devils.

20. And I was led to Guild Hall before the Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen,
the Mayors Name was Thomas Davis, a Stationer by Trade, a deadly Enemy to me,
and to all Moral Justice, and a Man made up more of Malice, and Ignorance of
the Law of the Land, than Ntural Wisdom, or Moral Knowledge: And as to
Spiritual Knowledge he was as Blind as a Beetle.

21. The Constable gave Judge Rainsford's Warrant into the Lord Mayor's Hand,
and the Wardens gave the whole Book bound into his Hands; and the Lord Mayor
asked me, whither I did own this Book; I said I did.

22. Then he commanded me to withdraw into another Room, and I did so with an
Officer with me; I stayed a little while and the same Constable brought my
Mittimus from the Lord Mayor, to carry me to the Geoal of Newgate until the
next Sessions.

23. So I being carried to Prison, I was Bailed out until the 17th of January,
in the Year 1676, then did Merne and Clark, draw up an Indictment against me,
but out of one of those Books they stole from me, called, The Neck of the
Quakers Broken.

CHAP. II. Of the Bill of Indictment, and of the Cruelty of the Judges.
1. NOW follows the Bill of Indictment, as I was Condemned for: The Persons or
Jury Sworn for our Lord the King; gave in that Lodowick Muggleton late of
London Labourer, being a Man Pernicious, Blasphemous, Seditious, Heritical, and
a Monster in his Opinions.

2. Pretending that he the said Lodowick Muggleton, is one of the two last
Witnesses, of Almighty GOD, and devising, and intending to Spread Abroad his
Pernicious, Blasphemous, Seditious, and Monstrous Opinions; and to disturb the
Peace and quiet of this Kingdom of England, and despise and debase the True
Religion, Established and Exercised therein.

3. As also to make and Excite discord, between the King and his Subjects, and
to bring into Odium and Disgrace, his said Majesty's Kingdom as to
Eclesiastical Matters.

4. He the said Lodowick Muggleton, on the 30th of August in the 23d Year of
His Majesty's Reign, in St. Giles's Parish without Cripplegate London
aforesaid, by force and Arms, did Unlawfully, Wickedly, Maliciously,
Scandalously, Blasphemously, Seditiously, Scismatically, and Heritically,
Write, Print, and Sell, Utter and Publish, a certain Malicious, Scandalous,
Blasphemous, Seditous, and Heritical Book Entitled The Neck of the Quakers
Broken.

5. In which Book, Written to Edward Burn, are contained these Unlawful,
Blasphemous, Seditious, Heritical, and Scandalous Sentences following, viz. I
Write these Lines unto you, Edward Burn, knowing you to be the Seed of the
Serpent.

6, There was repeated out of this Book much more, as Page the 18, 31, and 54.
That whosoever Reads that Book, may see those Blasphemies, these Quakers did
first Judge me with; so that I had cause enough given me to Pronounce those sad
Sentences of Damnation upon them, and those Books was known to the Powers of
the Nation many Years before, and the Powers of the Nation took no notice of
it, because that, and all others were Pardoned by the King, and Act of
Parliament, till within three Years, and that Book was Printed 13 Years before.

7. Yet these wicked Judges, and Jury and others, Conspired together to
persuade, the Court, that this Book was Antidated 13 Years ago, yet Published
this August 30th 1676, that it might come within the Act of three Years.

8. Now these words that were taken out of this Book, made some of the Judges
Mad with Envy, and grin'd their Teeth, and their Counsel said, it made his
Hair stand on an End, he was so Affrighted, which caused one of the Judges to
belch out of his Mouth, saying, it was to the great contempt and Scandal of
their said Lord the King, of His Crown and Dignity.

9. When as that Book did not meddle with their Established Religion at all,
neither was it any dishonor to the King, but rather an honor, if he had but
Read it over; but Truth does always offend the reason of Man, as is seen by
what a Multitude of Hellish Expressions, and Palpable lies, uttered in their
Indictment, being patched up with Reproaches, and Slanders, against the purest
Truth that ever was spoken by Prophet, or Apostle.

10. I shall now Record now unjustly Judge Rainsford dealt with me before the
Trial: The Sessions before I was Tried, the Bill of Indictment was Read in
Court, and I answered not Guilty, and said unto Davis, then Lord Mayor, that I
would Traviss the Indictment, and put in Bail to the Indictment.

11. So Davis asked whither I could put in three Sufficient Men, that could
Swear they were worth Two Hundred Pounds a Man, he would Accept of Bail,
thinking I could not have procured such great Security: And Judge Rainsford
Sat at the Right Hand of the Mayor, and I heard Judge Rainsford, say to the
Lord Mayor, that it was pity but I should be Burned; I heard by his Words, and
saw by his Countenance, that he was, and would be a Deadly Enemy.

12. But the Mayor, could not deny Bail, nor to Traviss the Indictment by the
Laws of England; so the Men were called, and the Mayor being Envious, asked one
of them if they were of my Gang, one of them answered and said thus? Sr. We do
not come here to be Examined whose Gang we are of, but we came to be Bail for
this Man for Six Hundred Pounds for his Appearance the next Sessions; The Mayor
said no more but Accepted it.

13. And when the time drew near, I did according to Law (with my Lawyer) go to
this Judge Rainsford, and got his Clerk to draw up a Sessarary, which was to
remove it out of that Court, into the Court of King's Bench; and this En, vious
Judge, being Judge of the Kings-Bench-Court, and we could not have a Sessarary
in any Court else, which he knew well enough, which caused his Envy to act so
wickedly and unjustly toward me.

14. For when his Clerk, and my Lawyer had Drawn up the Writing, and had
recived their Money, (near Forty Shillings) they went into the Judges-Chamber,
for him to set his Hand to it, to remove my Cause into his own Court, which was
but Law, but he made them answer, and said, he would not set his Hand to it,
but would hear the Trial himself, at the Sessions.

15. So I was Cheated of my Money by his Clerk, and he knew it, and he deprived
me of it and of the just Law, which is the Birth right of every free born Man
of England.

16. But now as to the Trial, I shall in the next place Record some of the most
remarkable Words, and Passages of the Judges, and the Counselors, and the
Witnesses against me in the Trial: Upon the 17th of January 1676, first the
Indictment was Read, and the Crier of the Court, said, Are you Guilty or not
Guilty.

17. I answred, not Guilty, but desired the Court to let my Counsel Plead the
Cause, because I knew they would have taken hold of my Words, and made them a
more horrible Crime, then the Book it self; which Judge Rainsford readily
granted, and asked Who was my Counsel, I said Mr. Gener.

18. And he received a Breviat of the Cause, showing the Wrong I had received
by their breaking open my House, and taking away my Goods, contrary to the Laws
of England: Also I gave into my Counsels Hands, the Kings Gracious Act of
Pardon; That whosoever did Sue any Man for what was Pardoned in that Act
afterward, that the Party so Sued, should Plead the General Issue and should
Recover Ten Pound a Man of those his Adversaries.

19. This Act was given into my Counsels Hands to Plead, and that Book that
stated the Indictment out of; was given into his Hand, which Book was Pardoned
by that Act, being Printed 13 Years ago, all was Pardoned till within Three
Years.

20. Also their Counsel, ( I know not his Name;) had one of the Bo^oks, with
the whole Volumn Bound and Clasped, (which they stole from me) in his Hand, I
saw the Chief Judges were bent upon Mischief against me.

21. Therefore I was resolved to follow the Practice of Christ, when Examined
by the high Priests, Rulers and Counsel, gave them no answer neither before
Pilate; for he knew they watched to catch Words out of his Mouth, that they
might have some what to Accuse him of, to make his Cause worse, then what his
Enemies did Accuse him with, as may be Read Luke 22.70. where Christ held his
Peace, and answered nothing.

22. Then said they all, Art thou the Son of God; and he said unto them? Yea
say that I am, and to this they said, What need we any further Witness, for we
our selves have heard out of his own Mouth; so Mark 14. and in verse 62, Jesus
answered and said to his question, I am the Son of God, etc.

23. Then the high Priests rent their Clothes, and they all Condemned him to
be guilty of Death; so likewise I did perceive that if I had pleaded my self I
should have Justified my Commission from GOD, and that he gave John Reeve, and
my self that Power and Authority to give Sentance of Damnation, to all that
Blaspheme against the Holy Ghost, as they did, as are Written in that Book.

24. These Words would have Enraged the Judges, and Jury, and the People more
then that Book; so that they would have said by me as the Priests, Scribes and
Pharisees said by Christ as aforesaid: The angrey and Malicious Judges, and
Envious Jury, and Ignorant Officers and People in the Court, would have rent
their Hearts with Madness against me, and said, What need we to mind this Book,
or Indictment, or Witness against him, for you hear his horrible Blaphemy out
of his own Mouth, therefore what think you? so that they all would have
Condemned me to greater Torments than they did.

25. Considering this, I held my Peace and speak not one word; which prevented
the Expectations of Thousands, which thought to have had a large Relation of
the Matter.

26. So that I left the Book that was Pardoned, and Act, and Indictment and
Witnessess, for them to Judge and Condemn me by; So they had no farther Matter
from me at all, which did frusterate their Expectations and Moderate their
Punishment, as the Reader may perceive by what does follow.

CHAP. III. The Counsel against the Prophet, Pleads with fear and horror: The
Prophets Counsel Pleads, and through fear, did wrong his Cause.
1. UPON the 17th of January 1676, after the Indictment was read, my Counsel
Pleaded to it, proving that this Book the Indictment was ground upon, it was
Pardoned by the Kings Gracious Act, being Printed 13 Years ago; neither was
this Book Published, nor Sold in any Shop, or to any Person in public; as can
be proved, but were locked up in Cheasts, etc. This with many other Words,
according to the Laws of England: This my Counsel pleaded, and my Counsel Sat
under Judge Atkins.

2. And their Counsel Sat under Judge Rainsford, and he did hold up the Book
in open Court, which Book was the whole Volumn Bound and Clasped: He held one
of the Claspes between his Finger and his Thumb up in the open Court, in
oppossition to my Counsel.

3. And he expressed these Words, and said with a loud Voice, That he did Read
one Leaf of this Book and turned over another. But said he, it was so full of
Horrible Blasphemy, that he durst not Read any further, for the Blasphemy was
so great, that it made his Hair stand an end, and his Heart to tremble; with
other Expressions of Dread and Fear.

4. As if the very Reading of it would have caused God to have parted the
Heavens assunder, and have Rained down Vengance upon him for Reading it, if he
had Read any further: For said he, It was impossible for any Man to Write such
a Horrible Blasphemous Book, in Assuming the place of God upon him, Except he
went to the bottom of Hell, for said he, it is so cunningly contrived, that it
confounds all the Reason in Man, with many other hedious expressions, which I
cannot remember.

5. He spoke truth, but knew it not, for the Spirit of Revelation does descend
to the bottom of Hell, else we could not tell others where it is, and prevent
others from falling into it; and as Christ himself Descended into Hell, and
quickened again out of it, so has the Spirit of Revelation in me descended
into the bottom of Hell a Thousand times, and has quickened out of it again,
and has forewarned many from going into that Place; but I know this Counseler
shall go into Hell, that has no bottom, called a Bottomless Pit, and he shall
never come from thence, to Eternity.

6. Likewise indeed the Revelation of Faith in me, has confounded all the
Reason in Man, as to Spiritual, and Heavenly matters.

7. After this my Counsel pleaded again to the same purpose; as he did before,
but he through extreme Fearfulness did wrong my cause, in two things: First in
that he made no mention of the Wardens breaking open four Doors, contrary to
the Laws of England; which was by the Law absolute Burglary, and the taking
away the Books, was absolute Felony.

8. This was in the Forefront of his Breviat, and I had reposed the Business to
him, because I would not plead my self, but he like a deceitful Knave, and
fearful Fool; did not speak one Word of it before the Court; which if he had,
it would have put these Envious Judges, and Jury to a Nonplush, how they could
have brought me in Guilty; so he spoyld my Cause.

9. For after he had Pleaded the Kings Act of Grace, as aforesaid, he said
these Words, that he had Pleaded so far as the Law would bear him out, but as
for the Words, and cause of Indictment, he was ashamed of it.

10. Upon these Words, did Judge Rainsford say unto the Jury, You see that his
own Counsel is ashamed of his Cause.

11. Here the Reader may see those Words verified, as I have Read, for my
Counsel did do at my Trial those things which he ought not to have done, and he
left undone those things which he ought to have done; for he ought to have
Pleaded the Breaking open of so many Doors, but he left that undone, and to say
he was ashamed of my Cause, he ought to have left those Speeches undone, and
not to have spoken them, being not forced by the Court.

12. And for a Man to take Forty Shillings to Plead a Man's Cause, and to say
he is ashamed of his Clyants Cause; what Man that has but Moral Reason, and
Sense in him, but will say such a Counseler has no Truth in him.

13. But Judge Atkins siting over my Counsel, might see the Breviat in my
Counsels Hand, which caused him to ask one of the Witnessess. (his name was
Garat) how did he come by those Books, he answered, that he did Seize them, as
they use to do, the Judge asked how many there were of them, he said a Porters
Load; The Judge asked him where the Books were, he answered, at the Bishop of
Londons House.

14. The Judge asked him again, if they were all of a sort, or all of a
bigness, he answered no, some were great ones, and some, lesser, some three or
four bound together, and some single: He was asked how many of them great Books
that were in the Court, he answered Six of them; he was asked what was the
Price that great Book was sold for; He answered, Twelve or Fourteen Shillings.

15: Now when the two Counsels had done Pleading, and the Witnesses Examined;
the aforesaid Judge Atkins stood up and said, Gentlemen of the Jury, you see
that the Book which the Indictment was grounded upon, was Printed 13 Years ago,
and is Pardoned by the Kings Gracious Act: Therefore said he, I cannot see, by
the Laws of England, how you can possibly bring this Man in Guilty, therefore
Jury look to it.

16. Then stood up Judge Rainsford and said, That if it was not Law, we will
make it Law, and further said, who knows but this Raskal might Antidate the
Book 13 Years ago, and Publish it this 30th of August last past.

17. The Envy of this wicked Judge, made him speak against his own Conscience,
for he knew it was impossible for me to do such a thing as to get it Printed so
lately, for he knew it were those that Stole my Books, published them.

18. And further this Rainsford vented his Envy exceeding high and called me
Incorrigable Rogue, that should Assume to himself to be in Gods place, a Man
Pernicious, Blasphemous, Seditious, Heritical, and a monster in his Opinions;
Pretending himself one of the two Witnessess of Almighty God, to the great
Scandal and Contempt of our Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity, as also the
Religion of this Kingdom rightly Established: And further said, he was Sorry
that the Laws of England were so unprovided to Punish Crimes of this Nature.

19. And further he goes on in his Rage against me and says; Gentlemen of the
Jury, if you do not bring this Man in Guilty, you will be pertakers with him in
all his Horrible Blasphemy, and grand Apostisie.

20. Many more hateful Words, with the Fire of Hell, that proceeded from his
Heart, and did appear in his Face; his Zeal was great to have me Punished, Nay
he thought in his Heart, that Hanging was too good a Death for me, for said he,
This Crime of horrid Blasphemy (as he accounted it) was worse than Murder,
Felony, or Treason; and was Sorry that the Laws was so unprovided to punish
such Crimes.

21. I was so moved in my mind, to hear this Cursed Devil to Blaspheme against
the Holy Spirit that sent me, and gave me Power to give Sentance of Eternal
Damnation upon such Blaspheming Devils. That I could have wished, that God
would have Executed some vissible Vengeance from Heaven upon this Blasphemous
Judge, to have smote him with a natural Blindness, for I knew he was
Spiritually Blind, for I had done wrong to no Man.

22. Only I had Executed the Commission of God faithfully in giving Sentance
upon all dispising Devils, who sinned againg the Holy Ghost: This was that Sin
the high Priests and Elders committed in Christ's time against him, in that
they said he cast out Devils by Belsebub the Prince of Devils.

23. I know this, that Judge Rainsford would have said the same to Christ
himself, had he been in my place, for his Blasphemy was great, not only against
me, but against God that sent me, which God he knew not.

24. Therefore my Anger was kindled against him, and desired an immediate
vissible Vengeance from Heaven upon him, that might have been a vissible
Witness, whither God did own him or me.

25. But there was a secret Voice within me said, thy Commission is Spiritual,
and has to do with the Spiritual and Eternal Estate of Mankind; and that all
such Persons are the Seed of the Serpent, and are to receive for their
Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, their Punishment in the Life to come, even
Eternal Damnation, which is the second Death, where the Worm of Conscience
shall never Dye, nor the Fire of Hell shall never be quenched to Eternity.

26. Then I was quiet and willing to bear all they could do unto me, even to
the loss of my Life.

CHAP. IV. The Prophet is brought in Guilty of his Sentance and Judgment; with
the nature of his Sufferings.
1. AFTER that Judge Rainsford had made his Speech to the Jury, then was the
Goler commanded to take me away from the Bar and put into a little Room for a
season, and after a little space I was called for to the Bar again, and
Jefferies being then in the Recorders place, that Bawling Devil, was to give
Sentance, and Judgment upon me.

2. And when I did appear before him, a great Fire was between us, where they
did Burn those in the Hand which were Condemned to that Punishment, but all
that was over before I did appear.

3. And this Jefferies Sat in the Judgment Seat, as Pilate din against Christ,
and I stood a Prisoner at his Bar; and when he saw my Face, the first Words he
speak, he called me Impudent Rogue, because my Countenance did not change, nor
look sad, nor asked any Favor of the Court, and said nothing to all their
Threats, Revilings, and Reproaches, whereby they Reproached me.

4. Then he asked the Jury, Is Muggleton Guilty, or not Guilty, They stayed a
little space before they speak; Jefferies asked again, is Muggleton Guilty, or
not Guilty, the Jury said Guilty.

5. Then he Proceeded in Judgment and said, the Court is sorry the Laws of
England are so unprovided to punish Crimes of this Nature, therefore the Court
has thought Fit, to give you but an Easy, Easy, Easy, Punishment.

6. You shall be committed, and put to stand upon the Pillory in three of the
most Eminent Places in the City: That is one Day in Cornhil, near the
Exchange, London; Another Day in Fleet Street, near the end of Chancery Lane;
and the Third Day, (being on the Market Day) to Stand in West-Smith-Field,
London, from the Hours of Eleven in the Forenoon, until one in the Afternoon.

7. On which said several Days, a Writing Paper showing your Offense, to be put
upon your Breast, and also your Blasphemous Books, in three Parts, to be
divided, and with Fire before your Face, near the Pillory aforesaid, by the
Common Hangman, then and there to be Burned.

8. And then to be returned into Newgate in safe Custody, until your Fine of
Five Hundred Pound be paid, and then to put in good Security, to be of good
Behavior the time of your Life, but none of your own Gang (as he called them)
shall be Security for you; These are the Words of the Sentance that Jefferies
passed upon me the 17th of January 1676.

9. The Paper that was tied to my Breast, every Day I stood upon the Pillory, to
show my Offense, and cause of this Suffering, the Words were as follows.

10. Lodowick Muggleton, Stands hear for Writing, causing to be Printed,
Selling, Uttering, and Publishing, a Blasphemous Book.

11. After this Sentance, and Judgment was passed upon me, I shall Record as
short as I can, the manner of the Execution of this Sentance; and how I did
suffer it, and bear the Curse of their wicked Wills; for they did make that
Law, which was not Law, as Rainsford said before, and as Judge Atkins, when he
saw me Condemned contrary to Law, he went off the Bench and said, there were no
fair Dealings with me.

12. This Sentance have I Suffered, in every Tittle in the greatest Rigor that
could be inflicted, even beyond their own Law, they made me Ride in a Cart, as
a Thief, or a Murderer, Bareheaded, without Hat or Cap; which never was done
in England before: I stood Bareheaded upon the Pillory, which no Cheat ever
did, but were suffered to wear a Cap of Steel under another Cap.

13. I was set as a Mark for every one to Throw a Stone at me.

14. My Books were offered up in Three Burnt offerings unto the Unknown God, as
Three Sacrifices before my Face, the smoke of them asscended into my Nostrells,
which caused me to Cry to Heaven for Vengeance, upon those Great Men of the
Earth, that were the cause of those Burned-offerings unto Devils.

15. And my self was Offered up, as a Sacrifice Three times, to the Rude
Multitude: For the People came from the Four Winds, or from the Four Quarters
of the City, and Subburbs round about; they were for Multitude without Number.

16. I was mauled by the People, some cast Dirt, and Mudd out of the Kennel at
me; others Rotten Eggs, and Turn^^s, and others cast Stones at me, some Stones
weighed a Pound, and out of the Windows at the Exchange, they cast down Fire
Brands, (Pieces of Billits with Fire upon them) at my Head, which if they had
lighted upon me, would have done the Work, as they desired.

17. I was Bruised and Battered, and my Innocent Blood was shed, though not unto
Death, for Gods Cause, for that the Blood of the last True Prophet, and Witness
of the Spirit, has been shed, by this Bloody City, for my Testimony to the
Commission of God, put upon me.

18. And it was the wonderful Providence of God, my Life was preserved; for I
was delivered into the Hands of unreasonable Men, the rude Multitude, by the
Hands of Rainsford, Davis, and Jefferies, Judges of the Law of Reason, and
Jury, these were the Men that were Guilty of my Innocent Blood.

19. I was willing to be stoned to Death, by the rude Multitude, and would have
gone off the Pillory to be stoned to Death, but the Officers would not let me
come down, when this was over, my Wounds and the Blood stanched, I was put into
the Cole Cellar again, the same Day at Night, I went Three pair of Stairs high
to my Lodging.

20 And the next Day, I would willingly have kept my Bed, but the Keeper said,
If I would not come down into the Cellar in the Afternoon, they would put me in
the Common Side; so I was forced into the Cellar, who had more need to have
kept my Bed.

21. But there is no mercy in Prison, therefore it may well be compared to
Hell, for in Hell there is no mercy, but Justice only, neither is there any
mercy in Prison Keepers at all without profit.

22. After I had suffered these things, I was put into Prison again for the
Fine of Five Hundred Pounds that was laid upon me to Pay, but I did lie in
Prison Six Months after I had suffered these things aforesaid.

23. And now in my Imprisonment, I considered that my sufferings were much like
unto the sufferings of the Prophet Jeremiah Chap 11.19. he suffered for his
Message from the Lord of Host, the mighty God of Jacob.

24. And my sufferings was for my Commission received from the high and mighty
God, the Man Christ Jesus, in Glory, the only wise God my King and my Redeemer.

25. And as his Enemies, that caused him to suffer, and would have had him put
to Death, were Princes, and great Men of the Earth; so likewise, those my
Enemies, were great Men, and as Princes on the Earth; and they sat upon the
Thrones, as Gods on Earth, in Judgment against me.

26. And as it was with Jeremiah, so it was with me, for I was like a Lamb,
that is brought to the Slaughter, and I knew not that they had devised devices
against me, if I had, I could have prevented them. They saying, Let us destroy
the Tree with its Fruit thereof, and cut him off from the Land of the Living,
that his Name may be no more Remembered.

27. That is, let us destroy this Muggleton, the Tree, and the Fruit thereof;
his Doctrine of the True God, and Right Devil in his Writings, that none may
receive his Writings more, nor believe his Doctrine, or Commission, that he has
Power from God, to Bless, and Curss to Eternity any more: This Reprobate Men
have practiced against me.

28. So that I have had Cause, to make my Complaint unto my God, my King, and
my Redeemer the Lord Jesus Christ, as David and Jeremiah did.

29. Oh Lord God of Truth, that Judges Righteously, that Tries the Reins, and
the Heart, let me see thy Vengeance on them, for thou know I have been
Faithful in Executing thy Commission, the Burden of the Lord, which thou
did lay upon me.

30. And thou know the unrighteous, unjust Judgments, these wicked unjust
Judges gave against me: They were not only Enemies to me, but thy Enemies, Oh
God; for they have hated me without a cause, and they have said, let us smite
him with the Tongue, with Lies, Slanders, and Reproaches.

31. Therefore heed, O Lord God of Truth, and harken to the Vioce of these
wicked Judges, and Jury, and all those that assented to that Judgment for harm,
that contended with me: And let me see thy Vengeance on those thy Enemies, for
their Fathers did unto thee when thou was upon Earth, as these do unto me.

32. Thou have saved me from Bloody Men: For they laid wait for my Soul to Kill
it, had the Law been provided with Strength, and not for any Transgression of
any Law that I had broken, but for thy Commission and Doctrine thou gave me
to declare.

33. Therefore Oh Lord God of truth! be not merciful unto any wicked
Transgression, that Persecuteth only for Conscience sake; it being the Sin
against the Holy Ghost.

34. And God will let me see my desire upon my Enemies, and bring them down, Oh
Lord my God.

25. This was my secret Supplication unto my God, when I was Prisoner in
Newgate, after I had suffered all those Corporal Punishments, which they
Sentanced me to Suffer.

CHAP. V. Showing how that the Prophet in a short time, saw his desire (unto
God) in part fullfilled.
1. AND a little while after these my Sufferings I saw my desire (in part)
granted, and several of my Potent Enemies cut off this Earth by Death: As first
that certain rich Man that took away poor Widow Brunt's Ground, as is
aforementioned; he was called Sr. John James

2. And notwithstanding I had overthrown his two Tenants in the common Law, yet
when he saw that I was in Prison, and Condemned for those Books, and had
suffered as aforesaid, yet I being Fined Five Hundred Pounds, he thought I
could not be delivered out of Prison no more, the Fine was so great.

3. Whereupon he wickedly took advantage upon my sufferings for God's Cause,
and sent a Writ of Ejectment to my Tenants, to Eject me out of Possession, so
my Attorney Read it and said, I must answer to it, else he would Eject me out
the next Term, so I was forced to Employ a Soliciter to answer to it, which
wickedness of his, cost me three Pounds.

4. And my Lawyer went to Treat with him, and this Knight was not very well,
very Cross, and said, he had turned his Business over to his Attorney: And his
Attorney was so full of Employment that nothing could be done.

5. So I hearing by my Lawyer that he was Sick, I desired of God, that he might
never come down from that Bed of Sickness, whereon he lay; and in a few Days
after, it came to pass, that he Dyed.

6. So our Law Suite was ended, I had been a quarter of a Year in Prison then,
now I knew this Man was the Seed of the Serpent, a Devil, and will be Damned to
all Eternity.

7. After this, there was another great Enemy, his Name was Garret, he was one
of those that broke open my House, and Stole my Books, and was a Witness
against me in the Court: He brought the Books to the Court, for the Common Hang
Man to Burn, every Day I stood upon the Pillory, my Wife Mary, gave him the
Sentance of Damnation to Eternity, and he Dyed Six Weeks after.

8. The third Person, was Judge Rainsford, Chief Judge of England, he was an
Implacable Enemy to me, but in a little time after his Judgment upon me, before
I was delivered out of Prison, he was put down from his Seat of Justice, and
all his Temporal Power was taken from him by the King; and another put in his
Place: And the King would give no Reason for it, but his own will.

9. So that his great Power, Honor and Glory, was departed from him, and he
had not so much Power as a common Justice of Peace, he was in the same
Condition as King Saul was, the good Spirit of Power of giving Righteous
Judgment in Temporal Things according to Law was departed from him, and an Evil
Spirit of Shame and Disgrace was sent unto him.

10. Which Troubled his Soul, so that in a little time after he Dyed, and went
to the same place, as King Saul did, that did enquire of a Witch that was
rejected of God, and not of his Prophet Samuel. And I am sure he shall be
rejected of God, even this Rainsford, and rejected of me, the last True Prophet
of the Lord, and that he will be Damned to all Eternity.

11. And he shall Remember in the Resurection, that his Damnation is the very
same which he called horrible Blasphemy, which he Judged me for, and said he
was sorry the Laws of England were so unprovided to Punish me no worse than
they did.

12. And as he had no Mercy for me when he was in Power, neither have I any
Mercy for him; and I am sure God will have no Mercy for him, but has provided
a Law to Punish him for his Envy against me, who did him no wrong.

13. And his Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost which God has said, and made it
a Law (never to be altered) that shall never be forgiven in this World, or in
the World to come: This is the Law that God has provided for us, the Two last
Prophets and Witnessess of the Spirit to Judge by; so that I know the hottest
of Hell Fire will be his Portion, and Reward, for his Sin against the Holy
Ghost, to Eternity.

14. The Fourth great Enemy to me was Sr. Thomas Davis, then Lord Mayor, he
being a Stationer himself, he was Confedrate with the whole Company of
Stationers, and Booksellers, and Jury: To Fight against the Lord and his Chosen
Prophet, and Witness of the Spirit, which did Incense the Court and Jury, that
I might Antidate that Book 13 Years ago, and yet Publish it this August; even
against his own Conscience.

15. Wherein he showed himself of that wicked reprobate Seed of the Serpent, a
Son of the Devil, and I certainly know him to be a Devil, and that he will be
Damned to all Eternity.

16. And about two Years and a half after he Judged me, he Dyed and passed
through this first Death, which is Natural, into the second Death, which is
Spiritual, and Eternal.

17. These great Enemies, I have lived to see them cut off from the Land of the
Living, with many others more Inferior Devils, which were my Enemies, have I
seen cut off by Death, and some to Poverty.

18. There is one more, that is yet alive, that I desire of God to have
Executed some vissible Vengeance at my Trial; his Name was Jefferies Recorder
of London: He was the Man that sat in the Judgment Seat, and gave Sentance
against me; He used several Scurrilous, and Disdainful Expressions, in the
Sentance he gave upon me.

19. He was a Man, whose Voice was very loved, but he is one of the worst of
Devils in Nature, for he is not only an Enemy to God, and all Righteous Men,
but an Enemy to all Moral Justice and Equity.

20. For if a Man's Cause be never so just, except he be Employed in it, he will
be sure to baffel and make quabbles, and wrangle out the justest Cause that is,
and will make that which is unjust it self to be right by Law, were it not for
more juster Judges that have a more just Conscience then he has, else the
Innocent would always loose his just right, if he be against him.

23. But that which I have against him is for his Blasphemy against the Holy
Spirit that sent me, and his wicked Malice and Envy against me, when he sat in
Judgment against me; That he said he was sorry the Laws of England were so
unprovided to Punish Crimes of this Nature, he was sorry the Laws could not
Empower him to give Sentance of Death upon me: This I know was the Desire of
his Heart.

22. And as he was sorry the Laws of England were so unprovided to Punish me,
so in like manner, am I glad that the Laws of Heaven is always provided to
Punish him with Eternal Torments, which is a Living Death, and a Dying Life, it
is well for me, and all the Elect, that Gods Laws are always provided to give
Sentance of Eternal Damnation upon all such dispising persecuting Blaspheming
Devils as this Jefferies.

23. I knew he was a Reprobate and appointed of God to be Damned before: But
this Trial of mine has given Testimony to me and all that truly believe me,
that he is an absolute Devil in Flesh, and his Sin does cry to Heaven for
Vengeance.

24. And look what measure he would have measured unto me, in that he would
have slain my Innocent Blood unto Death, the same measure shall be measured to
him again, because the Laws of Heaven are always provided, and has Empowered
me to give Sentance, and Judgment upon him, for I know, by Revelation of the
Spirit of God, that he is Recorded in the Tables of Heaven for a Reprobate
Devil, and he shall be Recorded here on Earth to the end of the World for a
Damned Devil.

25. For that Body of his, which is now his Heaven, which Clothed it self in
Scarlet, and sat on the Judgment Seat against me, shall be in Hell. And that
lofty bauling Spirit of his shall be his Devil, the one shall be as Fire, and
the other as Brimstone, Burning together to all Eternity.

26. And he shall remember in the Resurrection, when he is Raised again, that
he gave Judgment upon me for Writing this Sentance to others, and I am sure the
God of Heaven will not deliver him from those Eternal Torments.

27. There is a Necessity, that these Men of all others, should be Damned to
Eternity? For there was more Enemies against me then could be Numbered through
the Occasion of these Five Men aforementioned.

28. And I could freely forgive the rude Multitude, for they knew not what they
did, but there is no forgiveness of these Five Men, nor Jury, nor Judge, nor
Officers, that gave their consent to that Judgment that was passed upon me the
27th of January 1676.

29. Therefore I have left these Five Men upon Record, that the Age to come,
may see the wickedness of them; and take heed how they Persecute Innocent Men,
that does not break any Temporal Law? And especially such Men that has a
Commission from God to give Sentance of Eternal Damnation upon them, least they
come under the same Condemnation as these Men are under.

30. This I have left upon Record for the Age to come, after my Death, some of
the most Remarkable Sufferings which I have passed through in the Year 1676.

CHAP. VI. Of the Prophets deliverance out of Prison; of the Price and Vallue
that was made of him: The Rewards to the two Seeds at the last Day.
1. NOW having given an Account of my Sufferings, it will be necessary to give
an Account of my deliverance out of those Troubles.

2. While I was in the Press-yard, Prisoner, the Sheriffs did send several
times by the Goal keepers to see what I would do about the Fine, but they were
at no certainty, what they required: At last the Clerk of Newgate said, they
would take the 5th Part, which was one Hundred Pound.

3. I was unwilling to give so much, I let it alone a quarter of a Year longer,
for some Reasons I had in my self, after that time I sent a Letter to Treat
with them about the Fine: The Sheriffs Names was one Sr. John Peak, Sheriff of
London, the other was Sr. Thomas Stamp, Sheriff of Middlesex.

4. But they were very high, and would not abate one Shilling of one Hundred
Pound, and the cause why, was because some of the Goal Keepers, had Proffered
one Hundred Pound for me, to keep a Prisoner for ever, or else to have a large
Sum of Money for my Ransom.

5. I perceive, had not the Shreiffs Honor layn at the stake, I had been
Bought and Sold as Joseph was in Egypt for a Prisoner during Life, or till such
Ransom was Paid: It would have been a great Disparragment to the Sheriffs, if
they had Sold me, such as was never done in England before.

6. But they having an Eye to Credit, and somewhat to Conscience, they would
not do such Wickedness; but however it caused them to abate nothing of one
Hundred Pound neither would they give any time, but Pay down presently.

7. So We Borrowed an Hundred Pound the next Day, and gave to them, upon the
19th Day of July 1677, and the same Day at Night I was Released out of Prison,
and many of the Believers do keep that Day as a Feast Day every Year, in
Remembrance of my Deliverance out of Prison.

8. For I was Prized at a goodly Price, far Higher than the Lord of Life, when
he was on Earth: He was valued at but Thirty Pieces of Silver, the Thirty
Pieces of Silver was Thirty Pound, but they valued me at a Hundred Pieces of
Silver, for the Thirty Pieces of Silver they valued Christ at, must be so much,
else it would not have Bought the Potters Field.

9. Now the cause why they valued me at such a High Price above my Lord and
Master, it was because they knew I had some Interest in this World: And many
followers of me, therefore they valued me at such a High Price as 100 Pieces of
Silver.

10. And as the Thirty Pieces of Silver was the Price of Innocent Blood,
therefore not fit to be put into the Treasury, to be Expended upon any Holy
use, or to Relieve the Poor and the like; but to Buy a Potters Field to Bury
the Stinking Carcasses of strangers, Thieves, and Murderers, insomuch that the
Thirty Pieces of Silver was bestowed on the basest way, suitable to the
Purchase; being the Price of Innocent Blood.

11. So likewise the Hundred Pieces of Silver they valued me at, it was the
Price of Innocent Blood also, though not unto Death, as our Lord was a very
Goodly Price.

12. And this Money will not be put into the Treasury, to repair Churches, or
Relieve the Poor, but will be spent basely in Lust and Drunkenness, and in
Volumptiousness suitable to the Purchase of it, being the Price of Innocent
Blood.

13. Thus I have left upon Record, the substance of the whole matter, as short
as I can, both of my Sufferings and my Deliverance out of all those Troubles
that has happened upon me in the Year 1675, and in the Year 1676, and 1677,
and in the Year of my Life 67.

14. This is the 5th part of the Acts of John Reeve and Lodowich Muggleton, the
two last Prophets, and Witnesses of the Spirit, from the Year 1651 to the Year
1677 I have been preserved, and had Experience of the Truth of all these things.

15. And wonderful Revelations, and passages, and Acts, that are Written in
these Five Parts, that I might leave it as a Legacy for the Age to come upon
Record, that the unbelieving World may be convinced when I am turned to Dust,
as my Father Adam is, that I was Slandered, Reproached, Belyed, Persecuted,
Imprisoned, and Pilloried, without a Cause.

16. But I shall be raised again, by the Power of that God, the Lord Jesus
Christ, in whom I Believed, that he was Dead, even the Alpha, and Omega, and is
Alive for Evermore.

17. And it will not seem a quarter of an Hours time to me from my Death, to my
Rising again: For there is no time to the Dead: Time belongs to the Living.

18. And this I know, that as the 12 Apostles in the Resurrection, shall Sit
upon Thrones and Judge the 12 Tribes of Israel; those that Believed them when
they were upon the Earth. They were Judged with an Eternal Blessing of Life
Eternal, and those that Despised, and Persecuted them when on Earth, are Judged
by them to be Cursed and Damned to Eternity, which is a Second Death which is
Eternal.

19. So shall Reeve and Muggleton in the Resurrection Sit upon Thrones, and
Judge all True Believers of our Docterin and Commission of the Spirit, when we
were upon Earth, to be Blessed both in Souls and Bodies, that were Mortal when
they believed us, but now Immortal to Eternity.

20. And we shall Judge all those Wicked Despisers and Persecutors of us when
we were upon Earth with the same Judgment in the Resurrection, as we did here
on Earth.

21. That is, they are Cursed in that Soul and Body they shall have in the
Resurrection to Eternity; and shall remain in utter Darkness here upon this
Earth: Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth for Evermore.

Written by Lodowick Muggleton, one of the two last Witnesses and Prophets of
the Spirit, unto the High and Mighty God, the Man Christ Jesus in Glory.

FINIS.

