ENGLAND's TREASURE BY Foreign Trade. OR, The Balance of our Foreign Trade
IS The Rule of our Treasure.

Written by THOMAS MUN of Land. Merchant, And now published for the Common good
by his Son JOHN MUN of Bearsted in the County of Kent, Esquire.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Thomas Clark, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the South entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1664.

To the Right Honorable, THOMAS EARL OF SOUTH-HAMPTON, Lord High Treasurer of
England, Lord Warden of the New Forest, Knight of the most Noble Order of the
Garter, and one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
MY LORD,
I Present this ensuing Treatise to your Lordship as its proper Patron, to
whom, by virtue of your great Trust (the greatest, doubtless, in this Kingdom)
the management of his Majesty's Treasure, and improvement of his Revenue, are
most peculiarly committed.

The title of it ( Englands Treasure by Foreign Trade) alone berpeaks your
notice, the Argument, (being of so public a nature) may invite your perusal
but the Tract it self will, I hope, deserve your Lordships Protection. It was
left me in the nature of a Legacy by my Father, for whose sake I cannot but
value it as one of my best Movables, and as such I dedicate it to your
Lordship.

He was in his time famous amongst Merchants, and well known to most men of
business, for his general Experience in Affairs, and notable Insight into
Trade; neither was he less observed for his Integrity to his Prince, and Zeal
to the Commonwealth: the serious Discourses of such men are commonly not
unprofitable.

To your Lordships judgment I submit this Treatise, and my presumption herein
to your Pardon.

My Lord, Your most faithful and obedient Servant, JOHN MUN.

White Hall, March 24. 1663/4.
Let this Discourse of Trade be Printed.

HENRY BENNET.

THE ARGUMENTS.
CHAP. I. The knowledge and qualities, which are required to be in a perfect
Merchant of foreign trade. page 2 CHAP. II. The general rule whereby this
kingdom is enriched, and our Treasure augmented. page 11 CHAP. III. The
particular ways and means to increase the exportation of our commodities, and
to decrease our consumption f foreign wares. page 15 CHAP IV. The Exportation
of our Moneys in Trade of Merchandise, is a means to increase our Treasure.
page 34 CHAP. V. Foreign Trade is the only means to improve the price of our
Lands. page 51 CHAP. VI. The Spanish treasure cannot be kept from other
Kingdoms; by any prohibition made in Spain. page 56 CHAP. VII. The Diversity of
gain by foreign Trade. page 64 CHAP. VIII. The enhancing or debasing our
moneys cannot enrich the Kingdom with treasure, nor hinder the exportation
thereof. page 70 CHAP. IX. Atollration for foreign Coins to pass current here
at higher rates than their value with our Standard, will not increase our
treasure. page 79 CHAP. X. The observation of the Statute of Employments to be
made by Strangers cannot increase nor yet preserve our treasure. page 82 CHAP.
XI. It will not increase our treasure to enjoin the Merchant that exporteth
Fish, Corn, or munition, to return all or part of the value in money. page 90
CHAP. XII. The undervaluation of our money which is delivered or received by
bills of Exchange here or beyond the Seas cannot decrease our trea^ure. page 94
CHAP. XIII. The Merchant who is a mere Exchanger of money by bills, cannot
increase or decrease our treasure. page 105 CHAP. XIV. The admirable feats
supposed to be done by Bankers, and the Merchants Exchange. page 108 CHAP. XV.
Of some Excesses and Evils in the Commonwealth, which notwithstanding decay not
our trade, nor treasure. page 142 CHAP. XVI. How the Revenues and In-comes of
Princes may justly be raised. page 150 CHAP. XVII. Whether it be necessary for
great Princes to lay up store of treasure. page 161 CHAP. XVIII. How much
treasure a Prince may conveniently lay up yearly. page 167 CHAP. XIX. Of some
different effects which proceed from natural and artificial wealth. page 175
CHAP. XX. The order and means whereby we may draw up the balance of our
foreign trade, which is the rule of our treasure. page 192 CHAP. XXI. The
conclusion upon all that has been said concerning the Exportation, or
Importation of treasure. page 217
ENGLAND'S TREASURE BY FOREIGN TRADE. OR, The Balance of our Foreign Trade
is the Rule of our Treasure.
MY Son, In a former Discourse I have endeavored after my manner briefly to
teach thee two things: The first is Piety, how to fear God aright, according to
his Works and Word: The second is Policy, how to love and serve thy Country, by
instructing thee in the duties and proceedings of sundry Vocations, which
either order, or else act the affairs of the Commonwealth; In which as some
things do especially tend to Preserve, and others are more apt to Enlarge the
same: So am I now to speak of Money, which does indifferently serve to both
those happy ends. Wherein I will observe this order, First, to show the general
means whereby a Kingdom may be enriched; and then proceed to those particular
courses by which Princes are accustomed to be supplied with Treasure. But first
of all I will say something of the Merchant, because he must be a Principal
Agent in this great business.

CHAP. I. The Qualities which are required in a perfect Merchant of Foreign
Trade.
THe love and service of our Country consists not so much in the knowledge of
those duties which are to be performed by others, as in the skilful practice of
that which is done by our selves; and therefore (my Son) As it is very
commendable to know what is to be done by others in their places: So it were a
great shame to be ignorant in the duties of our own Vocations.
it is now fit that I say something of the Merchant, which I hope in due time
shall be thy Vocation: Yet herein are my thoughts free from all Ambition,
although I rank thee in a place of so high estimation; for the Merchant is
worthily called The Steward of the Kingdoms Stock, by way of Commerce with
other Nations; a work of no less Reputation than Trust, which ought to be
performed with great skill and conscience, that so the private gain may ever
accompany the public good. And because the nobleness of this Profession may
the better stir up thy desires and endeavors to obtain those abilities which
may effect it worthily, I will briefly set down the excellent qualities which
are required in a perfect Merchant.

1. He ought to be a good Penman, a good Arithmetician, and a good Accomptant,
by that noble order of Debtor and Creditor, which is used only amongst
Merchants; also to be expert in the order and form of Charter-parties, Bills of
Lading, Invoyces, Contracts, Bills of Exchange, and Policies os Ensurance.

2. He ought to know the Measures, Weights, and Moneys of all foreign
Countries, especially where we have Trade, and the Moneys not only by their
several denominations, but also by their intrinsique values in weight and
fineness, compared with the Standard of this Kingdom, without which he cannot
well direct his affairs.

3. He ought to know the Customs, Tolls, Taxes, Impositions, Conducts and other
charges upon all manner of Merchandise exported or imported to and from the
said Foreign Countries.

4. He ought to know in what several commodities each Country abounds, and what
be the wares which they want, and how and from whence they are furnished with
the same.

5. He ought to understand, and to be a diligent observer of the rates of
Exchanges by Bills, from one State to another, whereby he may the better direct
his affairs, and remit over and receive home his Moneys to the most advantage
possible.

6. He ought to know what goods are prohibited to be exported or imported in
the said foreign Countries, lest otherwise he should incur great danger and
loss in the ordering of his affairs.

7. He ought to know upon what rates and conditions to freight his Ships, and
ensure his adventures from one Country to another, and to be well acquainted
with the laws, orders and customs of the Ensurance office both here and beyond
the Seas, in the many accidents which may happen upon the damage or loss of
Ships or goods, or both these.

8. He ought to have knowledge in the goodness and in the prices of all the
several materials which are required for the building and repairing of Ships,
and the diverse workmanships of the same, as also for the Masts, Tackling,
Cordage, Ordnance, Victuals, Munition and Provisions of many kinds; together
with the ordinary wages of Commanders, Officers and Mariners, all which concern
the Merchant as he is an Owner of Ships.

9. He ought (by the diverse occasions which happen sometime in the buying and
selling of one commodity and sometimes in another) to have indifferent if not
perfect knowledge in all manner of Merchandise or wares, which is to be as it
were a man of all occupations and trades.

10. He ought by his voyaging on the Seas to become skilful in the Art of
Navigation.

11. He ought as he is a Traveller, and sometimes abiding in foreign Countries
to attain to the speaking of diverse Languages, and to be a diligent observer of
the ordinary Revenues and expenses of foreign Princes, together with their
strength both by Sea and Land, their laws, customs, policies, manners,
religions, arts, and the like; to be able to give account thereof in all
occasions for the good of his Country.

12. Lastly, although there be no necessity that such a Merchant should be a
great Scholar; yet is it (at least) required, that in his youth he learn the
Latin tongue, which will the better enable him in all the rest of his
endeavors.

Thus have I briefly showed thee a pattern for thy diligence, the Merchant in
his qualities; which in truth are such and so many, that I find no other
profession which leads into more worldly knowledge. And it cannot be denied
but that their sufficiency does appear likewise in the excellent government of
State at Venice, Luca, Genoua, Florence, the low Countries, and diverse other
places of Christendom. And in those States also where they are least esteemed,
yet is their skill and knowledge often used by those who sit in the highest
places of Authority: It is therefore an act beyond rashness in some, who do
dis-enable their Counsel and judgment (even in books printed) making them
incapable of those ways and means which do either enrich or empoverish a
Commonwealth, when in truth this is only effected by the mystery of their
trade, as I shall plainly show in that which follows. It is true indeed that
many Merchants here in England finding less encouragement given to their
profession than in other Countries, and seeing themselves not so well esteemed
as their Noble Vocation requires, and according to the great consequence of
the same, do not therefore labor to attain unto the excellency of their
profession, neither is it practiced by the Nobility of this Kingdom as it is in
other States from the Father to the Son throughout their generations, to the
great increase of their wealth, and maintenance of their names and families:
Whereas There is more honor and profit in an Industrious life, than in a great
Inheritance which wastes for want of virtue.
the memory of our richest Merchants is suddenly extinguished; the Son being
left rich, scorneth the profession of his Father, conceiving more honor to be a
Gentleman (although but in name) to consume his estate in dark ignorance and
excess, than to follow the steps of his Father as an Industrious Merchant to
maintain and advance his Fortunes.

But now leaving the Merchants praise we will come to his practice, or at least
to so much thereof as concerns the bringing of Treasure into the Kingdom.

CHAP. II The means to enrich this Kingdom, and to increase our Treasure.
ALthough a Kingdom may be enriched by gifts received, or by purchase taken
from some other Nations, yet these are things uncertain and of small
consideration when they happen. The ordinary means therefore to increase our
wealth and treasure is by Foreign Trade, wherein we Foreign Trade is the
rule of our Treasure.
must ever observe this rule; to sell more to strangers yearly than we consume
of theirs in value. For suppose that when this Kingdom is plentifully served
with the Cloth, Lead, Tinn, Iron, Fish and other native commodities, we do
yearly export the overplus to foreign Countries to the value of twenty two
hundred thousand pounds; by which means we are enabled beyond the Seas to buy
and bring in foreign wares for our use and Consumptions, to the value of
twenty hundred thousand pounds; By this order duly kept in our trading, we may
rest assured that the Kingdom shall be enriched yearly two hundred thousand
pounds, which must be brought to us in so much Treasure; because that part of
our stock which is not returned to us in wares must necessarily be brought home
in treasure.

For in this case it comes to pass in the stock of a Kingdom, as in the estate
of a private man; who is supposed to have one thousand pounds yearly revenue
and two thousand pounds of ready money in his Chest: If such a man through
excess shall spend one thousand five hundred pounds per annum, all his ready
money will be gone in four years; and in the like time his said money will be
doubled if he take a Frugal course to spend but five hundred pounds per annum;
which rule never fails likewise in the Commonwealth, but in some cases (of no
great moment) which I will hereafter declare, when I shall show by whom and in
what manner this balance of the Kingdoms account ought to be drawn up yearly,
or so often as it shall please the State to discover how much we gain or lose
by trade with foreign Nations. But first I will say something concerning those
ways and means which will increase our exportations and diminish our
importations of wares; which being done, I will then set down some other
arguments both affirmative and negative to strengthen that which is here
declared, and thereby to show that all the other means which are commonly
supposed to enrich the Kingdom with Treasure are altogether insufficient and
mere fallacies.

CHAP. III. The particular ways and means to increase the exportation of our
commodities, and to decrease our Consumption of foreign wares.
THe revenue or stock of a Kingdom by which it is provided of foreign wares is
either Natural or Artificial. The Natural wealth is so much only as can be
spared from our own use and necessities to be exported unto strangers. The
Artificial consists in our manufactures and industrious trading with foreign
commodities, concerning which I will set down such particulars as may serve for
the cause we have in hand.

1. First, although this Realm be already exceeding rich by nature yet might it
be much increased by laying the waste grounds (which are infinite) into such
employments as should no way hinder the present revenues of other manured
lands, but hereby to supply our selves and prevent the importations of Hemp,
Flax, Cordage, Tobacco, and diverse other things which now we fetch from
strangers to our great impoverishing.

2. We may likewise diminish our importations, if we would soberly refrain from
excessive consumption of foreign wares in our diet and raiment, with such
often change of fashions as is used, so much the more to increase the waste and
charge; which vices at this present are more notorious amongst us than in
former ages. Yet might they easily be amended by enforcing the observation of
such good laws as are strictly practiced in other Countries against the said
excesses; where likewise by commanding their own manufactures to be used, they
prevent the coming in of others, without prohibition, or offense to strangers
in their mutual commerce.

3. In our exportations we must not only regard our own superfluities, but also
we must consider our neighbors necessities, that so upon the wares which they
cannot want, nor yet be furnished thereof elsewhere, we may (besides the vent
of the Materials) gain so much of the manufacture as we can, and also endeavor
to sell them dear, so far forth as the high price cause not a less vent in the
quantity. But the superfluity of our commodities which strangers use, and may
also have the same from other Nations, or may abate their vent by the use of
some such like wares from other places, and with little inconvenience; we must
in this case strive to sell as cheap as possible we can, rather than to lose
the utterance of such wares. For we have found of late years by good
experience, that being able to sell our Cloth cheap in Turkey, we have greatly
increased the vent thereof, and the Venetians have lost as much in the
utterance of theirs in those Countries, because it is dearer. And on the other
side a few years past, when by the excessive price of Wools our Cloth was
exceeding dear, we lost at the least half our clothing for foreign parts,
which since is no otherwise (well near) recovered again than by the The State
in some occasions may gain most, when private men by their revenues get least.
great fall of price for Wools and Cloth. We find that twenty five in the
hundred less in the price of these and some other Wares, to the loss of private
men's revenues, may raise above fifty upon the hundred in the quantity vented to
the benefit of the public. For when Cloth is dear, other Nations do
presently practice clothing, and we know they want neither art nor materials to
this performance. But when by cheapness we drive them from this employment, and
so in time obtain our dear price again, then do they also use their former
remedy. So that by these alterations we learn, that it is in vain to expect a
greater revenue of our wares than their condition will afford, but rather it
concerns us to apply our endeavors to the times with care and diligence to
help our selves the best we may, by making our cloth and other manufactures
without deceit, which will increase their estimation and use.

4. The value of our exportations likewise may be much advanced when we perform
it our selves in our own Ships, for then we get only not the price of our wares
as they are worth here, but also the Merchants gains, the charges of ensurance,
and freight to carry them beyond the seas. As for example, if the Italian
Merchants should come hither in their own shipping to fetch our Corn, our red
Herrings or the like, in this case the Kingdom should have ordinarily but 25.
s. for a quarter of Wheat, and 20. s. for a barrel ofred herrings, whereas if
we carry these wares our selves into Italy upon the said rates, it is likely
that we shall obtain fifty shillings for the first, and forty shillings for
the last, which is a great difference in the utterance or vent of the Kingdoms
stock. And although it is true that the commerce ought to be free to strangers
to bring in and carry out at their pleasure, yet nevertheless in many places
the exportation of victuals and munition are either prohibited, or at least
limited to be done only by the people and Shipping of those places where they
abound.

5. The frugal expending likewise of our own natural wealth might advance much
yearly to be exported unto strangers; and if in our raiment we will be
prodigal, yet let this be done with our own materials and manufactures, as
Cloth, Lace, Imbroderies, Cutworks and the like, where the excess of the rich
may be the employment of the poor, whose labors notwithstanding of this kind,
would be more profitable for the Commonwealth, if they were done to the use of
strangers.

6. The Fishing in his Majesty's seas of England, Scotland and Ireland is our
natural wealth, and would cost nothing but labor, which the Dutch bestow
willingly, and thereby draw yearly a very great profit to themselves by serving
many places of Christendom with our Fish, for which they return and supply
their wants both of foreign Wares and Money, besides the multitude of Mariners
and Shipping, which hereby are maintained, whereof a long discourse might be
made to show the particular manage of this important business. Our Fishing
plantation likewise in New England, Virginia, Groenland, the Summer Islands and
the New-fourd-land, are of the like nature, affording much wealth and
employments to maintain a great number of poor, and to increase our decaying
trade.

7. A Staple or Magazin for How some States have been made Rich.
foreign Corn, Indico, Spices, Raw-silks, Cotton wool or any other commodity
whatsoever, to be imported will increase Shipping, Trade, Treasure, and the
Kings customs, by exporting them again where need shall require, which course
of Trading, has been the chief means to raise Venice, Genoa, the
Low Countries, with some others; and for such a purpose England stands most
commodiously, wanting nothing to this performance but our own diligence and
endeavor.

8. Also we ought to esteem and cherish those trades which we have in remote
or far Countries, for besides the increase of Shipping and Mariners thereby,
the wares also sent thither and received from thence are far more profitable
unto the kingdom than by our trades near at hand; As for example; suppose
Pepper to be worth here two Shillings the pound constantly, if then it be
brought from the Dutch at Amsterdam, the Merchant may give there twenty pence
the pound, and gain well by the bargain; but if he fetch this Pepper from the
East Indies, he must not give above three pence the pound at the The traffic
to the East Indies is our most profitable trade in its proportion both for King
and Kingdom.
most, which is a mighty advantage, not only in that part which serves for our
own use, but also for that great quantity which (from hence) we transport
yearly unto diverse other Nations to be sold at a higher price: whereby it is
plain, that we make a far greater stock by gain upon these Indian Commodities,
We get more by the Indian wares than the Indians themselves.
than those Nations do where they grow, and to whom they properly appertain,
being the natural wealth of their Countries. But for the berter understanding
of this particular, we must ever distinguish between the gain of the Kingdom,
and the profit of A distinction between the Kingdoms gain and the Merchants
profit.
the Merchant; for although the Kingdom pays no more for this Pepper than is
before supposed, nor for any other commodity bought in foreign parts more than
the stranger receives from us for the same, yet the Merchant pays not only
that price, but also the freight, ensurance, customs and other charges which
are exceeding great in these long voyages; but yet all these in the Kingdoms
account are but commutations among our selves, and no Privation of the Kingdoms
stock, which being duly considered, together with the support also of our other
trades in our best Shipping to Italy, France, Turkey, the East Countries and
other places, by transporting and venting the wares which, we bring yearly from
the East Indies; It may well stir up our utmost endeavors to maintain and
enlarge this great and noble business, so much importing the Public wealth,
Strength, and Happiness. Neither it there less honor and judgment by growing
rich (in this manner) upon the stock of other Nations, than by an industrious
increase of our own means, especially when this later is advanced by the
benefit of the sormer, as we have found in the East Indies by sale of much of
our Tin, Cloth, Lead and other Commodities, the vent whereof does daily
increase in those Countries which formerly had no use of our wares.

9. It would be very beneficial to export money as well as wares, being done in
trade only, it would increase our Treasure; but of this I write more largely in
the next Chapter to prove it plain-

10. It were policy and profit or the State to suffer manufatures made of
foreign Materials to be exported custome-free, as Velvets and all other
wrought Silks, Fustians, thrown Silks and the like, it would employ very many
poor people, and much increase the value of our stock yearly issued into other
Countries, and it would (for this purpose) cause the more foreign Materials to
be brought in, to the improvement of His Majesty's Customs. I will here
remember a notable increase in our manufacture of winding and twisting only of
foreign raw Silk, which within 35. years to my knowledge did not employ more
than 300 people in the City and suburbs of London, where at this present time
it does set on work above fourteen thousand souls, as upon diligent enquiry
has been credibly reported unto His Majesty Commissioners for Trade. And it
is certain, that if the said foreign Commodities might be exported from hence,
free of custom, this manufacture would yet increase very much, and decrease as
fast in Italy and in the Netherlands. But if any man allege the Dutch proverb,
Live and let others live; I answer, that the Dutchmen notwithstanding their own
Proverb, do not only in these Kingdoms, encroach upon our livings, but also
in other foreign parts of our trade (where they have power) they do hinder and
destroy us in our lawful course of living, hereby taking the bread out of our
mouth, which we shall never prevent by plucking the pot from their nose, as of
late years too many of us do practice to the great hurt and dishonor of this
famous Nation; We ought rather to imitate former times in taking sober and
worthy courses more pleasing to God and suitable to our ancient reputation.

11. It is needful also not to charge the native commodities with too great
customs, lest by indearing them to the strangers use, it hinder their vent.
And especially foreign wares brought in to be transported again should be
favored, for otherwise that manner of trading (so much importing the good of
the Common wealth) cannot prosper nor subsist. But the Consumption of such
foreign wares in the Realm may be the more charged, which will turn to the
profit of the kingdom in the Balance of the Trade, and thereby also enable the
King to lay up the more Treasure out of his yearly incomes, as of this
particular I intend to write more fully in his proper place, where I shall show
how much money a Prince may conveniently lay up without the hurt of his
subjects.

12. Lastly, in all things we must endeavor to make the most we can of our
own, whether it be Natural or Artificial; And forasmuch as the people which
live by the Arts are far more in number than they who are masters of the
fruits, we ought the more carefully to maintain those endeavors of the
multitude, in whom does consist the greatest strength and riches both of King
and Kingdom: for where the people are many, and the arts good, there the
traffic must be great, and the Country rich. The Italians employ a greater
number of people, and get more money by their industry and manufactures of the
raw Silks of the Kingdom of Cicilia, than the King of Spain and his Subjects
have by the revenue of this rich commodity. But what need we fetch the example
so far, when we know that our own natural wares do not yield us so much profit
as our industry? For Iron oar in the Mines is of no great worth, when it is
compared with the employment and advantage it yields being dug, tried,
transported, bought, sold, cast into Ordnance, Muskets, and many other
instruments of war for offense and defense, wrought into Anchors, bolts,
spikes, nails and the like, for the use of Ships, Houses, Carts, Coaches,
Ploughs, and other instruments for Tillage. Compare our Fleece-wools with our
Cloth, which requires shearing, washing, carding, spinning, Weaving, fulling,
dying, dressing and other trimmings, and we shall find these Arts more
profitable than the natural wealth, whereof I might instance other examples,
but I will not be more tedious, for if I would amplify upon this and the other
particulars before written, I might find matter sufficient to make a large
volume, but my desire in all is only to prove what I propound with brevity and
plainness.

CHAP. IV. The Exportation of our Moneys in Trade of Merchandise is a means to
increase our Treasure.
THis Position is so contrary to the common opinion, that it will require many
and strong arguments to prove it before it can be accepted of the Multitude,
who bitterly exclaim when they see any moneys carried out of the Realm;
affirming thereupon that we have absolutely lost so much Treasure, and that
this is an act directly against the long continued laws made and confirmed by
the wisdom of this Kingdom in the High Court of Parliament, and that many
places, nay Spain it self which is the Fountain of Money, forbids the
exportation thereof, some cases only excepted. To all which I might answer,
that Venice, Florence, Genoa, the Low Countries and diverse other places permit
it, their people applaud it, and find great benefit by it; but all this makes a
noise and proves nothing, we must therefore come to those reasons which concern
the business in question.

First, I will take that for granted which no man of judgment will deny, that
we have no other means to get Treasure but by foreign trade, for Mines we
have none which do afford it, and how this money is gotten in the managing of
our said Trade I have already showed, that it is done by making our commodities
which are exported yearly to over balance in value the foreign wares which we
consume; so that it rests only to show how our monyes may be added to our
commodities, and being jointly exported may so much the more increase our
Treasure.

We have already supposed our yearly consumptions of foreign wares to be for
the value of twenty hundred thousand pounds, and our exportations to exceed
that two hundred thousand pounds, which sum we have thereupon affirmed is
brought to us in treasure to balance the account. But now if we add three
hundred thousand pounds more in ready money unto our former exportations in
wares, what profit can we have (will some men say) although by this means we
should bring in so much ready money more than we did before, seeing that we
have carried out the like value.

To this the answer is, that when we have prepared our exportations of wares,
and sent out as much of every thing as we can spare or vent abroad: It is not
Money begets trade and trade increases money.
therefore said that then we should add our money thereunto to fetch in the
more money immediately, but rather first to enlarge our trade by enabling us to
bring in more foreign wares, which being sent out again will in due time much
increase our Treasure.

For although in this manner we do yearly multiply our importations to the
maintenance of more Shipping and Mariners, improvement of His Majesty's Customs
and other benefits: yet our consumption of those foreign wares is no more than
it was before; so that all the said increase of commodities brought in by the
means of our ready money sent out as is before written, does in the end become an
exportation unto us of a far greater value than our said money's were, which is
proved by three several examples following.

1. For I suppose that 100000. l. being sent in our Shipping to the East
Countries, will buy there one hundred thousand quarters of wheat clear aboard
the Ships, which being after brought into England and housed, to export the
same at the best time for vent thereof in Spain or Italy, it cannot yield less
in those parts than two hundred thousand pounds to make the Merchant but a
saver, yet by this reckning we see the Kingdom has doubled that Treasure.

2. Again this profit will be far greater when we trade thus in remote
Countries, as for example, if we send one hundred thousand pounds into the
East Indies to buy Pepper there, and bring it Remote trades are most gainful to
the Commonwealth.
hither, and from hence send it for Italy or Turkey, it must yield seven
hundred thousand pounds at least in those places, in regard of the excessive
charge which the Merchant disburseth in those long voyages in Shipping, Wages,
Victuals, Insurance, Interest, Customs, Imposts, and the like, all which
notwithstanding the King and the Kingdom gets.

3. But where the voyages are short and the wares rich, which therefore will
not employ much Shipping, the profit will be far less. As when another hundred
thousand pounds shall be employed in Turkey in raw Silks, and brought hither to
be after transported from hence into France, the Low Countries, or Germany, the
Merchant shall have good gain, although he sell it there but for one hundred
and fifty thousand pounds: and thus take the voyages altogether in their
Medium, the moneys exported will be returned unto us more than Trebled. But if
any man will yet object, that these returns come to us in wares, and not really
in money as they were issued out,

The answer is (keeping our first ground) that if our consumption of foreign
wares be no more yearly than is already supposed, and that our exportations be
so mightliy increased by this manner of Trading with ready money as is before
declared: It is not then possible but that all the overballance or difference
should return either in money or in such wares as we must export again, which,
as is already plainly showed will be still a greater means to increase our
Treasure.

For it is in the stock of the Kingdom as in the estates of private men, who
having store of wares, do not therefore say that they will not venture out or
trade with their money (for this were ridiculous) but do also turn that into
wares, whereby they multiply their Money, and so by a continual and orderly
change of one into the other grow rich, and when they please turn all their The
Proverb says, He that has ware has money by the year.
estates into Treasure; for they that have Wares cannot want money.

Neither is it said that Money is the Life of Trade, as if it could not subsist
without the same; for we know that there was great trading by way of
commutation or barter when there was little money stirring in the world. The
Italians and some other Nations have such remedies against this want, that it
can neither decay nor hinder their trade, for they transfer bills of debt, and
have Banks both public and private, wherein they do assign their credits from
one to another daily for very great sums with ease and satisfaction by writings
only, whilst in the mean time the Mass of Treasure which gave foundation to
these credits is employed in Foreign Trade as a Merchandise, and by the said
means they have little other use of money in those countries more than for
their ordinary expenses. It is not therefore the keeping of our money in the
Kingdom, but the necessity and use of our wares in foreign Countries, and our
want of their commodities that causes the vent and consumption on all sides,
which makes a quick and ample Trade. If we were once poor, and now having
gained some store of money by trade with resolution to keep it still in the
Realm; shall this cause other Nations to spend more of our commodities than
formerly they have done, whereby we might say that our trade is Quickened and
Enlarged? no verily, it will produce no such good effect: but rather according
to the alteration of times by their true causes we may expect the contrary;
for all men do consent that plenty of money in a Kingdom does make the native
commodities dearer, which as it is to the profit of some private men in their
revenues, so is it directly against the benefit of the Public in the quantity
of the trade; for as plenty of money makes wares dearer, so dear wares decline
their use and consumption, as has been already plainly showed in the last
Chapter upon that particular of our cloth; And although this is a very hard
lesson for some great landed men to learn, yet I am sure it is a true lesson
for all the land to observe, lest when we have gained some store of money by
trade, we lose it again by not trading with our money. I knew a Prince in Italy
(of famous memory) Ferdinando the first, great Duke of Tuscanie, who being very
rich in Treasure, endeavored therewith to enlarge his trade by issuing out to
his Merchants great sums of money for very small profit; I my self had forty
thousand crowns of him gratis for a whole year, although he knew that I would
presently send it away in Specie for the parts of Turkey to be employed in
wares for his Countries, he being well assured that in this course of trade it
would return again (according to the old saying) with a Duck in the mouth. This
noble and industrious Prince by his care and diligence to countenance and
favor Merchants in their affairs, did so increase the practice thereof, that
there is scarce a Nobleman or Gentleman in all his dominions that does not
Merchandise either by himself or in partnership with others, whereby within
these thirty years the trade to his port of Leghorn is so much increased, that
of a poor little town (as I my self knew it) it is now become a fair and strong
City, being one of the most famous places for trade in all Christendom. And yet
it is worthy our observation, that the multitude of Ships and wares which come
thither from England, the Low Countries, and other places, have little or no
means to make their returns from thence but only in ready money, which they may
and do carry away freely at all times, to the incredible advantage of the said
great Duke of Tuscanie and his subjects, who are much enriched by the continual
great concourse of Merchants from all the States of the neighbor Princes,
bringing them plenty of money daily to supply their wants of the said wares. And
thus we see that the current of Merchandise which carries away their Treasure,
becomes a flowing stream to fill them again in a greater measure with money.

There is yet an objection or two as weak as all the rest: that is, if we
trade with our Money we shall issue out the less wares; as if a man should say,
those Countries which heretofore had occasion to consume our Cloth, Lead, Tin,
Iron, Fish, and the like, shall now make use of our moneys in the place of
those necessaries, which were most absurd to affirm, or that the Merchant had
not rather carry out wares by which there is ever some gains expected, than to
export money which is still but the same without any increase.

But on the contrary there are many Countries which may yield us very
profitable trade for our money, which otherwise afford us no trade at all,
because they have no use of our wares, as namely the East Indies for one in the
first beginning thereof, although since by industry in our commerce with those
Nations we have brought them into the use of much of our Lead, Cloth, Tin, and
other things, which is a good addition to the former vent of our commodities.

Again, some men have alleged that those Countries which permit money to be
carried out, do it because they have few or no wares to trade withal: but we
have great store of commodities, and therefore their action ought not to be our
example.

To this the answer is briefly, that if we have such a quantity of wares as
does fully provide us of all things needful from beyond the seas: why should we
then doubt that our monys sent out in trade, must not necessarily come back
again in treasure; together with the great gains which it may procure in such
manner as is before set down? And on the other side, if those Nations which
send out their moneys do it because they have but few wares of their own, how
come they then to have so much Treasure as we ever see in those places which
suffer it freely to be exported at all times and by whomsoever? I answer, Even
by trading with their Moneys; for by what other means can they get it, having
no Mines of Gold or Silver?

Thus may we plainly see, that when this weighty business is duly considered in
his end, as all our humane actions ought well to be weighed, it is found much
contrary to that which most men esteem thereof, because they search no further
than the beginning of the work, which mis-informs their judgments, and leads
Our humane actions ought especially to be constdered in their ends.
them into error: For if we only behold the actions of the husbandman in the
seed-time when he casts away much good corn into the ground, we will rather
account him a mad man than a husbandman: but when we consider his labors in
the harvest which is the end of his endeavors, we find the worth and plentiful
increase of his actions.

CHAP. V. Foreign Trade is the only means to improve the price of our Lands.
IIt is a common saying, that plenty or scarcity of money makes all things dear
or good or cheap; and this money is either gotten or lost in foreign trade by
the over or under ballancing of the same, as I have already showed. It rests
now that I distinguish the seeming plenties of money from that which is only
substantial and able to perform the work: For there are diverse ways and means
whereby to procure plenty of money into a Kingdom, which do not enrich but
rather empoverish the same by the several inconveniences which ever accompany
such alterations.

As first, if we melt down our plate into Coin (which suits not with the
Majesty of so great a Kingdom, except in cases of great extremity) it would
cause Plenty of money for a time, yet should we be nothing the richer, but
rather this treasure being thus altered is made the more apt to be carried out
of the Kingdom, if we exceed our means by excess in foreign wares, or maintain
a war by Sea or Land, where we do not feed and cloth the Soldier and supply
the armies with our own native provisions, by which disorders our treasure will
soon be exhausted.

Again, if we think to bring in store of money by suffering foreign Coins to
pass current at higher rates than their intrinsic value compared with our
Standard, or by debasing or by enhancing our own moneys, all these have their
several inconveniences and difficulties, (which hereafter I will declare) but
admitting that by this means plenty of money might be brought into the Realm,
yet should we be nothing the richer, neither can such treasure so gotten long
remain with us. For if the stranger or the English Merchants bring in this
money, it must be done upon a valuable consideration, either for wares carried
out already, or after to be exported, which helps us nothing except the evil
occasions of excess or war aforenamed be removed which do exhaust our treasure:
for otherwise, what one man brings for gain, another man shall be forced to
carry out for necessity; because there shall ever be a necessity to balance
our Accounts with strangers, although it should be done with loss upon the rate
of the money, and Confiscation also if it be intercepted by the Law.

The conclusion of this business How we must get Treasure to make it our own.
is briefly thus. That as the treasure which is brought into the Realm by the
balance of our foreign trade is that money which only does abide with us,
and by which we are enriched: so by this plenty of money thus gotten (and no
otherwise) do our Lands improve. For when the Merchant has a good dispatch
beyond the Seas for his Cloth and other wares, he does presently return to buy
up the greater quantity, which raises the price of our Woolls and other
commodities, and consequently does improve the Landlords Rents as the Leases
expire daily: And also by this means money being gained, and brought more
abundantly into the Kingdom, it does enable many men to buy Lands, which will
make them the dearer. But if our foreign trade come to a stop or declination
by neglect at home or injuries abroad, whereby the Merchants are impoverished,
and thereby the wares of the Realm less issued, then do all the said benefits
cease, and our Lands fall of price daily.

CHAP. VI. The Spanish Treasure cannot be kept from other Kingdoms by any
prohibition made in Spain.
ALL the Mines of Gold and Silver which are as yet discovered in the sundry
places of the world, are not of so great value as those of the West Indies
which are in the possession of the King of Spain: who thereby is enabled not
only to keep in subjection many goodly States and Provinces in Italy and
elsewhere, (which otherwise would soon fall from his obeisance) but also by a
continual war taking his advantages does still enlarge his Dominions,
ambitiously aiming at a Monarchy by the power of his Moneys, which are the very
sinews of his strength, that lies so far dispersed into so many Countries, yet
hereby united, and his wants supplied both for war and peace in a plentiful
manner from all the parts of Christendom, which are therefore partakers of his
treasure by a Necessity of Commerce; wherein the Spanish policy has ever
endeavored to prevent all other Nations the most it could: For finding Spain
to be too poor and barren to supply it self and the West Indies with The
policy and benefit of Spain by the trade to the East Indies.
those varieties of foreign wares whereof they stand in need, they knew well
that when their Native Commodities come short to this purpose, their Moneys
must serve to make up the reckoning; whereupon they found an incredible
advantage to add the traffic of the East Indies to the treasure of the West:
for the last of these being employed in the first, they stored themselves
infinitely with rich wares to barter with all the parts of Christendom for
their Commodities, and so furnishing their own necessities, prevented others
for carrying away their moneys: which in point of state they hold less
dangerous to impart to the remote Indians, than to their neighbor Princes,
lest it should too much enable them to resist (if not offend) their enemies.
And this Spanish policy against others is the more remarkable, being done
likewise so much to their own advantage; for every Ryal of Eight which they
sent to the East Indies brought home so much wares as saved them the disbursing
of five Ryals of Eight here in Europe (at the least) to their Neighbors,
especially in those times when that trade was only in their hands: but now this
great profit is failed, and the mischief removed by the English, Dutch, and
others which partake in those East India trades as ample as the Spanish
Subjects.

It is further to be considered, that besides the disability of the Spaniards
by their native commodities to provide foreign wares for their necessities,
(whereby they are forced to supply the want with money) they have likewise that
canker of war, which does infinitely exhaust their treasure, and disperse it
into Christendom even to their enemies, part by reprisal, but especially
through a necessary maintenance of those armies which are composed of
strangers, and lie so far remote, that they cannot feed, clothe, or otherwise
provide them out of their own native means and provisions, but must receive
this relief from other Nations: which The effects of different wars concerning
Treasure.
kind of war is far different to that which a Prince makes upon his own
confines, or in his Navies by Sea, where the Soldier receiving money for his
wages, must every day deliver it out again for his necessities, whereby the
treasure remains still in the Kingdom, although it be exhausted from the King:
But we see that the Spaniard (trusting in the power of his Treasure) undertakes
wars in Germany, and in other remote places, which would soon beggar the
richest Kingdom in Christendom of all their money; the want whereof would
presently disorder and bring the armies to confufion, as it falls out
sometimes with Spain it self, who have the Fountain of money, when either it is
stopped in the passage by the force of their enemies, or drawn out faster than it
flows by their own occasions; whereby also we often see that Gold and silver is
so scant in Spain, that they are forced to use base copper money, to the great
confusion of their Trade, and not without the undoing also of many of their own
people.

But now that we have seen the occasions by which the Spanish treasure is
dispersed into so many places of the world, let us likewise discover how and in
what proportion each Country does enjoy these Moneys, for we find that Turkey
and diverse other Nations have great plenty thereof, although they drive no
trade with Spain, which seems to contradict the former reason, where we say
that this treasure is obtained by a Necessity of Commerce. But to clear this
point, we must know that all Nations (who have no Mines of their own) are
enriched with Gold and Silver by one and the same means, which is already
showed to be the balance of their foreign Trade: And this is not strictly
tied to be done in those Countries where the fountain of treasure is, but
rather with such order and observations as are prescribed. For suppose England
by trade with Spain may gain and bring home five hundred thou-Ryals of 8.
yearly, if we lose as much by our trade in Turkey, and therefore carry the money
thither, it is not then the English but the Turks which have got this treasure,
although they have no trade with Spain from whence it was first brought. Again,
if England having thus lost with Turkey, do notwithstanding gain twice as much
by France, Italy, and other members of her general trade, then will there
remain five hundred thousand Ryals of eight clear gains by the balance of this
trade: and this comparison holds between all other Nations, both for the manner
of getting, and the proportion that is yearly gotten.

But if yet a question should be made, whether all Nations get treasure and
Spain only lose it? I answer no; for some Countries by war or by excess do lose
that which they had gotten, as well as Spain by war and want of wares does lose
that which was its own.

CHAP. VII. The diversity of gain by Foreign Trade.
IN the course of foreign trade there are three sorts of gain, the first is
that of the Commonwealth, which may be done when the Merchant (who is the
principal Agent therein) shall lose. The second is the gain of the Merchant,
which he does sometimes justly and worthily effect, although the Commonwealth
be a loser. The third is the gain of the King, whereof he is ever certain, even
when the Commonwealth and the Merchant shall be both losers.

Concerning the first of these, we have already sufficiently showed the ways
and means whereby a Commonwealth may be enriched in the course of trade,
whereof it is needless here to make any repetition, only I do in this place
affirm, that such happiness may be in the Commonwealth, when the Merchant in
his particular shall have no occasion to rejoice. As for example, suppose the
East India Company send out one hundred thousand pounds into the East Indies,
and receive home for the same the full value of three hundred thousand pounds;
Hereby it is evident that this part of the Commonwealth is trebled, and yet I
may boldly say that which I can well prove, that the said Company of Merchants
shall lose at least fifty thousand pounds by such an adventure if the returns
be made in Spice, Indico, Callicoes, Benjamin, refined Saltpeter, and such
other bulkey wares in their several proportions according to their vent and use
in these parts of Europe. For the freight of Shipping, the ensurance of the
adventure, the charges of Factors abroad and Officers at home, the forbearance
of the Stock, His Majesty's Customs and Imposts, with other petty charges
incident, cannot be less then two hundred and fifty thousand pounds, which
being added to the principal produces the said loss. And thus we see, that not
only the Kingdom but also the King by his Customs and Imposts may get
notoriously, even when the Merchant notwithstanding shall lose grievously;
which gives us good occasion here to consider, how much more the Realm is
enriched by this noble Trade, when all things pass so happily that the Merchant
is a gainer also with the King and Kingdom.

In the next place I affirm, that a Merchant by his laudable endeavors may
both carry out and bring in wares to his advantage by selling them and buying
them to good profit, which is the end of his labors; when nevertheless the
Commonwealth shall decline and grow poor by a disorder in the people, when
through Pride and other Excesses they do consume more foreign wares in value
then the wealth of the Kingdom can satisfy and pay by the exportation of our
own commodities, which is the very quality of an unthrift who spends beyond his
means.

Lastly, the King is ever sure to get by trade, when both the Commonwealth and
Merchant shall lose severally as afore-written, or jointly, as it may and does
sometimes happen, when at one and the same time our Commodities are
over-ballanced by foreign wares consumed, and that the Merchants success prove
no better than is before declared.

But here we must not take the Kings gain in this large sense, for so we might
say that His Majesty should get, although half the trade of the Kingdom were
lost; we will rather suppose that whereas the whole trade of the Realm for
Exportations and Importations is now found for to be about the yearly value of
four millions and a half of pounds; it may be yet increased two hundred
thousand pounds per annum more by the importation and consumption of foreign
wares. By this means we know that the King shall be a gainer near twenty
thousand pounds, but the Commonwealth shall lose the whole two hundred thousand
pounds thus spent in excess. And the Merchant may be a loser also when the
trade shall in this manner be increased to the profit of the King; who
notwithstanding shall be sure in the end to have the greatest loss, if he
prevent not such unthrifty courses as do impoverish his Subjects.

CHAP. VIII. The enhansing or debasing our Moneys cannot enrich the Kingdom
with treasure, nor hinder the exportation thereof.
THere are three ways by which the Moneys of a Kingdom are commonly altered.
The first is when the Coins in their several Denominations are made current at
more or less pounds, shillings or pence than formerly. The second is when the
said Coins are altered in their weight, and yet continue current at the former
rates. The third is when the Standard is either debased or enriched in the
fineness of the Gold and Silver, yet the Moneys continue in their former values.

In all occasions of want or plenty of Money in the Kingdom we do ever find
diverse men, who using their wits for a remedy to supply the first and preserve
the last, they fall presently upon altering the moneys; for, say they, the
raising of the Coins in value will cause it to be brought into the Realm from
diverse places in hope of the gain: and the debasing of the moneys in the
fineness or weight will keep it here for fear of the loss. But these men
pleasing themselves with the beginning only of this weighty business, consider
not the progress and end thereof, whereunto we ought especially to direct our
thoughts and endeavoues.

For we must know, that money Money is the measure of our other means.
is not only the true measure of all our other means in the Kingdom, but also
of our foreign commerce with strangers, which therefore ought to be kept just
and constant to avoid those confusions which ever accompany such alterations.
For first at home, if the common measure be changed, our Lands, Leases, wares,
both foreign and domestique must alter in proportion: and although this is not
done without much trouble and damage also to some men, yet in short time this
must necessarily come to pass; for that is not the denomination of our pounds
shillings and pence, which is respected, but the intrinsique value of our
Coins; unto which we have little reason to add any further estimation or worth,
if it lay in our power to do it, for this would be a special service to Spain,
A notable service for Spain.
and an act against our selves to indear the commodity of another Prince.
Neither can these courses which so much hurt the Subjects, any way help the
King as some men have imagined: for although the debasing or lightning of all
our money should bring a present benefit (for once only) to the Mint, yet all
this and more would soon be lost again in the future great In-comes of His
Majesty, when by this means they must be paid yearly with money of less
intrinsique value then formerly; Nor can it be said that the whole loss of the
Kingdom would be the profit of the King, they differ infinitely: for all men's
estates (be it leases, lands, debts, wares or money) must suffer in their
proportions, whereas His Majesty should have the gain only upon so much ready
money as might be new Coined, which in comparison, would prove a very small
matter: for although they who have other estates in money are said to be a great
number, and to be worth All the ready money in this Kingdom is esteemed at
little more then one million of pounds
five or ten thousand l. per man, more or less, which amounts to many millions
in all, yet are they not possessed thereof all together or at once, for it were
vanity and against their profit to keep continually in their hands above forty
or fifty pounds in a family to defray necessary charges, the rest must ever run
from man to man in traffic for their benefit, whereby we may conceive that a
little money (being made the measure of all our other means) does rule and
distribute great matters daily to all men in their just proportions: And we
must know likewise that much of our old money is worn light, and therefore would
yield little or no profit at the Mint, and the gain upon the heavy, would cause
our vigilant neighbors to carry over a great part thereof, and return it
presently in pieces of the new stamp; nor do we doubt that some of our own
Countrymen would turn Coiners and venture a hanging for this profit, so that His
Majesty in the end should get little by such alterations.

Yea but say some men, If His Majesty raise the money, great store of treasure
would also be brought into the Mint from foreign parts, for we have seen by
experience that the late raising of our Gold ten in the hundred, did bring in
great store thereof, more than we were accustomed to have in the Kingdom, the
which as I cannot deny, so do I likewise affirm, that this Gold carried away
all or the most part of our Silver, (which was not over-worn or too light) as
we may easily perceive by the present use of our Moneys in their respective
qualities: and the reason of this change is, because our Silver was not raised
in proportion with our Gold, which still gives advantage to the Merchant to
bring in the Kingdoms yearly gain by trade in Gold rather than in Silver.

Secondly, if we be inconstant in our Coins, and thereby violate the Laws of
foreign Commerce; other Princes are vigilant in these cases to alter presently
in proportion with us, and then where is our hope? of if they do not alter,
what can we hope for? For if the stranger-merchant bring in his wares, and find
that our moneys are raised, shall not he likewise keep his Commodities until
he may sell them dearer? and shall not the price of the Merchants exchange with
foreign Countries rise in proportion with our Moneys? All which being
undoubtedly true, why may not our Moneys be carried out of the Kingdom as well
and to as much profit after the raising thereof, as before the alteration?

But peradventure some men will yet say, that if our Moneys be raised and other
Countries raise not, it will cause more Bullion and foreign Coins to be
brought in than heretofore. If this be done, it must be performed either by the
Merchant who has exported wares, or by the Merchant who intends to buy off our
Commodities: and it is manifest that neither of these can have more advantage
or benefit by this Art now, than they might have had before the alteration of
the Money. For if their said Bullion and foreign Coins be more worth than
formerly in our pounds, shillings and pence, yet what shall they get by that
when these moneys are baser or lighter, and that therefore they are risen in
proportion? So we may plainly see that these Innovations are no good means to
bring treasure into the Kingdom, nor yet to keep it here when we have it.

CHAP. IX. A Toleration for Foreign Coins to pass current here at higher rates
then their value with our Standard, will not increase our Treasure.
THe discreet Merchant for the better directing of his trade and his exchanges
by bills to and from the several places of the world where he is acustomed to
deal, does carefully learn the Parity or equal value of the moneys according to
their weight and fineness compared with our Standard, whereby he is able to
Merchants do or ought to know the weight and fineness of foreign Coins.
know perfectly the just profit or loss of his affairs. And I make no doubt but
that we trade to diverse places where we vent off our native commodities yearly,
to a great value, and yet find few or no wares there fitting our use, whereby
we are enforced to make our returns in ready money, which by us is either
carried into some other Countries to be converted into wares which we want, or
else it is brought into the Realm in Specie; which being tolerated to pass
current here in payment at higher rates then they are worth to be Coined into
sterling money; that seems very probable that the greater quantity will be
brought in: but when all the circumstances are duly considered, this course
likewise will be found as weak as the rest to increase our Treasure.

First, the toleration it self does break the laws of intercourse, and would
soon move other Princes to perform the same acts or worse against us, and so
frustrate our hopes.

Secondly, if money be the true measure of all our other means, and foreign
Coins tolerated to pass current amongst us, at higher rates than they are
worth (being compared with our Standard) it follows that the common wealth
shall not be justly distributed, when it passes by a false measure.

Thirdly, if the advantage between ours and foreign Coins be but small, it
will bring in little or no Treasure, because the Merchant will rather bring in
wares upon which there is usually a competent gain. And on the other side if
we permit a great advantage to the foreign Coins, then that gain will carry
away all our starling money, and so I leave this business in a Dilemma, and
fruitless, as all other courses will ever prove which seek for the gain or loss
of our treasure out of the balance of our general foreign trade, as I will
endeavor yet further to demonstrate.

CHAP. X. The observation of the Statute of Employments to be made by
strangers, cannot increase, nor yet preserve our Treasure.
TO keep our money in the Kingdom is a work of no less skill and difficulty than
to augment our Treasure: for the causes of their preservation and production
are the same in nature. The statute for employment of strangers wares into our
commodities seems at the first to be a good and a lawful way leading to those
ends; but upon the examination of the particulars, we shall find that it cannot
produce such good effects.

For as the use of foreign trade The use of Foreign Trade is alike to all
Nations.
is alike unto all Nations, so may we easily perceive what will be done therein
by strangers, when we do but observe our own proceedings in this weighty
business, by which we do not only seek with the vent of our own commodities to
supply our wants of foreign wares, but also to enrich our selves with
treasure: all which is done by a different manner of trading according to our
own occasions and the nature of the places whereunto we do trade; as namely in
some Countries we sell our commodities and bring away their wares, or part in
money; in other Countries we sell our goods and take their money, because they
have little or no wares that fits our turns: again in some places we have need
of their commodities, but they have little use of ours; so they take our money
which we get in other Countries: And thus by a course of traffic (which
changes according to the accurrents of time) the particular members do
accommodate each other, and all accomplish the whole body of the How foreign
Trade a destroyed.
trade, which will ever languish if the harmony of her health be distempered by
the diseases of excess at home, violence abroad, charges and restrictions at
home or abroad: but in this place I have occasion to speak only of restriction,
which I will perform briefly.

There are three ways by which a Merchant may make the returns of his wares
from beyond the Seas, that is to say in money, in commodities, or by Exchange.
But the Statute of employment does not only restrain money (in which there is a
seeming providence and Justice) but also the use of the Exchange by bills,
which does violate the Law of Commerce, and is indeed an Act without example in
any place of the world where we have trade, and therefore to be considered,
that whatsoever (in this kind) we shall impose upon strangers here, will
presently be made a Law for us in their Countries, especially where we have our
greatest trade with our vigilant neighbors, who omit no care nor occasion to
support their traffic in equal privileges with other Nations. And thus in the
first place we should be deprived of that freedom and means which now we have
to bring Treasure into the Kingdom, and therewith likewise we should lose the
vent of much wares which we carry to diverse places, whereby our trade and our
Treasure would decay together.

Secondly, if by the said Statute we thrust the exportation of our wares (more
than ordinary) upon the stranger, we must then take it from the English, which
were injurious to our Merchants, Mariners and Shipping, besides the hurt to
the Commonwealth inventing the Kingdoms stock to the stranger at far lower
rates here than we must do if we sold it to them in their own Countries, as is
proved in the third Chapter.

Thirdly, whereas we have already sufficiently showed, that if our commodities
be over balanced in value by foreign wares, our money must be carried out. How
is it possible to prevent this by tying the Strangers hands, and leaving the
English loose? shall not the same reasons and advantage cause that to be done
by them now, that was done by the other before? or if we will make a statute
(without example) to prevent both alike, shall we not then overthrow all at
once? the King in his customs and the Kingdom in her profits; for such a
restriction must of necessity destroy much trade, because the diversity of
occasions and places which make an ample trade require that some men should
both export and import wares; some export only, others import, some deliver out
their moneys by exchange, others take it up; some carry out money, others bring
it in, and this in a greater or lesser quantity according to the good husbandry
or excess in the Kingdom, over which only if we keep a strict law, it will rule
all the rest, and without this all other Statutes are no rules either to keep
or procure us Treasure.

Lastly, to leave no Objection unanswered, if it should be said that a Statute
comprehending the English as well as the stranger must needs keep our money in
the Kingdom. What shall we get by this, if it hinder the coming in of money by
the decay of that ample Trade which we enjoyed in the freedom thereof? is not
the Remedy far worse than the Disease? shall we not live more like Irishmen
than Englishmen, when the Kings revenues, our Merchants, Mariners, Shipping,
Arts, Lands, Riches, and all decay together with our Trade?

Yea but, say some men, we have better hopes than so; for the intent of the
Statute is, that as all the foreign wares which are brought in shall be
employed in our commodities, thereby to keep our money in the Kingdom: So we
doubt not but to send out a sufficient quantity of our own wares over and above
to bring in the value thereof in ready money.

Although this is absolutely denied by the reasons before written, yet now we
will grant it, because we desire to end the dispute: For if this be true, that
other Nations will vent more of our commodities than we consume of theirs in
value, then I affirm that the overplus must necessarily return unto us in
treasure without the use of the Statute, which is therefore not only fruitless
but hurtful, as some other like restrictions are found to be when they are
fully discovered.

CHAP. XI. It will not increase our treasure to enjoin the Merchant that
exporteth Fish, Corn or Munition, to return all or part of the Value in Money.
VIctuals and Munition for war are so precious in a Commonwealth, that either
it seems necessary to restrain the exportation altogether, or (if the plenty
permits it) to require the return thereof in so much treasure; which appears
to be reasonable and without difficulty, because Spain and other Countries do
willingly part with their money for such wares, although in other occasions of
trade they straightly prohibit the exportation thereof: all which I grant to be
true, yet notwithstanding we must consider that all the ways and means which
(in course of trade) force treasure into the Kingdom, do not therefore make it
ours: for this can be done only by a lawful gain, and this gain is no way to
be accomplished but by the overballance of our trade, and this overballance is
made less by restrictions: therefore such restrictions do hinder the increase
Some restrictions hinder Trade.
of our treasure. The Argument is plain, and needs no other reasons to
strengthen it, except any man be so vain to think that restrictions would not
cause the less wares to be exported. But if this likewise should be granted,
yet to enjoin the Merchant to bring in money for Victuals and Munition carried
out, will not cause us to have one penny the more in the Kingdom at the years
end; for whatsoever is forced in one way must out again another way: because
only so much will remain and abide with us as is gained and incorporated into
the estate of the Kingdom by the overballance of the trade.

This may be made plain by an example taken from an Englishman, who had
occasion to buy and consume the wares of diverse strangers for the value of six
hundred pounds, and having wares of his own for the value of one thousand
pounds, he sold them to the said strangers, and presently forced all the money
from them into his own power; yet upon clearing of the reckoning between them
there remained only four hundred pounds to the said Englishman for
overballance of the wares bought and sold; so the rest which he had received
was returned back from whence he forced it. And this shall suffice to show that
whatsoever courses we take to force money into the Kingdom, yet so much only
will remain with us as we shall gain by the balance of our trade.

CHAP. XII. The undervaluing of our Money which is delivered or receceived by
Bills of Exchange here or beyond the Seas, cannot decrease our treasure.
THe Merchants Exchange by Bills is a means and practice whereby they that have
money in one Country may deliver the same to receive it again in another
Country at certain times and rates agreed upon, whereby the lender and the
borrower are accommodated without transporting of treasure from State to State.

These Exchanges thus made between man and man, are not contracted at the equal
value of the moneys, according to their respective weights and fineness: First,
because he that delivers his money does respect the venture of the debt, and
the time of forbearance; but that which causes an under or overvaluing of
moneys by Exchange, is the plenty or scarcity thereof in those places where the
Exchanges are made. For example, when here is plenty of money to be delivered
for Amsterdam, then shall our money be undervalued in Exchange, because they
who take up the money, seeing it so plentifully thrust upon them, do thereby
make advantage to themselves in taking the same at an undervalue.

And contrariwise, when here is scarcity of money to be delivered for Amsterdam,
the deliverer will make the same advantage by overvaluing our money which he
delivers. And thus we see that as plenty or scarcity of money in a Plenty of
Money makes the Exchange cheap, and all other things dear.
Commonwealth does make all things dear or good cheap: so in the course of
exchange it has ever a contrary working; wherefore in the next place it is fit
to set down the true causes of this effect.

As plenty or scarcity of money do make the price of the exchange high or low,
so the over or under balance of our trade does effectually cause the plenty or
scarcity of money: And here we must understand, that the balance of our trade
is either General or Particular. The General is, when all our yearly traffic
is jointly valued, as I have formerly showed; the particular is when our trade
to Italy, France, Turkey, Spain, and other Countries are severally considered:
and by this latter course we shall perfectly find out the places where our money
is under or overvalued in Exchange: For although our general exportations of
wares may be yearly more in value than that which is imported, whereby the
difference is made good to us in so much treasure; nevertheless the particlar
trades do work diversely: For peradventure the Low Countries may bring us more
in value than we sell them, which if it be so, then do the Low What kinds of
plenty or scarsity of money make the Exchange high or low.
Country Merchants not only carry away our treasure to balance the account
between us, but also by this means money being plentiful here to be delivered by
exchange, it is therefore undervalued by the takers, as I have before declared;
And contrariwise if we carry more wares to Spain, and other places than we
consume of theirs, then do we bring away their treasure, and likewise in the
Merchants exchange we overvalue our own money.

Yet still there are some who will seem to make this plain by Demonstration,
that the undervaluing of our money by Exchange does carry it out of the
Kingdom: for, say they, we see daily great store of our English Coins carried
over, which pass current in the Low Countries, and there is great advantage to
carry them thither, to save the loss which the Low-Countrymen have in the
Exchange; for if one hundred pounds sterling delivered here, is so much
undervalued, that ninty pounds of the same sterling money carried over in
specie shall be sufficient to make repayment and full satisfaction of the said
hundred pounds at Amsterdam: Is it not then (say they) the undervaluing of our
Money which causes it to be carried out of the Realm?

To this Objection I will make a full and plain Answer, showing that it is not
the undervaluing of our money in exchange, but the overballancing of our trade
that carries away our treasure. For suppose that our whole trade with the
Low Countries for wares brought into this Realm be performed only by the Dutch
for the value of five hundred thousand pounds yearly; and that all our
commodities transported into the said Low Countries be performed only by the
English for four hundred thousand pounds yearly: Is it not then manifest, that
the Dutch can exchange only four hundred thousand pounds with the English upon
the Par pro Pari or equal value of the respective Standards? So the other
hundred thousand pounds which is the overballance of the trade, they must of
necessity carry that away in money. And the self same loss of treasure must
happen if there were no exchange at all permitted: for the Dutch carrying away
our money for their wares, and we bringing in their foreign Coins for their
commodities, there will be still one hundred thousand pounds loss.

Now let us add another example grounded upon the aforesaid proportion of trade
between us and the Low Countries. The Dutch (as aforewritten) may exchange with
the English for four hundred thousand pounds and no more upon the equal value
of the moneys, because the English have no further means to satisfy. But now
suppose that in respect of the plenty of money, which in this case will be here
in the hands of the Dutch to deliver by exchange, The undervaluing of our money
in Exchange is the Strangers, loss and our gain.
our money (according to that which has been already said) be undervalued ten
per cent. then is it manifest that the Dutch must deliver four hundred and
forty thousand pounds to have the Englishmans four hundred thousand pounds in
the Low Countries: so that there will then remain but 60000. pounds for the
Dutch to carry out of the Realm to balance the account between them and us.
Whereby we may plainly perceive that the undervaluing of our money in exchange,
will not carry it out of the Kingdom, as some men have supposed, but rather is
a means to make a less quantity thereof to be exported, than would be done at
the Par pro pari.

Further let us suppose that the English Merchant carries out as much wares in
value as the Dutch Merchant brings in, whereby the means is equal between
them to make their returns by exchange without carrying away of any money to the
prejudice of either State. And yet notwithstanding the Dutch Merchant for his
occasions or advantage will forsake this course of exchange, and will venture
to send part of his returns in ready money.

To this the answer is, that hereupon it must follow of necessity, that the
Dutch shall want just so much means in exchange with the English, who therefore
shall be forced to bring in the like sum of money from beyond the Seas, as the
Dutch carried out of this Realm; so that we may plainly perceive that the
moneys which are carried from us within the balance of our trade are not
considerable, for they do return to us again: and we lose those moneys only
which are made of the over balance of our general trade, that is to say, That
which we spend more in value in foreign wares, than we utter of our own
commodities. And the contrary of this is the only means by which 1 The Canker
of Englands Commonwealth. 2 Free trade. 3 Lex Mercatoria. 4 The Center of trade.
we get our treasure. In vain therefore has Gerard Malines labored so long,
and in so many printed books to make the world believe that the undervaluing of
our money in exchange does exhaust our treasure, which is a mere fallacy of the
cause, attributing that to a Secondary means, whose effects are wrought by
another Principal Efficient, and would also come to pass although the said
Secondary means were not at all. As vainly also has he propounded a remedy by
keeping the price of Exchange by Bills at the par pro pari by public
Authority, which were a newfound Office without example in any part of the
world, being not only fruitless but also hurtful, as has been sufficiently
proved in this Chapter, and therefore I will proceed to the next.

CHAP. XIII. The Merchant who is a mere Exchanger of money by Bills cannot
increase or decrease our treasure.
THere are certain Merchants which deal only upon all advantages in
The Exchange, and neither export nor import wares into the Kingdom, which has
caused some men to affirm, that the money which such mere Exchangers bring in
or carry out of the Realm is not comprehended in the balance of our foreign
trade; for (say they) sometimes when our sterling money has been undervalued
and delivered here for Amsterdam at 10. per cent. less than the equal value of
the respective Standards, the said mere Exchanger may take here one thousand
pounds sterling, and carry over only nine hundred thereof in specie, which
will be sufficient to pay his Bill of Exchange. And so upon a greater or a
lesser sum the like gain is made in three months time.

But here we must know, that although this mere Exchanger deal not in wares,
yet notwithstanding the money which he carries away in manner afore-written
must necessarily proceed of such wares as are brought into the Kingdom by
Merchants. So that still it falls into the balance of our foreign trade,
and works the same effect, as if the Merchant himself had carried away that
money, which he must do if our wares be overballanced, as ever they are when
our money is undervalued, which is expressed more at large in the 12. Chapter.

And on the contrary, when the mere Exchanger (by the said advantages) shall
bring money into the Kingdom, he does no more than necessarily must be done by
the Merchant himself when our commodities overballance foreign wares. But in
these occasions some Merchants had rather lose by delivering their money at an
under-value in Exchange, than undertake to hazard all by the Law; which
notwithstanding these mere Exchangers will perform for them in hope of gain.

CHAP. XIV. The admirable feats supposed to be done by Bankers and the
Merchants Exchange.
ALthough I have already written something concerning the Merchants Exchange,
and therein of the undervaluation of our money, and of the mere Exchanger, with
their true causes and effects; Nevertheless it will not be impertinent to
pursue this business yet a little further, and thereby not only to strengthen
our former Arguments, but also to avoid some cunning delusions which might
deceive the unskilful Reader of those books entitled, Lex Mercatoria, page
409. and The maintenance of free trade, page 16. wherein the Author Gerard
Malynes sets down the admirable feats (as he terms them) which are to be
done by Bankers and Exchangers, with the use and power of the Exchange: but how
these wonders may be effected he altogether omitteth, leaving the Reader in a
strange opinion of these dark mysteries, which I cannot think he did for want
of knowledge, for I find him skilful in many things which he has both written
and collected concerning the affairs of Merchants, and in particular he
discourses well of diverse uses, forms and passages of the Exchange, in all
which as he has taken great pains for the good of others, so do his Works of
this kind deserve much praise: but where he has disguised his own knowledge
with Sophistry to further some private ends by hurting the public good; there
ought he to be discovered and prevented, unto which performance (in this
discourse of treasure) I find my self obliged, and therefore I intend to effect
it by showing the true causes and means whereby these wonders are done, which
Malines attributes to the sole power of the Exchange. But first for order I
think it fit to set down the particular feats as they stand in his said books.
The admirable feats to be done by Exchange.
1. To lay their money with gain in any place of the world where any exchange
lies. 2. To gain and wax rich, and never meddle with any Princes commodities.
3. To buy any Princes commodity, and never bring penny nor pennyworth into the
Realm, but do that with the Subjects money. 4. To grow rich and live without
adventure at Sea or travail. 5. To do great feats having credit, and yet to be
naught worth. 6. To understand whether in conjecture their money employed on
Exchange, or buying of wares will be more profit. 7. To know certainly what the
Merchants gain upon their wares they sell and buy. 8. To live and increase upon
every Princes subjects that continually take up money by Exchange, and whether
they gain or no. 9. To wind out every Princes
treasure out of his Realm whose Subjects bring in more wares than they carry
out of the Realm. 10. To make the Staple of money run thither where the rich
Prince will have it to be brought, and pay for it. 11. To unfurnish the poor
Prince of his provision of money, that keeps his wares upon interest money, if
the enemy will seek it. 12. To furnish their need of money that tarry the
selling of their wares in any Contract until they make them come to their
price. 13. To take up money to engross any commodity either new come or whereof
they have some store to bring the whole trade of that commodity into their own
hands to sell both at their pleasure. 14. To hide their carrying away of any
Princes money. 15. To fetch away any Princes fine money with his own or any other
Princes base money. 16. To take up Princes base money and to turn into his fine
money, and to pay the deliverer with his own, and gain too. 17. To take upon
credit into their hands for a time all the Merchants money that will be
delivered, and pay them with their own, and gain too. 18. To make the Realm
gain of all other Realms whose Subjects live most by their own commodities, and
sell yearly the overplus into the world, and both occupy that increase yearly,
and also their old store of treasure upon exchange. 19. To undoo Realms and
Princes that look not to their Commonwealth, when the Merchants wealth is such,
that the great houses conspire together so to rule the Exchange, that when they
will be deliverers, they will receive in another place above the Standard of
the Mint of the Princes money delivered: and when they will be takers, they will
pay the same in another place under the Standard of the Mint of the Princes
money taken up. 20. To get ready money to buy any commodity that is offered
cheap. 21. To compass ready money to get any offered bargain out of another man's
hands, and so by outbidding others oftentimes to raise the wares. 22. To get a
part and sometimes all his gains that employeth money taken up by Exchange in
wares, and so make others travail for their gain. 23. To keep Princes for
having any Customs, Subsidies or Taxes upon their money, as they employ it not.
24. To value justly any Wares they carry into any Country by setting them at
that value, as the money that bought them was then at by Exchange in the
Country whither they be carried.


If I had a desire to amplify in the explanation of these wonders, they would
afford me matter enough to make a large volume, but my intent is to do it as
briefly as possibly I may without obscurity. And before I begin, I cannot choose
but laugh to think how a worthy Lawyer might be dejected in his laudable
studies, when he should see more cunning in Lex Mercatoria by a little part of
the Merchants profession, then in all the Law-cases of his learned Authors: for
this Exchange goes beyond Conjuring; I think verily that neither Doctor Faustus
nor Banks his Horse could ever do such admirable feats, although it is sure
they had a Devil to help them; but we Merchants deal not with such Spirits, we
delight not to be thought the workers of lying wonders, and therefore I
endeavor here to show the plainness of our dealing (in these supposed feats)
to be agreeable to the laudable course of Trade.

And first, To lay our Money with gain to any place of the World where
Exchange lies. How can this be done (will some men say) for Amsterdam, when
the loss by Exchange is sometimes eight or ten per cent. more or less for one
months usance? The answer is, That here I must consider, first, that the
principal efficient The principal efficient cause of loss by Exchange.
cause of this loss, is a greater value in Wares brought from Amsterdam then
we carry thither, which make more Deliverers then Takers here by Exchange,
whereby the Money is undervalued to the benefit of the taker: hereupon the
Deliverer, rather then he will lose by his Money, does consider those
Countries, unto which we carry more Wares in value than we receive from them;
as namely, Spain, Italy, and others; to which places he is sure (for the
reasons aforesaid) that he shall ever deliver his money with profit. But now
you will say, that the money is further from Amsterdam than before; How shall
it be got together? yes, well enough; and the farther about will prove the
nearest way home, if it come at last with good profit; the first part whereof
being made (as we have supposed) in Spain, from thence I consider where to make
my second gain, and finding that the Florentines send out a greater value in
cloth of Gold and Silver, wrought Silks, and Rashes to Spain, than they receive
in Fleece Woolls, West India Hides, Sugar and Cochineal, I know I cannot miss
of my purpose by delivering my money for Florence; where (still upon the same
ground) I direct my course from thence to Venice, and there find that my next
benefit must be at Frankfort or Antwerp, until at last I come to Amsterdam by
a shorter or longer course, according to such occasions of advantage as the
times and places shall afford me. And thus we see still, that the profit and
loss upon the Exchange is guided and ruled by the over or under balance of the
several Trades which are Predominant and Active, making the price of Exchange
high or low, which is therefore Passive, the contrary whereof is so often
repeated by the said Malynes.

To the second, fourth, fourteenth, and twenty third, I say, that all these are
the proper works of the mere Exchanger, and that his actions cannot work to the
good or hurt of the Commonwealth, I have already sufficiently showed in the
last Chap. and therefore here I may spare that labor.

To the third. It is true, I can deliver one thousand pounds here by exchange
to receive the value in Spain, where with this Spanish money I can buy and
bring away so much Spanish wares. But all this does not prove, but that in the
end the English money or commodities must pay for the said wares: for if I
deliver my thousand pounds here to an English man, he must pay me in Spain,
either by goods already sent, or to be sent thither; or if I deliver it here to
a Spaniard, he takes it of me, with intent to employ it in our wares; so that
every way we must pay the Stranger for what we have from him: Is there any
feats in all this worthy your admiration?

To the fifth, thirtenth, twentieth, and twenty first. I must answer these
Wonders by heaps, where I find them to be all one matter in diverse forms, and
such froth also, that every Idiot knows them, and can say, that he who has
credit can contract, buy, sell, and take up much money by Exchange, which he
may do as well also at Interest: yet in these courses they are not always
gainers, for sometimes they live by the loss, as well as they who have less
credit.

To the sixth and seventh. Here is more poor stuff; for when I know the current
price of my Wares, both here and beyond the Seas, I may easily conjecture
whether the profit of the Exchange or the gain which I expect upon my Wareswil
be greater. And again, as every Merchant knows well what he gains upon the
Wares he buyeth and sells, so may any other man do the like that can tell how
the said Merchant has proceeded: But what is all this to make us admire the
Exchange?

To the eighth and twelfth. As Bankers and Exchangers do furnish men with money
for their occasions, so do they likewise who let out their money at interest
with the same hopes and like advantage, which many times notwithstanding fails
them, as well as the Borrowers often labor only for the Lenders profit.

To the ninth and eighteenth. Here my Author has some secret meaning, or being
conscious of his own errors, does mark these two Wonders with a in the Margin.
For why should this great work of enriching or impoverishing of Kingdoms be
attributed to the Exchange, which is done only by those means that do over or
under-ballance our Foreign Trade, as I have already so often showed, and as
the very words of Malynes himself in these two place may intimate to a
judicious Reader?

To the fifteenth and sixteenth, I confess that the Exchange may be used in
turning base money into Gold or Silver, as when a stranger may coin and bring
over a great quantity of Farthings, which in short time he may disperse or
convert into good money, and then deliver the same here by exchange to receive
the value in his own Country; or he may do this feat by carrying away the said
good money in specie without using the exchange at all, if he dare venture the
penalty of the Law. The Spaniards know well who are the common Coiners of
Christendom, that dare venture to bring them store of Copper money of the
Spanish stamp, and carry away the value in good Ryals of Eight, wherein
notwithstanding all their cunning devices, they are sometimes taken tardie.

To the 17. The Bankers are always ready to receive such sums of money as are
put into their hands by men of all degrees, who have no skill or good means
themselves to manage the same upon the exchange to profit. It is likewise true
that the Bankers do repay all men with their own, and yet reserve good gain to
themselves, which they do as well deserve for their ordinary provision or
allowance as those Factors do which buy or sell for Merchants by Commission:
And is not this likewise both just and very common?

To the 11. I must confess that Lex Mercatoria, page 410. Maintenance of free
trade, p. 17.
here is a wonder indeed, that a poor Prince should keep either his wars ot
wares (I take both together as the Author sets them down both ways differing in
his said two books) upon interest money; for what needs the Enemy of such a poor
Prince deal with the Bankers to disapoint him or defeat him of his money in
time of want, when the interest it self will do this fast enough, and so I
leave this poor stuff^.

To the 19. I have lived long in Italy, where the greatest Banks and Bankers o^
Christendom do trade, yet could, never see nor hear, that they did, or were
able to rule the price of Exchange by confederacy, but still the plenty or
scarcity of money in the course of trade did always overrule them and made the
Exchanges to run at ^^^h or low rates.

(...) the 22. The Exchange by Exchange hinders not Princes of their customs.
bills between Merchant and Merchant in the course of trade cannot hinder
Princes of their Customs and Imposts: for the money which one man delivers,
because he will not, or has not occasion to employ it in wares, another man
takes, because he either will or has already laid it out in Merchandise. But
it is true, that when the wealth of a Kingdom consists much in ready money,
and that there is also good means and conveniencie in such a Kingdom to trade
with the same into foreign parts, either by Sea or Land, or by both these
ways; if then this trade be neglected, the King shall be defeated of those
profits: and if the exchange be the cause thereof, then must we learn in what
manner this is done; for we may exchange either amongst our selves, or with
strangers; if amongst our selves, the Commonwealth cannot be enriched thereby;
for the gain of one subject is the loss of another. And if we exchange with
strangers, then our profit is the gain of the Commonwealth. Yet by none of
these ways can the King receive any benefit in his customs. Let us therefore
seek out the places where such exchanging is used, and set down the reasons why
this practice is permitted; in search whereof we shall only find one place of
note in all Christendom, which is Genoua, whereof I intend to say something as
briefly as I can.

The State of Genoua is small, The present estate of the commonwealth of Genoua.
and not very fertile, having little natural wealth or materials to employ the
people, nor yet victuals sufficient to feed them; but nevertheless by their
industry in former times by foreign trade into Egypt, Soria, Constantinople,
and all those Levant parts for Spices, Drugs, raw Silks and many other rich
wares, with which they served the most places of Europe, they grew to an
incredible wealth, which gave life unto the strength of their Cities, the pomp
of their buildings, and other singular beauties. But after the foundation and
increase of that famous City of Venice, the said trades turned that way. And
since likewise the greatest part thereof does come into England, Spain, and the
Low Countries by navigation directly from the East Indies, which alterations in
the traffic, has forced them of Genoua to change their course of trading
with wares, into exchanging of their money; which for gain they spread not only
into diverse Countries where the trade is performed with Merchandise, but more
especially they do therewith serve the want of the Spaniards in Flanders and
other places for their wars, whereby the private Merchants are much enriched,
but the public treasure by this course is not increased, and the reasons why
the Commonwealth of Genoua does suffer this inconvenience, are these.

First and principally, they are forced to leave those trades which they cannot
keep from other Nations, who have better means by situation, wares, Shipping,
Munition and the like, to perform these affairs with more advantage than they
are able to do.

Secondly, they proceed like a wise State, who still retain as much trade as
they can, although they are not able to procure the twentieth part of that
which they had. For having few or no materials of their own to employ their
people, yet they supply this want by the Fleece-wools of Spain, and raw Silks
of Sicilia, working them into Velvets, Damasks, Sattens, Woollen-drapery, and
other manufactures.

Thirdly, whereas they find no means in their own Country to employ and trade
their great wealth to profit, they content themselves to do it in Spain and
other places, either in Merchandise, or by exchanging their moneys for gain to
those Merchants who trade therewith in wares. And thus wheresoever they live
abroad for a time circuiting the world for gain; yet in the end the Center of
this profit is in their own Native Country.

Lastly, the government of Genoua being Aristocracie, they are assured that
although the public get little, yet if their private Merchants gain much from
strangers, they shall do well enough, because the richest and securest
Treasure of a Free State, are the riches of the Nobility (who in Genoua are
Merchants) which falls not out so in a Monarchy, where between the comings in
of a Prince, and the means of Private Men, there is this distinction of meum
and tuum, but in the occasions and dangers of a Republic or Commonwealth,
where Liberty and Government might be changed into Servitude, there the Proper
substance of private men is the public Treasure, ready to be spent with their
lives in defense of their own Sovereignty.

To the 24. If a Merchant should buy wares here with intentions to send them
for Venice, and then value them as the Exchange comes from thence to London, he
may find himself far wide of his reckoning: for before his goods arrive at
Venice; both the price of his Wares and the rate of the Exchange may alter very
much. But if the meaning of the Author be, that this valuation may be made
after the goods arrive, and are sold at Venice, and the money remitted hither
by Exchange, or else the money which bought the said wares here may be valued
as the Exchange passed at that time from hence to Venice; Is not all this very
common and easy business, unworthy to be put into the number of Admirable
feats?

To the tenth. Although a rich Prince has great power, yet is there not power
in every rich Prince to make the staple of Money run where he pleases: for the
Staple of any thing is not where it may be had, but where the thing does most
of all abound. Whereupon we commonly say, that the Spaniard, in regard of his
great treasure in the West Indies, has the Fountain or Staple of money, which
he moves and causes to run into Italy, Germany, the Low Countries, or other
places where his occasions do require it, either for Peace or War. Neither is
this effected by any singular Power of the Exchange, but by diverse ways and
means fitting those places where the money is to be employed. For if the use
thereof be upon the confines of France to maintain a War there, then may it be
safely sent in specie on Carriages by Land; if in Italy, on Galleys by Sea; if
in the Low Countries, on Shipping by Sea also, but yet with more danger, in
regard of his potent enemies in that passage. Wherefore in this occasion,
although the Exchange is not absolutely necessary, yet is it very useful. And
because the Spaniards want of Commodities from Germany and the Low Countries is
greater in value than the Spanish Wares which are carried into those parts,
therefore the King of Spain cannot be furnished there from his own subjects
with money by exchange, but is and has been a long time enforced to carry a
great part of his treasure in Galleys for Italy, where How the Italians are
enabled to furnish Spain with money in Flanders.
the Italians, and amongst them the Merchants of Genoua especially, do take the
same, and repay the value thereof in Flanders, whereunto they are enabled by
their great trade with many rich commodities which they send continually out of
Italy into those Countries and the places thereabouts, from whence the Italians
return no great value in wares, but deliver their money for the service of
Spain, and receive the value by Exchange in Italy out of the Spanish Treasure,
which is brought thither in Galleys, as is afore-written.

So that by this we plainly see, that it is not the power of Exchange that does
enforce treasure where the rich Prince will have it, but it is the money
proceeding of wares in Foreign trade that does enforce the exchange, and
rules the price thereof high or low, according to the plenty or scarcity of the
said money, which in this discourse, upon all occasions, I think I have
repeated near as often as Malynes in his Books does make the Exchange to be an
essential part of trade, to be active, predominant, overruling the price of
Wares and Moneys, life, spirit, and the worker of admirable feats. All which we
have now briefly expounded; and let no man admire why he himself did not take
this pains, for then he should not only have taken away the great opinion
which he labored to maintain of the Exchange, but also by a true discovery of
the right operation thereof, he should utterly have overthrown his par pro pari;
which project (if it had prevailed) would have been a good business for the
Dutch, and to the great hurt of this Commonwealth, as has been sufficiently
proved in the 12. chapter.

Now therefore let the learned Lawyer fall cheerfully to his books again, for
the Merchant cannot put him down, if he have no more skill than is in his
Exchange. Are these such admirable feats, when they may be so easily known and
done in the course of trade? Well then, if by this discovery we have eased the
Lawyers mind, and taken off the edge of his admiration, let him now play his
part, and take out a Writ of Error against the Par pro Pari; for this project
has misinformed many, and put us to trouble to expound these Riddles.

Nay, but stay awhile, can all this pass for current, to slight a business
thus, which (the Author says) has been so seriously observed by that famous
Council, and those worthy Merchants of Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, and
also condemned by those French Kings, Lewis the 9th. Philip the fair, and
Philip de Valois, with confiscation of the Bankers goods? I must confess that
all this requires an answer, which in part is already done by the Author
himself. For he says, that the wisdom of our State found out the evil, but
they missed of the remedy; and yet what remedy this should be no man can tell;
for there was none applied, but all practice and use in Exchange stand still to
this day in such manner and form as they did at the time when these Feats were
discovered, for the State knew well that there needed no remedy where there was
no disease.

Well then, how shall we be able to answer the proceedings of the French Kings
who did absolutely condemn the Bankers, and confiscated their goods? Yes, well
enough, for the Bankers might perhaps be condemned for something done in their
exchanges against the Law, and yet their profession may still be lawful, as it
is in Italy and France it self to this day. Nay we will grant likewise that the
Banks were banished, when the Bankers were punished; yet all this proves
nothing against Exchangers, for Kings and States enact many Statutes, and
suddenly repeal them, they do and undo; Princes may err, or else Malynes is
grossly mistaken, where he sets down 35. several Statutes and other
ordinances Maintenance of free trade, p. 76, 77, 78, and 79.
enacted by this State in 350. years time to remedy the decay of Trade, and yet
all are found defective; only his reformation of the Exchange, or Par pro pari,
is effectual, if we would believe him; but we know better, and so we leave him.

I might here take occasion to say something against another project of the
same brood that lately attended upon the success of this Par propari, as I have
been credibly informed, which is, the changing and re-changing here within the
Realm, of all the Plate, Bullion and Moneys, Foreign or Sterling, to pass only
by an office called, The Kings Royal Exchanger, or his Deputies, paying them a
Penny upon the value of every Noble: which might raise much to their private
good, and destroy more to the public hurt. For it would decay the Kings
Coinage, deprive the Kingdom of much Treasure, abridge the Subjects of their
just liberty, and utterly overthrow the worthy trade of the Goldsmiths, all
which being plain and easy to the weakest understandings, I will therefore
omit to amplify upon these particulars.

CHAP. XV. Of some Excesses and evils in the Commonwealth, which
notwithstanding decay not our Trade nor Treasure.
IT is not my intent to excuse or extenuate any the least excess or evil in the
Commonwealth, but rather highly to approve and commend that which by others
has been spoken and written against such abuses. Yet in this discourse of
Treasure, as I have already set down affirmatively, which are the true causes
that may either augment or decrease the same: so is it not impertinent to
continue my negative declarations of those enormities and actions which cannot
work these effects as some men have supposed. For in redress of this important
business, if we mistake the nature of the Malady, we shall ever apply such
cures as will at least delay, if not confound the Remedy.

Let us then begin with usury, which if it might be turned into Charity, and
that they who are Rich would lend to the poor freely; it were a work pleasing
to Almighty God, and profitable to the Commonwealth. But taking it in the
degree it now stands; How can we well say, That as usury increases, so Trade
decreaseth? For although it is true that some men give over trading, and buy
Lands, or put out their Money to use when they are grown rich, or old, or for
some other the like occasions; yet for all this it does not follow, that the
quantity of the trade must lessen; for this course in the rich gives
opportunity presently to the younger and poorer Merchants to rise in the world,
and to enlarge their dealings; to the performance whereof, if they want means
of their own, they may, and do, take it up at interest: so that our money lies
not dead, it is still traded. How many Merchants, and Shopkeepers have begun
with little or nothing of their own, and yet are grown very rich by trading
with other men's money? do we not know, that when trading is quick and good,
many men, by means of their experience, and having credit to take up money at
interest, do trade for much more than they are worth of their own stock? by
which diligence of the industrious, the affairs of the Commonwealth are
increased, the moneys of Widows, Orphans, Lawyers, Gentlemen and others, are
employed in the course of Foreign Trade, which themselves have no skill to
perform. We find at this present, that notwithstanding the Poverty we are
fallen into by the Excesses and Losses of late times, yet that many men have
much money in their chests, and know not how to dispose thereof, because the
Merchant will not take the same at interest (although at low rates) in regard
there is a stop of trade in Spain and in France, whereby he cannot employ his
own means, much less other men's moneys. So that for these, and some other
reasons which might be alleged, we might conclude, contrary to those who
affirm, that Trade decreaseth as usury increases, for they rise and fall
together.

In the next place, we hear our Lawyers much condemned; the vexation and
charges by multiplicity of Suits do exceed all the other Kingdoms of
Christendom, but whether this proceed from the Lawyers Covetousness, or the
Peoples Perverseness, it is a great question. And let this be as it may, I will
enquire no farther therein than our present discourse does require, concerning
the decay of our Trade, and impoverishing of the Kingdom: Sure I am, that Suits
in Law make many a man poor and penniless, but how it should make us trade for
less by one single penny, I cannot well conceive. For although amongst the
great number of them who are vexed and undone by controversies, there be ever
some Merchants; yet we know, that one man's necessity becomes another man's
opportunity. I never knew as yet, a decay in our Trade and Treasure for want of
Merchants, or Means to employ us, but rather by excessive Consumption of
Foreign Wares at home, or by a declination in the vent of our Commodities
abroad, caused either by the ruinous effects of Wars, or some alterations in
the times of Peace, whereof I have spoken more fully in the third Chapter. But,
to conclude with the Lawyers, I say, that their noble Profession is necessary
for all, and their Cases, Quillets, Delays and Charges, are mischievous to
many; these things indeed are Cankers in the Estates of particular men, but not
of the Commonwealth, as some suppose, for one man's loss becomes another man's
gain, it is still in the Kingdom, I wish it might as surely remain in the
right places.

Lastly, all kind of Bounty and Pomp is not to be avoided, for if we should
become so frugal, that we would use few or no Foreign wares, how shall we then
vent our own commodities? what will become of our Ships, Mariners, Munitions,
our poor Artificers, and many others? do we hope that other Countries will
afford us money for All our wares, without buying or bartering for Some of
theirs? this would prove a vain expectation; it is more safe and sure to run a
middle course by spending moderately, which will purchase treasure plentifully.

Again, the pomp of Buildings, Apparel, and the like, in the Nobility, Gentry,
and other able persons, cannot impoverish the Kingdom; if it be done with
curious and costly works upon our Materials, and by our own people, it will
maintain the poor with the purse of the rich, which is the best distribution of
the Commonwealth. But if any man say, that when the people want work, then the
Fishingtrade would be a better employment, and far more profitable; I subscribe
willingly. For in that great business there is means enough to employ both rich
and poor, whereof there has been much said and written; It rests only that
something might be as well effected for the honor and wealth, both of the King
and his Kingdoms.

CHAP. XVI. How the Revenues and Incomes of Princes may justly be raised.
NOw that we have set down the true course by which a Kingdom may be enriched
with treasure; In the next place we will endeavor to show the ways and means
by which a King may justly share therein without the hurt or oppression of his
Subjects. The Revenues of Princes as they differ much in quantity, according to
the greatness, riches and trade of their respective dominions; so likewise is
there great diversity used in procuring the same, according to the constitution
of the Countries, the government, laws and customs of the people, which no
Prince can alter but with much difficulty and danger. Some Kings have their
Crown Lands, the first fruits upon Ecclesiastical Livings, Customs, Tolls and
Imposts upon all trade to and from foreign Countries; Lones, Donations and
Subsidies upon all necessary occasions. Other Princes and States leaving the
three last, do add unto the rest, a custom upon all new wares transported from
one City, to be used in any other City or place of their own dominions, customs
upon every alienation or sale of live Cattle, Lands, Houses, and the portions
or marriage money of women, license money upon all Victualling houses and
Inkeepers, head money, Custom upon all the Corn, Wine, Oil, Salt and the like,
which grow and are consumed in their own dominions, etc. All which seem to be a
rabble of oppressions, serving to enrich those Princes which exact them, and to
make the people poor and miserable which endure them; especially in those
Countries where these burdens are laid at heavy rates, at 4, 5, 6, and 7. per
cent. But when all the circumstances and distinction of places are duly
considered, they will be found not only necessary and therefore lawful to be
used in some States, but also in diverse respects very profitable to the
Commonwealth.

First there are some States, as namely Venice, Florence, Genoua, the united
Provinces of the Low Countries, and others, which are singular for beauty, and
excellent both for natural and artificial strength, having likewise rich
Subjects: yet being of no very great extent, nor enjoying such wealth by
ordinary revenues as might support them against the sudden and powerful
invasions of those mighty Princes which do inviron them; they are therefore
enforced to strengthen themselves not only with confederates and Leagues (which
may often fail them in their greatest need) but also by massing up store of
treasure and Munition by those extraordinary courses before written, which
cannot deceive them, but will ever be ready to make a good defense, and to
offend or divert their enemies.

Neither are these heavy Contributions so hurtful to the happiness of the
people, as they are commonly esteemed: for as the food and raiment of the poor
is made dear by Excise, so does the price of their labor rise in proportion;
whereby the burden (if any be) is still upon the rich, who are either idle, or
at least work not in this kind, yet have they the use and are the great
consumers of the poors labor: Neither do the rich neglect in their several
places and callings to advance their endeavors according to those times which
do exhaust their means and revenues; wherein if they should peradventure fail,
and therefore be forced to abate their sinful excess and idle retainers; what
is all this but happiness in a Commonwealth, when virtue, plenty and arts shall
thus be advanced all together? Nor can it be truly said that a Kingdom is
impoverished where the loss of the people is the gain of the King, from whom
also such yearly Incomes have their annual issue to the benefit of his
Subjects; except only that part of the treasure which is laid up for the
public good; wherein likewise they who suffer have their safety, and
therefore such contributions are both just and profitable.

Yet here we must confess, that as the best things may be corrupted, so these
taxes may be abused and the Commonwealth notoriously wronged when they are
vainly wasted and consumed by a Prince, either upon his own excessive
pleasures, or upon unworthy persons, such as deserve neither rewards nor
countenance from the Majesty of a Prince: but these dangerous disorders are
seldom seen, especially in such States as are aforenamed, because the disposing
of the public treasure is in the power and under the discretion of many;
Neither is it unknown to all other Principalities and Governments that the end
of such Excesses is ever ruinous, for they cause great want and poverty, which
often drives them from all order to exorbitance, and therefore it is common
policy amongst Princes to prevent such mischiefs with great care and
providence, by doing nothing that may cause the Nobility to despair of their
safety, nor leaving any thing undone which may gain the good will of the
Commonalty to keep all in due obedience.

But now before we end this Some States cannot subsist, but by the means of
heavy taxes.
point in hand, we must remember likewise that all bodies are not of one and
the same constitution, for that which is Physic to one man, is little better
than poison to another; The States aforewritten, and diverse others like to them
cannot subsist but by the help of those extraordinary contributions, whereof we
have spoken, because they are not able otherwise in short time to raise
sufficient treasure to defend themselves against a potent enemy, who has power
to invade them on the sudden, as is already declared. But a mighty Prince
whose dominions are great and united, his Subjects many and Loyal, his
Countries rich both by nature and traffic, his Victuals and warlike
provisions plentiful and ready, his situation easy to offend others, and
difficult to be invaded, his harbors good, his Navy strong, his alliance
powerful, Princes, who have no just cause to lay extraordinary and heavy taxes
upon their Subjects.
and his ordinary revenues sufficient, royally to support the Majesty of his
State, besides a reasonable sum which may be advanced to lay up yearly in
treasure for future occasions: shall not all these blessings (being well
ordered) enable a Prince against the sudden invasion of any mighty enemy,
without imposing those extraordinary and heavy taxes? shall not the wealthy and
loyal subjects of such a great and just Prince maintain his Honor and their
own Liberties with life and goods, always supplying the Treasure of their
Sovereign, until by a well ordered War he may enforce a happy Peace? Yes
verily, it cannot otherwise be expected. And thus shall a mighty Prince be more
powerful in preserving the wealth and love of his Subjects, than by treasuring
up their riches with unnecessary taxes, which cannot but alter and provoke them.

Yea, but say some men, we may easily contradict all this by example taken from
some of the greatest Monarchs of Christendom, who, besides those Incomes which
here are termed ordinary, they add likewise all, or the most of the other
heavy-Contributions. All which we grant, and more; for they use also to sell
their Offices and Places of Justice, which is an act both base and wicked,
because it robs worthy men of their Merits, and betrayeth the cause of the
innocent, whereby God is displeased, the people oppressed, and Virtue banished
from such unhappy Kingdoms: Shall we then say, that these things are lawful
and necessary because they are used? God forbid, we know better, and we are
well assured that these exactions are not taken for a necessary defense of
their own right, but through pride and covetousness to add Kingdom to
Kingdom, and so to usurp the right of others: which actions of Impiety The
sinister ends which some great Princes have in laying heavy taxes upon their
subjects.
are ever shadowed with some fair pretense of Sanctity, as being done for the
Catholic Cause, the propagation of the Church, the suppression of Heretics,
and such like delusions, serving only to further their own ambition, whereof
in this place it shall be needless to make any larger discourse.

CHAP. XVII. Whether it be necessary for great Princes to lay up store of
Treasure.
BEfore we set down the quantity of Treasure which Princes may conveniently lay
up yearly without hurting the Commonwealth, it will be fit to examine whether
the act it self of Treasuring be necessary: for in common conference we ever
find some men who do so much dote or hope upon the Liberality of Princes, that
they term it baseness, and conceive it needless for them to lay up store of
Treasure, accounting the honor and safety of great Princes to consist more in
their Bounty, than in their Money, which they labor to confirm by the examples
of Caesar, Alexander, and others, who hating covetousness, achieved may acts
and victories by lavish gifts and liberal expenses. Unto which they add also
the little fruit which came by that great sum of money which King David laid
up and left to his son Solomon, who notwithstanding this, and all his other
rich Presents and wealthy Traffic in a quiet reign, consumed all with pomp
and vain delights, excepting only that which was spent in building of the
Temple. Whereupon (say they) if so much treasure gathered by so just a King,
effect so little, what shall we hope for by the endeavors of this kind in
other Princes? Sardanapalus left ten millions of pounds to them that slew him.
Darius left twenty millions of pounds to Alexander that took him; Nero being
left rich, and extorting much from his best Subjects, gave away above twelve
millions of pounds to his base flatterers and such unworthy persons, which
caused Galba after him to revoke those gifts. A Prince who has store of money
hates peace, despises the friendship of his Neighbors and Allies, enters not
only into unnecessary, but also into dangerous Wars, to the ruin and overthrow
(sometimes) of his own estate: All which, with diverse other weak arguments of
this kind, (which for brevity I omit) make nothing against the lawful gathering
and massing up of Treasure by wise and provident Princes, if they be rightly
understood.

For first, concerning those worthies who have obtained to the highest top of
honor and dignity, by their great gifts and expenses, who knows not that this
has been done rather upon the spoils of their Enemies than out of their own
Cofers, which is indeed a Bounty that causes neither loss nor peril? Whereas
on the contrary, those Princes which do not providently lay up Treasure, or do
imoderately consume the same Excess and bounty brings beggary, which makes most
men devise in their heads how to extort and get money into their hands.
when they have it, will suddenly come to want and misery; for there is nothing
does so soon decay as Excessive Bounty, in using whereof they want the means to
use it. And this was King Solomon's case, notwithstanding, his infinite
Treasure, which made him over-burthen his Subjects in such a manner, that (for
this cause) many of them rebelled against his Son Rehoboam, who thereby lost a
great part of his dominions, being so grossly misled by his young Counselors.
Therefore a Prince that will not oppress his people, and yet be able to
maintain his Estate, and defend his Right, that will not run himself into
Poverty, Contempt, Hate, and Danger, must lay up treasure, and be thrifty, for
further proof whereof I might yet produce some other examples, which here I do
omit as needless.

Only I will add this as a necessary rule to be observed, that when more
treasure must be raised than can be received by the ordinary taxes, it ought
ever to be done with equality to avoid the hate of the people, who are never
pleased except their contributions be granted by general consent: For which
purpose the invention of Parliaments is an excellent policy of Government, to
keep a sweet concord between a King and his Subjects, by restraining the
Insolency of the Nobility, and redressing the Injuries of the Commons, without
engaging a Prince to adhere to either party, but indifferently to favor both.
There could nothing be devised with more judgment for the common quiet of a
Kingdom, or with greater care for the safety of a King, who hereby has also
good means to dispatch those things by others, which will move envy, and to
execute that himself which will merit thanks.

CHAP. XVIII. How much Treasure a Prince may conveniently lay up yearly.
THus far we have showed the ordinary and extraordinary incomes of Princes, the
convenience thereof, and to whom only it does necessarily and justly belong, to
take the extraordinary contributions of their Subjects. It rests now to
examine what proportion of treasure each particular Prince may conveniently lay
up yearly. This business does seem at the first to be very plain and easy, for
if a Prince have two millions yearly revenue, and spend but one, why should he
not lay up the other? Indeed I must confess that this course is ordinary in the
means and gettings of private men, but in the affairs of Princes it is far
different, there are other circumstances to be considered; for although the
revenue of a King should be very great, yet if the gain Foreign Trade must
give proportion to a Princes treasure which is laid up yearly.
of the Kingdom be but small, this latter must ever give rule and proportion to
that Treasure, which may conveniently be laid up yearly, for if he should mass
up more money than is gained by the overballance of his foreign trade, he shall
not Fleece, bu Flea his Subjects, and so with their ruin overthrow himself for
want of future sheerings. To make this plain, suppose a Kingdom to be so rich
by nature and art, that it may supply it self of foreign wares by trade, and
yet advance yearly 200000 l. in ready money: Next suppose all the Kings revenues
to be 900000 l. and his expenses but 400000 l. whereby he may lay up 300000 l.
more in his Coffers yearly than the whole Kingdom gains from strangers by
foreign trade; who sees not then that all the money in such a State, would
suddenly be drawn into the Princes treasure, whereby the life of lands and arts
must fail and fall to the ruin both of the public and private wealth? So that
a King who desires to lay up much money must endeavor by all good means to
maintain and increase A Prince whose Subjects have but little foreign Trade
cannot lay up much money.
his foreign trade, because it is the sole way not only to lead him to his own
ends, but also to enrich his Subjects to his farther benefit: for a Prince is
esteemed no less powerful by having many rich and well affected. Subjects, than
by possessing much treasure in his Coffers.

But here we must meet with an Objection, which peradventure may be made
concerning such States (whereof I have formerly spoken) which are of no great
extent, and yet bordering upon mighty Princes, are therefore constrained to lay
extraordinary taxes upon their subjects, whereby they procure to themselves
very great incomes yearly, and are richly provided against any Foreign
Invasions; yet have they no such great trade with Strangers, as that the
over-balance or gain of the same may suffice to lay up the one half of that
which they advance yearly, besides their own expenses.

To this the answer is, that still the gain of their Foreign Trade must be the
rule of laying up their treasure, the which although it should not not be much
yearly, yet in the time of a long continued peace, and being well managed to
advantage, it will become a great sum of money, able to make a long defense,
which may end or divert the war. Neither are all the advances of Princes
strictly tied to be massed up in treasure, for they have other no less
necessary and profitable ways to make them rich and powerful, by issuing out
continually a great part of the money of their yearly Incomes to their subjects
from whom it was first taken; as namely, by employing them to make Ships of
War, with all the provisions thereunto belonging, to build and repair Forts, to
buy and store up Corn in the Granaries of each Province for a years use (at
least) aforehand, to serve in occasion of Dearth, which cannot be neglected by
a State but with great danger, to erect Banks with their money for the increase
of their subjects trade, to maintain in their pay, Colonels, Captains,
Soldiers, Commanders, Mariners, and others, both by Sea and Land, with good
discipline, to fill their Storehouses (in sundry Munition for war ought to be
kept in diverse places of the State, to prevent* the loss of all by treachery in
one place.
strong places) and to abound in Gunpowder, Brimstone, Saltpeter, Shot,
Ordnance, Muskets, Swords, Pikes, Armours, Horses, and in many other such like
Provisions fitting War; all which will make them to be feared abroad, and loved
at home, especially if care be taken that all (as near as possible) be made out
of the Matter and Manufacture of their own subjects, which bear the burden of
the yearly Contributions; for a Prince (in this case) is like the stomach in
the body, which if it cease to digest and distribute to the other members, it
does no sooner corrupt them, but it destroys it self.

Thus we have seen that a small State may lay up a great wealth in necessary
provisions, which are Princes Jewels, no less precious than their Treasure, for
in time of need they are ready, and cannot otherwise be had (in some places) on
the sudden, whereby a State may be lost, whilst Munition is in providing: so
that we may account that Prince as poor who can have no wares to buy at his
need, as he that has no money to buy wares; for although Treasure is said to
be the sinews of the War, yet this is so because it does provide, unite and
move the power of men, victuals, and munition where and when the cause does
require; but if these things be wanting in due time, what shall we then do with
our money? the consideration of this, does cause diverse well-governed States to
be exceeding provident and well furnished of such provisions, especially those
Granaries and Storehouses with that famous Arsenal of the Venetians, are to be
admired for the magnificence of the buildings, the quantity of the Munitions
and Stores both for Sea and Land, the multitude of the workmen, the diversity
and excellency of the Arts, with the order of the government. They are rare and
worthy things for Princes to behold and imitate; for Majesty without providence
of competent force, and ability of necessary provisions is unassured.

CHAP. XIX. Of some different effects, which proceed from Natural and
Artificial Wealth.
IN the latter end of the third Chapter of this Book, I have already written *
something concerning Natural and Artificial Wealth, and therein showed how much
Art does add to Nature; but it is yet needful to handle these particulars
apart, that so we may the better discern their several operations in a
Commonwealth. For the effecting whereof, I might draw some comparisons from
Turkey and Italy, or from some other remote Countries, but I will not range so
far, having matter sufficient here in Great Britain and the united Provinces of
the Low Countries, to make this business plain: wherefore, in the first place,
we will begin with England briefly, and only in general terms, to show the
natural riches of this famous Nation, with some principal effects which they
produce in the disposition of the people, and strength of the Kingdom.

If we duly consider Englands Largeness, Beauty, Fertility, Strength, both by
Sea and Land, in multitude of warlike People, Horses, Ships, Ammunition,
advantageous situation for Defense and Trade, number of Seaports and Harbors,
which are of difficult access to Enemies, and of easy outlet to the
Inhabitants wealth by excellent Fleece-wools, Iron, Lead, Tynn, Saffron, Corn,
Victuals, Hides, Wax, and other natural Endowments; we shall find this Kingdom
capable to sit as master of a Monarchy. For what greater glory and advantage
can any powerful Nation have, than to be thus richly and naturally possessed of
all things needful for Food, Raiment, War, and Peace, not only for its own
plentiful use, but also to supply the wants of other Nations, in such a
measure, that much money may be thereby gotten yearly, to make the happiness
complete. For experience tells us, that notwithstanding that excessive
Consumption of this Kingdom alone, to say nothing of Scotland, there is
exported communibus annis of our own native commodities for the value of twenty
two hundred thousand pounds Sterling, or somewhat more; so that if we were not
too much affected to Pride, monstrous Fashions, and Riot, above all other
Nations, one million and an half of pounds might plentifully supply our
unnecessary wants (as I may term them) of Silks, Sugars, Spices, Fruits, and
all others; so that seven hundred thousand pounds might be yearly treasured up
in money to make the Kingdom exceeding rich and powerful in short time. But
this great plenty which we enjoy, makes us a people not only vicious and
excessive, wastful of the means we have, but also improvident and careless of
much other wealth that shamefully we lose, which is, the Fishing in his
Majesty's Seas of England, Scotland, and Ireland, being of no less consequence
than all our other riches which we export and vent to Strangers, whilst The
fruits of Idleness, which are Englands common reproaches among Strangers.
in the mean time (through lewd idleness) great multitudes of our people cheat,
roar, rob, hang, beg, cant, pine and perish, which by this means and
maintenance might be much increased, to the further wealth and strength of
these Kingdoms, especially by Sea, for our own safety, and terror of our
enemies. The endeavors of the industrious Dutch do give sufficient testimony
of this truth, to our great shame, and no less peril, if it have not a timely
prevention: for, whilst we leave our wonted honorable exercises and studies,
following our pleasures, and of late years besotting our selves with pipe and
pot, in a beastly manner, sucking smoke, and drinking healths, until death
stares many in the face; the said Dutch have well-neer left this swinish vice,
and taken up our wonted valor, which we have often so well performed both by
Sea and Land, and particularly in their defense, although they are not now so
thankful as to acknowledge The Netherlanders ingratitude.
the same. The sum of all is this, that the general leprosy of our Piping,
Potting, Feasting, Fashions, and mis-spending of our time in Idleness and
Pleasure (contrary to the Law of God, and the use of other Nations) has made
us effeminate in our bodies, weak in our knowledge, poor in our Treasure,
declined in our Valor, unfortunate in our Enterprises, and contemned by our
Enemies. I write the more of these excesses, because they do so greatly wast
our wealth, which is the main subject of this whole Books discourse: and indeed
our wealth might be a rare discourse for all Christendom to admire and fear,
if we would but add Art to Nature, our labor to our natural means; the neglect
whereof has given a notable advantage to other nations, and especially to the
Hollanders, whereof I will briefly say something in the next place.

But first, I will deliver my opinion concerning our Clothing, which although
it is the greatest Wealth and best Employment of the Poor of this Kingdom, yet
nevertheless we may peradventure employ our selves with better Safety, Plenty,
and Profit in using more Tillage and Fishing, than to trust so wholly to the
making of Cloth; for in times of War, or by others occasions, if some foreign
Princes should prohibit the use thereof in their dominions, it might suddenly
cause much poverty and dangerous uproars, especially by our poor people, when
they should be deprived of their ordinary maintenance, which cannot so easily
fail them when their labors should be divided into the said diversity of
employment, whereby also many thousands would be the better enabled to do the
Kingdom good service in occasion of war, especially by Sea: And so leaving
England, we will pass over into the United Provinces of the Netherlands.

As plenty and power do make a nation vicious and improvident, so penury and
want do make a people wise and industrious: concerning the last of these I
might instance diverse Commonwealths of Christendom, who having little or
nothing in their own Territories, do notwithstanding purchase great wealth and
strength by their industrious commerce with strangers, amongst The Hollanders
improvement and industry.
which the united Provinces of the Low Countries are now of greatest note and
fame: For since they have cast off the yoke of Spanish slavery, how wonderfully
are they improved in all humane policy? What great means have they obtained to
defend their liberty against the power of so great an Enemy? and is not all
this performed by their continual industry in the trade of Merchandise? are not
their Provinces the Magazines and Storehouses of wares for most places of
Christendom, whereby their Wealth, Shipping, Mariners, Arts, People, and
thereby the public Revenues and Excizes are grown to a wonderful height? If
we compare the times of their subjection, to their present estate, they seem
not the Those Princes which do willingly support the Dutch, would as resolutely
resist the Spaniard.
same people; for who knows not that the condition of those Provinces was mean
and turbulent under the Spaniards government, which brought rather a greater
charge than a further strength to their ambition; neither would it prove over
difficult for the neighbor Princes in short time to reduce those Countries to
their former estate again, if their own safety did require the same, as
certainly it would if the Spaniard were sole Lord of those Netherlands; but our
discourse tends not to show the means of those mutations, otherwise than to
find out the chief foundation of the Hollanders wealth and greatness: for it
seems a wonder to the world, that such a small Country, not fully so big as
two of our best Shires, having little natural Wealth, Victuals, Timber, or
other necessary amunitions, either for war or peace, should notwithstanding
possess them all in such extraordinary plenty, that besides their own wants
(which are very great) they can and do likewise serve and sell to other
Princes, Ships, Ordnance, Cordage, Corn, Powder, Shot, and what not, which by
their industrious trading they gather from all the quarters of the world: In
which Much Policy, but little Honesty.
courses they are not less injurious to supplant others (especially the
English) than they are careful to strengthen themselves. And to effect this and
more than has been said (which is their war with Spain) they have little
foundation besides the Fishing, which is permitted them in His Majesty's Seas,
being indeed the means of an incredible wealth and strength, both by Sea and
Land, as Robert Hichcock, Tobias Gentleman, and others have published at large
in print to them that list to read. And the States General themselves in their
proclamation have ingeniously set out the worth thereof in these words
following, The Part of the States Proclamation, dated in the Hague, 19. July
1624.
great Fishing and catching of Herrings is the chiefest trade and principal
Gold Mine of the United Provinces, whereby many thousands of Households,
Families, Handicrafts, Trades and Occupations are set on work, well maintained
and prosper, especially the sailing and navigation, as well within as without
these Countries is kept in great estimation; Moreover many returns of money,
with the increase of the means, Convoys, Customs and revenues of these
Countries are augmented thereby and prosper, with other words following, as is
at large expressed in the said Proclamations, set forth by the States General
for the preservation of the said trade of Fishing; without which it is apparent
that they cannot long subsist in Sovereignty; for if this foundation perish,
the whole building of their wealth and strength both by Sea and Land must fall;
for the multitude of their Shipping would suddenly decay, their revenues and
customs would become small, their Countries would be depopulated for want of
maintenance, whereby the Excise must fail, and all their other trades to the
East Indies or elsewhere must faint. So that the glory and power of these
Netherlanders consists in this fishing of Herrings, Ling and Cod in His
Majesty's Seas. It rests therefore to know what right or title they have
thereunto, and how they are able to possess and keep the same against all other
Nations.

The answers to these two questions are not difficult: for first, it is not the
Netherlandish Author of Mare Liberum, that can entitle them to Fish in His
Majesty's Seas. For besides the Justice of the cause, and examples of other
Countries, which might be alleged, I will only say, that such titles would be
sooner decided by swords, than with words; I do believe indeed that it is free
for the Fish to come thither at their pleasure, but for the Dutch to catch and
carry them away from thence without His Majesty's license, I harbor no such
thought. There may be good policy to connive still, and so long to permit them
this fishing as they are in perfect league with England, and in war with Spain.
But if the Spaniards were Masters of the United Provinces as heretofore, it
would nearly concern these Kingdoms to claim their own right, and carefully to
make as good use thereof for increase of their wealth and strength, to oppose
that potent enemy, as now the Netherlanders do, and are thereby well enabled
for the same purpose: by which particular alone they are ever bound to
acknowledge their strong alliance with England, above all other Nations, for
there is none that has the like good means to lend them such a powerful
maintenance. Nor were it Money and Fishing compared.
possible for the Spaniard (if he had those Countries again) to make a new
Foundation with the power of his money, to increase his strength, either by Sea
or Land, to offend these Kingdoms, more than he is now able to perform with the
convenience of those Provinces which he has already in his possession; for it
is not the Place, but the Employment, not the barren Netherlands, but the rich
Fishing, which gives Foundation, Trade, and Subsistence to those multitudes of
Ships, Arts and People, whereby also the Excises and other public Revenues are
continued, and without which Employment all the said great Dependences must
necessarily disbandon and fail in very short time. For although I confess, that
store of money may bring them materials (which they altogether want) and
Artsmen to build them Shipping, yet where are the wares to freight and maintain
them? if money then shall be the only means to send them out in Trade, what a
poor number of Ships will this employ? or if the uncertain occasions of War
must support them, will not this require another Indies, and all too little to
maintain the tenth part of so many Ships and Men as the Hollanders do now set
on work by the Fishing and other Trades thereon depending? But if it be yet
said, that the Spaniard being Lord of all those Netherlands, his expense of the
present War there will cease, and so this power may be turned upon us. The
answer is, that when Princes send great Forces abroad to invade others, they
must likewise increase their charge and strength at home, to defend themselves;
and also we must consider, that if the Spaniard will attempt any thing upon
these Kingdoms, he must consume a great part of his Treasure in Shipping,
whereby the means of his invading power of Money and Men to land will be much
less than now it is in the Low Countries: Nor should we regard them, but be
ever ready to beard them, when our Wealth and Strength by Sea and Land might be
so much increased by the possession and practice of our Fishing, of which
particular I will yet say something more where occasion shall be offered in
that which follows. And here in this place I will only add, that if the
Spaniard were sole Lord of all the Netherlands, he must then necessarily drive
a great trade by Sea, to supply the common wants of those Countries, whereby in
occasion of war, we should have means daily to take much wealth from him;
whereas now the Spaniard using little or no trade in these Seas, but employing
his Ships of war to the uttermost of his power, he only takes, and we lose
great matters continually.

Now concerning the second question, Whether the Hollanders be able to possess
and keep this fishing against all other Nations. It is very probable, that
although they claim now no other right than their own freedom in this Fishing,
seeming to leave the like to all others; yet if the practice of any Nation
should seek either to Fish with them or to supplant them, they would be both
ready and able to maintain this Golden Mine, against the strongest opposition
except England, whose harbors and In-lands with other daily reliefs are very
needful, if not absolutely necessary for this employment, and whose Power also
by Sea, is able (in short-time) to give this business disturbance, and utter
ruin, if the occasion should be so urgent as is before supposed: Neither is it
enough for any man to contradict all this by saying the Hollanders are very
strong by Sea, when both Sea and Land encounter them with a greater power: we
must observe from whence their strength does grow, and if the root may once be
spoiled, the branches soon will wither; and therefore it were an error to
esteem, or value them according to the present power and wealth, which they
have obtained by trade or purchase; for although this were far greater then
indeed it is, yet would it soon be consumed in a chargeable war against a
potent enemy, when the current of those Accidents may be stopped and turned by
preventing the substance it self (which is the Fishing in His Majesty's Seas)
that gives Foundation, and is the very Fountain of their strength and
happiness: The United Provinces (we know) are like a fair bird suited with
goodly borrowed plumes; but if every Fowl should take his feather, this bird
would rest near naked: Nor have we ever seen these Netherlanders as yet in
their greatest occasions to set forth near so many ships of war at once as the
English have often done without any hinderance of their ordinary traffic; It
is true indeed, they have an infinite number of weak Ships to fish with, and
fetch Corn, Salt, etc. for their own victualling and trading, the like to fetch
Timber, Plank, Boords, Pitch, Hemp, Tar, Flax, Masts, Cordage, and other
Ammunitions to make those multitudes of Ships, which unto them are as our
Ploughs to us, the which except The Netherlanders Ploughs.
they stir, the people starve; their Shipping therefore cannot be spared from
their traffic (as ours may if occasion require) no not for a very short time,
without utter ruin, because it is the daily maintenance of their great
multitudes which gain their living but from hand to mouths upon which also
depends the great excises, and other public revenues, which support the State
it self: Neither indeed are those Vessels strong or fit for war; and in their
proper use of Fishing and trade they would become the riches, or the purchase
of a potent Enemy by Sea, as they partly find by one poor town of Dunkirk,
notwithstanding their great charge of Men of war, strong Convoys, and other
comm^ndable diligence, which continually they use to prevent this mischief: but
if the occasion of a more powerful enemy by Sea should force them to double or
treble those charges, we may well doubt the means of their continuance,
especially when (by us) their fishing might nevertheless be prevented, which
should procure the maintenance. These Men who speak by affection or tradition,
not from reason.
and other circumstances make me often wonder, when I hear the Dutch
vain-gloriously to brag, and many English simply to believe, that the United
Provinces are our Forts, Bulwarks, Walls, outworks, and I know not what,
without which we cannot long The Hollanders main supportance is Englands good
Alliance.
subsist against the Spanish forces; when in truth, we are the main fountain of
their happiness, both for war and peace; for trade and treasure, for Munition
and Men, spending our blood in their defense; whilst their people are preserved
to conquer in the Indies, and to reap the fruits of a rich traffic out of our
own bosoms; which being assumed to our selves (as we have right and power to
do) would mightily increase the breed of our people by this good means of their
maintenance, and well enable us against the strongest enemy, and force likewise
great multitudes of those Netherlanders themselves to seek their living here
with us for want of better maintenance: whereby our many decayed Sea-towns and
Castles would soon be re-edified and populated in more ample manner than
formerly they were in their best estate. And thus these forces being united,
would be ever more ready, sure, and vigorous than a greater strength that lies
divided, which is always subject to delays, diversion, and other jealousies, of
all which we ought not to be ignorant, but perfectly to know, and use our own
strength when we have occasion, and especially we must ever be watchful to
preserve this strength, lest the subtilty of the Dutch (under some fair shows
and with their money) prevail, as peradventure they lately practiced in
Scotland, to have had a Patent for the possessing, inhabiting, and fortifying
of that excellent Island of Lewis in the Orcades; whose situation, harbors,
fishing, fertility, largeness and other advantages, would have made them able
(in short time) to offend these Kingdoms by sudden invasions, and to have
defended the aforesaid Fishing against his Majesty's greatest power, and also
to send out and return home their Shipping prosperously that way, to and from
the East and West Indies, Spain, the Straights, and other places, without
passing through his Majesty's narrow Seas, where in all occasions this Kingdom
now has so great advantage to take their Ships, and prevent their best Trades,
which would soon bring them to ruin, whereby (as they well know) we have a
greater tie and power over them than any other Nation. And howsoever the said
Island of Lewis might have been obtained in the name of private men, and under
the fair pretense of bringing Comerce into those remote parts of Scotland; yet
in the end, when the work had been brought to any good perfection, the
possession and power would no doubt have come to the Lords, the States General,
even as we know they have lately gotten diverse places of great Strength and
Wealth in the East Indies, in the names and with the purse of their Merchants,
whereby also their actions herein have been obscured and made less notorious
unto the world, until they had obtained their ends, which are of such
consequence, that it does much concern this Nation in particular, carefully to
observe their proceedings, for they notoriously follow the steps of that
valiant and politic Captain, Philip of Macedon, whose Maxim was, That where
force could not prevail, he always Where force fails, yet money prevails; thus
hopes the Hollanders.
used bribes, and money to corrupt those who might advance his fortune; by
which policy he gave foundation to a Monarchy; and what know we but that the
Dutch may aim at some such Sovereignty, when they shall find their Indian
attempts and other subtle plots succeed so prosperously? Do we not see their
Lands are now become too little to contain this swelling people, whereby their
Ships and Seas are made the Habitations of great multitudes? and yet, to give
them further breed, are they not spared from their own wars to enrich the State
and themselves by Trade and Arts? whilst by this policy many thousands of
strangers are also drawn thither for performance of their martial employments,
whereby the great revenue of their Excises is so much the more increased, and
all things so subtly contrived, that although the foreign Soldier be well
paid, yet all must be there again expended; and thus the Wealth remains still
in their own Countries; nor are the strangers enriched which do them this great
service.

I have heard some Italians wisely and worthily discourse of the natural
Strength and Wealth of England, which they make to be matchless, if we should
(but in part) apply our selves to such policies and endeavors as are very
commonly used in some other Countries of Europe; and much they have admired,
that our thoughts and jealousies attend only upon the Spanish and French
greatness, never once suspecting, but constantly embracing the Netherlanders as
our best Friends and Allies; when in truth (as they well observe) there are no
people in Christendom who do more undermine, hurt, and eclipse us daily in our
Navigation and Trades, both abroad and at home; and this not only in the rich
Fishing in his Majesty's Seas (whereof we have already written) but also in our
Inland trades between City and City, in the Manufactures of Silk, Woolls, and
the like, made here in this Kingdom, wherein they never give employment or
education in their Arts to the English, but ever (according to the custom of
the Jews, where they abide in Turkey, and diverse places of Christendom) they
live wholly to themselves in their own Tribes. So that we may truly say of the
Dutch, that although they are amongst us, yet certainly they are not of us, no
not they who are born and bred here in our own Country, for still they will be
Dutch, not having so much as one drop of English blood in their hearts.

More might be written of these Netherlanders pride and ambitious endeavors,
whereby they hope in time to grow mighty, if they be not prevented, and much
more may be said of their cruel and unjust violence used (especially to their
best friends, the English) in matters of blood, trade, and other profits, where
they have had advantage and power to perform it: but these things are already
published in print to the view and admiration of the world; wherefore I will
conclude, and the sum of all is this, that the United Provinces, which now are
so great a trouble, if not a terror to the Spaniard, were heretofore little
better than a charge to them in their possession, and would be so again in the
like occasion, the reasons whereof I might yet further enlarge; but they are
not pertinent to this discourse, more than is already declared, to show the
different effects between Natural and Artificial Wealth: The first of which, as
it is most noble and advantageous, being always ready and certain, so does it
make the people careless, proud, and given to all excesses; whereas the second
enforces Vigilance, Literature, Arts and Policy. My wishes therefore are, that
as England does plentifully enjoy the one, and is fully capable of the other,
that our endeavors might as worthily conjoyn them both together, to the
reformation of our vicious idleness, and greater glory of these famous
Kingdoms.

CHAP. XX. The order and means whereby we may draw up the balance of our
Foreign Trade.
NOw, that we have sufficiently proved the Balance of our Foreign Trade to be
the true rule of our Treasure; It rests that we show by whom and in what
manner the said balance may bedrawn up at all times, when it shall please the
State to discover how we prosper or decline in this great and weighty business,
wherein the Officers of his Majesty's Customs are the only Agents to be
employed, because they have the accounts of all the wares which are issued out
or brought into the Kingdom; and although (it is true) they cannot exactly set
down the cost and charges of other men's goods bought here or beyond the seas;
yet nevertheless, if they ground themselves upon the book of Rates, they shall
be able to make such an estimate as may well satisfy this enquiry: for it is
not expected that such an account can possibly be drawn up to a just balance,
it will suffice only that the difference be not over great.

First therefore, concerning our How we must value our Exportatione and
Impertations.
Exportations, when we have valued their first cost, we must add twenty five
per cent. thereunto for the charges here, for freight of Ships, ensurance of
the Adventure, and the Merchants Gains; and for our Fishing Trades, which pay
no Custom to his Majesty, the value of such Exportations may be easily
esteemed by good observations which have been made, and may continually be
made, according to the increase or decrease of those affairs, the present
estate of this commodity being valued at one hundred and forty thousand pounds
issued yearly. Also we must add to our Exportations all the moneys which are
carried out in Trade by license from his Majesty.

Secondly, for our Importations of Foreign Wares, the Custome-books serve
only to direct us concerning the quantity, for we must not value them as they
are rated here, but as they cost us with all charges laden into our Ships
beyond the Seas, in the respective places where they are bought: for the
Merchants gain, the charges of Insurance, Freight of Ships, Customs, Imposts,
and other Duties here, which do greatly indear them unto our use and
consumption, are notwithstanding but Commutations amongst our selves, for the
Stranger has no part thereof: wherefore our said Importations ought to be
valued at twenty five per cent. less than they are rated to be worth here. And
although this may seem to be too great allowance upon many rich Commodities,
which come but from the Low Countries and other places near hand, yet will it
be found reasonable, when we consider it in gross Commodities, and upon Wares
laden in remote Countries, as our Pepper, which cost us, with charges, but four
pence the pound in the East Indies, and it is here rated at twenty pence the
pound: so that when all is brought into a medium, the valuation ought to be
made as afore-written. And therefore, the order which has been used to
multiply the full rates upon wares inwards by twenty, would produce a very
great error in the Balance, for in this manner the ten thousand bags of
Pepper, which this year we have brought hither from the East Indies, should be
valued at very near two hundred and fifty thousand pounds, whereas The Trade to
the East Indies is not only great in it self, but it does also make our other
trades much greater than they were.
all this Pepper in the Kingdoms account, cost not above fifty thousand
pounds, because the Indians have had no more of us, although we paid them
extraordinary dear prices for the same. All the other charges (as I have said
before) is but a change of effects amongst our selves, and from the Subject to
the King, which cannot impoverish the Commonwealth. But it is true, that
whereas nine thousand bags of the said Pepper are already shipped out for
diverse foreign parts; These and all other Wares, foreign or domestic, which
are thus transported Outward, ought to be cast up by the rates of his
Majesty's Custome-money, multiplied by twenty, or rather by twenty five (as I
conceive) which will come nearer the reckoning, when we consider all our Trades
to bring them into a medium.

Thirdly, we must remember, that all Wares exported or imported by Strangers
(in their shipping) be esteemed by themselves, for what they carry out, the
Kingdom has only the first cost and the custom: And what they bring in, we
must rate itas it is worth here, the Custom, Impost, and pety charges only
deducted.

Lastly, there must be good notice taken of all the great losses which we
receive at Sea in our Shipping either outward or homeward bound: for the value
of the one is to be deducted from our Exportations, and the value of the other
is to be added to our Importations: for to lose and to consume does produce one
and the same reckoning. Likewise if it happen that His Majesty does make over
any great sums of money by Exchange to maintain a foreign war, where we do not
feed and clothe the Soldiers, and Provide the armies, we must deduct all this
charge out of our Exportations or add it to our Importations; for this expense
does either carry out or hinder the coming in of so much Treasure. And here we
must remember the great collections of money which are supposed to be made
throughout the Realm yearly from our Recusants by Priests and Jesuits, who
secretly convey the same unto their Colleges, Cloisters and Nunneries beyond
the Seas, from whence it never returns to us again in any kind; therefore if
this Two Contraries which are both prnicious.
mischief cannot be prevented, yet it must be esteemed and set down as a clear
loss to the Kingdom, except (to balance this) we will imagine that as great a
value may perhaps come in from foreign Princes to their Pensioners here for
Favors or Intelligence, which some States account good Policy, to purchase
with great Liberality; the receipt whereof notwithstanding is plain Treachery.

There are yet some other petty things which seem to have reference to this
Balance, of which the said Officers of His Majesty's Customs can take no
notice, to bring them into the account. As namely, the expenses of travailers,
the gifts to Ambassadors and Strangers, the fraud of some rich goods not entered
into the Custom-house, the gain which is made here by Strangers by change and
re-change, Interest of money, ensurance upon English men's goods and their lives:
which can be little when the charges of their living here is deducted; besides
that the very like advantages are as amply ministered unto the English in
foreign Countries, which does counterpoize all these things, and therefore
they are not considerable in the drawing up of the said Balance.

CHAP. XXI. The conclusion upon all that has been said, concerning the
Exportation or Importation of Treasure.
THe sum of all that has been spoken, concerning the enriching of the Kingdom,
and the increase of our treasure by commerce with strangers, is briefly thus.
That it is a certain rule in our foreign trade, in those places where our
commodities exported are overballanced in value by foreign wares brought into
this Realm, there our money is undervalued in exchange; and where the contrary
of this is performed, there our money is overvalued. But let the Merchants
exchange be at a high rate, or at a low rate, or at the Par propari, or put
down altogether; Let Foreign Princes enhance their Coins, or debase their
Standards, and let His Majesty do the like, or keep them constant as they now
stand; Let foreign Coins pass current here in all payments at higher rates
than they are worth at the Mint; Let the Statute for employments by Strangers
stand in force or be repealed; Let the mere Exchanger do his worst; Let Princes
oppress, Lawyers extort, Usurers bite, Prodigals wast, and lastly let Merchants
carry out what money they shall have occasion to use in traffic. Yet all these
actions can work no other effects in the course of trade than is declared in
this discourse. For so much Treasure only will be brought in or carried out of
a Commonwealth, as the Foreign Trade does over or under balance in value. And
this must come to pass by a Necessity beyond all resistance. So that all other
courses (which tend not to this end) howsoever they may seem to force money into
a Kingdom for a time, yet are they (in the end) not only fruitless but also
hurtful: they are like to violent floods which bear down their banks, and
suddenly remain dry again for want of waters.

Behold then the true form and worth of foreign Trade, which is, The great
Revenue of the King The honor of the Kingdom, The Noble profession of the
Merchant, The School of our Arts, The supply of our wants, The employment of
our poor, The improvement of our Lands, The Nurcery of our Mariners, The walls
of the Kingdoms, The means of our Treasure, The Sinnews of our wars, The terror
of our Enemies. For all which great and weighty reasons, do so many well
governed States highly countenance the profession, and carefully cherish the
action, not only with Policy to increase it, but also with power to protect it
from all foreign injuries: because they know it is a Principal in Reason of
State to maintain and defend that which does Support them and their estates.

COURTEOUS READER, these Books following are sold by Thomas Clark, at the
South-entrance of the Royal Exchange, London.
COnsuetudo vel Lex mercatoria, or the ancient Law-merchant, divided into three
parts, by Gerard Mulens Merchant.

The Merchants mirror, or Directions for the perfect ordering or keeping of his
Accounts, by Richard Dafforn, Accomptant.

An Introduction to Merchants Accounts, by John Collins Accomptant.

Amphithalamie, or the Accomptants Closet, being an Abridgement of Merchants
Accounts kept by Debitors and Creditors, by Abraham Liset.

An Analysis or resolution of Merchants Accounts, wherein the whole body of
Merchants Accounts is anatomized, by Ralph Handson Accomptant.

The Survey of London, containing the original, increase, modern estate and
government of this famous City.

The Surgeons Mate, or Military and Domestic Surgery, by John Woodall Master
in Surgery, very useful for all, especially for Surgeons.

A learned Commentary or Exposition upon the first Chapter of the second
Epistle of Saint Paul to the Corinthians, being the substance of many Sermons
formerly preached at Grayes Inn London, by that Reverend and Judicious Divine
Richard Sibbs D. D.

A Treatise of Justification, by George Downame D. D.

An Explanation of the General Epistle of S. Jude, by Mr. Samuel Otes, etc.

Colonel Monro his Expedition with the Scots Regiment, etc.

A Commentary on the first and second Chapters of S. Paul to the Collossians,
by Mr. Paul Bayn B. D.

The Doctrine of practical Prayer, together with a learned Exposition on the
Lords Prayer. By the Right Reverend Father in God Geo: Downame late Lord Bishop
of Derry in Ireland.

The Dipper dipped, or the Anabaptist duck'd and plunged over head and ears, by
Daniel Featly.

Beams of Divine Light, by Richard Sibbs D. D.

Evangelical Sacrifice;, in 19 Sermons, by Dr Sibbs.

Light from Heaven, in four Treatises, by Dr. Sibbs.

An Abridgement of D. Prestons Works, by the Industry of William Jemmat M. A.
and Preacher of Gods Word.

The Voyage and Travels of Sir Francis Drake into the Indies, in 4o.

Posthuma Fosteri, the description of a Ruler, in which is inscribed diverse
Scales, and the Uses thereof, with Propositions in Astronomy, Navigation, and
Dialling, with the declination of Horizontal Dials; to which may be added

Eliptical or Azimuthal Horologiography, by Samuel Foster, late Professor of
Astronomy in Gresham-College, London.

Popular Errors, or the Error of the People in matter of Physic, by D
Primrose.

Advice concerning Bills of Exchange, an excellent piece, by John Marius,
public Notary.

Tables of Interest and Rebate, for the purchase and discompt of Annuities,
more exactly calculated than heretofore, by Roger Clavel Mathematician.

A manual of Millions, or Accounts ready cast up, by which may suddenly be
known the true value of any Commodity at any price whatever, and how to resolve
many millions of questions either in Reduction or the Golden Rule, without any
use of Multiplication or Division, by Richard Hodges, a piece very useful for
all degrees of men.

The Accademy of Eloquence, containing a complete English Rhetoric,
exemplified in common places, and formally digested into an easy methodical
way to speak and write fluently according to the mode of the present times,
wit^ Letters both Amorous and Moral upon emergent occasions, by T. B. of the
Inner Temple Esquire. the third Edition.

A Latin Testament of a very fair Character in 12. necessary for all Scholars.

The Doctress, a treatise of those Diseases most incident to Women, by R. B.

A Sermon preached at the funeral of the Right Hon. Tho. Earl of Elgin, by
Rich. Pearson, D. D.

The Faith of the Church of England, by F. Tailor.

A Concordance in folio, in 4. in 8. in 12. to bind with Bibles.

Conformity re-asserted in an Echo to R. S. or a return of his word to Dr.
Wom^ck, asserting the modification of public worship by personal ability is
not the formal act of the ministerial office. 3. That the Minister of the
Church of England ought to submit to the use of an imposed Liturgy, by L. W. D.
D.

Take notice, that all sorts of Bill of Lading, whether in English, French*
Spanish, Italian or Dutch, likewise Indentures for binding Apprentices to
Planters in any of his Majesty's Islands, and also Indentures for the City and
Country, are printed for and sold by Thomas Clark at the South entrance of the
Royal Exchange.

FINIS.

