

Noe Art can cure this heart

Where in is storied, ye valorous atchieuements, famous triumphs, constant
love, great miseries, and final happiness, of the well-deseruing, truly noble
and most valiant (...) Sr Paris of Vienna and ye most admired amiable Princess,
the fair Vienna.

London Printed for WILLIAM LEAKE and are to be sold at his shop at ye crown
in fleet strett between the two Temple gaits. 1650.

JUst in the Cloud does lovely CUPID stand,
With Quiver at his side, and Bow in hand:
Which shows when his swift Arrows pierce the heart,
The wound must cured be, by Love, not Art:
And MARS the God of War to give renown
Unto desert, does here true Valor crown,
VIENNA Natures pride does parallel,
VENUS her self, who did her Sex excel.
The joined hands to the Spectarors show,
That Valor does to Beauty homage owe.
And with the stately Steed that stands in view,
Sir PARIS did great troops of Foes subdue.
The Castle strong and cruel laylors key,
Are Emblems of a Princes misery.
If that the bars were red and Scutch on white,
The Coat would show who did this Story write.
TO HIS WORTHY BROTHER in law, Mr. RICHARD MINSHVLL, all health and Happiness.
MOre Rich-art thou in mind then Mines,
but Myn-shall be the joy of heart;
Since still thy love with mine combines,
and smells of Nature more then Art:
For blood with blood, and sacred writ,
Such knots of love in Love has knit.
To thee therefore J only send,
this Spiders Web so vainly spunne,
Which my best thoughts to thee commend,
since what is done, for thee is done:
If any tax my idle brain,
Say once a year fond fools do reign.
M. M.

To the Reader.
NOt with intent to pass the speaking Press,
Or challenge Praise of any more or less.
This Book was writ, the Author for his pains
Did neither aim at merit, praise, or gains;
To gratify a well deserving friend,
This Story feigned, at vacant hours was penned:
Which though now to the world exposed it be,
The Authors heart is from vain glory free.
THOMAS CROKET in praise of the Authors Work.
IF graver heads should hold it to be vain,
that thou (well struck in years) do^st write of Love
Say thou the finest dye soon'st takes a stain,
and soundest Wits light subjects often prove:
But thou have temp'red so thy Love with Arms,
with Knightly prowess, and with Martial feats;
That thy smooth style (like sweet bewitching charms)
compells all sorts to read without entreats:
Then blush not since thy Pen such Art has shown,
as proves the difference 'twixt Love and Lust;
And stirs up Valor almost overthrown,
whose Arms lie cankered with consuming rust:
But rather glory in thy taken pains,
for which the world indebted aye remains.
THOMAS CROKET.

To the deserving Author.
Whilst Paris thy great Rape shall be renowned,
Or Troy it self on earth has any sound;
That in thy breast did foster such a flame,
To waste the Town, and yet preserve the Name:
So long (Sir Paris) thy chaste fires shall last,
Which (though not with such fury) burnt as fast;
And whilst the City of Vienna stands,
A virgin Town maugre the opposite bands,
Of insolent Turks vnravish'd by their steel,
And never their invasive Arms to feel:
So long a date Vienna thou do give,
To him whose Pen has made thee ever live.
Tho. Haywood.

VIENNA here presents to you,
Both Love and Valor, great and true,
And in this Story you shall find
Pregnant conceits to please the mind:
Which read, and view, and reap the gains.
Then thank the Author for his pains.
R. R.

THy pleasing Story gives most true content,
to all that have survay'd thy witty Lines:
For thou to Mars and Venus grace have le^,
and in thy Book both Love and Valor shines:
For which, let Martial Knights and Ladies fair,
say, and fay truth, that this is past compare.
T. M.

THy Mars- like Paris, and Vienna fair,
most pleasing do appear eclipsed no way:
Who viewes the same, thou needst not doubt or fear,
for it is decked in Wits rich array,
There Is such new pleasing ways to please the mind,
That all, that read the same, content will find.
Samoth Egnirawniam.

SInce graver wits (so much) thy Book commend,
Whose censures do my judgment (far) transcend:
Why should not I rest silent, and admire;
Knowing my skill answers not my desire?
The reason is, I (rather) will improve
My ignorance, then to conceal that love,
Which duty prompts to speak, which still does live,
To honor thee, since praise I cannot give
To equallize thy pains in study spent,
Which now (most fluently) in complement,
Shows the exactness of a sollid brain,
That makes so small a volume to contain,
Love, Valor, Fortitude; what not that is rare?
But in thy (pregnant) Lines composed are?
Wisdom, Conceit, Art, Learning, Knowledge, Wit,
Do grace thy work to make it exquisite:
Time shall proclaim thy worth to future days,
And Fame perpetuate thy living praise.
Io. Egnirawniam.

AS most esteem of Jewels for their worth,
And prize them high, though not in gold set forth:
So virtuous minds when they this Story view,
Admire and say (for it) great thanks is due:
If others cannot add (to it) like praise,
Time vows to store such worth for future days;
My Pen here stops, yet Natures stream runs so,
Rivers will ebb to th'Sea from whence they flow.
Mat. Egnirawniam.

IF duty did not bind, desert would move
my Art-lesse Pen thy Story to commend:
Since better plots of Valor, Art, Wit, Love,
to Momus view, the Press did never send.
Ralph Egnirawniam.

ANd I the last, but not the least, whose Love
to thee, and thine, is tied in treble bands;
For marr'age, blood, and friendship which may prove,
our constant buildings are not on the sands:
Therefore with thanks for this thy well wrote Story,
Though mine it is: yet thine shall be the glory.
Your Kinsman, Brother in law, and Friend, Richard Mynshull.

VIENNA.
WIthin the Principality of Viennois, whilome there lived and ruled, as
Daulphin, a most renowned Prince, no less esteemed for his admired Wisdom,
then highly honored for his respected greatness; But so absolute was he in
Opinion, so perverse in disposition, and so severe in Government, that he made
his Will his GOD, and rigor his law. This Daulphin had but one only Daughter,
whose exquisite beauty was so beautified with rarest virtues, that men honored
Nature as a God in her perfections, and held her more then a Woman in her
virtues. Amongst many Knights that then followed her Fathers Court, there was a
most well deserving aged Knight (who was known to be as sufficient, as he was
sufficiently known) named Sir Jaques, who had but one only Son called Paris,
whose but budding years, decked with Natures pride, and honored with timely
Knighthood, well challenged Renown for his right, Venus for his friend, and
Fortune for his servant. But it fortuned (so Fortune would) that this young
Knight casting casually his careless eye aside in Court, espied the young
Princess, the fair Vienna, (for so after the City was she called) talking
with her selected and ^^deered friend the Lady Izabella, whose gracious
demeanor he so devoutly noted, and whose unparalleled beauty he so feelingly
admired, that openly commending the one, he secretly affected the other. Many
were the unwonted thoughts that now troubled his troubled mind, and more then
many were the unquiet and universuall cares that now attended his new
entertained desires. Still he gazed, and gazing sigh't, and sighing grieved
that so he gazed, yet could he not cease to feed his hungry eye, nor durst he
once be seen to look on her, on whom he could not bur look. For as
commanding love did flatter his a spiring hope; so the remembrance of Phaetons
fall, did dismay him with a deadly fear. And fear he did, least that just
disdain would beget in her bitter revenge, and black revenge should bring
forth untimely deaths.

Thus in seeking to pass the mean, poor Paris dyed for being so mean, and
in this disconsolation glad he was to smother his sorrow to his greater
grief, nor daring to acquaint any but La-nova his second self, his companion
in Arms, and the sole secreter of all his secrets. To him, and none but him,
did he in sorrow bewray his love, and in love bewail his sorrow.

La-nova pitying his case, dissuaded him from the danger of Ixions love, least
with more repentance he vainly with Apollo pursued Daphne. Heavens forbid
(said he) my Paris eye should with the Eagle sore against so bright a Sun;
or that your desire should with the Be delight in such flowers, which being
sucked, will yield more poison then honey. Ah Paris, Paris, seek not to obtain
that with care, which you cannot keep without danger. To desire to be a King,
is no just title of a Kingdom; and to say you love her, no sufficient desert
to win her. Desire not then beyond thy reach, least thou fall in thy hope.
Nay, admit that her chaste conceits would entertain Venus deceits, yet follows
it not, that Jove's royal bird would prey on silly Flies. Alexander would deal
with none but Kings, nor Vienna with any but Princes; low shrubs wither ever at
the Cedars root. Beware Paris, least coveting with Iearus to soar above the
Sun, thou be punished in his pride under the Sun. Thy deserts are J
confess many, and meritorious, but the state of her estate stands not with thy
indignities; men are wey'd by the abundance of their fortunes, not by the
worthiness of their virtues. Then wade no further in this foord, but let
Armours, nor Amors, be the subject of thy thoughts, since the Camp affords
honors, and the Court such dangers.

Paris thus dehorted, resembled the Palm Tree, that the more it is pressed
down, the more it striveth upwards, so the more his friend misliked of that
he desired; the more he desired what so his friend misliked. Such was the
unresistable force of his inlimitable affection, that in spite of reason he
was enforced to do homage unto passion. For where Love is predominant, there
all other affections attend on it. And therefore he concluded still, and ever
to love her; but still, and never to let it be known to her. To approve
which, he requested La-nova's company that night secretly to give Vienna
music, who seeing his unremoveable resolution, vowed himself to his
fortunes. The same night when quiet sleep possessed each weary eye, he and
La-nova taking either of them a well tuned Lute, went directly under Vienna's
window, where sweetly striking their pleasant strings, Sir Paris thus
chearefully warbled out his Ladies praise.

Though present times allow of former age,
And yield the pride of grace to Joves fair Queen:
Though Junoes grace, did please each gazing eye;
And all men thought like grace was never seen:
Yet were I judge, to judge of sweetest grace,
Your grace, for grace, should have the chiefest place.
Though Pallas patroness of Wisdom be,
And wisest heads do homage to her shrine:
Though Doctors draw their learning from her brain,
And all men hold her sacred and divine:
Yet should I judge of Wit, Pallas should find,
Your Grace should wear the Laurel of the mind.
Though Paris, Vonus doomed, for fairest fair
Of Goddess^ three, that strove for Beauties pride:
Though Gods, and men, confirmed her beauties Queen,
And every eye, did honor Vulcans bride:
Yet might I judge; my judgment should be this,
Venus was fair; fairer Vienna is.
Then leave your strife, strive not you Worthy wights,
Yield beauties prize, unto my Princess praise:
Blush Trojan, blush, thy Helens hu^ is stayn'd:
Cease, cease, you Knights, your Ladies praise to raise.
Since so my Love, excels those Goddess three,
That all excelled, for grace, Wit, and Beauty.
Vienna pleased with the tune, but more with her praise, was moved with desire
to know who they were, that so sweetly sung, and so affectionately honored
her; but do what she could, she could not know them by any means, which much
grieved, but more troubled her disquieted thoughts. Still she conferred and
talked with Izabella of that heavenly harmony, and ever she commended, whom she
knew not to commend. For Paris having ended, where yet he had not begun,
conveyed himself away as privately as might be. But the next following night
they went again with doleful Recorders, on which they carefully sounded.
Paris unknown, thus plainly made his passion not his person known.

How should J joy, why should I sing,
That naught but woes, and sorrows bring?
What is that God of torments great?
What is his name Where is his seat?
Below, O no? there is not hell;
On high; sie, sie, there bliss does dwell.
Look on my eyes, let Judgment show,
Where that place is of endless woe:
Behold my heart, fresh bleeding still,
Where grief does live, and Love does kill:
Then see; ah me; where sorrows dwell,
It Is Love, I prove; that men call hell.
Love is that God, that men torments,
With raging woes; and sad laments:
My heart his seat, where he does reign,
With great contempt, and proud disdain:
This, this it is; makes love a Hell,
Then Care, prepare, to ring my knell.
Farewell most fair, Beauty adieu,
J dare not love, but honor you;
Starres-sixt so high, dimmes my weak sight,
I may not gaze on Lamps so bright;
Which proves, and moves, my tongue to tell,
That Love, proud Love; is worse then Hell.
This sorrowful Song ended, the Music ceased, and Paris returned to his
Chamber. But Vienna who attentively had listened to this careful Ditty, knew
not well by his over-passionate conceit, and alluding and insinuating Song,
that Love had made her a Mistress, and Fortune had sent her a servant. Yet could
she nor imagine who he should be, but much she was discontented that so it
should be, her Princely towering thoughts were not subject to Subjects fancies,
nor would she admit of servill fervants. And therefore because she would punish
their pride in their presumption, she went the next morning secretly to lier
Father, and told him how that the two passed nights, there had been some (not
known to her) that had bestowed Music on her, under her Chamber window, and
how that one of them the first night revealed his love in her praise; and the
second night bewailed his affection in his own grief. And therefore she
humbly requested him, that he would command a privy Watch to be made that
following night, that they might be discovered in their follies, and she live
acquitted of such vain fancies.

The Daulphin discontent that any in his Province should so proudly presume to
build his nest in the Sun, gave in secret charge, that six of his Guard
should watch as that night, to apprehend and bring them before him the next
day. All which was done accordingly: And Sir Paris not misdeeming any cross
adventure, came as he was wont with La-nova, to offer the sacrifice of his
consecrated Music to his devoted Saint. But they no sooner tuned, but they
were near over-turned. For the Watchmen fearing their escape, thought to make
them sure by laying them on the ground. But Sir Paris, provided always for all
perils, seeing such rude entertainment, and holding them but for straglers,
armed his whole endeavors to return them condign thanks for their so
unseasonable courtesies, in so much that with La-nova's furthering aid he
wounded most of their hands. So that being left alone, they easily recovered
their Chamber, without being discovered of any, which so much incenst the
Daulphin, that leaving the reins of his unlimited anger to his then enraged
will, he commanded that secretly twenty men well appointed, should the next
night lie in ambush to apprehend them.

Now Sir Paris holding that their late disturbance was rather casual, then
occasioned, went, in his unsatiable desire, the next night again. But no
sooner had they taken stand, but that they found themselves entrapped in the
snare; which they finding unresistable, yielded without resistance. The Watch
glad of their apprehension, held themselves so secure of them, that not
regarding (the night being dark) what they were, they carelessly went along
toward the Castle, until they came by a narrow Lane, that turned into the
heart of the City, whereunto Sir Paris all suddenly thrusting La-nova
forceably, took by force a Halberd out of the next Watchmans hands, and
stepping into the Lane, kept the entrance from them all. The Watchmen now grew
more furiously wrathful, then advisedly bold, and so confusedly assaulted
them, that Sir Paris laying the first three on the ground, the rest
(over-hastily still pressing forwards) stumbled and fell upon their Companions,
so many and so thick, that themselves bard themselves from the entrance, which
advantaged Sir Paris and La-nova so much, that having time to turn them to the
next turning, they got to their Chamber before they were descryed, or could be
well pursued. The Daulphin understanding the next morning of the uprore, and of
their escape, was much male-contented in himself, the Court wondered at the
accident, but Vienna now recounting their undaunted courages, with their noble
qualities, conceived them to be men of high esteem, and now more favorably,
and affectionately did labor the knowledge of them, but never after durst they
presume to venture the like adventure again, which much grieved Vienna, and
more incensed the Daulphin, who being frustrated of his expectation politickly,
yet plotted this devise.

First, he caused a Crystal Shield, and a Chaplet of gold to be made, both,
passing fair, and rich, then delivering them to a Herald, he commanded him to
take them, and to carry them throughout all the City, and by sound of Trumpet
proclaim a solemn Justs (free for all comers) to be kept 40. days after:
And that he that should win the honor of the day, should by Viennas hand be
crowned with the said Chaplet as Victor, and receive the said Shield as the
best deserving Knight. By this mean means, the Daulphin thought to find out
the unknown Lover. For it was an Article of his belief, that in honor of his
Daughter, he would (as a Knight) make trial of his fortune; and as a Lover
disclose himself, in his devise; whereby observance (the instrument of
knowledge) might well discover him. Great preparation there was made on all
sides, and diverse Knights and Barons of sundry Provinces, came as well to see
the admired beauty of Vienna, as to win renown for renowned Chivalry.
Amongst whom at last, though not least in worth, came Sir Paris, and La-nova;
w^ll mounted on white fiery Steedes, suitable to their white plain Armor,
without either mark, or devise: For neither, neither durst use for fear of
being discovered by them. But the day, and the Daulphin being come. Vienna was
set (richly roabed in Arabian Besse) on a fair capistred scaffold, the Chaplet
on her head; and the Crystal Shield standing before her at her feet; so that
she seemed another Pallas in a second Venus shape. Many Knights amazedly behold
her, most desired her, all admired her. Thus when each hungry eye had fed, but
not filled his covetous sight, the Herold standing up (after the summoning
sound of Trumper) bad every Knight do his best devoyre. Then desire of honor,
armed each martial heart with double courage and every Knights courage was
redoubled with hope of honor and Vienna's favor: So that the Justs grew
great, and both nobly did each Knight, especially La-nova bare him self. But
Sir Paris whose unknown prowis was not yet fully proved; seeing a Burgonian
proudly brandishing his Lance before Vienna, for the honor which yet he bare
away from all, was so erraged with choler and jealousy, that fiercely
spurring his hot ready Horse, he so forceably charged; and overcharged him in
the encounter, that he laid the Burgenians pride in the dust; which Vienna
noting, noted him for the most redoubted, and best merriting Knight of them
all. Still her eye followed his fortune, and still his fortune was remarkable,
and pleasing to her eye. For never ceased he Justing, nor never Iusted, but he
overturned some one, in which performance he was applauded of every one. Such
was his heroical fortitude, and such his quick delivery, and manly carriage of
himself, that in the end there was left none, whom he had not overthrown, nor
any overthrown, that would re-assay to overthrow the overthrower. Thus stood
unvanquished Sir Paris, like invincible Hercules expecting a charge; but in
finding none he found his own discharge. So that the Heralds (with Trumpets
sounding his praise) brought him to the scaffold, where the fairest fair, and
gracious Vienna graced his victory, with setting the Chaplet on his head, and
giving him the Crystal Shield, she blushing said: Receive noble Knight thy
most well-deserving honor, and heavens make thee happy both in thy designs,
and thy desires. Sir Paris more proud of her words, then of his reward,
received them at her hands, with more pleasing content then Paphos Queen did
the golden fruit, and humbling himself on his knee, he obsequiously
reverently, yet fearfully, kissed her hand, and laid his other on his heart, in
token that he was hers in all service; and so rising up he made a low
obeisance, and both parting, both of them looked back at one instant upon each
other; a true record, that their liking hearts rejoiced in the sight of either
other. But Sir Paris being come to the rest of the Knights, departed with them,
and as they rid each one toward his several home, he and La-nova took an
occasion to light to mend their Suddles, the rest passing carelessly on, which
they seeing, took the next turning, and so were gotten away before they were
mist, and mist before they were known. The Daulphin thus deceived by him he
meant to deceive, was much agrieved; so were the Knights that they could not
tell by whom they were vanquished; and so was Vienna, that she knew not by whom
she was honored. She thought and ever looked that he should have discovered
himself, that he might the better be respected of her, and the world take
further knowledge of him and his merit. But the clouding of himself, assuredly
assured her, that he, and none but he, was the man, that so sweetly (under her
window) sang her praise; that so dolefully recorded the passion of his
tormenting love; and that so valiantly forced to flight her Fathers Guard; His
secret departure, argued (she thought) so much; and his unvaluable valor
showed no less. Desire now, of she knew not what, made her love she knew not
whom: often she wished she knew him; still she talked of him, and ever she highly
commended him; but her wishes were but vain thoughts, and her words but as
alluring winds.

During this their discontentments. The Duke of Vandoume (now called Vendosme)
being brother to the issulesse King of France, a man so powerful in means,
and so popular in State, that nothing could make him unhappy, but the excess
of his happiness: This Duke, I say, being the first Prince of the blood, was
so transported with such an aspiring pride, and unlimitted desire of Rule, that
he could not digest a small expectation. His desire of Sovereignty carried him
so beyond the bounds of all respects, that neither Wisdom could inform his
mind, nor Honor sway his actions. Nature nor Duty could prescribe him any
law, though he were a Subject, subject to the law. How to gain the Crown was
all his care: His glorious consideration thereof. made a continual examination
of all his thoughts, how he should be possessed thereof. Ambition (the Nurse of
disloyal plots and practices) said, The King must dye; and Resolution (the
performer of all deeds) answered, He shall dye. But how, or by whom; he know
not. Young men (he said) are not ripe enough for such an action, and Old men
are too timorous for so great an enterprise. The rashness of the one, and the
fear of the other, are the ruin of such business. To trust others then, is
to deceive my self; For hope of reward (for the preservation of a King) will,
I fear, betray my trust; And then I must conclude, that though a desire to
steal, make not a Thief; yet my intent for treason, will make me a Traitor;
and in the punishment thereof, I shall find no distinction of persons. What
rests then but force and Arms? my sword must plead for possession, Rome
could not resist Caesar, when he came to the gates, in the strength of his
forces. I will therefore first fortify my self with potent friends, dissemble
for the time, my intent, and take counsel of three sorts of men of the Lawyer,
that speaks not as he thinks; of the Physician, that does not as he says;
and of the Divine, which oftentimes teaches better then himself leads, and
always better then the people follow. I know the least wind of the peoples
favor will fill my sails full; Their eyes are fixed upon my greatness, and
they observe me already for my interest; The King has no issue, and therefore
of less regard; his time is but short, and Respect only waytes on posterity,
that promises continuance of reign. No sooner (says some) is a Collateral
heir known, but the Kings Testament is made; why then should he live to
command me, that am borne to rule? He may live to bury me, where then is my
Crown? I must and will reign. Upon these moveable sands (like a foolish
Merchant, that adventures all his substance in a broken vessel) did this fond
Duke build both his resolve, and his hope; And to give success to his trust,
he sent presently to the Daulphin of Viennois (whose principality was in manner
equal with Kingly Royalty) to require his daughter, the fair Vienna; in
marriage for his son. The haughty Daulphius mind, did well simpathize the
Dukes nature; both their prides, and desires, were reciprocal: only the
Daulphin was more reserved, and ever better advised; but this motion did so
attarch him with joy, to think that his daughter should in time be a Queen,
that he covetously embraced the Dukes request, and wished that Commissioners on
either side, might be nominated, and appointed, to confer and conclude
thereof.

This consent of the Daulphin did so elevate and animate the Duke, that he
thought himself already an invested King. The incorporating of Daulpheny to
his Dukedom, would (he knew) make him undoubtedly, redoubted great; and the
uniting of both their powers with their adheres, would well enable him to
affront the King, who now was fitter for a Cloister (as he thought) then for a
Crown. Thus we see that where men has least reason, there they are aptest to
believe any thing, that but flatters their desires. Men that fall into
Treachery or misery, not known nor foreseen, are worthy of some compassion;
but they that wilfully run into rebellion, or calamity, deserve no pity, but
shame and death. In all our attempts, justice, and discretion, should be the
plotters; and Honor, and Moderation, the Actors. A violent humor overthrowes
the Master. Kings we know are made only by God, either in Justice to execute
his wrath upon a sinful Nation; or in mercy, as well to preserve and set
forth his worship and glory, as to maintain his people in righteousness and
peace. For neither Royal birth, succession, election, usurpation, conquest,
nor right, can so establish, or perpetua to a Royalty; but that God when he
pleases, can, and will translate it to others. But now the disloyal and
deceitful Duke (being as far from procrastination, as the Daulphin was
greedy of dispatch) sent his Commissioners for the recapitulation, and
perfecting of such Articles, as should be proposed on either side. In brief,
they agreed on all points, and assigned a day for the young Prince of Vandoume
to come to the Daulphins Court. This being divulged and made known to Sir
Paris, did so excutiate all his thoughts, and so inflame his perplexed heart,
that he was ready to expose himself to all dangers and hazards. In this
distraction, Lanova found him, and knowing the cause of his distemper (for
Rumor had possessed all men with it) he grieving, thus sadly said unto him. Let
patience my Paris conduct thee out of this stormy Sea into a more quiet Port.
Fortune should have no power over fortitude and courage What thou never had,
that thou do not loose. Thy inability, and imparity, could never promise thee
any hope (...) and thy long nourished dispairo shall now find a period, that
in the end, would have brought thee to thy end. Let necessity then make thee
now suffer constantly; and custom will make thy sufferance easy. Sir Paris
who did hear, but not hearken to what his friend had so discreetly delivered,
regarded him no more then a greedy Lawyer does his impoverished Clyent, but
still deeply excogitating how he might intercept, or pervert the intended
match, at length he all sighing said: This Gordian knot must be cut a sunder,
though I want an Alexanders sword. Iudustry, and Policy, often effects unlikely
things; and we should not judge that which is possible, nor that which seems
unpossible; as it is credible, or incredible to our capacities. The eternal
wisdom has (I know) a reserved power, and a secret intention, to bring
things to pass, which the wisdom of man cannot conceive, nor see, till it
happen, and be done. What though Vandoume be mighty? A small Rock may ruinate
a great Ship. I will not so loose Vienna, but where I want force to play the
Lion, there will I assay to gain by fraud. La-nova he said welcome, thou
come in a useful time, thou must secretly fit me with a gray beard, a pair
of Beads, a Friars Gown, and Hood. I must turn Friar, and Prophet all at
once. It must be so, the plot is laid, and we must be Actors both in the play.

La-nova, knowing that his undaunted courage could never brook a Corrivall,
though he were never so great, did much fear that he intended some straragem,
and therefore he told him, that unless he might know his purpose, he would
make no such provision. Why said Sir Paris, my thoughts dwell in thy breast,
and in thy heart, does my love (next to Vienna) live. How then can thou be a
stranger to my purposes, that art the Treasuer of my secrets? Thou know
La-nova how jealous the Daulphin is of his safety; His rigorous (I might say
cruel) Nature has taught him to fear many, whom many does still fear. Thou
know also that Kings are ever suspicious of their Successors: Experience
makes them to fear, least they should loose that which they, and many others
seek, with greatest dangers to obtain. My project is, to make the King and
the Daulphin my instruments to break the marriage; give me Pen, Ink, and
Paper, and thou shall see what a fearful fire, I will kindle, to burn up all
their matrimonial hopes and agreements. But to give more life hereunto, thou
must play thy part. Thy Uncle is Steward to the Duke of Vandoume, and thou thy
self art gracious in his presence. To him must thou post, in show of love to
see him, and in all duty to tender thy service; And when opportunity shall fit
thy purpose, thou must take occasion to wonder, that so great a Prince has his
Armoury so ill stored, and by way of persuasion, thou must tell him, that no
man's title is so right and just, but that it may find work upon their best
advantages, and therefore it is a provident policy for his Highness to be
presently furnished for all contingents. This La-nova, will so feed, and sway
his ambition, that he will make overhasty and unadvised provision. The
knowledge whereof, will so prepare and fortify the Kings jealousy, that it
will crown my device with belief and success, La-nova glad to see him so
well resolved, promised his best endeavors, and in the performance thereof had
his wished success. But before he went, he brought Pen, Ink, and Paper,
whereupon Paris (more Prophetically then he thought) writ as follows.

When Vandoumes first borne, shall Vienna wed,
The Daulphins Land, shall doom the Daulphin dead:
Pride scorns that time should check Vandoumes French Fate,
Thy death must help to Crown his Royal pate.
La-noua divining that this procreated conceit, would bring forth some good
issue, could not but laugh thereat; and in that joy, he went immediately to make
provision both for himself, and his friend.

Now each Wednesday, in every week, the Daulphin (more for applause, then to
do good) received himself (as he went to hear Mass) all the Suitors
Petitions; and in the afternoon viewed, and considered of them. Upon this day,
Paris having lapt up his fraudulent Libell, like a plain Petition, went to the
Court well furnished for the purpose, where he did so well personate a holy
Friar, that Linxes eyes could not discover him. There did he unsuspected
deliver it, and returned without perseverance. Asterwards the Daulphin upon the
perusing of them, found and read (amongst the rest) Paris his threatening and
suffocating Prophecy, which did so poison and swell him with suspicious
thoughts, and most fearful surmises, that in his irefull indignation, he
cried our with the King of Moab, How shall we avoid the deep dissembling of
Ehud? Plain dealing I see is dead without issue; and all Honor and due
respects are buried, in the insatiable desire of Rule. Surely this is no
enigmaticall, nor promiscuous Oracle, but a plain prediction sent by God, or
some good man in zeal and favor of Princes, and in tenderness of our
safeties. O most treacherous and perfideous Duke, that in the bonds of
Alliance, would cut off the small remainder of our days; to work thy
further bloody ends.

My daughter shall not so be Queen by our death; Nor shall our Subjects be so
slain in his unnatural and rebellious War. I will not suffer the true Vine
to be so displanted, nor shall my connivence traduce me for his impunity. For
though wisdom permits not, that I detect him openly, for fear of making him
my implacable enemy; yet will we send a private, and an unknown Messenger
secretly to his King, who shall (upon his Royal word for the concealment of
our intelligence) discover, and lay open, Vandoumes most impious and pernicious
intended Treason; and after shall he cast (by our instructions) such store of
oil upon that jealous flame, that it shall (at least) burn up all Vandoumes
hopes of further proceeding with us. Thus, did such hate proceed from fear
that after a small respiration, he sent accordingly to the King, who was no
sooner possessed thereof, but that his divided thoughts made such intestine war
within his breast, that he knew not what to say, or do. His fraternall love
made him weep, to see Nature so monstrous and unkind; and fearful
jealousies (a disease incident to Kings) called upon justice, and said, that
corrected Treason was the life of a Prince.

Distrust now still dreamed upon Murder, and unquier fear could not be
secured, but with execution: Then Affection told him, that then we come
nearest unto God, when we judge with pity, and pardon in mercy.

In this doubtful Combat of the mind, he sent for the Duke, who no sooner
came, but that taking him alone into his private Chamber, he with a mild
severiy, thus breathed out his grief, and his just and loving rebuke.

It is our pleasure Vandoume (for so thy Sovereign calls thee) that thou
neither interrupt us while we speak, nor it our conclusion, make any answer
or excuse; Then know, that if we were as ready to punish, as thou art ready to
rebel; Thou should now find a sharp censure in stead of a kind brother;
and we should be freed from an incompatible Traitor, in lieu of a loyal
Subject. God that potecteth Kings, has now made thy implicit Treason
transparent. Thy proclivity to rule; thy thirsting after popularity; thy
subtle taxing of ou^ Government: thy needless provision for Arms in a well
settled Peace: and thy disguised desire to match with the Daulphin, is not
unknown to us; And thou that in pride, could not brook a Superior, art now
by divine Justice, brought beneath the fortune of thy equals. It is now in our
power to humble thee, but not to make thee humble; Such is thy a spiring
Ambition, that nothing but a Crown can limit thy unbounded desires. For
neither the terror of Law, the instinct of Nature, my binding duty, nor the
awe of thy due duty, could keep, or confine thee, within the circumference and
compass of thy Allegiance. Know thou not that the jealousy of a King is
death? and that a Prince is neither a kin, nor allied to a Traitor. Admit
that thou had prevailed in thy most nefarious rebellion. What had been thy
Conquest? but terror of conscience, daily doubt of Treason, nightly fear of
murder, the shame of thy self, the hate of men, and the vengeance of God. O
what bitter fruits should thou so untimely have purchased. The usurpation of
my Crown (which a few days would peaceably give thee) could not Patronize thy
fratricide, nor dispense with the murder of thy Sovereign. How fondly,
inhumane, malign, and degenerate have thou then showed thy self? Many are the
probabilities that thou soughts my life, and more then many are the inducements
why I should secure my self by thy death. And what mercy can thou expect
there, when thou did intend no pity. I grieve and blush to see such an
Antipathy betwixt us. But it shall suffice, that to my glory, and thy shame, I
give the now pledge of the virtue of my love, that thou may hereafter the
better love me for my certue: For here I do not only freely pardon thee, but
do entertain thee anew to dwell ever in my dearest affection. A brothers
frown should set with the Sun; and here shall be, the period of my wrathful
indign^tion. Then let this new birth beget in thee a new life; and let this
make such a stable connection of our loves, that we both may hereafter contend,
whether we with a better heart have given thee thy life; or that thou can
more affectionately retaliate our kindness. Only thou shall abjure the match
with the Daulphin, and instantly write to him, that we oppose and prohibit
the same, And therefore shall thou pray his patience, and the continuance of
his love; and allege, that neither Subjects in matters of State, nor Princes
of the blood in Marriages, can dispose of their wills, nor of themselves,
without the permission of their King. This was no sooner said, but that
Vandoume (kissing his Sovereigns hands) with full falling tears (expressing
both his grief and shame) most willingly performed the same.

O most prudent Paris, with what prescience, caution, and facility, did thou
infatuate and delude these wise and great Princes; and how subtly had thou
made them thy deceived Agents, to work upon each other, all only to preserve
thy weak hopes of fair Vienna. But though Paris now had thus dispierc'd these
terrifying clouds that threatened shipwreck to his high desires, yet durst he
not dream after better fortunes, though he held the success of his late
fraudulent fiction very auspitious; But pleasing himself with what he had
done, and affecting still his own affections, he walked into the chamber of
presence, where Vienna, Izabella, and other Ladies, were playing at Cards;
Thither he went) under color of attendance) to feast his eves, and to
Paradise his heart with the beloved sight of his all-admired and affected Lady.
O with what wonder, did he now observe her matchless beauty, her graceful
Majesty, her pleasing words, and her sweet delivery. And what a conflict was
now grown betwixt his desire and despair: All his thoughts were extravayant,
and at war with each other. For as desire did find content, with joy, to be
in her presence; so Despair denied him all hope, with distrust or any comfort.
His heart now began to rebuke his eyes for soaring so near the Sun, and for
gazing after impossibilities. But his eyes told his heart, that no disdain
could dwell in so rare a perfection. In this perturbation of mind did he
stand, until Vienna being dry, called to him for a cup of wine, which he in
the pride of that employment hastily brought, but delivered it with great
astonishment and stupidity (as being over-surprized both with joy, and fear)
he all-shaking, flasht some of the wine over the cup, and so wet both their
hands; which one of the Ladies perceiving, scornefully said; Sir Knight, you
are over-bountifull, I am sure, my Ladies hand called for no wine. There is no
offense (answered Vienna) at all; He knew my hand was dry. So Madame, said
Izabella, is your foot. My foot, snee replied, is further off from the burning
Sun, and receives moisture enough from the humide eaith. But neither, said
Izabella, did need any wine. We called, said Vienna, for it, being dry; And
how could our body receive it, unless our hand had first taken it? A dry cup
and a clean hand, said another Lady, had been more serviceable. Why said
Vienna, clean hands are often waslit, and dry cups quenches no thirst; Then
must dryness have inoysture, and he has freely given it us: but no more, we
have lost our game in his defense. Paris, whose ecstasy had given way to these
passages, recollecting himself, humbly said, What (most gracious Princes) you
have lost in the game, that have you won by patience in your meekness; but
how shall I worthily magnify your great worth, that (notwithstanding these
tart Ladies bitter provocations (has showed the fullness of all virtue in your
goodness. Let your Highness but pardon my unstayed hand, and you shall ever
find me more ready to shed my dearest blood in your service, then I have been
either to wet your fair hand, or to spill your wine. Thanks good Knight, said
Vienna, we desire no such satisfaction; your taken pains shall be all your
punishment. Paris being proud of this conceited favor, (though Vienna in her
mild nature pleaded in his defense, only to cross the other Ladies derision,
and to approve her own acuteness) withdrew himself to the next window, where
with his Diamond he thus writ.

In spite of scorn, true virtue did me grave,
In scorn of spite, I Will laugh in Envies face.
But more considerately weighing his own case, he entertained better thoughts,
and therefore writ in the next stage of the window.

If Rivers great, from smallest Brooks do flow,
Poor hopes in time, far better haps may know.
But now Fortune that waited (though yet a far off) on Paris unknown merit,
gave him a befitting occasion to do Vienna (though still covertly) more
pleasing and more glorious service. For there had lately fallen out in the
French Court a great contention, betwixt the native Barons, and some several
noble Forraigners, that then for their pleasures, followed that Court in honor
of the King. The controversy was, whether was most fairer or the more virtuous
of these three Ladies; Valentia the great Duke of Burbons Daughter; Vienna, the
Daulphins sole heir of Viennois; or the Lady Margaret, sister to the King of
England. Great was their debate, and many there were that maintained each
several Ladies beauty. Insomuch, as they fall from arguing to anger, from
anger to blows, and from blows to wounds. The French King offended, with
their offending uproare, and great neglect of their due respect to place and
person, commanded peace upon their Alleageances: And after being pacified, and
fully possessed with the cause; he held the occasion well worthy dispute, but
their faulty courages, and our surious proceedings, punishable in the place:
Yet fearing the further ill that might in many particulars well ensue thereof;
out of his deep insight, he pardoned their great over-sights, and calling them
all before him (after some few reprehending words) he thus with a mild
majesty, briefly and wisely appeased them all.

First, he commanded that asolemne and royal Justs (in honor of the three
Ladies) should be proclaimed throughout all his Kingdom to be holden in Paris,
at Pente cost following, free for all comers, and that she whose Knight should
honor her, with the honor of the day, should be ever had, and held, for the
fairest of the three; and that his Queen should crown her with a Crown of
white Lillyes, beset with precious stones, as Sovereign Queen of most perfect
beauty: This mild and pleasing shower, so kindly distilling from the King, so
well allayed their stormy furies, that calming their over-enraged wills, in the
shame of their amiss; they hunibly on bowed knees, craved pardon for their
offenses, and thanked the King for the grace and honor that he did them. Then
sent the King his Ambassad our to acquaint the English King; and specially
Messengers to the Daulphin^, and Duke; entreating the King, and willing both
the other to honor him, and his Court, with their persons, his sister, and
their two daughters at the assigned day, and that each of them would be
pleased, to prepare, and bring some beseeming prize of value, befitting both
themselves, the cause, and the worth of the Victor. All which they promised in
the word of a Prince, holding themselves no little honored in so honorable a
contention. Before the day (the day drawing near) there came so many noble and
well appointed Knights, that the French Kings Court seemed an Alexanders Camp.
Great was their Feasting, and full Royal was all their entertainements. But
the day of trial being come. Aurora no sooner showed her mornings blush, but
that the French King ashamed of his sluggishnesse, rose, and (...) to see the
three high Artificial Mounts, which he had caused to be erected, and made for
the three Ladies to sit on; who no sooner were come and placed, but that the
Duke of Burbon came marching in, with a rich Garland made all of orient Pearl,
hanging on a blew Banner, with his coat of Arms on the other side and placed
it on the Mount belonging to Valentia, on her lest side.

Then followed the Daulphin of Viennois with a rich Collar of Esses, beset all
over with Rubies, hanging on a white Banner, with his Arines displayed on the
other side, and placed it on Vienna's Mount, on the right hand of his Daughter.
Then came Englands royal King, with an imperial Crown of burnishe gold, set
with Indian Diamonds and blew Saphirs, supported betwixt two regal Lions,
hanging on a red Banner, and placed it on the middle Mount before his Sister
the Lady Margaret: In the face of each several Mount (some four degrees under
the Ladies) fate each several Ladies Father, in a strange devised Seat, so
curiously made, and so gloriously decked, that each one seemed to be Apollo
sitting in the Chariot of the Sun. The Knights (whose rare Devises discovered
their secret and several fancies) as they were affected; so they betook
themselves to the Mount, whose honor they were to maintain. The French King
sitting in his rich Pavillion powdered with Flower-deluces, opposite to the
Mounts, caused Proclamation to be made on pain of death, that none but the
Knights Encounterers should stay, or enter into the Listes, and that no Knight
unhorsed should Just again, nor any make offer of Comba^e: This being done,
the King of Arms stood up, and after a third sound, bade them go too, and do
their best devoyres like valiant Knights: And no sooner had he ended his words;
but that there came from Valentias Mount a Knight well mounted on a speedy Bay,
his Armor, Bases, and all other his Furniture Azure, full of fiery flames, and
on his shield he bare a Phoenlx, enclosed within a bright shining Sun, and
under it, a hand reaching toward it, with this under written Motto, O^utinam:
Toward him came from the Lady Margaret's Mount, a green Knight, full of eyes
and bleeding Hearts, mounted on a fierce Black, bearing on his Shield an Armed
Knight prostrated under a Ladies mercy, his Lance lying unbroken by him, with
his Motto, All-ready conquered: These two Knights encountered with each other so
furiously and forceably, that their Staves shivered in the air, and witnessed
their courages in their fall, but in the counterbuffe, the knight of the
Phoenix was borne to the ground, so that the green Knight rode on,
overthrowing twenty other Knights that came from both the other Mounts; the
last of whom, bare in the Shield the Picture of Vienna most richly pourtracted
with a veil of lawne all over her, and from the dexter part of the Shield
there was a Hand and an Arm coming forth of a Cloud; holding a fair Labell,
whereon was written, Such an one, as such is none. Great was now the glory of
the Lady Margaret, and all malecontented sat the other two Ladies, especially
Vienna, who now seeing her shadowed self lying in the dust, mist, and wished
for her White and unknown Knight; And as her wandering eye romed up and down,
still looking whether she could epsy him, she suddenly both heard and saw a
well proportioned Black Knight, rudely rushing from her Mount, who so fiercely
saluted the Green Knight, that he made him pay tribute for his former honor,
in the overthrow of his fortune: Threescore other assayling Knights he
dismounted before Vienna, who now joying, wondered, and wondering, prayed that
he might be her desired knight, that won her Crystal Shield and Chaplet at
her Fathers Court; and well she prayed, that had so well her prayer, for it
was Sir Paris indeed who knowing that Emulation has many eyes, and that
Observation might easily discover him fearing to be known by his white Armor,
had thus fadly armed himself suitable to his sable fortune; and therefore he
bare nothing in his Shield but Blackness, for his Devise was still to be
without Devise, only his sad Armor was covered all over with mourning Clouds.
Many Knights there were overthrown by La-nova, but more then many did Sir
Paris foil. For then, if ever 3. and if ever, then: did he show the ver^^o of
his valor, in the strength of his courage. Now grew the hurly-burly great, and
many, and great were the oncounters made on each side, In so much, that there
rested but unoverthrowne, one Valentia on the Lady Margarets part, on
eitherside three; and all only on Viennas, but one; which was the black
clouded Knight, who now was deemed hardly bestead, both in regard of his former
travailes, and the present advantage of the six fresh assailants, who bent all
the^r forces first against him. Valentias hope was now a little revived, and
the Lady Margarets proud expectation fully answered Valentias hope. Only
doubtful Vienna, near dyed for fear, least that her beauty should now be
eclipsed in the loss of her gotten fame, and that her fame should be buried in
the dying renown of her best esteemed beauty. For as she wondered he had so
long resisted, so she held it unpossible he should longer resist. But Sir
Paris (only weary, in that there were no more to be wearied by him) casting
his eye (the messenger of his heart) on Vienna, and seeing the shining lights
of her transparent beauty, over-shadowed with sorrow and dismay. Desite so blew
the fire of his new conceived rage, that like an unmercifull, and
hunger-starved Lion, (that runs raging for his prey) so he violently run
amongst them, that with one staff he over^hrew the first three he met, and
turning his Horse, before Vienna could turn her despair, he charged the
fourth so forceably, that he sent both Horse and Man to the ground: At the
sight whereof, tee people gave such applaudrng shoutes, that Vienna lifting up
her sad eye (as waking from a careful slumber) she saw her Knight returning in
the glory of their overthrowes. So that hoping now for better hap, a better hap
did befall her then she did, or could expect. For no sooner made he his last
return, but he returned again from overturning of the other two. Who
triumphed then but Vienna? Who now more sad then Valentia, or who more g^^eved
then the Lady Margaret? the Just thus ended, the French Queen cam^^with a
troop of attending Ladies, carrying before her the Crown of Artificial
Lillies, richly stoned, and setting it on Viennas head, she Crowned her for
sole, and Sovereign Queen, of absolute, and matchless beauty.

Then came the King, and took Sir Paris by the hand, and lead him (all the
other Knights and Barrons following them) wit^ tryumphing honor, and sound of
Trumpets, to the three Mounts, where with his own hand he gave him the three
Banners, with the three prizes on them, which Sir Paris reverently taking,
re-delivered over to his friend La-nova, secretly to convay them away, while
he stayed the ending of all other the Ceremonies. All which being
accomplished: The King the Daulphin, and Vienna (rendering Sir Paris thanks for
his worthy and affectionate endeavors, and most renowned and fortunate
atchievem^nts (requested him, in the name of Vienna, to discover himself, and
tell unto whom they were all so much bounden. But Sir Par^^ humbling himself
in all duty, made reverent show of his unwillingnesse therein.; which the King
noting, would not further importune him, nor could the Daulphin in any wise
over-treat him, nor durst Vienna overmuch press him: So that he kissing her
hand, held it long and after drawing his sword, said it at her feet, and
taking it up again kissed it likewise; and then holding it up, seemed to
threaten the world in her behalf, which added this Article to Viennas belief,
that he undoub^edly was her white Knight, and the same, and non but the same
that first so melodiously sang under her Chamber window; and therefore her
desires having now no end she ever after though each hour an age, till she
knew him. But Sir Paris withdrawing himself to the rest of the Knights,
retired with them, still giving back, till he was the last of the troop, and
then taking a crosse-way, separated and convayed himself from them, and
suddenly disarming himself, he speedied to find out the Bishop of St.
Lawrence, with whom (of purpose to prevent all surmises) he had a little
before familiarized himself, and no sooner had he espied him, but that he
hasted to greet him, and still kept in his company, as if St. Mark had robbed
god Mars of a Martialist. Such was his holy show of devout Religion, as that he
made all men admire him, and his father to be inwardly grieved at him.

But Vienna, who now had greater cause to love him, then means to know him,
wondering at his valor, not to be valued; and valuing his virtues, by clouding
the glory and value of his prowis, held now his love an honor to her
affection, and vowed her affection a guerdon for his love. But when she heard
of his secret departure, and that no one knew what he was, from whence he came;
nor to what place he had ret red himself; Then impatient desire made her the
child of passion, and fear to loose that she never had, made her feel what
before, she neither knew, nor feared. And so much the more she held her self
miserable, in that she knew not for whom she was so miserable, nor how to seek
an end, to end her misery.

As Viennas, sad conceit, thus overshaded the glory of her beautiful Conquest,
so was Sir Jacques flattering hope made black with foul despair; For missing
his son Sir Paris out of two so Royal and honorable Assemblies, where
renown eternized each deserving Knight, with never dying fame, and seeing him
still associating the Bishop; he feared least his business of
over-superstitious Zeal, had abandoned all desire and regard of Knightly
Chivalry. And therefore hot in his repining conceit, he hastened to find
La-nova, unto whom in grief, he manifested the cause of his grief; Requesting
and conjuring him by the sacred laws, and name of friendship, and by the
honor he owed to Arnies, to persuade his son to a more be^tting respect of
his unregarded honor. La-nova hearing Sir Jacques worthy complaint, and seeing
his frosted beard all bedewed with the tears of his sorrow, pittyed his
lament, but durst not disclose the mystery of the truth; but commending his
honorable care, he comforted him with promise of assured and present remedy,
and so left him better satisfied, then truly certified. And no sooner where
they parted, but La-nova departed, to impart to Sir Paris, what his noble
Father had so sorrowfully said to him: which so moved his feeling
consideration in a Sons regard, that partly to satisfy his Father from
living so supposedly idle, and partly to forget (if so he could forget) the
tormenting thoughts, that still troubled his enthralled mind.

He determined to go (only with La-nova) to the wars of Florence. And
craving, he obtained, willing leave of his glad Father; but before his
departure, he called his Mother a side, and delivering her the key of his
Chamber, and Oratory, wherein were placed all his purchased Prizes, well covered
over with Hangings of sky-colored silk, embroydered with stars of gold, and
shaded all over with black Cipres, that the dimmest eye might perceive the
glory of the heavens, through the blackness of the cloud. Her he devoutly
requested, and humbly conjured (as she tendered his contentment, and following
welfare) not to suffer any to enter therein, nor so much as look therein her
self. This was his request, and this did she protest religiously to perform:
This done, he craved and received their blessing, and so set forwards toward
Florence; where in brief; he achieved so great honor in the Dukes Wars, as
the bruit of his spreading fame, both famed, and inworthied him in the
Daulphins Court, which much joyed the Daulphin, and more rejoiced Sir Jacques.

Vienna all this while grew more pensive, and passionate then before, and still
(as Pharaoh longed to know his dream) so desired she to know, and see him
whom she loved more then her self, Her vestall virtue was now no Diana's
proof, to withstand Vonus force; nor could her, chaste conceit dispense with
affectious thoughts. But the more she sought to quench desire, the more she
burnt herself within her own fire. Many Princes became Petitioners and
Prisoners to her beauty, and greatest Barous did homage to her virtues; But
neither Prince nor Baron could find favor in Beauty, nor love in virtue. So
strangely, was her strange affection, estranged to all but to him that was so
mere a stranger to her so flrange a passion. To him, and for him, had she
consecrated, and reserved her devoted heart; and to him, and none but him,
would she yield the conquest of her Maidens mind. And although disturbed
reason affoorded her no hope, nor possibility of finding of enjoying him; Yet
did the gracious aspect of her favorable stars, yield her this means to
know him. For Sir Jaques being greatly visited with sickness, was so generally
bewailed of all, and so particularly bemoaned of the Daulphin (in regard of his
thrige noble service in the wars, and his wise directions in Counsel) that he
sent the Daulphinis his Lady to visit him; who taking Vienna and Jzabella with
her went attended with four other Ladies, to see, and comfort his enfeebled
estate. But finding him pretily amended (after some fashionable, and cheerful
chat:) The Daulphinis (led thereto, I know not by what desteny) was desirous to
see hew well the house was contrived, how beautified, and how furnished; which
the good old Lady in all humbleness yielded unto, conducting them into every
place, until they returning, came again by Sir Paris his Chamber door, which
his Mother both going, and coming back, purposely past by. But being demanded
of the Daulphinis what Chamber, or Place that was; she durst not but tell; and
telling, would have past away, which the Daulphinis noting, merrily said; Nay
Madame, I will not leave the Chamber of so worthy a Knight unseene. The good
old Lady not knowing how to avoid this counterbuffe, fearfully with a
trembling hand, opened the door, wherein they were no sooner entered, but that
they saw all manner of Armours, and befitting furnitures for approoved good
Knights, which made them commend the owner no little; and to hold him far
worthier of a better Armoury.

As this they viewed his several Armours; Vienna happily sixth her eye on a
white Armor not far unlike unto that, which Sir Paris had on him, when first
he won her Chaple^, and Crystal Shield. The sight whereof, made Hope (the
Harbinger of happiness) to breath in her this pleasing comfort; that as that
Armor was none but the same: So Sir Paris (that renowned owner) must of
necessity be that secret Knight, that not daring to be known to love her, was
(by her sacred vows) to be beloved of her. Thus Hope prosumed the best, and
invited joy to gratulate her good success. But doubt (curbing rashness with
deliberation) persuaded her to further trial. For as her hope was ready to
embrace the first show of comfort, so was her desire most greedy of more
perfect assurance. And the better to effect, what she affected, she feigned (and
feign she was to feign) her self suddenly sick, and after some show of some
extremity, she desired her Mother (the better to make better search) to leave
her alone, all only with Izabella, to rest her for a time on the bed, which
they holding convenient, consented to it. And no sooner were they gone, but
that Vienna bolting the door, began to make a wary search. At last, at the end
of the Chamber she found a privy pertition, so well shadowed with the Hangings
of the Chamber, that hardly could any perceive the same; within, and behind
this, was the place wherein Sir Paris daily, sacrificed his prayers unto his
God, wherein they were no sooner entered, but that withdrawing a glorious
clouding Curtain, they discovered the three famous rich Prizes of Sir Paris
victorious prowis, stately erected upon the wall, and below them hanged the
Crystal Shield, and golden Chaplet, he first won at her Fathers Court.
Opposite to which, on the other side, stood his white and bl^cke clouded
Armours; so fully, and lively set up, as they seemed as ready to defend the
place, as their Master was willing to maintain her beauty. Long looked Vienna
on every several Prize, but longer looked she on both the Armours; now
blushing and sighing; then liniling and wondering at the stately and pleasing
proportion of them, In this contentment, and admiration of her thoughts, she
would have dwelled still; but that casting her nimble eye afide, to see what
Izabella did, she perceived these following verses to lie written on the Table.

Time, Fortune Love, and hot Desire, enjoynes,
Such Woe, Loss, Care, and Death, as Death procures:
Time doubts, Love fears, Fortune hard hap assigns,
Desire unrest; unrest Desire endures.
So that Time, Fortune, Love, and hot Desire,
My Woe, Loss, Care, and Death, does now conspire.
Time threatens Love; Love Life; Life Love attends,
Love doubts Disdain; Disdain, Desire nore slayes
Fortune my foe, my fancy still offends,
Desire, Live covets; Love desire gaine-sayes.
Thus Time, Love, Fortune, old Desires and new,
My Woe, Loss, Care, and Death, does often renew.
My Woe, Loss, Care, and Death, so often renewes,
As Love (no Love) a Lover so does leave;
Fortune most fell, my love, thy God-head^rues.
Desire dye, no hope of health conceive.
Since Time, Love, Fortune, and distressed Desire,
My Woe, Loss, Care, and Death, does all conspire.
But if that Time, in time, fell Fortune daunt,
If Love, in love, but move my Love, to love:
If Fortune smile, in Loves sweet yielding grant,
And my desires enjoy, what Lovers prove.
Then shall my Woe, Loss, Care, and Death retire.
And I laud Time, Love, Fortune, and Desire.
These Verses well pleased Vienna, and all contentment now waited on her first
liking conceit: But after she had more consideratively weyed how poor Sir
Paris was, that mean Man whom she wished so much to see, and to whom she had
devoted the honor of her love; her blushing bashfulnesse then rebak't her
misliked kindness, and his muddy clouded affection, ecclipsed the sunshine of
her far more glorious worth. In this dislike, she silent sat her down, and
rising straight again said; That promise is nefarious, that is to be
accomplished by an ignoble deed; and it is more tolerable to violate an
unworthy vow foolishly made; then by keeping the same, to draw on my disgtace,
and give just cause of offense to others: My faith falls out a treason to my
self, and the love I bear him, is the sield wherein I seek to overthrow my
renown: But why should my rash judgment set a ranckling tooth in his virtuous
side? Or why should I care for more honors then to content my self; Or for
more riches, then to enjoy my self? We are all borne to love; and we only
live, and love to be beloved: Then not to love, and think to be beloved, is
like that foolish Virgin, that sought to light her Lamp at another Torch that
was quite extinct. With that she began to recount the shining Glory of his
spreading renown, the full perfection of his many appro oved and admired
virtues; the commendable regard of his secret and imprisoned love, with the
dangerous and honorable approbation of the same; and how she was bound in honor
to honor and love him, that had above the pride of all honor, so honorred her.
Then, then began she to be more sorry she could love him no better; then
before she was ashamed she loved him so well: And therefore taking Jzabella by
the hand, she vowed and swore, that she would live to love none but Sir Paris,
not love to live longer ^hen she might be beloved of her Sir Paris; For Fortune
savd she has decreed it so; Love will have it so, and Vienna swears it shall
be so:

Izabella first uttering her mislike, in her complaining tears, and then
drowning her tears in the grief of her complaint, thus all sighing, she
sadly said: Ah Vienna, no more now Vienna, since Vienna has lost her self;
what is become of your Princely regard, befitting your state? where is your
wonted wisdom, so admired of all? Your virtue giving light to others, and
your modesty eternizing your beauty: Shall base conceit (ever attended on with
repenting follies) eclipse now, the honor and wonder of your Name? Are servile
thoughts beseeming companions for your noble mind? or ignoble Subjects fit
objects for Princes eyes? If Vienna be so predominate over you, that Diana is
quite forgotten of you; yet let me call you before the judgment of your own
ver^ue, and then tell me whether the unworthy worthiness of his Degree,
equalize the great greatness of your Dignity? Admit his deserts be many, and
promise much, yet are his possibilities of advancement, no possessions of
enrichment; nor are his noble deeds the deeds of a Noble man. Will you then
lose an honor for an humor? Nay, rather perform a Regal office in a
Prince-like nature; that being a Princess in your self, become also
Prince-like in your deeds. What will your Father say, nay all France, nay all
the world? when they shall hear that Vienna, late scorning the Royal love of
greatest Princes, is now subjected to the will of a mean Knight: Far be it
from my Lady so to do, far from any to think so, and far from Izabella
ever to see it so.

Vienna (whose settled affection) held her persuasive inversions odious, and
whose resolved determination, thought her reprehension loathsome, with usual
eyes, arguing her discontent, she all angry, thus sharply replied; Were J
(unkind, ungrateful, and unjust Izabella) as far from affection, as thou are
from reason and pity; Yet would not the common care that Ladies of esteem
ought to have toward Knights of good regard, suffer me to hear due deserts so
disgrac^d by injurious tongu^s, nor true renown so reproacht by malignant
mouths. Then know (and knowing grieve, that so thou know) that thy
unseasonable words has wounded my desire, and my desire abandons thee in thy
words: Think thou that desire dreams once on Dignities? or that Cupid cares
for Crowns, that never saw Gold: See not thou these Trophie^ erected in his
honor, and his honor shining in these Trophies? If I be great, his great
deeds answers my great estate, and my estate shall be made greater by his great
deeds: For if ever any Knight merited renown for renowned Chivalry, it is my
Paris; or if ever Knight followed his Lady with true love, loved her with
honor, or honored her with regard and remarkable services, it is my Paris:
Then if ever well-deserving Knight tryumphed in the faithful love of his Lady,
it shall be my Paris: For here J swear by the eternal justice of the
Highest, that none shall have Vienna but Paris, nor none love Paris so well as
Vienna. Then leave to grieve me, and load not my grief with further
displeasure, in gainsaying what J say again, J will never gainsay: For in
vain it is to water the Plant, the root being perished, or to seek to
persuade me, that am so resolvedly persuaded.

Isabella seeing her so resolute in her passion, and so passionate in her
resolution, thought it was in vain to urge her further, and fearing her
threatening displeasure, she thought it good thus to balm the wound she before
had given. Let not my honorable Lady (she said) return an imagined wrong,
with an effectual injury, but pardon the well wishing fault of your faultlesse
friend, who (if offending) offended in tender care of desiring your good, and
not of purpose to contract you, or with will to discontent you, whom before all
others I wish to content; for proof whereof, I here vow repay to the debt of
my error, with the interest of all my furthering endeavors, to advantage you
in your Love. No sooner had she spoken the last word Love, but that Vienna in
love, for love kissed, and embrast her joying in her promise and availing aid;
and protesting, that most grateful guerdons should make full satisfaction for
her offered kindness. In the mean time, she required secrecy, and fearing
least their long stay might procure, either some fear, or suspicion, in her
Mother, she thought good to depart as one well recovered of a sudden hatch,
but before they went, she caused Jzabella to take, and secretly to convey
away: the Crystal Shield, and Chaplet, the first and non records, both of her
beauty, ank his prowis, and this she did of purpose, not so much for any desire
we had to have them, as to give him occasion to come to enquire after them.

In this process of time, the Wars of Florence, were ended and Sir Paris
being intelligenced of his Fathers sickness (whose infeebled age he much
feared) and being desirous to see Vienna, though despair of success, the
hearse of his supposed idle hopes, yet Desire (the nurse of perseverance) g^ve
(...) wings to make the more speed, so that La-nova, and he, ost^ng homewards,
happily came, and found Sir Jaques well amended, whose good recovery was no
less joyful to Sir Paris, then his return was comfortable to his Father.
After they had long discoursed of the occurrents, of these Wars, and of his
many adventures and fort^nes. Sir Paris, longing to give his eye contentment,
by gazing on his I dolatrous Prizes, he took his Mother by the hand, and
walking toward his Chamber (like the Lapwing that flies far from her nest)
he enquired of Court affairs, but she being not able to satisfy the drift of
his reach, he pressed her no further, but being entered into his Chamber, he made
a step into his Oratory, were suddenly missing the first pride of his happy
achievements, the chief glory of his study, and the true testimony of Viennas
beauty, and bounty, being therewith, much appaled, and moved at their remove,
he all angerly came forth, and asked who had been there, and there had taken
away such things as ^ee most esteemed. His Mother abashed at the question, but
more grieved that three was any thing wanting, not knowing hew, or by whom they
should be taken away, answered, that since his departure no one had been
there, but the Daulphinis, and her daughter the Lady Vienna, accompanied with
other Ladies that came to visit his Father in his sickness, and that she
desired amongst other Chambers to see that, which she (after some denying
excuses) durst not longer gainsay, and how that she her self was with them
so long as they stayed. Saving that the Lady Vienna being suddenly surprised
with sickness, requested for her better ease, to stay only alone with
Izabella, to rest her a while on your bed. Paris flattering himself with his
own favorable construction, deemed (and truly deemed) that the cause of her
alteration, grew by the unexpected fight of the Prizes, and the view of his
verses, that he had left on his Table; and that she had taken them away
either in her angry disdain, or to see what account he made of them, or
whether he would re-demand them. And therefore pleased, to adventure his
Fortune upon the rock of this hazard, he showed no further mislike that he
mist them. But afterward, shadowing his desire to see Vienna, under the
borrowed veil of duty, to see, and to attend the Daulphin: he went to the
Court, where the Daulphin, glorying in the luster of his Subjects renown,
because it gave a splendor to his Greatness; he kindly received him, with
more familiar embracements, and loving respects, then his austere nature, did
usually afford: by this his unwonted courtesy and grace, he made Sir Paris
thoughts (more obligatory) to his favors; and fashioned his favors (more
complementory) to Sir Paris fortunes: for courtesy, they say, in Majesty, binds
ever affection in duty. As Sir Paris stood before the Daulphin (relating the
honor, and issue of the Florentine Wars) he glaunc'd, and fearfully
glaunc'd many times on Vienna but checking his eyes, that still rebuked him,
he left to look, on whom not daring to look, he could not but look. But
Vienna, whose late kindled love, was now grown into a flame, having tediously
before expected him, could not now seeing him, feast her ravished eyes at full,
but gazing still on his ample perfections (for now he seemed more then
exquisite) and taking pleasure in the sweet harmony of his well tuned words;
stree^^ sooner rejoiced, joying in her own desires; but that straight she
desired the enjoying. And turning toward ^^^billa, she all blushing smised,
and smiling blushed again, because she smiled, and then asked her, whether she
saw not bashful leare, and doubtful coffeehouse, (...) on the face of his
troubled countenance, for the loss of his Frizes, and the discovery of his
affection; and whether she were not happy in her Choice, and more then happy in
his love. All which, Gnathonizing Jabella prodigally confirmed, and demanded,
how she would do, to enfeoffe him with her affection, that durse not be
known of his own Lost. Which Vienna well ruminating in her mind, at length
(woman-like) found our this device.

She feigned her self, for some three days, very sick; and in the distemper
of her wounding offenses, fearful of her sinnel; but after when she was
better enabled (...) in body, and mind; she desired leave of her Mo^^er, to
go the next day (for the more quieting and confirming of her conscience, and
to give God praise for her recovery) to the Bishop of St. Lawrence, to confess
herself, and to receive the Sacrament within the sacred Temple of God; which
he Mother liking, yielded unto, rejoicing no little to see her so well
amended; and so devoutly and piously devoted. In the interim, Vienna caused
Izabella to send to Sir Paris in the Bishops name, to come and speak with him
in the Cathedral Church, at time of the clock the next morning; which Sir
Paris promising, performed accordingly. For at the appointed hour (...) came,
and being come, saw (and wondered that so he saw) the Princess Vienna
conferring with the Bishop, whose loysure, he willingly attended; and walked a
little aside, wearying his fancy with wishes; and punishing his concest with
fearful imaginations: Long he had not walked, but that Vienna espying him,
applauded her fortune; and armed with her own desires, she gave her self
countenance, under the pretext of employment; and called to Sir Paris, telling
the Bishop that she had matters of employment in foreign affairs, to impare
unto him from her Mother; And therefore shes requested the Bishop (if he had
any occasion with him) to walk a while aside, till she had performed her
Mothers command, and then she would leave them both to their pleasures. The
Bishop being glad to see the Princess so fanctified, commended her ^eale, and
lost her to the discharge of her duty, blindly supposing that the Daulphinis
would send Sir Paris in message to some of her foreign friends. But Vienna
finding her self alone with him, in whom she joyed alone; she pleasantly
demanded what he made there, or whether he had any suit to her, or to any
other, wherein she might accominodate him; If it be so (so it be convenient)
Sir Paris shall find a friend, if Sir Paris be found a friend. This pleasing
and preludious demand, and Enigmaticall conclusion, made Sir Paris, somewhat
fearful how to answer. But Hope the comfortable Counsailour of Love shaped,
in him this bold and short reply. My business (thrice worthy Lady) is the
Bishops will; my suit, your service; your service my chief desire, and my
desire your favorable countenance; And longer may not Paris live, then he
rests humbly thankful to Vienna; and if not offenssiue, a faithful servant
to my Lady. Thanks (said Vienna) good Sir Paris, your suit shall not be non
suit, if you shoot at Honors aim. But tell me, and truly tell me, whether
your suit (and your coffeehouse; which I see, ^^^bours in your eyes) be not
for your Prizes which I took away, when attending my Mother, I was at your
Fathers house, (...) If so it be, (be it so, or not so) you shall have them
again, if again you will return with me. Paris proud of her presence, held
himself more deified; then dignified, by her favors, and humbling himself;
he vowed, that they, himself, and all in all, were at her Honors command.
Then must I ( Vienna said) command, and conjure you to tell me, whether it were
your self, that so sweetly sung under my Chamber window; and so friendly gave
me Music; that did wound and beat my Fathers Guard; that won, and bare
away my Crystal Shield, and Chaplet, in the Tournament at my Fathers Court;
and that carried away the Honor and the three Banners, with their Prizes, from
all the Barons and Knights at Paris.

Paris astonished at her demand, durst neither confess, for foare of disdain;
nor yet dissemble, for offending her, whom in no wise he would offend; which
perceived by Vienna, she familiarly pressed him to acknowledge the truth, which
manifested; she with a pleasing and pleasant countenance merrily said, why
then does Sir Paris affectionately love us? Sir Paris whose enticing fault had
erst controlled, but now condemned, his over-clyming thoughts, was so amated in
himself, and so transported from himself, that silence, in bashful signs;
blushed out a dumb reply. But Vienna (ballancing his cold conceit, by the
alteration of his countenanes) allowed the weight, and, animated in her own
affection, she commanded him boldly to avene, what she her self inferred, by
such his troubled silence. Paris seeing the cloud of his care dispierced,
gloried the more in the brightness of his Sun; the beams whereof he found
for comfortable, that he proudly confessed his love, and that he had long done
secret, and humble homage, to Venus under her so rare a beauty. Vienna
surfeitting in the pride of her full content, kindly entertained his so
affectionate a conceit, with as friend^^ a receive, and briefly, assuredly
assured him; that none but Paris should enjoy Vienna it none but Vienna should
joy in Paris.

This cordial conclusion, being Sealed (...) protestation of perseverance, and
by confirmation of oaths, they knit two hearts in one, and parted one will in
two, and so departed. During these Haltion days, commanding Love, wrought
ensuing cares: For Vienna sitting-but in the shadow of to ye, thought the
fruits of affection overlong in ripening and therefore presuming (in her
c^^ing aim) that her Father in her favor would tie his consent to her choice,
and her, love to his liking. She importuned Sir Paris to request his Father to
acquaint the Daulphin with her affection, and humbly pray his consent in favor
of his Daughter: Which Sir Jaques advisedly at the first de^yed, as unwilling
to wakes a sleeping Lion; or to seek for Fish in a dry Poole. But Paternall
love (the assination of reason) and shattering hope (the hu^le of deceit) so
transported himself; from himself, that most unlike himself, be (vainly
dreaming after pomb^^^ie) yielded to sail in a Ship without a Ste^ne, and to
gather honey out of Stones. But the (...) (whose repugnane humor scorned so
servile a motion, and whose abured kindness, now begat in him most spiteful
rage) so ^refully boiled in his d^daine full furquedry, (...) bitierly thecking
Sir Jaques, he fearfully thundered out his threatening indignation, in exiling
poor Sir Paris.

Paris though cheekt, yet not mated; showed now the virtue of his co^^age in
the celipse of his fortune. For being preswaded by La^nova, to make presently
away; He notwithstanding the danger of tyran^^all authority, resolved to see
his Lady before he lost his Country: And therefore as one desperate in
despair, he hastily (yet secretly) went to participate his engrieved state
with hapless Vienna who hearing thereof, was so consounded of her less; as
she was sull of sorrow for being unable to re^eue him, as she was void of all
means to help herself. Their samentations paid now large tribute to their
griefs; and their desires that before had no end, did now, by despair, end
endless things in their first niotion: But after that the flood of their
seares was grown to an ebb, (ad^^itting the necessity of time) they
concluded, ever to live to none, but to each other; though they never saw
agaide one another. And so Sir Parie fainting in his farewell, was deprived of
his welfare: Which (all ^ouing and impatient ^^ennd not brooking, so to be
deposed from him, in whom she wholly reposed her self, reeall'd him again,
and enfolding him within her fainting arms, she vowed to partake with him in
all his fortunes: ever remembering him, that the chaste root of her true
affection was Virtue, clad in constant loves desire: She therefore advised him
secretly to conceal himself, and to provide for shipping, and at the hour of
Twelve, the third night following, she would disguised (with stored Gold and
Jewels) meet him in the Pouch of Saint Anthonies Church, and so depart with him
whither soever. Sir Par^^ kissing, her often, (for in waine kissing is some
pleasure) found now his purgatory, to be hit Paradise; Joy myu^^pht in his
eyes, and comfort lodged in his heart; and in this haven of happiness he
would have ^wimmed still, but that danger of delay told him, that growing Trees
have their fall, as well as their springs, and that apprenension would dissolve
all their harmony: He therefore (being borne away with the hasty ty^^e of
smallost leisure) rode presently into Prevence; where happily meeting with
Monsiour de la M^tt, a Ship-Master of his acquaintance, hoe privately told him,
that h^^ had flaine a Man of account, and that he must for a ^^me leave his
Country, and therefore prayed him (for his gold) speedny and s^^^ctly to Ship
him and his two Friends away into some other Coast; which Monsieur la Mott
promising, sent one away incontinent to Saint Victor, where his Ship lay, to
make all things in readiness, and returned himself with Sir Paris, to ass^t
and direct him in all his needful dispatches.

Now Vicuna and Jeabella, at the time and place appointed met with Sir, Paris
(according to their agreement) in men's apparel, dispencing with needless
salutations; add^est themselves to speedy journeyes: And do long they poasting,
rid out of all Highways, that being be^^ghted; they were glad to crave
harbor of a Presite, who lodging them, placed Vienna and Jzabella in one
Chamber, and Sir Paris and Monsteur de la Mott in another. In the morning,
their early desires so hastened their speedy departures that being timely up,
and quickly horsed, Sir Paris and La Mois, rude apace before, to view the
River, whose over-flowed banks were so over-runne, by the pride of a late
swelling flood, that the Foard was not passable, which made Sir Paris so
impatient, so to be frastrated of his attending Ship (the amrance of his
Usery) that Monsiour de la Mort over venturous to venture over the passage, was
in searching the Foard, most unfortunately drowned in the merciless Flood. Sir
Paris daunted at that so fatal a sight, sighed, and sighing, grew to a
prodigious Prognosticator of his own ensuing harms. But fearing least the
knowledge thereof might appale his fair Friend, he suddenly returned to
their religious Host, where he had left the two Ladies, when he went to find
the Foard, and to try the passage; and shadowing now his tormenting grief with
a forced smile, he demanded of Vienna how she fared, who answered, as my
Love fares, so fares thy Love, happy in my self; because happy in thee. And
long may (said Paris) my Love live to love, that loves to live only for my
love. Scarce had Sir Paris pronounced his last word, when one came running to
tell the Priest, that there were many Knights in he next Town, that came in
quest; and searched for Vienna and Sir Paris: Which Vienna understanding, was
so surprised with grief and fear, that being altogether disheartened in her
hope, she held her self more than undone in her disturbed expectation: But
after she had bathed the beauty of her eyes, in the sorrow of of her tears,
fearing most in this present peril, least death should arrest her beloved
Friend: She with a much more resolved mind, and ^n assured Countenance, then
befitted either the time, or was incident to her Sex, thus exhillerated her
astonished Friend.

My Paris, (she said) Time admits not there many words, where danger still
knocks at the door: In extremities, the winning of time, is the purchase both
of life and love: Let not violent passions (that never removes any ill, but
betrays our secret imperfections) now sway the virtue of thy thoughts: nor the
forti^ude of thy heart; but carry thou in thy Lions look, a Lions mind; and
like the Sun show thy fairest face, in thy lowest fall. Load not my sorrows
with thy grief, nor kill thou thy self, for fear of death; But in the wonted
courage of thy never-daunted Spirit, get thee to some other more safer shore;
where let Virtue he thy Governor, my remembrance thy Love; thy love my
comfort, and my comfort thy sole contentment. Thou have conquered men in love,
and Love in me; and both in worth and wisdom; and never shall I deem my
self happy, but when I shall see thee happy, for whom I now am so unhappy: As
thou leavest me, so shall thou find me; be but thou as constant a Friend to my
Mind, as thou shall be a Possessor of my Heart; and I shall have as much cause
of joy, as thou no cause of doubt. If thou continue loyal, success (thou
shall see) will bless thee well, and all good fortune will wait on thy just
merits. This Diamond which here I give thee shall be a true remaining record of
my sincere love to thee: Only, let me hear of thy abode; and so I leave thee
to the guide of Virtue, and service of Fortune. Sir Paris thus discomforted,
comforted; weighing the danger of delay, by his imminent peril, and forced to
set up his sails in this so insupportable and threatening a tempest; and there
sealing up the vow of his faith, in the silent grief of a departing kiss, he
posted to the River side again; where Despair made Fear so valiant, that ere
he found cause of fear, he was past all fear: For having past he knew not
how the River, he was got before he wist into the Ship: wherein being Cabined,
he told of La Mot his fatal accident, and forced them to put to sea, sailing
himself with as many contrary thoughts, as Eolus sent out winds upon the
Trojan Fleet: At length he arrived at Genoa, where he rested his restless
self, and where he lived, wanting but little, because not desiring much. But
such was his disconsolate solitary life, that the Citizens (though strangers)
affecting the man in his manners, pitied much his distress, in the show of
his coffeehouse. In the mean while, the Daulphin wasting himself, in his
own implacable, and unlimited wrath, violently, and suddenly seized, and
confiscated, all Sir Jacques Lands and Goods into his hands; Imprisoning both
him, and his Lady, as Fauters, Abetters, Confederates, and Adjuters thereunto.
Thus gets Outrage, ever the sharpest edge upon the first advantage; And in this
distemper of his ill disposed mind, he commanded that naught but bread and
water should be given them. For, said he, where the offense is greater then the
service, there Justice changes the bond of recompense into due punishment.
During this their faultlesse imprisonment, the questing Knights returned with
Vienna, and the Hospitalious Parson, her Host; who being brought before the
angry Daulphin (her enraged Father) she saw the cloud a far off, before the
storm fell, and therefore prostrating her self at his Feet, she required
pardon for her offense, and prayed that he would not make her sin deadly,
which was but venial; pleading ignorance for the Prelate, and irresistable
love for her self; swearing and assuring him, by sacrament of solemn oath,
and the testimony of her Host, that she was as honest in her flight, as she
was in her birth, and that her unspotted thoughts were never stained, with any
unchaste deed or desire. The noble followers of the obdurate Daulphin, seeing
the Princess washing her repentance in her own tears, humbly besought him to
forget, and to forgive her amiss, since the frailty of her offense, was rather
a sore, then a sin; and wounds were to be healed and not hurt. This
submission, strengthened by such general entreaties, somewhat quenched the
burning heat of his enflamed ^re: And though his severe Justice told him, that
not to punish an evil, was to allow of an evil; yet mercy he knew pardons
them often, that deserves it not, and judgment in nature, should be next a kin
to favor. Upon this calm construction (after many sharp rebukes, and
protested threats, he vowed that determinate, and inevitable condemnation
should punish her next offense) and so he pardoned her upon promise of more
regardfull duty.

Now Sir Paris had not long sojourned in Genoa, but that mindful of his
charge; he writ to Vienna, and enclosed it in another writ to La-nova, wherein
he excused his unkind departure without his priuity, and conjured him by the
sacred laws of true amity; to attend and follow his Lady, in all service and
fast friendship. La-nova glad of such glad tidings, went in the height of his
joy to Vienna, and (after some complementall salutes) asked her, what she would
give to hear of her Paris. Vienna great with child with the expectation of her
friends welfare, longed to be delivered with the notice of his health; and
said, that the whole world afforded not sufficient worth to answer her liberal
heart therein. La-nova joying in the constancy of her love, showed her the
letter, which she hastily snatching, as hastily read, re-read, and many times,
more then many times overread, the pleasing contents as follows.

SWeet (sweet Vienna) I see is the hope that springs in the bud, but most
sorrowful I find is the hap that decays in the blossom. The hoped harvest
that overcredulous love assured me. Time (injurious time) keeps now (you know)
from the sith, what Fortune before sought to destroy in the grass. What
rests then? but to curse Time; as enemy to our desires, and to bewail our
desires as intercepted by Time. Yet should I live many years, or had I as many
lives, as Nestor had years; Those lives, those years, and all in all should
(I protest) be only spent in recording your worthiness, and in arming my
whole endeavors, to do you some agreeable service. Only in absence, my
grief grows, in finding my present estate, so weak in Fortune, and my
deserts so slender in Nature; that not knowing with Anthony how to requite his
Cleopatra, I only rest with Anthony to dye for my Cleopatra. I cannot use many
words, where every word wounds me with a new careful conceit, and every
conceit kills me with a fearful doubt. Let it then only suffice, that as I
live to love none but Vienna; so I wish, and wishing desire, to be ever, and
only remembered of Vienna. I am now in Genoa, where my stay shall be little.
For my desire flattering me, with hope of honor, calls me (being debarred
from attending you) to foraigne services. I am therefore earnestly to entreat
your favorable consent therein, and that you would but grace my disgraced
fortune with your colors, that under protection thereof, I may for my better
security, march, as shadowed under Achilles shield. In lieu whereof, I vow that
all my happiest endeavors, and achievements, shall be done under the honor
and favor of your name. This is all, and of this would you but daign me the
comfort of your answer; I should think me unhappy, happy, and live to hope,
to be more happy. Thus wishing my deserts still suitable to my desires; and my
desires ever pleasing to your deserts; I rest, ever, for ever, your true and
loyal servant.

Paris.

Vienna well certified, but not fully satisfied, commanded La-nova to return a
speedy answer, with charge that Paris should not depart Genoa, but that he
should there sojourn, till better times afforded better turns: And that he
should bear himself, as himself, and her favorite. To maintain which, she
delivered to La-nova ten thousand Crowns, which he sent immediately: Sir
Paris receiving now so pleasing a pledge of her persevered constancy,
triumphed no little in her so agreeable affection. And as she required, so set
he up the maine sail of his obscured glory in the wind of her will, by taking
a great house, and by maintaining so great a Port, that his Majesticall
magnanimity well manifested, that his former sinister fortune was nothing
suitable to his birth and education.

Whiles Sir Paris thus Courted it out in some content, Vienna was solicited by
many great Lords. But the seed which they sowed in the sands, was washed away
with the first flood of the Tide; so that all their hoped Harvests, was naught
but crops of growing cares. The Daulphin (whose climing thoughts looked ever
upon greatest stars) kept the beam of her balance straight, without
gaine-saying this Suitor, or disgracing that. But to prevent all distaste that
might come by denial, he speedily sent special Messengers to his fast friend,
the Earl of Flanders, requesting his best labors and endeavors, to move, and
make (if so he might) a marriage, betwixt his daughter Vienna, and the Duke of
Burbon his son. Such was his covetous desire, in lieu of the Burbons
possessions, not to be valued; and such his conceit of his sons valor, not
then (as he thought) to be equalled; so as his pride, could, nor would, admit
of any other son in law, but this great and matchless Prince. The Earl of
Flanders glad that occasion offered it self, that he might both gratify the
Daulphin his friend, and interest himself in the love and greatness of the
Burbon Duke, which he had long desired; was now as willing as the Physician,
that is ever ready to pleasure another, to profit him self. And knowing, that
he that sleeps, catches no Fish; he went instantly to the Duke, who no
sooner heard of the motion, but glorying in the hope of such unexpected
advancement, he entertained the Earl with all the state, that either
greatness could perform, or desire require. In conclusion, the Burbon Duke
sent his son, in the greatest pride of proudest state, to the Daulphins
Court, where he did proportion his carriage answerable to the eminency of his
place; his merits being such, and so many, that (setting only aside his pride
of heart) Envy her self, could not detract from his worth. But before he came
to the City, the Daulphin hearing of his near approach, went to his daughter,
and told her what tender care he had of her good, how he had labored to make
the Burbon Prince, her glorious Groom. and how happy she might think her
self, to be bestowed on so great and famous a Lord. One, whom the world
admires for his heroical fortitude; fears of his greatness; and loves for
his deserts. A Prince incomparable by title and birth: A person beautified by
Nature; And a man inricht with wisdom, wealth, and worthiness. Then let my
Choice be thy content, and in thy full consent see that thou entertain him
with all virtuous favors. This said, he commanded to horse, not staying her
answer, and so rid forth royally attended, and appointed, to receive the young
Prince. And far he had not rid, but that he met, and encountered with his long
desired, and now expected ghest. The young Prince first alighting from his
Horse, gave the Daulphin occasion to dismount himself, who being on foot,
stayed till the Prince came unto him; where they greeted, re-greeted, and
embraced each other, and then remounting themselves, they rid Marshalled in
right good equipage to the Palace, where all the Ladies (saving Vienna) gave a
second salute, to the greater content of the Burbon Prince. But the Daulphin
missing Vienna, misliked much her absence, yet seemed to take no notice of it,
but smoothing the angry furrows of his coffeehouse, he (with an enforced
cheerefulnes) brought the Prince to his lodging, and there leaving him to his
private repose; he hastily went to Viennas Chamber, where all sad, and
solitary, he found her sitting in the seat of sorrow, or rather in the shade
of death, for fear of her fathers provoked ire; whose violent, and peremptory
disposition, would (she knew) transport him beyond all the bounds of Natures
tenderness. Of her, he demanded, why contrary to his command, she had
absented her self in the requisite entertainment of so great a Lord, and so
worthy a friend.

Vienna rising from her sorrowful seat, but not from her sorrow, with
fearful erected hands, and pity pleading eyes, humbled her self at his
feet, and told him, that for shame of her first flying fault, she had vowed
her chastity to Diana; and sworn her self, a Vestall, to Vesta. And therefore
had she so separated her self a side, because she would not give fire to his
fancy, nor wrong his better deserts with forlorn desires. In consideration
whereof she humbly prayed, that none but her self might enjoy her self, since
none but her self could, or should content her self. The Daulphin perceiving
light though a small crevis, began in mild policy, by gentle entreaties, and
rich persuasions, to weane her from her will; telling her, that unlawful vows
were to be violated; since the first cause ceasing and a new succeeding, both
might be altered; neither had she any such power in her self, that was not to
be disposed of by a Father; And to honor, and obey Parents. is the first
Commandment that has any reward promised on earth. Besides, it is an envious
wrong to Nature, to suffer her fairest work (like a sweet fragrant odoriferous
Rose) to dye upon the stock; that being plucked in the bloome, might yield both
pleasure, and profit to others: therefore renounce this belief, if thou
meanest to be saved, or to have any favor. For by course of kind all things
were made to increase; and by increase to benefit another; and she is a Devil
amongst men, that profits no man. This did the Daulphin think by his smooth
words, to build a Castle in the air, that had no hope of foundation on the
earth. For Viennas unremovable resolution, being bent to shoot at her first
mark, could not be won to level at another aim; which made the Daulphin,
(failing (like a Fox) to deceive with kindness) to play now the Lion by
compulsion; And therefore gnashing his teeth together for anger (like the Sea
that waxes mad, when the winds do rage) he commanded both her and Izabella
to close prison.

The young Prince meruailing beyond all measure, that he could not see amiable
Vienna, the eye of France, the miracle of her sex, the wonder of time, and the
pride of Nature; demanded of her Father, what ominous cloud shadowed the
brightness of France his second Sun, that she appeared not in her
all-admired glory. The Daulphin fearing least he should distaste the Prince, by
understanding the matter; framed, and feigned this excuse. That sickness had
attached her, and made her a prisoner to her bed, and therefore prayed his
patience a while, till her hoped recovery might better please his fancy. The
young Prince holding his words for Oracles, held himself contented, and
thought to wear and weary out the weariness of time, with other Courtly, and
more Knightly sports; wherein he was so fortunate, that Fame was the Herald
of his Heroical deeds This did so inflame the love of the Daulphin toward
him, that no eye-water could ever after quench the same; Desert did now double
his desire; and his desire had no end, in gayning his daughters consent, which
he again now vainly labored: Sometimes laying before her the Riches, Glory,
and Dignities of Juno: sometimes painting forth the Honor, Respect, and
Happiness, she should receive by such another Hector; and then pleading the
sweet content, that grows by enjoying so pleasing and complete a Prince. But
when he found his wasted words dye in their own sound, and all his hopes
utterly ship-wrackt; his better consideration was then forfeited further to
hate, and rancour; then either nature, or pity, could redeem it. Then began
he to thunder out fearful threats, cruel chastisements, and most
insupportable miseries. Commanding the Keeper (in his ouer-awfull justice) that
sad solitariness should only attend her imprisonment, and that eager hunger
should daily wait on her Table, and so he departed, hopeless of reclayming
her, and therefore resolved to chasten her obstinacy, with all severity. But
No force, can Fancy force; nor crosses Love expel,
For Rivers stopped, above their banks, will higher swell.


The young Prince having now-spent many days, and not seen her, whom only he
came to visit; importuned the Daulphin, that he might but visit her both to
comfort her in her malady, and somewhat to satisfy his starved eyes, in their
more then greedy desires. But the doubling Dalphin pleaded her mislike so to be
seen; assuring him, that she daily requested, that he (whom she only upon
sole report entirely affected (should not in any case see her so sore impaired.
So great (said he) is her care to seem pleasing unto you, such her
shamefastness at first so to be seen of you. And therefore let me entreat
your further patience, for your willing return, until her better health, may
better countervalle your taken pains; which once recovered, you shall be
speedily informed. In the mean time salute in my name, your thrice noble
royal Father, and tell him, that J hold my self so much honored, in his
desired affinity, that my self, and what is the Daulphinis, rests wholly at
his pleasure: and further, pray him that the lawful cause of this unwilling
stay; may stand for satisfaction till better payment. The young Prince thus
smoothed up with words of fairest dye, held himself well appeased, though not
thoroughly pleased; and holding the Daulphins words for written verity, he
implored the firm continuance of his found favors, and protested kindnesses;
and so commending himself to the good grace of his adored Lady; he humbly and
friendly took his leave, and returned to Burbon. The Prince departed: The
Daulphin, who had no more remorce then the cruel Judge has mercy; gave in
charge, that no one should visit, or repair to his Daughter, but only
Mounsieur Maux, a right Saturnist by nature, and an unrelenting Tyrant in life;
him he commanded (under pain of death) to give her nothing but Bread, and the
worst wine, twice a day; which this enemy of virtue, and stain of all mankind,
so barbarously performed, that his cruel usage too soon impared poor Vienna,
and distressed Izabella, who had unkindly; and untimely pined; and perished in
that loathsome solitary Prison, had not La-nova found out a means (as
hereafter shall be shown) to succor, and relieve them.

But now the Daulphinis, who had many times washed her aged face in the tears
of her consuming grief for her afflicted Child, having neither knowledge of
any means to relieve her, nor hope of her delivery: knowing the Daulphin, to
be as resolute in his rigur, as he was absolute in opinion: Advised with her
nearest friends, and obliged dependants, what was to be done in so desperate
and grievous a case. Where by the concurrance of advises, it was concluded,
that she should send unto the Delphian Oracle, there to learn what should be
done, and become of her enthralled Daughter. This Counsel being embraced, and
the journey undertaken, the winds gave speed, and the Messenger arrived at
Delphar, where after all Ceremonies were religiously performed, he received a
scrowle to carry unto the Daulphinis, with charge not to look therein. The
Daulphinis, whose fear made her think all good to be too good for her;
thought yet each hour an age, till his return: Misfortune so blinds those,
we will overthrow, as that she gives their desires wings to draw on; and
hasten their own decays. At last he came, and humbly delivered the scrowle,
importing this much.

Viennois hoyre, to thraldom still belongs,
until her Fathers bonds, shall set her free:
Who captived is; in place, confused with tongues,
by Ismaels brood, detayn'd shall be.
Both shall live, in doubt, in care, and we,
until the banished Son, of forlorn Troy;
Shall succor give, unto his greatest foe,
and bring him home, with hope, with love, with joy.
Then shall Vienna wed a fable Moore,
And happy live in Peace; and not before.
The Daulphinis, whose ever sad surcharged heart was unable to digest such
heavy and bitter Cates; found this sauce too sharp for her diet. For it was
no sooner read, but that finding (as she thought) all the gates of comfort shut
up with vntricate threats and impossibilities, (being too weak a (...) stell
(to bear so sharp a liquor) she shrunk under the weight of her sad burden,
and fell suddenly dead; and so left the Daulphin a eruell Father, and a
careless Widower.

This mournful accident rather exasperated his irefull displeasure toward his
Daughter (in making her disobedience the original cause of her death) then in
any wise extenuated his execrable resolution, against her determined endurance.
But he had not lived many days in dolor, but that burying the remembrance of
his dearest Spouse, in the hope of future happiness; his obdurate heart became
as unsenceable of her loss, as of his Daughters misery. Love found love, and
the madness of age made him such a slave unto his slave, that before one
years period, he married one of his Wives meanest Attendants; One (who knowing
her own unworthiness,) having neither Virtue to strengthen her fortune, nor
good nature to incite her to pity or goodness, nor any merit to win
applause was notwithstanding so potent over him, that she guided the stern of
his flinty and unpennitrable heart: And though she feared the scorn of abject
baseness, yet to maintain the stolen pride of her enhansed heart, she
cunningly gave fuel to her Husbands enraged will, and covertly blew still the
coals of his displeasure. For fear she did least that her Daughters liberty
should (in the aspect of true honor) could both her swelling conceited glory,
and detract from her proud insulting greatness: To frustrate which, she
cautely one day, leaning on his breast, and stroking his frosted beard, thus
sadly said.

When (my dearest Lord) I look upon the breach of the Princess, your
Daughters obligation; I find the penalty you take, to be most just (though
severe;) Since the just Judger of all, did for the sole disobedience of only
one, cast both him, and all his Posterity out of Paradise: How like unto him
you show your self herein, your unpartiall Justice well demonstrates, who
rightfully punishes the sin of disobedience in your own members, as God did
in his own creatures. Justice is the badge of virtue, the state of peace, and
maintenance of honor; and the will of a Father should be a religious law unto
the Child: And they that prefer their own lusts before their Parents
pleasures, loses the benefit both of natures right, and a Fathers regard: For
reason would not we should respect those that forsake us: The Husband man
cuttes and loppes off all unkindly Branches from the good Vine: Jove held his
Children part of his substance, of whom he did and might dispose; and the
noble Romans deprived their Sons of life, that infringed but their commands.
I allege not this (most worthy Lord) to aggravate your Daughters foul
offense, whose other deserts I honor, whose welfare I affect, and whose
merited punishment I condole; Nor yet to detract from the worth of your thrice
worthy chasticement, which all men commend, and justice allows. But fear (of
I know what) and the love of your safety enforces me in love and duty, to
manifest what I fear, and to prevent what I doubt. Vienna (you know) my
endeered Lady, is the immediate apparent Heir to this Principality, and the
unjust desires that wait upon a Crown, begets often most inhumane, unnatural,
and unlawful Acts: Nature in that expectation, loses her sight. Virtue her
strength, Duty her obedience, and Love her respect: Nothing can out-ballance
ambitious desire, either in the reach of dignity, or revenge; Nor is there any
limitation in the adventurers. Her restraint is (I fear) like fire raked up in
embers, that covertly will kindle, and openly burst forth into a flame; For
the harder she deemes her self handled, the more will she seek after her
release, if not after revenge; Nor can she want instigators thereunto: Since
all men like and prefer the rising of the Moon before the setting of the
Sun: And to win advancement in that hope they will contrive; practice, and
execute whatsoever, and howsoever: Such occasions gives fire to corrupt
Humorists; and such grounds sets repugnant Malcontents a work. I would my
death might free you from such dangerous intendments, or that my life could
acquit you from such heavy accidents. And therewithal (her heart having
taught her eye to weep) she threw her self into his bosom, the more to
endeere her self unto him, and without any sorrow, she sighing; said. Ah what
shall become of me, when I shall loose my loving Lord?

Graft gave her tears, Deceit showed grief;
Fraud forcit a fear to win belief.
Thus to nourish debate, after she had fed on slander, and instil'd in his
eats a fearful jealousy, which over-credulous minds easily apprehends, and
covetously entertaines. The better to acquit her self from all suppose of
malice or detraction: She weeping, told him, That the night before, her Mothers
Ghost appeared unto her, all in white, her unsmoothed hair displayed about her
shoulders. her ruefull fallen face pale, her eyes hollow, and in either hand a
Taper burning dim; which so affrighted her, that had she not comfortably
spoken to me, when I had no power to call to you; I had awaked you, and cried
for help: But suddenly, with a feeble voice, she mildly said; Fear not my
Daughter, to look upon thy Mothers harmless Ghost, who in tender care of
thee, and espoused Lord, have left my bed of rest, to come to premonish thee of
your ensuing ^ll. Treason does threaten the Daulphin; Subjects mislikes, works
upon Viennas discontentments: Her liberty will be his death, and in his
destruction shall thou find thy grave: Now thou know it, look to it, and
so farewell. With that she gave a wimpe, darkness possessed the place, and I
lay wounded and affrighted with remembrance, both of her sight and of her
words. This Apparision, the happy Angel of our God, (for visions are clear
revelations, where dreams are but delusions) has moved me, out of an
affectionate fear of you, to deliver what I saw, heard, and have said; which
otherwise in my love to your Princely Daughter, I would willingly have
concealed. And therewithal she wept again; and kissing him said, O hardest of
happes, but most unhappy only I, that she, to whom I owe all love, and from
whom I cannot withdraw my devoted affections, should by my means be the more
afflicted. But in my Lords love and welfare, do I only live, and will bury
all other affects and considerations. The guiled Daulphin, whose undisgested
displeasure, and over-jealous prejudicating heart, gave way to every suspicious
thought, so procreated by false conceit, and so confirmed by her mellefluous
and deceitful tongue; began now to conceive much more, then he did see or
perceive. Fear and dislike so shipwrackt his judgment upon his Wives clouded
reckes, that what before seemed to him by conjecture but probable; that he
holds now as an Oracle. And therefore embracing her, he kissed her often, and often
did wipe her forced bedewed eyes, and then did kiss again, and thanked her
for her provident care; and preserving love; assuring her that thus warned, he
would be ever armed, and that in his daughters wedded miseries, they would
build up both their securities. And thereupon commanded that a strickt Watch
should ever guard the prison door, that no one (but Monsicur Maux (should
come, or send unto her.

Thus Beasts corrupt do lightly poison take:
Thus euvie weeps, that tears may michiefe make,
But La-nova understanding of the Daulphins Decree, and finding the venomous
drift, and impoysoned mind, of this Serpentine mother; having Land adjoining
to the Castle, did erect (after a great, and strickt show of holiness) a
Chapel in honor of our Lady wherein he made a close partition; In the one
part to hear public Mass, and in the other (which adjoined to his Castle)
to prostrate himself before his God, and to power forth his more private
prayers for his secret sins. In this part, he dug in the night so long,
and many nights so long; that at length he made a secret way, that ascended up
to the place of their abode, and pausing there a while, to rest his
over-wearied self, he heard Vienna and Izabella carefully, and interchangeably,
sing this contentious Ditty.

Vienna. Who lives to love, does live to care,
Who cares much, much grief shall find:
Who finds grief tormented are,
In endless woe of woeful mind.
Why then should love possess our hearts,
That yields naught else, but secret smarts?

Izabella. Who loves to live, should live to love,
Who loves much, much joy shall find:
Who finds joy, such joys shall prove,
As proves no joy, to Lovers mind.
Why should we then, sweet Love dispraise,
By whom our minds, such joys assayes.

Vienna. The heart oppressed, in fancy dies,
Affection sails, in Times arrest:
Joves royal bird preyes not on Flies,
Loves greatest joy, is hopes behest.
Why love we then? Why joy we so?
Since hope is vain; and Love breeds woe.

Izabella. The Paulme suppressed, does higher grow,
The lowest sail, Time sets aloft:
The highest Sun, does shine below,
And poorest hope, finds hap full often.
Then live, and Love: then hope and have;
Heavens made love: Love heavens gave.

Vienna. But Towns besieged, distressed yields;

Izabella. But forts maintained, great glory gains:

Vienna. On forlorn Hope, Love never builds:

Izabella. In Fortunes change; Hope, hap obtaines.

Vienna. Then will I love.

Izabel. Then constant prove.

Vienna. Sweet Paris live.

Izabel. Vienna's love.

No sooner had they made an end of their Song, but Lanova, found an end of his
work, and going forth of his dark passage, he softly, yet cherefully entered,
and saluted Vienna, who though amazed, yet animated at his sight, run and
fell upon his breast, and in the fall of her many tears, asked him; What news
of her Paris, and whether he lived, and living, lived to his first Enone; or
straggling, had found, and made a second choice. Say, La-nova, say, has any
Hellen won my Trojane from his betrothed Nymph, or has Adonis forgotten his
Venus, and become amorous of another Lady. If so, say so, and tell me, how thou
came hither. For J wonder at thy presence, and fear thy hazard. Your Knight
(most constantly (virtuous, and renowned Lady) said La-nova) lives I hope, and
no doubt wholly yours: But never since the receite of this Letter, heard I any
tidings of him. Only my care of your good (the sum of Sir Paris charge) has
plotted, and effected, this poor shift, to relieve and comfort your grace. And
so he told her how, and showed her the way, the top whereof he advised her to
cover well, least it should be discryed, he undone and she unsuccoured. Vienna
re-embracing him for his kind and tender regard to her, and for his true, and
fast love to them both; gave him many thanks, and earnestly entreated him, to
make privy enquiry of the Genua Merchants, whether they knew, or had heard of
Sir Paris, and how he spent his days and so fearing the detested Keepers
coming. La-nava left her, to make provision for her.

Now the Daulphin, whose diseased mind could not be cured, but by the match
of the Burbon Prince; thought himself still endangered, so long as she lived
unmarried, and imprisoned: His wicked wily wife, had cast such an erroneous
mist over his bewitched eyes, and so drowned his heart in fearful doubts,
that he durst not trust his own safety; unless his harmless daughter were
either made away at home, or married away far from home. To give peace unto
these his disturbed thoughts, he went unto the Castle to see whether that
weakening diet, and tedious thraldom, had well reduced her seduced mind; and
made her of a disobedient child, the daughter of his will. In trial whereof,
he demanded, whether in the high, and sacred pre-eminence of a Father, he
should find yet the obliged duty of a Child; the which if she would in
repentance acknowledge, and in performance willingly accomplish his will. She
should be restored to her former estate, his wonted favor, and her preeminent
dignities. Vienna on humble ^^ees, falling at his (...), required his blessing,
and said, that (...) was had so mor^fied all thoughts of affection, that only
grief was grown to be pleasing to miserable creatures; and that custom had
made her content to lie in her bed of woe, and to water her couch with tea^es:
only she prayed, that the just God might appease his (...) against unjust men.
But how ((...) she) shall my self, persuade my self, that you mean me any
good, that not only have so hardly inticated me, and so unnaturally
imprisoned your sole child, but most unjustly and cruelly have put in prison
poor Sir Jaques, that has spent all his happiest days in your unrewarded
^ervice. It is the true properity of a Prince, to reser^ble God, in virtue,
bounty, and mercy: and not the Lion in force, rigor, and cruelty. Mercy
pardons those that deserve it not; and the interpretation of the strictest
law, should rather tend to mercy, then cruelty; since rigorous laws were
first, made more to terrify all, then to torment any. The doubtful Daulphin
finding his amiss, but not his remedy; somewhat to persuade his daughter of
his repenting rigor, and intended good commanded that Sir Jaques should be see
at liberty and restored to his Pristine estate; which greatly contented Vienna
for her Paris sake, and no little joyed good La-nova, that secretly had
^ucc^^red him. But these shows of favor, and promises of preferment, nothing
advantaged the Daulphin: For Vienna (strengthened in the expectation of forrow)
nor obstinately, but constantly told her father, that the Burbons, love, was
like a Spiders web, fit to be swept away; and that her Virgins vow, should
eternize her chastity after death. This resolve, raised again the storm of
his allayed sury; in the rage whereof he left her, discovering by his threats
and malicious words, the ill of his heart, as Vienna sorrowful sigher showed
the hurt of her heart.

La-^^va weighing (...) ^yranny of the time, and finding no hope of better
^^ap, presently writ to Sir Paris the truth of all such accidents as had
befalne, this Father Vienna, and himself; since the receipt of his Letter,
which gave so fresh and so sharp, an affault, to his already over-surcharged
heart, that virtue was no Armor of proof against such affliction, but raging
in the tempest of coffeehouse, rather like an unkennelled Cerberus then any
distracted Ajax, he blasphemously belched and breathed out cruel oaths,
vengeance, daring threats, and most foarefull words against Time, Love, Gods,
and Men.

O Time, said he, Traitor unto Love: O Love abused by Time: O Gods unjust to
men: O Men too subject to the Gods. O that your Deities were essential,
visible, and mortal, that I might hew vengeance out of your wrongs, and write
Tragedies on your lives. O heavens I challenge your Throanes, and deny your
powers. Your swift motions I will stay with my hand, and your revolutions. I
will drown in the Sea: I will unloose the bonds of Orion, and stop the course
of each constellation. The straying Stars I will pluck from their Spheres,
and with their influences will I kill all the Tyrants on the earth. Time I will
consume with my breath, and burn up Love with the Sun. The world I will cut
a sunder with my Sword, and make a new Land in the air. The Waters I will
swallow up, and bury the winds in the Moon. Ixion I will remove front his
moving and tormenting seat, and set the Daulphin on his turning wheel, where
hunger-staryed Vipours shall gnaw on his hateful heart, and pyning Tautalas
give him all his food. Vienna shall be sole Queen of h^ave^, and only rule
the glorious Globe. And I will reign in Jupiters stead, and throw down fire
and lightning on the cursed Castle that enthralls my love: I will beat that
cruel Daulphin to powder with thunder: that I may be revenged on Time, Love,
Gods, Men, the World, the Daulphin, and all for the Daulphin. Thus distract in
his madding mood he, all enraged, raged he knew not now, and said he knew not
what pulling the Letter in pieces with, his teeth, ^^^enting his Hangings,
earing his Clothes, and, breaking his bed, Board, and Stools, with such
violence, that his amazed servants durst not come near him.

At this unwonted passion, their hearts were possessed with wonder, and their
eyes floodded with tears; his bounty causing the one, and his wisdom the
other. But ignorance is the mother of admiration. They knew not where his shoe
did pinch him, nor could they toll th^^ to help him. At last (as one
breathless in his w^sted fury) he fell upon his bed; which they seeing,
hastily stepped to him; and uniting their strengthes, kept him down, making
silence their preparative, to quit his (...) thoughts. Then darkning the
Chamber; one of th^^ took a deep base silver stranged Band^^a, whereupon he
played so sweetly, and so doleful, that Sir Paris hearing or it lent a
listening to it, which brought him into such a sall melancholy: Muse, that be
began to slumber, and after fell into a heavy sleep, which so well appea^ed
the storm of his disturbed senses, that after three hours enjoying
reposedrest; he waked, and walked, perfected in his mind, and ashamed that he
had so defaced the Image of vart^e, and abused his own knowledge.
Consideration made him now hold himself the sole spite of Fortune, and the
very scorn of time, and men. Detraction threatened his disgrace, Derision
proclaimed his folly, and the guilt of his own ill, made him privately, and
secretly, to leave Genoa, and to wander whether his shame should not follow
him, nor any hear of his being. But before he departed, he both rewarded, and
discharged all his servants, and paying all duties whatsoever; he lastly writ
to La-nova and to his Father as follows.

IF silly Sheeps (my ever fast found friend) all only for their bare food (as
hating ingratitude) yield their fair (...) as due guerdons to their ^eepers.
How them shall (...) countervaile thy so many meri^s, that enjoy naught my
self but mere mi^^fortunes, and insufferable (...). Alas my La-nova the Times
are changed, and we are (...) in the times: Thou writest now of naught but
(...); and my grief is already such, as to live is a griefs Overhappie, (...)
ill, flows from my greatest good: and whose blisfull (...) is become my ^
ext^ng^ish thy affection, or thy (...) had (...) fetled on a more happier and
(...) perfo^^. The (...) more contented, and then (...) better afterward. (...)
since my love has wrought thy full; Thy fall shull be (...) in my loss. For
presently J will (...) to (...), and try the force of my further (...) in
seeking the (...) of my fortune, And therefore have J written to my (...), or
adopt they in my place for his (...) thee as (...) herefore write not; (...)
only (...) my love, to (...) Ladies (...), and ^^ll her, that J fly not from
her favor; but with my ill (...) from my more threatening prevert fortune: And
though J dye in her sorrow, yet will I ever (...) G^noa, the last of my (...)
and the first of my Filgrimage.

Only unhappie in his happiness,
Paris.

La-nova, having read his own sorrow in his Friends grief, could not refrain
from shedding most bitter ^^^es: and having long bewailed the unt^^ly loss of
his so worthy a Friend, he speedi^d himself to (...) Sir Jaquae unto whom he
delivered his Sennes Letter, importing thus much.

IF Plato (right dear dear Father, s^eing ^^^thanke full Man pro^^^) said
(...) the (...) more (...) they had laden ad (...) J humbly beseech you) the
(...) La-nova (my second self) has with (...) and done for us, be you (...)
Least his deferes dye in your shame, and your (...) without any (...) excuse.
And (...) fortune, has (...) my sinister Stars, has quite lately slain all
hape of future return. My last request (...), that J ^^ing the last of my
Tribe and the first of our declaying Family, you would comfort your age, with
the better hope of my Friends more worthier worthiness, (...) you will (...)
and take him for your (...): And when Nature shall pay the duty you (...) the
Earth, that then you will inherit him in all such (...) and Good, as Fortune,
in your fortune and ability, shall then (...) behind you: So shall you yield.
desert, his due, known (...) and eterniz^ your (...) fame. The hard give you
(...) with your blessing, comfort your gray (...), and redouble, with treble
happiness, your aged days.

Your hapless Son, only happy in being your Son, but most unhappie in being
himself.
Paris.

Sir Jaques having read the sad contents of his Sons resolved last fare-will,
fainted under the burden of his so unsupportable grief, but revived and
comforted by La-nova, that was himself to be comforted, he^ betook himself
unto his careful bed; where though his attached tongue could pay no tribute to
his dumb sorrow, yet did his silent woes, show his speaking grief. Such was
his, woe, that it was a woe, to see his woe: In so much, that La-nova, swol^^
with his own grief, was ready to burst, to, see his sorrow; And therefore,
having neither temperance to cover the one, nor a heart to look upon the
other; be returned to his erected Chapel, where he pierc'^ the very Heavens
for the presemtation of his Friend and powered forth his Prayers for his
return. This done, he held himself undone, in so mestinable a loss: And
after a long and sod meditating with himself he fearful, (...) went to
(...) all their sorrows might be complete at once: Her he found all persive
and heavy, as one presaging her further mishap; and no sooner she saw him, but
that drawing forth the true portractiue of sorrow, out of his careful
countenance, she hastily, yet fearfully, demanded what news? The Heavens
Madam (said La-nova) grant you patience, and more comfortable news. Vienna
aghast, ghastly asked, if Pari^ then were dead? Not dead he said, and yet
departed. Departed, (...) said Vienna, how, whether, or to whom? from life to
death, or from me to a causlesse change? If dead, why live I then? If alive,
why then dead to me? Say, say La-nova, where lives, or lies my Paris? Paris
(said La-nova) lives in his sorrow, and dies in your grief: But where, a^^usse
I know not; for mad in your affliction, he is gone in his fury, to dye
elsewhere for his fancy. Vienna, whose eyes over-flowed with tears, and,
whose heart was wounded with his words, stood like a second Ni^^^; and then
falling suddenly into a deadly trance, she no sooner came to herself again,
but that again she lost her self. But after her full recovery, her
remembrance then recording, how all her nourished wees had begot many crosses,
that miserably fell upon her like halle-stones, that strives to overtake one
another; she could not reframe, but thus bewailed herself.

What fault of mine, cruel and unkind, has caused thus thy causlesse slight?
Is this, ah this, and woe is me in this, the hoped harvest of devoted Love?
Deserves my endured miseries, this ungrateful guerdon? O Paris, Paris, thy
love comforted me in my cares, but thy loss has confounded me in my Love. O
that J had never sea^^ thee, whom yet J wish to see; or seeing there, had never
affected thee, whom ever I most affect: My hap is hard, that can neither have,
nor hope; and the fault J find in my self, follows we still, while death
does follow me. All Lavirva, what now avayles thy doubtful diligence to dry
Friend? under the realous show of thy (...) sanctitude? To what end now intends
my pining imprisonment the due chastisement of my neglected duty? Am J now
become the only Daughter of sorrow, and the cashiered Child of disgrace? O
happy Pertia, thy dead sad woes are all buried in my long lived griefs; and
Heccubaes tears are all drowned in the (...) of my sorrow. Why then do I live
longer in dolor, since my preordinate life is predestinate to a dolent death?
I will cruciare my esfamished Body? and satiare the angry Fates, with my
mortal and tragical end: The end of my woe, shall be the woeful and of my
life; and the life of my laments, shall be the wounds of my death: And
therefore leave me La-nova, leave me; that at last, I may honor the
Carthagenian Queen by breathing out my lost.

These last words, so sore appased La-nova, that jealous of her, weakness
(her enfeebled estate, being unable to support her oppressing and confounding
sorrows) he much feared (least overcome with grief and passion) she should
yield to mischief her misery: To prevent which, he buried, for the time, all
his own grief, in the heedfull care of he safety; and closely, wiping his
bedewed eyes, he began. Pastor-like, to Preach patience, Faith, Hope, and
Comfort, to her sad dismayed Soul. Let not (said he, I beseech your
Excellence) any sinister cross chance, or mundaine affairs, overthrow, or
oppress, the lively force of your requisite Faith; Nor lot any pusalimity
weaken the wonted, courage of your, prudent mind; but build your Faith and
hope on him, who as Roy, royal, rules and overrules all chances and accidents,
that befalls humane Creatures: Then embrace not a mischief, to prevent an ill:
since God sends good for evil, as he made light out of darkenosse, Joseph was
in prison, before he could be Governor of Egypt; and the Jsraelites were in
bond age, before they could come into Can^an: You see your soar, but not your
salve: Though with Job you lie, now in ashes, yet when with; Job, you be tried,
there shall be no more sorrows left to afflict you, then there were sores left
to torment him: For as the power of God is above our capacities; So does his
succors and comforts, come quite contrary to our hopes: To hi^ therefore (...)
all things, and in him only repose your self; and be you a^^ited, that in the
assurance of your better ^ust, you shall find conuo^^ unexpected, and hope
w^ll rewarded. Grosses (your Grace knows) are but touch-stones, to try our
pati^^ce; and patience is both a virtue and the true Physician of distress*
And in managing of affection and affliction, is the (...) propse of discretion:
To overcome another, is the guist of For^^^^; but to vanquish our own wills,
is the true proof^ of wile courage, and a glory proper to our selves,

I confess (said Vienna,) that Patience is a Virtue, but a poor one; and that
Hope is a heavenly thing, but long hopes consume patience, and water a fair
often, does ^^ver quench fire at hand; And when two, (...) together, Death may
fall before Summer. Yet (...) (said L^nova) heales griefs, by killing of
tat^^, ^ay, Time (she replied) is rather a devourer of our exp^^^^tions, then
a Chyrurgion to heal our loares: For all men takes pleasure to common their
journyes and before they be weary; and our reeping hopes, would ever be (...)
of a gracious Birth. Yet be you Madame (he re-answered) as you should be, if
not as you would be, since is will be as it is; and with some sweet deceit,
exile these soy^er cenceits. Alas, (said Wie^^na) ^ow, can soy^e conceit,
entertain sweet deceits? since present deceite^, are still my fowrest
conce^^es: Your Physic La-nova, is good, but my disease is desperate: For
patience without comfort, brings peril of consunpt (...); and they are always
unpatient Martyrs, that are punished unjustly: my grief was at the highest
before, and now like swelling Nilus, it disdameth bo^nds. Deceive not your
self, said La-nova, his endeered Love, not broeking your misery; and not his
fraud, never known to any; with his killing ^^pay^^ (the bloody butcher of all
hopes contentments) has forced thus his su^^er flight* And for probation
thereof, ^^^de kee^e his Let (...) which he sent me; and doubt you not Madame,
but when after-(...) shall make him find the error of his amiss, and that his
wounded hope shall be healed with better thoughts; that then (finding with the
sick man, that the shifting of his Bod, alters not his disease) he will then,
J say, return in his repentance, and make inquisition after your welfare.

Vienna taking and perusing the Letter, and swallowing up the contents, with
contentment, was overcome a smuch, with kind, and affectionate grief, as
before she was surprised with cold care and distaste, of his supposed flying
sancie: Insomuch, that washing a new her face, in the balmy drops of her
love-distilling reares, she laid her hands on his shoulder, and sighing said;
O pardon, La-nova, my offensive offenc^. Sweet Faris, where so-ere thou art,
pardon my amiss: J was, J am, and will be still the same, and ever thine. Thus
having surfeited in her own sorrow, she purged her jealous conceit, and in the
comfort of his constant love, she laid her down on her weeping bed, where
La-nova left her, to rest her restless thoughts.

By this time, the Moon seven times had shown her fullest face, and as many
times lost the splendour of her light. When the Prince of Burbon, desirous to
see the Emperious Mistress of his enthralled heart, taking humble leave of his
Father, secretly poasted to Vienna, where the Daulphin enknowledged of his
coming, went to receive him at his outermost gate. The young Prince, greeted,
entertained, and feasted, of some, of many, of all; amongst them all, mist the
fairest of them all, the fair Vienua, the admired Princess of all pulcretude,
of whose wished welfare, he asked her Father: Who like a subtle Mercurist
(cunning in Cautels) soberly said; that as yet she had not recovered her
health. The young Prince, discomforted in so lingering a sickness, importuned
the Daulphin, that he might visit her, and so somewhat satisfy his hungry
mind, almost famished with desire. The Daulphin (whose senses held now a
Synod) was driven to such a exigent, that not knowing how to avoyde the Cheque
without a Mate, he was perforce forced to confess the truth. So that taking
him aside ^he swore by Sacrament of solemn Oath, that his whose drift, and
desire was, to bestow his Daughter on none but him; and that he had banished
ambitious and audatious Sir Paris for his over-proud and persumptious love. But
such (said he) has been, and is still, her permanent frowardness, and most
obstinate disobedience therein, that in injustice, I have justly unprisoned
her, not so much for her degenerate breach of duty, (though not to restrain an
ill, is to maintain an ill) as to bring her to yield to your fancy: But
over-hardened in her wilful conceit, she rests no less careless of her
endurance, then resolved in her wilfulness; for which, I also have deprived
her offier glory, and comfort; sworn her continual thraldom, and pray the
cont nuance of your good opinion, and amity.

The young Prince astonished at the strangeness of the case, wondered greatly
at the cause: Yet flattering himself, with selfe-conceite of his worthy
worthynesse; He earnestly entreated the Daulphin, that he might make some
trial, what himself could do for himself. The Daulphin granting his
request, he presently clothed himself, in the richest Ornaments of Pride and
State; and Princely attended, went with more speed, then success to the
Prison; the Door whereof had but only a small hole cut forth, to take air
in, and to receive such lean and slender Sustenance, as was most sparingly
allowed her.

Vienns foretold of his coming, had before, gotten by La-uova's means, a
Capon, whose dismembered Legs; she closely had tied under the holes of her
naked Arms, that there, with heat putrefying, they might the soone^ corrupt,
and insavery, smell the stronger. The young Prince coming to the door,
knocked, and demanded for Vienna, Who coming and seeing him so richly clad, and
in so glorious an estate, blushed out such beauty, that her very Eves seemed a
fair Temple wherein Love and Beauty seated themselves: Yet dissembling her
knowledge of him she asked what he was, and would. Viennas Friend, (he said)
and Viennas Love I would. My Friend, (laid she) oh Friendlesse, name I Friend?
that live exempt from Friends: My Love, why name J Love? that only love to
live here unbeloved.

The young Prince (whose listening ears, were well pleased with the sweet
harmony of her well tuned words; and whose liking Eyes, were ravislied with the
sight of her perfections) was so perplexed betwixt new conceived desires, and
disdain to be disdained; that not knowing what to say, he stood like one
that had lost himself; not real in sense, but as a fair Flower, nipt with
the morning frost, hanging down his head, as most sorry, for his declining
glory: In this despair, the remembrance of his own greatness, and the
conceit of his own merits, gave such quickening life to his mortified thoughts,
and such freedom to his imprisoned tongue, that boldly, and plainly, he told
her, who he was, why, and for what he came. Vienna pleading ignorance for the
error of her careless regard, humbled her self, with thankful
acknowledgement of his more worthy worthiness: But such (said she) is the
obligation of my decreed chastity, that naught but death shall break the bond.

Why Madame (replied the Prince) in so doing, you wrong Nature, in clouding the
brightness of her Suone, deprive the world of more glorious light, neglect
your duty, in disassenting from your Fathers will, wound my desires with
forlorn hopes, and rob your self, both of propagating pleasure, sweetest
content, and greatest glory: Then leave these injurious walls, and change your
Prison (unfitting your Person) for a Palace prepared for a Princess; In
assurance whereof, accept most renowned Lady, this pledge of my Faith, wherein
is charactered the Life of my Love, and the Love of my Soul; and therewith, Of
Ruby rich, a wounded heart he gave,
That piere't by Dart, did bleed; and mercy crave.


This was so Artifieially made and cut; that the falling drops and seem to
mourn, and plead for pity, and underneath them, was engraven; Vie^mas help.
This he gave, and this she gave again; saying, that by guilts, we make our
selves Lords; but by taking slaves: J will not make a Prince servile, not can
you make a Prisoner proud: Affection is a mere stranger to affection; and
Jewels of price do not befir a miserable thrall. Then let your own gift
(replied the Prince) make you a Queen, and me your slave. My foruines (said
Vieuna) admits of no such Sovereignty; and your Greatness is too potent for a
Vassaile. J am too poor to give; and it stands not with a Lord to beg; then
be you still a King in your own thoughts, and I will rest content with my
Fate. Why, Kings (answered the Prince) have no privilege in Love: and the Gods
themselves were subject to beauty. Vieuna constant in her chaste pretense,
seeing his earnest prosecution, and being wearied with resistance, because
loathing such conference, held it good pollity to prevent his further
importunity. And therefore she briefly and plainly told him, that she way not
for his honor, nor his honor of her humor. For know (she weeping said.)
that the long cold and grievous imprisonment, which indurable. I have yet
endured, has so corrupted and putrified my impared body; that the very stench
thereof offends; and endangereth the small (yet tedious) remainder of my
loathed life. For proof whereof, she bearing her breasts, bad him feel, what
infectious sent her ulcerated and dying flesh yielded; which he no sooner did
but that he was near stifled with the smell. The enslamed Prince, thus cooled
in his hot pursuites, found his thoughts now freer from affection, then he
deemed his body sound from infection. Such was the choking savor, that so
offended his queasie stomach, that comforting her for fashion sake, ^ee made a
brief conclusion, and there left both her, and his love, that erst would have
dyed for love. Vienna well appayed in acquitting her self of so troublesome,
and hurtful a suitor, returned to Jzabella; and sighing out a smile, told
her, how she had deceived the Prince; whereat she joyed no little* and
concluded thereby, that women's pregnant wits, in all cases of sudden
extremities, pre-excelled men's most sapler^ heads. The Prince thus latisfied;
acquainted the Doulphin with the circumstance of the matter; which nothing
moved his Tygars heart; which the Prince condemning, held it no security to
stay with a Tyrant: and therefore striking sail, in so threatening a tempest,
he took his thankful farewell of him, and all his Knights, and so returned
to Burbon.

Now Sir Paris had by this time, recovered the bounds of Turkey, where fearing
the innate, and inveterated malice of those barbarous Infidels against
Christians. To dispietce that threatening cloud, that might shower down
mischief on his harmless head; He made policy his gayde, and craft his
Counselor; And being a great Artist, and well learned in the secrets of
Nature; He cast an Artificial blackness all over him, and transnominated his
name by turning his name backward, he Christened himself Sirap, an Arthiopian
borne.

For who in foreign place, will safely live, and eredit win,
Must work with wiles, and no^ oppose; nor hold their doing sin.
Thus with indefatigable pains he travailed, unregarded of all, and not
suspected of any, unto Constantinople; where having knowledge of the Greek
tongue; he conversed with the meanest of estate, the hetter to preserve his
own estate. And it happened, (and happly happened) that Fortune, Fortune-like
of his foe, became his friend. For walking one day into the fields; accompanied
with none, but with his own troubled thoughts, he encountered by adventure
with the Sultans chiefs Faulkner, who returning from Hawking, bare on his hand
a goodly fair Fausedn; so dangerously hurt, that there rested no hope of
hel^^. Scrap (for so now must we call him) seeing the Hawke hang her bruised
wings and all blooded o^ her flattered Breast, bring Artificially cunning, and
natu^^ ^^ffecting the game pitied the ^hance, and boldly (...) to him, ask
(...) how it happened. The Faulkener, near dead, to see his Hawke almost dead;
sadly told him, that flying a^ the River, his Hawke lying at height of highest
pitch, made so forceable a stouping on the rising Foul, that in her stonelike
fall, she nere gorged her self on a broken bough, that grew amongst other
branches, upon the Grovie bank. Such said Sirap, is the fortune of the Field;
but what will you give, if J recover your Hawke; any thing (said the Faulkner)
for that Solimon the great Sultan, does prize her for her high slying, before
any City in Greece: Then Sinap undertaking it, gathered certain powerful
herbs, of inward and unknown virtue, and bought other Apothecary materials;
and so carefully applied his expert skill, that in short time he healed, and
perfected the so endangered Hawke. The Faulkener admiring at his skill (for
ignorance is the mother of admiration) in the joy of his thoughts, went and
brought his recovered Hawke unto Solimon, and recounted unto him; how that a
stranger, an Athiopian borne, that called himself Sirap, had effected that
cunning Cure; and that he was a man so exquisite in all proportion, and of so
goodly and Majesticall a presence, that he seemed not only to be of an
Heroical heart, but also promised more then was usually in a man. The Sultan
joyour of his Hawke, and well pleased with his description, held his requisite
cunning in great regard; and his service more necessary then others: And
therefore he instantly sent for him; who no sooner came, but that liking his
person, he graced him with his good countenance, and demanded what he was, and
what occasion brought him into that Region. Sirap, whole Courtly demeanor,
might well warrant his behavior, and in whose face, was stamped the true
Character of honor, with humble boldness told him, that he was of no great
lineage, nor livelihood, yet gentle borne; but so subject to the Destinies
displeasure, that not brooking his fatal infelicity, he secretly had left the
utmost South of Aethiopia adjoining to the Deserts of Libia, his Native soil,
to (...) content elsewhere in foreign Nations; And after, said Sirap, I had
long with tedious travail past the hot, and whole Clymate of Affricke, having
no other companion then my mind, nor no other lervant then my tongue: I was at
length by the guide of Fortune, conducted into this part of Greece, where my
thoughts wing^d with desire, to see the most great, and mightiest Monarch on
the earth, brought me to this your Imperial seat. The Sultan pleased, with
his pleasing and well couched words (grew desirous of his service) and
therefore according to the nature of his pride (appropriating to himself
authority over all) he Imperiously commanded him to attend his Person: To
which, though Sirap knew, that denials to such absolute Potentates, were held
for capital offenses: yet he thus reverently and boldly answered. If, said he,
any poor endeavors of mine (most high and mighty Emperor) may be but
pleasing to your Greatness, I shall then think my self most happy, when I
shall find my self able to do you any agreeable service. But if in any wise
your unmatchable Majesty, seek so to tie me to your will; that of necessity I
must follow your fancy: Then diust I (not offending your magnificence) deem
both your highest Highness, unjust; and hold your Law, no Law; because
grounded on necessity. The Saltan wondering at his bold and discreet answer,
and liking his noble and generous spirit, highly estimated him, according to
the virtue of his courage; that could, and dirst with such prudent boldness,
and circumspect fear, except against his never controled pleasure: And
therefore allowing his reasons for reason; he freely granted him more then
the full pre-eminence of a free privileged Travailer; and setting greatness
and the law of his will aside; he gently entreated him, but to make some stay
in his Court, and he would moun^ his fortunes, by his extended favors.

Thus works our Stars; by means, most small
That things fore doomed; by (...) fall:
For Sirap, being thus rarely, and royally entreated, and entertained with the
Sultans unknown, and unusual favors and requests; wholly humbled himself at
his command; and said, that albeit, he had vowed continual Pilgrimage to
sundry Regions; yet would he in some sort, yield obedience to his will, and
dispense for a time with his conscience, because he would not oppose, not
resist the pleasure of his will, nor the command of his potent power. The
Sultan glad of his grant; gave one of his ^ashaes in charge, that he should be
provided for at his dispenses; who presently placed him next to the house,
where the Tartarian Ambassador, but newly arrived, was lodged.

Now amongst the Ambassadors followers, there was one that far exceeded all
the rest in huge height, incomparable strength, and great proportion, insomuch
that the Turks did with wonder admire his stature, and deemed his Sampson-like
force, beyond the power of men. This grim and insatiating Tartar (when served no
other God, but his will: nor observed no other law, but his lust) being one day
left behind, to manage some affairs in the house, when the rest were gone to
the Court: suddenly, and most rudely seized upon a young Damsel, that as
unfortunatly as unadvisedly, was come to see the provision, and manner of these
Strangers. Her (without any show of good entreaty, or kind usage) with a facile
force he carried into a Chamber, and disvirginated her; notwithstanding her
sh^^ll ^^yes, that called in many (but too late) to her aid. This untamed
beast, or rather infernal Devil, fiding himself oprest with multitudes, grew
so ^^^aged, that his wrath had no mean, neither did his interrupted fury,
admit of any consideration, but dreadlesse both of Law and danger, place, and
people: he threw all to the earth, that came near to him, endeavoring still
to retain his prey, which made the outcries of all so great: That Serap being
in his Chamber, at the ^^use thereof, rushed in with his peaceable sword, and
finding him carrying the (...) Maid, in an unmannerly manner from them, (...)
Chamber, he so powerfully smote him on the face with his displeased hand, that
force, perforce, he was forced to leave his hold, and betake him to his angry
Semitar, with which he furionsly assaulted him. But Sirap (who held it a great
fault, not to do a good thing well) readily returned him unwelcome interest,
for his so willing leave. Long did they work on each other, like tempests on a
Ship, and the blood of both, did well show, that neither of them were well
pleased: None durst come near them, till that Killer Aga, Captain of the
Janissaries, heating of this tumultuous and debatefull strife, came in, and
stayed the fight.

The Damsels Father, and friends, (standing upon their strength of restimony)
pursued the outrage, by way of complain^ against the Tartar, and required of
Solymon the benesit of Law. The Tarter (countenancing himself under the
protection of Potency and Ambassagie) pleaded the privilege of his place, and
said, That he was not liable to their ordinances; nor subject to any but his
own Lord, the Emperor: who in Majesty, might, and merit, far surmounted all
other Potentates of the world, and thereupon offered in open Court Combat,
thundering out defiance against all, that but durst aver the contrary.

Solim^n much distasting his ungoverned pride, and worse dis-jesting his
barbarous outrage, and offensive contempt: did in wardly fret that no one durst
attempt to quench, nor allay the prodigal heat of his foolish fire; and not
knowing how otherwise to correct his insolence, since Kings should ever show
themselves rather just, then great: and the law of Nations (which is the state
of Peace, and maintehance of Honor) did warrant his trial by Combat; he (at
last thus deliberately concluded: That the (...) day following, he should be
ready Armed at all assayes, and mounted like a Knight, to make that good with
his sword, which he so arrogantly and over-audaciously had delivered ^ith his
tongue. And if there came not any one then to chastise his stily, and correct
him for his bruish, and injurious atteu^pts, that th^^ he should be free from
touch, both of law and life. This being rumoured abroad, came to Siraps ears,
who grieving to loose opportunity, as one that thirsted after occasion, both to
show his courage in honorable revenge, and to do Solimon some commendable
service: though his resolution was a sufficient Armor for the encounter, yet
knowing that naked valor, could promise no success where Armed force did
assail: his greatest fear was, least for want of Armor, and furniture,
others would out the grass from under his feet, and so deprive him both of
favor and fortune. But this courageous fear, was acquitted by the timorous
fear of all others, that feelingly feared such desperate and deadly attempts,
as promised neither hap, nor hope of good success. At length the day being
come, and all things in order, came Solimon with his Sultanesse, attended with
his Vice-royes; Beglerbegs, and Basshaes in great Royalty, and 2000. Armed men
for his Guard, and in the place ofteyall assigned, he seated himself and his
Sultanesse upon a glorious Throane within his Im^eriall Pavillion; great was
the press, and many the people, that waited on the issue hereof: when
suddenly the sound of Trumpet showed the near approach of the Tartar: who (in
honor of his earthly God, the son of the light, the terror of men, and for
the repute of his Country) came with his sword drawine, accompanied with the
Ambassador and all his followers, most richly furnished. The Appellant himself
being mounted on a courageous Horse, his Caparisons, and other his furniture,
all of purple Satin, embroydered with gold all over, with dismembered heads,
arms and savered legs of slaughtered men, besprinkled all with blood.) And
in his Shield he over-gloriously ba^^ his own picture naked; holding a
Combiting Lion, stisled by the throat with his hand, and vnderaeath was
written, WHAT NOT: In this terrifying equiqage, he stayed at the Barriers of
the Lysts, until the Officers appointed for that service, demanded what he was
and wherefore he came; who answered, that he was Turbident the fierce, the
invincible Tartar, that came to prove by his sword, that he being only
subject to the greatest Monarch on earth (who had no equal) ought not to
undergo the censure of any other inferior power, and thereupon demanded
entrance; which being permitted, he put up his sword, and was conducted to the
upper end of the Lysts, where lighting, he was seated in a rich Chair,
suitable to his Basses, to repole himself in: Near unto which, was pitched a
most stately Tent for the Ambassador, and his Train. Then the Herald was
commanded to summon the Defendant by sound of Trumpet, but no one appeared,
which made Solimon featefull of disgrace. Then he sounded the second time, but
no one presented himself: which made the proud Tartar (in arrogancy or his
redoubted puissance) to stand up, and drawing his terrified sword, he
brandished i^ over his head, in such tryumphing and daring manner, that the
great Sultan seeing his insulting pride, could scarce contain himself within
himself, Then as the Herald sounded his last summons, a lowly Hermit, clad
all in gray, leaning on a staff of Ebony, stayed him with his other hand, and
required; that he might speak with Solimon the Emperor, who being brought
before him, bowed himself, thrice before him, and then prayed in zeal of
justice, and for the honor of the Turkish-Empire, he might have Horse, and
Armor, to tame that uncivil and vntutored Tartar, whose pride; he said, was
not so high, but that Vengeance did sit above it.

The Sultan glad that any one durst, and would in his honor undertake, so
great and fearful a hazard; commanded that presently he should be
with-drawne, and brought to his Armoury, and there at his choice be Armed, and
mounted as his proper Champion; which was no sooner said, but that the Hermit
being attended on thither, took (upon the view of all) one of the largest and
one that fitted his own conceit best: wherewith being Armed; and mounted, he
showed himself at the Barriers end of the List, in a bright Azure Armor, like
unto the sky, with a half Moon in the midst, both before, and behind: His
Basses, Caparizons, and other furniture waved like a Sea, full of silver
Fishes, that seemed as he rid, to stir; and play under so bright a Planet. On
his Shield he had a Ship, stayed (in the midst of a Sea) by a little Fish,
called Remora; and his impresse was, Virtue, not force. As thus he stood
looking for entrance, The appointed Officers, demanded what he was, and
wherefore he came, who answered, that he was a Man of peace, a devout Hermit,
and one of the least of the most humblest Servants of Great Solimon; Who for
the love of Honor, and to honor his Lord, came to approove that the Sultan of
Turkey, was a greater and a more Imperial, and a more magnificant Monarch,
then the Tartarian Emperor, and much more renowned in his person; And that
Turbulents shameful, and criminal offense, was punishable (by all National
laws) where the fault was committed; and this he would make good on his body,
and desired to enter the Lyks. Upon this, all the Turks gave a great showt,
and cried God, and Mahamet for the Hermit: And so putting up his Sword, he was
conducted by one of the Bacshaes to the other end of the Lysts, where
dismounting himself, he was seated in a rich Chair of State, curiously
wrought with half Moons in silver, and set with precious Stones. During their
small repose, the elected Officers viewed their Arms; and their Armours, to
see whether they were of equal length, and that there were no wrong done to
Chivalry: and then the chief Herald proclaimed, that no one under pain of
death should enter the Lysts, but the Officers appointed to the strvice, and
that no one should cast any thing into the Lysts, nor use any words, nor sign
to discourage, or encourage other party.

This done, he bade the Combatants to rise, and mount themselves, and at the
sound of Trumpet to begin the assault. At the setting forth it could not be
discerned who was first. The Tartar, bearing his Mast-like Staff over high,
carried away part of the Hermites Plume; But the Hermit (unto whom Judgment
and custom gave an advantage) bare himself so evenly in his winged Course,
th^^ he her the Tartar so forceable on the breast, that though the goodness of
his (...) donyed e^trance, yet did is make him do homage to the strength of
the blow: For Turbulent keeping his (...), wo^ notwithstanding, by the breaking
of all his Girthes, for on the ground, with his Saddle betwixt his legs. This
not only moved great laughter, but stroke all men with such a wonder, that
where before they could not harbor the least hope, now then began to look
after good ^op. The Tartar swelling with ^efull (...) (like unto the disturbed
Ocean) breathed out direful revenge; and furiously drawing forth his
dreadful Sword, called so him, (who needed no summons at all) threatening
death and d^struction, not only to him, but to all (...). But the Hermit,
whose undismayed codrage, could nor be silsken with any boisterous winds; upon
his stopage, ^ur^ed his Horse, and seeing him on foot, (scorning the
advantage) alighted, and (...) bathing his correcting (...), advisedly came
toward the Tartar, who rudbly (...) him, with so magntie a blow, that
notwithstanding his full war^, with his Shield h^e was forced to stagger a
little; whereby he knew the unresistable strength (...), and more warily stood
after, rather upon motion, then warding: Yet did his superlative valor, equal
the others incomparable strength: But the Hermit, in guerdon of Turbulents cold
courtesy, returned him such (...), as made his dazeled eyes ready to start out
of his: dis^^bed head. This interchange of puissant strokes (ench^ing like the
C^^lops blow, upon their fiery Anviles) beg^^ such sp^^^^full disdain, and
hal^inous rage in both, that the (...) pe^tuous futie of their stormy blower
came like (...), to the amazement of the beholders: The gleat (...)
unres^stable strength of the one, showing both might and courage; and the
unmatchable valor, and practive skill of the other, showing (...) prow is and
(...), mad with hateful and ang^^ (...) one should or could, so stand
against him (^^^^ing to his to (...) favling strength) layden such load on the
magn ^^^ous Her^^ite, as all men wondered how he could keep hi^ standing, or
standing, durst once stand ^o withstand him: But the bold haughty Hermit,
whole watchful care, and used skill, had made him export in such threatening
tempests, gave some way unto that stormy shower, avoiding the danger,
sometimes by motion of his Body, and sometimes by strong and wary wards;
never loosing any advantage to offend, hot giving ground in his defense.

In the (...), finding the Tartars wasting fury to consume it self; In the
abatement thereof, he so redoubled his renewed blows, which like hayle-stones,
strove to overtake each other before they fell, that Turbulent knew not how to
avoid the greatness of the storm. Now was there several Armonts broken,
bruiled, and mangled in many places, and the blood that issued from thour both,
made the dyed Earth a witness of their implacable rage. But the Tartar, that
had lost most bloed, finding his strength to abate, united all his forces
together, and mote the Hermit so forceable oh his Burgonet, that
notwithstanding his Shield, which then he cloue asunder, he brought him on his
knees maugro both his ward and his might; but such was his quick delivery,
and invincible courage, that he was no soone^ down, then he was up againe^^;
and seeing himself (...) of the best part of his defense, he was so overcome
with scornful anger, that he had been brought so lo^^^; that he began to
renew the Fight, more furiously, and with much more puissant and insupportable
blows, then before (...) and finding (by his euerwatching eye) that the
Val^b^^sse was broken, and fallen from the Tartars Cu^^^, and that he was
willing his advantage (...) taking his threatening and wrathful Sword in both
his hands, he hit him so full and so strongly on his disarmed Arm, that he
severed it from his oursed Body, so that Arm, and harmeful sword fell (...)
to the ground. The Tultar, and all the (...) onder^ wonditing at the greatness
of the blow (...) of so terrible a combat, admired who that valiant Hermit
should be that with such unwearied force, and such approved skill, had sh^^ed
such prowess, as the like was neverr seen.

The loss of the Tartars arm made him curse heaven, and earth, and frothing
at his mouth like a wild chaffed Bull, he bellowing out wrath, and vengeance
in such a ^^^dding manner, that (being as ignorant of his Fate, as he was
impudently mad in the maintenance of his ignominious wrong) he desperately
run headlong on the Hermit; thinking so to bear him over. But advised
experience, and wary circumspection, which had ever armed the Hermit for all
accidents and assaults, made him unwilling of such unkind embracement: And
therefore made stopage by a most fortunate thrust, which finding entrance under
his bruised Tases, run upwards and made quick inquisition after his death.
Thus was the pride of Goliath turned into confusion, and thus fell the redoubted
Tartar, like a great Tower upon the earth, to the amazed grief of the
Ambassador, and all his Train; and to the admiring joys of the Sultan and
his Turks. But the Hermit, who ever held, that to destroy mercifully, was to
save; stepped to him, and pulling off his headpiece, with his sword he smote off
his fearful head, and holding it up on high, Cried, God save Solimon, the
invincible Sultan, and mightiest Emperor, and greatest Potentate on earth.

This being done, the Trumpets tryumphantly sounded forth the joy of most
pleasing victory, and all the people made such rejoicing Cries, that their
applauding shouts pierced the lower Region, to witness their glory on the
earth. But silence being made, the heroical victorious Hermit (armed with
glorious conquest) was betwixt two Beglerbegges (the chiefest of the Turkish
Nobility) brought with sounding Trumpets unto the Sullan, who commending his
great strength, his surmounting prowess, and most invincible courage,
commanded him to put off his Helmet, that he might know who had so much
honored him, that according to his great, merit, he might dese^vedly advance
him. To which the humble Hermit answered, that all his Actions did aim at
Honor, not at advancement; and that the favors he had already found and
received of so great a Prince, was all-sufficient in it self, to enable a
weaker arm to perform a greater work; besides his desire (he said) did carry
him beyond all means, and ability; to do him a more pleasing service; And
therewithal taking off his Helmet, in all humility he bowed his body
(according to the Turkish manner) thrice unto him. But when Solimon saw that he
was Sirap, his near affected and entertained friend, laying aside all State and
regard of greatness, he came to him, and embracing him, said: How shall the
Turkish Sultan requite the honorable love of so praiseworthy a friend, but in
the renowned hazard of his invaluable life, has both preserved, and dignified
my name, and the fame of my Empire. But more bentting times shall show us
respectfully grateful, and affectionately mindful, of so virtuous a friend,
so famous a Champion, and so glorious an act. In the interim, he commanded
that three of his chief Bashaes should ride before Sirap, and that the first
should carry the Tartars louped arm and Sword: the second his unweldy Spear,
and massy Shield; and the third, his grim and terrible severed Head; and that
after should follow the monstrous and headless trunk of that huge boasting
Goliath; after whom would march the disgraced Ambassador, and all his
discontented train: And that Sirap mounted on his Courser, all alone, with his
naked bloudied sword in his hand, like a Conqueror should follow; and after
him, he himself, the Sultanesse, and all his royal Attendants should ride,
and so pass through the City, to his Palace. This he did to honor his
friend; And out of this honor, did Fugenia his Sultanesse more affectionately
look upon the merit of Sirap. His carriage seemed now more majesticall; his
color though black, she deemed lovely; and the nobleness of his spirit,
deserved (she thought) the favor of the greatest Empress. This liking begot
longing, and she desired how to enjoy, what she was enjoined not to affect. The
remembrance of her place, and the terror of their law, qualified, but not
quenched her sired fancy; which she seeking to smother in the embers, burst
out after into a greater, and more shameful flame.

But Sirap, during his repose, for the healing of his wounds, entering into
consideration of his cross fortunes, seeing his admired victories applauded
with open joys, honor, and tryumphes; and his dejected and enthralled heart,
still clad in black woe, and accompanied only with secret grief, and
tormenting passions. To feed his distaste of rejoicing, with some sad
conceits. He suitably composed these few following reverst, and returning
verses; which being read either forward or backward, are still the same in
sense both ways; and either way, end in meeter.

Joy, Mirth, Tryumphes; I do defy,
Destroy me Death; feign would I die:
Forlorn am I; Love is exilde,
Scorn smiles thereat; Hope is beguilde:
Men banished bliss, in Woe must dwell,
Then Joy, Mirth, Tryumphes, all farewell.
Thus did he show himself to be ever one, as constant in his woes as he was
unremoveable in his love; And thus ever in his hours of leisure, did either
his tongue complain, or his pen manifest his sorrow. But when loathed time
had healed his honored wounds. The grand Sultan to give his solitariness some
sollace, sent unto him, that the next day he should be in befitting readiness
to attend him to the chase of the wild Boar, in the near adjoining forest;
And commanded one of his Basshaes to see that Sirap should be well mounted, and
furnished accordingly. For still it bare him in mind (seeing the map of
Majesty in his eyes, and finding the virtue of true Nobility in his thoughts)
that he was extract from Royal blood; And by this means, he thought he
should (by his observance) make a further trial thereof. The next morning
Phoebus had no sooner rent the sable Clouds, and washed his face with the dew
of the earth, but that the winding of base and bugle horns, summoned the
Sultan to his Silvan sports, and Sirap to his attendance.

And long it was not, but that each one was in full readiness, and being
horsed, rid to the Forest, where separating themselves, they took diverse
ways, the sooner to find their game, but still Sirap attended the Sultan,
whose fortune was to epsy the Boar, whetting of his angry Tushes in the mouth
of his den, as though he had foreseen his pretended pursuit, and meant to
wound his pursuing foes. The Sultan proud of such success, gave spurs to his
flying Horse, and with careless eagerness unlodging the beast, pursued him so
swiftly, that none but Sirap could come near unto him. The Boar seeing
himself pursued, fled by decreed desteny toward the midst of the Desert;
where the Turk fast following, was suddenly seized on by a great, fell and
hideous Dragon.

Sirap seeing the Sultan so embraced within the murdering arms of death,
(knowing no fear to make a pawse) set spurs to his Horse, and so furiously
run at him with his Boare-speare, that he happily wounded him under the left
wing. The fierce Dragon feeling the smart of his hurt, left his unkind hold,
and smote with his wings so violently at Sirap, that he brake his Spear all to
pieces. Then drew Sirap his Semiter, which the Sultan had that morning given
him, and freshly assaulted that dreadful Beast with such advised heedfulnesse,
that hardly could that enraged Monster fasten on him; so quick in agility, so
ready in dexterity, and so watchful he was at all times. But in the end he
smote Sirap so forceably with his Serpentine tail, that maugre all his might
and strength, he was constrained to fall on the ground: when the wrathful
Dragon advancing his threatening wings, and opening his infernal mouth, made
offer as she would devour him at once. But Sirap seeing the danger, carried so
vigilant an eye, and so ready a hand, that the Dragon no sooner stooped to
feaze on him, but that, as he lay upright on the ground, he so strongly
thrust his well steeled Semiter into his almost unpenitrable breast, that
piercing his heart, he suddenly prevented death by death. Now the frighted
Sultan, who only was but pinched a little with his claws; was no sooner free
from that murdering Beast, but that creeping amazedly into a thick bushy
Grove, he fearfully hid himself there, scarce daring to lend his eyes, to
behold that uncouth and perilous Combat. But when he saw Sirap on his feet,
striking off that ghastly and monstrous head; and elivating it on the point of
his Semiter, and turning himself, called for his Lord. Then, then, came he
forth in the admiration of his thoughts; and kneeling down, first gave thanks
to Mahomet, and then to him, for his so redeemed and preserved life. But Sirap
yielding the heavens only thanks, bad him ascribe the only glory thereof to
God, and not to him a sinful man, or to any other surmized power; since none
but God had armed his humble heart with undaunted courage; and none but God
could have given his weak hand such a happy Conquest. As thus they sacrificed
their thanks. One of the Bashawes, that had lost himself in the pursuit, came
straying in by chance, unto whom the Sultan recounted all the accident: with
such admiring wonder of Siraps worthy valor, that both the Sultan, and his
Basha, esteemed him as another Mahomet. In this height of Solimons joy for his
secured life; he commanded the Bassha himself to carry the Dragons head
before Sirap into the City, and that his man should poast before to publish
that thrice renowned deed, that the Citizens might triumph in their Lords
escape, and honor Sirap for his purchased life. And no sooner it was revealed,
but that the Citizens first amazed with wonder, and after ravished with joy,
wholly went to meet their earthly God; whom once reveren^ed, they guarded to
the City gate; where the Caliph (the Primate of their superstition) to
celebrate the happiness of Solimons preservation, accompanied with all the
order of their ceremonious Priests, received him, and brought him after their
Heretical, or rather Heathenish manner to his Palace. The next day he caused
the Dragons head to be set on his Palace gate, that all men beholding it,
might know their Lords danger, and Siraps valor. Then he a stembled all his
Basshaes, and in their presence would have created him one of his Visiers;
which with all thankful humility he reverently refused, as not capable yet of
that dignity, and therefore humbly requested his Greatness, that he would for
a time pardon his denial, until the infancy of his weak merit, were grown
stronger in better deserts, which well pleased Solimon; because Solimon would
not displease Sirap. Then began he to feast, and to make tryumphes in his
Court. Where Sirap honored Knighthood in those Justs, and graced those Justs
in honor of the Sultan. Such was his Knightly carriage, such his unresistable
courage; so well could he manage his furious Steed, and so redoubted was he
in all his encounters, that all men rather deemed him the God of Arms, then a
man in Arms. For there was neither Turk, nor Sarazen, that could withstand
his puissant force: nor was there any dismounted, that held himself
dishonored. So highly did they estimate his unequalled valor, that they held
his power rather divine then humane. As for the vulgar sort they flocked about
to see him, with such applauding shoutes, as though Mars had left his heavenly
Sphere, and descended amongst them, to sport himself on earth.

These Heroical deeds of famous Chivalry, begot admiration in all, but brought
forth such unresistable affection in the faultfull Sultanesse, that what before
she held deadly, now she deemed it not to be venial: Lascivious love
dissolved the bonds of all respects, and her mind being set on desire nothing
could limit her adventures. For though lust carry ruin behind her, yet must the
Queen of love enjoy the God of War: yea, though Vulcan frame and lay his
subtle nets for their discovery. How to make Argoes sleep, was all her
unquiet care; the eyes of the Eunuchs must be made: blind, either with Gold,
or guile; which she put in practice by calling these watching Attendants, or
rather jealous Jaylors unto her; unto whom she told, that the day following,
Hirena another of the Sultans Wives, had secretly appointed a Grecian Hero to
come to solace with her; for as that day, the Sultan himself, his Visters,
Basshaes, and Martial Commanders, would sit in the Divano, there to consult
and conclude, for the invading of Christendom; And if they would stand as
faithful Sentinels in such a place as she would covertly appoint them to, and
carefully make their prying eyes full witnesses of her sportfull abuses, that
then she would guild their labors over with Gold, enrich their estates, and
make them more pleasing in the Sultans eyes, for that regardfull service, The
Eunuchs, whose offices stood upon such employments, embraced the offer, and
promised their best endeavoure.

The Sultanasse proudly glad, that she should by this deceitful means, be
freed from these preventing and interrupting Spirits, made now no question of
opportunity; and therefore no doubt of the fruition of her desire; To hasten
which she called unto her Mentiga, one of her attendants, whom she before had
fashioned to her purpose, and gave her in secret charge, that she should that
evening following, disguise her self in Man's apparel, and go to the
victorious Ethiopian, and warily deliver him that Letter, and crave his
answer. Glad was Mentiga of this employment, it fitted her nature well; and
hope of reward gave speed to her desires, to do her Mistress some pleasing
service. The evening being come, this mindful Montiga (sins packhorse) that
had tired many a Man, now attired her self like a Man; and going, found Sirap
alone in his Chamber; unto whom, humbling her solio, she delivered her carnal
Letter, which thus pleaded in her Misteisses behalf.

E^ge^i^ the Greatest of Women well greeteth Sirap, the Worthiest of Men's That
Invrite but he may be thy glory; and that I love then, let is be thy
happiness: If thou have wit to know Love, I have beauty to moove Love; and if
thou have merit to win Love. I have a body to reward Love: We both were bred in
the intrailes of the flesh, and therefore subject to the desires of the Flesh.
Let nature then excuse my blushing show of immodesty herein who has not left
our affections within our own p^^vers, but has framed our inherent and
inevitable fancies, as facile to be seduced by Love, as she has made us by
kind, too kind to resist Love. The Sultan grows old, and Love decks not her
self with fading Flowers, nor can the withered Tree shade beauty from the
burning Sun. Love without fruit is a Picture without a Face; and Venus ^^ best
pleased when she is feelingly infolded within Mars his arms. If then thou will
live like the King of Bees, seek honey at my Hive, and thou shall suck the
breasts of full delight, and gage the vessel, when this Earthly God shall
drink the Lee. It shall suffice Solimon, that the Sea is sufficient for more
Fishes then one; and it may proudly content thee, that opportunity waits on
thy best fortunes, for to morrow will the Sultan fit in the Divano, and I have
taken order for my Attendant^ Then cloth thy self in some Religious habit
(for they may ever do the most wrong, of whom least is looked for,) and come
where Pleasure shall enrich thee, and so farewell.

EVGENIA.


Sirap having read this with amazement, stood abashed, not that overpowerfull
Love had given her such bold countenance; but that licentious Lust had armed
her with such Impudency. He now found that the dry Earth, the Grave, and a
wicked Woman, were three unsatiable things: But her alluring sollies could not
win him nor her attractive offers weine him from the constant resolve of his
virtuous dispose; For though Fortunes gates were set wide open for him to
enter, yet he well knew, that as much would hurt the ill that he should find
as the good that he should loose: Though Laurel (he said) he of high esteem
yet who so tastes it shall find it bitter. Vices may vanish but their effects
can not perish: and therefore he chose rather with the Be, to extract Honey
from every weed, then with the Spider to gather poison of the fairest slower.
Viennas love was a rich rock of defense against all Siren songs, nor would the
binding benefits he had received of the Sultan suffer him to blast his
benefactors Vine, nor make him mud the fountain that gave him drink: A
perpetual repenting sorrow, he could not buy, for so golden and glorious
seeming a solace: For what profits it to touch, nay have the Crown? and
after to be smitten down with the Scepter. Dignities aggravate the offense
against him, that is bound not to offend; and such pleasures ever contaminate
those that embrace them. False disloyalty could not corrupt him nor could
poverty infect him. As these considerations made him resolute in the refusal
so doubtful, fear made him careful, least his denial should beget disdain,
and disdain bring forth direful revenge; for unjust Women, do never appease
their wrathful ires against just Men. To sail betwixt these threatening
Gulphes, was dangerous, yet like a wise Pilot, he turned himself to the
stearne of his best, providencie; and taking Pen and Ink, he no less
subtly then suddenly, writ her such an answer, as (being left of purpose
unpointed) might sensibly be read, either to suit her desire, or to excuse his
denial. This Letter he sealed, and delivered it to the Protean Messenger, with
excuse of the necessity of his Religious observation, to celebrate his
Nativitie the next day, and that he would couetously attend, and joyfully
embrace the benefit of the next Tide. By this colorable delay, he freed
himself from all hazard, and by winning of time, he hoped to avoyde all
dangers. But Eugenia receiving the Letter, read it as follows.

THe awe of Majesty, and bond of oblieging honesty I regard, not the
consideration of so glorious Love, shall make me yours; the greatness of your
merit J acknowledge, and will affect as I ought; respectively I honor the
estimate of your Place, and Greatness; your Love I will affectionately embrace
never; Eugenia for me, shall fail of her desire, and Sirap will ever live
freely; yours in all service,

Disdain of contempt, and rancorous despite for refused favors, would scarce
let her read out the last word, but that throwing it away in a most distasteful
rage, she vowed that his life should answer the disgrace: which Mentiga
hearing, grieved that her labors had brought forth no better fruit, and
finding her Paradiz'd hopes cast down, she in a most scornful manner took
up the Letter, and happily road it the other contrary way, and therewithal
humbling her self, be sought her Majesty to take a better view thereof, and
not to contemn him, that gave her such ample and pleasing content. Content,
nay contempt said Engenia, thou would say. Think thou that I cannot see
read, nor understand what he has done? what madness moves thee to persuade
me to unpossibilities. Thy idle words cannot make my constant eye, a Traitor
to my perfect judgment. See here witless woman, that have either lost thy
fight, or thy senses. Read, read, and let every word win thy assistance to
my just, and cruel revenge. It shall (most potent Empress) answered Mentiga,
so that in your own milder nature, and more temperate dispose, you will but
vouchsafe to see with patience, what I shall most truly and directly read. I
will said Eugenia on that condition, and thereupon Mentiga read the same
again, and as she read it, she poynted, it with her finger, as follows now
poynted.

THe awe of Majesty, and bond of oblieging honesty I regard not the
consideration of so glorious love shall make me yours; the greatness of your
merit I acknowledge and will affect as I ought respectively; I honor the
estimate of your place, and greatness; Your love I will affectionately
embrace; never Eugenia, form, shall fail of her desire; and Sirap will ever
live freely yours, in all service.

SIR A P.


Now most meritorious Lady (said Mentiga) and worthyest of Princes, what
mislike can you gather from so full a consent of love? Or what could you expect
more from him, then to be wholly yours? with adventure of life, he offers love,
and not regarding danger he devotes himself to your pleasure. O happy Lady,
Sovereign Queen of Fortune, and sole commander of contentment; that out of your
own fancy can triumph over others affections, and at your own pleasure enjoy
your desires with wished delights. Eugenia amazed, and confounded with wonder,
knew not what to say, or think of her self: Sure she was that she read it
directly otherwise, and as assuredly she found it now to be otherwise.

In this silent confused study she punished all her thoughts with variety of
hinking, and stood like a fair livelesse picture, made to life; but wanting
life, until fatal Mentiga awaked her wandering spirits, and thus merrily
cheered her.

Nay, most mighty Empress (she said) confess your error, and your pardon shall
be granted: here is nothing metamorphosed; only you may see, that there is
nothing well done, that is ill construed. Your fear to loose what you wished to
have; made you think as you doubted; believe what you feared; and read as you
deemed. But that cloud being dispierced, look now with comfort upon the glory
of the Sun, and with joy receive the benefit of his sweet influence, and
therewithal she read, and re-read it, with such plain and direct pointing of
it, that the Sultanesse (being easily made apt to embrace what she desired)
acknowledged her over sight, and never after sought to read it in any other
manner, or to any other sense.

To ratify which, Mentiga told her, that he sorrowfully craved pardon for his
next days attendance. For that it being his birth day, he was tied both by his
Countries custom, and by his obliged observance, religiously to celebrate it,
in a sacred sort according to their wonted and hallowed manner. This was
somewhat cordial unto her wounded heart, though not so comfortable as she
desired. And yet it did (because it must) satisfy for the time: which time,
was all, surprised Sirap sought to gain: For in the delay of days he hoped to
prevent that threatening evil, which so dangerously (like a prodigious, though
bright Comet) proclaimed and prognosticated his destruction. In the mean time
he left the pleasing and entising sports of the court (for pleasures are no
pastimes for male-contented and disconsolated men) and purposely walked all
alone into the fields (the freer to enjoy his own thoughts) where suddenly
making a stand in his melancholy pause, he writ in the sand with the point of
his sword as follows.

My foes I foyl; my woes do conquer me,
Fancy I fly, yet love, and loved would be:
Thus Sirap joys, and thus does Paris mourn,
In Greece graced, and admired; in France forlorn.
No sooner had he writ the last Letter, but with his discontented foot he
buried them all in their own Sepulchers, and smoothing he place again, stamped
out this new inscription.

No eye shall see, what sands would tell,
No winds shall blab, where I do dwell.
But then calling to remembrance his enthralled Lady, lying hopeless,
hapless, and heartlesse: in his loss, in her love, and in her self. And
finding himself exiled from Prince, Parents, and possessions, wandering like a
fugitive, from foreign places, to places still unknown. Then, then, drowning
the late flowing stream of his gotten glory, in the full Sea of present hard
haps; he began thus to ease his oppressing grief, by pleading, and publishing
to the winds his case, and cause of grievous care.

O false Fortune (said he) constant only in inconstancy, how have thou made me
a mirror of thy many mutabilities.

First, thou flatteredst my clyming thoughts with imperial conceits, and
promisedst success to my aspiring hopes, and then, even then, thou punishest
my desires with distrusting favors. After thou did erect rich and glorious
Trophses, for my renowned Victoryes; and in thy greatest grace, disgrace my
fortunes, and eclipse my honor, with most obscure and clouded Conquests. Then
in thy fraudulent smiles, thou wingedst my hope with beauties consent, and
made me fly in the heaven of my blisfull contentment. But after (like a
cruel Tyrant, thou thrust my heart out of Paradise, and like a Thief, robbed
my desires of his purchased Prey. And now rather to show thy staylesse state,
then to salve any wound thou gave; thou girdest me with pleasing glory, and
unaffected favors in Greece, and feedest my mated mind with unseasonable
joys; when alas my excruciated thoughts cannot but live, as strangers in
foreign delights.

O sweet Vienna, in thee only have I lost the beauty of the world, the pride of
all joys, the sweetest fruit of best content, and the highest mark of true
loves ambition: And for thee only all these remonstrances of love, joy, mirth,
solace, and triumphs, seem unto me but as the rich spoils of a vanquished
Kingdom, in the eye of a Captive Prince; which as they are, but as unbreadings
of his loss; so are these, but as sharp whetstones to my continuated sorrows.

O how these Barbarian, and Turkish times of comfort, sound in my ears, like
the Israelites bemoaning Music, upon the Babylonian banks: And how the
Sultan, and his Emperesses affording graces, seem unto me but as the glystering
sparks of a broken Diamond, and the Pictures of dead and decayed beauties;
fair signs, not salves, of my lost felicity; and true memorials, not
medicines, of my purchased calamity. O Vienna, Vienna, as thou art the food of
my thoughts, the relief of my wishes, and the only life, and repasse of all my
desires, so is thy love to me a continual hunger; and thy absence an extreme
famine. Then pardon my enforced flight in my stormy fury, driver thereunto by
my angry Pates; and let my faith live still in thy fancy, which is nor to be
controlled by any Fortune. But ala^, thou live thy self, a Captive Prince to
thy will; and a most desolate prisoner to thy abused constancy.

O cruel Dolphin, Tiger-hearted Father, and most unnatural, and unrelenting
Parent; the smallest drops will soften the hardest stones, but natures greatest
tears, cannot supple thy flony heart: thy justice without pity, is as cruel
as pity, without justice is foolish. If wrath were not by mercy to be
appeased, no flesh should be saved.

O would -- and thus as he would have floated further in the Sea of his sorrow,
he was interrupted and driven out of his Saturnall humor, by a certain
messenger of worth, that the Turk had sent to seek him, with whom he returned,
shadowing his grief, with the borrowed vail of seeming pleasant; and arming his
patience with noble resolution, to give way to all occurrents, and to withstand
all sinister accidents.

No sooner was he come into the Sultans sight, but that he cheerfully called
him, and briefly told him, that he meant to invade Christendom: And that for
his approved Prowes, and for the love he bare him, he meant to grace him with
the conducting of his Army, and make him General over all his forces. This
said he is our will, and this your charge; Then see that your performance
answer our expectation, and that our love be guerdoned with your victories.
Sirap wounded with these words, knew not how to lay a plaster on this sore,
yet resolved in his Countries good he humbly prostrating himself, yielded all
reverend thanks, for such his great esteem and graceful respect.

But such (said he, pardon me, most victorious, and most mightiest, of most
mightiest Princes) is my unpractized knowledge in Marshalling of Troops, and
ranging of Battles, that I should rather eclipse the feared honor of your
name, by my overthrow; then eternize your gotten same by my Conquests. Besides
know (most great Commander) that though I be a mortal enemy to the Cross of
Christ, and an inherent foe to all Christians; yet for some private causes
(best known to my self) I vowed long since never to tread on Christian
ground, nor come where any worship that Messiah for their God. Then let (I
humbly entreat your Imperial Majesty) some other in worth more worthier;
supply my defects in their better deserts, and bury not your living renown in
my so probable ignorance, and unexperienced discipline.

The Su'tan weying the danger of an unpractised General, allowed the rather
his devout objections; and considering the religiousnesse of his vows, (though
he held it superstitious in it self) yet would he not violate his consecrated
promise; but yielding to his request, he made Mustapha, Basha, his General;
and the preparation for him was so great that the bruit thereof piercing, the
Western clyme, came to the knowledge of the French King; who as the greatest
Christian Prince, assembled his wisest counselors, and noble Peers, praying
also in aid of all his allies, and Princely confederates about him, to confer,
and conclude somewhat, for the honor and preservation of Christendom; Amongst
whom, the Dolphin of Viennois was there as the sole Solon, and only wisest
(though too severe a Cato) of his Country.

But such was his over weening conceit, such the elevation of his high stirring
spirit, and such his proud estimation of his allowed wisdom; that halled on
(I know not by what destiny) he voluntary offered, secretly, and Pilgrim like
to go to Constantinople, there to espy, and learn, the strength, intention,
course and preparation then intended, meant, and made for Christendom.

This being applauded by the whole assembly, so tickled the flattering humor of
his vain glory the eclipse of his mature wisdom) that poisoned with their
praises; he sailed to look into the consideration of so doubtful, and
threatening an enterprise, Pride made him forget both his place and his years,
and Glory would not permit him, neither to take counself of Time; nor make a
provident delay; which well shows that they that are transported with their
own desires; have no true scope of judgment lest them, to look with perfec^
eyes into their designs; otherwise actions so uncertain had been better not
undertaken, then unfortunately hazarded: But he ever hastes to repent that
rashly enterpriseth: He was most resolute in his determination, nothing could
dismay him, nor no man could dissuade him: doubt he held to be the bane of all
hopeful endeavors, and if his fate were certain, he said it would profit him
little to take heed; and if uncertain, it would be more then mear foolishnes,
to fear what he was ignorant of would happen.

In this resolute resolve, he called for the Lord Vran Esperance, (a man whose
care and providence, was the life of that State,) unto his wisdom and trust
did he leave the whole government of his Principallity, till his return;
commanding him upon his allegiance, to martial, and manage the whole State, as
best should stand with Justice, Law, and equity; and that he would neither in
pity, duty, nor favor (such was his perseverant rigor) release, comfort, nor
give countenance to the Princess Vienna, otherwise then was by him already
censured, allowed, and accustomed: That her obstinate and degenerate
disobedience (she being a Traitor to true Generation) might eternize his un
partial Justice, make her miserable, in being an example to others, and that
his Title and right, might in his absence be the better secured by her
imprisonment. And so taking his leave, he privately departed, accompanied with
none but with Mal Fiance, his affected and learned servant.

After their Land-travell, they Shipped themselves and lanched into the Ocean;
where after some days sailing, they were by force of wrathful and sinister
winds (by the command of Nep^une) driven into the Egyptian Sea and so cast on
the Bay of Alexan Iria, where he had not rested full three days, but that a
subtle Mercurian, a Merchant of Babylon, that then lay in Traffic there,
observing more heedfully the eminent M^ jus^^iy and uncontrolled countenance of
the Dolphin, supposed ther^by that he was of no mean Estate. His Complexion and
attire made him a Christian; and his commanding eyes (the true image of the
mind) showed him to be of an high Spirit.

This Lynx, this Blood-hound to mischief, hunted after opportunity, to resolve
this doubt, and by fortune encountered with Mal Fiance in the Marketplace,
whither the Dolphin his Lord had sent him to buy some necessaries; Unto whom in
Latin (as the most general Tongue, best known to all) the politic Merchant
gave many kind salutes, offering him secretly for the love he bare to Christ,
and Christians, all the best Offices he might perform, wishing withal, (to
gain the more credit) not to make himself known in so dangerous and impious a
place. Mal Fiance (being better Learned then traveled) finding himself so
kindly entreated by a stranger, returned thanks, and joyfully embraced his
courtesy. The Merchant glad that he understood him, requested his acceptance
of a cup of their Country-Wine, which Mal Fiance (as one proud of such
unexpected friendship in so strange a place, and that he had met with one of
knowledge to confer withal,) willingly assented unto.

The Merchant, having waded thus far into the depth of his awaked intention,
thought good to sound the Foord at full by undermining their projects: And
therefore in the courtesy of their Bacchonizing cups, he gave him some few
pieces of Gold, wishing him to make his wants known, with the distress of his
Companion, that he might privately relieve them, and secretly give them comfort
and directions for their more security.

This false fire (the seeming show of good regard) burnt up all Mal Fiances
fear of distrust; the strength of hot wines, consumed all due consideration,
and the joy he took in finding so good a Christian amongst unbeleeving
Infidels, made him unadvisedly tell the Merchant who he was, whom he seroed,
and where his Lord the Prince was. This Machivilian Merchant, being now fully
informed of what he desired, the better to mature his ill design, spoke to the
Master of the House in the Slavonian Tongue, (a Language much used amongst the
Turks) that he should stay that Stranger, until his return from the Sanzake,
the Turks Governor of Alexandria, which he did, to no less admiration, then
dismay of confounded Mal Fiance: For now too late he found that Crystal is
like a precious stone, till it come to hamering; that his betraying tongue was
guilty of his own evil, and that in the least danger, is ever some eminent
peril. But this seducing Merchant (the son of deceit, born of hate, fed with
mischief, and maintained with others losses) being now armed with all the
apparances of Truth, that might fit and further his purpose, went instantly to
the dreadlesse Dolphin, and in his corrupt Latin (suitable to his ulcerated
heart) he thus greeted him.

THE Savior of the faithful, the comfortable Son of the most Righteous,
all-Seeing, and Everliving GOD, make your Excellency most happy in all your
intendments, and guard your person from the knowledge and malice of cruel
Miscreants. To testify my Faith by my Works, and to preserve the living
Plants of Christ's Vineyard, from the bloody hands of the destroyer. I am come,
most noble Prince, to save thy thrice worthy Christian life; from the Tyranny
of murdering Infidels: In assurance whereof, let this suffice, that your
attendant Mal Fiance is apprehended, and that for fear, he has confessed that
you are a French Prince, and Dolphin of Viennois; and that as a wily Ulysses,
you are selected, and come to pry into the Turkish State, and to discover their
projects; which being made known to the Sauzake, your Highness shall be sent a
Prisoner to Constantinople, where that cursed sinful Sultan will make you dye
a most cruel death. To prevent which, I have posted unto you, and will for our
Saviors sake, convey you from his slavish and barbarous cruelty. For know;
most gracious Prince, that in heart I am a real Christian, though in show a
Mahometitian, and have given addition of Life to many, by private intelligence,
secret relief, speedy prevention, and by close protection, and unknown
transporting them to their Native homes; And this and all this I do in some
satisfaction for my Sins, and to save my soul, for which the Lord of Life lost
his dearest life. This loathed habit of mine, gives me safety, and warrants my
vowed endeavors for Christian supports: Unto which saving service, I have
dedicated both the length of my days, and the fulness of my means. Nor do I
leave Gosh^n to dwell in the Tents of Kedar; Nor defire I with Lot to stay in
Sodom; nor would I for my possessions here, establish my inheritance (with the
Children of Ruben) in the Land of Gilead; But I live in Alexandria, for
performance of my sacred vows, and to preserve the Flock of Christ, from these
Band-dogs of Satan, that otherwise would be devoured by them. And therefore if
you love this your life go with me, and pass over the Foard now the waters are
low, least by your dangerous delay you be destroyed in the Flood: And to
prevent the instant search, I will bring you out of the Lions den; and free you
from the snare of the Hunter. Fraud you know goes beyond force, and prevention
helps, what repentance cannot redress. I will not use many words,
(Protestation is the Mother of Jealousy) but when time shall promise better
security, I will at my own charge convey you to France. In the mean time, you
shall want nothing that my money can procure, or my Labors obtain.

Thus did this subtle Sinon (who had the voice of Jacob, but the hands of
Esau) guild over his poisoned Pills, and weave the Web of the Dolphin's woe;
who finding cause of fear in that he was so apparently known, did willingly
feed on poison, and rashly commend his welfare, to his betraying trust;
praising God, that he had sent him such a Shield of defense, and had so
preserved him from the terror of shameful death: But this comfort in danger,
was but like the ho^^y that Sampson found in the Lions Jaws, or like lightning
in a foggy night: Time would not permit neither of better consideration, nor of
further complement.

The perfideous Merchants fear (for still he seemed fearfully to fear) haled
him away to his chamber, where he closely kept him with respect, until the
next day; against which time he had provided two swift Dromidaries well
furnished, to carry them to Babilm, there to make present of so great and
strange a Prince unto the Sultan his King, promising himself, either a great
share in his ransom, or no small reward for his so worthy a Prize.

The long travail of the Dolphin, made him give way to all suspicious thoughts:
His journies were greater then stood with ease or liking; Yet what he could not
avoid he learned to bear; necessity enforced him a constant patience. But being
come to Babylon, he was presented to the Sultan and like a Captive (in triumph)
he was led through the City to prison. The dejected Dolphin (whose French
Fortunes were but erst the Ministers of his will) was now so controled, and
deprived of all dignity, that hopeless of his life, he had no other comfort,
then to be void of all comfort: Sometimes he would invey against the detestable
treachery of his deceitful Servant, and condemn his own credulity in believing
an Unbeleever. Then would he curse his over-glorious desire of Popularity, the
ground of his grief in seeking applause with danger, and hazarding his person
to give liking to others, But after when humble misery had appeased his
discontented thoughts, he then cast off his Addersskinne; and soft Pity did
enter in at an Iron gate: and finding then his own cruel Tyranny, in another
long digested misery, he let fall some relenting tears, and passionately he
thus bewailed his Daughters endurance, in his own thraldom.

Ah poor Vienna, too poor for Vienna: Rich art thou in Feature, but more then
poor by thy Father, Nature has honored thee in thy Birth, Bea^ty has
eternized thee in thy Person, and Virtue has renowned thee in thy Life. Only
I, yea I only, thy hapless Sn^^, have made thee unfortunate, to be the more
unfortunate my self: The rigor of my Injustice, is in true Justice, now
punished in my self with rigor; and the remembrance of thy long injurious
endured miseries, is as a living hell to my dying soul. O that thy sorrows (my
thoughts tormentors) might end with my life, or that thy life (my lives honor)
might be preserved by my death; so should I dye more contented, and thou live
better regarded and comforted. But alas thou untimely dyest, to live in thy
renown, and I shamefully live, to dye in my reproach.

O cruel Father, unhappy Dolphin: O forlorn Vienna, but most distressed
daughter. The Heathens make my death their Heaven, and my nearest friends
account my life their hell. The earth now disdains to bear me, and yet the
heavens deny to receive me. Men scorn me in my fall, and God refuses me in my
sin: So shall I dye disdayned of most, bewailed of none, and unregarded of all.
Thus did misery, and sorrow (the kind sisters of mercy, and true wakers of
compassion) extract tears and sighs from stony cruelty; as strokes do force
fire out of hardest Flints.

But leaving him to his more deserved dolours; Let us return to the great
Sultan of Turkey, who hearing of the Dolphin's apprehension, and that he was a
prisoner at Babylon; wrote instantly to the Sultan, that in no wise he should
release him: In the Interim, he joying wondered, and wondering enjoined, that
Bonefires, Feasts, and Tryumphs, should be made throughout the City. In such
high account and fearful regard, did they hold him for his judicious
discipline, practice policies, turbulent spirit, Martial provocation,
approved directions, and rare stratagems, that now taken, they held (in this
presage) the Conquest, certain. But Sirap understanding the cause of these
rejoycings, was astonished at the news. Report could not make him believe what
reason showed was false. His greatness he thought denied all private exployts,
and his years gainsaid such tedious travail. The places were too far
remote; and there was no combination of Christian Princes, to undertake a
general War. Traffic stood not with his dignity, and pleasure could not
draw his age to peril. His command at home, would not suffer him to go from
home: Nor durst he trust the faith of a Subject, nor the strength of his Foes:
He had no Son, and therefore most subject to his neighbor invasions. He was
wise, and more feared then beloved; And therefore he had cause to fear many,
whom many did fear. These, and other reasons, persuaded him to the falsity
thereof.

But the Sultan discoursing of the truth, and the manner thereof wounded him
with wonder, and made belief subscribe to his relation. Now grief arrested his
loyal heart, and made his dutiful regard, a prisoner to his pensive thoughts.
His forsaken Country, was now forsaken, and made a pray for the avaricious
Forraigner. His distressed Lady destitute of his help, when she had most need
of his aid.

This was his greatest grief, and this commanded his return: But judgment told
him, that her right failed, while the Dolphin lived, that the Nature of Justice
was to render to every one his own, and that that he was bound for Vienna's
sake, and as a Subject, to industriate himself for his delivery: And though his
exile awaked Revenge, yet Charity, he knew, required forgetfulness of evil
deeds. His Countries hazard, he deemed less then his Lords loss. The
miscarrying of the one, might be helped by the recovery of the other: but the
destruction of the Prince would beget both foreign and intestine broyls.

In this persuasion, he secretly vowed his best endeavors for his
infranchisement; and secretly smothered his sorrow, never taking notice of the
accident, nor making enquiry after further occurrants. In the expiration of few
days, being in the Court, he found the Sultan alone, in the mildness of his
unusual mood, both pleasing and pleasant: In that happy hour he took
opportunity by the forepart, and (imprisoning his worthy resolution within the
Close^ of his secret thoughts) he in all subjected humbleness, requested his
favorable consent for the accomplishment of his obliging vow, that tied his
engaged soul, amongst other Cities of famous name, to see Babylon, both for the
antiquity and worthiness of the same: And that he would be pleased to grant
him his Imperial Warrant under his Silver Seal, for his better security in
travail; and further grace him, with his commendatory Letter to the Sultan,
that he might find favor in his sight, and respect with his Highness.

The Sultan unwilling to leave him; in that he both loved him affectionatly,
and intended to make a profitable use of his great, and unequalled valor,
persuaded him to stay still with him, and he should command in Turkey, dwell in
his grace, and live in height of honor. But Sirap pleading necessity to go,
promised speedy return; and that in lieu of his favors, he would bestow all
his remaining days in his service. This pleased the Turk so well, that he
yielded to his request, and to his encouragement for his back repair: He gave
him Princely Robes (as Ornaments of Honor) to countenance him; rich Jewels to
show his Dignity; and great Treasure to defray his answerable dispense.

He surnished him with Attendants, especially with one of knowledge in the
Chaldean tongue, to be his Interpreter.

He also writ unto the Sultan, to receive him, as one most complete in all
worth, worthy all honor, honored by Solimon the great, his especial
Favorite, and the God of Wars chiefest Champion; and therefore he entreated
him to receive him with all Royal regard, and to give him what contentment he
might; and the rather, in that he purposely came to see his magnificency, and
the state, both of his Court, and City. This no little availed Sirat, in his
intendments, and these Princely favors, and furthering means made him no less
joyful for his proud hopes; then most humbly thankful for the Sultans so
gracious a respect.

And so taking a submissive leave for that time; He would needs for his
pleasure go to Pera, a City distant but a mile from Constantinople: And as he
crossed Thracius Basforus, (a water that only divides the two Cities:) he
fortunately espied amongst the Gally-slaves that rowed him, a Frenchman no
otherwise known to him, then the Cloth to the List: For though seven years
slavish Captivity had made him a Grecian in his tongue; and dyed his
Sunne-burnt skin more blacker, then his Native hue; yet did his making, and
manner of his speech, proclaim him a French man. Of him in Greek, he demanded
what was his name, and Nation: who answered France is my Country; Bonfoy my
name, which pleased him well. Then (without discovering himself, or taking
further knowledge of him) he asked, Whether he would for his Liberty,
faithfully and truly serve, and follow him, and his fortunes: and he would
after sometime, send him into his own Country, wheresoever it was.

Bonfoy to gain that happy freedom, and to be free from that miserable and base
slavery; swore by the Son of God, who was made man, that men might be made the
sons of God; that he would truly, and faithfully (during his pleasure) tie
himself, and all his endeavors, to his command. Whereupon Sirap begged him of
the Captain, that durst not deny him any thing, and ever after most kindly used
him, and loved him, because he would be, not only served but beloved of him:
That forth of that love he might the better trust him, and be the better
interested in him. For where love has supremacy, there all affections attend
on it, and all other passions are overswayed by it.

But now the sensual Sultanesse hearing of Siraps hasty provision for his
sudden departure to Babylon, grew more then impatient in her discontented
fears; and beyond all consideration of her state, deplored the hardness of
her hap. Her lustful hopes were now wounded in the expectasion of he
rlascivious desires, and unbounded love so oppressed her unchaste thoughts, that
finding her infected affection frustrated of conceived joys, she fainted under
the burden of her unexpected vows. In this sad alteration she threw her self
on the humble floor, where her dumb sorrows uttered naught but bemoaning
tears, and complaining sighs: Which Mentiga ruefully beholding, and well
weying that this unwelcome event would deprive her of enriching favors, and of
promised preferments, she summoned her wits together, and set them all on the
rack of invention, to find out means of some redress.

At last, after a sad and serious pause, she said; Take comfort most mighty
Empress, and my most gracious Sovereign, let this sudden lightning dye in his
abortiye birth, and listen to your most submissive Handmaid, who desires no
longer life, then she may do your Highness acceptable service. Your Knight is
no doubt, enfore'd (by the Sultans employment) to this unliked journey, and
your remembrance will not only be a plea for his disparch; but his controling
affection will also give speed to his return.

In the mean time, I will undertake to bring him this night to your bed, where
you may make your desired delights, do homage to your wills, pay tribute to
your sufferance, and bind him over to accomplish your further pleasure.

Then raise your better thoughts, this base floor (but your footstool) is no
bed for Majesty: Nor stands it with the resplendant Queen of ASIA, to prostrate
her self so low, as to lie in the dust of the earth. Eugenia thus rowzed, rose
(with an erected heart) from her seat of sorrow, and carefully looking on her,
said; Ah, Montiga, Mentiga, can it be that Physic has any Cordial Receipt
for so desperate a Disease? Is there any mollifying salve can cure my
tormenting sore? or can thou give a healing plaster, to my wounded mind.
Speak thou hapless, or most happy woman: When, where, or how, can thou
effect so great, and sweet a work; and please thy Lady without perceivance? The
glorious Sun (thou know) is ever remarkable, when mean Stars are seldom
gazed on. Pale Joalousie is a subtle spy; and invincible Envy has
murdering eyes. Danger waits on dignities, and Beauty is ever guarded with
observance. The light (I fear) is a blab, and darkness but a Traitor: These
walls have ears, then be silent Mentiga, least the Air whilper, and betray thy
intention, and enterprise.

Thus had Eugenia (when it came to it) many Eyes, to see into many Evils, but
they were all blind to prevent any. Misfortune so blinds those she will
overthrow, that nothing can clear their understandings, nor limit their
adventures; which made Mentiga answer that she had a Charm to close up Argoes
eyes, and that deceit should lull danger a sleep, when Beauty should feast with
love. And this she said it is, and must be.

The Sultan, you know (either to refresh himself with ease or to make his
pleasures more complete by change) does the two last nights of every week,
abstain both from your bed and Chamber; And this ensuing night being the first
of the two, when your Eunuchs be at supper, we will in my chamber secretly
change our attyres, and so give life to our device, you must as Mentiga bring
me as Emperesse to your bed, where leaving me, you shall depart into my Chamber
next adjoining, where fastening the door you must attend the hour of midnight,
and then putting on my Nightgown, you must as silently as may be go down the
stairs into the Garden, and thereopening the postern gate, (the key whereof
shall be preprovided for you) you shall receive your disguised Knight and
bringing him up the stairs to my Chamber, you both may safely entertain your
stolen delights; and give both your desires all fullness of content.

But how (said Eugenia) shall he return undiscovered. Early in the morning
replied Mentiga, before the day shall descry your dalliances, will I rise and
come unattyred unto you to my chamber, when you shall leave my blessed and
beautified bed, and return to your own chamber in such manner as I came. And
then will I cloathe your Knight in the religious habit of the Hozes, the same
I used, when I went to him. And so he may depart, when the Sun (the eye of
the world) shall not discover him. For clouded Rocks deceive Mariners; A
justifiable cloak ever hides a treacherous fraud, and they ever may do the
most wrong of whom least is looked for. And because we will not procrastinate
our designs, lest our projects be communicated. I will presently put on my
Protean shape, and like a holy Father, go to Sirap, unto whom I will unfold all
that we have determined, and both enjoin and entreat him i^ your name, and for
your love, that he will not fayl his hour, at that place, but come to take
Loves farewell, and leave a settled possession of his purchased favors.

This enticing plot, promised more to Eugonia then a possibility. Her lawless
love saw no exception, nor could her wantonizing thoughts dream of any
interception: Her transported desires were so drowned in her over-amorous
passion, that she entertained the least conceit, that might but help her
foolish fancy. Her flattering hopes held good correspondency with all
likelihoods; and in the confidence of her supposed assurance she bad her go,
and after called her back again. Her presaging heart did fayl her, and she
began to fear she knew not what. A sudden trembling possessed her in every
part, and what before she but carelessly dreaded, now she did more then fearing
doubt. In this distraction, and fear of misadventure she said; It is better to
be in love most miserable, then through love to be guilty of our own manifest
confusion. Why should we then Mentiga for our lovingfolies weave the web of our
own woes? Violent streams being once run out the mud will appear in the bottom.
The indignation of a Prince is death; and the love of a stranger as inconstant,
as a Travelers mind is wandering. He is but mean, and puddles are not for
Princes to drink at: Let him be as he is, that I may be as I am. O Eugenia!
had thou been as provident to shun the cause of thy fall; as thou was
foolishly wise to apprehend thy fall: Thou might have longer lived in thy
renown,
But now thy sins are ripe; Fate throws thee down.


For she being drawn by a wilful folly, unto that whereunto she was destinate,
no sooner had uttered what she misliked, but straight she misliked what she had
uttered. Shall idle doubt (said she) the hearse of our desires, deprive me of
my wished delights? Is base fear (the badge and terror of Peasants) a befitting
Counselor for a commauding Emperesse? or is love tied to equality, honor, or
majesty, that knows no difference of persons? Must greatest Queens want their
wills, and the drosie of Damsels enjoy their pleasures? Where then is our
dignityes, our prerogatives, and our privileges? To command others, and be
slaves to our selves, is worse then subjection. I will be my self, my
affections shall bow to my will, and my fancy shall command my pleasures.

Necessity has no law, and where there is no law, there is no breach. Here
Mentiga take this purse, and happily get thee gone, and fortunately return.
This concluding command gave her speed, and being come before him, she thus in
his private chamber all alone salutes him,

Eugenia, the great Imperial Sultanesse, Sovereign Queen of Queens, and only
Mirror of Beauty and Bounty, by me her trusty Handmaid greetes thee well, and
wishes thee (O thou happiest of men, and blessed Son of Fortune) all the joys
that thy heart can wish, or her affection can afford. She grieves that thou art
bound for Babylon; and she entreats thee, that disguised this night, at the
hour of twelve, when darkness has put on her blackest robe, thou will come to
the Postern-gate of the Garden Wall, where she will in person receive thee, and
safely bring thee, where thou may Bathe thy self, in Beauties most
delightful Fountain, and feast thy best Fortunes, with all the pleasures that
true Love, or proud State can yield. Nor may thou doubt of hazard herein,
since thy security is thus carefully and certainly assured. And therewithal
she related to him the whole plot of their device; which she said was only
intended, that by your incorporated sarewels, you both might seal such an
infringeable deed of your covenanted Loves, that naught but death should break
the same.

Sirap being thus surprised, when least he looked for such an assault wished
himself in Babylon. His virtuous dispose, did contemn such shameful
treachery: Nor would he violate his plighted faith to Vienna, for all the proud
fortunes and Favors of Asia, and Afric: Yet fearing, least his refusal
should cross his departure, he smoothly set a scarletdy, on his rough and
course conceit, and like Jove himself when he entered Danaes Tower, he seemed
both pleasant and pleasing to Mentiga; which made her more apt to believe what
he never meant.

Return (said he) unto the brightest Star, and greatest Glory of Turkey, and
present in all humble humbleness, my true service unto her, and say; That in
the intercourse of Affection, my Love surmounts hers, and that neither danger
nor death shall alter, or hinder, the wished fruition of my fancy, so fortified
by a Princes favor: To take my farewell is my thirsting desire and to seal the
deed of my purchased favor, is the Gordian knot that I most wish to unloose;
Be true to thy Queen, wise to thy self, give thy thoughts no tongue, nor my
name no record.

Thus did he in another meaning satisfy blinded Mentiga; who proud of her
surmized success, that ravished with joy, that taking a compendious farewell,
she posted (in the conceit of her happy endeavors) to feast Eugenia with her
glad tidings.

And no sooner was she gone, but that Sirap falling on his knees, besought God
to guard his innocence, from all Barbarian perils, and to free his chaste
thoughts from those tempting Sirens, those ruinating Follies, and those
lascivious and nefarious Assaults; and that he would so direct him in his
wisdom, and so defend him by his power, that he might safely (without
interruption) go to Babylon, and for the good of his Sanctuary, remove that
Pillar of his Church out of the house of Dagon, and bring him home to be a
Glory to his temple. This saerifice was his safeguard; His virtuous deter
mination, and constant resolution, merited well; but his firm affiance in his
God, and dependancy on Divine perfection, shielded him, no doubt, from
partaking of that adherent mischief that fell fatally upon the Sultanesse, and
Mentiga: Yet in seeking to avoid Scylla, he feared to fall into Charibdis: His
nonappearance, would make his fraud apparent; and his delusion, might draw on
his secret destruction.

But Mentiga coming to her Sovereign Lady (who long had expected her before
she came, though she came long before reason could expect her) cheerfully
recounted unto her, what Sirap (in truth but not truly) had protestingly
delivered unto her; how pleasing her message was to him; how joyfully he
entertained the Name of Love; how feelingly he entered into comparison for his
affection; and how comfortably he embraced the remembrance of his desired
Farewell.

These, and other demonstrances of Passion, sheso full and pleasantly related,
that Eugenia drowning all thoughts of danger in the conceit of her approaching
happiness, she dreamed of naught but Loves Embracements, Venus Delights, and
wantonizing Sports; building a Palace of Pleasure in her mind, wherein she
meant to feast all her Amorous desires, and crown her thoughts with sweet
content.

To this end, she gave Mentiga in charge, that nothing should be wanting, that
should be requifite to further their designs; Whilst interrupted Sirap (being
thus chequ'd by a Queen) lay studying how he might drive it to a Stall, and not
receive the Mate but give speed to his departure.

Resolved he was, not to touch the forbidden Fruit, nor to drink on Circes Cup;
he would not with the Spider suck poison out of a fair Flower, nor spot his
true-love with the dregs of Majesty.

Proud bewitching pleasure could not entice him to Folly, nor rich alluring
Treasures corrupt his constant integrity: He scorned to sell his Loyalty for
Lucre, or Love for Silver: True wisdom made his virtuous mind to bend, rather
to that which was good in it self, then to that, which by evil minds might be
judged good.

In brief, his conclusion was, to excuse his not coming, by express command
from the Sultan, that as that night, he should consult with his Visiers,
concerning his Negotiation in Babylon.

But this false color need no allowance, Displeased Justice took away all
exception, and sealed him pardon before any accusation: For the dismal night
being come, Vengeance attended her fatal hour; which approaching, she
accordingly changed her attire with Mentiga, and brought her as her Handmaid to
her Royal Bed, and after went to Mentiga's Chamber, where she waking, waited
for the appointed hour; which come, she casting on Mentigaes Nightgown, with a
bold heart (beyond the resolve of her weak Sex) she paced down the stairs that
led into the Garden; Into which, she no sooner entered, but that she saw the
angry Heavens (then clad all in black) throwing down with violence, a fiery
threatening Star over-crosse the Garden, forbidding her farther passage,
notwithstanding the sable Skies lent not then an other Light.

This prodigious Sign, and fearful premonition, might well have appaled and
backed a more-redoubted heart, but that the voluptuousness of her thoughts,
extinguished the light of her mind. Love gave her boldness, and unlimited Lust
directed her (according to her sinister and destinated Fate) unto the Postern
gate, which she with nimble facility opened, and there made her fearless stand.

O imperious and impious Love, thou deluding Traitor, how rightly did the Poets
and Painters, paint thee blind, and naked? Since thou have no eyes to see into
how many dangers thou leadest thy servants; and like thy self, make them both
blind and naked, disrobeing them of all their virtuous abiliments, that their
naked shame may appear in their found pursuits.

Who seeks thee, finds deceit; and whosoever follows thee, seeks
reproach, and obtains repentance. Care, is thy Court; Tyranny, thy Reign;
Slaves, thy Subjects; Polly, thy attendance; Lust, thy Law; Sin, thy service;
and Repentance, thy wages. But this mighty Sultanesse, whose wretched folly,
was clothed in danger, had not long waited for her own woe, but that there
came a base Sarazen toward her, who of purpose did straggle that way, to seize
upon some prey; the fall of whose steps, gave the found Sultanesse such hope of
Siraps then coming, that over rashly running upon him; holding for certain
that it was he; she said, Come, come my best beloved and go with me, where I
will lodge thy love in pleasures lap, and guerdon thy labors with fullness of
gold; And therewithal she kissed him, more then often, deeming that his rough
habit had been but the cloak of his craft. For the Prince and the Peasant
differs but in the flaece, not in the flesh. But the subtle Sarazen being
capable of his own good, apprehended the error, and in hope of gain adventured
the success. Thus did the mounting Kite, seize on a homely prey, and in her
blindness, preser a greasy lamp, before a bright and mighty Star; and
throwing her Mantle upon him, led him toward her last prepared bed, where he
fearing to be discovered, disvested himself of his homely habit and rough
shirt.

And did (redid, and often did) full well,
The thing my modest Muse does blush to tell.
For with a lusty courage (stoutly borne)
He did (in Siraps stead) the Sultan horn.
And in this surfeit of pleasure did they cloy themselves till themselves had
wholly spent themselves. When wearied with delights, they both were summoned by
leaden Morpheus to banquet with blood and death. For the Sultan (by divine
decree) dreaming that night, that the roof of Eugenias Chamber did renting
part it self in two, and was open; and that he saw descending down from a
black Cloud; a grim swarty man, clothed in a short ill favored garment, all
to be rent, holding a broad rusty sword, dyed with Vermillion red in his
besmeared hand. Who falling on the tapestred floor, stood not long; but that
Eugenia came smiling all in white, besprinkled thick with blood, and put on him
a scarlet robe, set her Diadem on his shaggy head; kissed, and embraced him
often, and then taking him by the soyled hand, led him toward her royal bed;
which the Sultan seeming to see, cried out, and said: Stay villain, stay; The
Eagle made not her nest for the Owl to lie in; The Batte has no eyes to look
upon the Sun, nor may the Kestrell make her perch within her beams.

And therewithal, grasping for his Semitar he amazedly awaked, and finding it
but a dream, smiled, yet was wounded with no little wonder at the strangeness
of the same. His thoughts still were troubled and his heart (led thereunto by
the force of Fate) gave him such a present desire to go offer incense to Venus,
in Engenia's shrine, that suddenly taking his night robe, his Semitary, and his
key, (which pur posely he had made for his sole and private passage at all
times into her Chamber) he went to perform his wanton Sacrifice: and being
entered fincing by the dawn of day (for the night began to east off her black
Mantle) that all things as he thought were well, he joyed at the illusion of
his fantastical dream, and in the contentment thereof, withdrawing a little
the curtain, he carelessly laid him, down by Mentigaes side: who upon his
entrance awaked, and finding her self entangled in her own device, grew
fearful of the issue, and kept her self as close as might be. The Sultans
kind entreaties, found no resistance, nor yet any pleasing entertainment. The
fear of her death, took away all delight of dalliance; and those pleasures
which before she made her Paradise, she now deemed them a mortal punishment.
Feign would she have killed her self, for fear of death, but death gave her
no means of death. In this deadly terror she lay so distracted, that every
member began so to tremble and shake, that the Sultan in tenderness of her
health, (fearing sickness sudden attachment) hastily took her in his arms,
and kissing her many times, asked her how she fared, but receiving no answer
(for sudden surprised Treason has no tongue) he bare her toward the light,
to give her better air, when seeing who she was, and on whom he had spent his
enforced pleasures; missing Eugenia, and remembering his provoking dream; all
enraged, he cast her to the floor, and treading on her throat, be took his
Semitar, and thrust it quite through her heart, and then violently running at
the door that opened into Mentigaes Chamber, he burst it open: The noise
whereof awaked the sturdy slave, that he might see his own death; who seeing
one enter with his sword drawn, not knowing who he was, nor where himself was,
leaped out of his banefull bed, and snatching a bed-staffe in his hand,
fiercely rushed upon his unknown Lord, got within him, and being the stronger,
had him down, and so liberally belabored him, that the blood running down his
face, well witnessed that the slave alone, now less respected and feared him;
then many Nations, mightiest Armies, and greatest Princes, that only had
trembled at his sight. Which made the Snltan in his dismay, cry; Treason,
treason; at the hearing whereof came running in two Janissaries that were of his
Guard, whose allotment was that day amongst many others to attend.

They seeing this strange accident, pulled the rascal off the Sultan, and
hewed him all to pieces. But the Sulianesse thus surprised with shame, with
fear, and with amazement, was more confounded at the base sight of her
reproachful deceit, then at the bloody summons of pale death; and because she
would not see her own shame, nor look murder in the face, she crept over the
head into the bed, crying fearfully, No Moor, no Moor; because she saw, she
had not layn with the Moor. Which made Solimon suppose, that she cried that he
should stay his hand and do no more; which distasteful conceit, exasperated his
anger, and added more fuel to his enflamed fire, and in the heat of his
irefull indignation, he stepped to her adulterous bed, and like a tempestuous
storm he fell upon her, giving her stab upon stab, saying often withal; Nay,
thus much more and more: And the more he said so, the more he thrust his
Semitar (not yet dried with the blood of the Sarazen) into her body.

This speedy and sudden execution, was Siraps preservation. For it took away
all further knowledge of the cause. The Court was now all in combustion, and
the City hearing that the Sultan was slain, instantly did rise, and confusedly
did run to the Palace, bearing all down before them in such a distract sort,
that the Turks Guard was glad to shut the Gares against them, and to entreat
the Sultan to show himself out of the Casement unto them, which so well
appeased them, that they quietly returned to their houses.

Then was inquisition made after the knowledge of the Sarazene apparel, which,
was so base, that all men wondered not only that he was there, but how he came
there: His mangled body kept him unknown, and his mean habit made him no
appertenant to the Court.

When no notice could be had neither of the one, nor of the other, the appeased
Sultan sent for the Eunuchs that attended his Emperess, and caused two Mutes
to strangle them in his sight. After, he caused all the dead bodies, with the
two beds, and all their Apparel, to be carried forth of the City, and to be
burned all together; and further, gave in charge, that the two Chambers should
be converted into houses of base use, and that no one under pain of death
should after speak thereof.

Now Sirap, who during these tempestuous storms, lay at anchor in his own
private Harbor, as one that knew well, that great men ever envying the glory
and fortune of strangers, would in these tumults be ready to stab at the bosom
of merit; and that Mischief (the cursed Captain always of the unruly Commons,)
might in a disturbed uproar endanger his safety; hearing now that the sight of
the Sultan had allayed the windy Allarum of his rumoured death, and that the
present murder of the Sultanesse, with her Maid and unknown Paramor, was the
occasion of such disorder rising; He grew jealous of the Cause, suspicious of
the Firour, and timorous of his wend fare.

For, though gliarded with innocence, yet was he fearful, lest Mentiga had
cast some scandalizing aspersion upon his unspoiled honesty.

In this fearful doubt, he kept himself within himself, until report had
further manifested not only the manner of all their Deaths, but the ignorance
of the Cause. This dispierced all Clouds of care, and made him a perfect Judge
both of the error and the event. Then lifting up his erected heart, he said: O
Vienna, thy love I see now has given me a second life, and my constant loyalty
has kept me from the grave, Instice has preserved the guiltless, and
righteousness has found mercy in judgment,

Now praised be my God my strong defense: For he has covered me under the
wings of his protection, and kept me from the death of the wicked. He has cast
down lightning and burnt up the Daughters of Babell, that I might be safe in
their sudden destruction. The storm is past, and these cloudy occurrants
threaten another tempest. The Sea cannot be so calm in Summer, but that it may
swell again with the rage of wrathful winter; There is more wisdom in
prerenting then in redressing a mischief; Security lives not in tyranny. For
though the Tiger hide his claws, yet in the end will he show his Rapine.
Revenge has now smoothed the Sultans angry brow, and Time has given some
peace to his displeasure.

The tide serves me, and my profane abode with the heathen is displeasing to
the heavens. My captived Lord calls me away and Vienna says, I am too slow; my
mark is set, and I level straight, I will comend my aim, and therewithal
casting off all further deliberation, he went to the Court to take his leave of
Solimon, who seeing him stand upon his departure, after some private conference
and protestations, that he would crown his return with highest honors
advancement, he vouchsafed graciously to embrace him, and so bad him farewell.

The next morning Sirap having before caused all things to be in readiness,
the winds summoning him to Sea, he took shipping, and sailing by the Islands,
situate in part of the Mediteranean Sea, he landed at Sidon a Port Town in
Syria and there taking Horse, he posted through the Country, and part of the
Deserts of Arabia, and so came to Babylon. Where we will leave him to look into
France, and see how Vienna brooks her continued thraldom, which was not so
grievous unto her, as the tormenting suppose of Sir Paris loss. Great was her
sorrow in fear of him, and many her bernoanings for not hearing from him.
Insomuch, that La-nova seeing the increase of her growing cares, thus sadly
spoke unto her.

Madam, these ruthlesse Walls neither melt with your tears, nor yet shake, nor
shrink with your sighs. Comfort dwells not in restraint, nor lives remedy in
Lamentations. Though your Father be absent, yet has he left a jealous Keeper:
You may ever weep and bewayl your estate, and ly still in the bed of sorrow: If
you never seek after redress, you shall over find your self a Prisoner: You
know the scorer way I made to relieve you: If so you please, I will convey you
through the same, to some private place, where Metamorphosed we will either
hunt in quest after Sir Paris, or you shall rest unknown in some Foreign
Nation, till either my travel shall gain knowledge of his abode, or that the
death of the Dolphin shall leave (you for your right) to the tryell of your
friends,

Then cast off these mortif^ing dumps, and leave now your sorrow to the
Governors, as a pawn for your return, and let us stand upon our fortunes; hope
lives in industry, and my adventures shall ever wayt on your pleasure.

This kind offer did move her much, but could not remove her at all; Liberty
she said was sweet to that life, that might take the pleasures of this life:
But to a dejected heart whose banished content could promise no wished delight;
there a close prison was better then a glorious Palace. To travail (she said)
to my Paris; would be more pleasing then painful to Vienna; but not knowing
where he is, I might perhaps extravagantly go further from him then I am, that
a^n already further off then I would b^^ here for his love was I made a
Prisoner, and here will I still rest a Prisoner for his love. If he be living
and loving, here shall I soonest hear from him; and if he be neither in Love
nor in life, here will I end both my Love and life; Only take thanks for thy
loving care, and kind respect, and be still a true friend to Paris, that Vienna
may ever have comfort in La-nova.

Upon this conclusion he parted, and Isabella strewed the rusl^^es over the
private way that gave him entrance: But no sooner was it done, but that one of
the Keepers Gentlemen (that seemeel ever most serviceable unto her) came in,
whom the devilish Dolphinis had before fashioned to her purpose, for she
wrought upon his wants as knowing well, that poverty betrayeth virtue, and that
wealth bewitcheth wit; Corruption having made him her creature she had
instructed him how to train Vienna to her destruction; for naught but: death
could satisfy her disdainful fear: Her malicious and unbounded pride, looked
into the danger of her Lords return: If the Dolphin fell, then must Vienna
(though now a Prisoner) be Sovereign.

This made her heart-burning hate to prosecute her overthrow: And though she
had no cause to fear her, (for occasion never yet made her her enemy) yet could
she not endure to think that she should be subject to another, that now was
most eminent in her self.

To have the Regent was all her ambitious desire, and nothing did let but
Vienna's right; To frustrate which, she with fullness of Gold, and promites of
preferment had as aforesaid seduced this mettle-minded Servant, to deceive and
to destroy her by such subtle and obscure means, as both gave least show of
mistrust, and most likelihood of execution; And this it was.

Don Poltron (for so was he rightly named) bringing Vienna's mornings repast to
her, with a bemoaning tongue, and a sighing heart, complained much against
Nature, and envyed more against Fortune, that had made beauty so miserable and
virtue so unhappy, as to entomb the glory of the one and the efficacy of the
other, in so unprofitable, and so uncomfortable place. My eyes (said he) cannot
endure to sec Dignity so disgraced; nor can my Ears entertain the killing
sound of your laments: I must, and will leave my service, that at length I may
be a Stranger to sorrow, least my grief for your grief, make any revived woes
as great as your grief.

Vienna liking his generous nature, judged by his discreet and relenting
discourse that he was well bred, and pleasing witty; and therefore required him
to tell what was his name, and where he was born: who answered, Don Poltron am
I called, and in Spain was my birth; my education was better then my fortune,
and this my servile Place bears now record of my sinister fate.

Why, said Vienna, if thou be unfortunate, keep still thy station, here is a
place of woe and thou have a Princess to associate thee in thy sorrows: Have
thou cause to bewail thy mishaps? Let us know thy crosses, and we will ease
thee with our grief; For it is a comfort to find a companion in misery.

Then say Poltron (for thy Nature agrees better with us, then thy Name) and
story to us the life of thy Fortune, that we may also recreate our mind, by
listening to thy griefs.

Poltron having pleased her with this sugered Bayt, cast out his hidden Hook,
and told her that he was a rich Merchants Son in Spain, left so well Treasured,
that he swayed the world a^ will, until imperious Love made him of a free
Lord, a Bond slave to Molloflora.

Unto her (said he) I sued long for obtained grace; which had, I held my self
more fortunately happy, then Paris did in the fruition of his Love. Paris, said
Vienna, what Paris? Paris (said he) of Troy, that enjoyed the Beauty of Greece,
and made his Pleasure a Plague to his Country.

But in the height of my joys, and hope of highest happiness, Death deprived
me of my Paradised Bliss, and not only made my broken heart the sad habitation
of woe, but also turned my mind (which before was a Kingdom to me) into a Hell
of tormenting thoughts.

The place of my birth grew (by her loss) so hateful to me, that I was
necessitated to forgo the ground that yielded me no other Harvest but grief.

In brief, for better portage, I turned all my Substance into Jewels of
estimate, and traveled to Naples, where I spent more of my wealth, then I did
of my woes.

Th^n Repentance made me leave that wastfull Nation, and so I came
unfortunately into France. Thus he drew on her attention with a feigned tale,
that he might without all suspicion and with better gain of belief, give more
fuel to her desire, for his further betraying discourse.

And to blind all jealous thoughts, he purposely seemed by his abrupt end, to
be unwilling to proceed further. But Vienna (whose crossed affection delighted
to hear of semblable fortunes) would needs know what other mishaps waited on
his lost love.

Alas Madame, said Poltron, the small remainder of my broken state I brought
with me into France, to maintein the length of my days; but in my passage, I
was set on by four Thieves, that stripped me of all I had, and wounded me sore,
and would no doubt have taken my life, but that by chance there came by a poor
Hermit, who seeing their violence, without all dread of their number, or fear
of his own feebleness, cast off his peaceful Gown, and drawing out a hidden
sword out of his staff, he so fiercely assaulted them, that in the end he slew
three of them, whilst the fourth run away with the prey, the danger of my
wounds made him then as far to surmount himself in pity, as he had excelled
the other in valor: And in the tenderness of his relenting mind, he brought me
to his Cell, where on a bed of moss he laid me; and binding up my wounds with a
piece of his shirt (for other linnens he had none) he afterward applied the
juice of herbs so often unto them, that they healed, and I began to grow strong.

With him had I continued still, but that during the stay of my recovery, I
could not endure to see this good Chyrurgion, and noble minded Hermit, that
had so well preserved and cherished me, sit so often sighing, and many times
exclaiming against unjust rigor; and unnatural injustice; that half
distraught, he would often confusedly say; Does the Sea nourish a more cruel
fish then the Dolphin? Is not Vienna the fairest City of the world? And lived
there ever a more unfortunate man then Paris. Then would he bewayl destroyed
Troy, and blame Love that fired Illion; and by and by curse that wretched
Knight that overthrew so fair a Creature, and so glorious a City. Then would he
sit in a doleful dump, and after suddenly start up as one affrighted, and
accuse his offending tongue of treachery, for wronging the divine name of love,
since he was so highly beloved, as his mean fortune merited not the glory
thereof.

But leaving him (with my Prayers) both to his Cave, and to his Cell; after
many thanks, I left that woeful and worthy Hermit, and came to Viennois, where
necessity compelled me to seek this service. And this most virtuous Princess
is the Map of my misery; and so he seemed to end before he had begun; that the
Fish might bite the more eagerly, when the bayt was pulled away: But oh, said
Vienna (for now she had swallowed the hidden, and hurtful hook) did thou not
perceive the cause of his so secret and so great a grief? Yes, Noble Lady, said
Poltron. Time and Occasion gave me means to know the same; then good Poltron,
let me entreat thee she said, to relate the full discourse thereof. For such
subjects of woe best fitteth woeful minds, and causes of dolor and calamity,
are ever most pleasing to perplexed persons. Poltron thus halled on, to set the
trap, that should ensnare her life, thus cunningly gave fire to her tinder.

Though, said he, I am unwilling to ingrieve my thoughts with the sad
remembrance of my friends over-grievous sorrows; yet since it is your pleasure,
your will commands my obedience.

Then know, most fairest of fair Ladies, that after I had many times observed
the frenzy of his passions: and wondering, had noted his broken and disconsonant
complaints he being at other times most advisedly wise, and most humbly (though
sadly) patient; As we were sitting at the mouth of his Cave, chatting on the
miseries of this life, and the crosses of this uncertain world, I requested him
in favor of my desire, to recount unto me, the cause of his so often
passionate laments. In answer whereof he said.

Though my grief be already such as there can be no addition to so great an
extreme; and though my wounds cannot be healed, because they may not be
searched, yet to give thee some content, know that not far from Tolledo in
Spain, I served not long since a great and mighty Lord, called Don
Daulphinatus; who had one only Daughter named Paris-enna, whose beauty was far
fairer then the Evening Star, and whose virtue was more powerful then the
greatest constellation.

By her sweet influence did I only live and breath; and though my mean fortune
durst not gaze on so bright a Planet, yet did her gracious aspect both so
ennoble, and enable my towering thoughts, that unknown, I achieved in honor of
her name, many admired exploits.

After some season, both my acts, and my love, were accidentally made known to
her, who in time made me (though most unworthy) the Master of her desires, that
was, and still am, a servant to her will. Our mutual minds thus combined, was
like the Garden of Eden, wherein grew more delights, then either Nature now
affords, or Art can express. Our hearts fed on pleasures, our eyes beheld the
bliss of each other, and in the full comfort of all content, did we sleep in
love; and wake, and walk, in all fullness of joy. From this Paradise, were we
driven by felonious Fortune, who envying our happiness, would not suffer that
we should make this Earth our Heaven, that was before cursed for our sins.

My Lord, her Father, had hnowledge thereof, who finding my indignity not
worthy of such sovereignty, was so carried away with disdainful scorn, and
irefull displeasure, that he doomed me to death, if ever I were found within
the precinct of his command.

This separation (for now I was put to my flight) was such a corasive to both
our confounded souls, that she staid to endure a greater misery, the
deprivation of life, and I wandered in unknown paths, to seek after a wished
death.

Long was my travail and manifold my fortunes: But neither distance of place,
continuance of travail, happiness of fortune, nor tract of time, could free my
fancy, nor weary ine from my constant affection. At last, being both wearied
and nighted, I came to this harmless Ceill; where in love of Solitariness and
in contempt of the world, I vowed to spend the unspent sorrows of my Life, and
keep my self from the knowledge of Men: and thereupon he devoutly swore me
that I should not make his private abode known unto any Man.

Whereat the wounded Princess, in her apprehension, sighed, and watered the
floor with her baulmy Tear^s; as knowing by the amplyfied and conjoined Names,
and by the concurrence and circumstance of the matter, that he was most
assuredly her beloved Paris, and thereupon she demanded what was his Name? Sans
Lieure (replied Poltron) did be call himself. Sans Lieure, said she? Oh how
rightly did the Destinies Christen him: and how truly does his Name express
his fate; for grief has but a dead heart, and hapless love none at all. But
where is that place of plaint, that so confines sorrow in it self, and makes
woe a habitation for so miserable a Man? Tell me, oh tell me, that I may send
some sanctified person to comfort him, and wean him from so wretched a life.

My Oath (answered Poltron,) will not admit, that any man by my means should
know thereof. Then would I were (she said) with him my self, for by his Name (I
now remember) he is that Divining Man that has revealed Wonders, and can tell
what shall befall every one: Often have I heard of him, and strange things by him
foretold have come to pass.

Thus did they both disguise their minds, and with untempered Mortar daub
uptheir several concealed meanings, and hidden intentions, that they might
both the better work out their Advantages. But Poltron seeing his venomous Plot
had (without all suspect) thus poyfoned her belief; boldly told her, That as
she was no Man, she was not within the Condition of his Bond, and therefore (if
so she pleased) he would not only give her full Liberty, but also bring her
unknown to that hapless Hermit, whom she desired so much to see, provided
that she should give him Gold, to bring him after to his Native Home, and also
be directed by him, both for the means and the manner of their escape and
travail. To this, she answered that prisons were no Treasure-houses, and that
she had no Mint to answer her mind; only some reserved Jewels she had, which
she would give him.

It shall (said he) suffice; Pity pleads in your behalf, your merit claims
redress, and my feeling grief to see a Princess so distressed, commands the
hazard of my life. Be you but silent and secret, and you shall see, that I will
deceive the waking eyes of encharged wisdom, and overthrow the heedfull care
of reposed trust: And thus it must be: By the print of the keys (which I will
make in Wax) will I make other like keys, by which all the doors shall congee
to your will, and give passage to your pleasure.

Then will I have you for your better security homely attired, with a box under
your arm, and Bone-lace hanging out of it, a pair of shears tied to your
Girdle, and a yard in your hand, that you may seem to be not what you are, but
what in appearance I would have you show to be. And I will with a Pedlars pack
on my back, well suited thereunto, travel along with you as your husband: So
shall we both better escape and avoid suspicion,

But how, said Vienna, shall Izabella bestow her self? She, said Poltron, must
stay behind in prison, to take away the knowledge of our flight; For after our
departure she must lock the door again, keep your bed with the Curtains drawn,
and lay your clothes by, most in sight; and when any comes into her, she must
carefully say, that you are not well, and that you are laid down to sleep So
shall we gain time to prevent our hasty pursuits, and she may after at her will
repair to some private friend, in such disguise as I will provide for her.

That (said Vienna) may not be; for I will never leave her, that has never
forsaken me; nor will I without her, venture upon any such adventure.

Poltron seeing it would not otherwise be, yielded, though unwilling
thereunto, and like Sins Sollicitour, moved, that Izabella would play the
Pedlar, and he would become a Tinker, with his Budget on his back, a leathern
colored Apron before him, a Hammer under his Girdle, and a Brazen ladle in
one of his hands; And thus with his face besmeared, would he go a pretty way
before them, as none of their company, and yet guide them in the way. So
gallant a Bonelace-seller, so proud a Pedlet, and so stout a Tinker, all France
will not pattern; But thus it must be, if you Madam, will have your desire; Nor
may you scorn that means that promises assurance of Liberty, and hope of
better hap.

The Gods to have their wills, disdained not the shape of beasts, and we must
with the cunning Fowler, cloth our selves in Feathers, if we will deceive wily
birds. It is a Soar, no sin, to betray Tyranny; but a shift, no shame; to
get Liberty.

These guilefull enticing words of his, and the betraying instructions of the
deep deceitefull Dolphinis, were (without any semblance of other reach) so
smoothly, and passionately delivered, by this damnable and perfideous Villain,
that all his wily words were held as Oracles, and the further he seemed to be
from her, the nearer still he touched her to the quick: In so much, that Vienna
being blindly led in her over-affectionate desire, beyond the limit of all due
consideration, yielded to refer her self to his trust, and to fashion
themselves according to his direction.

Alas Vienna, where disloyal Treason threatens thy shipwreck, and where
remorcelesse murder is thy plot; there assured danger must be thy Harbor, and
reproachful destruction thy host: Implacable malice pursues thee; invisible
fraud bettayes thee, and too late repentance, will I fear, learn thee, that
they are most miserable, that make themselves wretched examples to others. But
how should Love (the child of Folly) look into a plot of policy, when
unseduced wit cannot see it, nor untainted wisdom find it. The appearance of
Truth, and the show of Pity, and simplicity, has in all deceitful Practices,
subverted Cities, deposed Kings, defrauded Subjects of their rights, and taken
away the guiltless lives of Innocents. How then poor Princess, could thou a
void thy running upon the Sands, though armies of objections did rise against
thy doubtful hazard; yet cannot thy good, though free intention, make thee
faulty, though thy over-credulity in entertaining of conjectures made thee
err. Thy chaste thoughts shine still. I see, in thy virtue; and thy virtue (by
divine providence) must shield thee both from abusive shame, and from
unexpected slaughter.

But now Poltron had provided at Vienxa's cost all materiala; and the Ladies
disrobeing themselves, hid their attyres, and to cast a mist before the eyes of
ignorance, they clothed them to the purpose, and at supper time, the night
being dark, upon Poltrons watchword, who then stood centinell, they came
forth, pulling the door after them; For lock it, Vienna would not because it
should appear which way they came forth, least upon further rearch they might
find out La-nova's private way, and so bring him into trouble, who at the time
was in Flanders enquiring after his lost friend.

The next morning their escape was discovered, the City was searched, Poltron
mist, and every way was full of inquisitors. But that nights travel, and their
unsuspected disguise (being the usual habit of such wandering professors)
brought them safe unto a great wood, that stood at the foot of a high hill in
Langnedoc, where he persuaded them the Hermit had his Cell.

At the entrance whereof, Vienna stumbled; the dull earth forbidding thereby
her further passage; and Izabella's eyes were suddenly for the time stricken
blind; as though the feet of the one, were unwilling to bring their Mislris
into peril: and the eyes of the other were ashamed to see such intended
villainy. But no presage can forestall desire, love looks altogether after their
own fancies, and consters all things acccording to her affections This
helhound, (the Devils Agent) seeing Vienna ready to fall, stepped to her, and
taking her by the arm, in show to support her, led her into the thickest of the
wood, where suddenly as one transformed, this seeming dove showed himself a
villture; and like cruelty her self, with imbossed mouth and staring eyes, he
drew his short sword that hung by his lustful side, and gashly swore, that if
either of them made any noise, he would forthwith kill them both: whereat the
weak and wearied Ladies, were so amazed, that all their senses were senseless,
their tongues were bound to the peace by justice fear; they could not speak,
nor durst not cry.

Now Lust, the (execrable parent of murder) seeing her abashed beauty shine
like the sun through a Cloud, had so fiered his fancy, that where before it was
but kindled by her looks, now having her within his power it did violently burn
by the touch. Death must now forbear, and attend his pleasure for his pleasure;
and nothing could satisfy this covetuous Fox, but after the stealing of the
grapes he meant to forage the vine.

To effect which, he turned Isabella's face to a tree, and bound her arms round
about the same, and notwithstanding flatteringly promised them both their
lives, if Vienna would but consent to his wanton will; If not, he then
prodigally swore, that in dispight of all he would gather the fruit, now it was
ripe, and after leave their slain bodies a prey unto the beasts ofthe field.
Vienna having recovered some spirit, and seeing the present danger, with
elevated eyes, erected hands, and bowed knees, she besought him not to sport in
her misery, nor to spot his soul with the repenting pleasure of uncleannes.
Remember said she, that I am a Princess, save but my honor, as thou art my
mothers son, and I will freely forgive thee my death, as I am my fathers
daughter.

I seek not life, but the honor of my life; for my long lived grief, makes me
hate life, and despise death, but in the loss of my chiefest cherished care,
my curses shall poison thy salvation; and the wildfire of thy lust, shall burn
up all thy worldly welfare, and make thee a speedy prey to speedy destruction.
O let then my Chaste tears quench the flame of thy sinful Concupiscence; biast
not the beauty of the Lilly in the bud; deprive not the Rose of the fairness of
the bloom; nor brand not thy self with the cursed name of a hateful villain.
The fiercest Lion has no cruelty to hurt a Royal Virgin; Man was made to
help not to hurt a silly maid; and the Lord of Hosts, has countlesse Plagues
to punish such ofenders. Thy carnal regard is but momentary, but thy shamse
will be everlasting, and thy punishment eternal; For repentance follows
fruition; and the reward of sin is death. Thus did she pray, plead, and
entreat, and thus would she have dissuaded him from doing evil, that never yet
knew good, but his unruly passion, and thirst of blood, could brook neither
intercession, nor interruption.

His hot untarned desires prayed in aid of force, which made her shreek, and
call full loud on Gods Justice for helpful revenge; when suddenly the angry
heavens began to make war against him, and to threaten him with a terrible
voice, and sending forth such fearful thunder, lightning, and powerful
storms, that force perforce he was enforced to desist for the time.

But as the woeful Ladies continued still their shouting cries; It fortuned
that two Peasants that had Pomage in the wood, had been seeking of their swine,
who by violence of the disturbed Skies, and wrathful Elements, had taken
shelter under a Tree. As thus they silent stood, praying for preservation, they
heard their dismal cries, and hasting (for so their good Angels would) toward
the place of plaint, they found the obdurate Traitor attempting a fresh
assault; which made, the swifter Man coming in with his Batte, to make him
loose his lascivious hold.

This happy accident revived the dying heart of Vienna and the guilty dread of
Poliron, fearing to be taken, made him so desperate, that he both wounded and
grounded the gentle Peasant; and as he endeavored to take away his life, the
other coming in, knocked out his brarnes. This speedy dispatch gave the Devil
his due, and freed the Dolphinis of all suspect, who otherwise had by Drugge
taken order for his perp^^^^^ concealments. The Ladies thus succored, freed,
and comforted praised God for their deliverance, and thanked the poor Men for
their assistance; And in guerdon of their so happy service, ^ot knowing
otherwise how to requite so great a good, they wished (concealing themselves)
that they would bring them to the Governor of Viennois, who they knew would
bountifully reward them.

The incapable Peasants, smiling thereat, told them, that they would not for
Jasons labor, seek after Coridons hyre: for persons (said they) so
unremarkable can neither pleasure nor profit greatness of State. To which, the
Princess answered, that by her means they should deliver into his hands the
two Ladies that were committed to his charge, and that lately conveyed
themselves out of prison.

This golden hope did win their consents, and not only refreshed them in their
travel, but also gave speed to their journey: Only it contented Vienna, that she
should by this means requite her preservers, though thereby she made her self
a thrall to time and tyranny. Liberty could give her no comfort, nor could she
tell how better to dispose of her loathed life, then to make her self a
prisoner to Love and Fortune: the care she had of Isabella made her the more
sensitive of her wrongs; and therefore turning toward her, she softly said;
Though the fruit of the O life tree come late, yet is the liquor both good and
wholesome.

The tide now serves, my dear Isabella, take thou the benefit thereof, and at
last free thy self from participating of my further woes: Fortune has bound my
life prentise to her frowns, and I am resolved to serve out my time; then leave
me to my fate, and get thee to some more happy place, where my prayers, and thy
more fortunate friends, may purchase thee more content.

Isabella's impearled tears did publish her mislike, and in her grief she
said, that love never thought that time too long, that did hang on desert; and
that sorrows grown to a custom, were pleasing to miserable Creatures; Then
what should separate my attendance from your Grace, since without you I cannot
live, and with you I mean to dye. Vienna thanking her, joyed no little in her
constant sellowship: For Friendship is ever most sweetest, when, Fortune is
most sowrest.

Thus as they chatted, they came to Viennois, where she advised their two good
conductors, to wait for the Governors going to the Church, and then boldly to
step to him, and secretly to proffer him the delivery of the Princess and her
Companion; which done you shall privately bring us unto him, unto whom we will
present what we have promised

The Peasants promise (having done according to instruction) made the Governor
to rejoice so at the news, that he returned back to his house, and sent one of
them for the Princess, who yet was not known to be the Princess. Upon their
return, Vienna with show of Majesty, thus greeted the Governor.

Let not my Lord Vray Esperance wonder at our disguise, nor question the cause:
it may suffice, you have your Prisoners, and we are content with our alotments:
Reward well these honest persons, that with hazard of their lives, have not
only preserved our honors and lives, but also freed you from many cares, and
saved you perhaps from dangerous troubles. This is all our desires, we know
your charge, and willingly yield to your dispose.

The Governor baring (in due reverence) his aged head with more tears of pity
then of joy, respectively saluted them, and giving the Peasants store of
Crowns, humbly and courteously he brought the Ladies to their careful Chamber,
where we will leave them to learn of Sirap, what success waited on his
Babylonian endeavors.

Now had time, and travel, brought Sirap (whom we left in his journey) unto
Babylon; where the Sultan (to gratify the Turk, and to show his love to
Virtue, and his estimation of merit) entertained him with all magnificence, and
variety of Kingly delights. But after they had feasted, and spent some days in
Courtly sports: Sirap being mindful of his Lord, desired to see the City, with
such Monuments and Antiquityes, as were therein; which so well pleased the
Sultan, that to honor him the more, he accompanied him in person, still
showing him by his interpreter, all such places of note and worth, as then were
there remaining: At length they past by, (for so their passage lay) the Castle
wherein the Dolphin was imprisoned.

Which Sir Sirap long viewing, commended, and in his praise thereof demanded by
his Interpreter, what Castle or Palace that was, that was so well situated,
so stately built, and of such strength. And they told him that it was Mount
Semerian, built of old by Semiramis, Queen unto the first great King of the
Assyrian Monarchy, and that as then, there lay as Prisoner one of the greatest
Princes of France in the Western clime; known by the name of the Dolphin of
Viennois.

Sirap seemed much to wonder both at the name and country, as unheard of
before, and therefore was desirous to see the stature, favor, carriage and
manner of those men; and to learn, if he could, the nature, law, religion,
custom, and state of the country; which stood so well with the Soldans liking,
that both in one desire, went to the Castle to see, and to confer with the
Dolphin,

Now Sirap building on Bonsoyes fidelity, as having somewhat possessed him with
his purpose, and wrought him to his will; did use him as Interpreter betwixt him
and the Dolphin: For he would not altogether, yet discover himself to Bonsoy,
and therefore speaking to him in Greek, he commanded that he should salute the
Dolphin in his name, and tell him that as a stranger he was come to see him,
and of meat humanity to visit him; which the Dolphin kindly accepting, as
kindly regreeted, and entertained him with all the gracious remonstrances he
could.

Sirap bad him then ask what his country was, howgreat; by what laws they were
governed, under what title they were subjected, what Religion they observed and
what God they chiefly adored, unto which the Dolphin thus briefly answered.

France he said is my native nest, both most populous and spacious, as having
in it 27 thousand Parish Churches; It is most fertile; and abounds in all
plentifulness of fruits, wines, salt, corn, fish and wild fowl; There are many
Universities famous therein (the nursing mothers of all virtue) out of whose
breasts, youth draws out the knowledge of all arts; It has many large
Provinces; and diverse bordering Principallityes owe homage thereunto: The
Cities are great and many; rich in treasure, and fair, and uniforme in
building; the chief whereof is Paris, famous for beauty and bigness: the
usual residence of the King, and great trassique of all kind of Merchandise.

Our Laws are termed the civil Laws, wherein Justice is tempered, and
qualified by equity and conscience; and equity and conscience are guarded and
maintained with Justice. Our Monarch is entitled a King, the most Christian
King of France, under, whose protection his people live secure, enjoying their
own, and under whose Greatness, his Subjects rest fearlesse of foreign foes.

Our Religion is built upon Gods sacred word; Truth is the root thereof,
Charity the branch, and good works the fruit. Our Pastors are our Teachers, who
like Lamps consume themselves to enlighten others; their Doctrine is examined
by the twelve Apostles: Our prayers by Christ taught six Petitions: Our Faith
by the general Greed; and our lives by Gods ten Commandments. And where the
tongue of Aaron cannot persuade, there the rod of Moses does correct, and
compel,

We serve and worship one only God in persons three, not confused, nor
divided; but distinct: of one and the same divine Essence, eternity, power, and
quality. God the Father, God the Son and God the Holy Ghost. The father being
the first, chief, and original cause of all things; The Sun his word and
eternal wisdom: and the Holy Ghost his power, vortue, and efficacy. This is
that God, that by his Word made the glorious Globe his seat, and the massy
earth his footstool; that fed his servants (the unprovided Israelites) with
food from Heaven, forty years in the Wilderness; that divided the Waters, and
brought them dry-foot through the Red Sea, and drencht proud Pharoh therein,
that purlued them with a murdering heart. To him we offer no burnt-offerings,
nor sacrifice of blood, but the sweet intercession of devout prayers. For those
ceremonies ceased at the coming of Christ, by whom we are called Christians;
and we are received into his Church by baptism, and continued and fed therein
by the other Sacrament of his last Supper,

And such is our Country, these our Laws, such our King, this our Religion,
and this the God we only serve, love, fear and adore. Sirap thanked him for
his good description, and seemed to take pleasure in the knowledge thereof.
Then he demanded how he brookt his Captivity, and he answered like a Prince,
and therefore like himself; as one subject to chance, and resolved in the
change. Then he bad him ask whether he had any children, and he all sighing
said, but one only daughter. Then Sirap caused him to ask why he then so
sighed; and he replying said, that his sole souls grief consisted in her
memory, and so made manifest his hard, cruel, and unnatural dealing toward
her; and how he had left her a prisoner to his tyranny, and therefore by divine
justice made himself a prisoner to Tyranny.

Sirap being thus certified, was well pleased that Vienna yet living, lived his
permanent friend; and though he grieved much for her endurance, yet did he
smother up his conceived sorrow in the recordation of her love. The thought of
his exile, and Vienna's thraldom, awaked Hatred and Anger (the ready Officers
of Revenge) to hasten his death: but in the eye of his milder consideration,
knowing him to be his Lord, and Vienna's father; his relenting heart checked
his repining humor, and blew the coals of his hotter desire, to seek, and to
effect his speedy deliverance.

To compass which he seeming (seemed of purpose) to take pleasure in him, and
understanding of his Countries customs, commodityes, and government. And
therefore he requested the Sultan for the continuance of his contentment, and
for his further knowledge of foreign affairs, to admit^, and tolerate his
thither repair, that he might hereafter (if cause so required) reduce his
learning to practice; which the Sultan granting, gave in charge for his free
access, and so they departed; the one glad in that he had, or could gratify
so worthy a friend: the other proud, in that he had laid a foundation whereon
to build.

The two next days Sirap spent in covertly revealing, wherein his expertnesse,
and carriage, did both win respect, and gave delight. The third following day,
he with his Interpretour went to parley with the Dolphin, who despairing of
life, they sound expecting death. But after they had greeted, and regreeted
each other, with kind salutes, Sirap told him by his Interpreter, that as a man
he bewailed his fortune; and as he was a Prince, he lamented his fall.

Yet dismay not noble Lord, said he, since all corporal damages, that happen
to mortal men, are either by means remedied, by reason suffered, by time
cured, or by death ended. Malicious and violent storms may for the time cleave
the bark from the tree, and rent the branches of his body; yet for all the
furious blasts of wrathful winds, it cannot be plucked up by the root. If there
be a power above the capacity of men then may there come comfort, contrary to
the conceit of men. Expectation in a weak mind, makes an evil greater, and a
good less: but the resolved mind digests an evil being come, and makes a
future good present before it come; Then expect the best, since you know the
worst at the worst, will have an end.

The Dolphin conceiting the civil demeanor, the Philosophical discourse, and
the pious mind of the supposed impious and barbarous Moor, honored his mild
inclination, wondered at his regular admonitions, and thanked him for his human
comforts and tender regard. My mind, mindful (said Sirap) of Fortunes
fickleness, affects (I know not how, nor wherefore) your deliverance: what
then will the Dolphin give, if I affect the same? The Dolphin, whose smallest
sails of hope, the least winds did blow, offered the third part of his
Principallity, when he should come to Viennois. Promises, said Sirap, of
advancement, are no assurances of enrichment, and he has a wit too short of
discretion, that will lose certain favors, for uncertain fortunes.

Notwithstanding, if you will but swear unto me by that same God, which you
serve and adore, to grant me one request, that I shall make when I come to
Viennois, I will endanger my life to free your life from danger; and leave, and
lose my honors in Babylon, and Greece, to seal and seat my self with you in
France; more you cannot desire, less (my Country-Gods ayding me) I will not
accomplish.

The Dolphin, whose flattering hope, suddenly gave him a present assay of
future happiness, though at the first he was very credulous in entertaining
such favorable conjectures, yet hardly could he ground any firm belief, since
knowing him to be but a Stranger, he thought that such deep wounds could not be
searched with such shallow Instruments.

But at the last, referring all things to God, and to the Will and Wisdom of
the supposed Moor, he wholly embraced his kind offer, and anchored all his
hopes, in his provident industry: unto whom, preferring life before livelihood,
he devoutly swear by his Fathers. God, the only one true God, and God of all
Gods, in whom he chiefly, and only trusted; that whatsoever he would demand,
should be freely, absolutely, and willingly given him, In further consideration
whereof, he gave him a rich Diamond, and his Interpretour a hundred French
crowns; which for his use, if need required, he had closely hid betwixt the
lyning of the collar of his doublet. Sirap holding himself satisfied, said, it
sufficed.

Only he required his continual prayers for his better success, and so left
him, to feast his hopeful heart with the expectation of desired success. The
next day, Sirap taking occasion to walk to Euphrates, that famous River that
runs by Babylon, there to view the variety of strange and several small ships,
he casually met, and secretly compounded with an avarous Pylot, whose
corruption being gilded over with gold; he was to bring him down the River
through the Persian gulf to the next Port town upon the Afric shore: the
fifth following night he appointed to come aboard, attended only with two men,
and therefore gave him in charge, not only to be most secret therein, but also
that he should make full provision of all requisites.

This done, he presently gave forth that he would shortly depart, and return to
Constantinople: and the better to accomplish his desire without misdeem: he
determined (under color of preparation, and fitly furnishing himself) to lie
some few days in the City, before he would embarque himself.

All which he presently imparted to the Sultan, and humbly with prodigal
thanks took his leave, saying, that his period of time, pleaded now his
promised return, which in no wise he would violate with the high Commander of
his thoughts, the great and Imperial Turk, unto whom he owed all obliged love,
and most reverend respect. And therefore, if so it pleased his Majesty to
conmand his ready service in ought, he would willingly attend his pleasure, and
by his Graces employments, hold himself more then graced.

The Sultan seeing he would depart, presented him with many rich gifts of
Royal estimate, holding himself no little bounden to his Gods, in that they
had interested him in so noble and meritorious a friend, so blinded was he with
Siraps civil demeanor, and so dusked with Solimans powerful commends, that he
could not with Palamedes, pry into the profundity of Ulysses; and therefore
requesting him to take in worth those small remembrances of his fast sealed
love, he friendly bad him farewell, and so left him,

Sirap whose thoughts traveled now in quest after the Dolphins deliverance,
got himself into the City, where he chambered himself in a Merchants house of
great and good regard, where being once left and seated, he began to call his
wits to account, how best he might best deceive the Dolphins Keeper.

For providence preventeth misfortunes, and gives life to our future actions;
And therefore he was neither carelessly, nor overtimerously suspicious of that,
which might sinisterly and suddenly succeed; but jealous, and heedfull in the
hazard, least any oversight might cross his endeavors, and so leave his Lord
helpless, and himself hapless. But after he had stretched and tentred his wit,
and set al possibilities on the rack of his invention; at length his desire
carrying him beyond all doubt of danger; he armed his determination with
steeled resolution, and setting his chance on the dice, he thus at tempted, and
assayed his fortune.

The day before his departure, he went unto the Castle, where gently greeting
the Keeper, he told him that he was to return to Constantinople, and therefore
finding himself engaged to him for his willing pains, and already showed
kindnesses, he was come of purpose in person to invite him, and all his
followers (unto whom he had been troublesome) to sup with him that night, that
he thereby might acknowledge his thankfulness, and they have cause to remember
his love, and his person: And because (he said) my Chamber is no receipt, and
that I am unwilling to be troublesome, or offensive to the Master of the house,
let me entreat the use of the Castle, and so make you my Host, and Guest at
once.

The Keeper blinded with his former bounty, secured by the Sultan, and now
drawn on, by the pleasing show of kind courtesy; knowing him (whom yet he
never knew) to be of a virtuous dispose, of great estimate, and highly favored
of the King; did freely, and gratefully offer himself, his service, and the
Castle at his command. The great unknown distance, betwixt the Dolphins and the
Moors country climes, with their admiration of each other, and the difference
of their tongues could not make the gul'd keeper suspicious, nor can cause him
once to dream of deceitful guile.

This illusion gave Sirap hope of happy success, and therefore manifesting his
thankfulness with a rich Jewel, that he (giving) required that he would wear
it for his sake, he left him, and prodigally provided, what either his purse
could procure, or the time would afford; he also gave further charge to his
attendents, that the Table should be still and ever fully furnished with many
repleat cups of Greekish Wine. For (said he) the cost is ill spared; that is
spared for cost; and the beauty of the banquet is there eclipsed, where
Jupiter raines not down full showers of Nectar.

As himself, he had carefully and secretly before provided sleeping Poppy,
heavy Darnell, and the mortifiing juice of life-bereaving Mandrake; with other
powerful powders, a small quantity whereof taken in drink would make the
receiver fall into a most sudden and deadly sleep. This did he so secretly, and
so frankly bestow amongst all the flaggon pots but one (which Bonfoy had in
trusty charge reserved by mark, for himself and his Lord) that every one had in
full measure his dormative full weight.

These poisoned pots he closely kept for the middle of the banquet; and supper
being served in, Sirap seated every one in their due places, to the contentment
of each one; and then he began to feast, and cheer his gladsome guests, and
like a pleasant Idolist, merrily cheered his feasted friends. But in the end
(they having no end in drinking) he seeing them so devoutly sacrificing to
Bacchus, he to honor their Religion, added then more fatal fuel to their
drunken fire.

Their overdrawn cups were still replenished with the powdered Wines, and ever
he plied them with cups, till their cups had over-plyed them: That drunk in
their drowsy devotion, they falling into a leaden slumber, began to sleep out
all living consideration.

Now Sirap seeing his hope honored with some perfection thought it fit to do
homage to opportunity; for in deferring of time, many times, it is both the
loss of life, and occasion: And therefore adding execution to time, he
instantly went to make all such as were in the Castle sure; which done, he came
back, and taking the keys from the Keeper, (whom with the rest of both their
servants, we will leave where they silent lay) he hastily went down to the
Dolphins lodging, where they found him prostrate on the ground, moystening the
earth, with his repenting tears, and piercing the heavens with his prayers for
the supposed Moors good success; but before he could make an end of his
prayers, Sirap came to end his prayers, and Purgatory at once; and releasing
him from his oppressing Irons, brought him up to view Morphens Comedy, which
that dull God (with his aid) had made, and prepared for his pleasure.

Thus when our sins are rips, and God to Justice bent,
He turns our greatest pleasures to our just punishment.
Now Time struck his lock before, and it fitted not to argue what was done; or
what was to be done, least they themselves might be undone; but giving praise
to God in their several showed kinds, they presently buckled up their spirits
with their legs, like Bees, that having sucked the juice of foreign Gardens,
make wing to their own hives, that they may make merry with the fraught of
their adventures. So did they have to the back gate of the Castle, which they
prizing open, went to the Rivers side, where the hired Pylot courteously
attended their coming: In a small vessel they imbarqued themselves, and
sailed to the Persian Gulf, and so a long to the Afric Sea: Upon the entry
whereof, there crossed them a great Pyrate of Arabia, whose uncheckt fortunes,
and uncontrouled strength still crowned his hardest attempts with victory.

But his pride was now like a vapor, that ascending high, soon turns into
smoke. For he no sooner saw their small Frigot, but counting it his purchase,
he hastily made toward them, and looking for no resistance, he grapled with
them, and commanded them to yield.

But Sirap being unwilling to loose the rich benefit of his high adventure,
having no acquaintance with fear, and being ever accustomed to conquer, drew
forth his sleeping Semitar, which his enraged fury whetted so sharp; that he
clove the first opposer down to the back, and sent the head of the next, as an
Ambassador, to plead for peace amongst the monsters of the Sea. The Dolphin
seeing such great chips cut out of such rough timber, wondered at his force,
and admired his valor; Death seemed now to hold a Sessions in the Ship, and
Sirap still gave the summons for their appearance. For fearing left their entry
into his ship, should endanger the Dolphin; he to prevent that, hazarded
himself the more, by leaping in among his enemies, where his magnanimious mind,
armed with the arm of puissance, so disheartened his foes, that the Captain
fearing least any more should come to assist him, caused the ships to be
ungrapled: And no sooner were they separated, but that the timorous Pilot
wherein the Dolphin was, seeing himself severed from peril, began to turn the
stern of his ship, and with a side wind to sail back; which Bonfoy espying,
thought it better to die in adventure of his liberty, then to become a Captive
again to misery.

Despair therefore made him valiant, and necessity did add to his courage,
which made him to exceed himself in might and to go beyond all hope in
success: For suddenly running the Pilot through with his sword, he wounded the
next to him so sore, that he could not offend. The Dolphin seeing the success
of his bold attempt, raised his fallen courage to the height of noble resolution;
and unsheathing his quiet sword, that Sirap had given him, he gave him such
assistance, as his weak abillity could afford.

In the end, fear made them valiant, and their valor freed them from fear. The
assaulted Sailors (being weaponlesse) fell in their blood; and in their
overthrowes, did the survivours submit themselves to the mercy of their swords.
Force now overawed them, and they were compelled by Bonfoy to make toward the
other Ship, wherein Sirap was making an end of an unequal battle. For having
at the first slain their redoubted Captain, he wrested his approved broad
shield from him, under which shelter, his increasing valor made such
slaughter, as of sixteen persons, he left but three alive, which as Bonfoy came
in, were prostrate on their knees for pardon. But when Sirap saw them, and
understood of their interaccident, he was more glad of their safeties, then he
was of his own victory. The Dolphin stood amazed when he saw the Ship embost
with scattered heads, divided arms, and dismembered legs; And in his admiration
said if he be but a man how this? If more then a man, why this? Such forceable
blows, shows a power beyond all human power, and yet I see he is but a man,
though he has done much more then many men.

This estimate of his valor and worth, made him over after respect him more
for his incomparable prowess, then he did before for his deliverance. Bonfoy
now thought himself happy in such a Master, and Sirap grew proud of such a
servant.

Lovi (the joy of nature) now sat in triumph for their securities, and the
wrathful God of War, being wearied with destruction, laid him down in the bed
of peace: with these two ships they securely sailed, with winds suitable to
their wills all along the coasts of Magadoxa in Aethlopia, and so by Guine,
where meeting with a Portugal Merchant, they hired the Pilot to bring them to
Marselles.

Thus did the inscrutable providence of God, from injurious and bad causes,
produce good effects; making the banishment of the one to save the life of the
other, and the love of liberty, to give liberty to love. The change that change
of fortune wrought in them all, made their minds more then pleasing Paradises
of unspeokable pleasures.

The Dolphin dreamd of naught but Majesty and Dignities; Bonfoy of freedom and
preferment; and Sirap his rich hopes promised him now golden fortunes: yet
durst he not unmask himself, left he should deprive Conceit of his new
Christendom, and betray Policy of his chiefest pretense; but still holding
the borrowed habit and artificial color of a black Moor, he still spoke unto
the Dolphin by Bonfoy his Interpreter, by whom he discoursed of many things:
and again, and again, and still again, enquired of such affairs, as most
nearest did concern him; wherein he took double delight, in not only gaining
knowledge of the assumace of Viennois life and love: but in deceiving the
Dolphin, that the Dolphin might thereby be the more deceived. In this clouded
communication we will leave them a while, to see what befell Mal Fiance, whom
we left detained in the Tavern, ignorant of his Lords surprise, though not
innocent of the cause.

Ten days did the Vintner keep him close, still expecting that either the
Merchant should return, or that the Sanzake should send for his restrained
guest. But when he could neither hear of the one, nor the other; he began to
grow jealous of the matter, and premeditating thereon, at last, fastened on this
belief; That the Merchant (like a subtle Mercurian) had cheated the Stranger,
and after left him, not only to pay for the wine, but also made him a stale to
convey himself away under the face of honesty. For otherwise he thought, that
if there had been cause of taxation, complaint, or examination; there would no
doubt have been hasty inquisition made after him.

In this persuasion he set Mal Fiance at liberty, who now found his repenting
error, in the loss of his Lord; Shame rebuk't his tongue, Grief attached his
heart, and Fear afflicted all his thoughts, at this deer rate he purchased wit;
which taught him to labor more advisedly in the fearful search of the
Dolphin; His enquiring eyes did still pry into every corner of all his careful
and wandering ways; and in all assemblies, he sought whom he could not find.
But when neither weary time, nor wary search could give him any knowledge of
him. Then happily meeting with a Flemming, that was ready bound for Zeland, he
went a Shipboard with him, hoping that either he should find his Lord returned
to Viennois, or give them cause to follow him in better quest.

After many days sailing they happily arrived at Middleburgh, where in an old
decayed Burgamasters house, they lodged Mal Fiance, who finding the a ged
jealousy of his aged Host, cunningly carried himself in a strict show of
purity; that under that deceit he might the better deceive. This suspicious
Sire, having not only a beautiful daughter, but a young fair wife whom he
lately espoused, was so fearfully jealous of them both, that he confined them
within the limit of his house; and if either of them were but out of his sight,
he straight supposed she was in action; A service which none can digest, that
may not themselves perform. But to take away all means that did help (not heal)
his misdeems; he caused his daughter to lie in a low bed within his Chamber,
and made the door to be locked each night.

Now it fell out that there was a great and secret love betwixt his Daughter;
and one Haunce; the son of a rich Tanner, that dwelt not far from him, who
by appointment came presently after supper time to her Chamber window, that
looked into the Garden, where he so passionately pleaded for the Harvest of his
amorous desires, that she (being made of flesh, not flint) granted that he
should reap the full fruition of his love, if he would but adventure the
venture of it. For so (said she) it is, that over and besides my fathers
watchful fear, and ever waking jealousy, I do lie near unto him, within his
chamber, where though I may easily give you entrance, yet to entertain you
without his perceivance, stands not with my belief.

That matters not said Haunce, I will not leave the venture, for any adventure;
leave the managing thereof to me, who will for thy sake attempt the height of
the hazard. Love fears no danger; and pleasure without show of peril, loses
the vigor of her sweetness: I will with fear so deceive his fear. Only be
not thou afraid at any thing that thou shall hear, or see, and so farewell, and
expect my coming.

All this wanton discourse did Mal-Fiance listening hear, as by chance he
leaned in his Chamber window, which was but the breadth of a post from her
window; who like a true Venerian (knowing their carnal conclusion) resolved to
take the benefit of the match, though she were more then his match, and to put
into the Mediterrancan Sea, when the wind should serve, in that pleasant
pinnace, wherein enhaunced Haunte hoped solely to sail with joy through the
Magellan straights.

To affect which, he sat in counsel with all his thoughts, how he might best
deceive not only hopeful Haunce, but also her jealous Father, and overamorous
mother; who being sick of old ages tedious, and overlong enduring debilityes,
had many times by her alluring eyes, stolen glances, and other enticing them
cancurs, looked for Physic at his hands. At last device advised him, that there
was no way to bind jealousy to the peace, and to keep himself from
interruption, but only by horror of fear, to make him loose himself, and
senseless of all other fear: In proof whereof, that night, at the dead hour of
heavy and leaden sleep, he took one of his bed-sheets, and tying a knot on the
top, threw it over him, and like a troubled ghost, with doubtful paces went
into the Burgamasters Chamber; who being kept waking by his decrepit griefs,
heard the fall of his steps, and being so dark that he could not see, he ghastly
asked who was there? None but I, said his watching sensual daughter, supposing
it had been Haunce.

Is the door locked said he? yes, quoth she, you heard me lock it your self, and
so she did, but without the staple. Mal-Fiance being thus Plannet-strucken,
cursed old Saturn, for being now so opposite to Venus, and in his pawse of
doubtful stay, he light on this subtle shift; presently he crept stealingly,
under his bed, where finding a pair of bellows, that ^^^lesly had been thrown,
and left there; he took them up, and softly rising by the beds head, he blew
many sudden and short blasts upon him, and then falling down again, he set his
back to the middle of the bed-cords; where with all his force he lifted the bed
up as high as he could, and then would let it softly fall, and then raising it
up again, would after let it fall suddenly; and then would he blast with the
bellows again, which so amazed and frighted the poor Burg^master; that he
could not speak, but fearfully crept over the head into the bed, and laid such
fast (though sho^king) hands, on his wife, that he awaked her; who being held
over-hard, demanded what so appaled him: who answered in a low voice, that
there was some tormenting spirit in the Chamber. Alas sweet (said she) thinking
it to be but the disease of his jealousy, you do but dream, there is no such
thing, give me leave to sleep, since you cannot keep me wa^ king.

The Daughter whose lustful attendance, waked after venercall copulation,
hearing this, and knowing the fallacy; could not but laugh at her fathers
deceiving, and betraying fear, and in the pride of her naked strength, she
prepared her self (being then most ready, when she was most unready) both to
assay and allay that troublesome spirit.

Mal-Fiance having thus secured their stirring, by deluding their hearing, went
boldly to the daughters bed, (the wished port, where he desired to arrive)
where finding no opposition; she still deeming him to be Haunce, he cast anchor,
that his barque might ride at full Sea: At which time Mars and Venus being in
conjunction, produced such strange effects, that the bed wherein they lay, did
both shake and rock; which her mother-in-law hearing, began to be half afraid,
having heard nothing before: yet out of wonted holdness (which was great in
bodily adventures) she called to her daughter and asked her how she did; I do
(q^she) well, and as well as any woman can do.

It is the better for you, replied the mother, but do you not hear, nor feel
any thing? I hear nothing (said she) that is ill, and most assured I am; I feel
no hurt. Well daughter, said the Mother, bless you, and cross you from all
evil spirits.

Nay mother (quoth she) my faith herein has ever been so great, and so good,
that I neither fear the Devil, nor think any man is present that endangers me.
All this while the poor Burgamaster lay over the head in the sweat of his false
fear, which and so tyrantize over his weakness, that he durstily no longer,
but hastily calling up his man, he had him light a candle: for he would rise,
and go fetch his ghostly Father Friar Br^^erick to come to bless his Chamber,
and sprinkle it all over with holy water.

His wife could not divert him from it, and his daughter and her unknown
Paramour were ready to betray themselves with laughter: yet was Mal Fiance glad
to hide himself in the bed, whilst to prevent suspicion, the daughter rose, and
took upon her to unlock the unlocked doors, by which time the man came with a
light, and getting his Master up, he help to array him, and after went with a
Lantern with him to seek the Friar.

No sooner were they gone, but in comes lascivious Haunce in the heat of his
desire, like the Prince of darkness, clothed in a Bulls-hide, with the horns
on his head, (for it much behooved him to have borns, that must leave horns
behind him) who finding the doors open, made no stay till he came to the
daughters bed, where hearing two breath, he softly shrunk back, supposing it
was the Fathers bed, and stumbling after by hap on the other bed, where the
wife lay all alone, he holding down his head softly said; Fear not my Love, it
is I, and so dismantling himself, laid him down by her, who conceiting that it
was Mal Fiance, that had taken the benefit of her husbands going forth,
resisted not, but entertained him with all the full favors, that wanton love
could afford: (Thus do Women's light thoughts many times make their husbands to
have heavy heads.)

But in this amorous combat, the very bed proclaimed their forceable
encounters, and the fall of bedstaves well witnessed their fresh assaults,
which the daughter hearing, deemed that her restless mother was tormented with
some terror of fear: and therefore calling to her, she wished her to have a
good litart, and not to yield to idle conceits, which but troubled the mind
with deceiving imaginations. The mother perceiving that something was
perceived, and that they were heard, took upon her to be affrighted, and said:
Alas daughter, something, I know, has been upon me, and if spirits have any
substances, it is surely one. Cover your self well, said the daughter.

By this enterchange of chatte, Haunce knew that he had travailed in a by-path,
which so distasted him, that his teeth gnashed together for anger, and Mal
Fiance lay loughing at the knowledge thereof, who remembering now, that Haunce
would come in some fearful shape, to make way for his pleasure he thought to
work further on him, and to beat him with his own weapon; And to give life to
his device, he stole up, and creeping along the beds side, wherein euchaffed
Haunce did^ly he sought by feeling, and by feeling sound the hairy hide, which
by handling thereof, he knew well was a garment of his Fathers, and as he threw
it over him, with intent to frighten Haunce, he heard his Host and the Friar
coming into the house; who came sooner then they were expected: Then he was
forced to run behind the door, thinking by his hell-like habit, to terrify
them all; and so got unknown to his Chamber.

Now Haunce perceiving light through the door (for as yet the Friar durst not
come in, till he had said diverse Pater nosters, and besprinkled the door with
his holy water sprinkle) leaped hastily out of his disliked bed, and failing to
find his devils coat, he pulled the higher sheet out of the bed, and shrowding
himself therein, went like a ghost to the other side of the door, thinking
likewise so suddenly to fright them, that undiscovered he might escape. But the
tardy-taken-women, that now were more afraid of shame, then they were before of
sin, were driven to such an exigent, that they knew not how to avoid, neither
rebuke not reproach: their scarlet blushes accused them, and the holy Church
was at the door ready to condemn them.

In this hell they lay, fearing to be seen, until the light which most they
feared, freed them from those they most feared. For the new transformed Devil,
and the late metamorphosed ghost, suddenly seeing each other by the light of
the Candle, upon the opening of the door, were so aghast at the fearful sight
of either others terrifying, and unknown shapes, that they verily thought,
that the Devil, or some other ill spirit were purposely come from hell to
carry them away, for their sinful assuming their damned forms to such wicked
and forbidden ends. In this fear and fearful thought, they made such have to
run away the one from the other, that they both rusht at once so forceably
through the door, that they bear the old Burgamaster down, and turned the poor
Friar over and over; in which fall he pitifully brake his face on the
housecill, and half drowned the Burgamaster with the Holy Water that he brought
and shed upon him.

The careful women though they were thus cleared of disgrace, yet were they so
danted at the sight of these incarnall devils, that they woefully cried, and
shrieked out; the servant with the Lanthorn as one distract; run out of doors;
Mal Fiance as fearfully fled to his chamber; and heartless Haunce most amazedly
run into the street after the servant; who looking for fear behind him, saw
this spirit P. running (as he thought) after him; which made him cry out, help,
help, a spirit, a ghost; a ghost, a spirit.

The Watchmen coming, and hearing him, thought the man was stark mad; but
looking about, they saw this affrighted frightning ghost coming toward them,
which put them all into such amazed fear, that they threw down their weapons
and run away. The coast being thus cleared, unhappy Haunce got into his Fathers
house.

But now the next neighbors that had heard the wretched woman's shrieking
cries, were risen, and having gotten lights speedily came to see, and know the
cause of their outcryes, And finding the Master of the house and the Friar
(whom fear had entranced) half dead on the floor, and the Friar all bloudied by
his fall, they supposing, that they were slain, instantly cried out, Murder,
murder; The dismayed women (that all this while lay over their heads, in the
bath of their sweating fear, doing penance for their stolen pleasures) having
their fear both renewed, and redoubled by these their cries; cried out as fast,
the Devil, the Devil, at the hearing whereof, all the neighbors run out of
the house again, and Mal Fiance grew upon this dreadful allanim, so fearfully
timorous, that he durst not moove though he were more then moved. In this
agony of terror, did they all lie till break of day, when light (the comfort
of dark dismay) emboldned the chief Officer (who of purpose was sent for) to
enter into this house of horror, where raising them from the place of
purgatory; they found upon examination that the devil had been there, and was
the cause of all their disturbances.

But Mal Fiance who now had made peace with his distracted thoughts; not only
found his own error, but easily apprehended the shift, and enforced subtilty of
the other. For remembering he had disfurnished Haunce of his black Mantle, and
so prevented him of his infernal shape, he conceited that he had no other means
to free himself, then by taking one of the sheets, and so by appearing like a
ghost to make way for himself. In the belief of this conceit, he vowed that
Haunce should well pay both for terrifying him, and for his planting in another
Vineyard.

And to this end, he seeking found him, and told him, that he had a very good
Bulls hide to sell him. Haunce knowing well where he lay was much astonished
thereat, and thanking him said, he had no need of any. Then (quoth Mal Fiance)
shall my Host have it to make him a Nightgown; but you shall pay for the
horns, though you were so liberal, as freely to give them. For in brief Mr.
Tanner, the abuse that you have offered mine Host, and the scandal that you
have raised on his house is so injuriously great, and so shamefully injurious,
that unless you will give me ten pounds, I will unease the Devil, and both
reveal his adulterous dealing, and tell of your ghostly escape Haunce seeing he
was discovered bought his concealment with his coin: which made Mal Fiance so
wanson, that being so well silver-shod for travel he discharged all his debts,
and in the innocence of his thought, not dreaming after any danger, he made
more have then good speed to Viennois.

And no sooner was he come, and known to be i^ Vienna, but that the Lord Vray
Esperance sent for him, and demanded where his Sovereign Lord the Dolphin was;
who being unable to answer thereunto, was presently deemed, either to have
murdered him, or to have betrayed him to his enemies: For it is a rule by
observation true: that they that fear not to be thought faulty, will neither be
afraid to commit the fault, nor ashamed to be seen after the fact. His leaving
(howsoever) of his Liege Lord, was held worthy of death. And therefore was he
sent bound hand and foot to prison, till rigor of justice should by speedy
sentence award him condign punnishment.

But the bruit hereof begat such tumultuous uproares, and brought forth such
mischievous factions both in Court and City, that hardly could the tempest be
allayed without the utter subversion of the State. For how should the low
shrubs stand in rebellion, when the high Cedar was thought to be blown down by
treason? In this combustion, some stood for the indubitate heir the Princess
Vieuna, whose liberty they proudly required amongst whom, Sir Jacques, and
La-nova were most forward.

Some for the malicious ano proud Dolphinis, whose Regency many affected; but
all malcontents, repugnant, humorists, disordered men decayed persons, and
servile Peasants (that thrive best in mutation of States, and live by others
falling, as swine do by the dropping of Acorns) flocked about Monsieur Malign,
the reputed bastard of the Delphin, who ambitiously would needs (according to
the wicked disposition of illegetimates) deprive others by ruin and rapine of
their rights, and appropriate to himself the Crown.

The fired factions began to break out into flaming sedition and masked
Rebellion waited but on time and advantage, to use open force against each
other; The Commonweal did well to see her destruction in this triumviry;
Among these briers and brambles; that sought to overtop the stately Oak;
awful Justice had no powerful place: Law was of no force, and authority lost
all command. For where alteration threatens War, there the sword makes all
things lawful.

But when the Lord Vray Esperance. who was an Anthony in clemency, a Trajan in
bounty, and another Augustus in wisdom, beloved of most and respected of all;
saw this tripertite and dissentious division growing to such monstious heads:
and hearing that many of the giddy-headed multitude were already assembled
together in the Market place in a most confused manner according to the
mutinous natures of the mutable Commons, fearing their aptness to innovation,
and the sad effects of civil broyls, or some sudden overture, leaving (because
wanting) all time of further consideration: even in the assurance of his
virtue, and strength of his zeal to his Country, he suddenly went to the
Marketplace, where all men (notwithstanding their distemperatures) gave way to
his merit, and in love followed after him.

So powerful was he in popular affection, which he perceiving, stayed; and
turning himself toward them, with tears in his eyes and his Hat in his hands,
more like an humble Suppliant, then a regal Ruler, he made a sign for
audience; which granted, he mildly after some few sighs said,

What moves my fast friends, loving favorites, and more then dear
Counntry-men, to this threatening mutiny? What disturbs your quiet peace, or
what seek you by the hurtful Arms? Do you want a Prince? Why the Dolphin, your
liege Lord (for ought any knows) lives, and the Princess his apparent Heir is
not dead.

Does any usurp your rights, or oppress you with wrongs? Why Justice shall give
to every one his own, and I am here ready to shed my blood in your behalfs. Or
does the bare suppose of your Sovereigns death, thus untimely move you to
create, and invest a new, because Mal-Fiance is returned without his Lord? A
project, trust me, that will bring forth some notable deceitful design.

If needs he must be dead, because none can hear tell that he is alive; Why
then should he not be as well living, because here no one knows that he is
dead? But admit, that our sins have (which God forbid) deprived us of him, does
it follow, that the ambitious Dolphin's, or that degenerat Bastard Malign,
should succeed him? What though Vienua be a prisoner to her Fathers will, and
my faith must keep her still a thrall to his severity? yet the Father dying,
the Daughters bonds are broken, I discharged, and you tied, to inthronize her
for your lawful Princess.

Why then should there be any such disparity of minds, or diversity of
affections amongst you, since you are all subjects born to one end, and
Viennonians sworn to one right? What shall become of this Principality, when
those that should unite themselves to maintain the Weal-publique; do thus
divide themselves, to overthrow the Publique-Weal? Know you not, that by thus
banding your selves, you do altogether abandon your selves?

Will not your insulting, and incroaching Neighbors (the proud Savonians) our
inveterate and irreconciliable enemies, take advantage of your weakening of your
own strengths, enter forcibly upon your rights, dispossess you of your
Habitations, and make you Aliens to your Inheritances? Yes, yes, be you
assured, that hatred amongst friends, gives ever succor to strangers; and that
Civil Wars within you, will bring Foreign Wars upon you.

Look on the Dolphinis, of whom I am loath to speak ill, yet in this, I know
not how to speak well. Does not her unwasted corruption, and pride show, that
she loves a P^llace better then her Paradise? that thinks by shameful
rebellion, to make her self a sinful Queen?

Know you not, that they that are so greedy, so unlawfully to get, will be ever
as ready to do wrong? What color of claim can she have, that is neither
royalized by propagation, nor extract from Princely or Noble blood? She had no
authority given her in his Highness rule; nor has she any left her at his
departure.

It is, I see, only her pride, that can suffer no equal; and Malignes
ambition, that can brook no Superior: two Firebrarnds that burnt up Romes most
glorious Monarchy O let them both then fall in their pride, that seek so
unjustly to fly, before they have wings; and wash not your eyes, and hands,
like Envy in one another fall. In persisting to maintain evil, Maligno does
condemn himself; otherwise, he would not seek to obtain that with blood and
shame, which he can neither get, nor keep, without sin and death. In all the
Scriptures, there was but one sole Bastard (only Jephtha) that did come to any
good; and yet he had the mark of the Curse: for his all-onely Daughter was most
sorrowfully sacrificed for her great Fathers offense; And this was but to show,
that there is no perpetuity, nor long prosperity, in hateful and condemned
bastardy. And will you then make the corrupt and cursed seed, and excrement of
sin, your unlawful Prince? that by all divine, nature, and national Laws,
has no inheritance on Earth, and whom the Jews counted as no part of their
Congregation.

If the Father be an Adulterer, and the Mother a Fornicator, the Son must in
reason be a bad liver, and a wicked Governor.

For he that is born in double sin, must of likelihood in nature, be both
subject to many faults, and guilty of many offenses. And how can polluted hands
make foul Vessels clean? or how can he that is but the Son of the People, be
the Son of the Dolphin? The Mothers acknowledgment, and protestation, is no
proof; that ever fathers them on those that can best maintain them. She cannot
be true to one, that is untrue to her self; Corruption will still break out
there, where it is once festered, How then can you affect the Son of shame, or
without shame, yield your selves subject to the Son of a strumpet? If his
desire be beyond his merit and reach, let him fall besides his hopes, and
receive just guerdon for his deserts.

As for the virtuous Princess, whose right I reverence, and whose worth I
admire* Let her yet remain (though with better respect) where she is,

For it is not good over-suddainly to open a wound, that has bin long closed
up.

The greatest right, may do the most wrong, and the omission of a good action,
is no sin; when it cannot be done without committing of sin. I have sworn
to her Father, and would be found faithful to my Lord; I affect not
government: For in this, I am but like the Sun that carries his Lan horn for
others, and not for himself. It is better to be doubtful, then over-credulous;
and the uncertainty of his death is no warrant for my discharge, nor your
disobedience. There is time for all things, and the Moon that is not yet risen,
may rise, and shine in full glory, though now she be eclipsed. What more would
you have, or what further (O you fond Viennonians) do you endeavor to affect?
Will you turn Traitors to your Lord, rip up your own bowels, make your wives
widows, and your children fatherless, and helpless? Will you put fire to your
own houses, possess your foes with your wives, and wealths, see your daughters
deflowred, and make an utter devastation of your Country?

Alas! I see your wilfulness betrays your wits, and draws on your overthrows
into your Enemies tryumphs; and grief makes me to shed tears of blood for your
own purchased destructions.

Let me at last, O let me in love, and tender care of your welfares, dehort you
from wounding of your selves, and leave these ill presaging jars amongst you;
and like birds of one flock fly together: Maintain your sacred Oaths, for
preservation of your Sovereigns right, till better assurance acquit you from
your obliged faiths. To hasten the knowledge whereof, I will wing many
Messengers with speed, to enquire, and learn what is become of our Sovereign
Lord; with that the tears did trickle down his face, which struck such a
compassionate regard in all their hearts, that being before made sensitive of
their errors, and now fully satisfied, and reclaimed by his tongue of
persuasion, they joyfully threw up their Hats, and some lifting him up, cried,
God save the Dolphin, and the Lord Vray Esperance, under whose Government we
will only live.

Thus did his pleasing words, powerful authority, mild behavior, refined and
probable reasons and subtilized distinction allay the force of he approaching
storm, and gave such contentment to all, that every one departing in love,
brought home peace to their Neighbors.

Thus did this noble Governor (like a good and skillful Musicianer put all
this jarring discord, in a good and true tune; which so crossed the hateful
hopes of malicious Malign, that failing of native strength and rebellious
forces; to dignifie his indignities; he suddenly fled unto the Savoy Duke, to
require foreign aid to royallize his proud baseness. Such was his aspiring
wrath, that it had no mean, and such his Treason that it ^ad no end.

Fear now made him doubt the rigor of law, that before would have been subject
to no law: and therefore did he in such unstable waters, and threatening winds,
seek for more powerful ears; which the subtle Duke well perceiving, thought
to feed on him, as Pharohs lean Kine did on the fat.

But before he went, he advised thereof with his politic and sworn confederate
friend, Monsieur Meschant, whose false semblable minds, ever made such a full
connection of wills betwixt them, as what the one perniciously contrived, the
other most traitorously put in practice.

And therefore Moschant seeing him already over the shoes in danger, persuaded
him to wade up to the chin: For, said he, there can never be any peril in the
adventure, where the Foord promises so good a passage. Danger now only dwells
at home, and the Savoy Duke may both fortify your hope, and raise your
fortunes. Offer him but interest in the Dolphin, and you shall find that his
avarice and pride, will in that hope greedily work on our broken and disturbed
state. So then happily with speed, and most powerfully and successively; may
you return; and as prevailent may your success be, as your going is most
pertinent. And therewithal, he took a sheet of clean paper, and laying both
sides straight together, he cut diverse rows through them both; and after
cutting them a sunder, he kept the one half himself, and gave the other,
saying:

By this, and through this, shall you (without either danger to me, or
perceivance of any other) still know what is here done, and what I would have
you further to do. For though I writ my Letters directly, and most distastfully
against your Apostasy, and combination with the public foe, and advise you to
betray that noble Duke, (which for safety I must still do, lest in the portage
or otherwise, my Letters should miscarry) yet shall you at all times unmask my
intended intelligence, and find out both my fallacy, and true instructions, if
you but take this your cut pattern, and lay it on my Letter, where you shall
plainly, and formally read through the same, no more, then what I purposely in
truth do write unto you, and would willingly enfeoffe you with. In like manner
(as I will teach you) may you safely by the same illusion, certify me of all
your projects and designs.

Malign thanked him, prayed his remembrance thereof, and so bad him farewell.
For fear sent him post away, and hope gave him such speed, and in short time he
came to the Dukes Court, where after he had most respectively saluted him he
related how that the Dophin his father was dead, and that the L. Vray Esperance
affecting government, most ambitiously sought to retain his usurped rule.

That the Princess Vienna was in prison unregarded o^ all; and that he had
himself many strong and assured favorites, that would stand for his fortune.
In furtherance whereof he was come to pray his assistance, and for guerdon
thereof, he would interest him in that half of Dolphin, thet lay next unto him.

Thus did he seek his own ruin with great labor, and buy repentance with
bloody cost. Thus did he make himself a bridge for the incroaching Duke to enter
upon his Country: and this gap did he open that the Savonian forces might like
an inundationsubmerg and overwhelm both himself, and the whole body of the
State,

For the Duke, who ever waited on opportunity, and still watched how the Market
went, finding now the Mine discovered; he thought good to make profit thereof,
and to take the benefit of the Tide, while the flood served. And therefore he
embraced the person, for the occasion, and premising him help (but with Judas
subtilty to make himself rich) he leavyed forty thousand men well appointed,
with whom, with all affected expedition, he instantly in person, went to fish
in Vieanois troubled water, without making a Conscience of thrusting his Sickle
into another Harvest. The opinion of possibility so redoubled his unbounded
desires, that he thought that time too long; that he spent in going. But it had
been better for him with the Tertoise, to have kept his head within his own
shell, then by seeking so abroad to raise his fortunes out of another ruins.

For that careful Shepherd, the ever watchful Governor) being now summoned
by wastfull War, to defend both his Flock and his Fold, stood not like a
doubtful Chyrurgion, to consult of the ripeness of the sore; but like an
expert Captain (that at the first) would prevent fury by force) he suddenly
raised 3000. men, whom in pride of his aged age he himself led into Dolphin to
encounter with the injurious and intruding Duke.

Now Mescant hearing that the Duke and Malign, were entered into Dolphin, and
seeing the present preparation, and hasty march that the governor now made
against them; He instantly writ unto Malign thereof, and thus deceitfully
disguised his subtle intelligences.

MY Lord, your speed to ruin I appland, and I joy in your approaching fall:
which I wish, if you seek to waste your Native and distressed Country with
Foreign strength. The terror of War, you, your Snvonian forces has yet
known. But be you assured, that God will confound those, that strive to
dispossess others of their rights. War never yet appaled the hearts of the
true and valiant Viennonians: Our Governor is wise, powerful and practive in
Martial discipline; His Allies great, his adheres many, and his followers
nothing fearful of the event; and though his Army cannot make 30000. strong,
yet has he leavied many more Troops, which are now marching on apace to his
aid. Betray that hateful Duke and you shall find many that yet are your
harmiless enemies, and some that will in that merit procure your pasdon. Trust
not a Foreign Conqueror; For he will be absolute, and remove you and your
assured friends. Loose no occasion, nor time in giving baltest, wherein you may
best work their overthrow, and redeem your lost Honor. Be secret in your
intended stratagems, lost you find more hazard, and resistance, by greater and
more dangerous opposition. If you will repair your fortunes, send me like
notice thereof, and you shall be secured by our supplies. Bend your forces
chiefly against the General. For dead men bite not. It matters not how, so it
be well done, Take but away the chieftain, and the Army will scatter, For in
his fall, the field is lost, and the honor yours, Far ewell.

MESCHANT.


Thus in a fair cup of gold did this pestiferous Meschant utter his hidden
poison; And under the apparent show of honest loyalty, did he give both
treacherous intelligence, and dangerous instructions to the hostile enemy. For
Malign upon the receipt of this Letter, laid his pattern thereon, and so read
his subtle and cloked advertisements through the same, as by laying down, and
covering this his Letter, with this exampled pattern, you may plainly perceive.

By this time had the Dolphin, and Sir Sirap (after teadious travail) recovered
Marcolles in Prevince, through which they past unknown into Dolphin; where the
Dolphin finding his Country, in his declining days, covered over with Camps,
Carriages, barbed Horses, and armed Soldiers; he amazedly asked, and asking
learned, the unexpected cause thereof; which made him beway his sinister
fortunes, and envy no little against that impious abject, his accussed supposed
Son. Grief now made him weep at his Countries calamity, and fear made him
doubt his own deprivation. The Harvest of his sins, yielded him now more
increase of woes; then the lusts of his youth afforded him pleasures. But how
should (said the sorrowful Dolphin) he that is begotten in my full sin, and
born in his own shame; live without doing villainy, or die without making
mischief? If his being be from me, why then should he seek to take from me my
being?

And if he be none of mine, what then has he to do with it, which is mine? but
he is not mine, but the Son of iniquity, and scorn of nature; and therefore
knows neither his shameless self, nor his ^^^full father.

I nourished him (as a Snake) in the bosom of my love, and now he would sting
me to death, in the poison of his hate.

O how just are the judgments of God, that pays our amiss, in the amiss of our
offenses, and makes our wicked pleasures our just punishments!

In this bemoaning fury, did he call for vengeance to be powered down on
Malign; which Sirap seeing, could not but grieve at his sad lamentations,
though otherwise he rejoiced, that occasion presented unto him both a means to
show there his prowess; and a way to make his Country indebted to his valor.
For (as a stranger) he knew he should win honor, and after gain (being made
known) more respect. The wruth of War he did not fear, nor made he any doubt of
his Countries safety.

And therefore he cheerfully commanded Boufoy to comfort the distressed
Dolphin, and to assure him, that the God of the Viennoians had brought him
thither, in justice, both to punish the treachery of his degenerate Son; and
also to correct the insulting pride of the intruding Duke; in both whose
ambitious bloods, he vowed to bath his revengefull Sword, and by force of the
Viennontan forces, to overthrow all the Savonians, Only entreat him to take up
the heat of his indignation in the embers, and to keep himself unknown that
thereby he might receive a true try all of his subjects forces, and fidelities;
and the easier escape, and support himself after, with foreign supplies, if
the Viennonians should unhappily be vanquished.

As for himself, he would (when they were hottest in battle) suddenly thrust
himself amongst them, where he would write such Tragedles in his enemies blood,
that weeping repentance should teach them, what it is, to invade another
right, and to displant the true Vine. His Highness and Bonfoy, I would have
them like two peaceable Pilgrims, to stand safely aloof, and to view the hazard
of the game, till the last chance be cast, and then secretly to convey
themselves to some cave in the near adjoining Wood, whither in the dark of
night I will undescryed repair, and further consult what after will be done.

To this the animated Dolphin subscribed. For in his virtuous valor, and
practive knowledge did he build his new raised hope; and on his unresistable
force, and most fortunate a^chievements did his comfort depend.

Now Sirap having about him his never failing Semitar, wherewith he vanquished
Turbuleut the fierce, and being furnished with the Shield, and armor, that he
forceably took from the Captain of the Pirates in the Afric Seas; he made all
things in readiness, and instantly sent Bonsoy to the next Town with his
Shield, to cause a Painter to draw on it a disturbed waved Sea, and in the
midst thereof a crowned Dolphin, driving other Fishes before him, and
striking many under the waves with his tail, with this Impresse under. Crowned
to Conquer.

Thus did the Dolphins unknown Knight, in honor of the Dolphin, make himself
the Knight of the Dolphin. But by this time the two Armies, marching both on,
^ffronted each other in sight, which made the Savoy Duke to make a stand, and
to set his men in good array of battle, which he divided into two parts. The
first were his troops of Horse, which he assigned to be conducted by the
Bastard Malign. The other, consisting of Foot, he led himself.

In this equipage he soberly marched, till he came to a spacious Plain, near to
Andre, where he preparedly stayed the coming on of the Viennonians, who being
well marshelled in one mean Battle, Cressat-wise, with two wings of Horse on
either side, came on apace, by the Command of their good General the Lord Vray
Esperance; unto whom, honor gave spurs; his place, faithfulness; and the love
of his Country, courage.

Malign hearthed on the Duke with the false assurance of the Viennonians
revolt, and the hope to incorporate that Principality to his own, haled him on
the more to that bloody bargain. For the charge being given, Desire and Revenge
encountered each other with such fury, that the Battle was long in suspense,
Victory inclining to neither side, till at last, the Troop of the Savonian
Horses disranked both the Wings of the Viennonians, and brake in upon the
Squadron of the Foot, with such violence, that they began to staggerand give
back. When the all-valorous, and invincible Sirap, the Knight of the Dolphin,
came fortunatly in, who finding where danger dwelled most, there he opposed
himself, and like to a sudden Tempest, bare down all before him. His desire to
approve himself in his countries defense, and his implacable wrath against
those, that sought to defeat Vienna of her right, and to defraud him of the
comfort of his hope, made his blows fall like thunder, and his sword to cut
like the Executioners Ax.

None could stand before him, nor durst there any come near him; which so
encouraged the disheartened remainder of the Viennonian Cavality, that they
ranked themselves again, and came up to second him.

This fresh, and new assault, disordered and dismayed the Savonian troops, who
now fought fearfully and confusedly; which Malign perceiving, purposely, and
fatally brought up all his forces, and begirt him round, thinking so to end the
battle by making ann end of him, that both had ended so many of their lives,
and only maintained the battle. In this danger, did the undanted Knight of
the Dolphin fight so long, that his horse was slain under him, which he with
great agillity well and quickly avoided, and being on foot, perceived his other
self; his entire deer friend La-nova (whom he knew by his coatarmor) to lie in
the dust.

This sight was such an alarm to waken revenge, that he grew now more
suriously wrathful, and more irefully impatient then before, and being
desirous to recover his body, he desperately strid over him, and like valiant
Hector amidst the begir^ing Myrmidons, he stood to withstand all assaylers.
Lanova being thus freed from the smothering feet of his enemies, having had
time of breathing, came to himself (for he was not mortally wounded) and began
to stir, which being found and perceived by the Knight of the Dolphin (maugre
all the force of his swarming and pressing foes, he took him up, and bare him
to the Lord Vray Esperance, unto whom, kissing him of in manifestation of his
love, he delivered him with many speaking signs, that he should be sent safely
away.

The General who had seen with the eyes of admiration, the incomprehensible
force, and unvaluable valor of this unknown Knight, respectively received him,
and accordingly sent him to the next Town, and then having already brought up
his strength of foot, of purpose to succor the Dolphin-Knight, he followed him
in his bloody passage, with intent to horse him again, lest he should miscarry
in that peril: In this desire, he came on so furiously fast, that the Savoy
Duke, seeing the rage of this tempestuous flood, to over-bear Malignes forces,
advanced his main battle, and like a terrible storm, fell upon the
Viennonians. But this lightning lasted not long, for the Knight of the Dolphin
perceiving that now the dice was cast, and that they both were to avoid their
last chance, summoned all his strength together, and in the vigor of his
displeased courage, meeting with Malign, he smote him so on his Burganet, that
he felled him sore wounded to the earth, where being no respite for reseue, he
was smothered, and trodden to death.

Thus died the spaws of sin, in sinful shame,
Ill was he got, lewd his life, bad his name,
Now notwithstanding, the withstanding Savonians, the Knight of the Dolphin
took Malignes Horse, and in despite of all interruption, he lightly mounted on
him, and with his confounding sword he made such a slaughter, that he found
little resistance.

This remarkable act, gave not only fresh hope, but new life to Esperance, who
wondered not so much at who he was, as at what he did, and yet he thought he
must be more then a man, that did more then a man could do. But the doubtful
Dolphin standing all this while aloof, joyfully beholding the heroical deeds
of his second Savior, said to Bonfoy, that Siraps valor was beyond all
apprehension, his courage above all conceit, his puissance more then humane,
and his deeds surmounting all opinion.

By him, said he, I have my second being; and by him I see, I shall be still a
Prince; O would, and as he would have proceeded further, he made a stay to
behold the distempered Duke, who seeing his men discomfited and slain, most by
this alone Knight, came in with a troop of reserve, whom he had commanded to
unite all their forces together, and bend themselves wholly for the taking or
killing of this unknown Hercules, the most redoubted Knight of the Dolphin; but
costly experience made them loath to come so near him, as to hurt him, least
breaking the rule of pity, they should be guilty of their own deaths.

Yet in some presumption both of their number and Armor, they faintly
assaulted him to their repenting detriments.

In this fresh conflict the Knight of the Dolphins Beaver was broken, and fell
down, which much more advantaged then endammaged, or endangered him. For the
Enemies seeing his black hew, and his wrathful eyes (being then kindled a new
with anger) shining like fire, were suddenly appaled with such dread and
fearful amazement, that (holding him rather an infernal spirit, then a
mortal man) they began to recoil and to fly from him like a great Covy of
frighted Partridges, from the first pursuit of a fierce Faulcon; whereupon he
flourished his Conquering sword, and cried out in Greek, Victory, Victory, and
then followed them with such raging fury, that he hewed out his way in blood,
till he encountered that proud invading Duke, whom he knew by his rich Armor,
and thinking now to make an end of both him and the battle at once, he lifted
up his controuling and quelling arm, and so enragedly smote him on the side of
his helmet, that neither the steel, nor the temper, could secure him from that
fatal and inevitable blow but as all men fall, that seek to build their
fortunes upon others ruins; so fell he now (in the height of his hope)
breathless to to the ground. Then began the Savonians to fly on all hands, and
light unharnessed legs were better then well approved arms. Most of them were
slain, few escaped, the rest were taken prisoners,

Night drawing on the General, the Lord Vray Esperance commanded to sound the
Retrait. But the Knight of the Dolphin purposely pursued the Chase, that in the
darkness of night he might the better convay himself away, and undiscovered go
(as he did) to the Wood, where the Dolphin joyfully attended him: And no sooner
did he see him, but that with tears of joy, that in triumph, trickled down his
cheeks, he hasted to embrace him, and impalling him within the circuit of his
arms, he held him fast, his tongue failing to be messenger of his thankful
heart, For in this passion, Love clipped him fast, true Comfort held him long;
Joy could not speak for Wonder had no tongue.


But after his full heart had a little enjoyed it self, and somewhat digested
his surfeit of joy. Then, then, his tongue was enabled to applaud his victory;
and he both crowned his prowess with loud resounding praises, and gave him
more then many thanks for his most glorious and happy labors; And now with
more regard, did he not only industriate himself to do him all the kind
Offices of love, but also humbly offered to unarm him, which in no wise Sirap
would permit, but wearied with that days travel, he betook himself to his
rest; where his restless thoughts began a new War betwixt his desire and
determination: fain would he have seen her, whom he loved more then his life,
and yet to deliberate well on things profitable, he held to be a most provident
delay.

At last he resolved to keep himself, and them unknown for some few days, that
the Country might be settled in peace, and he see what course would be hold both
for Vienna and for the government. In the interim he might the better conclude
with himself about his own affairs. O noble, noble Paris, more noble then those
that are enabled with flattering, and fading titles. How loving art thou true?
How truly wise, and virtuous; that not only can without pride conquer thy
foes; but also without folly (beyond nature) command to own and dearest
affections,

If that wanton Trojan had had the like sympathy of mind and the same stable
fincerity of heart, as he had the likeness and unity of thy name, Troy had been
unconquered, and he had lived longer, and in greater glory. But let us return
to the Lord Vray Esperance, who after the overthrow and ejectment of the
Savonians, had posting news brought him, that the malicious and imperious
Dolphinis, upon notice of the victory, fell suddenly dead. She could live no
longer, that had no hope to rule any longer; Her pride and Sovereignty could
neither brook subjection, nor endure controlement; Besides the guilt of her own
evil, proclaimed her death; and the fear of loosing her life, was the loss of
her life.

Such is the nature of greatness, that but crossed in their ambitious courses,
they shrink under the weight of their own burthenous pride.

But her remove, moved not so much the good Governor, as the miss of their
glorious preserver, that invincible and all admirable Knight of the Dolphin,
that to their amazement had so often relieved their weakened forces, rescued their
fainting endangered friends, repulsed their oppressing enemies, slain most of
their best Corumanders, danted the whole army, and at two blows, overthrown and
killed the Malignant Malign, and the proud ambitious Duke, that potent
General.

Then he caused inquisition to be made throughout all his Territories after
him, and rich rewards promised to him, that could or should give knowledge of
him: but no one could show what he was or where he was: only some declared,
that his Beaver being broken in battle, they saw his sace as black as
darkness, and his eyes as bright as fire; which made the Governor doubtful
whether he were a man, that did more then many men; or no man that could not be
subdued by an host of men; or that the all-mercifull God in favor of their
distressed right, had fent some of his correcting Ministers, to chaston, and
power vengeance on the hateful heads of their unjust soes.

But the War being thus ended, peace called a council for the further
establishing of tranquillity; And the consideration of these bloody jars
cordemned poor Mal-Firance to die, not only for leaving his Lord, and being
unable to give an account of his Sovereigns life; but also for being the first
cause of perturbanon in the State, and after of foreign invasion.

The loss of so many of their lives, made them all thirst after his; To hasten
which, they brought him the next day to the place of execution, where happily
the Dolphin, and Sirap, with his man Bonfoy, came by all in Pilgrims gowns, as
they were (by agreement) going to the City; who seeing and understanding the
cause of that Assembly, withdrew themselves, and upon short consideration, they
sent Bonsoy to the Governor (who needs would be there to hear his latest
Confession) that he might learn somewhat concerning his beloved Lord. Of him
did Bonfoy, (knowing now the cause) in the name of his Master, the Knight of
the Dolphin, require that Mal Fiance should be delivered unto him; which
granted, he would undertake to bring them to the Dolphin.

In assurance whereof, he (unfolding his Gown) tendered the honor of his
Masters shield, as a pledge for his performance which when the Lord Vray
Esperance saw, he knew it by the devise thereon, to be the same, that the
Knight of the Doiphin carried in btatell, and therefore he joyfully took it,
and kisting it reverently, said; That that remarkable badge of his?
all-vertuous, and most glorious worth, (besides the glad tidings he delivered
of their gracious Lord) was more then sufficient, to redeem a world of lives;
And therefore presenting Mal Piance unto him, he prayed that they might both
see the Dolphin, and the Dolphin Knight, whom next to the Dolphin, both he, and
all the Viennonians, did, and would ever honor, as their sole and only
preserving Patron; And then taking his Chain from about his neck, he gave it
him, saying: Let this be a witness of my gratesulnos, and truly tell thee with
what true joy I entertain, thy welcome tidings.

Bonfoy humbly thanked his honor, and requested him, that he would be pleased
to see how he bestowed Mal Fiance, whom he brought unto the other two Pilgrims,
that were walking a little a side from them, But when the Dolphin, had
discovered himself unto him, Mal Fiance fell down at his feet for mercy, and
rising, threw up his Hat into the air, and cried aloud, the Dolphin, the
Dolphin, God save my Lord the Dolphin.

This unexpected, and most fortunate accident, made all the company at the
hearing thereof, to showt for joy: And the good Vray Esperance hastily lighting
from his Horse, fell upon his knee, and kissing his hand said; Long may my
Liege Lord the Dolphin live. Whereat the Dolphin raising him, embraced him, and
told him, that as his loyalty, was crowned with renown, so would he add
honor, and reward to his virtues. But forget not, said he, my Lord, to welcome
this noble and heroical Moor, the thrice worthy Knight of the Dolphin, that
both has preserved me from death and thraldom, and delivered you and my
Country, from our oppresling foes. O with what joy, and astonishment, did then
this loyal rejoicing Lord hasten to kneel unto him: For though he held him
less then a God, yet he thought he could not be, but more then a man: Sirap
staying him, greeted him with all the demonstrations of love, and reverent
respect.

This done, they mounted both the Dolphin and this magnificent Moor, who needs
would ride barefaced in their Pilgrim-Gowns through the city; Mal-Fiance
waited on the Dolphins stirop, and Bonfoy manly carried his Masters Shield
before him, and after went the L. Vray Esperance, with all the rest of their
retinue.

Now their approach was no sooner known in Vienna, but that they knew their
welcomes by their rejoicing bells, stately bone-fires, and triumphing hearts.

Hardly could they pass for press of people, still they came running to see
them, especially the Knight of the Dolphin, whom they admired for his fame,
honored for his great achievements and loved for their protection. Sirap
seemed much to admire the French, whom the French themselves did more then
admire.

But in viewing the whole Troop, his observing eye, light, by chance on his
fast friend La-nova, at which sight, he sighed, yet thought himself happy in
the sight. Thus rode they one triumphant in themselves, and honored of all, At
length they came to the Palace gate, where dismounting themselves, the Dolphin
now happy in being the Dolphin, could not but shed swelling tears, in tender
remembrance of his too well beloved wife.

But as the General of an Army, buries all the remembrance of his friend. in
the pride and triumph of his Conquest: so did the Dolphin's freedom from many
perils, and the attainment to his near lost principallity, extinguish all
sorrow and memory of the dead Dolphinis. So that wiping his eyes, he turned
himself toward Sirap, and embracing him, said,

Most worthy Knight and my dearest friend, welcome to my Court, to my self, and
all that is mine: This Palace, my Country, and I, are all at your dispose; For
so in my particular obligation, and by your meritorious and pleading deserts,
am I bound unto you: And longer may I not enjoy, what I now possess, then you
shall find my promises full laden with rich performance. And be further
assured, that as I only live by your love, and reign altogether by your
valor, so will I ever owe you fealty for my life, and still do you homage for
my Crown.

Sirap understanding thus much by Bonfoy, returned him humble thanks for his so
grateful and high esteem, both of himself, and his poor endeavors, with
protestation that he never wished, nor expected so great and undeserved
guerdons; but still held himself most indebted unto his own desires, to do him
all further possible service.

This interchange of kindnesses, gave contentment to them both, and was most
pleasing to the Dolphin, who yet fed so on his fresh feeling happiness, that
he gave in charge that all his Subjects should honor Sirap as himself, and
hold his will, as the will of their Lord; For so (he said) is your Lords will,
that next to the Lord of Hoasts, holds his life and living of him.

Then told he them, how, and with what hazard of his life, he had redeemed him
from most base bondage, and cruel death: How he had left many Heathen honors,
to honor him, then greatly dishonored; and how he had protected him at Sea
from danger of Pirates: and lastly established him in his Regalty, in despite
of his foes. And therefore many, and sundry were the Tryumphs that now were
ordained for him: but more then many, were the several thoughts that afflicted
his doubtful mind: Vienna he thought had cause to condemn him, since
affection ever thinks all times of stay too long, that hangs on desert:
Lainova he knew would rebuke him for violating the sacred laws of friendship
in his concealment: and his reverend Father might well question his breach of
love and duty, that so refused to show himself a son. One while he was ready to
embrace Lainova, another time to run to Vienna, and by and by he was ready
pressed to fall on his knees to Sir Jaques.

Now did he pity distressed Vienna (who in all these alterations was neither
moved nor removed,) Then did he fear her liberty, since her Father had no
feeling of her calamity. Thus dubiously perplexed in mind, he sadly sat,
unregarding regarding, the continuing and maintaining justs, until the
Dolphin, judging of his stormy thoughts, by his clouded countenance, thus
awaked him by his interpreter.

What think, said he, my best worthy friend of our French Knights? and how
stands our Court sports with your liking? Sirap, whose Martial mind was now
mollify'd with milder and calmer thoughts, by his man thus answered. As Knights
of of good regard, I regard your Knights; and as noble befitting sports, I
commend your Heroical pastimes. All does well, and well does it stand with
your Highness that has Knights that can do so well.

But the justs being ended, the Dolphin that had read his coffeehouse in the
deep characters of his face (for the countenance often shows the affects and
passions of the heart) took him by the hand, and privately led him into a fair
tapistred gallery, hanged with most artificial pictures of greatest Monarchs,
where he thus again assayed to find the cause of his disturbance.

Let not (said he any doubt dismay my life's preserver, nor let any remembrance
of your last and lost honors work in you any repenting humor, since Viennues
Dolphin is both willing and ready, both to accomplish your demand, and to
honor you with all Dginities. What pleases Sirap, pleases the Dolphin, and
nothing shall content the Dolphin, but what shall well like Sirap. Then ask my
Lord, and be Lord of your asking. Sirap thus kindly entreated and encouraged,
lowly humbled himself, and by Bonfoy thus replied.

Know most renowned, and thrice worthy Prince, that doubtful suspicion
harbors not in noble hearts: nor think I once of honors change. Your
covenanted promise exiles that doubt, and the effect of my request, is the
honor that best will please my mind.

Then let me show, and showing crave, both what troubles your servant, and
what he now (in all humility) demands for his conditioned gift, not affecting
honors, the worlds fading glory: nor coveting riches, man's pleasing evil; but
seeking contentment in loves felicity, I ask, claim, and require, your
daughter my Lord, for my wife, and a wife for my reward. The renown of her
attractive virtues, and the virtue of her moving perfections, has by report so
captivated my freest thoughts since my coming to Viennois, that wondering at
her Fame, I am wounded with Fancy, and my desire is to see and applaud her
excellencies. Then let it not seem strange unto you, that unseen perfections
have thus wrought unknown passions, since the ear is as well subject to
conceit, as the eye is pliant to affection.

The Dolphin, whose unnatural and impenitrable heart felt no longer remorce of
her endured misery, then whilst he was himself in misery; and who was no
sooner free, but that he freed his remorced thoughts, from all thought of
remorce: In so much, that looking neither after her imprisonment, nor his own
posterity, he in his ever over awfulnesse showed himself now rather an
unrelenting Tyrant, then a chastising Father. But now thus urged by Sirap
(whose warranted demand, and highest deserts, might well challenge an absolute
grant) he herein (still discontented) thus contented Sirap.

Nothing I see (right noble, valiant, and most meritorious Moore) seems worse
to love. then to prefer any thing before it self; For cloathe Desire in
plates of burnished Gold, and Desire will shiver all for cold; and fill
affections purse with treasure, and fancy wanting contentment will starve for
hunger: so that nothing can satisfy Love, but love. Your deserts might well
have challenged my Principallity for your due, my Dignities for your right, and
all my treasure for your own. But all these I see suffice not, because they
satisfy not; And to ask you why, is to ask one half pyned why he is hungry.

You love my Lord, you love but whom? my daughter; yea that is my grief; Not
that you love her, unworthy your love but that I cannot give you her more then
worthy her. For such I swear (by the eternal and my all-preserving God) has
been and yet is, the undutifulll, and most obstinate will of my too disobedient
and degenerate daughter, that never yet, nor yet ever could I, or shall I (I
fear) persuade, entreat, or enforce her to consent to any, in royal rank,
worth or Majesty suitable to herself.

For many times many powerful Princes, that sued for her favor, she has both
carelessly disrespected, and scornfully refused; And as many times, many times,
has she therein my will disobeyed, and contemned. Not regarding her renown,
shining in their glory Nor respecting my contentment nor progeny, eclipsed both
in her, neglect of me, and in her afforded favor to her far inferiors, which
caused me in justice to punish her hateful disobedience with imprisonment, and
yet in nature to bewail her imprisonment, though enforced by Justice, Where I
left her, there (so you please) may you find her, a prisoner to her will, that
will not yet submit her self to my will; and therefore by my will; worthily
chastised without offense to nature.

For where nature, offends law, there law may justly be executed on Nature.
Assay her (most worthy of all worth) and put in balance your fortune with your
fancy, and if your hap may drown her favor, you shall redouble the small
remainder of my aged days, and well satisfy the justice of my displeasure,
with the honor of your desired affinity. All my right is yours; your demand,
my consent, and my consent a full fathers grant. Sirap acknowledging this his
so great bounty, gave him more thanks then if he had presently entitled and
invested him in the Principallity of Viennois: Yet said he, it seems not
over-strange to me, nor should it be so offensive to your Highness, that one
so enriched by Nature, so admired for virtue, and so endowed by fortune, should
herein against all nature, so resist the law of nature; since fancy is
altogether guided by Destiny; and Love is neither subject to duty nor reason.
Then seeing that love yields neither reason of choice nor change; I will leave
to reason further of it, and adventure once to carry up a dish to Venus table,
that never yet served in her Court.

The Dolphin, glad that his demand, was of no greater consequence, secretly
smiled at his simplicity, that neglecting honors highest advancements, only
contented himself with the naked hope of impossible savors.

But Sir Sirap being more assured then the Dolphin did assure himself, rested
thankfully contented with the same; And the next morning in the pride of his
secret joy he went unto the Castle where (having the Dolphin's signet, for his
warrant) he called for Vienna, who fearing some sudden stratagem, (for all her
hope of welfare was dead) fearfully came to the door, to know the end of her
punishment. But when Sirap saw the alteration, that virtuous constancy had
wrougnt in her imprisonment, grief so attached him, that he was more mottified
at the sight, then he was Moorefied in sight; yet after some secret digested
sighs, he cheared up his ingrieved spirit, with the joy he had to see her, and
thus by his interpreter he saluted her.

Our Gods of all happiness make fair Vienna happy in her desires, and more
fortunate in her life. The same Vi^nna ( Vienua said) yields you hearty thanks,
and prays that the like content may countervail your well wishing. Then shall
(said he) my love be made immortal in your liberty, and your liberty be
purchased by my love. Vienna abashed at his reyly, replied (...); that grief
had no harbor for love, nor love any acq^^^tance with distressed Vienna,

Anoble cause, said Sirap may yet help to heal a grievous case; Then leave
these forlorn walls, and let not your will make you a prisoner, that may live
in my love a Princess. For know (Madam) that your Father being a prisoner in
Babylon, and allotted there to a most base and cruel death; I though by kind
an unpassionate Moor, yet (much more then any Moor) pitying the miseryes of
others, had such compassion on your Fathers distress, that growing careless
of my estate (being there then entertained with greatest state) I adventured
with great adventure, to acquit him of shameful bondage, and more cruel
death; Conditionally, that upon my arrival with him in this Country; he
should grant me, without all exception, one gift, that then I should require;
which he then ratified by oath in sight of his God, and now has confirmed it,
by will in the presehce of his people.

Now Madam, hearing the well worthy renown of your renowned beauty, though
being by Nature fierce, yet subject to affection, I could not but in that
frailty, yield to human condition. And therefore prizing my content before a
Crown, I required your Ladyship for my Wife, which your Father by an Oath has
granted, which you in duty should yield unto, and which I in love (if love can
merit such happiness) do deserve, and yet most humbly do request. Vienna thus
moved, removed thus his flattering and aspiring hope. If, said she, my Father
enjoy a second life by your conditional adventure, you may Press him to the
performance, so far, as it is in his power to accomplish; more you cannot
ask, less he will not perform.

But know Sir Knight, that love knows no such paternall law, that never yet
was subject to any law. The Father has but a consent not the choice, in the
daughters affections; his free thoughts have no feeling of her conceit; and his
mettle mind, and corrupted humors, are often unpleasing to his child's fancy;
Neither stands it with any reason, that he cannot govern his own passions,
should command othere affections. Then must you of necessity, excuse his
impossibility, and admit only of his willingness; that can give naught but
consent for his larges.

Yet Madam, by your favor (said Sirap) stands the daughter bound for her
Fathers good, and the guerdon is but ungrateful, that is required in contempt.
True, said Vienna, but every good must not be rewarded with the best, lest the
best want fit requital for due desert. Let it then suffice, that with thanks I
acknowledge your great good, and in any other things will be ready to pleasure
you.

Only in this, pardon me my Lord, for in loves infirmities I have no affinity,
A troubled soul only in tears, her comfort seeks. It is a heavy comfort, said
Sirap, that in mourning stands, yet, said she, does the custom of sorrow
lessen the grief, and it is some comfort to be void of all comfort. Despair,
said Sirap, is mother to death, and death not fit companion for beauty. My
beauty, said she (poor as it is) has already bin my bane, and made me most
unfortunate in my most fortunatenesse.

Why Madam, quoth he, has your Grace bin deceived? So said she, say they that
told me so. But truth, he replied, stands not on the tongues of men; True, she
said, and that is the cause why we are deceived by men: you mistake me much,
said Sirap: Nay said she, not mistaken, but overtaken you in the truth, and so
she bad him farewell, leaving him tormented in mind, in that he gest by her
last words, that some one to advantage himself, or in malice to him, had
wronged him in words: yet could he not but smile, to think how his conceit was
her deceit.

But leaving her, whom he meant not so to leave, but to reassay her again, he
returned to the Dolphin, and told him of his hapless success. Who smothering
his inward joy, made such show of coffeehouse, that the angry Oceanswel'd
not as he seemed to storm.

But Sirap neither waying his anger, nor her answer, all smiling, said, that
once more he would with Ixion, assay to embrace Juno, and see whether in
shuffling again of the Cards' Fortune would deal him a better game. For he
would owe her himself, and try whether in his own language he could wean, and
win her to his will, which moved great laughter, and ministered further occasion
of pleasant talk. Thus they passed for the rest of the day, until Supper,
which ended, Sirap giving them the good night, went to his Chamber, where
calling to mind Vienna's words, which in his suppose, argued to report of his
disloyalty, which grieved him much that her grief would be redoubled by his
never intended falsity, and that he should be so wronged by unwronged, and
unknown men.

But after he had a little fed his sad humor with this deceiving conceit, he
determined darkly that dark night to show his conceit thereon, and to remove
that vail of misdeem that so shadowed the assurance of his faithfulness. And
therefore furnishing himself with a well tuned lute, in the dead of night, he
went alone to the Castle, where close shrowding himself under her window, he
sweetly sounding, thus chanted out this irefull song.

SLeep not Revenge, Revenge awake,
awake you irefull spirits all:
All are too few, too few you are,
to plague those tongues, that swim in gall:
Then wake Revenge, Revenge awake.
And blast those tongues that discord make.
Sleep not Revenge, Revenge awake,
envy my love, from love exhorts:
Report has wronged true Troylus name.
and false surmize; in slander sports.
Then wake Revenge, Revenge awake,
And cut those tongues for Plutoes sake.
Sleep not Revenge, Revenge awake,
Virtue has lost her constant mind:
Love lies sick in her deceit,
Fancy is subject to the wind.
And all through hate of spiteful tongues,
Then wake Revenge, revenge these wrongs.
Awake Revenge, for shame awake,
Suspect has robbed content of joy:
Malice has slain deserved trust,
and light belief has bred annoy.
Then wake I say, Revenge awake,
And now, O now, revengement take.
Revengement take, take this revenge,
Let banefull blisters rot their tongue:
Poison their breath, and make them dumb,
and let them live in dying long:
So shall Revenge a God be known,
When thus Revenge, revenge has shown.
Vienna hearing this jarring Ditty, wondered what he should be, or what he
should mean by this his wrathful song,

At last, she supposed it was Lainova, that in Paris behalf thus excused his
long silence and absence so condemned by her; but neither discrying him, nor
receiving any answer from him, she then imagined that he was some other, that
carried away with grief and wrong had amongst other doleful places, there
eased himself of his woeful burden, by breathing and oppressing out his secret
sorrows.

For it is some comfort to find either a companion in grief, or a sad befitting
wretched place, to lament and manifest his grief. But greatly disallowing his
uncharitable mind, she all sighing said

Cease grieved soul, my soul grieves at like wrongs,
Yet leave revenge to him revenge belongs.
Sirap perceiving that his song rather renewed, then relinquished her of her
causeless grief, and persuading himself, that her stepmother both in envy of
her glory, and in disdain of him, had at the first so hardened the heart of her
father, that he now altogether forgot (in conrinuing his rigor) that he was a
father; He thought to warble out a more pleasing note, and to lull her a sleep
with more comfortable music, And therefore turning his voice, he cheerfully
recorded this liking Ditty.

SLeep, sleep, O sleep sweet Lady sleep,
cloud not your beauty with black care:
Cares do consume, grief has no grace,
your graces grief wears beauty bare.
Then sleep, O sleep, sweet Lady sleep,
Let me, ah me; your sorrows keep.
Sigh not at all, all is in vain,
in vain are sighs; sighs do confound:
Times have their turns, turn then your tears,
your woe, with woe, my heart does wound.
Then sleep, O sleep, sweet Lady sleep,
Your slave alone, for you will weep.
O cruel Dame, Loves second choice,
O choice the change of natures love:
O Love forlorn, slave unto time,
O time corrupt virtues remove,
Why trouble you her quiet sleep,
Since I for her do daily weep.
Sleep, sleep, O sleep, fair Lady sleep,
your sorrows have all sorrows spent:
Hope doubt has slain, dead is despair,
and Love will crown you with content.
Then sleep, O sleep, sweet Lady sleep,
No cause there is why you should weep.
Why you should weep,
Why you should weep,
No cause there is, why you should weep.
Vienna pleased with the tune, amazed at the voice, but more then ravished with
the words, hastily put her head out of the window, and said, Whatsoever thou
art take thanks of a distressed Lady, and heaven comfort thee, as thou have, I
know not how, recomforted me. And so turning her self to Izabella, she asked
whether she had heard that voice before, who replying, said, That if her memory
failed her not, it was the same or much like: if not the same that they heard
first in Court under her Chamber window.

Ah Izabella, said Vienna. thou harpest too well to be so well: yet if my mind
divine aright, (God grant it may divine) I shall hear some tidings of my
Paris, so persuades my heart, so grant our God. But say Izabella, say, what
shall poor Vienna say to this moralized Moor, whose civil condition,
Majesticall presence, and sugared tongue, differs so much from his rude and
barbarous nation. Is not his black hue full of sweet favor, and his favor
sufficient to command Beauties proudest favor, Now trust me Izabella, the
gentle Moor, more and more would gain interest in my affection, but the more I
think he is a Moor, the more (for my Paris sake) I scorn to love the Moor.

And therefore resolved to live to none but Paris (though Paris has forgotten
Vienna:) how shall I nonsuit his importunity, whose proud hope promises love,
and whose love is warranted by my Fathers Oath. Izabella most carefully to
acquit her of that care (though it was the least care of her care) told her,
that her old putrified policy, would easily prevent that mischief; and
therefore having a ready Capon in the Castle, they presently dismembring the
body, took the two legs, and bidding them under her arm-holes, where the heat
of her body might soonest corrupt them, she preparedly expected his coming the
next day.

When Sirap clad in his richest array, strangely fashioned, came accompanied
with many, that of purpose (being made acquainted with his intention) came to
recreate themselves with his so supposed unusual courting.

For he being as they thought, not to be understood by his tongue, nor to be
satisfied by his ear; They vainly imagined, that he either would woe her with
gifts or with his countenance, or with variety of gestures. But he no sooner
came to the Castle (but frustrating their expectation) he requested them by
Bonfoy to ^lay, and stand a while aside. When winged with the hope of Loves
assurance, he instantly, boldly, and all only, entered, saluted, and in French
thus courteously assaulted his fair and friendly foe.

How fares, said he, the imperious Mistress of my inthralled heart? As a
Prisoner, not like a Princess, she said, fares the Mi^^ress of a thralled and
woeful heart. But how came you, Sir Knight, so frenchify'd, that erst was so
strangefy'd? Love, sweet Love, he said, has made my tongue your Countryman,
and my heart your servant: Then has Love (she replied) wrought a wonder in
you, and an admiration in me. Such (said Sirap) is the divine power of Loves
Diety, such the vettuous force of your heavenly beauty, and such the happy
issue of our decreed destiny. Therefore, yield Vienna, Vienna yield, to that,
which the Gods have decreed, Love commands, thy beauty requires, our Fortune
allots, thy Father wills, and I thy friend request. Vienna thus charged, could
not tell how to discharge her self of him, but by having a recourse to her
wonted and hidden policy; And therefore uncloathing her Ivory breasts, she all
sighing said, Alas Sir Knight, thy commendable demeanor, and Princely worth,
well merits favor; and thy enticing tongue is sufficient to entrap a
well-advised mind, and a far more stayeder conceit. But know, most noble, and
most magnificent Moor, that I am far worse then I seem, and much better then I
would be. For behold (she bared her breasts that he might behold) the untimely
corruption of my blasted beauty, look on the loathsome fruit of my long and
grievous imprisonment, and but feel; O feel not the filthy scent of my ulcered
and rotting body; and then tell me, whether I am not rather to be loathed, then
loved; sled from, then followed. Sirap astonished at her words, but beyond all
amazement, danted with the smell, near fainted thereat; such was his
insufferable sorrow for her, that he cursed himself for her; And yet such was
the constancy of his never dying love, that encouraging himself, the better to
cheer her up, he with a joyful countenance, said; Be it Madam so, or worse
then so, or what so you will; it shall not matter, I rest wholly yours, if for
yours, you will accept of me, that am none but yours.

For know, most constant, and my endeared Lady, that Paris (if Paris be not
forgotten) pleads now in person for himself, and here offers his life, and
service for your love. In confirmation whereof, see here the happy seal of your
love, and the sole comfort of my absence, the loyal, and unvaluable Ring, your
Highness gave me, when first being perused by your Fathers Knights, I departed
from you, like a hungry Infant pulled from his Nurses breast, or a thirsty Heart
chased from a sweet Fountain. Then, then in the pride of your perfections, you
paradiz'd me in the heaven of your love; and now in the decay of your glory
will I wed my everliving constancy, to your never dying loyalty.

Look, nay look not on me so strangely; my black hue is but an artificial
vizour, and my borrowed countenance, but the assurance of my safety.

Vienna not able on the sudden to entertain so great a joy, shrunk down,
deprived of her vital spirits, but chafed revived, and enabled by Izabella,
she with tears of joy distilling down here heeks, sadly said. Ah Paris, Paris,
thy love made me a contented prisoner, but thy long absence has made my prison
a tormenting hell. But now, O happy now; thy thrice happy return makes my
prison seem a Paradise, and my hell a most glorious heaven; with that falling
on his breast, and enclosing him within her fainting arms, she often redoubled,
her double doubled kisses. Paris being likewise surprised with fullness of joy,
lost himself in her arms, but being acquitted of that ecstasy, he paid her
large interest for her kindness, pleaded sorrow for her martyrdom, and mere
necessity for his absence.

Cease Paris she said, my Paris surcease these needless excuses of faultlesse
injury, since to over fortify innocence, is to breed suspicion. There is none
but I, that have (if offended) offended. As first in being cause of thy exile,
then of thy dangerous travells, and now in rejecting thy love; but impute the
first two to my Fathers severity, not to my love, and the last of my ignorance,
not to my inconstancy.

For proof whereof see here, (here showed she the Capons legs) the trial of my
truth, which but in policy I used in all extremities, to wirhstand importunate
Suitors, and all only to love none but thee, erst the sole hope of my life; but
now the only life of my soul.

Thus pleaded she to please him, and thus it pleased him, to praise her, and
both of them still joying, in that they enjoyed each other. Then turning to
Izabella, he kissed her many times, and vowed, that out of his best fortunes he
would be thankful to her, for her love to him, but especially for her comfort
to Vienna,

And taking them both by the hands he told them how, and by what means, the
Dolphin her Father had freely, and absolutely given her to him. And therefore
he requested them to conceal their knowledge of him, and to go along with him,
for that he meant to have her father to deliver her to him; all which they both
so willingly, and cheerfully did, that the Gent. attendiag his leisure, no
little marvelled to see him lead them so familiarly by the hands, and so
pleasantly talking with Vienna in a private manner.

But when they were come before the Dolphin, Paris (for now is Sirap turned
again to returned Paris) holding her by the hand, humbly requested, in the
presence of his daughter and Barons, to ratify his vowed gift. Which the
Dolph^n, both misliking, and admiring; demanded of her, whether her liking and
consent, stood to that black irreligious Moor, that had so often refused so
many Potent Lords, and most accomplished Princes.

To which she in all reverence, (praying pardon) said. That the black smeared
Smith was most pleasing to the Queen of beauty; That that constant color
unfadable in it self, well argued constancy in the person. That his barbarous
nature, was hoth reclaimed, and refined by his more civil education; and that
his Religion would easily be conformable to their profession, But howsoever, it
suffices, that I love him, and love yields no reason of choice, nor has any
respect of persons. His blind deity, blinds our fancies; and fancy lives not in
deserr but in desire. We love altogether by liking, not for honors; and our
will connot command our affections, that are not in our powers.

Then vouchsafe my Sovereign Lord and most gracious Father, of my destinied
desire. and admit of his well-merited demand, and let me with your free consent
enjoy him for my Husband that has so well purchased me for his Wife: so shall
you honor your self in doing him right: reward his services, enworthy your
posterity, and repair my decayed glory. The Dolphin seeing that it wrs but in
vain to resist Celestial influence, preordinate by Providence divine. and
that he could neither in honor, nor conscience, infringe his obliging Oath,
nor reject his pleading and glorious worth; showed a virtue in necessity, and
freely gave, and delivered her unto him,

Now Paris being thus possessed of his desire, cast off his artificial mask, and
lowly on his knees, showed and presented himself, the humble and thankful
servant of his Lord.

The Dolphin finding himself thus deceived by him, that happily deceived the
Sultan, and his Keepers for him; could not but commend his loyal love, and
love him for his saving service. His superlative valor, and unvaluable virtue,
showed that his great fortunes were but Ministers to his will.

And therefore he cheerfully said. In France was I honored by Paris, In
Babylon unthralled by Sirap, And at home, both I, my Country, and People, were
protected by the Knight of the Dolphin.

To Paris therefore I return my love, To Sirap I give my Daughter, And to the
Knight of the Dolphin I yield my Principality.

Then my beloved and renowned Son give me thy hand, and let me embrace thee
with thy valor. And here I swear by the all-ever-living-God, that if I were
sole Monarch of the whole Universe, thou only should rule for me, and after
me: More I cannot give thee for thy Asian lost honors, less thou shall not
have then my whole Europian dignities.

To confirm which, he presently caused him to be proclaimed his Son in law, and
the next lawful and immediate Heir to all his Royal Territoties. Great was
now the wonder of all men, great the preparation to solemnize their Nuptials,
and more then great, the joy and tryumphs made, and ordained for them. But
amongst them all, there was none ( Vienna excepted) that rejoiced more then old
Sir Jaques, whose silver beard, was all embossed with pearls of swelling tears,
for the joy of this so famous found Son.

As for his endeared friend La-nova, his glad heart showed the tryumphs of joy,
and all his thoughts were ravished with delights and contentments. To him
(after many embraces) did Paris give infinite thanks for his comfortable
friendship, and careful regard of Vienna, and his Father.

Thus lived they long happy in each other, until the Dolphin summoned by
death, paid Nature his due; and old Sir Jaques wasted by age, yielded to death.
Then was Sir Paris created Dolphin of Vienna, who enjoined La-nova to marry
Izabella, unto whom he gave all his Fathers Lands, and Bonfoy he made his
Steward. And so they fortunatly reigned, and lived together many years, with
great comfort, and full contentment, in Princely state, and height of
terrestiall Dignity.

The Image of God; the wrath of Mars; and pledge of Nuptial rite,
Records his name, that for his friend, this trivial toy did write.
FINIS
Printed or sold by William Leake, at the sign of the Crown in Fleetstreet,
between the two Temple gates, These books following.
YOrks Heraldry, fol. Orlando furioso, fol. The Spanish Mandevile. 40 Pareus
Chyrurgery, fol. The sinful man, or the corruption of Nature by sin. Written
originally in French, by John Francois Senault, and now excellently Englished
by the Right Honorable Henry Earl of Monmouth. 40 Callis learned readings on
the Statute 23 of Hen. 8. Cap. 5. of Sewers. Perkins of the Laws of England in
English, 80 The Persons Law, English. 80 Topics in the Laws of England
Wilkinsons Office of Sheriffs, with Court Let and Baron. 80 Vade Mecum, of a
Justice of Peace. Mathematical Recreations, 80 Malthus artificial fireworks,
80 Sken de signifi^ut sone verborum. 80 The book of Fees. 80 Mirror of
Justice. 80 Delimans use of the Horizontall Quadrant, 80 Nyes Gunnery and
Fireworks. 80 Wilbies second set of Music, 3 4, 5, and 6 parts. Garden of
natural Contemplations, by Dr. Fulke. 8. Cato Major, with Annotations, by
William Austin of Lincolns Inn, Esquire. Mel Helliconium, by Alexander Rosse.
80 Corderius in English. 80 Animadversions on Lilly. 80 The Fort Royal of the
Scriptures, or a vade mecum Concordance, presenting unto the world 100 heads of
Scripture; most of them common placed for public use, by J. H. 80 Nosce te
ipsum. by Sir John Davies. 80 Philaster, or Love lies a bleeding. 40 Mayds
Tragedy, 40 by Beamont and Fletcher. A King and no King. by Beamont and
Fletcher. The strange discovery of Jo: Gough. Grateful Servant. 40 The
Hollander, a Play. 40 Hero and Leander, by Christopher Marlow, and George
Chapman. Alcill^a, or Ph l^^as loving folly. 40 Epigrams Divine and Morrall, by
Sir Thomas Vrchard, Knight, Mayers Catechism, 80 -- Government. 80

