THE NOVELTY. Every Act a Play. BEING A Short Pastoral, Comedy, Masque,
Tragedy, and Farce after the Italian manner. As it is Acted at the New-Theatre
IN Little Lincolns Inn-fields. By His Majesty's Servants.

Written by Mr. Motteux, and other hands.

Haud facile emergunt -- Juvenal.

LONDON. Printed for Rich. Parker at the Unicorn under the Piazza of the Royal
Exchange, and Peter Buck at the sign of the Temple, at the Temple-gate in
Fleetstreet. 1697.

Lately published, A Foot and no Plot, a Comedy by Mr. Dennis.

In a few days will be published, The Intreagues of Versailles: Or, a Jilt in
all Humors, a Comedy by Mr. Durfey.

TO Charles Caesar, of Benington, Esquire
SIR,
NOvelties, and their Introducers, have generally most need of powerful
Patrons: Yet while I make bold to Dedicate to You a Dramatic Entertainment,
that may be said to want a precedent, I dare not presume to recommend it to
Your Protection. There are some ill Customs in the Business of the Pen, as well
as in that of the Sword. Methinks a Dedicator, who strives to engage a Man of
Honor blindly to take his Part against those that tax him with Faults,
resembles a mad ^^llow, who would draw in a Gentleman to be his Second, upon a
trivial quarrel, in which it is great odds but he is in the wrong. In either
Duel, instead of getting satisfaction, both Principals and Assistants are often
wounded, and many times the latter most. Neither the Fondness of a Parent, nor
even the Vanity of an Author, can make me think any thing that may be called
mine in the following Sheets worthy the honor of Your Patronage; and the rest,
for which I am obliged to others, its Merit will, I hope, secure it a kind
Reception.

Yet be pleased, Sir, to permit the whole to appear graced and countenanced
with Your Acceptance: I will not say, it will fright Envy and Ill Nature from
using this as ill as they do better Pieces; for I find, they are no respectors
of persons, and far from being so fearful as some Writers would have them be
thought by their Patrons, they make nothing of a Breach of Privilege, misusing
even what claims the Protection of Lords, nay, Majesty itself. But this I dare
affirm that Your Name will advance the Reputation of these Scenes; for those
Persons that are acquainted with your Character (and there are but few of the
better sort but know and respect it) will not be able to imagine that any one
durst presume to Dedicate to You an undeserving Piece; and should they mislike
this in the reading, they will, I fancy be inclined to suspect their own
Judgment, rather than that of the Writer.

But, Sir, while this may protect me from the Severity of others, it could
never secure me from Your juster Censure, were not Your Goodness as celebrated
as Your Judgment, and Your indulgent Disposition to pardon Faults as great as
Your Skill to discover them. You pity those unfortunate Men upon whom the Curse
of Poetry is entailed, kindly considering, that a Muse, like a Mistress, tho
pleasing at first, is seldom long so to the man that is wedded to her, or indeed
to any others, especially when he is forced to reduce her to be a Household
Drudge This, Sir, emboldens me to hope, that if You condemn the weakness of my
Performance, You Will at least approve my Zeal; since I do not offer this to You
as a Thing worthy Your Acceptance; but merely as an opportunity to publish the
Veneration I have for your extraordinary Merit. Were it not much more difficult
to commend than it is to admire, I would now, like some modern Writers, assume
a Poetic License to turn an Epistle Dedicatory into a Panegyric; Conscious that
what is Flattery in some, might be construed just praise when said of You.
Neither should I be stinted to the Encomium of Generosity, tho that is the Soul
of every noble endowment, and a virtue seldom forgot in Dedications. Yours;
like the Sun's kind influence, is still dispensed, even while the power that
exerts it is unseen; and therefore a bare hint of so diffusive and known a Good
would be sufficient; the rather, because I should have a large field for praise
in Your other Virtues; many of which are naturally inseparable from that. But
should I enlarge on the sweetness and evenness of Your Temper, on Your engaging
and discreet behavior with Your Equals, Your condescending affability to Your
Inferiors, Your Humanity, Your Moderation in a flourishing Youth, and what is
more difficult in an ample Fortune, Your knowledge of Men as well as of Books,
and every accomplishment that gains You the esteem of our Sex, and the Love of
the other, Your friends might yet justly accuse me of having said too little,
while Your Modesty alone would tax me with having said too much.

I had almost forgot its strict injunctions, and my promise not to make You
uneasy with Your Praises; so difficult it is to be silent when a pleasing Theme
and opportunity combine to make us speak. Yet what I must deny my self, will, I
hope, be the task of better Pens. Why may not Deucalion's and Pyrrha's being
safe upon Parnassus, when the rest of the world perished by the Deluge, be
thought to imply that the Muses friends will be preserved, while others shall
be swept away by inundations of ignorance and oblivion? if so, your Name shall
live, and may even transmit this faint essay to posterity.

But tho I must curb my fancy, I may give a loose to my wishes, for a long and
happy Continuance of that more real Life which you so wisely know how to use.
May your Years still roll on smoothly, and attended with new pleasures; may
your Desires be crowned, and may I still be happy, in being thought,

SIR, Your most humble, and most obedient Servant, Peter Motteux

The PREFACE.
Reader,
I Hope several things will induce you to pass gently over the Defects in this
entertainment. I was put on this bold Attempt, being hindered from giving you a
better Play, which, waiting its Turn, cannot appear till next Winter. Most of
the best Actors being engaged on there Plays, I could not expect they would
study mine. This made me think of something that might be got up by the by.

I writ the Masque of Hercules, and Mr. Eccles having set it with his usual
Success, and yet more masterly than my Mars and Venus, if possible, I prevailed
with the ingenious Mr. J. Oldmixon to give me a short Pastoral, while I scribbl
d over a Farce after the Italian Manner, and an Imitation of part of a
diverting French Comedy of one Act. (for such Plays are very common in Foreign
Parts.) Then I wanted nothing but a Tragedy to have something of every kind.
But, as I said already, the best Tragedians were engaged in other Plays.

At last bethought my self of one already studied, called The Unnatural
Brother, written by an ingenious Gentleman, and acted 6 Months ago, tho not
with the success it deserved.

Yet the latter Part was extremely applauded: So I was persuaded to make bold
with it, as I do, with thankful Acknowledgement; the rather, because I could
easily contract the most moving Part of the Story into the Compass of one Act,
with some Additions; yet without mutilating my Author's Sense, for which I have
all the Veneration imaginable.

All this was done in a very short time, the warm Season threatening me with
your Absence: And I got those Actors I could to study and rehearse for me by
the by: But among them I must particularly mention Mr. Bowen, who has been
singularly diligent in getting by heart a large Part, while he was studying
several others.

I will only add, that you are not to expect a Plot in the Pastoral; That Is
chiefly to amuse you a while by its Innocence, and the softness of the Verse.
As for the Masque, if it should be said that I have not altogether kept close
to the Story of Hercules; the Judicious know, that a Poetic License will bear
me out.

The foregoing Lines were published as a Preface to that Masque, some few
Copies of which were printed for the use of the Audience, the first day of the
Novelty's being Acted. I have nothing to add, but that altogether it has met
with better success than I could expect, since, (thanks to my friends) it was
not only beneficial to me on the third, but also on the sixth day, and that in
a Season when the Town is most empty. I know I ought to make amends, and I
fancy I am not without hopes of doing better, since I have not the vanity of
some, who think they have written well, when their bad Plays have succeeded
better than they deserved.

You have here the Farce as 'twas Acted the first day; the latter part being
left out afterward; some few of the Audience having been offended at it, but
more at the length of that Act. I have seen most of the things that were
mislik'd, much applauded when Acted by Harlequin and Scaramouch. But it must be
owned, that many fooleries pleased when graced by those incomparable Mimics
which may not suit with the Genius of our Stage. The whole will I hope, at
least be thought inoffensive, as is all that I have written hitherto; for I
have always been of Opinion, that a Writer cannot be too careful in public
Entertainments, tho we live in a licentious Age.

PROLOGUE,
spoken by Mr. Bowen.
TO please you with new Whims our Poet strives;
For most Things please when new, even your own Wives.
But Wi^es, he fears, are surer to delight
Than Plays. Play^ scarce can do it one single Night.
Yet still h'has found you kind; but, for his part,
Swears, 'Twas your goodness more than his desert.
Chiefly at others Cost he treats to Day;
For every Act you will have a diff^rent Play:
Each kind distinct: Then let no Critic grumble;
Some taking Plays are a worse sort of jumble.
The first's a Past^ral, which to a friend is due;
But that is for none but the innocent and true,
And I much fear, Gallants, it is not for you.
A Comic Dish before you then he will set,
And much in Season; that is a Beau in debt:
Poor, as a Poet, in all Things but's Cloths;
For Poets are at best but dirty Beaux,
And what, long after a third day, God knows.
His Third's a Masque. The fourth he chiefly drew
From a late Tragic Drama seen by few;
Yet hopes 'twill please no less than if 'twere new.
The fifth's a Farce, where some odd tricks are joined,
Used by the Italians; to which pray be kind:
Nor hope in Farce true Wit or Sense to find.
Sure your Devotion several Plays will bear,
As in one day, some several Sermons hear.
These are not long; but be not sorry for it,
All things are not the worse for being short.
Our Author studies, Sirs, to make you easy;
Some things, the less they are, the better please ye.
Light Cloths, and lighter Food are best this weather,
Next Winter for more solid sare come hither.
Plays, Whores and Masks, go rarely off together.
When Volunteers return, who, like Commanders,
Went to buy Mechlen-Lace, and drink Champaign in Flanders.
Then they all bravely march to Winter Quarters,
To be bombarded by the Vizard-Mortars.
The Tars, who played at Bow-peep with the French,
Come to spend all upon some battered wench;
And Beaux, of honor fond, when Dangers cease,
To buy Commissions, hearing of a Peace.
Raw Squires come to be modish, see a Play,
Be rigged, be rookt, be clapped, then sneak away;
And Petti-foggers come to spend their Guineas,
Then Plantiffs and Defendants all trot home like Ninnies.
Projectors come to offer means and ways,
And a huge Mob to offer us damned new Plays.
Kept back by many such, and some few better,
Our Author, till his turn, must be your Debtor,
For, by the by, we did these Acts prepare,
To make good his deficiencies of fonds last year.
Since he may make amends, pray let 'em pass!
Restore the Credit of the Bank of Bays!
He Will never thus trespass, till, by wondrous Chance,
This is revived, and we have Conquer^d France.
ACT I. THYRSIS. A Pastoral.
Shepherds.
Thyrsis, Mr. Scudamore. Damon, Mr. Bail. Montano. Mr. Arnold.
Shepherdesses.
Dorinda, Mrs. Lassels. Cleomira. Mrs. Boman.
Satyr, Shepherds and Shepherdesses.

SCENE a Green before a Wood.
Enter Montano and Dorinda in Shepherds Habit. Dor. I Shall be known.


Mon. You need not fear;
Your habit will secure you here.
On me you safely may depend,
You know I ever was your friend.
In this Disguise, if People knew
You were not lost, who'd think of you?
Among the Trees we'll stay unseen,
And hear what passes on the Green:
The Swains will quickly leave their Sheep,
To play beneath the Shades, or sleep;
Then Thyrsis comes, and you may hear
What ground you have for what you fear.

Dor. Delicious shades! Ye often have seen
How blessed I formerly have been,
When I have met my Thyrsis here,
And heard him sigh, and heard him swear:
But oh! he falsely sighed and swore,
That then he loved Dorinda more
Than Doves their Mates, than Ews their Lambs,
Than tender Kids their fawning Dams;
Than Streams the Banks they glide along,
Or joyful Birds their vernal Song:
But Streams still kiss their Banks: The Spring
Still tempts the joyful Birds to sing:
Kids never their fawning Dams forget,
Nor Ews their Lambs, nor Doves their Mates:
Yet he is changed, and thinks no more
Of me, or what he falsely swore.

Mon. He changed not till he thought you dead.


Dor. And hardly wept to lose a Maid
Whom once he loved, he swore at least,
And I believed he loved me best.
But who that hears my wrongs, will now
Believe a Shepherd for his Vow?
Ye Maids! that shall within this Grove
Be tempted with the voice of Love,
Refuse to hear, the Charmers shun,
For if you trust 'em, you're undone.

Mon. If Thyrsis loves, he loves in vain,
Your Sister likes another Swain.

Dor. Tho Cleomira should refuse
His suit, will that his Fault excuse?

Mon. Never think hi^ faulty, till you know
How far the Youth has broke his Vow.
Had you been dead, his hopes were gone,
And he had then been free.

Dor. So soon?
Montano, you of old have seen
The Shepherds often forsake the Green,
For years to mourn in Cypress Groves,
For such Misfortunes in their Loves.
To bath with Tears their Virgin's Graves,
Sigh to the Winds, and weep in Caves:
To Rocks, to Trees, of Fate complain,
And not pretend to love again.
While Thyrsis never forsook his Sheep,
And scarce could condescend to weep:
Nor sighed in Caves; nor to the Wind,
Nor told the Waves they were unkind;
But once or twice for Custom sighed,
And chose my Sister for his Bride.

Mon. You only was beloved in her:
He saw, and liked your Picture there.
You must confess his Love was due
To her, for what she has like you.
You^re sick, Dorinda; cease your fears.

Dor. See -- He that makes me sick appears.


Mon. No, by these Symptoms I can tell
He comes that is to make you well. Exeunt.

Enter Thyrsis. Damon following at a distance. Thyr. I should not fancy this
Retreat,
This silence, nor this Shade so sweet,
Did not my Thoughts when I am here,
Run all on her I love so dear.
That I would part with all I have;
For some small Hutt or little Cave,
Within the Covert of this Grove,
To spend my Life with her I love.
But she prefers another Swain,
And I Am condemned to love in vain.
When e're we pipe, his Tunes are best,
When e're we dance, it is I Am the jest.
She likes his step, she likes his mein,
And he is the Master of the Green.
The fairest Garlands she can weave,
She thinks not fine enough to give
To him; but what is on me bestowed
Is all too fine, and all too good.
Her Ribbands, and her Crook are his:
Nay, once by chance, I saw 'em kiss.
And yet, alas! I cannot forbear
To love, and serve, and think of her.
Will she then never on me bestow
Part of those Joys she lets him know?

Damon. ( showing himself) No.


Thyrs. What make you here insulting Swain?
Go mind your business on the Plain:
Go feed your Lambs, and watch your Sheep,
It Is true, thou have but few to keep:
But out of few to lose but one,
The loss is great, and you are undone.

Da. And yet, proud youth, tho thou have more,
Who envies thee thy Father's store?
Where-e're thou driv'st thy Flocks to graze,
The Nymphs and Shepherds leave the place.
They hate thy Pipe, and dread thy voice,
Our Lambs are frighted at the noise.
Thy Songs and Dances are at best
The Goatherd's scorn, and Ploughman's jest.
Thy Songs are bad, thy steps are rude;
But we confess thy Flocks are good.
Go watch 'em then, for great^s thy charge,
Thy Herds are vast, thy Pastures large;
Thy Men may sleep, thy Boys may play,
Thy Flocks may rove, thy Herds may stray;
And when thy Flocks and Herds are gone,
Poor Thyrsis thou art quite undone.

Thyr. No more of such disputes as these,
But go, and let me sleep in peace.

Dam. You came not here to sleep to day,
I know your Business, and will stay.

Thyr. There Is Room enough within the Grove:
Go in, and leave me --

Dam. With my Love?
My Cleomira? No, I Will stay,
And make her hear what both can say.

Thyr. Thy Cleomira? You Are a fool
To fancy she can be so dull
As once to think of leaving me,
And all that I possess, for thee

Dam. What reason coud'st thou ever find
To hope the Shepherdess designed
Her self for thee? When e're we play,
From thee she turns her head away:
When e're we dance she chooses me
To take her hand, and frowns on thee.

Thyr. She frowns perhaps to let me know,
She Is vexed at what she is forced to do;
And if she turns her head aside,
It Is more her Modesty than Pride.
Maids use those worst whom they like best,
And where they love they show it least.

Cleomira runs over the Green as from the Wood. Dam. Stay, my Cleomira!


Thyr. Stay!


Da. Hold! You fright the Nymph away.


Thyr. Hold! You fright her: Prithee see
How she looks and turns --

Dam. To me.
Tell me why you are afraid?
Who could hurt so fair a Maid?
Is your Spaniel run away?
Has the Woolf broke in to day?

Cleo. No, but I have been pursued
By two Monsters of the Wood.

Dam. Cease your trouble; never fear;
You are safe, while I am here.

Thyr. Cease your fear, you need not fly,
You are safe, while I am by.

Cleo. Should I trust my self to you,
What coud'st thou pretend to do? To Thyrsis.

Thyr. I could fight,


Dam. And so could I.


Thyr. I could bleed.


Dam And I could dye:


Thyr. I can --


Dam. What you have done before;
Talk of Marriage to a score;
And when all thy Reasons fail,
Think thy Riches will prevail.
I can --

Thyr. Boast of much desert
In bestowing of a heart,
Tho the present must be small
When with that you give your all.

Dam. I have nothing else to plead.


Cleo. Nothing else should here succeed.
Riches take at Court and Town,
Where there is nothing better known;
Love and Constancy must reign
In the limits of our Plain.
We that know what it is to live
On what Nature has to give;
On an Herb, or on a Plant;
How can we Provision want?
Every Wood and every Field
Stores of rich Provision yield;
He, and only he is poor,
Who is ever craving more.
He who thinks his Wealth above
Truth and Constancy in Love.
Let him not infect our Swains,
Let us drive him from the Plains:
Let the Maid, who e're he wooes,
All that he requests refuse --
Let me go, I see the Sun
Declines apace; I must be gone,

Dam. As yet it is high, and you may stay:
The youth will make himself away.

Cleo. You need not fear when Thyrsis grieves;
Dorinda's dead, yet Thyrsis lives --
Nay, let me go; the time is come
That I shall be expected home.
I loyter'd once, and lost a Kid,
And if I stay I shall be chid.

Dam. Must I go too?


Cleo. No, then they will say
That we have agreed to Wed to day.
They will not believe the Satyrs drew
Me here, but I came here for you,
No, Damon, stay; the dangers gone,
And I may venture home alone. Exit.

Dam. While I will to my charge repair,
And see that nothing's wanting there.
You, Thyrsis, too should not forget,
Your Herds are large; your Flocks are great.
You see, it is now too late to sleep,
And you will be wanted with your Sheep.
The Shade's too cool, the Maid is gone;
What then should you do here alone? Ex.

Thyr. Hence with hope, and hence with care!
There Is some comfort in despair.
Now I know the worst is past,
Something good may come at last:
Let me like a man endure
All my Pain, and hope no Cure.
Hope will but increase my grief,
When it is so much past relief;
Hence with hope, and hence with Care,
There Is some comfort in despair.
Oh, how much we do boast in vain
Of the quiets of the Plain!
How we idly talk of ease!
Love, alas! disturbs our Peace:
And where e're the Tyrant dwells,
Be It in Palaces or Cells,
Peace and soft Content remove;
War and Tumult wait on Love.
Once, and I call it often to mind,
I loved a Maid, and she was kind.
Oh! How could I once forget
How soft was every Word, how sweet
Was every Look! For me she chose
To leave her Lambs, to leave her Ews,
To hear me pipe beneath a Tree,
And all her Business was with me. Soft Music. Flutes are heard.
Hah! What friendly Notes are these,
That charm and sooth my mind to peace,
Some happy Swain within the Grove
Has met, and entertains his Love.
Music gives pleasure to the Blessed,
And to the Miserable, Rest.

He lays down on a Bank, while he sleeps a Satyr leaps out, and as he is (...)
to strike, enter Dorinda and Montano. Dorinda comes up and (...)Satyr runs
away. Dor. Hold Villain -- go in, Montano;
Nor stay to see a Virgin^s weakness;
But save my blushes: Stay within,
And, when you see your time, appear. Exit Mont.
He wakes, and as he lifts his Eyes,
They bring those glances to my view
Which charmed me once, and if I gaze
I love and then am lost again.

Thyr. Who talks of love, and being lost?
In words and with a voice so sweet,
That tho it wakes me from a dream
Where I began to taste of joy,
And feel Dorinda in my Arms,
Yet I am pleased.

Dor. Perhaps to be relieved
From Dreams which troubled your repose,
And set a Maid before your Eyes,
Whom you were willing to forget.

Thyr. Thy voice, fair youth, thy looks, prevent
My anger; but whoever thou art
It Is fare unkind to think me false,
Before thou know my guilt.

Dor. I know
You have been guilty, if it is guilt to love
Another while the Virgin lives
To whom you have engaged your heart,
To whom you vowed you would be true,
Till death should part ye -- Did you not?
Yet, ere death parted ye, you changed,
And if to break a vow be guilt,
I know --

Thyr. Nothing; for she I loved is dead,
They told thee false who said I changed
Till death, despair, and one so like
The Nymph I loved, so dear to her,
So kind to every one but me,
That not to love her had been worse
Than not to scorn her when her pride,
Disdained my Sighs; till these prevaild
The lost Dorinda had my heart.

Dor. But if the lost Dorinda lives
Could you pretend to innocence,
Or say you had not broke your Vow?

Thyr. But if the lost Dorinda lives!
Why that? Whence thou? and what thy Name?
Excuse me, lovely youth, from words,
And let me gaze upon thy Charms!
Oh! Every look revives my soul!
I see (or else I Am yet asleep)
The Graces that I loved in her.
But if the lost Dorinda lives!
That word, that last bewitching sound
Strikes to my heart, and to my mind.
Restores so many former joys,
That if thou art not her her self,
Thou art so like her, I forget
My Woes, and all that I have lost
To see thy Eyes, and hear thy voice.

Dor. Oh! Thyrsis. Falls in his Arms.


Thyr. It Is she! Dorinda! let me hold
Thee fast, and if I dream! Oh Heaven
Let me dream still, and never wake.

Enter Montano. Mon. Dorinda.


Thyr. Dorinda lives!


Dor. And Thyrsis loves!
My fears are gone, and joys succeeds.

Mon. You Thyrsis are obliged to me
For what you hear, and what you see.

Thyr. Oh how, Montano? Let me know,


Mon. Be calm, and I will tell you how.
As I this morning watched my Sheep,
While you perhaps was fast asleep,
A youth came to me from the shore,
Whose Face, methought, I Would seen before;
But when he asked me, if I knew
Such Swains, and blushed in naming you,
I kissed him often, and wept for joy,
To see Dorinda in the Boy.
She told me, when we thought her lost,
She safely reached the Delphian Coast.
How she came back, and why she came
In that disguise, and hid her name:
Your Marriage was resolved she heard,
And had she found it as she feared,
She vowed, alas! in that disguise,
To make her life your sacrifice.

Dor. Peace, good Montano, say no more,
For now that all our griefs are over,
Bring no sad Prospects to our view,
Since I am safe, and she is true.

Enter Damon, Cleomira, Shepherds and Shepherdesses. Damon. Thyrsis here so
late as this,
Sure there is something chanced amiss. Music is heard.
It Is past our sleeping time, it is cold,
The Flocks are driving to the Fold.
The Goats are milk'd, and we are come,

Thyr. To sing Dorinda's welcome home.


Cleo. My Sister here disguised!


Dor. The same.


Cleo. Oh say, when, how, and whence you came?


Mon. I brought her here, but when and how
I Will tell you, as we go.

Thyr. But e're we part,
Let each in Songs express his heart;
Let Us dance and sing while we have light,
And talk and kiss away the night.
You Damon, with your Pipe attend,
My Rival once, but now my friend,
The gayest Tune's Dorinda's due,
The gayest Tune must come from you.
To you those honors I resign,
Dorinda only shall be mine.

Mon. Her Welcome, Thyrsis, let us sing,
In Notes as sweet as for the Spring.
As when the Trees begin to bloom,
The Leaves to spread, the Buds to come;
When Vi'lets first the Fields adorn,
And warbling Birds salute the morn;
Feasts, Songs and Dances sill the Plain,
For joy that Summer comes again;
Such let Dorinda's welcome be,
And all rejoice like him and me. To Thyrsis.

SONG
HEr Eyes are like the morning bright,
Her Cheeks like Roses fair,
Her Breasts like Watered Lillies White,
Like Silk her flowing Hair.
II.
Her Breath's as sweet as Odors blown
By Zephirs over the Vales;
Her Skin's as fine as soft as Down,
Her Voice like Nightingales.
III.
Where e're she breathes, where-e're she sings,
How happy are the Groves,
How blessed, how much more blessed than Kings,
The Shepherd that she loves.
Chorus.
With gentle steps let us beat the ground,
In gladsom Couples joined,
For joy that your Dorinda's found,
And Cleomira kind. A Dance of Clowns and Shepherds.
Thyr. Thus merrily we'll homeward move, Exeunt with Music.
While Hill and Vale, and Plain and Grove,
Ring with the sound of joyful Love.

The end of the Pastoral.
ACT II. All without Money. A short Comedy.
Dramatis Personae.
Needmore, a Beau much in debt, given to treating. Mr. Scudamore. Speedwel, his
Man, a Witty, Saucy Valor. Mr. Bower. Theodosia, Needmore's Mistress. Mrs.
Prince. Brother to Theodosia. Mr. Bail. Freeman, Needmore's friend. Mr.
Arnold. Clara, Theodosia's friend. Mrs. Bud. Dorothy, Theodosia's Woman. Mrs.
Lawson. Le S^upe, a French Trai^e^r. Mr. Freeman.
Bailiffs, Tailor, Cooks men, etc.

SCENE the Pall Mall.
Enter Needmore, followed by Speedwel. Need. HEy! Speedwell! Where the Devil's
this Blockhead?


Speed. At your heels, Sir, light enough in Belly and Purse not to lag far
behind. Well, at last your Creditors have their turn; you have made them walk,
and now they make you run.


Need. The worst is, I have been balk'd where ever I went, and cannot raise a
penny.


Speed. Alas, Sir, my heart aches for you; I Am sure my Legs do with following
you; with much fear, but no money, a heavy heart, and a light pair of heels,
you ve made as many doubles to day as any hunted Hare; the truth is, you have
escaped a whole Kennel of Hounds.


Need. Ay, a damned Pack of Dogs had me in the Wind.


Speed. It Is well I had, you in the Wind too, for I should certainly have been
poisoned in some of those damned Alleys we went through. Well, I Am bound to pray
for Persumers the longest day I live: Therefore, sweet Sir, if you have any
kindness for your poor Servant, Pay honest Signor Pulvilio the first.


Need. We have gone through some unpleasant By-ways, I confess.


Speed. Some did you say? Why, no Sculking Scribbler, or Tally-man goes through
more in a week, I think. Then, in the streets, if you but spied some one of
your many Duns, you turned short, run like the Devil, or stepped into some house,
to ask for some body, who, to your knowledge, was not there: Presently after
pushed forward; then, to avoid another, you started, wheeled about, or made a
show of looking on a Wall; now whisk'd through an Inn, next through some blind
passage, till, like a Ship still tacking about, you at last just got -- to the
place from whence you came.


Need. The best Masters of Ships sometimes can do no more.


Speed. You're like a Master of a Ship indeed, for your Rigging and whole Cargo
belong to other men.


Need. To the Devil and your Dogship. He kicks him.


Speed. I beg the Devil's Pardon, and yours, Sir, I had forgot my self.


Need. Yes, you saucy insulting Rascal, and always do.


Speed. I know it, Sir; had I not, I had left you long ago, when you first
saluted me thus for advising you to keep in compass, as my old Master ordered
me. Well, I des^^ve it all, wicked Rogue as I am, for breaking the many Oaths
I Have made to quit your service -- But I am too generous to leave a Gentleman in
distress; and therefore I Will stay till I see you clear, if possible; for, as
for the Salary you owe me, I scarce look for it.


Need. You need not; you are Knave enough to have cheated me of more.


Speed. But I was Fool enough to let you cheat me again the lawful way of Loan
Well, I give that over too; only remember, Sir, a Man may cause his own Dog to
bite him; and when I leave you, all your Creditors, especially Monsieur Le
Diablo, will have more power over you than ever.


Need. Say thou so? Well then, for thy good Nature I will reward thee.


Needmore puts his hand in his pocket. Speed. Ha, ha, hah! Wh^t makes your hand
there? To my knowledge you ha'nt one Cross left. Your breeches are now in the
fashion, a damned deal of Pocket, but no Lining^ You ^ould have taken a Coach
else, but that you feared being served as you (...) was, keep it all day for
want of Money to discharge it, and be obliged to bilk it at night. Your Watch
too is gone, and your fine Snuff Box. The Painted one I have secured [ He pulls
it out, and takes Snuff out of it.] for the pretty Posture's sake, or it had
been gone at Play-last night -- But here it is for you, Sir. Takes Snuff again,
and gives it him.


Need. There, Sir! you love Snuff I perceive. Throws the Snuff in his face.


Speed. Ay, but not so much at once tho. So! Farewell Orangerie and Bergamotte.
Item half a Crown for that; which puts me in mind of about seven pound due for
Snuff, Cards, and Chocolate: And the Fruit-womans Bill too of four pounds odd
money, as conscionable as a Pothecary's. I don't think there is a Chairman or
Coach man you don't owe Money to. I dare say you're already in debt to the
She-Farmers of the Side-Boxes in the Playhouse.


Need. Well, Rascal! What then? half the fine fellows in Town do as much -- I
shall be able to pay my Debts shortly.


Speed. E God, that will not be like half the fine Fellows in Town then -- But I
fear, the Money you expect will go like the rest, 'that is (like, half the fine
Fellows in Town too) you will scorn to pay a farthing of your Debts with it, but
will wisely choose to play it away. -- Well, may I never see money again, if I
believe a Coach and Six could have drawn you off last night, till you had lost
those fifty Guineas, and made your self a clear Gentleman.


Need. It Is true; and it plagues me; for I have invited Theodosia to sup with
me here at my Lodgings to night.


Speed. So! The Devil owed you a shame, and he means to pay you. How do you
think to treat 'em? -- Ha! Let me see! There Is a new Beau-Peruke! Pray, Sir,
how much does that cost upon Rep?


Need. Only 35 Guineas, Sir.


Speed. Zoons! That Is more than head and all is worth. I Am afraid I shall see
you in Jail for Perriwigs and Powder! -- C'me, pull it off, Sir; pull it off,
and put on that you tick'd for before this, and then?


Need. What then?


Speed. What then! Why then, I Will pawn this and treat your Mistress.


Need. Prithee take my head too.


Speed. A Beau's head! Nay then no Broker will take it in -- Well, I find a
good Wig is the very last Moveable^ Beau will part with.


Need. But without fooling, what is to be done now?


Speed. Nothing without fooling: Unless we can fool that testy Cook Le Soupe,
your Guests must chew the Cod, and all of us go supperless to Bed.


Need. You know I shall have a Bill from my Father within these ten days, and
then I Will pay him; so tell him.


Speed. So you told him these ten months -- alas, Sir, you modish people have
no Almanacks, that makes you forget your selves, and play at Cards of Sundays
-- But here comes Mr. Freeman: Be sure you strike him, he is your friend; and to
make him more so, humor him, fawn on him, commend him: Flattery is a sort of
bad Money, for which even the wisest often part part with good.


Enter Freeman. Freem. I came to look you.


Need. My dear, dear Freeman! I Am heartily glad to see you. This is a kindness
beyond my hopes. What can I serve you in? Speak, you know I Am always ready to
serve my Friend, I Am open and free, and you may command me.


Free. I thank you: Let affectation dwell at Court; I Am without somality, your
friend.


Need. 'Twere a Crime to doubt it: But, Complements aside, pray let me know
what brought you hither?


Free. With all my heart. Smiling.


Speed. I must know too. ( aside and peeping.)


Free. You must know, I come to pass away this ^^ening with you.


Speed. So! ( aside)


Need. How unhappy am I, that you cannot! You must pardon me, my dear Friend;
for I expect Company tonight.


Free. Yes, Theodosia: She told me so her self; and entreated me to bring Clara
to sup with you too; of which I thought fit to give you notice, that you might
not be surpised.


^eed. More Guests! But 'twill be at his cost; or e'gad they are like to be
worse surpised. aside.


Free. Well, what say you to this matter.


Speed. Have a good heart, Sir. ( aside to his Master)


Need. You may be sure, you will be all as welcome as I can make you.


Speed. E'gad the welcome he will find, he is like to bring along with him Aside


Free. Then I Am resolved to be merry to night, and drown in Champaign a damned
melancholic humor that hangs upon me.


Speed. Champaign and no Money, I don't like this beginning. ( aside.)


Need. Can you have occasion to be melancholic, you who are the envy of the
Men, and the Darling of the Women?


Free. What a pox, have thou lately been reading the Academy of Complements? If
I did not know thou have money, I should think thou have a mind to borrow
some of me.


Speed. Ten pound to a Supper he lends us none. ( aside.)


Need. Whence proceeds then your being out of humor?


Free. From that which makes every body so, I Have parted with all my money the
old way.


Speed. Oh! Now for a Cordial! It Is well, if he don't ask us to lend. ( aside.)


Need. I Am heartily sorry for your loss.


Speed. So am I too, as I with for a Supper to night. ( aside.)


Free. The loss is not much; it is the manner of it vexes me most, for I lost
all running, without so much us turning a stake.


Speed. Sir, Sir, lend Mr Freeman 10 or 20 Guineas.


Free. By no means, I shall have money to morrow.


Speed. Nay, Sir, you know my Master's always ready to serve his Friend, he is
open and free, and you may command him.


Free. I know it -- But a pox of Fortune I say, she deals us good or bad luck
as she does Stations, or we Cards; Knaves, and Kings shuffled up together. I Am
afraid there were Sharpers in the Company.


Need. That Is not unlikely; they get now into the best: for there are some of
all Ranks. For this, I my self have now forsworn play; tho that is the way to
find the days tedious, and lose one'-interest with half the Beau monde? But I
find that playing on the square is like dealing on the square, the ready way to
be undone. Yet do not curse Fortune, my friend; you should rather pray to her,
she has been, and may be kinder to you.


Free. No, if she is a female, as her sickleness proves her, by a spirit of
contradiction, she will be sure to be kindess to those that respect her least.
Well, adieu till night! We'll come betimes.


Speed. Ay, sooner than welcome, I dare say. ( aside.)


Need. Your Servant. Exit Freeman.


Speed. Faith, Sir, I Am afraid he smoked you.


Need. I hope not. Yet friends when we are in prosperity cleave to us, as
Quicksilver does to Gold; but forsake us alike in the fiery Trial.


Speed. Ay, Sir; those are your Town friends: They Are like your Town Wines and
Town Wenches, e'gad you may try ten before you light on one that is right or
sound.


Need. Well, will you bethink your self how to bring me off from this handsomely?


Speed. I! I cannot tell what to do in it.


Need. What, then will you see me disgraced, and give Theodosia occasion to
frown on me for a month together? Prithee try to get us something to eat.


Speed. It Is vain, Sir; your Creditors are now no fools-Come along with me, and
see if I lie; which if I do, may I be bound to pay your debts, and that I would
not do for half an East India Bribe.


Need. But how shall I get off?


Speed. E'ne do as Ladies do when they are in love with their Doctor, seign your
self sick and take your bed.


Need. Then they will come to see what my Di stemperis, and finding I have no
Fever, presently call for Supper.


Speed. Send for some eminent Physician, he will order you some damned Drench and
make you sick enough.


Need. You know I dread Physic as I do Poison.


Speed. Or a Bailiff - Ay, I had forgot that; there is scarce a Town Spark, but
is as much set against Pills and Bolus, I think, as against Marriage and
Repentance; and that makes 'em delay those three bitter Remedies to the last.
Well then, suppose I pretended you were gone to fight a Duel.


Need. How! shall a Gentleman pretend a Duel?


Speed. Why, it is as common now to pretend 'em as assignations; tho 'twere but
to excuse the wounds get in a pleasanter sort of encounter.


Need. But this false report would frighten Theodosia into real sickness.


Speed. Very good! Go on, I perceive you intend to be a man of your word.


Need. No, prithee tell me what I must do?


Speed. God's Death, Sir, I Would as soon undertake to get you off, when flaster'd,
from a gaming Club, or chatting Mask in the Playhouse.


Need. Well, I will be wholly guided by thee.


Speed. Leave me then; I have a whim in my head may chance to set you free.


Need. Prithee let me know it?


Speed. Ay, as we do a Prophecy, when it has taken effect.


Need. Why will you hide it from me?


Speed. That it may be hid from other people -- What, tell a Beau a secret? a
Chambermaid would not do it. ( aside.)


Need. But it may be some pitiful mean thing.


Speed. A mean thing, and I contrive it!


Need. Let Us consult about it together.


Speed. No consultations, Sir: Two will keep Council if one be away.


Need. I must submit then to your Will and Pleasure.


Speed. You should have considered before you had made the Invitation. 'Sbud,
leave me to my self.


Need. Methinks --


Speed. Leave me, I say; You disturb me worse than a talking Better does a
busy Gamester.


Need. Well, I must endure any thing as matters go now. Exit. Nee^^ore.


Speed. So! Now I command. This it is to serve an unthinking Master. I was kept
to wait on his idleness at the College, and must attend his extravagance in
Town; till with a little more experience, I may set up for my self, get as much
by rooking, as he has lost by fair play, and then look as big on him, as others
formerly of my function do now on their Betters. But in the mean time my brains
must work for his. Stay! I have it! I Will whip over to Theodosia's and put it in
practice. He runs cross the Stage, and knocks at the Door.


Enter Dorothy, Opening the Door. Dor. Oh! Is it you? What Is your business?


Speed. I Would speak with your Lady.


Dor. Is your Business pressing.


Speed. Faith, not at all: I come to know when we may expect her, that Supper
may be ready at her coming; for, you must know, Child, my Master makes no
common entertainment to night.


Dor. I Am glad on it; I love feasting dearly.


Speed. Ay, your mouth waters at the very thoughts on it, like a Chaplain's
preaching grace over a good Dinner.


Dor. But are you in earnest?


Speed. As you were when you lost your Maiden head.


Dor. This pleases me; I love your costly great Treats.


Speed. I understand you; you are always for great things. Come, confess, don't
you love me a great deal;


Dor. Hang Love; let us talk of the Supper.


Speed. The best Love indeed is commonly after that. Well, ours will be an
extraordinary Treat, let me tell you.


Dor. And let me tell you, I Will keep an extraordinary Stomach for it. Take care
to pinch three or four Bottles of the choicest VVines, and secure some of the
best Dishes for us; then if I don't love you, say I Have nothing of a Lady's woman
about me.


Speed. I commend thee. Girl, thy love is in thy Belly: where else indeed
should it be?


Dor. Peace, I hear my Lady coming.


Enter Theodosia. The. How now, Sir! What brings you hither?


Speed. My Master desires to know, Madam, at what hour you will please to
honor him with your Company to night?


The. As soon as it is convenient: Too soon for him, tell him.


Speed. A Witch of my Conscience, if I don't prevent it. ( aside.) -- But,
Madam -- Shaking his head


The. But what?


Speed. I should acquaint your Ladyship with something if I durst.


The. If you durst! Why, is it of such dangerous consequence? If it be, it is
fit I should know.


Speed True, Madam; but the danger is chiefly to me: If my Master should once
come to know what I would fain tell you, murder would ensue.


Theo. Trust me, he shall not know it, as I have honor!


Speed. Ah! Madam; but it is very dangerous.


Dor. What ails the fool? What Is dangerous? To trust a Lady of Quality?


Speed. Yes, on her woman's secrecy.


Theo. No, I Will engage for her. Prithee let us know it.


Speed. Why then, Madam, (but not a word!) Some rascally Neighbors having
seen you twice or thrice coming from my Master's Lodgings, have been pleased to
bestow some uncivil reflections on your Ladyship, for which I have likewise
been pleased to bestow some blows on their Coxcombs.


Dor. What a tale of a Roasted Horse the Rascal tell us! What made you put my
Lady in the head of this.


Speed. I only would caution her, that if she should receive some small affront
as the past to or from us, she would take no notice of it, but to me; for my
Master is certainly the most desperate man on such occasions, that ever 'scap'd
the Law to his years.


Theo. No, no, to prevent the worst, I Will not go at all.


Speed. So! Now Master, thank my wit. ( aside.)


Dor. Well then, Madam, since you will not go to Mr. Needmore's, let the Supper
be brought hither, 'twill do as well.


The. With all my heart! Let 'em bring it.


Speed. O Lord! There this damned greedy Jade has over-reached me. aside


The. Stay I Will have no Supper brought. Do You hear! Let 'em bring none: twill
be too much trouble on both sides.


Dor. Trouble! Why, nothing more easy, Madam.


The. Hold your prating. I say I will not go.


Dor. But how will you excuse your self?


The. I Will pretend I Have the headache.


Dor. That will seem too sudden to be thought real.


Speed. Why so? It often comes suddenly; and I think it is the best pretense you
can use. I Will go and back it.


The. But take care --


Speed. O! for that never trouble your self: Be you but secret, Madam.


The. I will.


Speed. So! now my Master comes off with flying Colors. aside. Ex. Speed.


Dor. Would thy Neck were broke! Thou shamming Rascal -- I fancy this is one
of his projects to hinder us of a good Supper.


Theo. Ay, but I fancy it is by his Masters encouragement, Freeman and Cle^ are
to sup there to night: Now it comes into my head, that Needmore thinks he cannot
so freely entertain Clara, if I am with 'em.


Dor. Do you doubt his love then, Madam!


Theo. I don't know; Men are inconstant, and Clara's handsome -- Well, I Am
resolved I Will spoil their sport to night, for thither I will go.


Exeunt. SCENE Needmore's Lodgings.
Enter Needmore and Speedwel. Speed. Well, Sir, what do you think of my Conduct?


Need. It Is wonderful! Machiavel was but a Type of Speedwell.


Speed. Humh! This is some acknowledgment however.


Need. Prithee haste now to Freeman, and desire him to tell Clara that
Theodosia is taken ill, and the entertainment is put off.


Speed. Who the Devil could have imagined he had had so much sense! Aside. I Will
about it instantly.


Need. Excuse me to him.


Speed. You may be sure on it.


Need. Tell him that --


Speed. Teach a Bully to swear, or a Gamester to cheat! I want none of your
Instructions: What would you have done had it not been for me? Well, when I dye
(for I know I shall leave Money enough of my Wages in your hands) let me have a
Marble Monument, and my Effigies at full length upon it, with these lines
engraved at my Feet, Here Speedwell lies, of Serving-men the top,
Whose matchless Wit was the securest prop
Of a young, thoughtless, wild, expensive --
What rhimes to prop, has? 'Sdeath here comes one will put me to a stop.


Enter Theodosia and Dorothy. Need. Bless me! what are you abroad, Madam? This
Rascal told me --


Speed. Nay, the Rascal told you nothing but truth.


Need. That you were taken with a violent pain in your head.


Theo. Ay; but it is over now; and I came out to divert my self with company.


Dor. See, Madam! a man caught by his Wife with her Woman could not be more
surpised. aside to her Mistress


Need. I wish it ben't too soon, Madam! I fear you may take cold. I would
advise you to let me wait on you back.


Theo. No, no, I Will run the risque of that: I mean to be your Guest to night.


Need. Madam, the thoughts of you are an eternal feast to my Soul; think then
what now your sight is But yet I am most unhappy that I have countermanded
Supper upon notice of your indisposition.


Theo. No matter for Varieties; any little thing will serve my turn.


Dor. A little thing! I hate a little thing. aside. No, Madam, Mr. Needmore
expects Madam Clara --


Need. I did so, from your Ladyships Invitation; but upon the ill (...) sent to
beg her not to come to night.


Dor. If this ben't all a trick, I never knew any. aside to (...)


Theo. One Dish will be enough; you need trouble your self (...)


Need. But what, Madam, if Clara and Freeman should come?


Theo. Why, then lay the blame on me.


Need. But one Dish, Madam, looks so rude, and disrespectful.


Theo. I tell you it is enough: Pray send for it; for here I mean to sup.


Dor. Ay, ay, pray do, Sir; you see my Lady is resolved on t. If you ordered
three or four Dishes it would be ne re the worse; for we both love Suppers. aside
to Need.


Speed. Ay, three or fourscore! ah! thou unseasonable, thou unreasonable
Supper-gut. aside.


Need. Well, Madam, since you are pleased to command it, he shall order one --
Do You hear, go, and get us something. To Speed.


Speed. I fear, Madam, you wont like what I shall bespeak; and I Am very
confident you would highly oblige my Master if you would please to defe^ his
Treat till to morrow night, because --


Enter Freeman and Clara with her Woman. Dor. See, Madam, here are both Mr.
Freeman and Madam Clara!


Speed. Would they were at York! They Are even as welcome as a Tax Collector to a
Grumbletonian. aside.


Cla. You see, my Dear, I am obedient! But what would not I do to enjoy your
company.


The. Rea^^y, my Dear, had it not been for the pleasure of yours, I had supt
elsewhere to night; so Mr. Needmore is wholly obliged to you for mine.


Speed. O! Yes, most damnably, Deformity seize her for it! aside.


Free. Come, Ladies, Compliments apart, let us walk into the next Room, there
we may play till Supper comes.


Speed. Say you so, Sir? E gad then you may play till you starve. aside.


Cla. I hope it will not be long, for I ve a very good stomach.


Need. I fear you will have but a slender Entertainment; but this Lady is the
cause of it. They all go in except Speedwel.


Speed. Ay, and they will be damnably slender too, if they stay till it comes
They will find all as cold within, as a Citizen's Country House in Winter. But
what means my wise Master? He leaves me to bear the brunt? It Is commonly so:
The Master gets the Maid with Child, and the Man m^^^ marry her: Nay, pox on
him, if he is so regardless of his own business, why should I perplex my self?


Enter Needmore. Need. Speedwel!


Speed. Sir?


Need. What shall I do?


Speed. Faith, Sir, I cannot tell: I want some of that which damns Lawyers and
all the world; for without money I can do nothing; all your Creditors count me
a Cheat and a Rogue.


Need. Try if you could not prevail with Le Soupe.


Speed. I Have tried him often enough: You had as good beg in Dutch, and that you
know is a very speeding Language.


Need. But what shall I do with these people within?


Speed. Nay, look you to that.


Need. I wish they were out of the House!


Speed. Is this all you would have?


Need. That Is all.


Speed. O! that is easy enough. Do but seem somewhat frighted and disturbed:
Leave the rest to me.


Need. But what must I pretend is the cause of my being so?


Speed. No Dispute, Sir. Mind you your part, and I ll play mine, never doubt
me. Exit Speed.


Need. What the Devil he is going to do, I cannot imagine. It Is a sharp designing
Rascal, and I must let him alone at present. Sure the Rogue will take care of
my Reputation. I am now in his Power, and the Villain knows it but too well,
for which in time he shall feel mine.


Enter Theodosia, Clara, Freeman, Speedwel, and Dorothy. The. My Brother
wounded! Did you see him, Speedwel?


Speed. No, Madam, but I heard so.


The. Where did you hear it, and from whom?


Speed. At the corner of our street, from a crowd of People. Some were saying
he was dangerously wounded, others, that they feared his Wound was mortal.


The. Give me my Scarf.


Speed. So! It works rarely!


The. My Scarf quickly! I hope, Mr. Needmore you will not leave me in this
misfortune!


Need. No misfortune could make me leave you, Madam. Taking her hand.


Free. Stay. He Is here himself.


Enter Brother to Theodosia. The. O my dear Brother! We heard you was almost
killed.


Bro. They Are somewhat uncivil who killed me without letting me know it. Why, I
have not had the least quarrel: Who was the Reporter of this?


Theo. Speedwell.


Speed. I heard it at the corner of our street, Sir, from a crowd of people,
who named you, described you, said you was run through the Body, and, like me,
pitied you extremely.


Bro. You see I am as dead as any man alive: I dined at the Blue-Posts, where I
stayed till now.


Speed. Borrow of him if you can. aside to his Master.


Theo. And where they made you play, I warrant?


Bro. No, for I lent all my Money to a friend, who played and lost it.


Speed. So! This Commodity of Money is as scarce among these people, as
Virginity in a Playhouse. ( aside.)


Tho. Pray what brought you hither?


Bro. I heard at home y^u were come hither to Supper, so I came to take a bit
with you; for I hate as much to sup alone, as most people do to lie alone; you
know, nothing balks a good Stomach like that.


Speed. So! Customers come in apace! But e'gad, if you're not worse balk'd
here, I Will be bound to treat you a twelve month. ( aside)


Need. Be pleased to walk in there.


The. Ay, come, for he must give orders.


Bro. Hark you, nothing the more for me, I charge you.


Need. No, no.


Speed. Nor nothing the less, I dare promise him. ( aside)


Bro. If you do, I Will never be so free with you again. They all go in except
Needmore and Speedwel.


Need. Speedwel! Shows him by his Fingers how many Guests he must treat.


Speed. Sir? Answers him by signs.


Need. What never a word of Comfort?


Speed. Alas, Sir, all things runs so contrary, I vow I Am afraid you said your
Prayers this morning.


Need. Is there no getting them out of the House?


Speed. Be ruled by me, and I warrant you we'll do it.


Need. As how? Tell me, my dear dear Dog!


Speed. Why, set your Lodgings of fire.


Need. Ay, but it is dangerous.


Speed. Dangerous! What a pox, would you go to Heaven in a Coach with a Wench
in your Arms? No, you must take some pains, run some hazard -- Well, in short,
I have but one stratagem more.


Need. Have thou one more then? Oh! Tell it me quickly!


Speed. Pretend your pocket was picked this morning of all your Money; and that
you're fallen out with Le Soupe, and have no Credit any where else.


Need. That Is well enough too: But then I fear I shall displease Theodosia. Ay,
ay, that will certainly disoblige her for ever.


Enter Catherine, Clara' s Woman. Cath. Sir, you're wanted within.


Speed. Ay, and without too: Pox on her! Our Plot is spoilt again. ( aside


Need. I come -- Exit Woman. What shall I do, I am going to be horribly handled.


Speed. If they are for tossing you in a Blanket, I Will take a corner. Stay, what
do you think of giving your self to the Devil?


Re-Enter Woman. Cath. Sir, I Am sent again.


Need. (...), cannot come yet. Exit Woman.


Speed. Once more, if you will take my Counsel, walk off and leave 'em.


Need. I dare not.


Speed. Nay then take your own measures. But look you, Sir, here is Le Scupe.


Enter Le Soupe. Speed. Try, if you can work him to any thing of good nature:
for my part I found him more fawcy than a Bailiff.


Le Sou. Sir, your humble Servant! I hope your honor has got some money for me
now.


Need. O my worthy friend, Mr Le Soupe! Ay, ay, Monsieur, within this Fortnight
I Will pay thee every penny.


Le Sou. Ay, Sir, but in the mean time --


Need. Why, in the mean time I shall only desire you to let me have a pretty
genteel Entertainment f^^ some Friends that I Have here to night.


Le Sou. I have entertained too many of your friends already, Sir, to my cost.
Zoons! I have been as patient as a Grocers hall Creditor -- But I find, that
between promising and performing, a man's Walls may be as naked as the roof, and
his Back as bare as the naked truth.


Need. But now my Word shall be as good as my Bond.


Le Sou. I believe you. I would not take either of 'em for a sorry English
black Pudding.


Enter Brother. Bro. ( At the Door.) Needmore, a word with you.


Need. I Am coming -- dear Le Soupe, let me entreat this one kindness of you:
I Will give you a Note under my hand.


Le Sou. What, never to pay me?


Bro. They Are out of all patience within.


Speed. He Is speaking to the Cook, Sir.


Bro. Never put your self to unnecessary Charges! One Dish will be enough.


Need. Well, you shall have no more. Exit Brother.


Speed. No more than you have now, I dare engage. ( aside)


Need. Dear Le Soupe, let me prevail with thee. I shall have a Bill from my
Father's for 500 l. within this Fortnight, and then I Will pay thee upon my
honor.


Le Soupe. You Have pawned that so long ago, like many more, I dare say, you
do'nt think it worth redeeming! Look you, Sir, there never was less money, nor
more need of it; your words without that are like treating a man with a Fiddle
when he wants a Dinner. Upon the word of a Cook, I will send some friends of
mine to you presently; and so, Serviteur. Exit Le Soupe:


Speed. Ah diable je r'nie -- Will you go, Sir? And I Will provide for their
Entertainment. You know my Lord Title, what if he should protect you.


Need. Who?


Speed. Why, he who with 200 a year, has 300 protected servants? Ex. Speed.


Need. I scorn it --


Enter Bailiff in Woman's Clothes. Need. Hah! What Strapper's this? She looks
as much like a Bawd as a Catch-pole looks like a Rogue. ( aside)


Bay. Pray, Sir, how may I speak to Squire Needmore?


Need. He Is a little engaged at present, Madam; but if you please, I Will deliver
any message to him.


Bay. I must do it my self, Sir; for so I promised the Lady.


Need. Is your business from a Lady then?


Bay. Yes, Sir.


Speed, ( Peeps in) Ha! What Is here? A Woman? I Will listen, whatever h^^
business is. ( aside)


Bay. Are you the Gentleman, Sir?


Need. My Name's Needmore, Madam.


Bay. Then, Sir, pray give me leave to Arrest you, at the Suit of Mr Extortion
the Scrivener.


Speed. 'Sdeath, he will be buried alive! I must prevent it. ( aside and steps
out.)


Need. Is not he ashamed to take me up for the Principal? Why, I have not been
able to pay the use. None but a Knave would Arrest a man these times.


Bay. These times! why they are the best times in the World, for us. But, look
you, Sir, since you say there is nothing to be got of you, and you plead
poverty, in Charity, as I Am an Officer, I would avoid troubling you. Come, I Will
have but 5 Guineas Civility Money, and then you shall choose whether you will run
away from me, or I from you.


Enter Speedwel with a Sponge full of Ink: He comes behind the Bailiff and
blinds him with it. Speed. Who am I? Guess, Mistress Jenny.


Bay. I don't know. Let me go. ( struggling)


Speed. I Will wash your Eyes, Madam; 'twill clear your Eyesight.


Bay. 'Sdeath I Have lost my Prisoner.


Speed. Prisoner! Cry mercy! I Am mistaken, I took you for an honest Friend.
Exeunt Speedw. and Needmore.


Bay. Zoons! Where were your Eyes? I Am a Bailiff! Oh! He has put out my Eyes.
Stop him! Help! Murder! Setter, Sweet'n'em, Spunger, Dogbolt, where are you?
Help, help. Exit Bailiff groping.


Re-enter Needmore and Speedwel. Speed. The Rogue has grop'd out his way --
Now, Sir, run in, shut the door after you, and show your self, while here I
study to bring you off: Don't seem concerned; Do as Whores, Plotters, and
Tradesmen do, within a day of running away, put a good face upon the matter.


Need. I must. Exit Needmore.


Speed. Now must I shut the door, and cudgel my Brains again -- Hah! There Is Le
Soupe's Man! I Will cudgel the Rascal first, but [ after Sauce is come in,
Speedwel shuts the Door.] I must keep out his followers.


Enter Sauce with a Cloth. Sauce. Where Is your Master.


Speed. There Is yours, you Setting Dog: There Is payment: There Is Rake's Money:
There Is new fashioned Coin for you. Speed. beats him with a Cudgel.


Sauce. Oh hold! Hold! Hear me! My Master's sending half a dozen Dishes hither,
Mar.


Speed. How! Art thou in earnest?


Sauce. As you were with me now. He was out of humor; but he has bethought
himself, sent me to lay the Cloth, and beg your Master's pardon.


Speed. Then I beg thine. Come, let us do it quickly, dear Sauce -- But what
made him thus out of humor? They draw the Table and spread the Cloth.


Sauce. Why, many things; a Steward put him off till next year for denying him
treble Poundage of a Bill of 5 years standing. Then some Officers pawned two
Masks for a seven pound reckoning, and all their Clothes will not yield forty
Shillings.


Speed. Poor Devils. They work hard for 'em, and ten to one but they were
borrowed too.


Sauce. Then, Sir John Rattle bespoke a fine Dinner, and never came. Six
topping Sparks had the Guinea ordinary, then bid us set it down, and broke a
Waiters head for muttering at it; and 4 tearing Beaus took the best room,
called up all the house, asked for all varieties in Season, had a deal of
attendance, and at last dined on Small-ale, and a Cutlet.


Speed. And upon tick. Well, now the Cloth is laid, prithee go and hasten your
men


Sauce. I will Exit Sauce Speed. lets him out, and peeps.


Speed. Stay, let me look out sharp; I fear my She-Bayliff's Crew -- Hah! Are
you thereabouts -- I Will shut this door, and call my Master -- Oh! Here he is --


Enter Needmore Need. Ah! Dear Speedwel, thou have got us something, I find.


Speed. I have not time to talk of that yet. Off with your Upper Geer.


Need. How! Speed. throws down his own Hat and Wig, and his Masters; Needmore
lays his hand on his Sword.


Speed. Nay, it is no matter for drawing it, I must have that too.


Need. What Is the meaning of this?


Speed. There are more Rogues below, and I know best how to use the Sword.
Come, uncase, uncase. Speedwel pulls off his own Coat, throws it down: Then
helps his Master off with his, then dresses in his Clothes. Your Clothes fit me
so so; you're almost as well shipped as my self -- Come, Sirrah! Take up these
habiliments, and dress. Dress quickly, and observe your Masters motion. [
Struts about.] Now do I fancy my self a Master already. Why not? E'gad many of
ours are little better than Footmen out of Livery; and this seems to show they
may be more akin to some of us than they think. To himself.] Come, follow me.


Need. But what will your Honor do with Theodosia and the rest of 'em?


Speed. I Will set 'em going presently. [ Knocking at the outward door.] But
first get into the Closet, I Have locked the inner Door, your Guests cannot come
after us. [ Need. gets into the Closet] -- Now come in who will. [ Opens
the other Door, and two Bailiffs disguised like Porters come in.


Enter 2 Bayliff's dressed like Porters, carrying a large Basket covered with a
Cloth. 2 Bay. An't please your honor, we bring this from Mr. Le Soupe's.


Speed. Lay it down.


3 Bay. Ay, to take you up -- [ A head-Bayliff starts out of the Basket.] I
have two Writs against you, Sir. They take away his Sword.


Speed. Against me? Demme, at whose Suit? In a counterfeit voice.


3 Bay. Mr. Le Soupe, and Mr. Cabbage your Tailor.


Speed. Cabbage! I don't know the Thief, confound me!


3 Bay. That may be, some of you are so long in your Taylor's Books, they are
commonly forgot before they are paid: You shift 'em as often as you do new
Suits, and Lodgings -- Come along.


Speed. Prithee, Fellow, let us talk first.


3 Bay. I Will talk with you when you're out of Debt. Demme, would you have us
Gentlemen Officers wait as long as your Tailors Bills? Come away, or let us see
some Money, and we'll be civil. For a Guinea an have we'll keep you till you have
sent for Bail.


Speed. Damned Scoundrels! Was ever a man of Quality used thus.


Bay. Ay, and worse, what is quality to us? -- Run to the Office Manhound,
search if there be more Writs out, inform his Creditors; we'll be well paid
for it. aside to one of the Bailiffs.


Speed. Demme, I don't owe any man Two pence: Whom do you take me for?


3 Bay. You are Squire Needmore; we know you well enough.


Speed. Ha, ha, ha! You silly Dogs you! You know me as little as you do
Breeding. Demme, I shall catch you by the five pound Act.


Enter Cabbage. 3 Bay. O, Master Cabbage, you're come in good time: We Have taken
this Gentleman, who denies that he is called Squire Needmore.


Cab. No more he is not. Beg his pardon, and let him go: But methinks I Have seen
his face before now.


3 Bay. Noble Sir, we beg your Honor's Pardon. Gives him his Sword again, and
Speedwel strikes him with it.


Speed. Go, you Dags, Needmore is far enough by this time, your Game is out of
your reach.


3 Bay. We shall catch it at last: Our Game is better than the Beasts you hunt,
yet we don't so often miss on it.

Exeunt Bailiffs and Cabbage; Speedwel shuts the door after 'em
Enter Needmore. Speed. Come, Sir, the Coast is clear. He undresses, and
Needmore and he puts on their own Cloths again.


Need. That Is well, my diligent Mercury. But oh! Theodosia, and the Supper.


Speed. The first shall go hence presently, and the last I Am sure will not come
hither to night -- But, get you in again, Sir, and dress; and, by that time
you have done, come to 'em. But first give me notice with a hemh, that you are
coming: For just then I will pronunce the Charm that shall set 'em all a
flying. He unlocks the Door of the Inner Room.


Need. Dear Conjurer, be sure it be a powerful one. Exeunt.


Enter Theodosia, Clara, Brother, Freeman, Dorothy, and Catherine. Free. Where
the Devil's this Needmore all this while?


Bro. Playing the extravagant in providing us a Feast, I warrant you.


Theo. Methinks this long absence of his looks like rudeness: he might have
sent his Directions for the Supper by his man.


Dorothy. That man of his is a sneaking Devil, and the very Emblem of Hunger,
he would purposely have forgot half his orders, to have starvd us: But now we
shall have an extraordinary Supper.


Enter Speedwel. Theo. Oh here he is! Where Is your Master?


Speed. Madam, I Am afraid he will be here before I Have made a discovery to you
that concerns your health, your Beauty, and perhaps your Life.


Theo. What mean you by this discourse?


Dor. Mean Madam? Why he means to play your Ladyship some Trick.


Theo. I hope not; tell us quickly, good Speedwell.


Speed. To show you then Ladies that I value your Lives more than my own, I
shall tell you, though my Master looked Death with every Frown -- Need. peeps in
and hems.


Speed. Our Landlady's Daughter lies sick of the Small-Pox-over-head.


Theo. and Clara. Good Heaven defend us!


Enter Needmore. Need. How Is that, you Dog?


Bro. It Is false, is it not?


Need. Would I could say it were! But what should cause this Villain to
discover this to these Ladies? I knew on it but an hour ago; and wished 'em in
some other House, (knowing they dread the Smallpox) but durst not let 'em know
why, lest the Fear of that fatal Disease should make this Lady deprive me a
while of the Blessing I enjoy in seeing her.


Theo. Oh barbarous Man! Thy Servant has more Honor than thou. -- I Will not
stay here a Moment. Is this the Care you ought to have of our Healths?


Need. But Madam --


Theo. Not a Syllable; I shall be afraid to hear or see you this Fortnight. Be
sure keep out of my Sight till then. Come Brother, your Hand.


Need. Well Madam, I Will not stay a Minute in Town, while I may not see what I
value most in it. I Will into the Country, and there stay my time for Product:
Too much punished by so cruel an Absence.


Cla. Ah, Mr. Needmore, have a care how you expose young Ladies again to such
Hazards. Mr. Freeman, you must continue my Convoy -- I Will swear I Am very
hungry. Ex. Theo. and Brother, Clar. and Freem.


Dor. So am I too! Well, it is always so: I never fared worse than when I wished
for my Supper.


Speed. Remember Child, Abstinence is wholesome. We English, they say, dig our
Graves with our Teeth.


Dor. Peace, you meagre Chaps, I have a Saying for yours. A hungry Belly has no
Ears.


Sp. And good reason why; because Words will not fill it.- But see they are gone.


Dor. Would they would staid. I a'n't afraid of the Smallpox. Ex Dor. and Cla.


Speed. No nor of the great ones. -- Well Sir, they are fled, and it is fit we
should. Hunger is doing the Somerset in my Guts. E gad my Belly is as empty as
my Pockets -- Come, I Will have you to a Place, where, as well as at many others,
they will take the Rascally Servant's Word, though not the honorable Master's.


Need. Well, this has made me so sensible of my former ill Conduct, that from
this Moment I Will reform, pay my Debts, and regulate my Expenses by my Income.


Speed. Ay, do Sir, and then I shall be paid. -- Cut your Coat according to
your Cloth. Remember, Fools make Feasts, and wise Men eat 'em: My Son, keep
Money in thy Pocket. (I am damnably full of old Saws!)

Well, mind one more, to free you from Disaster,
And let your Purse for ever be your Master! Exeunt.

The End of the Comedy.
ACT III. HERCULES. A MASQUE. Set to Music by Mr. John Eccles.
The singing Actors in the MASQUE.
Hercules, Mr. Redding. Omphale, Mrs. Boman. Dejanira, Mrs. Willis Two of
Hercules's Children, Mis. Bradshaw. Jemmy Laroche. Nesica, Mrs. Perrin. Chorus
of Lydians, Singers and Dancers.
A Symphony with Trumpets, Kettle-drums, Hautboys, etc: Enter Hercules, and a
Chorus of Lydian Men and Women, who line both Sides of the Stage; Omphale among
them. Chorus of Lydians. VVElcome to the Lydian Court,
Great Alcides, still victorious,
Still more glorious,
Earth's Defense, and Heaven's Support!
Welcome to the Lydian Court.

Two Lydians. "By thee the worst of Monsters fell: "All the Lines marked thus
are lest cut in the Singing, lest the Entertainment should "be too long.

"By thee was curbed the Power of Hell:
"By thee on Earth Astraea rules again:
"The Toil and Glory thine, the thankful World's the Gain.

Here, to the Crowd. Hence Slaves, still crowding to caress,
Not Manly Virtue, but Success.
"Why must I be star'd at by you,
"As if I were a Monster too?
Why gazes on me every Eye,
When a more conquering Object's by?
Why sing my Triumph, when a single She,
A single Look has vanquished me? Omphale offers to go, seeing him bow to her.

Herc. Bright Omphale, in Pity stay,
Oh let me gaze, and gaze Eternity away.

Omph. "Why should I be gazed on by you,
"As if I were a Monster too?

Herc. "Why should I be thus shunned by you,
"As if I were a Monster too?

Herc. We Soldiers are blunt, and awkardly woo;
But though we cannot talk, you will find we can do.
A thousand hard Labors I Have conquered with Ease;
But think it much harder one Woman to please.
Yet here I stand ready, to try, when you will,
If one Woman's Wishes a Man may fulfill.

Omph. All you Men, when Love is new,
Promise much, but little do.
You in Search of Blessings run,
Which alas you quickly shun.
Should we cheap our Favors make,
You Would but conquer to forsake.
Lest our Slaves our Tyrants grow,
Little Freedom we bestow.

Herc. To try me and exert your Sway,
Speak, and, by Jove, I will obey!

Omph. Then learn to spin; it is all I ask.


Herc. For Hercules a very pretty Task!
It Is odd, it is odd, it is wondrous odd!
Malicious Love, resistless God!
But I have sworn, and then I burn,
And now my Club must Distaff turn.
I know by this I Am turning Fool,
And so we are all, while Women rule.

Enter Lydia and Nesica, two of Omphale' s Women, with two spinning Wheels,
brought in by two Men, who take them out to dance, and in the Dance they turn
the Wheels with diverse Postures, and Motions. Omph. "Come grieve no more for
turning Fool
"Than did your Sire for turning Bull.
"Love grows fiercer by Denials,
"Love, like Gold's refined by Trials.
"Doubts and Fears new Heat inspire.
"Melting Tears enrage the Fire;
"Sighs, like Wind, still blow it higher.
"Cruelty awake must keep
"Love, which Kindness lulls asleep.
"Off with your rough Attire of War;
"You must for softer Arts prepare. Exit Omphale.

Some of Omphale' s Attendants, strip Hercules of his Lyon's Skin, and put him
on a white Hood, a Night-Rail, and a white Bib-Apron; then they cap his Club
with Flax, and set a Spinning-Wheel before him -- he makes sad Faces all the
while. Herc. Well then if I must learn to spin,
And be a Coxcomb, let us begin.
Nesica showing him how to spin. Thus -- you must whirl about your Wheel;
Thus -- wet, and twist, and fill the Reel.

Lyd. "Come, spin out your Clue.


Herc. "God's Death, all is entangl'd! plague on it; it will not do.

Lydia and Nesica beat him with their Distaffs. "Come, spin out your Clue.

Herc. "Hold Women, hold; I never knew
"A Man could be a Match for two.
Enter Dejanira with Children and other Attendants. Oh, you treacherous Knave!
Oh you Villain, you Slave!
What, do I surprise you,
Your Wenches and you? e'Faith, I Will disguise you.
Let me reach 'em!
I Will teach 'em
To make themselves common,
And wrong me, not dreading the Rage of a Woman.
What, take you their Part?
I could tear thy false Heart.
"At home you still grumble,
"And though mighty abroad, there your Courage is humble;
"Still dull with your Spouse, and still gay with another,
"You make every Whore but your poor Wife a Mother.
Oh you treacherous Knave!
Oh you Villain! you Slave!
Two of Hercules' s Children sing in a crying Tone. Heh! hoh! pray, Sir, pray
now come!
With my Mother pray go home.

A Boy. All Night she makes her Moan,
She cannot lie alone.
As in her Arms I lay,
The Night you went away,
She sighed, and, with a Tear,
Cried, oh would it were my Dear.

A Girl. She over her Pillow weeps,
And hugs it as she sleeps;
Then, waking, with a Tear,
Cries, Would it were my Dear,

Both together. Heh! hoh! pray Sir, pray now come;
With my Mother pray go home.

Herc. Behold the Blessings of a married Life,
In bawling Children, and a scolding Wife!
"Poor Husbands the Noise of their Vexons must fly;
"If Juno but scold, even Jove leaves the Sky.
Like Furies they bellow, and rave, if we stray,
Yet still by their Clamours they drive us away:
"With Dragons and Devils I Would venture a Strife,
"But I dare not encounter that greater, my Wife.
Hercules offers to go. Dejanira holding him. Stay cruel Man; and e're you fly
me,
E're I my latest Farewell take,
Oh do not one poor Wish deny me!
Wear this more proper Garment for my sake!

She shows him a Vest and Shirt. Herc. Well, since you're milder, I comply.
Exit to put on the Shirt and Vest. One of Hercules' s Children dances for joy
that her Father is putting on the Shirt, which Dejanira has been told will
restore her his Love. Then Herc. reenters.
Herc. Your Vest is on, Thanks, Wife! and so god b'w'ye
At Night Arrears I Will satisfy. They all go out except Hercules. Hercules
feeling a sudden Heat.
It Is warm, -- it is hot, -- it is wondrous hot --
I Am scorched -- I fry -- I burn -- Oh strip me -- Give me Air --
The stubborn Vest obeys me not:
I cannot bear it --
Let me tear it,
Though with my Flesh, my Heart and Soul I tear.
In vain I strive; the Bosom-Traytor cleaves the more,
And spreads a more than Hell through every sucking Pore.
And now the flaming Poison gains
My Nerves, my Veins,
My Lungs, my Heart, my Brains --
Help! Water! Rivers! pour a Flood!
A Deluge scarce will quench the Fire that drinks my Blood.
He sinks on the Ground. Ah me! Ah, poor Alcides! wretched Man!
I sink, I faint, I die with Pain.
He starts up suddenly. Now with ten thousand Stings I suffer Life again.
"Run, haste, bid Neptune bring the Sea
"To save the World and me.
Wake sleeping Jove; It Is I that call.
Collect the Clouds, and squeeze 'em into Showers;
Or quench the Flame which thy Son's Heart devours
With thy less dreadful Thunder's fall.
"Rouse, idle Tenants of the Sky!
"Must I implore, and you deny?
Rouse; or on my own Fires I Will fly;
I Will dash to Air your Beings with a Stroke,
And, siring Ocean, Earth and Sky,
Entomb the World in everlasting Smoke.
See! Trembling Heaven assists for fear.
Behold a Fire! I Will cool me the e -- A Poetical Heaven appears in Perspective,
and a Fire under it.
Flames quench my Flames -- Hark! From the Heavenly Hall
I hear the beck'ning Thund'rer call --
I hear the Music of the Skies -- He flings himself into a Fire.
I come, I mount, my Spirit flies,
While my maternal Earthy Being dies. -- He dies.
The Attendants who sometimes appeared during Hercules' s Complaint, and were
frighted away by his Rant, return toward the End of his Rapture; and when it is
over, begin the following grand Chorus.
Grand Chor. Rejoice; Alcides lives on high:
Thus Heroes claim their Kindred Sky.
Through Fiery Trials thus the Soul must fly.
He ever lives who does not fear to dye.

The End of the Masque.
ACT IV. The Unfortunate Couple. A short Tragedy.
SCENE Lions.
Dramatis Personae.
Grammont, A Man of Quality. Mr. Betterton. Elvira, His Lady. Mrs. Barry.
Dampierre, His Kinsman. Mr. Freeman. Lysette, Elvira's Woman. Mrs. Lawson.
Leonora, Grammont's Sister. Ms. Boman. La Roche, Grammont's Servant.
SCENE A House.
Dam. LUst of Revenge! Mad Child of slighted Love!
Thou driv'st me, like thy Parent, to this House;
But not with Hopes so sweet. Yet I must on.
Elvira, loved by me, has cast me from her,
With insolent Reproof,
And all the Spite of a damned virtuous Wife.
She may complain of me to her Grammont. I must prevent her.
For favoring me, her Woman must to morrow
Be turned away: But we have this Night to plot.
The Creature's as revengeful too as I.
So when my cred'lous Kinsman Grammont comes
To his fond Wife to Night, with this false Letter
She shall so raise the Jealousy I Have kindled,
That Mischief will be great, and I revenged.

Enter Lysette. Lys. Well, Sir, the Letter.

Dam. There -- 'Twas writ to me, Gives it her.
To come to her, before she knew I loved her:
But I Have torn out my Name, and part of it:
Tear the rest with your Teeth when Grammont meets you.
Thus if he looks on it here and there a Word,
Backed with your feigned Surprise will make him think
'Twas sent to Montigny, as you must tell him.

Lys. Enough; go in; leave me to watch his coming.

Dam. Succeed; Dampierre has Gold waits to reward thee. Exeunt.

Enter Grammont, and a Page before him with a Flambeau. Gram. Business, unlucky
Business, long has kept me
From my Elvira. Though all late as it is,
Methinks some dark ill-boding Fancy seems
To tell me, it is too early yet, to seek
Those Joys I ever found in her dear Arms.
A strange unusual Damp has seized my Soul;
And I, who use with cager Joy to fly
To my Elvira, have now scarce the Strength,
Or Will, indeed, to move one step that way.
Oh Dampierre! Dampierre! what was thy Design!
Since I left thee, my working Thoughts have been
In a perpetual hurry: Thou, alas!
Have poisoned all my dearest Joys,
And in my troubled Mind laid the Foundation
Of eternal Doubts! Perplexing, gnawing, killing Doubts!
And yet, I know thee, Dampierre, base, of a poor, mean,
Low Spirit too, and so capable of any Mischief.
Why then should thou gain Credit with Grammont?
No, from my Memory henceforth I chase
Thee, and each Thought of thy base Treachery.
Grammont's too happy in a virtuous Wife
And generous Friend -- But, hark! What Noise is that?
A noise of opening a Door, and Lysette enters, who seeing Grammont, pretends
to avoid him, he stops her; and turning up her Hood, sees her tearing a Letter
with her Teeth. Oh! it is the Door opens. Hah! Who art thou that steal'st away
So guiltily! Nay, I must see -- Lysette! Whither away
At this unseasonable Time of Night?
And what Paper's that thou mumblest so?

Lys. Alas! I am undone! Pardon me, Sir! O pardon me, I beseech ye.

Gram. Would have me pard'n thee ever I know thy Fault?
Confess, and then perhaps thou may deserve it.

Lys. O never, never! All that I desire
Is, that you would be so just as to believe
Me only guilty; for on my Life my Lady's innocent.

Gram. Hah! Thy Lady! Speak what of her?

Lys. Why, she, I do declare to all the World,
Is innocent, by all that is Good she is!
Nay, were I to die next minute,
My Tongue should end my Story with that Truth.

Gram. I ask not of her Innocence; but tell me,
And tell me truly, as thou hop'st for any Mercy from me,
Whither we'rt thou stealing with that Letter, and what were the Contents of it?

Lis. For Heavens sake, and for your own, Sir, press me no further.
Here on my Knees I beg you would not.

Gram. Hah! do thou dally with me?
Come, speak quickly, or, by Heaven thou dy'st.

Lis. Do with me what you please; but force me not,
I do beseech you, to a Confession, that --

Gram. What? Speak, I say; tell me what was that Paper?
To whom directed, and from whom?

Lis. Alas, I die for fear.


Gram. If thou continu'st obstinate,
Not all the World shall save thee from my Fury.

Lis. It was --


Gram. What was it? Speak, I say.


Lis. It was a Letter.


Gram. From whom?


Lis. It was a Letter from my Lady --


Gram. Well said; to whom?


Lis. To -- Yet Sir, excuse me, I conjure you.


Gram. Ah! more trifling! Out with it boldly, or --


Lis. 'Twas to Montigny, Sir; your best and dearest Friend Montigny.


Gram. To Montigny! was it to Montigny, that Elvira sent thee
With that Letter, at this unseasonable Hour?

Lis. It was: But why should that so much disturb you?
A petty Quarrel parted 'em in the Evening,
When, though Montigny humbly su'd for Pardon,
She would not grant it, till at last, good Lady,
Repenting her Severity, she could not rest,
Till she had given him an Assurance under
Her Hand, that what he then so earnestly
Desired, was now as freely granted; and --

Gram. Peace, Screech owl! Peace, thou rank Messenger of Lust!
By Heaven I know not why I do not kill thee.
Hence from my Sight! away! Exit Lysette.
But which Way now, wretched Grammont, will thou
Direct thy wandering Steps? Where ever thou go
Destruction, Horror, and Amazement will attend thee.
thy faithful Ears, deaf to all other Tales,
Will turn each Sound into this one sad Story,
Elvira's false, Montigny's false; and now
Grammont's become the Scorn of all the World.
Oh, it is too much for Mortal Man to bear.
By Heaven I Will make my sad and just Revenge
As signally notorious as my Wrongs.
But hush. Be still y'unruly Passions of
My Mind; and think Grammont, that to revenge
Is but the way to publish thy Disgrace.
Patience then, oh Patience! grant me, just Heaven, more Patience;
Or take from me that li^^le I am yet Master of;
And in Return, bless me with Madness, eternal Madness;
Madness without one Minute's Interval of Sense.
Grief, Rage, Despair, possess my tortured Mind.
Make me but mad, ye Gods, and you will be kind. Exit.

Enter Dampierre and Lysette Dam. So, all goes well. I watched, and heard, and
joy'd.


Lys. Yes, yes, all yet goes wondrous well indeed;
But what the End will be, for my part I cannot guess.

Dam. No matter: Let there be no End at all,
But that which puts an End to all things; Death.
Oh, may Confusion, Rage, Despair,
And everlasting Jealousy attend 'em to their Graves.

Lys. Amen, say I; But yet suppose they should at last came
to a right Understanding; what would become of me, I pray?
Were it not better, think you, to decamp
In time, and leave 'em to themselves?

Dam. By no means; that would make 'em presently
Smell out thy Roguery and their own Error.
Rather be more diligent, and more assiduous
In your Attendance now than ever.
Consult their Looks: For till you find the Weather
Clearing there, you need not fear a Storm.
And then at last it will be time enough to fly.
In the mean time, here, Thou have been
Industrious, and do deserve Encouragement. Offers her a Pair of Gloves.

Lys. A paltry Pair of Gloves, I Will warrant you. Foh! I Will have none of 'em.


Dam. Away; Thou art a Fool; and know not what
Thou have refused. They are, I tell thee,
Gloves of the richest Scent; Besides, each Finger
Is lined with Gold: Here wear 'em for my sake.

Lys. Well, for once I care not if I do; the cordial Gold
Perhaps may keep my Spirits up, and give me
Strength to bear the Brunt of all. Adieu, Sir. Exit. Lysette.

Damp. She shall not sell me as she sold her Mistress.
Those Gloves, how rich soever their Scent may seem,
Yet once well heated in the Hand, will cast
A strong and deadly Smell most fatal to the Brain;
A Poison sudden in its Operation.
So thou, poor Fool Lysette have thy Reward.
Thus Caution dooms some dangerous Tool of State,
Left Petty Villains should betray the Great. Exit Damp.

Enter Grammont followed by Elvira. Elv. Oh Grammont! Nay, turn not, turn not,
cruel Man, away;
But look upon thy poor disconsolate
Elvira, almost drowned in Tears: Oh speak!
Oh speak at last, and let her know wherein
She has been faulty or unfortunate
Enough to merit this hard Usage from her much loved Grammont.

Gram. Art thou Elvira?


Elv. Why do thou ask that unkind Question?


Gram. Because Elvira ever loved Grammont;
And so could never be a Trouble to him.
But thou alas! art most importunate.
Prithee be gone, thou art not Elvira,
Not the same Elvira; that I Am sure of.

Elv. Yes, I am the very same I ever was;
The very same Elvira still, on whom
With dearest Transports thou did once bestow
Ten thousand Vows of everlasting Love.

Gram. Forbear, forbear, Elvira, and re-call
Not to my Memory those happy Days,
In which I dearly loved, and thou we'rt kind.

Elv. If in Elvira's Love thou once we'rt blessed,
Why art thou not so still?

Gram. Oh Elvira! All things are strangely altered since that time.
Love once was pure; and Friendship sacred held;
Yet now the one is little else but Lust,
The other all Design. Virtue is fled,
And Vice reigns now triumphant in each Sex.
We are all wondrous weak, alas, and frail. -- Oh --!

Elv. Alas, what means that sad and dismal Groan,
By Grief extorted from thy Manly Breast?
Thou can not sure be so unjust, as to
Suspect my Love? Yet if thou art,
Speak, I conjure thee; but speak plainly then,
And not in unintelligible Groans.
Speak, cruel Man, oh speak, do I not love thee?
Am I false? Oh may Elvira live no longer
Than with a Passion innocent and pure
She loves her dear Grammont.

Gram. What pity it is our Hearts are not exposed
To open View, as are our Faces, that
So, even our most private Thoughts might all
Appear naked and bare, as at their first
Conception, e're dressed up in ornamental
Words of a much different Import!

Elv. Ah, cou'd'st thou but see into my Heart,
Thou there wou'd'st soon perceive thy Error
And my Innocence. But since my dear Grammont
That cannot be, believe my Words, believe
These Tears, believe my Actions. Oh see
I am here ready to receive thee still,
Rude and unkind, ungrateful and inhumane
As thou art. Come then, come to these Arms,
Never yet stretched out to thee in vain.
Will thou not come? Not yet? Thou can not sure
Deny me now, when all I beg of thee,
Is, that once more thou wou'd'st be happy.

Gram. Why shou'd'st thou desire Impossibilities?
Alas, I never can be happy more.

Elv. Then must I be for ever miserable.
Cruel Man, show yet some small Remainder of Humanity.
Be not so rash: Either accuse, or else acquit me;
But pass not Sentence on me 'ere I Am heard.

Gram. No; Fear not too hasty or too hard
A Sentence from my Mouth. False as thou art,
I cannot hate where once I loved so well.
Live then Elvira, live long; but live
A Stranger to Grammont; and that thou may
Live happily, wipe from thy Memory
The dearest Passages of some few past Years;
And see thou quite forget there ever was such
A Wretch in the World as I am.

Elv. Hold! oh hold!
It is too much. Alas, insult not poorly
Over my Weakness, nor play the wanton with my Grief.
Why do thou bid me live if it must be
Without Grammont? Why do thou wish me happy,
When all my happiness, thou know depends upon thy Love?
Yet that, thou say, is forfeited, is lost to me for ever.
Oh! my Grammont, it is enough thou art unkind;
Be not unjust to thy Elvira. For Pity's sake grant something.
To the dear Memory of our mutual Love.
And if thou know me false, tell me wherein,
When, or with whom I have offended.

Gram. What Satisfaction would it be to thee,
Elvira, should I tell thee all? Since all
Alas! can be no more than what thou know,
As well at least, if not much better than
My self; In short I am convinced thou can not
Clear thy self; and if so, consider, that
A weak Defense is worse than none at all.
Tempt me not then to speak, since 'twill but add
To thy Confusion, and my Shame: But I would willingly
Spare both as much as may be with my Honor.

Elv. Confusion, Shame, Contempt, and everlasting Infamy
For ever be my Lot, if ever I wronged
Thy Love so much as in one guilty Thought.
Oh my Grammont, my dear, my loved Grammont,
See thy Elvira on her tender Knees,
From whence she never will rise, till she has learnt
The strange and fatal Cause of her Disgrace.

Gram. Away; this thy affected Obstinacy
Would make me hate thee, were it possible,
Elvira! Is it not enough that thou
Have wronged my Honor, but that I my self
Must here repeat the shameful Tale,
Only to gratify thy wanton Curiosity?
Perhaps indeed I know not half thy brave
Exploits; so my imperfect Tale may yield thee
Some Diversion. But have a care; The Cuckold yet
Bears his Misfortune patiently enough.
Make him not then thy sport: For, if thou do,
By Heaven! -- Away, away, Elvira.
I would not be provoked; away, I say,
While yet I Am Master of my growing Passion.

Elv. Do what thou will, be rude, be cruel,
Be inhumane as thou have been to the Poor
Elvira; Yet while she has any Strength,
She never will let go this Hold, unless
Thou first communicate the fatal Secret.

Gram. Away, away, thou wilt force me to be rude.
Be not so strangely obstinate, alas!
I would be civil, though I cannot be kind.

Elv. Barbarous Man! Yet speak, what have I done?


Gram. Will nothing then content thee? Then thus
I throw thee off, and force my Way. Strives to get from her, and drags her
about the Stage.

Elv. And thus
I cling to thee close as the tender Ivy
To the sturdy Elm. Do, do, merciless
Grammont, do, pull, hale, tear, drag, nay kill me,
Yet I Will not willingly let go. But oh!
His cruel Strength prevails. He. breaks from here.

Gram. Farewell thou most importunate of Women.


Elv. Stay, stay, my lost Grammont; give me but one
Poor Minute more, and all is done. Fear not;
I will no longer urge my Innocence.
It is enough that thou believ'st me false.
Oh, for thy own Repose, may thou for ever
Think me so!
Farewell, my dear unkind Grammont, farewell:
And when I Am dead, think what the poor Elvira
Would have done to have kept thy Love, who on
Her own tender Breast dares thus revenge the fatal Loss. She pulls out a
Dagger and stabs her self.

Gram. Hold! hold, Elvira, hold!
By Heaven 'twas boldly done, and nothing could
Have given so sure a Blow, but Innocence
It self. Yes, my Elvira, every Drop
Of that dear Blood loudly proclaims to all
The World thy Innocence, and my sad Guilt,
Oh! Ye juster Powr's above, to what strange Fate
Am I at last reserved! See, at thy Feet,
My dear Elvira, the wretched'st Thing alive:
A Thing unworthy of the Name of Man:
A Penitent who dares not hope for Pardon
Either from Heaven or Thee; though both, alas!
Are infinitely good and merciful.

Enter Leonora and La Roche. Leon. Never did so much Joy as here we bring
spring from sad so a Cause.
Oh, Heaven! Are all my dearest Hopes thus dashed?
Oh Brother, who has done this bloody Deed?

Elv. 'Twas I; 'twas I my self, my Dear; weep not
For me; but rather go and comfort, if thou can, the poor Grammont.

Leon. Oh Grammont!
Unfortunate Grammont, most grossly have
Thou been imposed on by that Monster Dampierre.
Know then, that Letter thought directed
By Elvira to Montigny, and sent
At that suspicious time of Night,
Was but a Trick, a mere Device, the whole
Only a Scene contrived by Dampierre, acted by Lysette.
This Truth from her own Mouth we just now learnt,
And she confirmed it with her latest Breath:
For she is dead, poisoned by Dampierre.
Oh that we had known this some Minutes sooner!

Gram. Gods! What has this miserable Caitiff done
To draw down all your Anger on his Head?
What horrid Crimes before had stained his Soul,
That you should thus all at one fatal Blow
Oppress the Wretch with your severest Judgments?
Oh that some Mountain now would fall on me,
And in its dreadful Ruins crush my Head.
But hark! Methinks the Gods grow loud, Hark! how
Their awful Thunder grumbles in the Sky.
See how the fiery Balls fly whizzing by,
Dealing Amazement and Destruction all around!
Ha, ha, ha, ha!
See you old Miser laden with swelling Bags
Of ill-got Gold, with how much awkard Haste
He limpsaway to Shelter: See how he ducks,
And dives, and dodges with the Gods, and all
Only in hopes to avoid, for some few Days
Perhaps, the just Reward of his accursed Extortion.
The hot Adult'rer now, all chill and impotent
With Fear, leaps from the polluted Bed,
And crams himself into a Cranny.
Those Mighty Men of Blood, who make a Trade
Of Murder, now forget their wonted Fierceness;
Out-nois'd they shrink aside, and shake for fear
Of The louder Threatenings of the angry Gods!
While I, I only, though the wicked'st Wretch of all,
With an erected Countenance, stand to it,
Courting those Dangers others seek to avoid.
And yet there is not one Dart, one Bolt for me;
Though I, Heaven knows, deserve 'em all. Oh! He throws himself on the Ground.

Elv. Let not the Knowledge of my Innocence,
My dear Grammont, add to thy Grief:
Rather believe me guilty still. Alas!
Thy generous easy Nature was abused,
Imposed on, by a Kinsman's wicked Arts.
Thou still art innocent, and so am I,
Who freely can forgive thy greatest Faults.
Come then, Grammont, come to thy Elvira;
And with a Kiss, a cold and dying Kiss,
I Will seal thy Pardon.

Gram. My dear Elvira, this thy prodigious
Goodness does but increase my Misery.
Yet I will come, yes, my Elvira!
With a down dejected Countenance,
Not daring to look up, but creeping thus,
And crawling on the Earth, I do approach
Thy Feet: Here spurn the vile Thing, tread, trample
The miserable Insect into nothing.

Elv. Oh! my Grammont! yield not too much to Grief;
It is a fatal, though a slow Disease.

Gram. I thank thee, dear Elvira, for that Hint:
Now thou art kind, and giv'st me good Advice.
Whoever would endure an Age of Pain,
When one such Blow as this, might give him present ease? Stabs himself.

Leon. Hold! oh hold, Grammont! Oh Heavens! what has he done!


La To. Too much, alas! though it is no more than what
I apprehended from his just Despair.

Enter Dampierre. Dam. by the Door. I Have heard loud Cries: I hope Grammont has
killed her. --
So! Murder has been busy. I Will draw near,
And with dissembled Pity mock their Woe.
O dismal Sight! Oh horror! Poor Elvira! He comes close by 'em.
Wretched Grammont! Cursed be the fatal Cause
Of this most sad Mischance!

Gram. Then, Villain, die! Grammont kills him with the Dagger.


Dam. Oh! Death and Hell! I Am killed.


Gram. The Murderer of our Joys has his Reward:
'Twas needful Mischief: We may kill a Monster,
Tho he resists not.

Dam. How am I a Monster?


Leon. Think on Lysette! She Is dead,
But first discovered all.

Dam. Cursed be her Tongue, and thine; cursed my Italian,
For his unprofitable lingering Poison;
And yet more cursed my self for trusting either.
I Am fitted -- Oh, Revenge! too fierce Revenge!
Thy Sweets, like Love's, soon, when enjoyed, grow bitter:
Like Guns o'er-charg'd, thou hurt'st the Hand that fired thee.
I Am dying -- Oh! I would, but cannot repent.
Hah! there is a dreadful Gulf! -- I Am on the brink --
Oh! now I Am falling, and for ever sink. Dies.

Elv. Where, where art thou, my Grammont?
A rising Mist has on a sudden snatched
Thee from my sight. Alas! I faint; I die. She dies.

Gram. She Is gone; and all my Comfort is, that I
Shall quickly follow. Yes, this fight wounds
Deeper than the sharpest Dagger, I come,
I come, Elvira; my aspiring Soul
Begins to mount; not to o'er-take, but at
An awful distance to attend and wait
On thine above, in those blessed Regions of eternal Peace. He dies.

Leon. Alas, he is gone! Oh! I Have scarce Power to speak it.
If Grief will let me live, I will attend
Them to the Earth, and give 'em both one Grave:
And as with Tears their Story I relate,
Teach happy Lovers to avoid their Fate:
Nor rashly to despair, nor Sland'rers trust,
Since Heaven at last never fails to right the Just.

The End of the Tragedy.
ACT. V. Natural MAGIC. A short Far. After the ITALIAN manner.
The PERSONS.
Pantalone, an old Miser. Mr. Trefuses. Cynthio, in love with Isabella. Mr.
Arnold. Pasquarel, his Man. Mr. Sorin. Mezzetin, Pantalone's Man. Mr. Knap.
Nicholas, a Clown. Mr. Trout. Columbina, Pantalone's Maid. Mrs. Lawson. Men
personating the Devil, and his Subjects.
Scene a Country House near Naples.
Scene a Chamber, with a Bed in it; a Table, Chairs, a Guitar and Chest.
Cynthio, Isabella, Mezzetin, Columbina, are discovered, talking. Cin. DEar
Isabella, forgive my Love the Trick it makes me put upon your cruel Uncle. You
know, this House, and the Land about it, should have been mine, but that he
cheated my Father of it; and unless we can fright him out of the Deeds, by
making him believe the House is haunted, I must despair of being able to
maintain you, as I would the only Person that can make me happy.


Isab. I can forgive you any Thing but staying here now, my Cinthio: My Uncle
is just coming to Bed; he is but speaking to his Tenant.


Cin. That Tenant is my Friend, and keeps him in Talk on purpose: Knowing that
your Uncle was to come this Evening from Naples, to take Possession of this
Estate, we have contrived Traps and other Matters to carry on my Design; and if
it succeeds, Colombina and Mezzetin shall be so well rewarded.


Mez. Yes, with a damned Cudgel, if our Master Signore Pantalone catches you
with us here.


Cin. Fear nothing: Pasquarel, my nimble Spaniard, watches, and will give you
timely Notice.


Col. You and he may be deceived in that, as well as in your Design of making
him pass for a Spirit: I fear he cannot speak our Language well enough for that;
though I own he speaks it like a Devil.


Enter Pasquarel. Pas. Sir, he is coming.


Mez. Away.


Col. We Are undone, that Door is double locked. Colombina goes to open the
other Door, and finds it shut.


Mez. There Is no way but one to bring you off; bolt the Door to keep him out.
Colombina, off with that black upper Petticoat. You, Sir, must unbutton your
Coat: It Is well it is black: Let me put it over your Head backwards, thus,
inside-outwards. Now your Arms through the Side-slits. Now on with the
Petticoat. Thus you will look like a Friar. Look grave. Leave the rest to me.
[Colombina' s Petticoat is put on by Cinthio, and his Coat put over his Head,
which exactly resembles a Fryar's Habit.] Hah! he is here already. Knocking
without.


Pas. What will become of me?


Mez. An Eunuch if he sees thee.


Pas. He shall not, if these Petticoats will hide me.


Col. Hold, hold, I Will let no Body come there.


Pas. That Is a Lie. I must even get under that Table. Pantalone without Knocks
and Calls, Open the Door! Pasquarel hides himself under the Table.


Mez. Oh! Sir, we dare not.


Pan. Who has shut it?


Mez. The Spirit.


Pan. The Spirit's the Wind, you Ass.


Mez. Now you may open. Opens the Door.


Enter Pantalone. Pan. entering. Where are these Fools that are afraid of
Spirits? [ He starts, seeing Cinthio.] Hah! what is that?


Mez. Nothing but a reverend Father, Sir. Your Niece is afraid of the Spirits,
which, they say, haunt the House; so she would not go to Bed without Confession.


Pan. She Is a credulous Fool. But no matter; it is well there are such, and
unbelieving Knaves to keep 'em so. Aside. Reverend Father, she is a stubborn
Sinner; she would marry a beggarly Reprobate, who says I tricked his deceased
Father out of this Estate. Would I had him here! he should feel the Vengeance
of an Italian. Reprove her, Father; I leave her wholly to be guided by you.


Isa. Since my Uncle is come into this Room, let your Reverence be pleased to
walk into the next. Cinth. Isab. and Mezzetin, Exeunt.


Pan. Your Reverence's humble Servant.


Col. Sir, here is a new Ruff was left for you: Pray try whether it fits, that
it may be altered, if it does not: For you will want it to morrow.


Pan. Do so. [ She puts the Ruff on him, and it rises over his Head.] Heigh
day! The Devil's in it.


Col. Ay, now it is about your Neck. Aside. Oh! Sir, the Spirit that haunts this
House, pulls it up.


Pan. Bless me! But I Will try to pull it down. Pasquarel attempts to get out,
but Pantalone pulls the Ruff down, and Pasquarel is forced to run under the
Table again.


Pan. So! it is off. Let the Devil put it on for me. [ He throws the Ruff down,
and spys a Letter, which he takes up.] Hah! what is that? A Letter.


Col. I fear Isabella dropped it. Aside. Don't touch it, Sir; sure the Devil
laid it there: 'Twill burn you.


Pan. Let Us see the Light! I Will put on my Spectacles, and read it.


Col. He must not. I Will make my Words good, and set it on Fire. Aside. She sits
it of Fire.


Pan. This Candle gives a pretty good Light. [ Having read a little.] Cot so,
my Fingers itch. Hell and the Devil! it burns me. He let us it drop, and it
burns to Ashes.


Col. I told you so, Sir: Some unlucky Devil dropped it.


Pan. There was something of Fires and Flames in it.


Col. No wonder then if it burned so. Oh! I dare not stay here. Exit. Colom.


Pan. I don't know what to think of all this! But come what will, I Will not
abate a Penny of the Rent. I Will even go too, and try whether the
Father-Confessor can set Things to right. -- Stay; is not that the Devil at my
Heels? [ Looks back, and sees Pasquarel come with great Strides, he starts;
Pasquarel makes odd Postures; frights him, trips up his Heels, and runs out.]
Help, help! Mezzetin! Colombina!


Enter Colombina. Col. What Is the Matter, Sir?


Pan. Did not you see it?


Col. What, Sir?


Pan. The Devil, the Spirit.


Col. I saw nothing.


Pan. Oh! I am crippl'd. Where Is the Father-Confessor?


Col. He Is gone, Sir.


Pan. What shall I do? I dare not lie alone. Colombina, prithee lie with me to
Night.


Col. Fie, Sir; such a wicked Thing would raise the Devil certainly.


Pan. But this is no such dangerous Devil neither: I dare say, he will do thee no
Harm.


Col. No; nor no Good neither, I dare say. Get your Man Mezzetin to lie with
you.


Pan. No, he is a Cow-hearted Rascal.


Enter Nicholas. Col. There Is Nicholas, your Farmer's Man! He Is a stout Fellow.


Nic. Cra' mercy; and God speed the Plough! I thought I had heard an Outcry.


Pan. So thou did. The Spirit has broke my Bones.


Nic. Oh! is that all? Mary it is well he have not broke your Neck.


Pan. He cannot, Nicholas: The Devil has no Power but on those that have sold
themselves to him: Now I have not sold my self to the Devil.


Nic. Troth, I don't know. You old Pinch-pennies are like your Wenches, and
your Court-Folks, they say; you would sell any thing for Money.


Pan. Well, will thou lie with me, honest Nick?


Nic. An't please you, I Am no proud Man; I had rather lie with you' Wench.


Col. What are you afraid of Spirits too? Exit Colombina.


Nic. Not I; but many a one has been trust up for being in bad Company. What if
old Nick should mistake in the Dark, and carry young Nick away in stead of his
Worship.


Pan. Thou needst not fear: Did thou ever give thy self to the Devil?


Nic. What need I? I Am no marry Man.


Pan. Then you are safe enough: The Devil has no Power over thee.


Nic. Why are you then so ascard?


Pan. I! I a'n't afraid. But it is good to have Company.


Nic. Why, I Have heard our Curate say, An Usurer's never alone; Gold and the
Devil (God bless us) are always in his Company.


Pan. Come, you must lie with me; for I will not lie by my self.


Nic. Stay; I Am thinking of a rare Bedfellow for you.


Pan. Say thou so? Prithee who is it?


Nic. Why, our Master's Wife. I dare say she will deny no Man. Then she must
needs be a plaguey good Body; for he has bid the Devil take her these Ten Years,
yet the Devil don't care to middle with her.


Pan. Come, lie with me; thou do not know what I Will do for thee.


Nic. No, nor never shall, I Will warrant. But if I must come, let us even pig
together quickly of God's Name; for I Am even as sleepy as our Neighbor's Dog,
that leaned his Head on the Wall to bark.


Pan. Draw the Window-Curtains, and we'll to Bed.


Nic. A Match, quoth Joane, when she lay with her Master. Exeunt.


SCENE changes to a Garden.
Enter Mezzetin with a Ladder and a Lanthorn. Mez. Here I must fix this Ladder,
to get into our old Hunks's Apartment, that Cynthio's Devils may get in to
fright him. He sets the Ladder by the Balcony.


Enter Pasquarel, like a Monkey, on all four. Mez. Hah! what is that? Some
English Mastiff? No, they have not such long Tails. Oh! it is the Devil himself.
Mez. runs out.


Pas. Mezzetin! Mezzetin! So I have frighted one Fool away! I find I shall pass
unsuspected in this Monkey's Dress and Face (though I Have seen some here pretty
much like it) but he must be subtiler than a Monkey that will work an Usurer to
refund. This way I must get in: But first I Will try whether I have my Monkey's
Tricks perfect. [ He jumps up and down, chatters, scratches himself, and does
many pleasant Tricks, like a Monkey. Then he goes up the Ladder through the
Rounds in and out, winding and screwing up his Body round in a very strange
manner. Being got up to the top, he fancies he hears some Noise, and lets
himself slide down at once.] A good quick way of coming down! I thought I had
heard some Noise! But 'twas nothing, I think. I Will up again. He gets up the
Ladder again.


Pantalone in the Balcony with a Light, looking about. Pan. Is all fast? [
Pasquarel hits his Head against Pantalone.] Hah! the Devil -- Exit Pantalone.


Pas. Of a Miser. [ He gets down, with his Head foremost, winding and screwing
down his Body through the Rounds very fast, and in a more surprising manner
than when he got up.] This was a new way of coming down! Well, I Have frighted
him away too, I hope. I Will scale the Wall once more. [ He gets up, and goes
into the Balcony.] Now good Night t'yee'. Exit Monkey, Enter Devil. Exit Pasq.


SCENE a Chamber, Nicholas snoring in a Corner.
Enter Pantalone, with a Light. Pan. Oh! deliver me from the Devil and his
Ape's Tricks! Nicholas! The Clown snores so loud, I wonder the Noise of his own
snoring don't wake him, Why Nicholas! Pushes him.


Nic. Cannot you let a Body sleep, you old fat Sow? Pushes Pantalone again.


Pan. He dreams! Why Nicholas, I Have seen the Devil in the Shape of an old
Woman, just like an overgrown Monkey. Nicholas all along answers yawning, and
rubbing his Eyes.


Nic. What, do you say, you're as apish as an old Monkey? I know it, Dame: I can
say no more to you now. You Have had enough for one Night, I think.


Pan. Why, you dreaming Sot; I Will awake you. Pant. strikes him.


Nic. What Is that for? Cannot you let me make an end of my Dream?


Pan. I Have seen the Devil.


Nic. Why, then, bid him good Night for me.


Pan. He Is a coming.


Nic. Let him, of God's Name. I Have the Key of the Door in my Pocket.


Pan. But he will get in through the Keyhole.


Nic. What do I care? I have not sold my self to the Devil.


Pan. How long must you be awaking, you Dolt?


Nic. Ay, ay, Forsooth. Rises, rubs his Eyes, and answers still yawning.


Pan. The Looby sleeps as he stands.


Nic. Ay, and stands as he sleeps. -- To Morrow, Dame, upon a Hay-Cock.


Pan. Go to Bed, you Lump.


Nic. Ay, and thank you too; I Will go sleep out my Sleep, and make an end of my
Dream. Nic. gets into Bed.


Pan. I Will go to Bed too; but I Will not venture to strip. I Will lay by me my
Dagger, my Pistol, and my Holy Water Pot. [ Lays them on a Stool by the
Bedside.] Thus, like a prudent modern Zealot, I Will trust to the Spiritual
Arms, when the Carnal Weapon's by.


Enter Pasquarel with a dark Lanthorn, he blows out the Candle. Pan. Bless me,
my Candle's out! I must crawl to the Chimny for a Firebrand. He goes to get a
Brand.


Pas. Hah! I Will secure these dangerous Tools: Exchange is no Robbery. [ He
looks about and takes up a Bolonia Sawcidge, a Mouse-trap, and a Pot of
Mustard; then lays 'em in the Place of the Dagger, Pistol, and Holy Water.]


Re-enter Pantalone with a Firebrand. Pan. So, I Have got one; I Will blow to
light the Candle.


Pas. I Will spare you that Labor. He gets his Head through Pantalone's Arms
blows the Cole, and lights the Candle


Pan. Mercy of me! What Is that? [ He sees Pasquarel, who having lighted the
Candle stares him in the Face, making strange Grimaces, as he withdraws his
Head from under Pantalone' s Arms.] Oh! the Devil blows the Coal. [ He lets it
fall, and lays the Candle down.] My Guitar's yonder; I Will try to play a Tune;
perhaps that will drive away the Evil Spirit. Here Is a Chair. I Will sit; for I
tremble so I cannot stand. [ Pasquarel jumps into the Chair, and places himself
like a Chair; and Pantalone takes the Guitar, sits on him; and then strikes the
strings.] It Is out of Tune, and so am I too. [ Pasquarel untunes it as fast as
he tunes it.] What ails the Guitar? One String gives all manner of Sounds! Oh,
now it is pretty well. [ Pasquarel puts his Arms under those of Pantalone, and
plays.] Oh! oh! it is bewitched I think. [ He rises, looks about, shakes the
Guitar, looks under the Chair, and shakes it; and in the mean time Pasquarel
gets out.] I can see nothing. [ He sits again, plays a little; and Pasquarel
walks on his Hands, and frights him.] Oh! I play, and the Devil Dances; sure
the Devil has never a Head, or it is where the Tail should be. Exit Pasq. having
first blowed out the Candle.


Mezzetin within, in a hollow Voice. Thus shall thou be plagued while alive;
and then thou shall burn for ever, unless thou restorest the Deeds to Cynthio.

Pan. Oh good, Mr. Devil, I Will do it, if I live -- till Doomsday. Aside.


Mez. Then I Will haunt thee no more.


Pan. Nicholas!


Nic. Hush! I Am asleep.


Pan. within Why Nicholas.


Enter Nicholas. Nic. Odsooks, don't I tell you, I Am asleep? What Is the matter
now?


Pan. Oh the Devil has been here! Is he gone?


Nic. Nay, look your self: I don't care to look after the Devil.


Pan. He Is gone.


Nic. Well, this same Devil is a main honest Man; thus he always comes, they
say, to make Folks honest, and destroy his own Religion.


Pan. Why, thou Fool, do thou think I Will give up an Estate of Two thousand
Ducats a Year, for a little Imp's Tricks? No, Nicholas; he cannot do me so much
harm, as this Land will do me good. I dare him, I defy him. Oh law! Is not that
he? No. I scorn to fear him -- [ Mezzetin like a Ghost, hid under a Shroud,
peeps in.] That is, when he is far enough off.


Enter Mezzetin, like a Ghost, with a Torch in his Hand. Mez. Give me up my
Deeds. Exit Mezzet.


Pan. Ah, sure, that is old Cynthio's Ghost. I must guard my self from that
Enemy of mine, with this good Dagger. [ He gropes about in the dark for the
Table, snatches up the Saucidge, and finds his Mistake.] Bless me! the Dagger's
changed into a Bolonia-Saucidge! However, I Will venture to keep that for my
Breakfast! But I think I feel my Pistol, I Will keep him off with that. [ His
Fingers are caught in the Mousetrap.] Oh! hoh! the Devil bites my Fingers off!
Hah, what is this? My Pissel's turned to a Mousetrap! But, sure he dares not
meddle with the Holy Element! Oh no! here it is. I Will cross my self. [ Crosses
himself out of the Mustard-pot.] Pshah! what is this? It offends my Nose.
Deliver me! It Is Mustard, or something worse! Oh, I Am dead with Fear.


Nic. Oh say your Prayers, Sir; say your Prayers.


Pan. So I would; but it is so long since I said 'em, that I Have quite forgot
'em. Say yours.


Nic. I cannot; I have trusted to our Curate, who lost to me ten Years-prayers
at All-Fours. Oh, I Have been a great Sinner; but Yesternight I thresh'd little
black Mary in the Stable, while her poor Husband was threshing in the Barn.


Pan. Oh!


Re-enter Mezzetin, like a Ghost. Mez. If thou restorest not the Land to
Cynthio, to Morrow, thou shall be like me.


Pan. Oh I will, I will, Mr. Ghost, and fourfold what I Have cheated others of.
Exit Ghost.


Nic. Hold, Master! Wowns! don't promise so much; you will be undone.


Pan. Tush, Fool; now the Danger's over, I Will not give up the worth of a
Notch'd Hoop-stick, or a cast Poet's day. No, not a single Piece --


A Figure like a Devil arises. Pan. For I Will give up a great many. Oh! save me!


Nic. Oh! this is the ugliest Thing we have had yet. He Is coming! Oh, if he
should kill me, I never shall be my own Man again. Oh let me alone, Mr. Devil;
as I hope to be shaved, I Will be bound to pray for your Worship all Days of my
Life. Confession! Absolution! Oh good Devil, give me but three or fourscore
Years to Repent, and take any Body else: There are a great many Whores and
Whoremongers, hereabouts.


Devil. Give up the Deeds to Cynthio; or prepare to meet me to Morrow at this
Time, for I Will Fight with thee for them. Sinks with a Flash.


Pan. Oh, he is gone: I was sadly afraid he would have left his Glove.


Nic. Why, will you Fight him?


Pan. No, I Am old; then he is no Gentleman! Do thou meet him, I Will reward thee
to Heart's Content.


Nic. Not I; I a'n't of his Match. Do you! I fancy an old Usurer's a Match for
the Devil.


Enter Mezzetin in his own Dress, and Colombina. Mez. Oh, Sir! We dare not go
to Bed: There have been strange Doings since we left you: Rattlings of Chains;
Flashes of Light: Some Imps, or sucking Devils overturned all the Pewter,
Bottles, Glasses, Pans and Kettles; laughed aloud, and throw'd each of us a
piece of Money, went away, and broke -- Nothing.


Pan. Make me thankful. Let Us see the Piece. Sirrah, you shall keep nothing of
theirs.


Mez. They hit me half a dosen Slaps of the Face too, thus and thus: Make you
thankful, Sir.


Pan. How, you Rogue?


Mez. Sir, you will have me keep nothing; and then this is to show you how they
did. But, Sir; there is a Spanish Capitan, who has been seeking Mischief and the
Devil in Savoy, Catalonia and Flanders, very unluckily these Eight Years, and
comes here to find him: Here he comes.


Enter Pasquatel, like a Capitan: He stalks along in strange Postures, with
large Strides. Pas. Senor, I am the renowned Don Mezzamorto de los
Rodomontados: Glory's my Chase; Fighting my Business; and Killing, my
Diversion. Traveling in the Dark (for I defy Danger) I lost my Men, and my
way. I have been seeking the Devil both in the Old World and the New, resolved
to find him in This, or in the Next -- I am for Rome; for that, they say, is
the likeliest Place to find him; but, hearing you have him in this House, I
honor it with my Presence; to let that Devil know, he is a Son of a Whore, to
make me seek him thus long: I, who send him such Crowds of Souls; the whole
College of Physicians scarce send him more.


Pan. Nay, he is an uncivil Person, that is the Truth on it.


Pas. Tell that Devil, I Am more a Devil than he.


Pan. Oh, Sir, you're most heartily welcome. Would you had been here a little
sooner; you might have told him so your self. But by to Morrow you will have your
Wish; nay, perhaps to Night.


Pas. I Will stay, and Face him; and with this Sword, with which I killed Catinat
--


Pan. Why Catinat is alive still, Sir.


Pas. Blood and Death! not the Catinat I killed.


Pan. Very true, Sir: I beg your Excellence's Pardon. -- A bloody Fellow. Asid.
Signore, to refresh you, my People shall serve a Collation. Mezzetin, some
Fruit, some Liquors and Sweat-meats, to refresh the Capitan; quick. Exit Mezzet.


Pas. Hold! If I stay, I must have a Thing that is pretty hard to be got, to
stay with me.


Pan. What Is that, Sir?


Pas. A Virgin! Such a one she must be, that the Devil may have no Power over
her.


Pan. Do hear, Colombina?


Col. Not I; but what should I stand here for? Going.


Pan. The Capitan wants a Virgin.


Col. Why, he does not want me.


Pas. Art thou a Virgin?


Col. I -- I -- am -- not -- to resolve you.


Pas. Death and Blood! Draw, some Body; for I will have Satisfaction.


Col. Indeed, Sir, I don't know, I am hard to be awaked sometimes; I don't know
what may be done, when I sleep. Let me go. Ex. Col. Nic. and Pan.


Pas. Well, be or be not; I Will act like all Husbands: At a venture, I Will secure
thee. Exit Pasquarel, after her.


Re-enter Mezzetin, with a Table and a Collation. Mez. I must watch this
Spaniard: I fear, this is rather a Plot to trick me out of my Mistress, than my
old Master out of the Deeds. Here Is a Table with Fruit; I Will place my Head in
it through this Hole, so as to observe him. She may well think him half mad;
and I Will palt him unseen, and put something in his Drink, shall make her think
him quite so. But hush! they are coming.


Re-enter Pasquarel, with Colombina. Col. Be pleased to sit, Sir.


Pas. Do you sit too. I hope she does not know me in this Garb. Aside.


Col. In Obedience, I will. Be pleased to taste of this, Sir.


Pas. By my Sword, dear Creature, there is nothing here I would taste of but you.


Col. Sure, Sir, you would not eat me?


Pas. Yes, with Kisses.


Mez. Are you so sharp set? I Will spoil your Stomach! There Is a Rogue! He Is for
taking my Copyhold over my Head. In the Table, aside.


Pas. Come, we are in Italy, where Opportunities are as welcome as they are
scarce.


Col. Oh! Sir; but what if the Devil should come this moment?


Pas. Why, then I Would make that Devil hold the Candle to me, hold his Life of me,
hold the Door for me; and hold himself contented. I Would make him tremble, like --
Mezzetin shakes the Table, and hoots like an Owl.


Mez. Who, who, who, whoop!


Pas. Hah! what is that?


Col. Nothing but a silly Owl. What, does that make you tremble?


Pas. What I? IN scorn to tremble. I must confess, it made me shake. But 'twas
as the I you does; nothing but the Rousing up of my Courage; and now it is up,
have at you. Offers to kiss and smuggle her.


Col. Nicholas! Mezzetin! [ softly.] I vow, Sir, I Will call louder! Nicholas!


Pas. Pox, that last was too loud: Now a well-bred Woman would have cried out
so softly, that no Body would have heard her.


Enter Nicholas. Nic. What Is the matter there?


Col. Oh! nothing: I was only afraid of the Devil. Yet stay, or I Will go too.


Nic. I will, and thank you too. He sits on the Table rustically, and falls a
munching.


Pas. Why, do you fear? Does not this Sword secure you? Nic. looks on it. With
this Nursing-Mother of Surgeons in my Hand, I took the Grand Visit, thus! [
Takes Nicholas by the Nose.] I Will tell you how, at the Battle of Argos, my
Courage and Conduct got the Day. There lay the Christians -- There the Turks.
These Sugar-plumbs the one; and these the other. Thus did I charge their Right;
pow, pow, pow! There Is a Colonel killed, with three Captains. Thus, they are
taken off, and the Ranks closed. Then their Left comes on, pow, pow! There lie
two Men slain; I take 'em off! Then thus I charge their main Body, pow, pow,
pow, pow; and I rout and take 'em all Prisoners. He takes most of the Plumbs
off; and from time to time Mezzetin pelts him, at which he starts, and makes
Grimaces.


Nic. Ay, but thus pow, pow, pow, you eat all. This is new-fashion'd Justice;
some all, some none.


Pas. No, Fellow, though thou art Clay. I Will fairly give thee half. There Is one
for Me, one for Thee, and one for Me. One for Me, One for Thee, and one for Me.
One for Me, one for Thee, and one for me.


Nic. Why, you take Two for my One* is this your fair half?


Pas. Ay, was ever the King's Moiety otherwise paid in? Come, now let us drink a
Glass.


Mez. There I watched you. As he lies hid in the Table, under the Fruit, he
pours something out of a Viol into Pasquatel' s Wine.


Pas. Confusion to all Cowards. He drinks.


Nic. Hold, Master, don't curse your best Friends.


Col. Ay, were it not for Cowards, how would half of you Men pass for Valiant?


Mez. Just as, were it not for Fools, half of you Women would pass for honest.
Aside.


Pas. [ He starts up suddenly, and makes strange Faces.] I Am hot, I Will take the
Air. To Horse, to Horse! Thus vaults the Soldier in his Landlord's Saddle. [ He
jumps on Nicholas' s Back, taking him for a Horse. Nicholas Neighs and Winses.]
See, see, how fast the brave Dutch Squadrons gallop. Bear me, Bucephalus, among
the Billows! Oh! it is a noble Beast. What Is that? I Will alight and catch it. A
Maidenhead! Whip, it is gone! 'Twas nothing. Thus it went. Hey! Presto pass. [
He passes very swiftly through the back of the Chair, then struts out.] As if
the old World modestly withdrew, and here in private had brought forth a new.


Nic. He Is stark staring Mad; he raves and heaves and winds himself, like any
Wench in Fits. Sure the Devil's got into his Wemb. He Is a playing's
Christmas-Gambols! Let Us scamper and tell our Master. Ex. Nic. and Colomb.


Mez. Would I were well off now. Aside.


Pas. Hah! I burn! Where am I? What Place is this? A Conventicle? How crowded
it is with Whoremasters! Hah! Sure it is Hell. I know it by their Grinning. How!
Vanity here! Vanity there! Vanity every where! What Is that lean Thing? Poor
Matrimony! See, see! Repentance treads on his Heels, and Cuckoldom rubs his
Forehead. Hah! hah! hah! Who Is that with a Face of the Color of a
Stock-jobbers Conscience? Hypocrisy! No, she is at Church. I know her now; it is
Proserpine. I Will have her, and make the Devil a Cuckold. Stay, I Will treat her
first with Fruit. [ Mezzetin, afraid of being seen and hurt, stirs in the
Table, creeping off with it.] How! The Table moves. It Is Tantalus's Feast. Now
by the Gods, by Pasquarel I swear, I Will be revenged and put out all Hells
Fires, Till Fiends meet Fiends, and justle in the Dark. Exit. Mezzetin runs
cross the Stage with the Table about his Neck, and Exit.


Enter Pantalone with a Blunderbuss, and Nicholas meeting. Pan. What Is the
matter? Is any Body robbing me here?


Nic. Oh, Sir, the Devil (God bless us) is certainly got into that same huffy
Fellow, and he is driving him for ought I know into the next Pond, like any mad
Swine.


Pan. I Am glad on it; then I hope we are rid of him.


Nic. Ay, Sir, I warrant you he is far enough by this Time. But there is a
Neighbor of ours without says, he has a Bargain for your Worship.


Pan. What, at this time of Night? Bid him come in though. Exit Nicholas. It must
be some good Bargain, by the Hour it is brought at. Aside.


Re-enter Nicholas, with a large parcel of Plate up in a Cloth. Nic. He will not
be seen, Sir; but here is a parcel of Silver-Plate he wished me to bring you.


Pan. Leave it, and tell him, I thank him.


Nic. Not so fast, Robin; I bring it to be sold, Man. Why, there is enough of it
to buy a score of Lordships, and debauch a whole County.


Pan. Sold! But where is there Money to buy it? Nic. opens the Cloth, and Pan.
looks on it, during a good part of the Scene.


Nic. Thus it is now with these Mony-mongers! They Will all tell you there is no
Money, yet they are always laying out.


Pan. Hark you; your Ear: Was it stolen? For then I must give accordingly.


Nic. No mary wa'nt it: 'Twas my Neighbor's old Master's, such another old
Thief as your Worship: He damned himself to get, and his Heir wants to sell it
to buy Earthen Ware, I think.


Pan. Oh! if it is a young Heirs, he will afford as good a Pennyworth, as if
'twere stolen. A prudent Age! Men part with their solid Metal, to purchase
brittle Earth! What do you ask for it?


Nic. Cheap enough! Threescore and two Pence an Ounce.


Pan. Is that cheap?


Nic. Ay, mary, is it: Some would give Threescore and ten, yet cannot get enough
on it.


Pan. Ay, but we Men of Money know better Things: Come, I Will give you Fifty
Crowns for it, all at a Lump.


Nic. Why, I could have more at the Mint. Pantalone ties up the Plate again in
the Cloth.


Nic. Ay, but when, my Friend?


Nic. When? Why not to Night, it is somewhat of the latest; but after to Morrow.
Good by t'yee. Going.


Pan. Come back, I Will give you Thirty Pistols for it.


Nic. No, I Will take no less than Forty.


Pan. Come then, I Will advance -- Sixpence.


Nic. Keep your single Sice to buy a Halter. I Will take no less than Fourscore
Crowns.


Pan. Well, come back, and take 'em. This Fellow's a Fool, and takes much less
in Silver, than I bid him in Gold. Aside. Here Is the Money. Gives him Money.


Nic. Ay, but where is my Pair of Gloves? Don't I know there is no good Jobb got
nowadays, but the Procurer gets a Spel?


Pan. Ay, a Peasecods on it! That sometimes amounts to half on both sides. As.
Come, I Will give thee -- I Will give thee --


Nic. What will you gi' me?


Pan. Thanks -- And that is more than some will give for a good Turn.


Nic. Farewell and be Hanged, that is twice Go'd buy. Goes toward the Door, and
changes the Cloth and the Plate for a Cloth just like it, full of Earthen Ware,
so dexterously, that the Audience cannot perceive it.


Pan. Come, there is a Crown for thee.


Nic. A Crown! I Will have Forty in one Word; or you shall not have it.


Pan. Forty!


Nic. Ay, now I bargain for my self, Man.


Pan. Hang it! Come, take 'em, here is the whole Sum. Gives him the Money.


Nic. And there is the whole Plate. [Gives him the Bundle.] Exit Nic.


Pan. What lumping Bargain's we get, now Mony's scarce! Let Us see mine again!
That Is half the Pleasure of an Usurer. Sure it is worth above six hundred
Crowns. [ He opens the Cloth, and finds it full of course Earthen Ware.] Bless
me! Do I see, or no? -- No, sure I Dream -- No, but I don't -- Oh! this is
another of the Devil's Tricks. I Am undone! I Will hang my self strait, to avoid
Shame and Sorrow.


Enter Cynthio, like an Infernal Deity. Cyn. Hold, Mortal! Behold Mammon, that
dread Power that makes Men great, the God thou serv'st and worship'st. I Will now
make up thy Loss ten thousand Fold. Some Fiends, set on by Cynthio, have this
Night disturbed and threatened thee, but fear 'em not. I Am their Superior, and
will make them serve thee: For, what withstands Almighty Mammon's Power? I Will
force 'em now to fill this Chest with Gold. But they are of dismal Shapes, and
their Sight hurtful; then turn thy Back, and as thou love thy Life, or dearer
Wealth, till they have performed my Will, cast not an Eye this way. When thrice
you are called, then, turn, see, wonder, and still serve Great Mammon.


Pan. Dread Mammon, I obey; and if I turn before, may I then lose whatever I
have here.


Cyn. Spirits of Earth and Fire, appear
Swift as Thought, Great Mammon's here.
Take this Chest, and all that is in it,
And here return it in a Minute,
As full of Gold,
As it can hold.

Enter Two Men dressed like Devils. 1 Devil. Shall we, for want of Time to make
it,
At the Bank of Venice take it?

Cyn. No, you must not, lest you break it.

1 Devil. Shall we to that of London run?

Cyn. No; much of its Gold is gone.

1 Devil. To Amsterdam we'll fly with Speed.

Cyn. Ay, There you will find enough indeed,
But kept so close you scarce would speed.
Fly to Cales; there, like silly Elves,
They get it, but keep none themselves.

1 Devil. Swifter than Sight we fly through Air;
And in a moment will be there. Exeunt Cynthio, and Devils with the Chest.

Pan. Well, I Am made for ever. My Lord Mammon is like all the World, and is
kindest to those that keep Money by them; and I Will keep mine so, that it is not
not Forty in the Hundred Discount shall decoy me to part with it. I Have a great
Mind to turn, and make my Court to the Spirits, that they may bring me more
hereafter. But I must not. Would they were come! Methinks they out-stay their
Time. -- What if this damned Fiend that haunts me, has changed Shapes to plague
me more? What need they have taken the Chest? There my Deeds are, and ten
thousand Ducats! Oh! I Am in a cold Sweat -- Shall I look back? What shall I do?


Enter Nicholas. Nic. Oh! here is the old Craven dares not go to Roost without
me. He sleeps standing. I Will call him -- Master! Signore Pantalone!


Pan. Oh! I beg Great Mammon's Pardon! They are come.


Nic. Why, Signore Pantalone!


Pan. Hah! I Have been called twice.


Nic. Hey, Signore Pantalone!


Pan. Now do I turn to look on my Gold, and thank Great Mammon. [ Falls on his
Knees before Nicholas, e're he sees him; then seeing him is startled.] Hah!


Nic. Nay, why do you kneel to me for? I a'n't your Godfather.


Pan. Where Is my Chest, my Money, my Deeds?


Nic. Nay, the Devil and you know best.


Pan. Undone! Ruined! Let me curse my self into the Ground, for I have not enough
left to bury me! Run, Cry, Ride, charge a Constable with them.


Nic. With whom? With the Devil?


Pan. Run to a Conjurer. Cast a Figure! I Will have it again, though he has me
for it. Stay, I Will be revenged on my self. Get me some Poison.


Nic. How much, Sir? We buy it of 'Pothecaries at Half a Crown a Glass; but you
may have it at the Vintners at Eighteen Pence a Bottle.


Pan. No, not so dear! All my Mony's gone! Two pennyworth of Ratsbane will do
-- Stay, I Will save the Money. There Is a Rope yonder, I Will even hang my self. Oh
my Chest! My dear Chest! I Will not survive thy Loss. Thou art gone to the Devil!
Oh my Chest! my dear Chest! I Will follow thee. He claps a Rope about his Neck,
and steps out, as if 'twere to hang himself.


Nic. Wowns! He Is hanging himself. It Is like to be a blessed Time, though, when
Usurers hang themselves! But what a Pity it is! I came to tell him how he might
have licked himself whole, by lending a well-landed Heir a Sum of Money. He puts
his Hands between the Rope and his Neck on a sudden, peeps in, and speaks as if
half choked.


Pan. Is he of Age?


Nic. Mercy of me! I fancy, the hopes of chousing a young Squire, would raise
an Usurer from the Dead. You're welcome from Hell, Sir! Of Age, say you? Mary,
many of his Age have spent two or three times more than they are worth -- Stay,
an' he lives to see the First of April come Twelve-months, he will be -- just Two
and twenty. Blessed be the Day when it comes.


Pan. Oh he is a Minor. Nothing to be done! And more cause of hanging my self.


Nic. But, Sir!


Pan. Lard! Cannot you let a Man hang himself in Peace. He goes in, and hangs
himself.


Nic. Wowns! I must go get a good Knife, or his Soul will burst out at the
Bunghole. Exit Nicholas.


Enter Cynthio and Mezzetin. Cyn. Signore Pantalone hanged. I Will cut him down.
Cuts him down.


Mez. Lard, Sir, could not you let him alone? He Will have an Action against you
for spoiling his Rope.


Cyn. He Is not dead! His Pulse beats! He Is but in a Swoon.


Mez. Let Us keep the Room dark, and when he wakes make him believe he is in
Hell: This may do you and him some good.


Cyn. So it may -- But what have you done with my Spaniard?


Mez. Sir, he is come to his Senses: The Dose which I poured into his Glass
never works above a quarter of an Hour.


Cyn. Then he may be further useful. Bring our Spirits hither, while I order
Things to bring him before us, who will represent Lucifer's Court of Justice. Oh
they are here.


Enter Two Men like Devils. Cyn. Apply this Essence to his Nostrils; and when
he revives, tell him he is in Hell. Exeunt Cynthio and Mezzetin, who first puts
out the Candle.


Pan. Where am I?


1 Dev. In Hell, wretched Soul!


Pan. Hah! Defend me! What are you?


1 Dev. We are the Sheriff's Officers of Hell: You must come to be tried and
sentenced.


Pan. Oh hoh! But am I then dead?


1 Dev. Yes, and damned: Were you not an Usurer?


Pan. No indeed; I only lent Money to Friends, on Land, or other good Security,
at Twenty in the Hundred -- And that is but a National Rate you know. Oh hoh! I
should have thought I had been alive, but that I remember I hanged my self;
methinks I am no more dead than e're I was in my Life.


The Scene opens, and discovers Mezzetin like Minos, attended by other Devils
in Gowns, and some with Torches; Cynthio, Isabella, Colombina, and Nicholas, as
some of 'em, disguised and marked. Mez. Bring the Criminals to the Bar to
receive Sentence. Make haste, I Am hungry, and consequently as out of Humor as
my Brother-Judges above, at a tedious Quarter Sessions.


1 Dev. Bear back there! Make way for the Quack Doctor.


Enter Quack Doctor. Quack. Transportation, my Lord! I Have sent more People to
Hell last Year, than did a whole Army in Flanders.


Mez. That was but against your Will. Hearken to your Sentence. I Am in haste,
and wave Method. You shall swallow every Day a Peck of your own Pills! Twelve
Vomits, Sixteen Purges, Fourteen Bolus's, and Six and thirty Clysters of Aqua
Fortis.


1 Dev. Make way for the Vintner.


Enter a Vintner. Vintner. My Lord, I Have killed my self in your Service; and
have sent you more People than the modern Broachers of Heresies in Physic and
Divinity; and that is whole Legions, my Lord.


Mez. Against your Will too. You shall set up a Hedge-Tavern for Bullies and
Night-walkers; never Ride nor Tipple abroad, sell in sealed Measures at the
Statute-price, be boiled in slumm'd Claret, and drink your own Wines over again.


1 Dev. Room for an old Maid.


Enter Old Maid. Old Maid My Lord, I Am not fit for Hell.


Mez. How? And an old Maid?


Old Maid. There must be gnashing of Teeth: Now I have none, my Lord: Then
there must be Weeping; and I wept so much, first, for having refused, and then
for being refused, that I Am as dry as Tinder, my Lord.


Mez. Her Crimes are too enormous for Hell to punish -- Let her be -- Stay,
what shall she be? -- Still an old Maid.


O. Maid. My Lord, let me have the Benefit of the Clergy.


Mez. It Is too late. Take her away; cut her into Matches, and lay her up in
Pluto's Tinder-box.


O. Maid. I Am quick with Child, my Lord. I plead my Belly.


Mez. Away with her; I Will hear no more.


1 Dev. May it please your Lordship, here is a Criminal to be tried. Shows Pant.


Mez. Dam him! I Am in hasle. Let him be hanged on Tantalus's s'ree.


Pan. My Lord, I Have been hanged already.


Mez. What art thou?


Pan. An Usurer, as they will have it, an't please your Diabolity.


Mez. Hell's full of them. This makes People want Money so damnably above. What
were thou damned for?


Pan. For nothing, my Lord: Only for thinking too well of the World. I cheated,
as every Body does; I was cheated again, and so suspended my self.


Mez. Hearken to your Sentence. You shall for ever lend Money, without
Secucurity or Interest, to Prodigals, Projectors, and Poets; receive as many
Lashes as you have got Pence by Extortion, be sindg'd with your best Bonds, and
the Lord of Hell roast your Sole.


Pant. Mercy, My good Lord-Devil! I have neither Bonds, nor Money. Mercy! Mercy!


Mez. How! No Bonds! No Money! Produce the Chest.


1 Dev. Here it is produced in Court. The Chest is produced.


Pan. My Lord, I Have no right in 'em. These are only some Deeds that belong to a
Gentleman, whose Father I wronged; his Name's Cynthio: Let him have 'em. And
the Ten thousand Ducats are my Niece Isabella's: I was her Guardian, and
cheated her of 'em. Let 'em take 'em among 'em, and Marry when they will, and
do you have Mercy my Lord-Judge. Transportation! Mercy!


Mez. Mercy, upon an empty Stomach? Yet what shall we do with this wicked
Fellow? He Will but spoil these worthy Gentlemen here.


1 Dev. Let him set his Hand to this Paper to make good what he says, and send
him to his World again, without Money. He Will be miserable enough thus. There Is
no Room for him here; no not among the Proctors, Tailors, Overseers of the
Poor, nor the Pawn-brokers. Pantalone takes a Paper which is showed him, looks
on it, and then signs it.


Pan. Stay, is it stamped Paper? Yes! Hah would it wer'nt. Aside.] There, my
good Lord! I deliver this as my Act and Deed, for the use of the Persons
therein mentioned. He gives the Paper to Cynthio, who sits disguised like the
Clerk of the Court.


Mez. And I adjourn the Court -- These Gentlemen may go Sup where they can: As
for you, Signore Pantalone, you shall be our Guest. Mezzetin jumps off suddenly
from his Judgment Seat; the black Cloth, that covered it, at once draws forward
with him, and discovers a Table with Plates and a Banquet. Cynthio, Isabella,
Colombina and Nicholas, pull off their Disguises.


Pan. Bless me! Are you all in Hell? Or am I out of it? Oh I have been cheated,
gulled, made an Ass, and what is worse, a Beggar!


All. Hah, hah, hah! They laugh at him.


Cyn. Come, Sir, you have enough left: You Have parted with nothing but what was
not yours; and it is to your Niece, and to me, to whom you owe more; since you
owe me your Life; for, had I not cut the Rope, you had been dead, and damned as
you thought your self just now. Thank Providence, and learn to make a better
use of what you enjoy.


Pan. Well, the Advice is good. Heaven forgive me, and bless you together!
Since you have saved a Life that stood between an Estate and your Mistress, you
show you deserve it, and you shall have all, when I die: For now I Will right
those I Have wronged, and, though late, begin to lead a new Life.


Nic. Look you, Master of mine, so would I too. I borrowed some Plate of our
Neighbor, Sir John's Steward, and sold it you; then changed it and the Cloth,
thinking you would fancy the Devil had don't in this Hurly-burly: Since that they
brought me into this Plot here, for I knew nothing on it before; but take your
Muck again, it is Usurer's Money, the Widow's and Fatherless's Blood, and the
poor Man's Curse; 'twoud not thrive with me.


Pan. No, to show I Am no more such, keep it; I give it thee freely, honest
Fellow.


Nic. Well, now I dare keep it. There Is a Wonder come to pass! A Pinchpenny
grown Free-hearted. Covetousness routed out. Well,

To cure all Misers of that cursed Evil,
I fancy there is no Doctor like the Devil.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE,
Spoken by Mrs. Prince.
KIngs send Ambassadors; so Poets do.
I from the French, to the Confederates, You,
Am sent Plenipotentiary; for Peace to sue.
To treat with me, pray think it no Disgrace!
You may read my Credentials in my Face.
Besides, I Am told, the silliest Women are,
Able to deal with the best of you here:
You're fierce at first, but tamely end the War.
The Power that sent me offers to restore
All he took since he treated here before,
Or else Equivalents. What would y' have more?
Not want at Home from others made him take:
He only took for sweet Convenience-sake.
Agree! Faith, once I thought, as he does use you,
This talk of Peace was only to amuse you.
But now he finds his Treasury grows low;
Though yours he fancies now is but so so.
Thus, tired like you, he is willing War should cease,
Because he hopes he may get more by a Peace.
All you he will spare, whom pointed Satire hits,
From those who crow'd us here, to yonder peeping Wits;
Even Critics, Masks, and Beaux; nay Cuckolds, Squires and Cits.
He Will let the Critic for good-natured pass;
The Mask for fair and modest, while she hides her Face.
The Fair, who scarce dares ogle at Hide-Park,
Shall safely meet in the other, when it is dark,
And keep Time with the Music and her Spark.
The Wits for Beaux shall pass; for Wits, the Beaux,
And if they please, wear Periwigs to their Toes,
And Shoulder of Mutton-Flaps in Gaudy double Rows.
The Squire shall be well bred, old Matron pretty,
And Cuckold's-point no Scandal to the City.
Why, thus you will all be safe! Then kindly bless
This my first Embassy, with fair Success.
Ladies, let your Mediation end the War!
He never trespassed yet against the Fair.
And, Sirs, till we your Hearts to a Peace induce,
Pray let me have your Hands, and grant at least a Truce,
We'll ratify't on Thursday at this Place:
But then be sure you ben't in Needmore's Case.
Plays, and other Books, Printed for and Sold by Richard Parker and Peter Buck.
MArriage-Hater Matched, a Comedy, by Mr. D'Vrfey. Traitor, a Tragedy, by Mr.
Rivers. Love's last Shift, a Comedy, by Mr. Cibber. Agnes de Castro, a Tragedy,
by a young Lady. Neglected Virtue, a Tragedy. Unhappy Kindness, a Tragedy, by
Mr. Scott. Love's a Jest, a Comedy, by Mr. Motteux. Pyrrhus King of Epirus, a
Tragedy; by Mr. Charles Hopkins, Author of Boadicea Queen of Britain. A
Tragedy. Old Batchelour, a Comedy, by Mr. Congreve. The Roman Bride's Revenge,
a Tragedy. Woman's Wit, or the Lady in Fashion, a Comedy, by Mr. Cibber.
Provoked Wife, a Comedy; by the Author of the Relapse, or Virtue in Danger.
Poems on several Occasions; written in Imitation of the manner of Anacreon;
with other Poems, Letters and Translations: By Mr. Oldmixon. The Gentleman's
Journal; complete Sets, or single ones. By Mr. Motteux.
Newly Published,
Plot and no Plot, a Comedy, by Mr. Dennis. The Intreagues of Versailles, or a
Jilt in all Humors; a Comedy, by Mr. D'Vrfey.

