THE QVESTIONS OF QVESTIONS Which rightly resolved resolves all our Questions
in Religion.

THIS QVESTION IS Who ought to be our Judge in all these our differences?

THIS BOOK ANSWERS THIS QVESTION And Hence shows a most easy, and yet a
most safe way, how among so many Religions the most unlearned, and learned may
find the true Religion.

BY OPTATVS DVCTOR

Call for one Simon, whose surname is Peter, and he will tell thee what thou
oughest to do. Act: 10. Verse. 5.6. Printed in GANT. By Maximilian Graet. 1658.

Permissu Superiorum.

The Table. The four chief Points handled in this Book.
The first Point. That there must be some infallible Judge, or Rule to decide
all necessary Controversies to whom all are bound under pain of damnation to
submit their understandings. Quest: 1. The second Point. That the Scripture is
not this infallible Judge or Rule appointed us by God to end all our
Controversies. Quest: 2. The third Point. That the Church is the Judge
appointed by God to end all our controversis in Faith. Quest. 3. The fourth
Point. That the Church which is the infallible Judge in all Controversies is
the Roman Church, and therefore all are bound to submit to her. Quest: 4.
There follows a Table of the several Questions and Sections into which the
four foresaid Points are divided.

THE QVESTION OF QVESTIONS. Who ought to be our Judge in all Controversies?
The Preface. The importance of this Question, and how easily even ignorant
people may come to be fully resolved in itt, all being reduced to fover only
points. P. 1. The First Question. Whether there must be some infallible Judge
or Rule to decide all necessary Controversies, to whom all are bound under pay
of damnation to submit their understanding? And how orderly we proceed in the
finding out this Judge. Page: 1. The second Question. Whether the Scripture be
this infallible Judge or Rule appointed us by God to decide all necessary
Controversies? Page: 9. The first Section. Containing five proofs that
Scripture is not this Judge or Rule. Page: 9. Section 2. That Scripture
conteyneth not plainly all things necessary to be believed or done to
Salvation. This is showed by 14. Examples. Page: 26. Section 3. By Scripture we
know not which books be Canonical Scripture, which not. Neither is Scripture
known to be Gods word by its own light. Wherefore Protestants do not believe
Scripture with divine Faith. Page: 43. Section 4. That the Scriptures cannot
decide this Controversy, which books be the true uncorrupted copies of the
true books of Scripture? And therefore Protestants believe not Scripture with
divine Faith. A word of the famous Bible now coming forth at London. Page: 65.
Section 5. That Scripture cannot decide this Controversy which Translations of
the word of God be true? And therefore ordinary Protestants cannot believe
Scripture with divine Faith. Page: 88. Section 6. That the Scripture cannot
decide the Controversy about the truth of S. Matthewes Gospel. And that our
adversaries do not believe this Gospel with divine Faith. Page: 104. Section 7.
That the Scripture cannot decide the manifest Controversies about the true
sense thereof; Therefore in the belief of the true sense thereof our adversaries
have no divine Faith, nor sure ground out of their Religion. Page: 110. Section.
8. Diverse other necessary points not contained in, or decided by Scripture.
Page: 136. Section 9. A Four and twentyth necessary point not contained in
Scripture. Page: 148. Section 10. By the text which our adversaries bring to
prove, that Scripture conteynes and decides all necessary Controversies, we
prove the contrary. Page: 156. Section 11. Although Scripture only should be our
Judge: Yet this Judge would decide many points clearly against you. Page: 181.
Section 12. That Holy Fathers never allowed Scripture for the only Rule of
Faith. Page: 185.
The third Question. Whether the Church be the Judge appointed by God to end
all our Controversies. With a word to the Socinians concerning reasons being
our Judge. Page: 191. Section 13. It is declared what we understand when we
seek whether the Church be our Judge or no. Page: 194. Section 14. It is proved
out of the old Testament that the Church is our infallible Judge in all
Controversies of Faith. Page: 197. Section 15. It is proved out of the new
Testament that the Church is our infallible Judge in all Controversies of
Faith. Page: 210. Section 16. The same is proved by several Reason:. Page: 342.
The fourth and last Question. Which is that Church which is the infallible
Judge in all Controversies? How she exercises her infallible Judgment? And
what submission is dew unto her? Page: 368. Section 17. Whether the Roman Church
be that Church which is our infallible Judge? Page: 370. Section 18. In what
court this infallible Judge decideth our Controversies in Faith? Page: 373.
Section 19. This Court in deciding Controversies rules her self by the word
of God written and unwritten. And why she rules her self by Tradition? Page:
385. Section 20. That the Fathers teach these Traditions, and the definitions
of Councels or Church to be infallible. Page 405. Section 21. That the Fathers
teach in general the Church to be infallible. Page: 414. Section 22. That all
which the Fathers say of the infallibility of the Church in her Traditions or
Councels, or in general terms, is meant by them particularly of the Roman
Church as we understand the Roman Church. Page: 435. Section 23. Some things
very necessary for the easier answering our adversaries Objections. Page: 443.
Section 24. Twenty Objections of an university man against the infallibility of
the Church and also some others are resolved. Page: 456. Section the last. The
Roman Church having been proved to be our infallible Judge, all under pain of
damnation are bound to submitt to her Judgment. Page: 477.

A Table of some particular Matters incidently treated in this Book.
OF Reading the Scripture, and using divine service in the vulgar tongue.
Question: 2. Section. 1. number: 10. 11. Page: 23.

Of doing good works for hope of Reward. Quest: 2. Sect: 4. n. 6. Page: 74.

Of the great difference in fundamentals between the Roman Catholic and
Protestants. Q. 2. S. 2. n. 13. P. 40. 41. and Q. 2. S. 7. n. 7. 8. 9. 10. etc:
Page: 121.

Of the necessity of Baptism for Children. Q. 2. S. 8. n. 3. etc: Page: 137.

Of the fast of Lent. Q. 2. S. 8. n. 8. Page: 146.

How Protestants are cheated by their Ministers who say to them come with us
and you shall see evidence of Scripture for all you believe and do. And how
Roman Catholics see better reason for what they believe and do then
Protestants. Quest: 2. S. 2. n. 1^. Q. 2. S. 4. n. 7. 8. Q. 2. S. 5. n. 2. 3.
4. 5. Q. 2. S. 7. n. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. Q. 3. S. 16. n. 7.

That the Power of Judging Ecclesiastical affairs belong not to the Lay. Q.
4. S. 18. n. 3. Page: 377.

It is a sin to marry after vowed Chastity. Q. 4. S. 20. n. 4. Page: 409.

Faith is more assuredly grounded upon Tradition then upon manifest Miracles.
Q. 3. S. 16. n. 5. Page: 356.

No Circle in the Resolution of Faith made by the Roman Catholics. Q. 3. S.
16. n. 6. P. 358. The Protestant Circle, Q. 2. S. 3. n. 13. Page: 64.

How the belief, even of ignorant Roman Catholics comes to be infallible. Q.
3. S. 16. n. 7. Page: 360.

What it is which makes our faith infallible though we have no infallible
knowledge of this infallibility. Q. 4. S. 23. n. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. etc. Page:
449.

Prayer for the dead better grounded then Baptism of children Q. 4. S. 19. n.
4. p. 411. Also better grounded then the faith by which Protestants believe the
Apocalypse to be Scripture. They were held for Heretics who denied Prayer for
the dead. Ibidem the Church shined with the custom of praying for the dead in
S. Austens days. Ibidem

Before thou read this Book take a pen and correct the chief faults thus.
Page. Line Fault Correction. 8 7 which in which 114 25 are care 120 26
corruption interpretation 121 20 which? I which I 159 near the end as he ask
173 near the end now here no where 224 10 Cause Case 366 12 head had 366 26
Verity Unity 373 17 infallible infallibly 394 2 Arminians Armenians 412 near
the end now here no where 412 5, again. Again 416 8 Thus. If this 423 3 Those
these 428 last as is 439 14 Freach to Freach French to French 456 1 has not
has or has not 458 8 af of 470 last intention with intention. With

In the nineth line before the end of Page, 90. blot out from such, and write
from such at the beginning of the next line.

THE QVESTION OF QVESTIONS Who ought to be our Judge in all Controversies?
THE PREFACE.
The importance of this Question: and how easily, even ignorant men, may come
to be fully resolved in it, all being reduced to four only points.

I. SAint Anselm has a very fit Similitude to express, how much a
contentious spirit in disputing does blind the understanding from seeing that
truth, which a peaceable search, free from all prejudice, does easily discover.
He tells us, that a little before Sunne-rising, two men in the open fields, did
fall into a hot debate concerning that part of the heavens, in which the Sun
was that day to rise. They passed so far in their contention, that, falling
first together by the ears, they at last pulled out one an others eyes, Whence
it happened that, when by and by after the Sun did rise, neither of them both
could see a thingh so clear as was that part of the heaven, in which the Sun
did shine so conspicuously to all men who had eyes. To our purpose. Many
thousands there be who knowing Zeal in Religion to be laudable, and having a
most prejudicate opinion of the truth of that Religion, in which they were from
the first use of reason bred up, and which brings many temporal commodities
unto them; they stand so hotly to the mainteyning thereof that their passionate
affection quite puts out that clear eye sight of reason: Whence it comes to
pass that, when the Truth, is no less clearly set before the eyes of their
understanding, then the brightest Sunshine is set before our corporal eyes,
they are not in case to behold it, though me^ of mean capacity would most
evidently see it, when they have laid a side all passion, and prejudice, and
with a calm and humble mind begged of Allmighty God grace to embrace that
sincerly, which upon diligent search, they should understand to be truth. He
who thus seeks, shall not fail to find.

II. I know the multitude of Controversies which have been raised this last
age, and the manifold difficulties with which they are now grown to be
entangled, do make the Search of Truth seem an impossibility to the ignorant,
and overwearisome to the most strong and struggling Wits: Therefore no Books
seem now more necessary then such Treatises which handle the maine question of
Questions, upon which all other particular questions so wholly depend, that the
true solution of it does necessarily draw with it the solution of all other
controversies which are or can be. This Question of Questions is, whether God,
out of his most sincere desire to bring all Souls to that happy eternity for
which only he created the^ has not left us some Judge upon earth to end all
our, otherwise endless, controversies? And who this Judge is For the
incomparably greater part of those Souls, for which Christ has shed his
most precious blood, being unlearned, his providence had been defective, if
the means of ending controversies in points necessary to salvation, had been
so hard to be applied that it had been out of the vulgar reach. It beseemed
therefore the Divine Providence to leave us such means as should be both easy
for all men to use (that so all men might, by the use of them, come to the end
which God so earnestly desires) and should also be most sufficient for our
safe direction. For, to provide us of easy means, which had been insufficient
to direct us securely, had not been to his, or our purpose.

III. We must say then, that God has provided us both of means sufficient to
bring us securely to the knowledge of that Truth, which is necessary for the
Salvation of our souls, and we must say also, that this means is
sufficiently easy to be duly used, and applied by the far greater part of
the world, consisting of unlearned people. For if it were not sufficiently easy
to them to apply it duly, so as by it to atteyne to that true belief, Without
which it is impossible to please God (11. Hebr: 6.) It would also be
unprofitable unto that end for which God did give it them. This is most
agreeable to reason and also to those most comfortable words of Scripture (
Esaias. 35.) Say to the faint hearted take courage and fear not. Behold God
himself will come and will save you. Then the eyes of the blind shall be
opened and the ears of the deaf. And there shall be a path and a way, and it
shall be called the Holy Way. And this shall be unto you a direct way, so that
fools cannot err by it. These words must be made good, and therefore such a
way must be given unto us. And it must not only be a Way direct in it self,
but also it must be unto us a direct Way, and that so direct that even fools
cannot (except Wilfully) err by it. This way was promised to be given us, as
it is there said when God himself should come and save us; and provide better
for our Salvation then he had done for those of either the Law of Nature, or
Jewish Law. Our labor must be to find out this Way. And this must not be hard
even to the ignorant. For it had been to small purpose to provide some where,
in this vast world, a Way, so direct for the guidance of the ignorant, without
the means, to be put in this way, were also sufficiently easy, even unto them
as ignorant as they are. See my second Section, also the 3. 4. 5. 6.

IV. I intend then (by the grace of God) in this Treatise to show that this Way
may be easily found out, by only satisfying ourselves in the true Resolution of
this Question of Questions, leading us to know assuredly Who is to be our Judge
in all our Controversies appointed to be so by God Himself? For when we have
once found him, all Controversies cease of what questions so ever; for without
all Controversy we must follow this Judge appointed by God to no other end,
then to make an end of all our Controversies by his clear sentence; Whence D.
Fern in his 27. Section: Indeed such a Judge or Vmpire of Christendom would
(if to be had) be a ready means to compose all differences and restore truth
and peace. We will then endeavor to show that such a Judge is to be had: And
our prime care shall be to proceed so clearly, that a man, of ordinary
capacity, may carry away the substance of our whole discourse, which for this
effect, we draw to only four pomits. First I shall show that we must have
some infallible Judge, or Rule deciding all our necessary Controversies, to
which Rule we will show all men bound under pain of damnation to submit even
with interior submission of Judgment. Secondly I will show at large that the
Scripture is not this Judge or Rule, which point will require a very full
examination, because our adversaries ground them selves mainly in the contrary
opinion, and all our new Sects have no other ground at all. I will show Thirdly
that this infallible Judge can be no other (as things stand) then the true
Catholic Church; And this must be also fully handled because it is the ground
of our Religion; And the true Resolution of the Question of Questions depends
wholly on itt. Lastly I will show that all the arguments, which convince the
true Catholic Church to be this Judge, do convince the Roman, and no Church
but the Roman. To be this infallible Judge to whom all consequently must be
bound under pain of damnation to submitt their Judgments, and accordingly live
united to her Communion; this blessed union will end our Controversies.

V. Indeed this Question of Questions truly resolved quite undermines the
foundation of all Sects opposite to the Roman Church, showing us a most easy,
and yet a most safe way, how in these times the most learned and unlearned may
find the true Religion, to wit, by following the Judgment of that Judge, whom
God has appointed them in all doubts of Religion to folllow. And therefore, in
this infinite confusion of new fangled Sects, this Question (though never so
often handled heretofore,) seems now more necessary then ever, even although
I should do nothing, else but publish new Coppies of old arguments; such
Coppies being now so very necessary to be thrust into every man's hands. My
best endeavors shall aim at making these arguments truly public: that is to
set them down so plainly, and in so vulgar and clear language, devoide of
School Terms, that ordinary people may fully conceave and perfectly
understand the force of them. If my endeavors in this can be successful, I
hope this work, after so many other men's writings will, not be unseasonable at
least for the vulgar. But they must have patience with a long answer to a most
important and ample Question.

printer's device of Maximilian Graet M.G.



THE FIRST QVESTION.
Whether there must be some Infallible Judge, or Rule to deduce all necessary
Controversies to whom all are bound under pain of damnation to submit their
understandings. AND How orderly we proceed to the finding out of this Judge.

1. THis Question is put in the first place, rather for order sake, then for
any debatable difficulty which it contaynes. For all Christians, of what
Religion so ever they be, do agree in this, that there must be some certain and
assured means to end all Controversies or doubts, which either be, or can be
in Religion. The reason is apparent, because otherwise every man might be left
free to believe what he judged best, and so we should soon have as many
Religions as there be private and different judgments. Truth is but one:
wherefore though all these different opinions may be false, yet it is manifest
that, (though they be thousands,) but only one of them can be true. For
whosoever differs from this one opinion which is true, differs from the
truth. S. Paul tells us (11. Hebr: 6.) Without Faith it is impossible to please
God. That is, it is impossible to please him without true Faith: for he is not
pleased with false Faith. Without we please God it is impossible to be saved,
and you see it is impossible to please him with out true Faith. And again you
see that true Faith cannot be found in quite contrary persuasions, of which one
only can be true, there must therefore be some means to know this one true
Faith from so infinite a multitude of false opinions. What means is this?

2. It must be a means infallible, as all Christians agree, but Socinians. For
if it be fallible, all Religion may be a phansy. Christian Faith is an
infallible assent, to which no fallible means can bring us. This means
therefore must be infallible. Hitherto we all agree. See whitaker Cont. 1. Q.
1. Cap. 8.

3. All also can not but agree in this, that our inward understanding must be
bound, under pain of damnation, to submit it self unto that infallible Judge,
or Rule appointed by God to decide all necessary Controversies. For if you in
your private judgment, without any fault at all, may follow what you really
think fittest to be followed, why may not I, as well as you; And an other as
well as you or I, follow what really seems fittest to be followed? Wherefore,
it were to no purpose at all (in order to the preservation of unity in faith)
to have an infallible Judge, unless every man in particular were bound, by a
most strict precept, to submit to that Judge. Again he who should not submit to
an authority acknowledged to be appointed by God to such an end, should
manifestly resist to be governed by that means by which the Divine Providence
had decreed to govern him, which is a damnable rebellion against God; and an
act of high treason it is against the Divine Majesty, to refuse to stand to the
judgment of that Judge, or determination of that Rule which God has placed,
for no other end but for all to stand and submitt unto it, that by this
submission, they may be guided infallibly to that one true Faith, without which
it is impossible to please God, or be saved. Now because all Faith essentially
consists in the inward understanding (which is the very seat of true or false
Faith) God, who looks upon our interior Soul, exacteth to see in that a
ready embracing of that Faith, without which no Salvation is to be had, and
therefore he should not seriously desire our Salvation, unless he desired that
we interiorly yealded full assent to this one, and only Saving Faith, which
Faith consisting essentially (as I said) in the interior judgment, God would
have this judgment readely to submitt to that infallible Judges determination,
appointed by him, as the only means to bring us assuredly to this one true
Faith. Things which are necessary to please God. must of necessity be things of
precept and strict command, even under pain of damnation, because our very
greatest obligation, of all obligatio^s, is to obey his will, and pleasure. And
his Sacred pleasure is to exact that most at our hands, which is most for our
good, and which makes most for our Salvation. True Faith therefore being a
necessary means to bring us to our eternal good, he, with all reason,
exacteth of us all, to submit our interior understanding (the very seat of true
or false Faith) to the full assent of that, which shall be prescribed us to
believe, by that means, which his holy providence shall assign us, for our
guidance in Faith: that so all may be united in Faith interiorly: for in deed
otherwise they be not of one Faith at all. And hence again appears that this
means must be infallible, for it is not possible that God should put a Command
upon all to follow that which might lead to any error great, or little.

4. Out of this general doctrine, received universally without any
considerable contradiction, there follows manifestly this consequence, that
two men, of two different Religions, cannot be saved, if both of them know what
doctrine is taught them, by that infallible Judge or Rule, appointed them by
God to be followed, as their guide, in matters of Faith. For both these men,
knowing on the one side that God has put an obligation upon them, to submitt
to the believing of that, which is proposed by his infallible Judge or Rule;
and yet, on the other side, one of them flatly refusing to believe what is thus
proposed unto him; this one who proceeds thus must needs be guilty of the
damnable sin of refractary disobedience against the express command of God,
obliging strictly all to submitt to the Judge appointed by him, to guide all to
the necessary true Faith, and known to be so appointed: Hence it is Scripture:
He who does not believe shall be damned. Mark. 16. v. 16. And of those who
follow sects, S. Paul says: Gal. 5.20.21. They who do these things shall not
obteyn the Kingdom of Heaven.

5. These principles I lay down so distinctly in the beginning, and will again
inculcate at the ending, that all may see of how high concernment it is to make
use of this means, wholly necessary to that only true Faith, without which it
is impossible to please God and to be saved. They therefore are in a damnable
case, who being strictly obliged to use that means, which is wholly necessary
to come to the knowledge of this only true Faith, do not inform them selves
carefully to find out this means appointed by God to guide and direct all to
this only true Faith, either fondly believing that men of contrary Religions
may be saved (which we have just now proved to be false, except in case of
invincible ignorance) or else by damnable negligence, omiting to use that
serious care in seeking out, and solicitously searching, the knowledge of this
means, which they are obliged to do in a matter concerning a no less business,
then an eternity of everlasting bliss; or never ending misery. Now least any
one should secretly dispaier of finding out this means, and so grow slack in
the search of it (which is the lamentable case of many thousands) I (in my
preface at the beginning) took care to show, that, even ignorant people,
might, by a very tolerable care, come to the knowledge of this means, or else
God had not sufficiently, according to his most sweet Providence, provided for
the far greater part of those Souls, for whose Salvation he died, intending
to save them all, by first bringing them to the profession of this only true
Faith; and consequently, intending to leave them some certain means, to come
to the knowledge of it, by such diligence as is very tolerable to human
frailety, and very possible to us, as ignorant as we are.

6. What then is this means? It is (as I said in the beginning of this
Question) to follow some infallible Judge or Rule, directing us plainly and
clearly to the knowledge of what God would have us believe, to whom we are all
bound under pain of damnation to submit our understandings. But who is this
Judge or Rule? This is the Question of Questions. Here we and all Protestants,
and all other Sectaries notably disagree. They all say that we are obliged to
follow, and admit no other infallible Rule then the Scripture, which Scripture
they all affirm to be a Rule sufficient, by it self a lone, to tell us so
plainly, and so clearly, all that is necessary to Salvation in matters of
Faith, that we need no other means to direct us in this point. We, who are
Roman Catholics hold the Scripture to be indeed a Rule infallible, and to
which all are bound, under pain of da^natio^, to submit their understandings;
but we have very many, and very convincing reasons, which move us to believe
that God did not intend the Holy Scripture to be, by it self alone, our only
guide in matters of faith necessary to Salvation, as I show by five proofs in
the first Section. Moreover we say that we stand in need of some other
infallible guide to know many things necessary to Salvation, which be not
clearly set down in Scripture, and I shall show no fewer then 24. all not to be
known by Scripture, which does not tell us which Books be the true word of God,
which be not, which be true uncorrupted coppies of these Books, which Coppies
be false and corrupted, and in what places they be corrupted. Here comes in an
unanswerable difficulty about S. Matthews Gospel. Again we stand in need of an
other infallible guide to tell us which is the true, certain and undoubted
sense of these true Coppies, and which is not. For, from hence arrise almost
all our gratest Controversies. Again, because our adversaries without such an
infallible guide, different from Scriptures, can neither infallibly know which
books be the true word of God, which be not; nor which be the true Original
Coppies of these true books, which not; nor which the true Translations of the
true originals; nor which is the undoubted sense of these true Originals or
Coppies, and which is not. Hence we conceive it impossible for them truly to
believe Scripture with that divine Faith, which is grounded always upon
divine revelation, and is wholly necessary to salvatio. Whence we hold our
selves only to be the true believers of Scripture; for we believe it with that
Faith which rests upon divine revelation. Moreover by our adversaries
arguments alleged out of Scripture, to prove it to be the only Rule of Faith,
sufficient by it self to decide all necessary Controversies, we prove that it
is not such a Rule. Yea though Scripture were granted to be this Rule, we from
hence can prove, that it clearly decideth many necessary Controversies for us
against our adversaries. But we hold that, for our Rule clearly deciding all
necessary Controversies, we must have a Living Judge which the Scripture is
not, and therefore the Holy Fathers, in their disputations against Heretics,
often refused to stand to Scripture only. This infallible Living Judge we say
is the Church, regulating her self in her determinations according to the
infallible Rule of Gods word, out of which word she judges her self to be
obliged also to Rule her self according to those Traditions which the Apostles
did deliver by word of mouth only, and not by writing. For the Scripture not
containing all matters necessary to Salvation; but the Apostoles of Christ
delivering some of these matters only by word of mouth, she rules also her
self in her definitions according to these traditions knowing that those
things which the Apostoles taught by word of mouth, are no less worthy all
credit, then what they taught by pen and paper. And by the same Traditions she
is as sufficiently assured of what was delivered only by word of mouth, as of
what was delivered by pen and paper. Now least that in taking true Sripture for
false, true Traditions for false, or in delivering the true Sense of the one,
or the other, this Church should be subject to error, we say, she is in these
matters, always assisted in her public determinations, by the infallible
assistance of the Holy Ghost, promised to her for this e^d to lead her in to
all truth. That chief Court, in which she delivers to the people her
infallible Definitions, we all hold to be lawful general Councels, which the
supreme Pastor of the Church presideth. Neither does this Church want means to
make all her decrees evidently known to the people, to be her true Decrees.
And all this, which has hitherto been said of the Church in general, we show
to be verified only of the Roman Church; of whom also all these prime things
which the Scriptures say of the true Church, are verified, and united in her
alone: The Roman Church therefore beenig this our infallible Judge appointed by
God to end, and determine all our Controversies, all under pain of damnation are
to submit their inward Judgments and understandings to her decrees, Neither
are they in state of Salvation who refuse to do it.

7. Here you have a brief Sum of all our doctrine in general, and just
almost in that very order that I have delivered here so many important points,
without bringing here any full proof of them. I shall now proceed to the full
proof of all, and every one of these points here set down, so briefly, to the
end that thou may see how clearly we proceed, resolving first this Question
Who is to be our Judge, by showing in diverse Sections that the Scripture is
not Judge. And then showing that this infallible Judge can be no other then the
Church. And thirdly, that this Church can be no other then the Roman. And
consequently all that has hitherto been said, or hereafter shall be said, to
agree to the infallible Judge (whom we are now seeking out) is verified of the
Roman Church and of no other.

THE SECOND QVESTION.
Whether the Scripture be this infallible Judge or Rule appointed us by God to
decide all necessary Controversies.

THE FIRST SECTION.
Containing five proofs that Scripture is not this Judge or Rule.

1. ALl Protestants, and all that numberles number of our new Sectaries, do
affirm that the Scripture, and only the Scripture by it self alone, is that
infallible Rule, by which all necessary controversies that are, or can be, are
to be decided. As for the means to regulate our selves in the knowledge of
true, and false Scripture, and for the finding the certain and undoubted true
sense of the same, they make no other use of the authority of any Church, or
any general Council, but to consider of what they say, and ponder how
agreeable, or disagreable their opinions be to Scripture, And then, if, by their
private judgment of discretion, they in their own, understandings be convinced
that, what they say, is agreeable to Scripture, they, for this reason, give
belief unto it. If they by their private judgment of discretion be convinced
that, what they say, is not agreeable to Scripture, they freely reject it, and
disbelieue it. And this has ever been the proceeding of all ancient Heretics
and is ever like to be the proceeding of all Heretics to come For by this
means thy all come to that, which they all desire, that is, to have that pass
for truth which each of them, in their private judgments of discretion, do
think to be true according to their manner of understanding the Scripture. And
they all trust more to their private understanding of the Scripture, then they
do trust to the interpretation of it made by the greatest Doctors that ever the
Church of God had for these thousand and six hundred years, how holy or how
learned so ever they were: Yea more then they will trust all the chief
Pastors and Prelates of the Church-assembled in a General Council, after they
have with all mature deliberation considered all the texts of Scriptures
coneerning such a point and conferred them with the originals, and with other
places, and after they have examined each Bishop of each nation what they find
to have been delivered to them by their a^cestors touching this point, by much
prayer, and public fasts of all the Church diffused, implored the assistance
of Allmigty God to direct them to the knowledge of the truth in such a poinct.
For after all this done, and after all these prime learned, and Holy Prelates of
the Church, have, by full consent, defined such a point to be held as true, and
that under pain of excommunication. Behold! When this decree Comes forth,
there will start up some devout Cobbler, or Weaver: he will take this decree
into the one hand, and in the other he will take his English Bible, translated
by some body (though neither I, nor he have any assurance of his honesty or
skill, or of the vncorruptednes of the Copy by which this English Bible was
translated) yet into his hands he will take it. And then sincerely he will make
a reuew of this decree, or of the whole book of decrees, made by this, or by
any general Council. And then if after his serious perusal of the matter his
rude understanding, according to his private judgment of discretion, does in
good earnest think this Decree (or all these Decrees) to be contrary to the
word of God (rightly interpreted by him) this man, according to the principles
of our adversaries, may securely disbelieve this doctrine, though proposed by
so great an authority as I have said, yea though this authority, as they them
selves say, be the very greatest authority upon earth. To relate this
prodigious opinion is enough to refute it; and to show how far more rationally
we Roman Catholics rather trust to the interpretations of general Councels,
which we on the one side find seconded every where by the authority of the
gravest Doctors of the Church of God, according to their judgment of
discretion, and the Tradition and judgeme^t, and perpetual practice of their
Ancestors. And the^ on, the other side we see our own selves, that all this
is to the very full as much yea and far more agreeable to the word of God
according to our own private judgeme^t of discretion, wherefore in this
respect we are to the very full as well grounded as they, and we see as well
what we do: But we infinitely exceed them in the advantage that we have, by
following not only our own, but also a far better sighted judgment the^ our
own, even in the use of natural reason, besides which reason those General
Councels have a more special assistance of the Holy Ghost. And thus we
persever in all ages in all unity, whilst they in this one age have so run
division upon the ground of Scripture, that the mere relation of their several
Sects in this one age, with the several opinions of every Sect of this age,
fills whole books, which be to to be seen in every Stationers Shop. And it
is a wonder if any new year pass without one or more Religions springing up,
as long as this one Principle passes for current, and men may have free
liberty to follow the consequences which manifestly follow from it, as of late
they have it. If this daily hatching of Religions happened not sooner, it was
because this liberty was not granted sooner. For althouh their Bishops held
the doctrine of giving all liberty to follow in Conscience what they in their
private judgments of discretion held to be conformable to Gods word; yet they
very inconsequently, forced their Consciences to an exterior conformity, as
long as their power lasted, for fear that should not last long, if men were
permitted to practice what they were permitted and taught to believe.

2. But to go on more orderly, we say the Bible by it self alone is not this
Judge, or rule appointed by God to decide all necessary Controversies, without
you take the Bible as it, by many and very clear texts, sends us for more full
instruction to the Church. In this sense, it is most true that the Bible is a
very sufficient Rule, as shall hereafter be more fully declared. But we deny
that, which our adversaries affirm, that the Bible, taken by it self, does
suffice to decide, and end all our controversies. This I prove first; by an
argument so manifest, that, in these days, he must put out his eyes who will
not see the truth of it. For who sees not now the Bible daily consulted, place
conferred with place, the best originals searched for, and looked for, and
published more then ever (we having the advantage of printing:) and yet after
this; who sees not that Controversies about the very chief points of
Religion, are so far from being lessened, that never was age seen, or heard
of, in which they multiplied more No sooner had Martin Luther broached this
Principle, that every man might take the Bible into his hand, and follow that
interpretation, which after due diligence used, he thought to be best; but
presently, there sprung up an incredible number of different Sects. For An.
1526. Carolostadius, Zuinglius and OEcolampadius began to preach that opinion
of the Sacramentaries, which denies Christ to be really present in the
Sacrament (an opinion which Luther did curse until his very death.) The next
year after Paciomontanus and Rothomannus, reteyning other opinions of Luther
brought in Anabaptisme. And these Anabaptists are now grown to be divided into
twenty different Sects, all described particularly by Spanthemius. In fine
Luther himself and his disciples did so tumble about their new Religion,
turning it with so many chopps, and changes, that OEcolampadius objected unto
them, If we reflect upon your dissentions, surely there are almost found among
you seventy seven changes. Aequa responsio ad Lutherum. Praefat. Their chief
permanent Sects were, the Antinomians, Osiandrians, Majorists, Synergists,
Stancarians, Amsdorfians, Flavians, Substantiatians, Accidentarians,
Adiaphorists, Musculans, Pseffringians, Vbiquists. So much for Lutherans.

3. Now in the year 1538. John Calvin a disciple of Zwinglius, despising his
master did set up of him self, adding many opinions to that of the
Sacramentarians. This man's Religion, and his disciples began so quikly to be
divided, and subdivided in to so many sects, that Luther did live to write thus
of them: I scarce ever read of a more deformed beresy, which presently in the
beginning was divided into so many heads, such a number of Sects (mark what
follows) not one like an other, and such variety and disagreeing of opinions.
Tom. 7. f. 380. And in another place he adds, Six or seven Sects of them to
have risen in only two years space. T. 6. f. 335. Thus much could Luther say
of their very beginnings. We, at this day, see that his English disciples can
ring the Changes as well as any of their forefathers, so that now every family
is like a house in which the Master speaks high Dutch, the Mistres French,
the children one Spanish, one Irish, one Scottish, and some servants welsh, some
Iaponian, some Polonian etc. And all this Babilonian confusion proceeds from
this one principle, of thrusting the Bible (in the vulgar language) into every
hand with teaching them this Principle, Behold here is the only Rule God has
given you to Rule your own selves by; and by which Every one is to Judge for
him self, which is true doctrine, which is false, after he has used such
industries, as shall be declared, Sect. 2. n. 13. Though eve^ after the use of
all those industries we do see with our eyes no end present, or ever like to
be made of our Controversies still increasing, and increasing like Snow falling
from a mountain.

4. A Second Reason much illustrating and declaring the former (because it
discovers the true original cause why we shall see no controversies ever
ended by standing only to the Sentence given by God in the Bible) is this, that
whilst we take thus the Scripture for our only Rule, and God, as he speaks
by the Scriptures alone, for our only Judge, we needs must fall into a vast
confusion. For every one of us having our private Judgments as different
almost from one an other, as our faces are, and these Judgments being so very
weak in hard, and high matters, how can it be but that presently we should
come to frame different Judgments of the true Sense and interpretation of that
sentence which we find given by God in Scripture as shall be very fully
declared Sect. 7. well then in this variety of judgments you say we may
refuse to stand to the interior embracing of that interpretation, which is made
by the gravest general Council that can be gathered upon earth, unless,
perusing the definition of this Council, we, in our private Judgment of
discretion, Judge it conformable to the word. But if (after use of such
industries as you require) we, according to our private Judgment (so very
various and so very weak in points so hard) do really think the definition not
to be conformable to Scripture, then (you say) we may interiorly dissent from
it, And yet it is true that all faith co^sists in the interior assent. Whence
it follows that the last Rule which is followed, when all comes to all, is
the Scripture, not taken as it sounds (for that we all reject) but taken in
that sense which our private Judgment (for this is your doctrine) draws from
it. This is that, say we, which opens a wide gap to all Sectaries and D.
Fern in his 13. Sect. in vain labors to show the contrary by telling them they
must bring evident Scripture and demonstration against public authority of the
Church And that upon dissent and gainsaying they must undergo the Churches
censures, which ce^sures, according to our adversaries doctrine, shall nothing
hurt your Soul. And he concludes, that there is no other means to preserve
unity proper to the Church. But questionles this means is most ineffectual,
which both experience teaches us (as I have just now showed) and the very
confideration also of the Nature of the means. For this means must at last be
applied by men, that is, by those to whom Nature has given as different
judgments in their understandings, as affections in their love and wills. Well
now, when this weak, this most fallible and most various understanding, has
got in to his hands the Rule, by which only every one is to be directed in
Faith, what can we expect but that, as every ones judgment is different, so
also will the Faith of every one be. And every one believing that to be evident
which he judges to be so, Every one will sincerly say that he brings evident
demonstrations of Scripture, and therefore he contradicts public authority
upon as good ground as you did, when you (at your division from the Roman
Church) did contradict, not only her authority, but also the public known
doctrine of all other Churches which God had visible, at that time, upon the
face of the earth. Tertullia^ wittily says: what was lawful to Valentinus was
lawful to the Valentinians. As lawfully as Luther, Zwinglius, Calvin, and
others did separate from all the Prelates and Pastors of the Church of their
age. So lawfully at the least the Lutherians, Zuinglians, Calvinists may
separate from them and their few new Prelates and Pastors, and may according to
the example which these men gave them, make them selves independents and cast
of this remna^t of depe^dency not only of higher Prelates, but also of all
inferior Curates: for this is but to go on consequently to the example given
unto them.

5. But for the importance of the matter, I will further declare this by a
clear example, which may here after be useful to us. Let us take an Arrian
Cobbler, and give him one great principle more of D: Ferns, that his part is the
negative: for he denies the affirmative doctrine of those who teach, that God
the Son is of the very self same substance with his Father; and that
consequently our Church must show him evident Scripture for what we affirm.
If you tell him, the great Council of Nice has unanimously declared the sense
of these words in Scripture, I and my Father am one thing, to be this, that God
the Son is one and the self same substance with is Father, though yet he be
a different person: well, will he say, I reverence Councels very higly, yet I
must peruse their decrees, and consider how conformable they be to Scriture. I
beginning to do this, began to ponder how God the Father and his Son are one
thing; being they be quite different persons? And surely this different
personality, in all reason, should be a different thing. How then (said I) are
they one thing? Is it not perhaps the true meaning of these words, that they
are one thing only by affection? As I have often been told by our great
Doctors. This I can easily understand: I will see a little further whether this
interpretation, conferred with other texts of Scripture, may not be found to be
very good. I conferred it with the text, which one of our Doctors cited out of
John. 17.21. where Christ prays to his Father That all his disciples may be
One thing, as thou Father in me, and I in thee. Here I marked that Christ
demanded, that his disciples might be one thing, as he and his Father are one
thing. Now every body sees, that Christ never begged, that his disciples might
be one thing in substance with him. Hence I manifestly conclude that I now am
not co^vinced of my negative opinion, for which I have all human reasons; but
contrary wise I bring for my opinion the evident demonstration of Scripture,
against the public authority of the Council of Nice. Wherefore if the
followers of that Council press me to make publik profession, that God the
Son is of the same substance with his Father, I may and must gainsay them
all. Good M. Doctor either convince this Arrian Cobbler, or give us better
satisfaction why you deny, that these your principles open a gap for Sectaries,
and even such Sectaries as overthrow the foundations of true Religion, as you
confess this Arrian belief does. And just as this Cobbler proceeds in denying
this Consubstantiation, so you proceed in denying Transubstantiation. Only he
who denies Confustantiatio^ has incomparably stronger reasons and better
authority of Scripture for himself. Of this review of Councels see Sect. 18.
n. 5. 6.

6. A third reason, why we say Scripture not to be our only Judge, is; that
our very adversaries confess, no one Book of Scripture, nor no certain number
of Canonical Books, to be our Judge: but they say the whole Canon, or all the
Canonical Books together, make up the only Rule, by which we are to be wholly
directed. Now if this be so, that you will have us judged by all Canonical
Books, then you must agree to tell us, which Books for certain be those which
belong to the making up the whole number of Canonical Books. For it is a most
just request to ask of you, by what Judge you would have us to be judged? You
say by all Canonical Books. Give us leave to ask how many, and which books
they be? Your English Bible thrusts out of the Canon, and places among the
apocrypha, some half a score Books which we hold for Canonical. Again,
your English Bible takes into the Canon of Scriptures, diverse Books which
your Lutheran Brethren cast out: as the Epistle of S. Paul to the Hebrews, the
Epistle of S. James; the second Epistle of S. Peter, the second, and third of
S. John; the Epistle of S. Jude; the Apocalypse or Revelation. We then say unto
you, agree at least first, by which Books you would have the Canon to be
completely made up, and then press us by your arguments to be judged by them
alone. This at least we have reason to say; but we conceive our selves also
to have reason to exact of you, to demonstrate unto us, that the Books of
Machabees (by which we prove Purgatory) and the other Books which you are
pleased to discannon, do not Belong to the making up of the true Canon. Yet
when you have done this, or allowed us all these Books for Canonical, we
shall not have the number of books requisite to make the full Canon. Hence
follows.

7. A fourth reason, that many, and very many of the Canonical Books of
Scripture have quite perished, and not so much as appeared in the days of the
very ancient Fathers: so that nothing but the names of these Books are come
unto us. Adamus Contzen in his Proemiall Questions to his Commentaries upon the
4. Ghosples Q. 4.. 8. does not only affirm, but most solidly prove, that no
fewer then twenty several Books of Scripture have thus wholly perished.
Serrarius does the same. I will give you the names of some of these Books. In
the Book of numbers c. 21. v. 14. we read thus: It is said in the Book of the
wars of the Lord. Where is this Book? It is quite perished. In the third Book
of Kings (which you call the first) c. 4. v. 32. Solomon Spoke three thousand
Proverbs: and his Canticles were a thousand and five. Where be these Books?
What a small part have we of them? In the second Book of Chronicles c 9. v.
29. it is said. Now the rest of the acts of Solomon first and last, are they
not written in the Book of Nathan the Prophet, and in the Prophecy of Ahijah
and in the vision of Iddo.? Where be these three several Prophets Books. They
are all quite perished. And the first Book of Chro: ends with these words,
Now the Acts of David the King first and last behold be they not written in
the Book of Samuel the Seer, and in the Book of Nathan the Prophet, and in the
Book of Gad the Seer? Where also be these several Prophets Books? They be
quite lost. In the last to the Colossians S. Paul Commands to read in the
Church the Epistle from Laodicia. Whereis it? It appears not. He also in his
first to the Corinthians c. 5. v. 9. says. I wrote to you in an Epistle. Where
is this Epistle to them which he wrote before the first that we have unto
them? It appeaers not. S. Matthew (whose Hebrew Ghospel is now quite lost) in
his 27. Chap. v. 9. cites words spoken by the Prophet Jeremy, which be not to
be found in all Jeremy as we now have him. Wherefore part of Jeremy the
Prophet is also perished, as Contze^ on this place excellently proves out of
Chron: 2. c. 35. v. 26. S. Matthew also c. 2. v. 23. says. It was spoken by
the Prophets, He shall be called a Na^aren. The Books of those Prophets who
spoke this are also perished, for we find Christ never called a Nazaren in all
the Prophets Books which we have. Whence S. Chrysostom writing on this place
Homil. 9. in Mat. says, Many of the Prophetical monuments have perished; for
the Jews being careless, and not only careless, but also impious, they have
Carelessly lost some of these Monuments: others they have partly burned, partly
torn in pieces. So he, Now those Books which the Jews out of impious malice
burned, or tore a pieces, are most likely to have been such as they did see the
Apostles to cite most for the proof of Christian doctrine as also it appears
by their making away the Prophets Books cited by S. Matthew. See S. Justin
against Tryphon showing that the Jews did make away many Books of the old
Testament, that the new might not seem to agree with it, as it should.

8. Well then by all this it is manifest that many, and very many Books of
Scripture have quite perished, besides those many which you your selves thurst
unjustly out of your Bible. Will you have us now, in all our Controversies
about necessary points, be wholly judged by all the Books of the Scripture?
Then bring them forth all, that we may know what is written in all of them. For
who can doubt but many things, as necessary as others that are in the Books
we have, were written in these Books which we have not? Especially the Jews
maliciously being most likely to have destroyed those Books first, which
contained the most clear places for our Religion. Where is it written that all
things necessary to be believed, be written in the Books which we now have?
Cite me a Text proving this, and I have done. Nay you your selves teach, that
all the whole body of the Books of Scripture is required, to give us those
points which are necessary to Salvation: and the reason is, because you cannot
assign any particular Books, or particular number of particular books,
containing clearly all these necessary points. Yea, we shall prove, that there
be no fewer then twenty four necessary points, which are, not contained in
any of those Books of Scripture which we have, whether they were contained in
the Books which have perished, no man but a Prophet can tell; or if they were,
then (now at least) since they are perished, we cannot know these necessary
points by them. Yet, these points being necessary to be known, God must
provide us of some other means to know them.

9. A fifth reason. If either all the books of Scripture, or some particular
number of them, had contained the only necessary direction, for every man to
guide him self by, in all points necessary to Salvation, it cannot be doubted
but the Apostles, who spent all their labors and lives, in seeking the
Salvation of Souls, and who knew very well that, on the one side true Faith in
matters necessary for belief and practice, was wholly necessary to the
Salvation of every one; and knew also on the otherside (as you must say) that
the only means, appointed by God for their necessary direction in this
necessary Faith, was the Scripture, and nothing but the Scripture, by which
every man was to Judge for him self; it cannot, I say, be doubted but they
(had this been true) would either them selves have procured, the Scriptures to
be put into such toungs, and languages, as the vulgar people of so many
different nations use, and only understand; for without their understanding the
Scriptures, it is impossible to direct them selves by them: and with out they
direct them selves by them, it is impossible to be rightly directed to the
knowledge of that Faith, with out which it is impossible to please God. The
Apostles knew this to the full as well as you, if it be true; And yet we could
never hear, that they took so much as the least care by them selves, or
charged their successors to take the least care, to turn the Scripture, either
all, or that part which is so wholly necessary, in to such languages as the
several people of these several nations (which they converted) did use:
neither could we ever hear, that their successors (so very well instructed by
them) did ever take the least care to do this, so wholly necessary to be done,
if your doctrine be true. Yet you all deny, that their immediate Successors did
set forth our Latin vulgar edition, which is the most ancient of all Latin
editions, S. Peter and S. Paul living so long in Rome caused no part of the
bible to be translated into the Romish language: yea S. Paul writes to them in
Greek.

10. Some answer, that the Apostles took this care because they writ the
greatest part of the new Testament in Greek. And then, they being put to prove
that greek was understood either by all, or by the greater part of the world,
they prove this most pitifully, by only citing Tully pro Archia Poeta saying.
Graeca omnibus fere gentibus leguntur. Greek is read almost in all nations. I
answer, that as we commonly say, that Tully and Virgil in latin, are read in all nations; and yet our meaning only is, that the more learned sort in all
nations read these latin books: so, in this sense, Tully may so much the
easier be supposed to have said, Greek was read almost in all nations, because
he added the word Almost even then, when he delivered this his saying in an
encomiasticall Oration, in which Orators make freest use of amplifications, and
hyperbolicall exaggerations ever without any restrictions at all; especially
when such Amplifications be for their turn, as here it was for Tully his turn,
because he was to show that this man (though a Greek Poet) could by his Greek
Poetry make the Romans famous, Greek Poets being read, by the learned sort of
the neigbouring nations, and the fame among the learned of those nations being
chiefly to be regarded. And either, in this usual sense, Tully must be
understood; or else flat Scripture must be denied. For the Scriptuer Act. 2.
intending on set purpose to give us the names of several people whose
languages were all different one from another, at the beginning of the Church,
names Pontus, Cappadocia, Asia (minor) Phrygia, Pamphilia, all which places
are situated between that City, which now we call Constantinople, and the
city of Antioch, in which town Tully says that Poet, which he undertook to
praise, was born. Within that compass also is Galatia, which S. Ierom
testifies to have had a language some what like that of Trevers. Now, if even
in these places, where a man, by Tully his words, would most imagine the Greek
tongue to be the Vulgar language, it is manifest (by Scripture it self) that it
was not so; surely we have all reason to imagine, that in remoter parts, both
in East, West, North, and South, it was in few places the vulgar language in
respect of the far greater part of the world. Call here to mind how much you
use to cry out against us, for using our common publik prayer in latin, though
this language, be so common among all well bred people; and yet, this our Common
publik prayer is a thing only offered to God, for the people of all Nations;
and not a thing spoken to the people of all Nations, for their necessary
instruction, as you say all the Scripture was. And moreover Mass is offered up
by a Priest, who understands the language in which he offers up these
public Prayers: But the Scripture, especially the new Testament, is delivered
to every one of the people (as you teach) for every one to judge by it for
himself, what is necessary for him to believe, and to do, to work his
salvation; and this is his necessary direction appointed by God to be so. Why
then do you not cry out much more against the Apostles, and their ill
instructing their Successors in so important a poinct, as was the communicating
or delivering to the people of all nations, in such languages as were known to
all nations vulgarly and commonly, that very Rule of Faith, so wholly necessary
for their direction, that all other means are accounted by you fallible, and
consequently insufficient to bring forth an infallible assent, such an one as
true saving faith must be. But the truth is, that the Apostles knew well
enough, that orall tradition, joined to the daily profession of the faith so
delivered, and to the daily practice, answerable to what they so professed,
would abundantly suffice for the sufficient communicating of Gods infallible
word to all Nations.

11. All this is confirmed by this demonstration. The Jews in their Captivity
at Babylon did wholly loose the vulgar use, and knowledge of the old hebrew
tongue in which the Law and Prophets were written, and ever after spok Syriack,
a language Mixed with Hebrew and Chaldean, and wonderful few by their private
study did so much as understand Hebrew. This is testified by your own greatest
Doctors of antiquity, who now are setting forth that admirable bible at London
(of which I shall speak Sect. 4. n. 8.) in their introduction they say: Certum
est ante Christum nullam fuisse versionem Syram. It is certain that before
Christ's time (and some time after) there was no Scripture translated into the
Syriack language. So that for fourteen generations the Jews had not the bible
in their own vulgar language: but the law and Prophets were read in their
Synagogue, and the Psalms were sung, in a language which the people no more
understood the^ they now understand latin. This was done before Christ's own
eyes, and he never found fault with it. An evident proof of the lawfullnes of
prayer in an unknown tongue, and that God gave not the Jews the Scripture only
for their Rule or Judge: for then it would have been judged necessary to have
been translated into Syriak; the only tongue they understood. Let us go on. Yet
before we proceed, let us note by the way; how soon you came to call your
public service into question, when once you had got it in your vulgar
language: every vulgar fellow presumes to censure it; yea it has in your
Courts been araigned and condemned: and is so vulgarly contemned that scarce
any minister dares offer to read it. But we must proceed to other Matters.

SECTION II. A SIXTH ARGUMENT.
That Scripture conteyneth not plainly all things necessary to be believed or
done to salvation. This is here showed by 14. Examples.

DOctor Fern in his Sect. 22. tells us: That Scripture co^teynes all things of
them selves necessary to be believed or done to Salvation: not expressly and in
so many words, but either so; or else, deducible thence by evident, and
sufficient consequence. And in his Sect. 26. What is necessary to life and
faith is for the most part, plainly set down. I suppose he says it is so, for
the most part, because sometimes it is only deducible by consequence, which
must be evident and clear; as a little after he says. And yet for fear all this
should come short, he presently adds that things thus necessary are not
deducible, all by every one that reads: but (...) if done by the Pastors and
guides which God appointed (...) Church to that purpose, using the means that
are needful to that purpose; such as is attention and diligance in search, of
the Scripture, collation of places, and observing the connections, also
sincerity and impartiallity in the collection or deduction which they make,
also prayer and devotion for assistance in the work. So he; very discomfortably
for the far greater part of the world, who (though most unlearned) are most
preposterously by Protestant Doctors invited, yea declared to be commanded, to
read the Scriptures, to the end they may plainly know by themselves what is
necessary for them to be believed and done to salvation; and yet here they are
plainly told that these necessary things are not all, but only for the most
part, plainly set down, and though they be deducible from Scripture, yet they
be not all deducible by every one that Reads; but it is enough if done by
their Pastors and Guides. What by them all? No, not by them all, but only such
as have used all these great diligences here expressed: to which he ought to
have added several things more, as perfect skill in Greek, and Hebrew, with
the perusal of the true, and certainly true, Originals: which diligences, with
all these conditions, one Minister amongst one hundred uses not, and those,
who have uses it, cannot b^ ^vidently known by the people to have used them;
and hough they could be known to have done so, yet they should be known to have
used means that are fallible. How then grow these consequences to be evident?
Yet all the people are all to hold such conseque^ces evidently deduced; and
yet without they themselves use these means (impossible unto them) they cannot
know the evidence of this deduction. For how should they know it evidently? And
yet again, these poor good people are most preposterously taught, to prefer the
doctrine of their Ministers, thus and only thus deduced, (even according to
their own confession) before the quite contrary consequences deduced by
incomparable better means: for what our Church teaches in her general
Councels, is deduced from Gods Word by most skillful, and most learned Prelates
assembled from all parts of the world, bringing with them the best Scholars
that can be got by them in the world: all chiefly having regard to what was
first delivered with their first faith. Moreover all the Christian world is
still helping them by their prayers all the time they are assembled. Again the
very conference of such men with one an other, is a thing wonderfully helping
to the finding out truth; to say nothing of the supernatural assistance of the
holy Ghost, made far surer; by promise of Christ, to them, then to any
private Ministers: what then more unreasonable then to forsake them, to follow
these?

2. But let us go on. The world consists of people, commonly not very
learned: For these men, God must have provided some way, to know clearly what
they are obliged to believe, and to do for their salvation. For many things
which are to be believed, are most hard to understand: And many things must be
practiced, which are very hard to be done. And the belief and practice of
these things must oblige all the world, as long as the same shall continue. Now
to oblige all for ever to this with out giving them means to know plainly and
clearly, what they should believe or do, had been a thing unreasonable, in so
sweet a Providence, as that of our Heavenly Father is. This obligation then in
every particular point which is necessarily to be believed, and done by us, for
the obteyning heaven and avoiding hell, must be clearly intimated to us all,
even in all and every one of these particulars. The means, by which this is
only to be done, is the Scripture taken by it self alone, as all you
Protestants teach: Wherefore an unavoidable necessity does fall upon you, to
affirm; that all things necessary to be believed, or done, are plainly set
down in Scripture: And consequently what is not so delivered, is thereby
sufficiently signified not to be necessary. As for your limitations, in
declaring these words, plainly set down, when shall (besides what we have
already said) say much more in the end of this Section and Sect. 7. Now we
must give a distinct declaration of this your opinion, which perforce must be
held by all kind of Protestants; for necessity enforces them, who disagree so
often, here wholly to agree. First then, let us declare those first words of
their assertion: All things necessary to be believed, or done. These words must
of necessity be understood so, that all things are plainly set down in
Scripture, which are thus necessary: First, to the universal Church, as it is
a Community; Secondly, all things which are necessary to all such states, and
degrees, as must needs be in so vastly diffused a community; and Thirdly, all
things which are thus necessary, to every single person, bound to be of this
community. As for the first; the Church being intended by Christ to be a
Community diffused through the whole world, and intended to be continued to the
end of the world; such a Community as this is, must, by infallible authority,
be plainly told many things, wholly necessary for her direction, and perpetual
preservation, which no one of you can show to be plainly set down in Scripture.

3. As first; she must by infallible authority be plainly told in what manner
she is, in all times and places, to be provided of Lawful Pastors, and that
with perpetual succession? As, whether it be in her power only to appoint the
manner of choosing these Pastors? Or they may be appointed her by mere laymen,
having secular authority: and that, whether this secular authority be lawfully
obtained, or unlawfully usurped? The knowledge of this is necessary: For we are
bidden, not to hear those Pastors which enter not by the door.

4. Secondly; in like manner, she must be told, what power these Pastors have
in respect of one an other; whether there be one, or none at all, to have
supreme authority over the rest? And who they be? Or whether they be all
equal, so that the one cannot be judged, corrected, or deposed by the other,
or by the secular Magistrate? Or how many of these Pastors, must concur to
the lawful judging, correcting, or deposing of these Pastors? Pastors have
such a main influence into their flocks, that, in so vast a Community, scarce
any thing is more necessary, then due and Lawful subordination among them,
legally appointed, legally observed. What plain texts of Scripture tells her
how this is to be done?

5. Thirdly; in like manner, she must be told, what power these Pastors have
over the laymen, be they Emperors, Kings, or other Magistrates, or common
people? What Laws any of these Pastors severally taken can make? And how
strictly these Laws oblige? How just the censures be, which are imposed for
the breach of them? All which things are of apparent necessity for the
direction of the Church, that every one of these Pastors may know what in
conscience he can, and ought to do, not to exceed his power, or not to be
defective in his duty.

6. Fourtly; She must in like manner be told that which so mainly concerns
her, in point of universal government; by the highest Tribunal upon earth;
which Tribunal Protestants acknowledge to be Lawful general Councels, and
then national Councels. For upon the lawfulnes of national Councels, and upon
their legal power (even in matters of making so great a change of Religion, as
was made, by bringing in Protestant Religion, in place of the Roman faith, and
dividing from the whole world) depends wholly the lawfulnes of the English
division from the Church of Rome, according to the great Defenders thereof D.
Hammond and D. Fern who Sect. 9. Says; A national Church has its judgment
within it self, for the receiving, and houlding the definitions and practices
of the Church general: and may have possibly just cause of dissenting (he
means in matters of faith) and reforming; and can do it regularly, according
to the way of the Church by Provincial Synods. And this is considerable in the
English Reformation. So he here; and again more fully in his new book. C. 1.
number. 24. against D. Champny. A strange, though a necessary contradiction, in
places so very near of so small a book, to lay for one ground of their faith;
that all things necessary must be evidently deduced from Scripture; and that,
against public authority evident demonstration of Scripture must be brought in
points of dissent (as I showed out of his 13. Sect.) And yet here to make this
authority of a national Synod to be so very great, with out showing any single
Text of Scripture, so much as obscurely intimating any such thing: Yea a Doctor
could not but evidently know that in all Scripture, there is no where any
mention of the authority of national Synods, especially in so mainly important
matters for the Salvation of a whole Nation. Also a Doctor could not but know
that neither the name of such a Synod, nor the thing signified by this name,
were so much as contained in the Bible. What then is this but to speak just
what is for the present turn? Mr. Doctor this authority of national Synods,
being made by you the fondation of your regularly reforming, (though perhaps
out of policy to oppose these daily borne Sects) should have been proved by
you, by evident demonstration of Scripture, to be so great, that it may
lawfully stand in oppositio^ to all Churches upon the face of the whole Earth.
Now as the salvation of a whole nation is so nearly concerned in the true, or
usurped authority of a national Synod, or Council; so the salvation of all
nations is no less concerned in the true, or usurped authority of a general
Council: and yet first, the Scripture neither tells you, who must of necessity
be called to this Council, to make the calling lawful? Nor secondly, who must
of necessity be assembled, to make the assembly full and lawful? Or how many
may suffice? Nor thirdly, who, or how many of those, who are assembled, must
consent to the voting of a decree, or definition before it obliges? Nor
fourhtly, who must call these men? Or what power he has to force them by
censures to appear at the time, and place appointed, and to continue there? Or
whether any one be bound to come, except those who please, and when they
please? Nor fifthly, who must preside in this assembly? Nor sixthly, what power
this assembly has to declare all doubts in faith? Or whether it can impose
precepts under pain of damnation? For example, commanding all under this
penalty to keep Christmas day, assension day, and to communicate once a year,
to fast on Christmas Eve, yea to fast a whole Lent? Or whether, after all their
decrees, every one, without Sin, may leave all they command in these, or the
like matters, quite undone at his pleasure? Here you see six things, all mainly
necessary to be known by the Church, as a Community; none of the which are
plainly told her in Scripture. These six points, added to the former three,
make nine. Let us then proceed.

7. Tenthly, this Community or Church must also be plainly told, what public
service her Pastors may, and ought to perform in the Church? Whether they may
have none at all, as now the fashion is? Or whether they may have such an one
as is different, even in the prime substance, from all the world; as the
fashion was heretofore? For it cannot but be a thing highly importing, in a
whole Community, to retain such or such a publik service as was, at least in
substance, appointed by the Apostles; and not to make what changes private men,
or national Synods please; nor to discard all publik service: Yea, that very
service which all Christians of all Nations, (which were not confessed
Heretics) every where used; as appears by all their most ancient service
books which you could find in any Corner of Christendom. The beginning of the
substantial things in this Lyturgy, or public service, ca^ never be found
out, by all diligent search used by Protestants this last hundred years;
though the time of every little accidental change be extant in many records,
which would not have failed to record the beginning, of the substance of the
Liturgy, had it had any beginning, different from that common beginning, of all
practices of Christian Religion brought in by the Apostles.

8. Eleventhly; the Church is primely concerned in the use lawful or unlawful
of Sacraments, and therefore this (as all other things necessary for her) should
be plainly taught her in Scripture: And yet in all Scripture she can neither
find the name of Sacrament in this sense which we, and our adversaries take
it, nor any rule, to direct her to know what a Sacrament is? Or what is
required to the lawful administration of true Sacraments? which our
adversaries hold to be so necessary to the true Church, that in their Tenth
Article, they make it one of their two certain signs and marks, by which the
true Church may always be known from the false Church; and yet (O
preposterous proceedings!) they, who will have all necessary things set down
plainly in Scripture, know very well that many necessary things, concerning the
true use of Sacraments, be no where expressed therein, as no one of those
things are which I have now named, nor many other things concerning their true
use; for example, by whom is every Sacrament necessarily to be administered?
Whether must the Ministers of all Sacraments of necessity have any Orders, or
none at all? And what order must they have? by whom, and in what manner, or in
what form must these Sacraments be conferred? or whether are we bound to use
these Sacraments only when we list, and as often, or as seldom as we list?
For nothing of this point is delivered in Scripture, nor of the other things I
just now named, whence very many, and very important differences be amongst us;
all vndecidable by Scripture, which is so deeply silent in all these points.
Hence some of you, for ordering Priests and Deacons, require Bishops ordained,
and ordeyning with such a form as never antiquity used; And without these
Priests, they say, there is no lawful administering Sacraments, at least in
publik: Yea, though they hold Matrimony no Sacrament, yet we see a world make
scruple about the Lawfulnes of it, except by ordained Ministers or at least
tickett Ministers: A thing manifestly not expressed in Scripture, to which
notwithstanding they all conte^d nothing to be added. Others therefore far
more consequently answer, that what is not plainly set down in Scripture, is
thereby signified not to be necessary; but it is not plainly set down in
Scripture, that of necessity Priests are to be so ordained, or are only to
administer Sacraments, or that they only should have power to bless the bread:
for where is this written? For Christ, after he had taken the wine, said: Drink
you all: which words import a command to laymen to drink (as you say;) why
therefore do not these words: Do you this, concern all Lay people as well as
your Priests, who can show no better authority why they only should bless the
bread and wine? You differ also, whether the bread of necessity must be of
wheat, or barley? Oats, or pease? In baptism, some will have such, and such
words to be necessary; others will allow baptism in the name of Christ alone;
others will say no words at all are necessary. For (say they) when our Savior
would have his Apostles to ask in his name, Io: 16.23.24. he is not to be
understood, that of necessity they should use any words, so when he did bidd
them Go and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father etc.
Matt. 28. he is not necessaryly and plainly to be so understood, as if he did
bidd them to use any words at all, for this is not set down in Scripture, and
what is not plainly set down in Scripture is there by held by you unnecessary.
Lo here in this number, how many other things have been set down by me all,
so necessary to the Church, as a Community; and yet not plainly told her by
the Scripture? But let all these many things go to make up an even dozen. This
dozen proves twelve times over what I said of the Church taken as a Community.

9. But most of these things also are necessary to be known by some peculier
states of persons, which must of necessity be in this Community: For in it there
must be Lawful Pastors, who cannot know them selves to be lawful Pastors, nor
carry themselves for such, unless they know them selves to be sent by lawful
authority; because (according to your doctrine), the other (and the only other)
mark of the true Church, is set down in your tenth Article to be the true
preaching of the word of God. But how shall they preach, unless they be
(lawfully) sent? Romans 10.15. They must know also whether, according to Gods
ordinance, any other be their Superiors to judge them, correct them etc. that
so they may discharge their duty in obeying them. Thy must know the bounds and
limits of their power over some, or all Lay men. They must know what their duty
is to see the Decrees of national or general Councels observed, when these
Councels are lawful; and consequently they must be furnished with sufficient
means to know the lawfulnes of them: which they can never be, but by knowing
those six things specifyed above N. 6, no one of which six things are clearly
told them by any Scripture. To these Pastors also it belongs to perform the
public service in due manner, and to teach the people when they are bound to
assist at it; and consequently they, of necessity, must be told which is the
public service used by the Apostles, and their successors instructed by them
to use it. For who can believe they used none at all, though what they used be
no otherwise written then in the public Practice of, not one, but as many
Nations as they converted; all which used Lyturgies containing the essence and
substance of a true sacrifice. These Pastors also must know all that in the
last number we said to belong to the wholly necessary knowledge of true
Sacraments: they must know, for example, whether they may permit women to
baptize, in case of necessity; as I shall show all antiquity to have held and
practiced, though there be no such thing clearly set down in Scripture; And so
for other things. And Thus much for Clergy men, and their state. Marriage is
also a state of millions of lay men, and to which so many of them, not yet
married, do pretend: now some things under pain of damnation must be
practiced, and consequently known, by these men, which notwithstanding are not
plainly told them in Scripture: as whether they may have two wives, or no, at
one time? we all hold this damnable, and yet this obligation of having but
one (so hard to many) is no where clearly, and manifestly set down in any
Scripture: Secondly, it is damnable to them to marry within such and such
degrees of kindred, as we all hold; where be these degrees clearly told us
in the new Scripture? If we are to practice what is in the old Testament, men
may, at once, have one or more wives; against which you have no clear Text in
all the new Testament. I might add that it is necessary, to those who marry, to
know whether it be lawful to do so without a Priest, there being no such thing
intimated in Scripture; according to which holy and misterious things are known
to have bee^ lawfully performed by the Ministry of Laymen. For the killing of
the Paschall Lamb was both holy and misterious, and yet done by Lay men. Why
may not then marriage be performed without a Priest? Add now these two or
three things to the former dozen, and you have at least fourteen several
things, the knowledge of which are all necessary to men of several states in
the Church; and yet no where set down in plain Scripture. I say here nothing of
the obligation which parents have, to send their children to be baptized in due
time; because of the obligation of baptizing children we shall speak hearafter
sect. 8. n. 3. as also of sending them to such who can lawfully administer
Baptism; of which I have said some thing.

10. Lastly, speaking of all in general, whatsoever they be, many of the
things now specified must, under pain of damnation be known by them, that they
may practice their necessary duty which obliges all and every one to be of a
Church which has lawful Pastors, and which has lawful Priests, Ordained,
with the matter and form which is necessary, by true Bishops, and not false
ones; and the Preachers of which Church must have true mission. All must know
also, how far they are bound to obey these their lawful Pastors, both with
interior submissio^ of judgment in some cases, and also exterior co^formity,
in others. They all must know themselves to be of a Church where God is
publicly served, with that public service which the Apostles brought into the
Church, and commended to their successors. Every one is bound not to work upon
the Sundays, as we will show, though neither this, nor yet many other things
(of which we shall speak in many of the next sections) be plainly set down in
any Scripture. Here we have had above 14. of these things specified, only for
the full declaration of these words; Necessary to salvation: all which you say
are plainly set down in Scripture.

11. Let us now declare these words, plainly set down in Scripture; that all
may plainly see how many more great new difficulties spring from them. The
first difficulty (cleared by no plain Scripture) is, whether the Book of
Scripture, in which such a point is set down, be Gods word, or no; as when it
is written in the book of Toby, Judith, the Machabees, the Apocalips? The
second difficulty, cleared also by no plain Scripture, is whether, though such
a book be Gods word; yet I be secured, that it has not been corrupted in the
Chapter, or verse, expressing the point in co^troversy. The third difficulty,
cleared plainly by no Scripture is, that these words, on which the controversy
depends, be infallibly taken in this place in their Common and usual sense, or
perhaps taken figuratively, or spoken mistically of some other thing. For how
is it possible, by Scripture only, to come to have an infallible knowledge of
this, on which the controversy wholly depends? being this depends merely on
the inward free will of God, who perhaps would use only the plain vulgar sense
of these words in this place, perhaps would use them only figuratively, or only
mystically. To know this secret free will of God, and that infallibly, I must
have such a Revelation, or such an assistance of the Holy Ghost, as you will
not allow to the Church represented in a Council, and therefore it cannot
prudently be allowable to any private man: neither can any private man show
plain Scripture for his particular pretense, to know infallibly this secret
will of God. A fourth difficulty (not to be cleared by plain Scripture) is,
that after I have perused the whole Scripture, purposely to know what I am
bound of necessity to believe, and do, for my Salvation; I find no where
plainly told me, that I am only to believe, and do that only which is plainly
told me in Scripture: so that perhaps I may be bound both to believe, and do,
somewhat not expressed clearly in Scripture, especially it not being clear,
plain, and manifest by Scripture, that I am not to hear the Church, nor admit
of unwritten traditions, but stand only to what is written. But of these four
difficulties we shall speak fully in the following Sections.

12. Now we must consider how these words, Plainly set down in Scripture, be
yet liable to a fifth difficulty; which is, that men of quite contrary
persuasions in faith, say, that such a text says plainly this; an other says,
that it says plainly no such thing; yea, that it says the plain contrary:
witness those words, This is my Body; which, as you bring it about, must plainly
signify, this is not my Body. And, thus we contend whether Scripture be plain
and clear? which makes it plain and clear, that Scripture, though submitted
to by us both, ends neither of our differences in most important matters.

13. A sixth difficulty (and a most fruictfull Mother of a number of
difficulties) arises from your own explications, and declarations, and
modifications, and limitations, and as good as annihilations, by which you so
restrain this principle; which you strain so much at other times, to make it
reach home to all points necessary, by a clear decision of the^ all, even in
any necessary controversy. Doctor Fern, with whose words I began this Section,
tells us, that all things necessary are not so plainly set down, that every one
who reads Scripture, can manifestly draw out of it the knowledge of all points
that are necessary; but (says he) it is enough, if it be done by the
Ministers. So little plain dealing there is in calling, or miscalling that thing
plain; which plainly proves it self not to be so, by not being plain to any,
who are not as knowing men as their Ministers. All women (who so desperately
read, and cite the bible) may now despair of knowing, by their own reading,
even those very things which are necessary to salvation. This, they now tell
you, must be done for you by Ministers, from whom if you will have it, you must
take it on their word: For you are a reprobate if you tell them their plain
deductions be not plain, nor conformable to Scripture; though you may be one of
the elect, and yet say so much against what whole general Councels have
deduced from Scripture. But this which they would have you believe to be
plainly set down, they tell you cannot be found out to be so by all kind of
Ministers, but only by such (point them out with your finger if you can) as use
all these things following. 1. Attention, 2. Diligence in search of the
Scripture, 3. Collation of places, 4. Observing the connexions, 5. Sincerity
and impartiality, 6. Prayer ard Devotion for assistance in the work. To all
which you must ever put this Notandum, that neither you can tell, when they
have used these things sufficiently, to come to the plain and wholly necessary
truth; nor they can tell whether there has not creapt in some error in the use
of these means, spoiling all. Neither will the use of these only suffice:
Skill in Greek, and deep skill, is required for pervsing the new Testament,
and no less skill in Hebrew for the old. To these, still fallible Rules, so
many more are to be added out of your own Divines, that your great Divine
Sanchius (de Sacra Scriptura Col. 409.) assigns no fewer then Nineteen
Rules, besides the having the Spirit of God (quite forgot by D. Fern) and
besides understanding the words and places of Scripture. No wonder then that
your learned Scharpius (in cursu Theologico de Scriptoribus, Controvers. 8. P.
44.) assigns full twenty Rules for the understanding of Scripture; which,
unless they be kept, we cannot but err, as he says. I wonder how many more
Rules be necessary for ordinary-vnderstanding men, to know that you have not
erred in the use of all these twenty Rules, especially he and others exacting,
among other Rules, to know Original languages, to discuss the words and
Hebraismes. Now, dear Reader, as thou love thy soul, stand here a little, and
ponder how thy Ministers abuse thee, which do, all of them, teach this doctrine
(delivered by D. Fern. in Sect. 8. 9. 10. 11. and 14. in these words, the place
last cited) If you will be with us, you shall see what you do. We require your
obedience to what we demonstrate to be Gods will. The Church of Rome (because,
forsooth, she will have you use the better light of Councels illuminated by the
holy Ghost) says; If you will come to me, you must putt out your Eyes. So he,
so all the rest do plainly cheat thee, when they tell thee, thou shall with thy
own eyes see all things plainly set down out of Scripture: For now, when they
come to their trial, they tell thee thou must trust Ministers, and not all,
but such as can, and really do use 20. hard Rules. But of this more Sect. 7. n.
3. Here, I only beseech thee to tell me, how thou can come to think that he,
who for our salvation gave his precious blood, would not give us also some more
plai^ Rule to direct us to the infallible belief of that, which he obliges us
to beleve under pain of damnation. See my Preface number. 2. 3. Dear Lord? Is this
that was promised for an extraordinary favor (not yet granted) when God him
self should come, and save us, and give us a way, so surpassing all former
ways. A way so direct unto us, that fools cannot err by it: For surely wise,
and very wise men know neither Greek, nor Hebrew, nor the means how to know
that those, who know these languages, have duly used their knowledge, and the
other odd nineteen Rules, which unless they be kept, we cannot but err. See
also Sect 7. Here protestants with weeping eyes may say, what Iuvenal did sing,
O quis custodiet ipsos Custodes!

What Rules to men short-sighted given shall be,
To know when Overseers oversee?
SECTION III. A SEVENTH ARGUMENT
By Scripture we know not which Books be Canonical Scripture, which not?
Neither is Scripture known to be Gods Word by its own Light; wherefore
Protestants do not believe Scripture with divine Faith.

1. THe force of this Argument breefly is this. If Scripture were our only Rule
of belief, it would tell us all things necessaryly to be believed: It does not
tell us what books be the only true word of God; which is a point most
necessary to be believed: It is not therefore our only Rule of belief: Here
you see a fifthteeth necessary, and most necessary point, not plainly set down
in Scripture. Luther denies the Apocalypse, the Epistle to the Hebrews, the
Epistle of S. James, and other parts of Scripture, to be true Scripture what
text tells him plainly he must believe the contrary? We hold some half a
score books to be true Scripture, which you hold Apocrypha: what Scripture,
or one single syllable of Scripture, tells us we hold false, and you true?
Cite that text, and we yield. If you cannot cite that text, then yield your
selves to believe many, and so, very many, parts of Scripture to be Gods word,
which by no one single text of Scripture, you can prove to be so. Tell me
then, I pray, tell me, as you tender your own and my salvation, upon what
ground you believe the^ to be so? You believe all things for the saying of true
Scripture: Why do you believe the Scripture to be Scripture and Gods word? Not
upon any text, for you have not one: And yet you believe this infallibly. What
other ground have you, besides texts of Scripture, able to support an
infallible belief? Is the tradition of the Church to be relied upon in so
great a matter? Then much more may it be relied upon in lesser matters. But if
she be fallible in the delivery of her traditions, how can I, upon her
authority, ground an infallible assent to the belief of all the books of
Scripture being Gods certain word? For this is a very hard point, because many
of them contein things of them selves very incredible, as that, the personality
of God the Father should be all one thing with the divine essence; and that,
the personality of God the Son should not be all one thing with the
personality of God the Father; and yet be all one thing with the divine
essence; which divine essence is all one thing with the personality of God the
Father. That the serpent should speak to Eve: that all the world should be
excluded Heaven for one man's eating an Apple. Is not that authority, which is
able to support the infallible belief of Books, which contain things so hard
to believe, able also to support the infallible belief of things far less
incredible, as Purgatory, Prayer to saints, an inferior worship of Images in
respect of the persons they represe^t? Have you any text to tell me, that I
must believe the Church in this most hard and important matter, (to wit in
this matter that such and such Books be infallibly Gods word) and that I must
not believe her in lesser matters? Give me this Text, or confess that you
volu^tarily believe a most huge hard point, on which al your belief in all
other points must rely, without any single text of Scripture.

2. D. Fern, to prevent this argument, puts yet a new limitation to the common
assertion of Protestants; that all things necessary are plainly set down in
Scripture. For says he sect. 13. We say the Scripture conteyns all the
material objects of faith necessary to Salvation, that is, All things that had
been necessary for Christians to believe and do, though there had been no
Scriptures. Whence sect. 24. he, out of this principle, answers my objection
thus; That to believe Scripture to be the word of God, is not of those
material objects of faith which we say are contained in Scripture, and are
such as had been necessary for Christians to believe though there had been no
Scripture. And the^ he proves the impossibility, that there is, that Scripture
should sufficiently tell us which Books be infallible Gods word: and that,
therefore we must suppose universal Tradition still to bring it down to us.
But Sr. you mark not how pitifully you undo that very prime doctrine of
yours, which forces you all to maintain, that all things necessary are
plainly set down in Scripture, to wit; That (according to you) Scripture is
given us by God, to be our only direction, in all that we must necessarily
believe and do for Salvation; for if this doctrine must pass among all for so
very true, that it must be embraced by the belief of all, before they ca^
wisely say; In this Bible only we are to find all necessary truth; It
follows then most undoubtedly upon Gods giving us the Bible, to be taken by
us as our only Rule, that there must needs arise a necessity of our believing
something which we should not have been bound to believe, if there had been no
Scripture written. For there must arise a necessity of believing this very
doctrine of yours, that the written word of God is given us for our only
direction in the points aforesaid, Or else no man is bound to believe this, and
to admit of Scripture only for his Rule. For nothing can be more sure, then
that this doctrine has not universal Tradition, still to bring it down to us:
Therefore either this doctrine is most false, (as really it is:) or most false
it is that we upon the writing of Scripture, are only obliged to believe that,
to the belief of which we should only have been obliged though there had been
no Scripture. For what say you to this argument. True faith is necessary to
Salvation, therefore the only Rule guiding us to true faith, must of necessity
be known assuredly by us: Because, without the guidance of this Rule we have
no assured means (as you say) to true faith: But the only true Books of
Scripture, are the only Rule guiding us to true faith; as you all teach:
therefore we must have an infallible assurance of these true Books. Again,
the more impossible it is for Scripture to inform us sufficiently which Books
be Scripture, which not, and that infallibly; the more certain it is, that just
as this most important point of all points, and the hardest of them all (for it
conteyneth all the points that are most hard in our faith) can be made
infalliby assecured unto us without Scripture, so other points also may be; as
Purgatory, Prayer to saints etc? and therefore these other less hard points
may be, as infallibly, by the Tradition of the same Church, assecured unto us.
For if tradition can support an infallible assent to the hardest points, it ca^
support the like assent to the less hard. He that can carry a hundred pound
weight, can carry three or fowerscore pound weight.

3. Hence it is that D. Fern, in the same place, is forced to fly to that
paradoxicall opinion, to which nothing, but desperation of escaping any other
way, has driven him and his Protestant brethren. Thus then he says;
Scripture being received upon such tradition, it discouers it self to be
devine by its own light, or those internal arguments which appear in it to
those who are versed in it. Which others express thus; the Canonical Books
are worthy to be believed for them selves; as we assent to the first
principles by their own light, so we do assent to Scripture to be the word of
God, through the help of the Spirit of God; as by its own light The Canonical
Books bear witness of them selves, they carry their own light, by which we
may see them to be Gods word: as we see the sun, to be the sun, by his own
light; so they.

4. We must then first speak a word of this Tradition, which D. Fern called
universal Tradition, that is the tradition of the whole Church, which you all
say is fallible, and so you must not rest upon it with an infallible assent,
but take it as a prudent motive persuading such Books, as you hold to be
Canonical, to be Gods word, which you believe to be so for it self. But Sr.
it is most false that universal Tradition has delivered just that number of
Books, and those Books, which you hold to belong to the true Canon. The
Council of Laodicea (in which you use to boast your Canon to be contained)
omitteth the Apocalypse or Revelations, and, besides Ruffinus, you will not find
one ancient writer who either puts not fewer or more Books in the Canon
then you do. Our Canon you deny, and discard some half a score Books out of
it. Yet ours is the only Canon which can claim a sufficient Tradition, as I
shall here show Number. 11. And as for the Council of Laodicea, it is far from
being against us, for it defines in deed such Books to belong to the Canon of
Scripture: but it does not exclude any one of those which also afterward, when
due examen was made, were found delivered, if not with as full, yet with a
Tradition sufficientlyfull; as you may see in the third Council of Carthage, to
which S. Austen subscribed in person. An evident Proof of this is, that the
Sixth General Council does confirm both this Council of Laodicea, and that
very Counsel of Carthage, which by name defined all the Books, set down in our
Canon, to be Gods word: see Number. 11. And then tell me with what face you can
so much as pretend to universal Tradition, for admitting your Bible a Bible
putting among the Apocrypha so many Books, flatly against the tradition of the
precedent 12. hundred years. If this Tradition be a prudent inducement to
embrace what it commends, then it induces us to embrace half a score Books
more then you putt in your Canon: If it be not a prudent inducement, it helps
you nothing. If you fly to the tradition of the Church only of the first four
hundred years, remember that the Council of Carthage, just after the end of
those years, alleged the ancient Tradition of their Fathers, which they
judged sufficient for defining our Canon. They, who were so near those first
four hundred years, knew far better the more universal Tradition of that age,
then we can 12. hundred years after it. True it is (nothing being defined
as then) private Doctors were free to follow what they judged to be truest: and
as you find them varying from our canon, some in some books, some in others;
so you will find them varying from one an other, and varying also from you.
For in those first four hundred years Melito and Nazianzen excluded the book
of Ester, which you add. Origin doubts of the Epistle to the Hebrews, of the
second of S. Peter, of the first and second of S. John. S. Cyprian and
Nazianzen leave the Apocalypse or Revelations out of their Canon. Eusebius
doubts of it. Only Rufinus aggreeth just with you. Does he make alone a
sufficiently universal Tradition from Christ's time to this? Now then all of
you, by refusing the Canon commended by the Tradition of our Church; are left
to the sagacity of your own noses, to hunt out that most important and
infallible certain truth of the true Canon of Scripture.

5. Here we must examine what help you will have by the true Books of
Scripture, which you say carry their own light with them, by which they may be
as clearly seen to be Gods word, as the Sunn by his own light. For to the truth
of this strange Paradox, explicated as above, you have brought the whole
substance of your faith, which must all fall to the ground, to be trodden upon
by the Socinians, if this groundles ground houlds not sure: Because you believe
all other particular points relying upon Scripture only; All the Scripture you
believe relying on this ground only, that you know by the very reading of such
a book, that this book is as evidently Gods word, by a certain light which
the reading of it (with Spirit) produces, as you see the Sun by his light.
Indeed you have brought your Religion to as pitiful a case as your greatest
enemies could wish it in.

6. First then this ground (upon which you ground all) is accounted a plain
foolish ground, by your own renowned Chillingworth; I say, your own, for the
most learned of both your universities have owned, and higly magnified his
book, notwithstanding his scornful language concerning this ground of your
whole Religion. Chillingworth then (p. 69. n. 49.) answering these words of his
adversary. That the divinity of a writing cannot be known by it self alone,
but by some intrinsecall authority: replyeth thus; This you need not prove: for
no wise man denies it. And M. Hooker (esteemed the learnedest Protestant which
ever putt pen to paper) writes thus; Of things necessary, the very chiefest
is to know what Books we are to esteem holy, which point is confessed
impossible for the Scripture it self to teach. So he Eccl. Pol: L. 1. S. 14.
Page 86. And D. Covel in his defense, Art. 4 P. 31. It is not the word of God
which does or can assure us, that we do well to think it the word of God. Yet
that which such men as these hold impossible, and a mere Chymaera, or phansy,
which no wise man would hold, you hold to be as evident as the sun being
seen by its own light; as evident as the first Principles, which are so evident
of themselves that they need no proof, but are clearer then any thing you can
bring to prove them. For example That the whole is greater then any part. It is
impossible that any thing should be so, and not be so, just in the same
circumstances etc. Do you think any rational man will believe that it is thus
evident that S. Matthewes Ghospel (for example) is the true word of God, by the
only reading of it, to him, who did not before read this verity? Do not all
evidently see, that there is no such evidence to be seen? About the truth of
first Principles no man ever doubted, or could doubt; about S. Matthewes
Ghospel the Manicheans, Marcionistes, Cerdonists etc. did not only doubt, but
flatly rejected it. And incomparable more doubt has been made of other parts
of Scripture, as we have seen, and shall yet further see. Sometimes indeed
devines call Scripture the first Principle, an undoubted principle, a most
known and certain Principle, Not that it is so for any evidence it carries
with it self, manifestly showing it to be so: But the Scripture is said to be
such a Principle among us Christians, because all of us now admit Scripture,
as of unquestionable and infallible truth. Upon this Supposition (evidently
granted by us all) we all, in arguing with one an other, still suppose, and
take for an undoubted Principle, that the Scripture is Gods infallible word But
this does only suppose, and not prove this truth, even so much as to our own
Conciences, that Scripture is the undoubted word of God, which it cannot show
it self infallibly to be, by the only reading of it.

7. Secondly there be many millions who can most truly and sincerly protest
before God, and take it upon their Salvation, that they are wholly unable, by
the mere reading of the books of Scripture (for example the Apocalypse, the
Epistle to the Hebrews etc) to come to an infallible assurance that they be
Gods word, to which assurance, even your admirable Luther, and his most learned
disciples, never came: For they all reject these, and other Books admitted for
Gods infallible word by you. Now good Sr. tell me what means has God
provided to bring us (who have not these new eyes, requisite to see the
Sunshine you speak of) or to bring your Lutheran Brethren who will be
confessed not to want the true Spirit (for they had the first fruits of the
spirit in the blessed work of your Reformation) what means, I say has God
provided to bring them and us, to this infallible assurance, by which we are
all obliged, under pain of damnation, to believe the Scripture to be Gods word?

8. Thirdly; how comes it to pass, that the Preachers of the Church find that
concurrance of Gods grace, in delivering the verities contained in the
Scripture to very Heathens, that millions of them have been thus converted: but
no single Man is reported (as far as I know) to have found such concurrance
by only reading the written word, as thereby to have been illuminated with the
belief of Scripture? How comes this about, if the divinity thereof be to the
reader (when he is as well disposed as the hearer) no less evident then the
broad Sunneshine? Does not this show that it is true which we teach, that
these internal Arguments are only discovered after the Scripture is accepted
for Gods word, and not before, as the Cause of accepting it for such?

9. Fourthly; as the Scripture is the only ground, upon which you build your
belief of all other things; so this divine light (discovered to you by reading
the Scripture) is the only ground, upon which you believe Scripture; and
consequently all other things which you believe. This ground then is the ground
of all true faith, according to your doctrine. If it be so; how is it possible
that the greatest Doctors that ever God placed in the Church to the edifying
the same, upon no one single occasion (having so continual occasions) do so
much, as once at least profess themselves to believe such or such a book to be
Gods word, because they, by the reading of it (which was their daily and
nightly work) did discover such divine rays, or such internal arguments
appearing in it, to those who were versed in it; as D. Fern speaks? Neiher
do any one of the^ give, so much as once, this for a reason why they doubted
of, or admitted not such, and such books, about which (before the definition of
the Church) there were so frequent Controversies, merely because they could not
discover this light, or these internal arguments Did these Men want the spirit
of God, even in the foundation of all true belief? Yea, had not these Men of
all others the most observing eyes, and the most irradiated understandings
which so many ages have brought forth? This argument falls heavier upon D.
Fern, and those who like his doctrine, then upon any other. For Sect. 7.
having undertaken to show, that Sectaries cannot make the plea which
Protestants make; he proves this by this Principle: That Sectaries do not
pretend to confirm what they say by practice of antiquity as Protestants do,
according to D. Fern and Doct. Hen. Hammond. But O great Doctor I pray, if you
can, show us but one small scrappe of antiquity for this your fundamental
Doctrine: For surely this most imports in the very groundwork of faith. And (to
use your own so often iterated argument) your part being the affirmative,
affirming a maine difference to be betwee^ you and Sectaries (arising from your
adhering close to a^tiquity) you are obliged to do this, at least where it so
imports, as it does in the belief of that upon which you believe all what
soever you believe. Again, if you be so good at finding out assuredly Gods
true word, from his false word, merely by this your sharp eye sight, you might
do notable service to those who now at Londen set forth the most famous Bible
that ever as yet (as they say) did see light. For you could tell the^ assuredly
which were the true Coppies of the true Originals, which not; whearas those
short sighted Doctors do openly profess them selves to sweat at this by
indefatigable labor in conferring every verse with several Coppies, and then
culling out that which agrees with the most and best Copies. To this industry
they Profess themselves to trust, and not to that pretended light, though you
make it the ground of all your faith. See the next Sect. n. 8.

10. Fifthly; I argue thus, Take the Book of Baruch, (which you hold not to be
Gods word) in the one hand, and the Book of Micheas in the other hand; this
Book has seven Chapters: Now I challenge you, if you can, to tell me that
Chapter, or the part of that Chapter in any one of these seven Chapters, which
has more divine rays, or internal arguments for the holiness of it, then
appear in the six Chapters of the book of Baruch. Your part is the affirmative,
affirming that there be such internal arguments, and such evidences, and that
there be more of them in the one, then in the other: Show me but one of them,
or else you will show your selves to the world to vent your own phansies, for
grounds of belief, even in the most important points of belief. So I say
again, take the book of Toby, take the book of Judith, which you reject for
Apocryphal, as not carrying with them a divine light, and those internal
arguments: take (I say) either of these books, and read it over, and be as well
versed in it as you are in the book of Numbers, for example; and see if it be
possible for you, with all the help your Brethren can afford you, to point out
any one Chapter, verse, or word in the book of Numbers, carrying with it more
divine rays, or better internal arguments, then appear in either of the
books I named. What would you have us do with our eyes, to keep us from
seeing how clearly this is impossible unto you; which nevertheles should be
most easy, if your opinion were true, or any thing like to true. For these
divine rays (say you) carry an evidence of so high a degree, that you do not
only believe (as we poor folks do) but you do know these books to be
divine: and this you know with a most infallible knowledge, produced by the
evidence carried in the clear Sunneshine of this Light, and these so
conspicuous internal arguments making it no less apparent then the first
Principles.

11. Sixthly if any one verse, or any one small word, changing the sense of the
holy Ghost (especially this little word, Not) beleft out in any one Chapter,
either through ignorance, malice or carelessness of those writers (whose Coppies
our printed Bibles have followed;) whom will you be able to make believe, that
you are so sharpe-sighted as to see this small omission, and that by a light
sufficeing for an infallible belief of it appearing to you only by the reading
that place. And yet this you must do to distinguish the true word of God from
the false. But how far all of you are from doing this, I will now declare:
All the days of Queen Elizabeth your Bibles did read in the 105. Psalm. v. 28.
they were not obedient, contrary directly to the true text; which has, They
were not disobedient, or rebelled not against his words, as now you read it.
These, and two hundred more Corruptions in the true Psalms, you did sing
daily. And who was there who did see in what places these corruptions were? Yea
the Queen, then head of the Church, made her Clergy subscribe that all these
corruptions were Gods own word. See the 5. Sect. number. 4. whence appears that
you cannot smell out these Corruptions; of which I shall say more in the place
cited. They then of your Religion believe the Scripture upon no ground which is
not fallible, and which may not really be false as this light may be; and
therefore it suffices not to a divine faith: and so you have no infallible
belief assuring you, that this book is Gods word; whence all that is in that
book has no divine authority, of which you are assured. And thus, most
pitifully, all of you are destitute of divine faith, in all points you
believe; because you believe them all upon the authority of those books, which
you, upon noe infallible ground, can believe to be divine. See here how you,
who boast of Scripture so much, come, by rejecting the Church, not to believe
the Scripture it self with any divine faith; but only with such human
persuasion as may be false, because it is fallible, having no infallible ground
to stand upon. Hence it is that your famous Chillingworth, having wit enough
to discover the vngroundednes of this ground, and not having grace enough to
set sure footing upon that firm rock of the true Church, in plain terms
comes to defend ( P. 327.) it to be sufficient to believe Scripture with noe
other kind of assent, then we believe, That there is such a city as
Constantinople, or the History of Caesar and Salust. Whence the ground of his
belief of the Scripture (upon whose authority only he believes all other
things) being thus confessedly found to be human, and to have nothing of
divine faith: he is forced to say ( P. 159.) We have, I believe, as great
reason to believe, That there was such a Man as Henry the Eight King of
England, as that Jesus Christ suffered under Pontius Pilate. Is this a book to
be owned by the prime Doctors of both universities, and to be so universally
cried up by our Nation? Dear Jesus! to what times were we come? No wonder that
these times are now come to us.

12. Seventhly; I further show the manifest falsity of your doctrine, by
unanswerable experience, confirming what now I said Nu. 9. Luther (a man
acknowledged by common consent of English Divines, to have had Gods Spirit in a
very Large measure) did read the Epistle of S. James, and he held it to be an
Epistle of Straw Praefat: in Nov. Test. and his chief disciple Pomeranus, upon
the fourth Chapter to the Romans, says: Out of this place you may discover the
error of the Epistle of James, in which you see a wicked argument: moreover he
ridiculously deduceth his argument: he cites (says this fellow) Scripture
against Scripture. But I go on with Luther, he did read the Apocalypse, and, for
all the light and internal arguments he could discover in it, he thought it
not written with an Apostolical Spirit. All our English Devines read these
self same books, and there is not one of them, nor of their disciples, so
ill-sighted, but they can discover a light no less clearly showing these
Books to be Gods infallible word, then the Su^ne shows him self to be the
Sun by his light; they all see internal arguments sufficeing to an
infallible assent of the quite contrary verity. But how can that ground be but
false which groundeth plain Contradictions? If you reply, that Luthers not
seeing such Books to be Canonical, is only a negative argument of small
force. I answer, that, where things are affirmed to be as evident as the
Sunneshine, and as clear as the first principles: and that these things,
affirmed by you to be so clear, are also daily set before the eyes of a man so
well seeing, as Luther, and his prime disciples were; and yet, that neither he,
nor his prime disciples, should ever be able to see this light (though their
sharp-sighted eyes so often labored to discover it:) this cannot be but a
certain sign that either these men were pitifully blind, or that you
miserably phansy such a light to shine in the very reading of the Apocalypse,
the Epistle to the Hebrews, the Epistle of S. James etc. Is it a weak argument
to say; I have been in the hall on set purpose to see if there were a Candle
set up lighted there, and I could see none, though I most carefully endeavored
to see it, and had my eyes about me; therefore I conclude there is no light
set up there? I conclude also that either I, who say this, am blind; or you,
who say there is such a light, are manifestly deluded by a false fansy of your
own? And I can also make my argument as strong in the affirmative, as in the
negative. I do it thus; S. Austen (the most sharpe-sighted man that the Church
has had) a man confessedly endued with the true spirit; and a man of your own
Religion, as you will say; and consequently a man agreeing with you in that
doctrine, on which all your whole belief is built; to wit, that true
Scriptures were infallibly believed to be Gods word, because they were
discovered in the very reading of them to be so, by a divine light, and by
internal arguments sufficeing to ground an infallible assent to this verity;
this man, I say, and the whole third Council of Carthage together with him, did
believe that all and every one of those books, which we believe to be
Canonical and divine, to be so indeed; and to be propounded to be so to the
people. Behold here, as good eyes, as you can pretend to have, reading these
books, and believing them infallibly to be divine: which they could not do
(according to your doctrine) but by discovering in them a divine light, showing
this truth evidently, and by such internal arguments as suffice to
infallibility. Therefore these books, (seen so infallibly to be divine) are
indeed so: and you must grant them to be so, and not to be Apocryphal, as you
hold them; or else you must grant, that S. Austen and the Fathers of the
Council of Carthage and all the Fathers, who ever after this Council held this
our Canon, did not agree with you in the prime principle of your Religion,
teaching that there is no infallible ground to believe such and such books to
be Gods word, but that divine light appearing in the reading of the^ to such
Readers as they were. For if they agreed with you in this principle, then they
did conceive themselves to discover this divine light in those very books,
which you call Apocryphal, as well as in the other, which you hold
Canonical: And if they all were deceived by this principle, in those books;
then you may be deceived in all the other, because your only ground for their
being divine, is hence clearly proved to be fallible and false, and most
insufficient to ground an infallible belief: But you have noe other faith,
then that which rests wholly on this ground; Therefore all the faith you have
is fallible. And if any one object that S. Ierom, (as great a Doctor in point
of the knowledge of the Scriptures as S. Austin) did not hold the Books of
the Machabees for Gods word, which S. Austen held to be Gods word: therefore
one of them relied on a fallible ground; why not S. Austen, as well as S.
Ierom? I answer, that even from hence it is evident that neither of these two
(though the most Eagle-sighted Doctors that ever the Church had) did make the
ground of their receiving or rejecting books for true or false Scripture, to be
any such divine light, appearing to such readers as both they were: For then
they could not have held quite contrary one to an other; as I said of the
Lutherans and you. The true reason, why these two great Doctors were of
contrary opinions concerning these books, as also diverse other holy Fathers
were concerning diverse other books, (which had bin impossible if the evidence
of true Scripture had bee^ so great as you make it;) the true reason, I say,
was, that as yet the Church of Christ had not defined which Books were Gods
true word, which not: wherefore, then it was free to doubt of such books as
were not admitted by such a Tradition of the Church, as was evidently so
universal, that it was clearly sufficient to ground an infallible belief. For
all those holy Fathers agreed ever in this, that such books were evidently
Gods word which had evidently a sufficient tradition for them; Now in the days
of those Fathers, who thus varied from one an other, it was not by any
infallible means made known to all, that those books (about which all their
variance was) were recommended for Gods infallible word, by a tradition clearly
sufficient to ground belief: for the Church had not as yet examined and
defined, whether Tradition did clearly enough show such, and such books, to be
Gods infallible word. But in the days of S. Austen, the third Council of
Carthage Anno 397. examined how sufficient, or insufficient the Tradition of
the Church was, which recommended those Books for Scripture, about which there
was so much doubt and contrariety of opinions. They found all the Books
contained in our Canon (of which you account so many Apocryphal) to have been
recommended by a Tradition, sufficient to ground faith upon. For on this ground
(Can. 47.) they proceeded in defining all the books in our Canon to be
Canonical. Because, say they, we have received from our Fathers that these
Books were to be read in the Church. Pope Innocent the first (who lived Anno
402.) being requested by Exuperius, Bishop of Toloufe, to declare unto him
which Books were Canonical, he answers Ep. 3. that having examined what
sufficient Tradition did demonstrate, Quid custodita series temporum
demonstraret, in the end of his Epistle c. 7. he sets down, Qui libri
recipiantus in Canone Sanctarum Scripturarum. What books are received in the
Canon of the holy Scriptures. To wit just those which we now have in our
Canon: and though he rejects many other Books, yet he rejects not one of
these. So that after these declarations of the sufficiency of this Tradition,
no one ever pertinaciously dissented from it, but such, as Protestants
themselves do confess to be Heretics; until the days of Luther, who
presumed to call Apocryphal, not only those Books which you count to be so,
but also diverse others; as I showed here nu. 1. Hence from the time of the
Council of Carthage, and Innocent the first, all in their daily citations of
Scripture, until the days of Luther, held those very books to be Gods word
which we hold to be, and were defined by them to be held to be so upon
tradition duly examined; And this within four hundred years after Christ, yet
after the time of S. Ierom. Now after this was done, there comes S. Austen, and
setts down all these books for Canonical Lib. de doctrina Christiana c. 8.
After him comes Gelasius the Pope (who lived Anno 492.) and confirms the same
Canon. After him comes the Sixth general Counsel celebrated Anno 680. which in
the second Canon (according to the Greek Copy translated by Gentianus)
desiring to establish what their holy fore Fathers had delivered unto them,
confirms this, and the other Council of Carthage. Go further downwards, and
still all Doctors and writers, in their daily allegations of Scripture, cite
these books as Scripture. The true Canon again is set forth by the Council of
Florence Anno 1438. To which Council the very Grecians, Armenians, and
Iacobites subscribed: No man pertinaciously gainsaying this so well established
tradition until Luther. Now if the true discovery of Scripture be to go by
the votes of the best and the most eyes, who sees not, but that even by this
rule, we shall have above half a score books discovered to be Gods word,
which your own sharp eyes cannot see to be so? especially that second book of
Machabees in which we so clearly discover Purgatory c. 12. v. 43. 44. 45. If
any man objecteth, that, in the Council of Carthage etc. that one book of the
Prophet Baruch is not set down by name (though never excluded:) he must
remember that this book of Baruch, is joined in our Bible with Jeremy, whose
Secretary he was, and as his Secretary he joined his book as an Appendix to
Jeremy: And therefore it is understood by these Fathers to be admitted together
with all Jeremy, excluding no part of him, as you exclude. I end then this
Sixth reason thus. The best seeing eyes of antiquity have seen different books
to be Gods word, from those which you hold to be so: again, your own first
brethren in your Reformation have seen those books not to be Canonical, which
you have seen to be so; therefore the true Scripture is not infallibly to be
known by so evident a light as you speak of, by which Contradictories can never
be seen.

13. If any man think he can escape the force of any of these arguments, by
pretending the private assurance of the Spirit, making this dim light appear
clearly to him, which so many others (for want of the assistance of this
spirit) come not to see: this man will run upon two main inconveniences. The
First is, that he most vngroundedly lays claim for him self, and for all
the little flock of his brethren, to have in private this assistance of the
spirit assisting them, even as far as infallibility, to the hardest of all
points: and yet, most vngroundedly denies any such assistance to the
universal Church, represented in a general Council. He denies also the same
spirit unto the greatest Doctors of the Church, confessed by all to have been
the chief lights of the world for Sanctity and knowledge in Scriptures: For all
these are found standing directly opposite to the^ in their Canon of Scripture,
and not one of them can be showed to agree with them in this prime ground of
admitting any book for Gods word, upon the light which God gave him by the
Spirit. The second inconvenience is, that, when he is questioned to give an
account, how he is assured that he in particular has this assistance of the
spirit, sufficeing to ground an infallible assent; and how he is most assured
that this is not an illusion? He can only answer, that he has tried, as well
as he (poor Soul) could, whether this Spirit were from God or no; and he found
it (and that infallibly) to be from God. But S.r I ask you by what infallible
means did you try it? If you say (as you must needs say) that you tried it by
the word of God: we cannot but pity your pitiful answer; for you forget
that, before this trial was made, you could not have any assurance that the
Scripture was Gods word; to the belief of which truth you cannot possibly
come, until you have first an infallible assurance, that you in particular
have Gods Spirit. For tell me, by what other way you can come to this
assurance? How can you then say, that you have tried your Spirit by that word,
which, before this trial of your Spirit, you could not possibly know to be
infallibly Gods word. You will all walk in a circle, as the wicked do, and as
that wicked spirit who circles about to see whom he can devour: until you
come to stand steadfastly upon the Rock of the Church.

SECT: IV. AN EIGHT ARGUMENT,
That the Scriptures cannot decide this Controversy, which books be the true
uncorrupted Copyes of the true books of Scripture: And therefore Protestants
believe not Scripture with divine Faith. A word of the famous Bible now coming
forth at London.

1. AS it is in vain to know for certain, that my Father did (to my great
advantage) make a true authentical will and Testament, of which I conceive my
self to have a true Copy: without I can authentically prove, the Copy that I
have to be indeed authentical. So, it is to small purpose, that God did, by
his Prophets, write such books as Genesis, Exodus and the rest of the old and
new Testament, to our inestimable advantage; unless I can also, by undeniable
assurance, show my self to have the true authentical and uncorrupted Copyes
of all these books; uncorrupted, I say, in all parts of them: for if it were
not known to be uncorrupted every where, it might be suspected of falsity
every where Now, that the Copyes, which we have of Scripture, even in the
Hebrew, or Greek tongues, be uncorrupted, we are no where told plainly in
Scripture. The last part of the Scripture which was written, was written about
a thousand and six hundred years ago. No Scripture has been written, since
that time, to tell us, that since that time no corruption has happened, or
falsyfying the copyes written since that time: no Scripture then written did
plainly assure us, that the Scriptures should never be corrupted by those who
printed, or writ them. Neither did the Apostles take care to have the Copyes,
written by them, to be authentically signed, sealed, and delivered into the
hands of such and such, as might authentically declare their being true
originals, or agreeing in all things exactly with the true originals; which is
an evident sign, that God intended not the Scriptures for our Judge, and only
direction in all points: For all lawmakers use this diligence, to secure their
laws from corruption. Behold then, here is now a sixteenth point primely
necessary to salvation, and yet no where set down in Scripture: I say,
primely necessary; for if it be necessary to have faith, it is necessary to
have the only Rule directing, and guiding to true faith, no where made crooked
and directed false, as a false corrupted Copy would do. Here then, you must
fly to the tradition of the Church; yea, and to the Tradition of the present
Church also: for the Church of other ages could not asseure us that the
Scripture should be uncorrupted in our Age. Is it not as great a contradiction
as can be, to say, we know by the tradition of the present Church that; that
very Scripture is uncorrupted, which very Scripture bids us not to believe the
Tradition of the Church: Which if I do not believe, I cannot believe the
Scripture to be vncorrupt, and that infallibly if her Tradition (upon which
only I believe this) be fallible? The traditions then of the present Church
be as infallibly true as your faith; which I prove by this Demonstration: Your
faith cannot be more infallibly true, then it is true that the Copyes of the
Scripture be vncorrupt; for your faith is built upon the word of God, as
delivered to you by these Copyes: just as we say, our faith is built upon the
word of God, as propounded or delivered to us by the Church: but it is not
infallibly true, that the Copyes we have now be uncorrupted, because that
very Tradition of the present Church which tells us this, is held by you to
be fallible and subject to lie; and which in a multitude of her other
Traditions, has lied unto us, according to your doctrine. Here you see again
that you believe nothing at all with divine faith; For all you believe, you
believe upon the word of God, as delivered to you by such Copyes as you only,
by an humane faith, know to be the true deliverers of Gods uncorrupted word:
This ground is fallible, being merely humane; therefore the ground which
supporteth all you believe, is humane, and not divine; Therefore all your faith
is humane, and not divine: And this holds true in all and every point which
you believe.

2. I will now further show you, how you cannot know by Scripture only, that
the copyes of it be vncorrupt, in those very languages in which the Scripture
was written: And yet this point is primely necessary to salvation, as I now
proved; And indeed if the Originalls cannot be known asseuredly to be
vncorruptedly copyed out, all the translations of these Originals may also be
false: Now the more they agree with corrupted Originals, the more we are sure
they are corrupted. But of Translations I will speak in the next section: Here
I will speak of the Copyes, which are said to be Copied out of the true
Original Copyes, agreeing word for word with those very Copyes, which S. Paul,
S. Matthew, Moses etc. did write; These Copyes we know by no scripture to be
vncorrupt. Yea, if you will hold the Church to be fallible; I will bring you
several convincing proofs, that there can be no certainty, that these Copyes
agree with the true Copyes written by the true scripture writers. These
scripture-writers did write, either in such Hebrew as was used in the Age in
which they did write, (as did the writers of the old Testament:) or they did
write in Greek; as did most of the writers of the new Testament. Let us see
first, how disagreeing the Hebrew Copyes may be, from the Original Copye of
the true writer thereof: Then we will see the same of the Greek Copyes.

3. First; diverse of the very originals themselves were written by such men as
we know not at all, and so we cannot know them certainly to have been true
Prophets, but by Tradition; which, if it may be false, it may also be false,
that they were true Prophets, having Gods true spirit, assuring them
infallibly in all that they did write: And so, though we did infallibly know,
that we had a most uncorrupted Copye of what they did write, yet we should
not be able to know that it were Gods infallible word; For how could we know
that he who writ this book, was a true Prophet; no body (as far as any body
knows) telling us one word of that man, good or bad? For these books were
written by God knows whom. We have nothing but uncertain opinions
concerning the writers of diverse of the most assured and protocanonicall
books of scripture: as of the books af Joshua, Ruth, Judges, Ester, the
books of Kings the books of Chronicles, or Paralypomenon. So also, it is not
certain whether Solomon himself did write his books of proverbs: or some
that were about him did severally, in scattered papers, one note what he heard
at one time; another what he heard him say at another time: And then, in the
days of Ezechias, some certain men (God know's who they were) belonging to
Ezechias; did make that collection of them which we now have; as the most
learned Lyranus holds, writing on that book, and grounding himself on these
words, cap: 25. These are also Proverbs of Solomon which the men of Ezechias
Copyed out. Wherefore not upon the authority of any scripture; but merely upon
the authority of Tradition, we know those true Original Copyes to have been
penned by true Prophets: though we know not who they were.

4. But, that which I press most is; that, though we had all infallible
knowledge that could be, that such Prophets and Moses had writ, with their
own hands, such and such books: Yet it is impossible (if the present Churches
authority be fallible) to know infallibly, whether the Copyes, we have now in
our days, agree in all places exactly with the Original. Yea, we are sure
they do not agree with it, which I prove thus: Noe books of Scripture were so
solemnly, publicly, and most authentically delivered to be kept, just as they
were written, as the books of Moses, witness the Scripture, Exodus 24. v. 4.
and Deutr. 31. v. 24. And it came to pass when Moses had made an end of
writing the words of the Law in a book, until they were finished: that Moses
commanded the Levites, which bare the Arc of the Covenant of our Lord, saying
take this book of the Law, and put it in the side of the Arc of the Covenant
of the Lord, that it may be there for a witness etc. But these very books,
thus written, until they were finished, have manifestly received the Addition
of the last chapter of Deutronomy which was written after the death of Moses;
as Calvin himself confesses. So Genesis 26. the 31. verse is clearly added by
some body, who lived in the times in which the Children of Israel had Kings:
which was long after the days of Moses: how then could he say, And these are
the Kings which reigned in the Land of Edom, before there reigned any King over
the Children of Israel? Who could set down these Kings as having reigned
until the days of the Kings of Israel, But some body who lived after their
reign? Bonfrerius, in his preface to the Pentateuck, adds two other places,
changed since Moses writ them. That the like changes have happened to the
book of Joshua, to the fourth of Kings and to Jeremy, is witnessed by
Torniellus Anno Mundi 1612. But let no man think, that I recount these changes
as corruptions; for we all believe those additions to have been made to the
true Copyes of Moses, and those other writers by men specially inspired by God
to make them: Yet we, standing only to the humane authority of history,
cannot tell by whom those changes were made: no history telling us, that the
authors of these changes were Prophets, or Imposters. Only we have the
tradition of the present Church, assuring us infallibly (which she could not,
if she were fallible) that the Scriptures, we now at present have, are
infallibly Gods word: and consequently, what changes so ever have been made in
them, were made by sufficient authority from God. You, who reject this
authority of the Church, can have no assurance that many other changes were not
made, as well as these: and such changes as may be most foul corruption, for
any thing you know. Again.

5. If we speak of such changes as may be both corruptions, and most
pernicious corruptions, in the Hebrew Bible: You (who reject the testimony of
the Church as a fallible witness,) cannot possibly make it appear, that the
Hebrew Copyes be not grossly corrupted since the times of the Apostles: For
many and great changes might, after their times, be made by the Jewish Rabbis
(men most perfidious and malicious,) when they did add points to the Text,
under pretense of preventing such mistakes, as might easyly happen to the less
skillfull, in reading the Hebrew text; which to that day had no points to
express the vowels: For in the Original it was written only with Consonants,
and the vowels were left to be added by the well instructed Reader; for whose
help (in reading the Scriptures right,) the Jewish Rabbis did first begin
to add certain points, so to tell us where an A, or an E, or any other vowell
was to be added according to the true manner of reading that place. Now only
God knows whether these, so malicious and perfidious Jews, taught us to read
every vowell as it should be read in such a place: and did not; by the adding
of what vowels they pleased change the sense of the word, to signifye what they
pleased. The putting of the vowels right or wrong depended, not only upon the
assuredness of their skill, which (for any thing we know) might in some
places be deficient, and we not knowing these places, are seure of no places:
but also the putting of these vowels depended primely on their sincere, and
upright honest dealing: which we cannot, in true prudence, much expect from
such sworn enemies to Christianity, as those Jews were. Such men then as
these putting all and every one of the vowels, to every word of the Hebrew
text, a good while after the Apostles time: what humane evidence have we,
sufficing to a certain assurance, of the adding the right vowell to every
syllable of the whole Hebrew Bible? If wrong vowels be added, the sense will
be incredibly wronged: The vowell is the very soul of the syllable, either
making, or marring the true sound and signification, and altering it to most
different senses; In so much that, not only in every word, but even in every
syllable, alteration may be made of the true sense. So in the latin word
monere to admonish, if you change the vowels at your pleasure (as those Jewish
Rabbis might often do, for any thing we know) you may read moneri, to be
admonished; manner, to stay^ manare, to flow from; minari, to threaten; munire,
to fence; muniri, to be well fenced; munera, gifts; minora, less things: And
thus the vowels change and alter the right word in several parts. The Hebrew
language is most subject to this inconvenience of any other, because it
co^sists exceeding much of words of one syllable; in which the change of the
vowell, makes the sense a perfect changeling. So in English, suppose the
Scripture should speak against the abuses in Balls: there comes a Protestant,
and he will say, it is against the abuses of Popish Bulls; there comes a
Puritan, and he will say it is against the abuse of Bells, vseing them in such
manners as have no authority in Scripture; some vpstart Sectary will say it is
against Bills, and other arms, which Christian mildness does not allow of.
See here how the change of one vowell in one syllable only, quite alters
the sense. This change of one vowell, makes a fatt man, to be a fit man: and
fatness in all places, to be fitness in all places: It makes that which is
Better, to be Bitter: It makes a pott full of Butter to be a pit full of
Batter. Though you magnify so much the present Hebrew Copye, as we have it now
pricked and pointed, to point us out the true vowels; yet your own English
Bibles, in several places, testifye their corruption, by forsaking their
translation to follow ours: I will give you but one example; We, (and you with
us) read, They have pierced my hands and my feet, Psalm. 22. v. 16. So clear
a Prophesye for our Saviors Crucifixion, is quite turned to another sense in
the present Hebrew Copyes, where these malicious Jews make us read, As a Lion
my hands and feet. Thus you see how very little is the assurance, which those,
who know Hebrew, have, even of their very reading it right as it should be,
acccording to the true meaning of the scripture-writer: Of David for example,
of whose true meaning, these false pointers have disappointed us. We then now
have no assurance, to know what vowels should have been putt. And if any man
now in these days, does pretend to be sure that he has so much skill, as to
tell, by the consonants only, what vowels should for certain be putt,
according to the meaning of Moses, of David, or of any other writer; I would
only desire this cunning man, to give me a trial of his skill, by telling
me what vowell I mean to have putt to these three Consonants, Bll: whether I
mean to signifye a Ball, a Bell, a Bill, or a Bull. You will sooner tell me
whether the pinnes I hold now in my left hand be even or odd? Here you will
be sure to hitt right at twice; for surely they be one of the two: But you
may guess twice two times, before you assuredly Prophesye, whether I mean by
those three consonants to signifye a Bal, a Bell, a Bill, or a Bull.

6. Now for the Greek Copyes; Though the Copye of the Septuaginta be not
Original, yet question less, if we were sure that we had the true Original
of that Translation, it would be a strong ground, for as much as concerns
those books which those 70. Interpreters Translated; who lived 300. years
before the new Testament was written: But you your selves exceeding often
refuse, in your English Bibles, to follow the present Copyes of the
Septuaginta, as copyes that are by you esteemed corrupted in several places;
and consequently secure in no place. I show this in several points of great
consequence. So Psalm. 118. v. 12. I have inclined my heart to perform thy
Iustifications for a reward: S. Augustine upon this place, says; For which
reward, he says, he did incline his heart to perform the Iustifications of
God: Hence proving, as you see, that David did make profession to do good
works, and to keep Gods commandments for the reward he hoped to get
thereby. So the Scripture says of Moses, that he had respect to the
recompense of the reward, and out of this respect did that most noble act of
preferrin^ the ignominy of Christ, before the being great in the Aegyptia^
Court: Heb. 11. v. 26. You to avoid this argument drawn from the clear text
of the Septuaginta, fly from they translation, to the Hebrew Copye of a
doubtful sense, the one agreeing with the Septuaginta, the other agreeing to
your turn of shifting off our and S. Austins sense; by reading as you read, I
have inclined my heart to perform thy statutes always even unto the end. So in
the fourth Chapter of Daniel, v. 27. Daniel says to Nebuchodonozor, Redeem
thy sins with alms: which words are most literally translated out of the
Copyes of the Septuaginta: but because they make so manifestly for Popish
satisfaction, by which they hope to redeem their sins, (Christ's passion
dignifyeing their good works;) you refuse again to stand to the Septuagint,
and fly again to the present Hebrew Copye, which having both the sense of the
Septuagint, and another sense helping you to shift off this place, you follow
that sense and read, Break off your sins by righteousness. Hence it
appears, that you yourselves will not allow the true sense of the Original
greek Copyes of the Septuagint. And indeed S. Jerome finds frequent fault
with the Copyes he had in his days of their translation; (which translation
he reverenceth:) See him in Quaest. Hebr. de optimo genere interpreta^di,
Epist. ad Suniam and Fritillam: And he often co^plaines of the corruption of
his Greek Copyes in his commentaryes upon the Prophets. Now in our days
Bellarmine Lib. 2. de verbo Dei, C. 6. houldeth that the Copyes of this most
famous Translation are so corrupted, that they seem to make a new, and quite
different Translation; as he proves by many arguments, of which one is this:
Genesis 26. Where the servants of Isaac do say, according to the Septuagint,
we have not found water: Whereas they should say, We have found water; as is
proved by the Hebrew, and by Isaac his own words, calling the name of that
place Abundance, for the plenty of water found therein.

7. I come now to the new Testament, which almost all of it (except S.
Matthewes Gospel) was by the Apostles themselves written in Greek. The chief
points of our our faith depend upon the new Testament. If the Copyes in this
language agree not exactly, and in all places, (for falsity in one place
proves possibility of falsity in other places) with the first Copyes written
by the Apostles; our Judge (for whose sole authority you plead) will be
co^vinced of corruption, and therefore no infallible Judge. Your great Doctor
Beza upon Acts, 7.16. does muster up a whole catalogue of corruptions in the
Greek Copyes. The same Beza judges Erasmus the best of all latter
translators: and yet Erasmus, speaking of the Sixth of S. Matt. condemns the
Greek of trifling and rash additions. If you will be Judged by the Greek
Copyes, then you must confess that Christ in the Sacrament did give us his
true blood; For all the Greek Copyes of S. Luke cap. 22. v. 20. read thus.
This cup is the new testament in my blood, which (cup) is shed for you. So that
the Cup, that is the thing contained in the cup, was that very thing which was
shed for us; But not wine, but Christ's true blood, was shed for us: Therefore
not wine, but Christ's true blood, was the thing contained in the cup. It is a
memorable thing which is lately related by Mr. Cressy Exomol: Ca. 8. Nu. 3. in
these words; In my hearing, Bishop Usher professed, that whereas he had of
many years before a desire to publish the new Testament in Greek, with
various lections and annotations; and for that purpose had used great
diligence, and spent much money to furnish himself with manuscripts: Yet in
conclusion he was forced to desist utterly, least, if he should ingenuously
have noted all the several differences of reading which himself had
collected: the incredible multitude of the^ almost in every verse, should
rather have made men Atheistical, then satisfy them in the true reading of any
particular passage. An evident sign that Governors of the Church did not rely
only upon what was in writing. So he. And though he has now twice printed
this, and though others have also divulged the same in print; Yet Bishop Usher,
seeing this done before his eyes, does not disclaim from it; Therefore I
cannot but believe the story to be true: And if it be true, how wonderfully
corrupted is your only Judge. Now if B. Usher alone, in this remote corner of
the world, being a private man, could procure so many old Copyes in writing;
what might have been done by some great Prince, vseing all industry to get
(by means of other great Princes, and all other diligences,) all the old
Copyes they could? For as the multitude of Copyes, procured by Bishop Usher,
did increase the variety of different readings; so a far greater multitude of
Copyes, would, in all probability, have yet much more increased this variety
and difference. And the same variety, for the same cause, might yet have been
found to be far greater, if five or six great Princes, liveing in five or
six Kingdoms (at the greatest distance from one another,) should have all
conspired to gather together all the ancientest Copyes that were any where to
be had. Wherefore, if in those only copyes procured by Bishop Usher, the
multitude of several readings were incredible almost in every verse: how much
more incredible would the multitude of several readings be, if the diligence,
I spoke of, should be used to procure a greater multitude of written Copyes? I
ask now, when, in these later days printing was invented, how those, who
caused the Greek Translation (which we have) to be printed: how (I say)
could they know for certain, that, that one reading (which they thought good
to follow in their printed Copyes) was the true reading? Or how could any man
tell which written Copye of B. Vshers was the true written Copye? I pray let
us so much as know our Judge, before we be obliged to accept of him in all
matters. Yea, you make us know he is corrupted in many matters: and others may
make us know that he is corrupted in many more. And sure I am, that corrupted
Judges, are not competent Judges. Crooked Rules are not good directors. The
Rule that is given to us all by God, to direct us all, must be a rule easily
applyable by all: For this reason, you say all must read the Scriptures, and
your meaning is (and must be) that they must read the true Scriptures; that
is, some true copye of the true books of Scripture: by what means shall they
be assured, that they read the true Copye, there being such an incredible
difference between Copyes which are set forth for true? Not one, among an
hundred thousand, can have this assurance; either want of means to get the
reading of these manuscripts, or for want of skill to read them, and
understand them so, as to be able to inform himself of their perfect
agreeing in points necessary: especially seeing that you so little agree in
teaching us, which points be necessary and fundamental, that you could never
yet be able to give us the number of them; much less to tell us which they
were, or in what books, or Chapters of the Bible, they were to be found.
Wherefore he, who will upon his own knowledge, and not upon some other man's
credit, (far inferior to a general Council,) inform himself of the truth
of his Copye (sufficiently to have a full assurance that it is the true
undoubted Copye of the true undoubted Word of God:) he (I say) who will so
much as hope to do this, is not one among an hundred thousand. How then can
this be that Rule given by God, to be applied by every man, to Judge by it for
himself: by which one among one hundred thousand cannot be able to judge for
himself, whether this undoubtedly be that Rule given him by God. Excellently
Seneca, Omnia delibera cum amico, sed prius delibera de amico. All
consultations with thy sure friend make: But first consult Whom for this friend
to take. Before thou consultest the whole business of thine eternity With this
Copye, first consult how sure thou art of the surenesse of this thy Copye. If
every man (as protestants Will have it) be to be judge for himself, in
points which so nearly concern himself, then doubtless, in the very first
place, he is to be judge for himself of this point above all points, which
concerns him as much as that upon which all other points of highest
concernement do wholly depend.

Thus you see, how, not one man among one hundred thousand escapes being
gulled by you, Whilst you all make him believe, that if he will follow you,
he shall see with his own eyes, what he does, and he shall judge for
himself: and not take his religion upon trust, as you make them believe we
do, because we trust general Councels. O dearest Brethren in Christ, for his
and for your own sakes, set your eyes at least half open, and you shall
presently see, whether we, or you be those who take up our faith on trust.
Do we do this, because we believe and trust general Councels? These
Councels, Even in humane knowledge and sincerity of judgment, far excel any
private man, trusted by you in this capital point: and, besides humane
knowledge, they have the infallible assistance of the holy Ghost promised to
them; at least as much, if not more then to those men, whom you trust. Or
rather do not you take your faith on trust? for who of you is able to judge for
himself, Which is the true undoubted Copy of the true Word of God, by which
only you must rule your faith in all points? And who therefore is there among
you, who seeing himself wholly unable to judge for himself in this point, (on
which all others wholly depend) is not forced to rely upon incomparable Weaker
authority, then is the authority of a General Council, to which the prime
Prelates of this World are called, bringing with them the ablest Divines they
can get, Each one in the Province, from which he comes: And all of the
Council delivering not so much their opinion (equal at least to yours) but
delivering what has bee^ by the^ received Universally from their Ancestors,
without note of novelty. Whereas you, when all comes to all, must in this very
point of points, rely wholly on the authority of those few learned men, who
have thought good to set forth this Copye, which you take upon their word to
agree faithfully in all places With the true undoubted Original. And this also
must be done by you Mr. Minister, and by you Mr. Doctor, Without you be
Perhaps a man more learned, then that one, who cannot be picked out among an
hundred thousand. Now if this be the case of men though so very learned; What
more clear then that the less learned (which make up the multitude of souls
redeemed by Christ) cannot possibly judge for themselves in this point of
points; but must trust others to judge for the^, and rely wholly upon their
judgment. What think you now? is this as safe as relying on the Church
Universal, represented in a General Council? Now if this Council may be
more Prudently relied upon in this point of high concernment; Why may it not
be relied upon, and judge for us, in points of less concernment? Shall I
wisely trust a man with a thousand pounds, and be unwise, if I trust him with
an hundred pounds? shall it be most prudently done, to let General Councels
judge for me, which Books I am to hold for the Copyes of Gods Word, and shall
it be imprudence to let a General Council judge for me, whether I am to
pray to Saints, or no? to pray for the dead, or no? to hold Christ most really
present in the Sacrament, or no? What Scripture, or any thing like Scripture,
have you, to tell me that the Church, represented in a Council, shall not
deceive me in this point (most important of all points:) but that it may
deceive me in other things, in which it is more Easy to Judge right? The
Church is a Judge, (as I shall show hereafter) to which the multitude of people
may have free access; and hear plainly, clearly, and most undoubtedly, what
is delivered for true, by the sentence of this most grave Judge: And such a
judge it beseemed the Divine Providence to give to the people, if he seriously
desired to bring them, by belief of the only true faith, to salvation. Whereas
it is not possible, for one among one hundred thousand, to hear plainly,
clearly, and most undoubtedly, the sentence delivered by any Book of
Scripture, concerning the true Copye of the true Scripture; though all my faith
must depend upon this, as you say: Neither can you find any other way to make
me secure of this choice of a true Copye, comparable to the authority of a
general Council.

8. To show this more plainly, I will most faithfully relate unto you, that
which you may soon see with your own Eyes, if you please. Your prime masters
of antiquity, your chief Doctors in all those languages, in which Scripture
anciently was written, have begun to set forth the most complete Bible that
ever yet appeared (as they say) for the number of the ancient languages in
which it is setting forth, and for the exquisite exactness of the Copyes, of
which I spoke Sect. 3. n. 9. The first five books are already printed, and to
be seen in many persons hands. The same men have also (in order to their Bible)
set forth an introduction, printed at London by Tho. Roycroft, Anno 1655. In
the preface to this Introduction, they profess, they cannot produce any one
Copye, which they can assure us to agree in all things with the true Original
handwriting of the Authors; Wherefore (say they) in the variety of Copyes, what
better Means can so much as be invented, to pick out the true reading, then
the conferring of the most choice and most ancient Copyes; and then to stand to
that reading, which agrees best with the greater part of the most ancient,
and most choice Copyes? This course S. Ierom etc: This S. Austen took etc: So
they. The chief thing they pretend to excel others in, is Exemplarium
optimorum delectu, In the choicenesse of the very best Copyes. Well now (dear
reader) can humane industry, such as this is (that is, as great as is to be
expected in this world by thee) take more pains, or do more, to procure for
thee the truest Copyes, which can be had for love or money? And, standing in
humane industry, millions of millions have wanted this means of discovering
the true Copye, which these learned men have. But what does all this avail
another man? For your religion will have every one in point of faith to Judge
for himself: So D.r Fern, S. 8. thinks that, because the Roman Church will
have us to trust to her judgment, pronounced by and with the consent of a
general Council; she will have us to thrust out our right eye, the eye of
our spiritual understanding etc; Wherefore, says he, we cannot yield, but
must say, that no man can beleve any thing truly, unless he be convinced of
it in his judgment according to that Romans 14. V, 5. Let every one be fully
persuaded in his own mind; Concluding, by the due use (note these words) of
his reason, that it is Gods holy will that they should so do and believe. And
by and by he tells you, why he said, that he must conclude (all that he is to
believe) by the due use of his reason. For notwithstanding the public
Judgment of the Church in a full Counsel, (I add notwithstanding also the
private judgment of such great Doctors as these are, Who now so painefully
labor in procuring the true Copye of the Bible For us) Private Christians
(says D.r Fern) have their private judgment of discretion for themselves
only, which is the discerning, and receiving to themselves only, as the will
of God, what is delivered and propounded to them. For they must answer also
for themselves, and live by their own faith; which cannot be without allowing
them due use of their reason and judgment, to see the evidence of that to
which they must assent. This is that which D.r Fern, and other protestant
Doctors are pleased to call, The due use of reason. Behold here (you most
learned Doctors, who so vnwearyedly sweat in setting forth this your admirable
Bible) behold a doctrine taught every where by your own Divines, and most
necessary to mainetaine your standing out to submitt your inward judgment to
the definitions of Councels: A Doctrine, making all your labor of very little
or no use at all, to your Protestant Brethren: For some seven or eight years
hence, when your Bible shall be quite ended, (for until the quite finishing
of it, we cannot have the benefitt of it as a Judge,) then your own Brethren
must not trust your judgment, iudgeing for them in the choice of the true
Copye, picked now out of one of your old Copyes, now out of another; now
trusting to this old Copye most in this verse, and by and by not trusting it
most in the next, or almost the next verse. The due use of reason (say they)
permits us not to stand blindely to the public judgment, even of whole
general Councels, when they define matters of less moment, then is the taking
upon your word, our Judge in all the points necessary to be believed or
practiced. For though in the second Council of Nice Anno 787. no fewer then
three hundred and fifty Fathers, did allow of the Worship of Relics and holy
Images of Christ and his Saints Act, 3: Yet we have the private judgment of
discretion to Judge for our selves, because we are to answer for our selves;
and we (duly vseing our reason) Judge Worship of Images to be either
Idolatry or superstition. Now, if you allow us, by your own Doctrine, not to
trust a whole general Council of three hundred and fifty ancient Fathers; you
have not the due use of reason your selves, if you think we may lawfully
blind our selves so far as to let you Judge for us in a far more
important point; that is, in the taking the only Rule of our whole faith upon
your judgment. I must, in this point, have your leave not to accept of any one
of your Copyes, as sufficiently true, to be my Rule in my whole faith, Without
I also can see the evidence of what I must assent unto: For so you teach me.
See what I said in the very end of the second Section. But I go on, and
confess that I see it is evident enough, that you do indeed say, that you
give me the best Copyes that can be got; and that, which is more, I see it
is evident that you do indeed say all your Copyes agree in things, which are
necessary to salvation: But I do not, nor cannot set (though one among one
hundred thousand be not so learned as I) that all you say to me is evidently
true, until I have conferred all the Copyes as well as you; and until I be
as fully certifyed of the antiquity, and choice exactness of all your Copyes,
as well as you: and this is impossible for me, until I can understand all
those languages as well as you; and pervse all the authentical testimonies,
which you have of this antiquity, and perfect exactness of your Copyes.
Besides all this, how can I trust you to Judge in all and every point, whether
the agreement of all the Copyes be exact in all and every point fundamental
and necessary to salvation: for I know, we our selves cannot agree which be
all the points fundamental and necessary; and my judgment may in this vastly
differ from yours, as much and as lawfully as it differs from the Council I
now spoke of. Thus much your own Brethren must be allowed to say.

9. As for our parts, we, to say nothing of what you mention concerning Beza,
Munsterus and Erasmus etc. (from whom, as from professed enemies, we cannot
without just suspicion receive any thing) we I say, besides this, do not
only suspect, but also evidently know that you mainly disagree from us in
understanding the sense of your own words, when you say, There is (in all the
Copyes you have by you) great agreement in all things belonging to faith, and
necessary to salvation etc: And more toward the end, you say, That they agree
in fundamentals. Bishop Usher, (whose Copyes you profess to use so much) if
he had gone on with his work I spoke of n. 7. had given us better
satisfaction in this particular, in that we had seen how great, and where, the
disagreements be: but you make us rely wholly on your authority in this point;
I know you could not do otherwise. But as for your judgment in fundamentals,
we know not how to rely on you; You tell us our religion and yours agree in
fundamentals: If your Copyes agree in fundamentals no more then our two
Religions; this agreement will be little to our satisfaction, nor much to the
satisfaction of many of your Brethren: For being they know you account all the
points, in which we and you disagree, not to be points fundamental or
necessary to salvation: they, by your granting frequent disagreeing in your
Copyes in points not fundamental, are not freed from, but confirmed in the
suspicion which many have, that the Copyes of the Bible agree no better then
Papists and Protestants; and that (for any thing they can yet judge by their
own judgment of discretion) these your Copyes disagree about the texts
concerning the real presence; the Popes supremacy; Image Worship; Prayer to
Saints, and for the dead; yea about our justification it self; the number, the
right use, the fruit, the necessity of Sacraments; and such points as these
are; which, though you account them not to be fundamental, yet you account
them of so great concernment, that the difference in these points, gave you
most just cause of separating and dividing from the Roman Church, with all
those Scandals and public evils ensueing upon this division. Will not then,
this be a sufficient reason of not embracing the Copyes presented unto them in
this most accurate Bible, they having no better assurance, that these Copyes
agree with those other Copyes concealed from them, in these points, (in which
their greatest difference from the Roman Church does consist) then the
authority of these learned men, who most plainly confess the frequent
differences of their Copyes in points not fundamental, and who also, by the
name of points not fundamental, are known most commonly to mean such kind of
points, as contain no meaner differences then those which are between Papists
and Protestants; and which caused this great division. A word more of this
Bible in the next Sect: n, 5.

10. To end then this matter, you see (Gentle Readers) That you have not among
you any Copy, which you undoubtedly know, so much as by evidence of humane
knowledge, to be Gods undoubted word: Will you, who contend so eagerly to have
nothing believed, for which there is not clear Scripture, have us, in the most
important point of belief, believe that for which we have neither Scripture,
nor evidence of humane reason? If you say the divine Providence would
doubtless keep the Copyes of the Originals uncorrupted, because otherwise we
should have no sure Rule of Faith: I answer that this is to suppose the very
thing which is in question, Whether Christ gave us Scripture for our only
Rule. Yea, because it is clear that, standing in humane evidence, no Copye can
be freed of the guilt of corruption: Therefore God would have no Copye at all
to be our only Rule of faith: but has provided for out direction another way.

SECT: V. A NINTH ARGUMENT.
That the Scripture cannot decide this Controversye, which Translations of the
word of God be true: And therefore ordinary Protestants cannot believe
Scripture with Divine Faith.

1. THe Divine goodness desiring passionately (as appears by his passion for
all) the salvation of all, and intending to make faith a necessary means to
this their salvation, must consequently provide some means to guide and direct
us to the truth of this faith; which must be a means so easy to be applied
by all, that all, by the use of this means, may (if they will) attain true
faith, which is but one; for faith unless it be one is not Faith, as S. Leo
says Ser. de Nativ. Hence it appears, to the very eye, that if the Scripture
cannot so be used by all (or the far greater part) as to guide themselves
by it, in all points necessary to salvation; it cannot be the only means
given them for their guide in points necessary to salvation: But it cannot do
this to the far greater part of the world, as I prove; For the far greater
part of the world cannot make use of Scripture in those languages, in which it
was written, as has been showed in the last Section, even concerning men, who
are more learned, then any one among one hundred thousand; and it is in it
self clear enough concerning those, who know not Greek and Hebrew in any
perfect degree of knowledge, in which languages the Scripture was written:
whence it follows, that the far greater part of the world, cannot know
what the true word of God (their only Judge and director) did say, but by the
means of a Translator or interpreter. Now judge you, in what uncertainty that
man should be left, who should have a very good guide locked up in some place;
to which he himself could never have access, but must hear all the
directions given him by some other man who is exceedingly subject to mistake
very many things, which that good guide should say to him; especially this
messenger being often to trust others of no undoubted credit: In this case,
your own doctrine does put you (O dear People) Who make Gods Word your only
guide, in a way full of a world of doubtful turnings, in which to miss is
everlastingly to perish. This word is locked up so in Hebrew and Greek
closets, that you cannot know what it says, but by the use of a Translator, as
by a messenger; who being a man, and having a weak understanding, and a will
subject not to take all the pains required for the exact knowledge of all
that, which the word of God speaks, in so great a book as ^he Bible is, in
which there be very many hard expressions in languages nothing easy to be
understood, in all words and phrases; especially seeing that the Hebrew tongue
was quite lost (for as much as concerns the vulgar use) in the Captivity of
Babylon, some six hundred years before Christ. How hard then must it be now
to know the full force, which common use gave these words two or three and
twenty hundred years ago? What skill can be known to be here secure?
besides the difficulty of the points of which I have spoken; I say nothing of
the wilful mistakes, which this messenger may committ, either fully on set
purpose, to make all go the way which he conceives to be best, upon his
passionate affection to it, or disaffection to the contrary: or rather, not so
much with so plain down right wilfulness; as with an overswaying prejudice,
which has prepossessed his judgment, that the way which he, as from thy
guide, bids the to go, is the only true way: not that he is fully sure
that thy guide did clearly say so; but thy messenger thought best to putt
down clearly this way for thy true way, because his own prejudice of its
being so, and his great desire that it should be held by all to be so, have
prevailed with him to deliver it clearly to be so. Moreover this thy
Translator or messenger had not immediate access to Gods word, in that very
hand writing in which it was written by the scripture writer: from such but
what he knows, he knows Copyes as were written by men of unknown fidelity,
who perhaps often were such hireling penmen as had more care to write much,
that they might gain much; then to write with all perfect exactnes, and to take
due pains and care in conferring their transcribed Copyes with the Copyes they
transcribed. And those very Copyes also were perhaps written out with the like
carelesnes. Besides this carelesnes; ignorance might likewise cause many a
mistake in so long a work, because all neither knew the la^guages perfectly
which they transcribed, nor did not perhaps know so cunningly those
abbreviations which those pennne men then used even almost at every word; in
which also one writer often differs from an other: Hence in a long work
numberles mistakes are incide^t, which soon grow to a far greater number,
whilst so many subsequent transcribers out of former Mistakers come to add
their new mistakes to those former. And to do it in a hand fit to cause their
mistakes to be yet more multiplied, when more Copyes (subject still to the like
inconvenience) come to be transcribed out of them successively for many ages.
Now thy messenger or Translator, in this vast variety of Copyes, (of which we
spoke more in the last Chapter) if he finds but one or two Copyes, which
more favor that way which he would have all go, or thinks in his private
judgment to be true; he makes choice to interpret this mistaken Copye for
Gods own word, and sets it down as advantageously as he can, to further his
opinion and his desire to bring such a way into greatest request. From such men
as these, you are immediately to take that direction for your only Rule and
guide: And yet, though you see with your eyes, your only direction to come so
indirectly to you; and, that you most manifestly neither do here Judge for
your selves, nor can possibly Judge for your selves in this Capital point
(comprehending all the points you are to believe:) yet you are taught by all
your prime Doctors, that, as you are to answer to God for your selves in all
you believe; so you must, by your selves also, Judge for your selves in all you
believe. Yet (O preposterous! O Monstrously preposterous!) you, in this
cheifest point of all, must rely upon the authority of a few English
Translators; who exact of you to rely on them with more confidence, the^ they
will permit you to rely upon the authority of a whole general Council,
seconded by the authority of the gravest Fathers which the church of God has
had: And you, who are taught to follow and believe nothing but scripture, are
now taught, without any one text of scripture to take the Tra^slations of men
for your only guides, in all and every point of your faith; and such
Translations also as we just now described, and shall here more fully
describe. In the mean time note, that here I have one more necessary point,
not clearly set down in scripture, to add to the former sixteen. If any
deny this point to be necessary to salvation, let him answer this Argument:
that is necessary to salvation, without which I cannot come to be assuredly
guided to true faith; But I (who understand not both Greek and Hebrew) can
not, without a truly Translated Bible, come to be assuredly guided to true
faith; the true Bible being (as you teach me) the only rule guiding and
directing to true faith: Therefore it is necessary for me, to use a truly
Translated Bible: But no scripture does direct me in the choice of a truly
translated Bible; Therefore scripture does not direct me in all points
necessary for me to salvation.

2. Here again I infer, that all that vast number of people, who, knowing
not perfectly both Greek and Hebrew, are forced not to Judge for themselves
which is the true word of God, must of necessity rely upon many vncertaintyes
in this very point, upon which all their whole faith does rely. First they must
rely upon this uncertainty, whether the Copye which this Translated Bible does
interpret to them, were a true Copye of the true uncorrupted word of God;
which, how great an uncertainty it is, has been showed in the last Section;
Where I showed also (and here you may see it again) how much more you take
your religion upon trust, then we do: Even those great Doctors, who now set
forth the famous Bible, Confess (in their Introduction) that Copyes are only
so far Gods true word, as they agree with the true Original Copye, written
by the Prophets or Apostles. How thy Translators Copye agrees with the true
Original, God knows; I am sure thou know not, nor thy Translator
himself. Secondly, it is uncertain, whether thy Translator did in every place
interpret sincerely, and not follow his own private opinions, in expressing
some points of Controversye. Thirdly, it is uncertain whether he were not, in
several places of so great a work, careless to express the true sense of
his Copye, not marking at all times attentively enough, or not vseing at all
times due labor to search for the true sense of such and such a word, in such
and such a place. Fourthly, it is uncertain whether thy Translators skill was
great enough to perform his duty in so vast a work as the Translation of the
B^ble is, even though he should use as great pains as he could. A faith
relying upon so many vncertainetyes, for certain cannot but be uncertain:
But all the faith, which such Protestants have, is thus uncertain; unless
they have skill and will to use the Hebrew and Greek Bible: Therefore their
faith is not certain nor divine in any one point; because in all points they
rely upon a Tra^slators authority, which is subject to so many vncertaintyes.
See this clearly confessed by prime Protestant Doctors, whose words I give you
hereafter sect. 16. 11. 7.

3. And, that you may see this the clearer, I will set before your eyes
several undeniable proofs of the gross falsity which is in the Translators
of your own Religion, in whom you trust most; that hence you may see, how
little they are to be trusted by you in so great a matter; especially to be
trusted more then a general Council. Luther (that great beginner of this
Reformation) did set forth a Translation, which, how good it was you shall
hear from your great Doctor Zvinglius lib. de sacra. fol. 412. Luther was
(says he) a foul Corrupter and horrible falsifyer of Gods word. One who
followed the Marcionists and Arians, that razed out such places of holy writ
as were against him. Thou do (says he to Luther) corrupt the word of God,
thou art seen to be a manifest and Common corrupter and perverter of the holy
scriptures. How much are we ashamed of thee who have hitherto esteemed thee
etc. And Luther himself, twenty years after, confessed he had often erred
because he had trusted too much the glosses of the Rabbis; as witnesses
Coc^^aeus in actis Lutheri. Behold here another way for Translators to err,
of which we thought not before. It is also worth the noting which Bellarmin in
his Sermon upon Pentecost says of Luther; Those (says he) who most diligently
have read the Books of Luther do bear witness that he, in the New Testament
only (so small a part of the Bible) has changed above a thousand places. He
did set forth the Gospels seven times, every time most different from all the
former, as the same Bellarmine there notes. So much for Luther. After him came
Zuinglius, and set forth a Bible, with the help of his disciples, which being
printed at Zurich, the Printer sent one of them to Luther: but he, rejecting
it, sent it him back again, as you may see in the Protestants Apology Tract: 1.
S. 10. Subd. 4. out of which place I cannot but add diverse most pertinent
things to our present purpose. This Apology then sets down all that here
follows; as that Luther said of those Zuinglian Translators, that they were
fools, Asses, Antichrists, Deceauers and of an Asse-like understanding. That
Beza reproves the translation of Oecolampadius (who with Zuinglius and
Carolostadius did first begin your Reformation in point of the Real Presence:)
He then having set forth his Bible at Basile, Beza said thus of it; The
Basilean Translation is in many places wicked and altogether differing from the
mind of the Holy Ghost. The same great Beza accounts that so highly esteemed
Translation of Castalio, to be Sacrilegious, wicked and Ethnicall. But Castalio
was quitt with Beza, for he writ a whole book against the Translation which
Beza made, saying; That to note all his errors (in translating) would require a
great volume. But Beza in his Annotat: goes on and calls Castalio his
Translation false, foolish, unskillful, bold, blasphemous, vicious,
ridiculous, Cursed, erroneous, wicked, perverse. Hitherto thou see these
Translations of thy prime Doctors condemned by the authority of other no less
famous Translators. And both those who were condemned thus, and who did thus
condemn, were men more famous among you then is any one translator of any one
English Bible: so that a greater authority, then is the authority of that man
(whose translation thou take for the only Rule of faith) tells thee that
Translations of far more learned Tra^slators then thine, be so full of
Corruptions, that great Volumes would not conteyn them: How then can thou
hope that thy less skillful English Translator has done his part better then
any of thy greatest Doctors. But I must yet further ask thee, how thou do
know this on thy own knowledge? and how it is possible for thee here to Judge
for thy self, which thy Doctors so often tell thee thou shall be able to do
if thou will follow the^? do not thou here again see how in a most important
poinct, thou art enforced to trust an incomparable less authority then that is
of any one of our general Councels, which they so strictly charge thee not to
trust even in far less points? O blindness.

4. But thou can not but see how much thou art gulled herin, and how
impossible it is for thee to judge of truth and faith by these English
translations, when thou shall yet hear what I have to say of them. Your first
English Bible was set forth in the days of Henry the eight by Tindal, whom
yours esteem the Apostle of England in this Reformation. May I not trust him
will you say? Truly Bishop Tunstall noted no less then two thousand
Corruptions in his translation in the new Testament only, as witnesses the
Remish Testament in the end of the Table of certain places; etc. How little a
part of the Bible is the new Testament? And yet two thousand Corruptions in
that only? Yet surely in Queen Elizabeth's days, who lived so very long, and
did see the Gospel so well perfected, our Translations (will thou say) were
completely exact: For then, if ever, our Doctors had the true Spirit. Indeed
then they were so confident their Translations did agree with the word of God,
that the Queen (whom all your Doctors by oath acknowledge Gouernesse of your
Church in England) in the 26. year of her Reign (as Sir Richard Baker writes
in that year) did command Whitgift her Archbishop of Canterbury, to set forth
three Articles to be subscribed by all her Clergy, and the second of these was
That the Book of Common Prayer conteyneth nothing contrary to the word of God.
By reason of the urging this subscription, many, marking well that in their
Common Prayer their Epistles, Gospells, Psalms etc. were contained, all which
were taken out of their Bible: and knowing by their learning that their Bible,
even then, was full of gross corruptions, contrary to the word; began now
openly to discover these errors. Hence diverse Ministers in a Treatise to her
excellent Majesty spoke thus; Our Translation of the Psalms, comprised in our
Book of Common Prayer, does in Addition, Subtraction, and Alteration, differ
from the truth of the Hebrew in two hundred places at least. And Mr. Burges in
his Apology S. 6. writes thus; How shall I approve under my hand a Translation
which has many omissions, many Additions, which sometimes obscureth, sometimes
peruerteth the sense, being sometimes senseles: sometimes contrary. And
Carlict says in his book of Christ's descent to Hell. P. 116. The Translators
thereof (the English Bible then used) have depraved the sense, or obscured the
truth, and deceived the ignorant. In many places they detort the Scripture from
the right sense; and finally they show themselves to love darkness more then
light, falsehood more then Truth. When King James began now to reign, the
Ministers of Lincolneshire, in an Abridgment of a book delivered to the king.
P. 11. 12, of the English Translation speak thus: It takes away from the
text, adds to the text, and this sometimes to the changing or obscuring of
the meaning of the Holy Ghost. A Translation which is absurd, and senseles,
perverting in many places the meaning of the holy Ghost. These things were so
notorious that Sir Richard Baker, an earnest old Protestant (as now they call
them) in the first year of king James his ^eign writes thus: He called to
Hampton Court diverse of his Bishops and Divines, to see what they could say
against the present gouuernement of the English Church. In this Conference D.
Reynolds motioned that there might be a new Translation of the Bible; because
the present Translation were Corrupt, and not answerable to the truth of the
Original; where of he alleged diverse examples, particularly that in the
hundred and fifth Psalm. V. 28 where it is said They were not obedient; in the
Original it is, They were not disobedient. To this it was agreed that a new
Translation should be made. Thus far Sir Richard word for word. By all which
it is evident that your Bishops, Doctors, Deuines etc. in Queen Elizabeth's
days, even to her last day, did subscribe, and by Public Authority were
ordered to subscribe, that falsified word of God to be the true word of God;
though it were flatly contrary (as in the place now cited) to the true word.
How know thou that the Deuines now, though they miss not always in the same
places perhaps, yet perhaps they may miss in Others of as great consequence?
The Scripture was held then as confidently to be the only Rule of faith, and
cited as fast, and as thick, for Gods word then, as it is now; And yet now your
very Bible coming forth on that occasion, does as good as tell you; the former
Bible was not Gods true word. Diverse years after the resolution made of setting
forth this new Bible, there still remained such open complains of the
corruptions of the word of God, that Mr. Broughton (a man as skillful in Hebrew
and Greek as any was in England) according to his skill did give this Censure
in his Advertisement of Corruptions to the Bishops; saying, That their public
Translation of Scriptures into English is such as it peruerteth the Text of the
old Testament in eight hundred forty eight places; and that it causes
millions of millions to reject the new Testament, and to run to eternal
flames. In what case then has this your doctrine putt you, which has taken
you off from following the judgment, of the Church in a general Council, to
make you Judge for your own selves: when your learnedest Deuines (who made so
corrupted Translations) did so ill Judge for them and others? Upon thy self
then thou can not safely rely in this poinct; neither can thou rely upon
thy Translators, who have used thee thus: Find me then, for Gods sake, find
me, if thou can, any where any, but half so sure, a ground as is that of
the Church, which is the Pillar and Ground of Truth. Thou do not only
venture the being deceived in this great point of the vprightnes of thy only
Rule, and Judge; but it is manifest that thou art deceived: for, thy Rule
(which is thy present English translated Bible) still stands accused of many
and gross Corruptions. Not to trouble thee much, I will tell thee only of one
or two; Thy Translator had a mind to make thee believe that faith only could
save thee; a damnable Doctrine, unknown to the greatest Doctors of the Church,
which could not be, were it the only thing which did justify and save us, as
thy Translator would persuade thee, when translating what Christ said to the
blind man, whom he cured Luke 18.43. he makes Christ to say, thy faith saved
thee, in place of saying, thy faith has made thee whole. Again, though Christ,
by way of Counsel, did propose in a general manner the embracing of a chaste
single life Matt: 19. v. 11. and. 12. saying; He that is able to receive it,
let him receive it: Thy Translator had a mind to make thee believe not only
that every one did not receive this doctrine, but he makes Christ in the former
verse tell us, All men cannot, receive this saying. Whereas Christ said only,
All men do not receive this saying, as is evident out of the Greek. Is this
fair dealing? is it all one to say, All men do not lead single lives; and to
say, All men cannot lead single lives, though they use fasting, praying etc.
This is as wilful an error, as it would be in one who heard me say (and also
set it down in writing to prevent mistake) All men are not honest; should
report that I said, All men cannot be honest. When I see a Translator not to
make any conscience of so wilfully falsifying Gods own word, in favor of his
own opinion; have not I just reason to say, I cannot be sure of my faith in all
points, if I (upon this man's authority) take his translation as the only Rule
of my faith in all points? What more clear?

5. Here I must needs examine the doctrine which those great masters of the
ancient languages, who now set forth that mighty work of the London bible, in
so many learned ancient languages, who in the introduction to this their Bible
(of which I spoke in the last Sectin. 8) spoke thus; It is not necessary for
the producing faith in the people, that there should be a translation wholly
infallible; seeing that de facto it is evident, that among those numberles
Translations which are extant this day in Europe, there is none of all them
which is of divine and infallible authority: For faith does rely on the
authority or veracity of God, which always is certain and infallible,
although all the means be not infallible; For translations have only so far
authority as far as they agree with the first own-hand written Original: But
they are sufficient means of faith when they conteyne (who knows when that
is?) all things necessary to salvation, without any error against faith or good
manners. So they. Let us examine, what they say, by parts as it lies in order,
and that in order to our present purpose only: and not in order to examine how
true all they say is. If true faith can be had now without any infallible
Translation, then the Bible is not our only guide to true faith, and our only
Judge in points controverted in faith: for this judge must be infallible, as
all your Doctors teach. If you answer the Judge is not the translated Copy, but
the Original in Greek, and Hebrew. I ask you, what shall almost all the world
do to hear this infallible Judge speak? For almost all are deaf to all that is
spoken in Greek and Hebrew. If there be not one infallible Translation in
Europe at this day; how at this day are all deluded, who are taught on the one
side to judge for them selves, and on the other side are told that they cannot
handle the Ruler by which they should Rule their judgment in all points: but
they must be contented with a fallible Lesbian Rule of lead, bent as it pleased
the Translator? Again, how is it possible God should bidd the people to search
the truth in the Bible, not only as the only place to find it in; but also as
the only place for them to find it in: For God knew all people could not search
truth in any Bibles, but such as are translated into a language they
understand; God knew all these Translations were liars, if indeed they be so as
you say; Ca^ God bid any man seek for the truth, only at a liars mouth? Yea,
would God, who loves Souls so well, give them no better means to know the
truth wholly necessary to Salvation? True it is, faith does rely upon the truth
of God, who said such a thing to be so and so: but if my Translator tell me;
that God said such a thing was so and so; and yet God said no such thing, but
an other thing very different, in place of which my Translator ignorantly or
wilfully obtrudes this thing: here manifestly I am left leaning, with all my
force, upon a Lie. And whereas you tell us that Translation (the only Rule we
can handle) have only so far divine authority as far as they agree with the
first own-hand-written Originals; This is small comfort to us, to whom it is
impossible to know how far this is. Yea you yourselves know not which be the
true own-hand-written-originals, which you confess to have perished, though
you say that they be faithfully restored by your laborious gathering and
co^ferring together more exquisite Copies then hitherto have been published:
which how true it is, I know not. And then secondly, without we also know the
languages, which you present unto us very faith ully, (as we perhaps suppose,)
it is impossible for us to know how far our Translations agree with the
Originals: therefore it is impossible for us to know, how far we may trust
to their authority as divine, or suspect it as human. And so by clear
consequence it is impossible for us to know when and where we may give a most
full undoubted assent to what we find translated in our Bibles. Is this the
comfort you leave us at last, when upon our leaving to rely upon the Rock of
the Church, you promised to make us men knowing what we do in all points: and
now, we are sure we know not what we do in any? For we know not what our
only Rule bids us to hold upon Gods authority, or what that man bids us upon
his authority only to hold, when offering us his own Translation, he bids us
take it for a divine Rule; which if he gives not, we are gulled even in that
point which nearest concerns our salvation. Indeed you conclude with a small,
crumme of comfort, when you tell us; Translations are sufficient means to
divine faith, when they contain all things necessary to Salvation, without any
error against Faith or good manners. But I pray reflect, how wholly impossible
it is for us to tell when they do this, without knowing first for certain all the points necessary to Salvation: about which you your selves are not yet
agreed; neither can you give us up a list or catalogue of them. Nay, I may
affirm, that no such list or catalogue can be given, (though even here it be
so apparently necessary) that thence we might see whether there be any such
error in our English Bibles, in those matters: Yea, all of you tell us, that
there is no way to know what is necessary to salvation, but by the true Bible;
and yet we (poor souls) cannot possibly come to know, which is the true
Bible containing all poincts necessary to salvation, without any error in faith
or manners; until we know first that a true Bible has told us so: And
again, we cannot know that Bible to be so true, which told us so; until we
know that, that very Bible contained all poincts necessary to salvation,
without any error in faith or manners. This is not only to blind us (as you
say the Papists do, when they make us follow the Church:) but it is to use us
as the Philistians used Sampson; first to putt out our eyes, and then to make
us run round in a mill, as blinded horses do in horse mills: For no circle is
rounder, and goes more about and about again in the same footstepps, then the
circle we are m^de runne-in blindfold; by having no other assurance, that the
only Rule of all our faith is a Bible, containing all things necessary to
salvation, without error against faith and manners; and having no other
assurance of what is necessary to salvation, what not; what is against faith,
what not; what is against manners, what not; but by an other Bible, of which
Bibles truth we have noe other assurance then the former; but we still require
an other Bible to assure us of the like things; and this other will require yet
an other, and so with out end. What circle can be more endless?

SECT: VI. A TENTH ARGUMENT.
That the Scripture Cannot decide the Controversy about the truth of S.
Matthews Gospel. And that our adversaries do not believe this Gospel with
divine faith.

HERE also I must needs propose a difficulty, which, in the principles of your
Religion, I conceive to be unanswerable. You do no less believe all things
written in S. Matthews Gospel, then you believe all things written in any other
book of the Scripture: But even your Doctors of the highest form, have no
other authority for all things in S. Matthews Gospel, but the Authority of a
Translation made by one, whom none of us all know; and so we can neither
assure our selves of his fidelity, nor of his skill, nor of his care to use a
true Copy, nor I of his industry in the use there of etc. Now you tell us (and
it is true) that Translations (prescinding from any decree of the Church
approving of them) have only so far authority, as far as they agree with
the true Original; But it is impossible for you (great Doctors) to know, how
far the translated Copyes of S. Matthews Gospel agree with the Original;
because, for these many ages, there has not been known extant in the whole
world, any one Copy of the Original-hand-writing of S. Matthew, who did write
in that kind of Hebrew which the Jews spoke in his days, as all and every one
of the ancient Fathers (who have writ of this matter, and whose works we
have) do testify, and S. Ierom libro de Schriptorib. Ecclesiasticis affirms
himself to have seen, and to have also written out that Hebrew Copy. But for
these many ages noe one Hebrew Copy has appeared in the world which, with any
sufficient probability, could be showed to be a true Copy: whence it is
evident, that none of you all can tell, how far the Translations we have of
that Hebrew Copy, do agree with the Hebrew Copy; therefore, not one of you all
can tell, how far these Translations, which we have now, be of divine
Authority, and how far now we may admit them as Gods undoubted word; there
being no reason known to us, why we should admit them more in one place
(upon S. Matthews authority) then in an other: and there being no reason why
we should admit of the whole Translation, made by I know not whom, rather
then of other Translations, whom we know, to have been made with all the best
industries which human ability can afford: whence I can neither admit the
whole Translation as divine, nor any part of it, rather then the part I admit
not; I not knowing any one part to agree more with the true Original, then the
other. All the whole Ghospel I cannot receive as divine, for no Translation at
all, (much less the translations of a man unknown) is to be admitted as
divine and infallible, there being no one such in all Europe as you say. Hence
I demonstrate, that you believe not S. Matthews Ghospel with divine Faith: For
you cannot say, that you give credit to any one thing in it for the authority
of the writer of it, because you know not any one thing delivered from God by
the writer unto you, but upon the authority of the Translation, which is no
further divine then agreing with the true Copy; which agreement you neither
know to be in this one point, or any other you can name. How can I know, how
the Translation agrees with the Original: if I know not what the Original
says?

2. Again, to believe S. Matthews Ghospel, is as necessary to salvation, as to
believe S. Lukes or S. John's; but no infallible Scripture (Translations not
being infallible) does tell you that S. Matthews Ghospel is the undoubted word
of God; How will you then prove this by Scripture against the Marcionists the
Cerdonists, and the Manicheans, who deny this Ghospel to be Gods word? All
points necessary to salvation, you say, are plainly set down in Scripture:
Show me this point plainly set down. Here then I have one necessary poinct
more, not plainly set down in Scripture which makes the former seuen-teene
poincts to be eighteen. Neither can you say, that, by the very reading this
Translation, you can discover a light showing it, as clearly as the Sun, to
be Gods word: For, though I can see no reason, why such light might not be
discovered, as well in true Translations, as in true Originals; yet because you
of your Religion, who only have eyes to see this light, do profess (as we
have lately seen your greatest Scripture-Doctors to profess) that there is not
one infallible Translation in Europe; and because we see, even such Doctors as
they are, not so much as to hope to discover, by such a light, true
Translations from false ones; but to bestow great pains in conferring the
several Copyes, of their several translations, with the best copyes of the
originals which they can find; and by the agreeing, or not agreeing with these
best copyes, to approve or reprove these Tra^slatio^s; we are by this
certifyed, that they trust nothing to this clear light, which if it were a
reallity, and not a real phansy, were the best guide of all, and would save
them infinite pains: Yea, whatsoever (to avoid our arguments) they boast of
this light; yet even in the approving or reproving the Copyes of the Original
it self, they trust nothing to it. If I thought, they did trust to such an
ungrounded Imagination, neither I, nor any one of my opinion (nor of thine
neither, as I think) would ever buy one Copye of their Translations.

3. Now; if you cannot discover any such light assuring you of the truth of all
things in S. Matthews Ghospel, I am sure you cannot do so in S. John's or S.
Lukes, or any other: And your own Consciences cannot but tell you, that the
light discovering its self in S. Matthew, is as great as in any other book of
Scripture; But this light is now clearly showed to be insufficient to prove S.
Matthews Ghospel to be Divine, it being only a Translation, which your best
Doctors confess to be fallible: neither is there any means to know one part
of it to be more infallible then an other, upon the authority of the writer
thereof; because we know not which part agrees with the true Copy of the
writer. You say you fix your faith upon what is Translated, and not upon the
Translation: But I say, if you fix your faith upon what is translated by a
false Translatour, you may soon fix your faith upon a ly; at least you cannot
tell when you do so, and when you do not; For you know not whether the thing
delivered be agreeable to Gods word, or only to the Interpreters fancy;
especially when you know not of what credit the Interpreter is. Do you know it
because your phansy also tells you this is Gods word? then thus we may have a
double fantastical assurance, and nothing else; one from the unknown
interpreters phansy, an other from thy own. I thought your faith had relied on
Gods written word. What written word is that which can neither be showed
assuredly written in any Original, nor in any Copye, nor in any Translation of
the Original Copye? If you fly at last to that miserable shift, as to say, that
the Illumination of the Spirit can tell you Gods word, without the mediation of
any certain undoubted means, conueighing it unto you: then you must needs be
Prophets all, and every one of you. Who ever heard of such a Church in this
world, in which there be as many Prophets as there be men and women? This is
not the Church of S. Paul, in which he said, 1. Cor: 12.19. Be all! Prophets?
and in which he gave only some Prophets. Ephesians: 4.11. But all of you who know,
imediately from God, that which no mediat means conueigheth unto you, must
needs be true Prophets. If this be true, then also any English clown, by the
like illumination, communicated to him in the reading of his English
Translation, may as well, and better, (because by divine illumination) be
assured, that all is true which is in his English Translated Bible; and so, by
good consequence, be assured that it is a very true Translation; though he
neither knew Greek, nor Hebrew. And indeed your Greek and Hebrew only helps you
to confer the Translation with the Originalls; but S. Matthews Original
Copye not being for many ages visible in the world, can be no more conferred
with by your Hebritians, then by this English Clown: And if his illumination
assures him of all that is written in S. Matthews Gospel; we will all, with
one consent, grant that it may assure him as well that all other parts of the
Scriptures be Gods word: what then need you talk of conferring with the
Originals, or knowing Greek or Hebrew?

4. Now at last, I hope, when you so universally allow to every man and woeman
who belieueth S. Matthews Ghospel, so large a measure of divine Illumination,
that it is sufficient to ground an infallible belief; You will confess your
selves to speak most inconsequently, if you offer to deny the like
illumination to the whole Church representative in a general Council: so now
we shall have a Church infallible; which is all I am endeavoring here by
degrees to prove. And tell me not, that you are not assured, whether they in
Councels have used the due means to obtain this illumination; for I shall as
easily tell you, that neither I, nor my Brethren, be assured that you, and
your Brethren, have used also the due means to obtain this illumination
concerning every Book, Chapter and verse of Scripture, assuring them all to be
Gods word; especially when they speak contradictions so fast as we see they do.

SECTION THE VII. AN ELEVENTH ARGUMENT.
That the Scripture cannot decide the manifold Controversies about the true
sense of the Scripture: Therefore in their belief of the true sense thereof,
our adversaries have no divine faith; Nor no sure ground of their Religion.

IN the former sections I have given you eighteen points, all necessary to
salvation, and yet not one of them plainly set down in Scripture: Now I add a
nineteenth point, which, though most necessary, yet, it is so far from being
cleared by only Scripture, that almost all our Controversies do arise from
hence, without ever being silenced by the definitive sentence of God,
delivered in the Bible: An evident sign that God, in the Scripture only, has
not passed the clear decisiue sentence of all necessary Controversies: For all
parties submitt unto that sentence, and yet none of them is clearly cast
thereby. They do then the holy Scripture much wrong, who say that God did write
it on set purpose to end all controversies: and yet they cannot possibly show
how God has done this completely: And so, by consequence, they are driven (to
the scandal of all Christians) to make God fall short of effecting that by
Scripture, which they say he intended to effect; to wit, the ending of all
Controversies; which with our eyes we all see wax endless, even among those,
who all submitt to Scripture as Gods word. We Roman Catholics are far from
doing the Holy Ghost this wrong: we say, Scripture was dictated by him, for
many most high ends belonging to the knowledge and love of God, and belonging
to the increase of all virtue and hatred of Sin, arming us with patience in
Gods service, by proposing most comfortable motives to us: so S. Paul teaches
us, what things so ever have been written, to our learning they are written,
that by the patience and consolation of the Scriptures we may have hope, and
thus walking cheerfully by those confortable examples, and these rate
documents, and fervent exhortations given us in Scripture to all virtue, we
may go in the end for which God made us. Yea we add, that Scripture wants
not this honor of providing sufficiently for our unity in faith, about all
points which can ever fall in Controversy; not that it ends all these by it
self alone: but that it bidds us have our recourse, in these cases, to his
Church, and to hear her, and that under pain of being accounted is a
publican or Heathen; and telling us, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against her, by any false doctrine; telling us, that she is the pillar and
ground of truth; that he is with her all days even to the consummation of the
world; and that He has prayed his Father to give her an other comforter, that
he may abide with her for ever, the spirit of Truth, who shall teach and
suggest unto her all things what so ever Christ has taught his Apostles,
guiding her into all truth. He tells us also that he has given us such Doctors,
and such Pastors, as may secure her from circumuention of error; for his
Covenant with her is this, My Spirit which is upon thee and the words which I
have put in thy Mouth; shall not depart out of thy Mouth, nor out of the Mouth
of thy seed, nor out of the Mouth of thy seeds seed, from hence forth and for
ever. And that her Sunn shall no more go down; For the Lord will be unto her an
everlasting light; she shall be a Kingdom standing for ever; that the Nation
and Kingdom which shall not serve her, shall perish. No National Synods shall
justify any nations division from her Communion. All these Texts I shall show
to be spoken of the Church; by which (I think) it is a apparent by Scripture,
that God intended not in Controversies of faith, to instruct us by Scripture
only; the very Scripture sending us so often to the Church, as also to her
Traditions; as 2. These. 2.15. Hold ye fast, and (to do this) hold the
Traditions which ye have learned, whether by word, or by Epistle: and again, 2.
Tim. 2. The things which thou have heard of me by many witnesses (he says not
by his writing only) these commend to faith full men, which shall be fit to
teach others also: And again, Those things which ye have been taught, and
heard, and seen in me, these do. Who sees not that we were to do, not only
what we had read, but what had been taught us, and what we had only heard or
seen shining in public practice. But of this here after see in the next Sect:
n. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. God then teaches us all things necessary in Scripture;
first, by delivering many things clearly in it; secondly, by sending us for the
rest to the Church, and to her traditions: By the Churches Pastors alone he
instructed some sufficiently in faith; as he did S. Paul, to whom it was said
Act: 9.6. Go into the City, and it shall be told thee what thou must do; and
as he did Cornelius, to whom it was likewise said; Call for one Simon, whose
surname is Peter, and he will tell thee what thou oughst to do. Act. 10. v.
5.6. What you object to the contrary I anwer Sect. 10. n. 6.

2. I return to you, who say, God intended by Scripture only to teach us all
necessary poincts; which if he has not done, you make him deficient in an
unworthy manner: and that he has not done it I have already showed in
eighteen necessary points: and now I add, that by Scripture alone he does not
teach us the true sense of Scripture: And yet the true sense thereof is that
which must give sentence in the decision of all controversies; the sense is the
kernel, the life, the Soul of the text; miss that, miss all; A wrong and
false sense is no less dangerous then a false text obtruded for a true one.
Hence Tertull: de Praescrip: The sense adultered is like perilous as the style
corrupted And S. Ierom Ep: ad Gal: says. The Gospel is not in the word but in
the sense; not in the bark, but in the sap. wherefore D. Reynolds in his
Conference with Mr. Heart P. 58. confesses, that it is not the show but the
sense of the words, that must decide Controversies. So he. It is not then the
Text as it sounds, but the text thus expounded, which must end (as you say) all
our debates: And yet this expounding thus or thus, is that very thing which
first makes all our prime debates and Controversies; and it is also that very
thing which makes them to be endless. This I still inculcate, because.

3. This, and the true reason of this, is exceedingly to be noted: For it is
not the Text, but the text thus or thus expounded, which is to decide
controversies: not the dead letter, but the true sense of it, delivers the
sentence of the Holy Ghost. The text, as expounded by private judgments, is not
to be held Gods undoubted Word; unless we first know the interpretation thereof
to be indeed true, and agreeing wholly to the mind of the Holy Ghost; which to
know is a thing wholly impossible with out a revelation; and yet, until we
come to know this, we shall neither have reason to agree in one inward faith
interiourly, nor in one outward profession exteriourly; But still our hearts and
lips will be divided. This we see, as clearly as noone-day-light, happen among
those who take Scripture only for their judge; which all Heretics did ever
use, and will ever use to do so, to escape being condemned or cast by any
other iudgment-Seate. Hence they all still appeal to Scripture; for then they
know beforehand all that can be said, and know also by what interpretatio^s to
show, all that ca^ be brought out of Scripture against them, not to be spoken
by God in any sense contrary to the opinion they hold. And thus contrary
opinions, grounded in contrary interpretations, are held, and will be held
until the worlds end; if there be no other Judge to end them, but the sentence
given by God in the Text of Scripture; not as the text sounds, but as the
Interpreter expoundes. Here with all possible care I would have you note, that
all the faith which our adversaries have, relying on their interpretations,
which ^are fallible, can be but fallible and human: For they believe, all that
they believe, because they fully persuade themselves, that, God says that
thing in the Scripture taken not merely as the words sound, but taken as they
verily apprehend and judge the true interpretation to be so, or so. This is the
ground of their belief in all points; and therefore this is fundamental to
their Religion; and that as properly as any thing can be called fundamental to
any Religion: for it is the foundation it self on which every single point of
their belief, and their whole belief in general is so wholly built, that they
rest upon nothing but this. Where first I observe, that you and we must needs
differ in the most fundamemtall point which concerns Religion: for we believe
nothing at all because, by our private judgment only, we judge it to be the
truly interpreted sense of Scripture; but because we know it interpreted so by
the Church, assisted by the holy Ghost in all her publik interpretations. You
will believe no one point (for example, that there is a Trinity,) for this
reason only; because for sooth you hold the Church fallible in her publik
interpretations of Gods word: and we will not believe any point of our faith
(for example, the Trinity) upon that ground; because we know assuredly that
our own judgments, in our private interpretations of Scripture, are most
fallible. Whence it is evident, that in those very points in which we do
agree, we fundame^tally disagree: because we disagree in the very foundation
of our belief concerning those poincts. Now, in point of belief, we must
mainly atte^d, not only to the truth of what we believe; but to the ground
upon which we build our belief. For, if we think our selves to build our
belief securely, upon a foundation which is deceitful, (as our own
interpretation is, and the Churches not:) we shall be soon lead to believe
things which are false; as we see a world of People do, by relying on the
scripture as interpreted by their private Judgment. The Turk believes that
there is a God, because his Alcoran (which is the Rule of his faith) teaches
him so: Now, because he believes the truth upon a deceitful foundation; he,
upon the same foundation, builds the belief of a thousand falsities. Add to
this, that this Judgment of the interpreter (who according to you is every
private man, yea every private woeman, for his or her own self:) this
judgment, I say, is most weak, and many points of faith are matters very hard
to conceive, and unfold; and controversies also are exceedingly entangled; and
the conferring texts with texts, like and unlike, rather increases uncertainty
of hitting right, then it helps to any full assured certainty: what then more
sure, then a most unassured proceeding, in this interpreter? Again, private
Judgments being almost as various as private faces (yea often differing from
them selves) infinite variety of interpretations must needs proceed from
infinite private men's judgments, so very various. You may see this in your
Patriarch Luther; who, in matters of highest moment, is noted no less then
fourscoore times to have taught flatt contradictions: as you may see showed in
the end of the first tome of our learned Coccius. Not only your Martin Luther
thus contradicted him self in words; but also your Martin Bucer contradicted
him self in exterior change from Religion to Religion: At one time he fully
judged those texts of the Scripture, which speak of the Sacrament of the Body
of our Lord, to be truly interpreted by the Roman Catholics; and so he
believed Christ's Body to be really present, and to be adored in the Sacrament.
After this he judged most sincerly, that the Lutherans did truly interpret
those texts; and so he became a Lutheran, holding the real presence, but
denying Christ's Body to be there adored. Thirdly after this he most sincerly
judged the interpretation of those texts given by Zuinglians, to be the only
true sense of the Holy Ghost; and then he became a Zuinglian, denying Christ's
Body to be really present in the Sacrament; for which Luther termed him
perfidious: Fourthly, he once more most sincerly judged Luthers interpretation
of those texts to be the truer sense of the Holy Ghost, and once more became a
Lutheran: and therefore in his first Edition of his Commentaries upon the sixth
of S. John and 26. of S. Matthew, he asks pardon of God and the Church for
having bewitched many with the Heresy of Zuinglius. Fifthly, yet after this he
sincerely judged again Zuinglius his interpretation of those Texts to be the
only true one: And this interpretation he did publicly profess and defend at
Cambridge; to which University he was called out of Germany as a prime Doctor,
to help us here in England in our new begun Reformation. And it is to be
noted, that, at every one of these his changes, he still used most earnest
protestations of undoubted certainty, conceived from the Scriptures: as you may
see in the most learned Brierley in his treatise of S. Austens Religion in the
Preface; where he cites his authors for all these changes. To which I add that
after all those changes, he is at last affirmed to have died a Jew, by Possevin
in notis Verbi Dei and Vlenbergius Causa 12. And indeed for one, who has first
believed Scripture as interpreted by every Man's private judgment, to be to
every man the only ground of all he is to believe concerning Christ, and his
doctrine: and then has considered after this, how groundles a ground this is;
and how, if this be the only means left by Christ for unity in his Church, his
Church is most pitifully provided: for in this most highly important point, it
cannot but breed a strong temptation, to fall quite out of love with Christ and
his Religion, in those who will not admit any thought of seeking for a better
ground amongst us, where it might be so easily found.

4. Questionles if Christ be God as he is; and if he truly loves these souls
for which he dyed; he would not have failed, to provide them of some more
assured, means; to know that true faith without which he will not save them;
then this means is, of leaving them to the Bible as interpreted by each one as
he thinks rightest. What Lawmakers in any Commonwealth was ever yet found any
where so imprudent as only to leave the people of his Commonwealth so
miserably provided (for the final ending all their Controversyes) as they
should be, if he did only leave them a Law-book for their sole and only Judge
in all their differences; without any living Judge to expound it with
vnappealeable authority. Well now the Church of Christ is a Community, which
was to be spread over the whole face of the Earth; and intended to last until
the consumation of the world: and therefore this Community, above all others,
had the greatest need of a most super-abundantly-sufficient means to end all
their Controversyes; which do not concern their temporal, but eternal
welfare. A world of Controversies must needs be still rising in a community
concerning so many sorts of people, and those still further and further removed
from Christ's time until the very end of the world. Wherefore this community
had been most miserably and pitifully provided for, in poinct of unity in
faith; and Christ should have gathered together a most heart-disvnited sort of
people, if in all their numberles differences, after all their reading of
Scriptures, conferring of places and such like Rules as you prescribe; they
should have no other means left them to end those Controversies, but the
written Text of the Bible, to be expounded according as they can guess at the
intent of the Holy Ghost. True faith consists in the interior judgment; if
then Christ desired they should be of one faith, he desired also they should be
of one interior judgment: But how could the wisdom of God expect this unity in
the inward judgment, knowing so well that every one of these judgments were
so exceedingly different in framing several judgments; and that even after
they have used all the Rules which you give them.

5. By this discourse, without going further, thou may once more see the
vngrou^denes of all thy whole belief, relying only upon the word of God: as
this word is expounded and understood by thy judgment; which in far easier
matters has deceived thee a thousand times, and may do so in this hard matter,
in which a world of better understandings then thine do vastly differ from
thee. If thou do answer, that thou relyest not on thy judgment, but on the
word of God. I ask, whether, thou do rely on the word of God just as the
le^^er sounds? Thou must say, no. How the^? Thou must needs say, that thou
do rely upon it, as it is expounded by thy own judgment. This also appears
by the infinite contrariety of expositions and interpretations given by so many
relying (just as thou do) upon the word of god: in so much that there be no
fewer then two hundred several interpretations of these four words; This is
my Body: which interpretations, although they be not all allowed of by thy
Religion, yet they all of them, proceed from this very ground of thy Religion;
of taking the word of God, not as it sounds, nor as expounded by the Church,
but as every one in his private judgment does really think it ought to be
expounded. Wherefore upon the whole matter, it is all one to rely upon a man's
private judgment: and to rely upon the Scripture, as interpreted by his own
private judgment. See the vast variety of Religions lately sprung up by
following this Principle, in my first Sect. n. 23. If thou replyest that thou
do not trust to, and rely upon thy judgment; but upon the spirit of God,
which thou know assuredly to rule this judgment, securing it from all
misunderstanding of Gods word: this thy answer will have many difficulties.
First, how can thou, without high presumption assume, to thy private self so
secure an assistance of the Spirit (assuredly preserving thee from all error
in thy private judgment;) when thou do so pertinaciously deny, that the
Church representative it self (when it judges in a general Council for the
whole world of believers) is assured so well in their public judgment as thou
art in thy private? And yet, because thou see their Judgment quite contrary
to thee, thou must fall into this presumptuous Paradox. Secondly how comes
there to be so mighty contrariety in judgments, among men confessedly guided as
surely by the Spirit, as thou art? Thirdly no one single Doctor of the
primative Church, did ever so much as pretend, to have this assurance of the
truth of (...) from the Spirit: Can thou prudently believe thy self to have
a greater gift in this kind, then any one of the Holiest Doctors of the Church
ever yet had? Fourthly, if thou be not a Prophet, and also if all those of
thy Religion be not Prophets (which was not in S. Paul's Church as I showed in
the last Sect. n. 3.) you cannot possibly know, with any full assurance, that
the Holy Ghost does assist you: because nothing, but the word of God ca^ secure
you of this; and it is no where written in the word of God, that you A. B. by
your private judgment, can infallibly expound all texts in the Scripture
concerning necessary points. And if you, by your private interpretation do
expound any text or texts of Scripture so, as to secure you of this: yet you
are assuredly to know, that you cannot assuredly knew this interpretation of
those texts to be most certainly true: For to know assuredly these texts to be
rightly expounded by you, you must be assured from some other text; about the
right understanding of which text there will be still the same (...), and the
same certain uncertainty; until, (...) bringing any text, you can (...) your
self certainly to (...) ^us infallibly assisted (...) interpretation. And
because you prove this (...) text; we are not to believe you, who teach us,
that nothing is to be believed, as infallibly true, which is not written in the
Bible: in all which I am sure, it is not written, that you A. B. are a true
believer: and therefore, though it were written there, That all true believers
had this assistance of the Spirit; You were never the nearer. Fifthly how
preposterously ridiculous is it, to hold your self infallible in declaring
Gods word: and yet not to hold the whole Church infallible in declaring or
interpreting the same?

6. Wherefore, your last refuge is to say, that all points necessary are
clearly set down in Scripture; which I have showed (and shall further show) to
be manifestly false: And you may even with your fingars touch the falsehood of
it, in this most necessary point, of knowing which is the certain undoubted
true sense of Scripture. For, in things, which are clearly to be seen, there
uses not to be variety (and infinite variety) of judgments: as we have seen
there is, in interpreting the necessary texts of Scripture: in so much as no
Divine, by Scripture only, can convince an Arian Cobbler, as I showed Sect. 1.
N. 5. Although this Cobbler houldeth also Scripture for his only judge. This
variety of interpretations (one flatly opposite to the other) shows evidently
the Scripture in these points not to be evidently clear. Again, if we mark it,
this answer is very little to the purpose, in our adversaries principles: for
first, they teach that our Catholic Roman Religion does not differ from theyrs
in any point fundamental, or necessary to salvation: secondly, they teach that
the Scripture cannot be showed to be clear in points not so fully necessary for
salvation. Hence I argue thus; in points wholly necessary to salvation you and
we all agree; as you say: so that by this you can infer no more then, that
the Scripture is clear in those points in which we both agree. What get you by
this? Do you separate from the whole Church for other points, which you cannot
prove your selves, by this ground, to have clear Scripture for? It is your
common doctrine delivered by D. Fern in his Sect. 13. that against public
authority (especially of all Churches, in the whole world, all which you
opposed in very many importa^t points) there must be brought evident
demonstration of clear Scripture. You do not prove that you bring this, unless
you can prove the Scripture Universally to be clear in points not necessary to
Salvation: for about these (as you say) we only differ. If you please to say
then, though Scripture be not clear in all points unnecessary, yet it is clear
in those in which we now disagree; every child will see, that you beg that
very thing which is in question. And what argument will you bring, to make us
believe that the best, and the choicest Doctors that were in any Church, for
these last thousand and two or three hundred years, could not see the true
sense of a clear plain and evident text of Scripture which they read every
day? And yet you must increase the miracle, and say; that all those Doctors of
that age in which first the true Religion decayed, must needs know, that the
whole former Church, from Christ's days to their days, had understood those
clear places just as you understand them now; that is in their true sense. Now,
I pray, upon what record have you it related, that there did fall in the
fourth, or fifth, or sixth age, such a thick mist upon all the best seeing eyes
of that unhappy age, (about which age also none of you ca^ agree;) that no one
Doctor could, or would see him self to proceed against the known sense of all
former Christianity, in the interpretation those texts, which so evidently
stand for the doctrine of all former Christianity against them? Will you have
us to believe this strangest wonder of all wonders, without any Record from
Antiquity; only upon your saying that it was so.

7. There is yet an other conuincing reason, why this clearnes you speak of in
Scriptures, to unfold unto us the undoubted sense of the Holy Ghost in all
necessary Controversies, comes to be of no service, for the infallible finding
out the true sense by every private man and woeman: to all which you use still
to say: if you will be with us, you shall see what you do; We require your
obedience to what we demonstrate to be Gods will for you to believe and do,
as D. Fern boasts Sect: 14. Here we come to the point to see your
demonstration: if you gull us here you undo us: Make us then see, that by clear
demonstration of Scripture, we may see what God in all necessary points
requires of us to believe and to do: and make all of us men, and women, do
this. How vastly you deceive us, I have showed all ready, Sect. 2. n. 13. which
place I must needs entreat the reader to turn to, and read attentively, before
he goes further. There we have showed (and that by D. Ferns own confession in
his Sect: 26.) that all things necessary are not contained expressly in
Scripture: but some of them are only thence deducible. But tell me (great
Doctor) be they deducible by all of us, who^ you promise so gloriously to make
eyewitnesses of this demonstration? They be (says he) deducible not all by
every one that reads; but it is enough if done by the Pastors and guides which
God appointed in his Church to this purpose. What? did you call us all to be
blind folded by you, and not to see the demonstration: but to hear only this
news of it; that it has been seen to be a demonstrable deduction by your
Ministers? we do not see your demonstration, but your gross cheat. Yet (my
dear Brother) thou shall see thy self gulled far more. Every Minister has
not eyes (how will thou know whether thy Minister has or no?) to see this
Demonstratiue deduction: for Dr. Fern adds that they must be Ministers
vseing the means that are needful (mark the word needful) for that purpose;
such as is, 1. Attention. 2. diligence in the search of the Scripture. 3.
Collation of places. 4. observing the connexions. 5. also sincerity and
impartiality in the collectio^ or deduction they make. 6. also prayer and
devotion for assistance in the work. Also, besides these six Rules, there be
fourteen more to be added; as I showed in the place above cited: of which some
be as impossible for the vulgar multitude to use (though this multitude make up
the number of the believers) at it is for them to be cunning in Greek and
Hebrew; for they (to know they have interpreted the Scripture right) must of
necessity be cunning in both these languages. Neither do I say any more in
this, then your own most learned Doctors have said before me; to which I add
your most learned whitaker Lib. de Sacra Script: P. 5. 23. where he says of
those who understand not the Hebrew and Greek; that they do often err, and
that unavoidably: Saepe ac necessario hallucinantur. Now bid us poor people
Come with you, and we shall see what we do. Now indeed we see what we do;
for we clearly see we do we know not what; because we see we leave, by
your instruction, the interpretations of all Councels, and Fathers, seconded by
the perpetual practice of all Churches, which God had upon the face of the
Earth, for twelve hundred years together, as is confessed: and this we do, to
follow, not this evidence which we are told we should see with our own eyes
to be such; but to follow what some Ministers say they see to be evident, to
wit, those few Ministers, who are perfectly, skilled in Greek and Hebrew; of
whose perfect skill we have no knowledge of our own; and though we had, we
do not perfectly know that they have used, in all points they teach us, these
twenty Rules which they confess to be Needful: and we also do know that all
these twenty Rules are confessed to be fallible; and we have little hope by
twenty fallible means, to come to see an infallible truth established; for
when we were boys at school, learning a little Arithmetike, we were taught,
that naught times naught did makes nothing but naught.

Mill licet Cyphris Cyphrarum millia jungas,
Nil praeter Magnum conficies Nihilum.
To Nothing ioyn ten thousand Nothings more:
Thou shall find nothing but of Nothings store.
Add not only twenty, but twenty thousand fallible Rules: you shall be never
the nearer that infallible truth, by being so well provided of fallibilities.

8. I have (I hope) showed thee sufficiently, that thou can not see
assuredly, and upon thy own knowledge know evidently, which is the true sense
of the Scripture. Now I will give thee a further reason thereof, delivered by
one of thy own chief Doctors, Doctor Jeremy Tailor in his discourse of the
Liberty of Prophesying, Sect: 3. where he proves the uncertainty of arguments
deduced (as D. Fern speaks) from Scripture, by the many senses of Scripture;
when the Grammatical sense is found out. For there is in very many Scriptures
a double sense, a Litterall and a Spiritual; and both these senses are
subdivided: for the Litterall sense is either natural, or figurative; and the
Spiritual sometimes allegorical, sometimes Tropologicall; sometimes there are
diverse literal senses in the same places: so he. Now it depends upon the
secret intention of the Holy Ghost, to have used these words in some one, or
two or more of these senses. How shall we find out so great a secret, and that
so infallibly, as to be undoubtedly assured, of our own knowledge, that we
have certainly discovered this secret? Twenty fallible Rules, though we should
use them all, as well as a man could, would not bring us to this infallible
assurance. Even your great Doctors (who have used them better then thou can
hope to do) have had two hundred several opinions about the true sense of
these four words, This is my Body. Thou think thy self to be assured
infallibly, upon thy own knowledge, that these words be to be interpreted
figuratively; because thou have conferred this text with some other texts, for
example with those texts which tell thee that Christ's words be spirit and life,
and that The flesh profits nothing. Alas thou have observed but one of these
Twenty Rules, which is Conference of one text with another: This Rule is
infinitely deceitful, as the same Doctor Tailor teaches thee, who in his next
Section says; Another great pretense (to justify new Interpretations) is the
conference of places; A thing of such indefinite capacity, that, if there be
ambiguity of words, variety of senses, alteration of circumstances, or
difference of style amongst Divine writers, there is nothing which may be more
abused by wilful people, or may more easily deceive the unwary, or that may
amuse the most intelligent obseruers. What shall then become or thee and me
who are none of the most intelligent obseruers? And so this Rule alone leaves
us at a non plus, even though we had both Greek and Hebrew: For (as the same
Doctor intimates) it is a most pitiful argument to infer; this must
infallibly be the true sense, because I can show that perhaps it may be the
true sense. Again, when your Doctors bidd me confer this text with other
texts of the Bible: I ask, whether I must confer it only with other places
of the same Book in which it is written? They will say, no; but I must confer
it with all other texts of the word of God, written in any Book. First this is
a vast labor, and requires a vast memory to do it, as it should be done, with
exquisite attention. Secondly, I have a question to ask, which I am sure will
pose you: how shall I, or any Doctor of them all, confer this text with the
texts of all other Book of Scripture, seeing that no fewer then some twenty
Books of Scripture have quite perished, and be no where to be found in the
whole world? as I showed Sect: 1. n. 7. Thirdly, you say that by this
conferring of places, what was obscure proves clear: and you mark not, that
by the very same means, what was clear grows obscure. What more clear then
what S. Paul said; If you be circumcised, Christ will profitt you nothing. Gal:
5. Take this so clear a text, and confer it with that Act. 16:3. He took
Timothy, and circumcised him; and you will find difficulty how the former text
can stand in full force. Do you think S. Paul would make Christ profit
Timothy nothing.

9. Hence I infer, that if God had intended the Scripture for our sole and
only Rule of Faith, he would have set down in some one place all necessary
points clearly, and distinctly; and he would not have left these points to be
picked out, one out of one Book, an other out of an other, no man directly
knows where: Yea no man knows by Scripture, which points are necessary even
for himself or for all. Had God intended to make a Book our only Judge or
Rule, he would have given us such a book, as should clearly and distinctly have
said; these points are necessary to be believed, these things are necessary to
be done. But now, one man tells us one thing is necessary, an other man says
no: The Scripture says neither Yea nor No. Therefore, to those who will follow
Scripture only, no assurance at all can be had of the necessity of such points
as the Scripture does not affirm to be necessary: For if you have only human
reason for this necessity, this is but a human motive, which is deceitful; and
being thwarted with a contrary reason of as apparent probability, my faith now
is turned into a doubt. The points which are necessary, you commonly say to be
but few; and that the Scripture sets them down clearly, as it does also set
down clearly many other points not necessary. Whence the vast number of those
not-necessary points clearly set down does infinitely increase the difficulty of
finding out these few which are necessary: seeing that they ly so scattered and
intermingled in the nu^berles number of the not-necessary. For some of these
necessary points are set down here, in the beginning of the Bible; some one,
some two or three books after; some other hard by that, some other a huge way
of; and so from Genesis to the Apoc. Yea, why not further then the Apoc. for it is
a mere guess made at random, to conjecture that in those twenty books of
Scripture, which be quite lost, no one necessary point should be set down
plainly, which is not set down plainly in these books which we have. At least
you say this without Scripture; and therefore, by your own principles, you
should not say it: for your part being affirmative, (affirming that no one
necessary point was plainly set down in those books which be lost, which is not
plainly set down in these which we have;) you must prove what you say, and
that by Scripture: For I am sure you cannot prove it by Tradition; and
therefore neither in your, nor our principles, it can be proved. Again; the
Bible, as it is now, makes a Book so big, that the far greater part of the
world, taken up with so many necessary affayers, cannot in a very long space of
time read over this book so often, and so exactly carry a-way all the clear
texts thereof, as to be able to confer one place with an other: For before
they come to the other, which is perhaps in the Apocalypse, that text, which
they did read in Genesis, is out of their mind: or if that text be not, some
other may be, even at a time in which they should have most observed it.
Besides this, what am I the nearer if I spend all this labor in my English
Translated Bible; of the right Translation of which I neither have, nor can
have full assurance, if I be not a very great scholar; as has been showed
Sect. 5. Yea, though I be so great that one among one hundred thousand is not
greater; (for I understand Greek and Hebrew most skilfully:) yet, for all this,
I neither have, nor can have full assurance, that the Greek and Hebrew Copyes
which I use, be the true Copyes of the true word of God; as has been showed
Section 5. Gods wisdom directs him to the best means, to compass his
intention: We even in our ordinary wisdom, if we intend to set forth a Book,
which should end all necessary Controversies, would all do our best endeavor
to comprise in half a dozen Chapters at the most, all these few fundamental
points; for these points you teach to be but few: and we would not make those
poor souls (which we deerly loved) at the peril of their own damnation, to
seek out, all the whole Bible over, these few points which are confessed not to
be so easy to be found out, but by some choice Ministers observing all that
long way, which is from the first of Genesis to the very last verse of the
Apocalips, no fewer then twenty Rules, and many of them very hard ones to
observe at all times, in all passages of so long a journey. And yet there is,
to the full, as great reason, why those twenty books more, which are lost; as
all these which we now have, should be consulted: being God gave us all the
whole written word for our guide. God did not proceed thus even in the old law
in points of far, and incomparable far less concernment; to wit in points
of mere Ceremony: For every little particular ceremony which he exacted is, with
most minute exactnes set down in the compass of not many leafes: Yet far
fewer would conteyne all points necessary to Salvation, if they be so few as
you hold.

10. We then, by our own judgment, are notable to deduce demonstratively all
those truths and verities, which are wholly necessary to our Salvation: But
instead of doing this by our own selves, and upon our own knowledge, with
demonstrative security; we are in plain terms told by the best Protestant
Doctors, that this cannot be done by us even in all these necessary points; no
nor done by all our ministers, without the use of many Rules, which the far
greater part of them cannot use. What then shall we do? Which way shall we
turn ourselves? Is there no better way, then to trust those choice, but still
fallible Ministers; using still only fallible Rules; and infallibly sure to
contradict one an other? I will tell thee first what thy own Protestant prime
Masters in Scripture do plainly tell thee, I mean those Renowned Doctors who
now, at this very time, are setting forth that so famous Bible, of so many
learned languages. These Doctors, perusing night and day the best Original
Copyes of the Bible that be to be had, may as safely be followed by thee, as
any Ministers thou know. These men in the Preface to their great work, which
I citted Sect. 4. n. 8. having first endeavored to clear that controversy
about the truth of the Copyes of Gods true word which they give us; they then
speak thus: The whole Controversy being about the true sense of the Scripture,
delivered by translations every where received, we have ready at hand the
judgment almost of that whole Church which is Catholic (or universal) as well
in respect of its being in all places, as its being in all times; which
Church unfolds to us the places in controversy. To whose judgment (mark this)
he who will not submit himself, truly he shows himself to be a man of no
judgment, and he is scarce worth the name of a man, much less of a Christian.
So they fol. 4. This is a different lesson from what D. Fern taught thee. But
it has better authority, Catholic Antiquity being altogether of one mind in
this point. I will tell thee this out of a most approved Doctor of the
primitive Church, and no man does so much as question whether the words which I
shall cite out of him be his or no; He has but one little book in all; It is
Vincentius Lerinensis, who lived in the fifth age, he writes thus: Do
Heretics use the testimonies of Scripture? Yes indeed do they, and that most
vehemently; you shall see them fly through all the sacred Booke^, the Books of
Moses, the Books of Kings, the Psalms, the Apostles, the Gospels, the
Prophets: And this whether they be among their own people, or others; both
privately and publicly; both in their discourses and in their books; both in
banquets, and in the streets: they scarce ever speak one word of their own
which they do not set forth with the words of the Scripture. Read but the works
of Paulus Samozatenus, of Priscillianus, Eunomius, Iovinianus, and such like
pestiferous fellows, you shall see infinite heaps of examples, and scarce one
side of a leaf, which is not painted out with sentences of the new and the
old Testament. And a little after; when now they shall begin not only to bring
forth, but also to expound, and not only to cast out, but also to interpret
those words, then profane Novelties are laid open, then you may see the
hedges cut down, and those limitts transferred which our fathers did put us;
then you may see the doctrine of the Church torn in pieces etc. And by and by
But some one will say what shall Catholics do, and the sons of the Church? By
what means shall they distinguish the truth contained in Scriptures from the
falsity of their interpretations? They must exceedingly apply their care to
interpret the divine Canon of Scripture, according to the traditions of the
Universal Church, and the Rules of the Catholic doctrine: which practice I
said in the beginning of this Book was delivered down unto us by Holy and
learned men. So he. And the place, which he cited out of the beginning of his
Book, is admirable to our present discourse: for having put the very objection
which our adversaries use to make; that seeing the Canon of the Scripture is
perfect, and super abundantly sufficient in all respects; what need is there
that the authority of the Churches interpretation should be joined to it? then
he answers; Because forsooth all men do not in one and the self same sense
take the sacred Scripture by reason of the great deapth thereof. One man
expounds it one way, one man an other way; in so much that as many senses may
seem to be deducible from it, as there be men. For Novatianus expounds it one
way, Photinus an other, Donatus an other: Arius, Eunomius, Macedonius an other;
Apollinaris and Priscillianus, Iovinianus and Pelagius, an other: Lastly
Celestius and Nestorius an other. And therefore multum necesse est, It is very
much necessary, to avoid so great and so manifold Labyrinthes of error, that
the Line, by which we rule out the Interpretation of the Prophets and
Apostles, be directed according to the Rules of the Church and the Catholic
sense. So he: so I; say thou also so; and all our divisions will be ended: for
then we should not, under pretense or seeing with our own eyes what we do,
take the Scripture contrary to so many Councels, and all authority of
Church-Tradition; because we Judge it ought to be expounded so in our private
Judgment, though differing from all Churches upon the face of the Earth. But I
must have a Church, upon whose authority we all securely may and also must
rely, in interpreting the Scriptures, as S. Vincent speaks; and that Church,
must of necessity be granted to be infallible: but no Church can be infallible
which has not this condition, that it houldeth and teaches it self to be
infallible; as I shall demonstrate Sect. 17. n. 2. which condition agreeing to
no one Church but the Roman (as is manifest;) this holy Father, and all the
rest (who bid us still to doubts and Controversies about the Scriptures, and
their several interpretations rely upon the Church, and take her doctrine for
our warrant) do bid us rely upon that Church which was held, and truly held
by all to be infallible. And so all very well know that they meant the Roman
Church, and no Church differing in Communion from her; because this condition
agreed to none but Her. When this was so vndisputably out of all question,
among all such as were then counted Catholics then they thought it enough to
say; Rely on the Church: without saying, Rely on the Roman Church. So we
Catholics, speak to this very day, never adding the Roman, but for our
adversaries sake among whom we live: just as English men say, The Parliament
decided such a thing; meaning the Parliament of England: which all English in
England perfectly understand without adding any other words: But the English
(who live among French men) when in France they say, The Parliament decree
such a thing; they must of necessity add, the Parliament of England, to be
rightly understood of the French men there; who otherwise might think they
meant some French Parliaments. Those who have made themselves of a different
Communion from Rome, will now in these days understand that pure old
Catholic language still common to all us of the Roman Communion: The Church
decreed this; Follow the interpretation of the Church; rely on the
interpretation of the Church, etc. when we express our selves thus by this
word Church, without adding the word Roman; we are known, by all who be of the
true Church, only to mean the Roman Church, and those of her Communion: Yet
even we in these strange new times to be understood by these outlandish (as I
may say) and newfound people of our days, must needs add the word Roman; or
else they will not understand us to speak of that Church, of which we are by
all our own Church most perfectly understood to speak. And Antiquity by the
name of the Church still meant the Roman Church; just as we do: and just as
we speak among our selves, so then spoake the holy grave Fathers, whose
Catholic language was nothing understood by that forreignner, who, more bouldy
then advisedly, said that, none of the ancient Christians believed the church
of Rome to be a Guide or Judge of all Controversies in Christianity, because
Tertullian, Vincentius Lerinensis and others giving Rules to know Heretics,
forgot this maine and clearest Rule: whereas you see by the words I have
cited, that Vincentius Lerinensis tells you as clearly as I do do, that to
avoid heresy you must, in understanding the Scripture, follow the
interpretation of the Church, as a secure guide and interpreter in all
Controversies arising about the sense of Scriptures; showing it a note of
heresy to do the contrary. The very self same is told you by all those
Fathers whom I shall cite Sect: 21. Numb. 2.3.4. There is then no more mystery
in saying that those ancient Fathers, being members of the Roman Church, did
by the name of the Church mean that Roman Church, of which they were members,
though they added not the name of Roman: then there is in the ordinary speech
of every man in England, when, by the name of the Parliament, he means only to
signify the English Parliament; though he adds not the word English: and yet
that acute University Man will not understand this so vulgar language.

SECT: VIII. A TWELFTH ARGUMENT.
Diverse other necessary points not contained in, or decided by Scripture.

1. TO the former nineteen points all necessary, and none of them all
contained in Scripture; I will add diverse more. The Creed of S. Athanasius
has ever ben admitted by all succeeding true believers, and your English
Church does profess to believe it, and used to read it in their Common Prayer.
In this Creed you profess your selves to believe several points no where
contained in the Bible in plain terms: As that God the Father is not begotten;
that God the Son is not made, but begotten by his Father only: that the Holy
Ghost is neither made nor begotten; but does proceed, and that from the Father
and the Son. And that he who will be saved, must believe this. For this is an
Article of that Catholic faith, which faith without a man houldeth entierly
and inviolably, without all doubt he shall perish eternally. All this is in
that Creed professed by us; and yet not one of those several points contained
in it, can be showed to be contained in Scripture, no not for the Substance of
them in any such texts as clearly decide the matter. Note by the way, how you
plainly contradict your selves, who subscribe to the truth of all that has
been said of the necessity that there is to salvation, to believe all the
foresaid particulars here expressed by S. Athanasius: and yet you will needs
hold the Greek Church for a true Church, which houldeth flatly against S.
Athanasius in this Article; though the houlding of it entierly be necessary to
Salvation.

2. To this point (for I let all these several points pass for only one) I
might add, that in the same Book of Common Prayer you in an other Creed
believe, that Christ is of one Substance with the Father; and that the Holy
Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son: For which words the Grecian
Church houlds us all Heretics; and yet your Doctors of the English Church will
needs hold them a true Church. But that which I press is, that we are bound
to give an infallible assent to this article of God the Sons being of one
Substance with the Father: But you, who will give no infallible assent to any
thing but Gods written word, cannot possibly give infallible assent to this
Article; Which is no where clearly set down in Scripture, but an Arian Cobbler
will easily putt off all the texts you can bring; as I showed S. 1. n. 5. But
not to stand contesting about the clearnes of these Tects, let this point pass
joined to the former.

3. For another point not contained in Scripture, I bring the Baptism of
Children; which is wholly necessary to the Salvation of Children. The learned
Layman says L. 5. Tra. 2. C. 6. nu. 11. that it has been by some observed
that the third part of Mankind dies before the seventh year of their age be
ended. The third part then of Mankind is concerned in this one point, of giving
Lawful baptism to them when they are Children: and yet, a point so necessary
to the Salvation of many, is no where plainly set down in Scripture. To this D.
Fern answers, S. 24. Baptism of Children, as to the practice of it, is not
contained expressly in Scripture; (id est) it is no where commanded to be
done, or said that they did do it: But the ground and necessity of it are
sufficiently delivered in Scripture; and that is enough for the doing of it.
And that the Arguments from Scripture, by Bellarmin and others alleged, do
sufficiently show. Futhermore, concerning Bellarmin, the Doctor tells us, that
he ( Lib. de Baptism c. 8.) says that the Arguments for Childrens Baptism
out of Scripture cannot be avoided; and that it is a thing evident in
Scripture. But yet (says D. Fern.) when he treats of Traditions ( L. 4. de
Verbo Dei Cap. 4.) This thing of Childrens Baptism must be one of them, that
it necessary and not contained in Scripture. This is not ingenuous, nor
Conscionable. So D. Fern; but far less conscionably: For Bellarmin L. 7. de
Bapt. in all that eight Chapter has no word in favor of the evidence of
Scripture for Baptism of Children; Yea, almost at every text that he cites,
he shows, that text to have noe force out of our adversaries Mouth. Of one
argument out of Scripture he says indeed; that, as it comes from us; (which
words D. Fern conceales) it is so manifest that it cannot be avoided; and that
is, that Circumcision was so clear a figure of Baptism, that S. Paul called it
Circumcision; But Circumcision was given to Infants, therefore Baptism may.
But here Bellarmin may well mean that this argument, as it comes from us,
cannot be eluded; to wit, by that usual shift, by which the Anabaptists can
easily elude it when it comes from Lutherans and Calvinists: whom Bellarmin
had showed to teach that the form of Baptism was only a Sermon; which agrees
not to Infants: This evasion cannot any way elude this Argument as it comes
from us. This is all can be convinced out of this place of Bellarmin. But there
be other solid ways of avoiding all force of this argument, even as it comes
from us. For first, every Sacrament must not be received by all those, by whom
the figure of that Sacrament might lawfully be taken; Sinners did lawfully eat
Manna, but they cannot lawfully receave the Eucharist; of which Manna was a
figure: So also Circumcision was necessary for the male-children of the Jews
only, and that not before the eight day; and Baptism is now necessary both for
the male and female Children of all nations in the world, and that before
either the eight, or second day, if there be danger of death: The consequence
then houldeth not from the figure to the thing figured. Neither is that a
necessary consequence which is drawn from baptizing of whole families. For
first, as we read that whole families were baptized, so we read that whole
families believed. Himself believed and his whole family. Io. 4. v. 53. Will
you evidently infer from hence, that the little Children, not yet of years of
discretion, did believe? They then only believed who were capable: So will
Anabaptists say, they only were baptized in these families who were capable of
first believing, and answering for themselves. Secondly, in many families all
the Children which are alive, are above seven years old, and of age to
believe: There be many families of new married people, who as yet have no
children; or those they had be dead: Many are barren, and will never have any.
Now Mr. Doctor as these two chief places (brought by Bellarmin, or others) do
afford you noe clear principle, from which you can evidently deduce the
necessity of Infants Baptism; or that it is good and valid, and not to be
iterated; or that their parents are obliged to procure it for their little
children: so other less strong places will less help you to the evident
inference of any of these points, which you hold necessarily to be believed. I
am not satisfied by being told, other men cite texts which do prove this
evidently: You must cite them, and show them to be evident. The best text,
besides these, is this, Except a man be borne of water and the spirit; he
cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven, Io: 3.5. but how many shifts the
Anabaptists have, to avoid the force of this text, Bellarmine tells you; and
you shall see one presently.

4. Much more ingenuous and Conscionable is your D. Tailor in his Defense of
Episcopacy, S. 9. P. 100. where he says; Baptism of Infants is of ordinary
necessity to all that ever cried; and yet the Church has founded this Rite
upon the Tradition of the Apostles. And wise men do easily observe, that the
Anabaptists can, by the same probability of Scripture enforce a necessity of
Comunnicating Infants, upon us; as we do of baptizing, upon them. For as we
press them with that text; Except a man be borne of water and the Spirit; he
cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven: so they press us for the necessity of
Infants Communion, by the text which follows but three Chapters after the
former: Verily Verily I say unto you, except you eat of the flesh of the Son
of Man, and drink his blood, you have no life in you. D. Tailor adds; And
therefore a great Master of Geneva, in a book he writ against the Anabaptists,
was forced to fly to Apostolical traditive ordination. Here is the very thing
ingenuously confessed which we labor to prove; that we must trust the
Churches Tradition for this point: the necessity of which is so great, that he
adds; They that deny this are, by the just Anathema of the Catholic Church,
confidently condemned for heretics. The Pelagians were ever accounted
Heretics, even in this respect, that they (as S. Austen witnesses Heresi,
88.) taught; Although Infa^ts be not baptized, they shall possess an eternal
and blessed life; though it be but of the kingdom of God. Those Protestants
are far boulder, who admit them even into the kingdom of heaven it self.
The doctrine of the ancient Fathers is so manifestly against this doctrine,
that Calvin himself says; ( Instit. lib 4. C. 15. n. 20. It was usual many
ages since, even almost from the beginning of the Church, that in danger of
death, Lay People might baptize. So he. And to say the contrary, were to cross
all antiquity; as your Bilson confesses in his Conference at Hampton Court.
Hooker says no less in his 5. Book of Eccl. Policy 62. For, as your Musculus
confesses; The Fathers denied Salvation to the Children who died without
Baptism; though their parents were faithful, So he in Locus tit. de Baptism.

5. To these, I might add the Milevetan Council; in which S. Austen was
present and subscribed, and in which ( Can: 2.) it is defined; That whosoever
denies Children newly borne to be baptized, or say they contract nothing of
Sin from Adam, which may be cleansed by the Laver of Regeneration: Anathema.
But that which I chiefly insist on, is, that the Fathers profess to believe
the necessity of Baptism for Infants upon Tradition. So that here D. Fern
will see a point necessary to Salvation to come down to us by unwritten
Tradition: which he stiffly denies, Sect. 24. Origin who lived just upon the
second age (which age knew best the Tradition of the first Age) writes thus
Cap: 6. Epistola ad Romanos. The Church from the Apostles has received the
Tradition to give Baptism even to little ones. And the great S. Austen is
witness of the Continuance of this Tradition in his Age; as also that this point
ought not to be believed at all, but upon Tradition: (Note his words Mr.
Doctor, they be these;) The custom of our Mother the Church, in baptizing
little ones, is not to be contemned: Neither is it by any means to be reputed
superfluous: Neither ought it to be believed at all, without it were an
Apostolical Tradition. lib. 10. de Gen: ad lit. C. 22. Note that he esteems
the belief of this necessity, to be so weakly grounded in Scripture, that it
ought not at all to be believed without it came down to us by Tradition. And
again ( contra Grescon: lib. 1. C. 33. speaking of this point, he says; That
nothing for certain can be alleged out of Canonical Scriptures in this point;
Yet in this point, the truth of Scriptures (and consequently a sufficient
ground for faith) is kept by us, when we do that which seemed good to the
Catholic Church; which Church the Authority of the same Scriptures does
comme^d. Now ioyn this place to these places which I have alleged in the last
Sect: n. 1. to show that the Scripture did bid us still follow the Church:
and you will see manifestly that we may, and, in this point, must, ground our
faith upon what we have only from the Church; or else we can have no faith at
all of this necessity of Baptism, as our adversaries have none at all of it:
For Scripture they have not, and the Tradition of the Church they hold no
sufficient ground of faith; which S. Austen in this necessary poinct takes for
the chief ground of his faith; and again ( lib. 4. C. 24. adversus Donat. de
Baptism. Parvulorum) speaking of this point; That which the Universal Church
houldeth, and was not instituted by Councels, but yet always held, is most
rightly believed to be delivered down to us by no other then Apostolical
Authority. If Apostolical Authority be not a sure ground for belief; upon
what ground have we received all our writings as divine? This Authority
secured S. Austen in the belief of a necessary point not contained in
Scripture. The like authority may also as well secure us all in those other
necessary points, which we have showed to be contained in no Scripture.

6. What I have said will be much confirmed by an other necessary point, which
also is not contained in any Scripture. It is a damnable herely to affirm that
those who were baptized by Heritikes, ought to be baptized again. This
controversy was moved in the days of S. Cyprian; and he was a man as able to
see that which was clearly set down in Scripture, as any of you all: Yet, as
appears by his first Book of Epistles ( Ep. 6.) and other places, he did
really judge the Scripture to teach, that all those were to be rebaptized, who
had been baptized by heretics. On this ground he held that opinion. And for
the same opinion, says Vincentius Lerinensis, there stood so great force of
wit, such torrents of eloquence, so great a number af patrons, so great
appearance of truth, so many Oracles of Scripture though misinterpreted. How
come they to be overthrown? He tells you a little before; Then Pope Stephen of
blessed memory, the Bishop of the Apostolic Sea, together with his fellow
Bishops, yet more then any other, did resist them; esteeming it, as I think, a
worthy thing, if he did surpass all the rest in devotion of Faith, as he
surpassed them in the Authority of his place. In fine in that Epistle of his,
which was sent into Africa, he decreed with these words: That nothing ought to
be innovated; but that to be retained which was delivered down to us. Hence,
says this holy Father, the end of the business was that; Antiquity kept
possession. And he adds, strange change of things. The Authors of this self
same opinion are judged Catholics, and their followers Heretics. The Masters
of it are absolved, and the disciples condemned. So he: For it was not a
necessary point of belief, before the Church had declared this opinion to be
contrary to true faith, because it was contrary to Tradition; now in a Council
examined by the Church, and found to be full and strong enough to assure us of
the Apostles authority in this point. And so S. Cypria^ and others did hold
the contrary opinion, and were not Heretics: but all those who, after this
declaration, opposed this tradition thus examined, and proved for Apostolical,
were, for that very oppositio^ of such a Tradition adjudged heretics. Neither
were they before adjudged to be Heretics for their opposing the Scripture as
clear in that point. No such thing was ever so much as objected against the^.
Hence that great African Doctor S. Austen, speaking of this very point of
Rebaptization, writes thus, De vnitate Eccl. c. 22. This is neither openly nor
evidently read (in Scripture) either by you or by me: Yet if there were any
wise man, of whom our Savior had given testimony, and that he should be
consulted in this question; we should make no doubt (Mark this all you who
oppose the infallibility of the Church) to perform what he should say; least
we should seem not so much to gainsay him, as to gainsay Christ, by whose
testimony he was recommended. Now Christ bears witness to his Church. Mark
also this reason, and confer it with all those testimonies given by Scripture
to the Church, which I cited the last Sect. n. 1. and then mark S. Austens
consequence, which is; Whosoever refuses to follow the practice of the Church,
does resist our Savior himself who by his testimony commends the Church. Go
now, and tell S. Austen that seeing neither he nor you could find this point in
Scripture, therefore it is not necessary to hold with the Church in this
point, for which she has only tradition: You shall see if he will not again
tell you, as clearly as I do, that as you should oppose Christ him self, if
you refused to obey some one man, whom Christ should bidd you obey in points of
belief; and you should not so much disobey the man, as you should disobey
Christ authorizing this man; so being that Christ bids you obey the Church;
you should not so much disobey the Church, in refusing to obey her in points of
faith, as you should disobey Christ who authorized the Church, and invested her
with this power in the Texts cited Sect. 7. n. 1.

7. Hear again S. Austen de Baptismo contra Donatistas, lib. 15: C. 23. The
Apostles (in Scripture) have prescribed nothing concerning this thing; (the
point I speak of) but this custom, which was opposite to S. Cyprian, ought to
be believed to have taken is origin from their tradition. As there are many
things (note that he speaks in a matter necessary to be believed) which the
universal Church observes; and for that reason (O excellent reason) are
rightly believed to have been commanded by the Apostles, although they are not
found in their writings. Give me leave here to ask; whether it be not
damnable, to refuse the observation of that which, upon so good a reason, (as
is the testimony of the universal Church,) is rightly believed to have been
commanded by the Apostles? Sure I am that you cannot have the thousand part of
so good a testimony, that such an one is your father; no, nor that such an one
is your mother: And yet it is damnable to refuse to obey them. Tell me then,
tell me; I say, tell me, why should it not be much more damnable, to refuse
obedience in a point (for example, the fast of Lent) which the universal
Church testifies, that it is rightly believed to have been commanded by the
Apostles. Whence M. Cartwright in his second Reply against Whitg: par. 1.
says. If S. Austens judgment be a good Judgment; then there be some things
commanded of God, which are not in the Scriptures. Whitakers and Reynolds words
speak much to that effect. Se also S. Austen lib. 2. contra Donat. C. 7. and
my Sect: 21. n: 5.

8. Here I might show, out of most evident texts of holy Fathers, that the
Apostles did make the fast of Lent a matter of precept; and consequently the
breach of it to be damnable, and the observance of it necessary to Salvation.
Sec S. Leo Sermon. 6. Sermon. 9. S. Ambrose Sermon. 25. Sermon: 34. Sermon. 36. S. Hier:
Epist. 54. S Austen fully Sermon. 62. And see him presently against Aerius. Also
that those are judged heretics by the Church, and called Quarta-decimani, who
would needs observe Easter on the fourteenth of the Moon, though it were not
Sunday: Yet no clear Scripture was against them; but they were against the
Church. So for the same reason Aerius is lifted for an Heretic; and one of his
Heresies is related by S. Austen (in his Book of Heresy, Heresy 53.) to be
this: He taught private opinions of his own, saying; That we must not pray or
offer for the dead; and that the solemly approved fasts were not to be kept;
that every man was to fast when he pleased; that he might not some to be under
the Law. Were not these heresies good protestant doctrine? So is that which
follows; If at all I will fast, I will choose any day of my self; and I will
fast that day to show my Liberty; Says the same Heretic in S. Epiphan: his
Catalogue: Haer. 72. I might also add that S. Austen, in the same book (
Haer. 84.) puts down for heretics, the Heluidians; for affirming that the
Virgin Mary had other Children after the birth of our Savior: and there is no
clear text of Scripture against them. Yea S. Ierom swears hard to answer all
the texts of Scripture which Helvidius brought: see his book against that
Heretic: whose Heretical followers S. Epiphanius in his catalogue calls
Antidicomaritas. I might also add several such points; as to communicate
fasting; and but once in the day: and such like points wholly neccessary for our
observance; and whose transgression is damnable: yet, to be liberal, I will
take all these last points specified in this Number, only for one. Now, for the
peoples sake, who are most capable of that point, I will add one more in a
section apart; and so will make the former nineteen points to be just two
dozen, by the addition of these four points explicated in this Section, and of
that other point which follows. I shall add also an other Sect: 16.n 2. And
yet an other Sect: 20. n. 4. And yet an other Sect: 21. n. 5.

SECT: IX. A THIRTEENTH ARGUMENT.
A four and twentieth necessary point not contained in Scripture.

1. ALL things, say you, which are necessary either to be believed or done, for
obteyning Salvation, are clearly put down in Scripture: I now, by a four and
twentieth instance, show this to be false. That is necessarily to be done to
Salvation, which left undone causes damnation; But the observation of the
sunday, (commanding the absteyning from all servile works) if neglected, or
left undone, brings damnation; therefore to observe in this manner the
Sunday, is a thing necessary to salvation. And yet this point is so far from
being clearly put down in Scripture, that, standing merely to the sole
judgment of Scripture, we can show far clearer texts for still observing the
Satterday; then for the lawfulnes of working upon that day, and the unlawfulness
of working upon the Sunday: for neither of these have so much as one clear
text; but the still keeping of the Satterday (for all those who hold Scripture
the only Rule of faith and necessary practices) has many texts, wholly
Unanswerable; if this main Controversy between us and the Sabbatharians be to be
tried by Scripture as the only Judge. And it is impossible for you, by
Scripture only, to convince the Aethiopians, who are said to observe both the
Satterday and the Sunday; grounding them selves also in the Apocryphal
Recognitions of S. Clement lib. 7. C. 24. where the Satterday is commanded to
be kept, as well as the sunday, see Bellar: lib: de Scrip: in Clem.

2. It is superfluous to cite the many texts, by which God commanded rest from
all work upon the Satterday, which was the seventh day; because it was the day
ou which our Lord rested. And it was not any one day in seven, but the seventh
day of which (and not of any other among the seven days) it is said; And God
blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it; because in that (and not in any
other) he had rested from all his work. Genesis 2. How comes this blessing given
to noe other day among the seve^, but given to the seventh day only, to be
lost? Who took a way the sanctification of it, given by God himself; and
given for a reason, which is as obliging now as ever? Give me a text, which
tells us (and that clearly) that this Sanctification was ever taken away. If
you contend, that a new Sanctification was given to the Sunday, because our
Savior did rest that day; let it be so, to the honor of his holy name: but
where do you read, that, at the giving of this new Sanctification (for which
also you have no clear text) the former sanctification given to the seventh
day, on which God rested, was taken away from that day? Again, the day of our
Saviors Ascension to heaven was upon the thursday, and that may, exceeding
properly, be called the final periode of all his actions: what clear text of
Scripture tells you, that any particular sanctification was given to the Sunday
in honor of our Saviors Resurrection, more then was given to the Thursday in
the honor of his Ascension?

3. But standing to the new Scripture only, I will show that we have stronger
texts, resting in the strength of the text only, (as you will have us,) for
still sanctifying the seventh day or Satterday; then for Sunday. I will give
you text for text; and let any reasonable man judge whether the text be not
more clear for Satterday, then for Sunday. I have in the Revelations, that S.
John was in Spirit upon our Lords day; that is Sunday. What then? Is every day
to be sanctified, by absteyning all the world over from all work, because S.
John had a Revelation on that day; as also he had on many other days? O but
hence it is clear that there was such a Day as our Lords day: so it is. But how
do you prove from hence; that the Sanctification given to Satterday was taken
from that day? Or that there was given a Command to all the world not to work
upon that day which was called our Lords day? How prove you that by Scripture
only; Or that it was not the day of the Resurrection, or Ascension, or
Christ-masse day which S. John called our Lords day? Now give us as good an
answer (if you can) to the text I shall bring for still keeping the Satterday.
We are still obliged to keep all those Commandments which our Savior did
bid us keep with his own mouth; But he did with his own mouth bid us keep
the whole Decalogue, or those ten Commandments given to Moses, in the very
sense which the Jews understood them; Who did understand, that by Remembering
to sanctify the Sabbath day, they were obliged to sanctify the Satterday. I
prove what I have said out of the 10. of S. Matt: where we read that one came
to our Savior saying; what good shall I do, that I may have life everlasting?
Our Savior answered; If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments. And
when that man replied to know what Commandments our Savior meant? out deer
Lord did clearly explicate himself to mean all the Commandments of the
Decalogue given to Moses, those very Commandments which this man knew very
well, as appears also by Mark 10. Luke 18. You see here the very Author of our
new Law, with his own mouth, requiring no less the keeping of this
Commandment, as necessary for our entrance into life everlasting, then the
keeping of any other Commandment.

4. Give me your second text for the Sunday, and I will return a more clear
one for the Satterday. Your best text is Act: 20 v. 7. And upon the first day
of the week when the disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached
unto them, ready to depart on the morrow. Hence (will you say) it appears,
that the first Christians were accustomed to Communicate upon the first day of
the week; which was Sunday. I answer first, that it is not clear out of the
text that they used to do so; but that they did so that particular Sunday: of
which a very good reason may be give^ out of the words following, telling us
that, S Paul was ready to depart on the morrow. Wherefore those first fervent
Christians might all assemble themselves to communicate at the hands of so
great an Apostle before his departure; and they being assembled, the Zealous S.
Paul made them a Sermon: but you have no where that he preached every Sunday.
But I have a clear text for his preaching every Satterday. For he disputed in
the Synagogue every Sabbath and he exhorted the Jews and the Greeks. Act. 18.
Again no wonder they assembled to communicate that day before S. Paul's
departure, because they were used then to Communicate every day, as many
Doctors say, or wonderful frequently, as is strongly gathered by that text,
Act. 2.46. and they continuing daily (mark the word daily) with one accord in
the Temple, breaking bread from house to house. Thirdly how does their
commnicating upon Sunday take away the Sanctification which God himself gave
to the seventh day; setting that day a part from all servile work? Again do you
think they never worked on that day of their Communion, who communicated daily
or exceeding frequently? Is their communicating once upon a Sunday enough to
prove, that all the world must never more work on the Sunday? And that, from
that day, it shall be ever lawful to work on the Satterday? Is such a text
clear enough to abolish a precept clearly confirmed by the mouth of the Author
of the new Law? My second text for still keeping Satterday, is far clearer,
out of 1. Cor: 7:19. Circumcision is nothing, and prepuce is nothing, but the
Observation of the Commandments of God; that is the thing we must now look
after, if we will have life everlasting. Behold here that great Apostle of
the new Law does tell us, that even then when Circumcision was quite abolished
and made nothing, yet the observation of the Commandments (of which the
sanctifying the seventh day, or Satterday, was one) did still stand good, and
in its full observance: so that we have now our Savior him self, and three
of the four Evangelists, and S. Paul, for the observation of the seventh day,
as much as for the keeping of the other Commandments.

5. Let us hear your last text; for you have but three. It is 1. cor. 16. Now
concerning the collections for the Saints, as I have given order to the
Churches of Galatia, even so do ye upon the first day of the week; (that is
Sunday) let every one of you lay by him in store as God has prospered him,
that there be no gathering when I come. A very weak place to abolish an old
known and still observed Commandment, confirmed by Christ's mouth; and to bring
in a new obligation upon all the world forever. I pray mark, that it is not so
much as said, that these monyes were to be gathered when the people did meet
at the Church upon Sundays: but, Let every one lay up by himself in store;
for which work some one day of the week was to be appointed; S. Paul thought
fit to appoint the first day for a pious beginning. But how will you deduce
from hence by evident consequence (as you must) that he gave them leave to
work the day before, and obliged them, and all others not to work that day,
until the worlds end? Neither this, nor any other place can be brought out of
the whole Bible, from which this consequence can be evidently inferred. And now
comes my turn, to give you a third and far more evident text, for the still
sanctifying the Sabbath or seventh day: For my text shall show, that standing
to Scripture only, the seventh day was of command to be observed long after S.
Paul did say those words; and long after the practice of Communicating upon
Sundays was in the Church. My Text is Mat. 24. v. 20. But pray you that your
flight be not in the Winter, neither on the sabbath day. Hence our Savior
foretells clearly the destruction of Jerusalem (which was to happen in the year
of our Lord 73:) that is forty years after the Resurrection of Christ. Then,
if ever, a nun would think the command for the observation of the Sabbath, or
seventh day, to have been abolished; so that it could not be profaned: and yet
our Savor did bid his Apostles, (for to them he spoke these words;) pray
that this flight might not he upon the Sabbath or seventh day, to avoid the
profanation of that day; on which indeed Jerusalem was taken, and pillaged.
And there was, besides a perpetual massacring, a perpetual pillaging, and
carrying their goods to places of security; as also a perpetual flight of
those Jews which could fly, and carry away their goods if they could, or
endeavoring to carry them or sweating with incessant labor to hide them, by
which actions the profanation might seem to be committed. Therefore all the
places alleged before hand do not convince, that the obligation of not
profaning the sabbath day was taken away: as also they convince no new
obligation of not working upon the Sunday to be brought in. For both these
things I ask for Scripture, and nothing but Scripture: for it is nothing to our
purpose to bring reasons, why the sabbath might be taken away; and this
obligation of not working upon the Sunday might be introduced: But you, who
affirm not the possibility only of the fact, but the real fact of abolishing
Satterday, and of instituting Sunday; you, I say, must prove both these things
with clear texts, Or else your mere discourses and reasonings will not be
half so good arguments, as our constant Tradition of the Church, which you
absolutely deny to deliver down to us any necessary obligation, not clearly
expressed in Scripture. Your own Doctor Tailor in his Defense of Episcopacy, p.
100: confesses the plain truth. For that (says he, speaking of the keeping
of the Sunday) in the new Testament we have no precept; and nothing but the
Example of the primitive disciples: at Geneva they were once about changing
Sundays feast into a Thursday, to show their Christian Liberty. So he. Had the
contrary been plainly set down, your so illuminated Brethren of Geneva should
have seen it. Give me then infallible texts, and not fallible discourses
concerning the abrogating of the satterday, and institution of the Sunday feast
in place of it.

6. But I have a new difficulty in this matter, which is objected by no body
that I know of, because it is not very obuious. My difficulty is this; that we
are bound under pain of damnation, to keep our Sunday in a manner, not only not
expressed in any clear Scripture, but also against the usual manner of keeping
the Sabbath, and all festival days, expressed in clear Scripture. For,
according to clear Scripture we are to begin the Sabbath or feast on the
Evening before, and to end it the next evening: as is clear out of the twentieth
three Chapter of Leviticus, where all the old sabbaoths and feasts, and the
manner of keeping of them are put down; From Evening to Evening shall you
celebrate your sabbaoths. It was then forbidden, under pain of damnation, to
work on friday after the evening: in so much that a tailor, shoe maker, weaver
etc. who should have continued working for any long time between sunsett and
twelve a-clock at night, should have been damned for his labor: and yet at the
next Evening he might lawfully have worked until mid night: But I hope there
is no such thing held lawful on Sunday after the evening; neither is it
unlawful to do any, though never so laborious work, upon satterday evening
until mid night. Here then you have an other obligation under pain of
damnation, which is not plainly put down in Scripture; but delivered unto us
by the tradition of the same Church, which delivers the obligation of fasting
in Lent unto us. Wherefore none of you all can show any ground, upon which any
obligation of keeping the Sunday, and keeping of it in this manner (which I now
specified) can be grounded solidly; but upon the very self same ground we
will as solidly ground the obligation of keeping Lent with a fast of precept
(as I showed Sect: 8. n. 8. as much as Sunday is a feast of precept. This
argument will trouble D. Fern who. 13. most inconsequently to his other
principles, houldeth the obligation of keeping the Lords day, made plainly
known unto us by Tradition only: And yet houldeth that in the Scripture only
all necessary obligations are set down plainly: plain contradiction.

SECT: X, A FOVRTEENTH ARGUMENT.
By the Texts which our adversaries bring to prove that Scripture contaynes,
and decides all necessary Controversies, we prove the contrary.

1. All of you say, that all things which are necessary to be believed or done
for obteyning salvation are clearly put down in Scripture: therefore if it be
necessary to our salvation to believe Scripture to be by it self alone our
only rule of faith, or to hold that by it self alone it decides all necessary
co^troversyes; the Scripture must also be showed by you clearly to conteyne and
determine all this: For else you press us to hold that which no clear
Scripture bids us to hold; which thing you all account unreasonable in us.
Your part is here affirmative; and in this prime point you contradict the
practice of all the Church; against so great and so publik Authority, you must
bring the evidence of clear Scripture, according to your own principles: If we
then can but show that all the texts you bring do not suffice to this evidence,
you are condemned, even by your own principles. Let us then hear you Texts: and
that out of D. Fern: for he has the chief of them.

2. The first text which is brought by D. Fern laboring in his Sect. 23. to
satisfy my doubt, is this; For in them (the Scriptures) Ye think ye have
Salvation. Joan. 5. v. 39. I pray mark what I say; and you shall see how weak
this and other such like arguments are. In the seventeenth verse of this
Chapter begins a discourse of our Saviors to the Jews; and when he comes to
the 34. verse, he says; These things I say unto you, that you may be saved.
Now my answer is this: That which our Savior said unto them, that they might
be saved, is a stronger proof that that alone by it self was sufficient to
salvation, without any thing else: then to say, The Jews did think by such a
thing to have salvation; Therefore that thing by it self alone does (without
doing any more) suffice to Salvation: For undoubtedly our Saviors saying such
a thing, is better then the Jews thinking such a thing. This supposed, would
you not count him mad who should say that those precedent verses, which our
Savior had then said when he spooke these words, These things I say unto you
that you may be saved, did conteyne alon a clear expression of all particular
necessary points distinctly putting them all down? How then does it follow,
that because the Jews did think (and perhaps truly think) to find that which
might save them in the Scripture, therefore the Scripture did conteyne alone a
clear expression of all particular necessary points, distinctly putting them
all down? Wherefore, as you must not understand that short speech made by our
Savior to have sufficed to Salvation, by expressing distinctly all particular
points necessary: but because it did suffice to bring them to the knowledge of
the true Messiah, whom they acknowledging might, by his particular instruction,
know distinctly all particular necessary points: so the Scripture did suffice
to Salvation, by expressing clearly enough that Jesus Christ was the true
Savior of the world; whom they could not but believe if they would believe
Moses: For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me, for he wrote of
me; says our Lord in the same Chapter v. 46. believing then our Savior they
should from him (and his Church after him) receive full instruction in every
particular necessary point. But D. Fern urges this place wonderful weakly;
because (says he) they might know all things necessary to salvation (by
Scripture only,) therefore he bids them search the Scripture, and they should
find they testified of him. A weak consequence to prove that they might know
all necessary points out of Scripture, because they might know this one point
or our Saviors being the true Messiah. For it is no Consequence, This one
point is clear in Scripture; therefore all other necessary points are clear in
Scripture. My second answer is, Go and search the Scriptures now and you shall
finds Salvation in them; for they will clearly Send you to the Church for your
particular instruction in all points necessary; as I showed Sect. 7. n. 1.
Thirdly search the Scriptures and you shall find Salvation in them; but not in
them as expovnded by every man for him self (for these very men found not
Salvation by them as they understood them;) but you shall find Salvation by
them as expovnded by the public interpretation of the Church. And as it is no
consequence, Christ did bid the Jews Search those Scriptures which they had
then, because in them, they should find clearly putt down, that one point of
his being the Messiah; therefore those Scriptures and all the new Testament
(of which no one word was then written) are affirmed by Christ to conteyne all
points now necessary, and to put all down clearly: so also it is no
consequence, Christ bid us search the Scriptures; Therefore we are to attend
to them alone, and not to attend also to the voice of his heavenly Father,
bidding us hear him; nor to the voice of Christ him self testifying of
himself; nor to the voice of his Miracles, which he calls a testimony
greater then John. Nor are we to attend to the voice of John, although he was
sent on set purpose to bear wittnes of the light. Io. 1.7.8. And yet all these
consequences be as Good as this your consequence: Christ bids us search the
Scriptures, therefore we must attend to them alone, and take them alone to be
of sufficient authority to ground faith in all points necessary; and not attend
to the Church. I will give you a consequence, though most bad, yet to the full
as good as this: S. Paul says, If women will learn any thing let them as^e
their husbands at home. (1. Cor. 14:35 Therefore women are to attend only to
what their husbands teach them at home; and not to go to the Church to be
instructed in points necessary by the Minister. But after all this I must tell
you (M. Doctor) for a fourth answer, that you assume that which it is
impossible for any of us all to prove; that is, that our Savior did bid them
search the Scriptures. S. John did write in Greek, and the Greek word
(Ereunate) as also the Latin Scrutamini, does as commonly, and as properly
signify You do search (in the indicative mode,) as, Do search (in the
Imperative): and therefore the Translator of your Bible might, according to the
Original, as well have putt it, not as he did, but thus; you do search the
Scriptures, because ye think ye have Salvation in them; of which
notwithstanding they did miss with all their search. If we read (as we may)
you do search; then this place evidently proves, that the search of the
Scriptures only does not suffice to Salvation: and therefore it is as probable
(to the very full) that this text makes against you, as that it makes for
you. And this interpretation of mine is not only the interpretation of S.
Cyrill lib. 3. in Io: c. 4. but also your learned Beza says; I do assent to
Cyrill expressly admonishing that these words (Ereunate) etc. ought rather to
be taken in the Indicative mode, You do search the Scriptures. How often have
Protestants heard us give this vnavoideable answer; and yet they, being never
able to answer it, will never give over the citeing of it, as if it were a
maine proof of this fundamental point of their Religion? an evident sign of
their want of evident texts. Again, the knowledge of the only Rule of faith is
necessary for all: but Christ did not bidd all common people search the
Scriptures; for at that time the Scriptures were not in the Syriake Language at
all; which only Language the people of the Jews could understand. See this
proved Sect. 2. n. 11.

3. D. Ferns second Text is; They (the Scriptures) are able to make wise unto
Salvation. He presses it thus; Can that be said to be able to make a man wise
to such a purpose and only do in part, and imperfectly, teaching him only some
knowledges to that purpose? Also he says after, v. 17. The man of God is
thoroughly furnished, or perfected to every good work. I answer, that the short
speech which our Savior made, intending it (as I showed in the former
Objection) to make those wise to Salvation, was truly able to do what he
intended, and the perfectly; or else he had missed in the choice of a means
sufficient to that end, which he clearly said he intended; to wit, that they
might be saved: Yet you cannot say, that speech, by it self alone, sufficed to
make them wise to Salvation; but it did enable them with sufficient principles,
by following of which Salvation might be effectually obtained; and so that
speech was able, not in part and imperfectly only, to work the effect, by
giving some knowledge to that purpose; but that very knowledge which that short
speech gave; was a knowledge effectual for the direction of all those Jews;
not by directing them in every particular, but by telling them clearly whence
all particular directions were to be had, which any one following will soon
prove a man of God perfect, thoroughly furnished to all good works. Is not all
this true even of that short speech? Much more is it true of so many speeches
made to us in Scripture for our Salvation, and able to bring us effectually to
it, if we follow them, especially such speeches as bid us so often to follow
the Church. See the many places I cited S. 7. n. 1. These Scriptures then so
full of these speeches, and these divine writings then so full of these
speeches, and these divine writings expounded, not by private, but by public
exposition of the Church, do not in part only and imperfectly, work this
effect, by teaching us some knowledges to that effect; but they teach us a
great sum of such knowledges, as are able to effect the work, though not by
giving us every particular point to be done, but by telling us whence every
particular point might securely be had. Yet to give you fuller satisfaction; I
say, it was far from S. Paul's mind to say the Scriptures are able to make us
wise to Salvation, as they are used by those, who take them as interpreted
according to that sense, that every man shall in his Conscience judge to be
true. The Scripture thus taken, breeds infinite inconveniences, as I showed
at large Sect. 7. whence appears that the Scriptures used so, are the cause of
many men's damnation. S. Paul then did not speak of the Scriptures taken so (as
you do;) but he said, they were able to make Timothy wise to Salvation;
because he was indeed a man of God who did continue in the things which he
learned and had been assured of; to wit, by the orall tradition of the Doctors
of the Church, and by S. Paul himself: for so S. Paul teaches me in the
beginning of his former Chapter saying to Timothy; Thou therefore (my Son)
be strong in the grace, that is in Christ Jesus, and in the things which thou
have heard of me among many witnesses. And in the Chapter before that v. 13.
Hold fast the form of sound words which thou have heard of me. Yea and in
this third Chapter, But thou have fully known my doctrine, Manner of life etc.
All this doctrine he could, not have known by any Scripture, of which a small
part was then written. Give me then a Timothy, a man so well preinstructed by
Tradition, so fast a houlder of Traditions, and a man so knowing from whom he
had learned these things; and I will freely allow you, that the Scriptures will
make such a man wise to Salvation: For he will be sure to take them, not upon
any private man's judgment, or upon his own; but to take them as interpreted by
the Church, whom he will be sure never to contradict; she being the pillar
and Ground of Truth, as that his great Master says, all whose Doctrine he
fully knew. But those Scriptures which are able to make such a man of God, such
a Timothy, wise to Salvation, and thoroughly furnished or perfected to every
good work, are not able to do this effect, if used in a manner contrary to that
which I have showed they were used by him, and should be used by us. We do
abuse them if we take them and discanon them (as I may say) by our private
interpretations, contrary to the Tradition, and unanimous exposition of the
Church. These men use Scriptures to their perdition as S. Peter said some did
the hard places of S. Paul's Epistles: Whence you see that misinterpretations of
hard places were made to the perdition of the Interpreters. Wonder not then to
hear us say that the obscurity of some places of Scripture have occasioned the
perdition of the false interpreters of those places, out of which state of
perdition some guide there must be who can lead them securely: Can you find
me a surer then the Church? There is no want of Infallibility in Scripture but
there is great abundance of fallibility in our private judgment of discretion,
which makes us need a sure guide in the interpretation thereof.

4. Having now showed in what sense the text alleged did say, The Scripture
was able to make a man wise to salvation; I shall easily show how weakly from
these words S. Paul is said to have meant, That the Scripture by it self alone
was sufficient for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness; that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to all
good works. I then freely grant the Scripture sufficient for all this, but
still in the same sense that I have explicated the Scripture to be able to make
a man wise to salvation; to wit, as interpreted by the Church, or as
understood by men well preinstructed by Tradition, who will be sure in all
doubts to have recourse to the Church; and esteem as much what tradition
teaches the Apostles to have said, as what their books tea^h them to have
written: their words being of the same authority unwritten as written; and
tradition being a more vncorrupt deliverer of their doctrine, then writing;
which is subject to be so many ways corrupted, and altered, and of which we
are only certifyed that it is Apostolical by the Tradition of the self same
Church, which does as well certifye us that other doctrines be Apostolical,
besides those written in this book. Here also I must tell you how M. Fisher
did excellently silence D. White, when in their public conference he urged,
this text, The Scripture is profitable: etc. For, said he, Although wood be
profitable to make the substance of a house, to make wainescot, stools,
tables, and other furniture; yet hence does not follow wood alone is sufficient
to build and furnish a house: So Scripture is profitable for all these ends,
but alone it is not sufficient. Whence all the weight of your argument comes to
this; that if it be so profitable as to make a man wise to Salvation, it must
be sufficient by it self alone to do so: which I have already showed to be
false; without you take the whole Canon of Scripture as interpreted by the Holy
Church, or as understood by those who are preinstructed by Traditions, as
Timothy was.

5. Indeed you say, this sufficiency belongs to the whole Scripture, though in
proportion only to every book; and therefore the Apostle said, That Scriptures
are able to make a man wise to Salvation. How they are able to do this, I have
showed; But M. Doctor of what Scriptures did S. Paul say these words? If he did
not say these words of the whole Canon of the Scriptures which we now have,
and to which you streach these words; this place cannot possibly prove that
this sufficiency belongs to the whole Scriptures we now have: But it is
evident he did not speak these words of the whole Canon of the Scripture which
we now have; for almost all the new Scripture was as then not written. How
could that, which was not at all, have a being then able to make Timothy wise
to Salvation? S. Paul spoke of the sufficiency (if you please) of all
Scriptures which were then extant. You deny this sufficiency to them, and you
say: It belongs to the whole Scripture, though in proportion to every book:
therefore it belonged in proportion only to those books which were written
then. Why did S. Paul then say of those books then extant, that they were able
to make a man wise to Salvation? Now answer your own argument. Again; if every
Book of Scripture contributeth its proportionable part, to make up a whole body
of Books completely sufficient to this purpose; how will you do now, when no
fewer then twenty Books of the Scripture are quite lost, as I have showed
Sect. 1. n. 7. We have not any thing like a Text, by which we can prove that
these 20. Books were not as requisite to make up this full sufficiency of the
whole Canon, to decide all Controversies, as any other twenty which we have;
especially if you except the four Ghospels. And yet the Original of one of
these Ghospels is also quite lost; and we have no surer ground for that
belief, by which we believe our selves to have the true Copy of it, then the
Tradition of the Church: if she be fallible in her Traditions, we cannot
believe any thing in S. Matthews Ghospel: as I showed sect. 6.

6. Whereas you object that, though the Scripture did conteyne more things
plainly in it self, and show us from whence we may have the rest, that is
from the Church: Yet thus the Scripture could not be said to make us perfect,
for so the Law might be said to make us perfect, because it shows us Christ,
and was a Schoolmaster to him. Gal: 3. And John Baptist might have been said to
have perfected his Disciples by showing them Christ. So you. I answer, that you
all fight against this objection with every text you bring in this controversy
against us: For as the two former, So all the following texts objected against
us, speak of the old Testament, or Law; for In that (Christ said) the Jews
thought to find Salvation; of that he said, Search the Scriptures; of that S.
Paul said, It was able to make a man wise to Salvation, it was profitable, so
that by it the man of God is thoroughly furnished or perfected (mark that word)
to every good work. And now behold you your self come and infer for an
absurdity, that the old Scripture should be able to do this. We freely
acknowledge that the Law of it self could perfect no man, no nor justify any
man, as S. Paul clearly says in the place cited: but they were all to be
justified by faith in Christ. The Law, as introducing to this, did sufficiently
perfect all those, who were perfect under the Law: independently of this, it
did not do so. As for S. John; you are clearly told by S. Luke C. 1. v. 13.
that he was sent Parare Domino plebem perfectam, to prepare to our Lord a
perfect people: and toward the end of that Chapter, Thou Child shall be called
the Prophet of the highest: for thou shall go before the face of the Lord to
prepare for his ways, to give knowledge of Salvation unto his people by the
remission of their Sins. Can you show the Scripture does more in this point
then it says S. John did?

7. Your third text is, You shall not add to the word which I speak unto you,
nor take from it. Deuteronomy: 4.2. Therefore the Scripture is so perfect, and so
sufficient, that it alone conteynes all necessaries; and therefore condemns the
superadded Traditions. You have forgot M. Doctor your very last words; That the
Law (chiefly contained in Deutronomy) could not make us perfect: and now you
bring these words as words implying the perfection and sufficiency of it; For
of it alone these words are spoken. Secondly you have forgot your very first
words of this your 23. Sect. where you putt three sorts of Tradition that you
allow there, and. 13. Be not these additions to the written word? Thirdly you
have forgot that the Jews had at least two undeniable Traditions, besides
those which delivered the Scriptures and the true sense of the Scriptures unto
them: For they knew only by tradition what remedy was to be used to free their
female-Children from original Sin; as also to free their male-Children in
danger of death before the eight day. This remedy they knew and observed, and
were bound to know and observe. And yet they infallibly knew it without haueing
any Scripture expressing to them the knowledge of this remedy, or of their
obligation to use it, Or that it was so necessary for the Salvation of their
Children, whom they did believe to be in Original Sin, and by that debarred
from Salvation, unless some remedy were applied. Some remedy surely was as
necessary for the female, as Circumcision for the male: Show me this Remedy in
Scripture. Secondly they truly believed some of those bloody Sacrifices to have
been appointed unto them by God, for the expiation of their Sins; but they
could not truly believe that any of those Sacrifices could expiate their Sins
by its own virtue: They believed then that those Sacrifices had this expiative
virtue from the merits of Christ: show me any text in which this was then
written. It is ridiculous to say that this faith was not necessary to that
Church, at least so as to be believed by some among them. Fourthly, M. Doctor,
you forget against whom you bring this testimony: If it belongs only to the
Jews; why do you bring it against Christians? If it belongs also to
Christians; why do you not circumcise your selves? You urge against us, Ye
shall not add: We urge against you, ye shall not diminish. Fifthly M. Doctor
you forget that you are to conclude thus; The whole Canon of Scripture is a
sufficient direction for us: and you conclude, that the Law of Moses is a
sufficient direction for us; which you and yours confess to be false. Sixthly
you forget that a whole score of books are diminished from the Canon by being
quite lost; half a score more you will take from us, and cast amongst the
Apocrypha. Do you think that no part of this sufficiency is wanting to such a
Canon as you now have! Give me your text for that. Seventhly, you forget that
it is impossible for you to prove, that the Scriptures must be taken either as
they sound, or taken by every man in that sense that he in his own Conscience
judges. Give us the Scriptures taken in the sense which the visible Church
judges (for the Judge of the sense must be visible;) and we will grant all.
For then without any addition, and by only true interpretation, we will prove
that we must take the Church for our infallible guide: and she will show us
Scripture rightly by her interpreted, for the admitting of unwritten Tradition.
In the middle of this your seavenfold forgetfulness I pray remember what
pitiful texts you have putt in the forefront to prove that, which, if not
proved better, your Religion will prove most pitifully grounded. The sense of
the words which you urge is literally this; Let no man presume by his private
interpretations to deprave any Law either by restreyning, or streaching the
natural signification of the words in which it is delivered. For example; God
in the 17. of Deutronomy v. 11.12. says; Thou shall not decline from the
Sentence which they (that is the High Priests) shall show thee, to the right
hand nor to the left. And the man that will do presumptuously, and will not
harken unto the Priest, even that man shall dye. God would not have this Law
depraved by such an interpretation as you use to give; that the Sentence is to
be followed of those Judges which God appointed to tell you what was Gods Law
rightly understood, if they give sentence according to Scripture; as you would
have it expounded.

8. Your fourth text out of the end of the Revelations is incomparably weaker,
and it evidently damneth your Father Luther and Lutheran Brethren unto Hell;
for S. John testifyeth to every man that hears the words of the prophecy of
this Book (he speaks of the Revelations only:) If any man shall add unto
these things, God shall add unto him the plagues which are written in this
Book. And if any man shall take away from the words of the Book of this
prophecy, God shall take his part out of the Book of Life, and out of the Holy
City. But Luther took away all the words of the Book of this prophecy, when
he said in his first Preface to the new Testament, that he received this book
neither for Prophetical nor Apostolical: Therefore God shall take his part
out of the book of life, and out of the Holy City. The same shall be done to
his Lutheran disciples. Thus you see I have concluded evidently what I said,
let us hear you conclude; Nothing must be added to this book; therefore all the
Scripture is sufficient to decide all controversies; though twenty whole books
of it be lost, and though you take all the texts of the whole Canon in that
sense which every man in his conscience thinks best: Thus in effect you
conclude. Note also that there is no kind of certainty that the Apocalypse was
the last book of Scripture; for your own Kemnitius houlds S. John his Gospel
written after that; and most hold his Epistles the very last part of
Scripture. Now mark, that the very last verses, which were written in his last
Epistle are. I had many things to write (now when all the Scripture was
written:) But I will not with ink and pen write unto thee. But I trust I shall
shortly see thee and we shall speak face to face. Peace be to thee. Now for
Gods sake, what text assures you (for all other assurances we by your own
principles reject;) what text (I say) assures you, that those things which S.
John had yet to write, but did express them by Mouth only, were all of them
things unnecessary.

9. Your fifth text Gal. 1.8. Though we or an Angel from Heaven preach an
other Gospel unto you then that which we have preached unto you; let him be
accursed. As I said before, so I say now again, if any man preach an other
Ghospel unto you then that ye have received, let him be accursed. First M.
Doctor you forget that, in the beginning and in other parts of your book, you
will have our Church to be one and the same with yours in such fundamentals as
constitute a Church: and will you now prove this Church, by the sentence of the
Apostle to have been accursed, anathematized, and excommunicated, or cut off
from the true Church? You must sweat to find God a true Church upon Earth, if
ours stood excommunicated by S. Paul ever since it held Traditions. Secondly
you forget that you bring this Curse upon your own head, for it is you who
preach an other Gospel from that which S. Paul preached, and that which we
received from him, To stand fast and hold the Traditions which we have
learned whether by word or Epistle. 2. These. 2.15. And sure we are that the
Epistles to the Thessallonians did not conteyne the whole Gospel: If they did,
then find in those Epistles, that you must take the Scripture only for your
Rule in all points of faith, and all other necessary points. It is also the
doctrine of S. Paul; The things which thou have heard of me before many
witnesses, the same commend thou unto faithful men, which shall be fit to
teach others also. 2. Tim: 2.2. You will have us commend to other men, not
those things which were only heard before many Witnesses by public Tradition,
but only such as are written: You therefore gainsay S. Paul, and on you the
Curse of his Excommunication falls. Where you see, by the way, a good reason,
why we could not hold you in our Communion, you being anathematized by S.
Paul himself. We then, conformably to the doctrine of S. Paul, say that the
Ghospel which he preached unto them, and the Ghospel which they had received
(see his first Epistle to them Cap. 1. and 2.) was a Ghospel, which is most
truly expounded by us to conteyne both his unwritten and written doctrine: Yet
in all probability very little of the Ghospel had been, as then, delivered in
writing unto the Galatians; or tell me how much, if you can? Sure I am that,
besides what was written, they were yet to receive much more in writing: Yea
the surest opinion is, that the first thing that ever S. Paul did write was the
very Epistle to the Galatians, as is well proved by the Remish Testament in the
Preface of the Epistle to the Romans. And you can bring nothings but
conjectures to affirm that he had delivered at this time any written Ghospel
at all unto them. Again you most unskillfully say, that this text must be meant
of the written Ghospel only, for that which is written bears (you mean,
only) the name of Ghospel. for first this very place proves the contrary:
Secondly many other places show the contrary, for in S. Matthew c. 4. v. 23.
Jesus went about all Gallilee preaching the Ghospel: what Ghospel was then
written? And c. 9. v. 35. Jesus went about all the Cittes and Villages
preaching the Ghospel: what Ghospel was then written? or written when our
Savior said; wheresoever this Ghospel shall be preached. c. 26. v. 13. S. Mar:
c. 1. v. 14. Jesus came into Galilee preaching the Ghospel of the kingdom,
saying repent and believe the Ghospel. What written Ghospel did they know? or
S. Peter, to whom in the 10. Chapter Christ speaks about leaving goods for
the Ghospel. And thus, I might run over the new Testament, where the word
Ghospel is so often taken for the doctrine delivered by word of mouth; and
perhaps not thrice in all Scripture it is clearly taken for the written
Ghospel. And also To Evangelize is far more frequently taken for preaching the
unwritten word, then the written. This text then most convincingly proves that
S. Paul commands them by no means to go against the doctrine rceeived by
Tradition. As for S. Austens authority, with which you back your
interpretation, Bellarmin told you truly, that he did not expound this text,
but did only cite it to prove that nothing was to be believed against
Scripture: No nor besides Scripture interpreted truly by the public authority
of the Church; as I said before: And this answer satisfies what you bring out
of S. Ierom; although indeed he speaks of those who bring not known and
publik tradition of the Churh; but of those who devise new things and give them
out for old Traditions: which not being true Traditions delivered by the
Church, must needs be of no authority; without they can prove their truth by
Scripture, which they cannot prove by true Tradition.

10. It is therefore false which you say, that in the Judgment of S. Aug: and
S. Ierom it is enough to incur the Anathema, if they teach any thing of faith
besides that which is received from Scripture, in the sense you take this word
Besides. It is also impossible to show that S. Paul there spoke of Scripture.
Yea he speaks of that which they had received from him, who never writ any
thing before that Epistle, as I said: neither do we teach any thing of faith
besides that which has authority from the Scripture, though not from the
Scripture expounded as private men think fittest, but from Scripture rightly
expounded by the Church, to which we add nothing but what Scripture bids us
add. Wherefore the authorities you cite are ill applied to us, for we speak
nothing without authority and testimony of the Scripture taken in this manner,
as it should ever be; neither add we any thing what, is not written; For it
is written, Hold ye the Traditions. If you say, this is no true Tradition. I
am by Scripture bidden to hear the Church before you. Note that it is a very
good argument to say, it is nowhere written, therefore it is not to be
admitted; if this argument be only used as the Fathers use it, that is, when it
was notorius that such a thing was not delivered by tradition: For what is not
delivered by Church Tradition, must be proved by Scripture. See S. 12. n. 6.
You see what little need we have to interpret the words, besides what I have
preached, to be the same, as if he had said, Contrary to what I preached. Yet
because this is very true, it is justified by Bellarmiue: and you, not going
about to answer so much as one of the proofs, deserve no answer. Yet mark
what what S. Paul says Rom: 16. I desire you Brethren to mark them who Make
dissentions and scandals (note the next word) contrary to the doctrine which
you have learned, and avoid them. Who are contrary to what was delivered to the
Roman Church, to which S. Paul did write these words? who be they? mark them:
avoid them.

11. Your sixth objection is no text, but an argument drawn from this text, To
man's Testament noe one adds. Gal: 3.15. Much less is it lawful to add to
Gods testament; say you. We answer, that we add nothing to Gods testament:
But with all reason we still stand to have it interpreted, not by any man's
private authority. For what Commonwealth permitts The Testaments and Last
wills of man to be so interpreted? Let us have Gods testament both new and
old, interpreted by that Publik Authority empowered by Gods commission to this
end, and we require no more. Less then this cannot in reason be required: so
that your jest of a will partly written parley nuncupatory is lost. No wills
worse made then those which concern many intricate matters belonging to very
several persons, and yet prohibiting any Court in the world to interpret them,
but do let the sense be judged by every one concerned in it. In so much that
though Christ's, in four several places of his will, clearly tells us that, he
leaves us the inestimable legacy of his precious Body and blood; and that his
flesh is truly meat etc: Yet by private interpretations it shall be lawful to
tell us, that we must have only a figure and sign of his Body. Would any man
admit of the figure or picture of a Horse or House, in place of a Horse or
house given him by Legacy? Shall there be no Court in the world to prevent
these inconveniences? Thus you would have Christ make his Testament. Who has
so little discourse as to think a Testament; left to noe Courts interpretation
in the world, to be a fit judge, by its own evidence, when twenty, or thirty
leaves can be proved to be missing unto it? And yet to the whole testament, new
and old, twenty whole books be missing, as I have proved Sect: 1. n. 7. and
half a score more be most unjustly pulled out of the Canon by you, and cast
among the Apocrypha. And yet you would have all us stake our souls upon the
full assurance we have that this broken testament taken thus, and also taken
as it is expounded by you, against Fathers, Councels, and the constant judgment
of the greater sort of the present Christian world, and the known judgment of
all the Christian world for a thousand years together? what more unreasonable.
With man's testament none deals thus, much less with Gods.

12. I must needs also put you in mind, that you are much mistaken when you say
that the word Testament signifies only a written testament: For our Savior in
his last supper said, This the blood of the new Testament. Mat. 26.28. mark
14.24. and again, this cup is the new Testament in my blood which (cup) is shed
for you. Here we have the new testament made by unwritten words eight years
before one word of it wsa written, and well toward eighty years before all of
it was written to the end. Having the^ showed that the words Ghospel and new
Testament according to Scripture, do most properly signify the unwritten word
of Christ: we may confide^tly say, that we add nothing to the Ghospel of
Christ, or new Testament: If you ask, how I know what was delivered by Christ's
unwritten Ghospel and new Testament? I easily answer; I know this by the
testimony of the self same always visible Church, by whose testimony you know
that such books conteyne Christ's written Ghospel, and written new Testament. I
know this by the Tradition of the same Church, by which only all Christians did
know it, for those seventy or eighty years, which passed between the passion
of Christ and the finishing his written Ghospel or new Testament. I know this
by a better Testimony then all the world knew the Articles necessary to
salvation before any one word of Scripture was written, which time conteyneth
above two thousand years: for if the Tradition of that Church, in the Law of
Nature, were sufficient to ground the infallible assurance of all the articles
believed by that Church, for two thousand years; I hope the Tradition of the
Church, which is now in the Law of Grace, is yet a more strong ground to assure
me of that unwritten doctrine of Christ delivered far more publicly by him
and his Apostles, then that unwritten word of God was delivered in the Law of
nature to some few Patriarchs, in a manner very private in comparison of
Christ's unwritten doctrine; as shall be said Sect: 16. n. 2.

13. Your Sixth and last text here objected is our Saviors speech Matt. 15.
taken from Isa. 29.13. Their fear toward me is taught by the precepts of men.
Whence you infer that all things of worship or faith necessary to salvation
which are not commanded or written, are to be condemned. Before I return
answer, give me leave to tell you whose language you speak when you deliver
this your own doctrines. S. Austen (contra Maximum l. 1.) Brings in this
Arian Heretic speaking thus to the Catholics. If you bring any thing from the
Scripture, it is necessary that we hear it: But these words which be besides
Scripture, are in no case received of us, seeing our Lord does admonish us
saying, in vain they worship me teaching the Commandments of men. So that
Heretic. Just so you and yours. I answer first that many things may be
commanded by God and yet not written, and so be precepts not of men, but of
God, though we be assured of them by men. For all precepts which were for
those two thousand years and more, concerning worship or faith, necessary in
those Ages to Salvation, before the first Scriptures were written, were truly
the precepts and doctrine of God, and as such to be observed; though this
obligation was notified only by the man of that Church. For example, the fall
of Adam, and the promise made our future Redemption, was notified by Adams
Children, who delivered the same to their Children, and so downwards. So we
read Gen: 9. That God said to Noe and his Sons, that it was not permitted to
them to eat blood v. 4. This precept was obliging all the world upon the credit
of the Tradition of so few. So likewise we read in the 17. of Genesis, that
when Abraham was ninety years old and nine, the Lord appeared unto him and
made a Covenant with him and his seed, to make him the Father of the faithful,
to bless all in his seed: And then him, and all his posterity, a most strickt
precept of Circumcision. All this Abraham only notified to his posterity: They
all believed this promise and Covenant of God, and they all strictly observed
this precept of Circumcision: And yet neither this precept, nor this Covenant,
were written for those four hundred years and more which passed between the
time of Abraham and Moses, the first Scripture writer. Was that unwritten
Covenant the doctrine of man? Was Circu^cisio^ the precept of man? No. Was the
precept of not eating blood the precept of man? and yet by Tradition it had all
its force, even from Noe to Christ's time, among the Gentiles, and until the
times of Moses among the Jews. Well the^, why should the vnwritte^ doctrine
and precepts of Christ, and his Apostles, be called the doctrine and precepts
of men? You can say nothing, but that the testimony of men is not sufficient
ground for us to hold this doctrine, and these precepts to be divine or
Apostolical; whigh is apparently false: For the men of the Church of Christ,
and the supreme Pastors and governors thereof, cannot be of less credit and
authority, then were the men of the Law of Nature, or of the seed of Abraham,
or the testimony of Noe and his sons. Their testimony could, and did suffice to
make their doctrine, and precepts, delivered by God in a far more private
manner, to be notwithstanding prudently believed, and embraced for divine. Why
then should not the testimony of the Church suffice to make the unwritten
doctrine, of Christ and his Apostles to be held for divine? It is therefore no
kind of proof to say; Christ reprehends human doctrines and precepts,
therefore we must not embrace divine doctrines and precepts merely because
they are not written. You embrace the doctrine of men, who tell us this
doctrine of yours; which is neither written nor delivered by universal
tradition. Again, were not all the precepts and doctrines of Christ believed as
divine for those, fourscore years or there abouts, before the whole Canon of
Scripture was finished? of all these Traditions see my Sect: 16. n. 1. 2. and
the whole 19. Sect. Secondly, I pray how do you avoid the embracing doctrine
of me^, who hold the Churches authority to be mere human: and yet merely upon
her authority you receive such, and such Copyes to be the true Copyes of the
true Original word of God: see Sect. 4. n. 3. 4. etc Yea, upon the mere weak
testimony of your own private Translatours, all you (who are not exceeding
skillful in Greek) take your English Bible for the word of God; and again,
upon the mere weak authority of your Ministers, you take that interpretation
for true which they tell you to be so; though you cannot know it to be so, for
want of skill in Languages, and for want of skill in conferring places, and for
want of ability to use those twenty Rules which your own Doctors hold
necessary for the knowing assuredly the true sense of God. Thus I might show
you how in all those twenty four necessary points (which I have hitherto showed
not contained in any part of the written word of God) you hold truly and
properly the doctrine and precepts of men, whom you believe to have merely
human authority. Thus you proceed as the Jews and Pharisees did, not relying
only upon the traditions they had from Moses; (for example, concerning the
remedy against original Sin appliable to female Children:) but relying upon
traditions devised by some ill interpreters of their Law; by Sammai, by killel,
by Achiba and such other Rabbis: as S. Ierom teaches in Several places.

14. Whereas you add, that our Traditions are to be challenged of contrariety
to the Scripture for the most part, you proceed in your usual manner to say
bouldy what is for your turn, but never turn your hand or finger to prove it.
M. Doctor, I will undertake to make good at any time, that there is
incomparable more difficulty to show that one part of the written word is not
contrary to some other, then to show that any one of our Traditions be far
from the least contrariety to the word of God: see Sect. 23 n: 6. All Scholars
know I speak in this point that which is evident. Thus I have answered your
whole 23. Section.

15. I have now a word of great importance to say to you and yours. You affirm
the Scripture alone to be necessarily admitted by us, as our sole and only
judge. In this, your part is affirmative, and so you must prove what you say.
In this you contradict all visible Catholic Churches which were in the world at
your Reformation: Against so publik authority evidence of Scripture must be
brought; or else you do most injuriously oppose so publik an Authority,
according to your own principles. Thirdly in this you deliver a point which (is
true) is no less necessary then the true choice of the only Rule directing to
true faith; Therefore, according to your own principles this point must be
clearly contained to Sripture, in which you say all necessary points are
clearly contained. But we have now at large heard every next you thought fit
to bring for a thing of so great concernment; The answers given to every one
show clearly, not any one of them to conteyne that point clearly: Whence I
conclude, that what in such kind of matters, cannot be proved by clear texts,
must not be believed, according to your own principles; therefore, even
according to them, we are no^ to beleve that Scripture is by it self alone
our sole and only Rule of faith, or that it clearly conteynes the plain
decision of all necessary controversies; which it must do to be our Judge in
them all. Remember M. Doctor how you. 13. tell the Antiprelaticall Party that
they are bound to bring plain and express Scripture to demonstrate that
Episcopacy is unlawful. It were well, more Authority were yielded to Tradition
of the Churches of God. And. 14 we thence received Bishops, whence we
received the Christian faith. So you. Say so of all you received, and I need
say no more.

SECT: XI. A FIFTEENT ARGUMENT.
Although Scripture only should be our Judge, yet this Judge would decide many
points clearly against you.

YOU cannot but give me leave to call that clearly decided against you by
Scripture, for which I can bring, at the least, as clear texts, as you bring
for the decision of many necessary points, which you hold (by reason of such
texts) to be clearly decided by Scripture, as you say all points are, which be
necessary to Salvation. Therefore, if I can bring as clear texts for some
points of our faith, opposite to yours, as you can bring for those fourteen
necessary points of which I treated in my second Section; and as clear as you
can bring for your belief of those diverse points specified in my eight Sect:
in which I have particularly examined all your chief texts for baptizing
children: if I also can bring as clear texts as you could bring in my nineth
Section, for the lawfulnes of working on Satterdayes, and unlawfulness of
working on Sundays; or as you could bring in the precedent Section to prove
that the Scripture conteynes, and clearly decides all necessary Controversies:
if I can do all this, then these texts of mine cannot but be allowed by you to
be indeed clear; because you say, you can bring clear texts for all points
necessary (as all the above mentioned points be;) but I will show that the
texts that I shall here bring, for some prime points in which we believe
contrary to you, be at the least as clear as any of those Texts brought by you
and affirmed by you to be very sufficiently clear wherefore my texts, being as
clear as those which are acknowledged to be Sufficiently clear, must also be
acknowledged to be sufficiently clear. Now then to my Texts.

2. What imports more a dying Christian, then to have his Sin, forgiven
him; and that upon the word of God? and yet you cry Superstition, Superstition,
if a Priest be called to fray over him, and to anoint bim with oil, to procure
forgivenes of his Sins. But what faith your own Bible? Is any Man sick among
you, let him call for the Elders (the Priests) of the Church, and let them pray
over him, anointing him with Oil in the name of the Lord, and the payer of the
faithful shall save the sick. And the Lord shall raise him up, and if he has
committed Sins they shall be forgiven him. James 5.14. Have you among all the
texts which you cited, and I examined in the last Section, any one text but
half so clear format you intended. to prove, as this text is to prove
extreme-ynction to forgive Sins; and consequently to be a Sacrament, or
visible sign (such an one as the act of anointing is) of invisible grace
conferred thereby to forgive his Sins, for (says the text) if he be in
Sins, they shall be forgiven him. If your have but any one text half so
clear for that prime fundamental point of yours, I pray bring if forth now
whilst that and the answer to that is in fresh memory, That answer will tell
you what I have to say against any such text: Let us see what you can say
against this text? some answer, that it relates to the gift of healing in
those days; which shift it directly against the words of the text saying, if
he has committed Sins, they shall be forgiven. Again what Scripture have; you
to prove that the elders in the days of S. James cured all infirm men with
anointing them with oil? Lastly I am most earnest to know by what clearer text
then this, you were forced to forsake the practice of this Sacrament used by
all Catholic Churches upon earth, when you cast it off as Superstitious; Where
is, I pray, your so much boasted-of evidence of Scripture against so publik
Authority? M. Doctor remember your own words cited in the end of my last
Section. Remember that you. 43. say that the universal practice of the Church
is the best Interpreter of Scripture, if here there is no plain Text (as here
there is not) to take away all gainsaying.

3. When a little after your first Reformation you (contrary to all the Churches
both of East and west) denied the Real Presence of Christ in the Sacrament; by
what clearer text could you evidently demonstrate that those following texts
could not be truly interpreted of a real presence? This is my Body: The bread
which I will give is my flesh; my flesh is meat indeed, my blood is drink
indeed: in so much as he who eats or drinks unworthily is guilty of the
Body and blood of our Lord. This is the cup of the new testament which Cup (as
is evident by the Greek text where the gender agrees only with the cup) shall
be shedd for jou: that then in the Cup was the very same blood which was shed.
Give me as clear texts as these are, to prove, that one man may not at the
same time have two wives, or that he may Labor on the Satterday, but not on
the Sunday etc?

4. Again, when you denied the priests of the Church to have power to forgive
Sins, contradicting also herein all the Catholic Churches upon the earth;
what clearer text did you bring against them all, to prove that they falsely
interpreted to their purpose this text: He breathed upon them, and said, whose
Sins so ever ye shall remitt, they are remitted: and whose Sins so ever
ye shall retain they are retained Io. 20.22. Against publik authority you
should bring evident demonstration of Scripture, according to your own
principles: we now most earnestly call for this evidence in the three
Sacraments here mentioned by me. We call at least, for clearer places then
these be, in case you say these be not clear enough to decide the controversy
for us. And we call for such places to decide all those four and twenty
necessary points which I have mentioned: which being necessary, must be showed
to be decided rightly by clear Scripture; and consequently by clearer texts
then any of these are; in case you deny these to be sufficiently clear: Give us
those clearer texts, and we will confess our selves Silenced. If you cannot
do this; this little will serve to silence you.

SECT: XII. A SIXTEENTH ARGUMENT.
That the Holy Fathers never allowed the Scripture for the only Rule of faith.

1. IT is most unreasonable to say, that the greatest Doctors of the primitive
Church did not know the only Rule of faith: For this point importing above all
point, the Apostles must needs (had it been so) have imprinted it deeply in
the minds of all they instructed; and all their Disciples would have done the
like to their Disciples: so that many of the Church, especially the most
learned of the whole Church, would not be ignorant of this point; at least I am
sure, that you may sooner now be presumed ignorant of the only true Rule of
faith; then they then.

2. First then, had the Holy Fathers ever allowed of the Scripture for the only
Rule of faith, they neither would, nor could have held any men Heretics for
houlding that which was contrary to no clear Scripture: but they did hold many
such to be Heretics, as I have showed Sect: 8. where I showed that S. Austen
did hold on the one side, that Baptism of Children could not be proved by
clear, Scripture; and yet he, in and with the Milevetan Council condemned
those for heretics who did deny the necessity of Baptism for Children. See
Sect: 8. n: 3. 4. 5. There also n: 6. He and Vicentius Lerinensis accovnteth
them heretics who held rebaptization necessary to all baptized by heretics:
and yet he held on the other side, that this point could not be cleared out of
only Scripture; see them n: 7. In the next number I did show how Antiquity hold
also the Quarta-decimani for heretics, though the believing Easter ought to be
always kept on the fourteenth day of the Moon be not against clear Scripture.
There also I showed out of S. Epiphanius and also S. Austen (who expressly in
the beginning of his Catalogue professes to put down none but such as are true
heretics) that Aerius was held by antiquity for an Heretic, because he denied
prayer for the dead, and held that there was no fasting days of precept: in
which points I am sure you will say that this Aerius held nothing contrary to
Scripture. There also I showed out of S. Epiphanius and S. Austen, that the
Antidicomarites or Helvidians were held heretics by Antiquity, for denying
that our Lady after the birth of our Savior did ever live a Virgin: which
point is not clear in Scripture. Therefore all those were heretics, not for
co^tradicting Scripture; yet they were heretics for contradicting some Rule of
faith: therefore there is some other Rule of faith besides Scripture; and
consequently Scripture alone is not the only Rule of faith.

3. Secondly it was by holy Fathers noted to be peculiar to heretics to stand
to Scripture only, and to refuse all other Rules: So the Macedonians and
Eunomians, having no regard of what was taught to the contrary by the multitude
and antiquity of Christians, denied the Holy Ghost to be glorified with the
Father and the Son; because the Scripture did no where expressly say this.
S. Basil de Sp: Sanc: c. 25. and l. 1. contra Eunom: So the Pelagians (in S.
Austen de Natura and gratia c. 39.) were used to say; Let us believe that which
we read, but let us believe it to be a wickedness to believe that which we do
not read. So S. Austen L. 1. against Maximinus the Arian Bishop, brings him
in saying: If thou bring forth any thing from those divine Scriptures which are
common to us both, we must needs hear thee. But those speeches which are not
in Scripture, be, by no means, received by us, seeing that our Lord
admonishes us and says, without cause they worship me teaching the
Commandments and precepts of men. So he. And just so you, as is clear by your
objection in the last Section but one before this, Number. 13. and again I wish to
be the Disciple of divine Scriptvres. Wherefore the Council of Sens in the
seventh age decreed ( Decreto 5.) That it was a dangerous thing to be in that
error, that nothing is to be admitted which is not drawn from Scripture. For
many things are derived by Christ from the hands of the Apostles from mouth to
mouth etc. which are to be houlden without all doubt. See Sect: 20.

4. Thirdly the Holy Fathers expressly refuse to dispute out of Scriptures only,
upon this very cause, that they do not suffice to end and decide all
controversies. So the most ancient Tertullian speaks first in general of
never disputing with heretics. C. 17. Out of Scriptures only, Because this
Scripture-combat avails to nothing; but to the making either ones stomach,
or ones brains to turn. lib. de Praes. C. 17. And by and by he in particular
says of the Gnostikes, that which we may say of our adversaries. This heresy
does not receive some Scriptures; (you put ten books among the Apocripha) some
Scriptures they receive with additions and detractions ordered to their turn:
(see what I said of your translations Sect. 5. and those Scriptures they
receive in any manner intierly, they turn to their turn by new devised
expositions (see how you do this Sect. 7. Then he concludes generally: we must
not therefore appeal to scriptures, nor in our combat rely upon them, in which
either no victory is to be obtained, or a very Uncertain one. Which how true it
is, you may see in my Scripture-disputation about the keeping of Sunday, Sect:
9. where I gave you text for text, as good as you brought or could bring. Thus
the Anabaptists do not only weary you out, and show you to the very eye; that,
standing to Scripture alone, they are invincible by you: but also they some
times force your prime Doctors to leave their standing on Scripture only, and
force them to fly to Tradition. See D. Tailors plain confession hereof Sect. 1.
n. 4. And your great Beza found this insisting upon Scripture only to breed
such endless iarring that in his last book but one, he professes himself to be
weary of such combats and encounters, because he finds controversies thereby
made brawles; and therefore wishes that in some Common assembly of Churches all
these striffes at once were decided. The evidence of this point made your
learned Sutcliffe in his review P. 42. to say, it is false that we will admit
of no Judge but Scripture; for we appeal still to a lawful general Council.
But there I would ask, how we can rest upon the sentence given by a general
Council, if that be not infallible; for still every man must be calling this
Sentence to review made by his own weak judgment: as has been fully declared
Sect. i. n: 1. 2 3. 4.

5. Some of our adversaries think to shift off the authority of Tertullian, as
if it were delivered against those only who rejected great part of the
Scriptures, and corrupted other parts; which, say they, we do not. I answer,
that of your like proceedings I have spoken enough in the places I cited
jointly with Tertullians words: But this your shift is clearly undone by
Tertullians own words following, C. 45. We now hitherto have in general (mark
this word) treated against all heresies, repelling them (all) upon certain just
and necessary exceptions from Conferring out of Scriptures. So he. Yea the very
drift of a great part of this his little book is, independently of all
Scripture, to confute all heretics, by proving that true believers must be
able to show by tradition the descent of their doctrine from the Apostles. But
if indeed truth stands for us (says he, C. 37.) whosoever we be who walk in
that Rule which the Church has received from Christ, Christ from God, we
proceed manifestly in our intent, defining that heretics ought not to be
admitted to make their appeal to Scriptures whom we do prove without the
Scriptures, not to have any right to the Scriptures. Note here first, that he
speaks of such as would appeal to Scriptures; therefore they did receive them,
Note Secondly, that without Scriptures Tertullian promisseth himself the
surest Victory, by forceing them to show their visible succession, and to show
their doctrine delivered from hand to hand by Tradition or word of Mouth; as
that word was which the Apostles received from Christ, and Christ from God. By
this Rule he would have, us all walk.

6. Our adversaries use to allege some passages of Fathers appealing in their
disputes against heretics unto the Scriptures, chiefly S. Austen who disputing
against the Donatists conceived himself to have most manifest texts to prove
against them that Christ true Church could never grow so low, as to be visible
only in part of Africa; the visibility of Christ Church through the world
being manifest in Scripture, as he says de vnitate Ecclesiae, C. 7. 11. 15.
and 17. But it is no good argument to say, The Fathers appealed to the
Scriptures in some few points, in which they knew they had manifest adva^tages;
therefore they approved appealing to Scripture only in any kind of controversy:
So it is no argument to say; the Fathers did exact written texts of Scripture
in proof of some heretical Novelties; and professed they would not give ear
to such Novelties without written texts: therefore we must not admit of any,
though never so ancient, belief of the whole Church, delivered by Tradition
from the Apostles, without some clear written text can be alleged for it. This
is no consequence; for in points which are known not to be delivered by
Tradition, yea not so much as pretending to it, is a good argument to say; Give
me a clear text for this, or else with the same facility that you affirm it,
I will deny it: as I said S. 10. n: 9. 10. Do but note what I said there, and
then ioyn it to these places; and all places alleageable out of the Fathers
will easily be solved.

7. All those Fathers which might he alleged (and part of them is alleged
Sec: 8.) for houlding Traditions in points necessary to Salvation, no where
expressed in Scripture; as also all those who hold the Authority of the Church
by it self to suffice to ground our faith, and to determine all our
Controversies (whom we shall cite Sect: 21.) all these I say, clearly hold
that Scripture is not the only Rule, guide and direction of all that is
necessary to be believed, or done by us for obteyning Salvation.

THE THIRD QVESTION.
Whether the Church be the Judge appointed by God to end all our
Controversies? with a word of the Socinians concerning Reasons being our
Judge.

1. SOME men may perhaps wonder why, in so short a work, I should be so long in
proving the Scripture not to be, by it self alone, our only Rule, or direction
of faith; but those who are understanding Scholars will easily see, how, after
the proof of that point, I have in a manner dispatched all this business:
Because all Sectaries, making their standing to the sole Judgment of
Scripture, to be the only foundation of all and every one of their so several
Sects; when now this foundation is showed not to serve the end they intend, but
that we must yet have a Judge giving us infallible assurance of many necessary
verities of which the Scripture alone does not assure us: hence follows
manifestly the utter overthrow of all these and all other imaginable Sects, by
the apparent Necessity of houlding the true Church of Christ to be this Judge;
she only being the Judge, to which we are sent by Scripture it self, with an
obligation of our being held for Publicans or Heathens unless we hear her.
Neither is there any kind of probability now left of finding any other Judge
sufficient to direct us in all things necessary to Salvation, and to end all
our Controversies, and sufficient to conteyne us all in unity of one interior
faith, and exterior profession of the same, with all other conditions requisite
in our Judge.

2. Human Reason, so adored by the Socinians, cannot be this Judge; First,
because fallible: But with this they easily dispense, denying any faith to be
infallible. Secondly no one parish in the world was ever yet known to be of
this their opinion; is it the^ likely to be true in the eyes of any rational
man? What wit is there in thinking to be wiser then all wits? what reason to
make Reason judge in things known to surpass Reason? Thirdly does not reason
persuade any man to think that it is fitter for him to submitt to the
authority of all the Christians of all ages, and places, who ever had any thing
like a Church, then to adhere to a few scattered selfe-conceited people,
pretending to find out a wiser ground of Religion, then ever was acknowledged
by any kind of people in the world, who had the shape of an Universal and
perpetual Church? of which more Sect: 14. Fourthly how imprudently did the
Apostle exhort all Idem sapere, to be of one opinion, to keep unity in faith,
To speak one thing, to be perfect in one sense, and one Judgment 1. Cor: 1.
and 2. Cor: 13. if he knew it were Gods will that every one should follow his
own judgment, which everyone has as different almost from an other, as their
faces are? Fifthly what an improportionable means is this to keep that unity
in faith, and to adhere to what has been evangelized or delivered unto us,
though an Angel should come to persuade the contrary. For let but an abler Man
then my self come, and show me, that I have not so good reason for what I
believe as he has, and as he (If we stand only to reason, without respect to
authority) can bring to the contrary; I must (say they) follow what he
proposes: So that weak men must be weather cocks, Sixthly, is it not all
reason, that what convincing motives make evidently credible to be revealed by
God, that I should credit that not as the word of man, but receave it as the
word of God, as truly it is; and so rely upon it as strongly as is fit to
rely on the word of God? Seventhly, according to this unreasonable Ground,
there must be allowed, all the world over, as great variety of believing more
or less, as there is of understanding more, or less: and as great Contrariety
of belief must be lawful, as these is contrariety in the Judgments of one to
an other, and of the same man in different occasions. Can any creature who is
but like a rational man, believe that the world was taugh to proceed so by
Christ, and his Apostles; or that the world did ever proceed so in any one age?
What Record testifies any such thing? Is this to bring into Captivity all
understandings to the Obedience of Christ? 2. Cor: 10.5. If this wild Liberty
be called Captivity; I am sure that, by as good a figure, you Socinians (who
call your selves Rational men) may as truly be called the most Irrational of
all Christian men. You needs most pardon me if I Judge so, for your own
principle of following what my own Reason tells me, makes me most really to
think so, after mature consideration of the matter.

SECT: XIII.
It is declared what we understand when we seek whether the Church is to be
our Judge or no?

1. IT must still be carried in our minds, that we are in the search of the
Judge appointed us by Christ; and consequently. we must proceed as men do, who
first seek after a general knowledge in gross, and then descend to
particulars. So first we searched whether God had Given us any Judge; then
finding that he has given us some infallible direction, we did see whether
this were given sufficiently in any one Book of Scripture, or in any particular
Number of Books, or in the whole Canon taken together. But we, not finding as
yet what we sought, we cast an eye upon natural reason, which, if it were to
be followed by us as our Judge, this very Judge of ours (that is our own
Reason) told us she neither was, nor appeared like to that judge we sought
for she being a Judge not ending, but endlesly raising doubts in all points:
still therefore we are in our general search. And we have only in gross got
a hint of finding some infallible means, to guide us securely in all our
doubts, in that blessed congregation of people which followed the instructions
of Christ, and his disciples, still propagating the doctrine delivered to them
from age to age until we come to our Age. Here, or no where, this infallible
direction is to be had. But by what particular way this Congregation is to
communicate, and impart this direction unto us, is not the thing we now seek
at the first; but it is the very last thing we can seek for. For that being
found, we are to follow that particular means, and by no means to stray one
foot from it. We must seek that we may find; and after we have once found
what we sought for, we must stand still firmly fixed in the faith we have
found. Because by what we have found we are also taught to believe this
particular, that we are to rest free from further enquiry; Because our God
would not have us follow any other Judges then he appoints: therefore he would
have us seek after no other; but beleve that no other was to be sought after;
least so we ^ should be always seekers and never be Believers: as
Turtullian discourses admirably C. 7. de Praescript:

2. We do not therefore as yet search whether this particular means of
directing us, be by the Decrees of the cheef Pastor of this Church; or by the
Councels held without him, or held by him and defining together with him; for
this search is yet a further work; though it be a work soon dispatched, for as
much as concerns our purpose, after that we have once assuredly found out that
this infallible means is to be found in this blessed congregation instituted
by his disciples, and their followers with a visible succession in all ages
from Christ's age this. Now then, this one thing we search. (...) whether this
blessed Congregation (which we always understand here, when we name the
Church, as long as we speak of searching our Guide or Judge in a more general
manner) has not some means or other appointed by God, by which she can
infallibly guide us to the knowledge of the true faith? When we have found
that she has some such means; we shall readily pass on further, to see
what means this is. Now let us be sure not to entangle our selves with that
further Search, or any thing belonging to it, until we have fully satisfied
our selves of this general verity, that this blessed Congregation has in it
some means appointed by God, to direct all to the knowledge of the only true
faith. Neither yet do we begin to search, whether this Congregation,
instituted thus by Christ, and still visibly continuing in his doctrine, be the
Church of Rome, or the Protestant Church, or both these, or any other besides
these, of which hereafter: but that one thing for which now we only search is,
whether this Congregation (wheresoever it is) has not some infallible means
appointed by God, to be followed by all, that all may come to be saved in it?

3. And we most groundedly say that this Church (still meaning, by this name,
the Congregation we speak of) is our infallible Judge: and consequently, this
Church has some infallible means to guide all to the truth in all points of
faith, though not expressly contained in Scriptures, and to decide all our
Controversies in Religion: for which I shall give my reasons in the ensuing
Section. But before I begin it, I note in a word; that this Church, having some
infallible means appointed by God to direct us in the only true faith,
(without which faith eternal Salvation cannot be had) it must be a damnable
Sin not to take pains, in a tolerable manner, to find it out; and to embrace
it, when we have found it: for otherwise we should neglect the execution of
what God has appointed us to do, in a matter necessary to our Salvation; and
we should also. Sin against that Charity, which every one owes to his own
Soul, if, having means offered us, to be infallibly guided in the choice of
that faith necessary to Salvation, we should neither take ordinary pains to
find it, nor to follow it, when we had found it. This lesson is so very
necessary to many thousands, that it deserves to be a thousand times over
inculcated unto them.

SECT: XIV.
It is proved out of the old Testament that the Church is our infallible Judge
in all Controversies of Faith.

1. FOR more then two thousand years, before any word of the old Testament
was written, Gods Church had some infallible way to end all controversyes; for
all that time there was no Scripture, and yet there were many points then
necessary to be believed, in which men of various judgments might vary in their
judgments: For example, about the belief of reward, and punishment of the life
to come; about the immortality of the Soul; about the fall of Adam; the
promise of a Redeemer; and afterward of this Redeemers being to be the Son
of Abraham; about the necessity of the Circumcision given unto him etc. The
Church of that time was the only Judge of all these, and such like
Controversies: and as they, who opposed her known tradition, were accounted
misbeleevers; so those who believed them, are declared by S. Paul to have had
the same Spirit of Faith that we. 2. Cor: 4.13. Shall not then Christ Church
be as much enabled by God to pass an infallible decision, of what is to be
held now by us in poinct of Faith? The like argument houldeth strong the Jewish
Church, which from the time of Moses, to the time of Christ, had some
infallible means, besides Scripture, to end all Controversies, as appears by
Deutr. 7.8. Where those words, An they shall show the sentence of judgment, and
thou shall do according to it? etc. And those other words: The Man that will
do presumptuously and will not harken to the Priest, even that man shall die:
Clearly intimate the infallibility of this Judges sentence. For God would never
oblige all to follow an erring judgment, which defines often lies for truth:
And oblige all to embrace those lies, under pain of death. Secondly the
refusers to embrace a ly do not do presumptuously, as God says those do who
will not harken to the Priests: He therefore ever says the Truth. Thirdly
according to the true translated Bibles it is said in the ninth verse, of the
Priest, Who shall show thee the truth of the Judgment. Which words prove that
God would assist in declaring always the truth. Fourthly it had been a most
unjust murder to put a man to death for not following that which might be a
Lie: God would never have enacted such a Law. Fifthly, Joseph the Jew L. 2.
contra Apion: testifyeth their High Priests to have been their Judges of
Controversies. And D. Whitaker de Sacra Scrip: Page: 466. Acknowledging as much
says, It was not Lawful to appeal, for otherwise there would have been no
end of contention. Shall Christ's Church, which is the mistress and Lady, want
that which the Jewish had, she being but the handmaid?

Before I come to the texts, which speak particularly of Christ's Church, I
appeal to any sober judgment, who shall ponder them with due reflection, to
judge whether they be not, to the very full, as clear to prove my intent, as
any of those, which any of our adversaries can bring, for any one of those
twenty four necessary points, which I have heretofore showed to be clearly set
down in no Scripture, though they affirm them all to have clear texts of
Scripture for them? Whence again I ask, how you can deny these my Texts to be
clear, which are in any sober judgment as clear, as those which you all hold
(and must hold) to be clear? And particularly, I wish the texts I am now going
to cite, were equally balanced with those texts which D. Fern and others
cite, to prove that Scripture is our only judge; for so my Reader (if he will
but please to turn to those texts Sect. 10.) may soon see whether, even
according to the judgment of Scripture, (their own only Judge) the Church be
not better proved to be our Judge, then the Scripture alone is proved to be so.
And I desire all to note, how unjustly we are dealt with-all, who being
advantaged by the peaceable possession of all public ecclesiastical
authority, which any Catholic Church had in the world, at that time in which
you began your Reformation (all which authority stood for the Churches being
the infallible judge;) and yet no evidence of Scripture, half so good, being
brought against this our authority, as we can bring for it; we
notwithstanding were dispossessed of it, and condemned of the most unjust
usurpation that ever was, by those who hold, that against publik authority
evident demonstration of Scripture must be brought. Examine the texts I shall
bring and then examine your weak evidences brought in my tenth Section.

3. Again, before I cite these texts, I must needs desire my reader to carry
alone with him in his mind one note more, which is this; that all these texts
speak still of a Church always teaching truth in all points which she
proposes to be believed, and not in some certain points only. This I desire
much to be noted, because our adversaries only acknowledge, that by these texts
the Church is secured from erring fundamentally To the subversion of saving
faith; as D. Fern acknowledges Sect. 20. This confession of theyrs undoes
all Religion; because the texts I am going to allege speak as universally, and
as far from all limitation of the Churches being by God secured from all
kind of error, fundamental, or not fundamental, as any texts speak of the
Apostles or Prophets being secured from all kind of error fundamental or not
fundamental: And you by Limiting these texts to the only securing of the
Church from only fundame^tall errors, do teach others in like manner to limit
those texts by which the Prophets, or Apostles, are said to be secured from
error, to only such a security, as secureth them from fundamental errors
only; which would be a most damnable doctrine: For, thence would follow that,
the fundamental points being very few, (as you say,) all that is written or
said by the Apostles, or Prophets, which concerns not those few fundamental
points might be false, as being delivered by men not secured from error in any
points not fundamental. For my part, I take the most fundamental point of
faith to be this; That there is a God speaking infallible truth in all that he
sayt, by what instrument so ever any one of his sayings, in any matter
(whatsoever it be) is proposed by him, whether this instrument be the Church,
as it was for the first two thousand years of the world, or the Prophets or
Apostles raised up in his Church. And now let us proceed (...) to our texts.

4. My first text is out of the second of Isa: v. 2.3. And it shall come to
pass in the last days (so the Apostles called the time of the New Law) that
the Mountain of the Lords house shall be established in the topp of Mountains
(behold its great visibility, so that) All Nations shall flow unto it (behold
its vast extent) and say (witsh joy) Come ye and let us go up to the mountain
of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob: and He (note this word He) will
teach us his ways (in this House or Church;) For out of Sion shall go forth
the Law (as it did by the Apostles on whit-Sunday;) and the word of God from
Jerusalem (from whence the Churches first preachers began the diuulging of
their doctrine:) And he shall judge among the Nations, (not in his person, for
Christ went not out of Iewry; but he shall Judge among the Nations) by his
Churches tribunal erected among all Nations, so conspicuously, that they all
may flow to it: Will any man say His judgment is fallible? in this tribunal
it is He who teacheh us his ways: dare you say that He teaches us errors? Is
any error, (though not fundamental) his way? Christ then, erecting a Church
visible to the whole world, that the whole world might resort with joy unto it
for necessary instruction; and inte^ding himself to instruct them by it, and
by it to Judge among all Nations; had not co^plied with this intention of his,
if he had not secured that Church from all error, by which be himself teaches
all the world his ways, and not superstitious errors. And had this his Church
been Liable to pass false judgment, in deciding controversies about faith;
the disgrace had redounded to God, who authorized that Tribunal, to be that
very Court in which, to the joy of all, He judges among all Nations.

5. My Second text is out of the same Prophet C. 35. promising to us, at the
coming of Christ, a way so direct (not only in it self) but so direct unto us,
that fools cannot err by it. Is it not then infallible? But of this text I
say no more here, because I have po^dered it already in the very Preface, Number.
3. I only note that this way, being so direct to us all, must needs be only in
such a Church, as is of a Vast extent, and so visible every where in all ages,
that, all men of all places might be in all ages directed by it, and so
directed as not to err; For fools can not err by it. What more infallible in
order to us?

6. My third text is out of the same Prophet. C. 54. where first mention is
made most gloriously of the vast extent of Christ's visible Church; Sing O
barren etc. Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the
Curtains of thy habitations. Spare not, lengthen thy Cords, and strengthen thy
stakes, For thou shall break forth on the right hand and on the left, and thy
seed shall inherit the Gentiles. As I have sworn that the waters of Noah
should no more go over the Earth, So I have sworn that I would not be wroth
with thee (as I am with all who admit superstitions and foul errors to reign
over them.) Every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shall
condemn. The toungs of all heretics be toungs that rise against the Church,
in judging contrary to her definitions in matters of faith: but fear not (O
Church of God) for every tongue that shall rise against thee in Judgment thou
shall condemn: Yea their very rising in opposition of judgment unto thee, is
their condemnation; because hence appears that the Church differs in
judgment from them, which is enough (in the opinion of S. Austen) to make us
hold them heretics; For just in the end of his catalogue or Book of Heresies
he says, it is superfluous to set down what the Church (in particular) has
defined against them all: but (says he) Scire sufficiat eam contra ista
sentire, Let it suffice (for their condemnation of heresy) that she is
contrary in her judgment to them all. And therefore it is not lawful to hold
any one of them. See Sect: 21. n: 4.

7. My fourth text is out of the same Prophet Cap: 59. v. 20. and 21. which
text ( Rom: 11. v. 26) S. Paul interprets to be spoken of the Church of
Christ, to which, after his coming, many of the Jews were to unite themselves
being to be baptized in it, instructed in it, governed by it, and consequently
the text speaks of such a visible Church, as that must needs be, to whom the
Jews converted could unite them selves, to be by it baptized, instructed,
governed. To this visible Church thus says our Lord; As for me this is my
Covenant with them, says our Lord: My spirit (free from all error) that is
upon thee and my words (free from error great or little) which I have putt in
thy Mouth, (that Mouth by which Visibly she does teach my ways to all Nations
that flow unto thee, that Mouth by which I judge among all Nations, that Mouth
which shall condemn every tongue that shall rise against it in judgment) My
words (I say) which I have putt in (this) thy Mouth, shall not depart out of
thy Mouth (thus visibly teaching, judging etc.) nor out of the Mouth of thy
Seed; nor out of the Mouth of thy Seeds Seed; says the Lord, from hence forth
and for ever. Behold here the Spirit of truth intaled upon the Church visible,
and Gods words put in her Mouth, by which she teaches all Nations in her
first Age; And in the Mouth of her Seed, by which she teaches all Nations in
the second age; and in the Mouth of her seeds seed from thence forth and for
ever, by which she teaches all Nations in the third age, and in every other
age thence forth following, to the end of the world. Find me then an Age, in
which this everlasting visible Church shall teach any error, though never so
little? If you can do this, then in that Age his Covenant was made void.

8. My fifth text shall be out of the very next Chapter (to wit Isa: 60. v.
10.) in which God by the Prophet triumphs in the vast exte^t and glory of his
Church visible, The Sons of strangers shall build up thy walls, and their
Kings shall Minister unto thee, Thy gates shall be open continually (A poor
glory if they admit in Idolatry, Superstition etc.) they shall not be shutt
day nor night, that man may bring unto thee the forces of the Gentiles, and
that their Kings may be brought (securely from all error to be instructed by
thee:) For the Nation and Kingdom which will not serve thee, shall perish. The
sense of which last words is clearly this; What Nation so ever refuses to serve
the Church, by not submitting to her doctrine: shall perish, not temporally in
this world, in which they often flourish; but aeternally in the next. It is
therefore damnable, not to submit to the doctrine of some Church which is
visible at all times, and known to all Nations: for it could never be damnable
not to submitt to an Invisible Church; There must then ever be some visible
Church on Earth, which all Nations, under pain of damnation, are to serve; And
to which, God may truly say, The Nation and Kingdom that will not serve thee,
shall perish. Now tell me, I pray, when this English Nation, by a National
Synod (as they call it) acknowledged no visible Church which this Nation was
bound to serve; but decreed many things contrary to all the visible Churches:
how escaped they this Sentence of damnation? I confess Nations should do well,
and should further their Salvation, in refusing to serve all Churches then
visible; if all those Churches did both err, and also father their Lies upon
God the Father of truth; venting their own errors for divine verities: But, I
say, it is impossible that all the visible Churches in the whole world should
in any Age come to this pass; For in every Age it must be true, that The
nation and Kingdom which will not serve thee, shall perish. But you will say
perhaps, for these 10. or 12. Ages her errors have Eclypsed her? Read then the
following Verses, I will make thee an everlasting excellency (an excellent
Church indeed which fathereth her Lies and superstition upon God him self. It
follows, but should not follow, if this were true; And thou shall suck the
breasts of Kings etc. yea, Thy Sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy
Moon Withdraw it self: but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light:
How an everlasting light? an everlasting excellency, which ended with an
Eclipse of some thirteen hunded years; if she failed with the third Age, as D.
Hammond and others please to say? which third Age was before she sucked the
breasts of Kings whence appears the falsitie of their assertion. Again, how
does it follow; The days of thy Mourning shall be ended? when you make her to
have had so sad a time of mourning as thirteen hundred or (at the least) a
thousand years, under the yoke of Popery? How truly then does God in the next
Chapter v. 7. promise her Sons, That an everlasting Joy shall be unto them:
Where as the days of Popery are acknowledged to have covered the face of all
Christendom four times as long as the day of her true Joy? How then also is it
said to her in the end of the next Chapter following, Thou shall be called a
City sought for, and not forsaken, if all this while she were the woman
fled into the desert? Away, away with these false glosses; these words of
Esaias must needs be understood of a visible Church, which was not only sought
for, but also inhabited, and not forsaken, nor left forlorn, nor made
abandoned by Idolatry, superstition etc, and Errors intolerable, as D. Fern
calls those of the Church Sect: 19.

9 My sixth text (for I will count all the many texts, in the last number, but
for one, which might be urged severally, all having great force) shall be out
of the Prophet Daniel C. 2. v. 44. In the days of those Kingdoms, the God of
Heaven shall raise up a Kingdom, which shall not be dispersed, and his
kingdom shall not be delivered to an other people. And then to signify the
vast extent, the manifest visibility, and Perpetuity of this Kingdom (which is
his Church, founded by Christ) it follows, And it shall break in pieces and
consume all these (Idolatrous) Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever. Behold
here, God promising the Kingdom raised by him, that kingdom of his only true
Church, which visibly has by its doctrine broak in pieces all Idolatrous
kingdoms of the known world, and is so well secured of Gods assistance, to
preserve it in quality of a kingdom, that, even in this quality, it shall
always continue, and stand for ever a glorious visible Kingdom. And thus
literally is fulfilled that, Luke 1.33. And he shall reign in the house of
Jacob for ever. Whence I argue thus; No Church fallen into Heresy, schism,
Idolatry, Superstition; yea no Church fallen so deep toward Hell, as to father
gross, and intolerable errors upon God, delivering them as divine Verities,
can be said to be Gods Kingdom; or (being so foully fallen) to be his
standing Kingdom; or permitting gross errors to reign in quality of divine
verities, to be the house of Jacob, in which he reigns for ever Therefore, to
verify these of Scripture, there must be found, some ever visible Church upon
Earth, a Church flourishing in quaiity of his standing Kingdom, not fallen into
such errors as you say did reign; but a Church where he, and not any error
may reign. This Kingdom, so secured from error, is that which I call Christ's
visible, perpetual, and infallible Church, The House of our Lord established
(so as to stand visibly for ever) in the top of all Mountains, and all
Nations shall flow unto it, and say come, and let us go up to the Mountain of
our Lord, and to the House of the God of Jacob, in which he shall reign for
ever, and he will teach us his ways and not gross errors of superstition,
Idolatry, and there he shall Judge among the Nations; Even He who cannot give a
false Judgment, and consequently infallible is his Tribunal erected here in
his Church, to send forth his Decrees, by which he gouerns, and reigns. If
error be president in this his Tribunal, Error should reign, and not He: I
pray mark how fitly all the above cited texts agree with this interpretation,
and how harmonically they explicate and confirm one an other.

10. It is also a thing most remarkable how, at the very first attentive
reading of these texts, all these new vpstart sects (and Socinianisme as well
as the rest, yea and so much the sooner because it never flourished in one whole
Parish;) how, I say, all these new vpstart sects, presently appear to be so
exceedingly unlike to Gods only true Church, which is foretold to be of so
vast extent, so glorious for the multitude, and magnificence of her
professors, as Kings; yea all Kings, Princes, and chief Potentates of the
Earth, so conspicuously visible in all Ages, and places; that there is noe
tolerable interpretation to be thought of, by which these and such like Texts
can be applied to any one of these Congregations. Take Protestanisme, and allow
it to conteyne all these new fangled Sects; and yet all the professors of it
will not make the thirtith part of Christendom, although Christendom be but
the fifth part of the world. But take Protestanisme as it was for some twelve
hundred years before Luther, and so down ward, in every one of those twelve
Ages to Luther; and you will not find it to be the tenth thousand part of the
world, even by its own account: Yea by true account it will be found not to
have had one parish any where. How then do such kind of Religions agree to
these descriptions of the true Church in the Scripture? especially if to the
former places you add diverse others of the same nature, As that Isa: 49.
(which S. Paul Act: 13. interprets of the Church) It is a light thing that
thou should be my Servant to raise up (only) the tribes of Jacob; I will, also
give thee, for a light to Gentiles, that thou may be my Salvation unto the
end of the Earth. Kings shall see, and arise; Princes also shall worship.
Behold these shall come from far, and lo these from the North, and from the
West, and these from the Land Sinam. Sing O Heaven, and be joyful O Earth, The
Children which thou shall have shall say again, The place is too strait for
me: give place to me that I may dwell; Kings shall be thy Nursing-Fathers,
and Queens thy nursing Mothers (They shall not be thy Heads, or Governors,
but) They shall bow down to thee with their faces toward the Earth, and lick
up the dust of thy feet (prostrating themselves to kiss the feet of thy
Supreme Pastor.) Tell me now, of what Church speaks this Prophet? where was
it. Read also his next Chapter; Kings shall walk in the brightness of thy
rising. Their Kings shall Minister unto thee, And not Rule over thee, as thy
chief Governors. And yet much more Chap: 62. particularly; All Kings shall
see thy noble one, with that other eloquet expressio^ of the Churches visible
gloriousnes, Pass ye, pass ye through the gates, and prepare a way for the
people, and make the journey plain, and pick up the stones, and lift up the
sign to the people: Behold our Lord will make heard to the end of the Earth.
For, as David said: Ps: 21. v. 28. All the ends of the Earth shall remember and
be converted to our Lord, and all the families of the Gentiles shall adore in
his sight. And Malachy 1.11. from the rising of the Sun even to the going
down of the same, my Name shall be great among the Gentiles, and every where
incense shall be offered to my name (as it is in the Roman Church,) and a pure
offering (of Christ's pure Body.)

11. These and diverse such like passages be so clear of the vast extent,
majesty, and glory of the Church, with its perpetuity in all ages, that diverse
of our adversaries, not finding any Church upon Earth, but the Roman, to which
hey could be applied, and persuading themselves that the Roman Church was
false; became so wicked, as to deny all Christian Religion, because they could
not see their own Scriptures verified in it, as it is most fully showed in the
Protestants Apology Tract: 2. c. 1. S. 5. There you shall see how this
consideration made that famous Protestant David George to preach against Christ
and his Apostles. This made your chief Pastor of Heidelbourg, Adam Nauserus,
to turn Turk. This made your Alemanus to turn Jew, having been a great
disciple of your great Beza, with a multitude of others here in England, cited
by the above named author. Now I conclude, that Christianity cannot be
maintained without such a Church, as is here described, to be found somewhere
on earth; which Church cannot be found if the Roman Church be such a Church as
you make her. But whether she be Christ's only true Church, and our Judge, we
shall see here after. Now I go on.

SECT: XV.
It is proved out of the new Testament, that the Church is our infallible Judge
in all Controversies of Faith.

1. TO my six texts out of the old Scripture I add six more out of the new.
My seventh text then is Mat: 16.19. Upon this Rock I will build my Church,
(that Church which Christ foretold by the Prophets to be of so vast extent, so
visible in all ages to the end of the world) and the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it. Of this text D. Fern treats in his whole twentih
Section. The substance is; that the Roman Church is but part of the Catholic
Church, and so though the gates of Hell had prevailed against her; yet they had
not prevailed against the Catholic Church. Yet says he, We acknowledge that
Hell gates did not privaile against the Church of Rome to a subversion of the
Faith in it, or a total infection of the members of it, with all the errors
and superstitions that prevailed in it.

2. Although it be not to my purpose (as long as I continue still in a general
search after some infallible Church) to pass to that particular inquiry,
whether this Church be the Roman or no, (of which afterward:) yet because this
prime objection may be best solved in this place; I answer, that neither D.
Fern, nor any other Doctor, can find out upon earth such a Church, different
from the Roman, as has been promised in the texts of the former Chapter, to
which all Nations were to flow, to which Kings and Princes were to minister,
whose gates should be open night and day, whose Sun should never set etc: For
by the Roman Church we do not understand the particular Diocese of Rome; but
we understand all such Churches as are joined in Communion to the Roman, as
members to their head. Had Hell gates privailed against all such Churches,
where (I pray) had there upon Earth bee^ found any one single Church against
which Church, Hell had not more prevailed, then against the Roman? Name but
one, and I am satisfied. But that one must be showed to have been perpetually
conspicuous to which all nations might flow, having Kings and Potentates of the
earth Ministers unto her; in so much that the Nations which would not serve her
(as the Nations joined to the Roman Communion would not) should perish. That
Church must have these and such other qualities, expressed by Scripture in my
precedent Section. Knowing you could not find any Church upon Earth so
qualified but the Roman, which taken (as we usually take it) comprehends the
Churches of all Nations joined in Communion unto her, you are forced so to
qualify your censure of her errors prevailing in her, that you say, they
prevailed not to a total infection of the members of it, with all the errors
and superstitions that prevailed in it. How come you to know this; if it be not
upon record, that some considerable quantity of men in All Ages (sufficient to
constitute such a Church, as we have seen Christ's true Church must be) did not
assent to all that was defined by the Roman Church, nor to other errors as
great as hers, but kept themselves to that which you call the pure doctrine of
Christ: if this be not upon record (as I was saying) then you say you know not
what: If it be upon record, begin to tell me who these men were in that
second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth age after Popery, against whom these errors
prevailed not; and I will trouble you with no further examination of your
Records. You can as well eat a whole Millstone to breakfast, as prove any such
thing by any Records.

5. But you say the Fathers interpreted this promise, of the gates of Hell not
prevailing against the Church, of the not failing of the Church; and never of
the not erring of it. Those who object this, mark not that the chief way of
failing is to fail by erring. How did the Church fail in the Dominions of the
Arians, was it not by erring? And so of all dominions corrupted by Heresy. So
also the whole visible Church had failed, if the whole visible Church had
proposed any error to be believed for a point of faith; for to do this is to
propose alye as vpheld by divine authority; which is to fall no less foully
then he should fall who should teach, God to be an affirmer and confirmer of
Lies. For whatsoever point any Church held as a point of their faith, they held
it as a divine verity, affirmed and revealed by God: Therefore if in any age
the visible Church held any Error for a point of faith, it did fail most
miserably; And yet your Protestant Doctors generally teach, that the only
visible Church did teach several errors as points of faith. So. D. Fern
accusseth even the primitive Church of teaching the Millenary belief, and
Infants Communion, though most falsely; as our Doctors often have showed: Thus
they throw dirt upon Christ's unspotted spouse. And as the black Aethiopia^s
painted their Gods black: So your foully erroneous Church would have all
Churches to have been foully erroneous; as you would have even the purest Church
to have been, had she proposed these two gross errors for divine verities, as
you say she did.

7. Yet to make a show of some thing like a Church, D. Fern says; the Gates of
Hell may prevail, not to the overthrowing of the fundame^tall Saving faith;
but to Superstructio^ of hay, stuble and worse, I mean errors in belief and
practice; Yet such as may still be convinced by the doctrine of saving faith,
still preserved in the Church. With these superstructions you charge the Roman
Church, yet adding; that she has the fundamental faith in express terms
delivered down in her, and such saving knowledge as was sufficient to discern
the foundation from the superstructures. All this is confidently said by you;
but still (like your self) you end the matter, and offer no kind of proof:
Neither do you add any one syllable to satisfy the great difficulties which
occure in this confident assertion, against which I have some thing to say.
First, to assume such Liberty to our private selves, of Limiting that which the
Holy Ghost thought not fit to limit; is to teach others to limit such texts as
promise divine assistance to Scripture writers, and to the Apostles, so, as to
say in like manner, that they shall deliver nothing against the fundamental
saving faith, but yet that they may superadde a vast multitude of their own
private phansies. Secondly you cannot name a perpetual visible true Church,
which Christ had upon Earth, against which this Error (for so you call it) did
not prevail, of admitting for an infallible truth whatsoever was proposed by
the Church. Of this error (if it be one) you can assign no beginning in the
Roman Church, (nor in any other Catholic Church:) But this error is a
fundamental error, not only because it lays the foundation, upon which
infinite errors must be built; but chiefly, because it admits of no other
ground upon which to found any divine faith; For it admits of Scripture it
self upon this only ground, See Sect: 20. n. 5. If this ground be an Error,
the foundation of all the faith that is in the Roman Church is an error, and an
Error fundamental, as properly as you can prove any error to be fundamental:
For it makes the foundation of all our faith to be an error. Have you as good
ground to say (as you do Sect: 6.) The Arian Heresy is an error directly
fundamental? Wherefore you must needs say that the gates of Hell prevailed
against the Roman Church to the Overthrow of fundamental saving faith. And
then you will never be able to find Christ a true visible Church, by which you
received your doctrine, your Mission, your Ordination, your Succession from the
Apostles: for these you had not from the Greek Church. Thirdly, as I just now
urged, every Church, to which you dare affirm the name of Catholic to have
agreed, did teach all the Articles she proposed to be believed as divine
verities revealed by God: even the Greek Church did this. But now, as it is
damnable, even in matters of smalest importance, to affirm with an Oath any
Lie (because we should take God for a witness and assertor of our Lie;) so it
is a most damnable thing to all those Churches, to propose errors even in
matters of smalest importance for Articles of their faith, to be believed as
divine verities, revealed, and affirmed, and confirmed by God. If the Roman
Church, as well as all the rest, did this (as you must say she did) she was
no Church, but a Synagog^ of Satan, because she proposed Lies to be beleev^
equally to divine verities, and thus did make the Sp^ of Truth, to be the
Father of her lies: wherefore you must needs say the gates of Hell prevailed
against her sufficiently, to bring her (and those who followed her doctrine) to
hell. But when, not only the Roman, but also all other Churches for the last
thousand years did this, where will you find Christ such a Church as
Scriptures promise? from which Church you did receive your doctrine, your
mission, your ordination, your succession to the Apostles. Fourthly neither
you, nor any of yours, can tell (with any certainty) which be those particular
points by the belief of which the saving faith is preserved so, that, if all
those points be held, this faith is held entirely; if they be not all held,
she is lost. How blindely then do you proceed, when you affirm, that the
Gates of Hell prevailed not to the overthrow of fundame^tall saving faith;
which is more then you can know, unless you can tell in the belief of which
particular points, this fundamental faith consists. Do you think this was
done by preserving still in her such knowledge as was sufficient to discern
the foundation from the superstructure? If this be enough, then Arianisme, or
any other Heresy, preserving the Scriptures, and not having sufficient force to
abolish the knowledge of principles, by which they may be reclaimed, may be
said not to have erred in fundamental saving faith: for you say that in the
Scripture all fundamental points are clearly set down.

8 Now give me leave to urge the force of my text God builds upon a Rock (a
full expressio^ of greatest security) not any Church, but that very Church
describ^ in my former Section out of the Prophets: And so (...) that has been
said of that Church, must be verified of ^his; with a reiterated promise, that
the gate of Hell shall not prevail against it: without breach of which promise
this Church could not have erred so notoriously, as I have showed you affirm
all Churches visible upon Earth, to have erred; And particularly the Roman
Church uses to be styled by yours, Idolatrous, Superstitious, the Seat of
Antichrist, the Synagogue of Satan, a Nest of Errors, covered with an
universal Leprosy, overwhelmed with more then Cymerian darkness, averted by
apostasy from the whole Body of Christ. This is the character you give of the
Roman Church: And then, when we press you with this and other clear Texts;
you, for your own ends, say, the Roman Church erred not fundamentally: yet your
famous French Brother John Daille, whose book of Schism has been now twice or
thrice published in England, in express terms charge the Roman Church With
fundame^tall errors overthrowing the foundations of Christianity. C. 7. And
then in the next Chapter, he begins to show how our opinion of adoring the
Eucharist is a fundamental error; in the proving whereof he labors even
until his nineteenth Chapter, the title of which is, That there be very many
other beleefes in the Church of Rome which overthrow the foundation of our
faith. And indeed he is the true disciple Of Calvin, who Instit: 4. C. 18.
says of us; They made all the Kings and the people of the Earth drunk from the
first to the last. Add now to this, that which D. Whitaker Controv: 4. Q. 5.
c. 3. confesses in these words; In times past no Religion but the Papisticall
had place in the Church. Therefore, (say I) if this Papisticall Church was such
an one as yours describe it; and if there were no other Church but this the
gates of Hell prevailed against all Churches upon the Earth. And indeed the
very claim which this Church makes to infallibility, and her conformably
pressing all the world to submitt to her definitions, and hold them for divine
Oracles (if they be errors) is the very bane of Christendom, as D. Fern calls
it Sect: 27. For upon this principle she may oblige all to hold your Church
(which you will say is Christ's purest Church) not to be any Church at all, but
a damnable Congregation of Heretics. How then have not the gates of Hell
prevailed against her, who teaches the purest Church to teach most damnable
Heresy? And again, if Hell gates have prevailed against Her; against what
Church did they not, for a thousand years before Luther, prevail? So much of
this Text.

9. My eight Text, to prove the Church to be our infallible Judge, secured by
God from leading us into any error great or little is Mat: 18.17. He that will
not hear the Church, let him be unto thee as a Publican or Heathen:
Therefore, merely for not hearing the Church, a man, according to the true
Judgment of God himself, is to be held (and consequently does justly deserve
to be held) as a Publican, or Heathen: But all men are obliged not to do that,
by which so heavy a Judgment may deservedly fall upon them: Therefore all men
are obliged to hear the Church; the merely not hearing of her, deserving so
heavy a Judgment, even in the sight of God; who says in the next verse, that
the Churches judgment (condemning those who refuse to hear her) shall be made
good, and approved of in Heaven. No man therefore is secure in conscience, or
innocent in the sight of God, who refuses to hear, or obey the Church. Hence
follows first, that this Church cannot err damnably, for so a man in
conscience might be bound to follow a damnable error. Secondly, hence follows
that she cannot err in any small matter belonging to faith, for all men
being bound to hear her, and follow what she teaches; and it being
impossible any man should in conscience be bound to hold the least falsity as
an article of faith revealed by God (for that were to hold God a revealer or
affirmer of a Lie) it follows, that it is impossible the Church should ever
deliver any small error for an Article of Faith. In hearing and obeying the
Church we follow Gods Command: But no kind of Error Little or great can be
incurred by following Gods Command; Therefore in hearing and obeying the Church
we can be led into no kind of Error little or great.

10. Now if any one reply; that we are to hear the Church, so long as she
swarveth not from Gods word. My answer is; that to swerve from Gods word, is to
err: But this text proves she cannot err: therefore this text proves she
cannot swarve from Gods word. And indeed, if she could err, or swerve from
Gods word; the merely not hearing, or not obeying her, could not deserve that a
man should be justly accounted by God as a publica^, or Heathen. See here. N.
19. Others reply that this text is to be understood, not of hearing this Church
in matters of Faith and unbelief, but of matters of trespass between Brother
and brother, which trespasses are also to be told to every particular Church
and to several Prelates; and therefore this place makes nothing for the
authority of the universal Church. I answer; particular trespasses are to be
referred to particular Prelates; and that the Church is not to be assembled in
a general Counsel for every private ma^s trespasses. Singular private men are
to be condemned by they particular Prelates of their particular Churches,
proceeding according to the known decrees and Orders of the universal Church.
If any man, when they proceed thus, disobeyeth them, he in them disobeyeth the
universal Church; according to whose known Laws, and Decrees, these Prelates
clearly proceeded. And therefore he, merely for this only act of refractory
disobedience to the Church, deserves, by Gods own judgment, to be accounted as
a Publican or Heathen. So we see, that every man, who disobeyeth the
particular Judges, judging clearly according to the known Laws of the
Commonwealth, disobeyeth the Commonwealth. And it is this refractary
disobeying, and not hearing the Church, which makes the Crime so enormous: For
this teaches others to do the like; and so all government falls to confusion,
all Order to disorder. Whence you may easily see, that the not obeying and
following particular Prelates, in so well ordered a Commonwealth as the Church
is, does commonly come to be the very self same enormous Crime of not hearing
the Church. And because all particular Prelates of the Church are supposed (if
the contrary be not notorious) to do their duty in giveing sentence according
to the known Decrees, orders, and Canons of the universal Church, those who
disobey the Prelates of particular Churches, must (by no less general a
manner of speaking) be said to disobey the universal Church; as those, who
disobey the Judge, are said to disobey the Commonwealth. So that at last, this
disobedience against the Church, is against Christ and God himself, according
to that which God said to Samuel; lib. 1. c. 8. They have not rejected thee,
but they have rejected me: and Christ to his disciples, the first Prelates of
the Church; He that despises you, despises me. Luk 10. whence you did see
Sect: 8. n: 6. how S. Austen taught us, that if there were a Man appointed by
God to be heard by us (and known to be so commissioned) nobody would dare to
refuse obedience unto him in what he taught; least so doing, he should be truly
judged, not so much to have refused Obedience to this man, as to have refused
it to God, who gave Commission to this man. Just so (as S. Austen also
discourses) being it is God who gave this Commission to the Church, obligeing
all to hear her, with so strict a command, that the Refusers are to be Judged,
by his express Order, as Publicans, and Heathens; he who refuses to submitt
to this Church, for doing so, is truly Judged not so much to disobey the
Church, as to disobey God who gave the Commission to the Church: see Sect: 22.
n: 5. And therefore Christ commanded the Lawful Successors of Moses to be
obeyed, in what they commanded (to wit, either by publik authority, or by the
known doctrine or practice formerly ordered by public authority;) although
these Successors of Moses were men, not only wicked in their lives, but also
did (on their private authority) teach errors, and that publicly; Yet never
authorized by any one publik definition of the seat of Moses. And they were
these never-authorized errors of theirs, which Christ called the Leaven of the
Pharisees; bidding his Apostles take heed of it. But now, for as much as
concerns the doctrine, which was authorized by the publik definition of that
feat, Christ was so far from bidding, eve^ the common people, to take heed of
it, that he said publicly, to the whole promiscuous Multitude, and also to his
disciples; Upon the Chayer of Moses have sitten the Scribes and Pharisees, All
therefore what soever they bid you, observe, and do. Mat: 23. v. 1. Note
those must ample words (All therefore what soever.) O! will you say, what if
they bid us do against the Scripture; what most you do? I answer that, just
as you must say concerning that voice, which came from Heaven, commanding (Mat:
27.) to hear our Savior, Ipsum audite, was not to be eluded by the Pharisees
saying, hear him if he teach no falsity; but was a declaration from Heaven,
that he, who was so universally to be heard, should be secured from teaching
any falsity: see Sect: 22. n: 5. so also these words, All therefore whatsoever,
And these words of the text I am now urging, If any man will not hear the
Church etc, be words containing a declaration made by our Saviors own Mouth,
that the old and new Church so universally commanded to be heard, were secured
from teaching any falsity. And I shall answer, before I end all your chief
objections to the contrary, Sect: 23.

11. Now as the Synagogues authority was to be heard in all whatsoever they did
bid in matter of doctrine, and not only in point of trespasses between
Brother, and Brother; we cannot (without notably depressing the Authority of
Christ's Church, and casting of it under the Synagogue) allow to the Synagogue a
power to be universally heard in all whatsoever, and yet confine the Authority
of Christ's Church to those narrow limits of being heard only in point of
trespass betwee^ Brother and Brother; where as the Synagogue is but the
Handmaide, the Church the Soverain Lady, and has a better Covenant established
upon better promises. Hebr: 8.6. The force then of my text is this, If any one
will not hear the Church, even in trespass between Brother and Brother
belonging to her Court, let him be accounted as a publican or Heathen and much
more, let him be so accounted if he will not hear the Church in such
trespasses which one Brother committs against all his Brothers, and against his
Dearest Mother the Church; this being incomparably a crime more heinous, and
more particularly belonging to the Court of the Church; over which crime if God
had not given her power, he had not given her sufficient power for her own
preservation, as every Commonwealth has, and of necessity must have;
especially so ample a Commonwealth, as was intended to be dilated over the
whole face of the Earth, and to be established in a vast extent for ever.
Wherefore as our adversaries use to say, that every Kingdom or Commonwealth
must needs have power to make Laws and statutes, of sufficient efficacy to
keep off all foreign Jurisdiction, by which it may be ruined, because as Suarez
says ( lib 3. de Primat. Pont: C. 1. n: 4.) humane nature cannot be destitute
of necessary remedies to its own preservation; so we say God having erected a
Kingdom to stand for ever, as Daniel called his Church (of which I spoak the
last Sect: n. 9.) he cannot but be supposed to have given this his Kingdom, or
Church, that Ecclesiastical Power which was requisite to preserve it from all
secular insurrections, against the Ecclesiastical or Spiritual power thereof;
or else it might easily be quitted and cast off by them all. This Kingdom
then, being to reign in the middle of all Nations, he gave it a Spiritual
Jurisdiction over all Nations, in so much, as he said to his Church; The Nation
and Kingdom which will not serve thee, shall perish of which I speak more the
last Sect. n. 8: Who so ever then broacheth any heresy, as a poisoned cup
prepared to the ruin, not of one Brothers body; but of as many Brothers Souls
as he can any way entice to drink thereof: if he still persistes in this
malicious practice, and so, to the notorious trespassing of all his Brethren,
and dearest Mother, continues committing this Soul-Murthering Crime of Heresy
(a Crime the most destructive of the Common good that can be thought of) he is
questionles to be proceeded against by the Church: to which if he submitt not,
he, most deservedly, in the highest degree, is to be accounted as a Publican or
Heathen. And Note that all heretics are not only guilty of this
Soul-Murthering crime of heresy: but by standing out against the Prelutes of
the Church, in the maynteyning of their Heresy, they fall into Schism; which
Crime of its own Nature (as S. Thomas affirms) is the most heinous trespass
against our Brothers, and against the most solemn band of fraternall Charity,
that can be committed. If therefore trespasses against our Brethren belong to
the Court of the Church, and she is here by God made the Judge thereof, with
that high prerogative of having her Sentence ratifyed in heaven: then doubtless
those whom she condemns are condemned persons, both in the sight of God and
men. She therefore, under so great a penalty, being to be heard, is secured
from all kind of error in her Sentence, or decree. And as the broaching of
heresy, and the standing out in defense of it by Schism, is incomparably more
destructive to out Brethren, and offensive to our Mother the Church, when this
is done by a great multitude or a whole Nation; so, in this Case, the Crime
more Nearly concerns the Court of the Church, and she is empowered to pass
sentence against it; which being no less, but rather more just, then in the
former Case, will no less, but rather more assuredly, be ratyfyed in heaven. I
note this for D. Ferns sake, who, under pretense of Reformation, licenceth a
whole nation to stand out against all other Churches. S: 4.

12. Here fitly comes in the discussing of that (which some inconsideratly
use, to elude the force of this Text;) that this sentence of the Church
consists only in an exterior excommunication, in which she may err, and the
party (erroneously excommunicated) may be a just man in the sight of God. I
answer; if we deceive not our selves by putting a Cause different from that
which concerns the true understanding of this text; the matter will soon be
cleared. This text speaks of one who will not hear, nor submitt to the
Church, after she has given sentence against him: Give me a man, who, in
this case, does not submitt to the Church, and this very not submission of his,
cannot but be that very crime, for which Christ him self houldeth him
accountable as a Publican or Heathen; and affirms that this sentence shall be
ratified in heaven: wherefore it is impossible this Censure should be unjust,
if he be truly guilty of not hearing the Church. It is true that by false
information, or some such way, a man may be judged to be guilty of not hearing
the Church, when really in the sight of God he is not guilty; and so there may
some times be an error in the mistake of the fact: and thus Clave errante, by
an error only in matter of fact (in which the Church is not infallible,) the
sentence will not be ratified in Heaven. But this is nothing to the purpose of
our adversaries, who would have a man be innocent in the sight of God, who
professes in many particulars not to conform to what the sentence of the
Church commands all to conform; for example to adore the Sacred Eucharist
etc. Every man who professes this, professes not to hear the sentence of the
Church, which is still by severe Censures pressing this upon him. Wherefore in
pronouncing sentence here (where the fact of not hearing the Church is
maynteyned as good and laudable,) there ca^ be no error in the fact: for they
confess and profess that here they neither do, nor will hear the Church;
against which they (with D. Fern Sect: 10) say, they have Evidence of
Scripture, demonstration of Reason, and a conformable consent of Primitive
times, the pure ages of the Church. Wherefore when the Church pronounces these
persons, so notoriously refractary, to be accounted as Publica^s, or Heathens;
her sentence shall be ratifyed in heaven; and either Scripture must be false,
or those men guilty.

13. That all may clearly see what an empty boast this is, which D. Fern, and
others make of their having evidence of Scripture against what our Church
teaches; I challenge him, or any other, to show, if he can, by Scripture only
(for that you all make your Judge) that the texts which here I allege for the
Church her being our infallible Judge, cannot be interpreted truly, as our
church says they are to be interpreted. For to show this, it is not enough for
you to devise some different interpretation, in which it is possible for these
texts to be taken: For it is no proof to say, This may be true true
interpretation, Therefore it is so: Or, it seems probably to be so, therefore
evidently this, and no other but this interpretation is true: But you must,
(and that by evidence of Scripture only) show that these texts cannot be truly
interpreted, as our Church interprets them; and you must prove by Scripture
only, that the tradition, by which she has received these interpretations, is
not a true tradition descended from the Apostles. For if it be a true tradition
(he contrary to which can never be evidently demonstrated out of Scripture
alone) she is grounded as well as those who received their doctrine from
Scripture only. For the Tounges of the Apostles were as infallible as their
pens; and what they said, and caused to be reduced to practice all the world
over, is far less subject, to be either counterfeited, or mistaken, then
their writings. You also will never answer what I said, that these texts, which
now I am bringing for this point, be as clear evide^ces out of Scripture for
the Churches being our infallible Judge, as those other texts brought by you,
and examined here by me Sect: 10. be clear evide^ces to demo^strate that
Scripture only is to be our Judge; which point, if you cannot make more evident
out of Scripture then I can make this point; it is manifest, that you stand out
against all the Prelates of all the Churches under which you lived before your
division, without convincing them by evidence of Scripture that you might and
ought refuse submission to them. The Church then being in possession of her
Authority over you, and not manifestly convinced by you with any evidence of
Scripture (of the Evidence of which there is far more reason she should be
judge, then you:) you, for not hearing her, are by her just sentence denounced
to be held as publicans or heathens; and this sentence is ratifyed in heaven.

14. My Ninth text, to prove the Church infallible in her Defin^tio^s and
judgments, is out of S. Paul 1. Tim. 3. calling her The Church of the living
God, the pillar and ground of the truth. May not all securely rely in their
faith upon the very pillar of truth? May they not, most groundedly, ground
their faith upon the very ground of Truth it self? what do we say more? Now I
pray, what possibility can there be for you to show by evident Scripture, that
this text is not capable of this interpretation, which our Church gives unto
it? In place of showing this (which only makes to the purpose;) you go about
to show that text may have other interpretations, therefore (you infer) this is
not the true one: which is a pitiful argument. For what text was ever cited
by S. Paul, or other Apostles, which might not have had some other
interpretation putt upon it? Thus in place of bringing evident Scripture
against us, you still bring your own interpretations of it; as if Scripture
(fallibly interpreted by you) were to be our Judge. What text have you for
that? If you say, Scripture interpreted truly, must be our Judge; but you do
interpret it truly; therefore Scripture, as you interpret it, must be our
Judge. What heretik will not say thus much for his damnable interpretations?
Tell me then, what interpretation can be demonstrated to be the only true
one, which is different from our interpretation: which says thus; The Church
being the pillar it self of truth, we may, without fear of ever erring, rely
upon her? She being the very ground of truth it self; we are securely
grounded, as long as we are grounded on her Authority. What have you in
Scripture only, to prove this interpretation to be manifestly false; as you
must prove it against so publik authority? what (I say) have you out of
Scripture on^y, to demonstrate this? Nothing: But, in place of bringing us
evidence of Scripture, so vainly boasted of; you bring us, for your best
answer, an interpretation of your own, which you say must be true, because
perhaps it may be true; As if I should sufficiently prove that A. B. must be a
thief, be acuse perhaps he may be so. To answer in the like form, I may as
well say; this interpretation of yours must be false: because perhaps it may be
false. But let us hear what your best interpretation is. You commonly say,
there is a double Pillar, and a double Ground: One pillar, or ground which is
principal, and that is the Scripture; an other pillar or ground subordinate to
the former, and that is the Church. But this double dealing in distinguishing,
helps you not. The Church must still be a true pillar and a true ground of
the truth. The people believed God and Moses, says the Scripture, Ex: 14. v.
31. Moses was infinitely under God, and subordinate to him; as the Church is
under Scripture and subordinate to it: and yet this did not hinder but that all
the people did most truly believe Moses, and ground their faith on what he
said; because they knew he had received what he taught, from God. So all the
subordination the church has to Scripture, does not hinder, but that we may
truly rely in our belief upon the Church as the people relied upon Moses;
because we also know that what the Church teaches, she has received from
God by Christ, and his Apostles. Again, the tradition or doctrine of our Church
is as secure, as the tradition or doctrine of the Church in the Law of Nature
was for all those two thousand years which were before all Scripture: but then
men might (and all did) securely rely on that Church as the pillar and ground
of truth, on which all their faith relied: Ergo they may now thus rely on
Christ's Church. Again, what clear text have you to prove, that Christ's Church
is less secured from falsity, then that Church? Had not this ground been sure
enough (as it had not if that Church had been fallible) the faith of all the
world, could not have been grounded sufficiently upon it: And that, which is
most to our purpose, at that very time in which S. Paul did call the Church the
Pillar and ground of the truth; he did call her so before the Canon of the
Scripture was finished, before which time, you your selves confess the Church
might be, and was securely relied upon, in all points of faith; And no one
Christian can, by any text, be proved to have then understood S. Paul to speak
these words of the Church, as of a pillar and ground of truth subordinate to
the Canon of Scripture when it should be finished. How then comes this now to
be the only true sense of Scripture? what text have you to prove (and that
demonstratively) that the Church of Christ, which, before any word of the new
testament was written, was the Pillar and ground of truth; and that so
universally, that she was secured from proposing any error to be believed,
were it great or little: but yet she, immediately upon the writing of the
Scripture (confirming this title unto her) became less universally a Pillar
and ground of truth, and more subject to error then before? You, who will have
nothing of moment held without clear Scripture: show but one single clear text
of Scripture for this. More again of this Sect: 16. in the beginning N. 1. 2. 3.

15. An other shift to elude the force of my text, is, to say; that by these
words S. Paul intended only to set forth the office of the Church, and not her
authority. For Gods sake mark how you handle Scripture against us. You say you
will bring evident demonstration of Scripture, and now you bring your mere
conjectures of S. Paul's inward and secret intention, known to God only. Let
me then ask you. What Text tells you clearly that S. Paul had only an intention
to set forth the Churches office, and not her authority? whereas, in fewer
words, I think, it scarce possible more fully, and more emphatically, to set
forth her infallible authority, then by tearming her the Pillar and ground of
the Truth; which words strike so strong upon our understandings, even at the
first hearing of them, that the first consequence we can make from hence is;
therefore upon this pillar of truth we may securely rely in our belief of
truth; Therefore upon this ground of truth we may safely ground our belief.
Concerning the office of this Church no man thinks, until he be putt in
mind, or has turned a while his understanding to the search of several
interpretations. S. Paul then using words as sufficient to declare the
infallible authority of the Church, as men in ordinary speech use to do, yea,
using a most Expressive Metaphore, which comes fully home to this intent; what
do you but tell us your bare conjectures (and those most weakly grounded) when
you tell us, you know his intention was not to declare the authority of the
Church. Some prove this weak conjecture by an other weaker: for they say, to
what purpose was it for S. Paul instructing Timothy, how to behave himself in
the Church of God, to set forth unto him her infallible authority? I answer,
that is was not only much to the purpose to instruct all posterity in one of
the most necessary points; but also it was most pertinent to that particular
end of moving Timothy to behave himself irreprehensibly in the Church, because
she was constituted the Public Oracle for all the world, that all in all ages
might come to her for secure direction in their faith, and for assured decision
of all their controversies (she being the Pillar and ground of truth) S. Paul
thought fit to admonish Timothy, and all other Prelates in his person, so to
behave themselves, as not, by their misdemeanour, to make men think it
improbable that God should give a perpetual infallible assistance to such a
Church, whose prime and first governors (who should be the pattern of the
rest) lived scandalously or less Godly. How much do, (not your multitude only)
but even your greatest Doctors, think themselves to say against the Church of
Rome, claiming this infallibility (yet improbably say you;) because her
Prelates have been avaritious, cruel, lascivious, or otherwise scandalous?
This indeed is a pitiful argument, for so it should be proved improbable
that, God assisted infallibly wicked men to write (without the least error)
some parts of the Holy Scripture. And yet we know David was both an Adulterer
and murderer; Solomon was an Idolater, who went after Astoroth the Goddess of
the Sidonians, and after Michom the abomination of the Amonites: 1. Kings 11.
v. 5.7. Of diverse books we know not the Authors, and so we cannot tell
whether they were good or badde. Yet as pitiful an argument as this is, we
know it troubles weak Souls; and therefore you use it against us. Wherefore,
to take away all scandal from these little ones, it was very convenient that
Bishops, especially those who first held that place in the Church (as Timothy
did) should be blameles, continent, vigilant, sober, of good behavior etc: For
such good precepts as these were here given by S. Paul, as much making to his
purpose; to maintain the credit of such a Church as might seem to all, fit to
be that which indeed was constituted the Public Oracle of the world, the
Pillar and ground of truth.

16. My tenth text is out of the last words of S. Matthew. Go you therefore,
and teach all nations, baptizing them, etc: and (...) I am with you always;
even to the end of the world. The Apostles, in their own persons, were not to
be here teaching and baptizing until the end of the world: Therefore, not only
according to S. Austin and S. Hierom upon this place, but also according to
manifest reason, these words were spoken as a promise both to them and to their
successors for ever, by whom they were for ever to be teaching all Nations, and
baptizing: and consequently this promise was made to the assembly of Teachers,
Doctors, and Bishops of that visible Church, in which they were visibly to
perform all that belonged to the instruction of all Nations unto the worlds
end. That Church which had no such visible being in all ages, has no share in
this promise; for who is not the party to which the promise is made, has no
part in the promise. You then, having no share in it, enviously labor to
lessen it, by saying; that it is not to be understood that there should be
aequality of assistance in all ages, securing the Church at all times, from all
error in every age, as she was secured in the first age, when she was
governed by the Apostles; And after they had written the Scriptures, there was
no further need of any other infallible Rule; a lesser assistance therefore
might serve after ages. I answer that this is only to tell me what you think
might be said: but where is your evidence of Scripture, to demonstrate that the
assistance God promissed was indeed extended to infallibility in the first age;
but was not so in any other age? I ask for infallible texts, and not for
fallible reasons: Though I must tell you, that according to reason, after the
first age (when the Church was now grown from a grain of mustardseed to be a
vast tree; extending her branches from Sea to Sea, and still growing to a
greater extent) in process of following ages, there must needs, in so huge a
compass of the world, embracing men of different understandings, dictamens,
principles, educations, instructions, humors, and wills; there must (I say)
needs happen in the progress of many ages (still removed further, and further
from Christ's time, and the days of his Apostles) a world of Doubts, debates,
and controversies, some affirming such and such Books to belong to the true
Canon of Scripture, others rejecting them as Apocripha. Some affirming such and
such Copies to be the only true uncorrupted Copies of those Books, others
affirming those Copies to be corrupted, and others different from them to be
the only true ones. And again after they had agreed upon the true Books, and
the true Copies (though perhaps they might in that agree in a fundamental
error) yet they would be sure mainly to disagree about the true sense of those
copies. Why then might not Christ, to secure his Church from erring in so
important Controversies (vndecidable by Scripture,) promise also an assistance
extended to infallibility in latter ages, as well as in the first age? For
infallibility was given to the Apostles, not for their own sakes, but for the
good of those whom they were to teach, and to secure them from error. Now the
Christian people of after ages were incomparably more in number, and their very
number made them incomparably more subject (in process of many ages still
remoter from Christ) to be led into inextricable errors; wherefore surely they
did exceedingly need this infallible assistance, given, as I said, for the
peoples sake. Those who had been instructed by the Apostles, before Scripture
was written, converted and instructed thousands, who never had heard any
Apostle preach: All these Believed upon the authority of the then present
Church, and their faith was infallible; therefore that Church, which was then
before Scripture, had an infallible assistance to secure her from proposing any
error. What Scripture tells you she lost this assistance when Scripture was
written? And that men could not rely upon her authority, when now, besides the
help of tradition, she had also the help of Scripture, to rule her self by?
See this more fully S. 16. n. 2. You say, this infallible assistance was less
necessary for her after she had received the Scripture. I might say, it was
more necessary; because in process of time heretics would arise, who would
affirm the Scriptures to have bee^ purposely written to be our sole and only
Rule of Faith; and this they would say of Scripture as interpreted by them, and
not as interpreted by any infallible, visible interpreter. This heresy, into
which all heretics have ever fallen, makes the necessity of an infallible
assistance greater after the writing of Scripture, then it was before. Again,
what Scripture tells you that God is so sparing in his providing means for the
direction of his Church, that, giving them Scripture, he will subtract his
assistance formerly extended to infallibility, and not leave them, with their
Bibles in their hands, to go which way every one in his private judgment shall
think fittest, with out the former direction of a publik, visible, and
infallible guide? Had we not better have kept such a guide still? D. Fern
could not but acknowledge, that such a visible infallible Judge, or Vmpire of
all Christendom, would (if to be had) be a ready means to compose all
differences, and restore truth and Peace. S. 27. The Church was this infallible
visible Judge before Scripture was written; and it is also confessed, that such
a Judge would now, after we have the Scripture, be an exceeding benefitt: why
then do you say, God took away this inestimable gift from his Church with one
hand, when he gave the Scripture with the other; there not being the least
text in Scripture for so important an assertion? I think any one would hold it
most rash to say, that S. John the Evangelist, after he had writ the last
words of the whole Canon or Scripture, presently lost his infallibility in
teaching, instructing guyding, interpreting etc: Why then should the whole
Church of Christ loose that infallibility which confessedly she had before the
Canon was quite finished? Again, you cannot say the Scripture was superfluously
written, though the Church, before the writing thereof, was an infallible
guide: How then can you say the infallible guidance of the Church is
superfluous, after the writing of the Scripture? especially, being such an
infallible guidance is even now confessed to be so ready a means to end all
controversies; which among those who admit no such guides, are endless. See
also my next Sect: n. 1. 2. 3. Christ therefore, not only in the first age, but
even to the consummation of the world, is with his Church; But he is not with
those who introduce, and father upon him, as the first Reuealer thereof, many
gross, and intolerable Errors, and superstitions, as you call those which you
found in all Churches upon the face of the Earth, this last thousand years:
Therefore these last thousand years he was not with his Church, or else her
errors were not such as needed so sad a Reformation as yours was, to the
disturbance of all Christendom. If her errors were tolerable, they should (to
avoid so great mischeefes) have been tolerated: if they vere intolerable, how
was Christ with her? Or what other Church can you name whose errors were not
as intolerable? Now that all may clearly see, that this promise of Christ
assured the Church of an assistance extended to an infallible security from all
error fundamental, or not fundamental: this will appear by that farther, and
fuller explication made of this promise in S. John, who writ on purpose to
explicate more fully some points, less fully set down by the former
Evangelists.

17. My eleventh text then is out of S. John, where C. 14. v. 15. Our Savior
says; I will pray the Father and he will give you an other Comforter, that he
may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of Truth whom the world cannot
receive. And v. 27. The Comforter which is the Holy Ghost whom the Father will
send in my Name, he shall teach you all things, and suggest unto you all things
whatsoever I shall say unto you (fundamental or not-fundamentall.) And C. 16.
v. 12. I have yet many things to say unto you (the fundamentalls be not many
things, as you all confess;) How be it, when the spirit of Truth is come, he
will guide you into all Truth, not only fundamental, but also
not-fundamentall, which belong to those many things which I (who have told you
things fundamental) have not yet told you. In these things this Spirit will
guide you into all Truth. But all Truth excludes all Errors, not only in
fundamental, but also in not-fundamentall points. You know not which points be
fundamental, which not; which destructive of Salvation, which not; which
curable, which incurable; Yet fear not: believe the Church in teaching these,
or any other points; for she, guided by this Spirit of Truth, will guide you
into all Truth: But you will say, How long shall her chief Pastors have this
great privilege? For ever, says the first part of my Text; by which words it
is made evident that the promise was made, not only to them for themselves
(they not being to live for ever teaching us these Truths;) but also for they
Successors in the prime government of the Church, who were to guide the People
into all Truth for ever; as I shall presently show farther out of S. Paul. I
argue hence (just as I did before;) This assistance which was promissed for
ever, was ever, and in all ages, performed; therefore in those ten ages (which
made the thousand years before your Reformation) this promise was performed;
Therefore what All the prime Prelates of the Church did teach all that while
for truth, was not erroneous, or superstitious: But in all these ages they all
confessedly did teach for truth those very points, which you hold to be our
grossest errors; Therefore these be not errors, but truth. Here you see
again clearly, why this great promise cannot belong to your Prelates or other
Governors of your Church, as it is different from ours. First, because you had
no visible governors at all of your Church as distinct from ours. For
Governors must needs be visibly chosen, have visible subjects, send forth
visible decrees etc. Name such governors as these different from ours, if you
can. You can name none but ours. With ours then only the Holy Ghost abided all
these ages, guiding them into all Truth. Whence Secondly it follows, that he
cannot now be guiding your governors into all truth; they being manifestly
guided into opinions directly opposite to those doctrines which were, all these
last thousand years, taught by all those who were governors of the Church. If
you could show governors of Churches in all these last ten ages still teaching
those points in which you differ from us, without teaching other notorious
errors; then indeed you might have some color to plead; that this Spirit of
Truth might as truly have been said promised to the governors of your Church,
as to those of ours: But this promise, not being performed to them (there
being no such persons to be found in those ages) was not doubtless promised to
them; otherwise Christ's promise had not been performed.

18. My twelfth and last Text, showing clearly that this promised assistance
was extended to infallibility, is. Ephesians: 4. Whence appears that the end, and
intention of Christ in giving the chief Gouvernours of that Church (which was
to be visible in all Ages) was such an end, and such an intention, as could not
be compassed by giving us such chief Gouvernours, guides and instructors in
belief, as were merely fallible, and who might lead us into circumvention of
error, even then, when they were legally assembled together to deliver the
Truth, from their highest Tribunal, in a general Council. For had all these
our chief Gouvernours, even then, been liable to broach gross errors, vented
for divine verities (and pressed upon all to be admitted as such) how had
Christ obtained that end for which he gave us these our prime Gouvernours,
guides and instructors? For he gave some Apostles (succeeding always in full
Apostolical authority, as we see in S. Peeters successors:) some Prophets
(those says S. Thom. 12. Romans v. 6. Are called Prophets in the new Testament
who expound the Prophetical sayings with that Spirit with which the Scripture
was written:) and some Evangelists (that is Preachers of the Ghospel; So
Philippe is called an Evangelist Act: 21. v. 8. So S. Paul bad Timothy do the
work of an Evangelist. Tim. 4. v. 5.) some Pastors and Teachers; whose offices
are more known. But to what end did he give all these? It follows; For the
perfecting the Saints. How pitifully should they be perfected by obtruders of
gross intolerable errors for divine verities? For the work of the ministry;
how pitifully also had such men performed this work? For the edifying of the
body of Christ: such Broachers of Errors had been fitter to work her
destruction. How long did God intend to give all these sorts of persons, of
which some were to be endued with the plenitude of Apostolical authority, and
consequently with an infallible authority; How long, I say, did God give such
to his Church? Till we all come into the unity of the faith; which will not be
until the last days of all: Wherefore until the end of the world, the world
shall be provided. But are we, by being thus provided, sufficiently secured
from all Error? The next verse will tell you, that this was Gods chief
intent; That we hence forth be no more childeren tossed to and fro, and
carried about With every wind of doctrine, by slight of men and cunning
craftines, whereby they ly in wait to deceive. Gods end then was so to provide
us of a means, by which we might be so secured in our belief, that no man's
craft or cunning might be able to toss us to and fro; as we see now all they
are, who hold themselves able to bring evidence of Scripture, against all
those who for the last ten ages have been Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
Pastors, and teachers in Christ's visible Church.

19. To elude some of my texts, our adversaries use to say; we must indeed
hear the Church, as long as she teaceth what is conformable to Scripture: and
so long the gates of Hell shall not prevail against her; so long, and no
longer, she is the pillar and ground of truth, and God is with her etc. I
answer first, That in consequence to this the father of lies himself may be
believed so long as he teaches comformably to Scripture. Secondly who sees
not how ridiculous it is to say; we shall hear the truth from the Church as
long as she does not teach against the truth. Is this to be the pillar of
truth? A straw is a pillar as long as it bends not, and quicksand is sure
ground until it yields. Blasphemous is the sense which makes Christ speak
nonsense. As all by a voice from Heaven were bid to hear Christ, so all are
bidde^ by Christ o hear his Church: her governors therefore shall never come
by unanimous consent to propose lies for articles of faith. For if all should
teach a lie (as every error against Scripture is a lie) with who^ is that
promise made good, that the spirit of truth should guide them into all truth.
If we may be misseled by all those guides which God gave his Church, to the
end that we hence forth be no more children tossed to and fro, and carried
about etc: how short did God fall of his intent in falling upon such guides as
being liable so to swerve from the Scripture, must needs leave us, yea make us
tossed to and fro. Read but over the texts I cited last Sectio^ out of the old
testament, and you shall see how flatly this interpretation opposes Gods word,
which shall never depart from the Churches mouth, nor her Seed, nor the Seed of
her Seed etc. See also my answer above, n: 10. Thirdly, thus you will leave no
Text to prove she shall never err in fundamentalls: for you will still be
answered; that so long as in them she teaches conformably to Scripture, she
shall not err in them; But if once in them she teaches not conformably to
Scripture, she shall err even in them; and so Christ shall have no Church.

20. Having now ended the complete dozen of texts brought partly out of the
old Scriptures, manifestly promising infallibility to Christ's Church; partly
out of the new, manifestly conferring the same: I cannot but desire all those
who read those lines out of a desire of finding the truth, that they would stay
here a while, and examine carefully whether these texts be not clearer, and come
not far more home, then those texts which were the best D. Fern brought to
prove, that Scripture by it self is so our infallible Judge. See those texts
examined Sect. 10. See also if you have any thing near so good grounds out of
Scripture for any one of those 24. points which I have showed to be necessary
to salvation, and for which consequently you say you have clear Scripture.
Confer these with the best you have for the keeping the Sunday, for baptizing
infants etc, Which I have here examined; and ask your own conscience, whether
you can be able to give your own Judge a reason why you did not hear his
voice, speaking far more home in these texts, then he did in those? Lastly, I
again call upon our adversaries, to show by evidence of Scripture, if they can,
that these twelve texts here cited by me, are not capable of that
interpretation which we, conformably to our Churches doctrine, have given
them. But still we note that they fall short of doing this, so long as they
only show, that it is possible to invent some different interpretation of these
texts, from that which we have given them: for so even the texts which the
Apostles have interpreted out of the old Scripture, may be showed to have been
capable of other interpretations, though the interpretation they gave them were
very true: you must then show, and that by evident demonstration, that the
interpretation which our Church gives them, is not true; Or else vain is your
boast, that you hear not our Church, because you have evident demonstration of
Scripture against her; For no less can suffice against so publik authority,
even according to your own principles.

SECT: XVI.
The same is proved by several Reasons.

1. THe first reason, why the Church must needs be furnished with some
infallible means besides the use of Scripture, (which use is not infallible
though the Scriptures be infallible) is taken out of that which I touched upon
( S. 10. n. 13.) to wit; that there is no Reason, nor any one single text,
teaching that the Church in the Law of Nature, should be said to be privileged
with infallibility, above the Church of Christ in the Law of grace: But the
Church in the Law of Nature, which lasted for two thousand years (until the
first writing of Scripture by Moses) was all that while infallible in proposing
true traditions, and not so much as liable to propose false ones. This I prove,
because all the faith which the true believing people had in those two thousand
years was infallible, though it relied only on the proposal of the Church;
proposing such, or such a point as received from God revealing to Adam or some
other Patriarch those verities: for example, that they were to observe the
sabbath, Genesis 2. the distinction between clean and unclean beasts and meats,
Gen: 7. and Gen: 9. v. 3. That the soul is immortal; that the rewards and
punishments of the next life lasted for ever; that they were, by the fall of
Adam, conceived in original Sin; that such, and such remedies, were to be
used to free them selves and their children from it; what repentance they were
to use; how fast they were to stand to their traditions; how they were to
account it a most damnable Sin to forsake them etc. This was the faith of all
true believers in the world, which for two thousand years had no other ground
then the revelation of God, as proposed by the tradition of the Church present
to all believers in every age, in which these believers lived. And though their
Tradition was inferior to ours, as I showed in the place now cited, yet the
Church then, in every age, was infallible in propovnding that which they had
once received by Revelation: And the believers of each Age resting upon the
infallible authority which their present Church had in propounding those divine
verities, had the same spirit of faith, as S. Paul says 2. Cor. 4. The
misbeleevers then had the same Spirit also which they have now in opposing the
Churches tradition. This Spirit, before the flood, was in Cain, who, as Thargum
Hierosolymitanum says, protested to Abel that there was no Justice, nor Judge,
nor other world then this, nor noe reward for virtue, nor punishment for Sin:
And perhaps he used the argument which D. Fern and many now use, that his part
was negative, Abels affirmative; and so Abel was bound to prove what he held:
which because he could do only by Tradition, Cain (having the true misbeleevers
Spirit) scoffed at all Tradition: His Heresy made the world so corrupt, that
few just men were left at the flood of Noe, although this heresy was stra^gely
opposed by Enoch, above four hundred years before the flood; whence S. Jude
(v: 11.) having said Woe be to them for they have gone in the way of Cain;
adds ( v: 14.) And Enoch also the seventh from Adam prophesied of these
saying, behold our Lord comes in his holy thousands to do judgment upon all,
and to convince all that are ungodly amongst them of their ungodly deeds. After
Noes flood, these denyers of Gods judgment being extinguished; Ne^rod was the
second Arch-heretike, as Josephus wittneseth l. 1. Antiq: C. 4. for he taught,
That men were not behoulding to God, but to themselves for te^porall
prosperity; and thus Heresies, by contempt of Tradition, again multiplied: Yet
still God had a visible Church houlding fast the above named traditions
received from Ada^ as the keeping of the sabbath etc: And some five hundred
years before God gave the first Scripture to the Children of Israel only, he
did separate Abraham from all other Nations, giving afterward unto him and
his, the precept of Circumcision ( Gen: 17.) which precept (though no Scripture
could be the^ showed) was, for above four hundred years, observed by his
posterity as a necessary precept. Upon tradition also they believed the
Covenant God made to Abraham of making him the Father of Many Nations; and that
the Messiah should be borne of his seed. Then after Moses his days Scripture
was written, but given only to the Children of Israel: No other Nation being
bound to submitt to this Law. All other nations, as they had then several true
believers among them, when Abraham was separated from them, so there is not the
least mention of their total decay in belief after that separation; all they
then still believed what they had believed before, upon the same ground as they
did before, neither were the Scriptures promulged among them. And thus true
faith might be preserved among many who never heard of Scripture, until
Christ's time; that is for an other two thousand years, and more. Just so true
faith, even aften Christ's time, was preserved among many without any Scripture;
as I shall by and by show. But to go on; we read that Job and his friends
(when or wheresoever they lived) lived not among the progeny of Abraham; and
yet Job was most eminent in virtue and true faith, and his friends (and
probably many of his and their neighbors) believed in one God, held the
resurrection of the flesh, and that God should judge all according to their
works, and diverse other points, relying still upon only Tradition. Why should
the Tradition of Christ's Church be more fallible then theyrs was? As I argued
Sect: 13. see that place, and also what I said Sect: 10. n. 13. and you will
see that there is far greater reason why our Tradition should be credited
more them theyrs. Is not Christ's Church nobler then theyrs? Did God give them
any means fitter to secure their Traditions from being falsified, then he
gave his Church: Could Tradition be an infallible ground for above 4000. years
before Christ, and can it not have been so ever since Christ for 1657. years.
Add also to this, that the children of Israel, though they had the Scriptures,
yet they had not all necessary points written in their Scripture, but did rely
wholly upon the Tradition of their Church for the truth of them; as I showed
Sect: 10. n: 7.

2. My second reason, to prove the Church is provided of some infallible means
for the secure direction of her Children, is, that not only from the beginning
of the world to Christ's preaching his new Ghospel, the infallible faith of
several true believers had no other ground but the infallibility of their
respectively present Church, in proposing the Traditions she had received; but
also the first true believers in Christ relied in their faith upon the
infallibility of Christ's Church, not having any other infallible ground but her
authority, affirming that she, by Tradition? had received such and such points
taught her by Christ, or his Apostles. See what I said in my last Sect. n. 16.
This manner of believing, even our own Protestant adversaries confess to have
been infallible until the whole Canon of the Scripture was written, and
divulged, which was some 70. or fourscore years after Christ's passion. Now how
this manner of security relying upon the church, which, from the beginning of
the world unto the finishing of the last book of Scripture and publishing of
the same, had been the common practice of true believers, did presently turn
to be Popish, and unlawful, I cannot co^ceave: But I a^ sure all our
adversaries stoutly affirm that it is so; and here their part is affirmative,
and affirmative of the unlawfulness of that which from the beginning of the world
was ever lawful unto that day. Wherefore to plead against so long a
prescription (that the world was not capable of a longer) for introducing a new
obligation of not believing upon a ground which had been, for above four
thousand years, able to bear all the faith of the world, evidence of
Scripture ought to be brought: What then more reasonable then to ask of them to
cite at least one single clear Text, commanding all the believers of Christ's
Church to give over relying upon her authority, as now never to be any more
infallible after the finishing and publishing of the last book of Scripture?
Our adversaries cannot bring any such text affirming this clearly, without we
will be pleased to take their fallible and ungrounded interpretations to be a
ground sure enough to make the Texts reach home to the proof of what we
dema^d: which cannot be allowed by us; because, by their own confession, their
interpretation is fallible: And we must have an infallible ground to overthrow
an infallible authority, standing sure even from the beginning of the world.
Call then, and call again and again; for this text, and be sure to allow no
Interpretation to help the text to reach home, but such as can, by clear
Scripture, be showed to convince that the Text tells you evidently, that after
the finishing and publishing of the last book of Scripture, no body was ever to
rely upon the Churches authority, now grown fallible, though ever before
infallible. Do but stand close to this, and their vain boast of demonstrating
this by Scripture, will fall down dead before thy feet to be trampled upon by
thee. Yea, not to condemn their own Brethren the Lutherans (who deny the
Apocalypse or Revelations to be Scripture) they will tell thee that for diverse
ages this Book was not known to be certain Scripture, and yet perhaps this was
the very last Book of Scripture, until the publishing of which the
infallibility of the Church was to last. If this be so then, you must allow it
probable that the infallibility of the Church lasts until this very day, for
any certainty we have of the contrary: For your Lutheran Brethren will say,
that Book of the Apocalypse was never as yet sufficiently published to the
Church to be Scripture; for if it were so, they neither could, nor would reject
it. Secondly it seems inconceptible how the writeing and publishing such a
Scripture, as was at last written and published, should, without any distincter
declaration then the Scripture, by little and little (that is, as people were
pleased to copy it out) should make invalide the hitherto-infallible authority
of this Church: there being in this Scripture twelve texts at the least (as I
have showed in the two former Sections) recommending to all, the authority of
the Church; besides diverse others bidding them hold still her Traditions, and
inculcating this over and over again; as I showed Sect: 10. n. 9. Traditions do
not grow weaker, but stronger, by being witnessed also by writing; and the more
authority the writing has, the more strength is added to the former tradition:
For example, we know by tradition there is such a place as the Indies, where
gould is to be found; but when our own fleetes come to go thither, and fetch
the gould from thence, and in testimony thereof stamp goulden pieces with
this inscription, Brought by our fleet from the Indies; and when Acts of
Parliament come to be set forth concerning the value of such, and such pieces:
when I say this goulde^-printed-testimony comes forth, is not the former
tradition grown rather more, then become less credible? So when any of the
former most credible traditions come to be now written in the goulde^ letters
of the Scriptures, and of such Scriptures as commanded Traditions to be held;
and commanded again and again the Church to be heard, followed, obeyed, relied
upon as the very pillar and ground of truth; is not her authority and the
credit of her Traditions rather increased, then lessened, by this goulden and
divine writing? Again; it was wholly necessary that if after the finishing of
the Canon, the Church was no longer to be infallible, that notice thereof, by
some very public Decree, or Act, should have been given to all the people in
the Church; that they might not go on, grounding their faith upon the
infallible tradition of this Church, as they did before; least so doing they
should rely now, not upon the pillar and ground of truth, but upon a fallible
authority. That this was done you can prove by noe kind of testimony.

3. But I can prove, by a most grave testimony, that, long after the finishing
of the Canon of Scripture, the faithful believers still held on their former
manner of relying in their whole Faith wholly upon the infallible authority of
the Church: just as I said before that, when Moses gave the Scripture to the
Jews, the faithful people among the Gentiles had not these Scriptures, but
continued still to believe upon Tradition only (See my first Number:) My
testimony is out of S. Irenaeus, who was disciple to S. Polycarp, though he
lived a hundred and fourscore years after Christ. This saint, in that
vnquestio^ed work of his against Valentinus. L. 3. C. 4. Where he shows, in
what manner we were all to believe the same things which now we do believe,
although there were no Scripture at all; and he shows this by showing how,
even after the writing of Scripture, many whole Nations did believe, who had
never seen the Scripture, by following (as an infallible Rule) that order of
Tradition which had from hand to hand been dilivered to the Prelates of the
Church; and by them to the Churches of which they respectively had charge. For
thus he speaks; What if the Apostles had not left us the Scriptures? Must we
not have followed that order of Tradition which they delivered to those to
whose charge they left the Churches to be governed? To this order of Tradition
(by the unwritten word) many barbarous Nations do assent, who have believed in
Christ without any Writings, keeping diligently the ancient Traditions. Note,
that he calls these Traditions ancient because they had stood a good while
after the finishing of the Canon, before which time all Nations believed merely
on Tradition, as I said, and before which time, no one tradition of Christian
faith could be ancient. Hence then S. Irenaeus proves, that we might believe
with divine faith, upon the sole account of, or merely relying upon, that very
tradition, which the Apostles de facto left to those to who^ they left the
government of the Church; although the Apostles had never written any thing at
any time. S. Irenaeus therefore did believe that the tradition de facto left by
the Apostles, was a sufficient ground to vphould divine and infallible faith;
and consequently that it was infallible: So that upon it merely, whole nations
might believe: For, if he had not thought that they had believed merely upon
tradition, but had only by it been recommended to take the Scripture for their
ground; he could not hence have showed (to show which he brought this proof)
in what Measure we had all been obliged to believe all the points of our
Christian faith, although never any Scripture at all had been at any time to be
written; in which case it had been impossible for our belief to have had any
kind of Relation to Scripture. And because the belief of these Nations had no
such Relation, this example was to his purpose: which otherwise had not been
So. Now what S. Irenaeus says must needs in all reason have been true; for the
Scripture by the Apostles was only written in Greek, and some very few parts in
the Hebrew then current: A vast multitude of Nations understood not these
languages, as I have showed Sect: 1. n. 9. neither did the Apostles take any
care to procure the Scripture to be turned into the languages of every
converted Nation which had a different tongue; For had they done So, diverse of
these translations would either have been for some ages exta^t, or at least
some memory of them; where as there is not the least sign of any such thing.
The Latin tongue was by the Romans imposed upon most of those many Nations,
which were converted in the Apostles Age, and the Ages following: wherefore a
man would think that in the first place, or among the very first, this language
would have been chosen by the Apostles for publishing the Scriptures, if the
Scriptures had been the only ground to be relied upon in faith: Yet for all
this you will not grant our vulgar Edition (which you grant to be the most
ancient of all Latin Editions) to have been set forth by any command given by
the Apostles, or by any one of their immediate Successors, or to have been
approved by them: from hence then we manifestly gather, that the Apostles
esteemed that very tradition, which they delivered to these to whom they
committed the government of the Church, to be a most sufficient ground to
support infallible faith: And consequently they held such traditions
infallible, leaving them for the only ground of faith to the far greater part
of the Nations which they converted; to whom they delivered no Scripture at all
in their own tongue, nor left any Command (that can be proved) that Scripture
should be (presently after the finishing of the Canon) delivered to them in
their own languages; for had this been done, some of their Translatio^s would
have been kept. If you say they had the Scriptures, though in Greek only. I
answer, that those who understand not Greek, are never the nearer for having a
Greek book. Why did not S. Peter and S. Paul (who writ in Greek even to the
Romans themselves) at that time they stayed in the Latin Church, procure or
order the Scriptures to be putt in Latin; if, without grounding our selves upon
Scripture in every point of belief, no part of our belief, which is not so
grounded, can be infallible. And hence clearly and orderly follows.

4. My third reason, That no man now has any infallible faith, but he who
relyeth upon the Tradition of the present Church, as an infallible ground. This
I prove out of what has been by me already demonstrated. First, for the most
learned sort that be in the world, they cannot know, by any ground which is
infallible, (except the Tradition of the Church be infallible,) which Books
the Prophets or Apostles did write, which not; as I have showed Sect. 3. Nor
which be the true uncorrupted original Copies, which not; as I showed Sect: 4.
and therefore they must rely in these two points, (upon which no less then all
their faith does rely,) upon the Tradition of the Church as infallible; for a
fallible Tradition cannot be a sufficient ground to support an infallible
faith: either then they have no such faith, or they must allow Tradition to be
infallible. As for those who are not so learned as to understand Hebrew and
Greek, or who have not means to know which Copyes be uncorrupted in Greek or
Hebrew; They must believe this but by mere humane authority, if they refuse the
Churches Tradition; So by and by: n: 7. And so for Translations, which be the
very prime conveighers of all that is in Scripture, to those who understand not
Greek, and Hebrew; either these men must rely upon the word of God, as conveyed
unto them by such fallible men, as I have showed their Translators to be, Sect.
5. or, far more wisely, they must rely upon the Tradition of the Church as
infallible: And if they do not, their faith will ever be fallible, as I have
showed. Again, it is not the bare letter of Scripture which can be a Rule or
ground of faith unto us; but it is the sense of this letter interpreted
according to the true mind of the holy Ghost: Now the private interpretation,
which any particular Man's Wit, or learning, or Spirit can give to this bare
letter, is fallible; even though he shall exactly observe those 20. Several
Rules of which I spoke Sect. 7. n: 7: for theses Rules are all fallible;
wherefore the bare letter, taken in the sense that we, by our private wit,
learning, and Spirit imagine, and merely conjecture it to be taken, is not the
infallible sense of the Holy Ghost; and therefore no ground of faith, even to
those most learned men who are able to use exactly all those twenty Rules. See
the place last cited. But as for all that vast multitude which cannot
understand perfectly Hebrew and Greek, it is impossible for them to observe
those twenty Rules (of which one supposes perfect skill in Hebrew and Greek:)
wherefore it being our adversaries own doctrine that, without the exact
observance of all these 20. Rules, the infallible sense of the Holy Ghost
cannot be infallibly known to any one, but only fallibly: after all that still
fallible industry, it is a clear demonstration, that those who know not Greek
and Hebrew, cannot know infallibly what the Scripture bids them do or
believe; they not being able infallibly to know the sense of the bare letter,
which sense (you say) is the only Rule and direction of faith, and the only
infallible ground upon which all divine faith must rely. Wherefore almost all
mankind, who is unskillful in Greek and Hebrew, must first have not only the
letter of the Scripture faithfully delivered unto them upon trust of the
Translators; But Secondly, this must be done after that these Translators have
made an unquestionable choice of sure uncorrupted Original Copyes, (in which
choice it is not possible for them to proceed, but very fallibly as I showed,
Sect: 5.) Thirdly also they must have the sense of the letter delivered truly
and assuredly unto them. I ask, by whom? You say, by your Ministers. Then (say
I) you rely upon the wit, skill and Spirit of those Ministers. Is this proved
infallible? No. How then is your faith infallible? As for us, we rely upon the
unanimous tradition of those Governors of our Churches to whom the Apostles,
with that charge, delivered all the important points of our faith, as well by
word of Mouth, as by daily practice answerable thereunto: commanding them to
deliver to all in their Churches (among whom were their future Successors) the
same points both by word of Mouth, and by the answerable practice, just as they
had received. In like manner their Successors successively were directed and
commanded to proceed. No writing (as I shall show Sect: 19. n. 4.5.6. etc.)
can, with so full assurednes, bring down to our age, what was taught and
practiced in the first age, as perpetual Tradition of the same doctrine,
confirmed by the continuance of the same practice first received, and never
able to be showed to have been altered or changed. Upon this Tradition we are
sure that we believe as groundedly, at the least, as all the true believers
did for the first two thousand years before any Scripture was written: And as
groundedly as all the Gentiles (for only Jews had the Scripture) believed at
any time after wards: And as groundedly as the Jews believed still some things
only upon Tradition; for example, what remedy was to be used to take away
Original Sin from their female-Children, or from their male-Children dying
before their Circumcision on the eight day: And again, as groundedly as those
many Nations, converted by the Apostles successors, believed after the
Scripture was finished; though they never had so much as seen Scripture; but
wholly relied, in their whole belief, upon the ancient tradition received from
them from whom the governors of their Churches had originally received their
governments and authority; to wit, from the Apostles; as I showed out of S.
Irenaeus. Tradition then of these Governors of our Churches, delivered
unanimously by them, makes the points so delivered now as evidently credible,
and as fit Objects of divine faith, as it made the points delivered then by
their Governors or Pastors; Wherefore we have as good reason now, to take
what is thus proposed for truth revealed by God, to be indeed so; and
consequently to be embraced with so firm and immovable adhesion of
understanding, and will; that the preaching of the contrary by an Angel from
Heaven should not stagger our belief therein: And we have as good reason to
proceed thus in our belief, as all those, I spoak of, had to proceed so in
their belief.

5. My fourth reason hence deduced is, that Christ him self expects and
exacteth an infallible assent of faith to be given to any point, which is
confirmed by miracle from Heaven; and such an assent has a sufficient ground
to support its infallibility. Christ calls these Miracles a testimony greater
then John. Mark 5. Yea a testimony (in order to us) greater then his own word;
If you will not believe me, believe my works. He calls that a kind of sure
knowledge which is grounded on the testimony of a miracle; So Matt: 9. v: 6.
But that you may know that the Son of man has power on Earth to forgive
Sins, he says to the man Sick of the palsy: Arise, take up thy bed, and go
into thine house. You see Christ used the testimony of this one miracle, as
sufficient to make them know the truth of his having power to forgive Sins.
Miracles then ground a sure knowledge of faith, or an infallible assent to what
they confirm: But the Tradition of the Church makes that which it witneseth
to be as infallible, and as evidently credible in order to us, as this curing
of the man sick of the palsy, or any such Miracle can do; therefore this
Tradition may be as solid a ground of an infallible assent, as a miracle: I
prove it clearly thus. Let any man speak as he thinks in the fight of God, and
he will plainly confess, that to be most true which I am going to say. I say
then, that though a man had lived in the Country all his life, and never had
seen London; yet be (merely upon the testimony of Tradition) would so fully
believe that there is such a City as London, and that it is the Head Town of
England: that neither I, not you can prudently conceave how the testimony of
any one miracle (wrought on purpose to prove that there is such a City as
London) should make it more evidently credible unto him, that there is such a
City, without the Testimony of any Tradition; then Tradition has made it
without the Testimony of any miracle: whence you see Tradition wins belief as
powerfully as any Miracle. True it is, this Tradition we spoak of is but
humane, and so be the motives of Credibility making it evidently credible that
God, by his Apostles, affirmed such or such a point unto the first believers of
the Church. But when it is once made to me as evidently credible that God has
revealed such and such verities, as it is credible by human tradition that
there is such a City as London, then presently (by the grace of God) I
conclude; that it being so credible that God has said such, and such a thing,
that I cannot in prudence no more doubt that he has said it, then I can doubt
there is such a City as London: I being thus assured, am by my duty to God
bound to yield that submission of my understanding to this saying of God, which
is fit to be yielded to the word of a God, which word cannot (without
blasphemous impiety) be held subject to the least fallibility. And therefore
what by Tradition is made so evidently credible to me, to have been revealed
by God to this Church; ought to be accepted by me, as the word of God. Whence
I ought to account it blasphemous impiety to doubt of the trutht of it, and
consequently I ought to hold it infallible, and as far from all possibility of
being false as Gods word is. And being that this very self same tradition
tells me, that the same God who revealed by his Apostles so many other
Verities to his Church, did also reveal, by the same Apostles, to the same
Church, that this Church was to be heard as the Mistress of truth, with whom he
would ever be present, suggesting her all truth and never permitting the gates
of Hell to preuail against her; but that he placed her as a Pillar, and ground
of truth; giving her such Pastors, as should secure her Children from being
tossed to and fro wi^h every wind of doctrine: being (I say) this very self
same tradition, which made it evidently credible unto me, that God had
revealed many other verities to his Church, had also (together with them,)
revealed this verity, of her being infallible in proposing any point for
divine faith; and being that I did see with my eyes, that she did propose her
Traditions for verities received from God, it could not but be evidently
credible unto me that God had revealed the infallibility of his Church, and
consequently the questionless Truth of her Traditions. Wherefore I yielded
that submission of my understanding to this saying of God, which was fit to be
yielded to the word of a God, which word I could not without blasphemous
impiety suspect to be any way liable to fallibility.

6. Here, by the way, out of what has been now said, we may easily clear two
common difficulties. The first is, how we do committ noe vicious circle in our
faith: For though first we believe the Scripture to be Gods word, because the
Church, which is infallible, told us so: Yet, when again we are asked, why
we first believed the Church to be infallible? we do not say (as our
adversaries would needs make us say, whether we would or no) that we first
believe our Church to be infallible, because the Scripture told us the Church
was infallible; But we answer, that we first believe the Church ^o be
infallible by her Tradition delivered her by the Apostles before any Scripture
was made; which tradition makes things so evidently credible, as I have just
now declared, that even a miracle wrought purposely to confirm such a point
makes not that point more evidently credible. Tradition therefore is a ground
able to support an infallible assent. Well then, I believe Christ to have been
crucified because the Scripture says so: I believe the Scripture, because the
Church by her tradition, says the Scripture to be Gods word; I believe the
Church, and her tradition, for its own credibility. If you ask me why I do so?
I answer, because I will do prudently in a matter of so great consequence; that
is, I will submitt, and I will captivitate my understanding in such manner, as
to yield all firm assent, which (by God his grace) I possibly can do, unto
that, which the Church by her Tradition proposes unto me as Gods true word;
upon which word my understanding shall be fixed so immoveably, that no Angels
words shall move me from it: see Sect: 23. n: 5 6. Hence you see to what my
understanding cleaves so fast; to wit, to Gods true word proposed by the
Church, or her unanimous Tradition. Now if you ask me; why my will is so
resolute in making choice of thus submitting, and thus captivating my
understanding? I easily answer; because my understanding has evidently Seen (I
do not then go blindely to work, (as our adversaries conceive we all do Sect.
8:) Because my understanding has evidently seen that, even according to all
reason, prudence, and piety, it is most unreasonable, imprudent and impious,
not to yield this submission of understanding to that which is evidently
credible to be Gods word; and that to the full as that which is confirmed by
miracle: For what is affirmed by the Churches unanimous Tradition, is no less
evidently credible then what is confirmed by miracle, (as I proved in the very
last Number;) Therefore (and in many other respects) it is most unreasonable,
most imprudent, and impious, not to yield all possible submission of
understanding to that which is proposed as Gods word, by the unanimous
Tradition of the Church. It is madness not to believe what is made evidently
credible, even then when heaven, is offered unto me if I will believe it, and
when hell is infallibly to be my punishment, if I will not believe it. For so
our Savior himself said, when men had only Tradition to rely on (to wit,
before any word of that new Scripture was written) He that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not shall be damned. (Mark 16
v. 15.) And many were damned for not believing the Church, before either the
old Scripture was written in the Law of Nature, and before the finishing of
the new testament in the first seaventy years after Christ's passion; and after
the finishing of it also, many were damned for not believing among those
Nations to whom the faith, without any Scripture was so well proposed, that
thousands of them were most true believers, merely grounding their whole faith
upon the Church and her unanimous Tradition.

7. The Second difficulty (which may easily be cleared by what has been here
said) is, how the ignorant vulgar sort come to embrace our faith, and all the
points of it, with an infallible assent, and that prudently? whence will
appear that Tradition is the fittest deliverer of certain truth, and the most
proportionable to the capacity of the incomparably greater part of the world.
For no man, who is above the degree of a fool, is so ignorant, but by such
careful search, as all are bound to use in finding out the way to their last
end (which is eternal Salvation;) he will presently find, that the unanimous
Tradition of our present Church proposes such and such points to be believed
as being points reveled by Christ's Apostles to the Church, for example, the
Trinity, the Incarnation, the Death and Resurrection of our Savior, his having
planted upon Earth an infallible Church for our direction etc: Then having
found this to be the unanimous consent, and Tradition of our Church, he may
easily be made capable how evidently credible that is which is proposed by the
Tradition of such a Church. First, because all those who believed for the first
two thousand years, did believe all that they believed upon a weaker Tradition
then this is, as I discoursed before: Secondly, he may also easily understand
how true it is which I said n. 5. that no miracle can move a man so effectually
to believe that there is such a place as London, as Tradition does move him
there unto: wherefore as miracles can beget an infallible assent, so also may
Tradition. Thirdly, he can understand that the Churches Tradition is secured by
God, from deceiving us; for else all the faith of those millions and millions
(to whom God gave no other ground but this to ground that faith which he, under
pain of damnation, exacted of them) might have been an error; and could not
have been infallible, as he exacted their faith should be. Now all this being
most true, and being also a real proposal of what is indeed revealed by God
(which it is not when any false Church uses this argument) God can, and will
concur with this ignorant man, as well as with any Doctor, to raise him by
supernatural Grace to an infallible assent to the truth, which he embraced
most prudently upon Reasons proportionable to his capacity; which Reasons do
really make the verities which he believes to be first evidently credible to
him. His faith may the^ be truly infallible, though he knows not that it is
infallible; for this knowledge is no way necessary even in learned men, as I
shall say. Sect. 23. Now among our Sectaries ignorant men can never embrace the
points of faith with an infallible assent. For they must embrace no point with
such an assent but when the Scripture, not taken according to the bare letter,
but taken as interpreted truly, tells them that such a point is true. But I ask
how it can ever be made evidently credible to them that such a place of
Scripture is truly interpreted in that sense but especially seeing that the
greatest Protestant Doctors teach that the true sense cannot be found out but
by observing perhaps twently Rules; of which they are by them plainly told,
that they cannot observe diverse, as I noted just now n: 4. whence it is clear
they may and must despair of finding amongst you any true ground fit to
support an infallible assent. This your own prime Doctors did easily see, and
knew not how to deny. Hence Whitaker de Sacra Scriptura Q. 5. C. 9. Eighthly
because the unskillful know not rightly to use these means (of consulting the
Hebrew and Greek Originals) they must go to those who are more skillful: So he.
And your great Devine Baronus in Apodixi P. 47. The unlearned Laymen cannot
have a certain and explicit and distinct knowledge of the Scriptures, and of
the doctrine contained in the Scriptures, or that the Translated Bible agrees
with the Original edition. Yea they do not know but by the testimony of
others, that the doctrine which is proposed to them to be believed, is
contained in this Bible. And again P. 48. They only by human faith believe that
the doctrine which is proposed to them is contained in the Bible. So he. You
then, who are not perfectly skilled in Hebrew and Greek, are taught by your own
Doctors, that it is impossible for you to believe, but upon trust and relyance
on the authority of some more ski^full. Do you not know evidently these on whom
you rely, to be fallible? Yes. Why then know evidently that your belief,
amongst Protestants, can never rise to be infallible, nor so much as evidently
credible, even to the ignorant; For they are sure that, as your Ministers say,
such and such Protestant Doctrine is evidently by them deduced out of the word
of God; so they are sure that a far greater and learnedes number of the
present age, and all the whole numberles number of those who lived these last
ten ages before your Reformation, who were men most virtuous and most
learned, did unanimously affirm the quite contrary doctrine to be conformable
to Scripture rightly understood. And this they know by your own confession: For
you never deny that Popish doctrine was the current doctrine of all Christians
these last thousand years, excepting only such Christians as were notorious
Heretics, or some few others who make no number at all fit to appear in the
view of so many millions of millions as these ordinary Laymen know to have
most constantly embraced the Roman faith; and, with a vast multitude of Books,
to have most learnedly mainteyned, the doctrine flatly contrary to yours, to be
the more conformable to Scripture; in which they lived with far more sanctity
them now you do: why then should I now forsake that, which is also confirmed
(as you acknowledge) by many great Councels; and chose to venture my Soul with
these new believers, whom I and every ignorant man knows to go to a Church
every sunday, the very Walls of which Church be many years elder then their
Religion: If they will go with us the old beaten way, trodden by all
Antiquity, and chalked out by an uninterrupted Tradition from the Apostles
days to these, they (as ignorant as they are) may, as I said, easily come to
see, First that, they shall have as sure ground for all their whole belief, as
all true believers had the first two thousand years before the first Scripture
was written. Secondly, they shall see they have as sure a ground as all true
believers (the Jews at the most excepted) had for those two thousand years
following, before other Nations had the Scripture. Thirdly they shall see that
they have as sure ground as all Christians are confessed to have had the first
seventy years before the New Testament was finished, and divulged. Fourthly
they shall see they have as sure ground as those many Nations had, who believed
all that other Christians did, and believed it with as true a divine faith;
though they never did see Scripture: as I said eve^ now out of the most ancient
Doctor S. Irenaeus. So that they see that the ground of their belief has been
a most sure ground of true divine infallible faith for above more then four
thousand years, to wit, a good way down-ward after Christ's time. Fifthly, they
see also that the last thousand years, which was just before your Reformation,
all those vast multitudes, whom you confess to have followed Popery, to have
still believed on the same ground relying on the present Church as infallible;
Therefore from Christ's time to the Reformation they see only a wonderful short
space of years, in which space you say all refused to rely in their belief
upon the Church: What is this space to be compared to that almost whole space
of time which was from the beginning of the World to this Reformation: in all
which vast space all faith of all men relied on the Church as infallible. Again
(as simple as I am) I understand this evident argument, that in the thousand
years just before your Reformation there were many Councels, many learned, and
many very holy men (for they say that then men generally rather lived better
then now) Now these Councels, these great numbers of learned and Holy men could
not but see the truth of those matters which are clearly and plainly set down
in Scripture; And even the Protestants themselves teach that all necessary
matters are clearly and plainly set down in Scripture: I therefore neither have
charity nor wit, if I say that they then could not see the truth, so
manifestly clear in such points; wherefore upon good reason in those points I
will agree with the Roman Catholics: But now for those points which are not
clear in Scripture, I will also not disagree from them; because, in things
confessedly-not clear, you are likelyer to misunderstand Scripture then they:
And they (besides Scripture) give me that excellent sure ground of the
Tradition of the Church, which has been a sure ground for so many thousand
years; and questionles is a surer ground then trusting you; I will then, in
these points, trust them, and not you. And so you see why I resolve in all
points to trust the Church. But all this is spoaken by the way: now let us go
on.

8. My fifth Reason for the infallibility of some means in the Church
sufficient to ground divine faith, and yet differing from Scripture, is this:
God has given us some means sufficient to come to the faith necessary to
Salvation (as has been proved Quest: 1.) But this means is not the Scripture
(as I have showed in the twelve first Sections;) Neither is it natural Reason
(as I showed Sect: 13:) Therefore the means which now actually is given us by
God, is the infallible direction of the Church; there being not the least
appearance of probability for any other means which God has given us, though
he might have given us other means, if he had pleased.

9, My Sixth Reason is that, Whatsoever was held by the universal Church, was,
without farther questioning, held for true; and the contrary to it was ever
rejected as an error: two manifest Signs of infallibility; both which will
appear sufficiently proved, when I shall come to cite the Fathers authority for
the infallibility of the Church. Sect. 20:21:22: and you know already S.
Austens saying in the End of his Book de Haeresibus, that though he tell you
not, in particular, what the Church has defined against every one of those
several heresies, yet says he; Sufficient eam contra ista sentire, It is
enough (to make us fly them as heresies) to know that the Church houldeth the
contrary. Neither will you ever find any Catholic who ever had the bouldnes to
say, that all the Church of his days did universally hold any thing that was
an error: And their works were conformable; for never shall you read of any
Catholic (much less of any Holy Father) who refused to conform himself to
the universal belief and practice which was current in the whole Church of
their times: your Luther and Calvin ^ad not their Spirit. Here I entreat you to
read the Authorities which hereafter I shall bring out of the Fathers, and you
shall see the sense and feeling which Sacred antiquity had in this point, see
my Sect: 20. etc. How close in all interpretation of Scripture (on which all
depends) Antiquity did ever stand to the Church, I have said Sect. 7. n: 9. out
of Vincentius Lerinensis.

10. My Seventh Reason is that, without the Church be provided of some other
infallible means to direct us to the truth, besides Scripture; there will
never be any Unity and agreement in the Church, in necessary points of
Religion. For I have already fully showed that Scripture alone (though
submitted unto by all sides) does not produce this (...) even in necessary
points: for I have numbered up. 24. such points not so much as contained in
Scripture. Hence I frame this argument; under pain of damnation all are bound
to agree in this one thing, that all and every one interiorly gives an
infallible assent to all such points, as are necessary to be believed for the
atteyning of Salvation; because all are bound to please God, and consequently
to have that faith without which it is impossible to please God: But all ca^
never be brought to agree in this one thing (that all and every one of them
interiorly gives an infallible assent to all such points, as are necessarily
to be believed for atteyning Salvation) without all and every one submitt their
assent to some other infallible Rule besides Scripture; for submitting to
Scripture only does not produce this union, as so long and so lamentable
experience has taught us: Neither can the Scripture alone suffice for this
end, being it does not so much as conteyne 24. of such points as are all
necessary to Salvation; Therefore all can never be brought to agree in that one
thing (in which under pain of damnation they must agree) without they all and
every one interiorly give an infallible assent to some other Rule of faith then
the Scripture: No other, with any appearance of reason, can be thought of, but
the direction of the Church; Therefore her direction is this Rule. But if her
direction be this Rule, her direction must needs be infallible; and this for
two very manifest Reasons. The first is, that it is impossible all should be
(as they are) bound under pain of damnation to follow this Rule, if this Rule
could guide the^ into error: Because it is impossible God should da^ne men,
for not following so foul an error as this is, which makes the^ father as
many lies upon God as they believe errors to be divine verities. The Second
reason is because all (as I said) are bound interiorly to give an infallible
assent to all such points as are proposed by the Church: But it is impossible
to give an infallible assent, grounded upon a ground which is not infallible
(as it is clear:) Therefore seeing that the ground, upon which their belief in
these points must rely, is only the mere direction of the Church; it evidently
follows that her direction is infallible. Why I defer to answer the
Objections against the infallibility of the Church, and some other things: I
shall presently tell you.

THE FOVRT AND LAST QVESTION.
Which is that Church which is the infallible Judge in all Controversies? How
she exercises her infallible Judgment? and what submission is due there unto?

1. HITHERTO we have, only in general, declared the Church to be our Judge,
and to be provided of some infallible means (besides Scripture) to guide and
direct us in faith: not intermedling with other important, but more particular
doubts; until we had gotten sufficient principles solidly established, to
proceed to these particulars with more clear and distinct knowledge. By the
Church, we have hitherto understood that blessed congregation of people which
followed the doctrine of Christ and his disciples, still propogating the
doctrine delivered to them from age to age, until we come to our Age. But,
because there be a number of Congregations pretending to be this blessed
Congregation; we must see in particular, in which of them we can find this
infallible means to end all controversies, and to direct us securely in all
points of faith. Secondly we must see, in what particular manner this
particular blessed Congregation does judge all Controversies; and how she
directs us in particular in all our doubts of faith. When we have found these
two things, we shall soon see the last thing we seek for, to wit, what
particular submission is due from all, that they all may be securely directed
in that faith which leads to eternal Salvation: the end for which we all
were created; and consequently at which all our most serious endeauours ought
to aim.

2. And because we now shall come to speak of the Roman Church, and to show
how she in her general Councels, proposing unto her self the word of God, as
well written, as unwritten, does issue forth her Definitions, Decrees, and
Orders, by which she directs us: we only now can clearly dispatch some
things, which very properly belonged to the last question, but could not be so
commodiously treated there, because they required a more distinct knowledge of
the questions to be handled here. Here then we shall solve the objections
against the infallibility of the Church, which our adversaries use to make
against the Roman Church in particular; and therefore they were to be treated
here. Here also we must answer many things they bring against Councels; and
when we declare how Councels propose to them selves Gods word written, and
unwritten, we must add somewhat more of Tradition then has yet been said;
answering what else they object against it. And because the testimonies of the
Holy Fathers, confirming the infallibility of the Church, do sometimes speak of
her infallibility in general; sometimes they speak of the Roman Churches
infallibility in particular; some times how infallible general Councels are;
some times how infallible the unwritten Traditions of the Church are (which
merely rely on her authority:) we have thought good to place their testimonies
after that we have treated of all these particulars: which are linked
together with so necessary connection one of an other; that the proof of the
one, is the proof of the other.

SECT: XVII.
Whether the Roman Church be that Church which is our infallible Judge?

1. BY the Roman Church, we do not understand the particular dioces of Rome:
but we understand, that vastly extended Community of Christians which houldeth
Comunion with the Church of Rome, submitting them selves to the Bishop of Rome
as to their head; so that whatsoever he decrees with a general Council, they
embrace as the definition of the true Church, which they hold infallible. This
is the flock of Christ adhering to the true sheepeheard appointed by him; as I
shall show Sect: 20. n. 6. Wherefore when you come now in particular to see
into what we resolve our faith, when we say that we rely upon the Church as
infallible; you shall find that it is resolved finally into the Authority of
God proposing such and such things to us to be believed by this his Church:
whose mind is made known unto us, partly by such traditions as universally go
current in her, and are most notoriously known, not only to be permitted, but
also to be on all occasions unanimously taught by her Prelates; and partly by
such definitions, and Decrees, as the Prelates of the Church, lawfully
assembled by order of, and together with their head, do set forth; of which
manner of government we shall speak in the next Sectio^s. 2. We then
constantly affirm, the Roman Church thus understood is our infallible Judge in
all our controversies of faith, and appointed by God to be so. The proof of
this is easily and demonstratively performed, supposing the truth of all that
has been said and proved in the last Question; in which, both out of the old
and new testament, I have brought most convincing testimonies, to prove that
God has appointed some Church upon Earth to be our infallible Judge. The same
I proved by Several reasons in the last Section. So that we do not, without
full proof, suppose that God has appointed some Church upon Earth to be our
infallible Judge. This then (upon good proof) supposed; we easily demonstrate
this Church appointed by God for our Judge, to be the Roman, and only the Roman
Church: we do it thus. The Protestant Church, and all other Churches different
from the Roman, do judge, do declare, and profess them selves to be fallible,
even according to the infallible word of God: If then the Protestant Church, or
any other Churches different from the Roman, be infallible in all that they
judge, and in that they declare and profess to be true even according to the
word of God, they doubtless are then infallible, and speak then the infallible
truth, when they judge and declare and profess, that even according to the
word of God, they are fallible: Therefore infallibly they are fallible. Hence
again, it being thus proved that no Church different from the Roman is
infallible: and it being formerly proved that God has appointed some Church
upon Earth to be our infallible Judge: it demonstratively follows, that the
Roman Church must needs be this infallible Judge; because no Church different
from the Roman (that is, none but the Roman) can be this infallible Church; as
my former argument proved. Some of our adversaries are pleased fondly to
mistake this argument, as if we argued thus; The Roman Church claymeth
infallibility: Therefore she must needs have right to it. This argument we
give our adversaries free leave to scoff at, as much as they please; it is
nothing like ours: we put all the force of our argument in this; that the
Church, truly appointed by God for infallible Judge of Controversies, cannot
possibly be any of those Churches which teach them selves not to be this
infallible judge; because they teach them selves to be fallible. If then they
be infallible in the doctrine they teach, they are infallible when they teach
them selves to be fallible: Whence it follows that infallibly they are
fallible. The Church which is truly appointed by God to be infallible Judge,
must needs have this condition; that she does own her infallibility: but this
is far from saying; that merely the ownning of infallibility does make
infallibility her own. It is a very different thing to say, he that must be a
Minister, must needs be a man, and not a Woman: and to say, that such an one
must needs be a Minister because he is a Man, and not a Woman: so it is one
thing to say, the Church which is the infallible Judge, must be a Church
judging, and houlding, and professing her self to be infallible; and cannot be
a Church which judges and professes her self to be falible: And another
quite different thing to say; that such a Church is the infallible Judge,
because she tea^heth and professes her self to be so.

3. Others have in exceeding plenty alleged other arguments which may be seen
in them: this one being a Demonstration serves my turn; and this one being
put alone, I hope my Reader will more mark the force of it.

SECT: XVIII.
In what Court this infallible Judge decideth our Controversies in faith.

1. OUR adversaries would make the world believe (as may be seen in D. Ferns
Sect: 17) that they have a great advantage against us, when they put this
question to us; for by putting it they conceive they put us at Variance with
one another: because some will say, first, the Pope can infallibly by him
self, out of a Council, decide all Controversies; others will say Secondly,
that a Council can do this without a Pope. But I must tell them that thirdly,
all and every one of us (without the least disagreement) do and will
unanimously say, that all those definitions declare an infallible truth, which
are set forth by the Pope defining together with a general Council. Any one
way of defining infallibly is enough, and is sufficient to end any
Controversies Yield but to this one way, and we will press you no further. If
you will not yield to the Pope defining jointly with a Council, we are sure
enough that you will neither yield to Pope alone, nor Council alone. If God
has provided us of one way, which is a sure and infallible way to know any
necessary point of faith, and to keep us all in settled unity, concerning all
matters declared by this infallible authority (such as we all hold this
Authority to be:) it is impossible that we should want necessary direction, or
a sufficient means to maintain that unity which is necessary for the Church,
or that guidance which is necessary for our Salvation. If their opinion be true
who say, the definition of the Pope alone is sufficiently infallible to do this
without a Council; these men furnish us with two means of necessary direction:
for they do not distroy, but maynteyn the former; Because no man is so senseles
as to hold the definitions of the Pope to be infallible without a Council, and
to be fallible with one. So also noe man is so senseles as to say, that
Councils definitio^s are infallible without a Pope; and that they are not
infallible when Councels define together with the Pope. But these me^ who say,
councils defining eve^ without a Pope, are infallible, do also add a third
means of infallible direction. The one means I speak of is allowed by every
one: and this one means is sufficient for every one. You see then, this
disagreeme^t guieth you not the least advantage to deny the infallibility of
the Roman Church, as long as by this name we understand continually either
this Church speaking by universal Tradition, or the Church representative, by
which we understand the Bishop of Rome our Supreme Pastor defining with a
Lawful general Council. The infallibility of the Church, thus understood, is
a point of Catholic faith: the other be opinions of Catholic Devines, all who
agree in the exacting the belief of the infallibility of the Church taken in
this sense as we still take it.

2. If you ask us then, not our opinions, but our belief: (I pray mark this
distinction:) We all unanimously agree, that the Supreme Bishop of the Church,
or Pope, defining with a general Council, is the infallible Judge of
Controversies. And it cannot seem strange to any Christian that the same God,
who gave an infallible assistance to Solomon (who proved an Idolater) that the
Church might enjoy the benefitt of his Books, should give either the supreme
Pastor of the Church, or the Church Representative, for that particular time,
his infallible assistance, that all the Church might enjoy so great a benefitt
as is the secure direction in all points of faith, and the perpetual
preservation in unity of faith, not to be had sufficiently by any other means
that is given unto us. Yea, who can choose but think it strange, that Christ,
for the secure direction of all the first Christians converted only in the
Apostles days, should give this infallibility to all, and every one of the
Apostles; and that he should regard so little the secure direction of all that
infinite number of Christians, who were to be converted after the Apostles
times to the very end of the world, that for their sakes, and for the secure
direction of their Souls, and their preservation in unity of faith, he would
not give this infallibility so much as to one only man? No nor to the Church
representative in a full Council, even for that short time in which they are to
pass their decrees concerning the most important affairs in Christendom?
Especially seeing that on the one side, this gift of infallibility is given,
not for their private sakes to whom it is given; but it is given for the
universal good, and necessary direction, concord, and perpetual unity of the
whole Church: And on the other side, that, even now after we have Scripture,
the necessity of this infallibility is so great, that our adversaries with D.
Fern Sect. 17. do confess, That such a Judge or vmpire of Christendom (as a
Council endued with infallibility) would (if to be had) be a ready means to
compose all difference, and restore Truth ad Peace. Is it then strange that God
should give so necessary a gift, or a gift so beneficial to his Church?

3. Having now, by all said in the former discourses, proved that the Church
diffused, or universal, was furnished by God with some infallible means,
besides Scripture, to direct all securely in faith, and to preserve them in
unity, by the true decision of all their Controversies: we have found already
enough to persuade any prudent Man, to seek after the particular manner by
which this means is to be appliable, and serviceable unto him. Now this is
easily understood by that manner of government which we had here in England,
from the Conquest to our days; according to which, all the decrees, and
ordinances, by which we were governed, or directed, were to be made by a
Lawful King jointly with a Lawful Parliament. This Representative, and their
Decrees, be called the Decrees of the Kingdom. Just so, the particular manner
by which the Church diffused or universal is directed, and governed, is by a
Lawful Pope, as supreme Pastor, jointly with a Lawful Council: and this
assembly is called the Church representative, and their Decrees be called the
Decrees of the Church. This way you shall find to have been very connaturall to
the Church: For it was impossible, that the Church universal, or diffused,
should be assembled for the making the Decrees. And though Children and women
belong to the Church; yet all easily see, that the Church government belongs
not to them: neither is their Vote (in any man's opinion) required for the
decision of Controversies in Faith: We say also, that the Laity has no
decisive voice in this point: they be sheep, and not Pastors. Every inferior
Clergyman, is not a considerable Governor in the Church: This government then
belongs to such as are Prelates Overseers, and Governors over the rest,
Bishops placed by the Holy Ghost over all the flock, to feed (or govern) the
Church of God. Act: 20. v. 28. For not Lay-Magistrates, but only
ecclesiastical, are said ( Ephesians: 4.) To be given us by Christ for the work of
the Ministry, for the edifying the Body of Christ, that henceforth we may not
be carried about with every wind of Doctrine etc. It was not to a Lay
Magistrate, but to a Bishop, to whom Christ said: Feed my sheep. Io. 21. v. 15.
It is worth the Readers knowledge to relate here (out of Rufinus. l. 10. and
Caranza his Sum, just before the Council of Nice) how the first general
Council was assembled in the days of the first Christian Emperor Constantine
the Great. Rufinus then, having related how the heresy of Arius growing up to
the ruin of Christendom, Constantine the Great, ex sententia Sacerdotum, by
the advice or Judgment of the Priests, did call together Episcopale Concilium
a Council of Bishops, to Judge of the Propositions, and Questions of Arius.
Behold their power of Judicature acknowledged by their calling, and coming and
sitting: for thy were called, did come and fit, for no other end, but to end
Controversies by their Judgment. And then he tells, how these Bishops
beginning to give up in Writing complaints against one an other to the
Emperor; he, putting all those papers in his bosom, without ever opening or
looking upon them, said to the Bishops; God has appointed you Priests, and
given you power even to Judge of us also; and therefore we are rightly judged
by you: but you (speaking of them as a whole Council) cannot be judged by men:
wherefore expect only the judgment of God upon you; and that your complaints,
whatsoever they be, may be reserved to the Examine of God. For you are given
unto us by God, as Gods (that is Judges in his place;) It is not convenient
that men should judge the Gods: but he alone of whom it is written; (Psalm: 82.)
God stands in the Congregation of the Gods. He judges among the Gods.
Constantin having said this; he commanded all those papers to be burnt: And,
when now the sentence of the Council, defining that the Son of God was
Consubstantiall to his Father, was brought to him, Ille tanquam a Deo prolatam
veneratur etc, that is; He did reverence this sentence as pronounced by God
himself; and if any one should offer to go against it, he protests he will
banish him as a man going against the divine Statutes?

4. Behold here how the decrees of Councels ought to be reverenced as divine.
Hence S. Athanasius In Epist: ad Episcop: Affricanos, after this self same
definition, said; The word of God by the Nicaean Council does remain for ever
and ever. Hence S. Horsmida C: Sic ille Did: 58. says We believe that in
them (the Fathers of this Council) the holy Ghost did speak. Hence S. Cyrill
(in the Council of Ephesus to: 1. Ep: 1.) speaks thus of these Fathers of the
Council of Nice; They; least they should swerve from truth, being inspired by
the Holy Ghost (because it was not they which did speak but the Spirit of God
and the Father who did speak in them, as Christ our Savior protests) have
set forth the Rule of pure and vnblamble faith. So he; and Parenthesis also is
his. His also be these words; How can it be doubted but that Christ did preside
invisibly in that holy and great Council? Epist: ad Anastas: Alexandrinum. S.
Leo (whom I shall cite by and by) says, that what this Council defines it did
seal by the holy Ghost. S. Isidore, in the Preface to his collection of
Canons, not only recommends what the first four Councels have defined, but
says also of the decrees of other Councels; that they stand firmly settled in
all vigor, which the holy Fathers, full of the Holy Ghost, have established.
Mark how common it is to asscribe the Decrees of the Councels to the
assistance of the Holy Ghost, to whom to ascribe any thing that might be an
error, is a great Sacrilege. Also S. Leo Ep: 84. ad Anast: calls the Canons
of the holy Fathers made by the Spirit of God, consecrated by the reverence
given to them by the whole world. And Ep: 73. he says, the Council of
Chalcedon was assembled by the holy Ghost, that their definitions were a Rule
proceeding from divine inspiration. Hence S. Ambrose speaking of the Heretics
condemned by a Council, Lib: defide ad Gratianum C. 9. They were not condemned
by human industry, but by the authority (more then human) of those Fathers. For
as S. Greg: Nazian: says in his Oration to S. Athanasius; The Fathers of this
Council were gathered by the holy Ghost. He had the same Spirit that the other
S. Gregory the great had, who said; I do profess my self to reverence the
first four Councels as I reverence the four Books of the Ghospel: And in the
same manner I reverence the fifth Council. Whosoever is of an other mind let
him be an Anathema. Li. Epist: Ep: 24. propefinem. And the very self same he
says again. Lib. 2. Indict: 11. Ep. 10. ad Sabinum. And Justin the Emperor,
before him, made this saying famous by inserting it into the Law Authenticarum
Collat: 9. de Eccl. tit: c. 1. We receive the doctrine of the said (four
first) Councels as we receive the Holy Scriptures. Unless perhaps John the
second (Bishops of Rome) who lived and died in the days of this Emperor (A.
532.) Epist. ad Liberium Severinum etc, gave occasion to this saying, by these
following words spoaken of the first four Councels; this is the ground of our
faith; this is the most firm Rock of our belief. Behold how he relieth on
the Councils, as S. Paul seems to teach, when he calls the church, the
pillar and ground of the Truth. From this the Councels are called by antiquity
rules of faith, as you have heard already out of S. Cyril, and S. Leo. So
Vincentius Lerinensis Adversus Hereses, speaking of the Council of Ephesus,
says; Where question was made de Sanciendis fidei Regulis, of establishing the
Rules of faith: So Cassiador: Institut: Divin: L. 1. C. 11. And that no mistake
in the Rules of faith may hurt you, read over the Councels of Ephesus and
Chalcedon. Yet more fully spoak Pope Gelasius A. 490. Epist: 11. ad Episcopos
Dardaniae, where giving a reason why, after the definition of a general
Counsel in any point of faith, that point ought never again to be questioned,
no not so much as in an other Council; for, says he, otherwise noe
constitution of the Church should be stable, if men cease not to rise up
against the foundation of truth, Contra fundamentum veritatis se attollere:
Calling thus the definitions of Councels the very foundations of truth.

5. When thou shall have read but this small part of authorities for the
infallibility of the Church representative, or assembled in a genetall Council,
thou will stand astonished to read in some of our adversaries, that there is no
mention at all in antiquity of the infallibility of the Church; For thou see
here first how Councels are called purposely to end all controversies in faith,
by defining what is to be believed by all; that is, what is to be undoubtedly
held as a divine truth revealed by God. All the Fathers, who assembled to
define this, did assume an unquestionable authority to their assembly to do
this: upon this authority they passed their votes, in order to make a
definition of what was to be proposed to all men living then, and ever to live
in the Church hereafter; even cursing and excommunicating all who should at any
time believe contrary to what they defined: which had been a most Sacrilegious,
and impious, and a most unjust and tyranicall act, and the most destructive to
the Church that could be invented, if, by so great an authority, a precedent
were given, and a wide gappe opened to press errors, upon all the world
present and to come, to be believed as divine verities revealed by God. The
most bloody persecution of tyrants could never have been half so pernicious to
the Church, as would have been to be compelled by general Councels (that is by
the Unanimous consent of Christendom) to embrace that as a Divine Verity,
which is, in real truth, a lie fathered upon God. Surely a practice so
universal, so frequent, so pernicious, so notoriously public, would have been
cried out upon over and over again by the most Zealous, and most learned
ancient Fathers; who notwithstanding never opened their mouths against this
proceeding of Councels: For those proceedings could not be justifiable, though
those Councels had defined nothing but truth at the present: but so, that they
had been liable to define falsity; Because thus they did setle for ever a
Court, which by way of course should perpetually be called and assembled, for
the definition of matters of greatest moment, which definitions, under pain of
excommunication were to be submitted unto by all the world: Now if these
definitons could be errors, this was nothing else but to take the surest course
they could invent, to circumvent all ages into incurable errors. And yet this
was the proceeding of the purest antiquity; And this course they held the best
to preserve purity of faith. And, as you have seen, the most holy Fathers
reverenced with highest respect all the General Councels, which had passed
before, or in their days; leaving us example to show the like respect to all
which have passed, or may pass in our days. For the authority given by God is
equally given to other as lawful Councels: to wit, the infallible authority
of judging right by the assistance of the holy Ghost, so often insisted upon by
the Fathers now cited. Whence it is that, if you read histories of all ages,
you shall never meet with any man (held for Catholic) who ever opened his
mouth, I do not say to cry down, but even in the least degree to call in
question the truth of any thing which he knew to be defined by a lawful
general Council. What bouldnes the^ is it, after the authority of so great a
Council, that they make new disputations and questions? says S. Atha: Epist:
ad Epict: And yet this bouldnes your Doctors allow, when they permit any one
to review Councels, to see whether they be conformable to Gods word, as I
showed Sect. 1. n. 4. But, as it is said in the Epistle of Julius ad Diaconum
Flaccillum etc. registered in S. Athanasius his Apologia 2; Every Synod has an
unviolable authority, and that Judge is contumeliously dealt withal, whose
Judgment by others is again examined. There is extant in the Council of
Chalcedon Act: 3. that excellent edict in which are these words expressly
declaring that Councels are to end Controversies: Let all profane Contention
cease, for he is truly impious and sacrilegious who, after the Judgment passed
by so many Priests, reserueth any thing to be handled further by his own
private Judgment. And yet you will presume to reserve the final Review, and
the approving or reproving all the Definitions of the Council, by your private
Judgment of discretion, if that lead you to conceave that you have clear
Scripture on your side. He was the chief Bishop of the Church, and presided by
his Legates in the Council of Chalcedon, who writ these following Words to the
Emperor; ( Leo Magnus Ep: 78. ad Leonem Augustum, C. 3.) Concerning the
affayers which have been defined at Nice, and at Chalcedon, we dare not
undertake a new treaty, questioning again those things, as if they were either
doubtful or of weak strength: which so great an authority by the holy Ghost
has settled. What he dared not do, any Cobbler amongst you dares venture on. But
very truly said Gelasius (whom I cited in the end of the last number) the doing
of this is the undoing of all Councels; for No Constitution of the Church
should be stable, if men cease not to rise up against the Foundation of Truth;
for so he called the definition of a general Council almost twelve hundred
years ago. You, who make these definitions fallible, make them no definitions;
for they never put a final end to the Controversy, they never do terminate any
point: for after their determinations, as if they were no determinations, you
call all to your private Reuiew; and there, what you really think fit, your
judgment of discretion (with out any judgment and discretion) freely rejects
and disbeleeueth.

6. I say not this rashly, for, as S. Bernard says in a Sermon upon the
Resurrection; What greater pride can there be, then that one man should
prefer his judgment before a whole Congregation. It is fine doctrine, that
you and I should sit down, and call to our examine the definitions and
determinations of a general Council. Have we such assistance of the holy
Ghost as Councels have? Have we half the authority, or any thing like to the
one quarter of the wit, or learning, or knowledge, or judiciousnes which they
have? Let, I pray, us two rather sit down, and examine how true this is which
I shall now say; Either the determinations of Councels in points of Faith (for
of these I always speak) be such as are evidently against clear Scripture; or
else the texts, to which we think the Council to be contrary, be not clear and
evident to the contrary; which, if they be not, it would be a shameless
imprudence in you and me, to think we should surer hitt right upon the
meaning of obscure texts in Scripture, then a whole general Council (the
greatest Authority in Christendom) has done. But now if the places
alleadgeable against the Councels be evidently clear, do you think to persuade
any prudent and pious man, that this evident cleernes could not be seen by so
very many, and those so very eminent for piety, and for prudence, as are known
to have subscribed to so many general Councels; who could use, and are to be
judged to have used all the best Rules to understand Scripture as well as we
two. God give us Humility, God give us Charity, God have Mercy on us in the
bitter day of his Judgment, if we pass so bitter a judgment against the
whole Church representative: And yet if you pass not this judgment, you will
never pass this objection without being posed.

SECT: XIX.
This Court in deciding Controversies rules her self by the word of God
written and unwritten: and why she rules her self by tradition.

1. IT was a very gross proceeding in Calvin L. 4. Inst. C. 1. Sect. 7. and C.
3. Sect. 2. So to propose our doctrine as if we taught, that our Church might
define and determine what she thinks fit, without any relation to the word of
God. No less grossly did your Zanchius tom: 8. tract: de Scrip: Q. 3. Go about
to persuade his reader, that we hold the authority of the Roman Church
greater then that of Christ, and the Ghospel: whereas we all hold, that every
general Council is to examine controversies belonging to faith, according to
the word of God. But, because all human learning, wit, and Judgment would
still be liable to error, we say; that Christ, of his goodness, has obtained
for his Church (thus lawfully assembled,) such an assistance of the holy Ghost,
as shall ever preserve it from error. True it is, that in wit, and judgment,
and learning, so great an assembly far excells your private Ministers: But
this assistance of the holy Ghost is an advantage surpassing all that is human:
This assistance we have proved all the last question, and in the last Sectio^
we showed this assistance given to general Councils.

2. Now to see what the Councels on their part are to do; I must tell you, that
their chief business is to examine the points in controversy; hearing all that
occurreth for the one side and the other, and permitting several replies, if
any remain, in due time to be made. After this diligence is used, they
consider what seems most conformable to the word of God, and every ones vote
is to pass upon this particular. But here I must tell you that by the word of
God, all Councels, and Orthodox believers, have ever understood, not only Gods
written word contained in Scripture, but also his vnwritte^ word made known to
the Church by only Tradition; which Tradition also is, and was ever, accounted
by the Church the very best and surest interpreter of the Scripture. The votes
therefore of the fathers assembled in Council are demanded, not only of what
they think to be conformable to Gods word written in Scripture, but also how
conformable such a point is, or is not, to that tradition, which they have all
received from the Fathers of their Church, as delivered to them from their
Fathers for Gods word, by Tradition committed to their Forefathers as such,
from the Apostles themselves. So for example, if in a Council there does arise
a question, whether we are to pray for the dead, or to adore the Sacrament, or
to confess our sins to a Priest; the Council asks the Prelates of Italy,
Britany, Spain, Polonia, Greece, etc, What in each one of their respective
Nations, so vastly different from one an other, has been the ancient practice
and belief amongst them? And whether at any time such a point was ever said to
have been introduced among them as a novelty? Or contrary wise that no other
beginning of that practice could be ever heard of then the first beginning of
Christian Religion? Now when by the unanimous answer of all the Prelates of
Italy, Spain, Britany, Polonia, Greece, etc, It is constantly avered that in
all these so vastly distant Nations, Prayer for the dead, Adoration of the
Sacrament, Auricular Confession, were ever, time out of mind, practiced, and
believed, and noe time in any one of those Nations can be found, in which this
practice and belief was held to be introduced as a novelty; but contrary wise
they are, and ever were (as far as they can hear of) esteemed to have been
delivered to them, together with all the other points of Christian Faith, when
this Faith was first planted in each one of those Nations. It cannot but then
appear evidently credible unto the Council, that these doctrines and practices
are Apostolical; whence accordingly they pass their votes to define them. So
that when their votes are past and gathered, This only, and nothing but this,
the Catholic Church does do by the decrees of her Councels; that what before
they had received by only Tradition from their Ancestors, that no they leave
consigned in authentical writing to all posterity. These be the very words of
Vincentius Lerinensis advers: Hereses: neither could I devise any fitter for
our doctrine.

3. If you ask, why the Church or Councels esteem so much tradition? I answer
first, Because in prudence, and piety, they cannot but esteem as much Gods
unwritten word, as his written; seeing that the word of a true honest Man, is
as much to be esteemed true, when it is only delivered by word of Mouth, as
when it is delivered by writing. Your Ministers usually so confound the
business, that they make their Auditors even to startle, when they tell them,
that we hold Tradition equal to Scripture; because first, they have deeply
imprinted in their minds, that Tradition is nothing but an old tale set on
foot by I know not whom: But if they meant to deal really, they should say
what the Truth is; that we do indeed equalize Tradition to Scripture, and that
we have all reason to do so. Why? What is Scripture? Gods word written. What
is Tradition? The same Gods word notified, not by writing, but by the full
report of the Catholic Church, I pray now, how do we wrong God, when we say
of his word, what we say of the word of one, whom we most commend for Truth,
that his word only spoaken, and not written, is as sure, or true (and
consequently as much to be esteemed, and credited) as any word of his that is
written even with his own hand. Nay, I pray mark how you wrong God, who slight
Tradition, which is nothing but the word of God unwritten. What wrong is it to
an honest man, to slight all he says unless he confirms it by writing? I
know the best answer you have to justify your selves is, That Scripture is
assueredly known to us to be Gods own word: But as for our Traditions, you do
not know, nor cannot believe that God does own them for his own word. But give
me leave to ask, whence are you assured that the Scripture is Gods own word?
Your best, and indeed your only, assurance is, that all the Christian world
says so: See Sect: 20. n. 5. That then which makes you, with so great
assurance, know Gods written word, is Tradition: But the same Tradition, which
tells us that the Apostles delivered these points to us as divine verities in
writing; tells us also, that the same Apostles delivered these and these points
to us as divine verities by word of Mouth only. If the Tradition of the Church
be a Liar in this last part, she may as well be a liar in the first part. When
you believe Scripture, you trust to tradition, testifying that the Apostles
gave such and such books to the Church of the first age to be believed as Gods
word: see two admirable places of S. Austen pressing this hard, which I cite
presently n: 7. Again, when you believe that the Copies, which we have now of
those books, be neither forged, nor corrupted Copies, but do truly agree with
the Originalls given out by the Apostles; you again wholly trust to the
traditions of all the after Churches that have been in every age from the
Apostles to this very present Church. For it was as much in the power of the
Church, in any one of these ages, to have thrust a false Copy into your hand,
in place of a true one; as to thrust a false tradition into the Mouth of every
Catholic every where, in place of a true one. Admirably Tertullian (de
Prescript: C. 28.) How is it likely that so many and so great Churches should
err in one faith? Among many events there is not every where one issue. The
errors of the Churches (had there been any in the delivering of these
Traditions) must needs have varied; (for though every man should agree to tell
his child a lie, yet every one would not agree in telling just the very self
same lies:) But that which amongst many is found one, is not mistaken, but (as
a sure Tradition) delivered: Audeat ergo aliquis dicere eos errasse qui
tradiderunt? Dare then any man say that they all erred who delivered (with such
uniformity) This tradition? so he; houlding it, as you see, impudence to say
this tradition could be fallible. Is not this clearly to hold the Tradition of
so many and so great Churches infallible? Behold here then plain Popery in the
highest point proved and approved with in two hundred years after Christ. But
more of Tertullia^s opinion concerning traditios hereafter, S. 20. n: 4. and
much has bee^ said, S. 12. n. 4. 5

4. My task now is, to show tradition does convey and bring down Gods word to
us as sure, yea rather surer, by perpetual practice, and uniform doctrine,
then by any writing. To show this, I brought many strong arguments Sect: 10. n.
13. and Sect: 16. n. 1. 2. In both which Sections I have said many things of
traditions: and in the first place I solved the chief objections against them.
But yet I will clear this, and one or two other doubts which trouble many. For
clearing then of this doubt, let us take two traditions, one confessed by you
to be a true one, the other to be proved by me to be no less true then the
former, because it is testified by as good a tradition as the former; and
therefore either the former is not proved Sufficiently by this testimony, or
else the latter is. Yet the truth is (and my argument shall make it good) that
both of them be made as credible to be Gods word by Tradition only, as any
writing by its sole force could make them. The first tradition which I will,
for example sake, take, is the Baptizing of children (of which I spok Sect. 8.
n: 3.) The Second is of praying for the dead. Of these two I discourse to my
purpose thus. Both these points (say I) were for divine verities and practices
recommended by the Apostles to the primitive Church, and so from hand to hand
came most undoubtedly delivered down to us. Hence, conformably to this
tradition, every where the Christians baptized their little Children; every
where they prayed for the faithful departed. Nothing more common to all men
then to be borne, nothing more common then to dye, for every one who is borne:
hence, as the daily custom is of being borne, so the daily custom in all the
Church, is to baptize those who are newly borne: and as it is the daily custom
for all that are born to die; so the daily custom was to pray for the dead. But
yet prayer for the dead was, by more frequent practice, testified in this
respect; because those who are borne, are baptized but once in their Lives: but
those who are dead are many times, and that for many years after their death,
prayed for by name; besides the daily prayers for all the faithful departed in
general. Well now, let us suppose that both these traditions be called in
question, whether they be faithful deliverers of the true word of God; or
rather, in place of it, deliver some human invention; as you will say, Praying
for the dead is; and the Anabaptists will say, that baptizing of children is.
Let us now further see, which of these two traditions cannot defend it self
from forgery, as well as any Scripture questioned of being true Scripture: for
example, the Apocalypse, or Revelation, which your Lutheran Brethren hold not
to be true Scripture. How will you defend the Apocalypse? you can say no more
then I have said Sect. 3. n. 12. for all our Canon in general; And the
tradition upon which those Councels received the Apocalypse had more
contradiction, then ever prayer for the dead had. For the Apocalypse was not
only rejected by the most ancient Heretics, the Marcionists, the Alogians, The
Theodotians; but also by diverse ancient Catholics (especially the Grecians; as
S. Jerome testifies Epist: ad Dardanum:) But Prayer for the dead was
contradicted by no Catholic at all: amongst ancient Heretics, Aerius indeed
did contradict it; but this is noted in him as a peculiar Heresy of his own
invention, both by S. Austen (whose words I gave you Sect: 8. fine:) and S.
Epiphanius Heresy 75. says, this Aerius had an aerian wicked Spirit against
the Church; and then he denovnceth against him, that prayers do profit the
dead. And the same Saint there says, the Church does this necessarily (this is
his word) by The Tradition received from her Ancestors. And he not long after
(Heresy 77.) does profess, that every man falls into strange
inconveniences, if he will but once pass the bounds set him by the Holy
Church, and leap over the hedges of traditions. He held therefore prayer for
the dead suitable to the doctrine of the Church, and Tradition. And as for S.
Austen (Chap: 1. de Cura pro Mortuis agenda) He says, that the universal
Church did shine with this custom of praying for the dead at the Altar. The
greatest Doctors of the Church could not be ignorant of a Custom shining in
the Church, not particular, but universal. And it is this shining of this
Custom which I press, and not S. Austens authority, otherwise then as a
witness of this shining Tradition. He also Sermon: 32. de Verbis Apostoli (which
place Bid. 1. These: 4. almost a thousand years ago cited out of S. Austen)
says thus; By the prayers of the Holy Church, and by the wholesome sacrifice,
and by the Alms which are given for their Souls, it is not to be doubted but
the dead are helped: so that our Lord deals more mercifully with them, then
their Sins have deserved. Why is not this to be doubted of? It follows,
Because this, delivered down from our Fathers, the whole Church does observe.
See S Chrysostom: testimony of this tradition in the next Sect. n. 4 And this
tradition is that which I now stand upon, which indeed did shine in the
practice of the primitive Church. You shall not find one Liturgy, or Service
book, used in the ancient Church, which is not witness of this tradition; though
these books were found in every Parish of Christendom in which divine Service
was almost daily Said. Tertullian (who lived within less then a hundred and
fifty years after the Canon of Scripture was finished) does number up this
custom of prayer for the dead among the ancient traditions; De corona milit.
C. 3. It is ordinary in Law (for proof of long possession) to find witnesses
testifying what was done not only fifty, but also three or four score years
ago: Wherefore even two or three handings of this tradition by such aged
hands, would reach down this practice from S. John the Evangelists time to
Tertullian. And it is but a small allowance to a thing testified to be a
tradition, to allow it three or four descents (can the authenticalnes of the
Apocalips be better proved, going upwards to the Apostles, then this? I am sure
Baptism for Children cannot. Again, in both these points it is a most strong
argument (and as strong for Prayer for the dead, as for the other) that no time
can be named in which these customs began; No Man can be thought of, who could
by human means (and such means as should not make a mighty Noise amongst
those great reverencers of tradition) draw all the world, in so short a time
after the Apostles, to follow customs as Apostolical which then, that is, in
that age in which they were first vented, Were evidently, by every man, not
only known, but clearly seen to be new hatched Novelties; and not ancient and
Apostolical traditions. This man who broached this false doctrine should have
been putt in the Catalogues of heretics by S. Epiphanius and S. Austen:
whereas they did not only not put him down for an heretics, but they both did
put down Aerius for one, because he taught the contrary. Now if you speak of
these Customs, going downward, until the Age in which they began to be
denied by Anabaptists, or Protestants; Prayer for the dead has come down with
such a full stream, that it drew all Countries in all ages with it; in so much
that every where (but among a few late borne Arminians and Albigenses) the
public service books in all Parishes of all Countries can be as sure
witnesses of this custom, as the Copies of Age after age can testify we have
the true Copy of the Apocalips. And so old Rituals will testify (though not
so fully) Baptism of Children, by witnessing the Ceremonies observed in such
Baptismes. And, as for prayer for the dead, the very stones cry out in all old
monuments, for our prayers for those who ly interred under them. The ouldest
foundations be those, which our greatest grand fathers made (as appears by
the most ancient Records) for the obteyning prayers for their Souls: And this
not in one Country, but there is not one Country which abounds not with such
Monuments, and such Records; the very strongest proofs of assured antiquity
and unquestionable tradition.

5. Thus, I hope, I have made good that, tradition shining in perpetual
practice in all times, and all ages, is a surer relator and reporter, then a
testimony in writing; which, if ancient, must also have the prime testimony
(witnessing it to be vncorrupt) from tradition. And hence also you clearly see,
that Scripture, true or false, can be no better known to be so then true
tradition from false: for if Tradition could be false in any point so
universally current; it might bear witness to a false Scripture, and deny due
approbation to many true ones.

6. When then we are demanded, how we can know a true Tradition from a false
one? We answer, first; that we can do this better then you can know true
books, and true Copies of the true books of Scripture, from false: for,
before you can do either of these, you must first know true Tradition from
false; that hence you may, not coniecturally, but assuredly say. These be the
true books of Scripture; these be the true Copies of these true Books;
because true Tradition recommendeth them for such: These be false books, or
false Copies of true books; because the Tradition which recommendeth these, is
false. Tell me the means by which infallibly the true tradition in this point
may be known from the false; and that very means I will assign to know, in
other points, true Tradition from false. Secondly, I shall show, that we have
better means to do this, then all the world had to know their true traditions
from false, for the first two thousand years, before the time of Moses.
Thirdly, I answer directly, by assigning this means; which is, when a doubt
begins to be far spread in the Church concerning any tradition, to call a
general Council, and there, by the examination instituted by men most knowing
of antiquity in general, and particularly well versed in the received, and
approved old customs of their countries. For the countries of those in the
Council being so far distant, and so wholly independent one of an other,
cannot possibly have all of them received, and that without any known
opposition in any one of them, one and the very self same tradition, from any
other hands but from those, from whom they received their whole faith, and this
particular tradition for part of it. For, had the beginers and sowers of this
tradition now questioned, been after the first Planters of our faith, there
would in some country or other, be found out some author of this first
tradition; there would be some fame good, or badde, of that man who was able
to persuade a phansy of his own, to be Apostolical doctrine; and to be firmly
held so by all the world, without opposition in any part thereof, even though
this tradition (as you say of most of our traditions) had a direct opposition
to the ancient doctrine of the Apostles. Which doctrine, when our traditions
were held for Apostolical, was too too fresh to be so soon forsaken, and that
so easily, and so generally, with out any opposition. Now when the^ the gravest
Prelates from all parts of the world assembled, having instituted an exact
process of the true antiquity and universality of the tradition questioned;
and in this process found an unanimous consent of all kind of testimonies from
all corners of the world; it is now iuridically and notoriously made evident,
that such a point has come down to us by a true tradition; and for that very
reason is a true object of faith, being the word of God delivered by as
faithful a messenger, as the very Copies of Scripture are. And thus, when it
was grown doubtful in the Church, whether such and such books were part of
the true Cano^ of Scripture; the tradition which recommended these books was
examined in the third Council of Carthage, in which S. Austen was present, and
there (as I showed Sect. 3. n. 12.) all the books of our Canon (so different
from yours) were found to be recommended to the Church by a true and
authentical tradition: and therefore we embrace them as the word of God;
Tradition being as credible a relatour of Gods word delivered by the Apostles
to the Church, as any writing.

7. Whence again you need not wonder to see that by us and by the Fathers
cited in the next Section numb: 4. Tradition is equalized to Scripture, for
this is nothing else but to hold that the word of God delivered by tradition
is as sure a messe^ger as any writing ca^ be, and is to be believed, as much as
the word of God delivered by writing and such a writing as has no surer witness
of being Authentical then tradition. Hence S. Austen (de vtilit. Credendi C.
14.) disputing with an Heretic, who would first have him to believe Scripture
before Catholic Tradition, makes the heretic speak thus: Beleeeve this
writing. Then he replies; But every writing if it be new and unheard of,
recommnded by a few, no other reason cofirmlng it; we do not believe the
writing, but we believe those who bring forth this writing: wherefore if you
(Lutherans, Calvinists, etc.) bring forth this writing, you being so few and
so unknown (for where were you these last thousand years before Luther?) I
have no mind to believe you. Now because the heretic knew not how to press S.
Austen to give first credit to this writing or Scripture, by saying that all of
his religion said it was the word of God; without pressing him with the
testimony of all the Christian world by universal tradition: S. Austen
prevents him, by telling him; well you will send me to the multitude and fame
(of Church tradition;) but I pray rather admonish me to seek out the chief
leaders of this Multitude, and to seek them out most diligently and most
laboriously, that from these, (governers of the churches) rather the^ from you,
I may learn some thing of these writings: for if these me^ had not been, I
should never have known that there had been at all any thing to be learnt
(concerning these Scriptures truly in my mind this, not only authority, but
this most pressing reason of S. Austen, conuinceth that the Governors of this
multitude of all true believers (especially assembled in one Council together)
be the best guides God has given us upon earth, both to know which is
Scripture, of the true word of God written; and which Tradition, or the true
word of God unwritten: and also to know most assuredly, how this word of God is
rightly understood. Wherefore presently the same S. Austen (Cap: 15.) does
admonish, us for the avoiding of all errors, as the easiest means thereunto,
willingly to obey the precepts of that Catholic Church, precepts made by her
with so great an authority. And then in his Sixteenth Chapter he clearly tells
us that, God having given us this Authority, we ought not to despair of an
infallible means to know the truth; because this Authority is that very
infallible means confirmed by miracles, and by the miraculous multitude
following it so extremely against all human interest. Thus then he discourses;
For if the divine providence of God does nor preside in human affairs, in vain
would solicitude be about Religion: But if both the very outward beauty of all
things, and our inward Conscience does both publicly and privately exhort us
to seek out and serve God, we are not to despair that there is some
authority appointed by the same God, on which Authority we relying, as on an
assured step, may be lifted up to God. This Authority moves us by two ways,
partly by Miracles, partly by the multitude of its followers. Behold here an
authority appointed by God, an authority, on which we may most securely rely,
and not only not get a fall (slipping into errors) by leaning upon it
confidently; but an authority, on which we relying, as on an assured step,
may be lifted up to God, who with miracles has confirmed this authority to be
most secure. Whence presently S. Aug: tells us how those miracles have drawn so
great a multitude. But whether this multitude were Catholics, or Protestants,
you shall know them by their fruits, for they had a Temperance extended to
fasting with bread and water, and not only daily fasts, but fasts continued for
many days. A Chastity disdaining the having wife or children; a patience
sleyghting crosses and slames; a Liberality reaching forth to the distributing
out to the poor their whole patrimonies. These things we see still daily
among Catholics; and though, (as S. Austen adds) but few do these things, yet
all people praise the^, approve the^, love the^: none accounted the^
superstitious in those days. When we see then so great hope from God, so great
profit, and fruit, shall we doubt to betake our selves to the lap of that
Church which even by the confession of mankind from the Apostolic seat (so
antiquity uses to call the seat of the Bishop of Rome) by succession of
Bishops has obtained the top of authority; heretics in vain barking round
about it, but condemned partly by the judgment of the people (upon tradito^,)
partly by the gravity of Councels, partly by the majesty of Miracles; to which
church not to give the first place is truly a thing either of greatest Impiety,
or of headlong Arrogance. So he. So I. So we all.

8. I have putt down the place more fully because D. Fern Sect. 30. would
disprove our Tenets by the deep Silence of them in Antiquity, and particularly
in S. Austen, Whom I shall show also presently ( Sect. 21. n. 5.6.) in a doze^
places of his works to hold dictinctly this infallibility of the Church in her
traditions and doctrine. Well then, she being as infallible in delivering the
unwritten word of God, as in delivering the written word; the Prelates
assembled in her Councels have as much reason to rule themselves, and their
subjects by the one, as by the other. By a writing only we never knew any
Common wealth governed. By Tradition only the whole English Nation has kept
our Common Law; which was never written by the Law Makers themselves; Yet is
made no less known by only Tradition then our statute Laws which were
delivered in writing by the Law makers. But what speak I of one Nation? The
whole Church through the whole world was governed by Tradition only. For the
first two thousand years; and then partly by Tradition, partly by writing, it
was governed for above two thousand Years more; to wit, for the second two
thousand years from Moses until Christ's time. See Sect: 16. n. 1. Now from
the preaching of Christ unto the finishing of the Canon, and the diuulging of
the same in such languages as all Nations understood, very many years passed,
and all the true believers in Christ's Church were governed by Tradition only;
See Sect: 16. n. 2. And whereas some of our adversaries obscurely answer; That
the word of God was in substance before Christ's Church, which (say they) was
begotten by it. We reply clearly to them thus: When (say we) You speak of
the word of God, which was before Scripture, and which begot the Church, you
speak of the unwritten word of God; This unwritten word is that very thing
which we call Tradition. And indeed when you speak of such a word, as must be
sufficient for an exterior and infallible direction for so many Millions (as
were to be directed by it in the way of Salvation before the Scripture was all
written, and divulged in such languages that might make it fit to direct all
Nations) you must of necessity put this word of God outwardly expressed by some
means or other, expressing it in such a manner, as might be able to produce
this effect of guiding whole Millions in the way of Salvation, by an infallible
belief of all that God has said by that word. Now (I pray) find me out any
word of God, any where existent before Scripture, in a manner fit for the end
I now speak of, except this word be granted to have wholly existed in the
Orall Tradition of the Church of those times. You all say, Gods word revealed
is the ground of all faith. All these millio^s of the true believers in those
ages bad true faith; therefore they had Gods word revealed, and revealed in a
sufficient manner to ground divine faith. But they had Gods word revealed by
Orall Tradition only; Therefore Gods word, revealed by orall Tradition only, is
a sufficient ground to ground divine faith; which it could not be, were it not
infallible, in what it delivers for Gods word; and what is thus delivered (by
being so delivered) is a fit Object of divine faith, such as they all had in
those ages.

9. This then is the first Reason why the Church in her Councels directs her
self as well by the unwritten, as by the written word of God, because the one
is as truly in it self the word of God, and as sufficiently notified to us to
be so by Tradition, as the Scripture is notifyed to be so by writing: for which
cause holy Fathers still taught those things which we know by Tradition only,
to be believed and held equally to those things which we know by Scripture.
See Sect: 20. n. 4. A second reason why this Church not only does, but of
necessity must direct and govern her self not by Scripture only, but also by
unwritten Traditions, is because Scripture only does not deliver down unto us
all points necessary for the whole Church, and all the members thereof: as I
have at large showed Quest: 2. naming no fewer then four and twenty of those
necessary points. All these points being wholly necessary, and errors being
no where more dangerours then in points wholly necessary, there does arise an
unavoidable necessity to grant, that the first Church planted by the Apostles,
received her necessary direction and infallible instruction in these points by
Tradition only; for manifest it is, that they at the first received from the
Apostles all complete instruction in necessary points: And Again it is no less
manifest, that they received no such complete instruction in Scripture
concerning those twenty four points, for then we should be able to find this
instruction in Scriptures, which we not being able to do, we must perforce
grant that they received this instruction by tradition expressed in no kind
of Scripture, but such as commanded in general all men to hold the Traditions
delivered to them. 2 Thessalonians: 2. And that though an angel from heaven should
teach the contrary or besides what they received, they should account him
Anathema, Gal: 8. And again Have thou the form of sound words which thou have
heard of me 2. Ti: 1.13. And yet again c. 2. The things which thou have heard
(he says not read) of me by many witnesses, these commend to faithful men
which shall be fit to teach others also. Now as the first Age received their
necessary instruction by being sent to no other rule of faith in these
necessary points then the Tradition of the Church, and by this only were most
completely instructed in divine faith; so now this present Church in all points
not clearly expressed in Scripture, and also in that prime point of rightly
interpreting the Scripture it self, has recourse to Tradition as to an
infallible Rule, able to make all that it teaches a fit Object of divine and
infallible faith.

10. A third Reason why Councels may and ought to propose Tradition to
themselves for an infallible Rule of faith, is this; Because that Rule must
needs be infallible by which only we can be assured what the Apostles both by
writing, and out of writing did teach to the Church: For in their doctrine
written and unwritten, all things belonging to faith are contained; that
therefore which infallibly teaches us this, and is also the only thing which
teaches us this, must needs be the infallible Rule of faith: But Tradition is
the only thing which teaches us this; to wit, what the Apostles did teach us
both by writing and by word of mouth without writing; which this Tradition
performs by millions of true believers of the first age, all taken a part (as
witnesses use to be to find out how well they all agree in their testimony)
and placed in several parts in the world; Many vastly distant from one an
other, and yet all delivering the same things to those other millions, who in
greater number succeeded them in life, and in delivering the same things, in
the same manner to new millions of their posterity, all constantly agreeing in
the testification of the very self same points, all affirming them to have
bee^ delivered publicly in Churches, and greatest assemblies every where all
their country over; and that so very exceeding often, and by so very many and
by so very diverse persons of all kind of conditions, that it is more possible
for all men in the world to fall into a fit of dancing just for a quarter of
an hour at one and the self same time, without ever agreeing to do so before
hand; then it is possible for all these millions of men in so different places,
and of so different judgments by nature, and so contrary in their humors,
inclinations and proceedings, to conspire thus in one and the same story
containing so many particulars, without that thing had been really and
notoriously true, which so many millions, taken in so different circumstances,
all testified unanimously to be true. If this does not make it evide^tly
credible that the Apostles taught this, I dare say that no miracle which God
can do, without forcing our wills, can make this point evidently credible unto
us. Neither have we any thing else but this Tradition which makes it
evide^tly credible to us what the Apostles did teach the first Church by
writing, and by such writings, and by such and such things delivered only by
word of Mouth. Wherefore either by such a testimony as this, or by no testimony
at all, we may be induced to believe infallibly that the Apostles did teach
such and such things by word of mouth, and also did write such and such books.
And it is most preposterous to believe for this testimony this last part, and
not to believe the first part; yea this is plain contradiction in him who
understands what he does: for on the one side he says, The testimony of
Tradition suffices to make a thing a fit Object of divine faith, so that upon
this testimony only I may build that infallible assent, by which I believe
these and these books to have been delivered by the Apostles; and yct I will
not believe that the Apostles delivered by word of Mouth the doctrine of
praying for the dead, of baptizing infants etc, because this self same
testimony of tradition suffices not to make a thing a fit object of faith, to
which before I said it did suffice. How then come I now to say it does not
suffice, and to contradict my self with the same breath? I end with Doctor
Ferns own words. 2. It is impossible that all the Christian Churches which
began in and about the Apostolical times, and so succeeded through all Nations
and ages, should be either deceaved in what they unanimously witnessed, or
agree all of them to deceave those who followed them.

SECT: XX.
That the Fathers teaches these Traditions, and the definitions of the
Councels or Church to be infallible.

1. WE must first correct the error of some apprehensions, who do not conceive
suck Authorities of Fathers to speak home to our purpose, unless they say
plainly the Church is infallible. The Fathers did conceive themselves in their
writings to speak to men capable so far of reason as to be able to deduce a
clear evident consequence, when they are comepleatly furnished with the
principles, from which it must needs follow. You shall not perhaps find a
clear place that says the Apostles were infallible; Yet we have evident
principles from whence we deduce that verity. Note that we now vulgarly use
this word infallible, because no word more fully, and breefly expresses our
mind. The thing meant by this word, was, by most equivalent expressions, set
down to the very full by Antiquity.

2. I will show this clearly by what I have already showed Antiquity to affirm
concerning the infallibility of Councels, in the last Section but one. There
you shall see Constantine praised by Antiquity for reverenting the sentence of
the first Council as if it had been spoaken by Gods own mouth, and punishing
the gainsayers of it as Violatours of a divine Law. Is not this a full
acknowledgment of infallibility? As also when S. Athanasius calls this
definition the word of God. Is not the like fully acknowledgment which was
showed there to be made by S. Hormisda believing the Hoy Ghost to have spoken
in the Fathers of that Council, and by S. Cyrill affirming them to have been
inspired by the Holy Ghost that they should not swerve from truth having the
Holy Ghost speaking in them; and calling their definitions, The Rule of pure
faith, which nothing can be but what is infallible. The same is spoken
equivalently when he says again, that Christ did preside invisibly in that
Council in which the Ambassadors of the Bishop of Rome presided visibly. The
same is done by S. Leo affirming that to be settled by the holy Ghost which was
defined by the Council, and calling the Canons thereof, made by the Holy Ghost
or Spirit of God using also the like speeches of the definitio^s of the Council
of Chalcedon, tearming them a Rule proceeding from divine inspiration. Is not
this to acknowledge such a Rule infallible? What more has been written of the
Apostles doctrine? Diverse other such like sayings I have there given you, out
of the Holy Fathers, affirming Lawful Councels to be gathered by the Holy
Ghost, and what was done in them not to be done by Human industry, because the
Fathers so assembled were full of the Holy Ghost. Hence also there was such
reverence professed to their definitions as to the very Ghospels them selves,
which is to express infallibility in a superlative degree: In which degree
also I may place the sayings of those Fathers, who called the Definitions of
Councels, The ground of our faith, The Rock of our belief, Rules of faith, the
very Foundations of truth. All superlative expressions of Infallibility, And
yet men will please to wonder at the deep silence of Fathers, concerning this
point in which they could never content themselves to speak in a vulgar
manner, but always in such a high strein of veneration, that the true
believers might be not only instructed to believe, but also taught to reverence
this infallibility, as the communication of the Spirit of divine truth, as
indeed it is; Concerning Councels then what we said in that Section co^teyning
all this here recapitulated shall suffice. Remember also what Vincentius
Lerinensis C. 4. says All those who will not be accovnted Heeetikes must
conform themselves to the decrees of general Councels. Let us now see what
they say of the infallibility of Tradition, taking Tradition as it conteynes
what is not written in Scripture, and yet is necessary to be believed or
practiced.

3. This Tradition the Fathers acknowledge infallible and several ways; some
of them I have sufficiently insinuated Sect: 12. where I showed that the
Fathers refused to stand to Scripture only, as to the only, Rule of faith,
because all necessary Principles for convincing of Heretics could not be
deduced sufficiently from thence: And consequently they did hold that there
was some other Rule of faith, containing those principles, to wit Tradition,
which could not be this other Rule of faith, nor furnish them sufficiently with
such principles, except she, in delivering of them, were infallible. There
also I showed that the Fathers held diverse points necessarily to be believed or
practiced, for which they professed, themselves to have no Scripture, but only
Tradition: Therefore they held this to be a sufficient ground of faith. There
also I showed that they held diverse points to be damnable errors, which they
know to be contrary to no written Rule, therefore they thought is was
sufficient to hold them for damnable Heresies, only because they were contrary
to the unwritten Rule of faith, which we call Tradition, which if it were a
fallible Rule, it might be gainsaid without falling into the damnable Sin of
Heresy, of which Sin the gainsayers of it are, for this only reason accused
by the Fathers. I have also Sect: 16. n. 3. showed, how manifestly S. Ireneus
teaches the unwritten Rule of Tradition (and such Tradition as was really in
the Church then existent) to be a sufficient Rule, and ground for divine faith
and consequently to be infallible. In the very last Sect: n. 3. I gave you
Tertullians plain words condemning them who say the Church can err in her
Traditions. But of Tertullian. See Sect: 12. n: 4. 5. In the next number
following I gave you two clear places out of S. Epiphanius for our obligation
to follow these Traditions. Going on to the seventh Numb. I gave you not only a
convincing Authority, but an unanswerable argument of S. Austens for the
infallibility of the Church in her Traditions; whose authority he teaches to
be appointed by God that there may be some sufficient authority upon which, men
relying, as upon a well assured step, may be lifted up to God; and he
houldeth it a headlong arrogance not to rely upon it: which had been most
inconsideratly spoken, had it been only fallible, All this is already
dispached;let us now proceed to the full confusion of these who complain of so
deep silence in this point of Infallibility, And because D. Fern Sect: 24.
says, the authorities cited by Bellarmin come not home, I will begin with some
authorities taken out of him, which I shall show to reach abundantly home to
our purpose.

4. S. Denis Disciple to S. Paul C. 1. Eccl: Herarch: says; Those our first
Captains of Preestly function (to wit the Apostles) did deliver to us the
cheifest and supersubstantiall points partly in written, partly in unwritten
institutions. So that, part of the cheifest, and consequently part of the
necessary and fundamental points, were delivered to us in unwritten Traditions
only. If therefore this Tradition be only a fallible Rule, we have no
infallible Rule to rely upon in all points necessary; because part of them must
rely upon unwritten Traditions only. S. Justin in the end of his second Apology
for the Christians, among these unwritten Traditions places some things made
necessary by Apostolical precepts; As the consecrating of Wine mingled with
water; and that is is lawful to no body (though never so contrite for his
Sins) to receave the Eucharist before baptism. Is not this necessary? and yet
what Scripture have you for it and where find you in clear Scripture that the
Apostles were baptized before they communicated in the last supper of our Lord?
There follows the Authority of S. Ireneus, which I have showed to reach so
home, that the whole faith of whole Nations may be divine, and infallible by
relying only upon traditions, even long after the finishing of the Canon of
Scripture S. Chr: upon 2. Th: 2. It is manifest that the Apostles did not
deliver us all things in writing but many things without any writing: and these
be Worthy of the very self same faith. Good M. Doctor is that, which is
fallible, worthy of the same faith which that which is infallible is worthy of?
He held then Tradition as infallible as Scripture; of which I have given you a
clear reason Sect: 9. number: 3. Theophilact and Oecumenius upon the same place of
S. Paul deliver just the same doctrine. Of S. Epiphanius I have spoaken
already. And Bellarmin recounts how angry Brentius is whith him for saying;
that it is by Apostolical tradition known to be unlawful to marry after a vow
of Virginity. It is necessary to avoid, that which is damnable. Wherefore to
all who have made such vows, the knowledge of this point is necessary
Tradition therefore delivers some necessary points: Hear S. Epiphanius his
words (Heresy. 61.) It behooves us also to use tradition because all things
cannot be had out of Scripture. The Apostles delivered some things in writings,
some things by Tradition; As S. Paul says, according as I have delivered unto
you. And in an other place. So I teach, so I have delivered to the Churches.
The Holy Apostles of God then have delivered that it is a Sin to marry after
Virginity decreed; to wit, by vow. Besides what I have cited out of Turtullian
already, he is much to be insisted upon in his Book de Prescrip: where C. 19.
he very distinctly notes; that first of all, before ever you enter into dispute
with Heretics out of the Scripture, you must dispute these following points:
From whom, by whom, when and to whom that discipline was delivered by which we
were made Christians? and there assuredly will be found the truth of Scriptures
the truth of their interpretation, and the truth of all Christian Traditions.
Mark here how the first ground, upon which we are to stand, as upon a ground
most advantageous for gaining the victory against error, and purchasing triumph
to truth, is Tradition; For by that alone, and no possible way but by that, we
assuredly know from whom (to wit from Christ sending his Apostles) by whom (to
wit by the Apostles) When (in the time of their preaching) to whom (to wit to
the Churches founded by them) this discipline by which we were made Christians
was delivered. From the Tradition then of these Churches as you take the letter
of Scripture, we take also the Soul and interpretation of it conserved in the
daily answerable practice first instituted by those Apostles, and thence by
Tradition (as surely as by any writing) delivered down by successive practice
of all such Churches; to which Churches Tertullian, in his next words,
distinctly expresses him self to send us, for the foresaid end. And thus all
things being driven to their first Source and Origin) will be discovered that
only Tradition, is in which all these Mysteries of our faith are contained;
upon this ground, says he, I will prescribe, That what the Apostles have
preached ought nor to be proved any other way but by those Churches, which the
Apostles them selves have founded either by preaching to them by word of mouth,
or by Epistle. And if this be so, it is evident that all doctrine, agreeing
with the doctrine of these Apostolical and Mother Churches, is suitable to
truth, and to be embraced without all doubt (so infallible does this Tradition
make it.) And thus Tertullian goes on still pressing his adversary,
independently of all Scripture, merely by the tradition of this present Church,
showing her pedigree from the primitive Church: And this way, and only this
way, he prescribes that we ought to show what Christ and his Apostles taught.
And in the beginning of his Book de Corona Militis, his doctrine comes very
home in many things to our purpose; As first, when a question is asked, why we
in this Church (whose pedigree we can draw from the Apostles) do pray for the
dead? pray to Saints? worship the Eucharist etc, the very asking of this
Question, why do you do it? proves that we do it. And because we every where
do it in the Church, the observation of these practices is to stand good,
because, we are Habentes observationem inveteratam quae praeveniendo, statum
fecit. Hanc si nulla Scriptura determinavit, certe consuetudo roboravit; quae
sine dubio etc. we have an observation which by prevention, having got along
standing prescription, has settled it self. And though no Scripture has
determinately appointed this observance, yet custom has given it strength:
which custom without all doubt came from Tradition; For how can a thing be in
practice (so universally) if it were not at first delivered by Tradition? Now
if you say, that even for such practices, delivered by Tradition, the Sripture
must be alleged, all his whole following discourse is framed against this
objection, and he mustereth up a number of things, then observed by the Church
(that is in the first two hundred years) without any proof of Scripture, by
the mere and sole title of Tradition. Thus much is very home M. Doctor; as also
that among those most primitive obseuances he places, Offering for the dead,
and the even wearing out our forehead with making the Sign of the Cross at
all kind of works we begin: And though a man may be saved who does not
practice these things, yet they being Apostolical institutions, how can a man
be saved who contemnes them? It was not in vain says S. Chrysostom hom: in
Ep: ad Philip: and again hom: 69. ad populum. It was not in vain decreed by
the Apostles, That in the celebration of those most dreadful Mysteries, memory
should be made of those who are dead: They knew well that much benefitt and
profitt did hence redound unto them. See if you be safe who condemn that for
superstitious, which the Apostles decreed as most beneficial to the Souls; of
which I have spoaken more Se: 19. n: 4. And of S. Austens authority Sect: 12.
n: 3. 4. 5. (and you must observe how he speaks of that which on the one side
he held wholly necessary, as Infants baptism, not Rebaptizing Heretics, and
yet no where set down in scripture:) which is to come further home then D.
Fern could wish. To these I add Origin: Prefat: in Lib: Periarch: That only
is to be believed for truth which in nothing disagrees from the Tradition of
the Church: And in our understanding Scripture, we must not believe otherwise
the^ the Church of God has by succession delivered unto us. Wherefore if all
the world understood those words, This is my Body, concerning a most real
corporal presence, we must not believe otherwise, again because, the public
practice of the Church does understand S. James (when he bids the Priests to be
called for to anoynte the sick with oil, to obtain forgiveness of their
Sins) to speak of a true Sacrament he clearly teaches by this her practice,
that the Scripture should not be understood otherwise. The authorities
therefore of the Fathers, com homo to our purpose when so often they inculcate
this verity.

5. So also do those Fathers who profess them selves to receive such and such
Books for Canonical upon Tradition. The very same Rufinus (who alone is found
to deliver the whole Canon just as you do) in the words immediately going before
the naming those Canonical Books, speaks thus in Enarratione Symboli: It
seems good distinctly to set down in this place which be the volumes of the
new and old Testament, which are believed to have been inspired by the Holy
Ghost (mark the ground why) according to the Tradition of our Ancestors, as
we have received them out of the Monuments of our fore fathers. Note that he
here does not only take the Canonical books for Tradition which most
Protestants will say they themselves do, but he takes then to be Canonical
for tradition; and upon this ground he says, They were believed to have been
inspired by the Holy Ghost. See also what I said of the Council of Carthage and
others Sect: 3. upon this ground S. Athanasius (in fine Synopsis) receives the
Ghospel of S. Matthew, and rejects the Ghospel of S. Thomas. Upon this ground
Tertullian S. Heirome, S. Aug: S. Leo, do admit such books to be, and to deny
others to be Canonical. Upon this ground S. Austen receives the Acts of the
Apostles. See his words Sect: 22. fine Hence also Eusebius says in Histor:
Eccl: Lib. 3. Such Scriptures by Tradition are held for true, genvine and
manifestly allowed by the opinion of all, and that hence, as by an evident note
or mark they be distinguished from others. Behold the most perspicuous note
or mark by which Scriptures could infallibly be known. If this Rule be
fallible, we have no infallibility of the Scriptures being or not being
canonical Writings. None of the Holy Fathers can be showed to have let fall
one word insinuating, that by the light discovered in such or such books, they
were assured, and that infallibly, of their being Canonical; of which I spoak
Sect: 3.

SECT: XXI.
That the Fathers teach in general the Church to be infallible.

1. BESIDES those manifold authorities which I have cited out of the Fathers,
clearly teaching the church infallible in her Traditions (by which and by her
answerable practice, she makes known to her Children her belief) and besides
those other Authorities teaching that this Church, in her Representative or
General Councels, does with the infallible assistance of the Holy Ghost, set
forth her Canons, or Rules for belief and practice; there be several other
authorities in which the Fathers, in very full expressions, declare their
belief of the Churches infallibility: for when soever the Fathers speak of the
Churches being to be followed by us in all things most securely, as being a
certain guide or Rule; or when they use any such kind of speech they either
mean the Church representative in a Lawful Council, or the Church Universal,
delivering such or such a point by tradition shining with conformable practice.
Whence my Reader will observe how the Fathers (whose speeches of the Church in
general I am going to cite) when they use such general speeches, do confirm,
by their authority, what I have said of the infallibility of the Church
Representative in Councels, or of the like infallibility of the Church
Universal in her Traditions. And on the other side all those manifold
authorities, by which infallibility of Councels and Traditions have been
already confirmed by me, do also confirm this general proposition. That the
Church is infallible: that is, the Church as well universal, speaking by
Tradition; as Representative, speaking by a General Council.

2. Of this infallibility in general thus S. Cyprian de vnitate Eccl: The
Church is the sponse of Christ which cannot play the Adulteress. And Again
Epist: 55. The Church never departs from what she once has known. And S.
Hierome thus, Lib. 3. in Ruffinum. C. 8. fine In Her is the Rule or Square of
Truth. And thus also Rufinus (in Enarrat: Symbol:) explicating those words; I
believe the Holy Catholic Church: she therefore is the Holy Church not having
spott or wrinckle, words spoaken of Christ's visible Church on Earth as appears
as well by the words going before, which are; In this Church there is one
faith, one Baptism; as by the words following, Many others have gathered
Churches together as Marcion, Valentinus, Arius etc; But those Churches be not
without spott and wrinkle. Had Christ's only Church upon Earth been so foul,
(as you must of necessity say it was for a full thousand years, before your
Reformation) she had notoriously played the adultresse and been indeed the
whore of Babylon, as you at every occasion call the only Church Christ then
had, or as pure as any he then had. This Church also had interiourly departed
from what she received, she had played the Mistrisse of misrule and not been
the Rule and square of Truth, lastly she had not been without most hideous
spotts, and far greater deformities then wrinckles. See how you have painted
her out above in my Sect: 15. n. 8. How differently S. Ireueus, Lib. 3. C. 40.
where the Church is, there is the Spirit of God: But the Spirit is truth: And
Lactantius, Lib. 13. cap: vlt: calls the Church The wellspring of Truth, The
dwelling place of faith. You, who make the Church dwelling in Error so many
ages join error, and most intolerable error, to geather with the Spirit of
truth. How was this Spirit of truth in a Church imposing lies (as you say) for
divine verities and exacting of all, under pain of excommunication, to submit
to her proceedings here in? And yet you can find Christ no better Church for
the last thousand years. There be four Fathers for whose testimonies diverse of
our adversaries use to call, in so much that they account their deep silence
our condemnation, because those Fathers have treated expressly against
Heretics, and undertaken how to direct others in the true faith; and therefore
doubtless, had they esteemed the Church to have been infallible they would have
made her direction the first Rule of all. The first of these Fathers is
Vicentius Lerinensis, whom I have already sheved at large to stand mainly upon
this direction. See his words cited Sect. 7. As for the second, who is
Tertullian he lived before the Church had or could have any general Council,
by reason of the universal persecution under those Heathenish Emperors: and
so Tertullian does not indeed speak of the Church representative in Councels;
Yet he speaks home of the infallibility of the Church universal, declaring
her doctrine by her Tradition, and her practice conformable to her Tradition
and in all thus declared Tertullian houlds her infallible; as I have already
showed the last Sect: n: 4.

3. The third Father is S. Epiphanius, who how clearly he speaks of the
infallibility of the Church in her Traditions, we have seen in the same
number: I add here further an admirable saying of this father of the Churches
infallibility: for having showed Heresy. 49. how all Heresies seek to go by new
found by ways, he calls the following of the Church that kings high way of
which Moses spoake (Mystically by the King of Edom) saying; that he would pass
by that right on to the Land of Promise, neither declining at the right hand
nor the left, neither on this side not on that, but we will go on straight in
the Kings high way. For the Kings high way is the Holy Church of God, the Road
of Truth. But every one of these Heresies leaving this Kings high way decline
either on the right hand or on the left to error. But you O servants of God,
you Sons of the Church of God, who have known the sure Rule, and do go on in
the way of truth, go on clearfully, and be not called back by their words and
clamours, for their ways be erroneous. So he Here you have, that all Heresies
agree in this, that they leave the infallible direction of the Church, and
become Heretics by choosing out ways on their own head, erroneous ways,
which in the Church never could have been met with all, she being the Kings
high way, the beaten Road of Truth, the sure Rule, the way of truth. What more
clear? To take the Churches direction as infallible, is the very bane of
Christendom with Doctor Fern; with others it is the most intolerable error
in Popery, making all the errors incurable: and yet this ancient holy Father
who (as S. Austen in his Book of Heresies says) is the most learned man that
had written of Heresies reprehendeth all and every one of these Heresies, for
erring, by refusing to follow the Church, as a sure Rule, and as the Kings
highway, and as a known Road of truth. Now if your censuring the Church for
teaching her self to be this sure Rule and plain high way of Truth, were
just, S. Epiphanius did him self err most misserably, in imputing the denial
of this to them all as an error, of which every one of those Heresies stood
guilty. It is therefore most false which a certain university man (of whom I
shall speak more in the next Chapter) over rashly affirms, that neither S.
Epiphanius, nor S. Austen in their Catalogues of Heretics, branded any one as
guilty for gainsaying this infallible guidance of the Church. For you see S.
Epiphanius brands all Heresies with this foul mark, saying; That every of
these Heresies leaving this Kings high way (of the Church the sure Rule, and
plain Road of Truth) declines either on the right hand, or on the left. And
the same Father ending his Books of Heresies says, these be the young
wenches) so he reads that place of the Canticles Cap: 6. v. 8.) which are
said to be without number: and then to the Church he applies the next verse,
My Dove, my undefiled is but one, One is this Virgin, this chaste one, this
spouse, the holy city of God, the faith, the foundation of truth the firm
Rock against which the gates of Hell shall not prevail. And then going to give
an abridgement of the faith of the Catholic Church, he exults in the
beginning, that he is now to have nothing to do with filthy Heresies, but has
made his approach to the Calm Coasts of Truth, to wit, the doctrine of the
Church And mark how secure from errors he thinks him self here; for now
(says he) being free of all fear and trouble and tediousnes, and being in
an excellent posture by reason of the firm tranquillity and security here
breathing, how did we rejoice in spirit being received in a Serene Haven? We
have passed many evels in our navigation, through the foresaid Seas (of
Heresies) but now having in sight the City (of the Church) let us make have to
this Holy Jerusalem, and Virgin of Christ, and Spouse and secure foundation and
Rock, our Reverend Mother, most seasonably saying; Let us ascend unto the
mountain of our Lord, and into the House of the God of Jacob, and she will
teach us our ways (and not errors for how free she is from them he farther
expresses.) Let us speak to her these words which her spouse did; Come my
spouse from Libanus, because thou art all fair, and there is not any spott in
thee: (this he says of the visible Church on earth teaching us on earth her
ways, for presently he flies to her thus;) to the end that being placed in
thee, we may rest from those troublesome businesses of the foregoing Heresies,
in the our Holy Mother the Church and i^ thy Holy Doctrine, and that we may be
refre^hed in the truth with the Holy and only faith of God. And having spoken
so full of this perfect security from error in the Church. he tells us whence
it proceeds; to wit, from the special assistance of God, and that she is not
like thy Concubin Queens, but that she is Queen, as the true Spouse having for
her dowry from Christ the receiving the Holy Ghost. And the^ having spent good
part of this Abridgment in showing, by the gross errors among Gentiles and
Heretics, that their faith was like the Concubines, which have no such dowry
from Christ, he returns to declare in diverse particular points the faith of
this Chaste Virgin the Church, in which nevertheles he spends but a leaf and
a half according to my Book. This I note because D. Fern Sect: 30. wonders
that in a Book of this subject there should be no more mention of Popish
doctrines, had they been the doctrines of Antiquity. I think this Doctor never
so much as read that book, for if he had, he should have found that he
speaks of no one point of any true Christian faith at all, until, he comes
to these three last leaves except it be of the admirable praises of the Church
and of her infallibility, or most safe certain, and secure direction: which is
the prime point of Popish doctrine. But whosoever shall come to answer that
place of D. Fern, will tell him how many other Popish points make up the other
leaf and leaf following: all which points are put down by S. Epiphanius as
Traditions necessary to be delivered here by him.

4. S. Epiphanius was most wrongfully accused by that university man of
silence, concerning this point of infallibility (which he so much extolleth,
where as he should have putt it for one of the Heresies if he had been one of
your Religion:) so also is S. Austen no less wronged, who is the fourth Father
whose silence of this infallibility they object; And first say they, he calls
no man Heretic for denying of it, whereas all Heretics mentioned by him in
his books of Heresy, could not but deny it according to us, or else they had
not been Heretics. A strange argument you say, because, all Heretics denied
this; therefore he should have at least noted this in some one of them. I
contrariwise say, because every one of these Heretics denied this therefore
it had been ridiculous to express it concerning any one of them as if he had
been singular in that one which is common to all, and every one (for example
Were it not ridiculous in the Catalogue of Canonical Books, put down in the
front of the Bible, to say of some particular Books, for example, of the book
Liviticus or the book of Judges) this book is the true word of God. And would
not such an addition, make men think, that the being the true word of God, was
less common to other books, or that there were some special doubt of these
two books. Just so it would be ridiculous to say such Heretics held the
Church fallible, a thing common to all Heretics. Therefore you see S.
Epiphanius, when he was speaking of any particular Heresy, did not say, what he
said of that particular Heresy, but he said Every one of these Heresies do
this; there never being any special doubt concerning any one single Heresy,
whether it did do that or no, which all Heresies, must needs do; In so much
that to give you a Catalogue of Hertickes, is the self same thing that it is
to give up a List of such men, who, teaching a doctrine, differing from the
Church to be true; must needs teach her doctrine to be false: and consequently
that she did err, and is fallible; and therefore a Judge not to be submitted
unto in those her errors. Neither did S. Austen omit to note this, if you
omit not to note well what he says. First in the beginning, He puts down the
Epistle of Quod vult Deus entreating him to write this book that he might know
what Heresies there have been? what they did hold contrary to the Catholic
Church? And also what on the contrary the Catholic Church has declared
against them? These two questions S. Austen takes special notice of in his
Preface to his book, repeating them in the words in which they were proposed by
Quod vult Deur. And then he begins to satisfy his first question by telling him
what every Heresy has held contrary to the Catholic Church. Do you not here
see how, on all sides, it is supposed that every heresy held some thing to be
true which the Church held to be false, and that therefore every Heresy must
needs teach that the Church is guilty of errors, and being mistress of errors
cannot be infallible in deciding all points truly. A little skill in
Aequipollentibus (to which those arrive who have passed the bridge) would have
made an university man see a thing so clear. Especially being the second
Question makes the first yet more clear, by acknowledging that it is the part
of the Church to declare her meaning against heretics, which is to
acknowledge her the Judge in these matters: for this question was to know quid
contra teneat Ecclesia quantum instructioni satis est subdi, that as much as
was necessary for instruction might be told him concerning the contrary,
Judgment of the Church. S. Austen comes not to touch in the least word this
second demand, until the end of his Book, and then he cuts him of thus; It is
superuously demanded (what you expected to be told by me) what the Catholic
Church judges against all these seeing that for this end (of having as much
instruction as it is necessary) it is sufficient to know that the Catholic
Church is of a contrary judgment to all these. Therefore every Christian
Catholic ought not to believe these things. Behold here the Judgment of the
Church, so much esteemed, that we have as much as is sufficient for our
instruction to avoid any opinion, when we do but know that the Church judges
the contrary: and to desire to know more, is superfluous; for this alone is
enough to make any Christian Catholic not to be of a judgment contrary to the
judgment of the Church. Could any Pope in those our days have spoaken more
Papistically? If you were to make a Catalogue of gross errors, and errors
incurable, you would put this down in capital letters.

5. Let this then be the first authority of S. Austen for the infallibility of
the Church; that we have enough to disbeleeve any opinion, when she bids us
disbeleeve it: whence it evidently follows, that we have sufficient to
believe any thing, because she bids us believe it; her authority being as well
assured for the one, as for the other. A Second very full place I gave you
Sect: 19. n. 7. Thirdly it is notorious that S. Austen often professes (see
his words which I cite presently) that Baptism given by Heretics is to be
held of infallible validity: and this, not because it is set down in any
Scripture (for he confesses it is clearly set down in noe Scripture;) but
because the Church in a Plenary Council has declared it to be so; as he often
urges in the beginning of his fourth Book de Baptism^ and there, Chap. 4. he
houldeth the validity of the baptism given by Heretics to be a point
revealed by the Holy Ghost; to wit, when the Apostles delivered this Tradition
first to the Church; as he intimates there Chap. 6. This Revelation, made by
the Holy Ghost of this point, did then grow to oblige all to assent unto it,
when it was notifyed to the Church by a Plenary Council after S. Cyprians
days; as the same S. also teaches. Fourthly he accounts it also to have
proceeded from the Holy Ghost, that we are obliged to communicate before we
eat any thing which will of the holy Ghost is not notifyed to us by any
Scripture; but the Church is of sufficient authority to notify this will of the
Holy Ghost, and to make it obligatory. His words are; It is manifest that when
the Disciples received the Body and blood of our Lord, they did not receive
fasting: Must we therefore calumniate the universal Church for all ways
receiving fasting? For hence it is that it has pleased the Holy Ghost that, in
the honor of so great a Sacrament; the Body of our Lord should enter into the
Mouth of a Christian before external meats. For this cause this custom is
kept through the whole world. Epist: 118. ad Ianuarium. Fifthly S. Austen Lib.
7. de Baptismo C. 53. treating of a question in which nothing was yet defined
by the Church, says: It is not safe for us rashly to deliver our opinion in
this matter, which is not determined by any Council; but let our care be (says
be) to affirm that to be (securae vocis) a thing to be spoaken securely which
in the government of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is confirmed by the
confession of the Universal Church. No danger of error in this speech; For I
ask you, were you not (without fear of being led into error) securely to rely
upon the testimony of that party whom Christ should bid you believe? you dare
not but say, Yes. Read then Sixthly S. Austen, and mark how fully he tells you
that; what the Church tells you, is told by one, upon whose testimony Christ
did bid you rely: and mark how he infers from hence that; as not to hear
such a person, whom Christ did bid you hear in such a controversy, were
rather to reject Christ, then to reject such a person; so not to hear the
Church, whom he did bid you hear in all Controversies, is not so much to
reject her, as to reject Christ. See if he speaks not to this effect as fully
as I have done. Thus then he writes de Vnitate fidei C. 19. Let now an
Heretic say unto me, how do you admit of me into your Communion? (he
speaks of such an one as was baptized by Heretics) then he replieth: I
readily answer you. I admit of you as that Church admits of you, to which
Church our Savior gives testimony. Do you know better, how you ought to be
admitted of, than our Savior? Here perhaps you will say) read unto me then
(out of Scripture) in what manner Christ has commanded those to be admitted
of, who desire to pass from Heretics to the Church? This clearly and
manifestly (set down in Scripture) neither I do read nor you. Now then, seeing
that in the Scripture we find not that any who passed from the Heretics to
the Church, were admitted of, either as I say (without being rebaptized) or as
you say (by first rebaptizing of them) I am of opinion, that if there should
have been some wise man, to whom our Lord Jesus Christ gives testimony and
this (wise) man were consulted by us, we ought by no means to doubt of doing
that, which he should say, least that we should be judged not so much to be
refractory to this (wise) man as to be refractory to Christ our Lord, by whose
testimony he was commended (to be heard.) But Christ does give testimony to his
Church. If then thou will not (be admitted of as she admiteth of thee) thou
do most perniciously resist not me, or any man, who will this admit of
thee, but thou do most perniciously resist our Savior himself, contrary to
thy Salvation (that is damnably) being that thou will not believe that thou
ought to be admitted of in such a manner, as that Church does admit of
thee, which Church he, by his testimony, does commend, he (I say) whom you your
selves confess that it is a wicked thing not to believe. So he; and no Papist
could speak more clearly, to declare the damnable Sin of being refractory to
the Church, even when she has no other Scripture for what she bidds, then
that Scripture which bids us hear and obey her. To which purpose Seventhly
lib. 6. 1. contra Gr^scon. cap. 33. speaking of the very self same point in
which the Churches infallible authority without other Scripture is to be wholly
relied upon, to wit, that Baptism given by Heretics is true Baptism.
Therefore although truly concerning this thing no example can be brought out of
the canonical Scriptures, yet even in this very thing the truth of the same
Scriptures is held by us, when we do that which has pleased the Church. which
Church the authority of the same Scriptures does commend, that because the holy
Scripture cannot deceive, whosoever fears to be deceaved by the obscurity of
this Question, let him go and counsult the Church concerning the same (obscure
question) which Church the Holy Scripture without all doubtfulnes does
demonstrate to us. Behold here S. Austen, in a necessary point of faith (which
after the Scriptures perused is still obscure) freeth us from all fear of
erring; if, even in such a point, we rely on the Church as infallible. Hence
Eighthly on the psalm: 57. he writheth thus: It may be that a man may lie, but it
cannot be that Truth can lie. From the Month of Truth I acknowledged Christ
Truth it seife. From the mouth of Truth I acknowledged the Church partaker of
truth. Behold that to a man subject to lie, he opposes first Christ Truth it
self by essence; secondly he opposes the Church Truth by Participation of his
truth; both of them infallible or not subject to lie, as man is. Ninethly
having delivered the doctrine of the Church concerning baptizing Children
(which point as I showed Sect: 8. n. 5. he held not to be clearly set down in
Scripture) he accounts him self by the Churches authority alone so
infallibly grounded in this point, that he breaks forth into these words,
Sermon: 14. de verbis Apostol: cap. 18. The Authority of our Mother the Church
has this. This is made good by the grounded Rule of truth. Against this
strength, against this insuperable wall whosoever rusheth shall be crushed. A
place so convincing, that those great defenders of your cause in the famous
Conference of Ratisbon, were forced to answer to it thus; In this point we
freely dissent from Austen. In Protocall: Monach: edit: 2. Page 367. But let
them take what the same S. Austen tenthly says Ep: ad Ianuar: 118. cap. 5. If
the whole Church through the world practice any thing, it is most insolent
madness to dispute whether that ought to be practiced or no. So he. Now this by
no means could be true without the Church were infallible. For a wise man may
with modesty dispute against that, which may well be an error. Eleventhly
because the enemies of the infallibility of the Church use to fright the
defenders thereof with a fond fear of being misled blindly by her Prelates,
who may (say they even in Council err; S. Austin answers for us thus, Epist:
166. in fine. In so much as he makes, his people secure from ill Governors,
beast for them the Chair of wholesome doctrine should be forsaken, in which
even the evil are constreyned to deliver true things. For they are not their
own things which they say; but Gods, who has placed the doctrine of verity in
the Chair of unity whence he says, Do what they say, but according to their
works do you not Mat: 23. So he.

6. Twelfly, this Prince of Doctors, has a place which I will ponder apart,
not only because he says clearly as much as we could wish, but chiefly
because he proves unanswerably what he says. And therefore this authotity is
not answered with out answering the arguments which he presses like a Master
Disputant, demonstrating clearly why at the very writing of this, he refused to
be a Manichaean, and why every one, both infidels and Christians, ought to
refuse the same. I will putt his goulden discourse at large, adding a short
paraphrasis, to putt my reader it mind of such reflections as deserve to be
made of so admirable words. This place is lib. contra Epist: Fundamenti cap. 4.
The Epistle of M^ (which the Manicheans would have pass for Ghospel) begins
thus. Manichaeus the Apostle of Jesus Christ by the providence of God the
Father. I ask therefore (layth 8. Aug.) who this Manicheus is? you will answer
the Apostle of Christ: I do not beleve it. Perhaps you will read the Ghospel
unto me endeavoring thence to prove it. And what if you did light upon one who
did not beleve the Ghospel? what would you do then, if such an one should say
unto you, I do not believe you. (this is his argument to prove why an Infidel
has no reason to be a Manichean, because you manicheans (you Lutherans and
Calvinists) who deny the authority of the Church, by taking away her
infallibility, leave no infallible authority upon which, any man can safely
rely in admitting the Ghospel for the undoubted word of God. Wherefore S.
Austen tells them, that they destroying this ground, leave him no infallible
ground to believe the Ghospel more then infidels do believe it. Wherefore he
adds; But I would not (because now you have left me no sufficient, that is,
no infallible, ground for it) But I would not believe the Ghospel unless the
Authority of the Church did move me there unto. Here is the first place, where
he tells you the Church is esteemed by him so sure a ground, (which it could
not be were it a fallible ground) that upon it alone he builds the belief of
this article; The Scripture is the word of God: I say, he builds the belief
of this upon this ground alone, because he tells us, if it were not for this
ground, he would not believe this fundamental point whence appears the
weakness of our adversaries best answer; which as that S. Austen only tells
us here; what occasionally moved him, when he was a Manichean, first to believe
the Ghospel; so that the sense (say they) is this; I, when I was a Manichean,
would not have believed the Ghospel, had it not been that the Churches
authority had first occasionally moved me thereunto. But I pray reflect how
clear it is by S. Austens words that he gives an absolute universal reason,
why, at the very writing of this discourse, he received the Ghospel for Gods
true word, so moved thereunto by the authority of the Church that were it not
for her authority, he would not believe the Ghospel to be the word of God. If
he should only have told the Manicheans, what he had done at his first
conversion occasionally upon a ground; which ground now he himself thought
insufficient, for such an infallible assent, he had given them no kind of
satisfaction; Neither could he have urged them still (as he does) that he, in
rejecting Manicheans must needs rely (as upon sure ground) on the same
authority upon which he first relying was most groundedly induced to give
credit to the Scripture. The truth then is, that S. Austen told them; that
neither infidels could believe them (they only citing Ghospel;) nor Catholics
could believe them, because they only cited that Ghospel against the Church,
which he himself with all Catholics believed only to be true Ghospel for the
authority of the Church. Whence it follows in him; Why should not I (now at
the writing of these) obey them (the Prelates of the Church) saying unto me,
Do not obey Manicheus to whom I obeyed, saying believe the Ghospel. (Note here
that he tells you he had so good a ground for what he did, that even now this
motive, as an invincible motive, prevails with him: for he still makes it
good thus; Choose which you please. If you say, believe the Catholics; they
admonish me to give no credit to you. Wherefore believing them I cannot but
disbeleeve you. But if you say do not believe the Catholics; then you do not
take a right course to force me, by the Ghospel, to believe Manicheus; (I pray
mark his reason) Because I believed the Ghospel it self, the Catholics
preaching it unto me. But if you say (to me) you have rightly believed the
Catholics praising the Ghospel, but you have not rightly believed them
dispraysing Manicheus; do you think me so very a fool that, no reason being
rendered for it, I will believe what you list, and disbeleeve what you list;
except you do not only bid me believe what you will, but you also, most
manifestly and evidently, make me know itt. If you be (as you will say) going
to give me such a reason as shall make it manifestly and evidently known to
me that the Catholics erred, in the bidding me not believe Manicheus, but
that they erred not in the bidding me receive the Ghospel, what then? Dimitte
Evangelium. Bidd Farewell to the Ghospel. (why?) Because if you hold your
self to the Ghospel (upon a ground that cannot deceive you) I (for my part)
will hold my self to those, through whose teaching I have believed the
Ghospel, and at their command I will not believe thee. Behold S. Austen te l
them, that even now, he will not believe them, because even now he believes
the Gospel at their teaching by whose command he is not to believe you. I
pray what had this answer been to the purpose if S. Austen had thought the
Catholics now to be believed witht assent less then infallible? For if he
had thought they could have misled him in bidding him believe the Ghospel, he
might have thought they could also mislead him in bidding him not believe
Manicheus. But you will say he thought they might bring manifest and evident
demonstrations for this ast, because he insinuates that if they did so, he
would believe them, even when they said he had reason to believe the Church
praising the Ghospel, but not to believe it dispraysing Manicheus. Whereas from
that which we hold infallible, no reason shall remove us. I answer, that he
who says to a man of an other Religion, I do not mean to pass to your
Religion except you can show me, by manifest and evident demonstration that my
Religion is false; does he, by this saying intimate that he does not give
infallible assent to the Religion he is now of? For one may say to an Athiest.
I will dye for my belief in the Scripture, except you evidently can
demonstrate that the Scripture is false, and cannot be Gods word. In these
speeches a man's meaning is, that until you can show me that you have done
this (which I am sure you cannot show me) you have no reason to find fault
with me for not passing over unto you. I prove this to be so here if I may but
suppose (a thing most true) that S. Austen did, with an infallible assent
believe the Ghospel. For I pray observe if he speaks not of his intending to
forsake his belief in the very Ghospel it self, if the Manicheans can show by
Scripture that any doctrine contrary to the belief of the Church can be true.
So impossible did he hold it to show the Church fallible in any one point. For
even thus he says; If perhaps in the Ghospel thou shall be able to find any
place that is manifest to prove Manicheus a true Apostle, then indeed you shall
weake^ unto me the authority of the Catholics bidding me not believe thee
(by showing their authority is fallible.) Be pleased to reflect attentively on
what follows; This Authority (of the Catholics) being weakened, now I
cannot so much as believe the Ghospel. The word (now) shows that at the very
writing of this, he professes that if the Catholics authority could, but in
any one single point, be showed fallible, he cannot now believe the Ghospel;
because says he, by those Catholics, I had believed the Ghospel, whom you
now have in one point showed fallible. Here some of our adversaries catch hold
on those words because by those Catholics, I had believed; whereas, say they,
If he had meant their authority had been the Cause of his belief, he should
not have used the particles, Per, by, or throuh, but the particle Propter for.
A weak objection; for how often in Scripture does this particle, By, express
the true Cause upon which, and only which men believed infallibly, as all did
first by or through the preaching of Christ. So. Io. 17. v. 20. Christ prays,
not only for his Apostles, but also for them which should believe in him by or
through their words. And S. Paul 2. These: 2.15. would have us stand fast and
hold The Traditions which have been taught us by word, or by his Epistle. What
was held by those authorities was held by them with infallibility. That by two
immurable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have
strong consolation. Hebr: 6.18. Weaker then this is an other cavel that; S.
Austen could not esteem the Church infallible, because for a clear place in
Scripture he would have denied her infallibility: For according to this fond
cavelling reason he should have also esteemed the Scripture fallible, because
he likewise says; the Catholics authority being weakened, now I cannot so
much as believe the Ghospel. The truth then is that he speaks with an
Heretic denying the Churches infallibility, and disputing against it out of
Scripture; Wherefore he speaks just with him, as we use to speak with you,
doing the like; that is, he tells him only what should happen if his
impossibilities were showed to be realities. And first he says, that unless
his open falsities can be demonstrated out of the true word of God, (which is
one impossibility) he would not believe them. Secondly he, even after the
performance of this impossibility tells him, he has yet an other answer, to
wit, that he will neither believe him speaking that, which he could show to be
clear Ghospel, neither would he believe the Church any more, because she had
taught him to believe that to be Gods true word, which notwithstanding did
bear clear witness to that, which she taught to be a Lie: whence he, seeing
her in one point fallible, would never rely on her so as to believe the
Scripture upon her authority, as then he did. You shall see how clearly he
says this; Wherefore (says he) if in the Gospel no manifest place be found
concerning the Apostleship af Manicheus, I will rather believe the Catholics
then thee: but if thou shall read me out of the Ghospel any place manifestly
for Manicheus, I will neither believe them, nor thee. I will not believe them,
because they have lied unto me concerning thee (this one Lie showing their
Church to be fallible;) Neither will I believe thee (even citing clear
Scripture, as thou call it) because thou citest to me that Scripture to
which I gave credit by those who have lied unto me. Which words be perfect
nonsense without you say the Scripture in S. Austens opinion loses (in order
to us) her infallibility, if the Catholic Church can tell one lie: For in
that case S. Austen says, he would forsake both Church and Scripture also, if
any clear place in Scripture should say Manicheus was a true Apostle. And he
says that for that cause, and upon that ground be would forsake Scripture,
because it was that Scripture, which he only held to be so, by the authority of
the Catholic Church, which now he had taken in one lie. But for all this,
says he, God for bidd I should not believe the Ghospel for thou can not
bring any thing to make me believe either the Church, or that which is
commended for Gods word by the Church to be contrary to truth. For even
believing the Ghospel I do not find how I can believe thee, there being in the
Ghospel nothing for thee. And then he shows, how clearly he finds the Acts
of the Apostles to be against them: Which book (says he) it is necessary for
me to believe if I do believe the Ghospel. Note first how he speaks of the
belief he had now at the very writing of these saying, that he must believe
this Book which is a Book rejected by the Manicheans. Whence it is manifest
that he speaks of himself as now a Catholic and such a Catholic as
received only such books for Gods true word, as the Church recommended to him
for such; houlding also her recommendation so sure, that she could not fail
in recommending any one book for Gods word, which was not of necessity to be
held so, merely upon her recommendation; For thus he proves that it was then
necessary for him to believe this Book (of the Acts of the Apostles which the
Manicheans held to be no Scripture) if he believes the Ghospel, Because the
Catholic Authority (of the Church) does in like manner commend both
Scriptures unto me, to wit as well the Acts, as the four Ghospels; for indeed
it is proper to those who believe the Church fallible to believe her only when
they think fitting: whereas those who with S. Austen believe her infallible,
must needs speak as he does, that being the Church proposes this to be
believed, as well as that, it is necessary for me to believe this on her
Authority as well as that.

SECT: XXII.
That all which the Fathers say of the infallibility of the Church in her
Traditions or Councels, or in general terms, is meant by them particularly
of the Roman Church, as we understand the Roman Church.

1. I Must now take away from our adversaries their last shift, which is that
although S. Austen and so many other Fathers speak so often of the
infallibility of the Traditions of the Church, and of the Councels, of the
Church, and of the Churches authority in general; yet, say they, what is this
to the Roman Church, more then to the English which is a part of the Catholic
as well as the Roman; she only being a part and not the whole Catholic
Church? I answer, that when we say the Church is infallible, we speak, as
Antiquity uses to speak of the Church: that is, we speak of it, as of a flock
adhering to their true Head-Pastour; and consequently we speak of the Church
of Rome in this sense, as she is a Church Catholic, that is universally
comprehending all the sheep of Christ, living in any nation though never so
far from Rome, yet joined in communion to the Bishop of Rome, as to her
Head-Pastour: For thus the Roman Church, as comprehending all Churches united
to her Communion, cannot be showed in any time since Christ, to have differed
in doctrine from what the universal Church ever taught, or practiced: If
therefore the universal Church, following Tradition be, by the guidance of the
same Tradition infallibly conducted, according to the opinion of the Fathers;
the Roman Church, ever, treading the very self same stepps, must needs have
proceeded as infallibly. Again, if the Church representative be infallibly
guided by the Holy Ghost, as I have proved, the self same must needs be true
of the Roman Church, who ever was joined in Communion and unity of Doctrine
with every lawful general Council which has been from Christ's time to this.
For it is so notorious, that our adversaries cannot deny it, that the Bishop of
Rome either by him self, or by his Legates in his name, has presided in every
such Council, and subscribed unto it in the very first and chief place, or at
least he did send his confirmation and ratification of all the acts thereof.
Her doctrine has then always agreed with all Lawful Councels: If their
decrees be infallible Rules, as I have proved, then the Roman Churches
doctrine, ever ruled by them, is infallible. And the same Fathers who say the
doctrine agreeing with Councels is infallible, also by manifest consequence
say, that the doctrine of the Roman Church is infallible. This being so
notorious, no wonder if the Fathers many times promiscuously speak in the same
manner of the Roman Church, and of the Church in general, and take the one for
the other, making no distinction at all. And this they do both for the reasons
before said, as also because by the very name of the Church they understood the
flock of Christ governed by S. Peter, and his Successors as their Lawful
Pastor appointed by Christ. And, just as the Apostle tells us, that Christ did
purchase a Church unto himself by his blood; So S. Chrysostom: Lib. 2. de
Sacerd: asking, why Christ did shed his blood? answers, That he might purchase
unto himself his sheep, the charge of which he committed both to Peter and
his successors. Hence you see that with him the Church universal, is one, and
the self same thing, that the flock of Christ's sheep, governed by S. Peter's
successor the Bishop of Rome so S. Ciprian tells us Epist: 69. that the Church
is a people united to their Priest, and a flock adhering to their shepherd.
Hence Venerable Bede lib. 2. Hist. Eccl. cap. 2. says Pope Greg: governed the
Church in the days of Mauritius the Emperor. And S. Gregory lib. 4. Dial. c.
40. says the Church, refused Lau^ence to be her governor when Symmachus was
chosen Pope. He used the style of S. Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 3. who says that to
Linus (the successor of S. Peter) the Apostles gave the charge of governing the
Church; taking the Roman Bishops charge promiscuously for the charge of the
universal Church: And S. Hierome Epist: 58. ad Damasum. If any one be joined
to the Chair of S. Peter Meus est, he is of my Religion. And Again Ep: 57. to
the same Pope he speaks thus; To thy Holiness, that is, to the Chair of S.
Peter I am joined in Communion; upon this Rock (so he calls S. Peter's Chair)
I know the Church is built. He is profane, whosoever he is, who eats the
Lamb out of this house. He who is not in the Ark of Noah shall perish in the
deluge. And S Leo Ep: 84. ad Anastic. 11. shows distinctly, how in the church
there is such subordinatio^ of the people to their Bishops, and of these to
their higher Bishops: and of all higher Bishops to the Bishop of Rome; that by
the^ the charge of the universal church might be referred to that one chair
of Peter, so nothing any where should disagree from their head. S. Hierome
again 1. ad Tim 13. says, that Pope Damasus was Rector of that House of God
which S. Paul called the Pillar and foundation of Truth. And S. Ambrose in
Oratione funeb: de obitu fratris sui Satyri, prayseth his Brother Satyrus for
his care in choosing a Catholic Bishop by this Rule, that he inquired whether
they agreed with the Catholic Bishops, that is, with the Roman Church: So he,
taking the Catholic and the Roman for all one. Hence S. Cyprian calls the
Bishop of Rome, the Bishop of the Catholic Church. We know Cornelius to have
been elected by Almighty God and Christ our Lord, the Bishop of the most holy
Catholic Church: Neither are we ignorant that there ought to be one God, one
Christ our Lord, one Holy Ghost, one Bishop in the Catholic Church. So he lib.
3. Ep: 11. And Again de Vnitate Ecclesiae: Does he confide him self to be in
the Church, who forsakes the Chair of Peter; upon which the Church is
founded? Whence it is evident that by the Church he meant the multitude of
believers adhering to the Chair of the Bishop of Rome. So also the most
ancient Pope Anacletus, not fourscoare years after our Saviors death, spoake
thus, in the end of his first Epistle registered among the Decretals and
Councels, The Apostles by the command of our Savior have appointed that the
greater and harder questions should always be referred to the Apostolical
seat, upon which Christ has built the universal Church, he himself saying,
Thou art Peter (that is a Rock) and upon this Rock I will build my Church. So
he Hence I have the very ground why the Fathers promiscuously by the name of
the Church, universally understood the Roman Church, upon whose seat the
universal was built. And this ground is made good by a world of Fathers in
Coccius where he treates of the Primacy of the Bishop of Rome.

2. That which is for my present intent, is to show that the Fathers, and why
the Fathers, do take the name of the Church promiscuously for the Roman Church,
though they do not name her by that name; because it was so notorious that by
the name of the Church they meant no other thing then Christ's flock under their
true Shepherd the Bishop of Rome: And when it is once notoriously known to
the hearers what is meant by such a word, the use of it is sufficiently
determinate. So here in England when with one an other we say the Parliament
did decree or examine such a thing, we are known notoriously to speak of the
English Parliament; Though the word Parliament be as indifferent to signify the
French Parliament, especially if spoaken by French to French in the middle of
France, as I have further declared Sect: 7. toward the end. I note also that
all that I here in the last Sections cited out of the Fathers for the
infallibility of the Church in her Traditions and Councels, must needs be
spoaken of no other Church then of such an one as did not disclaim from
infallibility; But all Churches, but the Roman, disclaimed from infallibility;
Therefore they taught no other church but the Roman to be infallible. If you
ask why they must needs teach no Church to be infallible which disclaimed from
being so, I have given you a most evident reason thereof Sect: 17.

3. This note shows that the Fathers must needs have, in those sayings of
theyrs concerning infallibility, understood the Roman Church and could
understand no other differing from her. But indeed (as I have said) their very
vulgar phrase of Catholic Church, was known then to be applied to the Roman,
taken in the sense we spoak of. Hence that old Arian Iocundus said to King
Theodorick; If you putt Armogastes (a Catholic) to death, the Romans (that is
the Catholics) will proclaim him a Martyr, as witnesses Victor Vti: de
Persec: V and: lib. 1. Hence also Ricemer, an other Arian, did write unto the
Gennenses. If he be a Catholic, he is a Roman And S. Greg: of Tours lib. 1.
de gloria Martyr: cap. 25. telling how Theodegesilus an Arian King of Portugal
said such a Miracle was a trick of the Romans; he add this Parenthesis, For
they call the men of our Religion Romans. So he This then was the vulgar old
style, Thus spoak Antiquity, If he be one of Christ's sheep he is one of S.
Peter's Successors flock, as I showed out of S. Chrysostom; If he be of the
Catholic Church, he is one of the people united to this chief Priest as I
showed out of S. Cyprian. If mention be made of one to whom the Charge of
Governing the Church is given, the Bishop of Rome is understood in the vulgar
language of the primitive Church, as I showed out of Bid, S. Gregor, S.
Irineus. If a S. Hierome would tell you, who were of his Church or Communion,
he understands every one joined to the Chair of S. Peter; For upon this Rock
he knows the Church is built. If a S. Leo speaks of one who has the charge
of the universal Church, he means the Bishop who fitteth in the Chair of S.
Peter. If a S. Hierom will signify a Damasus Bishop of Rome, he will do it by
calling him, The Rector of the House of God, which is the Church the Pillar and
Foundation of truth. If a S. Ambrose or his Brother, be to pick out among
Schismatikes a Bishop who is a true member of the Catholic Church, he will do
it by asking, whether he agrees with the Catholic Bishop: And he will tell you
that in plain terms by that name he means the Roman Church. And if a S.
Cyprian be to speak of a Cornelius Bishop of the Roman Church, he will
explicate him self in current language, by calling him Bishop of the
Catholic Church, he being notoriously known to be that one Bishop which must
be at all times in the Church, and no man can confide that he is in the
Catholic Church who forsakes the Chair of S. Peter. You need not then
wonder to hear me say that by those who are in the Catholic Church, we
mean those who have not forsaken, but cleave fast to the Chair of S. Peter,
for on this Apostolical seat Christ has built the universal Church as the
most ancient Anacletus has told you. Hence a S. Austen (Epist: 162.) will
tell Cecilian, that he needs not fear the conspiring multitude of African
Bishops as long as he communicated with Melchiades the Pope. Hence Optatus l.
2. contra Permenian: will thrust the Donatists out of the number of
Catholics, because they communicated not with the Roman Church: and he
himself will adhere to Sericius the Pope to whom all the world was united. All
the world then were Papists; and those counted Heretics who refused to be so.
And in this sense not to be a Papist, that is not to be one united in Communion
to the Pope, was the self same as not to be Catholic; for all the Catholic
world was united to the Pope or Head-pastour of Christ's flock.

4. Besides all this, you must know, that the Fathers did not always forget to
express themselves concerning the infallibility of the Church of Rome by name,
or as significantly as if they had put that name. In my 19. Sect. n, 7. I cited
S. Austens words at large to prove that God has left some such authority unto
us; that by it, as by a well assured step we may be lifted up to God: and
hence he concludes that no man should doubt to betake himself to the lap of
the Roman church for this church you will find his words evidently to describe.
Read the^ and you cannot deny it. Again Psalm. in Partem Donati he speaks thus
of S. Peter's Chair. She is that Rock which the proud gates of Hell cannot
vanquish. And S. Cyprian Ep: 55. n. 6. They are so bold as to carry letters
from profane Schismatikes to the Chair of Peter and the principal Church
whence Priestly unity rose, not considering the Romans to be them, whose faith
(the Apostle being the Commender thereof) was praised, to whom misbeleefe
cannot have access. And S. Hierom Apologia adver: Ruff. L. 3. cap. 4. Know you
that the Roman faith commended by the Apostles mouth, will receive no such
deceits, nor can possibly be changed though an Angel taught otherwise. Our
adversaries commonly receive the Sixth general Synod celebrated A. 680. in
which, after the Epistle of Agatho the Pope had been read. (Act: 4.) it was
confirmed by these words (Act: 8.) This is the true Rule of faith which the
Apostolical Church of Christ has vigorously held and still! defends; which
Church shall never be proved to have erred from the Path of Apostolical
Tradition: (And that you may know this was to hold true for ever, the Council
adds) according to the divine promis of our Lord and Savior, I have prayed
for thee that thy faith may not fail, Here you have the very phrase we now
use of impossibility of erring grounded in the divine promise. What is this
called but Infallibility? The same divine promise is just so applied to S.
Peter's Successors by S. Leo. Sermon: 3. in Anniver: suae Assum: If we will
speak with Antiquity, here is Aperta promissio a manifest promise that the
Pastor of the Church S. Peter's Successor proceeding as Universal Pastor, or
defining in a Council neither shall nor can fail, for which promise D. Fern
Sect: 27. calls so earnestly.

5. By this time my Reader will see how exceeding little reason our adversaries
have to take for a strong argument against infallibility the deep silence of
Antiquity (as they speak) in this point; whereas I in a very short time, with
my small reading, have been able so to weary out my Reader with the plentiful
Authorities of Antiquity, that he will easily remember hereafter what just
indignation ought to be conceived against this gross falsity.

SECT: XXIII.
Some things very necessary for the easier answering our adversaries
objections.

I. BEfore I begin any one of our adversaries Objections I must (to take away
all prejudice) entreat my Reader in the whole reading of this next Section to
note, First how infallibly all the Christian world, except some few Socinians)
affirm them selves to believe all things contained in those Books which they
hold canonical Scripture. and yet I will undertake that any judicious man in
the world, who with a calm sober, and disinterressed mind shall attentively
ponder on the one side what they object against the infallibility of the Church
and then on the other side, all those exceeding many places of Scripture which
seem so manifestly contrary to one an other, that the greatest wits that ever
yet were could never clear them so, but still the difficulty which remains is
so very great that no full satisfaction would ever be received if men's wills
were bent as resolutely to receive no answer but a manifest one against the
infallibility of scripture as the wills of Protestants are bent to reject all
we can say in answer to their objections against infallibility of the Church,
unless our answers be more manifestly evident then the Noone-sunn-shine:
Wherefore in this matter due respect to divine authority makes us always so
far submitt our understandings, by force of our will, that, if the contrary
be not (as I may say) more then evident, we are resolved to yield no assent
unto it. Any man who should ponder this on the one side, and then with due
attention consider on the other side how very few the objections against the
infallibility of the Church be, in comparison of the objections against the
infallibility of Scripture, and with how much sweat and labor these be scarce
solved at last? where as the others be answered so that nothing like evidence
can be brought against them, especially if men would come to look upon these
objections, as upon so many weak difficulties of human reason against an
Authority, which so strongly can prove her participation of divine verity,
having for the evidence thereof twelfue strong texts of Scripture related Sect:
14. 15. So many invincible reasons related S: 16. So many unanswerable
testimonies of Holy Fathers as have been related these four last Sections, He
(I say) who would thus on both sides consider the matter, would find it even
impossible for him in his conscience to deny that the objections against the
infallibility of the Church be anywise either so many in Number or
soinsuperable to human capacity as the objections be which may be made against
the infallibility of Scripture.

2. And because this observatio^ and note is of great moment to make the
Protestant reader see, that it is more his own prejudice against the Churchs
infallibility, which stands in his light, then any solid reason; I will allege
an objection or two, which poor weak human reason, moves against the divine
infallibility of all that is contained in undoubted Scripture. We need not go
far to find these objections. Even in the first Chapter of the first Ghospel
I find a difficulty so great, that though I have (as I fully think) most
carefully sought satisfaction concerning it, in thirty or more of the best
interpreters, yet I could find no answer half so satisfactory, as I, with my
poor ability, hope to give to the very strongest objection that I could ever
yet see made against the infallibility of the Church, taking the Church in the
sense which I explicated Sect. 18. The objection is this, which you may touch
with your fingers. It is said Mat: 1. v. 17. All the generations from Abraham
to David are fourteen generations, and from David until the carrying a way
into Babylon are fourteen generations: and from the carrying a way into
Babylon unto Christ are fourteen generations. This is the infallible Text. Now
take your fingers, and count with as great infallibility, as you can count,
fourteen names set down in fair print before your eyes. In the first
fourteen you will find Abraham to be the first and David to be the last. These
you must not count over again in the second fourteen. So that Solomon is the
first of the second fourteen, and Iechonias is the last; and as David was not
to be counted in the second fourteen, because he was already once counted in
the first, so also Iechonias must not be counted once more in the third
fourteen, because he has been once before counted in the second fourteen;
whence it follows that the first in the third fourteen is Salathiel the
Son of Iechonias, and the last must needs be Christ himself, so that you
must find twelve more generations between Salathiel the first and Christ the
last, or else (says human reason) infallibly you have not fourteen generations
as S. Matthew says, you have. It is a small labor for you to see whether you
have twelve more, or no? Lay every several finger upon every several name,
and if you have ten fingers two names must remain untouched, or else you
will not have twelve. I touched my thumb upon the name of Salathiel, whom I
have proved to be the first of the last fourteen, then I touched the name of
Zorobabel with my forefinger, and thus having touched all my ten fingers at
the te^ne follawing names, I could not possibly see any more names to touch but
the name of Joseph. When reason told me that seemed to the very eye to be a
demonstration that Salathiel, who was the first of this last fourteen having
but eleven more following him to Christ, could not (with Christ) make up the
last fourteen. How then, if this be infallibly true, comes that also to be
infallibly true which S. Matthew says contrary to this, calling these last
thirteen generations as clearly fourteen as he called the former.

3. Again S. Luke setting down the genealogy of Christ says cap. 3. v. 35: 36.
Salah which was the sone of Cainan which (Cainan) was the Son of Arphaxad.
And all the Greek Copies of the new testament read thus, conformable to all the
Greek Copies of the old testament Gen: 11. v. 12. Yet if you turn to this
place in Genesis, translated faithfully by our vulgar, and your own Bible, you
shall not find that Cainan was the Son of Arphaxad, as S Luke says, but you
shall find these words; And Arphaxad lived five and thirty years and begot
Salah where as this Salah, was the Son of Cainan according to S. Luke and not
the Son of Arphaxad. If you say this Salah was Arphaxads Son because
Arphaxad was his grandfather I pray note that Arphaxad is said to have begot
him, when he was five and thirty years old, whereas if you mark, even that
Chapter of Genesis, you shall see no one there mentioned who had a Son before
thirty years old; for as in those days they lived very long, so it was long
before they used then to marry. Again there is yet a far greater difficulty
that the Greek Copy of the old testament, which S. Luke followed, reads
thus; And Arphaxad lived five and thirty years and begat Cainan, so that, if
Arphaxad were Grand father to Salah because he begot his, father Cainan, when
he himself was five and thirty years old (in which year of his age your
Bible and ours say he begat Salah) thus Salah his grand child and Caina^ his
Father must be born the same year, which, says reason, is infallibly false.
Now if you say Caina^ is to be omitted according to some greek Copies in the
old testament yet what will you say to all the Copies of the new testament
which most unanimously put him down. Here venerable Bede professes himself
to admire that which his dulnes cannot understand. And indeed I think no man
understands it. And Reason is more gravelled and quite non-plussed at an other
contradiction, which seems to her unavoidable. Turn in your Bible to the 2.
Kings cap. 8. v. 26. There you read Two and twenty years old was Ahazia when
he began to reign and he reigned one year in Jerusalem, and his Mothers name
was Athaliath. Now turn to Chron: 2. cap. 22. v. 2. And see if a very
different story be not also true Scripture. For thus you shall read, Forty and
two years old was Ahazia when he began to reign and he reigned one year in
Jerusalem his Mothers name was Athaliath. Against the infallibility then of
Scripture reason co^ceiveth her self to have this infallible demonstration: No
one is infallible in speech who speaks two things quite contrary one to an
other; but these two speeches be quite contrary, when of the same man one
affirms. He began to reign when he was two and twenty year old and an other
affi^mes that he was forty two years old; Therefore the Scripture is not
infallible in speech.

4. Here by the way reflect (deer reader) how demonstratively false it is which
our adversaries say, that by the only knowledge of Scripture a man may clearly
be instructed in all fundamental or necessary points: now I ask, whether any
point be with you more fundamental or more necessary then this; The Scripture
is infallible? But this point is so far from being clearly deduced out of
the reading of the Scripture, that he, who shall read these three places, shall
see with his eyes that these places alone make this verity more obscure then
any place of Scripture makes the contrary evident; For reason, left to her
self, will sooner shift off any place you can cite for the evidence of the
Scriptures infallibility, then you shall be able to shif off the places cited.
I do not put the answer to those three places, that the reader may, by his own
experience, see how true it is that all that concerns necessary points is not
clear in Scripture; for what point more necessary then that the Scripture is
infallible, and what point has such unanswerable difficulty as these be? If
you could but bring half so clear a demonstration against the infallibility of
the Church, how would you triumph? All that could be said by us would never
satisfy you. And yet here you must be satisfied, or grant Scripture in it self
not to be infallible. What fondnes then, for incomparable weaker objections, to
stand out so perniciously against the infallibility of the Church. Note this
and you will soon note your own preposterous dealing.

5. Secondly I must set down here a note which, according to good method, some
might have expected in the beginning of this question of infallibility; But had
it been put down there, it might have been subject to have been forgotten
before we should have come to make chief use of it, which is to be done in
this next Section. This second note then is this, that my Reader must be made
capable of what kind of infallibility we speak, when we say; the Church, in
her traditions, and definitions, is infallible; or that these traditions and
definitions deliver infallible verities unto us. This point is learnedly
declared by our learned Country man Bacon in analysi fidei Disp: 3. cap. 7.
citing diverse solid Devines for this doctrine. We say then, that our act of
faith, by which we believe the Church, proposing any thing to us by her
Traditions or definitions, is infallible in this sense; that this Act of faith
is begot by such causes as do secure it from all kind of error: so that the
understanding, which is informed, or made knowing by this act, ought to adhere
so strongly to what such an Act affirms to be true, that though an Angel from
heaven should say the contrary, this understanding would never be brought to
assent to him. So firm adhesion flows from an act secured so well from
error by the causes which did produce it, I say with great reflection that
this understanding by this act is so affected that the party would not be
brought by the preaching of an Angel to believe the contrary, and I did not say
that it could not be brought. For though the nature of evident knowledge
showing that a thing is so makes that the party cannot assent to the contrary;
yet this infallible act of faith, only makes a man so affected that he will
not cease from adhering so strongly to what he believes, as long as this act
remains vnretracted. This firmenes of adhesion springs from the great value
and esteem which we put (deservedly) upon the causes moving him to this
assent. And this is the true reason why you will by no means be brought to
doubt of the infallibility of the Scripture by any strong objection that your
natural reason makes, when she suggesteth such objections as I just now
framed Mere pertinaciousnes also and a false fansy of the value of the causes
by which even Heretics pretend to be moved to their errors, makes many
rather loose their lives, then forsake to stick close to what they imagine to be
Gods word: shall not then a prudent esteem, solidly grounded concerning the
devine authority moving to the belief of these and these points, be able to
make a man adhere so closely to them as I said? when then my understanding has
Motives, though not wholly infallible, yet such as cause a most prudent assent
that God has said such a thing; and this is made so evidently credible unto
me, that in prudence I cannot think it to be otherwise, and Heaven, is also by
most highly valuable promises, offered me, if I will assent to this with that
respect which is due to Gods word, and Hell on the contrary is threatened unto
me by most truly formidable menaces, if I will not assent to this verity as to
a Verity affirmed by God; am I not rather stark mad, then imprudent only if I
will not bend my understanding by force of my will to adhere with all its
power, to this verity, as to a Verity affirmed by God, and esteem it as such a
Verity ought to be esteemed. Wherefore, as it is a blasphemous inpiety to
suspect that the very least danger of falsity can be in a thing affirmed by
God; so, because the reasons I alleged make me carry my self so toward that
(which is thus proposed to me to believe) as toward a Verity teveled by God,
the self same reasons do make me consequently more willing to deny any
natural evidence, that I can have, the^ to give way to the entertaynment of
any suspicion of fallibility in this which I have received as Gods own word, as
indeed it is See Sect: 16. number: 6.

6. Now that which I mainly insist upon is this, such an infallibility of
adhesion as this act is, cannot be liable, or any way subject to uncertainty,
no more then the infallibility of that man whom God had fully resolved so to
guide, and direct, in all that he should say or write, that he would never
permit him to say or write, the least falsity, although this Man never knew
nor suspected himself to have this privilege. Just so, though, we neither
feel, nor by evidence know the infallibility of our assent, our act of assent
will be infallible, if God really concur unto it by such principles as are no
way liable to error. All the difficulty then in proving this our assent to be
infallible, consists in this, whether or no we can prove that God concurreth
to this assent by such principles as are no way liable to error? To prove this
we must prove that our assent has for its object not only an apparent
Revelation, but also a revelation certainly true, and not only true casually
(by our hitting by chance upon such an object as is truly revealed by God) but
it must be of such a nature that it cannot, in these circumstances guide me to
assent to any thing but that which cannot but be truly revealed. This then I
prove thus. Although there might be imagined such circumstances in which God
could let me have all the motives which so powerfully move to believe that
such and such a point is revealed by God, although this were not so; yet
supposing that the divine Providence has resolved never to permit (in the
circumstances in which men now live) any falsity to be commended to our belief
by so powerful motives as these be to wit miracles, full report of millio^s
and millions teaching uniformly the same points to have been delivered down to
them, by millions attesting that they received them as delivered from the
Apostles, and thus going up until we come to them who testify that with their
own ears they heard all these points delivered by them and did see the^ work
worlds of miracles in confirmation of them, that they did hear those simple men
resute all Philosophers, speak all languages, tell the very secrets of the
heart, foretell things to come without ever missing etc. supposing I say that
the divine Providence is resolved never to let any falsity cloak herself
with these powerful motives, these motives must needs be the certain Liveries
of truth, and that which comes vested in them, cannot be any thing but truth.
And this houldeth good whether I be or be not assured, that the divine
Providence is resolved never to permit any falsity to be thus recommended to
us. For it is not our knowing that no falsity will ever be permitted by God to
be thus recommended to us, which is the cause why no falsity can be thus
recommended: but it is merely the extrinsecall will of God, determining to
provide so for our sure guidance to that end, for which he created us, that
hence he comes to resolve not to permit at any time, any falsity to be so
powerfully recommended unto us as it should be by these Motives of Credibility
which he sets a part for his peculiar use of delivering the Verities of our
faith unto us as we set the use of our Scales a part for ratifying only such
things as we intend to acknowledge for our own true deeds.

7. If you ask of me, how I can prove that God has resolved never to permit
any falsity to be recommended by those motives, by which the Verities of our
faith are recommended? I answer that first, the motives, which re^commended the
verities of our faith, do convince that which is so recommended, to be morally
certain: as the full report of all men from all parts of England make it
morally certain that there is such a City as London to those who never came
near London by a hundred miles. How much then would it misbeseeme the divine
verity and Goodness to co^curre to the making of a falsity so credible as it is
credible to all men that there is such a City as London? But Secondly it
would far more misbeseeme him to make no less assured offers of Heaven to
those who would believe a Lie thus recommended, and threaten Hell unto them
without they would embrace such a Lie, even for a verity revealed by God, which
threats were as certaintly to be feared as London is certaintly to be believed
to be in England by those who have not seen London. Thirdly it is evident that
God can impose an obligation upon man to follow the true Religion as a means
necessary to obteyn his Salvation, which ^gion may propose some Verities to be
believed as devine and as things revealed by God: Now supposing our nature and
present condition, (I may bouldly say) either that belief which is recommended
by such motives as ours are, must be this true Religion, or you cannot assign
unto me any other kind of belief, recomme^ded by any other kind of motives,
which can make it seem so credible to me as our Religion, It is impossible
that a mere lie should be so much more credible then Gods true word, as our
religion is absolutely more credible the^ any false belief; for this would
breed a notable disparagement and disesteeme of the devine Authority, making it
of less credit then a Lie. How can that God, who has a serious will to oblige
us to embrace that belief as divine, which is the only true way appointed by
him to lead us to heaven, have a will also directly destructive of this will?
that is, how can he have a will to permit the Lies, opposite to what he would
have us believe, to be in all reason made more credible by the motives which
recommend them, then those Verities are which according to reason he would have
us embrace, not only for Verities, but for Verities affirmed by him; that is,
for infallible Verities? So that you see at last we have brought it to a plain
contradiction to say, that (supposing our nature and the present circumstances
appointed de facto, by the divine providence) our Religion recommended by the
foresaid motives should be false in this present state, whatsoever it might
have been in some other state, which God could have chosen if he would have had
no providence concerning us: to which providence I confess nothing could
oblige him.

8. Supoosing then no more then what is evident both by Scripture and reason,
that God is resolved to have a providence over us, and to bring us to the end
for which he made us by the belief of several Verities which he has
revealed; it is impossible that as long as he has this will, he should not
also have a will to recommend to our belief these verities (which he would
have us believe) by such motives, as no lie can come recommended by him as long
as he still intends to use this providence toward us. The acts then of our
faith are infallible, because really (whether the party who believes knows
it or no) these acts proceed from such causes as are incapable (in these
present circumstances) of recommending any thing that is false: But they still
recommend that which is attested not by any apparent, but by a most true
revelation made by Christ's Apostles to the Church; which Church also is, by the
like motives, recommended, as infallible, and we evidently, by our very
senses, know what this Church certainly teaches: whereas, though all which the
Scripture says be infallible, yet we have not only no infallibility, but
even no very probable certainty of our understanding the Scripture in the true
sense in many necessary points, except it be by the instruction of the Church;
as has fully been showed Sect: 7.

9. Now besides these exterior principles of our assent, by which I say we
believe with an infallible belief the articles of our faith, we must here
note that the assent it self is never produced (even by those who have the
Habit of true faith) unless it be by the supernatural illumination of God,
elevating us to all that has immediate relation to the Supernatural state of
Heavenly glory, whence S. Paul teaches us that in order to atteyne this high
state we are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves
but our sufficiency is from God 2. Cor: 3.5. Every time that a true believer
exercises an act of true faith, God, of his infinite goodness, affords this
supernatural light infusing it unto the understanding to elevate it, and
enable it, to produce the supernatural act of faith. Yet when man has not
this supernatural assistance in his act, he cannot tell, be he never so
learned. This all may know, that God does never give this supernatural help to
believe any thing, which is not really delivered by a true revelation made to
the Apostles, otherwise he might be said to give supernatural aid to believe a
Lie.

10. Out of all this discourse, that appears to be true, which we most
desire to be noted, that our acts of faith may be most truly infallible and
are proved to be so, because they proceed from Causes so determining to that
only which is true, that they cannot determine our assent to any falsity and
that all this happens thus although we cannot evidently know when we
believe infallibly.

SECT: XXIIII.
Twenty Objections of an University man against the infallibility of the
Church, and also some others are solved

1. AFTER I had resolved on this treatise I did read in the preface of an
University man to a work of John Daille, set forth to excuse the reformed
Churches from Schisms, twenty objections urged with so great confidence
against the infallibility of the Church that at the end of his Preface he
promises to turn Papist if such objections be punctually answered; but with
all he would have yet one argument more solved. I shall endeavor to give him a
little more large satisfaction then he requires, For I will also return him
answer to all that concerns this point either in this or any other part of his
Preface.

2. First then P. 22. he would overthrow all we have said of the Churches
being our Judge in Controversies because so little is said against Heretics,
for denying this, by S. Epiphanius and S. Austen, to which I have abundantly
answered Sect: 2. As also he would have us condemned by the silence of
Tertullian, which I have answered Sect: 20. n. 9. fine and by the like silence
of Vincent Lerinen which I have answered Sect: 7. What you add of Optatus and
S. Austen, who found against their adversaries no Judge upon earth (as yon say)
but Scripture, you must note that they spoak as they did, not because the
faithful people were not provided of an other infallible Judge but because
those contentious fellows against whom they spoak did (as Optatus intimates)
make no account of the Churches contrary Judgment as the Jews make noe account
of our new testament: Wherefore as, when Doctors or Fathers dispute against
Jews, they do not stand pressing them with the authority of the new testament,
though they themselves hold it of infallible authority (because the know the
Jews scoff at such authorities) so S. Austen here, and formerly cited by you,
as also Optatus, did not stand pressing their adversaries with the Authority of
the Church, which they them selves held infallible because they knew those
Heretics would as much scoff at them as the Jews would scoff at those who
should press the Authority of the new testament, and as you use to scoff at us
if we only cite the Council of Trent against you. Wherefore you see that I,
who so clearly hold the Church our infallible Judge, do not take any text of
the Council of Trent for my argument to prove this, though I hold that Council
infallible.

3. Again you object S. Paul's making no mention of this Judge in his Epistle to
the Romans: in which I am sure he does not also tell them that the Scripture
only must be taken for Judge; nor does he warn them to take great heed of the
Bishops af that city who in time would vsurp a Iudicative authority which
should be the bane of Christendom, as D. Fern speaks, and make all their
errors incurable, as you both speak, which news would have been worth all
the rest of his Epistle, in the Judgment of those who pass their judgment with
that profane Liberty that you do here. The truth is that this Judgment seat
concerned no more the Romans, then all the world. S. Paul twice taught the
infallibility of the Chrch to all the world in the texts I cited Sect: 15. n:
14. n: 18. That then, which no more concerned the Romans then all the world was
not in reason to be intimated to them in particular. What you add next of the
deep silence of the Fathers and Historians about this point, must needs turn
to confound your ignorance when you shall have read all I said Sect: 18. 19.
20. 21. 22. Your ensving discourse (for as much as concerns our doctrine of
infallibility) has had its full answer in my last Section, by which you will
see that when any thing is believed, which is not truly revealed, the Act of
faith can never be infallible, and so no act of faith concerning Protestantisme
can be infallible. Neither are we infallible because the Acts of our faith are
infallible, no more then all those who believed Christ himself or his Apostles
were infallible. They are indeed infallibly guided but if they leave off being
thus guided, and will be come guides, they will soon bewray their own
fallibility. What next concerns infallibility, be your twenty Objections put by
way of questions, as some of them indeed are.

4. OBjection 1. You ask whether there be any infallible Judge upon Earth! I
have given you a full answer Quest: 1.

5. OB: 2. whether the Church be that judge? and why not rather some of those
ten things named by Chilling: I have Quest. 3. initio, given reasons
sufficient for any reasonable Man, who must not think that in this our last age
he is borne soon enough, by a thousand and six hundred years to teach the
Church that which no one parish of the Church can ever be proved to have held.
The very citing Scripture for ten several Judges (as you say Chilling: does)
shows clearly how infinitely short of solid proof all other Judges
Co^missions fall in comparison of what we have alleged for the Churches
Authority in this point through the whole third Question.

6. OB: 3. whether the Roman Church be this Judge? Yes. See all my proofs from
Sect: 17. to my last Section.

7. OB: 4. Whether the infallibility of this Church, be in the head (the Pope)
or in the body; and whether in the body diffusive or collective All this I have
answered Sect: 18. n. 1. 2. 3. for as much as concerns the practical duty of
any Catholic. School speculations (or Devines private opinions) have nothing
to do with necessary faith.

8. OB: 5. Here your questions turn to objections, which conteyne in general
the difficulties concerning those persons who ought to have their free votes in
a Council. Concerning this point I have said something. Sect: 18. n. 3. by
which the Laics and inferior Clergy are sufficiently excluded, though these
Clergy men's votes as Consultive, or for advise sake be most laudably demanded.
when they be eminent devines; And, for the comfort of the weaker, their
subscriptions may be of very good use and service to overwhelme Heretics by
such authority as they use to fear most, who slight any mention of more then
human authority in Councels. And because amongst all these inferior Clergy men
you think the Chor-episcopi to be most regarded, I will easily satisfy you
concerning their small right to pass a decisive voice in general Councels, If
you have either the Councels or the Sum of the^ by Carranza you shall find in
the decrees of Pope Damasus, as ancient as he his, how being asked (Epist: 4.)
Whether the Chor-episcopi were any thing in the Church of God or nothing? and
what authority they had in the Church? and he answers That they were nothing
in the Church of God, in which they had no authority, and that their
institution was wicked, and too too badde, and contrary to the Sacred Canons
and the Peace of the whole Church. And therefore he defined that all was vain
and void that they had done in the Episcopal function. And that, for those
causes, they were forbidden both by the Sacred Seat (of Rome) and by all the
Bishops of the world. It follows How that in the Primitive Church these
Chor-episcopi did seem necessary for the peculiar care thy had over the poor,
and though by Ordination they were only Priests they presumed at last to
exercise many things belonging to Bishops to consecrate subdeacons, and deacons
etc. But their ambition was soon curbed by the Church; And Bishops were
severely forbidden to lay any part of their Episcopal function upon them. I
say then that only Bishops have right in a general Council. For of thee
Prelates only it was said; He that will not hear the Church let him be unto
thee as a publican or Heathen. To them only it was said Go and teach all
Nations, and Lo I am with you until the end of the world. To them all those
special promises of devine assistance were made which I urged Sect: 15. n: 17.
None of these are directed to Laikes or inferior Clergy men, who succeeded the
disciples and not the Apostles.

9. OB: 6. Whether these Bishops assembled (with their Head and chief Pastor)
be so absolutely infallible that they cannot determine falsely in point of faith
let them do what they will? I answer, that, as I showed Sect: 19. n. 1. 2. they
are to regulate themselves according to Scripture and tradition, discussing
carefully what has been revealed to the Church by these means, concerning the
points which they treat of. See the place I cited and you will see how
notoriously manifest their proceedings must needs be; but they must be the
judges, and not we, that they have done their duty in regulating themselves
according to those two infallible rules yet we are secured that they have done
their duty both by the notorious publicity of the fact and by their
subscriptions to the legal carriage of all that essentially concerns the
Being of a true Council; and also by seeing no considerable part of the Church
diffused, refuse their decrees. Fear not you to do, what you see all the Church
do, with so universal a consent: neither will I press you to consent, until
you first see this general consent go before you. Were there any notorious
neglect of legal proceeding to the introducing of error, the whole Church
representative and diffusive, would never be permitted by God, to submitt
cheerfully thereunto. I might ask how shall I know the Scripture writers did
their duty in obeying devine inspiration? If they did not: a dieu all faith.

10. OB: 7. How shall I know when they determine aright? what is required to a
Synodicall Constitution? Must all concur in the vote, or will the mayor part
serve the turn? I answer you shall know all these things to have been done as
they should be, by seeing that all have subscribed to the Council as proceeding
legally in her Constitutions, which also you may stay to see accepted by the
Church for lawful decrees. When you see this done, without any considerable
contradiction, I hope you will think you may prudently submitt, and cannot but
imprudently stand out any longer. And for your particular we will co^descend
to you to stand out so long. When you are to be so leading a man of whole
Provinces, that your submission would be required before any of theyrs, it will
be a longer work to tell you all belonging to your duty. What belongs to you at
present I have told you in order to practice. The constant practice of the
Church has sufficiently informed the leading men Governors of the Church how
they are to procceed in doing that which so many ages have practiced before
them.

11. OB: 8. What makes a general Council; must all the Bishops of the world be
called? I answer that makes a general Council which has, ever since the
primitive Church, served to make all the general Councels which have been
made. Look on the first Council in the Apostles time and you will find not all
the Apostles but only Peter, James, John, Paul, and Barnaby present. See Baron:
An: 51. And yet their Decrees sent to all Churches did bear this preface. It
has seemed good to the Holy Ghost and us. In the four first Councels (which
your English Church admits) the fourth part of the Bishops was never
present, and in the Councels kept in the East few Bishops appeared from the
west, and to the Councels kept in the west few Bishops came commonly from the
East. The practice of the Church (the best interpreter of divine Laws) teaceth
that it suffices that all who can conveniently he called and summoned do
appear, and that such a competent number appear and set in Council as those
(who are assembled together with their head) judge sufficient on the one side;
and on the other side that those who be not present, knowing well enough (as
we see by experience of the appearance made in Parliament how all men know how
great or little it is) those I say knowing how great or little the appearance of
Bishops is in the Council, say nothing against it, but silently consent to
permit them to proceed as a sufficient Representative of the Church and
accordingly admit of their Decrees when they are made.

12. OB: 9. Whether it be a Lawful Council if all come not who are called. I
have made my answer already that it is sufficient that a sufficient number
comes; that is a number approved for sufficient by the Church in the manner I
now expressed.

13. OB: 10. Who must call the general Council? The Pope, or Christian Kings
and Emperors? And how shall I be assured which of them must? I answer that it
is evident out of Scripture that there is no divine Institution by which either
Emperous Or Kings be assured to be still found in the world; or that (when they
have that dignity) they be, by divine institution, invested with a power to
call Councels. We seek for this divine institution. This we will not admit
until it can be showed in Scripture or tradition. The fact of calling shows
not divine institution. Secondly as for the Prelates of the Church we can show
divine institution. Act. 20.28. Bishops placed by the Holy Ghost over all the
flock to feed or govern the Church of God. And 4. Ephe: Not Lay magistates but
only ecclesiastical are said to be given us by Christ for the work of the
ministry, for the edifying the Body of Christ, that hence forth we may not be
carried about with every wind of doctrine: etc. Thirdly the Emperor is not by
divine institution Lord of the Christian world no nor of any considerable part
of it, wherefore seeing that a motive power is no motive power any further then
it can or ought to be able to Move; the Imperial power which neither can nor
ought to move further then it reigns, cannot consequently command any further
then his territory at the uttermost. The Power of the chief Pastor of the
universal Church is coextended to the universal Church. All Bishops of the
universal Church being to be moved must be moved by such a power as this is.
If Emperors called councels; it was not by any Ecclesiastical calling (such
an one as the Pope called them by at the very self same time) but the Emperors
calling, was only political, proceeding from a temporal power, subserving to
the Ecclesiastical, and not able to force them by censure in case of refusing
to come, as the Ecclesiastical power could, which power inplored the Imperial
assistance to concur with her, only for the more effectual execution.
Perhaps sometimes Emperors might venture to call dependently of the
ratification of the supreme Pastor, which they presumed would be easily
obtained in so just necessities as then seemed to press for a speedy remedy.
If Emperors or Kings were present in Council, it was only by their presence and
good Countenance to honor, encourage and further the proceedings of the
Council, and not to pass their vote in points of belief.

14. OB: 11. How far be the Counsels determinatio^s infallible? Whether in
matters of fact as well as faith? I answer that they be infallible only in
matters of faith. Matters of fact have no ground for their having been done so,
or not done so, either in Scripture of Tradition; Wherefore concerning matters
of fact the Church rules her self by no former revelation, and she pretends
to no new Revelations, but only to declare clearly what she finds to have
before been revealed. The infallibility was thus promised to the Church He
shall teach you all things and suggest all things whatsoever I shall say unto
you. Things of fact are said and testified only by men therefore not objects of
faith.

15. OB: 12. Whether in these matters of faith the Church be infallible in
fundamentalls only? I answer that in all the Authorities which I cited for the
infallibility of the Church out of Scripture Sect: 14. n. 3. etc. and 15. I
showed that they are groundlesly restreyned to only fundamentalls in the sense
you mean. The same was proved by my Reasons Sect: 16.

16. OB: 13. How shall I infallibly know what points are fundamental what not?
I answer This question may pose those who will be restrayning the general
promises of infallible assistance made to the Church to fundamental points
only; that is unto they themselves know not what. But to us Catholics all is
fundamental which is made appear to be proposed to us by the Church as a
Verity revealed by God, whether it be in a matter more or less importing of
its own nature.

17. OB: 14. How shall I know in time of Schism, when there be two Popes or
more, which of these is S. Peter's true Successor? I answer that this question,
as explicated by you, is put very unskillfully. For you pass from arguing
against the infallibility of a Pope, as defining with a Council, to argue
against those Devines who deliver not the Churches belief, but their private
opinion to be that the Pope should beheld infallible out of a Council;
concerning which opinion, I have showed it all ready to be impertinent to our
purpose. Your Objection against us, should be put thus. The Church (with us) is
held to be the Pope defining with a Council, But in time of schisms, where
there be more pretended Popes, we do not assuredly know that he who defines
with the Council is the true Pope, or Successor of S. Peter. And then I answer
thus, If before the calling and meeting of the Council there be more then one
pretending to be Popes, that he shall ever be esteemed the right Pope, to whom
the Prelates of the Church shall unanimously obey when he calls them to meet
in a general Counsel, and in this Council to preside over them. To have two
such Popes (as these are) at one time, is impossible. And this is the only time
in which a Pope defines with a Lawful Council. What you say of Popes not
defining in such a Council, is not our Case. Putt me a Pope defining with a
Lawful Council, and then prove him fallible if you can. Whether the Popes
definitions out of a Council be fallible or infallible, makes nothing to this
purpose. Only this is evident, if they be infallible out of a Council, they be
infallible in a Council in all opinions. I add with Bellarm: lib. 2. de
Concilijs cap. 19. that Although a Council with out a Pope cannot define any
article of faith, yet in time of Schism, it can judge which is true Pope, and
provide the Church of a true Pastor, if she had none; who thus provided by the
Councels authority; may dissolve the Council if he pleases, or if he please to
have them remeyn assembled, they remeyn so, now by his authority, and can
define as well as other Councels called by the Pope. In that meeting in which
the Pope was to be chosen, or declared the undoubted Pope, the Prelates of the
Church might, and ought to meet upon their own authority and assemble them
selves.

18. OB: 15. Suppose all agree on the Pope and a general Council meet, how
shall I be sure that he, who is accounted Pope, is so indeed? for Simonie makes
him none; and that he was not Simonicall is impossible for me to know? and
then you labor to prove that Sixtus Quintus was notoriously Simoniacall which
makes nothing to our purpose: Neither follows it from hence that those, who,
being made Cardinals by him, came afterward to be Popes, were no true Popes.
For you are too ignorant to treat of these matters, if you know not that a man
may be a true Pope, who never was a Cardinal To that which is pertinent, I
answer, that though he, whose election to the Popedom is Simonicall, may be
deposed, as having obtained that dignity unlawfully yet, as all Iurists say The
Crown once obtained supplieth all defects, So I may far better say, that this
defect being only against Ecclesiastical Laws, may be supplied so, that of
an illegal Pope, he may be after ward made a Lawful one. For in the Church
diffusive there is power to have this man Pope if they will; and that they will
they testify when they obey his Summons calling all Bishops to a Council, and
permitting him, as their head, to preside, and as supreme Pastor to define in
the Council. Lastly by the Churches, admission of the Council I know the
Council, and consequently the Pope was as legal as is necessary.

19. OB: 16. How shall I know that those Bishops who with the Pope make up the
Council be Bishops indeed. For no Bishops, no Council. Now if he, who ordained
them, when he gave orders did not intend to give them those orders (and whether
he did or no God only knows) then they be no Bishops. I answer that If they be
Bishops I am bound to admit their decrees, and as he should sin damnably,
who would not honor such a man held by all men to be his true Father, because
it is impossible for him to know that his Mother did not ly when she said so,
or to know whether it be not the devil in his Fathers shape, so I should sin
damnably in not acknowledging, by due Obedience these to be true Fathers of
Gods people who are esteemed so by all the world upon far better ground then
such a man is esteemed your Father For first those who ordeyne Bishops or
Priests be for the most part men most eminent in the Church. How is it then
morally possible, that many such men should just bappen, in so many several
places of the world, just to be the Ordeyners of just such Bishhops, as should
be in the Church just at that time, (which commonly is not above once in a
hundred years) when a Council is called. Again there be more then three
thousand Bishops at a time in the Church (as witnesses Alb: Ros: Rubric: ff.
de statu omnium) out of which number we see that it is very rare for more then
three hundred to be assembled at a Council, which is but every tenth Bishop,
now morally impossible is it that just every tenth Bishop should happen just to
be that Bishop who goes to the Council from this part of the world (where in
an age no one Bishop was ever heard of to be thus invalidly ordained) and that
just at the same time there should come from an other part of the world (where
such an abominable ordination is as unheard of as in this part) an other
Bishop, whose ill hap it was to be thus ordained And thus from a third,
fourth fifth sixth part of the world, just such Bishops should come in a number
sufficient to make the number of other true Bishops insufficient for a true
Council. Surely this is a thing far more morally impossible then that the
Common wealth of England should ever happen to have a full Parliament of
Knights and Burghesses freely chosen, to the number of three hundred who should
not only be all of them Bastards; but also all of them called John. This I
prove evidently: because to confer holy orders or baptize without a due
intention, is not only a Sin most abominable and damnable, but it is such a
Sin as brings with it neither pleasure nor proffitt nor any thing which may
the least entice any ordinary man (much) less Bishops and Priests to committ a
sin so hideous: and so unprofitable wherefore from Christ's time to this I do
not think that the most knowing man upon earth does know to produce six
examples of the committing of this sin. But on the other side no man knows
so little, but he has knowledge enough to tell him, with out any rash
judgment, that it is an ordinary thing in every County and City of England to
find diverse known Bastards, and that the number of the vnkown is ten times as
great. And again the name of John is the most common of all names; wherefore
considering the nature of things, it is far from all impossibility that many
of these Bastards should be called by this name And their Bastardisme not
being known, the election may fall upon them in this County; and what
happens in this County may happen in an other, and so in all at once. Weaker
far then this is your argument And yet how secure would all men think England
from all misery, if we were all fully assured that no misery should fall upon
this Nation until we did chance to have a free Parliament, consisting of
three hundred men, of which every one should be a Bastard and every one called
John? It is great want of solidity in judgment in so many sharp witted men*
to esteem so much such a weak argument. And this is true prescinding from all
special providence of allmighty God over his Church; but the least thought of
that providence makes this light objection vanish into smoke, and together
with it the next Objection. For how easily could God putt itt efficaciously in
the minds of true Bishops to meet in a sufficient number and when I see the
Church Universal admit such a Council to be a true one I Hence know that it
had a sufficient number of true Bishops.

30. OB: 17. How shall I know that the Pope and Bishops assembled are
Christians etc. Here you discourse just as before and the same answer answers
you to the full. Yet for a further answer to both I will show how wise your
argument is by framing just an other like to it thus. O Christians how do you
infallibly know that in these Sixte^ne ages since the Age of writing of the
Bible the Devil in some one Age did not entice as many men as were sufficient
to corrupt the Bible for I cannot see but that the Devil might easily make so
many promises far more enticing then any ordinary motive which should move
men to baptize a child in a false form or with want of due intention with such
promises then the devil might entice those who did write out the Bible, to
write false, just in such and such places as he should suggeste to them so that
in the space of a few ages, the multitude of the false Copies made them pass
for the only true ones; And how know we infallibly that this might not have been done much after that age in which the devil incited the Tyrants to force
all Christians to give up their Bibles to be burnt, by which means the true
Copies growing scarce, false ones might possibly be brought into common use by
the malice of the devil as has been said. And this exemple defeateth also your
next objection. Does the divine Providence Sleep in this manner?

21. OB: 18. How shall we know certainly that these are the determinations of
the Council? false Canons may be foisted in and false Copies may be vented. I
answer that what has, or has not been decreed by a Council, may as well, and
far better be known certeynly, then what has been decreed by one of our
Parliaments, For Councels be so much more notifyed to all, because they be the
Parliaments not of one, but of all Catholic nations and so their deeds are
more public. Now how intolerable a caveller were he in a Commonwealth, who
should plead the not obliging of Parliamentary decrees, by reason of the
impossibility to know for certain what was decreed? and which were the true
Copies of the true decrees? You would petswade us that we cannot be sure of
that of which we see by daily experience we may be made as sure as we would
wish. The decrees of Councels are publicly read, in the Council publicly
subscribed, and sealed by the Council The Original of these subscriptions
carefully preserved, the Copies first set forth before diverse witnesses are
conferred with the Original with a public testimony (as you may see at the
end of any Bull) that it Agrees with the Original. Those, who in great Number
were present, at the making of the decrees do own them; no one in the Church
disclaimes from them and in case any should satisfaction would presently be
given. Our very adversaryes write against us for decreeing such and such
things, The fact is never denied, but ever defended. If in any press, a false
Copy should be set forth you will have prohibition after prohibition, and
penalty added to penalty, until those Copies be suppressed; and all books
would be noting, and notifying this forgery: As we see in our Church by daily
experience in matters of less consequence, as in setting forth the decrees of
Cardinals, the Decisions of that Roman Court called the Rota, or any other
thing of this nature. These evidences make every one know these decrees with an
unquestionable credibility, which, when we have, we are sufficiently
furnished (for as much as concerns the proposing of the object to embrace with
our will these decrees as proceeding from the Holy Ghost, and teaching Verities
revealed by God, upon which we immoveably fix our understanding, and we are
resolved by our will to fix it so firmly, because (by Gods Grace) we have a
will to proceed prudently in so important an affair as the salvation of our
Soul to which Heaven is offered if she will submitt to believe what God thus
reveeleth; And Hell is threatened if she will not thus submitt. And this offer
and threats be as prudently to be regarded as certain, as English men prude^tly
belive that there is such a cytty as London. Nothing then which is not most
rational is required of us it being most manifestly made credible, that this
is the true command of God Mad therefore is that Soul, which will not
submitt. See what I said in the former Section from the fifth number to the
end. And also what I fully expressed Sect: 16. n: 6. For that which you add of
forging a Canon of the Council of Nice I doubt not but you may twenty times
have met with a satisfactory answer there unto. See Baronius or Spondan: An:
419. n. 13. Tell me do forged Scriptures make the true Books of Scripture to
Become fallible?

22. OB: 19. How shall I be assured of the meaning of the true decrees when I
now know them? For learned men have been of contrary opinions about the meaning
of them. I answer, that to ease your tender Conscience, we will permit you
not to give your assent to any thing, of which you are not in Conscience
manifestly persuaded that this, and only this, is the true meaning of such a
Council: so that you be ready prepared in mind and heart to submitt to the true
meaning, when you shall come manifestly to know it. To more then this we
press no body: only let not people feign that they do not know what they
know, or easily may know if they will: you must observe that Councels use to be
assembled against such and such known opinions of Sectaries: against these they
frame their decrees so clearly, that the Sectaries themselves cannot find
impudency enough to deny their opinions to be clearly condemned, and the
contrary clearly defined: Wherefore we see by experience they never so much as
offer to do this; But all their forces are bent to cry down and vilify the
authority, by which they were condemned. Some other passages in Councels may be
found to be of an ambiguous sense, and until those passages be by public
authority, further declared, we hold no man an Heretic for not taking them
in the sense which some men are most inclined to conceive them to be spoaken.
Hence appears the great benefitt it is to have a living Judge, to whom all
that is doubtful may be referred and a clear declaration procured, as it is
expressly noted in the very end of the Council of Trent.

23. OB: 20. What necessity of an infallible Judge at all? I answer first, who
assured you that God would give no prerogative to his Church which is not
precisely necessary for her very preservation? D. Fern professes such a Judge
would be of singular benefitt for the keeping of unity in the Church, and the
ending all Controversies. See what I said Sect: 18. n. 2. I have also showed
the great necessity of this Judge Sect: 1. n. 4. etc. True it is during the
most bloody persecution of the first 300. years the Christian world could not
enjoy this benefitt: But I pray note what S. Isidor says Praefat: in suam
Canonum collectionem; where having observed what I now said of the persecutions
hindering the keeping of Councels, he adds that hence Christianity was torn
in to diverse Heresies, because license was not given to the Bishops to meet in
Councels until the time of the foresaid Emperor (Constantine:) And yet for
the first three hundred years Tradition of all points necessary could not but
be so fresh as to make a far less necessity of Councels then afterward when
Heresies had so opposed the first Traditions. But an infinite number sticking
close to those traditions were not only saved, but were glorious Martyrs in
those first three Ages.

24. Thus having answered your twenty Questions pertinent to the point of
Infallibility I come to give you satisfaction in an objection wholly impertinent
to this purpose. For it concerns not any article defined by our Church, but
private opinions of some private divines in our Church, whose opinions (though
never so erroneous) ought not to hinder your conversion if you were in earnest.
Yet even in this I hope to give you satisfaction. Your objection then is P. 16.
out of D. Tailor, endeavoring to prove our inconsistency with civil government,
because some of our Divines teach, that that which one or two or some few of
our Doctors say is lawful, may, in our judgments, be done without mortal
sin: But not only one, but many of our Doctors say it is lawful to murder or
depose a supreme Magistrate that is guilty of Heresy, or suspected of it:
therefore Cavete Principes Conclusionem, say you; but according to truer Logike
you should say Cavete Principes Heresim. I answer first, this objection makes
nothing against our faith, but against private opinions of private Divines,
which opinions he who will practice must expect public execution, which is so
terrible, that it secures Princes more then any preachers frighting them with
fear of Sin. Secondly I do nothing doubt but even those Divines would so
limitt, and restrain their loose opinion to such peculiar circumstances, as
would presently clear, even their opinion from being the least inconsistent
with the present government, besides our cheerful willingness to take any oath,
and enter into any Bond, obliging us to the loss of all that in this world can
be lost, if ever we so much as attempt the putting this opinion in practice,
which cheerful willingness I am sure you will find in any Roman Catholic friend
you have or can have in England. But I dare bouldly say, that those very
Doctors never intended to speak of the lawfulnes of murdering an Heretical
King, or Governor in a Country where that which they call Heresy, did already
over whelme the whole Nation. I say nothing of their other many Restrictio^s.
As that the Heresy of such a Prince if he lives will certainly ruin his
country. That his country will certainly be preserved by his death and no other
way. And that for certain by killing him no very great inconveniences will
follow. All these and other Restrictions even those Authors will require.

25. Again Protestants, and those whom they own for their Brethren, have far
more loose principles then these are, uttered even by their prime Apostles of
their Reformation. You own the Wiccleffians for Brethren: they all believe
that every Magistrate does truly for feitt his authority by sinning. You own
Luther for your prime Patriarch, and Calvin for his second: the first is
notoriously known to have preached rebellion, and to have said that the Ghospel
is not Ghospel except it he divulged with timults: and Calvin speaks thus cap.
6. in Daniel. v. 22.25. Earthly Princes do bereave themselves of authority,
when they erect themselves against God, and, we must rather spitt in their
faces then obey them. See Beza de Iure Magistratuum in subditos; to say nothing
of a world of others which might be cited whom you hold not to have erred
fundamentally in true Religion, and consequently these their errors not to be
damnable. And The author of the end to Controversies has lately in his Preface
showed in particular how in every place but England your new Reform was
brought in by rebellion. And D. Fern.. 16. says Those Churches had but
tumultuary Reformations.

26. Having now complied with your desire I might claim the performance of
your promise, but I know Gods grace must rather be earnestly begged, then you
earnestly pressed. Lay prejudice a side, with other human respects, and pray
humbly to know the truth: and then by Gods grace, that may be done without
which you will be eternally undone.

THE LAST SECTION.
The Roman Church having been proved to be our infallible Judge, all under
pain of damnation are bound to submitt to her Judgment.

I. IN my first Question I proved ( n. 1.) that there must be some certain and
assured means to end all controversies or doubts which either be or can be in
Religion. And ( n. 3.) I proved that all must needs agree in this, that our
understanding must be bound, under pain of damnation, to submitt it self to
that infallible Judge or Rule appointed by God to decide all necessary
controversies. Now, because all faith essentially consists in the inward
understanding (which is the very seat of true or false faith) God, who looks
in to our interior Soul, exacteth to see in that a ready embracing of that
faith without which no Salvation is to be had: And therefore, as I said, he
should not seriously desire our Salvation unless he desired that we
interiorly should yield, full assent to this one, and only saving faith, of
which faith the Apostle said that with out it it was impossible to please God,
and S. Mark, He who does not believe shall be damned. A false faith, taking the
belief of a lie for a divine verity can help to save no body. All then, to
please God, and to be saved must have true faith which essentially consisting
in the interior Judgment, God would have this Judgment readily to submitt to
the direction, or determination of that infallible Judge which was appointed by
him as the only means to bring us assuredly to this one true faith. I
earnestly in treat the Reader to read the proof of all this in the place
above cited And Sect. 16. n. 10.

2. All this interior submission of understanding, to-be due even to all that
is said in the Bible, and that even under pain of damnation, will easily be
granted by any Sectary, houlding the Bible to be that only Rule and direction
which God has given every one, as the only means to bring him assuredly to
the true faith: We Catholics do no less readily then they, submitt to the
Bible as to Gods word: but from the beginning to the ending of the second
Question, we have brought a world of evident and most convincing reasons;
proving that the Scripture, by it self alone, cannot be the only means
appointed us by God to bring us to the assured knowledge of the true Faith
necessary to Salvation; neither can it by it self alone, end and decide all
controversies about such matters of belief and practice as are wholly necessary
to Salvation; This I have showed in above four and twenty particular points:
Whence it follows that God has appointed some other means for our certain
and assured guidance in all these things. This other means I have proved,
through all my third question, to be the infallible direction of the Church,
and then I passed to show at large (through all my fourth Question) that this
Church, whose direction is infallible is the Roman Church, taking the Roman
Church as containing all that whole flock of Christ's sheep adhering to the
Bishop of Rome, as to their head Pastor, in what place of the world so ever
they live. I have showed the Traditions of this Church to be infallible. I have
showed the decrees or definitions set forth in any lawful General Council of
this Church to be infallible. Nothing of this I have supposed, but every
particular, here specified, I largely proved: so that I do not here, without
having first given full proof, Suppose this Roman Church to be infallible.

3. This then supposed; I do not see how our very adversaries (convinced of the
former points) can deny that all submission, interior, and exterior, must of
necessity be yielded to this Church, whose directions be infallible, and
secured by the assistance of the Holy Ghost from all kind of error: for, on
the one side, there cannot be imagined the least fear of falling into any
error, by following our guide, who is proved to be secured from leading into
error, and on the other side, this security from error, proceeding from the
promised assistance of the Holy Ghost, given to the Church purposely to direct
all her children, in all points of that faith which God exacteth of all to
please him, and to work their Salvation by it; and this direction being also
the only safe and secure means which he has given us to this end; it is
manifest that we sin damnably if we refuse to follow it. First because it
is a damnable Sin not to submitt to that order of government which the devine
providence has by his wisdom and also his Sovereigne Authority appointed unto
all for their direction: For (as we at large showed out of S. Austen Sect: 21.
n. 5.) if God should give a man Commission to direct us in such points, unto
which he would have all to conform, he who should refuse to submitt to the
direction of this man, should be guilty of damnable disobedience, not so much
toward this man, as toward God who gave that Commission to this man: so God
(according to what has been proved) having given Commission to the Church to
decide and determine all our Controversies in faith, and to direct us in all
things necessary to Salvation, as well in belief, as practice; to stand out
against the Church, and not to submitt to this order appointed by God, is a
most damnable sin of refractary disobedience.

4. Secondly we have no stricter obligation imposed by the Law of Charity
toward our own selves, then to procure that last end for which we were
cracted, to wit the eternal Salvation of our own Souls: We are sure this
cannot be done, but by pleasing God, who is not pleased but by our profession
of that only one true faith, of which it is said without faith it is impossible
to please God Hebr: 11.6. And he (who with this true faith) believes not,
shall be damned. Mark. 16. v. 16. He then, who will not take pains and care to
see himself securely settled in this true faith (so wholly necessary to
Salvation) is damnably guilty of uncharitableness toward his own Soul; whose
greatest and eternal good he neglects to procure, by neglecting to procure
the only means of true faith, by which it ca^ only be atteyned. And let no
body say this Means is too hard to be procured by me; for I am no scholar
but a poor ignorant creature. This will not excuse you for God knew well
enough, that the far greater part of those, who^ he created for eternal
Salvation and obliged to work the same with fear and trembling, and for whom
he did, shedding the Last drop of his blood so to purchase a greater plenty
of graces for them; this God, I say, knew well enought that the greater part of
those, for which he did and suffered so much, were poor ignorant people: and
therefore he had been no earnest Lover of Souls, if he had not ordained some
means so easy, even to the ignorant, that they thereby, might effectually be
brought to that true faith, which he so rigorously exacteth of all under pain
of damnation. This means, and this only means, I have proved at large to be
the infallible guidance and direction of the Church, whose traditions and
decrees in all points necessary are so inculcated by every preacher and
Catechist of this Church, that it is impossible for any one, desirous of
instruction, to live in ignorance of them; impossible to live according to them
and not to be saved. For this Commandment which I command thee this day, is
not hidden from thee, neither is it farro of: It is not in Heaven, that thou
should say who shall go up for us to heaven, and bring it down unto us, that
we may hear it, and do it. Neither is it beyond the Sea that thou should
say who shall go over the sea for us and bring it unto us, that we may hear
it, and do it. But the word is very nigh unto thee. Deutr: 30.11. We exact not
the knowledge of Greek, and Hebrew, and the use of near twenty Rules more as I
have showed our adversaries to do Sect: 7. n. 6. But we exact only the
following this so know direction of the Church A way so direct that no fool
can err in it. And we having so groundedly seen that this is the direction
given us by God to follow, we do not proceed blindly by following it with all
submission, but no blindness is greater then in an vnkown way, through which of
nececessity we must pass at our eternal peril if we miss to refuse the
following of an infallible guide provided for us and offered to us in this
passage and rather to yield our selves over to a confessed fallible direction.
What greater blindness?

5. D. Fern indeed and Protestants discourse otherwise of the submission due
to the Church; but it is upon the false supposition that She is fallible,
without they mean to discourse only of their own Church, and then they may
truly suppose her as fallible as they please: and she being so fallible they
most unreasonably are still exacting of us even by most rigorous sequestration
of all our estates, ad by what other penalties they think fit, to leave that
Church which we so groundedly hold to be the only infallible guide appointed
us by God himself, as the only means to direct us securely to our eternal
Salvation and to yield exterior conformity to their own new molded Church,
which they all confess and profess to be fallible: which is to say, you must
be undone in your estate, without you conform your selves to that new
reformation of ours, which perhaps is true. For we do not challenge infallible
truth to what we teach, we being fallible men, and our interpretations of
Gods word being only fallible; Yet infallibly we will undo you, if you will
not follow us: and yet if you do follow us perhaps you may be undone
eternally; for we cannot say that our Church is infallible in what she
teaches contrary to yours. She may therefore deceave you to embrace a ly for
a devine Verity: For you must be forced to embrace a doctrine deduced by
fallible interpretations out of Scripture which Interpretations the far greater
and the far learnedner part of this present age rejects as Heretical and which
as such were rejected by almost all visible Christianity for this last thousand
years, and which will perhaps shortly be rejected by us. For it is ordinary
with us (I speak what truly Protestants may speak) to reject that to day which
yesterday we cried up for a devine Verity.

6. Now all this being so truly spoaken I do not see what needs more to be
spoaken to vindicate and justify our most just Recusancy in refusing to submitt
to so preposterous proceedings of men when they, providing us no better
security enforce us to refuse due submission to that infallible direction of
the Holy Catholic Church most orderly appointed by God to bring us securely to
that end for which he made us, to which God of his infinite mercy vouch safe to
bring us all.

7. And thus having ended what I had to say of this most important matter I
must crave my Readers pardon for enlarging my self so fusely For I am wholly of
the mind of that dear friend of S. Austen called Nebridius, who was used to
say: That in a great Question, he hated a short Answer Aug: to: 1. Epist: 23.
ad Bonif: Wherefore in this Question of Questions brevity might well be
accounted hateful.

FINIS.

