Mount AEtna's Flames. OR, The Sicilian Wonder,
Really manifesting and plainly demonstrating, the prodigious effects of that
dreadful Spectacle of those furious Flames of Mount AEtna (an Island called
Sicily in the King of Spain's dominions,) which in 40 days time destroyed the
Habitations of twenty seven thousand persons, made two hills of one a thousand
Paces high a piece, and has already much Endangered the famous City of
Catania which the Inhabitants are forced to desert for fear of ruin and
destruction.

Tune of, Troy Town.
Mount AEtna
CATANIA



COme hear a wonder, people all
Of an unwonted pro^igy.
A mountain that destroys up all
I^t^n the Isle of Sicily,
The flames are fierce, no stop can be
Put so its fury as we see,
Of all the wonders in the world
of which the learned men do wr^^e,
Nor one like this, is to be found
and brought to blew and public sight
Though strange, it is true I witness can
it is known to many a learned man.
In Sicily an Island fair
under the rule of Spain's great King,
A mountain is, without compare
which does to many sorrow bring,
Sad is their fate (...) so nigh
These sad conclusion for to try.
Mount AEtna it is called by name
a fearful sight for so behold,
Old Authers has described the same
therefore to speak I may be hold
The flames which do from thence proceed
Makes many a melting heart to bl^^d,
Catania that City fair
full fifteen miles from this same place
Is threatened with the flames so near
the people in a woeful case,
Least thy should fear, as neighbors do
Which makes their heart, be full of woe.
The fiery flames from thence proceed
and cinders, they fly up amain,
Whilst Sulphur mines the same does feed
and rolling stones, return again,
A sad and dismal fight to see
For souls in that perpierity.
From out the rock a river slides
like burning streams unto the eye.
And in a Channel strange it glides
with flames that see^ to seals the sky*
Nothing is seen but smoke and fire
Which makes the people all admire.
Six hundred yards into the S^x
this burning river drives by force,
Still flaming most impetuously
it keeps it is dreadful fiery course.
No fish nor fowl, the same comes nigh
Put presently fall down and dye.
The Second Part
to the same Tune.
TWo ^ocks in one this same has put
each one a thousand paces high,
And what dame nature wisely cut
it does deface most furiously:
Water and fire, good servants are
But once being Masters, rags and tear.
Do but observe and you shall find
that former age^ ner^ did know,
Nor e're did see, time out of mind
such flames from AEtna's mount to glow
A dreadful sight it is to see
Huge stones like Atoms test should be.
In forty days it did destroy
the habitations and the home.
Of twenty seven thousand m^^
and left them all abroad to route.
Castles and Towns it Swallows d^wn
A fearful sight as are was shown.
The bideans noise and ^^^ings loud
which echoes from this dreadful place
Whilst flames ascend as in a ^loud
poor people are in woeful safe,
The a^^^, and water do conspire
To show themselves like flames of fire.
The towns, this earthquake has destroyed
was worth some Millions of good gold,
People of all sorts it anoy'd
by lodging in the fields so cold,
Pass souls what pity they deserve
Which now for want ^olye and starve,
Then he b^t take a serious view
of what do follow in this place,
And all your grief it will renew
to see what towns it down did race,
And then give thanks to God on high
That we such sorrows are not nigh.
And last of all observe the form
of this prodigious mountains birth.
Which rocks and hills does overturn
and does deface, our Mother earth.
And then conclude this story's (...)
Which I have set forth to Poor (...).
A List of the most considerable Towns and places ruined and destroyed by the
dreadful Earthquake and Eruptions.
The Town of Nicoloss wholly Ruined by the Earthquakes. The Towns of Pad^^ Tree
Castagne
the greatest part destroyed by the Earthquake. The Towns of La Guardia
Malpasso Ca^yo Rotundo La Potielli Antonino Pietro Mostorbianto Montpiler^ La
Annunciata Falicchi Pla^chi
, Wholly Overflowed, Consumed and lost in this Flery Inundation, with all the
Lands belonging to them no Footsteps of them remaining. The Towns of Mascalncia
St. Giovanni de Gal^r^^.
Rusin'd in part. The large Gardens and Vineyards of Albanelli Overflown and
Destroyed. The Famous Piece of Antiquity of Marcus Marcellus much Ruined.
Madonna de Monserrat^ destroyed, besides many Castles, Far^s, and other places:
which have r^n the same Fortune, whose Names we for bravity pass over,
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, and J. Wright.


