TWO LETTERS From Sir Charles Coote, Lord President of the Province of Connaght
in Ireland.

To the Honorable William Lenthall, Speaker of the Parliament.

RELATING The Rendition of the Town and Castle of Carickfergus, to Sir Charles
Coote.

Together with The total Defeat of the Scottish and Irish Forces in the North
of Ireland, under the Command of the Lord Ards, Lord Claneboys and Monro.

Imprimatur,

Hen: Scobell, Cleric: Parliamenti.

Printed at London for Robert Ibbitson dwelling in Smithfield near Hosier Lane,
1650.

Two Letters from Sir Charles Coote, Lord President of the Province of
Connaught in Ireland.
For the Honorable William Lenthall Speaker of the Parliament.
Honorable Sir,
BEing advertized by several hands, that upon the retreat of Monroes party out
of the Laggan, he would join with the Lord of Ards, and Claneboyes, about
Charlemount, and march into these parts of the Counties of Down and Antrim,
for relief of Carickefergus, and that they did expect many of the Scottish
Inhabitants here to rise and join with them, I drew forth what Force I could
make (with security to the Garrisons) on Saturday the 25 of November, to a
Randezvouze at Drombo, between Belfast and Lisnegarvy, which consisted of part
of my own Regiaments of Horse and Foot, and others that I brought from the
Laggan. Sir Theophilus Jones, and Collonell Chidley Cootes Regiments of Horse,
with Collonell Venables his Troop, and Lisnegarvy Horse, Colonel Slaydes
Regiment of Foot, part of Colonel Venables, and four Companies of Colonel
Fenwicks, in all about 1500 Foot, and 1200 Horse. The next day we advanced to
Lisnegarvy, and lay there six days, though very ill accommodated by reason of
the former burning of that place and Country about it by Monro.

On Friday, the 30 of November, the Enemy advanced into the Country, and slipped
by us beyond Drummore into Mac Cartans woods, which we could not hinder, lying
at such a distance; nor could we advance higher into the Country, without
hazzarding the Enemies passage another way over Bogs and Mountains to
Carrickfergus.

On Saturday, they came to Cumber* and early on Sunday, to New Town. We
followed them, and had like to have engaged them on their rising from Cumber,
some of them were cut off in the Rear, and some of their Tents and Ammunition
taken, but coming a little short, and the waters being up, they got into New
Town, whither we sent a strong party to face them, and provoke them to fight,
whereunto not finding them inclined, and the weather so excessive wet, our
Ammunition spoiled, and victuals spent, we marched back to Malone to refresh
our men, change our Powder, and get new supply of Bread, intending to visit
them again within two days. But they prevented it by their march upon
Wednesday last the 5 Instant within a Mile of Lisnegarvy, intending to get over
the River of Laggan above that place, and to pass into the County of Antrim to
Carrikfergus, on which we drew up again to Lysnegarvy, on this side of the
water to oppose their passage, expecting hourly, with Major Ormesby 400 more
of my Horse, which I had sent for out of the Laggan, who came immediately after
our advancement, and were very serviceable in the execution. The next morning
as soon as the Enemy arose, we marched after them very early out of Lisnegarvy,
and before they had marched a mile from their Quarter, we engaged with their
Rear-guard upon a Boggy pass on the Plain of Lysnesreane, and after an hot
dispute, our Vanguard of Foot, being commanded by Major Gore of my own
Regiment, and that of Horse by Major Dunbar of Sir Theophilus Jones his
Regiment, who both behaved themselves very gallantly, got the Pass, and killed
Cap. Hambleton, and diverse others in the charge.

After which Forlorn of Horse, it was Sir Theophilus Jones place to charge;
who did it with a great deal of gallantry prosecuting the Enemy (whose gross
Body made little resistance) from place to place, till they were totally routed.

I sent off Major King, and Cap. St. George, with a party of Horse, to make
good a Pass, which the Enemy of necessity must have gone through, who behaved
themselves extreme well in prosecution of the Orders given them; so that we
conceive there could not be less killed then a thousand of the Enemy; neither
Officer or Soldier of the Army omitting any thing that was possible to be done
by men; the execution being pursued above eight or ten miles, and but for the
Bogs and thick wood, few of them could have escaped. And such horsemen as did
escape, left many of their horses, and fled on foot.

All their Ammunition and Baggage was taken, and most of their foot Officers.
Collonell Henderson that betrayed Sligo, was killed; and Col. Hambleton is
prisoner, with diverse other Officers; what became of the Lords of Ards, and
Claneboyes, and Monro, I am not yet able to give an account, some of our party
being yet upon the pursuit; their number was 2000 Foot, and 800 Horse, as we
were informed, the night before we engaged with them, by some of their men that
ran to us from them, as likewise by prisoners which we took in the fight; they
were all Irish except a very few.

The most of the Scots which the Lords brought with them, left them, nor did
any in the Country join with them; we lost but one corporal of Horse, and
three private Soldiers, and not many hurt. For all which we have great cause
to bless Gods holy name, to whom only the glory is due.

On Thursday next Carickfergus by the capitulation is to be surrendered unto us;
and I doubt not they will now perform with us; but such is the sad condition
of this Province by these late troubles, and the great destruction that has
been made by all parties that it is impossible to support men enough out of the
contributions thereof, to secure the Garrisons and Country, from the incursions
of the Enemy, until Charlemount, and Eniskelly be first taken in; so that the
Parliament must be pleased to afford us supplies for our men; or this Country,
now almost wasted, will be totally ruined; which but moderately handled for one
six months, would afford a constant considerable relief to their Forces.

This Gentleman Capt. St. George, is one who has been a sufferer with us, his
Father and the whole Family, having lost all they had, for their fidelity in
the States service; whom I humbly recommend to your favor, and remain

Sir, Your most humble servant CHARLES COOTE.
Belfast, December. 8. 1649.
For the Honorable William Lenthall, Esquire Speaker of the PARLIAMENT.
Honorable Sir,
COntrary winds detaining my cosen Cap. St. George, since the writing of my
dispatch, two or three days ^^^ger then I expected. I have this day received
Carrickfergus Town and Castle, according to capitulation, wherewith I have
thought good to acquaint you, and shall humbly desire the same may be
communicated to the House, which I believe will be very acceptable, I have
placed Colonel Venables Governor thereof, and shall further humbly desire you
to acquaint the House, that this Town and Castle is of the greatest importance
of any place in this Province. Which being all, I take the boldness to
conclude my self,

Sir, Your most humble and faithful Servant Charles Coote.
Carrickfergus December. 13th. 1649.
Imprimatur

Hen: Scobell Cleric. Parliamenti.

FINIS.

