The Neck of the QUAKERS BROKEN: OR, Cut in sunder by the two-edged Sword of
the Spirit which is put into my Mouth. First, In a Letter to Edward Bourne a
Quaker. Secondly, In Answer to a Letter to Samuel Hooton and W. S. Thirdly, In
a Letter to Richard Farnsworth, Quaker. Fourthly, In an Answer to a printed
Pamphlet of the said Richard Farnsworth, Entitled, Truth Ascended: Or, The
Anointed and Sealed of the Lord defended, etc.


Written by Lodowick Muggleton, one of the two Just Prophets and Witnesses unto
the High and Mighty God, the Man Christ Jesus in Glory.

AMSTERDAM: Printed in the Year of our Lord God, 1663.

And are to be had in Great Trinity-Lane, over against the Lion and the Lamb.

Lodowick Muggleton 's LETTER TO Edward Bourne.
I Saw a Letter of yours which you sent to Dorothy Carter, wherein I perceive
she did lend you a Book of ours, of the Two Witnesses of the Spirit, which you
have perused, not for your good, but for your eternal hurt; for you have
discovered in that Paper what seed and nature you are of, which is the
reprobate Angels seed and nature which is called in Scripture A Serpent, or
Devil, of whose seed or child you are one, which you have plainly expressed in
your Letter, by speaking evil of the things you do not know, in which Book or
Books you were not worthy to look into: But many more besides you of the
Serpents brood have stumbled at this stone, even the Commission of the Spirit,
to their eternal condemnation, which we the Witnesses of the Spirit have
denounced upon them, which no infinite Spirit or Light of Christ within them
shall take it off from them, nor deliver them in the day of trouble.

I shall show in some particular places in your Letter wherein you have sinned
against the Holy Ghost, a sin that will never be forgiven in this world, nor in
the world to come. And so I shall proceed to the sentence of eternal death upon
you.

First, you say that you perused the Book till you was weary with looking into
it, for it was one of the dirtyest and confusedst piece of work that ever you
saw.

Also you do advise Dorothy Carter to consider of it, and let the witness of
her own conscience answer whether it was given forth from the Spirit of Truth,
or from the spirit of error and deceit, or not.

This I would have you to know, though it be too late for your good, that it is
neither the light in her, nor in you, nor no man under heaven at this day, that
can, or ought to judge of the Doctrine or Declaration of a Prophet that has a
Commission from God, but ought rather to submit and yield obedience to their
Doctrine; for there is no eternal life to be had but in the faith of it: For
whosoever receives a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall receive a
prophets reward: which reward is no less then the assurance of eternal life. So
on the contrary, he that despises a prophet; Doctrine, despises him that sent
him, and shall receive from that Prophet the seal in his conscience of his
eternal damnation.

The first thing that you take offense at, is that we say that the reprobate
Angel had the womb of a woman to clothe himself with flesh also to bring forth
Gods design: From which you do ask, whether that which is the Devils work can
be Gods glorious design, seeing God has manifested his Son to destroy the
works of the Devil?

To which I answer, That the reprobate Angel clothing himself with flesh in the
womb of a woman, it was Gods design that the reprobate Angel should do so for
this very purpose, that there might be a generation of men and women of his
seed brought forth here in this earth, in the state of mortality, being horn
under the Law, it being written in their seed and nature, and by the not
fulfilling of that law which is written in the serpents seed, it is made
capable to suffer the pains of eternal death, which is the second death, and
this was Gods design, that he might destroy the seed of the serpent with a
second death.

And as for Gods destroying the works of the Devil, he does destroy them two
ways, that is, he that is God did lay down his spiritual and heavenly glory in
the womb of Mary the Virgin, and so clothing himself with flesh and bone, so
that he might be capable to suffer the pains of death: therefore it is said in
Scripture, that this Jesus which is called the Son of God: but in other places
of Scripture he is called the Very God, as the Epistle of John where he says,
This is the very God and Eternal Life. And Isaiah where he says, To us a
Child is born, to us a Son is given, attributing to that Child Jesus the
Title of Everlasting Father, Mighty God, and Prince of Peace. There might be
more places of Scriptures named to prove this thing, as that saying, that the
fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily in him: and that saying in the Revelation,
I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last: he that was dead, but am alive,
and behold I live for evermore: And as the Angel by taking flesh upon him by
entering into the womb of Eve, brought sin and death into the world unto the
seed of Adam, so God by clothing himself with flesh in the womb of a Virgin,
that he might be put to death in that flesh, and by his spirit quickening again
in that flesh, he will destroy him that had the power of death, which is the
devil, and the devils works.

He destroyed the works of the devil in the seed of Adam, by their having faith
in the death of God, which faith purifies the heart, and is justified in the
sight of God, and in their own conscience, and so the works of the devil are
destroyed in the seed of Faith, which is the seed of Adam, by believing in the
blood of God, they having their hearts sprinkled by faith in his d^^^ and this
did God procure to his own seed, by clothing himself with flesh. So on the
contrary, he by his design of clothing himself with flesh, has procured the
eternal destruction to that reprobate Angel and his seed, and you being one of
the devils sons, I know by your words, for by your words you shall be
condemned; for you have plainly showed unto me by your Letter what seed you are
of, and who your father is, even the same as was Cains father, you and he have
all one father, for you were begotten of that wicked one, even that reprobate
Angel which God designed him and his seed unto that endless misery, as is
spoken of in that Book which you call a Confusion and a Lie: And not only so,
but you have called many heavenly Mysteries, the Bottomless pit of Confusion,
as that God created the person of the serpent more glorious than the rest of
the holy Angels.

Also you would have it proved by Scripture, that God made Angels spiritual
persons; neither can it enter into your heart to believe that the serpent was
made by the Wisdom and secret Council of God, to bring forth his seed to oppose
the Creator; and yet you read in the Scripture, that God would put enmity
between the seed of the serpent, and the seed of the woman. From what did this
seed of the serpent come, but from that reprobate Angel which is always in
opposition unto the seed of the woman, which is the seed of Adam, which is the
seed of Faith, which is the seed of God?

The knowledge of these two Seeds is that which can truly explain the true
meaning of the Scriptures, and open the gates of hell, and let in all the seed
of the serpent who deny a personal God in flesh and bone glorified: Also the
knowledge of the two seeds does open the gate of heaven unto the seed of Faith,
and lets them enter in to that everlasting glory, where they shall see their
God face to face to their eternal joy, because God has a body and face, and so
shall every seed have a face of its own. And though the seed of the serpent
shall have a face of its own, yet it shall never see the face of God, Angels,
nor man, no nor their own face, to eternity: for as they lived and died in
darkness here in this world, not knowing what the form and nature of the true
God is, nor the form and nature of the right Devil; and so not knowing what
nature and seed themselves are of, they shall rise again in that eternal
darkness, never stirring from the place they are raised, to eternity.

I write these Lines unto you Edward Bourne, knowing you to be of the seed of
the serpent, and appointed to eternal damnation before you were born, though
you know it not, I do know it by your speaking evil of that doctrine which is
declared by us the VVitnesses of the Spirit, by calling of it Deceit,
Confusion, and Lies, with many more wicked speeches against the purest Truth
that ever was declared by Prophet or Apostle, because this is the Commission of
the Spirit, and the last Witness of God on earth.

Therefore for these your hard sayings against the Doctrine of this Commission
of the Spirit, in obedience unto my Commission, I do pronounce you cursed and
damned soul and body from the presence of God, elect men and Angels, to
eternity; neither shall that light within you, nor any God deliver you from
this Curse, but according to my word it shall be upon you, because you shall
know that God has given power unto man to curse you to eternity, and that
there is a Prophet of the Lord now in the Land.

Written by Lodowick Muggleton, one of the two last Witnesses and Prophets unto
the High and Mighty God, the Man Christ Jesus in Glory.
Vale. August the 10. 1662.
A LETTER of Samuel Hooton and W. S. to Lodowick Muggleton.
Friend,
FOR so we can call thee, as Christ did Judas, and also the sloathful servant
whose talent was hid in the earth, who art in the highest state of enchantment.

Thou have slandered the children of the Most High God, thy lips has uttered
lies, thy tongue has forged deceit, thou art a false witness, a wanderer, a
vagabond from the true understanding, true knowledge and council, under whose
tongue is the asp and the venom, who out-sputters it against the children of
light, but with it thou art comprehended, and shall be made manifest, and the
hook (...) (Vah) is put into thy nostrils, by which thou shall be held, and
(...) Obed) is thy state if thou can read it, which upon thee shall come, and
can thou read ((...) Tame) thou have polluted thy self, thou have defiled thy
self, thou have made thy self unclean, and thou art unclean, and art in the
highest state of Ranters from the holy body, in the polluted body, and where
ever thou have an entrance thou will defile, and thou may deceive fools and
them that be void of understanding, but the sound and the weighty thy spirit
has not, nor never had any entertainment; for thou art clothed with a Curse
and not with a Blessing, the fruits of which is sputtered abroad, and the
eternal Sentence of Judgment of the Lord God is sentenced upon thee. And now
to the matter of thy flanders, and scandals, and reproaches that thou casts
upon the Most High's children.

First, Thou say, We (that are called Quakers) are guided and led by the
Spirit of Antichrist.

Answer. This is false, for we are in the Spirit of Christ before Antichrist
was, and we have it, and are Christ's, and so thy slanders does not touch us,
but is thy own, who speaks of thy self, and bears witness of thy self: but
our witness is in Heaven which bears witness of us, and witnesses to us,
which thou have manifested thou know not, who judges with evil thoughts, and
is in that judgment which is to be reproved, for we have Judgment to sentence
and judge such spirits perpetually.

Secondly, Thou say, We are the worst of all, and the most cursed of all in
point of doctrine.

Answer. This is false again, and from slanderous lips: our doctrine is Christ's
and the Apostles, and we that does his will do know his Doctrine, and we are in
the power of God that was before Sects was, and thou art the man that wanders
up and down to make Sects, whose mouth is filled with cursing, and sows it,
so thou shall reap of the same, which will enter into thy bowels, who art the
Antichrist out of Christ's doctrine and the Apostles, and an enemy to it, which
says, bless and curse not; therefore thou art one of the cursed children the
Apostle speaks of, who speaks forth the high swelling words of vanity to the
alluring of the lusts of the flesh, and so to catch people with thy bait, but
thy damnation and judgment lingreth not, nor slumbreth not. Remember thou wast
told this in thy life time.

Thirdly, Thou say, We deny both the Father and the Son to be a person in
the form of a man, and that we deny the same flesh and bone of Jesus which
suffered death, was laid in the grave, which rose again, which was seen
afterward by his Apostles and others, which ascended up into heaven in that
same flesh and bone, which he suffered death.

Answer. To this we charge thee, and command thee to mention the man, and the
place of his abode that denied this, and is a Quaker. Secondly, thy charge is
utterly false, and lies, and slanders as to us, and the Lord will judge thee
for sowing such lies abroad; for we own Christ, and none of us denies him that
was prophesied of, seen by the Prophets and holy men of God, came according to
the Prophecy, and was born of a Virgin according to the Prophecy of Isaiah, and
suffered death, and rose again according to Scriptures, the Man Christ Jesus,
who shall judge the world in righteousness, whom God has ordained: and we own
that according to the flesh he was of Abraham, and the same that suffered,
rose, and ascended into heaven, and remains in the heavens until the
restitution of all things, and we sit in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, who
is the express image and substance of his Fathers person; and we own the Holy
Ghost, and we own the Father, and knows them: And as touching Christ's flesh, we
are bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, and we have the mind of Christ,
and so thou liar, let thy mouth be stopped.

Thirdly, Thou say, If we should own Christ to be a person, then that light
of Christ which we so much talk of, would vanish like smoke, and come to
nothing.

Answer. To this we answer, That thou have manifested thy darkness and
ignorance, not knowing Christ, not knowing the Holy Ghost, not knowing the
Father, not knowing Christ's flesh, his blood and bone, nor Christ and the
Apostles doctrine, nor the Law; for first, The Law is light, says Solomon, and
the law is in the heart, and with the light they saw Christ, yea his flesh.
Secondly, John he bare witness to the Light that enlighteneth every man that
comes into the world, which is Christ: And Christ says, I am the Light: and,
believe in the light while ye have the light, that ye may be children: so there
is no becoming children but by the light of Christ. And the Apostle says, God
who commanded the light to shine out of darkness has shined in our hearts, to
give us the ^ight of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ
Jesus, and that was the treasure in earthen vessels. So first thou art ignorant
of this treasure, and both thee and thy doctrine, and thy principle flies away
like that smoke thou speaks of, and the light remains which is thy
condemnation, the witness in thy conscience shall answer it, which thou in thy
uncleanness have long rebelled against. Secondly, thou that so rebels against
the light of Christ we speak of, knows not Christ his flesh nor bone, nor the
Father, nor the Holy Ghost. As first thus: the light that shines in the heart
gives the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ, and so without
this light they have no knowledge of him: and this we say to thee, and all upon
the earth, that none knows the Father, none knows the Son, none knows the Holy
Ghost, none knows the Flesh and Blood and Bone of Christ, but by the light of
Christ, for that reveals him, and not Flesh and Blood, for thou art like to the
Jews who stopped their Ears, and closed their Eyes to that of God within them,
and therefore heard not, saw not, so was not converted; and such professed a
Christ was to come, but persecuted him when he was come, as thou do now
where he is made manifest in his light.

Fifthly, Thou say, That we will have no person at all.

Answer. This is false, though thou have laid it down general; for Christ is
the express Image of the Fathers person we say, as in Hebrews: But thou art the
man who wilt have no person at all that denies the light, for they that was in
darkness could not see God nor Christ, nor the Holy Ghost, that hated the
light, and the Apostle, said he, in the person of Christ, which many does
witness now, Glory to the Lord for ever: for if thou do profess them in thy
words, yet again in thy words, thou that denies the light, denies them, and so
Babylon, and blasphemously terms it to smoke, and for thy work the Lord will
reward thee.

Sixthly, Thou say, A great part of us are of those wicked Ranters that has
been given over to bloodshed with a sword of Steel, or else to all manner of
lusts of the Flesh, and now thou say we think by a more precise and
exactness of Life to recover our peace with God, and yet deny the very person
of God without us.

Answer. Here again thou adds lie unto lie, but who is the father is known by
us the children of the Most High, and what does the Devil rage in thee, because
some that has been Ranters, and used outward weapons formerly, now they are
turned from these things to God and Christ, the express Image of the Fathers
person, and comes to live in Christ and serve him in a new life, therefore
do thou rage? they do not own their former principles that comes amongst us,
but does judge them, and deny them, and all the lusts of the flesh, and does
their exactness of life and good conversation judge thine, that makes thee so
fret and chase thy self, and scoff, and calls it precise? and to this thou
adds a lie, and says we deny the very person of God without us: but to this
we say, God fills Heaven and Earth, and Christ the express Image of the Fathers
person, is manifest within us, and thou who railes at this, does manifest thy
self a reprobate, one in whom God and Christ is not, and an Antichrist, and a
false witness, and a lying spirit; for Christ says he would dwell in the
Saints, and God would dwell in them, and walk in them: and has the devil made
thee so blind and ignorant of the letter of the Scripture, who art given up to
believe lies, and who makes lies thy refuge, and have thou no other refuge but
lies, who by this manifests thy self to all sober people what thou art, and
from whence thou comes, and is not repentance hid from thy eyes, it is manifest
by thy spirit, yet we must say this to thee, thou art in the unclean flesh, and
has an unclean body, thy flesh burns with thy heat of thy lusts, and therefore
thou have uttered forth thy ruin; nevertheless here is some queries for thee
to answer in writing, else for ever stop thy mouth.

1. Is there any such thing as sin, and what is sin in it self, and whether
thou can act any sin, and express what is a sin to thee?

2. If thou do acknowledge sin, then shall a man while he is upon Earth be
made free from sin, and come into the state that Adam and Eve was in before
they fell, while they be upon the earth, and come to Christ, a state that shall
never fall while he be upon earth?

3. For what end did Christ come, does Christ enlighten every man that comes
into the world with a saving light, and a condemning light, yea or nay? Is
there any true Prophecy, Knowledge, Revelations or Witness seen or known, but
by the light of Jesus Christ?

4. What is the Soul, is it mortal or immortal? What is Conscience, and where
is it seated in man? What are the Angels, and the worshippers of Angels? What
is the worship of the Beast and the Dragon? And what is the Whore that sits
upon the Beast, which all nations drink her Cup, and what is her Cup?

5. What is the woman that fled into the Wilderness? And what is the
Wilderness? And what are the times, and time, and half a time that she was to
be fed the^e? And what was the number of the Beast, which is the number of a
man, and what is the number of a man?

6. What is the Serpent? And what is the Tree of Knowledge? And what is the
Tree of Life? And what is the flaming Sword? And what is the body of Death? And
the body of Sin, is it a man's outward body yea, or nay?

7. Shall a man be made free from Sin and Death whilst he be upon earth, and
be made perfect?

8. Dare thou say that thou have the same Spirit and Power as Christ and the
Apostles had?

9. Have thou heard the voice of God and Christ immediately from Heaven? Have
thou seen the shape of God?

10. What is the first principle of the pure Religion? And what is that which
leads to Repentance? And what is that which gives the knowledge of God, and of
Christ? And whether it be within man, or without man?

11. What, and where is the Church of Christ?

12. Do thou sin, or can thou sin? Or have thou any guilt for sin?

13. Has every man the Spirit of God?

14. What is the honor that is from above? And what is the honor that is from
below?

15. Do not thou continue in the highest strain of Ranters? Seeing thy mouth
is full of cursing, and yet thou art finding fault with those that be changed
from it?

16. What is Evil? And what is Good? And what is Light? And what is Darkness?
And how do thou know them, and distinguish them in thy self? And if thou can
distinguish the one from the other, then what is it to be baptized for the
dead? (mark) we ask thee what this baptism is for the dead, and what is the
dead?

17. What is it that leads nature out of its course? And what is it that
defaces the glory of the first body? And what is the glory of the first body,
and what is it that leads nature in its course? And where is it?

18. What is Self-righteousness and its ground? And what is the Gospel? And
what is Election? And what reprobation? And what is Cains mark?

Answer these things in Writing, and send them to Thomas Hyfield at Notingham.

Lodowick Muggleton's Answer to Samuel Hooton and VV. S.
Samuel Hooton and W. S.
I Received a paper from you two, being Quakers, wherein I find your Spirits
much moved to wrath and railing, because I have told the truth to one John
Levens, formerly a Sword-man in the Army, but now turned Quaker. In a Letter to
him it does concern all the Quakers all the world over, and through some
passages in that Letter you have been moved by that light within you, to send a
long railing Letter unto me, with some Propositions from Scripture-texts for me
to answer; which railing Letter of yours is so much, and your questions so
many, that it would take up a volumn to answer.

Yet nevertheless because you are not under the sentence of this Commission
already, and for the further information of other Quakers that are not under
it: And for others that shall come to hear or see this Answer, I shall trouble
my self so far as to give answer both to the railing part of your Letter, and
(if your Queries be worth the answering, which is not already answered in some
of our writings) I shall say something to them, for some of those Scripture
texts which you quote, is not worth the answering: And those that are of most
concernment are interpreted, and unfolded very plainly in that Treatise of the
Interpretation of the 11 Chapter of the Revelation of St. John, That is to say,
Concerning the Tree of Life. The Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil. Of the
Serpent. Of the Woman that fled into the Wilderness. What that Wilderness is.
What the time and times, and half a time is. What the Dragon is. What the Beast
out of the Bottomless-pit is. What the State of Adam was in his Creation, with
the Person and Nature of Angels, and the Immortality of the Soul, with many
other deeper secrets then those Texts of Scripture which you mention, does or
can bear; which Books that are written by us the Witnesses of the Spirit, such
Devils as you are not worthy to look into.

But to give answer to the railing part of your Paper, which has very little
else in it, and if there be any thing in the Queries worth the Answering, which
is not answered already in some of our writings I shall do it, not rendering
railing for railing, but I shall speak what I certainly know concerning you
two, and the Ministry of the Quakers, and all those that believe them, which
continue in that Faith after they have heard of this Commission of the Spirit.
I know what I speak to be truth, as with relation to your Principles, and to
your Eternal estate.

1 Answer. The first part of your Paper has little in it but railing against
me only, where you say, that I am in the highest state of inchauntment, in
that I have slandered the Children of the most High God.

First, I declare as I am a Prophet and Messenger of the true God, that the
people called Quakers are not the Children of the Most High God, but for the
generality of them, they are the children of the devil, and are the very seed
of the devil, and were begotten by him, and I (as I am an Ambassador ordained
of God by voice of words) can as truly say that they are of the seed of the
Serpent, and so the Children of the Devil, as Christ did to the Jews, when he
said, that they were Serpents, yea Devils, and the Devil was their Father, so
can I say by you Quakers, and many thousands more as well as you, that you are
the Children of the Devil, that were begotten by him, and not begotten by Adam,
who never came through the loins of Adam, though they came through the womb of
Eve: For this I know, that Cain was the firstborn of the Devil, and Adam had
no part in the begetting of him. And from this Cain came those Jews that Christ
called Serpents and Devils.

And the Quakers people which you call the Children of the Most High God, are
the Children of Cain, who was that Angel or Serpent that beguiled Eve, which
became flesh, blood and bone, and so begat millions of men and women which are
his Children, whereof most of the Quakers are: Therefore do not you say that I
slander them in saying that they are led by the spirit of Antichrist, and that
they are the worst of all in point of doctrine, though the best of all in
practice of Life. For what I have said of them will prove no slander nor ill
report, but truth is self; Neither can any Quakers principles comprehend me,
nor the Doctrine declared by us the Witnesses of the Spirit.

And as for that high enchantment, which you say I am in, and those you call
fools which believe it, shall find it the power of God unto Salvation. But on
the contrary you that despise it, shall find it the power of God to your
eternal condemnation; which many of the Speakers of the Quakers, and other
opinions, with many hundreds of private persons besides, shall not deliver
themselves from the Sentence, which we the Witnesses of the Spirit have
declared through a true discerning, which you call Enchantment; But it is the
Commission and power of God which shall war with the Quakers, and all other
opinions in the world; because it is the two-edged Sword of the Spirit which is
p^t into our mouths. And this which we have said against you Quakers, will be
no slander or reproach, but as true as any word that ever was spoken by Moses,
the Prophets and Apostles, or Christ himself; for we are the Witnesses of the
Spirit, which is the Spirit of Truth which has made us judge of the world in
spiritual matters, concerning the Eternal estate of Mankind: And what person
soever we determine judgment upon, it is so, and there is no revoking of it.

You have written that I say, you that are called Quakers are guided and lead
by the Spirit of Antichrist.

This is as true a saying as ever was spoken by Prophet of Apostle, that the
Quakers are lead and guided by the spirit of Antichrist, for they are not in
Christ, neither is Christ in them, ye^ say they, we are in the Spirit of Christ
before Antichrist was.

This lie exceeds other lies, for Antichrist has been in the world ever
since Cain was born, of whose seed and nature they are. And Christ came into
the world when Abel was born, then was the Seed and Nature of Adam, which is
the Spirit of Faith, which is called by the Apostle, the Spirit of Christ, and
who ever is partaker of the Seed of Adam, may be said to have the Spirit of
Christ in them, and their spirits to be in him, that is, Christ dwells in their
hearts by Faith.

But on the contrary, the Quakers being the seed and nature of the lost Angel,
whose nature was before his fall pure reason, and Cain being the first born of
the Devil, the fullness of the Angels Godhead dwelt bodily in him, and Cain
having copulation with the female Sex, millions of men and women have been
brought forth of his seed which is reason fallen, and this seed of reason in
Cain and his seed, is that spirit of Antichrist, and this began to act it self
forth when Cain and Abel began for to worship God, and ever since the spirit of
Antichrist has remained in its seed, which brake forth in this later age, in
a more eminent manner in one particular person, namely John Robins, that
seemingly carried a more pure God-like power, then any other Antichrist which
went before him. And the Quakers have the very influence of John Robins his
spiritual witchcraft-power upon them; And so indeed it may be truly said that
the Quakers are lead and guided by the spirit of Antichrist, and so their
spirit is in him, and his spirit in them, so that they cannot be in Christ nor
Christ in them, for they are not of that seed that should have made them the
children of the Most High God, though I know they cannot help it, yet it is so
decreed by the Creator, and he has been pleased to make it known unto me; and
though you say I bear witness of my self, yet is my witness and judgment in
these things, true.

Whereas you rail in that I said the Quakers are the worst of all, and most
cursedst of all in point of Doctrine, etc.

2 Answer. As to the slander and lies you speak of, I shall let them pass, for
I have spoke enough of them before; but as for that saying of mine aforesaid,
That the people called Quakers are the worst of all, and the most cursedst of
all in point of Doctrine, That is as pure a truth as ever was spoken with
tongue, neither do you know the doctrine of Christ, neither can you do his will.

How can you know the Doctrine of Christ? When as your Christ has never a
body, for you have got your Christ all within you, as I shall make more appear
hereafter.

And as for my wandering up and down to make Sects, it is those of the Quakers
that wander up and down. As those that went to New England, and John Parrot
unto Rome, to get the Pope and his Bishops to be Disciples of Christ, and there
to be punished in his body, and when he came home again to be damned to
eternity by me for his pains, because he went by the light within him, and was
not sent by voice of God without him. Therefore eternal damnation will be his
reward for going without a Commission from God, and so will all the Ministers
of the Quakers, and all other Ministers too for going Ambassadors for Christ
when as he sent them not.

Though they preach from the letter of the Scriptures, or from a light within
them, though the Devils be cast out, and much good done thereby, yet it will be
but as a work of iniquity, because they went before they were sent.

O how willingly is Reason the devil to be an Ambassador for Christ, when a
Christ will not accept of him, therefore reason the devil goes of himself
thinking to have a reward in heaven, for he will say, Lord have not we preached
in thy Name, and prayed in thy Name, and cast out devils in thy Name? and the
Lord will say, depart from me you workers of iniquity.

So that what man soever that preaches or pretends to be a Minister, an
Ambassador of Christ without a Commission from him, it will be charged upon him
as a work of iniquity.

Indeed there are too many Messengers and Ministers of Christ to be true, for
indeed the world can hardly bear with one true Messenger at a time, this I can
truly speak by experience, because I am the last man that God will give a
Commission unto, until time be no more; yet never was there any Prophet, or
Apostle, or Messenger of Christ, but they have traveled up and down more then
ever I did, almost these eleven years, so that I have not traveled up and down
as the Quakers have, for to get either wise or fools to believe me: Yet this
Commission has gone through more parts of the world then any Quakers ever did,
but that is a thing I do not much matter.

You Quakers say that my mouth is full of cursing, and that I shall reap of the
same: likewise you say that I am out of Christ's and the Apostles Doctrine, that
said bless and curse not, with many other sayings, which will be too tedious
for me to write.

As for my mouth being full of cursing, that is my Commission: neither do I
curse any but Devils which are appointed for it of God, and there is never a
one that I have cursed that shall escape that curse which I have denounced upon
them, neither will any God deliver them from it, for I do curse none but the
seed of the Serpent, who had his curse denounced upon him and his seed at the
beginning by God himself.

Now in this last age God has given me power, and discerning to determine and
give judgment upon men and women, according as I do discern by their words,
and I thereby also know what nature and seed they are of, and accordingly I
give judgment upon them, for I do go by as certain a rule as the Judges of the
Land do, when they give true Judgment according to the Law. For God has
ordained me the chief Judge in the world at this day to give sentence upon men
and women's spiritual and eternal estate what will become of them after death.

Full of this cursing I confess my mouth is, and I do rejoice in it too, I know
that God is well pleased in the damnation of those that I have cursed, and I am
wondrous well satisfied in giving judgment upon them, according to the tenor
of my Commission: and this is that which you call swelling words.

You would have called the Prophet Eliahs words swelling words, if you had been
of those four hundred priests of Baal, which he commanded to be slain by the
power of his word; which power of the Commission of the Spirit, is of a more
high nature then that of Eliah's was; for his was but the sentence of death
natural, but this is the sentence of death eternal; but because it is not
immediately executed as his was, you think that there is nothing in it, but it
will be found suddenly enough both to you and to many that are entered into the
second death already: for there is no time to the dead, but after death to
judgment, which judgment they have in themselves, which is the remembrance of
that sentence, that we who are Witnesses of the Spirit, did pass upon them in
this life, for they shall never see any other God or Judge, but that sentence
that we have passed upon them.

You are much mistaken if you think to deal with a Prophet, that has a
Commission from God, as you deal with the Priests of the nation: Because you
Quakers have baffled the Priests of the nation by that light within you,
because you are fallen to a more precise exactness of life then they, though your
doctrine is worse then theirs, you must not think to do so by a Commissionated
Prophet.

This Commission of the Spirit shall break the Neck of the Quakers, as it has
done diverse others: for this take you notice, that after the Sentence is passed
upon the Speakers of the Quakers, they shall never grow more to any great
experience, neither shall they have those Visions, Apparitions and Revelations
from that light within them as they had before, but shall rather wither.

This experience has been known by Quakers and others, as John Robins, John
Taney, John Harwood, Fox the elder, Fox the younger, Edward Burrowes, Francis
Mowgil, with many others, with hundreds of all Sects besides, which shall not
escape what has been decla ed by us the Witnesses of the Spirit.

As for that saying which you quote out of Christ's words to his disciples
before they had their Commission, where he said unto them, Bless, and curse
not, that concerns not me, nor any other man in the world at this day. Peter
and the rest of the Apostles had power both to bless and curse after they had
received their Commission, which was after Christ's Ascension, as you may read
in the second of the Acts, then was that saying of Christ fulfilled which he
had said unto Peter, I have given thee the Keys of Heaven and of Hell, that
what thou bindest upon earth shall be bound in heaven, and what thou loosest on
earth shall be loosed in heaven. Or thus: What sins thou remittest shall be
remitted, and whose sins thou retains shall be retained; That is, thou shall
have power to give Sentence of Blessedness to those that believe thee, and
Sentence of Cursedness to those that despise thy Declaration.

This was the remitting of sins, and the retaining of them, so that Peter and
the rest of the Apostles were not tied after they had received their Commission
to those words of Christ which he spoke unto them when they were private
Believers. Neither am I tied to those words of Christ which he spoke unto his
disciples at that time; for he has given me power and authority to be Judge of
the Scriptures, he has given me understanding of his mind in the Scriptures
above all men in the world at this day; nay, if I should say than all the men
since the beginning of the world, I should not lie: for I being the chosen
Witness of the Spirit, and the last man that shall ever speak to this bloody,
unbelieving world by Commission from God; for he will never choose any more
after me so long as the World endures.

Neither does any man know the Scriptures, neither can any man interpret the
Scriptures truly but my self; for God has given the Scriptures into my hands,
even as he gave the Priests Office into the hands of Aaron; none ought to
officiate the Office of the Priesthood but Aaron, and those that were appointed
by Moses and him: So it is now, none ought to officiate the Office of a
Minister, Messenger, or Ambassador of Christ, but those that are approved of by
John Reeve and my self. For by reading the letter of the Scriptures, or the
light within a man, is not sufficient to make a man a Minister, Messenger, or
Ambassador of Christ; therefore those words which Christ said to his disciples,
bless and curse not, is nothing to me; for he has given me power since that to
the contrary.

He has put the Two-edged Sword of his Spirit into my mouth, that whosoever I
pronounce cursed through my mouth, is cursed to eternity: And my power is as
great, and rather greater than the Apostles was that you speak of, which is
called a cursed child. The Apostles curse was but a weak curse to that power
which God has given to me; For the Apostle says, if an Angel from heaven
should preach any other Doctrine than what he and the rest of the Apostles had
taught, let him be accursed, I do not only say, let him be accursed: but if an
Angel from heaven should come and say I have spoken false, or lied in the
Doctrine that we have declared, and in those things which I have said
concerning the Quakers, I have power not only to say, let him be cursed, but
to curse Angel or man to eternity.

As for your judgment from the letter of the Scriptures, or from the light
within you, it is not worth a straw: but the curse that I pronounce upon men
and women, it is not from the light of the Scriptures, nor from the light
within me, but from the power and authourity of a Commission received from a
God without me, which spoke by voice of words to the hearing of the ear, and
this is that curse that shall remain, and be remembered by all those Quakers and
others that are under it, both in this life and to eternity.

3. Thirdly, I did say truly in that I said you deny both the Father and the
Son to be a Person in the form of a man; and that you deny the same flesh and
bone of Jesus which suffered death, was laid in the grave, which rose again,
which was seen afterward by his Apostles and others, which ascended up into
heaven in that same flesh and bone that he suffered death in.

In your Answer to this abovementioned, you charge me to mention the man, and
the place of his abode that denied this, and is a Quaker.

There are some other words in this Letter of yours that is to be minded, and
it is this where you say Christ Jesus is the express image and substance of the
Fathers person, and you own the Holy Ghost, and you own the Father, and know
them; And as touching Christ's flesh, you are bone of his bone, and flesh of his
flesh, and you have the mind of Christ, and so you call me a Liar, and say,
let my mouth be stopped.

Answ. This same is riddle me, riddle me, what is this? What a fi^e distinction
have you given of the Trinity, and wha^ solid Arguments do you think that you
have given to prove me a liar in what I have said?

First, according to your charge, I shall tell you both the place and some of
the persons which did deny this. The place where this was denied was in
Eastcheap, at a Butchers house, the persons who did deny those things
aforesaid, one was the Butcher himself, I think his name was Richard Whitpan,
or such a like name, the Quakers Downfall does name it right: another of them
was Fox the younger, which is now both dead and damned to eternity: another of
them was John Harwood, as for the other two I do n t remember their names, but
one of them was a great lubberdly fellow, perhaps you may know him better than
I; these five did all of them deny that flesh and bone, or body of Christ
wherein he suffered death, which same body is now living which they did deny;
for which the just Sentence of Condemnation is passed upon them, as is public
in the Quakers Downfall.

Nay, it was not only these five Quakers that did deny these things aforesaid,
but all the Quakers that ever I talked with, both men and women have done the
same. And I know, that if I should but discourse with you, I should find you
to do the like, for it does not stand with a right Quakers principle to believe
that the same flesh and bone of Christ which suffered death, was laid in the
grave, rose again, and is now living in heaven in that same body, neither can
that body be in heaven without the soul or spirit, for where his body is, there
is his spirit also, for they both lived together, they both suffered death
together, they both rose again together, and are both in heaven together; if
so, how is it possible that the Quakers should get Christ within them?

For if Christ be a distinct person of himself, of substance flesh and bone,
though a spiritual body now in heaven, how comes Christ to get his spiritual
body into every Quakers body, and every man's body else? For the Scripture
says, that the heavens shall contain him until the restitution of all things,
meaning that body of flesh and bone: so that the person of Christ or his
Essence, cannot be in this world at all, much less in the Quakers bodies; nay,
he is not in mine, though he has chosen me to be his Messenger to declare what
he is in his form and nature, as has been abundantly declared in our Writings.

Therefore do not you say that it is a slander and a lie for me to say, that
you are the very absolute spirit of Antichrist, that does deny both the Father
and the Son; for though you talk of a Christ, and of his being the express
Image of his Fathers person, and of a Holy Ghost, because you read of such
things in Scripture, which were other men's words, so you reading of them, have
jumbled the Father, Son and Holy Ghost together, and so in stead of one person,
you have gotten three persons, and yet never a person. For I am sure when I
talked with John Perrot about God, he could find never a person, but an
infinite Spirit without a body or person at all.

All the Quakers that ever I have had to do withal (which have been a great
many) I could never find any Quaker to own God to be a person in the form of a
man, but an infinite Spirit that fills heaven and earth, and all places, and
all things, and so does the Pope and all other Opinions that are, which does
show the darkness of the Quakers, and the Pope, and all others: For if God be a
person in the form of a man, as I am sure he is (for I do acknowledge no other
God but the Man Christ Jesus, who is a distinct body of flesh and bone of his
own,) how then can he fill heaven and earth with his presence, and get into the
Quakers bodies, and all other peoples bodies too, and yet he is in heaven above
the stars, which heaven must retain him until the last day?

From this body of Christ which is the only God, have I power over all other
gods or infinite spirits whatsoever. I could show in what sense it may be said
that God fills heaven and earth, but it would be too large to unfold, besides
it is declared already in our Writings.

There is one blasphemous saying of yours, through your ignorance of the
Scriptures, in this Letter of yours. You say that you do own Christ, according
to the flesh he was of Abraham; Which is blasphemy to say it, being quite
contrary to the Scriptures; for those Jews that persecuted Christ were,
according to the flesh, the children of Abraham; therefore it was they said, We
have Abraham for our father, and never were in bondage to any; for indeed all
those that are the children of Abraham according to the flesh, are the children
of the devil, or of the serpent: but all those that are the children of Isaac,
or the children of the Promise, which is the seed of Faith, which are the
children of Abraham according to the Spirit, and so according to the faith of
Abraham, of which Christ came, and so the Seed of Faith may say truly they are
bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, because the seed or spirit of Faith
which Abraham the father of the faithful had in him, lives in our flesh and
bone, and we may be said indeed to be bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh,
and so called his Brethren, because we are born not of the will of man, nor of
the flesh, but of water and of the Spirit; which Spirit does lie secretly hid
in the water, is the motions of peace that does arise from the seed which is
called the Spirit.

But on the contrary, the Quakers Christ is according to the flesh of Abraham,
and so indeed they are bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh; for indeed
they know no other Christ but according to the flesh, that is, according to the
seed of Reason. For in Scripture the seed of Reason is called the Flesh from
whence the motions of sin does arise, which are called the motions of the
flesh, which I have largely unfolded in The Interpretation of the 11th Chapter
of the Revelations, for the Scripture takes no notice of the outward bodily
flesh, but as the two seeds does operate and work in man. Reason is called the
Flesh, and Faith is called the Spirit, wherefore it is said, Let Christ dwell
in your hearts by faith. And so every one that does truly believe in that flesh
and bone of Christ to be now living, does eat his flesh, and so Christ dwells
in his heart by faith, and not in his person and essence, as the Quakers do
vainly imagine.

For they make no distinction between the person and essence of Christ, and the
light of Christ, which light of Christ is one thing, and his person another, as
the body of the Sun is one thing, and the light that shines from it is another,
and so according to the flesh, that is, according to the seed of Reason, the
Quakers are bone of his bone, and flesh, of his flesh: And they being the
children of Abraham according to the flesh, as their imaginary Christ is; for
all Abraham's children according to the flesh, are the children of Cain, who is
the father of most part of the Quakers, and in this sense they may say that
they have the mind of Christ in them.

4. You say I write, if you should own Christ to be a person, then that light
of Christ you so much talk of, would vanish like smoke and come to nothing.

In your Answer to this, you upbraid me with my ignorance and darkness, as not
knowing Christ, nor the Holy Ghost, nor the Father, nor Christ's nor the
Apostles doctrine; and for which purpose you quote Solomon's Writings which is
no Scripture, with some Scriptures to show my ignorance, and that my Doctrine
should fly away like smoke, as I said by yours, with many more sayings that
would be too tedious to write.

Answer. If I were as ignorant and as dark in the knowledge of Christ, and of
the Holy Ghost, and of the Father, and of the Apostles doctrine as you are, it
would be no matter if my tongue should cleave to the roof of my mouth: for your
ignorance and darkness is plainly discovered, in that you quote Solomon to
prove your Scripture, light and knowledge of Christ, that which is no Scripture
no more than the Apocrypha is, but I perceive it is as good Scripture to you as
any; for you are but like a Parrot that speaks other men's words, for it is
nothing to you what Christ or the Apostles said at that time.

You ought to have heard what the Commission of the Spirit says now, in these
last days; for none can interpret Scripture truly but my self, neither does
any man in the world truly know Christ, nor the Father, nor the Holy Ghost but
my self, and those that believe in this Commission of the Spirit; for it is not
with me as it is with you, for you are to be judged by the letter of the
Scriptures, but God has made me the Judge of Scriptures and of you also.

For my Commission and the Doctrine of it is as true as the Prophets and
Apostles Commissions were in their time; nay, it is of a more higher nature
than theirs were: For we the Witnesses of the Spirit do know more than Moses,
the Prophets, or Apostles did, things of more higher concernment, As

To know the form and nature of the true God before he became flesh. The form
and nature of the right Devil before he be a^e flesh. The persons and nature of
Angels. The rise of the two Seeds. What knowledge can exceed, or go beyond the
knowledge of the true God and the righ^ Devil, many other deep Secrets which
has been declared by this Commission of the Spirit, which the Prophets and
Apostles were but dark in, in comparison of the Witnesses of the Spirit.

If so, how should you Quakers come to understand any thing concerning Christ,
the Father, and the Holy Ghost, who have nothing but the dead letter of other
men's words, whose light was but dark in comparison of that light that comes by
this Commission of the Spirit, so that you can never know Christ, nor the
Father, nor the Holy Ghost, by the words of the Scripture, nor by the light of
Christ within you, without an Interpreter, there being none in the world at
this day but my self.

Can your light within you make these three you speak of, Christ, the Father,
and the Holy Ghost, to be but one person and particular body of flesh and bone
in the form of a man? if you can, then may you truly say that you know the
Father, Christ and the Holy Ghost, which I know no Quaker or other does, or can
know at this day, but this Commission of the Spirit only; Neither can any man
by the light of Christ within him, come to know these things aforesaid, but by
believing of him that is sent by voice of words from a God without him.

But the Quakers were never sent from a God without them, but only from a
Light within them, and though it be the light of Christ, yet will it not give a
man the knowledge of the true God, but will perish; and he that has it, except
it be grounded by faith to believe that God spoke to such a man to the hearing
of the ear, and then the light of Christ in a man being grounded upon that
voice, he shall come to know the Father, Son, and Spirit, to be but one
personal Glory in the form of a man, which no Quaker in the world does,
therefore cannot know the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost by that light within them
which they talk so much of: for a child that answers from his Catechism-book
would have said as much from the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as these Quakers
do, for a boy could have rehearsed these places of Scripture, and have made as
good a Confession of his faith as any Quaker does. But let that pass, and come
to the next.

5. You say further, that I have written, The Quakers will have no person at
all.

The words in your Letter to this is not worth a Reply; for there is little in
it but the repeating of Scripture words, and what the Apostle says of Christ
being the express image of the Fathers person; which if it were but opened, it
would utterly destroy their own principles of the light of Christ within them,
which they are very angry with me for saying that the light within them will
vanish like smoke, which they will find to be true: but I shall go to the next.

6. You say I write, that a great part of you are of those wicked Ranters, that
have been given over to bloodshed with a sword of steel, or else to all manner
of lusts of the flesh, and now I say you think by a precise and exactness of
life to recover your peace with God, and yet deny the very person of God
without you.

Your Answer to this Sentence of mine is something large, but most of it
railing and rehearsing the same words as were spoken before; for you make a
great deal of do about knowing the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and
keep a stir about Christ's being the express image of the Fathers person, and
yet all this while you cannot find out any person of God at all; only you
have gotten Paul's words, and run away with them as a dog does with a bone: for
the letter of the Scriptures is cast down as a bone by the Prophets, Apostles,
and Christ himself; for how would Quakers have done to have found out these
words, That Christ is the express image of the Fathers person, if Paul had not
said so? I marvel how they would have known that Christ enlighteneth every man
that comes into the world, if they had not found such words in Scripture.

But those men that spoke the Scriptures know what the light of Christ was,
these can only speak of it, but know nothing truly what the light of Christ
is, nor from whence it does arise.

There is one expression in this part of your Letter which would make one
laugh, which is this, Does the devil rage in me because some who have been
Ranters and used outward weapons formerly, now they are turned from these
things, and turned unto God, and Christ the express image of the Fathers person?

As for those Ranters that are turned to God and Christ in the Quakers way,
they had better have kept themselves where they were; for before they were in
the wilderness, but are now turned back into Egypt, and so are further off from
entering into the land of Canaan, that is a place of rest for their souls, than
they were before: So that the state of the Quakers is more incapable to be
saved than the Ranters; for if they turn a right Quaker after they have been at
the Rant, there is no possibility for them to be saved, for they are twofold
more the children of the Devil than they were before: For if such a Quaker
should give his goods to the poor, and his body to be burnt for that light
within him, it will avail him nothing; for there are but these three states in
man, Egypt, the Wilderness, and the land of Canaan.

But by faith in a Commission, and they that truly believe in a Commission, are
the Saints that Christ dwells in, and not the Quakers; for they are for the
most part of them, as I said before, the children of Cain, who was of that
wicked one, which always was in bondage, and there shall remain to eternity. So
much in answer to your railing Letter.

Now I have given you answer to your cursed blasphemy and railing speeches
against those Truths which I have said concerning you Quakers, it remains that
I should give answer to your Queries, which are many. There are Queries enough,
if answered, to make a Volumn bigger than the Bible; for there has been
greater Volumns than the Bible made of one of those Texts of Scripture which
you have propounded, by wise men in reason.

But this seems to be a mavelous thing, that you Quakers that are guided by
the light of Christ within you, and knows the mind of Christ and the Apostles
doctrine, and knows the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and Christ
the express image of the Fathers person, in that you should be ignorant of the
knowledge of these things which you propound unto me to answer, else I must
stop my mouth for ever.

Ce tainly if you had known them your selves, you would not have propounded
them to me to answer; neither is it the propeity of him that has true
knowledge in him to put questions to another, which he cannot answer himself.
It is a thing I never did to any since I came to know the truth, I never did
propound any question to any man that I could not answer my self; though I have
been asked many questions by several sorts of people, yet never any went empty
away without an answer; some satisfied, and some unsatisfied, because they
could not question any further; nay, there has not been that question that
could arise out of the heart of man, let it be what it would concerning
spiritual things, with relation to God, Devil, Heaven, Hell, or any other
spiritual thing, but I have given answer to it. Nay, some have gone so far as
to ask who made God, and I have given answer to that also.

N thing has been too hard for me in spiritual things, if it has been
propounded in English words. When I say spiritual things, I speak with relation
to the knowledge of the true God his form and nature before he became flesh,
and what he is now in himself. And what the right devil was before he became
flesh, and what he is now in himself, and how Heaven and Hell does depend upon
these two, with the knowledge of the persons and nature of the Angels, and the
mortality of the soul. On these six Principles depend all spiritual and
heavenly knowledge, with many other heavenly secrets, which flows as a river
of living water from those six heads, which no Quaker does or can know in that
state of being a Quaker, nor any other Opinion or Religion whatsoever, but
those that do believe in this Commission of the Spirit.

And as for those eighteen Queries that you have propounded, those that are of
the most highest concernment, they are answered and opened at large in our
Writings already. And some of your Queries are of such a long nature, that they
are not worth the labor to answer, neither would there be any great edification
to any that should know them, yet I shall give a word or two to the first part
of your third Querie.

For what end did Christ come?

Answ. Christ came into the world for this very end, for to destroy him that
had the power of death, which is the Devil, which Devil is the seed or spirit
of Reason in man, of which spirit of Reason which is the Devil, most part of
the Quakers are of his seed, and Christ came into the world for to destroy,
that is, to destroy the seed of the Serpent with an eternal death, and to raise
the seed of Adam up to a more happier estate than that was wherein he was
created.

This could not be accomplished but by Gods coming down f om Heaven into the
womb of a Virgin, and so became a child in pure mortality, and when he grew up
to be a man, according to the Scriptures, he was capable to suffer the pains of
death, and so pass through death, and quickening into life again in the same
body, he got power over death, in that death was not able to keep him under;
and so got power over him that had the power of death in his hands, which is
the devil.

This devil so much spoken of in Scripture, is no other but the spirit of
Reason, which was first in Cain, he killing righteous Abel had power to kill,
that is, power to put to death, and so d^^th entered into the world; for death
never was in the world before the Serpent beguiled Eve, then entered death into
the world; and Cain being the firstborn of the devil, ^he had the power of
death in his hands, and it does remain in his hands to this day.

But happy are the seed of Adam, that has so much faith as to believe that it
was the very Godhead life that suffered death, and so overcame death by his
quickening into life again, and so has gained to himself a greater power and
glory than he had before death entered i^to the world; for by his rising again,
he has got power to raise the seed of Adam to a more happy and glorious estate
than that was wherein he was created.

He has gotten power also to destroy him that had the power of death in his
hands, that is, to keep the seed of Reason in a more low and sad estate then
that was wherein he was created, even under the second or eternal death, which
could not have been but by the death and rise again of God himself; and for
this very end did Christ come into the world.

It would have been well for you and many thousands more, if Christ had never
come into the world at all; for your Condemnation is procured by it.

I could open what is meant by the light of Christ, and how it may be said that
Christ enlighteneth every man that comes into the world, but it would be too
large, besides it is fully opened in that Book of ours, called, A Divine
Looking-Glass.

And as for Adam and Eves estate before the fall, and after their fall, that is
plainly declared in The Interpretation of the 11. of the Revelation. The Tree
of Life, and the Knowledge of good and evil, and of the Serpent, and of the
woman that fled into the wilderness, and what the time, and times, and half a
time is, and of the Beast, with many other things opened, and Scriptures
expounded of a far more high concernment than those things you propounded. I
say these things are largely opened in The Interpretation of the said 11
Chapter of the Revelation, and in The Divine Looking-Glass, wherein are written
the deepest mysteries that ever was penned, if understood by the Reader.

Also there is the Mortality of the Soul, that does show what is Scripture, and
what is not, and how the Soul of man is not immortal, but must, and does dye.
Also there is that called, Look about you, for the Devil that you fear is
within you. And a Dialogue between Faith and Reason, and the Quakers Downfall.
There is hardly any thing that is necessary to be known concerning the
spiritual estate of mankind, but it is to be found in some of these Writings.

Therefore if any of you Quakers have a mind to be any further informed of
your Queries, they must look into those Writings aforementioned; for there is
very few of your Queries that are not answered in one kind or another. But I
know you Quakers do not regard looking into any other writings but your own,
therefore I shall not persuade you unto it, but let you remain in your own
conceited light of Christ within you.

But you will find it to be the greatest darkness of all the seven Churches,
because it is the very spirit of Antichrist, or the Devil transformed into an
Angel of light, that is it carries the purest show of holiness of life, and
suffers more than any other does for his Religion, and yet the most cursedst
of all in point of doctrine; for they are the greatest fighters against Gods
being a person, by that light within them, of any. Neither will there ever come
any more spirits of Antichrist so Angel-like, as the Quakers do, for they have
received the spirits of Antichrist new in this last Age, as I said before, and
it will continue to the end of the world.

Samuel Hooton and W. S. you might have set your name as well as two Letters,
but it matters not now.

I have given Answer to your railing Letter you sent to me for speaking the
truth. For there is not one jot or tittle of my words in those six Principles
or Sentences of mine concerning the Quakers, that shall fail and not come to
pass, but are as true as any thing that ever was spoken by Prophet or Apostle.

Therefore I shall speak a few words unto you two in particular, because you
two have committed that unpardonable sin that never will be forgiven in this
world, nor in the world to come; for you have done despite unto the Spirit of
Truth, in speaking evil of things you do not know, for you have called the
Doctrine and Declaration of the Spirit, Blasphemy, Deceit, and Lies, with many
other railing speeches, with high impudency, from a light within you, and from
the dead letter without you, and has presumptuously lifted up your selves with
that light within you, to speak evil of the Commission of the Spirit, which we
received from the true personal God without us, even the Man Christ Jesus in
Glory. Therefore in obedience to my Commission, I do pronounce Samuel Hooton
and W. S. for this their Blasphemy against the Holy Spirit that sent me, cursed
and damned souls and bodies from the presence of God, elect men and Angels, to
eternity.

Your Light within you, nor God without you shall deliver you from this
Sentence which I have declared upon you, because you shall know that there is a
true Prophet now in the last Age, as well as there has been in former times.
And this Sentence shall be the mark of your Reprobation in your foreheads to
eternity, even as your great Grandfather had in his forehead; and all the Seed
of Faith that shall read this Epistle and see you, shall see the mark of
Reprobation in your foreheads, neither shall you scrape it out, but it will be
seen by the Elect as long as you live.

And when you dye, you shall pass through this first death into the second
death, and in the Resurrection you shall never see the face of God, nor man,
nor Angels, nor your own faces, to eternity: but you shall be in utter
darkness, where is weeping, and gnashing of teeth for evermore

And though you think you shall have never a body, you are deceived: you shall
have a spiritual dark body which shall be capable to bear those eternal
torments, and you shall remember you were told so by a Prophet.

Written by Lodowick Muggleton, one of the two Last Witnesses and Prophets unto
the High and Mighty God the Man Christ Jesus in Glory.
November 3. 1662. POSTSCRIPT.
I Have published your Lettter to as many of the Believers of this Commission
of the Spirit, as I have had opportunity to meet with them; so I do expect that
you should read mine unto as many of the Quakers as you shall have the like
opportunity.



For Samuel Hooton and W. S.
Let this be sent to Thomas Highfield at Notingham, to be delivered to the
abovesaid.
A LETTER of Richard Farnsworth to Lodowick Muggleton.
False Judgment reversed and against testified by Rich: Farnsworth, in Answer
to Lodowick Muggleton.
Lodowick Muggleton,
THou who pretends to have received a Commission by voice of words to the
hearing of the ear, from a God w thout thee, to curse Angels or men to
eternity: And say thou art the Witness of the Spirit, and the last Witness
that ever shall speak by Commission from God whilst the world endures. And
say, God has ordained thee the Chief Judge in the world at this day, to
give sentence upon men and women spiritual and eternal, and what shall become
of them after death. And in obedience to thy pre ended Commission, say, thou
have already cursed and damned many hundreds of souls and bodies from the
presence of God, elect men and Angels, to eternity, and that thou rejoycest in
the Condemnation of them, and art wondrous well satisfied in giving Judgment
upon them. By which it appears, thou would be both Judge, Accuser, and
Witness thy self, to condemn without any right order, and contrary to truth at
thy will and pleasure, which is Antichristian and very erroneous: But Error in
Judgment ought to be undone, and holden for nothing, as thine is, who
notwithstanding thy pretended Commission, art discovered to be a false prophet,
and in delusion, as is apparent and manifest in several particulars, in a Reply
of Mine to that of Thine bearing date August the 10. 1662. written by thee in
Answer to Edward Bournes to Dorothy Carter. But since I have seen four sheets
of paper written by thee, dated November the 3. 1662. and directed to Thomas
Highfield in Notingham, for Samuel Hooton and W. S. which coming to my hands in
Notingham the 22th day of the ninth month, 1662. (being then prisoner there) I
carefully perused over, which I found to be of like nature the other was of. In
both which, or all of those Writings of thine, I have found therein contained,
employed, asserted and affirmed by thee, as is apparent unto me, and evident
against thee, these necessary Deductions hereafter following, which may be a
sufficient discovery of thee, and testimony or warning against thee.

1. That under pretense of a Commission of the Spirit, thou have abused,
belyed, and wronged the Spirit, by presuming in the ^ame and authority of the
Spirit, to set up thy self as Judge, Accuser, and Witness, to condemn at thy
will and pleasure all such as are beloved, blessed, and justified of God, and
his Holy Spirit, who cannot receive thy errors for truth, but deny them, and
testify against thee for appearing in the same under pretense of a Commission
in thy imagination, pride, and presumption, because thou say, thou art both
Judge and Witness. And the Accuser thou art, and false Witness also, who
say, That never a one that thou have cursed, shall escape that curse which
thou have denounced upon them. And that if an Angel from heaven should come and
say thou have spoken false, or lied in the doctrine which thou have declared,
thou have power to curse Angels or men to eternity. And further say, that no
God will deliver from thy Sentence; All which sayings of thine are false and
erroneous, and therefore undone and holden by me for nothing, but as thy
errors, false judgment, delusion, pride, and presumption.

2. That under pretense of a Commission from God, thou have presumed in thy
imagination and pride of thy heart, to exalt thy self above God and Christ, and
to take all pardoning power from them, because thou accounts if thy Sentence
and Judgment be once pronounced and past, though never so erroneous and false,
that they might not be able to reverse, and undo the same. Thou presumes to
take all pardoning power from God and Christ in that case, because thou say
no infinite Spirit of Christ, nor any god can, or shall be able to deliver from
thy Sentence and Curse, which is thy error and lying divination, or false
doctrine, pride, and presumption, as is apparent.

3. That under pretense of a Commission from the Spirit, thou presumes in thy
imagination to be singular in doctrine, knowledge, judgment, and power above
all men, either Prophets or Apostles since the beginning of the world, or that
ever shall be hereafter whilst the world does endure.

4. That under pretense of a Commission of the Spirit, thou presumes to exclude
all true Witnesses of the Spirit, and also all true Ministers, Messengers, and
Ambassadors of Christ from the work of the Ministry, both now in this Age, and
whilst the world does endure, to the end and intent thou may set up thy
self alone in their places and stead, because thou presumptuously say, That
God has made thee the Judge of the Scriptures, and has given thee
understanding of his mind in the Scriptures above all men in the world, or
above all men since the world began. That no man does know the Scriptures but
thy self. That no man can truly interpret Scriptures but thy self. That God
has given the Scriptures into thy hand, as he gave the Priests Office into the
hands of Aaron. That no man ought to officiate the Office of a Minister,
Messenger, or Ambassador of Christ, but those that are appointed by John Reeves
and thy self. That thou knows more then Moses, the Prophets, or Apostles did.
That thy Doctrine and the Commission of it, is as true, and of a higher nature
than the Prophets and Apostles was in their time. That thy Commission, and the
doctrine of it, is of a higher nature than that of the Prophet Elijahs was,
when he commanded four hundred priests of Baal to be slain, by the power of his
word. That thou art the last Witness that ever shall speak by Commission from
God. And that God will never choose any more after thee, whilst the world
endures; All which are thy errors and lies, which are by me denied, and
against testified.

5. That (under pretense of thy Commission) thou have brought forth a Doctrine
contrary to truth, and that the same Doctrine ought not to be entertained or
received by Dorothy Carter, nor none upon the earth, because thou say thou
art the last Witness and Prophet that ever shall speak by Commission from God;
and there is no eternal life to be had but in the faith of thy Doctrine,
because thou say there is no eternal life to be had but in the faith of the
Doctrine of a Prophet who has a Commission from God. And there neither is, nor
shall be any such Prophet (thou say) but thy self, whilst the world
endures. And also say, That neither Dorothy Carter, nor no man upon the
earth can, or ought to judge of thy Doctrine, because thou say that neither
she, nor no man upon the earth can, or ought to judge of the Doctrine of a
Prophet who has a Commission from God: And say, there neither is, nor shall
be any such Prophet but thy self, as aforesaid. And to exclude Dorothy Carter,
and all men upon earth from judgment in point of Doctrine, is to exclude them
from reception thereof, and so from the reward, if any be due; which is
contrary to the Doctrine of Truth, which says, Prove all things, hold fast
that which is good, 1 These. 5.21. And try the Spirits whether they be of God,
because many false prophets are gone out into the world, 1 John 4.1. And how
can doctrines be proved, and spirits be tried, if none he capable to judge
thereof, who are to receive? By this it is apparent, that thou art unwilling to
have thy doctrine proved, and spirit tried, lest upon trial and proof thou be
found out to be a false prophet, which thou art, as is apparent enough.

6. That there is no eternal life to be had but in the faith of thy Doctrine,
and that none upon the earth can or ought to receive the same, because thou
have excluded them all off from judgment in order to reception thereof; by
which its apparent, that under pretense of thy Commission, thou labors to
exclude Dorothy Carter, and all men upon earth from salvation, which makes it
evident against thee, that thou art a messenger of Antichrist, and not of
Christ.

7. That thou presumes under pretense of thy Commission of the Spirit, to rob
Christ of his Office which his Father has committed unto him, as Chief Judge
ordained of God; because thou say, thou art chief Judge in the world
ordained of God, to give Judgment upon men and women spiritual and eternal,
and what shall become of them after death, which is but thy presumption, pride,
and false doctrine.

Rev. 1.5. For Christ Jesus who is the faithful Witness, and Prince of the
Kings of the earth, he has all Judgment committed unto him, because it is
written concerning him, That the Father has committed all Judgment unto him,
John 5.22. And has given him Authority to execute Judgment, because he is the
Son, as it is written, John 5.27.

But it is no where written in the Scriptures of Truth concerning thee,
Lodowick that all Judgment either is, or shall be (by the Father) committed
unto thee, to pronounce the Sentence of eternal death and damnation upon the
souls and bodies of men to eternity, as thou have done. Whereby it appears thou
would exclude Christ from his Office (in point of Judgment) which the
Father has committed unto him, and are thereby discovered to be a false
witness, and messenger of Satan.

Lodowick, thou art not the chief Judge in the world at this day ordained of
God, as aforesaid. Thy Message and Testimony is false and not true, because the
^rue Witnesses of the Spirit, and Ambassadors of Christ who were Anointed and
Sealed of God, have declared and said, That God has appointed a day in the
which he will judge the world in righteousness, (not by thee, but) by Jesus
Christ whom he has ordained, whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in
that he has raised him from the dead, as may be read Acts 17.30, 31.

And because God has ordained Christ Jesus to be Judge of all men, and has
given them assurance of the same, in that he has raised him from the dead,
thou Lodowick, art not that Judge ordained of God, because thou art not Christ
Jesus which was raised from the dead; neither has God given that assurance to
all men of thee, that he gave of Christ; by raising him from the dead, as
aforesaid. Here I charge thee to be a false judge, and a false prophet, that
ran but never was sent of the Lord. Thy judgment and doctrine is very
erroneous and false, as is plainly manifest against thee, and is therefore
reversed.

They who were the true and faithful Witnesses and Ambassadors of Christ, who
were anointed and sealed of God, and had a Commission of God, they did not
presume to take the Office of Christ, as Judge ordained of God, from Christ,
and assume it to themselves, as thou most unjustly have done, whereby thou have
appeared to be a false prophet, and messenger of Antichrist.

For they who were anointed and sealed of God, who were the true Witnesses of
the Spirit, and had a Commission from Christ, to whom all the Prophets gave
witness, they witness against thee, by testifying on the behalf of Christ, that
he commanded them to preach unto the people, and to testify that it is he who
was ordained of God to be Judge of the quick and the dead, Acts 10.42.

First by their Commission they were to preach to the people. And secondly by
the same Commission they were to testify to them, that Christ was ordained of
God to be the Judge both of quick and dead; Therefore thou art not Judge,
because thou art not Christ, as aforesaid.

And whereas thou accusedst the Quakers to be of the nature and seed of the
Serpent, and gave judgment against them accordingly, thou have cleared them
from the same by thy self-confutation, and self-contradiction, wherein thou
say, That the Quakers do preach from the Scriptures and light within, and
that devils are cast out, and much good is done by them.

First, the Quakees (so called) do preach from the Scriptures and light within.

Secondly, because they so preach, they are sent of God; for how shall they
preach, except they be sent?

Thirdly, That by virtue of their preaching, and the power which they have
received of God, devils are cast out, and much good is done by them; and such
are not of the nature and seed of the Serpent.

Thou have cleared them from the same by thy self-confutation, and then to what
purpose is all thy false Judgment, and what ever thou have laid against them
in thy presumption, pride, and imagination? It is but error in judgment, and
is therefore undone, (as I said) and holden for nothing.

Written by Richard Farnsworth Quaker,

and sent to Dorothy Carter to be directed to Lodowick Muggleton.
Lodowick Muggleton's ANSWER to Richard Farnsworths Letter.
Richard Farnsworth,
I Received a Paper from you, entitled, False Judgment reversed and against
testified, in Answer to Lodowick Muggleton. In answer to this Paper of yours, I
shall first commend you in these two things, first, in that you have set your
name to it; for I have a Letter from a Quaker in Lancashire which has neither
set his Name, nor two letters, yet I have made a shift to send an Answer: but I
had rather to have his name or two letters, as I had of W. S. The second thing
that I commend you for, is because you have set down my words so truly and
punctually, it makes my Commission and Authority to shine the more bright and
clear to all those that understand the nature and power of a Commission, though
you in the close of many of those passages, have slighted, vilified, and spoken
evil of those things which are as true as Truth it self, and that you shall
find.

And because you are not under the Sentence of this Commission of the Spirit,
by verbal words or writing already, I shall give Answer to your Letter; for I
never do give answer in writing to any one that is under the Sentence of this
Commission, for he is but as a condemned man; neither is it the practice of any
earthly Judge after he has condemned a man to die, for to treat any more with
him that is so condemned, neither can that man get the Judge to revoke it: but
perhaps a man so condemned by the Law may make suit to the King, which is above
the Law, and so may get his pardon, but that is seldom known. But it is not so
with those that are condemned by the Commission of the Spirit, because no
condemned person can make his Appeal unto God, the King of Heaven, neither by
himself nor by any other, because God the King of Heaven is not in this world
at all; therefore he has commissionated mortal men to be Messengers,
Ministers, and Ambassadors, to treat with mortal men about their spiritual and
eternal estate, and every true Ambassador stands in Gods stead, and has power
to condemn and to save alive, that is, to bless to eternity, and to curse to
eternity: And this power has God given unto us two the chosen Witnesses of the
Spirit, neither can God take it again, because God has spoken it, and cannot
lie; for he said these words, That he had chosen us two his last Messengers
unto this bloody unbelieving world, and that he had put the Two edged Sword of
his Spirit into our mouths, that who ever was pronounced blessed through our
mouths, are blessed to eternity: So on the contrary, who ever we pronounce
cursed through our mouths, are cursed to eternity: and this I know God cannot
revoke, because he is Truth, and cannot lie.

Therefore to give Answer to those despising, slighting, and vilifying words of
yours in your Letter against those Truths which you have set down, which was
written to Edward Bourne, and the four sheets which I sent to Samuel Hooton and
W. S. And in the first part of your Letter you have showed what seed and nature
you are of, even as Edward Bournes, and Samuel Hooton, and W. S. have done, you
being of the same seed as they are of, that is the seed of the Serpent, which
must go the same way as your father Cain which begot you, must go; for you have
blasphemed against the Holy Spirit that sent me, by calling the Authority of
this Commission of the Spirit Antichristian, and very Erroneous, and a false
prophet, and a Delusion, with many other wicked speeches thoroughout your
paper, which is a clear testimony and discovery unto me that you are the seed
of the Serpent, and so guided and led by the spirit of Antichrist now in this
last Age of the world.

The first thing that you do accuse in me to be false is, that you say that
under the pretense of a Commission of the Spirit, that I have abused, belyed,
and wronged the Spirit, by presuming in the Name and Authority of the Spirit to
set up my self as Judge, Accuser and Witness, to condemn at my will and
pleasure all such as are beloved, blessed, and justified of God.

Answer. That my Commission of the Spirit is no pretended thing, but as true as
ever Moses and the Apostles Commission was, and of as great, my of a greater
authority than theirs was, and given by the same Spirit of Truth as theirs was;
Neither have I set up my self as a Judge, Accuser, or Witness, but God has set
me up to be the chief Judge in the world at this day; for he has set me in his
stead to be Judge, Accuser, and Witness, to judge and condemn Antichristian
spirits, that does deny God to be a distinct person of himself of flesh and
bone, and all blasphemous spirits which sins against the Holy Ghost. These
two things there is more of the Quakers does commit, than any other Sects
whatsoever, therefore there is great need that God should make some mortal man
Judge of these conceited, stubborn-hearted people called Quakers; neither are
those people the beloved, blessed, and justified of God, but the most cursedst
of God of all other Sects, neither does any other Sect fight against Gods being
in the form of a man, as they do; for they have got Christ within them, but
does abhor that he should have flesh and bone of his own without them: and by
this Christ which is flesh and bone glorified without me, am I made Judge of
men's spiritual estate, neither shall any one that I have condemned see any
other God or Judge but that Sentence which we the Witnesses of the Spirit have
passed upon them.

And though you call it presumption, and a thing undone and holden by you as
nothing but errors, false judgment, pride and such like, yet you shall find
it to be as true as if God had judged you himself; for this I can boldly say,
that I am, as true an Ambassador of God, and Judge of men's spiritual estate, as
ever any was since the Creation of the world: and if you Quakers and others can
satisfy your selves that there never was any man commissionated of God to
bless and curse, then you shall escape that Curse that I have pronounced upon
so many hundreds, and I only shall suffer for cursing others, without a
Commision from God, but I know by what authority I do these things, and so I am
at perfect rest; as to my Eternal happiness, in that I have heen obedient unto
my Commission which was given of God by voice of words, to the hearing of the
Ear.

2 You say, that I under pretense of a Commission from God, have presumed in my
imaginations, and pride in my heart, to exalt my self above God and Christ, and
to take all pardoning power from them, because say you, that I account of my
sentence and Judgment, if once pronounced and past, though never so erroneous
and false, that they might not be able to reverse and undo the same: that I
presume to take all pardoning power from God and Christ in that case, because I
say no infinite Spirit of Christ, nor any God can, or shall be able to deliver
from my Sentence and Curse, which you Quakers does say these sayings aforesaid
is my error, and lying divination, or false doctrine, pride and presumption, as
is apparent.

Answer. That my Commission is no pretended thing, but as true as Moses and the
Prophets, and as the Apostles Commission was, and John Reeve and Lodowick
Muggleton are ordained and chosen of God by voice of words, and commissionated
with power as realy and truly as ever Moses and Aaron was. And as Moses and
Aaron were the chosen Messengers and Commissioners of the Law, so likewise are
we the two chosen Witnesses and Commissioners of the Spirit: And as Moses and
Aaron were the two first which God chose to give forth the Law, and to
prescribe Rules of Worship for the people of Israel, so likewise we two being
the two last chosen Witnesses of the Spirit, we have power and authority in
this Commission of the Spirit, for to declare what the true God is in his form
and nature, and what worship does belong to the knowledge of the true God in
these latter days, which cannot be known but by this Commission of the Spirit
only.

And as for my taking of all pardoning power from God and Christ, in this you
show that you have gone no further, nor hardly so far as the Priests of the
Nation; for you have got a God and a Christ too, and yet neither your God nor
your Christ has never a body, and in this you are worse than any other Sect:
for though other Sects of Religion will have a God and a Christ, yet they can
find but one body, and that is the body of Christ, but the Fathers body they
cannot find at all: but you Quakers can find never a body neither for God nor
Christ but your own bodies, for you have got your Christ and God all within
you; so that Christ has never a body of his own, but is forced to make use of
every Quakers body for his Spirit to dwell in. But from that Christ which
suffered death in his own body, and rose again in the same body, and is now in
Heaven in the same body, according to the Scriptures, from this Christ which is
the only God, I say I have power over all other Gods or infinite Spirits
whatsoever, and from this Christ which is God-Man now above the stars, have I
this pardoning power and damning power, neither did I take it of my self, but
it was put upon me by God himself: for if I had not obeyed the voice of God
when he spoke to John Reeve, then he was to pronounce me cursed to eternity,
and so by my yielding obedience unto the voice of God, I was made partakers of
that power to bless and curse to eternity: and this is that power which you say
I presumptuously have exalted my self; neither will God give this power to any
more after me, neither can any man come to the assurance of the favor of God
now in these days, but in believing that God gave this power unto John Reeve
and my self; for there is no coming to know God, nor see God, but by the faith
in this Commission of the Spirit: for I having the Keys of Heaven and of Hell,
none can get into Heaven except the Witness of the Spirit does open the gates,
and so the King of Glory may enter in, that is, the knowledge of the true God
his form and nature may enter into your hearts, by having faith in this
Commission of the Spirit: for God has given me the same power now, as he gave
to Peter when he was upon earth, and what power that was may easily be read
where Christ said unto Peter, Upon this Rock will I build my Church. Also he
hid give unto Peter the Keys of Heaven and of Hell. Also he should have power
to bind and loose, and whose sins he remitted should be remitted, and whose
sins he retained should be retained. What is the remitting and retaining of
sins, but to forgive them their sins which received his Doctrine, and to retain
and bind their sins of unbelief more close upon their consciences, for their
despising of the Doctrine of Christ which he did teach? And was this any less
than blessing and cursing, or opening the gates of Hell and of Heaven? and yet
you see that Christ gave this power unto man: you would have said as much by
Peter and others, if you had been living in those days, as you do by me: you
would have said that they did it out of the pride and presumption of their
hearts, though they had their Commission put upon them by God himself, as I
have now in this Commission of the Spirit: and as Peter had power to bind and
loose, or to remit and to retain, so likewise has the same God given me power
to bless and curse men and women to eternity: and this is the keys of Heaven
and of Hell; for the blessing of a commissionated Prophet it opens the gate of
heaven, that is, it opens the heart in love to that God that sent such a
Messenger of glad tidings of Salvation: So on the contrary, the curse of a
Prophet it opens the gates of Hell, that is, it opens the heart in envy, malice
and revenge; nay sometimes when the gate of Hell is opened by the curse, it
has caused revenge to increase so hot, that it has broken forth into a great
flame, the fire of Hell has been so hot burning within them. This I know by
experience, which I never did know until the Keys of Heaven and of Hell were
put into my hands by God himself, and by this I know what Peter's and other
Prophets power was; for God has given power for one creature to judge another,
and what that man does which has authority from God, God himself cannot undo
it; for it is not the light of Christ within you Quakers, nor the letter of the
Scriptures, nor God without you, that shall deliver you Quakers and others that
are under this Sentence, from that curse which I have pronounced upon you,
though you call it error, lying divination, false doctrine, pride and
presumption: but it will appear to be no other but the Curse of God himself,
though it be pronounced by a mortal man like your selves.

3. And as for my being singular in doctrine knowledge, judgment and Power
above all men, either Prophets, or Apostles since the beginning of the world,
or that shall ever be hereafter, whilst the world does endure.

Answer. This is as true a saying as ever was spoken, for this being the
Commission of the Spirit, it has more spiritual knowledge, judgment, and power
above all men either Prophets, or Apostles, why? because Moses, and the
Prophets did not know so much as the Apostles did, because Moses Commission was
that of the Law, under the title of God the Father, therefore the Apostle says
concerning those that were educated under the Law of Moses, they were under a
cloud, and saw but darkly as in a Glass, showing the benefit which came to
those that were under the Faith of the Gospel, for those that were under the
Law, they were come but to Mount Sina, which gendred unto bondage, but those
that were come unto the Faith of the Gospel, were come unto Mount Sion. Now the
Law of Moses was Mount Sina, and the faith of the Gospel of Jesus was Mount
Sion, and this Gospel of Jesus which was committed to his Apostles, was the
Commission of the blood, and this Commission of the blood, did know more then
the Commission of the Law of Moses, and the Prophets did, so likewise this
Commission of the Spirit, does know more then either of them both; for Moses
and the Prophets had no Scriptures for to interpret or expound, but their own
prophesies, therefore the Apostles must needs know more then the Prophets did,
because they were the only interpreters of the Law and the Prophets, and of
their own signs, so therefore their knowledge in the Gospel, must needs be
greater then that of the Law; so likewise we the Witnesses of the Spirit must
needs know more then either Prophet or Apostle, because none can interpret the
Scriptures, but we the Witnesses of the Spirit, and this Commission of the
Spirit did God force, and lay upon us against our wills, and withal he has
given us understanding of his mind in the Scriptures above all the men in the
world, which words of Gods I find to prove true, for I do certainly know that
I have more spiritual knowledge then all the men in the World, nay I am sure
that I do know more in spiritual things, then ever Prophet or Apostle did since
the beginning of the World, then of necessity it will follow that I do know
more then any shall do to the end of the World, because I am one of the two
last Witnesses and Prophets that God will ever send; therefore my knowledge,
and judgment, and sentence must needs be above all that is gone before me, or
that shall come after me to the end of the world, yet I am no ways lifted up
with pride and presumption because of this knowledge and authority that God
has given me above all men since the beginning of the world, to the latter end.

I know what I say to be truth, for true knowledge is never puffed up with
pride, neither am I, whatsoever the seed of the serpent may judge of me, for I
do neither bless any out of affections for any by ends, but according as I do
discern their Faith in the thing, neither do I curse any thorough envy or
malice, but either it is because they have sinned against the holy Spirit, a
sin that is not to be pardoned, or else I do know them to be of that reprobate
seed, and so I know my judgment is true, and according to the tennor of my
Commission, so that I am neither lifted up with pride, nor cast down, or
troubled with sorrow; but am very well satisfied in those that go on the right
hand, though they are but few, as I am with those that go on the left hand,
though they be many; for I see it must be so, for God has so decreed it, and
he has been pleased to make it known unto me, and has made me the only Judge
of the two seeds now in this last days, which is a thing I never did desire.

4. There is little of your matter in this particular, but rehearsing of my
words, only you say that I under the pretense of the Commission of the spirit,
that I do presume to exclude all true Witnesses of the Spirit, and also all
true Ministers, Messengers and Ambassadors of Christ from the work of the
Ministry, both now in this age, and whilst the world does endure, to the end
and intent that I might set up my self alone in their places and stead.

Answer. That my Commission of the Spirit is no pretended thing, but as true as
God is Truth, neither is there any true Messenger, Minister, or Ambassador of
God in this world at this day but my self, neither shall there be any sent of
God after me to the worlds end; for there can be no true Minister except he be
sent of God by voice of words to the hearing of the ear, or else by him that is
so authorized; which I know no speakers in the world has, neither the Priests
of the nation which are ordained by man, nor no other Sect, which by their
natural wit, from the letter of the Scriptures, does think because they can
play upon the letter of the Scriptures as upon a Harp, that they are very good
Ministers of Christ, but he sent them not: and as for you Quakers, which
thinks the light of Christ within you, is sufficient to make you Messengers
and Ministers of Christ, you are much mistaken, for you do but run into the
Ministry before you were sent; for the light of Christ within a man did never
authorize any man to be a Minister of Christ, except he be ordained and
authorized from a God without him, or from a man without him, which you Quakers
do abhor to think that there should be any other authority besides the light of
Christ within you, but you will find that the authority of a God without you,
will be too hard for the light of Christ within you.

For little do you Quakers know what that Son of Man is which John in
Revelation. 1.13. speaks of, so in the 16 verse, There went out of his mouth
a sharp two-eged Sword. Now this Son of Man which John speaks of, was no
other but Christ himself, and this Christ is the very God, and he is that Alpha
and Omega, the first and the last, he that was dead, and behold he is alive for
evermore, and this two-edged sword that came out of his mouth, he has put into
my mouth, and that was when he said, I have put the two-edged Sword of my
Spirit into thy mouth to pronounce blessing and cursing to eternity; now God
having put the two-edged Sword of his Spirit which came out of his mouth, and
has put it into mine, how will you Quakers, or any others do to deliver your
selves from it? for it is a two-edged Sword, it cuts down the seed of faith, as
the wheat in love, and makes it obedient unto the Commission of the Spirit, and
so they are gathered as Gods wheat into his barn, which barn is the Commission
of the Spirit, for every Commission is a shelter, or as a barn to keep the
wind, storms, and rain off from the wheat: but on the contrary the other edge
of this Sword which is put into my mouth, it cuts down the tares: the tares is
the Seed of Reason, which are bound in bundles and cast into the fire: for this
edge of the Sword which is the sentence of condemnation, it cuts down many
bundles of the seed of reason for the fire of hell, to one sheaf of the seed of
faith which is gathered into Gods barn, that is, to believe the Commission of
the Spirit. Now the Quakers and all other Sects, the speakers of them, and many
hundreds of their believers besides, are those tares which this Commission of
the Spirit has cut down by the edge of this Sword, which shall be as bundles
of tares fit for nothing else, but for that eternal fire, because they have
despised that their fellow creature should have power to bless and curse,
though God will have men and women justified and condemned, no other way but by
man like themselves; for it was always Gods practice to give authority to men
that are mortal, to Judge and Condemn according to the tenor of their
Commission, whether it be for a temporal death, or an eternal death: and this
power has God given unto me, and in this regard I am the only and alone Judge
what shall become of men and women after death, neither shall those that are
damned by me, see any other God or Judge but me, or that sentence which I have
passed upon them: but the blessed shall see that God face to face, which has
set me as an Ambassador in his room, and this power I know God will never take
from me, whatsoever you Quakers deny or testify against.

5 There is little in this particular also, but my words repeated, only this,
there is something concerning Dorothy Carter, whereas I neither say that
Dorothy Carter, nor no man upon the Earth can, or ought to judge of the
doctrine of a Prophet, that has a Commission from God, there being none in the
world at this day, but my self.

Answer. Who do you, blind Quakers, think should be the Judge of a Prophet that
has a Commission from God? is not a true Prophet the Law giver, and ought not
every one to submit unto his Laws? has not a Prophet a prerogative power as a
King has? does not a true Prophet stand in the King of Heavens room, as an
Ambassador does in the place of an earthly King? and shall those that are to be
subject to the Laws of the King, go to try whether the Kings Laws be good or
just? nay those that are the Kings Friends, ought not to try whether the Kings
Laws or Declarations be just, because his friends hapiness lies in yiedling
obedience unto it; and if his Friends ought not to try the King, much less his
enemies: so I say, though Dorothy Carter be a Friend to the Prophet of the
Lord, that it lies not in her power, neither is it for her to try the Doctrine
of a Prophet, but to submit unto the Doctrine and power of a Prophet, for
therein lies her, and all others safety. And whereas you say, that I have
excluded Dorothy Carter, and all other men upon Earth, from salvation, I do
here testify, that she is one of the blessed of the Lord, with many others in
the world at this day, though I will not allow Dorothy Carter, nor no other, to
have power to try a true Prophets Doctrine, though they be believers of it,
that does not exclude them from salvation, but gives them the more assurance of
it, in that they suffer themselves to be tried by a Prophet, and his Doctrine;
therefore I do exclude D^rothy Carter, and all men upon Earth in point of trial
or Judgment of the Doctrine of a Prophet that has a Commission from God, as I
have, and if those of the same Truth with a Prophet, may not try a Prophet, how
will you do that are enemies to try his Doctrine? for it is not your quoting of
the letters of the Scriptures as you have done in two places, nor the light of
Christ within you, that can try me; for I being one of the last Witnesses and
Prophets by Commission from God, I am made Judge of the Scriptures, and Judge
of the light of Christ within you, and how will you do? or by what will you try
my doctrine and me, seeing I am made Judge of the Scriptures, and of your light
of Christ, and your light of nature, and all that is within you and without you
both? it is all to be condemned by me, by which way then can you come to try
me, and to make me appear to be a false prophet, as you say is apparent enough?

The sixth and seventh things that you upbraid me with, that I say there is no
eternal life to be had but in the faith of this Doctrine. And that I do presume
under pretense of my Commission of the Spirit, to rob Christ of his Office
which the Father has committed unto him as chief Judge ordained of God; with
many other sayings of m^ne which has been expressed in a Letter of mine unto
Samuel Hooton and W. S.

Answer. That there is no eternal life to be had now in these days, but by
faith in the Doctrine of this Commission of the Spirit, that is truth, and many
there is that can witness the same, I mean in those that have heard the sound
of it, and it will be found to be so by you Quakers, and many hundreds of other
Sects besides. And as for my saying that God has made me the chief Judge in
the world at this day, that is true also, notwithstanding Christ's having all
Judgment put into his hands by the Father; for that is nothing to you what is
spoken of in Scripture, that will do you no good: for this Christ which the
Scripture^ speaks of, is God the Father, and this God has chosen and ordained
me to be the chief Judge in spiritual and eternal things* Also he has made me
Judge of the Scriptures, as I said before, neither have I taken the Office from
Christ, but he has given it unto me, and has invested it upon me; neither
will he take it away from me, and that you and such as you are shall find to
your eternal sorrow, make as light of it as you will you shall not be delivered.

The latter part of your Letter has little in it but repeating of
Scripture-Texts, and some passages or words of mine which you do invade against
me, there is one thing would make one smile, and that is this, because it is
not written in the Scriptures of truth that I Lodowick Muggleton art ordained
of God to be the chief Judge in the world in these last days, will it follow
therefore that I am not the chief Judge because my name is not recorded in
Scriptures? If you had lived in the days when Christ was upon earth, you would
hardly have found his name recorded in the Law and the Prophets; nay, it is the
more probable that I am ordained the chief Judge, because my name is not
recorded in Scripture; for if there had been such a name written in Scriptures
that should be the last Prophet in the world, many men would have named their
sons Lodowick Muggleton; and that is the cause there is so many John's and
Thomasses, and Jeremiahs, with many other Scripture Prophets and Apostles
names: but there is never a Lodowick Muggleton in all the Scriptures, and yet
God has ordained him to be the Judge of Quakers and all other despising
spirits. And though there be a general Day of Judgment, that is, a general day
of Execution when men shall receive the possession of eternal happiness, or
eternal misery, and this may be called the day of Judgment which Christ shall
judge the world with, when as it shall be said, Come you blessed, and Go you
cursed: but the Judgment and Sentence they have in this life by those
Prophets, Ministers and Messengers of Christ which he has made Judges for that
purpose, it is just like a Jail-delivery. The Judges many times condemns men to
die, yet the Execution is not immediately done, but at the day appointed it is:
so it is with all true Prophets who are made Judges of the spiritual and
eternal estate of mankind; they have their Judgment in this life, and in the
day of death it is put in execution by Death; for there shall be no more
pleading with God, but this will be all that God will say in the Resurrection,
Come you blessed, and Go you cursed: neither shall you Quakers and others have
any other Sentence but what I have passed upon you, and when death seizes upon
you, then shall you enter into the possession of it by passing through this
first death, and so enter into the second death, where you shall remain for
ever and ever.

In the last place you say, that I accuse the Quakers to be of the nature and
seed of the Serpent, also I do say that the Quakers do preach from the
Scriptures and light within, and that devils is cast out, and much good is done
by them.

And from these words of mine you say that I confute and contradict my self,
for this Quaker would fain prove that because they preach from the Scriptures,
and light within, therefore they are sent of God, for how shall they preach,
says he, except they be sent? and by virtue of their preaching, and the power
they have received of God, devils are cast out, and much good is is done by
them, and such, says he, are not of the nature and seed of the Serpent.

Answer. As for you Quakers being the nature and seed of the Serpent, that is
certainly so, and can be no other ways, because you are the very influence of
John Robins spiritual witchcraft power upon you, and the very spirit of
Antichrist does run thorough the bodies of the Quakers, for they do all of them
deny a personal God without them, they do all of them deny also the
resurrection of a body, so that they are the greatest fighters against God of
any; for they having got Christ all within them, they are such a proud,
conceited, stiff-necked people, that no body can deal with them but this
Commission of the Spirit; and this I will say to you, that there is never a
Quaker that is a speaker, neither man nor woman that lives and dies in that
principle, that can possibly be saved, no more then Cain and Judas is saved,
think of your selves what you will: and do not you Quakers think because you by
the letter of the Scriptures, and by the light within you, do cast out devils,
and much good is done thereby, that you are ever the less the Serpents seed,
neither does that prove that you are sent of God, but rather the contrary; for
the Priests of the nation, and all other Sects of Religion does the same
things, for the Papist Ministry by report has done more wondrous things in
that kind then any Quaker ever did, by the laying on of the hands of the
Elders, and anointing of them with Oil, and praying over them and such like,
they have cured, as they say, diseases, and cast out devils, and other
wondrous things, and which I never heard that any Quaker ever did: the
greatest things, that ever I have heard the Quakers do, is to find fault with
a piece of Ribbon, or Gold-button, or a Bandstring, and such like, and to
possess themselves with a melancholy spirit of Witchcraft, and so fall into
Witchcraft fits, to lie humming and groaning, which does fright the beholders,
so in stead of those merry devils which they had upon the Ranting-score, where
all was good lying with their neighbors wife, deslowering virgins, couzening
and cheating, and destroying every one in their outward estate which did
entertain them, and now that devil is cast out, now they are grown in as much
extreme on the other side, for now they are grown so precise and exact for
apparel and for words, no word must be placed out of joint, so that no man can
almost tell how to deal with them; and this melancholy devil has cast out the
ranting devil, which makes them so proud and stiff-necked, thinking themselves
that they are better then other people, when as they are worse, for they are
possessed with the spirit of Witchcraft, which makes them a twofold more the
children of the devil then they were before, which none can discover but this
Commission of the Spirit, neither did I ever hear by any which has heard the
Quakers speak, that they did ever preach any sound doctrine, but only exhort
people to hearken to the light within them, which is a very low and easy thing
for every ordinary understanding to comprehend, and that is the cause there is
such a multitude of men and women fall into it, which if they were sent of God,
there would but few understand their doctrine, nor bear their words; for no
Quaker need suffer any thing for his doctrine, for that is but like other men's,
nay, there is not so much in their doctrine, as there is in the Priests of the
nations doctrine, therefore the Quakers are not sent of God, no more then the
Priests of the nation, or any other Sect is, for the Priests of the nation they
preach from the light of the Scriptures, and from the power of the civil
Magistrate, and the Quakers they preach from the letter of the Scriptures, and
from the light of Christ within; and though devils be cast out by you both, and
much good be done by you both, yet neither of you are sent of God, because
neither of you nor no other is sent by voice of God without you, so that I have
not cleared the Quakers from being the Serpents seed, neither have I confuted
my self, neither will my Judgment prove false concerning you Quakers, but you
will find it to as much purpose, as if God had said it himself,
notwithstanding you call it false Judgment, Pride and Presumption, and error
in Judgment, and therefore undone, and holden for nothing by you Quakers, and
so forth.

Now I have given answer to as many passages in your paper as is necessary, I
have been something larger then I did intend, but because others may be
benefited by it, it may be worth the labor: for had it been no more for others
benefit then for yours, I would only have sent the sentence unto you, and no
more: but I having read and viewed your paper over with serious deliberation, I
find very little matter or substance in it, but the repeating of my words: but
for that which is your own, the most of it is in speaking evil of those truths
which you have read out of those four sheets which was sent Samuel Hooton and
W. S. and in that Letter to Edward Bourn, which is a clear discovery to me that
you are the seed of the serpent, and that you have sinned the sin against the
holy Ghost, for that is a thing which most Quakers do; for I find in your paper
a multitude of blasphemous speeches against this Commission of the Spirit, by
calling of it errors, false judgment, delusion, pride, and presumption, with
many more such like expressions almost at the end of every sentence, which is
enough to damn a thousand Quakers, if they should speak but the fourth part as
you have done; therefore in obedience unto my Commission, I do pronounce Richard
Farnsworth, for this his cursed blasphemy against the holy Spirit that sent me,
cursed and damned, both in soul and body, from the presence of God, elect men
Angels to eternity.

For God has made me the Judge of the Light of Christ within you, and of that
infinite Spirit which you call God without you. For though Christ be the true
way, yet I am, as John the Baptist was, the messenger to prepare the way, and
to make his paths straight. And though Christ be the truth, and the life, yet I
am the only declarer what this truth and life is. And though Christ be the
door, yet I have the key given me to open the door to life Eternal, and this
Commission of the Spirit is that key of David, which opens and no man
shuts. And though Christ be the true Shepherd which has laid down his Life
for his sheep, yet I must be, as Peter was, I must feed his sheep, and feed his
Lambs with that green pasture, which is the doctrine of truth, whereby they may
ly down in perfect rest in their minds, and rejoice in God their Savior, so
that they may leap for joy, as the young Lambs do upon the green hills. And
though Christ be the only true God, the King of Heaven, yet I am his only
Ambassador, so that there is no coming to treat with him, but by receiving his
Ambassador, this Commission of the spirit being it.

These things being so, How is it possible that you Quakers, and others, that
have despised the Commission of the Spirit of truth, should escape the
damnation of Hell?

Written by Lodowick Muggelton, one of the two last Witnesses and Prophets unto
the High and Mighty God, the Man Christ Jesus in Glory.

Lodowick Muggleton's Reply to Richard Farnsworths printed Pamphlet.
I Saw a printed Pamphlet of Richard Farnsworth, called, Truth Ascended: Or,
The Anointed and Sealed of God defended, as a testimony as he says, against a
counterfeit Commission, as he calls it, meaning Lodowick Muggelton.

I had thought not to have printed no more, but seeing this Quaker has put
something in print against me, he thinking thereby to make me the more odious
unto the world, and to lie the more open to the Magistrate, he has printed
this pamphlet against me, and because the Quakers shall not boast, as if they
had set out such a thing that could not be answered, I am moved in my mind, to
put those Letters of the Quakers to me, and my Answers to them, with my Answer
to this printed pamphlet into the public view, that their deceit may be the
more discovered to the world, and that I am not ashamed to own those Letters
which I sent to them, nor that sentence and curse which I have pronounced upon
them and others, let the effect be what it will.

And whereas Richard Farnsworth does say, that he is bold in the behalf of the
Lord, once again to bear his testimony against, as he calls it, my pretended
Commission, and the Doctrine thereof. I marvel what Lord it is the Quakers are
bold in (...) a true Prophet may blow their Lord away with the breath of his
mouth, for they have no other Lord or God, nor Christ, but what is within them,
for their God nor Christ they so much talk of, has never a body nor substance
of his own, as those Letters aforewritten of mine does more fully discover,
wherein the Quakers are discovered to be led and guided by the spirit of
Antichrist, which does deny God come in the flesh, that is to say, that the
flesh and bone of Jesus Christ, which he suffered death in, is not now living
in heaven distinct of himself from man; this I say is the Quakers faith, and
principle, and Antichristian, this I know to be true, as will be read in those
Letters of mine unto them: and from this body of Jesus which they deny, have I
power to blow Richard Farnsworths Lord which he is bold in, away; for they own
no other Lord but what is within them, so that all Quakers in their conceit are
Gods, but I shall say no more of that, but shall proceed to answer those things
which are of most concernment, and most needful in his printed Pamphlet, for
the satisfying of all people who shall come to read or hear it, which is as
follows:

WHat I have written in a sheet of paper to Edward Bourne, and also those four
sheets to Samuel Hooton and W. S. which was directed to Thomas Highfield at
Notingham, and I do own to be as true as the Prophets and Apostles Writings
were to those people in their time, neither shall they be delivered from that
Sentence which I have declared or pronounced upon them: Also I was in some
hopes that you would have put them Letters, with that which I sent to you, in
print as they were written to them, and you, it would have saved me that charge
and trouble which now I shall be put into; for I will, if I can get them
printed come unto public view, with your Letters to me without any alteration,
but as you have written them to me, so that my presumption, pride, and false
doctrine, as you call it, and your deceit and Antichristian spirit may be
discovered unto the world, that the people may be no more cheated with your
hypocritial show of holiness, which never could have been discovered by any but
by this Commission of the Spirit which God has given to John Reeve and my self.

And whereas you R. F. does say, that you are bold on the behalf of the Lord,
once again to bear your testimony against my pretended Commission and the
doctrine thereof, and that you shall make it appear that it ought not to be
entertained by any man or woman upon earth, because, say you, it is contrary to
truth: And that my Judgment ought by all to be reversed, undone, and made
void, because, say you, it is erroneous and false; for, say you, that I am no
chosen Witness of the Spirit of Truth; neither have I, say you, received any
Commission from Christ, to whom all the Prophets gave witness, as hereafter
appears.

L. M. Here the Reader may see how simply he proves that I have no Commission
from Christ, and that I am no chosen Witness of Christ.

R. F. 1. He tells me, that there were chosen Witnesses of Christ to whom all
the Prophets gave witness: this he proves out of the Acts of the Apostles in
diverse places.

2. That they had a Commission from Christ to whom all the Prophets gave
witness, or that he commanded them to preach to the people. This he proves
likewise out of the Acts of the Apostles.

3. They who were chosen Witnesses of Christ, whom God the Father anointed
sealed and sent, and had a Commission from the Spirit and Power of Christ, to
whom all the Prophets gave witness, in testifying on the behalf of Christ,
their testimony stands as an evidence against, as you say, my pretended
Commission and the doctrine thereof.

L. M. Reply. Let any man that knows what belongs to a temporal Commission,
judge whether these places of Scripture which you have named, does prove me a
false witness, and my Commission to be a pretended thing, or no: for I do own
and believe that the Prophets under the Law were true witnesses of Christ, that
is, they did witness and testify unto the people of the Jews that Christ the
Savior of mankind was to come, and to be born of a Virgin, this I do
faithfully believe. Also I do own and believe that the Prophets and Apostles
were true Witnesses and Ambassadors of Christ, and that the Apostles were
chosen Witnesses of Christ to testify and witness that Christ the Savior was
now born in their time, when they did thus witness, as the Scriptures does
abundantly relate. Also I do own and believe that Christ is ordained to be the
Judge of the quick and the dead. Also I do own and believe that the Scriptures
were spoken as Holy men were inspired, and so they may be called, and are owned
by me to be, the Word or Words of God. Yet this I say by the way, that no man
upon the earth at this day, does know the Scriptures truly, nor can interpret
them truly, but us the Witnesses of the Spirit, because all men in these days
are ignorant of the form and nature of the true God, and the right Devil, as I
have showed in those Letters to Samuel Hooton and W. S. and to Edward Bournes,
and to your self. Those Letters do open it more at large.

Again, Do you blind Quakers think that the repeating of Scripture-texts,
which were other men's Commissions and words, that it will prove me a false
witness, and my Commission to be a pretended thing? then I say those Jews which
were under the Law of Moses might as truly have said as you do by me, that the
Apostles Commission wat but a pretended thing, and their witness which they
bore to Christ was a false witness, and so they did; therefore they persecuted
them for it, as you would do me if it lay in your power, as it did in theirs.

4. R. F. By their Commission they were to preach to the people, and the same
Commission and the doctrine thereof they were to testify to them that Christ
was ordained of God to be the Judge both of quick and dead: but thou art not
Christ to whom all the Prophets gave witness, therefore it is evident that thou
art not chief Judge ordained of God, though thou presume to say that after
death they shall never see any other God or Judge, but the remembrance of that
Sentence which you the pretended Witnesses of the Spirit did pass upon them in
this life, because thou falsely says, no man knows the Scriptures but thy self,
and that no man can truly interpret the Scriptures but thy self, and that no
man ought to officiate the Office of a Minister, Messenger, or Ambassador of
Christ, but such as are appointed by John Reeve and thy self.

Which Assertions or Doctrines of thine are false, and not true: for this I
say, that the only knowledge and right of interpreting Scriptures belongs not
to thy self, but to the Lord Jesus and his blessed Spirit, who is the true
Judge, and has power to open men's understandings, and can give them the true
knowledge and right understanding of Scriptures, Luke 24.32.

Lodowick Muggleton 's Reply. The Reader may see the gross darkness of the
Quakers, here he proves my Commission, as he does think, to be false and a
pretended thing, from the letter of the Scripture, as if the Prophets and
Apostles Commission being repeated over so many hundred years since, would make
my Commission false, and to be but a pretended thing, when as I do declare that
I do not take up my Commission from the letter of the Scriptures, as other men
do; for that is a pretended Commission which does counterfeit and pretend to do
the same things, as they did which had their Commissions signed and sealed by
the voice of God himself, as Moses and Paul, the Prophets and Apostles, these I
do own that they had a Commission from God, but what is this to any Quaker, or
any other man? does this prove that the reading of other men's Commissions will
make a man a Minister, Messenger or Ambassador of Christ? surely no, neither
will the reading of the Scriptures prove my Commission to be false and a
pretended thing, as you say it is; for I said in those Letters to the Quakers
that my Commission is as true as the Prophets and Apostles Commissions were,
and of a more higher nature then theirs were, this I own to be true; for my
Commission was given by voice of words from God as theirs were, therefore it is
that I certainly know that God did give a Commission to Moses and the Prophets
and unto his Apostles.

Also as Moses and Aaron were the two first that God did choose and give a
Commission unto, to act forth the Law, which did signify the water: so
likewise God has chosen John Reeve, and Lodowick Muggelton to be his two last
Witnesses, and Prophets of the Spirit; so that the repeating of the true
Prophets and Apostles Commissions over again now, will never prove me a false
witness nor my Commission to be a pretended thing, for the Jews, which were
under the Law of Moses might, and did as well say as you do by me, that the
Apostles Commission was false and a pretended thing, by their repeating of the
Law and the Prophets: but the repeating of other men's Commissions will not make
void that which is given by voice of words from God, for that will stand for
ever, and that you and many more shall know to your eternal pain and shame, let
your pretenses be what they will.

Also I do own that the Prophets and Apostles of Christ did witness and
testify that Christ was ordained of God to be the Judge both of the quick and
the dead.

I also do own and believe the same thing my self, but what does this prove
therefore that I have no Commission from God to be the chief Judge of Quakers
and other dispising spirits? That does no ways weaken my power, but rather
confirm and make it the more stronger, for I do believe Jesus Christ to be the
the only God both God and Man in one person, by whom the world was made, and
from this Christ God Man am I made Judge, and not from the letter of the
Scriptures, which were other men's Commissions; so that I am no Minister of the
letter, but a Minister of the Spirit, and so the chief Judge ordained of Christ
by voice of words, as Moses, Elijah, Paul, and Peter, other Prophets and
Apostles were, so that though Christ be chief Judge of the quick and the dead,
in that he has power to raise mankind again at the last day, and so give
possession of eternal happiness to the seed of Faith, and possession of endless
misery unto the seed of Reason, and in this regard Christ is chief Judge both
of the quick and the dead, yet this does no ways prove me a false Judge but
rather the contrary, for all Prophets and Apostles which were ordained of God
were Judges, and some more chief then others, as Moses was a chief Judge,
Elijah, and Elisha, and Samuel, and diverse others were chief Judges, they being
above all other Prophets at that time, therefore chief Judges in the time of
their Commissions so likewise the Apostles were all Judges, yet Peter was more
chief Judge then all the rest, so is it now, John Reeve and my self being the
last chosen Witnesses of the Spirit, we are Judges, but while John Reeve was
living he was chief Judge, but he being fallen a sleep I am chief Judge, much
like unto Elijah and Elisha, yet in all this there is no dis-throning of
Christ, nor diminishing of his honor and power of being the Judge of the quick
and the dead. And as for my saying, that no man knows the Scriptures, nor can
interpret the Scriptures truly but my self, that is a standing truth, neither
shall any man or woman that I have passed the Sentence upon be delivered from
it; and as for the interpretation of the Scriptures belonging unto the Lord, as
you say, and not unto my self; to this I say, God does not come down from
heaven upon this earth to interpret the Scriptures unto men, but this was
always Gods practice to Commissionate particular men, and furnish them with
gifts for that purpose, and what interpretations of Scriptures they give, it is
owned of God as if he had done it himself; therefore the people of the Jews
would have Moses to speak unto them, he being a man like themselves they could
better hear him then God, because Gods voice was so terrible that mortals could
not bear it, yet Moses words are owned to be the words of God, as if God had
spoke them himself, and so all Prophets and Apostles could say, Thus says the
word of the Lord: so that what declaration or interpretation a Messenger of God
does give, it may be said it is from God, and so ought to be received by man;
so that Christ does not teach every particular man neither by his Spirit, nor
by voice of words; but if any man believe him that he is sent of God, he may be
said to be taught of God; so that the true and right interpretation of the
Scriptures, it lies in those men that God has chosen, anointed, and sealed
for that purpose, and men cannot come to the knowledge of God, nor the true
meaning of the Scriptures, no other way; so that I knowing these things to be
true, that the interpretation of Scriptures belongs unto Commissionated men,
and not unto Christ himself, as the Quakers does vainly imagine.

5. R. F. does say, that the chosen Witnesses of Christ, who had a Commission
from his blessed Spirit, they were anointed and sealed of God.

6. Says he for the Ambassadors who had a Commission to Preach, and were
anointed and sealed of God.

7. He says the Ambassadors of Christ who were anointed and sealed of God, and
had the ministration of reconciliation given unto them.

8. The Ambassadors of Christ who were anointed and sealed of God, and had the
glorious ministration of the Spirit given unto them.

9. He says the Ambassadors of Christ, and chosen Witnesses of the Spirit, who
were anointed and sealed of God, they were workers together with God.

10. He says the true Witnesses of the Spirit and Ambassadors of Christ, by
the Father of Mercies, and God of all Comfort, they were comforted themselves
in all their tribulations that they might be able to comfort them that were in
any trouble, by the comfort wherewith they themselves were comforted of God;
for which purpose he has quoted abundance of texts of Scriptures, which would
be too tedious to cite.

L. M. Reply. Here you that have any true saving light in you, you may judge
whether this man has proved me a false Witness or not: he tells me that the
Prophets and Apostles of old many hundred years ago before I was born, that
they were anointed and sealed of God for the work of the Ministry; that is
confessed and owned by me, that the Prophets and Apostles of old they had a
Commission from God to ordain other men for the work of the Ministry, but what
does this prove that God has not given a Commission to John Reeve and Lodowick
Muggelton, because the Prophets and Apostles were anointed and sealed, and had
a Commission of God; neither will their Commission authorize any Quakers nor no
other man for the work of the Ministry; but when the Prophets and Apostles were
living, they had power to authorize any man which they did discern fit for it,
but the reading of their Commission now they are dead, will not empower a man
to be a Minister or Messenger of Christ, yet this is the course that you
Quakers and most men in the world does take to prove a live man's Commission to
be false, by a dead man's Commission; but you will find it to the contrary in
the end.

Again though the Prophets and Apostles were anointed and sealed of God for
that great work, will it follow therefore that you Quakers, because you read
their writings, that you are anointed and sealed of God for the work of the
Ministry? surely no, neither will it follow, because they were true Witnesses
of Christ, therefore I must needs be false: For this I say, that my Commission
is from the same God as theirs was and is as true as theirs was, neither have I
my Commission from them, but from God himself as they had, so that it will
prove a vain conceit of you Quakers and others that are under the sentence of
this Commission of the spirit, to tell me that they were, that is, the Prophets
and Apostles were anointed and sealed of God; what is that to you what they
were? their being true Witnesses of Christ, will never a whit diminish or
weaken that power and authority which God has given me, but confirm and
strengthen it the more, in that I know that they had the like power in their
time, according to the nature of their Commission, as I have: And now I
certainly know that they were true, and what their their power was, in that I
know my self to be true, and what my power is now, so that I cannot be deceived
as you Quakers are with other men's Commissions that are dead, you not knowing
the extent of their Commissions, nor when they began, nor when they did end;
and your ignorance of those things makes you fight with the dead letter against
a living Spirit, just as if a man should fight with the sheath against him that
has a two-edged Sword in his hand, so do you Quakers with me.

And as for my fleeing from Chesterfield to Backwel for fear of a few stripes,
or a whipping, when the same was but threatened against me, this is utterly
false; for I did not know that any such thing was threatened against me, neither
was I ever at Backwel in my life to my knowledge; neither did it lie in the
power of the Magistrates in that Country to do any such thing, in case they
had caught me at that time: I say it was more than their Law would bear them
out to do: but however if I had fled for fear of the Devils malice, I did no
more then other Prophets and Apostles which were Ambassadors of Christ before
me, they did the same: as Eliah fled from Jezabel, and Paul fled for fear of
persecution: and Christ gave advice to his disciples, that when they were
persecuted in one City, to flee into another, so that would have been no new
thing, neither should I have been e're the more a false Witness or Ambassador
of Christ if I had fled for fear of a whipping.

And whereas you say that I was threatened for my false Judgment and Doctrine,
as you call it, saying it was reviling, cursing, and damning: As for cursing
and damning, I do own that I did pass the Sentence of eternal damnation upon
some Quakers and others, that was but according to the tenor of my Commission
from Christ, and I am very well satisfied in so doing: but as for my reviling
of any man or woman I never did, it was always contrary to my natural temper
before I knew what a Commission was, to revile any man or woman, much less now,
that I think the Priest of Chesterfield will witness, that when I was caught
and brought before the Mayor thereof, and examined by the Priest, I gave him
nor no other man there, no reviling speeches: but as I am a Prophet and a
Witness of the Spirit, discerning that the Priest was of the seed of the
serpent, and of a persecuting spirit, which would have took away my life, if it
had layen in his power, or in the power of the Laws of England, he would have
done it, though I never had any prejudice, nor no speech with the man in my
life before, yet his envy and malice was so great to me; for which I did pass
the Sentence of eternal damnation upon him, but no ways reviling, but did give
him civil respect as a Priest of the Nation, which I think he will witness,
notwithstanding his malice and envy was great to me which did him no wrong, nor
no man else in that town, yet he caused me to be sent unto Derby Goal, where I
did remain until the Assizes; so that the malice of men has been exercised
upon me as much as lies in their power to do, and it is only upon this
account, they cannot endure that God should give power to a man like
themselves, to bless and curse to eternity.

Neither do I curse any until he judge me first, much less revile any: you may
as well say that a Judge when he passes Sentence upon a malefactor to be
hanged for the breach of such a law, that is capable of death, you may as well
say that this Judge does revile, curse, and condemn the man that has broke the
law, when as the Judge can do no otherwise, but according to the tennor of his
Commission which he is authorized by Commission from the King: so that every
Judge is made a savor of life and death; for the one he condemns to die
according to the law, and the other he does acquit and set free, and is this
any less then a temporal blessing and cursing, and no reviling at all? Even so
it is with me, I being one of Gods chosen Witnesses and Ambassadors by virtue
of his Commisson given unto John Reeve and my self, I am made Judge of men and
women's spiritual and eternal estate, what shall become of them after death, yet
this I would have the reader to understand, that though a Judge of the Land be
Judge of many Countries and Shires, yet his power is seen most in those that he
does acquit or condemn; so is it with me, my power is most seen in those that
receive and believe me, and so are blessed to eternity, and in those that
despise and persecute me, in that they are cursed and damned to eternity; for I
never bless none but those that truly believe it, neither do I curse any but
those that despise or persecute me upon that account: but all that does neither
receive it nor despise it, I let them alone and meddle not with them, but leave
them to stand or fall as the two seeds within them shall uphold them, or let
them fall. And as for your saying that I have reviled, cursed, and damned the
beloved people of God, meaning you Quakers: So that I say I never did curse any
of them till such time as they did Judge or despise my Commission first; for I
never do judge first, so that I am certain that most part of the Quakers are
the seed of the serpent, and not the beloved of God: so that those Quakers
which I have cursed shall not escape, they being the seed of the serpent, and
have despised to be taught any other way but by the light within them. But I
have opened that more clear in those Letters to Samuel Hooton and W. S. and to
Richard Farnsworth himself, therefore I shall say no more in that point.

I shall pass by those ten particulars repeated by R. F. to prove me not a
chosen Witness of the Spirit, and shall come to that which is of more
concernment for the reader to know, that is, that God has chosen me now in
these last days to be an Ambassador and Witness of the Spirit, and so chief
Judge in the world concerning the spiritual and eternal estate of men and women
after death, and that I do go by as certain a rule, as the Judges of the Land
do when they give Judgment according to Law, as may be seen aforesaid in the
Letters to the Quakers.

Here R.F. would seem to prove me a liar: First, because says he, thou art
both judge, accuser, and witness thy self, and says that I do condemn and give
judgment at my will and pleasure contrary to truth. And he further says, that
I do not go in so doing by so certain a rule as the Judges of the Land do.
Secondly, He says, that I go not by so certain a rule when I pass the Sentence
of death and damnation upon the souls and bodies of men, as the Judges of the
Land does; for which purpose he does quote Judge Cook upon the confirmation of
the Charters of the Liberties of England, who says this cause is worthy to be
written in Letters of gold, now what that clause is; would be too tedious to
write: but the sum of all is, that the Judges of the Land have certain outward
known Laws, as a rule of direction to guide and lead them to judgment when
they give it according to Law: but, says he, thou Lodowick, have no certain
outward known Laws either of God or the land, as rule of direction, and so
forth. Likewise he quoted many places of Scriptures, and some out of the civil
Law, some out of Edw. third, and Cooks Inst. and with the Proverbs of Solomon:
he has paid me with Solomon's words, and so bids me take notice of that which I
do take great notice: for I see by that, that the Proverbs of Solomon is as
good Scripture to the Quakers as any, and how well the Quakers knows the
Scriptures, I am never a whit deceived in them people, for they seem to have
the greatest light, but are the darkest people of all in the knowledge of the
Scriptures, and in the interpretation of Scriptures; according to the common
sense the Priests of the Nation does go far beyond them, for the Quakers are so
choked up with hearkening to the light of Christ within them, that they
despise the body or person of Christ without them, but I have discovered their
Ant^christ spirit more large in other Letters unto them, so that I shall say
the less here.

L. M. Reply. The great thing to be known is, how I will do to prove my self
to be the chief Judge in spiritual matters, and that I do go by as certain a
rule as the Judges of the Land do, when as they give Judgment according to
Law, seeing he has brought so many places of Scripture, and the Proverbs of
Solomon, and Acts of Edw. 3. and Judge Cooks Judgment of the Law, all to prove
me a false Judge, and that I do not go in my sentence by any known Law, either
of God nor the Land, so that if this be answered, most part of his Pamphlet
will be answered, For it does consist most part of it upon this thing;
therefore I shall give answer to it, that others may be the better informed in
themselves, th^ugh I am satisfied in it as to my self, yet this I do
ingeniously confess, that I never did pretend the knowledge of the Civil Laws
of the Land, neither do I. Now all the knowledge that I profess to know of
them, is to yield obedience unto them, in doing of them, or else to suffer the
penalty or punishment of them, this is the greatest knowledge I have of them;
for if my innocence nor money will not deliver me, I must and will suffer under
it; but since God has chosen John Reeve and my self to be his last Witnesses
of the Spirit, I know the better true power of a Judge; For as Moses and Aaron
were the two first chosen Witnesses of God, so likewise John Reeve and my self
are the two last that God will ever choose by voice of words to the hearing of
the ear: and as Aaron was given to be Moses mouth, so Lodowick Muggelton was
given to be John Reeve mouth these things cannot be known but by faith, neither
can any man tell that God chose Moses and Aaron but by faith. But if it be
objected, that Moses did miracles: To that I answer, that there is as much need
of faith to believe that as the other, for what cannot be seen must be
believed: So believing that God spoke to John Reeve, and that God gave unto
John Reeve a Commission by voice from Heaven by verbal words to the hearing of
the ear three mornings together, and that I was given to be his mouth, and by
his voice did I receive my Commission, whereby I am empowered to be a Messenger
and Ambassador for the great God the Man Christ Jesus, which is both God and
Man, who has chosen me to be at this day chief Judge, and has given me a
Commi^sion so to be, as Paul said in his time, meaning himself, and the rest of
his Apostles: We, says he, are Ambassadors in Christ's stead beseeching you to
be reconciled, and the like: So say I, that I am an Ambassador in Christ's
stead, to bless them that are reconciled unto the true faith in Christ, and to
curse and damn those that despises and speaks evil of them whom God has
sent; So that God has made me chief Judge now to give sentence upon men and
women's spiritual and eternal estate, so that I shall unfold as short as I can,
how I may be said to be the chief Judge, and that I do go by as certain a rule
as the Judges of the Land do when they give Judgment according to Law. These
two things I shall unfold a little more clear then in those Letters aforesaid.

First, that I am chief Judge in spiritual matters, I prove thus: Because I do
believe and certainly know by the revelation of Faith, that God did speak to
John Reeve three mornings together distinct words and sentences to the hearing
of the ear, in the year 1651. February the third, fourth, and fifth, and gave
him a Commission as he did Moses. And Aaron was given to be Moses his mouth, so
was Lodowick Muggelton given to be John Reeve mouth, so that John Reeve being
the chief while he was living, but since the burden or Commission of the Lord
has been laid upon me; and as Elisha had a double portion of Eliahs Spirit; so
have I had a double portion of Revelation of the Spirit in opening the
Scriptures since John Reeve departed this life. Also God said, that he had
chosen John Reeve his last Messenger, and that he had given him Lodowick
Muggelton to be his mouth, and the next words following, that he had put the
two edged-sword of his Spirit into his mouth, to pronounce Blessing and Cursing
to eternity, with many other words which are in public, therefore I shall say
no more of them here, so that John Reeve being dead, I must needs be chief
Judge in these days, neither will God Commissionate any more after me to the
worlds end, because he did say that he had chosen us his last. Now I being his
last chosen Messenger, I must needs be chief Judge of spiritual matters
concerning men and women's eternal estate, and what will become of them after
death, if these things cannot be believed by you Quakers and others, I cannot
help that, neither does this power which God has given me any ways dishonor or
disthrone Christ of his Office of being the Judge of the Quick and the Dead;
for God does do much like unto an Earthly King, for though a King be the chief
Judge of those Kingdoms which he is King of, yet he does Commissionate some
particular man to be chief Judge, to be in his stead: though the King does
Commissionate many more Judges, yet there is but one particular in every
Kingdom which is called Lord Chief Justice of England, Scotland, or Ireland,
these being three distinct Kingdoms, they have three distinct particular
persons, which are called Chief Judges, and they are so by Commission from the
King, besides all other Judges; yet you see that the King though he be Chief
Judge of all his Kingdoms, yet he seldom or never acts in Judgment himself,
but does leave it to those which he has Commissionated for that purpose.

So is it with the God of Heaven, though Christ which is God and Man, be King
of heaven and chief Judge both in Heaven and in Earth in spiritual and eternal
matters, yet he by Commission does chose some particular person to be chief
judge in spiritual things, as Moses was chosen chief Judge, and Samuel, and
Elijah, and Elisha, and diverse other Prophets which did govern Israel, that
were chief Judges in the worship of God at that time, as there must also be one
particular man that must be High Priest, so likewise Peter was the chief
Apostle, and so chief Judge, so that some particular man must be chief in all
places of trust, whether it be under a earthly King, or under the King of
Heaven, yet no dishonor nor dis-throning either of them both, so the God and
King of heaven having chosen John Reeve and my self, he has Commissionated me
to be his Messenger, Minister, or Ambassador in his stead, to set life and
death before men, even as Moses did to the people of Israel; and as men and
women do receive it, they shall have life eternal abiding in them, and some can
witness it at this day, and as men and women does despise the Doctrine of Truth
declared by us the Witnesses of the Spirit, they have the sentence and seal of
eternal death abiding in them, and many can witness that in themselves, but
that they will not; yet some few to my knowledge has been forced to do it
thorough the terror of soul: but however it is not the fewness of them that do
receive it, nor the multitude of them that despise it, does make me question
e're the more the truth of my Commission, and though Christ be the King of
heaven, and the Judge of the quick and the dead at the last day, and so he is
the chief Judge, in that he can raise men and women again, and give the
possession both of eternal happiness and eternal misery, according to that
sentence which the Prophets and Apostles, and we the Witnesses of the Spirit
did pass upon them in this life, so that we see that God has made chief Jugdes
in spiritual matters, we do no ways dis-throne Christ of his Office, no more
then the chief Judge of England does dis-throne the King, in that his
Commission from the King will bear him out, he judging according to the tenor
of his Commission; so is it with me, God having made me chief judge of men's
spiritual and eternal estate, what will become of them after death, and I going
and judging according to the tennor of my Commission, I do no ways dishonor my
King, but honor him, in that I am faithful to that trust which God has
entrusted me with, and I am very well satisfied in the performance of it, yet
this I would have the reader to know, though I do own my self the chief judge
in spiritual matters, yet this I say that every true believer of this
Commission is a judge as well as I my self, and may upon occasions when they
meet with despising spirits, curse them to eternity, if their says be strong
enough to bear them up; so that they do not doubt. For if any shall pass the
sentence upon another, and doubt, the influence of that sentence will return
back again to themselves: this I have seen in some believers of this Commission
of the Spirit, some again of the believers have been so strong in their faith,
that the sentence which they have passed upon despising spirits, it has had as
great effect upon them it was passed upon, as mine has, and rather greater, so
that every believer of this Commission whose faith is strong is a judge as well
as I, though not chief judge: but if peoples faith be weak and not strong
enough to bear them out in it, I do not tie them to any such thing, but I could
wish they were all so strong that the devils might be met with every where,
where the knowledge of this Commission of the Spirit is known and believed. And
as the King of earth has many Judges in his Kingdom, yet but one chief Judge,
in l ke manner is it with God the King of Heaven, he has many Judges of
despising spirits in spiritual and eternal things, yet but one chief judge: and
as the Apostles were chief Judges in their time, yet the believers of them were
saints and so judges, therefore it is said, that the saints should judge the
earth; nay, says Paul, know you not that we shall judge Angels? What is that?
That is, you that are believers of our Gospel, you shall be made by the power
of faith to judge wise and prudent Angel-like men, in the wisdom of reason
which came from the fallen angels seed and nature, endued with piercing,
rational God-like wisdom, therefore called Angels; these are those Angels which
the Saints in Paul's time should judge: so is it now with me, I being chief
judge in these last days, I have judged many wise Luciferian Angel-like spirits
within this twelve years, and so has some of the believers in this time judged
many of these Angels, they may be called Angels, because they are of the
serpent Angels seed, and has the highest wisdom of Reason in them which their
fallen estate will afford, but the weak and simple seed of faith must be their
judges, so that it may be clear to the reader that understands, that all true
believers of this Commission of the Spirit are judges of men and women's
spiritual and eternal estate, what shall become of them after death, yet none to
be chief judge but my self.

2. The second thing is to show that I do go by as certain a rule as the Judges
of the Land do, when as they give judgment according to Law: To this I say
that the Judges of the Land they have a Commission first from the King to be
Judges.

2. They have the Book of the Law to be their guides.

3. They must be men supposed to know the Law.

4. According to the known Law the Judge gives sentence and judgment either
to acquit or condemn by the Law.

So is it with me: First, God has given me a Commission to be chief judge.

2. He has given me the Book of the Law.

3. He has given me to know the Law.

4. According to the known law I do give sentence and judgment of blessing or
cursing to eternity.

1. That I have a Commission from God to be chief judge, that I have proved
before, if it cannot be believed I cannot help that.

2. That God has given the Book of the Law which is the Scriptures into my
hand, is as certainly true also; for the Scriptures are given into my hands, as
the Priests office was given unto the hands of Aaron, yet every man that read
the Scriptures does think to find eternal life in them, as Christ said to the
Jews, and as you Quakers and others does now a days; but thinking will not
serve turn, for all most all the world has no other assurance of eternal life
but thinking: but it is knowledge and faith in the true God that gives certain
assurance of eternal life, which I know no Quaker has, or can have in that
estate and principle which they hold; for they deny that flesh and bone of
Christ which suffered death to be now living above the Stars in that Heaven;
but I have opened that more large in those Letters to the Quakers.

3. God has given me to know the Law, that is, to know the Book of the
Scriptures; and that he has given me more knowledge in the Scriptures than all
the men in the world at this day: this I know to be truth, and some others can
witness it, neither can any man interpret the Scriptures truly but my self and
those that have it from me, because no man does know the true foundations which
the Book of the Scriptures does stand upon, namely, the true God, and the right
Devil.

4. And according to the known Law of the Scriptures, I do give Sentence and
judgment of blessing and cursing to eternity.

Thus far I do proceed like unto the Judges of the Land, but now as for Juries,
and witnesses, and accusers, the Judges of the Civil Law and I shall differ
something, but not much, because Juries and Judges are so bound together by the
Civil Laws of the Land, that one in many cases can do nothing without the
other, so that many times there is a great deal of hurt done as well as good,
because the power lies in them both; for many times when Judges would do right
according to Law, yet the Jury does prevent him, and so tyeth his hands:
likewise sometimes the Jury is willing to show mercy, and do right, and the
Judge will not, having some prejudice against that party, and does overpower
the Jury with his authority and knowledge in the Law, so that Judgment is
turned backward sometimes because the Law lies between two, the Judge and the
Jury; which if it did lie always in one, then there would be always either true
Justice done, or injustice always done these things some can experience which
have been accustomed to the Law.

2. The Judges of the Civil Law, can do nothing except there be Witnesses or
Accusers face to face, the cause of that is, because the Laws of the Land are
grounded upon Reason, and the Judges of the Land are the interpreters of the
Law of reason, so that Reasons kingdom being in this visible world, it must
proceed in the way of reason, by the Law of reason, which is the Law of the
Land, for the Law of the Land can lay hold of nothing but what is a visible
breach of the Law; therefore the Judge must have a visible Witness or Accuser
face to face, else be can give no Judgment upon the matter, yet there is some
cases in Law that men are sued at the Law, and condemned by the Law at a
distance, the party sued, not being face to face, nor knows of it until that
he be condemned; this some can experience, yet this I say the Judes of the Land
does go the best way in having Iuries and Witnesses that reason could find out,
and for my part I do approve of their way very well, but whom God does make
judges, they must go a nearer way to work; for you may read that those judges
which God did ordain in spiritual matters, they did not call for Juries and
Witnesses as the Judges of the Land do: what Jury did Moses call for to plague
the people of Israel for their Idolatry? And what Jury did Elijah call for when
he called for fire from Heaven to destroy those two Captains and their fifties?
What Jury did Elisha call for when he cursed those forty two children, and
caused them to be slain by two She-bears? What Jury did Peter call for when he
struck Annanias and Saphirah his wife dead with a word speaking? with many more
things which the Prophets and Apostles which were Judges of spiritual matters
have done without any Juries or witnesses, and yet they have gone by as certain
a rule as the Judges of the Land do when they give judgment according to Law:
so that I do know how to proceed in Judgment according to the tenor of my
Commission, as the Prophets and Apostles did in theirs, and as the Judges of
the Land do in their Commission of the Laws of the Land.

But to give little further satisfaction to the Reader, I shall show why I do
condemn men and women at a distance, and yet something agreeable to the way of
the Law of the Land: First those that are condemned by me at a distance, there
is some of this Faith that has heard them speak wicked speeches against me,
and the doctrine declared by this Commission of the Spirit, and have given me
intelligence of it, and so upon their witnessing the same I have sent the
sentence unto them, so that if the witness that informed me did not witness
truth, then that sentence which I have passed upon them shall be of no value,
which is better judgment in some kind then the Judges of the Land does give,
for if Witnesses be false and swear falsely, the Judges of the Land do many
times condemn the innocent merely through false Witness, therefore in that
regard my judgment and sentence is more certain then the Judges of the Civil
Law is, in regard I never condemn the innocent through false witness, for I
seldom or never do send the sentence to any, though their wicked speeches be
witnessed unto me by one that is not in this faith, though they may speak truth
in that thing as well as others that are of the same faith with me.

2. I never do pass sentence on any at a distance, except I have some Writing
from their own hands, as I have had from you Quakers, and your Handwriting is
as good a Jury and witness to me, as the Judges of the Land can have, for what
jury or witness can be required more then a man's own hand Writing? Others again
have blasphemed against the holy Spirit that sent me in my hearing, so that
there does need no jury, nor witnesses, nor accusers, but their own words, for
by them shall they be condemned or justified: for you see that men are put to
death for speaking treason against the King, as well as for acting Treason, so
is it with God; for words of blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, is a sin that
God will never fo^give, neither in this world nor in the world to come, yet we
read in Scripture that all manner of other sins shall be forgiven unto men, but
not that sin, and this I say there is more Quakers guilty of that sin then any
other Sect whatsoever, and for that very sin have I passed the sentence of
eternal death upon so many of them: for God has g^ven me a discerning to know
when a man does commit that sin, I being one of the Witnesses of the Spirit,
and so judge of them that I know does commit it, I do give judgment and
sentence of eternal damnation upon them, so that I am neither accuser nor
witness in those that are condemned at a distance, but their own writings or
their own words shall be a witness and an accuser against them: for I do accuse
no man of sin, but gives judgment upon them for their sin: and if you call the
sentence that I pass upon them to be an accusation and a witness against them,
then indeed in that sense I am both judge, accuser, and witness my self; but
these things aforementioned being considered, will prove that I do go by as
certain a rule when I pass sentence of eternal damnation upon the bodies and
souls of men and women, as the Judges of the Land do, when they give judgment
according to Law; and as the Charters and Liberties of England are worthy to be
written in letters of gold as Judge Cock does say, because of the excellency
and justness of them, I say so too, for I always loved legal justice among men:
so I say likewise that those Letters which I have sent to you Quakers are
worthy to be written in Letters of gold, also that they might endure in the
memory of men and women to the worlds end, for I am certain they will endure in
your memory to eternity.

Yet in all this I do neither own my self a King, nor God, not Christ, nor the
Holy Ghost, nor any of those titles do I take upon me, but this I do own my
self to be one of the two last Prophets and Witnesses of the Spirit, or
Messenger, Minister, or Ambassador of Christ, this I do own my self to be, and
by the authority of the Commission I received from Christ I am made chief Judge
in spiritual matters in all those that does either receive my Doctrine, or
despise it: But as for others that does neither receive it, nor despise it, nor
hear of it, I Judge them not, but leave them as God shall find them at the last
day.

And whereas R. F. does say, that God has reserved a pardoning power in the
Eternal Godhead and a punishing power to correct and punish me, and such as I
am: also he says, would thou make the Eternal Power and Godhead inferior to
the Kings of the Earth? Does not, says he, the Kings of the Earth reserve a
pardoning and punishing power in themselves, besides what they give to their
Judges by their Commission? So in his conclusion of that matter, he does affirm
that there is a punishing power reserved in the Eternal Godhead, and does
therewith remain to punish the rebellious, and obstinate, and presumptuous,
such, says he, as I am, or as may be read Heb. 10.26. with many more places of
Scriptures which would be tedious to cite.

L. M. Reply. That there is reserved a pardoning power and a punishing power in
the Eternal Godhead, that I do own and believe, but the pardoning power in the
Godhead does not extend to those that are condemned by those which God has
made Judges, why? because those Judges that God does make in spiritual and
Eternal things, they go by a certain rule: those Judges does either discern men
and women to be the absolute seed of the Serpent, or else that they have sinned
against the holy Ghost: these two things are infallible rules for Gods Judges
to go by, for will any one think that when Peter retained any man's sins, that
God would forgive that mar^h's sins afterward? surely no: so say I, you
Quakers and others that are condemned by us the Witnesses of the Spirit, you
will not be pardoned of God, because most of you have sinned against the holy
Ghost especially you that have written to me in calling the Doctrine and
Declaration of us the Witnesses of the Spirit whom God has chosen, anointed
and sealed, to reveal the whole council of God, in that he became flesh, which
is the greatest mystery, in that we the Witnesses of the Spirit are so far
honored of God as to be the finishers of it as John, Revelation, the 10, does
speak of: I say you Quakers have despised it more then all other men, by
calling this Doctrine blasphemy, error, lies, and deceit, with many other wicked
speeches which could not have been spoken but by the seed of the Serpent;
therefore I am no ways deceived in saying that those people called Quakers that
the most part of them are of the seed of the Serpent, and not the beloved of
God as you say, so that they and others that I have passed the sentence upon
will not escapet though their be a pardoning power in the Godhead, yet none of
those which I have pronounced sentence upon, shall partake of it for those
reasons aforesaid: For though there be a power in the Godhead to do what he
will, yet when he has given his word he will not go back from it, because he
cannot ly: So that it is not your repeating what power the Prophets and
Apostles of old had, nor the multitude of Scriptures which you have rehearsed,
that will stand you in any steed, nor deliver you from that sentence which I
have passed upon you, yet in all this I do not make the Eternal Godhead
inferior to the Kings of the earth. I do also acknowledge that the Kings of
the earth reserve a pardoning power in themselves, besides what they give to
their Judges: But this I must say to you that it is very seldom known that an
earthly King has any pardoning power in himself for such traitors that act
treason against the Kings person, this I suppose all men's experience will
witness, so that there is some crimes that earthly Kings have no pardoning
power for in themselves: so is it with you Quakers, you have committed such a
sin even against the Holy Ghost, so that there is no pardon in God himself not
for you, no more then there is for Cain that slew Abel, nor Judas that betrayed
Christ: if these be saved, then you shall, and remember you were told so by the
last true Prophet. But if earthly Kings do pardon any traitor, it is because
some other persons in great power does petition or intercede to the King for
him, and so perhaps the King for some ends best known to himself, may save his
life, but keep him in prison all days of his life, so that this can not
properly be called a pardoning power, except he freely forgive him, and raise
him up to the same honor which he had before: but you Quakers have no such
friend to intercede for you to the King of Heaven, now you are condemned by his
Messenger; for Christ will not intercede for you, for you have denied him
before men, in that you deny that flesh and bone which he suffered death in,
and rose again in the same flesh and bone, and ascended up into heaven, and
does now remain there in that same body, only it is spiritualized and
glorified body, yet a body: this I say, you Quakers does deny, whatsoever you
may prattle and talk of a Christ, yet you own no Christ but what is within you,
this I know to be true, else I should not be so j alous against those people
more then others, but for this very thing that Christ will never intercede for
pardon for you Quakers that are condemned by me; yet this I shall say if it
will please you, that if I be a false prophet and witness as you say I am, then
I say that curse which I have passed upon you and many others; I say let it be
all upon me, and you shall all go free: but if I be true as I know I am, there
is no possibility for you nor others to escape. I can say no more in this
thing, but shall leave it to Christ the Judge of the quick and the dead, to
give me my reward according as I have been faithful in the Commission which he
has put upon me.

Again, it is not with earthly kings as it is with the King of Heaven, for
many times earthly kings have their pardoning power and their Condemning power
which they have in themselves taken away from them, and so does stand in need
of pardon themselves, and so all those Judges which had their Commissions from
the king is worth nothing, because another power has overcome him, and has
took it by the power of the sword; so that earthly kings does sometimes stand
in need of pardon and mercy themselves: for an earthly power does stand no
longer then till a stronger then he does overcome him, as may be read
concerning the Kings of Israel, and others which fought against them, as Saul
against King Agag, and Jehu against the house of Ahab, and diverse others which
might be named: and so in G^rmany and many places of Christendom, and here in
England has not the pardoning and condemnidg power been rent out of the Kings
hands? and so all those Judges which had their Commissions from him, are put
out of their places of power, and so their Commission is made void and of none
effect? This experience in these our days has showed the truth of it, but that
Commission which is given of God the King of Heaven, cannot be made void,
neither can that man which God has made Judge of spiritual and eternal
matters, I say that man's Commission cannot be taken away by any but by God
himself: and seeing that no power can conquer or overcome God the King of
Heaven to dis-throne him, because he is from everlasting to everlaing; and look
what those Judges that God has chosen, anointed, and sealed for that purpose,
their Sentence is for everlasting and to eternity, as God himself is: For as an
earthly Kings power does last no longer than his life, and not always so long,
so God being for ever to eternity, so will those his commissionated Judges
their Sentence be everlasting and eternal a so; so that those Judge; which God
has commissionated, even we the Witnesses of the Spirit, do go by a more
certain rule than the Judges of the land do, when they give Judgment according
to Law; neither can that sentence which I have passed upon you Quakers and
others be revoked, not as the Judges of the Lands sentence may through many
tricks and quibbles in the Law: but no trick nor quibble in the repeating of
Scripture-texts as you have done, shall deliver you, because I know the Law of
the Scriptures, as well as the Judges of the Land do the Civil Law; and though
they may through Iuries and false witnesses give wrong sentence sometimes, it
is not so with me, for I do walk by a more infallible rule than they do, when I
pass sentence upon men and women; for it is not Iuries nor false witnesses that
can turn, or make me give judgment contrary to truth, because I received my
power and authority from the God of Truth; and let men rage, revile, persecute,
and do what they can, they will not be delivered from that Judgment that I
have passed upon them, and if their persecution should extend unto death, it
will but make the fire of hell to burn the more hotter in their souls to
eternity.

In the latter part of your Pamphlet you spoke something concerning the two
Witnesses; for, say you, if John Reeve and thy self were Joint-Commissioners,
and had your pretended Commission not severally asunder, but joint together,
has not, say you, the death of John Reeve made void thy pretended Commission
to all intents, constructions and purposes whatsoever? Or if John Reeve and thy
self did pretend to be the two Witnesses spoken of Rev. 11.3. and to have power
given to them? Has not, says he, the death of John Reeve made it evident
against you to be none of them? and so he goes on repeating most part of the
11 chapter of the Revelation, as if it were to be fulfilled legally as it is
set down in the Letter.

L. M. Reply. That the death of John Reeve does not make void my Commission, no
more then the death of Aaron did make void Moses Commission of the Law, neither
was the Commission of the Law made void when Moses himself was dead, or taken
out of this world, but stood in full force and virtue after that that many
hundred years, and was never made void until John the Baptist and Christ did
enter into the Ministry of the Gospel; for John the Baptist was the last
Prophet of the Law, and in his death the Commission of the Law of Moses was
made void and of none effect to those that did believe in Jesus Christ, which
brought in a better Covenant, or a better Commission than that of the Law: so
likewise the worship of the Gospel of Jesus which was set up by his Apostles,
which was according to the faith which they had in Jesus Christ his being the
only begotten Son of God, and Savior of them that believed: but this
Commission of the Apostles did stand in full force and virtue but a matter of
three hundred years, yet the Apostles which were the Commissioners, did not
live themselves above forty years after their Lord Christ was put to death,
must that Commission therefore be made void, because the Commissioners were all
dead? surely no. And this I further do affirm, that never since that three
hundred years there has not a man been commissionated from God, to be a
Messenger, Minister, or Ambassador of Christ, to preach the everlasting Gospel
of life and salvation, until that God spoke to John Reeve in the year 1651. for
all men that have exercised the Office of a Minister, Messenger, or Ambassador
of Christ since that three hundred years to the year 1651. have run before they
were sent; for God sent none of them by voice of words, but they have preached
only from the letter of the Scriptures, or else from the light within, as the
Quakers do, but have had no Commission from Christ without them, though much
good has bin done by their preaching, and a great deal of (...): but let that
pass, because I have spoken of that more at large in the Interpretation of Rev.
Chap. 11.

So I say though John Reeve be dead, and I were dead also, yet will not this
Commission of the Spirit be made void: for this I say, as long as there is
faith and believers of this Commission, it will not be void and lose its
virtue, which I know will be to the end of the world, though perhaps I my self
may be either put to to death, or die naturally within few years, yet the faith
in this doctrine which we the Witnesses of the Spirit have declared concerning
the true God, his form and nature before he became flesh, and what he is now,
and the form and nature of the right Devil before he became flesh, and what he
is now, with the place and nature of hell, and of heaven, the person and nature
of Angels, and the mortality of the soul: These six points of doctrine, with
many more heavenly Secrets which has been declared by Us, I say that there
will be faith in some men and women to believe and understand these things
which we have written, even to the worlds end, so that my Commission will not
be void, reversed, and undone, though I were dead. Also I being the last true
Prophet and Witness that ever shall come, which is more than any Apostle or
Prophet could say, therefore who ever shall truly believe these things, may be
the more comforted and revived that redemption is so near at hand, when as all
tears shall be wiped away from your eyes; and not only so, but you shall enter
into the joy of our good God and Savior in whom ye have believed, even the Man
Christ Jesus, who is both God and Man clothed with flesh and bone, who poured
out his sold unto death, whose blood was no less then the blood of God, and
this is that blood, that who ever can believe it, it will sprinkle their souls
here, and make them pure and clean, so that nothing shall offend or cause any
fear of eternal death, but this natural death shall be but as a door of
intrance into those eternal joys, where we shall see our God face to face: and
if you Richard Farnsworth had but read that book of mine of the Interpretation
of Revel. chap. 10 you would never have repeated so much of it in your Pamphlet
as you have, to prove me a false Witness; for there is every particular verse
in that chapter opened and expounded, besides many other places in the
Revelation opened, more then all the learned men in the world has or could do,
but it is a vain thing to talk of any heavenly secrets to Quakers, for they
will not bestow a penny in any writings but their own, let them cost ever so
much pains the writing, and charge the printing, but if they can see them for
nothing perhaps they will view it a little sl^ghtly over, but as to buy I
hardly know any Quaker that does, surely they are afraid they should lose their
believers if they should see my works: now I am very free that any believer of
this Commission should see their writings, not fearing they will draw them
away. God has sent a Commission into the world to knock them down into that
bottomless-pit, where shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth for evermore: and
do you rage, and rail, and slight, and do what you can, you shall not be
delivered from that sentence and curse which I have pronounced upon you,
neither is the Doctrine of this Commission any deceit, neither is it pride and
presumption in me, in what I have said concerning you, but as true judgment as
ever was past upon any man by any Prophet or Apostle, or by any true Judge of
the Land, without envy or malice, but in true discerning and knowledge of the
spiritual Law of the Scriptures, have I given Judgment upon you and others,
whereunto I shall set my hand and seal, and if the Law can do it, seal it with
my Blood.

Lodowick Muggleton.


