THE LIEE and DEATH OF Doctor Faustus, Made into a FARCE.

By Mr. MOUNTFORD.

WITH THE Humors of Harlequin and Scaramouche: As they were several times
Acted By Mr. LEE and Mr. IEVON, AT THE Queens Theater in Dorset Garden.

Newly Revived, At the Theater in Lincolns Inn Fields, With Songs and Dances
between the ACTS.

LONDON, Printed and sold by E. Whitlock near Stationers Hall, 1697, Price 6 d.

The Life and Death of Dr. FAUSTUS.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Dr. Faustus seated in his Chair, and reading in his Study. Good and bad Angel
ready. Faust. SEttle thy Study, Faustus, and begin
To sound the Depth of that thou will profess;
These Metaphysics of Magicians,
And Negromantick Books, are heavenly
Lines, Circles, Letters, Characters,
Ay, these are those that Faustus most desires;
A sound Magician is a Demi-God:
Here tire my Brains to get a Deity.

Mephostopholis under the Stage. A good and bad Angel fly down. Good Ang. O
Faustus I lay that damned Book aside;
And gaze not on it, lest it tempt thy heart to blasphemy.

Bad Ang. Go forward, Faustus, in that famous Art
Wherein all Natures Treasure is contained:
Be thou on Earth as Jove is in the Sky,
Lord and Commander of these Elements.

Spirits ascend. Faust. How am I glutted with conceit of this?
Shall I make Spirits fetch me what I please?
I Will have 'em fly to India for Gold,
Ransack the Ocean for Orient Pearl.
I Will have 'em Wall all Germany with Brass;
I Will levy Soldiers with the Coin they bring,
And chase the Prince of Parma from our Land.
[Rises. It Is now the Dead high Noon of Night,
And Lucifer his Spirits freedom gives;
I Will try if in this Cricle I can Rai^e
A Demon to inform me what I long for.

Sin^ mihi Dii Ach^ron^is prop^tii, Orientis Princeps, Beelzebub, German.
Demogorgon. Mephostopholis, Mephostopholis, surgat Spiritus. [Thunders.
Mephostopholis Speaks under Ground. [Thunders. Meph. Faustus, I a^tend thy Will.


Faust. Where are thou?


Meph. Here.


[a Flash of Light. Scar. within. Oh, oh, oh.


Faust. What Noise is that? Have thou any Companions with thee?


Meph. No.


Faust. It comes this way?


Scar. Oh, oh, O --


[ Enter Scaramouche. Faust. What ail'st thou?


Scar. OF of of


Faust. Speak, Fellow, what is the Matter?


Scar. O Poor Scaramouche l'


Faust. Speak, I conjure thee; or Achero^tis Dii Demogorgon. --


Scar. O I beseech you Conjure no more, for I am frighted into a Diabetes
already.


Faust. Frighted at what?


Scar. I have seen, Oh, oh --


Faust. What?


Scar. Tho Devil.


Faust. Art sure it was the Devil?


Scar. The Devil, or the Devil's Companion: He had a Head like a Bulls, with
Horns on; and two Eyes that glowed like the Balls of a dark Lantern: His Hair
stood a Tiptoe, like your new-fashion'd Top-kno^s; with a Mouth as large as a
King's Beef Eater: His Nails was as sharp as a Welshman's in Passion; and he
looked as frightful as a Sergeant to an Al^^tian.


Faust. But why art thou a^raid of the Devil?


Scar. Why I never said my Prayers in all my Life, but once; and that was when
my damned Wife was sick, that she might dye: My Ears are as deaf to good
Council, as French Dragoons are to Mercy. And my Conscience wants as much
sweeping as a Cook's Chimny. And I have as many Sins to answer for as a
Churchwarden, or an Overseer of the Poor.


Faust. Why, the Devil loves Sinners at his Heart.


Scar. Does he so?


Faust. He hates none, but the Virtuous, and the Godly. Such as Fast, and go to
Church, and give Alms-deeds.


Scar. I never saw a Church in my Life, thank God, (I mean the Devil;) and for
Fasting, it was always my Abomination; and for Alms, I never gave any Thing in
my Life, but the Itch once to a Pawn-broker. Therefore I hope he may Love me.


Faust. And he shall Love thee; I Will bring the^ acquainted with him.


Scar. Acquainted with the Devil?


Faust. Ay; Tant^ m^tropon^is Acherontis.


Scar. Oh, oh, oh.


Faust. Fear nothing Mephostopholis, be visible.

[ Scaramouche sinks behind the Doctor, and peeps his Head out behind the Slip
of his Gown. A Devil rises in Thunder and Lightning. I charge thee to be gone,
and change thy Shape; thou art too ugly to attend on me. I find there is Virtue
in my Charm; Come, rise up, Fool, the Devil's gone.


[The Devil sinks. Scar. The Devil go with him.


Faust. Fear nothing, I command the Devil. If thou will leave thy
Chimny-sweeping Trade, and live with me, thou shall have Meat and Drink in
Plenty; and 40 Crowns a Year shall be thy Wages; I Will make* thee Learned in the
black Art.


Scar. I am a Student in that already* But let me consider, Good Meat and
Drink, and 40 Crowns a Year. Then I Will change my black Art for yours.


Faust. There Is Earnest, thou art now my Servant; dispose of thy Brooms and
Poles, they will be useless to thee here; take this Key, go into my Study* and
clean* take all the Books you find scattered about, and range 'em orderly upon
the Shelves.


Scar. Happy Scaramouche, now may thou Swear, Lie, Steal, Drink and Whore;
for thy Master is the Devil's Master, and thou in time may master 'em both.

[ Exit Scaram.
Enter Mephostopholis. Meph. Now, Faustus, what would thou have with me?

Faust. I charge thee wait upon me whilst I live,
And do whatever Faustus shall command.

Meph. Ay Faustus, so I will, if thou will purchase me of Lucifer.

Faust. What says Lucifer, thy Lord?

Meph. That I shall wait on Faustus whilst he Lives,
So thou will buy my Service with thy Blood.

Faust. Already Faustus has hazarded that for thee.

Meph. Ay, but thou must bequeath it solemnly,
And write a Deed of Gift with it;
For that Security craves Lucifer.
If thou deny it, I must back to Hell.

Bad Ang. But Faustus, if I shall have thy Soul,
I Will be thy Slave, and worship thy Commands,
And give thee more than thou have Will of.

Faust. If he will spare me Four and twenty Years,
Letting me Live in all Voluptuousness,
To have thee ever to attend on me,
To give me whatsoever I shall ask,
And tell me whatsoever I demand;
On these Conditions I resign it to him.

Meph. Then, Faustus, stab thy Arm courageously,
And bind thy Soul, that at some certain Day
Great Lucifer may claim it as his own;
And then be thou as Great as Lucifer.

Faust. Lo, Mephostopholis, for Love of thee, Faustus has cut
His Arm, and with his proper Blood
Assures his Soul to be great Lucifers.

Meph. But, Faustus, write it in manner of a Deed, and Gift.

Faust. Ay, so I do; but, Mephostopholis, my Blood congeals, and I can write no
more.


Meph. I Will fetch thee Fire to dissolve it straight.
[Exit.
Faust. What might the staying of my Blood portend,
It is unwilling I should write this Bill.

Good and bad Angel descend. Good An. Yet, Faustus, think upon thy precious
Soul.

Bad An. No, Faustus, think of Honor, and of Wealth.

Faust. Of Wealth. Why all the Indies, Ganges, shall be mine.


Good An. No, Faustus, everlasting Tortures shall be thine.

Bad An. No, Faustus, everlasting Glory shall be thine.
The World shall raise a Statue of thy Name,
And on it write, This, this is he that could command^ the World.


[Good Angel ascends, bad Angel descends. Faust. Command the World; Ay,
Faustus, think on that.
Why streams not then my Blood that I may write?
Faustus gives to thee his Soul; Oh! there it stops. Why should thou not? Is
not thy Soul thy own?


Enter Mephostopholis with a Cha^er of Fire. Meph. See, Faustus, here is Fire,
set it on.

Faust. So now the Blood begins to clear again.

Meph. What is it I would not do to obtain his Soul?

Faust. Consummatum ect; the Bill is ended.
But what is this Inscription on my Arm?
Homo fuge: Whether shall I fly?
My Senses are deceived, here is nothing writ;
O yes, I see it plain, even here is writ.
Homo fuge: yet shall not Faustus sly
I Will call up something to delight his Mind.

[Song. Mephostopholis waves his Wand. Enter several Devils, who present Crowns
to Faustus, and after a Dance vanish. Faust. What means this then?

Meph. It Is to delight thy Mind, and let thee see
What Magic can perform.

Faust. And may I raise such Spirits when I please.

Meph. Ay, Faustus, and do greater Things than these.

Faust. Then, Mephostopholis, receive this Deed of Gi^t;
But yet Conditionally, that thou perform all
Covenants and Articles herein subscribed.

Meph. I swear by Hell, and Lucifer, to effect all Promises between us both.

Faust. Then take it.

Meph. Do you deliver it as your Deed, and Gi^t?

Faust. Ay, and the Devil do you good on it.

Meph. So, now, Faustus, ask what thou will.

Faust. Then let me have a Wife.

Faustus waves his Wand, and a Woman Devil rises: Fireworks about whirles
round, and sinks. Faust. What sight is this?

Meph. Now, Faustus, will thou have a Wife?

Faust. Here Is a hot Whore indeed, I Will have no Wife.

Meph. Marriage is but a Ceremonial Toy;
I Will cull thee out the fairest Curtezans,
And bring 'em every Morning to thy Bed:
She whom thy Eye shall like, thy Heart shall have.

Faust. Then, Mephostopholis, let me behold the Famous
Hellen, who was the Occasion of great Troys Destruction.

Meph. Faustus, thou shall.

[Waves his Wand, enters. Faust. O Mephostopholis! what would I give to gain a
Kiss from off those lovely Lips.


Meph. Faustus, thou may.


[He kisses her. Faust. My Soul is fled; come Hellen, come, give me my Soul
again; she is gone.


[He goes to kiss her again, and she sinks. Meph. Women are shy you know at the
first Sight; but come, Faustus, command me somewhat else.


Faust. Then tell me, is Hell so terrible as Churchmen write it.


Meph. No, Faustus, it is Glorious as the upper World; but that we have Night
and Day, as you have here: Above there is no Night.


Faust. Why sighs my Mephostopholis, I think Hell's a mere Fable.


Meph. Ay, think so still.


Faust. Tell me who made the World?


Meph. I will not.


Faust. Sweet Mephos^.


Meph. Move me no further.


Faust. Villain, have I not bound thee to tell me any Thing.


Meph. That Is not against our Kingdom, this is: Thou are Lost; think thou of
Hell.


Faust. Think, Faustus, upon him that made the World.


Meph. Remember this.


[Sinks. Faust. Ay, go accursed Spirit to ugly Hell,
It Is thou have damned distressed Faustus Soul:
I will Repent: Ha!
[Goes to his Books. This Bible's fast, but here is another:
[They both fly out of^s Hand, and a ^^aming Thing appears written, etc. Is It
not too late?

[Ring. Good and bad descend. Bad An. Too late.


Good An. Never too late, if Faustus will repent.


Bad An. Faustus, behold, behold thy Deed; if thou r^pent Devils will tear thee
in Pieces.


Good An. Repent, and they shall never raze thy Skin.


[Scene sh^ts, Ang. ascends. Scene changes to the Street. Enter Harlequin.
Harl. This must be Mr. Doctor's House; I Will make ^old to knock: My Heart fails
me already.

[ Harlequin opens the Door, peeps about, and sh^ts it. I begin to tremble at
the Thoughts of seeing the Devil.

[Kn^^ks again. Here Is a great Resort of Devils, the very Doors smell of
Brimstone: I Will even back -- No: I Will be a Man of Resolution: But if Mr. Doctor
should send a Familiar to open the Door, in what Language should I speak to the
Devil?


[Knocks. Enter Scaramouche. Scar. peeping. This is some malicious Spirit, that
will not let me alone at my Study; but I Will go in, and conn my Book.

[Exit.
Harl. I believe Mr. Doctor is very Busy; but I Will rap this time with Authority.


[ Harlequin raps at the Door, Scaramouche peeps out. Harlequin strikes him,
and jumps back, runs frighted off. Scene changes to a Room in the Doctor's
House. Enter Scaramouche, with a Book in the Doctor's Gown. Scar. I have left
the Door open to save the Devil the labor of Knocking, if he has a mind to
come in: For I am resolved not to stir from my Book; I found it in the Doctor's
Clo^et, and know it must contain something of the Black Art.


Enter Harlequin. Harl. Oh here is Mr. Doctor himself; he is reading some
co^juring Book. I Would fain jecit.


Scar. This must be a conjuring Book by the hard Words. AB, EB, IB, OB, VB* BA,
BO, BV, BY.


Harl. It Is Child's Primer.


[ Harlequin looks over him. Scar. The Devil, the Devil; be gone, avoid Satan.


[Runs off. Harl. O the Devil! Now will I lie as if I were Dead, and let the
Devil go hunt for my Soul.


[Lyes down. Enter Scaramouche. Scar. I have learned to raise the Devil, but
how the Devil shall I do to lay him. Ha! what is here, a dead Body? The Devil
assumed this Body, and when I began to mu^ter my Prayers, he was in such haste
he left his Carcass behind him. Ha! it stirs; no, 'twas but my Fancy.

[ Scaram. lifts up all his Limbs, and lets 'em fall, whilst Harl. hits him on
the Breech, lifts his Head, which falls gently. All Is dead but's Head.
[Sets him upright. The Devil, the Devil! Be gone; what art thou?

Harl. A poor unfortunate Devil.


Scar. The Devil; Avaunt then Hogon mogon strogon.


Harl. O good Mr. Doctor, conjure up no more Devils and I Will be gone, or any
thing. -- I came only to ask your Black Artship a Question.


Scar. No, this is not the Devil. Who are thou? Whence come thou? What Is thy
Business, Quick, or Hogon strogon?


Harl. Hold, hold, hold, I am poor Harlequin: By the Learned I am called Z^ne,
by the Vulgar Jack Pudding, I was late Fool to a Mountebank* and last Night, in
the mistaking the Pipkin, I eat up a Pot of Bolus instead of Hasty P^dding; and
devoured Three Yards of Diaculum Plaster instead of Pancake, for which my
Master has turned me out of Doors instead of Wages: Therefore, to be revenged,
I come to hire a Devil or two of you, Mr. Doctor, of a strong Constitution,
that may swallow up his Turpentine Pills as fast as he make 'em, that he may
never cure poor Whore more of a Clap; and then he will be undone, for they are
his chief Patients.


Scar. What Practice has he?


Harl. Why his Business is to patch up rotten Whores against the Term for
Country Lawyers, and Attorneys Clerks; and against Christmas, E^ster and
Wh^^sum Holidays, for City Apprentices; and if his Pills be destroyed, 'twill
ruin him in one Term.


Scar. Come in; and for a Crown a We^k I Will let thee out a Devil, as they do
Horses at Livery, shall swallow him a Peck of Pills a day, though every one
were as big as a Pumpkin; and make nothing of a Bolus for a Breakfast.


Harl. O brave Mr. Doctor! O dainty Mr. Devil!


Scar. S^igniora.


[Here they Complement who shall go first. The End of the First Act.
ACT II.
Faustus in his Study. Good and Bad Angel descend. Good An. FAustus, Repent;
yet Heaven will pity thee.


Bad An. Thou art a Spirit, Heaven cannot pity thee.


Fau. Who buzzes in my Ear, I am a Spirit; ^e I a Devil yet Heaven can pity me:
Yea, Heaven will pity me, if I repent.


Bad An. Ay, but Faustus never shall repent.


Good An. Ay, Sweet Faustus think of Heaven, and heavenly Things.


[Ascends. Fau. My Heart is hardened, I cannot repent.
Scarce can I name Salvation, Faith, or Heaven,
But I am pinched, and pricked, in thousand Places.
O help distressed Faustus!
Lucifer, Beelzebub, and Mephostopholis rises.

Luc. Non^ can afford thee help; for only I have Interest in thee, Faustus.


Fau. Oh! What art thou, that looks so terrible?


Luc. I am Lucifer, and this is my Companion Prince in Hell.


Beel. We are come to tell thee thou do injure us.


Luc. Thou call'st on Heaven contrary to thy Promi^e.


Beel. Thou should not think on Heaven.


Fau. Nor will I henceforth pardon him for this,
And Faustus Vows never to look to Heaven.

Beel. So shall thou show thy self a faithful Servant,
And we will highly gratify thee for it.

Fau. Those Words delight my Soul.


Luc. Faustus, we are come in Person to show thee Passtime; sit down, and thou
shall behold the Seven Deadly Sins in their own proper Shapes and Likeness.


Fau. That Sight will be as pleasant to my Eye, as Paradise to Adam the first
Day of his Creation.


Beel. Talk not of Paradise, but mind the Show. Go, Mephostopholis, and fetch
'em in; and, Faustus, question 'em their Names.


Enter Pride. Fau. What art thou?


Pride. I am Pride; I was begot by Disdain and Affectation, I always took the
Wall of my Betters; had ever the first Cut, or else would not eat: I scorned
all Advice, never thought any one handsome but my self; had the best Pue in the
Church, though a Tradesman's Wife; and at last dyed of the Spleen, for want of
a Coach and Six Horses. Why is not thy Room perfumed, and spread with Cloth of
Tissue? What must you sit, and I stand? Rise up Brute.


Fau. Go, thou art a proud Slut indeed.
[Exit. Enter Covetousness. N^w what art thou the Second.

Cov. I am Covetousness; I was begot by a close Fist, and a griping Heart, in a
Us^rer's Chest. I never eat, to save Charges: This Coat has covered me for
Fourscore Winters: This Beard had seen as many more. I never slept in my Life,
but always watched my Gold.


Fau. What wort thou on Earth?


Cov. I was first an Exciseman, and cheated the King and Country; then I was a
Baker, and from every Neighbor's ^oaf I stole Two Pound, and swore 'twas shrunk
in the Oven. I was a Vintner, and by bribing of Quest men had leave to ^ell in
Pint Bottles for Quarts: At last I was a Horsecourser, made Smith^ield too hot
to hold me, and rid Post to the Devil? Give me some Gold, Father?

[Exit.
Enter Envy. Fau. What art thou the Third?


Env. I am Envy; begot by a Chimny-sweeper upon an Oyster-wench. I cannot read,
and wish all Books burnt. I always cursed the Government that I was not
preferred; and ^as a Malcontent in Three Kings Reigns. I am Lean with seeing
others Eat; and I wish the Devil would make a Sponge of thy Heart, to wipe out
the Score of my Sins.


Enter Wrath. Fau. Out Envious Wretch. What art thou the Fourth?


Wra. I am Wrath; I had neither Father nor Mother, but leaped out of a Lion's
Mouth when I was scarce an Hour old. I always abhorred the Art of Patience, and
cursed all Fishermen. I beat my Wife for my Pleasure; cursed Heaven in my
Passion, 'cause it gave me no Fortune, and was hanged for a Rape on a Scotch
Pedlar.

[Exit.
Enter Gluttony. Fau. What art thou the Fifth?


Glut. I am Gluttony; begot by a Plowman on a Washerwoman, who devoured a
Chedder Cheese in two Hours. I am of a Royal Pedigree: My Grandfather was a
Sur-loin of Beef, and my Mother a Gammon of Bacon: My Sisters were Sows, which
supplied me with Pork: My Brothers were Calves, which afforded me Veal: My
Godfathers were Peter Pickled-Herring, and Michael Milk-Porredg: My
Godmothers were Susan Salt-butter, and Margery Sous'd-Hog'sFace. Now, Faustus,
thou have heard my Pedigree, will thou invite me to Supper?


Fau. Not I.


Glut. Then the Devil choke thee.


Enter Sloth. Fau. What art thou the Sixth?


Slo. Hey ho! I am Sloth; I was begotten at Church by a sleepy Judge on a
Costermonger's Wife, in the middle of a long Sermon. I am as Lazy as a
Fishmonger in the Dogdays, or a Parson in Lent: I would not speak another Word
for a King's Ransom.


Enter Leachery. Fau. And what are you, Mr. Minks, the Seventh and last?


Leach. I am one that love an Inch of Raw Mutton better than an Ell of Fried
Stock Fish, and the first Letter of my Name begins with Leachery.

[Exit.
Fau. This Sight delights my Soul.

Luc. Faustus, in Hell are all manner of Delights.

Fau. O might I see Hell once, and return safe.

Luc. Faustus, thou shall; give me thy hand.
Hence let us descend, and we will Faustus show
The mighty Pleasures in the World below.

[Vanishes. SCENE* Changes.
Enter Harlequin, and Scaramouche in the Doctor's Gown; a Wand, and a Circle.
Scar. So, now am I in my Pontificalibus: Now can I show my Black Art; for I
have found that heavenly Book which Faustus used to raise the Dead in: Come,
stand within this Circle.


Har. It Is time to Conjure, for I am almost famished. We have fasted like
Priests for a Miracle.


Scar. I Will make thee amends presently; I Will conjure up a Spirit, ask what thou will thou shall have it.


Har. Let me alone for asking.


Scar. Be very earnest with him, and entreat mightily.


Har. I Will entreat Earnestly.


Scar. Silence. Sint mihi Dii Acherontis propitii Nobis Diccatus,
Mephostopholis, etc.


Mephostopholis rises. Meph. How am I tortured by these Villains Charms?
From Constantinople have they brought me now,
Only for Measure of these idle Slaves? What
Would you with Mephostopholis?

Scar. We Would know how Dr. Faustus does.

Meph. Well.

Scar. When comes he home?

Meph. Within Two Days.

Scar. What was he doing when you left him?

Meph. He was at Supper, eating good Cheer.

Har. Good Mr. Devil, tell him we are almost starved* and desire him to send us
some of his good Cheer.


Meph. Is that all?


Har. Some Wine too?


Meph. What else.


Har. What else: Why if Fornication been't against your Commandments, we would
have some live Flesh; a handsome Wench.


Scar. Only for a third Person, and please your Damnat^on.


Meph. You shall have your Desires.


Har. We desire your Mephostopholiship too, not to let us stay the Roasting and
Boiling of any thing: For we are as Eager as the Wine in Smith^ield, and want
no whetting.


Meph. You shall.
Scaramouche and Harlequin pull off their Caps. Now if your mighty Darkness
would please to Retire.

Meph. Farewell.


[Vanish. Scaramouche steps out of the Circle, and str^ts about. Scar. Now how
do you like my Art?


Har. O rare Art! O divine Mr. Doctor Scaramouche! If the Devil be as good as
his Word, I Will owe him a good Turn as long as I live: But I wish our third
Person would come.

A Giant rises. ^^a! What Is here?


Gi. I am sent by Pluto to bear you Company.


Har. Is this his third Person? Or is it Three Generations in One? Come you
from Guild Hall, Sir?


Gi. No, Mortal, from the Stygian Lake. I am the Giant which St. George
destroyed; and in the Earth have been decaying ever since, but now am come to
Eat with you.


Scar. To pick up your Cr^ms, Sir: You Are heartily Welcome.


Scaramouche gets upon Harlequin, and salutes him. Gi. I have lain now within
the Stygian Lake 2000 Years.

Scar. Your Honor is not much shrunk in the Wetting.

Gi. But we loose Time, and Dinner cools.

Har. Where is it?

Gi. In the next Room.

Scar. Will it please your Lustiness to lead the Way?

Har. Will it please you then to make way for him?

Gi. I can divide my self to serve my Friends?
[Giant leaps in two. Breeches be you my Page, and follow me.

Harleq. and Scaram* complement the Breeches. [Exeunt. SCENE draws, and
discovers a Table furnished with Bottles of Wine, and a Venis^n Pasty, a Pot of
wild Fowl, etc. Enter Scaramouche, Giant, and Harlequin. Har. O heavenly
Apparition!

Scar. Come, let us sit down.

The upper part of the Giant slies up, and the under sinks, and discovers a
Woman in the Room. Harlequin and Scaramouche start. Scar. Ha! What Is here, a
Woman?

Har. O happy Change! Madam, with your good Leave.

[Kisses. Scar. Never too late in good Breeding.
[Kisses.] Rare Wench! And us Luscious as Pig-sauc^.

Har. Heaven be praised for all.

[Woman sinks, a Flash of Lightning. Scar. Your unseasonable Thankfulness has
robbed us of our Strumpet.


Har. No matter, no matter; we shall meet her in the Cloisters after the Fair.
Come let us fall too.

[They put their Caps before their Faces. Ha!


Scar. The Table runs away from us.


Har. We'll bestow the Pains to follow it again; this I see is a running
Banquet.


[They put their Caps on again, the Table removes. Scar. I have found the
Secret: We must not say Grace at the Devil's Feast.


Har. Come then let us fall too, San's Ceremony; Will you be Carver?


Scar. Every one for himself, I say.


Har. Ay, every one for himself, and God for us all.


[Table ^^ies up into the Air. Scar. A Plague o'your Proverb; it has a Word
in it must not be named.


Har. Ah, Mr. Doctor, do but entreat Mr. Mephostopholis to let the Table down
to us, or send us tothat, and I Will he his Servant as long as I live.


[They are hoisted up to the Table. Scar. and Har. Oh, oh, oh.

Scar. Now have a care of another Proverb:
We go without our Supper.

Har. Nay, now I know the Devil's Humor, I Will hit him to a Hair: Pray, Mr.
Doctor, cut up that Pasty.


Scar. I cannot get my Knife into it, it is over-bak'd.


Har. Ay, it is often so: God sends Meat, and the Devil sends Cooks.


[Table ^^ies down. Scar. Thou Varlet, do thou see what thy Proverb has done?


Har. Now could I curse my Grandmother, for she taught 'em me: Well, if sweet
Mephostopholis will be so kind as but to let us and the Table come together
again, I Will promise never to say Grace, or speak Proverb more, as long as I
live.


[They are let down to the Table. Scar. Your Prayers are heard, now be careful;
for if I lose my Supper by thy Negligence I Will cut thy Throat.


Har. Do, and eat me when you have do^e. I am damnably hungry; I Will cut open
this Pasty, while you open that Pot of wild Fowl.


[ Harlequin takes off the Lid of the Pasty, and a Stag's Head peeps out; and
out of the Pot of Fowl ^^i^s Birds. Harlequin and Scaramouche ^^art back, sall
over their Chairs, and get up. Har. Here Is the Nest but the Birds are flown:
Here Is Wine though, and now I Will conjure for a Supper. I have a Sallad within
of my own Garhering in the Fields to Day.


Scar. Fetch it in; Bread, Wine, and a Sallad, may serve for a Collation.


Enter Harlequin with a Tray of Sallad. Har. Come, no Ceremony among Friends.
Bon. fro.

Scar. Sallad mal adjuste; here is neither Fat nor Lean.

Har. O Mr. Doctor, neither Fat nor Lean in a Sallad.

Scar. Neither Oil, nor Vinegar.

Har. Oh! I Will fetch you that presently.

[ Harlequin fetches a Chamber Pot of Piss, and a Lamp of oil, and pours on the
Sallad. Scar. O thy Sallad is nothing but Thistles and Netles; and thy Oil
stinks worse than Arse^etito.


Har. Bread and Wine be our Fare. Ha! the Bread's alive.


[Bread stirs. Scar. Or the Devil's in it. Hey! again.

Bread sinks. Har. My Belly's as empty as a Beggar's Purse.

Scar. And mine as full of Wind as a Trumpeter's Cheeks.
[Table sinks, and Flash of Lightning. But since we cannot Eat, let us Drink:
Come, here is Dr. Faustus's Health.


Har. Ay, come; God bless Dr. Faustus.

[Bottles fly up, and the Table sinks. Scar. What all gone: Here Is a Banquet
stole away like a City Feast.


[Musick. Har. Ha! here is Music to delight us.

[Two Chairs rises. Harlequin and Scaramouche sits down, and are caught fast.
Scar. Ha! the Devil. We are locked in.

Har. As fast as a Counter Rat.

Enter several Devils, who black Harlequin and Scaramouche's Faces, and then
squirt Milk upon them. After the Dance they both sink. Scar. and Har. OF o, of
--.

The End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE a Wood.
Mephostopholis and Dr. Faustus. Faust. HOW have I been delighted by thy Art;
and in Twelve Years have seen the utmost Limits of the spacious World; seasted
my self with all Varieties; pleasur'd my Fancy with my Magic Art, and lived
sole Lord over every Thing I wished for.


Meph. Ay, Faustus, is it not a splendid Life?


Faust. It is my Spirit; but prithee now retire, while I repose my self within
this Shade, and when I wake attend on me again.


Meph. Faust, I will.

[Exit.
Faust. What art thou, Faustus, but a Man condemned. Thy Lease of Years expire
apace; and, Faustus, then thou must be Lucifers: Here rest my Soul, and in my
Sleep my future State be buried.


Good and bad Angel descends. Good An. Faustus, sweet Faustus, yet remember
Heaven.
Oh! think upon the everlasting Pain thou must endure,
For all thy short Space of Pleasure.

Bad An. Illusions, Fancies, Faustus; think of Eart^.
The Kings thou shall command: The Pleasutes Rule.
Be, Fa^stus, not a whining, pious Fool.

[Ascend. Enter Horse-cou^ser. Horse. Oh! what a couz'ning Doctor was this: I
riding my Horse into the Water, thinking some hidden mystery had been in 'em,
found my self on a Bundle of Straw, and was dragged by Something in the Water,
like a Bailiff through a Horse-pond. Ha! he is a Sleep: So ho, Mr. Doctor, so
ho. Why Doctor, you couz'ning, wheedling, hypocritical, cheating, cho^sing, Son
of a Whore; awake, rise, and give me my Money again, for your Horse is turned
into a Bottle of Hay. Why Sirrah, Doctor; 's^oot I think he is dead. Why Doctor
Scab; you mangy Dog. [pulls him by the Leg.] 'Zounds I Am undone, I have pulled
his Leg off.


Faust. O help! the Villain has undone me; Murder.


Horse. Murder, or not Murder, now he has but one Leg I Will outrun him.

[Exit.
Faust. Stop, stop him; ha, ha, ha, Faustus has his Leg again, and the
Horse-courser a Bundle of Have for his Forty Dollars. Come, Mephostopholis,
let us now attend the Emperor.


[ Exit Faust* and Meph. Enter Horse-courser, and Cartor, with Pots of Ale.
Cart. Here Is to thee; and now I Will tell thee what I came hither for: You have
heard of a Conjurer they call Doctor Faustus.


Horse. Heard of him, a Plague take him, I have Cause to know him; has he played
any Pranks* with you?


Cart. I Will tell thee, as I was going to the Market a while ago, with a Load of
Hay, he met me, and asked me, What he should give me for as much Hay as his
Horse would Eat: Now, Sir, I thinking that a little would serve his Turn, bad
him take as much as he would for Three Farthings.


Horse. So.


Cart. So he presently gave me Money, and fell to Eating: And as I Am a cursen
Man, he never left Yeating and Yeating, 'till he had eaten up my whole Load of
Hay.


Horse. Now you shall hear how he served me: I went to him Yesterday to buy a
Horse of him, which I did; and he bad me be sure not to ride him into the Water.


Cart. Good.


Horse. Ad's Wounds 'twas Bad, as you shall hear: For I thinking the Horse had
some rare Quality, that he would not have me know, what do me I but rides him
in the Water; and when I came just in the midst of the River, I found my self a
Straddle on a Bottle of Hay.


Cart. O rare Doctor!


Horse. But you shall hear how I served him bravely for it; for finding him a
Sleep just now in a By-Field, I whoop'd and hollowed in his Ears, but could not
wake him; so I took hold of his Leg, and never left pulling till I had pulled
it quite off.


Cart. And has the Doctor but one Leg then? That Is Rare. But come, this is his
House, let us in and see for our Money; look you, we'll pay as we come back.


Horse. Done, done; and when we have got our Money let us laugh at his one Leg:
Ha, ha, ha.


[Exeunt Laughing. Enter Hostess. Host. What have the Rogues le^t my Pots, and
run away, without paying their Reckoning? I Will after 'em, cheating Villains,
Rogues, Cut-purses; rob a poor Woman, cheat the Spittle, and rob the King of
his Excise; a parcel of Rustic, Clownish, Pedantical, High-shoo'd,
Plow-jobbing, Cart-driving, Pinch-back'd, Paralytick, Fumbling, Grumbling,
Bellowing, Yellowing, Peas-picking, Stinking, Mangy, Runagate, Ill-begotten,
Ill-contriv'd, Wry-mouthed, Spatrifying, Dung^^ill-raking, Costive, Snorting,
Sweaty, Farting, Whaw^rover Dogs.

[Exit.
Enter Faustus. Faust. My Time draws near, and 20 Years are past: I have but
Four poor Twelve Months for my Life, and then I am damned for ever.


Enter an Old Man. Old M. O gentle Faustus, leave this damned Art; this Magic,
that will charm thy Soul to Hell, and quite bereave thee of Salvation: Though
thou have now offended like a Man, do not, oh! do not persist in it like a
Devil. It may be this my Exhortation seems harsh, and all unpleasant; let it
not, for, gentle Son, I speak in tender Love and Pity of thy future Misery; and
so have hope that this my kind Rebuke, checking thy Body, may preserve thy Soul.


Faust. Where art thou, Faustus? Wretch, what have thou done? O Friend, I feel
thy Words to comfort my distressed Soul; retire, and let me ponder on my Sins.


Old M. Faustus, I leave thee, but with grief of Heart,
Fearing thy Enemy will near depart.
[Exit.
Enter Mephostopholis Meph. Thou Traitor, I arrest thee for Disobedience to thy
Sovereign Lord; revolt, or I Will in piecemeal tear thy Flesh.


Faust. I do repent I ever offended him; torment, sweet Friend, that old Man
that durst dissuade me from thy Lucifer.


Meph. His Faith is great, I cannot touch his Soul; but What I can afflict his
Body with I will.


Enter Horse-courser and Carter. Horse. We are come to drink a Health to your
wooden Leg.


Faust. My wooden Leg; what do thou mean, Friend?


Horse. Ha, ^a! he has forgot his Leg.


Cart. P^ha, it is not a Leg he stands upon. Pray, let me ask you one Question;
Are both your Legs Bed-fellows?


Faust. Why do thou ask?


Cart. Because I believe you have a good Companion of one.


Horse. Why, don't you remember I pulled off one o'your Legs when you were a
Sleep?


Faust. But I have it again now I am awake.


Cart. Ad's Wounds, had the Doctor three Legs! --. You, Sir, don't you remember
you gave a Penny for as much Hay as your Horse would eat, and then eat up my
whole Load.


Horse. Look you, Mr. Doctor, you must not carry it off so; I come to have the
Money again I gave for the Ho-o-o-


[Faustus waves his Wand. Cart. And I come to be paid for my Load of Ha-a-a.


Enter Hostess. H^st. O Mr. Doctor! do you harbor Rogues that bilk poor ^olks,
and wont pay their Reck'nings? Who must pay me for my A-a-a-a


[Waves again. Enter Scaramouche. Scar. Mr. Doctor, I cannot be quiet for your
Devil Mr. Me-o-o --


[Waves again. [Exeunt Faustus and Mephostopholis. They all stare at one
another, and so go o^^, crying O, o, o, o- to the Emperor's Palace. Enter
Emperor, Faustus, Gent. G^ards. Benoolio above. Emp. Wonder of Men, thrice
Learned Faustus, Renowned Magician, welcome to our Court; and as thou late
did promise us, I would behold the Famous Alexander fighting with his great
Rival Dari^s, in their true Shapes, and State Majestical.


Faust. Your Majesty shall see 'em presently.


Ben. It thou bring'st Alexander, or Dari^s here, I Will be content to be
Act^^on, and turn my self to a Stag.


Faust. And I Will play Diana, and send you the Horns presently.


Enter Dari^s and Alexander; they Fight: Dari^s falls. Alexander takes his
Crown, and puts it on his Head. [Exit. Dari^is sinks. Faust. Away, be gone; see,
my Gracious Lord, what Beast is that that thru^ts his Head out of yo^' Window.


Emp. O wondrous Sight! see tow Horns on young Benoolio's Head; call him, Lords.


Lord. What, ho! Benoolio.

Ben. A Plague upon you, set me Sleep.

Lord. Look up, Benoolio, it is the Emperor calls.

Ben. The Emperor; O my Head.

Faust. And thy Horns hold, it is no matter for thy Head.

Ben. Doctor, this is your Villainy.

Faust. O say not so, Sir; the Doctor has no Skill, if he bring Alexander or
Dari^s here you will be Act^^on, and turn to a Stag: Therefore, if it please your
Majesty, I Will bring a Kennel of Hounds to hunt him. Ho! Helmot, Argi^on,
As^erot.


Ben. Hold, he will raise a Kennel of Devils. Good, my Lord, entreat.


Emp. Prithee remove his Horns, he has done Penance enough.


Faust. Away; and remember hereafter you speak well of Scholars.


Ben. If Scholars be such Cuckolds to put Horns upon honest Men's Heads, I Will
never trust Smooth-face and Small-band more: But if I been't revenged, may I be
turned to a Gaping Oyster, and drink nothing but Salt Water.


Emp. Come, Faustus, in recompense of this high Desert, Thou shall command the
State of Germany, and live beloved of mighty Carol^s.


[Exeunt omnes. SCENE a Garden.
Lord. Nay, sweet Benoolio, let us sway thy Thoughts from* this Attempt against
the Conjurer.


Ben. My Head is lighter, than it was by the Horns:
And yet my Heart's more ponderous than my Head,
And pants, until I see the Conjurer dead.

2 Lord. Consider.

Ben. Away dissuade me not he comes:
[Dra^s. Enter Faustus with a false Head. Now Sword ^trike home*
For Horns he gave, I Will have his Head anon.

Runs Faustus through, he falls. (...). Oh, (...)

(...)
(...) his Head off. Lord. (...)

Ben. First, on this Scull, in qu^ttance of my Wrongs, I Will na^l huge ^orked
Horns within the Window where he yoked me first, that all the World may see my
just Revenge; and thus having settled his Head --


Faust. What shall the Body do, Gentlemen.

Ben. The Devil's alive again?

Lord. Give the Devil his Head again.

Faust. Nay, keep it; Faustus will have Heads and Hands:
I call your Hearts to recompense this Deed.
Ho; Asteroth, Belin^oth, Mephostopholis.
Enter Devils, and Horse 'em upon others. Go Horse these Traitors on your fiery
Backs.
Drag 'em through Dir^ and Mud, through Thorns and Briers.

Lord. Pity us, gentle Faustus, save our Lives.

Faust. Away.

Ben. He must needs go whom the Devil drives.

[Sp^rits ^ly away. Exit Faustus. SCENE a Hall.
Enter Harlequin in a Beggar's Hebit. Harl. I find this Scaramouche is a
Villain; he has left the Doctor, and is come to be Steward to a rich Widow,
whose Husband dyed Yesterday, and here he is coming to give the Poor their
Doles, of which I Will have my Share.


Scaramouche, and poor People, with a Basket of Bread and Mon^y. Scar. Come
hither, poor Devils; stand in Order, and be Damned. I come to distribute what
your deceased good Master has bequeathed.


[They all s^are at Scar. H^rl. God bless you, Mr. Steward.


Scar. Let me tell you, Gentlemen, he was as good a Man as ever piss't, or
cried Stand on the Highway.

[ Scaramouche takes out a Loaf and a Shilli^g, ^olds it out, and Harlequin
takes it. He spent a good Estate, it is true; but he was no Body's ^oe but his
own. I never left him while he was worth a Groat, [Again.] He would now and
then C^r^e in (...) Passion, and give a Soul to the Devil, or ^o; yet, what of
that? He always paid his Club, and no Man can say he owes this. [Again.] He had
a col^'s Tooth, and over-laid one of his Maids; yet, what of that? All Flesh is
^rail. [Again.] It Is thought that her Body workt him off on his Legs; why, what
of that? his Legs were his own, and his Arse never hung in your Light. [Again.]
Sometimes, you will say, he would rap out an Oath; what then, Words are but Wind,
and he meant no more harm than a sucking Pig does by squeaking. [Again.] Now
let us consider his good Deeds; he brewed a Firkin of strong Drink for the poor
every Year, and killed an old Ram every Easter: The Meat that was stale, and
his Drink that was sour, was always yours. [Again.] He allowed you in Harvest
to ^lean after his Rake. [Again.] And now, at his Death, has given you all this.


[Again. Scar. So, setting the Here Is Head against the ^oose Giblets, he was a
good Hospitable Man; and much good may do you with what you had.


Poor. I have had nothing.


2 Poor. Nor I^


3 Po. Nor I.


4. Po. Nor. I.


Scar. Nothing.


All. Nothing, nothing.


Scar. Nothing, nothing; you lying Rogues, then there is something for you.


[Beats 'em all off. Enter Harlequin in a Cloak, l^^ghing. Har. So now I am
Victual'd, I may hold our Siege against Hunger.

[A Noise within; this way, this way. Ha! they are hunting a after me, and will
kill me. Let me see, I will take this Gi^bet for my Preserver, and with this
long Cloak make as if I were hanged. Now when they find a Man hanged, not
knowing me in this Disguise, they will look no farther after me, but think the
Thie^^s hanged. -- I hear '^m coming.


[Throws himself off the Ladder. Enter Scaramouche. Scar. Ha! what is here, a
Man hanged? But what Paper is this is his Hand?

Whilst Scaramouche reads, Harlequin puts the Rope over him. I have cheated
the Poor of their Money, and took the Bread out of their Mouths, for which I was
much troubled in Conscience, fell into Despair, and, as you see, hanged my self.

[Pulls him up, and runs out. O the Devil! Murder, murder!


Enter Poor. Poor. O Neighbors, here hangs the Rogue.


Scar. Help me down?


Poor. No, you are very well as you are.


Scar. Don't you know me?


Poor. Ay, for a Rogue; even finish your Work, and save the Hangman a Labor.
Yet, now I think on it, self-murder is a crying Sin, and may damn his Soul.
Come, Neighbors, we'll take him down, and have him hanged according to Law.


[When ^e's down he trips up their ^^^s, and r^ns out, they after him. All.
Stop Thief, stop Thief.


Thunder and Lightning; Luci^er, Beelzebub, and Mephostopholis. Luc. Thus from
the infernal Dis do we ase^nd, bringing with us the Deed; the Time is come
which makes it forfeit.


Enter Faustus, an old Man, and a Scholar. Old M. Yet, Faustus, call on Heaven.


Faust. O^! it is too late; behold, they lock my Hands.


Old M. Who, Faustus?


Faust. Luci^er and Mephos^opholis; I gave 'em my Soul for Four and twenty
Years.


Old M. Heaven ^orbid.


Fau. Ay, Heaven forbad it indeed, but Faustus has done it; for the vain
Pleasure of Four and twenty Years* Faustus has lost eternal Joy and Felicity: I
writ 'em a Bill with my own Blood, the Date is expired; this is the Time, and
they are come to ^etch me.


Old M. Why would not Faustus tell me of that before?


Faust. I often in^ended it, but the Devil threat'ned to tear me in Pieces. O
Friend, retire and save your self.


Old M. I Will into the next Room, and their pray for thee.


Faust. Ay, pray for me; and what Noise soever you hear stir not, for nothing
can rescue me.


Old M. Pray thou, and I Will pray. Adie^.


Faust. If I live till Morning I Will visit you; if not, (...) is go^ to Hell.


[Ex^unt old Man and Scholar. Meph. Ay, Faustus, now thou have no hopes on
Heaven.


Faust. O thou bewitching Fi^nd; 'twas thou, and thy Temptations, has robbed me
of eternal Happiness.


Meph. I do confess it, Faustus, and rejoice.
What weep'st thou, it is too late; hark to thy knell:
Fools that will Laugh on Earth, must Weep in Hell.
Ext.
Good and bad Angel descend. Good An. O Faustus, if thou had given Ear to me,
Innumerable Joys had followed thee:
But thou did love the World.

Bad An. Gave Ear to me, and now must taste Hell's Pains perpetual.


Throne of H^aven appears. Good An. Had thou a^^ected sweet Divinity,
Hell, nor the Devil, had no Power on thee.
Had thou kept on that way, Faustus, behold in what resplended
Glory thou had sat; that have thou Lost.
And now, poor Soul, must thy good Angel leave:
The Jaws of H^ll are ready to receive thee.

[Ascend. H^ll is discovered. Bad An. Now, Faustus, let thy Eyes with Horror
stare
Into that Vast perpetual torturing House.

Faust. O I have seen enough to torture me.

Bad An. Nay thou must feel 'em, 'taste the Smart of all.
He that loves Pleasure must for Pleasure ^all:
And so I leave thee, Faustus, till anon.
Thou Wilt ^umble into Confusion.

[Descends. The Clock strikes Eleven. Faust. Now, Faustus, have thou but one
bear Hour to Live,
And then thou must be Damned perpetually:
Stand still you ever-moving Spheres of Heaven,
That Time may cease, and Midnight never come.
Or le^ this Hour be but a Year, a Mon^h, a Week, a natural Day; that Faustus
may repent, and save his Soul. Mountains and Hills come, come, and ^all on me,
and hi^e me from the heavy Wrath of Heaven. Gape E^rth; Oh no, it will not
harbor me.

[The Cl^^k strikes. Oh! half the Hour is past; 'twill all be past a^o^. Oh! if
my Soul must suffer for my Sin, impose some end to my incessant Pain. Let
Faustus live in Hell a Thousand Years, an Hundred thousand, and at last be
saved. [Strikes Twelve. No End is limited to damned Souls: It strikes, it
strikes. Now, Body, turn to Air, to Earth, or Water. Oh! avoid the Fire: They
come. Oh! mercy, Heaven; ugly Hell gape not. Come not Lu^ifer; O Mephostopholis.


[Sink with Devils. Thunder. Enter old Man and Scholar. Old M. Come, Friend,
let us visit Faustus: For such a dreadful Night was never seen.


Scene discovers Faust^s's Limbs. Schol. O help us, Heaven; see here are
Faustus's Limbs,
All torn asunder by the Hand of Hell.

Old M. May this a fair Example be to all,
To avoid such Ways which brought poor Faustus's Fall.
And whatsoever Pleasure does invite,
Sell not your Souls to purchase vain Delight.

[Exeunt. Scene changes to Hell. Faustus Limbs come together. A Dance, and
Song. FINIS.

