Mechanic Dyalling: TEACHING Any Man, though of an Ordinary Capacity and
unlearned in the Mathematics, to draw a True SUN-DYAL On any Given Plane,
However situated: Only with the help of a straight RVLER and a pair of
COMPASSES; And without any Arithmetical Calculation.

By Joseph Moxon, Hydrographer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.

LONDON. Printed for Joseph Moxon on Ludgate Hill, at the Sign of Atlas.
MDCLXVIII

MECHANIC DYALLING.
Description of Dyalling.
DYalling originally is a Mathematical Science, attained by the Philosophical
contemplation of the motion of the Sun, the motion of the Shadow, the
Constitution of the Sphere, the Situation of Planes, and the consideration of
Lines.

Explanation.
THE motion of the Sun is regular, it moving equal Space in equal Time; But the
motion of the Shadow irregular in all parts of the Earth, unless under the two
Poles, and that more or less according to the Constitution of the Sphere and
situation of the Plane. And therefore Scientifick Dyalists by the Geometrick
considerations of Lines, have found out Rules to mark out the irregular motion
of the Shadow in all Latitudes, and on all Planes, to comply with the regular
motion of the Sun. And these Rules of adjusting the motion of the Shadow to
the motion of the Sun may be called Scientifick Dyalling.

But though we may justly account Dyalling originally a Science, yet such has
been the Generosity of many of its studious Contemplators, that they have
communicated their acquired Rules; whereby it is now become to many of the
Ingenious no more difficult than an Art, and by many late Authors so entitled:
Nay more, by this small Treatise it will scarce be accounted more than a Manual
Operation; for, though (hitherto) all the Authors I have met with seem to
presuppose their Reader to understand Geometry, and the projecting of the
Sphere already, or else endeavor in their Works to make him understand them,
as if they were absolutely necessary to be known by every one that would make a
Dyal, when as in truth (the contemplative pains of others aforesaid considered)
they are not; but indeed are only useful to those that would know the reason of
Dyalling. Thus they do not only discourage young beginners, but also disappoint
many Gentlemen and others that would willingly either make them themselves, or
set their Workmen about them, if they knew how to make them.

This little Piece I have therefore composed for the help of those who
understand neither the Projection of the Sphere, or Geometrical Operations:
Only, if they know how to draw a straight Line between two Points by the side
of a Ruler, describe a Circle with a pair of Compasses, erect a Perpendicular,
and draw one Line parallel to another, they may know how to draw a Dyal for any
given Plane, however situated in any Latitude.

But perhaps these two last little Tricks are not known to all new beginners,
therefore I shall show them. First,

How to erect a Perpendicular. For Example, in Fig. 1.
Upon the Line AB you would erect a Perpendicular to the Point C: Place one
Foot of your Compasses upon the point C, and open the other to what distance
you please; For Example, to the point A, make there a mark; then keeping the
first Foot still in C, turn the other Foot toward B, and make there another
mark; then open your Compasses wider, suppose to the length AB, and placing one
Foot in the point A, with the other Foot describe a small Arch over the point
C, and removing the Foot of your Compasses to the point B, with the other Foot
describe another small Arch, to cut the first Arch, as at D. Then lay your
straight Ruler to the point where the two small Arches cut each other, and upon
the point C, and by the side of the Ruler draw the Line CD, which shall be a
Perpendicular to the Line AB.

Another way with once opening the Compasses, as by Fig. 2.
Draw the Line AB, and place one Foot of your Compasses upon the point you
would have the Perpendicular erected, as at the point C, and with the other
foot describe the Semicircle A ab B, then placing one Foot in B, extend the
other Foot to b, in the Semicircle; and keeping that Foot in b, extend the
other Foot to D, and make there a small Arch: Then remove one Foot of your
Compasses to A, and extend the other Foot to a in the Semicircle, and keeping
that Foot in a, extend the other to D, and make there another small Arch, to
cut the first small Arch; and laying a straight Ruler to the point where these
two small Arches cut each other, and upon the point C, draw by the side of the
Ruler the Line CD, which shall be Perpendicular to the Line AB.

To erect a Perpendicular upon the end of a Line, as by Fig. 3.
On the point B, at one end of the Line AB, place one Foot of your Compasses in
the point B, and extend the other on the Line toward A, as to b, and with it
describe the Arch ba C; then placing one Foot in b, extend the other to a in
the Arch, and make there a mark; Divide with your Compasses the Arch ba into
two equal parts, and keeping the Feet of your Compasses at that distance,
measure in the Arch from a to C, then draw a straight Line from the point C to
the end of the Line B, and that straight Line shall be Perpendicular to the end
of the Line AB.

To draw a Line Parallel to another Line, as by Fig. 4.
Example. If you would draw a Line Parallel to the Line AB, open your Compasses
to the distance you intend the Lines shall stand off each other, and placing
one Foot successively near each end, describe with the other Foot the small
Arches CD; lay a straight Ruler to the top of these Arches, and draw a Line by
the side of it, and that Line shall be Parallel to the Line AB.

Definitions.
A Dyal Plane is that Flat whereon a Dyal is intended to be projected.

Of Dyal Planes some be Direct, other Decliners, others Oblique.

Of Direct Planes there are five sorts: 1. The Horizontal whose Plane lies
flat, and is parallel to the Horizon, beholding the Zenith. 2. The South Erect,
whose Plane stands upright, and directly beholds the South. 3. The North Erect,
whose Plane stands upright, and directly beholds the North. 4. The East Erect,
whose Plane stands upright, and directly beholds the East. 5. The West Erect,
whose Plane stands upright, and directly beholds the West.


Of Decliners there are infinite: and yet may be reduced into these two Kinds:
1. The South Erect Plane, declining more or less toward the East or West. 2.
The North Erect Plane, declining more or less toward the East or West.


Of Oblique Planes some are Direct, others Declining; and are of four sorts: 1.
Direct Inclining Planes, which lean toward you, and lie directly in the East,
West, North, or South quarters of Heaven. 2. Direct Reclining Planes, which
lean from you, and lie directly in the East, West, North, or South quarters of
Heaven. 3. Inclining Declining Planes, which lean toward you, but lie not
directly in the East, West, North, or South quarters of Heaven: But decline
more or less from the North or South, toward the East or West. 4. Reclining
Declining Planes, which lean from you, but lie not directly in the East, West,
North, or South quarters of Heaven: But Decline more or less from the North or
South, toward the East or West.


If the Situation of the Plane be not given, you must seek it: For, there are
several ways how to know these several kinds of Planes used among Artists; But
the readiest and easiest is by an Instrument called a Declinatory, fitted to
the variation of your Place: And if it be truly made, you may as safely rely
upon it as any other.

OPERATION I. The Description of the Clinatory.
THE Clinatory is made of a square Board, as ABCD, of a good thickness;, and
the larger the better; between two of the side is described on the Center Aa
Quadrant as OF divided into 90 equal parts or degrees, which are figured with
10, 20, 30, to 90; and then back again with the Complements of the same numbers
to 90: between the Limb and the two Semi-diameters is made a round Box, into
which a Magnetical Needle is fitted; and a Card of the Nautical Compass,
divided into four Nineties, beginning their numbers at the East, West, North,
and South points of the Compass, from which points the opposite sides of the
Clinatory receives their Names of East, West, North and South.

But, Note, that the North point of the Card must be placed so many degrees
toward the East or West sides of the Clinatory as the Needle varies from the
true North point of the world, in the place where you make your Dyal; which
your Workman that makes your Clinatory will know how to fit.

Upon the Center A, whereon the Quadrant was described, is fastened a
Plumb-line, having a Plumbet of Lead or Brass fastened to the end of it, which
Plumb-line is of such length that the Plumbet may fall just into the Grove GH,
below the Quadrant, which is for that purpose made of such a depth that the
Plumbet may ride freely within it, without stopping at the sides of it. See the
Figure annexed.



With this Clinatory you may examine the situation of Planes. As if your Plane
be Horizontal, it is direct: and then for the true scituating your Dyal you
have only the true North and South Line to find: which is done only by setting
the Clinatory flat down upon the Plane, and turning it toward the right or
left hand, till you can bring the North point of the Needle to hang just over
the Flower-de-luce, for then if you draw a Line by either of the sides parallel
to the Needle, that Line shall be a North and South Line.

If Your Plane either Recline or Incline, Apply one of the sides of your
Clinatory parallel to one of the Semi-diameters of the Quadrant to the Plane,
in such sort that the Plumb-line hanging at liberty, may fall upon the
Circumference of the Quadrant, for then the number of degrees of the Quadrant
comprehended between the side of the Quadrant parallel to the Plane, and the
Plumb-line shall be the number of degrees for Reclination, if the Center of the
Quadrant points upwards; or Inclination, if the Center points downwards.

If your Reclining or Inclining Plane Decline, Draw upon it a Line parallel to
the Horizon, which you may do by applying the backside of the Clinatory, and
raising or depressing the Center of the Quadrant, till the Plumb-line hang just
upon one of the Semi-diameters, for then you may by the upper side of the
Clinatory draw an Horizontal Line if the Plane Incline, or by the under side if
it Recline. If it neither Incline or Recline, you may draw a Horizontal Line
both by the upper and under sides of the Clinatory. Having drawn the Horizontal
Line, apply the North side of the Clinatory to it, and if the North end of the
Needle points directly toward the Plane, it is then a South Plane. If the
North point of the Needle points directly from the Plane, it is a North Plane:
but if it points toward the East, it is an East Plane: if toward the West, a
West Plane. If it do not point directly either East, West, North, or South,
then so many degrees as the Needle declines from any of these four points to
any of the other of these four points, so many degrees is the Declination of
the Plane.

You may find a Meridian Line another way; thus, If the Sun shine just at Noon,
hold up a Plumb-line so as the shadow of it may fall upon your Plane, and that
shadow shall be a Meridian Line.

OPERAT. II. To describe a Dyal upon a Horizontal Plane.
FIrst draw a North and South Line (which is called a Meridian Line) through
the middle of the Plane: Thus, Set your Declinatory flat upon the Plane, and
turn it to and fro till the Needle hang precisely over the Meridian Line of the
Declinatory; then by the side of the Declinatory parallel to its Meridian Line,
draw a straight Line on the Plane, and if that straight Line be in the middle
of the Plane, it shall be the Meridian Line, without more ado: But if it be not
in the middle of the Plane, you must draw a Line parallel to it through the
middle of the Plane for the Meridian Line, or twelve a Clock line: And it shall
be the Meridian Line, and also be the Substilar Line; then draw another
straight Line through the middle of this Line, to cut it at right Angles for
the VI. a Clock Lines; and where these two Lines cut one another make your
Center, whereon describe a Circle on your Plane as large as you can, which by
the Meridian Line, and the Line drawn at right. Angles with it will be divided
into four Quadrants; one of the Quadrants devide into 90 degrees thus, Keeping
your Compasses at the same width they were at when you described the Quadrant,
place one Foot in the twelve a Clock Line, and extend the other in the
Quadrant, and make in the Quadrant a mark with it; so shall you have the
sixtieth degree marked out: then place one Foot of your Compasses in the six a
Clock Line, and extend the other in the Quadrant, and make in the Quadrant
another mark with it; so shall that Quadrant be divided into three equal parts;
each of these three equal parts contains 30 degrees: Then with your Compasses
devide one of these three equal parts into three parts, and transfer that
distance to the other two third parts of the Quadrant, so shall the whole
Quadrant be divided into nine equal parts. Then devide one of these nine equal
parts into two equal parts, and transfer that distance to the other eight equal
parts, so shall the Quadrant be divided into eighteen equal parts. Then devide
one of these eighteen equal parts into five equal parts, and transfer that
distance to the other seventeen equal parts, so shall the whole Quadrant be
divided into 90 equal parts. Each of these 90 equal parts are called Degrees.

Note, That you may in small Quadrants devide truer and with less trouble with
Steel Deviders, (which open or close with a Screw for that purpose,) than you
can with Compasses.

In this Quadrant (thus divided) count from the Substilar or Meridian Line the
Elevation of the Pole, that is, the number of Degrees that the Pole of the
World is elevated above the Horizon of your Place, and draw a Line from the
Center through that number of Degrees for the Stilar Line. Then on the
Substilar Line choose a point (where you please) and through that point draw a
Line at right Angles to the Substilar Line as long as you can, for the Line of
Contingence, and from that point in the Substilar Line measure the nearest
distance any part of the Stilar Line has to that point; and keeping one Foot
of your Compasses still in that point, set off that distance in the Substilar
Line, and at that distance describe against the Line of Contingence a
Semicircle, which devide from either side the Meridian or Substilar Line into
six equal parts thus; Draw a Line through the Center of this Semicircle
parallel to the Line of Contingence, which shall be the Diametral Line, and
shall devide this Semi Circle-into two Quadrants; one on one side the Substilar
Line, and the other Quadrant on the other side the Substilar Line: Then keeping
your Compasses at the same distance they were at when you described the
Semicircle, place one Foot first on one side the Diametral Line at the
Intersection of it and the Semicircle, and then on the other side, at the
Intersection of it and the Semicircle, and extend the other in the
Semicircle, and make marks in the Semicircle on either side the Substilar
Line: Then place one Foot of your Compasses at the Intersection of the
Semicircle and the Substilar Line, and turn the other Foot about on either
side the Semicircle and make marks in the Semicircle, so shall the
Semicircle be divided into six equal parts: Devide one of these equal parts
into two equal parts, and transfer that distance to the other five equal parts,
so shall the whole Semicircle be divided into twelve equal parts. These twelve
Devisions are to describe the twelve Hours of the Day, between six a Clock in
the Morning, and six a Clock at Night.

If you will have half Hours you may devide each of these twelve into two equal
parts, as before: If you will have Quarters you may devide each of these twenty
four into two equal parts more, as before.

For thus proportioning the Devisions in the Semicircle, you may proportion
the Devisions and Subdevisions of Hours upon the Dyal Plane; for a straight
Ruler laid upon each of these Devisions, and on the Center of this Semicircle,
shall show on the Line of Contingence the several Distances of all the Hours
and parts of Hours on the Dyal Plane: And straight Lines drawn from the Center
of the Dyal Plane, through the several Devisions on the Line of Contingence
shall be the several Hour Lines and parts on the Dyal Plane.

But an Horizontal Dyal in our Latitude will admit of four Hours more, viz. V,
IV, in the Morning, and VII, VIII, in the Evening. Therefore in the Circle
described on the Center of the Dyal Plane transfer the distance between VI and
V, and VI and IV, on the other side the six a Clock Line; And transfer the
Distances between VI and VII, and VI and VIII on the other side the opposite
six a Clock Hour Line, and from the Center of the Dyal Plane draw Lines through
those transferred Distances for the Hour Lines before and after VI.

Then mark your Hour Lines with their respective numbers. The Substiler Line in
this Dyal (as aforesaid) is XII, from thence toward the right hand mark every
successive Hour Line with I, II, III, etc. and from XII toward the left hand
with XI, X, IX, etc.

The Style must be erected perpendicularly over the Substilar Line, so as to
make an Angle with the Dyal Plane equal to the Elevation of the Pole of your
Place.

Example.
You would draw a Dyal upon a Horizontal Plane here at London; First draw the
Meridian (or North and South Line) as XII B, and cross it in the middle with
another Line at right Angles, as VI, VI, which is an East and West Line; where
these two Lines cut each other as at A, make the Center, whereon describe the
Semicircle B, VI.VI; but one of the Quadrants, viz. the Quadrant from XII to
VI, toward the right hand you must devide into 90 equal parts (as you were
taught in Fol. 12.) and at 51 degrees (which is Londons Latitude) make a mark,
and laying a straight Ruler to the Center of the Plane, and to this mark draw a
Line by the side of it for the Stiler Line. Then on the Substilar Line choose a
point as at C, and through that point draw a Line as long as you can
perpendicular to the East and West Line VI, VI, as OF, (which is called the
Contingent Line,) where this Contingent Line cuts the Substilar Line place one
Foot of your Compasses, and from thence measure the shortest distance between
the point C and the Stilar Line. And keeping one Foot of your Compasses still
in the point C, set off the shortest distance between the point C and the
Stilar Line on the Substilar Line, as at D; which point D shall be a Center,
whereon with your Compasses at the same width you must describe a Semicircle
to represent a Semicircle of the Equinoctial. This Semicircle devide into six
equal parts (as you were taught Fol. 13.) to each of which equal parts, and to
the Center of the Equinoctial Semicircle lay a straight Ruler, and where the
straight Ruler cuts the Line of Contingence make marks in the Line of
Contingence. Then lay the straight Ruler to the Semicircle of the Dyal Plane,
and to each of the marks in the Line of Contingence, and by the side of it draw
twelve straight Lines for the twelve Fore and Afternoon Hour Lines, viz. from
VI in the Morning to VI in the Evening. Then in the Quadrant VI B, measure the
distance between the VI a Clock Hour Line, and the V a Clock Hour Line, and
transfer the same distances from the VI a Clock Line to VII, and V on both
sides the VI a Clock Hour Lines, and through those distances draw from the
Center of the Plane the VII and V a Clock Hour Lines, and measure the distance
between the VI a Clock Hour Line and the IV a Clock Hour Line, and transfer the
same distance from the VI a Clock Line to VIII and IV, and through those
distances draw from the Center of the Plane the VIII a Clock and IV a Clock
Hour Lines.



If you will have the half Hours and quarter Hours, or any other devision of
hours, you must devide each six devisions of the Equinoctial into so many parts
as you intend, and by a straight Ruler laid to the Center of the Equinoctial,
and those devisions in the Equinoctial Circle make marks in the Line of
Contingence, as you did before for the whole Hour Lines; and Lines drawn from
the Center of the Plane through those marks shall be the sub-devisions of the
Hours: But you must remember to make all sub-devisions short Lines, and near
the verge of the Dyal Plane, that you may the easier distinguish between the
whole Hours and the parts of Hours; as you may see in the Figure.

Having drawn the Hour Lines, set the number of each Hour Line under it, as you
see in the Figure.

Last of all sit a Triangular Iron, whose angular point being laid to the
Center of the Dyal Plane, one side must agree with the Substilar Line, and its
other side with the Stilar Line; so is the Style made. And this Style you must
erect perpendicularly over the Substilar Line on the Dyal Plane, and there fix
it. Then is your Dyal finished.

OPERAT. III. To describe an Erect Direct South Dyal.
YOU may know an Erect Direct South Plane by applying the North side of the
Declinatory to it; For then if the North end of the Needle hang directly over
the North point of the Card in the bottom of the Box, it is a South Plane; but
if it hang not directly over the North point of the Card, it is not a Direct
South Plane, but Declines either East or West, and that contrary to the
pointing of the Needle Easterly or Westerly from the North point of the Card:
for if the North point of the Needle points Easterly, the Plane Declines from
the South toward the West: if it point Westerly, the Plane Declines from the
South toward the East.

You may know if the Plane be truly Erect or upright, by applying one of the
sides AB or AD to it; for then by holding the Center A upwards, so as the
Plumb-line play free in the Grove, if the Line falls upon 0, or 90, the Plane
is upright; but if it hang upon any of the intermediate Degrees, it is not
upright, but Inclines or Reclines.

If you find it Incline, apply the side AB to it, and see what number of
Degrees the Plumb-line falls on, for that number of Degrees counted from the
side AB, is the number of Degrees of Inclination.

If you find the Plane Reclines, apply the side AD to it, and see what number
of Degrees the Plumb-line falls on, for that number of Degrees counted from the
side AD is the number of Degrees of Reclination.

These Rules being well understood, may serve you to find the situation of all
other sorts of Planes.

But for the making a Dyal on this Plane, you must first draw a Meridian Line
through the middle of the Plane, by applying a Plumb-line to the middle of it,
till the Plumbet hang quietly before it: for then if the Plumb-line be black't
(for a white Ground, or chalked for a dark Ground) and strained as Carpenters
do their Lines, you may with one stroke of the string on the Plane describe the
Meridian Line, as A XII: This Meridian is also the Substilar Line.



Then on the top of this Meridian Line, as at A, draw another Line athwart it
to cut it at right Angles, as VI, VI, for an East and West Line. At the meeting
of these two Lines on the top, make your Center, whereon describe a Semicircle
on your Plane, as large as you can, which by the Meridian Line and the East and
West Line will be divided into two Quadrants. One of these Quadrants devide
into 90 Degrees (as you were taught Fol. 12.) and from the Substilar Line count
the Complement of the Poles Elevation, which (here at London where the Pole is
elevated 51 Degrees, its Complement to 90) is 38 Degrees, and make there a
mark, as at E. Then on the Substilar Line choose a point (where you please) as
at F, for the Line of Contingence to pass through: which Line of Contingence
draw as long as you can, so as it may cut the Substilar Line at right Angles,
and from the point F in the Substilar Line measure the shortest distance
between it and the Stilar Line, and keeping one Foot of your Compasses still in
the point F, transfer that distance into the Substilar Line, as at G; then on
the point G describe a Semicircle of the Equinoctial against the Line of
Contingence, which Semicircle devide into twelve equal parts, (as you were
taught by the Example in the Horizontal Dyal, Fol. 13.) and by a straight Ruler
laid to each of these Devisions, and to the Center of the Semicircle make
marks in the Line of Contingence by the side of the Ruler: For straight Lines
drawn from the Center of the Dyal Plane through these marks in the Contingent
Line shall be the 12 Hour Lines before and after Noon.

Then mark your Hour Lines with their respective Numbers: The Substilar or
Meridian Line is XII, from thence toward the right hand with I, II, III, etc.
and from thence toward the left hand with XI, X, IX, etc.

The Style must be erected perpendicularly over the Substilar Line, so as to
make an Angle with the Dyal Plane equal to the Complement of the Poles
Elevation, viz. 38 Degrees.

OPERAT. IV. To make an Erect Direct North Dyal.
THE Erect Direct North Dyal, Style and all, is made by the same Rules,
changing upwards for downwards, and the left side for the right, the Erect
Direct South Dyal is made: for if the Erect Direct South Dyal be drawn on any
transparent Plane, as on Glass, Horn, or an oyled Paper, and the Horizontal
Line VI, VI, turned downwards, and the Line VII marked with V, the Line VIII
with IIII, the Line V with VII, and the Line IIII with VIII, then have you of
it a North Erect Direct Dyal.

All the other Hour Lines in this Dyal are useless, because the Sun in our
Latitude shines on a North Face the longest Day only before VI in the Morning,
and after VI at Night.

OPERAT. V. To describe an Erect direct East Dyal.
HAng a Plumb-line a little above the place on the Wall where you intend to
make your Dyal, and wait till it hang quietly before the Wall: Then if the Line
be rubbed with Chalk (like a Carpenters Line) you may by holding the Plumbet
end close to the Wall, and straining it pretty stiff, strike with it a straight
Line, as Carpenters do: This Line shall be a perpendicular, as AB. Then choose a
convenient point in this Perpendicular, as at C, for a Center, whereon describe
an occult Arch, as DE; This Arch must contain the number of Degrees of the
Elevation of the Equinoctial, counted between D and E, which in our Latitude is
38, or (which is all one) the Complement of the Poles Elevation. Therefore in a
Quadrant of the same Radius with the occult Arch measure 38 Degrees, and set
them off in the Plane from E to D: Then from D to the Center C in the
Perpendicular draw the pricked Line DC; this pricked Line shall represent the
Axis of the World. Then cross this Line at right Angles with the Line CF, and
draw it from C to F, so long as possibly you can: This Line shall be the
Contingent Line. Then choose a point in this Contingent Line, as at VI, draw a
Line through that point at right Angles for the Substilar Line, as G VI H for
the Substilar Line; then open your Compasses to a convenient width, (as to VIG)
and pitching one Foot in the point G, with the other Foot describe a
Semicircle of the Equinoctial against the Line of Contingence, which
Semicircle devide from VI both ways into six equal parts, as you were taught
by the Example in the Horizontal Dyal: and laying a straight Ruler on the
Center of this Semicircle of the Equinoctial, and to each of those equal parts
mark on the Contingent Line where the Ruler cuts it, for those marks shall be
the several points from whence Lines drawn parallel to the Line CD shall be the
respective Hour Lines.



The reason why the Contingent Line is drawn from VI. to F, so much longer than
from VI to C is; because the Hour Lines from VI toward XII are more in number
toward Noon, than they are from VI backward toward IIII: for this Dyal will
only show the Hours from a little before IV in the Morning to almost Noon: For
just at Noon the Shadow goes off the Plane; as you may see if you apply a
straight Ruler to the Center of the Equinoctial Semicircle G, and lay it to
the point 12 in the Semicircle; for the straight Ruler will then never cut the
Line of Contingence, because the Line of Contingence is parallel to the Line G
XII on the Equinoctial Circle, and Lines parallel, though continued to never so
great a length never meet.

To these Hour Lines, set Figures as may be seen in the Scheme.

The Style IK of this Dyal as well as of all others must stand parallel to the
Axis of the World; and also parallel to the Face of the Plane, and parallel to
all the Hour Lines, and stand directly over the Substilar or VI a Clock
Hour-Line, and that so high as is the distance of the Center of the Equinoctial
Semicircle from the Contingent Line.

OPERAT. VI. To describe a Dyal on an Erect Direct West Plane.
AN Erect Direct West Dyal, is the same in all respects with an Erect Direct
East Dyal: Only as the East Dyal shows the Forenoon Hours, so the West shows
the Afternoon Hours.

Thus if you should draw the East Dyal on any transparent Plane, as on Glass,
Horn, or oyled Paper, on the one side will appear an East Dyal, on the other
side a West: Only the numbers to the Hour Lines (as was said before in the
North Dyal) must be changed; for that which in the East Dyal is XI, in the West
must be I; that which in the East Dyal is X, in the West must be II; that which
in the East Dyal is IX, in the West must be III, etc. The Style is the same.

OPERAT. VII. To describe a Dyal on an Erect North, or Erect South Plane
Declining Eastwards or Westwards.
THese four Dyals, viz. the Erect North Declining Eastwards, the Erect North
Declining Westwards, the Erect South Declining Eastwards, and the Erect South
Declining Westwards, are all projected by the same Rules; and therefore are in
effect but one Dyal differently placed, as you shall see hereafter.

First draw on your Plane a straight Line to represent the Horizon of your
place, and mark one end of it W for West, and the other end E for East. Choose a
point in this Horizontal Line for a Center, as at A, whereon you may describe a
Circle to comprehend all these four Dyals: Draw a Line as MAM perpendicular to
the Horizontal Line WE, through the Center A for a Meridian Line, and on that
Center describe a Circle, which by the two Lines WAE, and MAM will be divided
into four Quadrants, which will comprehend the four Dyals aforesaid: for if it
be a North declining West you are to draw, the upper Quadrant to the left hand
serves your purpose: If a South Declining West, the same Lines continued
through the Center A into the lower Quadrant to the right Hand serves your
turn; if a North Declining East, the upper Quadrant to the right Hand serves
your turn; or if a South Declining East, the same Lines continued through the
Center A into the lower Quadrant to the left hand serves your turn; and you
must draw the Declination, Complement of the Poles Altitude, Substile, Style
and Hour Lines in it; but the Hour Lines must be differently marked as you
shall see hereafter. I shall only give you an Example of one of these Dyals;
viz. A South Declining East.



We will suppose you are to draw a Dyal that declines from the South 50 Degrees
toward the East; here being but one Dyal, you need describe but one Quadrant
of a Circle. Set off in the lower Quadrant WAM 50 degrees from the Meridian
Line M toward W, and from the Center A draw a straight Line through that mark
in the Quadrant as DA, which may be called the Line of Declination; then set
off from the Meridian Line the Complement of the Poles Elevation, which in our
Latitude is 38 degrees, and there draw another Line from the Center as AP,
which we will call the Polar Line. Then take in the Horizontal Line a
convenient portion of the Quadrant, as AB, and from the point B draw a Line
parallel to the Meridian Line AM, and continue that Line till it intersect the
Polar Line, as at P, from which Point P draw a Line parallel to WA, as PC: Then
measure the distance of AB in the Horizontal Line, and set off that distance in
the Line of Declination, as from A to D, and from that point of distance draw a
Line parallel to the Meridian AM through the Horizontal Line at R, and through
the Point D, and continue it through the Line PC, as at S; then laying a
straight Ruler to the Center A, and the Intersection of the Line PC, at S draw
the Line AS for the Substile: Then upon the Point S erect a Line
perpendicularly as ST; Then measure the distance between R and D, and set that
distance off from S to T, and from the Center to the point T draw the Line AT
for the Style or Gnomon; and the Triangle SAT made of Iron or Brass and erected
perpendicularly over the Substile SA shall by its upper side TA cast a shadow
upon the Hour of the day. But you will say the Hour Lines must be drawn first:
It is true; Therefore to draw them you must choose a point in the Substile Line
where you think good, and through it draw the Line FF as long as you can for
the the Line of Contingence: then with your Compasses take the shortest
distance between this point and the Style, and transfer that distance below the
Line of Contingence on the Substile as at Ae, and with your Compasses at that
distance describe on the Center Ae a Circle to represent the Equinoctial; Then
(as you were taught in the Example of the Horizontal Dyal) devide the
Semicircle of the Equinoctial into twelve equal parts, beginning at the point
in the Equinoctial Circle, where a straight Line drawn from the Center of it to
the Intersection of the Line of Contingence with the Meridian Line cuts the
Equinoctial Line, as here at the Point G; Then lay a straight Ruler to the
Center of the Equinoctial Circle, and to every one of the Devisions in the
Semicircle, and mark where the straight Ruler cuts the Contingent Line; for
straight Lines drawn from the Center A of the Dyal to those several marks on
the Contingent Line shall be the Hour Lines; and must be numbered from the Noon
Line or Meridian A M backwards, as XII, XI, X, IX. etc. toward the left hand.
So is your Dyal finished.

This Dyal drawn on any transparent matter as Horn, Glass, or an oyled Paper,
shall on the other side the transparent matter become a South Declining West,
(Style and all) but then the I a Clock Hour Line must be marked II, the XII
XII, the XI a Clock Hour Line I, X, II, IX, III, etc.

If you project it anew, you must describe the Quadrant MW on the other side
the Meridian Line, on the Center A from M to E, and then count, (as before) the
Declination, Altitude of the Pole, Substile, and Style in the Quadrant,
beginning at M toward E, and work in all respects as with the South Declining
East; only number this South Declining West as in the foregoing Paragraph.

If you project a North Declining East, you must describe the Quadrant above
the Horizontal Line from M upwards, toward E on your right hand, and count (as
before) the Declination, Altitude, Complement of the Pole, Substile, and Style
from the Meridian Line, and work as with the South Declining East: It must be
numbered from the Meridian Line M toward the right hand with XI, X, IX, VIII,
etc.

If this Dyal were drawn on transparent matter, the other* side would show a
North Declining West: But if you will project it anew, you must describe the
Quadrant above the Horizontal Line, from M upwards toward W, and count from
the Meridian Line AM the Declination, Complement, Altitude of the Pole,
Substile and Style, and work with them (in all respects) as with the South
Declining East; but then the XI a Clock Hour Line must be marked I, the X, II;
the IX, III, etc.

OPERAT. VIII. To draw a Dyal on an East or West Plane Reclining, or Inclining.
DRaw a straight Line parallel to the Horizon, to represent a Meridian, or XII
a Clock Line, and mark one end N, the other S; Choose a point in this Line, as
at A for a Center: then if your Plane be an East or a West Incliner, let fall a
Perpendicular upon this Center, (that is, the Perpendicular must stand above
the Meridian Line NS.) as AE, and upon the Center A describe a Semicircle
above the Meridian Line NS;) But if your Plane be an East Incliner, or a West
Recliner, let fall a Perpendicular from the Center A under the Meridian Line,
and upon the Center A describe a Semicircle under the Meridian Line. If your
Plane be a West Incliner, work (as shall be taught) in the Quadrant on the left
hand above the Meridian Line. If an East Recliner, in the Quadrant on the right
hand above the Meridian Line. If it be a West Recliner, work in the Quadrant on
the left hand under the Meridian. If an East Incliner, in the Quadrant under
the Meridian Line the right hand.

For Example, An East Dyal Reclining 45 Degrees.
You would draw a Dyal on an East Plane Reclining 45 Degrees: Therefore in the
Quadrant on the right hand above the Meridian Line, set off from the
Perpendicular AE 45 Degrees on the Quadrant, for the Reclination of the Plane;
and set off also in the Quadrant 38 Degrees from the Perpendicular for the
Complement of the Poles Elevation, and at these settings off make marks in the
Quadrant: Then lay a straight Ruler to the Center A, and to the marks in the
Quadrant, and draw straight Lines through them from the Center. Then choose in
the Meridian Line NS a convenient point, as at B, and through that point draw a
Line parallel to the Perpendicular AE, which will intersect the Line drawn for
the Complement of the Poles Elevation AP in P; from which point P, draw a Line
parallel to the Meridian Line NS, to cut the Perpendicular AE in C, and also
the Line of Obliquity AO in O. Then measure the length AO, and set off that
length in the Perpendicular ACE from A to E, and draw the Line EG parallel to
the Meridian Line NS, which will cut the Line BP prolonged in G. Measure also
the length of CO, and set that length off from A to Q on the Line of Obliquity
AO, and draw the Line QR parallel to the Perpendicular ACE. Then measure the
distance of AR, and upon the Line GPB set it off from G to S; and laying a
straight Ruler to the point S and the Center A, draw by the side of it the Line
AS; for the Substile Line. Then measure the length of QR, and from S raise a
Perpendicular, and in that Perpendicular set that length off from S to T; and
laying a straight Ruler to the Center A and the point T, draw the Line AT for
the Stilar Line, which Stilar Line being perpendicularly erected over the
Substilar Line AS, will stand parallel to the Axis of the World, and cast its
shadow on the Hour of the Day.



To draw the Hour Lines on this Plane, you must (as you have several times
before been directed) choose a point in the Substilar Line, and through that
point draw at right Angles with the Substilar Line the Line of Contingence so
long as you can: Then measure the shortest distance between that Point and the
Stilar Line, and transfer that distance below the Line of Contingence in the
Substilar Line, as at Ae, and with your Compasses at that distance describe
against the Line of Contingence the Equinoctial Circle; Then divide the
Semicircle of the Equinoctial next the Line of Contingence into twelve equal
parts, (as you have formerly been taught) beginning at the Point in the
Equinoctial Circle, where a straight Line drawn from the Center of it to the
Intersection of the Line of Contingence with the Meridian Line NS cuts the
Equinoctial Circle, as here at the point D: Then lay a straight Ruler to the
Center of the Equinoctial Circle, and to every one of the Devisions in the
Equinoctial Semicircle, and mark where the straight Ruler cuts the Contingent
Line: for straight Lines drawn from the Center A of the Dyal through these
several marks in the Contingent Line shall be the Hour Lines, and must be
numbered from the Meridian or Noon-Line NS which is the XII a Clock Line
upwards, with XI, X, IX, VIII, etc. The Center of this Dyal must stand downward.

If this Dyal were turned with its Center upwards, it would show a West
Inclining 45 degrees, only the numbers to the Hour Lines must be changed; for
to XI you must set I, to X, II; to IX, III, etc. and the Substile over which
the Style must stand, must be placed in the Semicircle (at first described) as
much to the right hand the Perpendicular AE, as it does on the left hand.

If this Dyal were drawn on Glass, Horn, or an oyled Paper, and you turn the
Meridian Line NS upwards, the backside shall be an East Inclining 45 degrees,
and the Hour Lines must be numbered as they are on the East Reclining: But the
Substile over which the Style must stand, must be placed, in the Semicircle
(at first described) as much to the left hand the Perpendicular AE, as it is on
the oyled Paper to the right hand.

If you turn the Meridian Line NS downwards, the backside shall be a West
Recliner 45 degrees, and the Hour Lines must be numbered from the XII a Clock
Line upwards, with I, II, III, etc.

You must note that all the Hour Lines of the Day will not be described in this
single Quadrant, nor does the Quadrant at all relate to the Hour Lines; but is
described only for setting off the Complement of the Poles Elevation and
Reclination of the Plane, that by working (as has been shown) you may find the
place of the Substilar Line, and the Angle the Style makes with it: For having
the Substilar Line, you know how to draw the Line of Contingence, and to
describe the Equinoctial Circle, by which all the Hours are described on the
Plane.

To draw a Dyal on a Direct South or North Plane Inclining or Reclining.
Direct Reclining or Inclining Dyals are the same with Erect Direct Dyals that
are made for the Latitude of some other Places; the Latitude of which Places
are either more than the Latitude of your Place, if the Plane Recline; or less,
if the Plane Incline: and that in such a proportion as the Arch of Reclination
or Inclination is.

Thus a Direct South Dyal Reclining 10 degrees in London's Latitude, ( viz. 51
degrees) is an Erect Direct South Dyal made for the Latitude of 61 degrees. And
a Direct South Dyal Inclining 10 in the Latitude of 51 is an Erect Direct South
Dyal in the Latitude of 41 degrees: and is to be made according to the
Direction given in Operat. III.

OPERAT. IX. To draw a Dyal on a South or North Inclining Declining, or
Reclining Declining Plane.
THese four sorts of Dyals viz. the South Inclining Declining, and South
Reclining Declining, and North Inclining Declining, and South Reclining
Declining, are all projected by the same Rules; and therefore are in effect but
one Dyal differently placed, as you shall see hereafter.

First draw on your Plane a straight Line parallel to the Horizon, and mark one
end W for West, and the other E for East. On South Incliners and Recliners, E
on the right hand, and W on the left: on North Incliners and Recliners E on the
left hand and W on the right. Choose a point in this Horizontal Line for a
Center, as at A; Through this point A draw a Line Perpendicular to the Horizon,
and on this point (as on a Center) describe a Semicircle, one Quadrant above,
and another below the Horizontal Line. (though for this Example I describe but
one.) Then if the Plane respect the South, set off in the lower Quadrant from
the Perpendicular the Declination, the Inclination, or the Reclination, and the
Complement of the Altitude of the Pole; and through these several settings off
in the Quadrant, draw straight Lines from the Center A; then take in the
Horizontal Line toward the Semicircle, a convenient distance from the Center
A, as B, and through the point B draw a straight Line parallel to the
Perpendicular, and prolong it through the Polar Line, as BP: Through the point
P, draw a Line parallel to the Horizontal Line, as PC; this Line will cut the
Line of Obliquity in the point O: Then measure the distance of AO, and set off
that distance on the Perpendicular from A to F, and through the point F draw a
straight Line parallel to the Horizontal Line, as FG, for the Horizontal
Intersection. Then measure the distance of CO, and set off that distance on the
Perpendicular from A to I; from the point I, draw the Line ID parallel to the
Horizontal Line, to cut the Line of Declination in the point D. Then measure
the distance of AB, and set off that distance in the Line of Declination from A
to E; and from the point E draw a straight Line parallel to the Horizontal Line
WE, to cut the Perpendicular in the point K. Measure the distance of EK, and
set off that distance on the other side the Perpendicular in the Horizontal
Intersection, from F to H, and from the point H draw HN parallel to the
Perpendicular to cut the Horizontal Line in the point N.



Then to find the Meridian Line, Substile and Style, do thus. If your Plane be
a Southern Incliner, or a Northern Recliner, measure the distance of LD, and
set off that distance in the Horizontal Intersection from F to M, and through
the point M draw the Line AM for the Meridian Line. Then add the distance of AL
to AK, thus: measure the distance of AL, and place one Foot of your Compasses
in the point K in the Perpendicular Line, and extend the other to X, and
measuring the distance of AX, set it off in the Line of Obliquity from A to Q;
and from the point Q draw the Line QR parallel to the Perpendicular, and
cutting the Horizontal Line in the point R. Then measure the distance of AR,
and set off that distance from H in the Horizontal Intersection to S on the
Line HN, and to the point S draw the Line AS for the Substile. Then measure the
distance of QR, and set off that distance perpendicularly from the point S to
T; and lastly, from the point A, draw the straight Line AT for the Stilar Line,
which Stilar Line being perpendicularly erected over the Substilar Line AS,
will stand parallel to the Axis of the World, and cast its shadow on the Hour
of the Day.

But if the Plane be a Southern Recliner, or Northern Incliner, measure (as
before) the distance of LD, and (as before you were directed) to set it off
from F in the Horizontal Intersection on the right hand the perpendicular Line;
So now, set that distance from F to m in the Horizontal Intersection on the
left hand in the Perpendicular Line, and draw the Line A m for the Meridian
Line. Then as before you were directed to add AL to AK: So now, substract the
distance of AL from AK, and the remainder will be LK: Set therefore the
distance of IK from A to q in the same Line of Obliquity, and from the point q,
draw the Line qr parallel to the perpendicular. Measure then the distance of A
r, and set off that distance in the Line HN, from H to s for the Substilar
Line: Then erect on the point s a Perpendicular, and on that Perpendicular set
off from s to t the distance of qr: And lastly, from A draw the Line A t for
the Stilar Line.

If K falls upon L the Plane is parallel to the Axis of the World, and the Dyal
drawn upon it will have no Center: But s will fall upon H, and AH (or A s) will
be the Substile.

I shall give you two Examples of these Rules: One of a Dyal with a Center, and
the other of a Dyal without a Center. And first,

OPERAT. X. How to draw a Dyal with a Center, Declining 20 Degrees, and
Inclining 30 Degrees.


HAving by the foregoing Precepts of the last Operat. found the Substile,
Style, and Meridian, you must (as you have often been directed) choose a point
in the Substilar Line, through which, at right Angles to the Substilar Line
draw the Line of Contingence as long as you can: Then measure the shortest
distance between the point of Intersection and the Stilar Line, and transfer
that distance on one side the Line of Contingence upon the Substilar Line, and
so describe the Equinoctial Semicircle against the Line of Contingence: Then
lay a straight Ruler to the Center of the Equinoctial Circle, as at Ae, and to
the point where the Line of Contingence cuts the Meridian Line, as at Z, and
mark where the straight Ruler cuts the Equinoctial Circle, and from that mark
begin to devide the Semicircle into twelve equal parts, and by a straight
Ruler laid to those devisions and the Center of the Equinoctial, make marks in
the Line of Contingence. Then shall straight Lines drawn from the Center A of
the Dyal through every one of those marks in the Contingent Line be the Hour
Lines of the Dyal, and must be numbered from the XII a Clock Line toward the
right Hand with I, II, III, IV, etc. And the other way with XI, X, IX, etc.

OPERAT. XI. How to draw a Dyal without a Center, on a South Plane; Declining
East 30 Degrees, Reclining 34 Degrees 32 Minutes.
HAving by the Precepts of Operat. IX found the Substile, you must find the
Meridian Line otherwise than you were there taught: For, having drawn the Lines
of Latitude, Declination and Reclination, and found the Substile, measure the
distance of BP, and set it off on the Line of Declination from A to K, and draw
from the Perpendicular AF the Line KQ parallel to AB: Then measure the length
of KQ, and set it off on the Polar Line AP, from A to V; then take the nearest
distance between the point V and the Line AB, and set it off on the Line QK
from Q to M; through which point M, draw a Line from the Center A: Then measure
with your Compasses in the Semicircle WNE (which in this Dyal may represent
the Equinoctial) the distance of the Arch N m, and set off that distance from
the Intersection of the Substile with the Semicircle at S to T in the
Semicircle, which point T shall be the point in the Equinoctial that you must
begin to devide the Hours at, for the finding their distances on the Line of
Contingence.



Then consider (according to the bigness of your Plane) what height your Style
shall stand above the Substile, and there make a mark in the Substile: For the
distance between the Center A and that mark must be the height of the Style
perpendicularly erected over the Substile, as at I. Draw through this point I a
Line of Contingence, as long as you can to cut the Substile at right Angles,
and then laying a Ruler to the Center A, and successively to each Devision of
the Equinoctial make marks in the Line of Contingence, and through those marks
draw straight Lines parallel to the Substile, which shall be the Hour Lines;
and must be numbered from the left hand toward the right, beginning at the XII
a Clock Line with I, II, III, etc. and from the right hand toward the left on
the XII a Clock Line with XI, X, IX, etc.

The Style to this Dyal may be either a straight Pin of the length of AI, or
else a Square of the same height, erected perpendicularly upon the point I, in
the Substile Line.

OPERAT. XII. To make a Dyal on the Ceeling of a Room, where the Direct Beams
of the Sun never come.
FInd some convenient place in the Transum of a Window to place a small round
piece of Looking-Glass, about the bigness of a Groat, or less, so as it may lie
exactly Horizontal. The point in the middle of this Glass we will mark A, and
for distinction sake call it Nodus. Through this Nodus you must draw a Meridian
Line on the Floor, Thus, Hang a Plumb-line in the Window exactly over Nodus,
and the Shadow that the Plumb-line casts on the Floor just at Noon will be a
Meridian Line; or you may find a Meridian Line otherwise by the Clinatory.
Having drawn the Meridan Line on the Floor, find a Meridian Line on the
Ceeling, thus, Hold a Plumb-line to the Ceeling, over that end of the Meridian
Line next the Window; If the Plumbet hang not exactly on the Meridian Line on
the Floor, remove your hand on the Ceeling one way or other, as you see cause,
till it do hang quietly just over it, and at the point where the Plumb-line
touches the Ceeling make a mark, as at B; that mark B shall be directly over
the Meridian Line on the Floor: then remove your Plumb-line to the other end of
the Meridian Line on the Floor, and find a point on the Ceeling directly over
it, as you did the former point, as at C, and through these two points B and C
on the Ceeling, strain and strike a Line blackt with Smal-Coal or any other
Color (as Carpenters do) and that Line BC on the Ceeling shall be the Meridian
Line, as well as that on the Floor: Then fasten a string just on the Nodus, and
remove that string, forwards or backwards, in the Meridian Line on the Ceeling,
till it have the same Elevation in the Quadrant on the Clinatory above the
Horizon that the Equinoctial has in your Habitation, and through the point
where the string touches the Meridian Line in the Ceeling shall a line be drawn
at right Angles with the Meridian, to represent the Equinoctial Line.

Thus in our Latitude the Elevation of the Equator being 38 degrees; I remove
the string fastened to the Nodus forwards or backwards in the Meridian Line of
the Ceeling, till the Plumb-line of the Quadrant on the Clinatory, when one of
the sides are applied to the string, falls upon 38 degrees: and then I find it
touch the Meridian Line at D in the Ceeling: therefore at DI make a mark, and
through this mark strike the line DE (as before I did in the Meridian Line) to
cut the Meridian Line at right Angles: This Line shall be the Equinoctial Line,
and serve to denote the Hour Distances, as the Contingent Line does on other
Dyals, as you have often seen^

Then I place the Center of the Quadrant on the Clinatory upon Nodus, so as the
Arch of the Quadrant may be on the East side the Meridian Line, and underprop
it so, that the flat side of the Quadrant may lie parallel to the string, when
it is strained between the Nodus and the Equinoctial, and also so as the string
may lie on the Semi-diameter of the Quadrant, when it is held up to the
Meridian Line on the Ceeling. Then removing the string the space of 15 degrees
in the Quadrant, and extending it to the Equator on the Ceeling, where the
string touches the Equator, there shall be a point through which the I a Clock
Hour line shall be drawn: and removing the string yet 15 degrees further to the
Eastwards in the Semicircle of Position, and extending it also to the Equator,
where it touches the Equator, there shall be a point through which the II a
Clock Hour Line shall be drawn. Removing the string yet 15 degrees f^rther, to
the Eastwards in the Semicircle of Position, and extending it to the Equator,
there shall be a point through which the III a Clock Hour Line shall be drawn:
The like for all the other Afternoon Hour Lines. So often as the string is
removed through 15 degrees on the Quadrant, so often shall it point out the
Afternoon distances in the Meridian Line on the Ceeling.

Having thus found out the points in the Equator through which the Afternoon
Hour Lines are to be drawn, I may find the Fore-noon Hour distances also the
same way, viz. by removing the Arch of the Quadrant to the West side the
Meridian, as before it was placed on the East, and bringing the string to the
several 15 degrees on the West side the Quadrant; or else I need only measure
the distances of each Hours distance found in the Equator from the Meridian
Line on the Ceeling; for the same number of Hours from XII, have the same
distance in the Equinoctial Line on the other side the Meridian, both before
and afternoon: The XI a Clock Hour distance is the same from the Meridian
Line, with the I a Clock distance on the other side the Meridian; the X a Clock
distance, the same with the II a Clock distance; the IX with the III, etc. And
thus the distances of all the Hour lines are found out on the Equator.



Now if the Center of this Dyal lay within doors, you might draw lines from the
Center through these pricks in the Equator, and those Lines should be the Hour
lines, as in other Dyals: But the Center of this Dyal lies without doors in the
Air, and therefore not convenient for this purpose: So that for drawing the
Hour Lines, you must consider what Angle every Hour Line in an Horizontal Dyal
makes with the Meridian; that is, at what distance in Degrees and Minutes the
Hour Lines of an Horizontal Dyal cut the Meridian; which you may examine, as by
Operat. II. For an Angle equal to the Complement of the same Angle, must each
respective Hour Line with the Equator on the Ceeling have.

Thus upon the point marked for each Hour distance in the Equinoctial Line on
the Ceeling, I describe the Arches I, II, III, IV, as in the Figure, and
finding the distance from the Meridian of the Hour Lines of an Horizontal Dyal
to be according to the Operat. II. Thus, The 1 a clock Hour line 11.40 whose
Complement to 90 is 78.20 The 2 a clock Hour line 24.15 whose Complement to 90
is 65.45 The 3 a clock Hour line 38.14 whose Complement to 90 is 51.56 The 4 a
clock Hour line 53.36 whose Complement to 90 is 36.24


I measure in a Quadrant of the same Radius with those Arches already drawn
from the Equinoctial Line for the 1 a Clock Hour 78.20 for the 2 a Clock Hour
65.45 for the 3 a Clock Hour 51.56 for the 4 a Clock Hour 36.24
and transfer these distances to the Arches drawn on the Ceeling: For then
straight Lines drawn through the mark in the Arch, and through the mark in the
Equator, and prolonged both ways to a convenient length, shall be the several
Hour Lines (aforesaid;) And when the Sun shines upon the Glass at Nodus, its
Beams shall reflect upon the Hour of the Day.

Some helps to a young Dyalist for his more orderly and quick making of Dyals.
IT may prove somewhat difficult to those that are unpractised in Mathematical
Projections, to devide a Circle into 360 Degrees (or which is all one) a
Semicircle into 180, or a Quadrant into 90 degrees; and though I have taught
you in the projecting the Horizontal Dyal the original way of doing this, yet
you may do it a speedier way by a Line of Chords, which if you will be curious
in your Practice, you may make your self; or if you account it not worth your
while, you may buy it already made on Box or Brass of most Mathematical
Instrument-Makers. This Instrument is by them called a Plain Scale, which does
not only accommodate you with the devisions of a Quadrant, but also serves for
a Ruler to draw straight Lines with: the manner of making it is as follows.

Describe upon a smooth flat even-grain'd Board a quarter of an whole Circle,
as BC, whose Radius AB or AC may be four inches, if you intend to make large
Dyals, or two inches if small; but if you will, you may have several Lines of
Chords on your Scale or Rule. Devide this Quadrant into 90 equal parts as you
were taught in the making the Horizontal Dyal.



Then draw close by the edge of your straight Ruler a Line parallel to the
edge, and at about 1/20 part of an Inch a second Line parallel to that, and at
about of an Inch a third Line parallel to both. Then place one Foot of your
Compasses at the beginning of the first degree on the Quadrant descibed on the
Board, as at B, and open the other Foot to the end of the first degree, and
transfer that distance upon your Rule, from B to the first mark or devision,
between the two first drawn Lines. Then place one Foot of your Compasses again
at the beginning of the first degree on the Quadrant described on the Board, as
at B, and open the other Foot to the end of the second Degree, and transfer
that distance upon your Rule from B to the second mark or devision between the
two first drawn Lines; And thus measure the distance of every Degree from the
first Degree described on the Quadrant, and transfer it to the Rule. But for
distinction sake, you may draw every tenth devision from the first Line
parallel to the edge of the third Line, and mark them in succession from the
beginning with 10, 20, 30, to 90: and the fifth Devisions you may draw half way
between the second and the third parallel Lines; the single Devisions only
between the two first parallel Lines. So is your Line of Chords made.

The Use of the Line of Chords.
AS its use is very easy, so its convenience is very great; for placing one
Foot of your Compasses at the first Devision on the Scale, and opening the
other to the 60th Degree, you may with the points of your Compasses (so
extended) describe a Circle, and the several Devisions, on the Scale shall be
the Degrees of the four Quadrants of that Circle, as you may try by working
backwards, to what you were just now taught in the Making the Scale: For as
before you measured the distance of the Degrees of the Quadrant, and
transferred them to the Scale, so now you only measure the D^visions on the
Scale, and transfer them to the Quadrant, Semicircle, or whole Circle
described on your Paper. For Example:

If you would measure 30 Degrees in your described Circle, place one Foot of
your Compasses at the beginning of Devisions on the Scale, as at A, and extend
the other Foot to the Divisions marked 30, and that distance transferred to the
Circle, shall be the distance of 30 degrees in that Circle. Do the like for any
other number of Degrees.

You may draw your Dyal first on a large sheet of Paper, if your Dyal Plane be
so large, if it be not so large, draw it on a smaller piece of Paper; Then rub
the backside of your Paper-Dyal with Smal-coal, till it be well black't; and
laying your Paper Dyal on your Dyal Plane, so that the East, West, North, or
South Lines of your Paper agree exactly with the East, West, North, or South
situation of your Dyal Plane. Then with Wax or Pitch fasten the Corners of the
Paper on the Plane, and laying a straight Ruler on the Hour Lines of your Dyal,
draw with the blunted point of a Needle by the side of the Ruler, and the
Smal-coal rubbed on the backside the Paper will leave a mark of the Lines on
the Plane.

If you will have the Lines drawn Red, you may rub the backside of your Paper
with Vermillion; if Blew, with Verditer; if Yellow, with Orpment, etc. Then
draw upon these marked Lines with Oil Colors, as you please.

If your Dyal Decline far toward the East or West, the Hour Lines (unless
projected to a very great length) will run very close to one another; therefore
in this case you must project your Dyal on a large Table, or sometimes on the
Floor of a Room, and cut it off as far as you think good, from the Center; for
the further from the Center, the larger the distance of the Hour Lines. See the
Figure.

An Explanation of some Words of Art used in this BOOK.
ANgle. The meeting or joining of two Lines.

Arch. A part of a Circle.

Axis. The straight Line that runs through the Center of a Sphere, and both
ways through the Circumference: though in Dyalling it is all one with the
Diameter of a Circle.

Clinatory. See Fol. 8, 9, 10.

Chord. See Fol. 44, 45, 46.

Complement. The number that is wanting to make up another number 90 Degr. or
180 Degr. or 360 Degrees.

Contingent. A Line crossing the Substile at right Angles.

Degree. See Fol. 12.

Diameter. The longest straight Line that can be contained within a Circle,
viz. the Line that passes through the Center to the Circumference both ways.

Dyal Plane. See Fol. 7.

Elevation of the Pole. So many degrees as the Pole is elevated above the
Horizon.

Equinoctial. The Equinoctial is a great Circle that runs evenly between the
two Poles of the World. But when we name the Equinoctial in this Book, we mean
a small Circle which represents it, and is the Circle or Arch of a Circle which
is divided into equal parts to find thereby the unequal parts on the Line of
Contingence. In the Horizontal Dyal it is that Arch of a Circle marked GCH.

Horizon. Is a great Circle encompassing the place we stand upon; but in
Dyalling it is represented by a straight Line, as in Operat. III. In the South
Dyal the Line VI A VI is the Horizontal Line.

Latitude. The Latitude of a Place is the number of Degrees contained between
the Equinoctial and the place inquired after.

Line of Contingence. See Contingent.

Magnetic Needle. The Needle touched with the Loadstone, to make it point to
the North.

Meridian, is a great Circle of Heaven passing through the North and South
points of the Horizon; but in Dyalling it is represented by a straight Line, as
in Operat. II. in the Horizontal Dyal the Line XII A is a Meridian Line.

Nadir. The point directly under our Feet.

Nautial Compass, Is the Compass used by Navigators, whereon is marked out all
the 32 Winds or Points of the Compass.

Oblique Plane. See Fol. 7.

Parallel. See Fol. 6

Perpendicular. See Fol. 5.

Pole. The North or South Points on the Globe of the Earth, are called North or
South Pole.

Quadrant. The fourth part of a Circle.

Radius. Half the Diameter of a Circle.

Right Angle. A straight Line that falls perpendicularly upon another straight
Line, makes at the meeting of those two Lines a Right Angle.

Semicircle. Half a Circle.

Semi-Diameter, The same Radius is.

Sphere. The highest Heaven with all its imagined Circles is called the Sphere.

Style. The Gnomon or Cock of a Dyal.

Substile. The Line the Style stands on upon a Dyal Plane.

Triangle. A figure consisting of 3 Sides and 3 Angles.

Zenith. The Point directly over our Head.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of GLOBES Celestial and Terrestrial, Spheres, Mapps, Sea-Platts,
Mathematical Instruments, and Books, made and sold by Joseph Moxon, on
Ludgate Hill, at the Sign of Atlas.
GLOBES 26 Inches Diameter. The price 20 l. the pair. GLOBES, near 15 Inches
Diameter. The price 4 l. GLOBES, 8 Inches Diameter. The price 2 l. GLOBES, 6
Inches Diameter. The price 1 l. 10 s. CONCAVE HEMISPHERES of the Starry Orb;
which serves for a Case to a Terrestrial Globe of 3 Inches Diameter, made
portable for the Pocket. Price 15 s. SPHERES, according to the Copernican
Hypothesis, both General and Particular, 20 Inches Diameter. Price of the
General 5 l. Of the Particular 6 l. Of both together 10. SPHERES, according to
the Ptolomaick Systeme, 14 Inches Diameter. Price 3 l. SPHERES, according to
the Ptolomaick Systeme, 8 Inches Diameter. Price 1 l. 10 s. Gunter's Quadrant,
13 Inches Radius, printed on Paper, and pasted on a Board, with a Nocturnal on
the backside. Price 5 s. Gunter's Quadrant, 4 Inches Radius, printed on Paper,
and pasted on Brass, with a Nocturnal on the backside, and a Wooden Case
covered with Leather fit for it: A new invention contrived for the Pocket.
Price 6 s. A large Mapp of the World, 10 Foot long, and 7 Foot deep, pasted on
Cloth and colored. Price 2 l. A Mapp of all the World, 4 Foot long, and 3
Foot deep, pasted on Cloth and colored. Price 10 s. In sheets 2 s. 6 d. A
Mapp of the English Empire in America, describing all places inhabited there by
the English Nation, as well on the Islands as on the Continent. Price 15 s. Six
Scriptural Mapps, 1. Of all the Earth: And how after the Flood it was divided
among the Sons of Noah. 2. Of Paradise, or the Garden of Eden; with the
Countries circumjacent inhabited by the Patriarchs. 3. The 40 years travel of
the Children of Israel through the Wilderness. 4. Of Canaan, or the Holy Land:
and how it was divided among the twelve Tribes of Israel, and traveled through
by our Savior and his Apostles. 5. The Travels of St. Paul, and others of the
Apostles, in their propagating the Gospel. 6. Jerusalem, as it stood in our
Savior's time; with a Book of Explanations to these Mapps* entitled Sacred
Geography Price 6 s. Useful to be bound up with Bibles. A Sea-Platt, or Mapp of
all the World, according to Mercator, in two large Royal Sheets of Paper; set
forth by Mr. Edward Wright, and newly corrected by Joseph Moxon Hydrogr. etc.
Price 2 s. Sea Platts for sailing to all parts of the World. Price 6 d. the
sheet. The famous City of Batavia in the East Indies, built and inhabited by
the Duth; curiously engraved, and printed on four large Sheets of Royal Paper.
Price 2 s. 6 d. A small Mapp of all the World, with Descriptions, on one Sheet.
Price 6 d.
BOOKS.
A Tutor to Astronomy and Geography, or the Use of both the GLOBES Celestial
and Terrestrial; by Joseph Moxon Hydrographer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. Price 5 s. The Use of the Copernican Spheres, teaching to salve the
Phenomenon by them, as easily as by the Ptolomaick Spheres; by Joseph Moxon
Hydrographer etc. Price 4 s. Wright's Correction of Errors in the Art of
Navigation. Price 8 s. New and rare Inventions of Waterworks. Teaching how to
raise Water higher than the Spring. By which Invention the perpetual Motion is
proposed, many hard labors performed, and varieties of Motion and Sounds
produced. By Isaac de Cause, Engineer to King Charles the First. Price 8 s.
Practical Perspective, or Perspective made easy. Teaching by the Optics how
to delineate all Bodies, Buildings and Landskips, etc. By the Catropticks, how
to delineate confused Appearances* so, as when seen in a Mirror or Polisht
Body of any intended shape, the Reflection shall show a design. By the
Dioptricks, how to draw part of many Figures into one, when seen through a
Glass or Crystal cut into many Faces. By Joseph Moxon Hydrographer, etc. Price
7 s. An exact Survey of the Microcosine. Being an Antaomy of the Bodies of Man
and Woman; wherein the Skin, Veins, Nerves, Muscles, Bones, Sinews and
Ligaments are accurately delineated. Engraven on large Copper Plates, Printed
and curiously pasted together, so as at first sight you may behold all the
parts of Man and Woman; and by turning up the several Dissections of the
Papers, take a view of all their Inwards: with Alphabetical referrences to the
Names of every Member and part of the Body. Set forth in Latin by Remelinus,
and Michael Spaher of Tyrol: and Englished by John Ireton Chyrurgeon: and
lastly, perused and corrected by several rare Anatomists. Price 14 s. Vignola,
or the Complete Architect. Showing in a plain and easy way, the Rules of the
five Orders in Architecture, viz. Tuscan, Dorick, Ionick, Corinthian and
Composite: whereby any that can but read and understand English, may readily
learn the proportions that all Members in Building have to one another: set
forth by Mr. James Barrozzio of Vignola, and translated into English by Joseph
Moxon Hydrographer, etc. Price 3 s. 6 d. Christiologia, or a brief, but true
Account of the certain year, Month, Day and Minute of the Birth of Jesus
Christ. By John Butler B. D. and Chaplain to his Grace James Duke of Ormond,
etc. and Rector of Lichborough, in the Diocese of Peterburgh. Price 3 s. 6 d. A
Tutor to Astrology, or Astrology made easy; being a plain Introduction to the
whole Art of Astrology. Whereby the meanest Apprehension may learn to erect a
Figure, and by the same give a determinate Judgment upon any Question of
Nativity whatsoever. Also new Tables of Houses, calculated for the Latitude of
51 degrees. 32 min. Also Tables of Right and Oblique Ascensions to 6 degrees. of
Latitude. Whereunto is added an Ephemeris for three years; with all other
necessary Tables that belong to the Art of Astrology. Also how to erect a
Figure the Rational way by the Tables of Triangles, more methodically than has
yet been published; digested into a small Pocket Volume, for the convenience of
those that erect Figures abroad. By W. Eland. Price 2 s. The Use of a
Mathematical Instrument called a Quadrant, showing very plainly and easily to
know the exact height and distance of any Steeple, Tree, or House, etc. Also to
know the Hour of the Day by it; the height of the Sun, Moon or Stars; and to
know the time of the Sunrising and setting, and the length of every day in the
year, the place of the Sun in the Ecliptic, the Azimuth, right Ascension, and
Declination of the Sun: with many other necessary and delightful Conclusions,
performed very readily. Also the use of a Nocturnal, whereby you may learn to
know the Stars in Heaven, and the hour of the Night by them. With many other
delightful Operations. Price 6 d. A brief Discourse of a passage by the
North Pole to Japan, China, etc. Pleaded by three Experiments, and Answers to
all objections that can be urged against a passage that way. As 1. By a
Navigation into the North Pole, and two degrees beyond it. 2. By a Navigation
from Japan toward the North Pole. 3. By an Experiment made by the Czar of
Muscovy: whereby it appears that to the Northward of Nova Zembla is a free and
open Sea as far as Japan, China, etc. With a Mapp of all the discovered Land
nearest to the Pole. By Joseph Moxon Hydrographer etc. Price 6 d. Regulae Trium
Ordinum Literarum Typographicarum: Or the Rules of the three Orders of
Print-Letters, viz. The Roman, Italick, English, Capaitals and Small. Showing
how they are compounded of Geometrick Figures, and mostly made by Rule and
Compass. Useful for Writing-Masters, Painters, Carvers, Masons, and others that
are lovers of Curiosity. By Joseph Moxon Hydrographer etc. Price 5 s. The Use
of the Astronomical Playing Cards. Teaching an ordinary Capacity by them to be
acquainted with all the Stars in Heaven: to know their Places, Colors, Natures
and Bignesses. Also the Poetical Reasons for every Constellation; very useful,
pleasant and delightful for all lovers of Ingeniety. By Joseph Moxon Hydrogr.
etc. Price 6 d. The Astronomical Cards. By Joseph Moxon Hydrographer, etc.
Price plain 1 s. Colored 1 s. 6 d. Best colored and the Stars gilt 5 s. The
Genteel Housekeepers Pastime: Or, the Mode of Carving at the Table represented
in a Pack of Playing Cards. By which, together with the Instructions in this
Book, any ordinary Capacity may easily learn how to Cut up, or Carve in M^de
all the most usual Dishes of Flesh, Fish, Fowl, and Baked M^^^^; and how to
make the several Services of the same at the Table; with the several Sawces and
Garnishes proper to each Dish of Meat. Set forth by several of the best Masters
in the Faculty of Carving, and published for public Use. Price 6 d. Carving
Cards. By the best Carvers at the Lord Mayors Table. Price 1 s. Compendium
Euclidis Curiosi: Or Geometrical Operations. Showing how with one single
opening of the Compasses, and a straight Ruler all the Propositions of Euclids
first Five Books are performed. Translated out of Dutch into English. By Joseph
Moxon. Hydrogr. etc. Price 1 s. An Introduction to the Art of Species. By Sir
Jonas Moore. Price 6 d. Two Tables of Ranges, according to degrees of Mounture.
By Henry Bond, Senior. Price 6. d. Mechanic Exercises: Or the Doctrine of
Handy-Works, in six Monthly Exercises; began January 1. 1677. and monthly
continued till June 1678. The first three, viz. the Numb. I. Numb. II. Numb.
III. teaching the Art of Smithing. The other three, viz. Numb. IIII. Numb. V.
Numb. VI. teaching the Art of faynery. Accommodated with suitable engraved
Figures. By Joseph Moxon Hydrographer, etc. price 6 d. each Exercise.
At the place abovesaid, you may also have all manner of Mapps, Sea-Platts
Drafts, Mathematical Books, Instruments, etc. At the lowest prizes.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is invented by the Right Honorable the Farl of Castlemain, a new kind
of Globe, called (for distinction sake) the English Globe; being a fixed and
immovable one, performing what the Ordinary ones do, and much more, even
without their usual Appendancies; as Wooden Horizons, Brazen Meridians,
Vertical Circles, Horary Circles, etc. For it Composes it self to the site and
Position of the World without the Mariners Compass, or the like foreign Help;
and besides other useful and surprising Operations (relating both to the Sun
and Moon, and performed by the Shade alone) we have by it not only the constant
proportion of Perpendiculars to their Shades, with several Corollaries thence
arising, but also an easy, new, and most compendious way of describing Dyals
on all Planes, as well Geometrically, as Mechanically: most of which may be
taught any one in few Hours, though never so unacquainted with Mathematics.

To this is added on the Pedestal a Projection of all the appearing
Constellations in this Horizon, with their Figures and Shapes. And besides,
several new things in it differing from the common Astrolabe, (tending to a
clearer and quicker way of Operating) the very Principles of all
Steriographical Projections are laid down, and Mathematically demonstrated; as
is every thing else of Moment throughout the whole Treatise.

These Globes will be made and exposed to Sale about August next, (God
willing:) against which time the Book for its use will also be Printed, and
sold by Joseph Moxon, on Ludgate Hill, at the Sign of Atlas.


