A DEFENSE OF AMICIA, Daughter of HVGH CYVELIOK, Earl of CHESTER.

Wherein it is proved, That Sir Peter Leicester Baronet, In his Book,
Entitled, Historical Antiquities, In Two Books; The first Treating in General
of Great Britain and Ireland. The second containing Particular Remarks
concerning Cheshire


Has without any just Ground declared the said Amicia to be a Bastard.

By Sir Thomas Mainwaring of Peover in Cheshire, Baronet.

London, Printed for Sam. Lowades over against Exeter House in the Strand. 1673.

TO Sir Peter Leicester, Baronet.
IT will appear very strange to those who know the nearness of Blood that is
betwixt us, that I should appear in Print against you; and I do confess, it is
not without some regret, that I am constrained so to do: If you would have been
contented to have delivered what you did conceit, concerning Amicia, the
Daughter of Hugh Cyveliok, Earl of Chester, as an uncertainty only (as you
have done that of Roger, Son of the said Earl Hugh) you know I would have
rested satisfied with the Judgment of those many knowing and unconcerned
Persons that have dissented from you therein, and would never have given you
and the Reader the trouble of any one of these Lines. But since you were so
fond of divulging this your supposed new Discovery (notwithstanding your being
descended of her) as to determine her in your late published Book, absolutely
to be a Bastard; and did also many years since, without any other occasion at
all, send a Paper tending to the same purpose, to a then Deputy Herald (though
at that time you did wholly mistake the state of the Case) I hope it will not
be taken ill if I endeavor to give her a public Vindication.

I might here take occasion to tell you, that I very much wonder, when you
mention Ralph Mainwaring, Chief Justice of Chester, and his Son Roger, and
William Mainwaring Younger Son of the said Roger, (which William had Over or
Higher Peover by gift of his said Father) that you do not take notice that they
were all three Knights, you having seen proof thereof by many Deeds, where the
word Dominus is prefixed to each of their names, which was not (that I know of)
used to be done to any in those elder Ages, but those that were Knights (Clergy
Men only excepted) and accordingly in the 330 and 332 Pages of your Book, you
own Sir Thomas Mainwaring of Warmincham, to be a Knight upon the like Proofs;
as also, why you have not in the descent of the Mainwarings of Peover, set down
Ranulfus that is mentioned in Domesday Book (whom you truly suppose to be a
Mainwaring) as also all the other Mainwarings that were before the aforesaid
Sir William Mainwaring, in regard they held Over-Peover, or the most part
thereof, as well as they held Warmincham. For, that Tadetune which Ranulfus in
Domesday Book is said to hold in Mildestric Hundred is Warmincham, it appearing
by Ancient Records, that Manerium de Tetton and Manerium de Warmincham est unum
and idem Manerium; and it is also clear, that Ranulfus was a Mainwaring,
because, though he be there named without a Surname, as Odard or Hudard (the
owner of a part of Dutton) and many others were, yet the Surname of Mesnilwaren
or Mainwaring (for that name in Records and Deeds is written very many ways)
was as appears in your Book Page 111. used in the days of King William Rufus
(as it also was ever since) and all the Lands that the said Ranulfus had in
Cheshire which are mentioned in your Book, Page 422, 423, 426, 427. As also all
the Lands that Ranulfus held in Norfolk were enjoyed by the Family of the
Mainwarings.

I might also here take notice of your mistake in the 336 Page of your Book,
where you blame the Herald for making, in Queen Elizabeth's time, for the then
Sir Randle Mainwarings Coat Barry of Twelve pieces Argent and Gules (for which
you cite Guillims Heraldry) but that was the mistake of Guillim, and not of the
Herald, as appears by the Pedigree then made, which you have often seen. For,
the Coat which the Herald did then allow the said Sir Randle to have a Right
unto (as well as to those two placed in your Book, P. 331. and 333. the first
whereof, though cut right, is by you blazoned amiss) was Argent six Barulets
Gules, which Coat you take notice Sir Roger Mainwaring did Seal with; and the
direct Line of the said Sir Roger Mainwaring presently failing (Sir Thomas
Mainwaring Eldest Son of the said Sir Roger, having issue Sir Warine
Mainwaring, who had issue a Daughter and Heir) I know no reason but the
Mainwarings of Peover, who (as is confessed by you Page 333.) are now next
Heir-Male to the Mainwarings of Warmincham, have a good right to the Six
Barnlets with which Sir Roger Mainwaring of Warmincham, Father of Sir William
Mainwaring of Peover did Seal, as well as they have to the Two Bars, which Sir
Thomas Mainwaring of Warmincham, Brother of the said Sir William Mainwaring did
bear.

I might in like manner here, let you know that I do suspect you have branded
several Persons in your Book with Bastardy, without direct Proof thereof. And
although I shall not concern my self for any, but some of those which are by
you mentioned, when you write of the base Issue of Hugh Cyveliok; yet if I make
it appear that you have there without any certainty aspersed two other Ladies
besides Amicia. I hope you will have no just cause to blame,

SIR, Your most affectionate KINSMAN and Servant Thomas Mainwaring.
Baddeley, Feb. 27. 1672/3.
The Words of Sir Peter Leicester, concerning Amicia, Daughter of Hugh
Cyveliok, Earl of Chester, in his Historical Antiquities.
Part 2. Chap. 5. Page 134, 135, 136, 137, and 138.
IV. The Base Issue of Hugh Cyveliok.
PAganus, Dominus de Milton, whom I have seen witness to a Deed, subscribed
thus --

Filius Bastardus Hugonis Comitis Cestriae.

Roger, witness to a Deed of his Brother Randles, to the Abbey of S. Werburge,
whom I conceive was a Bastard.

Amicia, the Wife of Ralph Mainwaring sometime Judge of Chester, to whom Hugh
Cyveliok, Earl of Chester, her Father, gave In libero maritagio servitium
Gilib. filii Rogeri, scilicet servitium trium Militum: Faciendo sibi servitium
duorum Militum, as the words of the Original Deed do run now in the Possession
of Sir Thomas Mainwaring of Over Peover Baronet.

Also, another Base Daughter, as I conceive, Married one Bacun, and had Issue
Richard Bacun, Founder of the Priory of Roucester in Staffordshire, about the
Reign of King John; for the safety of his Soul, and the Soul of his Uncle
Randle, Earl of Chester. Monast. Part 2. page 267.

And here I cannot but mislike the boldness and ignorance of that Herald, who
gave to Mainwaring of Peover, the Quartering of the Earl of Chester 's Coat of
Arms. Which device was never done before the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, in the
time of Sir Randle Mainwaring, late of Peover, the Elder, my Grandfather by the
Mother; for if he ought of right to Quarter that Coat, then must he be
descended from a Coheir to the Earl of Chester, but that he was not; for, the
Coheirs of Earl Hugh, as you see before, were married to Four of the greatest
Peers of the Kingdom, the Earl of Huntington, the Earl of Arundel, the Earl of
Derby, and the Earl of Winchester 's Son and Heir, who lived not to be Earl:
Neither was Mainwaring then an equal Competitor to have Married a Coheir to the
Earl of Chester; and it is plain, Ex Placitis, 18 Hen. 3. Rot. 14. in the Tower
of London, where the Coheirs implead John the Scot, Earl of Chester, for their
part; there is no mention of Amice claiming any part, or any from or under her
in the Record: Besides, all Ancient Authors of those times, as Polychronicon,
Matthew Paris, Knighton, Stow, and others, would not have omitted her amongst
the rest which they have set down, had she been a Coheir, which also she must
needs have been, had she been Legitimate; for Hugh Cyveliok never had any other
Wife but Bertred, and she survived him.

And though Amice, in the Deed before mentioned, is styled Filia Hugonis
Comitis, without the Addition or Note of Bastard; it was very usual in those
elder ages so to do: The like we find of Geva, Base Daughter of Hugh Lupus, and
several others.

V. Concerning this Bertred, the Wife of Hugh Cyveliok, I cannot omit the
Falsities and Absurdities of some Authors, as Powel on the Welsh History, p.
295. and Fern in his Lacy's Nobility, p. 53. Both of them calling this Bertred
by the name of Beatrix, and saying she was the Daughter of Richard Lucy, Chief
Justice of England, a most gross falsity. I am very certain, that Hugh
Cyvelioks Wife was not Daughter of Lucy, nor ever called Beatrix in any old
Deed or Record, though I find by good authority that there was a Woman called
Beatrix Lucy, but never Wife of Earl Hugh.

The Death of Hugh Cyveliok. Obiit. 1181.
THis Hugh, Earl of Chester, died at Leek in Staffordshire, and was buried at
Chester, Anno Dom. 1181. 27 Hen. 2. Hoveden, Page 615. With whom, Westminster,
Polychronicon, and Cambden inter Comites Cestriae, do all agree.

He was Earl of Chester Twenty eight years, and gave the Church of Bettesford
to the Prior and Canons of Trentham, after the death of William Barba, who at
the time of this Grant possessed the same, a Copy of which Deed, I received
from Sir Simon Dews Baronet.

Now because I find that some are displeased at my placing of Amice, sometime
the Wife of Ralph Mainwaring, Judge of Chester, among the Base Issue of Hugh
Cyveliok, Earl of Chester; and also, that I am informed that three eminent
Judges and four Heralds, are of opinion, That she was Legitimate, and not a
Base Daughter of Earl Hugh. It is very necessary, that I put down here my
Reasons why I have so placed her, protesting withal, that I have not done it
out of any prejudicate opinion, or calumny intended in the least, but only for
the truths sake according to the best of my judgment, and that after a long and
diligent scrutiny made herein; for I must ever acknowledge my self to be
extracted out of the Loins of this Amice, by my own Mother; but you know the
old saying of Aristotle, Amicus Plato, Amicus Socrates, Sed magis amica
veritas. Neither were Bastards in those elder Ages of such disrepute as now in
our days, Memini me alicubi legisse ( says Spelman in his Glossary on the word
Bastardus) Priscos septentrionales Populos etiam spurios admisisse in
successionem; and where he farther tells us, that King William the Conqueror
began his Letter to Alan, Earl of Little Britain, as he did many other more, in
these words, Ego Willielmus cognomento Bastardus. Of which Title (it seems) he
was not ashamed, otherwise he would never have used it himself.

And therefore the Question being no more then this, Whether Amice was a Base
Daughter, or no? I will first answer those Reasons which seem to be the chief
ground of those worthy Persons abovesaid, who think Amice was no Bastard, and
then in order set down my own Reasons, why I conceive her to be a Bastard;
submitting my self wholly to the judgment of all Learned Persons herein.

The Reasons that She was no Bastard.
FIrst, Our Common Law allows not that any Lands can pass in libero Maritagio
with a Bastard Daughter, Coke upon Littl. fol. 21. b. And therefore Amice
having Land given with her in libero Maritagio by the Deed, it must be presumed
that she was no Bastard.

Answ. To which I answer, That it is true, the Law is so taken at this day with
us; but that the Law was so taken in the elder ages of Henry the Second, when
Hugh Cyveliok lived and upwards, I very much doubt; and if we mark well this
Grant, it is the Grant of Earl Hugh to Ralph Mainwaring with Amice his
Daughter, in Frank-marriage of the Service of Gilbert, Son of Roger, to wit,
the Service of three Knights Fees, by doing the Service of two Knights Fees to
the said Earl and his Heirs; which is rather a Release of the Service of one
Knights Fee, then the Grant of any Land. But to pass by this -- I say, That the
Common Law in sundry things is altered at this day, from what it was in former
Ages, long after Henry the Second, Coke upon Littl. fol. 34. Sect. 39. Coke
ibid. fol. 3. a. fol. 8. a. At the bottom of the Page, and on the other side
(b) at the bottom, Fol. 26. b. Sect. 29. and infinite other particulars may be
cited. And that in this particular also of passing Land in libero Maritagio
with Bastards, the Law seems clearly to be altered herein since the Reign of
Henry the Second. For, the common practice I take to be the Common Law, and I
shall give you here one Precedent made about the Reign of King Stephen (and
doubtless many others might be mustered up from those elder ages, if any
curious person would take pains to search old Deeds and Records) which Deed I
received from Sir Simon Dewes, transcribed out of a Manuscript in Arundel House
in London, belonging anciently to the Barons of Stafford, wherein the old
Charts belonging to the Bassets of Drayton-Bassets in Staffordshire where
enrolled about Richards the Second's time. Ibid. fol. 67. a.

Ranulfus Comes Cestriae Willielmo Constabulario and Roberto Dapifero and
omnibus Baronibus suis and hominibus Francis and Anglicis totius Angliae
salutem. Sciatis me dedisse and concessisse Gevae Ridell Filiae Comitis Hughes
Draytunam cum pertinentiis in libero conjugio, sicuti Comes Hughes ei in libero
conjugio dedit and concessit. Et teneat been and in pace, honorifice, and
libere ut melius and liberius tenuit tempore Hugonis Comitis and aliorum meorum
antecessorum eisdem consuetudinibus and libertatibus. Testibus Gilberto Filio
Ricardi, and Adeliza forore mea, and Willielmo Blundo, and Alexandro de
Tresgor, and Rogero de Bellocampo, and Willielmo de Sais, and Roberto de Sais,
and Ricardo Filio Aluredi, and Hugone Filio Osberti, and Henrico de Chalder:
Apud Saintonam.

Wherein Geva is called Daughter of Earl Hugh Lupus, as Amice in that other
Deed is termed Daughter of Earl Hugh Cyveliok. Now that Geva was a Bastard is
very plain out of Ordericus, a Man that lived in that very age, he tells us,
Lib. 10. page 787. speaking of Hugh Lupus his death -- Richardus pulcherrimus
puer quem solum ex Ermentrude Filia Hugonis de Claromonte genuit, etc. Richard,
a brave youth; whom only Hugh Lupus begot on Ermentrude, Daughter of Hugh de
Claremonte, etc. Nor can this be restrained to the only Son, for then it must
have been otherways expressed; and if Hugh Lupus had any other Son or Daughter
by Ermentrude, then cannot Richard be said only to be begotten on her by Earl
Hugh, and so Geva was a Bastard, or else Ordericus lies. Also the same Author
tells us, Lib. 4. p. 522. that Hugh Lupus had also many Base Sons and Daughters
by several Strumpets, who were almost all swept away by sundry misfortunes; and
very probably, if Hugh Lupus had any more Legitimate Children by his Wife,
besides Earl Richard, either Son or Daughter, Ordericus would have Recorded
them as well as he has put down others in like Nature, being indeed his usual
method through the whole course of his History. And had Geva been Legitimate,
then her Issue ought rather to have succeeded into the Earldom of Chester, then
Randle de Meschines, after the Death of Richard, Earl of Chester, for as much
as the Sister and her Heirs, ought to inherit before the Aunt and her Heirs;
and howbeit many Earldoms have descended to the Heirsmales, and not to the
Heirs General, yet in this case were no Heirs-male, but two Females, an Aunt
Legitimate, who had it, and a Sister not Legitimate: And show me a Precedent,
where ever the Heirs of an Aunt inherited before the Heirs of a Sister, both
legally born, and no Heirs-male left, unless in case of Forfeiture by Treason,
or some other great cause to hinder the same.

Secondly, Add to these the words of Glanvile, Chief Justice of England, who
lived under Henry the Second, in that very age with Amice, Lib. 7. cap. 1.
Quilibet liber homo quandam partem terrae suae cum Filia sua, vel cum aliqua
alia qualibet muliere dare potest in Maritagium. sive habuerit haeredem, sive
non, velit haeres vel non, imo and eo contradicente. And if a Man might give
Land then in Free-marriage with any Woman whatsoever, then he might give it to
his Bastard, and then the Law is now changed, for now it must be of the Donors
Blood, and a Bastard is now said not to be of the Donors Blood, Quasi nullius
Filius, and it seems to me, that in those elder ages, Bastards were reputed of
the Blood by the frequent appellation of them by the names of Uncle, Brother,
Daughter, Son, and Cousin: Besides, our Laws were then imperfect, dark, and
obscure in most things, till Bracton, under King Henry the Third, compiled the
Body of our Laws, and brought them into a method.

And now I have done concerning this chief Reason, whereupon those worthy
Judges grounded their Opinions; and we daily see Opinions of Lawyers follow the
putting of the Case, which many times upon mature deliberation, and hearing of
the Case well argued, may then be of another Opinion.

Now follow the Arguments of lesser moment, which I persuade my self were no
Grounds for the Judges aforesaid.

II. THe disparity of the years between Hugh Cyveliok and Bertred his Wife
(...) may suppose he had a former Wife; for Bertred was but Twenty six years
old at the Death of Earl Hugh 1181. as appears by the Inquisition taken 30 H.
2. 1183. after the death of Hugh Cyveliok; and Hugh was Earl of Chester Twenty
eight years, which was one or two years before Bertred was born; besides what
years were run up of his age before his Father Randle died, which may be
supposed to be a competent term of years; and then it is probably he had a
former Wife, and that he staid not unmarried so long as till Bertred was fit
for marriage.

Answ. Now let us examine the Matter a little, it will give us some light,
Robert, Earl of Gloucester, married Mabill, Daughter and Heir of Robert
Fitz-Haimon, Anno Dom. 1110. So Stow in his Chronicle. See also Seldon 's Tit.
Hon. page 647. By her he had Issue four Sons and two Daughters. Maud, the
younger Daughter married Randle de Gernoniis, Earl of Chester, Father to Hugh
Cyveliok. Vincent upon Brook, p. 216. Now suppose we, Maud to be the fourth
Child, probably she was not born till about the year 1117. or thereabout; and
that about the year 1139. she was married to Earl Randle, whereby Robert, Earl
of Gloucester, strengthened his party for Maud the Empress; at that time she
cannot well be supposed to be above Twenty two years old, if she were so much.
Now Earl Randle died 1153. So that Hugh Cyveliok could not possibly be above
Twelve years old at his Fathers death, he might be much less: But suppose we in
a middle way, that he was six years old at his Fathers death, which is more
then can be well affirmed, then could not Earl Hugh be above Seven or eight
years elder then Bertred his Wife; And what great matter is this? I my self was
eight years older then my Wife when I was married; but it is much more probable
that he never had any other Wife, because he had many Bastard Sons and
Daughters, whose heat of youth might by a very timely marriage, have been
possibly prevented, or at least assuaged in some measure.

III. Bertred, the Wife of Hugh Cyveliok, was a witness to the Deed in
Frankmarriage with Amice, and Amice had a Daughter called Bertred, after the
name of the Countess. Ergo, Probably Amice was no Bastard.

Answ. Truly this is of so little weight that it will need no answer; for I yet
apprehend no reason in it.

IV. Roger Mainwaring, Son of Ralph Mainwaring, calls Randle Blundevil, Earl of
Chester and Lincoln, his Uncle in another Deed; wherefore it is to be supposed
that Amice was no Bastard, otherwise Roger durst not have presumed to have
called the Earl Uncle.

Answ. Histories, Deeds, and Records, are full of Examples in this nature,
where we find Bastards frequently called Cousin, Brother, Uncle, Son, and
Danghter. For example, Robert, Earl of Gloucester, Base Son of King Henry the
First, is frequently called in Histories, Brother to Maud the Empress, Hoveden.
p. 553. He is also so styled in a Deed made by Maud the Empress her self,
Seldon 's Tit. Hon. p. 649. Called also Cousin to King Stephen, Ordericus, page
922. Reginald, Earl of Cornwall, another Base Son of Henry the First, styled
Avunculus Regis Henrici Secundi, by Hoveden, page 536. Robert and Ottiwel, two
Bastard Sons of Hugh Lupus, frequently called Filii Hugonis Comitis Cestriae,
and Ottiwel styled Frater Ricardi Comitis Cestriae, Ordericus, p. 602. and 783.
and 870. Geva a Base Daughter of Hugh Lupus, styled in old Deeds Filia Hugonis
Comitis; and there also she calls Earl Randle her Cousin, Monasticon, Part 1.
page 439. Also Richard Bacon, Son of another Base Daughter of Hugh Cyveliok,
calls Randle Blundevil, Earl of Chester, his Uncle, in another Deed, as
Mainwaring in like manner here styles him in this Deed, Monasticon. Part 2. p.
267. Every Man that is but the least versed in Antiquities, knows these things
to be very usual.

The Reasons that Amice was a Bastard.
1. IF Hugh Cyveliok had no other Wife but Bertred, then Amice must certainly
be a Bastard; for she was not a Daughter by Bertred, as is granted on all sides.

But Hugh Cyveliok never had any other Wife but Bertred. Ergo, Amice was a
Bastard.

Now the Minor is to be proved by the Affirmer, Oportet Affirmantem probare:
For as yet I never saw the least proof thereof, either by Deed, Record, or any
Ancient Historian, nor yet any inducement of good reason to incline my belief
of it; and till this be done, it is unreasonable to impose it upon any Man's
belief, by supposing that he had another Wife, for suppositions are no proof at
all. It is not enough to suppose Amice might be by a former Wife, but it must
be clearly proved, or strongly inferred from solid Reason, that it is so, and
that Hugh had a former Wife.

Neither is it a sufficient answer hereunto to say, That it is unreasonable to
conclude all Children Bastards, whose Mothers cannot be proved, God forbid: But
in this Case we find a Wife certainly Recorded, and a Son and four Daughters
(who were afterward Coheirs, and carried away all Earl Hugh 's Lands) clearly
proved by Records, and Ancient Historians; and also Earl Hugh is certainly
known to have had many Bastards both Sons and Daughters, which gives occasion
of strong suspicion, that Amice was a Bastard, she being neither Recorded by
any Historian, nor ever had or claimed any Land as a Coheir; and therefore here
is a necessity of proving a former Wife; which, for my part, I believe firmly
Earl Hugh never had.

2. Whatsoever is given in Frank-marriage, is given as a Portion. Now the
Release of the Service of one Knights Fee in Frankmarriage, seems not a
competent Portion for a Legitimate Daughter of the Earl of Chester, especially
for the eldest Daughter, for so she must be, being of the first venture, which
always is more worthy then the second, if she were at all Legitimate. And we
find the other Daughters married to four of the greatest Earls in England. All
which is a strong presumption, that Amice was a Bastard and no Legitimate
Daughter.

To this it may be answered, That possibly Earl Hugh might give Amice a great
Portion in Money, though she had no Lands; and I say possibly too, he might
give her no Money, or at least nothing considerable. Which great Portion in
Money, when it shall appear to be true, may take off the strength of this
Argument or Second Reason, till then it must be very pressing.

3. The Ancient Historians of our Nation, as Polychronicon, writ by the Monk of
Chester, Henry Knighton, the Monk of Leicester, and others; also Stow and
Cambden have Recorded the lawful Daughters and Coheirs of Earl Hugh. And so the
Record of 18 Hen. 3. And had Amice been a Legitimate Daughter, it is likely
that these Historians would not all have omitted her, but of her there is Altum
silentium among all the Historians and Records which I have yet seen, though
indeed I look upon this only as a probable, not as a sure evincing Argument.

These were the Reasons which inclined my Opinion to place Amice in that order
as I have done; but since there are some Learned Men of another Opinion, I must
leave every Person to the dictate of his own Reason.

THE DEFENSE OF AMICIA, Daughter of Hugh Cyveliok, Earl of Chester.
I Do very much wonder that you should so peremptorily call Amicia a Base
Daughter of Hugh Cyneliok, unless you had more sure grounds to go upon: And
though it be only my task to defend the said Amicia, yet I do suppose I shall
make it appear before I have done, that you go upon no absolute certainty, in
calling her that was Mother to Richard Bacun, Founder of the Priory of
Roucester in Staffordshire, another Base Daughter of the said Hugh Cyveliok, or
in calling Geva a Base Daughter of Hugh Lupus.

At present give me leave to remind you what you have been formerly told, viz.
That those Heralds that gave to Mainwaring of Peover the quartering of the Earl
of Chester's Coat in Queen Elizabeth's time, were Mr. William Cambden and Mr.
Sampson Erdeswick (Persons, who very well understood themselves) and I do not
know why you should so much mislike their boldness and ignorance (as you call
it) for their so doing: For, though we did not anciently quarter that Coat, it
not being usual in that age, when that match was made, for any so to do; and
that it may perhaps in strictness be true, that it does yet only belong to
those of the whole Blood to Quarter Coats, and that to show their Right; yet it
being now a common practice for those who are of the half Blood also to do it,
to manifest, That they descend of the same Father that those of the whole Blood
do, I know not why it should be accounted a crime in us, more then in others in
the like Case.

As for your Objecting, That Mainwaring was not then an equal Competitor, to
have married a Coheir of the Ear! of Chester, the Coheirs being married to Four
of the greatest Peers of the Kingdom: We do not say, That he either was an
equal Competitor, or that she was a Coheir to Earl Randle, she being the
Daughter to Hugh Cyveliok, by a former Wife, and so but half Sister to the said
Earl Randle; however, that could have been no substantial Argument to prove
that Amicia was not Legitimate.

1. Because, sometimes some particular Persons have the fortune to marry Wives
far beyond their Degrees or Estates.

2. Neither was Sir Ralph Mainwaring so inconsiderable a Person, as perhaps you
may conceit him to be. For, besides that, Sir Roger Mainwaring, Son of the said
Sir Ralph, did after the death of the said Sir Ralph give to Sir William
Mainwaring his younger Son, Peover, as also some other Lands; the said Sir
Ralph had also the Lordship of Waburne in Norfolk, and the Lordships (or great
part) of Rode, Blakenhal, Warmincham, Northerden, Ashton juxta Kelsall,
Henbury, and Pexhull. Willaston, Great Warford, Little Warford, Whelock,
Winnington, Cokishall, Tatton, Senellestune, Smalwood, and half of Pichmere, as
also other Lands in Cheshire; the most of which came to Sir William Trussel,
who about Edward the First's time, married Matilda, the sole Daughter and Heir
of Sir Warine Mainwaring, Son of Sir Thomas Mainwaring, Son of Sir Roger, Son
of the said Sir Ralph and Amicia: And the said Sir Ralph was Chief Justice of
Chester, which anciently has been a place of that great repute that Dukes of
York, Gloucester, Exeter, and Ireland; and Earls of Nottingham, Wiltshire,
Suffolk, Shrewsbury, and Derby; besides, other great Persons have heretofore
enjoyed the same.

3. Neither was the Case the same with the other Daughters of the Earl of
Chester, when Ralph Mainwaring married with Amicia, as it was afterward, for
Amicia was married in the life time of her Father Earl Hugh; whereas those Four
came to be such great Fortunes upon the death of their Brother Randle, Earl of
Chester and Lincoln, without Issue, to whom they then became Heirs, they being
his Sisters of the whole Blood; and though all, or most of them were married
before they came to be his Heirs, yet the said Earl Randle having never had
Issue, the expectation of that Estate added to their other Portions, must needs
make them very considerable Fortunes; whereas Amicia was but of the half Blood,
being a Daughter of Earl Hugh by a former Wife.

And whereas you do acknowledge that you have been informed, That Three eminent
Judges, and Four Heralds are of opinion that Amicia was Legitimate, and not a
Base Daughter, you received that information several years ago; but you were
also lately told by one, whom I hope, you have no reason to discredit; that
since then, several other Learned Judges and Heralds had been consulted. All
which did concur in the same opinion, that Amicia was Legitimate.

But before I come to the Reasons that are by you alleged, either for or
against Amicia, give me leave to recite these Three Deeds following, that those
who read them, and the Reasons on both sides, may clearly understand the full
State of the Case.

HVgo Comes Cestr' Constabular' Dapifer' and omnibus Baronibus suis and
Vniversis Ballivis and hominibus suis Francis and Anglicis tam praesentibus
quam futuris salutem. Sciatis me dedisse and concessisse and hac praesenti
Karta mea confirmasse Radulpho de Menilwarin cum Amicia Filia mea in libero
maritagio servitium Gilib. filii Rogeri, scilicet, servitium trium Militum
faciendo michi servitium duorum Militum ille and haeredes sui michi and
haeredibus meis, quare volo and firmiter praecipio ut nullus super hoc eum vel
haeredes suos vexet, vel amplius quam servitium duorum Militum de hoc praedicto
tenemento requirat. Test R. Abbate Cestr. Bertreia Comitissa Cestr. Sim.
Thuschet, Rogero de Livet, Gilib. filio Pigot. Rob. fratre suo, Frumb. de
Ridford. Willielmo de Meinilwarin, Rob. filio Ham. Bettr. Came. Rob. de
Meinilwarin, Ran. de Lee, Rad. Clerico, Petro Clerico qui hanc Kartam fecit and
multis aliis apud Lee.

RAdulfus de Meidnilwar' omnibus praesentibus and futuris ad quos praesens
scriptum pervenerit salutem. Saiatis me dedisse and concessisse and praesenti
carta mea confirmasse Henrico de Alditelegh in liberum maritagium cum Bertrea
filia mea Smelewde cum pertinentiis and Senellest': Cum pertinent. and dimid'
Pichemere cum pertinentiis suis and i. Marc. de redditu annuo in Civitate
Cestr' de terra quae fuit Fagun. quam Robert' filius Ermwi de me tenuit illi
and haeredibus suis qui de dicta Bertrea filia mea pervenient habend' and
tenend' de me and haeredibus meis in feodo and haereditate libere and quiet
plene and pacifice in bosco and plano in pratis and pascuis in aquis viis and
in semitis in vivariis and in molendinis and in omnibus locis and libertatibus
praedictis terris pertinentibus sicut liberum maritagium melius and liberius
teneri pot': Et ego and haeredes mei illi and dictis haeredibus suis contra
omnes homines dictas terras Warrantizabimus. Test' Ran' Com' Cestr. Hug' Com'
Vltoniae, Phil' de Orreby tunc Justic. Cestr. Joh. de Ptell' Hug. Malebiss.
Ric. de Vern. Ran. de Meidnilwar. Clerico. Lidulf. de Tuaml' Rob. de Periis,
Ric. de Kingest. Norm. Pant. Tho. de Orreby, Alured. de Sulinni. Pet. Chan. Gg.
de Aldith. Ric. de Rodest. Clerico and multis aliis.

OMnibus hanc Cartam visuris vel audituris Rogerus de Menilwarin aeternam in
Domino salutem. Noverit Vniversitas vestra me pro salute animae Domini Ranulphi
quondam Comitis Cestriae and Lincolniae Avunculi mei and prosalute animae meae
and animarum antecessorum and successorum meorum dedisse concessisse and hac
praesenti Carta mea confirmasse Deo and Beatae Mariae and Abbati and Monachis
de Deulacresse and eorum Grangie de Biveleg. in liberam puram and perpetuam
Elemosynam liberam communam in bosco meo de Pevere, scilicet, Vt accipiant de
eodem bosco husbot and haybot rationabiliter per visum alicujus forestariorum
meorum quantum necesse habuerint, sine impedimento aeriarum nisorum meorum
ubicunque nidificaverint, Praeterea dedi eis liberam pessionem and quietam de
pannagio quinquaginta porcis quandocunque voluerint in praedicto nemore meo de
Pevere, pro hac autem donatione and concessione mea, Ego Rogerus praedictus and
haeredes mei de praedictis Abbate and Monachis de Deulacresse nichil exigere
poterimus, nisi orationes and suffragia ordinis Cisterciensis. Ego vero and
haeredes mei sepedictam donationem and concessionem meam sepedictis Abbati and
Monachis and Grangie de Biveleg contra omnes gentes Warrantizabimus
imperpetuum. Et ut haec donatio mea rata and inconcussa in sempiternum
perseveret eam praesentis Cartae testimonio and Sigilli mei impressione
roboravi. Hiis testibus Willielmo de Menilwarin. Willielmo Capellano de Lauton.
Ricardo de Moston. Bened. de Cawdray, Johanne de Motlawe, Willielmo de Pevere,
Hugone de Weloc. Nicolao de Wereford, Gilberto Gekell and aliis.

And now I shall consider of your Answer to the first Reason on the behalf of
Amicia; which Reason, I think, should have been expressed to this, or the like
effect, viz.

Our Common Law neither now does, nor heretofore ever did allow, that Lands or
Services could be passed In libero Maritagio with a Bastard Danghter by the
Reputed Father, because a Bastard is not De sanguine Patris. And therefore
Amicia having Services given with her In libero Maritagio by her Father, it
necessarily follows that Amicia was no Bastard.

To which, your Answer is, that it is true, the Law is so taken at this day;
but you much doubt, whether it was so taken in the elder Ages of Henry the
Second, and upwards; and to make good what you say, you cite my Lord Coke upon
Littleton in several places; as also Glanvile, Chief Justice of England, who
lived in the same time that Amicia did; and you also allege, that you have
found a Precedent where Lands were given by the Father in Free Marriage with
his Base Daughter.

To what you urge out of my Lord Coke, I do thus say, That I do conceive the
Common Law, where not altered by Parliament, is the same at this day that it
was formerly; and therefore my Lord Coke on Littleton, telling us Page 115. b.
that it is a Maxim of the Law, That whatsoever was at the Common Law, and is
not ousted or taken away by any Statute, remains still. I might thence argue,
That if it had ever been at the Common Law, that a Man might have given Lands
or Services In libero Maritagio with a Bastard, or one that is not of the
Blood, that it would be lawful to do so still, because that part of the Law is
not ousted, or taken away by any Statute; but a Man cannot do so now: And
therefore the Common Law never was, that a Man might give Lands or Services
with a Bastard in Free Marriage, or to one that was not of the Blood. So that
those places which you have cited, do not prove, That the Common Law at this
day does vary from what it was in former ages in any particular, but only that
it was taken to be otherwise in those days; and it is but just like some Cases
in our Reports, which have at several times been adjudged directly contrary to
each other, but notwithstanding that, the Law was still the same.

But that I may come as near you as I can, I shall acknowledge, that though the
Common Law was ever the same, where not altered by Parliament, yet in former
Ages they did in some particulars, take the Law to be otherwise then they now
do; and if you could prove, that they did so in this Case of Free Marriage, it
would take off much of the strength of this Argument, because that Ancient
Deeds and Grants (according to what my Lord Coke on Littleton, says fol. 8. b.
at the bottom) are to be expounded as the Law was taken to be at the time of
the Grant: But this is so far from making against my opinion, that I think it
does add very much strength thereto; for if it had been taken in former Ages,
that Lands might have been given in Free Marriage with a Bastard, or one not of
the Blood, it certainly would sometime or other, have been so observed by some
of the Sages of the Law; for where the Law has been taken in one Age after one
manner, and in another age after another manner, it is so remarkable, that it
could not pass unobserved by all.

As to what you allege out of Glanvil, who says, Quilibet liber homo quandam
partem terrae suae cum Filia sua vel cum aliqua alia qualibet muliere dare
potest in Maritagium. I do conceive it is the same thing in Law, and shall be
so intended, as if it had been expressly said, With any Woman of his Kindred; and
that for these Reasons.

First, Because though such kind of Expressions seem to be Universal, and
without any exception at all; yet they shall not be so largely taken, but shall
be expounded so as may agree with the Laws of that Kingdom or Nation, to which
they particularly do relate; and for this I shall give you an example out of
Scripture it self. In the Fourteenth Chapter of Deuteronomy, and the Twenty
sixth Verse, there was a Liberty given to the Jews in some Cases, and at some
of their Feasts, to eat whatsoever their Soul lusted after, and whatsoever
their Soul desired: And yet this was not to be expounded universally of all
Meats whatsoever (in case they desired the same) but must be meant only of
such Meats as were legally clean, and allowed them to eat by their Law. And
thus, when we also say, That any Man that has Money enough, may buy Lands when
he pleases, it shall not be understood of any Man whatsoever: For, a Traitor,
or a Jew, or one that is convicted of Felony, or an Alien cannot purchase Land
in England; but it shall be understood of one that is by Law enabled so to do:
And so in like manner the words Cum alia qualibet muliere, must be understood
only of such a Woman as is capable of such a gift, which a Woman that is a
Bastard, or not of the Blood, or a Jew, or an Alien, etc. is not. For in these
kind of Gifts, as Mr. Bracton tells you, Lib. 2. cap. 11. the Land so given is
Liberum tenementum uxoris, and non viri, cum non habeat nisi custodiam cum
uxore.

Secondly, Because I do conceive that Glanvil has immediately contradicted
himself, unless by these words, Cum aliqua alia qualibet muliere, he
understands a Woman that is of the Blood of the Donor: For he tells us in the
same Chapter, and the very next words to those that you cite, That none can
give Lands in remunerationem servitii sui, to hold good after the death of the
Donor, unless there be Seisin in the life time of the Donor, which is untrue.
If a Man having a mind so to reward his Servants, can give Lands with his
Woman-servant to a stranger, or with his Woman-servant to his Manservant in
Free Marriage. For, where Lands are given In libero Maritagio, according to
Law, there needs no Seisin; and where they are given contrary to the Law, viz.
(to one not of the Blood of the Donor) Seisin does only make it an Estate for
Life, as my Lord Coke says in his Institutes, Part 1. page 21. b. So that it
seems clear, Glanvil by the words Cum aliqua alia qualibet muliere, understands
one of the Blood of the Donor, as well as I hope hereafter to prove that
Bracton does by the words Cum aliqua muliere.

Thirdly, Because that though Glanvil, lib. 7. cap. 1. says, A Man may give
part of his Heritage to his Bastard; and that also Bracton in his Second Book,
and beginning of his Seventh Chapter tells us, That Lands may be given Bastardo
in Maritagium cum aliqua muliere; yet neither of them has one word at all to
prove, That Lands may be given to a Man cum Bastarda, whereas in this Case of
Frank-marriage, the party with whom the Land is given, not the party to whom
the Land is given, is the principal thing that is considerable herein.

Fourthly, Because my Lord Coke in the First Part of his Institutes, fol. 21.
b. tells us, That if the King give Land to a Man with a Woman of his Kindred in
Frank-marriage, and the Woman dies without Issue, the Man in the Kings Case
shall not hold it for his life, because the Woman was the cause of the Gift;
but it is otherwise in the Case of a common Person. And to prove this, in the
Margent he cites, 9 H. 3. Dower 202. Whereas, if you look Fitz-Herberts Graund
Abridgment, 9 Hen. 3. Dower. 202. the words run thus, Si le Roy done certain
tree a un homme ove une feme en marriage, si le bar' and issue pur la feme il
naver la tree apres la morte la feme mes cest issu q' la feme au devaunt
enherit, etc. So that you see in these Cases of Free Marriage, my Lord Coke
makes no difference between these words, Ove une feme, and these words, With a
Woman of his Kindred; and by the same Reason, being in the Case of
Frank-marriage also Glanvile's words, Cum alia qualibet muliere, are to be
understood, with any other Woman of his Kindred only. Also, which is very
observable, Glanvile was first made Justice of England, 26 Hen. 2. as Mr.
Dugdale tells you in his Chronology of Lord Chancellors, Lord Keepers, Lord
Treasurers, Justices, etc. which was about Forty five years before the 9 Hen.
3. Therefore what likelihood is there, that the Law should be differently taken
in so short a time, from what it was in the time of Glanvile, and especially
since the Statute of Westminster, the Second, was not made till about
Threescore years after the Nineth of King Henry the Third.

Fifthly, Because the Author of the Book called The Laws Resolutions of Women's
Rights, Printed by the Assigns of John More, 1632. does tell us, That in old
time these Gifts in Frank-marriage were to be made to them of the Kindred, as
well as now. His words in his Thirty third Section of Frank-marriage, page 73.
are these. It was, as I suppose, more frequent in the old time, that Men gave
Lands with their Daughters in Marriage, then it was at this day; but now as
then if a Man liberally and freely, without any Money or other considerations,
save only Love and Natural Affection, give Lands or Tenements to another Man,
with a Woman which is a Daughter, Sister, or Cousin to the Donor in
Frank-marriage, whether it be tempore Matrimonii, vel ante, vel post. This word
Frank-marriage makes an Estate of Inheritance, viz. to the Donees, and the
Heirs of their Two Bodies, and they shall hold quite of all manner of Services
(except the pure Fealty) till the Fourth degree be past; but the Issue in the
Fifth degree, and his Descendant, shall hold of the Donor and his Heirs, as
they hold over.

Sixthly, Because the Author of the old Treatise, commonly called Fleta, in the
Third Book, and Eleventh Chapter, De donationibus in Maritagiis, does imply
that these kind of Gifts must be made to them of the Kindred; his very words are
these, Est autem quoddam Maritagium liberum ab omni servitio solutum donatori,
vel ejus haeredibus usque ad tertium haeredem vel usque ad quartum gradum
faciendum and debent gradus sic computari, ut Donatorius primum faciat gradum,
haeres ejus secundum gradum, haeres haeredis tertium, and haeres secundi
haeredis quartum, qui quidem tenebitur ad servitium ut ad homagium, prius autem
minime ne Donator vel ejus haeredes per homagium, homagii acceptionem a
reversione repellantur, sed in quarto gradu pro eo quod tune vehementer
presumitur quod terra non est pro defectu haeredum donatoriarum reversura, quia
etsi propinquos haeredes non habeat, vel cum habeat and defecerint ad donatorem
vel ejus haeredes qui homagium ceperint non erit terra reversura, dum tamen
aliquis remotus de consanguinitate appareat, qui jus in haereditatem poterit
vendicare alioquin evanescit homagium, and revertetur. Et cum de sanguine
homagium factum fuerit, extunc obligatur homo ad servitium, quia servitium
semper sequitur homagium, etc.

Seventhly, Because Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 7. par. 3. says thus, Et sciendum
quod terra datur aliquando ante sponsalia and propter nuptias a patre mulieris
vel alio parente ipsi marito cum muliere aliqua vel utrique simul, sc. tali
viro and uxori suae (quod idem est) and eorum haeredibus vel alicui mulieri ad
se maritandam, etc. And presently after, Fit etiam talis donatio ante
Matrimonium contractum aliquando in ipso contractu, aliquando post contractum.
Which in my apprehension is as much as to say, That this kind of Gift can only
be made by the Father, Mother, or some other Kinsman, (for the word parens or
parent in Latin and French has oftentimes that signification) and of this
opinion was my Lord Coke. For in his Institutes upon Littleton, page 21. b. he
tells you, That one of those things incident to a Frank-marriage is, that the
Woman that is the cause of the Gift, be of the Blood of the Donor, and for this
as appears Letter (1) amongst other Proofs, he in the Margent cites Bracton,
lib. 2. cap. 7. Also, which is very considerable, Mr. Bracton here uses this
expression Cum muliere aliqua, and yet means a Kinswoman, and why then should
we think that Mr. Glanvile does not mean a Kinswoman, though he use this
expression Cum alia qualibet muliere, and especially since my Lord Coke in the
very Page of his Institutes last mentioned, quotes Mr. Glanvile, lib. 7. cap.
18. And amongst others, that expression of his Cum aliqua muliere in
Maritagium; and also in the Margent cites Glanvile, lib. 7. cap. 1. (the very
place on which you frame your Argument) which he would never have done, if he
had thought the opinion of Glanvile had been contradictory to his own. And if
there had been any such thing, as that the Law in this point had been severally
taken in so very short a space, as betwixt the time of Bracton and Glanvile,
sure my Lord Coke would in that place have taken notice thereof.

Eighthly, and lastly, The Law appears to be the same in this Case which it was
in Glanvile's time, because as Littleton tells us in his 271 Section, Gifts in
Free-marriage were by the Common Law before the Statute of Westminster the
Second. Now the Common Law has always been the same, and as my Lord Coke tells
us in his First Part of Institutes, fol. 115. b. has no Controuler in any part
of it, but the High Court of Parliament, and if it be not abrogated or altered
by Parliament it remains still: But the Parliament has made no alteration
concerning Gifts in Free-marriage, except the said Statute of Westminster the
Second, cap. 1. By which they turned the Estate that passed by those Gifts in
Feesimple into an Estate Tail, (all Inheritances being Feesimple before the
said Statute) so that in other respects the Law in this Case remains as it did.
And that this is so, I conceive is very clear, because, I suppose neither you,
nor any other person, can tell any one particular in which the Common Law is,
or has been altered but by Act of Parliament: Neither could there be any
occasion to alter the Common Law, or to take it otherways in this particular
then they did formerly, because since there were Estates in Tail, there could
be no great occasion to make Gifts in Free-marriages; and therefore my Lord
Coke says in his First Part of Institutes, fol. 178. b. That such Gifts are
almost grown out of use, and serve now principally for Moot Cases and Questions
in the Law, that thereupon were wont to arise.

Neither is there any weight in what you say, That it seems to you, that in
those elder Ages Bastards were reputed of the Blood, by the frequent
appellation of them by the names of Uncle, Brother, Daughter, Son, and Cousin;
for, by the same Reason you should repute them of the Blood now, this Age being
as civil to them in their expressions, as any former Age could possibly be.

And for the Precedent you give me, wherein you say Lands were given in libero
maritagio with a Bastard, I conceive it will not hold;

Because it does not certainly appear, that Geva was a Bastard; for, in all the
Records that you cite, she is called Earl Hugh's Daughter; and in one of them,
she calls Randle Earl of Chester her Cousin, which makes it probable that she
was Legitimate, especially, since I do not find by any Deed, Record, or Author
whatsoever, that she is at any time called a Bastard.

As for your saying, That it is plain out of Ordericus, p. 787. that Geva was a
Bastard, because, speaking of Hugh Lupus his death, he adds these words,
Richardus autem pulcherrimus puer quem solum ex Ementrude Filia Hugonis de
Claromonte genuit. I am not satisfied, but he might as well mean, that he was
the only Son which Earl Hugh had by Ementrude, as that he was the only Child
that he had by her. For, there is no necessity to take the word Solum
adverbially; neither is it marked as an Adverb in Ordericus his Book, though it
be so in yours, and yet in his Book Adverbs are usually marked. And though that
Ordericus (if his meaning were so) might have worded it more clearly, yet he
many times expresses himself worse then he does here, and particularly Page
871. And though he tells us, Page 522. that E pellicibus plurimam sobolem
utriusque sexus genuit; yet he does not say that Geva was one of them.

Neither is there any force in what you allege, that probably if Hugh Lupus
had any more Legitimate Children by his Wife besides Earl Richard, either Son
or Daughter, that Ordericus would have Recorded them as well as others, being
indeed his usual method through the whole course of his History. For he could
have no Legitimate Son but Earl Richard, unless he had another Wife besides
Ementrude ( Ordericus being express therein) and possibly for some Reasons he
might have another Wife besides Ementrude: But whether Geva was by a First or
second Wife, I know no necessity to conclude that Ordericus should Record her,
I finding no such usual method of his, as this which you speak of: For he does
not (that I see) make it his business to Record what Wives or Children the
Earls of Chester, and other great Men had, but only speaks of them
occasionally, and so he also does of some of their Illegitimate Children; but
if he made it his design to give an exact account of these things, he ought to
reckon Geva, either amongst the lawful, doubtful, or illegitimate Children of
Hugh Lupus.

And as to your Objection, That if Geva had been Legitimate, her Issue ought
rather to have succeeded into the Earldom of Chester, then Randle de Meschines,
after the death of Richard Earl of Chester, That does not at all follow,
because, it is possible the Earldom of Chester, at that time (as most times
Earldoms anciently were) might be Entailed on the Heirs-males only, and then
the Male Line being extinct, why might not the King confer it as well upon
Randle de Meschines, who was a near Kinsman, as upon a stranger? Which later
course is also usual at this day. And it is very probable, that the Earldom was
Entailed on the Heirs-males only; for James York in his Union of Honor, p.
105. says, That this Randle was made Earl by Grant of King Henry the First; and
if so, it came not to him by Descent: So that all which you here object is
fully answered. But if it had been so, that the Earldom had been to Descend to
the Heirs General; if Geva was Daughter of Hugh Lupus by another Wife, besides
Ementrude; then the Earldom of Chester would have Descended from Earl Richard
to Randle Meschines by his Mother, being Aunt of the whole Blood to Richard,
and not to his Sister Geva, or her Issue, they being but of the Half Blood to
him.

And whereas you desire me to show you a Precedent wherever the Heirs of an
Aunt inherited, before the Heirs of a Sister, both legally born, and no
Heirs-male left, unless in Case of Forfeiture by Treason, or some other great
cause to hinder the same. I shall now show you where an Honor in such a Case
came to the Heirs of the younger Sister, and not to the Heirs of the elder
Sister, which is full as much as if it were done in the Case of a Sister and an
Aunt. If you peruse the Magazin of Honor, Collected by Mr. Bird, and enlarged
by Sir John Doderidge, One of His Majesty's Justices of the Kings Bench, page
96. you will there find, That whereas Radulfe, Lord Cromwell, being a Baron by
Writ, died without Issue, having Two Sisters, and Coheirs, Elizabeth the Eldest
married to Sir Thomas Nevil, and Joan the Younger married to Sir Hunt Bourcher:
He who had married the Younger Sister, was called to the Parliament as Lord
Cromwell, and not the said Sir Tho. Nevil, who had married the Elder Sister; so
that you see no convincing Argument can be brought from the enjoyment of the
Earldom by Randle de Meschines, however the Case prove to be.

I do therefore still conceive, That it is very clear that Lands or Services
never were in any Age passed, In libero Maritagio with a Bastard, or with any
one that was not of the Blood, but only for Term of Life, and that with Livery
and Seisin; and consequently, all persons to whom such Deeds or Grants were
made (unless for life only) are certainly to be concluded Legitimate; and if
you will bring a Convincing Precedent to the contrary, do not produce a Record
or Deed of Lands or Services given with one that you suppose to be a Bastard,
or not of the Blood; but first clearly prove, That the party was certainly a
Bastard, or not of the Blood, by some Deed, Record, or Ancient History, and
show Lands or Services so given with her and then there will be some strength
in such a Precedent.

But what will you say, If this Deed which you allege to be made to Geva, will
not at all concern Amicia, if Geva were a Bastard. If you peruse what my Lord
Coke upon Littleton, says page 21. b. he will there tell you, That these words
In liberum Maritagium, are such words of art, and so necessarily required, as
they cannot be expressed by words equipollent, or amounting to as much. As if a
Man give Lands to another with his Daughter In connubio soluto ab omni
servitio, etc. yet there passes in this Case but an Estate for Life; for
seeing that these words In liberum Maritagium create an Estate of Inheritance
against the general Rule of Law, the Law requires that they should be legally
pursued. And in this Deed to Geva, the words are not In liberum Maritagium, but
In libero Conjugio; and so are but like the words In connubio soluto ab omni
servitio, which make but an Estate for Life, and so might be passed either to a
Bastard, or any other person whatsoever. And if you look well on the Deed to
Geva, it is worded as if it intended only an Estate for Life, there being no
mention of her Heirs, and running also in the singular number, Et teneat been
and in pace, etc. Vt melius and liberius tenuit, etc. Also, if you observe my
Lord Coke upon Littleton, a little before on the same Page, he will tell you,
that Four things are incident to a Frank-marriage: The first whereof is, That
it be given for consideration of Marriage, either to a Man with a Woman, or as
some have held, to a Woman with a Man, (and with this Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 7.
does accord.) And the fourth thing is, That the Donees shall hold freely of the
Donor, till the fourth degree be past, (with which the old. Treatise called
Fleta, lib. 3. cap. 11. does agree.) For both which Reasons, this Gift cannot
be a Gift in Frank-marriage, because, what is here given, is given to Geva
alone, and not to an Husband with her; as also, there are here no Donees, but
one Donee only, and the Estate was not to continue until the fourth degree was
past, but was only an Estate intended for the Life of Geva, as appears before;
whereas what was given by Earl Hugh to Ralph Mainwaring with his Daughter
Amicia, and by Ralph Mainwaring to Henry de Alditelegh with his Daughter
Bertred, was given in Freemarriage, and their Heirs are mentioned in both the
Deeds: It remains therefore clear, That the Deed to Geva was not a Gift in
Frank-marriage, and is also very uncertain, whether Geva was a Bastard, as you
suppose.

The second Reason alleged to prove, That Amicia was Legitimate, has also yet
its full strength, and is not at all weakened by any thing that you have said:
For, I think it will still appear, that Earl Hugh was much Elder then his Wife
Bertred; and therefore probably had a former Wife, who dying and leaving him no
Issue-male, it is no wonder at all, if he that had so great an Estate, did
afterward marry a Lady that was very much younger than himself. And though you
do affirm, That Earl Hugh could not be above Seven or eight years older then
Bertred his Wife, I suppose I shall make it appear, that there might be many
more years betwixt them, and that from the Argument upon which you your self do
reckon, viz. The Marriage of Robert Earl of Gloucester, with Mabill Daughter and
Heir of Robert Fitz-Haimon. For whether the said Robert Earl of Gloucester,
according to Seldom, married the said Mabill in the year 1109. or according to
Stow in the year 1110. The said Mabill might possibly have Maud, her second
Daughter in the year 1112. Which Maud, if she was married in the year 1128.
when she was Sixteen years of Age to Earl Randle de Gernoniis, might have her
Son Hugh Cyveliok in the year 1129. Which if true, the said Earl Hugh was Fifty
two years of age at his death, for he died in the year 1181. And if so, then he
was four years above twice the age of Bertred; for she was aged but Twenty four
years when the said Earl Hugh died, as appears Rot. de Dominabus pueris, etc.
In Scacc. penes Remem. R. sub Tit. Linc. Rot. 1. And it is certain, That the
said Earl Hugh was Earl of Chester about four years before his Wife Bertred was
born, besides what age he was of, when his Father died: But I may very well
abate you several years of this account, and yet Earl Hugh be a great deal
older then his Wife Bertred.

And as to the Third and fourth Reasons, they were only urged as concurrent
Proof, with the Argument brought from the words In libero Maritagio, yet I
conceive there are many more circumstances than you take notice of: And
therefore when I have observed them all, viz. That in the first Deed, Hugh
Cyveliok's Countess is a Witness, by which the said Earl gives Services to the
said Amicia in Freemarriage, and calls her his Daughter: And in the second,
That Ralph Mainwarings Daughter is also called Bertred after the Countess, and
Randle Earl of Chester, a Witness to what was given with her in Free-marriage
to Henry de Alditelegh, who was Great Grandfather to the Famous James Audley
that warred in France. And in the third, How Roger Mainwaring in his Gift to
the Monks of Deulacress, calls Randle Earl of Chester and Lincoln his Uncle;
and how, as appears in Mr. Dugdale's Antiquities of Warwickshire, page 88.
Ralph Mainwaring was with the said Earl at Coventry, and a Witness to his
Charter to his Burgesses there; as also, how Roger de Meinwarin and Henry de
Aldithele, who married his Sister, Monast. Angl. Part 1. page 891. are
Witnesses to the Deed of Randle Earl of Chester and Lincoln, concerning his
Abbey of Deulacress; as also, how the said Henry de Audley, Monastic. Angl.
Part 2. page 509. was a Witness to the Deed of Robert de Ferraris, whose Mother
was one of the Sisters and Coheirs to the aforesaid Earl Randle; as also, how
Raph Menilwaringe or Mainwaring, as appears by your Book, Part 2. page 130.
131. 139. 143. and 144. is a Witness to one Deed of Hugh Cyvelioks, and to
three other Deeds of the said Earl Randle, (who in some of them is also styled
Duke of Britain, and Earl of Richmond) I shall leave it (without any more
words) to the Reader to judge, whether these Circumstances be not such as do
show more great and constant intimacy betwixt the said Two Families, then
probably would have been, if Amice had been a Bastard; and if so, they strongly
concur to prove her Legitimate, which is all the use that is made of those
Arguments.

And although you Object, That you frequently find in Histories and Records,
that Bastards are called Cousin, Brother, Uncle, Son, and Daughter. I grant it
to be true, yet that is either done where the persons came to be very great, as
Robert Earl of Gloucester did, or else, are called so by those that write the
Histories of them, or else are so termed by their Relations, who out of their
Humility did condescend so to style them upon ordinary occasions, though it
were not their due. But I believe you can hardly find one that you can
certainly prove to be a Bastard, or the Son of a Bastard, who does presume in a
Deed to call so great a person, as the Earl of Chester was, his Brother, or
Uncle, unless he came to be a very great person himself.

Also I do verily believe, that Richard Bacun's Mother was not a Base Daughter
of Hugh Cyvelioks, nor any Daughter of his at all, because, as you may see
Monast. Angl. Part 2. page 267. When Richard Bacun did found the Priory of
Roucester in Staffordshire, his Uncle Randle Earl of Chester was then living,
and a William was then Archbishop of York, and one whose name did begin with R.
was then Bishop of Chester; but if the Catalogue of Archbishops and Bishops at
the end of Isaackson's Chronology be right, there was no William Archbishop of
York, during the life of Randle Blundevile; nor any Man Bishop of Chester,
whose Christian name began with R. except Richard Peche, who died in the year
1182. At which time Randle Blundevile could not be of age to Seal any kind of
Deed, because Bertred, the said Randle's Mother, was then but about Twenty five
years of age. I rather think that Bacun's Uncle, mentioned Monastic. Angl. Part
2. page 267. was Randle de Gernoniis; for he was Earl from the year 1128. to
about the year 1152. And in the year 1143. as Isaackson says, William Sisters
Son to King Stephen, was Archbishop of York, but was ousted of it again, till
about 1152. or 1153. And Roger Clinton from the year 1128. until the year 1149.
was Bishop of Leichfield and Coventry; which Bishop in elder ages, was the same
with the Bishop of Chester. But that Randle Earl of Chester, who is mentioned
Monast. Angl. Part 2. page 268. was indeed Randle Blundevile, who was Earl from
about the year 1180. till about the year 1232. ( Roger Constable of Chester,
who lived in the time of no other Earl Randle, being a Witness to the said
Deed) But what the said Randle Blundevile did, was but by way of Confirmation,
which in former times was very usual to be obtained from Princes several
Generations after; as to instance in one Case, instead of many. If you read
Monastic. Angl. Part 2. page 24 and 25. you will find King Henry the First,
Reciting and Confirming what had been given to the Priory of Huntendune, and
Page 27. you may find King Henry the Third doing the like; and yet there was a
greater space betwixt King Henry the First, and King Henry the Third, than
there was betwixt Randle de Gernoniis and Randle Blundevile. So that you may
see, such great persons as these may have some Children which our Historians
take no notice of: And you may also discover upon what slender Grounds you have
charged Richard Bacun's Mother with Bastardy, she being so far from being a
Base Daughter to Hugh Cyveliok, that she was no Daughter of his at all; but she
was Sister to Randle de Gernoniis, and Daughter to Randle Meschines.

But I shall now come to Answer the Reasons that you bring to prove, That Amice
was a Bastard. And your first is this.

If Hugh Cyveliok had no other Wife but Bertred, then Amice must be certainly a
Bastard; for she was not a Daughter by Bertred as is granted on all fides: But
Hugh Cyveliok never had any other Wife but Bertred. Ergo, Amice was a Bastard.
And you say the Minor is to be proved by the Affirmer; For, Oportet Affirmantem
probare.

To this I say,

First, That by this Rule you your self are as much bound to prove her a
Bastard, as I am bound to prove that Hugh Cyveliok had a former Wife; for you
as clearly affirm that, as I affirm the other; and there is no reason why
Suppositions should pass for Proofs any more in your Case, then they should do
in mine.

Secondly, That less Proof by many degrees will serve to prove a thing that was
done long since, then will be required to prove that which was done lately. To
instance in one Case, which may serve instead of many: If you be to prove a
Deed that was lately Sealed, it will be expected you produce the Witnesses who
were present at the Sealing and Delivery thereof. If your Deed was sealed a
good while ago, the proving of the Hands will be required: But if the Deed be
so old, that none alive could know the Handwriting of the Witnesses, then the
Deed carries its own Proof with it: And the like reason there is in all Cases
of Antiquity, and especially in those that are so very ancient as this is. For,
if I did only prove her called a Daughter, being it is so long since, she
ought to be presumed Legitimate, unless the contrary do appear. For the proving
she was not by Bertred, does not prove that she was a Bastard; but only proves
that she was either a Bastard, or else by a former Wife: And our Law at this
day is, That a Bastard cannot be proved a Bastard but in his life time; and so
it anciently was also, as appears by the Old Treatise called Fleta, lib. 6.
cap. 39. sect. 14. where it is thus said, Si autem post mortem alicujus
apponatur Bastardia, non allocabitur; cum defunctus ad talem exceptionem
respondere non poterit. Now, if a Person cannot be proved a Bastard immediately
after his death, because he cannot answer for himself, What reason is there to
charge Amice with Bastardy so many hundred years after her decease.

Thirdly, I do conceive that the Passing of Services In libero Maritagio with
Amice, does absolutely prove that she was a lawful Child, and by consequence by
a former Wife: Also, if you take notice of what Sir Henry Spelman writes in his
Glossary, on the word Bastardus, you will find him quoting Coustum. du Normand.
Artic. 77. in Annot. thus, Quoties enim agitur de honor vel commodo Filiorum,
appellatione Filiorum non comprehenduntur Bastardi. I suppose therefore in this
Case, Amice would not have been styled as she is in the said Deed, unless she
had been a Legitimate Daughter.

Fourthly, If this Argument of yours would hold as you have framed it, we
should have almost nothing but Bastards in the Ancient times: For if all must
be Bastards, if we could not tell who their Mothers were, nor directly prove
their Fathers married, we might then conclude, most persons to be Bastards that
lived in the First and second Centuries after the Conquest. I shall not offer
to put the Case upon any other Family but my own (though it does reach a
multitude of others.) But as to my own, if I mistake not, I find Eight persons
whose Wives we are altogether ignorant of, and Six of those persons left Issue,
all which Issue, by your Argument would be Bastards; which I am confident you
cannot, nor will not suppose. I shall instance only in one, viz. Roger
Melinguarin who in the Reign of King Henry the First, as you may see in the
First Part of Monasticon Anglicanum, p. 985. gave Plumley (a place in Cheshire,
near to Peover) to the Abbey of S. Werburge at Chester; and as it appears by
the said Record; the said Roger Mainwaring had Three Sons, William, Randle, and
Wido. Now if you should affirm, That the said William Randle and Wido, were
Legitimate, which I verily believe you will not scruple to do, I could thus
frame your own Argument against you.

If Roger Melinguarin had no Wife, then, William, Randle, and Wido, Sons of the
said Roger were certainly Bastards: But Roger Melinguarin aforesaid had no
Wife. Ergo, etc.

Now if this Argument would hold against Amicia, it would also hold against
these three Children of Roger Mainwaring, and indeed against all other persons
whose Fathers we could not directly and interminis prove to have been married
(the Proof lying on the Affirmers side) the Absurdity of which is so great,
that you your self cry, God forbid all Children should be concluded Bastards,
whose Mothers cannot be proved.

But if it be possible for a Man to have one Wife, and we not know who she was,
Why may not a Man have two Wives, and we be ignorant who the former Wife was.

Yea, but (say you) in this Case we find a Wife certainly Recorded, and a Son
and Four Daughters, who were afterward Coheirs, and carried away all Earl Hugh
's Lands, clearly proved by Records and Ancient Historians; and also Earl Hugh
is certainly known to have many Bastards, which gives occasion of strong
suspicion that Amice was a Bastard; and therefore here is a necessity of
proving a former Wife, which you firmly believe Earl Hugh never had.

For answer hereunto, I say that I do believe if Randle Blundevile had left any
Issue Male, you had not met with such Proof of the Four Sisters his Coheirs, as
you now do: For, the falling of that great Estate to them, they being of the
whole Blood to their Brother, is the occasion of their being Recorded, and so
much taken notice of by Historians. And though this Earl Hugh their Father had
some Issue that was not lawful, (as many of the great persons of that age had,)
yet that hinders not but he might have two Wives; neither had he so many
Bastards as you lay upon him, for, I have showed before, That Richard Bacun's
Mother was not any Child of his: And I do conceive I have by necessary
consequence proved, That the said Earl Hugh had a Wife, who was Mother to
Amicia, though we cannot tell who she was. And it is no great wonder, if the
old Historians do not mention who Hugh Cyveliok's first Wife was, for, there is
not any of the Ancient Writers that I know of, who does make it his business to
tell what Wives and Children this Earl Hugh had; nay, I think there is no
Ancient Historian that does mention his Wife Bertred: And therefore, we had
never known who she had been, but only because she survived her Husband, and
was mentioned in the Inquisition taken after his death, and because her
Daughters after the death of their Brother came to be Heirs.

Also, it is very hard to tell who were Wives to Walter Gifford, the First Earl
of Buckingham; John of Henault, Earl of Cambridge; Baldwin de Ripariis, Earl of
Devonshire; William Fitz-Piers, Earl of Essex; Robert de Ferrars, the First
Earl of Ferrars, (and as some say of Derby) Robert de Ferrars, Second Earl of
Ferrars; Ralph de Maunt, Earl of Hereford; William de Iper, Earl of Kent;
William de Romara, Earl of Lincoln; Morchar, Earl of Northumberland;
Gospatrick, Earl of Northumberland; Robert Mowbray, Earl of Northumberland, and
several others; and therefore, what great wonder would it be for Hugh Cyveliok
to have a former Wife, and yet we to be ignorant who that former Wife was.

Your second Reason against Amicia will not hold, For though what is given in
Frank-marriage, be given in consideration of Marriage, yet it cannot properly
be called a Portion. For, such Gifts may be made either before Marriage, at
Marriage, or after Marriage, as you may see Coke on Littl. 21. b. And besides,
what is given as a Portion remains to the Husband for ever, and is wholly at
his disposal; but Lands given in Frankmarriage, shall after the death of the
Husband and Wife (if they die without Issue) revert to the Donor: Also any
person that pleases may give a Woman a Portion, but none but one of the whole
Blood can give Lands with a Woman in Frank-marriage, as Mr. Hughes says in his
Grand Abrigdment of the Law, page 970.

But the reason why you call it a Portion, is, Because you would have it
thought that this was all her Portion, and thence would infer, that she was
Illegitimate, because so very little was given with her: But I think any Man
that will weigh things indifferently will easily conclude, That if she had been
but a Bastard, yet being a Bastard of so great a person, she would have had a
great deal more given her then these Services, upon those terms that they were
given, and especially considering how you have observed out of Sir Henry
Spelman, that Bastards were not in such disrepute in those former ages, as they
are now; and besides, I have made it appear, that Sir Ralph Mainwaring was no
inconsiderable person, and therefore would deserve a great deal more. And you
may also find in one of the Deeds beforementioned, that though the said Sir
Ralph had Issue Male, yet he gave that which was of far greater value in
Free-marriage with a Daughter of his own: But I perceive, if this Deed of Earl
Hughes had been lost, you would not have believed that Sir Ralph Mainwaring had
had any thing with Amicia, because then it would not have appeared, which is a
strange way of arguing, about things that were done so long since. And, if this
be a good reason, I wonder you do believe that Earl Hugh had any Portion with
his Countess Bertred, because (for ought I yet know) it does not appear that he
had.

As for your alleging how the other Four Sisters were married, I have
answered that before; and though you say, That if Amice had been Legitimate,
she being of the first Venture, would have been more worthy then those of the
second, though that be true when the Sisters Claim as Heirs to their Father;
yet when they come to Claim as Heirs to their Brother (as in this Case) if
there be Sisters of two Venters, and the Brother be of the second Venture, then
the Sisters that are of the second Venture shall be preferred before those of
the first Venture, because those of the second Venture are of the whole Blood. I
shall therefore here conclude what I have to say to your second Reason, when I
have told you, that I do not understand why you call this Gift of Earl Hughs
(as you do in two several places) A Release of the Service of one Knight's Fee.

Your third and last Reason, I conceive has no weight at all; For those
Historians and others which you speak of there, do not take upon them to give
an account of all the Children of Hugh Cyveliok, but only to tell who were the
Heirs of Randle Blundevill; and of this you are so sensible, That you confess
this Argument not to be evincing, and yet it is as strong as your first Reason.
But I cannot but wonder when you name Mr. Cambden to be one of those that take
no notice of Amicia, being you well know that he has mentioned her in his
Britannia, in his Description of the County of Chester; and though not as a
Coheir to her Brother Randle, (for that she was not) yet without the least
brand of being a Bastard: Also all those Judges and Heralds, of whom you have
formerly heard, and all other persons (except your self) which have seen my
Deeds, have from the Expressions therein, been fully convinced, that she must
needs be Legitimate; and amongst others, that worthy and judicious person,
William Dugdale Esquire, our Norroy, King of Arms, is of the same judgment, as
will appear in his Historical Discourse of the Baronage of England (which will
be shortly ready for the Press.) In which, from the Authorities and Reasons
there briefly cited, he concludes, That Bertred was a second Wife, and that
Amicia was a Lawful Daughter of the said Earl Hugh by aformer Wife, though it
be not known who that Wife was, and which is worthy observation, the said Mr.
Dugdale has heard you allege your Reasons to the contrary, but did not find
them such as to be satisfactory to him: I hope therefore that I shall not
because of my Relation to that Noble Lady, be thought to be Partial or Singular
herein, since that it appears she stands vindicated by the Sentence of so many
knowing and unconcerned persons; but it will necessarily follow, that you have
dealt very severely with your said Grandmother, and that upon such weak
Grounds, as your Three Pretended Reasons, which will not prove her to be a
Bastard, if those Arguments that were brought on her behalf, were all laid
aside.

I have now answered the Objections which you have brought against Amicia, the
Wife of Sir Ralph Mainwaring; but before I conclude, I shall acquaint you, and
the Reader, with two Deeds; the first whereof, does belong to Thomas
Ravenscroft of Bretton, in the County of Flint, Esquire; and the other to Henry
Mainwaring of Kermincham in Cheshire, Esquire, the words whereof do here
follow, as they were coppied out several years since from the Originals by
William Dugdale Esquire.

SCiant praesentes and futuri quod ego Alanus de Boidele dedi and quiet' clam'
fratri meo Willielmo de Boidele and haered' suis Doccliston in feod' and
dominicis cum omnibus pertin' infra Limam. Tenend' and habend' de Domino meo
Ranl' Com' Cestr' and haered' suis faciend' servicium de praedict' terr' sc. De
quatuor feod' and dimid' praenominato domino meo Ranl' Com' Cestr. and haered'
suis. Et ego vero Alanus de Boidele and haered' mei praedict. terr. cum omnibus
pertin' praenominato Willielmo de Boidele and haered' suis contra omnes homines
and feminas cum pertin' warantisab. Et quia volo quod hec mea donatio and
quiet' clam' stabilis and inconcussa and rat' permaneat praesenti scripto
sigillum meum apposui. His test' Domino Ranl' Comite Cestr' domino Rad' de
Mainwaringhe tunc Justiciar' Cestr' domino Roberto de Monte alto, Domino Hug'
Dispensar' Domino Ham' Sen' de Mascy, Domino Warino de Vernun, Domino Willielmo
de Venables. Toma fil' Willielmi de Goulborn, Petro de Bekering. Rob' tunc
persona Gropenhale scriptor' hujus scripti and multis aliis.

SCiant and omnes praesentes quam futuri quod ego Robertus dominus Moaldie and
senescallus Cestrie, concessi and praesenti Karta confirmavi domui sce'
Werburge Virginis in Cestria and Monachis ibidem Deo servientibus totam Villam
de Goostree plene and integre cum omnibus pertin' suis in puram and perpetuam
elemosynam pro salute anime niee and animarum praedecessorum meorum, liberam
quietam and solutam ab omni seculari servicio and omni seculari exactione. Ita
quod in eadem Villa de Goostre nihil ad opus meum vel haeredum meorum retinui
praeter elemosynam and orationes and tantam libertatem in ipsa eadem Villa
praedicte domui and praedictis Monachis concessi quod in posterum nullus
haeredum meorum quicquid libertatis superaddere possit. Et ut hec mea concessio
rata and inconcussa permaneat imperpetuum eam sigilli mei appositione roboravi.
Hiis testibus Rad' de Menilwar' tunc Justiciar' Ham' de Masci Gwar de Vern'
Rad' fil' Sim' Pho' de Orreby. Sim' de Thuschet' Rog' de Menilwar' Willielmo de
Venables. Toma Dispensatore Rob' fil' Picot' Petro Clerico Com' Ricardo de
Vern' Rob' de Menilwar' Brito Paulum Patr' de Moberl' Liulf' de Twamlow. Peers
de Surtm' Ran' de Praers' Ricardo de Kingsl' Jo' de sancta Maria, and multis
aliis.

I shall also desire you to take notice of what you your self have observed in
your Historical Antiquities, page 160. how that Earl Randle de Gernoniis (as
does appear by the Charter there mentioned) did give the Office of Constable of
Cheshire, in Fee to Eustace, Baron of Halton, and his Heirs; and did constitute
the said Eustace (to use the words of the said Charter) Haereditarie
Constabularium and supremum conciliarium post me and super omnes optimates and
Barons totius terrae meae. As also Page 161. how the Baron de Montealto or
Moald, being Dapifer, Seneschal, or Steward of Cheshire in Fee, had the second
place, which is also confirmed by several Deeds mentioned by you, Page 129.
130. 139. 144. and 162. In all which, the Constable and Steward are named
before the Justice of Chester, and all the other Barons; which being so, it
will be difficult to give a Reason (if Amicia was but a Base Daughter) why Sir
Ralph Mainwaring, in the Deed abovesaid of Alan de Boidele, is named as a
Witness next to the Earl of Chester, and before Sir Robert de Monte alto or
Moald, Steward of Cheshire, and so many of the other Barons; as also in a Deed
mentioned in your Book, Page 139. why the said Ralph Mainwaring is named next
to the Countess of Chester, and before Roger, Constable of Cheshire; as also,
why in a Deed in the 143 Page of your Book, the said Ralph Mainwaring is again
named next to the said Countess, and before Ralph, the Steward of Cheshire.

But if Amicia was a Legitimate Daughter, the reason thereof will be apparent:
For though it be true, that the Husband cannot be Ennobled by the Marriage of
his Wife, yet the Earl of Chester, being a Count Palatine, and one that is
confessed by you, Page 152 and 159. to have Royal Authority within himself, and
not unfitly to bestiled a Petty King, having under him his Constable of
Cheshire in Fee, in imitation of the Lord High Constable of England, and his
Steward of Cheshire in Fee, after the example of the Lord High Steward of
England, and his Noblemen about him, in imitation of the Barons of the Kingdom;
as also his Chamberlain, who supplieth the place of Chancellor, and his
Justices of Chester, (who have like power to the Judges of the Courts of Kings
Bench and Common Pleas,) as also a Baron of the Exchequer, a Sheriff, and other
Officers proportionable to those of the Crown: It is no wonder at all, if these
great persons did voluntarily give Precedence to Sir Ralph Mainwaring during
his life, in regard he had married a lawful Daughter to one of their said Earls.

Add hereunto, that when Earl Hugh Cyvelioke, did by his Charter mentioned by
you, Page 131. acquit the Abbot and Monks of Stanlaw, of some Toll in Chester,
(which could be but a little before the said Earl's death, because, the said
Earl died in the year 1181. And the Abbey of Stanlaw, as is confessed by you,
Page 267. was Founded but in the year 1178.) The said Earl in his said Charter
(contrary to all former Precedents which I have seen) does name the Justice of
Chester before both the Constable of Cheshire, and Steward of Cheshire; and the
Reason thereof, I suppose to be, because the said Ralph Mainwaring, who was Son
in Law to the said Earl, was then Justice of Chester, as he also was, some
years in the life time of Randle Blundevill; though the said Ralph, as appears,
by his aforesaid Deed made to Henry de Alditelegh, did afterward part with the
said Office, Philip de Orreby being Justice of Chester, when the said Philip
was a Witness to the said Deed.

Now this preeminence could not be given to the said Ralph, because he was
Justice of Chester? (that being below the Offices of Constable and Steward, as
appears before) but because of the Relation of the said Ralph, to the said
Earl: But as this respect was too great to have been showed him, if he had
only married one that was a Bastard; so it does not consist with your
conceits, that the said Amice was Illegitimate, and that the said Ralph had
nothing else with her, but the aforesaid Services: For indeed they were not of
sufficient value to be a Portion suitable to the Estate of a very mean
Gentleman.

I Have at present done with this Discourse, concerning the aforesaid Amicia,
but being desirous to rectify all Mistakes which do concern my Family, in all
the Particulars that I can, I think it not inconvenient to inform the Reader of
one of yours, in the 334 Page of your Book, wherein, speaking of Margery the
Wife of Randle Mainwaring, you say, This Randle Manwaring of Over Peover,
styled commonly Honkyn Manwaring in the Language of those times, died 35 H. 6.
1456. Lib. B. page 21. E. Buried at Over Peover in the Stone Chapel on the
Southside of the Church: Which Chapel Margery his Wife surviveing, erected,
with the two Monuments therein for her self and husband, Anno Dom. 1456.

For albeit it be very true, that the said Randle Mainwaring did marry Margery,
the Daughter of Hugh Venables, Baron of Kinderton, and Widow of Richard
Bulkeley of Chedle in Cheshire, yet the said Margery did not survive the said
Randle, and after his death, Erect the said Chapel and Monuments therein: For
although on the Eighth day of August, in the Year of our Lord God, One thousand
six hundred and forty, the Pictures of the said Randle Mainwaring and Margery
were tricked out by a very good hand, as they were then remaining in a Glass
Window of the said Chapel, Kneeling, with this Inscription, viz. Orate pro
animabus Ranulphi Maynwaryng and Margeriae Vxoris ejus qui istam Capellam, Anno
Dom. Mcccclvj............

And although the Year when the said Chapel was built, is still to be seen in
the said Window, yet that does not prove, that the said Margery survived her
Husband Randle, and erected the said Chapel and Monuments: For, the word qui
cannot possibly relate to Margery alone, but does, as I conceive, (in the true
meaning thereof) relate only to the said Randle: For it appears by an
Inquisition taken after the Death of the said Margery, that the said Margery
held in Dower, at the time of her Death ( Ex dotatione Richardi Bulkeley
quondam viri sui) the third part of the Moity of the Manor of Chedle; as also
Five Messuages in Middlewich; One Message and Sixty Acres of Land and Wood in
Newton near Middlewich; Ten Acres of Land in Ashley and Hale; Eight Acres of
Land in Occleston; Six Messuages and Two hundred Acres of Land, Meadow, and
Wood, in Whatcroft; Six Messuages and One hundred and twenty Acres of Land,
Meadow, and Wood, in Holme juxta Davenport; the Moity of the Site of one
Water-Mill, and Four Acres of Wood in Little Stanthorne, and the Moity of the
Manor of Timperley: And it is also found by the said Inquisition, that William
de Bulkeley was the next Heir of the said Margery.

Now this Inquisition being taken in the Twenty seventh year of King Henry the
Sixth; and the said Randle Mainwaring, together with his Three Sons, Sir John,
William, and Randle, (for the said John was Knighted in the life time of his
Father) being all Three mentioned, as then living, in a Deed of mine, dated the
Saturday next after the Feast of Saint Hillary, in the Thirtieth year of King
Henry the Sixth; and I having also in my custody another Deed, dated the Sunday
next before the Feast of Corpus Christi, in the said Thirtieth year of the said
King, made betwixt the said Randle Mainwaring the Elder, and Sir John
Mainwaring Knight, his Son, on the one party, and John of Ashley of the other
party, concerning a Marriage to be had betwixt Hamnet, Son and Heir Apparent of
the said John Ashley, and Margaret Daughter of the said Sir John Mainwaring
(which Deed is also mentioned by you Page 334.) It is from hence very clear,
that the said Margery did not survive her said Husband Randle Mainwaring, and
erect the said Chapel and Monuments therein, after the said Randles death.

There is also omitted by you in your Historical Antiquities, Agnes the
Daughter of John Mainwaring of Over Peover Esquire, who was Sister to Sir John
Mainwaring, and Wife of Sir Robert Nedham Knight: And of this Match, there is
very good Proof, (which you have been informed of) I having by me the Pictures
of the said Sir Robert and Dame Agnes, as they were carefully tricked out the
Tenth day of August, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred and
forty, from a Glass Window in Holmes Chapel in Cheshire; where they were then
Kneeling, with the Coats of Arms of Nedham and Mainwaring empaled betwixt them,
and Three Sons Kneeling behind the said Sir Robert, and Two Daughters Kneeling
behind the said Dame Agnes, together with this Inscription.

Orate pro bono Statu Roberti Nedam Militis and Agnetis Vxoris ejus and pro
animabus Thomae, Johannis, and Roberti filiorum and pro bono statu Matildae and
Johannae filiarum ejus Roberti fieri in Anno Domini Mcccccxliiij. Also, in the
Chancel of the Parish Church of Adderley, in the County of Salop, being the
usual Burial place of the Nedhams of Shenton, in the said County, (which Family
of Nedham, is now honored with the Title of Viscount Kilmorey of the Kingdom of
Ireland) there do yet remain the Monuments of the said Sir Robert and Dame
Agnes, there being on a Blowish Marble Stone, the Pictures of the said Sir
Robert Nedham, and Dame Agnes, and Seven Sons, and Two Daughters; as also an
Inscription (all of them of Brass) which Inscription is as follows.

HEre lies Buried under this Stone the Bodes of Sir Robart Nedeham Knight, and
Dame Agnes his Wyffe, Daughter of John Maynwaring of Pever Esquyer, which said
Robart deceassed the iiii day of June, An. Domini 1556. And the said Agnes
deceassed the ii day of May. Anno Domini 1560. FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold By Samuel Lowndes at his Shop over against Exeter
House in the Strand.
DE Jure Uniformitatis Ecclesiasticae, or Three Books of the Rights belonging
to an Uniformity in Churches: In which things, the Laws of Nature, and Nations,
and of the Divine Law concerning the Ecclesiastical State with the Civil, are
unfolded. By Richard Davis, Chaplain to His Grace, the Duke of Buckingham, in
Fol. The true Prophecies of Michael Nostradamus, Physician to Henry the Second,
Francis the Second, and Charles the Nineth, Kings of France, and one of the
best Astronomers that ever were. A work full of curiosity and learning.
Translated by Theo. de Garencieres, Doctor of Physic, London. Folio. Aerius
Redivivus: Or the History of the Presbyterians, containing the Beginnings,
Progress, and Successes of that active Sect. Their oppositions to Monarchical
and Episcopal Government, their Innovations in the Church, and their
Imbroilments of the Kingdoms, and Estates of Christendom, in the pursuit of
their designs from the year 1536. to the year 1647. By Peter Heylyn, D. D. And
Chaplain to Charles, the First and Second Monarchs of Great Britain. The
Complete Horsman, and Expert Farrier, in Two Books. 1. Showing the manner of
breeding good Horses, with their choice Nature, Riding, and Dieting, as well
for Running as Hunting; as also, directing the Groom, and Keeper, his true
Office. 2. Directing the most exact and approved manner, how to know, and cure,
all Diseases in Horses. A work containing the Secrets and best skill belonging,
either to Farrier, or Hors-Leach, the Cures placed Alphabetically; with
hundreds of Medicines never before Imprinted by any Author. In Quarto. The
Famous Conclave, wherein Clement the Eight was elected Pope; with the
Intrigues, and Cunning Devices of that Ecclesiastical Assembly, in Quarto. A
Familiar Discourse between George a true hearted English Gentleman, and Hans a
Dutch Merchant, concerning the present Affairs of England, in Quarto. A Short
and Strange Relation of some part of the Life of Taffaletta, The Great
Conqueror and Emperor of Barbary, in Quarto. Paul Festeau's French Grammar,
being the newest and exactest Method now extant, for the attaining to the
Purity of the French Tongue. Augmented and enriched with several choice and new
Dialogues, in Octavo. (...). Or a View of all Religions in the World, with the
several Church Governments from the Creation, to these times; also a discovery
of all known Heresies in all ages, and places, and choice observations and
reflections throughout the whole World. Enlarged and Perfected by Alexander
Ross, in Octavo. Of Credulity and Incredulity in things Divino and Spiritual,
(among other things) a true and faithful Account is given of the Platonic
Philosophy, as it has reference to Christianity: As also the business of
Witches, and Witchcraft, fully argued and disputed by Merick Causabon, Doctor
in Divinity, and one of the Prebends of Christ Church in Canterbury, in Octavo.
Cicero against Cataline, In four Invective Orations, concerning the whole
manner of discovering that notorious Conspiracy, in Octavo. Sermon Preche
Devant le Roy a Whitehal. Par le Docteur Tillotson, Doyen de Canterbury. In
Octavo. The Sinners Tears, in Meditations, and Prayers. By Tho. Fettiplace,
Dom. Pet. Cantab. In Twelves. The Gentile Sinner, or England 's Brave Gentleman
Charactered. In a Letter to a Friend, as he is, and as he should be. By Clement
Ellis, M. A. Fellow of Qu. Col. Oxon. Private Devotions, digested into Six
Letanies. 1. Confession, 2. Deprecation, 3. Supplication, 4. Thanksgiving, 5.
Intercession, 6. For the Sick. With Directions and Prayers for the Lords day,
Sacrament, Day of Death and Judgment; and two daily Prayers for Morning and
Evening. Twenty fours.
FINIS.

