THE MOURNING COURT OR, The Solemn Representation of the Royal Funeral OF That
Most Illustrious PRINCESS MAR^ LATE Queen of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, etc.
WHO Changed this Earthly Crown for a more Glorious and Celestial Diadem, on
the 28th of December 1694, and was Interred in King Henry Chapel, at
Westminster, on the 5th of March 1695; attended by the chief Nobility of the
Kingdom; together with the House of Commons, and many thousand of Loving and
Loyal Subjects, who was sorrowful Spectators of that Mournful Solemnity.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

depiction of funeral of Queen Mary

YOu Loyal Protestants, both High and Low,
Who to our Queen did true Allegiance owe,
Receive these Lines, and let them ever be
Preserved for Her blessed Memory:
As bound in Duty, I could not forbear
To write of her, whose most Religious Care,
was to preserve the Church in Righteousness;
^er Virtues therefore let us all express,
^n ancient Times the Friends surviving gave
^ome rich Memorial to the dead Friend's Grave,
Gold, Pearl, or Jems, which Custom did intend,
Our Riches ought to wait upon our Friend
(...) Life and Death; and therefore let us now
(...) and Sorrow on each Subject's Brow,
(...) the Queen due Veneration Pay,
^^o did of late the Royal Soepter sway.
^hile here she reigned, her Virtues did appear
^^^ough all the Land and Nation far and near,
that sad showers of melting Tears did fall,
(...) sad Eyes which saw her Euneral.
My Gratitude presents unto Her Hearse,
My Tears for Balm, for O fering my sad Verse;
Give leave then, Grief, let my drowned Muse declare,
What She that is dead, was unto them that are:
A Virtuous Life it is well-known she led,
So that at length upon a Dying-bed
Her Thoughts was placed above those Earthly things,
Where everlasting Joy and Pleasure springs.
First, She loved God, not like the Pharisee,
In Ostentation and Hypocrisy;
But even with all her Heart, and all her Soul,
She secretly did raging Sin control;
For She was upright, just and innocent,
Exhorting all Her Subjects to repent,
That God might spare us for his Mercies sake,
Though Rome would fain a final Conquest make.
Likewise Her Princely Mercies did extend,
In Christian Love to nourish and defend
The Poor, and those that never could repay,
But with their Prayers to God both night and day.
She on Religion placed Her chiefest Love,
Adoring God who sits enthroned above,
And not on Worldly Grandeur, for She knew
Those empty fading Shaddows would not do.
Although a bright Imperial Crown She wore,
And here was Decked with many Jewels more;
Swaing the Scepter on the Royal Throne,
Her chiefest Love was placed on God alone.
She was a Pattern of Humility,
And therefore Ladies now of high Degree,
Her good Examples immitate, and try
To Live like Her, that you like Her may Dye
In the true Faith, that when the hand of Death
Shall give the sudden Stroke, and snatch your Breath,
Your Souls may then a Habitation gain,
Where Good Queen MARY does in Glory reign.
No kind of Sorrow ever enters there,
All righteous Souls are freed from Grief and Care,
In those blessed Regions where she does reside,
With whom let us at last be Glorified.
LONDON Printed in the Year 1608.


