THE Successful Straingers A Tragi-Comedy: Acted by their Majesty's Servants,
AT THE Theater Royal,

WRITTEN By WILLIAM MOVNTFORT.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for James Blackwell, at Bernards-Inn-Gate, Holbourn; and Sold
by Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall. 1690.

To the Right Honorable THOMAS WHARTON, Comptroller of his Majesty's Household,
and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
SIR,
I Know Addresses of this Nature are commonly founded on Flattery; and when
Interest guides the Pen, (without a just esteem free from a Mercenary end) it is
hard to avoid it. It Is easier to be an Author then a Judge, and harder to be
Impartial in Commendation then either: For where the known verity of the
Character proves its Title to Applause, the Nicety is so great, that the
Admirer must approach with such a decent Respect, that the Patron may not have
more or less praise then is requisite, and then the Writer may defy Censure.

I know not which is the greatest Pleasure in others, That of receiving
Favors, or acknowledging of 'em; But in me the latter exceeds the first. And
as your Honor was never backward in serving the poorest Petitioner, I hope you
will not be shye of receiving the thanks of your humblest Admirer.

It has been the greatest part of your Satisfaction to be in Power to serve
your Friends; nor is it possible any Advantage or Preferment could corrupt you
into the forgetfulness of 'em. All your Favors come from you so easy, so free
from State, or Expectation of Attendance from those you assist, that a man
would almost wish to want, only to be obliged by so much goodness.

What you now possess was accepted for the benefit of the Public, not the
Profit of the Employment: And the People are safest when the Affairs of the
Nation are managed by those who are above Bribes, and have not their Fortunes
to make out of 'em.

Much more may be said, but the World is so very sensible of the Honor,
Generosity, and Worthiness, which attend you, That my weak Panegirick would
sound like a Tale ill and twice told to a Person who had both heard, and could
deliver it better. I only wish I may never lose the Happiness I now enjoy, in
subscribing my self

Your Honors most Obliged, Humble, and Devoted Servant, Will. Mountfort.

THE Preface to the Reader.
IT has been a hard matter for the most Celebrated Pens to please all humors;
The best of Writers have erred, therefore the worst may the better be excused.
All young Trees are allowed time to bear, and a poor Soil with diligence and
care, has by degrees Rewarded the pains of the Husbandman. I am not unsensible
of my Imperfections, nor of the necessary Assistances I want in writing: In the
first place, I must confess I am no Scholar, which renders me Incapable of
stealing from Greek and Latin Authors, as the better Learned have done; the
dressing of an old Thought in new Words, is an Excellency I should be ashamed
of, could I do it to Perfection. A silver Tankard may be melted down, and
worked up into a Cup with Ears, nay, fine figures engraved upon it too, yet the
mettle's the same, though the fashion be altered.

I have a natural Inclination to Poetry, which was born and not bred in me; I
endeavor to do well, but have not Learning enough to be positive it is so; yet
my Industry should not be despised, when I confess my weakness; But the Town
are as unwilling to encourage a young Author, as the Play house a young Actor;
well, time may work Miracles; I am sensible if Dr. Busby had slighted all his
Junior Block-heads, scarce Divinity or Poetry had arrived to that unexpected
Perfection as is now extant.

I know I have a great many Enemies, but why they are so, is more than they
know, I cannot remember any person I ever injured willingly: If my opinion be
Obnoxious to some, why, that I must account for Above. And it is very hard I may
not enjoy it here, when my side's uppermost; and yet those who are of a
contrary mind, are allowed theirs quietly. I thought I had been beneath their
scorn, but I find their malice excuses none.

I have heard a Judge (who has writ, but was advised not to expose it) say
there was scarce a Poet left worth hanging, but I wish those that are, had
their Deserts; my Comedy in the Play probably is not so Light, nor the serious
part of it so heavily managed as it ought to be, yet the Masters of the
Playhouse lost nothing by it, nor will the Printer I hope, though it sells for
Twelve Pence.

Well, to show you I am an encourager of Poetry, I have Printed some verses,
which but for my good nature, might have been buried in Oblivion; but I think
it is pity a Style so Elegant (attended with such Prodigious Fancy) should be
lost: They were sent me from an unknown hand by the way of Instruction.

Imortal Mountfort should begin this Letter,
But that thy Play's as mortal as a better,
But let what will of that be said,
'thas made provision for the Parsley bed;
A pretty portion for thy eldest Daughter,
(At which the Minor Poets mouths make Water)
Who did with little wit and much ill Nature,
So soon set up for Comedy and Satyr;
Prithy be free thou lucky Rogue,
How came thy Jests so much invogue,
That it is a mode to laugh and do 'em reason,
Least those who don't, should be brought in for Treason.
Well, Faith and Troth thou art a happy Dog,
And can design and flatter, fawn and Cog,
With a whole Audience, banter'd by an Epilogue,
When next thou do employ thy working Brains,
Take modestly thy Fate, Husband thy Gains,
And learn to speak with Reverence of James.
That last Rhyme I think is Admirable, though if he had had Stairs to his
Brains, it might have chim'd as well. I don't know that I meddle with any State
Affairs in my Play; and for Satyr, I Will swear he has found out what I never
meant.

Perhaps these verses may seem a little gross, but they are dismal severe: And
I have charity to believe they were writ off hand, for really as Mr. Bays says,
I don't believe when the Person invented 'em, he ever troubled his head about
it: I wonder if this Gentleman cost Omnipotence a second thought, if he did, I
have heard second thoughts are best; and I cannot help saying it cost
Omnipotence its best thoughts, how to make one of the worst Poets.

Here is another facetious piece as Ironically meant, as the former was
seriously designed; it was sent me as from a Woman, to make it go down the
glibber; and I think* I could not do the Author justice (any other way) but in
Printing it.

Hail thou the Shaksphear of our present age,
Who do at once, supply and grace the Stage
With different proofs of thy surprising wit,
Vying with what the established Pens have writ;
Young Muse go on, whose early purchased Praise*
Contends with Lawriet and decaying Bays,
Nor is it unjust to sacrifice both them,
To thy aspiring, and as hopeful Pen,
Since Emulation stil's the Poets aim,
And his most loved Reward, but glorious fame,
Just Praise will raise thy soreing Muse still higher,
And add new Vigor, Spirit, Life, and Fire,
To what thy fruitful Brain shall more acquire;
But to increase the wonder of thy pen,
Thou art not now, more learned then Shakespeare then,
Who to the amaze of the more Lettered men,
Minted such thoughts from his own Natural Brain,
As the great Readers, since could never attain,
Though daily they the stock of Learning drain,
Nature most justly, in thy Play is seen,
Easy the Plot, and turning of each Scene;
Thy Similies so new, that they surprise
Like a fresh Beautie's bright, all-conquering eyes,
Thy words with artless Grace so smoothly flow,
That like soft Waller's verse, thy Prose does show;
Harmonious is the sound, tunes every Line,
More pleasing far, then Gingling tiresome Rhyme,
Those few will nicely taste the sweeter Chime,
Whose Soul's composed of numbers, like to thine.
Already have thou learnt the Art to move
From nicest honor, to the tender'st Love,
And gently do instruct the blushing maid,
How soon her Love, is still by Love betrayed
Into a soft Confession of her flame
For him that dies for what, he dares not name.
This last writ Play discovers to in thee,
Something like Reading, and Philosophy,
Else how could thou, with such judicious art,
Copy true nature in each various part.
The lower Comedy which seems designed
To please th'unthinking crowd, and less Refined,
Even that is natural, brisk, correct, and free,
Has the true Salt, and Spirit of Comedy:
May it succeed, and please the carping Age,
Who snarlingly enjoyed thy Pucellage,
As vexed the first should so much pleasure give,
Foretelling that the next would longer live.
Have Courage then, and be no more afraid,
You need not act again the bashful Maid:
Let not the fate of that discourage thee,
But listen to famed Waller's Prophecy.
"The faiding Blossom's, which a young Plant bears,
"Engage our Hopes for the succeeding years;
"And Hope is all which Art or Nature brings
"At the first Trial to accomplish things.
"Mankind was first created an Essay,
"That ruder Draught, the Deluge washed away.
"How many Ages past, what Blood and Toil,
"Before we made one Kingdom of this Isle.
How long in vain, had Nature strived to frame
An acting Poet, till great Shakspher came;
And thou the next will it Rival him in Fame.
Unknown Admirer, as I am of thee,
Whom nothing could debauch to Poetry,
But the strange Zeal I have to do thee Right,
Maugre my Sex's weakness, Nature's spite.
I Will hope good Nature so will interpose,
You Will not these well-meant Lines a Jest expose
To lashing Critics, whose ill-natured rage
Blow off young Blossoms in this Satirick Age.
To the blushing Flames let it committed be,
In silence dye, there only slain -- by thee,
Now I am not at all concerned at this, nor do, or did I ever write for Fame:
And when I chance to write again, (as indeed all my Works are hab nab at a
Venture) if the Town will be as kind to my next third day, as they were to my
last, I shall leave my Poetry to the utmost Severity of their Censure, and end
with an approved Saying, If I have their Money, much good may do them with
their Jests.

Dramatis Personae.
DON Carlos, a haughty Spaniard, in Love with Dorothea, but married to Biancha
at last. Mr. Williams. Silvio, a stranger in Love with Dorothea. Mr. Mountfort.
Antonio, Brother to Silvio, the other stranger in Love with Feliciana. Mr.
Powel. Don Lopez, a Rich old covetous Spaniard; Father to Feliciana and
Dorothea. Mr. Nokes. Don Francisco, an old Spaniard, Father to Don Carlos* Mr.
Lee. Don Pedro, Father to Biancha. Mr. Bright. Guzman, Serve. to Carlos, and
intriegues with Farmosa. Mr. Underhill. Sancho, Serve. to Silvio, an Englishman
picked up in England. Mr. Bowen. WOMEN. Dorothea, in a manner engaged to
Carlos, but in Love with Silvio. Mrs. Knight. Feliciana, her sister in Love
with Antonio. Mrs. Mountfort. Farmosa, Woman to Dorothea. Mrs. Corey. Biancha
in Love with Carlos. Mrs. Bracegirdle. A Neice to Don Pedro. Mrs. Miles.
Dons, Attendants, Fiddlers, Bravo's, etc.
SCENE Sevill.

PROLOGUE.
Spoke by Mrs. Bracegirdle.
WEll, worthy Auditors, I am come again,
To plead in the behalf of a weak Pen;
Quaking within the expecting wretch does sit,
To hear the dreadful sentence of the Pit.
Some are resolved (he hears) it shall be damned,
Only because it is from a Players hand;
Sure we have acted some notorious Treason,
You Will not allow the Men, nor do us reason;
Our Women are as kind as may be too,
But nothing but a May forsooth will do,
And her twice had, rot her, she was not so;
You turn her off upon some base pretense,
So making her a fool, proves you have sense;
How many of our poor deluded train,
Have been took off the Stage and sent again.
One day high dressed as any intriegueing Sinner,
The next, poor riggings pawned to buy 'em dinner,
So from that greatness, still grow less and less,
Commend me to a Huswife for a miss.
Before the silly Creatures you debauched,
You made high presents, some of 'em were caoch'd,
Some on first floor did lodge, in plate did feast,
And nothing but tit bits could they ingest;
Toys of all sorts, with Squirril, Lizzard, Parrot,
And in three Months, O flesh! how could they bear it,
In clogs did beat the hoof, and lay in Garret;
Some sparks have told me they would do as much,
If I had grace enough to be but such;
Nay, I was offered fifty Skillings -- Dutch.
But to our Author --
Could but the Females see, how very sad
He looks, they would pity such a likely Lad,
But hang him slave, he is married, there is the curse,
Ah Devil for this better and for worse.
Well Gallants, be impartial to him this day,
If his Play's bad, dawn him indeed I say;
But if by chance, he has writ it to your mind,
As ever you expect my heart to find
Inclinable to you, be kind to him,
And Ladies if you smile, we doubt not them.
The First ACT.
Enter Don Carlos, and his Man Guzman. SCENE I. A Garden.
Carlos. HAve I invented numerous pleasures for her?
Wasted my plenty to advance Her State?
Was I the first that set her up for show?
Nourished her Emulation, still with presents
Which raised the Envy of the Spanish Dames,
Because their Lovers could not match my gifts? --

Guzm. Good Sir, don't chafe so! --

Carl. Arts have been puzl'd and Invention tired,
To humor her affected Luxury;
There Is not a sense she has, but as it palled,
I still supplied with change!

Guz. Nay, you have had enough to do to please her,
For she has been as humoursome, as Breeding Quality,
When the Family wants an Heir.

Carl. Damn her foul feeding, on this course Plebeian,
For were he Noble he would own his Being,
It is some first Rate Servant to a Frenchman,
Whose Singing, Dancing, Tilting h'has been learned,
By his observance, when his Master practiced.

Guz. What a dull dog am I, without these Graces!
I have seen as much as any man;
Remember as little, and perform less!
If I get but a Horseback,
They swear I look like a Monster on a Monster;
And quote me for a figure in St. Antony's Dream.

Carl. O Love! thou woman in the man, and woman man's,
Ill Planet curse on ye both.

Guz. Prettily described, and heartily cursed!
His Honor's as fancifull as a Dutch-Print.

Carl. When yesterday I led her from the Church,
Amongst the Crowd this thing admiring stood,
Each Gallant did his daily duty Pay,
She unconcerned without return passed by 'em;
I was amazed at this unusual Carriage;
But as I wondering stood to guess the Cause.
This upstart with a tedious grace Saluted,
Whilst she to satisfy him, 'twas approved,
With the like lazy movement, answered it.

Guz. This comes of good breeding. Our Country's famed
For It: He that is mannerly here, Ten to one but
He Is poisoned, my Beaver's worn out with
My Serving man's Curtefy!

Carl. Peace Fool! This Morning will I watch her!
For if he cherishes what last she gave him
He will be there again to covet more.
I will observe their Glances eagerly;
Eyes will sufficient Testimony give,
Then, if I am resolved of what I dread,
Her spruce Adorer I Will dispose of quickly.

Guz. Sir! If your passion would abate a while,
To serve you: I Would discover something to you
Though, it is not like a Man of Guzmans Honor,
To boast of what his Rhetoric has obtained.

Carl. What says the Coxcomb?

Guz. The Coxcomb has done Sir:

Carl. Sirrah, restrain your Follies till you find my temper
Fitter to receive 'em.

Guz. If your temper desires to be informed, whether
Your Mistrisses Inclinations bend more to another
Then your self, slight not my Intelligence.

Car. Prithee -- say any thing, for I am so wrackt
With my suspicions I could destroy the Sex.

Guz. Know then: (oh secresy forgive me!) Her Maid,
(Pardon me, my frailty:) I have --

Carl. What?

Guz. Enjoyed!

Car. What then?

Guz. Why then she is a Whore: But her sin is the less
Because that she pays for it.

Carl. Prolixity! go on, what comfort must I hope from this -- Speak!

Guz. Why you are as hasty as an Heir for his Fathers
Death, or a Gamster for his Wive, when he has
Lost all.

Carl. Slave*

Guz. This Damsel, I say, being fond of my parts,
And being the Closet of her Mistrisses thoughts
Will sincerely instruct me, in all her affairs, which
Being informed of, you will the better contrive the ruin
Of him, you doubt will be yours.

Carl. Is thy discovery Faithful?

Guz. As the love of Spaniels!

Carl. O! thou have given my longings vast delight!
For to be certain in my Souls Ambition;
These secret-bearing Bawds are often of use,
Money and Lust corrupt the Hearts of all:
Not Man the Judge of Honor can withstand 'em
Kingdoms have been betrayed by first and last,
And Families are still debauched by Confidents.
Here Is Gold for thee -- pay her in other Coin,
Sift out the Truth and all I have --

Guz. I Will hav't Sir.

Carl. Away then,
I must to Church, wait on my wavering Love,
Take heed she knows not that I set thee on;
For if this Stranger has presented Her,
As it is the Trade to make such Trulls our friends*
He that the largest gifts does still bestow,
Must be her Chapman: Therefore do it secretly.

Guz. As Bankers break Sir -- She Sleeps in Ignorance:
For I have read a Proverb heretofore --
Learn Secrets from, bnt trust none with your Whore.

[Exit. Carl. O Jealousy -- Thou evil fruit in
Lovers Paradise; which tasted, forfeits
All our Happiness.

Enter Don Francisco. Fran. For shame boy don't loiter so! why, the Sun
Has took leave of his Mistress these four hours,
And thou have not visited thine yet.

Carl. I am ready Sir.

Fran. And I Will warrant she is ready for thee boy, or the Woman has failed her,
thy Mother was ready for me at all times, nay sometimes readier then I; but not
till I was Five and Forty by the Champion of Spain.


Carl. Are you for Church Sir?


Fran. No I leave the Church for such young Fellows as you are, you have
debauched it so among you that Heaven has forsook it.


Carl. Forsook Church Sir, why where does it inhabit then?


Fran. Where? why in Sanctified thoughts, Holy and Private Closets, Strict and
devout living.


Carl. Why is not the Church Sanctified, holy, strict, and devout?


Fran. The Church, ay Sir, but what are the Congregations watchers of Eyes,
Dressing admirers, Insinuating Leerers, Hypocritical Fawners, Debauching
Gallants, bribe-taking Servants, promising bawds, Mothers that sell their
Childrens, Children that cheat their Mothers, Fluttering Courtiers, Strutting
Merchants, Affected Gay-Fops, Baboones of fifty mimiking Apes of five and
twenty, proud Heiresses, Fortune-Plundering Soldiers, Hectoring Bravo's,
Coy-seeming Maids, Lewd wives, Painted Widows, and pocky Whores by St. Iago.


Carl. I Will take my Mistress Sir from such ill Company as soon as I can.


Fran. Well said, do boy, marry her quickly, the sooner the better; thou may
loose her yet, she may be Stole in the mumbling of a Paternoster, or the
humming of an Amen; there are perking, prinking, Dancing Finicall Rogues a
purpose for such business.


Carl. O my Spleen stifles me at his chance saying.


[knocks within. Franc. By St Iago there is the Father of thy Mistress, he is
come about the Agreement for the Marriage; Here let him in, take the Key of the
Garden door with thee.


Carl. O for a key to unlock his Daughters Soul: If she be false, this Justice
I will have to see the cursed occasion in his Grave.


[Exit. Fran. Now concerning this match, I have a Confounded old Rogue to deal
with; He has no more Conscience then a Soldier in free Quarter; And as fond of
his money as a Priest of a fresh Convert; As proud as a Darling Statesman, as
Positive as an Affected Wit, as Sullen as neglected merit, and more
troublesome, if possible, then the Civil Law. It has cost me the Devil and all
to maintain this Amor: A confounded Extravagant Rogue of a Son too, has
presented her profusely -- A Pox of her pride, It has cost me 5000 Crowns the
wooing of her. By St. Iago, in England a Man might have layn with the whole
Nation for half the money.


Enter Don Lopez. Signior Lopez good day to you.

Lop. The like to you Signior Francisce.

Fran. Will you walk Signior Lopez, or shall we sit down on this banck?

Lop. I am indifferent warm with walking hither, if it please you let us sit.


Fran. With all my heart -- within there? [Enter Servants. Give us some
Chocolate, Brother that must be, to our Affairs concerning our Children.


[Ex^unt. Lop. Why truly the charge of Children is of great concern, of mighty
moment Brother, and Girls more chargeable, more dangerous, and much more
troublesome then Boys: you I think have but one Son; ah happy man, you're in no
fear for his miscarriage, he cannot Scandalize a Family so much as a Daughter.


Fran. He cannot be got with Child indeed, but for every thing else, I think
boys are full as troublesome: they are either given to Fighting, Drinking,
Gaming, or Whoring; If they are given to Fighting, Fifty to one but they are
killed, and a hundred to one but in a Whores quarrel; then probable the name
of a Family is lost by it; if to Drinking, why, if it is bad Wine it flings 'em
into a fever, which is damnable expensive, there is Doctors and Apothecaries,
Rogues that get a Livelihood by destroying of others; and kill or cure, they
must be paid: which is very hard upon the Subject; If to Gaming, why, If he has
Indulgent Parents he is undone for ever, and if to Whoring, he may rot with the
Pox.


Lop. Ah! That Pox Brother, is almost Epedemicall; They say 'twas begot by an
Italian on a French Woman, sent to Nurse into England, and brought hither by
some Cavaliers in the time of the late Civil Wars.


Fran. Why it is a burning shame, a Crying Sin Brother, and they dye (they say)
in greater numbers then they recover.


Lop. Why it is great pity there is not an Order Instituted by the Government
here among Physicians, No Cure, No Money.


Fran. By Esculapius they would starve in a month then, you would see a greater havoc
amongst them then ever they made among us. Well, but to our Children:


Lop. Why, ay Seignior, to come to the Point. You know I have two Daughters,
they must both be provided for, indeed if my daughter Filly had dyed of her
disaster, I could have made your Sons Mistress a much better Fortune.


Fran. Why Feliciana is the youngest, is she not?

Lop. Yes, yes.

Fran. Why, I tell you what I designed by my young Son, whom I lost at Sea,
Octavio; had he lived, and I died before him, I would never have robbed the
Eldest; For I think it a Sin unpardonable: I would have left him Sole Governor
of his Brother, and natural honor would have made him provide for him.


Lop. Ay, but natural honor will not do in my Case: A Sister cannot do like a
Brother; For when once she is Married, the Power is lost, and though she has
Inclinations to be Generous, the Husband does often deny it.


Fran. I dare swear for my boy Carlos, my dear boy Carlos would let her want
nothing.


Lop. That might send her out of the World. [aside* If you will settle 2000
Crowns per Annum on your Son; and make my Daughter a Jointure of 500 Crowns per
annum, I will give him 20000 Crowns with her.


Fran. 20000. Why my Son has presented her to the vallue of 5000 Crowns in one
thing or another.


Lop. Ay but that will be his again you know.

Fran. His again, but with your leave, you give but 15000 Crowns with her at
that rate.


Enter Servants with Chocolate, who place themselves of each side of Lop. and
Fran. Serve. Here Is Chocolate, Sir.

Fra. Fill, fill therefore Brother, I think your obliged in honor to give her
5 and 20000 and then --


Lop. In honor Seignior

[rises] Fran. Ay in honor Seignior

[rises] Lop. Why, I know what belongs to honor as well as you.

Fra. You don't practice it though.

Lop. Think better of your Countries Constitution, and provoke not, with such
Indecent Insolences; Consider who I am.


Fra. Who you are.

Lop. Ay:

Fra. Ay:

Lop. Ay.

Fra. Why you are,

Lop. What?

Fra. What?

Lop. Ay, what?

Fra: Why, you are an old Fellow as old as my self, nor better nor Stouter.


Lop. Ignominious Comparison, think of what House I come from:

Fra. From home for ought I know, and thither you may return.

Lop. Expect to answer this.

Fra. I will.

Lop. You shall, This for thy Son.

[beats down Chocolate] Fra. This for thy Daughter.

[strikes down Lob O! I Have Scalded my hand,

Fra. O my Leg, damned careless Dogs

[beats hopping.] Lop. It Is Lamed for ever, Oh revenge!

Fra. Hang thy self;

Lop. Burn thy self;

Fra. Damned villains, blind villains:

Lop. I Will heal my hand in thy hearts blood.

Fra. I Will bury my Legs in thy Guts, Dogs, hell hounds, Sacrilegious, Impious:


[Beats 'em off hopping.] Lop. O! I shall not be able to push this month.

Exit. SCENE II. A Street.
Enter Silvio. Silvio. Here she must pass, here throngs admiring Spain,
To Gaze upon the Excellence it boasts of:
It Smiled upon me yesterday, and with a Comfortable glance,
Gave me a promise of a Blooming hope:
Particularly she returned my Complement,
The Haughty Don that led her Looked disturbed,
Grudging the mighty favor she bestowed;
In all the Public Entertainments too,
She has seemed pleased with what I still performed;
And by her eyes has given me often notice,
She would discourse me if she knew but how;
Sure She Will be angry with my fixed observance,
For I shall gaze with such amazement on her;
My Strict admiring may appear Idolatrous.
Enter Several Dons. How the Crowd Swells and like Increasing waves
Each backward Gallant presses his foregoer.

Enter Carlos leading Dorothea, Feliciana after her, the Gallants all how in
their turn: Dorothea drops her Glove, Silvio takes it up. Madam your Glove.

Dor. Nay, keep it Sir, and this, you have made 'em both your own by touching
one, I scorn to wear what Strangers hands defile.


[She pulls off her Glove and flings it down. Car. Stranger, you're saucy.

Sil. Spaniard, you're happy.

Car. Madam, you are too much in the Sun:

Sil. If this be not Encouragement, I Am Stupid,
Designed by Heaven purely designed, I saw it,
Perceived how her disdain was Counterfeited,
And how my Sullen Rival Interposed betwixt
Me and her Eyes; up you Blessed present, here
Next my heart remain -- ha -- here is something
In 'em, it sticks; A Letter by my Soul directed to me,
Sure the Contents contains Felicity.

[opens it and reads. Sir,
YOu have Committed an Error dangerous, though unwillingly, and your Ignorance
may prove as fatal to us, as your self. Therefore be at the Porch of St.
Gregory at Eight this Evening, from whence you shall be C^nducted to one who
will inform you better -- if you dare venture -- fail not --


Thou shall find I fear nothing.
Oh Love, be Just in what thou seem to incline.
And this blessed day shall be for ever thine.
[Exit. SCENE. III. Don Lopez House.
Enter Carlos, and Dorothea. Car. Madam, this Strangers most amazing Insolence
My Honor must Correct, or else be Censured;
Spain's Custom pleads against such Liberty,
If we allow it now 'twill grow upon us.

Dor. Your Honor ought to let him pass neglected,
To question him would argue a suspicion,
Let the thing unregarded sleep in Silence.

Car. Unpunished the Insulter may presume,
His Arrogance is Cherished.

Dor. If the conceit can give him satisfaction,
Let him Enjoy it since it is all he will meet with.

Carl. How this affected carlessness betrays her;
Madam, with leave he must return your Gloves.

Dor. Why, are they such a Fortune?

Carl. Great Fortune, and great favor to a Stranger
The Splendid'st Dons that strut in shining Spain
Would Worship 'em above their Popular Saint.

Dor. I should be Guilty then o'th Superstition,
If Bigoted admirers so esteem me;
I Am safer far in his Indifference,
Which cannot affect such a Blaspheming zeal.

Carl. But Madam, I must urge again,
Our Countries Custom is enchroacht upon.

Dor. The Custom of our Country none can match,
Nor is there any Nation under Heaven
Guilty of such Barbaritys as this:
What is but decent Curtesy elsewhere,
Produces here good reasons for a Murder;
Falsely pretending honor prompts you to it,
As honor were a Countenance for baseness,
No, it is the just mistrust upon your usage
In your Confining of us every way;
And If Suspicion never so poor but catch you,
Never ask why, but mischief must ensue.

Carl. Madam your Argument has sure been Studied,
That thus you show our Country all at once;
Me thinks you argue with more tenderness
For this same Stranger then your virtue ought.

Dor. There peeps the nature of your Souls again.
You Would make us leave the world before we are wives;
Were I but Mistress of my self, I would not
Be a Nun out of a Cloister, That Freeborn
Woman that a Spaniand weds, may she be
Kept from what she marrys for.

Carl. It Is well you have a Father to Control you Lady.

Dor. That Is my Jail-keeper whilst I am single,
You Will shortly take the Office off his hands:
Oh happy England, Holland, France, where women
Have the freedom of the Light.

Carl. The Sun is not so sierce upon 'em there,
Our Climate heats our blood and makes us wanton.

Dor. I never yet heard any of our Wives
Complain o'th heat, o'th Climate in their Husbands:

Carl. Madam,

Dor. Seignior.

Lop. within. -- Why Dory, Dory, Dorothea my Darling. Enter Don Lopez who
starts at Don Carlos. Carl. Seignior, Good day, I am glad to see you well.

Lop. Signior yours.
Do you love my Daughter Don Carlos?

Carl. Do You doubt it Sir?

Lop. I hope I need not.

Dor. What means he?

Lop. Answer me one thing: say she should dye, or should be forced from thee,
or any accident should rob thee of her, would it not much torment thee?


Carl. Wretches in boiling Lead, or steeped in Snow,
Not all the Plagues I could Invent for him
Should rob me of her, could match the
Torment such a Loss would bring.

Lop. Better and better.

Carl. I am glad it pleases you.

Lop. And I am glad she pleases you.

Carl. Good Sir, what ails your Arm?

Lop. No matter for my Arm, since thou love my [Dor. weeps* Daughter: why
Dory Dory, Fathers none Joy why do thou weep? prithee be good Company with
me; For my part I am so pleased with what he has assured me, that my Arm that
has Pained me, did pain me, does pain me, shall pain me, neither has, does, or
did, or ever shall more, Call up my Servants.


Carl. Are you then agreed?

Lop. Ay, ay, call up my Servants, you are sure you love her:

Carl. By all that is holy.

Lop. Enough, enough, why where are my Servants? Certain you love her.


Carl. Do I live Sir.

Lop. Why Dorothea, love none but her?

Carl. None Sir.

Lop. Why, my hearts delight Dory little Dory, nor will you ever love any but
her?


Carl. Never, Oh blessing!

Dor. Oh Curse!

Lop. Swear it and witness it.

[Enter Servants Carl. May Heaven for ever Curse me
[To his Servants Both here and hereafter if ever
[kneels. I Love ought but Dorothea.

Lop. And may Heaven for ever Curse me here and hereafter, if ever thou see
her more.


[pulls her veil down Carl. What said you Sir?


[Rises Lop. Lord Sir, I can hear without that noise, and you shall hear it
again that you shall, never see her more: So either Boil thy self, or Starve
thy self, Shoot, Broyl, Fry, Drown, Hang or Damn thy self, As the Devil and you
shall think fit.


Car. Impossible.


Lop. Nay I believe you will scarce do any of 'em.


Carl. You mock me sure.


Lop. Yes, yes, as your Father did me.


Carl. My Father*


Lop. Ay, think upon pains to torture him, for he has robbed thee of her; go out
of my house; the next time my doors enclose thee, the building is thy Monument.


Carl. Think thou that I will bear this tamely?
I tell thee Lopez thou shall smart for this.

Lop. I tell thee Carlos, I do smart for this Daughter, Go in.


Dor. Good buy to you Sir.


[walks up to Carlos [and Smiles Exit. Carl. Damnation.


Lop. That be your Doom.
For if you loved my Child your Hell's to come.

Carl* If I am Damned I Will not alone be lost,
Lopez thy Family attends my Ghost.

[Exeunt Severally. The Second ACT.
SCENE. I. A Hall.
Enter Guzman and Farmosa. Guz. NAy, prithee Farmosa,

Far. Avaunt Traitor, hang thy self false one.

Guz. Nay, why in this fury?

Far. Have I not reason, have I beheld thy Eyes.
This three days; did I yield up my Honor my unspotted Virginity?

Guz. Of fifty years standing, an old dried Pumpkin.

Far. To such an unworthy Perjured Villain, and no sooner obtained, but
slighted, like a Jugglers trick when it is discovered.


Guz. Indeed there was no great Conjuring in thine:


Far. I could keep nothing from you, told you my Love, and gave you my Love;
what though I did languish for you, must I reveal it like a fool, could I not
keep it to my self? Ah woe be to those that make their Secrets known, so I say.
Time was that the Cock should never wake the Morning, nor the Owl welcome
Night, but Farmosa should be visited; But now I am laid by, like an old Deed,
which when once proved is Examined no more.


Guz. These Stale Maids are so Amorous; Why I have been out of Town Farmosa, my
Master has had business for me, to prepare things for his Wedding, which I
suppose may be unspoke again, or else I would no more have been from thee, then
a Gander from his Goose when she is a hatching.


Far. Go, go, it is False, my Fondness has made you loath me.


Guz. Loath the^* thy voice is sweeter then the Early Lark's, (and shriller,)
Thy breath's as fragrant as a foggy Morning; Thy cheeks appear like Roses
(Dried for Cakes) And Dimples like the Hollows of two Ovens; Thou art all over
Admirable? (ugly)


Far. Away, away, you flatter me

[pats him on the Cheek] Guz. By this, and this, I speak my Soul.

Far. And will you always love me?

Guz. Hum --
[Huggs her.] Now tell me my Farmosa,
The reason of this breach between our Family.

Far. Why know you not the quarrel 'twixt my Master and your own?


Guz. Ah, but is that all the Cause?

Far. All that I know of.

Guz. Has not our Lady think you some aversion to the Person of my Master, has
she not seen a Stranger whose Gay Demeanor and Accomplishments has played the
Cupid in her heart.


Far. What mean you?

Guz. Nay my Farmosa, if thou love, be Real, is there a Secret I would keep
from thee, by this there is not.


[kisses] Far. I never see you but for Information, and you are as short in
your visits as an Eminent Physician, I am the Pulse by whose beating you find
out my Mistrisses Inclinations, and when you once know the state of her Body
never* Enquire after mine.


Guz. This night I Will give thee proof of my Enquiry,
But prithee tell me, has not our Spanish Dame
Some Longings for an English Breed?

Fra. Why truly I guess some such thing, but have no positive Demonstration.


Guz. Does she not seem to be in Love?

Fra. How seem?

Guz. Does she not sigh and covet being alone, make Contrary Answers sometimes
to Questions; Does she not slight her meat; and with her Knife scratch figures
on her plate, mince her fruit small, then toss it up and down, fancy strange
things in the fire and in the Clouds, blush if she hears an Englishman but
mentioned, does she not read Romances, and delight much in standing at the
window of an evening, cry sometimes to thee Oh Farmosa, then stop as if she had
forgot her self, Complain she cannot sleep, and of odd Dreams.


Fra. Why, are these signs of Love?

Guz. O Great ones:

Fra. Then surely I am so:

Guz. Pox on thy observation.

Fra. For I can sit and sigh a whole day long, fancy strange things in the fire,
love standing at the window, love reading of Amors, there are but two things
we differ in.


Guz. Prithee what are they?

Fra. Why I eat heartily and sleep soundly:

Guz. Thy sighs will never give thee the Chollick,
But tell me did never observe any of this in her?

Fra. Why truly I have, and if I see you to night, I Will take care to get it out
of her: not but I know it already, but the Rogue will balk me anon if I tell
him now.


Guz. Will thou be Diligent?

Fra. As a knave for an Employment: Go at ten, I Will wait at the little
Back-garden, here take the key, you must go out that way, for if you are seen
it may cost your Bruises some Brandy* I Am called, Adieu.


[why Farmosa within Guz. One word, have thou no little Sum to spare thy Lover,
no trisling Doubloon, no Idle Pistol.


Far. What pay beforehand Signior:

[Exit running Guz. It Is so, she loves this Stranger, and anon I shall know all:
It Is a fine Life we serving-men do Lead:
Our Masters take the Mistress, we the Maid:
If Ladys you will not have your secrets known;
Keep us asunder or your work's soon done:

[Exit. SCENE II. A Garden.
Enter Carlos and Francisco. Fra. What! turn thee out of Doors?

Carl. Ay Sir, and menaced me with Death when next I entered*
I vowed revenge which but Increased his Laughter,
When he had Sworn me to Eternal Love,
And everlasting says to Dorothea:
He rendered all my Oaths ridiculous:
Then with the very Curse which I invoked,
If ever I proved treacherous to his Daughter,
He wished the like Destruction might seize him,
If ever more I after that beheld her.

Fra. Why let him keep his two Daughters, Like an old Lot as he is, and
multiply his Generation himself: What think thou Carlos of the fair Biancha,
Younger and Richer far then Dorothea, who Languishes too for thee, and from her
Infancy almost has Loved thee; besides Boy thou know thou were in a manner
promised to her.


Carl. But Sir, can you so easily forget the villain,
Or tamely suffer such an Arrogance?
Must all my Presents too be slighted and yet kept?
Must all --

Fra. Presents, no, I forgot that Boy; I Will make him refund, or swear him into
the Inquisition for Blasphemy.


Carl. No, Since my Love's despised I Will court revenge;
That Is now the Mistress of my eager Flames,
which nothing can assuage but Silvio's blood.

Fra. Blood, Boy:

Carl. Ay Blood Sir, Rivalls blood,
The precious blood that Dorothea doats on;
My wanton hands shall play in the warm Gore;
Then on her face the purple Scandal print,
And show my Injuries in lasting Blushes.

Fra. A Rival Boy; by the head of our Church thou have reason, or hold Carlos,
hold, suppose now we should contrive some dreadful Infamy; some terrible
disgrace that he may live with;


Carl. As how Sir?


Fran. Why as a punishment for his endeavoring to supplant thee in this Ladies
Quarters; we will make an Eunuch of him: and he shall repent in Anthems.


Carl. An Eunuch -- Damn him that would make him blessed;
Women are never so fond as when secured of pleasure
Without Scandal;
No, it is his heart must feed my hungry spleen,
The heart which disinherited my hopes,
And was Adopted Heir of all my wishes.

Fran. Why Murder him; and there is an end on it:
Don't stand mouthing like a Lawyer that has
Puzzled his Cause, and knows not how to get clear
On It; hang him Dog, have his Throat cut, and
Encourage decayed Trade; our Bravo's grow
Pious, the times are so bad, and go to Church
For want of Employment.

Carl. It shall be so, I Will have him set with speed,
Not but I would engage with him alone,
But he that robs my Love deserves it not;
A Rival, nay, A Heretic, those words
Here Guilds a Murder wrought by 50 Swords.

[Exit. Fran. So here is a fine Feast providing for the Devil; I must have a
tugg with my old Antagonist for the 5000 Crowns his Daughter has cost me; Ah
that I could persuade this Platonical Fool, this Dorothea's Flesh-fly, to Marry
Biancha, there is a Fortune: Her Father's a Fool too, and might easily he
brought to take my Son without a Groat; damned stubborn dog -- Hum! He knows he
is the last of our Family, and knows I am past getting of Children, or I would
so penny-bind the Rogue, he should scarce have enough to pay the Fees of his
Confessor: Children are great Plagues, not but Parents are great Rogues, though
sometimes I know not which are the worst:

If the Estate be by the Father Gained,
The Childrens duty is by hopes obtained
Of what he will leave 'em: else he might be damned;
For when the Estate's entailed upon the Son,
There Is no respect to Parents, it is his own,
Scorns 'em on Earth, and laughs at 'em when gone:
So one against the other may exclaim each hour,
But both of 'em are Rascals in their Power.

[Exit. Scene Changes to the backside of a Church.
Enter Silvio and Sancho. Sil. How goes the Evening, Sancho?

Sa. Very nigh Sunset, Sir.

Sil. Be on your Guard, this Country is not to be trusted late.

Sa. I am provided Sir, Well-Weapon'd, and Well-fed,
Like a Town relieved I could sally furiously:

Sil. The God of Day does so his Thetis have,
In Clouds of Gold and shining purple dressed,
Each laboring Husbandman its setting waits,
And to his course, but welcome home retreats:
The Drudging Oxen from their Yoaks are freed,
And scattering Ews which on the Mountains fed
Are by their Shepherds to Enclosures led;
Whilst the Gay Chirping Flutterers of the Air
To their own mossy Architects repair.

Sa. Sir, Sir:

Sil. What say thou?

Sa. Does the Devil ever walk in these holy Countries?

Sil. I never saw him Sir.

Sa. I thought he had practice enough in England to keep him from Rambling.

Sil. No Sancho, they tell us he is every where:

Sa. I would not have left it, if I had thought so.

Sil. Why?

Sa. Because we believe we give the Devil the slip when we go to another
Country.


Sil. Indeed.

Sa. Ay, and that is the reason they say of our Gentrys Traveling so much.


Enter Farmosa in a long black Veil, and strikes Sancho on the Sh^ulders. Far.
Come with me Seignior!

Sa. I am taken Sir, he has me,

Sil. What are you?

Far. Is you name Silvio?

Sil. It is.

Far. Follow me then to Dorothea.

Sil. Thou have mentioned one would Charm me any where.

Far. Is not that your Servant?

Sil. He is.

Far. Take him he may be of use:

Sil. Sancho.

[kicks him. Sa. Satan.

Sil. Rise for shame, we are all Friends,
Why do thou not speak?

[He rises and stares; Trembles, but cannot speak, and makes Signs to 'em to
be gone. Far. His fright has lost his Speech; come on Sir.

Sil. Where ever thou will lead.

A Priest crosses above the Stage, which Sancho seeing. Exlunt. Scene Changes
to Dorothea's Bedchamber.
Enter Dorothea and Feliciana. Fell. What fall in Love with a Stranger?

Dor. Well Tyrant, well:

Fell. Nay, upon my Conscience it is a Judgment upon thee;
You that could slight the worthyest of our Country,
And walk in State through Lands of bleeding hearts:

Dor. Sister, the time may come when I may give you back this Triumph.

Fell. Not for my loving a Stranger Dorothea:

Dor. I am sure he is a Gentleman:

Fell. Nay, he may be Jove for ought I know in disguise:
It Is not the first time the Deiety has played Truant above to divert himself
here.

Dor. For shame Feliciana.

Fell. For Grace Dorothea, do not throw thy self away thus:

Dor. How can I help it?

Fell. Help what?

Dor. Being in love:

Fell. I don't blame thee for loving, but I discommend thy choice.

Dor. He has in Appearance all that woman can be fond of.

Fell. Have a care of that; some say he is an Italian, and he is not the first of
that Country in Breeches that has wanted somewhat of all a woman would be fond
of.


Dor. Fie, Fie, you are wicked:

Fell. Well, I wish his behavior may reward the great faith you have in him.


Dor. Well I have told you my mind, and what I desire of you: I do love and
must love him, let my Future fate be what it will. And you may choose a Rich
Gay thing for your self out of the Dons you spoke of.


Fer. Thank you for what you cannot eat, Madam, Bless me from such motions of
men: why they are so fond of themselves, that unless it be you, their eyes
survey nothing else; what should I do with such waxwork? They Are sit for
nothing but to set off a mantle-tree, or furnish out a Closet.


Dor. Would they had you in a closet to stop your mouth.


Fell. By my faith I don't believe I should cry out for 'em, why, they can do
nothing to a woman but stare at her, nature never intended these Animals for
any thing but ornament, like Swans they make a show, but are good for nothing
-- they are pretty Parrot-keyts to hold in ones hand, or to be strok'd like
Squirrills.


Dor. Have a care of their Tales Sister.


Fall. Do you look after your own; and if thou art Conquered by this Silvio, who
may be a Tinker for ought thou know, we may find the effects of his love in
three months, and see you carry his Budget before you.


Enter Farmosa. Far. Madam Don Silvio:

Dor. Prithee retire:

Fell. I am gone -- but I will have a peep at him, though my Curiosity prove as
fatal as Acteons; it may be a stranger I have seen, and I should be loath to
Jump in a fancy with her.


[Exit Dor. What shall I do?
Oh Silvio, I would Indulge thee,
But let me not be thought too easy by it.

Enter Farmosa and Silvio. Farmosa retires. Sil^io. Thus Pilgrims after many a
weary march,
When they have reached the purpose of their Travails,
Bow to the Shrine their eager zeal had sighed for,
Paying like me their reverend Acknowlegements.

Dor. Rise Sir, I can forgive your Flattery,
Since it is the General practice of your Sex.

Sil. To Flatter here would be a Crime indeed,
Nor know I how, if it would help my cause,
Yet I could talk for ever on the Theme:
The God entices us to show our follys,
And prove his powers too high for words to reach,
For when our thoughts Engage to search the wonder
Like notions of Eternity they are Puzzled,
Brought back to their first fond Imagination,
Admiring what they cannot Comprehend.

Dor. How his Tongue charms me.

Sil. Oh Dorothea, If a Love like mine could be related,
'Twould disgrace its passion:
If thou art angry with me I must love
For I Am a Biggot in the Mystery;
And have a faith defys all Arguments.

Dor. Sir, you mistake the Intention of my Message,
If you surmise that Love directed it;
I sent to you out of a Generous pity,
Unwilling (being a Stranger) you should fall
Under the Error of your Courtesy;
Nor do you know --

Sil. Alas I would not know;
Wretches that dread their doom endure enough,
Without the terror of a Confirmation;
Therefore I beg that I may only fear;
Fears may have hopes:
Hope is the only Cordial for our fears,
A vain uncertainty by Errors nourished;
A fond opiniator of it self:
Cheated by distant probability.

Dor. You ought to fear my frown, and hope my pardon:
Not back one Insolence with another,
Daring to think of Love to one yo've Injured.

Sil. To one I Have Injured, then my Love's a fault!
In that alone are Centered my Transgressions.

Dor. Know you not Spain's notorious for Resentment,
Nay even the woman often suffers Death,
For the presumption of the man she knows not;
What are you that expose your person thus,
Under the vanity of an Admirer?

Sil. I am a Gentleman of Spanish blood;
Though born out of the Country.
My family's well known when I shall name 'em.
They sent me forth being fond of my Improvement
To see what the reputed parts o'th world
Could store my Observation with:
But oh the wonders which I thought I had seen,
Are as far short, of what I now behold,
As I am in my hopes of gaining it.

Dor. They Are nearer then thou think for:
[Aside He steals upon my Soul too hastily;
I find I yield too fast, yet cannot help it:

Sil. Inform me Dorothea how to please thee,
I am like a Travailer in unknown land,
Where several beaten ways confound his choice;
Direct my Soul in its perplexity,
And guide it to the Paradise it seeks for.

Dor. I know not how to shun or meet my wishes,
It must be done; but why so hard to do?
Like one that is to a tedious Journey bound,
Tyres e're half his Travel is performed,
Fond of his end but troubled to get to it.

Sil. May I not hope a word?

Dor. You are too bold;
Yet I forgive what is past;
But leave the Town, and never see me more.

Sil. Oh heavy task, impossible to undertake or do!

Dor. Do you think the prize so easy to be won,
Or that your face can meet with no denial?
Or can you think so meanly of my worth
To give the least Encouragement to one,
Who only is acquainted with my eyes?
No; could you like Deitys create your self,
Master of all the Graces in the world;
Each should present it self in full perfection;
E're I would listen to the tale of love.
So Sir retire, and tell the world that once
You met a woman could withstand your Charms:
Oh it is too harsh,

Sil. And tell how fatally her own has used me.

Dor. I Will speak no more:

Sil. Yet stay and hear a little more,
My Souls contriving some way to obey thee;
And it would soften too some way thy Judgment:
That I must leave thee, in thy eyes I read it:
I see thy Pride disdains my Sacrifice:
It Is thrown aside like common Offerings,
It has but to thy number added one,
And lies without distinction with the Mass:
Oh! If I never must behold thee more,
Let my Blessed Rival rid thee of this Monster:
I want the power to Execute thy will;
I shall be fond of Living whilst thou art here,
For Heaven is only Certain, where thou art.

Dor. Will you not go?

Sil. I cannot stir; I would obey thee, but my Limbs*
Refuse me.

Dor. Mine like their standing too:

Sil. Oh why you powers did you direct me hither?
Fond of beholding more, I have lost all,
which my Enquiry has so long pursued,
So fares it with the Merchant, who his store
Would fain Increase by ventering for more,
Sends out his Laden Barque to some new shore,
But oh like me Shipwrackt upon the way,
Curses himself, his fate, the winds and Sea.

Dor. Oh Silvio:

Sil. What said you Madam?
My Sinking Soul flies upward to that Sound,
Like one upon its Journey to destruction,
When the blessed voice of a Repreiv's behind it.

Dor. Out nice Impertinence; Stubborn Usurper,
Thou Sullen honor why do bind me thus?

Sil. Did you not call, or did I dream being fond
Of wishing it?

Dor. Who can deserve me better then the man I love?
It must be Silvio.

Sil I am here.

Dor. So thou art here indeed, out with it then, Silvio.

S^^. Dorothea:

Dor. Silvio!

Sil. Dorothea!

Dor. Oh I can nothing sound but Silvio, Silvio!

Sil. Dorothea, Dorothea, Dorothea.
[Embraces Oh let me clasp thee ever in this Circle,
Like Antony I could despise the world,
And in thy Charms let all ambition perish.

Dor. Oh! I have gone too far.

Sil. Thou never were so near thy self as now,

Dor. I trust thy honor, do not wrong my faith;
Nor give my easy Soul a misconstruction.
I could have held out longer for Condition,
Like Towns when the Besiegers are in doubt,
At best Discretion make their Articles;
But trust me Silvio, I abhor the guile
My Subtle Sex approve so Politic;
At thy first setting down before me, I resign,
Hoping to make thee by it faster mine*

Sil. Oh I will study more then can be ask't,
My Gratitude shall struggle with thy Love
Which shall exceed:
My diligence shall still be at thy call,
And give thee more if possible then all.

Dor. The Match 'twixt me and Carlos is broke off;
Prove thy self worthy of my Fathers choice:
Nothing can bar our bliss.

Sil. Oh I will give him firm Security, I am
Worthy of thy blood, though not thy Love.

Enter Farmosa. Far. Madam your Father has inquired for you,
I sent him to the Garden!

Dor. Then we must part?

Sil. But with design that our next meeting may be longer.

Dor. To morrow I shall be at Chapel, There we may Feast our Eyes and fancy
more; be watchful of your self, and at Night be where you were this Evening,
and you shall be conducted here again.


Sil. Be swift ye Fiery Steeds and mount the day,
Or get the Night to exchange with thee for once,
The Tedious hours I Will wast in fancied Scenes
Of the past passages of our Extremes:
Call on to Morrow, oh to morrow come,
And give my Soul a prospect of its home,
Hug thee in thought whilst my delighted Tongue
In Raptures shall express thee all Night long:
And Dorothea be my only Song.

Exeunt. The End of the Second Act.
The Third ACT.
SCENE. I.
Enter Guzman and Farmosa. Guz. AT Nine do say again, to Night?

Far. Yes, I must be Mistress of the Ceremonies again:

Guz. He may be Conducted into Another World!

[Aside. Far. Well, really he is a sweet Creature, and his expressions are
refined like loaf-Sugar, they dissolve in the Ear till the mouth waters.


Guz. What a luscious Consort I have:
[aside. Well Farmosa he may out-talk me,
But he can do no more then other Men.

Far. I know not that, few things know their strength till they are put to it.


Guz. Thou would work him finely if thou had him at thy-discretion, Thou
art for spurring a Free-Horse to death.


Far. Well, Certainly he is an Angel, I never saw so Divine a Creature.


Guz. What have thou an Itching to a Deity?

Far. Why not, if he would accept of my frail Mortality;

Guz. Frail indeed,
[aside. Well I must be gone,
The Morning's nimble and gets ground of us,
Adieu!

Far. Why in such have?

[Bell Rings. Guz. My Master will want me, hark, the Bell
Rings to Morning Exercise, I shall be discovered:

Far. Why People are not so Religious of late,
To break their Sleep to serve Heaven:

Guz. It Is the 5 a Clock bell:

Far. Why let it be the 6 a Clock Bell, it Rings not for you, you are eager at
Every call but mine.


Guz. Nay Farmosa it is Reputation:

Far. It Is your uneasiness; but go and you will;
I had a piece of Barbary-Gold too, might have bore you Company -- but you must
be gone.

Guz. Well, I can deny thee nothing --

Far. That I pay for; A Vengeance take ye for Insulters,
But it is the Fate of us all, we must lay up
When we are young, If we expect
Any pleasure when we are old:

Guz. I Will be sure to see you to Night:

Far. You will not:

Guz. Will the Night Come?

[hugs her. Far. Well then I Will keep this till then,
And give you another with it:

Guz. Nay, faith I Am poor.

Far. You Will not see me till its spent: I am made use of like Parents, when the
Children want money they are as diligent as Parish-Officers against Christmas,
but when they have it they so itch to be gone.


Guz. Why I would grow to thee if possible.

Far. Well, there it is; you may drink my health out on it though, and remember the
Founder when you turn off the Cups:


Guz. Thy health! why, there is no taste without it. Thou art the Anchovy to my
Liquor, the Rellishing bit, the tempter to the other Bottle, the Tobacco to my
Pipe, the catch that makes me merry, the Theme of my Wit. With the juice of the
Grape thou swim'st in my Brain, And art washed every Night by Sparkling
Shampain, which dances in the Glass like the Beam in thy Eye, and till I am
dead-drunk my Wine never dies.


[Farmosa called within] Far. Adds life, my Mistress up so early, away, and
forget not night as you hope for the other Barbary.


[Exit. Guz. Oh! you who other ways your means receive,
Pity the Drudgery by which we live.

[Exit. Enter Dorothea in a Nightgown. Dor. I cannot sleep;
My Faculties are all upon the watch,
As if my Soul were Jealous of a Mischief
Like Midnight-Nurses over a sickly Patient,
They doze and nod and start at every sound;
There Is not a Tatling measurer of the time,
But I have numbered with it every hour;
Oh Silvio, Silvio, if this be not love,
Some evil Hagg has charmed thy Dorothea.

Enter Lopez. Lop. Morrow Jewel! Health to thy early rising,
Art thou for Church this Morning?

Dor. Not till toward Noon, if it please you, Sir:

Dor. Ay, with all my heart, its indifferent to me if ever thou go again;
but what is to be done in this business concerning the match with Carlos?


Dor. I thought you had resolved Sir, I was ordering his Presents all to be
returned to him.


Lop. Marry, Heaven forbid, why they are worth 5000 Crowns.


Dor. Were they worth Millions Sir, it is Mercenary, and base to keep 'em, after
the Person who presented 'em's discharged from her he gave 'em too, it is poor
--


Lop. Yes to be without 'em, prithee tell not me of base and Mercenary, did
ever know a project in thy life go on without cost? Besides his Father has sent
to me and desires another Conference.


Dor. After so base a usage in your last Sir, will you see him?


Lop. Why, I don't know, he has sent me a hundred of Barbary-Gold.


Dor. And will you take 'em Sir?

Lop. Hum -- Why 'twould be an affront to return 'em whether I see him or no:


Dor. Fie Sir* Fie:

Lop. Fools face go, now I think on it, yet go in since you wont go out to
Prayers, and leave the management to me:


Dor. For Heavens sake Sir:

Lop. For your own sake, will you do as I Will have you, or 'twill be worse for
you:


Dor. Good Sir;

Lop. Get you in when I bid you:

Dor. Consider,

Lop. Get you in,

Dor. Will you not hear me?

Lop No, get you in:

Dor. Oh Silvio --

[sighs, Lop. Ay, ay, go, go, call upon your Saints, and ask their advice;

Dor. Can you believe, Sir?

Lop. Can I, yes, how should I be saved else? get you in I say:

Dor. But Sir --

Lop. Why, what will you neither serve God nor me, get you in you peremptory
baggage, get you in -- [pushes her off. Well what is to be done in this Case? I
have made a rash vow, but they are better broke then kept, when it is to
Advantage; I know this Carlos Doats on my Girl, and the Father will come to any
terms, rather then he should fall under any danger for the loss of her. I will
now demand just as much more with his Son as I did, and give my Daughter but
half as much as I offered: for it is usual to make the best of ones Goods when
the first price is refused, and the Customer fond of his Choice.


Enter Farmosa. Far. Sir, Don Francisco's below and desires to see you:

Lop. Conduct him up -- and d'hear, let my Servants be within call. lest the
old Bravo should quarrel again, and he is too rough for me; on Equal terms now
Lopez look about thee, and like a Cunning Usurer at a pinch, part not with the
Principle without good Interest.


Enter Don Francisco. Fra. Signior, you see I trust in your honor, and venture
where your Spleen might make sure work, but I believe you are noble.


Lop. Signior, I am a more Generous Enemy then to take advantage -- but I hope
the matter being forgot we may begin as friends:


Fra. I embrace the offer, and with this hearty Clasp here sign the Peace.


Lop. Bona -- Signior, are you for some Liquor this morning?


Fran. Something that will not Scald, if it please you Signior.


Lop. Within there, some Sherry: do you like Nutmeg and Sugar?


Fran. I think it is more a Cordial so!


Lop. Spice it d'hear? well Signior, I must Inform you, that on the noise of
breaking the Match between your Son and my Daughter, I have had many fair
offers, but matters having gone so far with us, Though passion was predominant
some time, I would not though to advantage hear of any 'till I had tried If you
had quite forsook her.


Fran. Signior, I am not Ignorant of her Deserts, nor of the Crowd of Gallants
would Espouse her; therefore as Prudent Travelers, when the Roads are full
send to their Inn beforehand for reception, so I did constantly dispatch to
you; still as my Son designed to approach your family, some token for his kind
Accommodation.


Lop. Signior, it is true, but now I had one from you; And like a faithful Host
I Will entertain you; My Daughter is the best of my Apartment; which I suppose
your Son would fain repose, Come to my terms and he shall take possession, and
make his Conjugall Entry when he pleases*


Fran. The sooner the better; for here are dismal times coming on; the whole
worlds in a Riot, never was such Universal Confusion known.


Lop. Look you Signior, give me a good Conscience neighbor, a good Conscience:
I look upon a man that loves his neighbor as himself, does as he would be done
by, and is contented with what he has; is in a very fair way to Salvation.


Fran. Now I Will hit the old Jew -- [aside Then woe be to Usurpers and
Gamesters, for they never do as they would be done by, and are allways Coveting
their neighbors goods.


Lop. But Pox of Politics (and the Rogues bitter sayings against Usurpers)
[aside] Let us return to our Children.


Enter Farmosa. Far Sir, here is a young Gentleman, a Stranger desires to be
admitted.


Lop. I am buisy.


Far. I told him so Sir, but he will not be answered, he says he must needs see
you, and is resolved:


Fran. Why let him come up Signior, we can dispatch our business when he is gone.


Lop. Bring him up then If he will come.

Far. Sir you may gratify your Resolution and Approach.

Enter Antonio who kisses Farmosa. Ant. Nay I allways pay the doorkeeper.

Far. I like the Sample so well, I would I had the whole piece.

Lop. Now Sir your business:

Ant. Sir, I know Presumption in this Country is dangerous, but my freedom has
no further end then Acquaintance, and I hope I may satisfy you I am worthy of
it.


Lop. Sir the Satisfaction will be equally grateful to me as my acquaintance
acceptable to you.


Ant. Courteously Answered Sir.
Be pleased to read this Letter.

[Enter Servants with wine [Lopez reads] Signior Lopez, The Person that brings
this is a Gentleman of Worth and Fortune, I would have waited on him to you,
but he would not admit of it; you may redit what he says, for he is Noble: I Will
wait on you at night, and tell you more: Yours to command, Gomez.

Adds me my neighbor, your recommendation is good:

Ant. I must inform you then --

Fran. If you please Sir let us drink first, I hope the partaking of a Bottle
will not choke your Information.


[drinks Ant. Faith no Sir, I come from a Country where the Element of Bacchus
is more potent then any of the four where Religion and Politic are the Subject
of the 3d. bottle, and scarce any of 'em know either when they are Sober.


Lop. Little England I warrant you:

Ant. You are in the right Sir, it is as famous for Ease and Luxury as the Life
of Cleopatra, where the Courtiers get the Citizens Children, and then marry 'em
to their own, where Impudence is pregnant, and Fools multiply, where most men
dye natural Deaths: and the youth keep Company before they can read.


Lop. A pretty Gentleman; Come Sir, your Glass:

Ant. With all my heart, God bless the King, and may his Subjects
Serve him with unfeigned hearts and constant Zeal;
May he be just to 'th good o'th Commonweal,
Whist France the Scourge of the Confederates feel.

[drinks Lop. Amen.

Fran. Pray Sir how thrives that Country you came from?


Ant. Troth Sir, it is in a fairer way then ever, the Prince and the People have
faith in Each other, and there is great hopes that Britain will retreive its
long lost glory.


Lop. I Am glad on it, and now Sir, Let me begin a health, for to tell you a
Secret; I wish 'em well Boy, for all I Am a Catholic;

May that Country, its Trade nor its Church never loose,
May they stand by their Prince, and he Conquer their Foes,
And the Wives go as fine as they will in their Clothes.

Ant. Well Sir, now to my Business. I am a Gentleman whom Fortune has blessed
early in the World, whose Family this Country is no Stranger to, I have lain
here incognito some time for want of my Effects, which being come, I thought
fit to attend on you; for they say no man more fitting to tell his own tale
then himself.


Lop. Proceed:

Fran. By Heaven this Rogue is a Lover I fear,
If he be my Boys Rival, he had better have fancied a Blackamore.

Ant. My Father was Don Mihil Frederick
Sole Governor of Quitto in Peru;
I had an Elder Brother dear to him as his life,
And willing all Accomplishments might grace him,
Permitted him to Travel,
It Is Six years since he left him;
But the two latter whether by neglect
Or the misfortunes of the Seas I know not,
He heard not from him, which heavy
Absence hoth of Son and Letters bereft him of his Life.

Lop. Unhappy accident, I have heard nobly of him.

Ant. He left me all as being all he had,
It Is 18. months since he died:
I straight Converted what he left me
To the easyest movables I could,
And resolved to see the world and scarch the knowledge
Of my Brother; I have been three months in
England where I heard he was gone for Rome,
And stopping here in my pursuit of him
Which is but now four days, I have seen a
Lady who as I Am informed 's your Daughter;
I Love her, and If my fortune merit her,
Which is 400000 Crowns, that and my Person
Are at her disposal.

Fran. It Is so, it is so, I see it in the Rogues Eyes
Here Is more murder for the Boy.

Lop. Four hundred thousand Crowns.

Ant. Ay Sir, it is at my Lodgings in Jewels, and in Gold* But most of it
uncoyn'd.

Lop. Some wine there! 400000. Crowns Sir,
Your health

[drinks. Fran. Hark you Sir, which of the Ladys is it?

Ant. Faith Sir, I cannot well enough describe her,
But I Am sure I know her If I see her; Some more wine -- here my fair
Mistrisses health:

[drinks. Fr. Heark'e Sir, your fair Mistress may make foul work, If it be
Dorothea.

Ant. Sir, Let her name be what it will, If I win her, I Will wear her, and with
her Fathers leave I Will venture as far as any man.


Lop. 400000. Crowns, why 'twould make a Parish of noble Venetians, how they would
Jump at this youth now; 400000 Crowns; why 'twould Lead their Army to
Constantinople: Some wine Sir, here is to the memory of your Father, I was
allways a Lover of Orphans, and especially those who never trusted the Bank of
a City with their Fortunes.


Fran. But Sir, will you tell me her name?

Ant. Faith Sir I wish I could, I would repeat nothing else.

Fran. You must draw then; perhaps I may find it in your heart though your tongue
is so stubborn.


Lop. Hold Signior, and Sir excuse him, the wine is uppermost; here, call out
my Daughters.


Fran. He shall be undermost, If he be my Sons Rival:

Ant. And so Conqueror over two, faith:

Sir, here is your health, I will Drink with you for her, Fight with your Son
for her, Ravish your Wife, and fire your House for her.


Fran. Thou lie, thou dare do neither:

Ant. I would do all rather then loose her.

Fran. Why you are an Eunuch, you Dog, you can do nothing with her.


Ant. Yes, I will get a Boy upon her, that shall live to Cudgel thy third and
fourth Generation.


Lop. Nay prithee, Francisco, have Patience till the Gentleman sees her: O here
they come.

Enter Dorothea and Feliciana. Now Sir, Sand still Children, stand upright:


Feli. That Is more then the Father can; Certainly Dorothea, the old fellow has
made a good Bargain, he would never have allowed wine enough for all this else.


Ant. That Is She Sir.

Fran. Which Sir? --

[Stands before him. Ant. Prithee give me the Sun little Alexander; for like
Diogenes I could live in a Tub and behold nothing else; It Is she Sir, she that
Hellen of her Sex that like poor Troy has set my heart a Flaming; Madam may I
crave the Curtesy of a first meeting? -- [Salutes Feliciana May I presume here
too, Madam?


[Salutes Dorothea. Fell. Shame on this fellow, what has he done to me?

Lop. Well; since you have made your choice Sir, it shall be laid by for you:
Go get you in Children, and Sir, pray be pleased to step in with your Mistress,
I have a little business with this Gentleman which when dispatched I Will be with
you: 400000 Crowns you mad baggage -- [to Feliciana Go, go, Son in Law, go,
don't look melancholy, Dory, Fathers eldest Joy; I Will take care of thy fortune
too I warrant thee.


Dor. Oh Cursed Gold! how many miserable matches have thou made? --


[aside. Ant. The honor Madam to conduct you:

Fe. I know the way back again;

Ant. Then please to direct a Stranger, Madam:

Fe. What the Devil ails me?

Dor. Sister, what makes your color change?

Fe. Its the weakness of your Eyes:

Dor. Ah! are you caught?

Fe. Why, I an't in love now --

[Exit Fell. Dor. Yes, with a Stranger too -- oh La!
Come Sir pursue, I believe you have a Critical minute!

[Ex. Do. and An Fra. Come Brother, since this Gentleman's choice is so
acceptable to you, here is prosperity to 'em.


Lop. With all my heart:

Fra. And if you will, my Son and he may be married together; and one
Entertainment will serve both.


Lop. Look you Signior, your Frugality is good, but we must know first our
Bargain.


Fra. Let it not be a dry one; Some more Wine;
Why I will come to your first proposals:

Lop. That will never do Seignior; for look you, this Gentleman is worth 400000
Crowns, and takes my youngest Daughter, now I will never let my Eldest go under:


Fra. Here Is a Dog, 400000 Crowns, why how the Devil will you make your
Daughter worth such a Fortune?


Lop. Why, this Gentleman asks me not a penny with her:

Fra. So you would have 400000 Crowns, and not give a penny with the other.


Lop. Ay!

Fra* Ay! I Will see you damned first; were not you talking just now of
Conscience?


Lop. Signior 400000 Crowns will purchase the best Conscience in Christendom,
and as the Merchant says, If you will not come to my price, I Will keep my
Commodities to my self:


Fra. 400000 Crowns, are you at a word?

Lop. Ay!

Fra. Will thou bait nothing Quaker?

Lop. No, I Am at a word:

Fra. Then a word and a blow -- wash your face you dirty Curr you --
[Throws the Glass in's face, and draws. And draw Heathen, Draw!

Lop. Help, Murder, Murder.

Enter Servants and Antonio. Ant. What Is here to do! A Sword drawn? nay, then
for the honor of the Lopez's:


Fran. Ay! Come Rogue, I Will have a bout with you:

Ant. Put up old Fellow, I shall spoil your dancing else:

Lop. Kill him Son-in-Law, kill him:

Fra. Well said Conscience, Let me go dog;
Let me have but one poke at him.

Ant. Go, get him to sleep, or send him home:

Lop. Ay! out with him.

Fra. Give me my money Rogue, the 5000 Crowns my Son has presented your stale
Daughter with; And the hundred broad pieces sent you this Morning.


Lop. Not a farthing, they shall pay for the washing of my face, Signior.


Fra. Villains, Murderers, Usurers, Rogues, that profess Christianity without
Conscience, and Conscience without Christianity -- hark thee Lad, thou art a
pretty fellow; ben't seduced, he will not give thee a penny with his Daughter,
he will Cheat thee of every groat; Prithee stand by, and let us rob the Rogue;
I Will bind him whilst thou lie with his Daughters, And then we will share his
money betwixt us.


Lop. Away with him!

Fra. I will sell my Soul to the Devil; but I will be revenged; May thy
Daughters have the smallpox till their faces look like the inside of a
Bee-Hive; May thy Servants all have Stomachs like Cormorants, may thou change
'em each week and be robbed by 'em each Month; may all thy Bankers break, thy
Ventures be lost, till you are as poor in thy Person as you are in thy Spirit,
and thy own Children deny thee -- Help, Murder, Treason, Fire, Assassinates,
Rebels.


Ant. He Is stark mad sure?

[Servants force him off. Lop. Ay, something lies heavy upon his Conscience,
he is a Strange wicked fellow:


Ant. What money was that he talked of?

Lop. Hang him, Blasphemer, I never had a penny of him, I scorn it --
But come Child, where is my Daughter?

Ant. Within Sir.

Lop. Come along then: thou shall certainly have her,
And such a Fortune I will make her.

Ant. I expect it Sir.

Lop. And thou shall have it Child -- Prithee bring thy Jewels and thy Gold,
and thy and what thou have hither -- Methinks I would have 'em safe.


Ant. So would I, therefore I shall not trust you with 'em.

Lop. Well, prithee kiss me, thou art so like my Wife that is dead, I must needs
kiss thee --


[Hugs him. Ant. God's Death the old Fellow will ravish me I think;
Sir, your Daughter expects you.

Lop. Well, never was two faces so alike: I don't believe you're a man you
Rogue, as Francisco said.


Ant. He Is dismal drunk.
Here, take care of your Master:

Lop Let me alone ye Rogues:

Ant. Go carry him into Bed:

Lop. I will go to a Whore you Rogues:

1. Serve. Yes Sir,

Lop. Be sure you carry me to a Whore,
And in Her Arms I Will play,
And pass the sweet hours away,
For though like a Coy Virgin she lay,
I tickled her e're it was day.

[Ex. Servants. Ant. What a lewd old Fellow is here?
Now for the Daughter, If she have not more
Of the Champhire in her then her Father;
The Soyles so hot for me to plant in,
Yet I might save the Priest a labor by it,
And Fornication would serve my turn as well:
If she will be kind and save the form of Wedding,
She Will have the Advantage of a wife in Bedding.

The End of the Third Act. Mrs. Butlers Dance.
The Fourth ACT.
SCENE. 1. A Hall,
Enter Antonio and Feliciana. Fell. I Never was so Toung-worried in my Life,
Thou art more troublesome then a Woman-Wit
And altogether as Impertinent.

Ant. To see how Pride corrupts manners, rather then
Confess your Frailty, you will be rude; But do stifle
Your passion till it choke you, do -- till like a
Secret in a Fool it itches, so to be revealed you
May scratch your self to death for vexation.

Fell. Sweet Soul, how it fancies it self; I Will call for a
Cestern of water, where like Amorous Narcissus
It shall Court the shadow of its own Beauties.

Ant. If you will Act Diana, I may see some of your Ladyships:

Fell. Would I were any thing but what I am;

Ant. I Will make worse of you presently if yon please:

Fell. Art thon a Man?

Ant. You had best try:

Fell. No, thou have the Appearance of many, but not the Soul
Of one, thou art a Compound of all Nations, without
The perfections of any; thou art neither well-
Fashioned, Well-made, nor well-bred, but a most
Complete bungle of Nature; Thou have the
Insolence of a Spaniard, the heavyness of a
Dutchman, the haughtiness of a German, the dullness of
An Irishman, and the Impudence of an Englishman.

Ant. I am glad on it with all my heart, for thou have
All the Pride of an Italian, the Gayety of a
French-woman, the management of a Venetian,
And the Spirit of a Welsh-woman.

Fell. I Will stay no longer;

Ant. You shall:

Fell. You will not force me.

Ant. No, but I Will keep you here

Fell. And I shall not go,

Ant. No:

Fell. No:

Ant. No -- you shall not, you shall not, faith; not
That I am fond of your Company, but since I
Have no other, I will not be left alone:

Fell. You had as good, for I Will not loose another word on thee:


Ant. So much the better; when the Thunder's expelled
The Sky may grow clear, and I like a Landscape
better then a Storm.

Fell. Your Importunity's intolerable.

Ant. Then I have my Ends -- and I Will be as diligent
In perplexing thee as I would in my attendance
On a great Man, who to ease himself of an
Assiduous Suitor, bestows something on him to
Keep him out of the way, and so is tired into a kindness.

Fell. I could find in my heart to marry thee to be rid of thee.

Ant. Faith do, it is as good a Receipt for Separation,
As borrowing Money is to break Friendship;
It Is a Trade among the Grandees all over
Europe, A man of Quality would no more
Be seen with his Wife after he has treated her
Relations and secured her Portion, then a Mistress
Would admit of the Visits of her Cully when she
had spent his Estate, or a Gamester endure
The Conversation of his Buble after he had won all.

Fell. How proud you are of these Villainies and
With what pleasure you relate 'em:

Ant. Therefore I would have the women be wiser and
Take the Man they like without that sure
Physiek of Matrimony, it kecks in the stomach,
And works in each Faculty, and purges out the
Very desire we Wed for: Love's like a Bottle
When freely proposed, to depart when you
Please, or as long as you please, but when once
Is Constrained it Curdles in the Blood, it palls every
Tale; Each Glass is a Potion, and poisons the
Kind Conversation you met for.

Fell. What can thou see in that impudent face
Of thine, to imagine any she-thing would trust
Thee without substantial Security?

Ant. Faith nothing, but that Impudence you speak of:
Assurances is half in half with a woman.
If we are modest when we woo you, you're
Afraid we will be bashful when we have you.
If the Spirit be meek, you Conjecture the Flesh
Must be feeble, and a modest Lawyer can
Never have good Practice.

Fell. Nor an Impudent one a good Reputation, he
May baffle a Cause, but never maintain one.

Ant. Come, you're conceited;

Fell. I am sorry I invade your Property:

Ant. Your Sex is all Vanity:

Fell. And yours all deceit, it is the practice of
Your Souls to seduce us into Faith, you're
Never well but when you're beloved, nor easy
When you are so, Change is your delight,
And Constancy your Scandal; you Curse
Every man that is falser then your selves,
And are Potent in nothing but perjury.

Ant. Well I Will have done for the present, and like
An Ingenious Preacher leave off whilst my
Sermon is hot in your memory, and not
Doze your Attention with dwelling too long on
The Subject, therefore hoping you may edify by
My Present Doctrine, I Will finish my text at
Our next meeting -- Farewell.

Fell. With all my heart:

Ant. You Will Cry when I Am gone:

Fell. 'Twill be for fear of your return then:

Ant. Well, I can have the Liberty of Serenading,
And expect not to sleep when I wake.

Fell. Would thou were gone once.

Ant. I am departing:

Fell. Peace be with you:

Ant. I will so maul thee when I have thee.

Fell. No, I shall sleep then I suppose without Serenading:

Ant* May all thy thoughts thy Soul toward man's Flesh bend.

[Exit. Fell. And may you prove as good as you pretend,
Well, I do like this Fellow,
And Love him I Am afraid,
But I am sensible he has as good thoughts of me:
What Fools are women to hide their Inclination,
When they are satisfied the man's their own:
But it is a Policy our Mothers teach us
Persuading 'twill inflame the Lover more,
When Every Tedious hour delays our bliss,
And makes us keep what most we wish were his.

[Exit. SCENE. II.
The Backside of the City, near a Church. Enter Silvio and Sancho. Sil. Either
we have out-staid our time,
Or Darkness Creeps too hastily upon us,
Can tell the hour, Sancho?

San. It should be toward supper-time by the
Wambling Chimes of my Carcass, pox of this Love,
It starves the whole Family, and because your
Honor can diet with Camelions, you
Think in manners we ought not to fare better.

Sil. Art thou not ashamed of thy Gluttony?

San. No, but I am of my Abstinence, this is fasting
Without doing Heaven any service; never
Did Love Monopolize like yours: Starving
Honor I have heard of, but this Effeminate
Punctilio is a disgrace to your Sex:
Nothing but sighing, and thinking, and walking
Discontentedly in Fields, as if the blood of a
Murder lay on your Conscience.

Sil. Prithee hold thy idle Tongue:

San. Would I had wherewithal to divert it otherways;
I am indebted to my stomach 3 meals, and cannot
Get one to be bayl for me, good Sir think
Upon some means to pay something down
To stop his mouth a little, for I have Confessed
A Judgment to hunger, and famine will
Serve an Execution on me.

Sil. If thou mindst thy wife when thou have one,
As much as thou do thy belly, she will have a good time on it

San. I Am sure If I don't mind that, she will have an Ill
Time on it; you know no body now adays take
Houses with bare walls, wenscoat me well with
Beef, and it may recommend me to a good Tenent.

[Enter four Bravo's.] Bra. It must be he, for this is the time and place we
were directed to observe:


[Clock stricks nine] Sil. Strikes not this nine, Sancho?

San. Yes sure it does:

Sil. I Am right in my Appointment then.

Bra. May I be so in mine, If this fail,
[Fires a Pistol we must all fall on him

[but misses Sil. Ha! art hurt Sancho*

San. Not that I know of;

Sil. Assist thy Master then:

San. Against any thing but the Devil:

1 Bra. Fall on:

[They fight and Sil. Oh villains, this is Carlos's work:

[at last the Bravo's San. They give ground Sir.

[retire. Enter Carlos and Guzman as the Bravo's are retiring, and Joins with
'em. Carl. Oh Cowardly Dogs! but think not Silvio thou shall escape me:

Sil. It Is like thee base and treacherous Carlos.


As Silvio and Sancto give ground Enter Antonio and Joins 'Em. Ant. Ha giving
ground! for the weaker side, like a true Champion.


They Fight vnd Guzman falls. Guz. So I am satisfied.

San. There Is a rising-blow for you:

[Stabs at h^^ Guz. Dogs --

At last Carlos falls and the Bravos all run. Guz. Help, murder, murder:

Fran. [above Ha! what noise is this, and just before my door?

Ant. Who are you Sir, and how is it with you?

Sil. I am a Stranger Sir; but slightly hurt I think;
I have only time to thank your Generosity; If
There Is no murder done I Will find you out, and
Study to return this happy rescue:

Ant. I Will wait you till you're out of danger.

Sil. By no means Sir, you are not known, and may
Be safe, I am; this mischief has been
hatching too some time; therefore I
Beg you would Enquire no more; If
[Crys of Murder I do well, I certainly will seek you,
[within. If not I Will ever love your memory.

Carl. Help Pedro; Sphorso, I shall bleed to Death:

Fran. above. Ha! Is not that my Sons voice? Lights there:
Murder, oh my Child, Lights, Rogues, murder.

Ant. Shift for your self then; for
[Retires from above The hounds are near us.

Sil. Sancho

San* Your shadow Sir:

[Exeunt severally. Guz. I Am mauled like a forlorn hope:

Carl, Oh!

Guz. Don Carlos l

Carl. Who Is that Guzman? art thou hurt too?

Guz. Like Master, like man, at present, I am
Stuck as if I were to be Larded:

Enter Francisco Servants with Lights. Fran. What are you? and why this outcry?

Guz. I Am in Labor Sir, and want to be delivered.

Fran. Guzman -- my Son too wounded and on the
Earth; oh! speak, who did it? what,
Not a word -- oh! speak, how is it with thee?

Carl. My Soul is like a Lamp on its departing,
My Blood the oil that fed it is quite spent,
And nature Struggles for its last pale glimps.

Fran. Oh horrid villainy, get Doctors, Slaves, and Surgions,
Summon a College of Pulse-fumblers, and
Lint-Scrapers, propose rewards to show
Their utmost Art; sly slaves -- in gently, villains,
Gently with him, look to your Fellow Servants.

1 Servant. Alas poor Guzman.

[They carry off Carlos. Guz. None of your pity, but lend me your help,
They have missed my heart, I think, and that is all,
I am slashed like grill'd mutton; oh for some
Conger-Eels to stop these Leapings; Softly Rogues,
Softly, I shall come to my Journeys end soon Enough.

[They lead him off. A noise within of pursue this way. Enter Silvio and
Sancho. Sil. What Shall we do? we run mazes sure and
Come to the End where we begun; ha! here is a
Garden-wall; by your leave who ever you
belong to, If he be noble he will protect me:
Follow me Sancho.

[Climbs the wall San. I warrant you Sir, I have been
Used to rob orchards -- what is the matter now?
I cannot mount it, and have hopt over higher
in my time; I believe the Devill's at my arse,
And thinking I am Climbing toward Heaven,
Tugg's me back as if I were out of my way:
Up Gundy or be stuck with Soledo's,
[noise still Till thou lookst like a Porcupine and shoots
Thy Quills Backwards --

[Gets over and several [run Cross SCENE. III.
The Inside of the Garden. Enter Dorothea and Farmosa. Dor. Surely thou will be
late:

Far. Oh fear not, Madam, your true Lover will
Out-wait an Angler, and thinks not his
Time ill-spent, If he catches a fish at last,

Dor. No more delays, but have:

Far. I Will be with him in less then a tickling time.

As she is going off Sancho runs against her, and they both fall. Far. Murder,
Thieves, Thieves:

Dorothea Shreiks, and as she is running off is met by Silvio who Catches her in
his arms. Sil. Dorothea!

Dor. Silvio!

Sil. The same and thine for ever;

Far. Sancho, what art thou? a mole, have got no eyes?

San. No, but I want the strength of one to heave this
Earth up --

[he lifts her up Dor. How got you In?

Sil. Pursued by villains I leapt the wall
For Sanctuary.

Dor. What mean you?

Sil. As I was waiting for my guide to approach thee,
Four Bravo's set on me, one fired at me, but mist;
Straight they all came on me, I had the good fortune to
Receive 'em well; nay they were giving ground:
When Carlos Roared, think not thou shall escape,
And seconded their attempt.

Dor Oh Heavens!

Sil. My advantage quickly lessened, and I had perished
But for the kind relief of one I knew not, I think
some fell; who with their Cries alarmed the neighborhood;
I got in here hoping to miss their fury,
And chance has guided me to what I longed for:

Dor. Let us retire and think upon some means how
To Secure thee, Oh my Silvio, it is what I dreaded:
But by my Love I will partake thy fate
Let Stars be as malicious as they please.

Sil. Sure all must be propitious in the End,
Or Heaven's Partial to the most deserving.

Dor. Oh I shake!
My Soul as if it gave me warning sickens,
And Sighs out, we must never meet again.

Sil Let Us never part then, and defy the Omen;
Thus fortified by Love we will dare the foe,
Till our ill Stars grow weary of the Siege,
Or at the general Assault we will stand
When their dire Influence is ready drawn,
Against the vast breach of all our miseries,
And where Oppression's thickest fall together.

Dor. No, let us Study how to live together:
I have revealed the secret to my Father,
All thoughts of Reconcilement with your Rival
Are quite discarded; he seems inclined to
What I have proposed -- nay, I Have more to tell
Thee; If the description I have heard don't Err,
Thou have a Brother here, one Don Antonio, Son
To Don Michael Frederick of Peru.

Sil. Antonio.

Dor Go in, I Will tell thee all:

Sil. I wait it with Impatience:

Dor. Oh Silvio, to loose thee now,
When all my hopes were in such perfect health,
They seemed insur'd against all Accidents,
It Is like a Chemist whose unwearied Toil
With eager diligence long time had searched,
Through every curiosity of Nature,
To bring his mighty project to perfection;
And when the wished for Art he had attained,
Dyed in its finishing Operation: away
Farmosa, stay you here, If any disturbance
Should approach our Walls, give notice of it.

[Exit Sil. and Dor. San. I suppose I must come up
With the baggage, and may halt with your Ladyship:

Far. A likely fellow this, how long have you lived with your Master, friend?

San. Ever since he has lived with me, he never
Forsook me, nor will I ever discharge him.

Far. A pleasant Fellow, what are you?

San. His Portmanteau, I carry his Equipage:

Far. I mean, what Countryman are you?

San. A Resident of chance:

Far. What Is that?

San. A Courtier, a Gam'ster, a Pimp, a Vallet,
Or any thing that all Countries, Religions, or
Customs are alike to:

Far. A Savoury Fellow, and rellishes of Wit*
Are all women too as well as Countries,
Religions, and Customs, alike to you?

San. All of this side fifty:

Far. Then there is hopes for me, for I want a year
On It: If I could marry this Rogue and redeem
My Virginity now, 'twould do well; I have a
Pretty good sum of money which I have scraped
Together in Service; and mine is not the first
[Aside Cracked Reputation has been put off that way:
Besides that Villain Guzman grows weary
Of me, and will never be brought to buy that
Outright which he has had the use of so
Often for nothing.

San. I Will strike in with this Autumn, this latter
Season if I can; for they say she has made
[Aside Good use of her time, and has been highly
Presented by her Mistrisses Suitors, what though she be somewhat
Ancient I shall break her heart the sooner, I Will
Enamour her first with my Graces, and then
My Person will appear more lovely.
[Sings. Sweet Nymph, if that you are at Leisure
To hear a Swains misfortune,
You of my heart have made a seizure,
And yours I do Importune:
Oh let it, let it not be said,
A Man of Comely feature
Should be slighted by a scornful Maid,
So become a wretched Creature.

Far. As I hope to be honest his Organ is delicious,
He shall hear the Excellence of mine:
[Sings. Signior, you shall not find me so hard-hearted
To scorn the offers of a Love so true,
But since a flame so Generous you have started,
Take me, and I Will take you;
All I am Mistress of I give
My heart's fully resigned
A blushing Virgin then receive
And prithee work me to thy mind.

Saa. Good, she comes -- Most admirably performed --
Let me salute the Orifice of your Melody:

[kisses her. Far. Far short of yours Sir, pray be ingenious, and
Tell me in what Climate you stole this great
Accomplishment?

San. In England.

Far. Were you born there?

San. Stark naked:

Far. Waggish Britain:

San. Let me once more adore that heavenly voice:

[kisses Far. Beshrew me but your Endearments are very
Warm: If a virgin should be good-natured
And like you, you Could not be constant.

San. As pride to Authority, or first Love to its appointments.

Far. If I should throw my self away upon thee,
Would you really, truly, sincerely, and faithfully
Serve me?

San. Zealously: I Will be fonder of thee then the
Spiritual Court of an Ill neighbor.

Far. We Will go in and talk more on it.

San. Agreed and make more on it too if I can:

Far. If he has heard any thing of me, and Guzman,
I shall be puzzled for a denial -- I Am resolved;
I Will forswear it and protest my honesty and
Innocence, nay, I have a good mental
Reservation for it:
For though by Guzman's Love I was betrayed,
I Will swear for thee I am a Real Maid.

[Exeunt SCENE IV.
A Hall.
Enter Biancho, Neice, and women, and Pedro. Ped. Nay prithee Child:

Bia. Away, and give me Liberty to vent my Griefs,
I know you not, you are all my Enemies;
Why do ye preach up patience for my woes,
Yet Bar the Remedy that would procure it?

Ped. What Is the matter now?

Nei. Why she has heard of Carlos's misfortune,
And nothing can appease her:

Ped. Why Biancha, thou shall see Don Carlos,
I Will carry thee to him:

Bia. No, it is too late:

Ped. He Is hurt, but not destroyed, he will recover:

Bia. It Is Equally to me, Dye or Revive,
If he recovers, Dorothea has him,
If not I cannot;
For should I follow him to the other world,
And he retains the Passion which he fell for;
I in Elysium shall neglected pass.
The wretched pity of each happy pair.

Ped. No, 'twill be better, the match is broke,
Thy Rival loves another, and when he is sensible
What you endure, I Am sure his Soul will
Readily Embrace you.

Bia. What, must I tell him that I Love him then?
No, let my fever dry me first to Ashes,
If Heaven deprives me of my Virgin-Love:
Oh! mark me with its figure on my Soul,
That by the Token you may know hereafter
What here I wanted, and present him there.

Ped. Will thou not hear me?

Bia. You (...) not me when I entreated harden:
Oh heart-hard Stubborn heart break or forget
Thy Passion.

Ped. Do thou desire to see thy Father dead?

Bia. Father, what Father? -- Fathers love their Children,
Indulge their tender tempers, fond their humors,
And when they are just, comply with their desires;
Mine unregarded, heard me sue and sigh,
Nay, like a common beggar past me by,
As if entreating were a Trade I practiced.

Ped. Neice, do thou solicit for me, friends all
I beseech ye.

[They shake their heads. Bia. Well 'twon't be long e're I shall go abroad,
And walk in Paradise with my dear Love;
A Terras-walk we will have above the rest,
Which shall be sprinkled over each morn with Pearl,
And bruised by Rolling Stones of Diamonds,
Drawn by two Angels, Lovely as himself,
Whilst wondering Saints shall listen to our Songs
And learn from us how to be truly happy.

Ped. Heaven guard your Senses:

Bia. Heaven! I have a Song of Heaven*
[Sings. Come, come, ye Inhabitants of Heaven*
Conduct me to my Love,
Where by the Gods we may be given,
Where nothing can our Joys remove:
I mount, I fly, my Rosy Wings
Expand and Cut the yielding Air,
Each little Cherubin my Welcome Sings,
And Fathers cannot hurt us there.

Ped. Follow her all, Come Neice --

[Exit. [Exeunt all but Neice. Neice. So this I hope will do
'Twas rarely Acted,
If she can keep it up the Man's her own,
Oh Children bred by Nature to deceiving,
And Silly Parents cheated by beleiving;
When I have any, if a Man will take me,
As 'twould be hard if they should all forsake me:
Girls, I especially would watch their waters,
For Mothers by themselves may guess their Daughters.

The End of the Fourth Act. The Fifth ACT.
SCENE I.
Discovers Don Carlos on a Couch, and Servants. Carlos. MY Feavour lessens, and
I gather strength,
The blood that fed the follys of my Love
Is fled through every wound its Rage occasioned,
And prudent Judgment Reassumes her seat;
The Powers are Just, for I did Ill
To seek Redress by such vile Practices:
Oh Biancha! I have done thee wrong,
Neglected what my Stars seemed to enjoyne,
And they have proved they hate my stubborn choice.

Enter Francisco. Fran. Good morrow Boy, how is it?
Did thou rest well? do thou continue, temperate?

Car. Yes Sir, I hope I shall do well,
Nature it is wonted measure seems to affect,
And all my faculties return to order.

Fran. Well, have thou considered child,
What I proposed about Biancha's Love;
Pox of this Dorothea and her Father,
They never I believe, either of 'em liked us;
Besides, it will be such a Revenge to slight her
And marry the other, -- She Will look as melancholy
As a Discarded Statesman, and out-Fret a
Court-beauty for her Tailors disappointment at a Ball.

Car. Sir I have weighed, and wholly resign my
Self to your disposal.

Fran. Well said Boy, I will make such a man of thee,
Thou shall outshine a Country Squire on the
Sabbath, Live higher then a whore in her first
Month; And out-strut a Citty-Colonell at the
Head of his Regiment: nay we will have Justice
From old Lopez too.

Enter a Servant. Ser. Sir Don Pedro is below, and desires to
Speak with you.

Fra. Ads me, he sent to me, and desired me to stay
At home, it is thy Father in Law that must be,

Carlos; well such things I will do for thee --

Carl. Do what you please, all shall be easy to me.

Fra. Well, thou art the best Boy; thy obedience is so
Inducing, Charming and Obliging, as I hope
To live, I am afraid I shall dye a year sooner
then I intended, to make thee amends.

Carl. I willingly would go into the Garden, the
Air, Sir, may refresh me.

Fra. Wait on him to the Garden, I Will be with thee presently.
[Exit Carlos and Servants. Well things are brought about rarely,
Now will he have a swinging fortune with
Biancha:
And after her Fathers Death all his Estate.
He shall have all mine too when I Am dead,
I will take her Portion and settle so much
per annum, and Live upon him into the Bargain;
I Will not part with a free penny, till I cannot help it.
When Parents once upon their Children Live,
Though all they have we gave 'em, yet they greive;
Therefore to keep mine still at my Command,
I Will leave the world before I part with Land.

Scene discov'rs Guzman in a Chair. A Surgeon by him, and a Table with
Gally-Pots, Vrine-Violls, etc. Guz. Well Sir, and how long must I endure your
probings and your Cullices?

Chirurg. A week, if you keep a good Diet, will set you Right again.

Guz. Why there he is, a good Diet, that is, eat nothing*
Suppose I keep an ill Diet, and eat, will a
Fortnight cure me?

Chirurg. A fortnight! by'r Lady, it may cost you your Life for ought I know.

Guz. Nay, for ought thou know, I may dye to night
Of a Quinzey.

Chirurg. Why, so you may Sir.

Guz. Yes, I thought so; Suppose
I have a mind to let blood:

Chirurg. You have lost enough already one would think,
I see no occasion for that.

Guz. Ay! but there may be for ought thou know:
What a wretch am I ordered to look after me?
Because I am a Servant I must have no other
To take care of me; my Master has the head of
The Doctors and Chyrurgeons, and I must be
Managed by their Glister-Carrier.

Chirurg. You are disposed to be merry, Sir.

Guz. Very well, because I don't like this Rascal,
I am disposed to be merry; hark ye you
Serringe-Bobber, -- disposeme to be merry you
Had best, or I Will depose you from your Quack-Salving --
I would drink a Glass of Sack.

Chirurg. You may do what you please, but it may do you harm.

Guz. Ay, for ought thou know -- why you Dog,
Suppose I have a mind to a wench.

Chirurg. A wench!

Guz. Ay a Wench, oh it is a kind Decoction, meet and
Proper for the Body of a man, operating
Simpathetically toward the healing of the Inwards.

Surg. A Woman will kill you Sir.

Guz. I don't mean to work so hard Sir, to debauch once
a Month is a Cordial they say.

Surg. Why, Nature is so Exhausted, it would not supply
You if you had really a desire for one,
Your Spirits are wasted.

Guz. Why you dog, do you take me for a boys
Pot-Gun, without any pith in my back.

Enter Servam. Ser. Here Is a Young woman would speak with Guzman.

Guz. A young Woman, bring her in.

Surg. If she be a young woman keep her out.

Guz. Hark you Diaculum-Dauber, let her come in.

Sur. She shall not come in.

Guz. Shall Not she, Urinall-peeper.

Sur. No.

Guz. Sirrah, bring her up:

Sur. Sirrah, keep her down.

Guz. Bring her up, or I Will Murder thee.

Sur. Bring her up, and I Will poison thee.

Guz. I will bomb thee with thy own Gally- Pots then.

Sur. What mean you?

Guz. To try Experiments upon
You with your own Slops and Salves; --
There Is a Bowlus for you, there is a Potion,
There Is a Glyster, there is a Julip,
There Is an Ointment.

[Flings Pots and Viols at him. Sur. Help, Murder.

[runs. Guz. Take 3 Spoonfulls fasting of this, and sweat after this;
And sleep after this; hang your self at the last, and
Be damned after all.

Exit after the Surgeon. Scene Changes to Don Francisco's Garden.
Enter Carlos and Biancha. Carl. Indeed this goodness far exceeds my thoughts,
I could not hope such mercy from your wrongs;
But as you Copyed Heaven in suffering 'em,
You seem still more Divine in your Forgiveness.

Bia. The Frailties of my passion were too great
For me to hide
I would have smothered it and kept it down
In the dark Duugeon of forgetfullness,
But oh! The Bars of Virgin-Decency
Were all too weak to bind the Prisoner in,
Like struggling winds in hollow Caverns pent,
It burst my feeble Breast, and Sighed its way out.
Then, as the Clouds by Grumbling, Thunder forced,
In showers it gushed from my o're-swelling Orbs.

Car. They have at length moistened this stubborn Clay,
And made it pliable to thy desires; work me
Like Yielding wax, I Will fashion with thy will,
And figure with the wishes of thy Soul.

Bia. Oh happy Change!
Heaven cannot more rejoice when Sinners sigh,
Than I for thy Conversion.

Carl. Nor can a Soul convinced of long lived Errors,
Embrace the blessed Truth with more delight,
Then I my Dear Biancha.
Thus let me show my humble Penitence,
[kneels.] Here let me languish for my past Offense,
And take forgiveness at my Alters Feet.

Bia. Thus the kind Oracle enjoins thy Penance,
Love her who has thy tedious absence mourned;
Nor cease, till by Biancha thou art scorned.

Carl. Yet nearer, nearer yet.

Bia. Lock me within thee,

[Embracing.] Carl. Oh! Mercy --

Bia. Love.

Carl. Goodness on Goodness,
There is but one that is just in thy whole Sex,
And thou art She.

Enter Pedro and Francisco. Fra. Joy, Joy, Eternal Joy, rise my blessings,

Ped. My Comforts.

Carl. Sir, for what is past --

[ to Pedro.] Ped. No Excuses, she is thine, and thou art hers;
What Is past be forgotten, and what is to come
Keep to your selves.

Fra. I long to see them one, ah! Carlos, Carlos, that I were in a Condition to
take thy place that Night; but no matter, I Will tell thee how I did at thy Age,
and if thou can out-fling thy Daddy a Barr's length, much good do thy Spouze
with it.


Ped. I warrant you Brother, she will match him, or she is a Bastard by the
Mother's side; but Brother --


Fra. Brother --

Ped. You stand to what we have agreed on.

Fra. Do I hope to be a Grandfather -- to see a -- chopping Rogue come out of
thy Parcely-Bed, and hear it cry Granny, Daddy. -- If thou do not get her
with Child in a Month, by the Champion of Spain I Will do it my self.

Ads! precious, I could so -- Go, get you in you
Little Rogue you, or I shall marry thee my --
Self, and put his nose out of Joint. Go, go.
[ Exeunt Carl. and Bia. Lord I am so wanton,
My Blood's as warm as
Five and twenty Brother. How do you feel your self?

Ped. I am at frozen Sixty Brother, Nature has no such Ecstasies in my Veins.


Fra. Why truly, I think mine is but a flash,
Yet we have been Brother --

Ped. Ay! We have have been Brother --

Fra. A Pox of this Inclination without Power,
But the Comfort is, tho young Rogues will be old
Like us, and love to talk on it when they are
Past the Action. -- But come, let us follow our
Intentions, and go where we resolved.

Ped. I wait on you.

Fra. Well, this Boy and this Baggage puts me so in mind
Of the Night I got her in --

Ped. Well, think no more on it.

Fra. Ah Brother!
Old Soldiers, their past Actions, love to own.

Ped. Ah Brother!
And often Brag of more then has been done.

[Exeunt. Scene changes to Don Lopez his House.
Enter Dorothea and Feliciana. Fell. Then Carlos is recovered?

Dor. Thanks to my Stars, I hear so.

Fell. Well, I have sent to this Antonio to come to me to Night, I find I am a
Fool, and ask you pardon for all I have said of Silvio.


Dor. I rejoice in your Repentance.

Fell. But what is become of Silvio?

Dor. Why, he is safe, under the care of Signior Octavio, a neighboring
Merchant, an Ancient Friend of his Fathers; But I have sent to him concerning
Carlos's recovery, and he will come to night; I have told my Father he is the
Brother of your Lover, and he approves of his Amor. -- but here he comes, Ill
tell you more anon.


Enter Lopez. Lop. Well Children, have you heard any more concerning Carlos?

Dor. Nothing but that he is forward on his Recovery,

Lop. Well, and when did you see Antonio?

Fell. Not since yesterday.

Lop. I think I have provided well for you, you young Baggage;
You Will taste man earlier by three years then your Mother, take heed
you don't surfeit Filly.

Fell. Oh! Preach that to the Men, they are apt to be soonest cloyed.

Lop. Well Dory, I have considered concerning this Silvio; If it be proved
Adtonio and he are Brothers, take thy choice, I Will not Interrupt thee.


Dor. I humbly thank you Sir, and hope he will prove he merits me.

Enter Servant. Serve. Sir, Supper waits.

Lop. Ads me, come Girls, come, my Appetite's provoking.

Fell. Sister bear up.
Thou Wilt have thy man near doubt, and so shall I,
'Twere hard for our first Longings we should dye.

[Exeunt. Scene the Street.
Enter Silvio and Merchant. Sil. I have told you all the Progress of my Love,
And ever must acknowledge your Assistance,
The Hazards I have vanquished, give me hopes
I may at last possess what I have toiled for;
I only want to find my Brother out;
Likewise, I beg you would go with me this Night
To satisfy Don Lopez what I am.

Mer. You may be sure, all I can serve you in is full as welcome to my Soul, as
to your own.


Sil. I have sufficient reason to believe it;
And what you have told me of Don Carlos,
Relating to the Daughter of Don Pedro,
Together with his blessed recovery,
Creates in me a double Joy.

[Sings here.] SONG.
Oh! Lovely Virgin, Look down
And view, a Slave impatient of thy Sight;
Behold a Wretch by thee undone,
Whose Heart is all thy own.
Oh! Guide him in this starless Night,
And let thy Eyes create new Light.
Enter a Spanish Count with Music, Serenaders, etc. Mer. Whom have we here?

Sil. Some Serenading Gallants to my Mistress,
If they stay long I shall be rude to 'em.

Mer. Let us observe 'em, I may chance to know 'em.

Count. Come, come, place your selves ready, and take care your Simphany's and
Retournels, and your what de Callums, come in good time; Come strike, strike
the key there.

[Sings. May the Eyes of my Mistress everlastingly flourish
And my constant Affection I hope they will nourish;
For if my Amor Dorothea don't cherish,
By the Lord I am likely, most likely to perish.
God this don't do I believe, I am whorse, and she don't hear my Music.


Sil. Sir, I have some Affairs in this Family; which oblige me to wait here,
and it would conduce much to my designs if you would please to retire.


Don. Sir, I have some Affairs in this Family, which oblige me to wait here,
and it would conduce much to my designs if you would go about your business.


Sil. I am about it Sir.

Don. So I am about mine Sir, may the Eyes of my Mistress --

Sil. Hark ye Sir, If you will not quit your post,
I must endeavor to force you.

Don. Force me, draw Fiddlers.

[ Silvio draws, and the Merchant, and beat 'em off crying Murder. Scene
changes to a Garden Wall.
Enter Lopez with a Torch, and his Sword drawn. Lop. What cry of Murder's this?
Enter Silvio. Who Is there?

Sil. A Gentleman.

Lop. Of whence*

Sil. Of England, and going to my Lodging was set upon by Villains, If you have
Honor give me your Protection.


Lop. Question not what I have, but follow me.

Scene changes to the inside of a Garden.
Lop. Here, step into that Arbor, I Will go and see if my Servants be removed,
that you may be safe; I Will be with you presently, for if the Corrigedore be
raised --


Sil. By Heaven! this is the Father of my Love,
What will become of me?

Enter Farmosa. Fra. Well; we Confidents have a sad time on it, up at all hours,
and ready upon all Occasions; And for Lying no People come near us. I fent
Antonio the key of the Garden, and this is the time he was ordered to be in the
Arbor, I think I see him, hist* Sir, my Mistress stays for you.


Sil. What shall I say, by Heaven this is some Appointment with a Rival, Oh
false Dorothea!


Fa. Nay, come --

Sil. I will have Patience to see the end of this.

Fa. Lord it is very dark! well, it is a pleasant time for Lovers, if I had a
Gallant I should love the dark excessively.


Sil. What does the old Hagg mean?

Fa. If a man had a mind of ravish me in the dark,
I swear, I believe I should not dare to cry out.

Sil. Come lead me to your Mistress

Far. Well, you have the softest hand that ever I felt.

Sil. Here Is something to soften thine.

Far. This was not the thing I meant; He Is so dull I cannot persuade him to be
rude. -- this Climate has such a heavy Influence on man in England, now the
Maids are often their Mistresses Tasters; Come then, since you are so stupid --


Sil. Oh! Women, Women, Why do men believe 'em.

[Exeunt. Enter Antonio* Ant. This Garden is so large, and it is so dark, I
scarce can grope this Arbor out. Oh! for my Mistress on a soft bed of Roses,
yielding as I am, with transported Sighs, then blubbering for the Joy her Love
had lost -- with one hand pushing me, the other griping, till by repeated bliss
her griefs forget, and she rejoices in the flame she dreaded. Oh! here is the
Arbor, would my Guide would come.


Enter Lopez. Lop. Come Sir, all is clear, and I Will preserve you till the search
is over, and then take care for your escape.


Ant. Escape, the Devil, what can this mean.

Lop. Nay, Come Sir, come.

Ant. I dare not disobey, but what the Event will be, Fortune knows.

Scene changes to Farmosa's Bedchamber.
Enter Farmosa and Silvio. Far. Stay here till I see if the old man be safe,
and Ill conduct you to my Lady speedily.


[Exit. Sil. It Is so, her fickle Soul is fond of some new Face;
As Carlos was for me scorned and neglected,
So am I now for this; yet I shall see this faithless
Fair Persuader, that led my Soul away toward promised
Joys, and now it is plunged in love, laughs at its
Sufferings.
Oh Woman! Woman! thou Primitive Seducer,
That with the Serpent club'd for our Damnation:
Man was forewarned, and could have stood his Guile,
But thou, the greater Fiend, not being suspected,
Finished what Satan but imperfect drew.

Sancho creeps from under the Bed. Sol. I am almost smothered, and so stung by
Vermin, that if I had a Glass I might fancy I had the Smallpox; the Fleas have
danced backwards and forwards o'r me this three hours, that I am gawl'd as if a
Nest of Aunts had travailed over me with their hoard for Winter.

Enter Lopez and Antonio. Hark! the Door opens.


Sil. Ha!

Lop. Stay here one Minute, and I Will fetch a Light.

Sil. What have we now --

Ant. What will become of me, I know not, I must put a good Face upon the
matter, and pretend I only came to see what house his Daughter kept.


Sil. This surely is my Rival; what are you?

Ant. God's Death, is the House haunted, what is that to you?

Sil. Thou art a villain.

Ant. Thou lie, be a good Angel or a bad.

Sil. I Will feel what you are.

Ant. I Will keep thee at Arms length if I can.

Sil. So, here is murder going forward, would I coud get under the bed to my
leap Frogs again.

[They push at one another, and at last Antonio falls over Sancho a top on
him.] Help! Murder! Oh! I quake for fear of a chance thrust in my bowels;
murder, help, murder.


Sil. Lie still, or thou art dead.

Enter Lopez with Lights. Lop. Ah! what is here, three men, thieves, give me my
Sword, fetch up my great Guns, help, thieves there, thieves.


[Runs out.] Enter Dorothea and Feliciana. Dor. For Heavens sake what is the
matter?

Sil. Now I shall see the Face which has undone me.

Dor. Silvio.

Sil. Yes Madam, unexpected.

Fell. Antonio, what brothers fighting!

Sil. Antonio!

Ant. Silvio! what Stars set us at odds?

[Embracing.] Sil. They have lost their aim, I hope thou art not hurt, forgive
me Madam; Oh my brother! My Soul's divided so 'twixt Love and Frindship, I know
not which to serve.


Dor. I miss no Love you e're can show to him.

Ant. Nor I no Friendship he bestows on you. Nay, come into the Lump, and let us
all four unite into one Soul; where have thou been? but more of that hereafter;
but what is he, we stumbled on?


San. Your faithful Friend and Slave Sancho.

Sil. Sancho! How came thou hither?

San. I was locked in by my Lady Farmoza, I came on the same design your honor
did, only my Love was placed on a lower object.


Sil. Does thy heart lean that way?

San. Faith Sir I should be loath to part the Family,
I have promised her for Spouze,
Therefore I beg we may live with you still; make her your housekeeper, and me
your valet, though I Am preferred, I am not grown proud Sir,

But is this your honors Brother.

Ant. At your Service Sir.

San. My respects to you Sir, shall prove how much I honor my Masters
Relations.


Enter Lopez with a Gun and Servants. Lop. Stand clear, make room, or I fire on
all.

Ant. What my dear Father, cock't against your Daughters.

Lop. Antonio.

Fell. Yes Sir, and this his Brother, of whom my Sister fully has inorm'd you,
Lop. his Brother, Sil. yes Sir.


Lop. How got they in?

Sil. Sir, you conducted me hither.

Ant. And this key, by your Daughters Appointment, gave me admittance.


Lop. Besure you oil the wards well, and keep 'em from Rusting. But Son in Law,
is this really your Brother?


Ant. The very Brother I told you I was in search of, how we have mist each
other here, I know not, but we are met at last, nor shall the world part us; my
Fathers Death -- I suppose this Lady has given you a full Account of -- my
Travels are too tedious for the present, we'll talk of 'em hereafter, the four
thousand Crowns my Father left, I freely deliver to you, and only contrive some
way that I may purchase this man's meat, and I desire no more.


Sil. Sir, I have a thousand Crowns more in Don Octavio's hands, which shall be
put to what my Brother speaks of, and be divided equally betwixt us, if you
think them Recommendations sufficient to your Daughters Love, we are happy; if
not, we must submit, and curse the Scantiness of our Fortune.


Lop. Sir, you speak worthily: and had ye no fortunes? So well I like your
Principles, I should esteem them Estates of themselves. The morning comes fast
upon us, the transactions of this night we'll deferr till a more Leisure time;
here, take my Daughters, and use 'em as their behavior deserves.


Ant. If mine have a Conscience, and will be contented with what I have, I
shall think nothing too much for her.


Fell. I expect no volunteers, be just to your Family Duties, that is all I shall
look for.


Ant. If I run upon tick Cuckold me --


Fell. Even Reckonings you know, make long Friends, be prudent, for as you use
me at first, I shall expect hereafter.


Lop. Well, do you think you are matched --

Ant. I Will tell you after the first night Sir.

Sil. Now Dorothea, now our fears are ended;
How shall we recompense our Sufferings,
But by excess of Joys.

Dor. Spare my blushes, and take me to your self.


Enter Farmoza. Far. Sir, here is Don Octavio below enquires for Don Silvio.

Sil. Entreat him to appear, it is my Appointed Guardian, by my Father whilst I
inhabit here.


Lop. I desire his presence.

Enter Octavio, runs to Silvia. Oct. Silvio, I joy to see you safe,

Sil. You see me happier then e're I thought for.

Lop. Signior Octavio, you are an earlier riser --

Oct. Indeed I have not been in Bed this night,
My Soul's disordered for Don Silvio's safety
Has interrupted all my usual customs;
But since I see him well, I find my self so.
And Signior Lopez, if you think him worthy,
As I am sensibly your Daughter does; his family
Is noble, and his Fortune equal to --

Lop. Sir, we are satisfied already.

Sil. Brother pray be acquainted with my friend.

Oct. It this Antonio.

Ant. The same, and in my Brothers interest much obliged to you.

Enter Farmoza. Far. Sir, I believe the Inhabitants of Sevill have been all
upon the Ramble to night, for here is Don Francisco, Don Pedro, Don Carlos, and
the Lord knows who below.


Lop. Why, they are welcome, bring'em up, and we'll be friends with all; it
shall not be said on such a day, I have emnity with any, if Franciso is to be
reconciled, I Will refuse no Articles, he shall propose.


[Enter Francisco.] Enter Francisco. Fran. Signior Lopez I am come --

Lop. I know it, and for what too -- come Brother, that was to have been -- if
you can forget what is past I shall, your Sons presents shall be restored, and
I Will present my Cousin Biancha, whom I hear he is to marry, with two thousand
Crowns for a Suit of dressing Plate.


Fran. Are you in earnest?


Lop. Here Is my hand.


Fran. Well, I did ever think thee a good man in the worst of our Quarrels --
call up my Son and the Company with him, brother, we'll keep the Name, though
we are not, so may we never meet but thus, Oh!

Enter Carlos, Pedro, Biancha. Oh Boys! Such news, such ample Satisfaction,
that his Generosity almost brings tears in my Eyes.


Car. Sir.


Lop. No Complements Signior Carlos, all is well.


Car. But here is a Gentleman I Have most offended, can you forgive me Sir?


Sil. The joy I have to find you safe, cancels all injuries; and it shall be
the future study of my Life to gain your Friendship.


Carl. And mine to show it Sir -- if I am not deceived, this Gentleman was he
that rescued you in that unhappy broil.


Ant. I do remember some such bustle Sir,
But knew not 'twas my Brother that I served.

Sil. Was it thy hand Antonio, blessed be thy Arm, and mine that pressed no
deeper.


Dor to Bian. Give you joy Couzin.


Bian. I have it, I hope, if Carlos can bestow it.


Ped. Blessings on ye all, Brother Francisco, it is such a comfort to see our
Children thus provided for, that sure no ordinary Joy must wait upon 'em; let us
be Luxurious in this Festival, and stretch our strings to make it truly
Glorious.


Fran. Stretch! By St. Jago I Will turn my baggs inside outward, till we have
purchased the utmost of pleasure.


Sanc. Must I be left out of this joy Sir?
What say thou Farmoza?
Have not thou a grumbling toward night?

Far. Yes, if I thought you could perform as well as your Master.


San. I am not so tempted Farmoza, but in the dark who knows but Joan may be as
good as you know the Proverb --


Lop. Come, none shall depart from this house unsatisfied; take him Farmoza,
and I Will give you 500 Crowns to begin the world with.


Far. I am at your worships dispose Sir.


Lop. And if thou can increase thy Family by her, I Will give thee as much more
to provide for it.


San. I warrant you Sir, I have a good Steel and a Flint, if the Tinder will
take fire.


Lop. Go run my Servants, and set Spain at work to feast our fancies; Lovers
take hands; nay, let the Fathers join too, we'll haste to Church, and see these
man and wife, all revel here this day.


Fran. And with me to morrow.

Ped. Mine Is the next.


Lop. May nothing interrupt these Lovers Bliss,
But every day prove fortunate as this.

[Exeunt Omnes.] EPILOGUE.
[Spoken by Mr. Nokes, Mr. Lee, and Mr. Mountfort. Mr. Nokes pulling Mr.
Mountfort. Mr. Lee. NAY, Prithee come forward and be'nt so ashamed,
Time enough to be sad, when you are sure thy Plays damned;

Nokes. A Player and bashful, it is as senseless I Am sure,
As that Vizards should swear they come here not to Whore,

Lee. Or that sharpers wont pay, yet deny they are poor;
It Is as senseless in us as in some sparks of the Nation,
Who wear Red to shun debts, and pretend it is a fashion,
To see 'em strut about in mean conditions,
Despising of want, and cursing Commissions.

Nokes. Ay, or that Vintners should swear, they are pleased with the votes
Which obliged 'em to sell for the future in Pots;
Why, I may as well pretend to be as wise in the City,

Lee. Why Brother I think in your Trade you are witty,

Nokes. Ay, but that Jest is over, the more's the pity;
Come prithee bear up, and be not so shy,

Mount. Nay Masters I Will swear you make me blush --

Nokes. You Lie.

Mount. Speak but for me this time, I Will desire no more;

Nokes. Well, make your Leg,

[Mount. bows to Audi. and Exit.] Lee. And begone you Son of a Whore,

Nokes. Well now Master Lee,

Lee. What d'say Master Nokes,

Nokes. Are you ready?

Lee. With what?

Nokes. Your Gibes and your Jokes;

Lee. Mr. Mountfort desired you would speak of his Play,

Nokes. I have been considering, and I don't know what to say;

Lee. Why, they know it, now they have seen't,

Nokes. Ay, and if they like't they may;
There Is one thing I Am ssure, which none of you know,

Lee. Yes they do; that is, the Play's but so so.

Nokes. Well, mark what I say, and remember it too,
Mr. Lee and my self -- come Tony let us go.

FINIS.

