THE USE Of the ASTRONOMICAL Playing-Cards, Teaching any Ordinary Capacity by
them to be acquainted with all the STARS in HEAVEN, To know their Place in
Heaven, Color, Nature, and Bigness.

As also the Poetical Reasons for every CONSTELLATION, Very Useful, Pleasant,
and Delightful for all Lovers of INGENIETY.

By Joseph Moxon Hydrographer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.

LONDON: Printed by J. Moxon, and are to be Sold at his Shop at the Sign of the
Atlas in Warwick Lane. 1692.

OF THE Stars in HEAVEN.
THE Stars are divided into six sorts or sizes called Magnitudes, (which are
you may see) distinguished with six several sizes of Asterisks made like Stars,
as sent down in a Table on the Card over Dorado, whither I ^efer you.

Astronomers have computed the sizes of these Stars by comparing them either to
the Diameter, or ^lse to the whole Globe of the Earth. The Diame^er of the
Earth is 6872 of our common Miles, viz. ^uch Miles, as the whole Circumference
of the Earth and Water makes 21600 Miles; allowing for every ^egree of the
greatest Circle 60 Miles. Now the Diameter of a Star of the first Magnitude
compared with the Diameter of the Earth has such proporti^n to it as 19 has
to 4; therefore it contains ^he Diameter of the Earth 4 times and.

The Diameter of a Star of the second Magnitude ^s unto the Diameter of the
Earth as 269 is to 60: therefore it contains it 4 28/90 times.

The Diameter of a fixed Star of the third Magni^ude is unto the Diameter of
the Earth as 25 unto 6: therefore it contains it 4 times.

The Diameter of a fixed Star of the fourth mag^itude is unto the Diameter of
the Earth as 19 unto (...): therefore it contains it 3 times.

The Diameter of a fixed Star of the fifth Magnitude is unto the Diameter of
the Earth, as 119 unto 36, therefore it contains it 3 11/36 times.

The Diameter of a fixed Star of the sixth magnitude is unto the Diameter of
the Earth as 21 unto 8 therefore it contains it times.

As for the proportions of the cloudy and obscure Stars, they are not
expressed, because they are but few, and of no great account in respect of
their smalness.

The proportions of the fixed Stars compared with the Globe of the Earth, are
as follow.
A Star of the first Magnitude is to the Globe o^ the Earth, as 6859 to 64,
therefore it contains the Globe of the Earth 107 times.

A Star of the second Magnitude is to the Globe o^ the Earth, as 19465109 is to
216000, therefore i^ contains it 90 times.

A Star of the third Magnitude is to the Globe o^ the Earth* as 15625 is unto
216, therefore it contains it 72 times.

A Star of the fourth Magnitude is to the Globe o^ the Earth, as 6850 is unto
125: therefore it contains the Globe of the Earth 54 11/12 times.

A Star of the fifth Magnitude is to the Globe o^ the Earth, as 1685159 is unto
46656, therefore i^ contains the Globe of the Earth 36 8/1 times.

A Star of the sixth Magnitude is to the Globe o^ the Earth as 9261 is unto
511, therefore it contains the Globe of the Earth 18 1/10 times.

I confess all this may seem matter of incredulity to those whose understanding
is swayed by their visual sense, because they cannot perhaps conceive it
possible that the Heaven which appears so small to the bare eye should be able
to contain so great a number of such great bodies as is here spoken of; yet if
those be capable to consider the vast distance of this Heaven, and consequently
of the Stars placed in it from the face of the Earth, and also the Diminutive
quality of distance, their reason will be rectified, and their incredulity
turned into an acknowledgment of the unspeakable wisdom of Almighty God; and
they will say with the Psalmist, Great is our Lord, Great is his Power, his
Wisdom is Infinite, Psalm. 147.5.

The distance of the Stars therefore from the Earth, is according to Mr. John
Dee's computation, 2008 1 semidiameters of the Earth. The semidiameter of the
Earth contains of our common miles 3436 4/11, such miles as the whole Earth
and Sea round about is 21600: allowing for every degree of the greatest circle
60 miles, so that the distance of the Stars from the Earth is in miles
69006540, a distance so vastly great, that were there a path for a Footman to
walk in of that length, he must have set forth 9452 years 347 days ago, and
have traveled 20 miles every day to have been just now at his Journeys end.

Now as Mr. Dee says (almost in the same words) if you weigh well with your
self this little parcel of fruit Astronomical, as concerning the bigness and
distance of the Stars, etc. and the huge massiness of the Starry Heaven, you
will find your Consciences moved with the Kingly Prophet to sing the confession
of Gods Glory; and say, The Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament
shows the works of his Hands.

Of the Constellations in Heaven.
A Constellation is a certain number of Stars placed by God Almighty near one
another in Heaven, and by Astronomers circumscribed in one Figure depicted
about them, as Aries the Ram is a Constellation. Taurus the Bull is another
Constellation, etc. Astronomers brought them into these figures, for
instructions sake, things cannot be taught without names* to give a name to
every Star had been troublesome to the Master, and for the Scholar, for the
Master to devise, and for the Scholar to remember; and therefore the
Astronomers have reduced many Stars into one Constellation, that thereby they
may tell the better where to seek them, and being sought, how to express them.
And they brought them into these figures, and none other, being moved thereto
by these three Reasons: first these figures express some properties of the
Stars that are in them; as those of the Ram to be hot and dry, Andromeda
chained betokens imprisonment: the head of Medusa cut off, signifies the
loss of that part: Orion with his terrible and threatening gesture, imports
tempest, and terrible effects: The Serpent, the Scorpion, and the Dragon
signify poison: The Bull, insinuates a melancholy passion: The Bear
infers cruelty, etc. Secondly, the Stars (if not precisely, yet after a
sort) do represent such a figure, and therefore that figure was assigned them:
as for example, the Crown, both North and South; the Scorpion and the Triangle,
represent the figures which they have. The third cause was the continuance of
the memory of some notable men, who either in regard of their singular pains
taken in Astronomy, or in regard of some other notable deed, had well deserved
of mankind.

The first Author of every particular Constellation is uncertain; yet are they
of great antiquity; we receive them from Ptolomy, and he followed the
Platonicks; so that their antiquity is great. Moreover we may perceive them to
be ancient by the Scriptures, and by the Poets. In the 38 Chapter of Job there
is mention made of the Pleiades, Orion, and Arcturus, and Mazzaroth, which some
interpret the 12 Signs: Job lived in the time of Abraham, as Syderocotes makes
mention in his Book de Commensurandis locorum distantiis.

Now besides all this, touching the reason of the invention of these
Constellations the Poets had this purpose, viz. to make men fall in love with
Astronomy: And to that intent have to every Constellation invented strange
conceited stories, (as you may read hereafter, therein imitating Demosthenes,
who when he could not get the people of Athens to hear him in a matter of great
moment, and profitable for the Commonwealth, he began to tell them a tale of a
fellow that sold an Ass; by which tale he so brought on the Athenians, that
they were both willing to hear his whole Oration, and to put in practice what
he exhorted them to. The like intent had the Poets in inventing of those
stories: they saw that Astronomy being for its commodity singular in the life
of man, was almost of all men utterly neglected: Hereupon they began to set
forth that Art under Fictions, that thereby such as could not be persuaded by
commodity might by the pleasure be induced to take a view of these matters; and
thereby at length fall in love with them. For commonly you shall note this,
that he that is ready to read the stories, cannot content himself therewith,
but desires also to know the Constellation, or at leastwise some principal
Star therein.

All the Constellations formerly notified by the Ancients, were in number 48,
because no more were seen in our Hemisphere, though in this latter Age there
are 12 more discovered about the South Pole, which because it may be somewhat
more pleasant for reading, and much more helpful for your memory, I shall give
you their Names in plain English Rhythmes.

The Constellations of the Fixed Stars.
THE Army of the Starry Sky
Declares the Glory of God most high;
Seen and perceived of all Nations
In eight and forty Constellations.
First near unto the Northern Pole
The Dragon and two Bears do role;
Whose hinder parts and Tails contain
The lesser and the greater Wain.
The Hair, the Bear-ward, and the Crown,
And then comes Hercules kneeling down.
And next below a place does take
Great Serpentarius with his Snake.
Under the Harp of Orpheus
The Eagle and Antinous.
The Silver Swan her Wings does spread
Above the Dart and Dolphins head.
Then Pegasus comes on amain,
Andromeda follows in her Chain.
The Triangle below her stands;
And at her feet in Perseus hands
The Gorgon's head. Above are seen
Her Parents Cepheus, with his Queen
Cassiope. Not far below
Heniochus his Goat does show
On his left shoulder: in his hand
He does the stormy Kids command.
Of the Zodiac.
Here in the Zodiaque begins
The Ram, the Bull, the Loving Twins;
The Crab, the Lion, and Virgin tender,
The Balance, Scorpion, and Bow-bender;
Goat, Waterman, then Fishes twain
Shall bring you round to the Ram again.
Fifteen Images appear
In the Southern Hemisphere.
The Monstrous Whale before the rest,
Eridanus scarce wets his breast:
Over the Hare Orion bright
Sparkles in a Winters night.
Then comes the Great Dog, at whose tail
The famous Argo spreads her sail.
Above the Little Dog does flame,
For whom the Latins had no name:
Long Hydra on her tail allow
Carries the Pitcher and the Crow.
The Centaure holds the Wolf by th'heel.
The Altar, and Ixions Wheel
Are never seen of us: but here
The Southern Fish brings up the rear.
Southern Constellations.
About the Southern Pole there be
Twelve Constellations we cannot see,
Which Frederick Houtman did survay
Upon the Island Sumatrae:
They Are called the Crane, the Phoenix, and
The Indian, with three Darts in's hand,
The Bird of Paradise, the Fly,
The Peacock, the Camelion sly,
The South Triangle, and South Snake,
The Toucan Goose with its long Beak,
The Flying Fish and Dorado:
Two Magellanick Clouds also.
Of the Nature of the Stars.
To many of the Principal Stars there is in planetical Characters prefixed
their Planetical Natures. The Astrologers make great use of them for knowing
the nature of the Stars; for those Stars that have the character of adjoined,
are said to be of the nature of; those that have adjoined, are of the nature
of, and so of the rest. If a Star have the characters of two Planets adjoined,
that Star participates of both their Natures, but most of that Planets whose
character is first placed.

The use Astronomers make of those characters, is for knowing the color of any
Star; as if a Star have adjoined, it is of the color of; if, it is the color
of, etc.

The fixed Stars are known from the Planets by their continual twinkling, for
the Planets never twinckle, but the fixed Stars do.

How you may learn to know all the Stars in Heaven by these Playing Cards.
To each of these Cards I have set down the day of the month that the
Constellation in it rises at the Time of Sunsetting, as also the point of the
Compass it rises on, so that if you will observe it, when the Sun sets, you
will see the Constellation rising upon that point of the Compass set down on
the Card with the letters of the point of the Compass.

For Example.

If you would know when the Little Dog rises in the Evening, look in the bottom
of the Card, and you will find Jan. 11. E. by N. which shows that on the 11 th.
of January at Sunset the Constellation of the Little Dog rises East and by
North; therefore looking into that part of Heaven, you shall see the
Constellation rising, and the Stars placed in Heaven, just as you find them
placed on the Card. But if the Constellation be risen some considerable time,
you must know the time since it rose, and estimate how high it may be above the
Earth, by allowing about the twelfth part of Heaven for every hour since
Sunset, and about that esteemed height look for it, and when you find a number
of Stars placed in Heaven like those on your Card, you may conclude that to be
the Constellation, and to your great delight and satisfaction. See in what part
of the Constellation each particular Star lies, and of what Nature, Color, and
magnitude it is.

These Cards are divided into four Suits, as other Playing Cards are, viz.
Spades, Hearts, Diamonds, Clubs: And Astronomers have divided the whole face of
Heaven into four Colures, viz. The Vernal Colure, or Spring, The Aestival
Colure, or Summer, The Autumnal Colure, or Autumn, The Hyemnal Colure, or
Winter.
Because when the Sun comes to any of these Colures, the Season of the year
alters into Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter; and so have I divided these Cards;
for all the Constellations that are in the Vernal Colure are known by the suit
of Spades, in the Aestiral Colure are Hearts, in the Autumnal Colure Diamonds,
and in the Hyemnal Colure are Clubs, which are placed on the top at the left
hand of every Card; and the number of each suit is marked on the top of the
Card close by it with Numerical Letters thus, I, II, III, IV, V, etc. to X, and
the Kings, Queens, and Knaves of each suite are also depicted on the top in the
middle of the Card.

Of Via Lactea, or the Milky-way.
This Circle is not set down on the Cards, because it takes up the whole
compass of Heaven, but it is so plain to be seen every clear night, that it
needs no picture: Yet I shall tell you what Constellations it passes through,
so that you may easily find any part of it that is above the Horizon when you
please.

VIA LACTEA, or Circulus Lacteus by the Latins so called; and by the Greeks
Galaxia, and by the English the Milkey way. It is a broad white Circle that is
seen in the Heaven: In the North Hemisphere, it begins at Cancer, on each
side the head thereof, and passes by Auriga, by Perseus, and Cassiopeia, the
Swan, and the head of Capricorn, the tail of Scorpio, and the feet of Centaur,
Argo the Ship, and so unto the head of Cancer. Some in a sporting manner do
call it Watling-street, but why they call it so, I cannot tell, except it be in
regard of the narrowness that it seems to have, or else in respect of that
great Highway that lies between Dover and St. Albans, which is called by our
men Watling-street.

Concerning this Circle as there are sundry opinions, so there is great
difference among some writers, both touching the place, matter, and efficient
cause thereof: Aristotle dissenteth from all other, both Philosophers and
Poets, in the place, matter, and cause of this Circle; saying that it is a
Meteor engendered in the Air, made of the vapors of the earth, drawn up thither
by the heat of the Sun, and there set on fire. But his opinion is of all men
confuted.

First, touching the place, it cannot be in the Air, whatsoever is in the Air,
is not seen of all men, at all times, to be under one and the same part of
Heaven; If we see it in the South, they that are in the West shall see it under
the East side of the Heaven; and they that are in the East, shall see it in the
West part of the Heaven, but this Circle is of all men seen always under the
same part of Heaven, and to be joined with the same Stars: therefore it cannot
be in the Air.

Again, for the matter, it cannot be made of that which Aristotle names ( i.
e) the vapors of the Earth because of the long continuance of the thing, and
that without any alteration: for it is impossible that any Meteor made of
vapors drawn up from the Water, or exhalations from the Earth, should last so
long; as may be seen in Blazing Stars; which though they have continued long,
as namely 16 months, some more, some less; yet at the length they have vanished
away; whereas this Circle has continued from the beginning unto this day.
Besides, put case it were made of these exhalations; whence will they infer the
uniformity thereof? The Comets do alter diversely, both in the fashion of their
Blazing, and also in their several quantities, whereas in this Circle there is
nothing but the same part, always of one form, and of one bigness. In the
efficient cause thereof he must needs err: for if it be neither in the Air,
nor made of the exhalations of the Earth, it cannot be caused by the Sun; for
the one is the place, and the other the matter, wherein, and whereupon the Sun
shows his power.

All other (besides Aristotle) agree in the place, but differ in the efficient
cause thereof: and rhey are either Philosophers, or Poets. Both these affirm
that it is in the Firmament, ( i. e.) in the eight Sphere; but they disagree in
the cause thereof.

The Philosophers, (and chiefly Democritus) affirm the cause of the thing, to
be the exceeding great number of Stars in that part of Heaven, whose beams
meeting together so confusedly, and not coming distinctly to the eye, causes
us to imagine such a whiteness as is seen. But the best opinion is this, that
this Milkey way is a part of the Firmament, neither so thin as the other parts
thereof are, nor yet so thick as the Stars themselves. If it were as thin as
the other parts of the Heaven besides the Stars, then could it not retain the
light, but the light would pass through it and not be seen; if it were as thick
as the Stars, then would the light be so doubled in it, that it would glister
and shine, as the Stars themselves do: but being neither so thin as the one,
nor so thick as the other, it becomes of that whiteness we see. Thus far Dr.
Hood. But

Our modern Philosophers conceive this Lactean whiteness arises from a great
number of little Stars constipated in that part of Heaven, flying so swiftly
from the sight of our eyes, that we can perceive nothing but a confused light;
this the Telescope (more lately found out) does evidently demonstrate to us: by
the benefit of which, little Stars (otherwise inconspicuous to our eyes) are
there clearly discerned.

About the Southern Pole are seen two white spots, like little Clouds, colored
like the Via Lactea. One of which is trebble the latitude of the other; some
Mariners call them Nubeculae Magellani.

Here follows the ANCIENT STORIES Of the several Stars and Constellations.
Showing the Poetical Reasons why such Various FIGURES are placed in HEAVEN.
Collected from Dr. HOOD.
And First, Of the Northern Constellations.
URSA MINOR, This Constellation has the pre-eminence, because it is nearest of
all the rest unto the North Pole; and is called of the Greeks Arctos, whereupon
the Pole is called the Pole Artick, for that it is near unto this
Constellation. It is also called Helice minor, because of the small Revolution
which it makes round about the Pole: or rather of Elice, a Town in Arcadia,
wherein Calisto the great Bear, and Mother to the less, was bred. It is called
Cynosura, because this Constellation, though it carry the name of a Bear, yet
it has the tail of a Dog: Last of all, it is termed Phaenice, because that
Thales, who first gave the name to this Constellation, was a Phaenician: And
therefore the Phaenicians being taught how to use it in their Navigations, did
call it by the name of the Country wherein Thales was born: It consists of
Seven Stars, which the Latins call Septentriones, because by their continual
motions those Seven Stars do as it were wear the Heaven. The Spaniards do call
them all Bosina, that is an Horn; because they may be very well brought into
that form; whereof that which is the end of the Tail is called the Pole Star,
by reason of the nearness thereof unto the Pole of the World; for it is distant
(according to the opinion of most) from the true Pole, but 3 degrees 30
minutes. The Arabians call it Alrukaba. And of the Scythians it is said to be
an Iron nail, and is worshipped by them as a God. The two Stars that are in the
shoulders of the Bear, are called the Guards, of the Spanish word Guardare,
which is to behold; because they are diligently to be looked unto, in regard of
their singular use which they have in Navigation.

The reason why this Constellation was brought into the Heavens is diversely set
down, and first in this manner; Saturn having received of the Oracle that one
of his Sons should banish him out of his Kingdom, determined with himself to
kill all the Men-children that he should beget; whereupon he gave command to
Ops his Wife, being then great, that she should show him the Child so soon as
ever it was born: But she bringing forth Jupiter, and being greatly delighted
with his hair, gave the Child unto two Nymphs of Creet, dwelling in the Mount
Dicte, whereof this was one, and was called Cynosura, the other was Helice.

Jupiter, after that (according to the Oracle) he had bereft his Father of his
Kingdom, in recompense of their pains and curtesy, translated them both into
the Heavens, and made of them two Constellations, the lesser Bear, and the
greater Bear.

Other-some say, that it was Arcas the son of Calisto, and they tell the Tale
on this manner; Calisto a Nymph of singular Beauty, Daughter to Lycaon King of
Arcadia, induced by the great desire she had of hunting, became a follower of
the Goddess Diana. After this, Jupiter being enamoured with her Beauty, and out
of hope, by reason of her profession, to win her love, in his own person,
counterfeited the shape of Diana, lay with Calista, and got her with Child, of
whom was born a Son which was called Arcas. Diana, or rather Juno, being very
much offended herewith, turned Calisto into a Bear. Arcas her Son at the age of
fifteen, hunting in the Woods, by chance lighted on his Mother in the shape of
a Bear, who knowing her Son Arcas, stood still that he might come near unto
her, and not be afraid: but he fearing the shape of so cruel a Beast, bent his
Bow of purpose to have slain her: whereupon Jupiter to prevent the mischief,
translated them both into Heaven, and of them made two several Constellations:
unto the Lesser Bear there belongs but one Star unformed.

2. VRSA MAJOR, the Greater Bear, called also of the Greeks Arctos, and Helice,
consists of 27 Stars; Among the which, those seven that are in the hinder
part and tail of the Bear are most observed; the Latins call them Plaustrum,
and of our met they are called Charles Wayn; because the Stars do stand in such
sort, that the three which are in the tai^ resemble the Horses, and the other
four which are in the flank of the Bear, stand (after a manner) like the Wheels
of a wagon, or Chariot; and they are supposed by some to be greater than the
Sun. The reason of the translation of this Constellation into the Heaven, is at
large set down in the other Constellation^ and therefore needs not here to be
repeated. This Constellation was first invented by Nauplius, the Father of
Palamedes the Greek; and in great use among the Grecians; and this is to be
noted both in this and the former Constellation, that they never set under the
Horizon in any part of Europe: which though it fal^ out by reason of their
situation in the Heavens; Ye^ the Poets say, that it came to pass through the
displeasure and hatred of Juno, who for that she was by Calisto made a
Cuckquean, and they notwithstanding (as she took it) in despite of her' were
Translated into Heaven, requested her brother Neptune, that h^ should never
suffer those Stars to set within hi^ Kingdom, To which request Neptune
condescended^ so that in all Europe they never come near unto the Sea, or touch
the Horizon. If any one marvel, tha^ (seeing she has the form of a Bear) she
should have a tail so long; imagine that Jupiter fearing to come too nigh unto
her teeth, laid hold on her tail, and thereby drew her up into Heaven; so that
she of her self being very weighty, and the distance from the Earth to the
Heaven very great, there was great likelihood that her tail must stretch. The
Unformed Stars belonging to this Constellation are Eight.

3. DRACO, the Dragon, of some named the Serpent; of others the Snake, by the
Arabians, Aben, and by Junctinus Florentinus, Vrago; because he windeth his
tail round about the Ecliptic Pole; it contains 31 Stars. This was the
Dragon that kept the Golden Apples in the Orchard of the Hesperides, (now
thought to be the Islands of Cape de Virde) and for his diligence and
watchfulness, was afterward Translated into Heaven: Yet others say that he
came into Heaven by this occasion; when Minerva withstood the Giants fighting
against the Gods; they to terrify her, threw at her a mighty Dragon, but she
catching him in her hands, threw him presently up into Heaven, and placed him
there, as a memorial of that her resistance. Others would have it to be the
Serpent Python, whom Apollo slew, after the Deluge.

4. CEPHEVS, contains in him 11 Stars, and has two unformed. This was a King
of the Aethiopians, and Husband unto Cassiopeia, and Father of Andromeda, whom
Perseus married: He was taken up into Heaven, with his Wife and Daughter, for
the good Deeds of Perseus his Son in Law, that he and his whole stock might be
had in remembrance for ever. The Star which is in his right shoulder is called
by the Arabians Alderahiemin (i. e.) his right Arm.

5. BOOTS, the driver of the Oxen (for so I suppose the name to signify,
rather than an Herdsman, for he has not his name because he has the care of
any Cattle, but only because he is supposed to drive Charles his Wain, which is
drawn by 3 Oxen) he is also called Arctophilax, the keeper of the Bear, as though
the care of her were committed to him: This Constellation consists of 22
Stars. Some will have Boots to be Arcas, the Son of her who before was turned
into the Great Bear; and they tell the Tale thus: Lycaon the Father of Calisto,
receiving Jupiter into his house as a Guest, took Arcas his Daughters Son, and
cut him in pieces; and among other Services, set him before Jupiter to be
eaten; for by this means he thought to prove if his Guest were a God, as he
pretended to be Jupiter perceiving this heinous fact, overthrew the Table,
fired the house with lightning, and turned Lycaon into a Wolf: but gathering,
and setting together again the limbs of the child, he committed him to a Nymph
of Aetolia to be kept: Arcas afterward coming to man's estate, and hunting in
the Woods, lighted at un-awares upon his Mother, transformed by Juno into the
shape of a Bear, whom he pursued into the Temple of Jupiter Lycaeus, whereunto
by the Law of the Arcadians, it was death for any man to come. For as much
therefore as they must of likelihood be both slain, Calisto by her Son, and he
by the Law, Jupiter to avoid this mischief, of mere pity took them both up into
Heaven. Unto this Constellation belongs but one Star unformed, and it is
between the legs of Boots, and by the Grecians it is called Arcturus, because
of all the stars near the great Bear named Arctos, this star is first seen near
her tail in the evening. The Poetical invention is thus.

Icarus the Father of Erigone, having received of the God Bacchus a Flagon of
Wine, to declare how good it was for mortal men, traveled therewith into the
Territoires of Athens, and there began to carouse with certain shepherds, they
being greatly delighted with the pleasantness of the wine, being a new kind of
Liquor, began to draw so hard at it, that er'e they left off, they were past
one and thirty; and in the end, were fain to lay their heads to rest. But
coming unto themselves again, and finding their brains scarce in good temper,
they killed Icarus, thinking indeed that he had either poisoned them, or at the
leastwise made their brains intoxicate. Erigone was ready to dye for grief,
and so was Mera her little dog. But Jupiter to allay their grief, placed her
Father in Heaven, between the legs of Arctophilax.

6. CORONA BOREA, the Northern Garland, consists of Eight Stars; yet Ovid
says, that it has nine. This was the Garland that Venus gave unto Ariadne,
when she was Married unto Bacchus, in the Isle Naxus, after that Theseus had
forsaken her: which garland Bacchus placed in the Heaven; as a token of his
love. Novidius will have it to be the Crown of the Virgin Mary.

7. ENGON ASIS; This Constellation has the name, because it is expressed under
the shape of a man kneeling upon the one knee, and is therefore by the Latins
called Ingeniculum It contains 29 Stars and wants a proper Name, because of
the great diversity of Opinions concerning the same. For some will have it to
be Hercules, that mighty Conqueror who for his 12 Labors was thought worthy to
be placed in the Heaven, and nigh unto the Dragon whom he overcame. Others tell
the tale thus: That when the Tytans fought against the Gods, they for fear of
the Giants, ran all unto the one side of the Heaven: whereupon the Heaven was
ready to have fallen, had not Hercules together with Atlas, set his neck unto
it, and stayed the fall: and for his Desert he was placed in Heaven.

8. LYRA, the Harp, it contains 10 Stars, whereof thus goes the Fable. The
River Nilus swelling above his banks, over-flowed the Country of Egypt; after
the fall whereof there were left in the fields diverse kinds of living things,
and amongst the rest a Tortoise; Mercury, after the flesh thereof was consumed,
the sinews still remaining, found the same, and striking it, he made it yield a
certain sound; whereupon he made an Harp like unto it, having Three strings,
and gave it unto Orpheus the Son of Cassiopea. This Harp was of such excellent
sound, that Trees, Stones, Fowls, and Wild Beasts are said to follow the sound
thereof. After such time therefore that Orpheus was slain by the Women of
Thrace the Muses by the good leave of Jupiter, and at the request of Apollo,
placed this Harp in Heaven. Novidius will have it to be the Harp of David,
where by he pacified the Evil spirit of Saul. This Constellation was afterward
called Vultur Cadens, the falling Grype: and Falco the Falcon; or Timpanum the
Timbrel.

9. OLOR, or Cygnus the Swan, called of the Chaldaeans Adigege, it has 17
Stars: of this Constellation the Poets Fable in this manner. Jupiter being
overtaken with the love of Laeda the wife of Tyndarus King of Oebabia, and
knowing no honester way to accomplish his desire, procured Venus to turn her
self into an Eagle, and himself he turned into the shape of a Swan. Flying
therefore from the Eagle, as from his natural Enemy that earnestly pursued him
he lighted of purpose in the lap of Laeda, and as it were, for his more safety
crept into her bosom, The Woman not knowing who it was under that shape, but
holding (as she thought) the Swan fast in her arms, fell asleep. In the mean
while Jupiter enjoyed his pleasure, and having obtained that he came for,
betook him again unto his wings; and in memorial of his purpose (attained under
that form) he placed the Swan among the Stars.

Ovid calls this Constellation Milvius, the Kite and tells the Tale thus.
The Earth being greatly offended with Jupiter, because he had driven Saturn his
Father out of his kingdom, brought forth a monstrous Bull, which in his hinder
parts was like a Serpent; and was afterward called the Fatal Bull, because the
Destinies had thus decreed, that whosoever could slay him and offer up his
Entrails upon an Altar, should overcome the eternal Gods, Briareus that mighty
Giant, and ancient enemy of the Gods, overcame the Bull, and was ready to have
offered up his Entrails according to the decree of the Destinies: but Jupiter
fearing the event, commanded the Fowls of the Air to snatch them away: which
although to their power they endeavored, yet there was none of them found so
forward and apt to that action as the Kite, and for that cause he was
accordingly rewarded with a place in Heaven. Some call this Constellation
Orvis, that is the Bird: others call it Vultur Volans, the Flying Grype: It is
called Gallina, the Hen. Unto this Constellation do belong two unformed Stars.

10. CASSIOPEIA, She consists of 13 Stars. This was the Wife of Cepheus, and
the mother of Andromeda, whom Perseus married, and for his sake was translated
into Heaven, as some write. others say that her beauty being singular she waxed
so proud, that she preferred her self before the Nereides, which were the
Nymphs of the Sea: for which cause, unto her disgrace, and the example of all
others that in Pride of their hearts would advance themselves above their
betters, she was placed in the Heaven with her head as it were downwards; so
that in the revolution the Heavens she seems to be carried headlong.

11. PERSEVS, he has 26 Stars. This was the Son of Jupiter, whom he in the
likeness of a Golden-shower begat upon Danae, the daughter of Acrisius. This
Perseus coming unto man's estate, and being furnished with the Sword, Hat, and
Wings of his brother Mercury, and the Shield of his Sister Minerva, was sent by
his Foster-father Polidectes, to kill the Monster Medusa, whom he slew; and
cutting off her head, carried it away with him: But as he was hasting
homewards, flying in the Air, he espied Andromeda the daughter of Cepheus and
Cassiopea, for the pride of her mother, bound with a Chain unto a Rock, by the
Sea side, there to be devoured by a Whale: Perseus taking notice and pity of
the case undertook to fight with the Monster, upon condition that Andromeda
might be his Wife, to be short, he delivered Andromeda, married her, and
returning homeward unto the Isle Seriphus, he found there his Grandfather
Acrisius, whom by mischance and unadvisedly he slew with a quoit: (or as Ovid
reports) with the terrible sight the horrible head of Medusa not knowing that
it was his Grandfather: but afterward understanding whom he had slain, he
pined away through extreme sorrow whereupon Jupiter his father pitying his
grief took him up into Heaven: and there placed him in that form wherein he
overcame Medusa with the Sword in one hand, and the head of Medusa in the
other, and the wings of Mercury at his Heels. This Constellation because of the
unluckiness thereof, is called by Astrologers Cacodaemon (i. e.) Unlucky, and
Unfortunate. For (as they say) they have observed it that whatsoever is born
under this Constellation, having an evil aspect, shall be stricken with Sword,
or lose his Head. Novidius says that it is David with Goliath his head in one
hand, and his Sword in the other. The unformed Stars belonging unto this
Constellation, are three.

12. AVRIGA, the Wagoner, or Carter: he consists of 14 Stars: the Arabians
call him Alaiot; the Greeks Heniochus, (i. e.) a man holding a bridle in his
hand and so is he pictured. Eratostenes affirms him to be Ericthonius King of
Athens, the son of Vulcan: who having most deformed feet, devised first the use
of the Wagon or Chariot, and joined horses together to draw the same, to the
end that he sitting therein might the better conceal his deformities. For which
invention, Jupiter translated him into the Heavens.

In this Constellation there are two other particular Constellations to be
noted; whereof the one consists but of one Star alone, which is in the
left-shoulder of Auriga, and is called Hircus, or Capra the Goat; the Arabians
call it Alhajoth: The other consists of 2 little Stars a little beneath the
others, standing as it were in the hand of Auriga; this Constellation is called
Haedi, the Kids. The tale is thus; Saturn (as you heard before) had received of
the Oracle, that one of his Sons should put him out of his Kingdom, whereupon
he determined to devour them all: Ops by stealth conveyed away Jupiter, and
sent him to Melissus King of Crete, to be nourished. Melissus having 2
daughters, Amalthaea, and Melissa, committed Jupiter unto their Nursery;
Amalthaea had a Goat that gave suck unto 2 Kids, so that by the milk of this
Goat, she nourished Jupiter very well: To requite this her care and courtesy,
Jupiter (after he had put his Father out of his Kingdom) translated her Goat
and her two Kids into Heaven, and in remembrance of the Nurse, the Goat is
called Capra Amalthaea. Novidius says, that when Christ was born, and his
birth made manifest by the Angels unto the Shepherds, one of them brought with
him for a Present, a Goat and two young Kids; which in token of his good will,
were placed in Heaven.

13. OPHIVCVS, or SERPENTARIVS, That is the Serpent bearer. This Constellation
has no proper name, but is thus entitled, because he holds a Serpent in his
hands. It contains 24 Stars. Some say that it is Hercules, and report the
Tale on this manner. Juno being a great enemy to Hercules, sent two Snakes to
kill him as he lay sleeping in his Cradle: but Hercules being a lusty Child
(for Jupiter had spent two days in begetting him) without much ado strangled
them both: In memorial of so strange an event, Jupiter placed him in the
Heavens, with a Serpent in his hands.

14. SERPENS, the Serpent of Ophiuchus, which consists of 18 Stars. Some say
that it is one of the Serpents that should have slain Hercules in his Cradle.
Novidius says, it is the Viper that bit Paul by the hand. Others deliver the
Tale in these words; Glaucus the son of Minos King of Crete, was by misfortune
drowned in a Barrel of Honey: Minas his Father craved the help of Aesculapius
the Physician: and that he might be driven perforce to help the Child, he shut
him up in a secret place, together with the dead Carcass: whiles Esculapius
stood in a great maze with himself what were best to be done, upon a sudden
there came a Serpent creeping toward him, the which Serpent he slew with the
Staff which he had in his hand. After this there came another Serpent in,
bringing in his mouth a certain herb, which he laid upon the head of the dead
Serpent, whereby he restored him unto life again. Esculapius using the same
herb, wrought the same effect upon Glaucus. Whereupon (after that) Esculapius
(whom some affirm to be Ophiucus) was placed in the Heaven and the Serpent with
him.

15. SAGITA, or Telum; the Arrow or Dart. This was that Arrow wherewith
Hercules slew the Eagle or Grype that fed upon the Liver of Prometheus being
tied with Chains to the top of Mount Caucasus, and in memorial of that deed,
was translated into Heaven. Others will have it to be one of those Arrows which
Hercules at his death gave unto Phyloctetes, upon which the Destiny of Troy did
depend. The whole Constellation contains five Stars.

16. AQVILA, the Eagle, which is called Vultur Volans, the flying Grype. It
has in it 9 Stars. The Poetical reason of this Constellation, is this; Jupiter
transforming himself into the form of an Eagle took Ganimedes the Trojan Boy,
whom he greatly loved up into Heaven, and therefore in sign thereof: (because
by that means he performed his purpose) he placed the figure of the Eagle in
Heaven. There belong unto this Constellation 6 Stars (before time) unformed,
but now brought into the Constellation of Antinous. But whereupon that name
should come, I know not, except it were that some man devised it there to curry
favor with the Emperor Adrian, who loved one Antinous Bithynicus so well,
that he builded a Temple in his honor at Mantinea.

17. DELPHINVS, the Dolphin: it contains 10 Stars; yet Ovid in his second
Book de Fastis, says that it has but nine. Neither did the ancient
Astronomers attribute unto it any more, according to the number of the Muses;
because of all other Fishes the Dolphin is said to be delighted with Music.
The Tale goes thus concerning this Constellation. When Neptune the God of the
Sea greatly desired to match with Amphitrite, she being very modest and
shame-faced, hid her self; whereupon he sent many messengers to seek her out,
among whom, the Dolphin by his good hap, did first find her; and persuaded her
also to match with Neptune: For which his good and trusty service, Neptune
placed him in the Heavens.

Others say, that when Bacchus had transformed the Mariners that would have
betrayed him, into Dolphins, he placed one of them in Heaven, that it might be
a lesson for others to take heed how they carried any one out of his way,
contrary both to his desire, and their own promise. Novidius refers this
Constellation unto the Fish that saved Jonas from drowning.

18. EQVICVLUS, is the little Horse, and it consists of 4 Stars. This
Constellation is named almost of no Writer, saving Ptolomeus, and Alphonsus who
followed Ptolemy, and therefore no certain Tale or History is delivered thereof
by what means he came into Heaven.

19. EQUUS ALATUS, the Winged Horse, or Pegasus, it contains 20 Stars. This
Horse was bred of the blood of Medusa, after that Perseus had cut off her head,
and was afterward taken and tamed by Bellerophon, whiles he drank of the River
Pirene by Corinth, and was used by him in the conquest of Chimera; after which
exploit Bellerophon being weary of the earthly affairs, endeavored to fly up
into Heaven. But being amazed in his flight, by looking down to the earth, he
fell from his Horse, Pegasus notwithstanding continuing his course (as they
feign) entered into Heaven, and there obtained a place among the other
Constellations.

20. ANDROMEDA, She consteth of 23 Stars; but one of them is common both unto
her and Pegasus. This was the daughter of Cepheus and Cassiopeia, and the Wife
of Perseus; the reason why Minerva or Jupiter placed her in the Heavens, is
before expressed. Novidius refers this Constellation unto Alexandria the
Virgin, whom S. George through the good help of his Horse delivered from the
Dragon.

21. TRIANGULUM, the Triangle, called also Deltoton, because it is like the
fourth Letter of the Greek Alphabet D, which they call Delta; it consists of
four stars. They say it was placed in Heaven by Mercury, that thereby the head
of the Ram might be the better known. Others say, that it was placed there in
honor of the Geometricians, among whom, the Triangle is of no small
importance. Others affirm, that Ceres in times past requested Jupiter that
there might be placed in Heaven some Figure representing the form of Sicily an
Island greatly beloved of Ceres for the fruitfulness thereof: now this Island
being triangular (at her request) was represented in the Heaven under that form.

Thus much concerning the Constellations of the Northern Hemisphere. Now follow
the Poetical Stories of the Constellations of the Southern Hemisphere.

Secondly, Of the Southern Constellations.
1 CETUS, the Whale, it is also called the Lion, or Bear of the Sea. This is
that monstrous Fish that should have devoured Andromeda, but being overcome by
Perseus, was afterward translated into Heaven by Jupiter, as well for a token
of Perseus his manhood, as for the bigness of the Fish it self. This
Constellation consists of 22 Stars.

2. ORION, this has 38 Stars. The Poetical reason of his translation into the
Heavens, shall be shown in the Scorpion amongst the Zodiacal Constellations.
The Ancient Romans called this Constellation Jugala, because it is most
pestiferous unto Cattle, and as it were the very cutthroat of them. There are
bright Stars in his girdle, which we commonly call our Ladies yard, or wand.
Novidius, applying this sword of Orion unto Scripture, will have it to be the
Sword of Saul, afterward called Paul, wherewith he persecuted the Members of
Christ: which after his Conversion was placed in Heaven. In his left shoulder
there is a very bright Star, which in Latin is called Bellatrix the Warrior,
in the Faeminine Gender. I cannot find the reason except it be this; that Women
born under this Constellation shall have mighty tongues: the reason of the Ox
hide which he has in his hand, may be Gathered out of the next story.

3. FLUVIUS, the River; it comprehends 34 Stars: It is called by some
Eridanus, or Pagus; they say that it was placed in Heaven in remembrance of
Phaeton, who having set the whole Earth on fire by reason of misguiding his
Father Phoebus his Chariot, was slain by Jupiter with a thunderbolt, and
tumbling down from Heaven, fell into the River Eridanus, or Padus, which the
Italians call Po. Others say that it is Nilus, and that that figure was placed
in Heaven because of the excellency of that River, which by the Divines is
called Gihon, and is one of the Rivers of Paradise. Others call it Flumen
Orionis the flood of Orion; and say that it was placed there, to betoken the
offspring from whence Orion came: for the tale is thus reported of him.

Jupiter, Neptune, and Mercury, traveling upon the Earth in the likness of
Men, were requested by Hyerus to take a poor lodging at his house for a Night:
they being overtaken with the evening, yielded unto his request; Hyreus made
them good cheer, killing an Ox for their better entertainment: The Gods seeing
the good heart of the old man, willed him to demand what he would in recompense
of his so friendly cheer. Hyerus and his Wife being old, requested the Gods to
gratify them with a Son. They to fulfill his desire, called for the hide of the
Ox that was slain, and having received it, they put it into the Earth, and made
water into it all three together, and covering it, willed Hyreus within ten
months after to dig it out of the Earth again; which he did and found therein a
Man-child; whom he called Ourion, ab Urania, of piss; although afterward by
leaving out the second letter, he was named Orion. At such time therefore as he
was placed in Heaven, this flood was joined hard to his heels, and the Ox hide
wherein the Gods did piss, was set in the left hand, in memorial of his
Offspring.

4. LEPUS, the Hare, which consists of 12 Stars. This Constellation was
placed in Heaven between the legs of Orion, to signify the great delight in
hunting which he had in his life time: but others think it was a frivolous
thing, to say that so notable a fellow as Orion would trouble himself with so
small and timorous a Beast as the Hare; and therefore they tell the tale thus.

In times past there was not a Hare left in the Isle Leros; a certain youth
therefore of that Island, being very desirous of that kind of beast, brought
with him from another Country thereabout, an Hare great with young; which when
she had brought forth, they in time became so acceptable unto the other Country
men, that every one almost desired to have and keep a Hare. By reason whereof,
the number of them grew to be so great, within a short space after, that the
whole Island became full of Hares, so that their Masters were not able to find
them meat: whereupon the Hares breaking forth into the fields, devoured their
Corn. Wherefore the Inhabitants being bitten with hunger; joined together with
one consent, and (though with much ado) destroyed the Hares. Jupiter therefore
placed this Constellation in the Heavens; as well to express the exceeding
fearfulness of the Beast, as also to teach men this lesson; that there is
nothing so much to be desired in this life, but that at one time or another
brings with it more grief than pleasure. Some say, that it was placed in
Heaven at the request of Ganimedes, who was greatly delighted with hunting the
Hare.

5. CANIS MAJOR, the Great Dog, it consists of 18 Stars. It is called Sirius
Canis, because he causes a mighty drought by reason of his heat. This is the
Constellation that gives name unto the Canical or Dog days; whose beginning
and end is not alike in all places, but has a difference according to the
Country and time: as in the Time of Hippocrates the Physician, who lived
before the time of Christ 400 years, the Canicular days began 13 or 14 of July.
In the time of Avicenna, the Spaniard, who lived in the year of Lord 1100. the
Canicular days began the 15, 16, or 17 of July. In our Country; they begin
about St. James-tide, but we use to account from the 6 of July, to the 17 of
August; which is the time when the Sun begins to come near unto and to
depart from this Constellation.

Novidius will have it to be referred to Tobias Dog which may very well be,
because he has a tail; Tobias Dog had one; as a certain fellow once concluded,
because it is written that Tobias his Dog fawned upon his Master, therefore it
is to be noted (said he) that he had a tail. The Poets say, that this is the
Dog whom Jupiter set to keep Europa, after he had stolen her away, and conveyed
her into Creet, and for his good service was placed in Heaven. Others say, that
it was one of Orion his Dogs. There belong unto this Constellation 11 Stars
unformed.

6. CANIS MINOR, the Lesser Dog; this of the Greeks is called Procyon, of the
Latins Antecanis; it contains but two Stars. Some say, that this was also
one of Orion's Dogs. Others rather affirm it to be Mera the Dog of Origone, or
rather of Icarius her Father, of whom mention is made in the Constellation of
Boots and Virgo. This Dog of mere love to his Master, being slain, as
aforesaid, threw himself into the River Anygrus, but was afterward translated
into Heaven, with Origone. Among the Poets there is great dissension which of
the two should be the Dog of Origone, some saying one, and some the other, and
therefore they do many times take the one for the ^^her.

7. ARGO NAVIS, the Ship Argo which comprehends 41 Stars; this is the Ship
wherein Jason did fetch the golden fleece from Colchis, which was afterward
placed in Heaven as a memorial, not only because of the great Voyage, but also,
because (as some will have it) it was the first Ship wherein any man sailed.
Their reason why this Ship is not made whole is that thereby men might be put
in mind not to despair, albeit that their Ship miscarried in some part now and
then: some avouch it to be the Ark of Noah. Novidius says it is the Ship
wherein the Apostles were, when Christ appeared unto them walking on the Sea.
In one of the Oars of this Ship there is a great Star, called Canopus, or
Canobus, which the Arabians called Shuel, as it were a bone-fire because of the
greatness thereof. It is not seen in Italy, nor in any Country on this side of
Italy: Some say that Canobus the Master of Menelaus, his Ship was transformed
into this Star.

8. HYDRA, the Hydra, that has 25 Stars and two unformed.

9. CRATER, the Cup, or Standing-piece; that has seven Stars, some say that
this was the Cup where in Tagathon, that is the chief God, mingled the Stuff
whereof he made the Souls of Men.

10. CORVUS, the Crow; this has seven Stars. These 3 Constellations are to be
joined together, because they depend upon one History, which is this. Upon a
time Apollo made a solemn feast to Jupiter, and wanting water to serve his
turn, he delivered a Cup to the Crow (the bird wherein he chiefly delighted)
and sent him to fetch water therein. The Crow flying toward the River, espied
a Fig Tree, fell in hand with the Figs, and abode there till they were ripe: In
the end when, he had fed his fill of them, and satisfied his longing, he
bethought himself of his errand, and by reason of his long delay, fearing a
Check, he caught up a snake in his bill, brought it to Apollo, and told him
that the snake would not let him fill the Cup with water, Apollo seeing the
impudence of the bird, gave him this gift, that as long as the Figs were not
ripe upon the Tree so long he should never drink: and for a memorial of the
silly excuse that she made, he placed both the Crow, Cup, and Snake, in Heaven.

11. CENTAURUS, the Centaure, which comprehends 37 Stars. Some say, that this
is Typhon, others call him Chiron, the Schoolmaster of those three excellent
men, Hercules, Achilles, and Esculapius: unto Hercules he read Astronomy, he
trained Achilles in Music, and Aesculapius, in Physic: and for his upright
life he was turned into this Constellation, Yet Virgil calls Sagittarius by
the name of Chiron. In the hinder feet of this Constellation, those Stars are
set which are called the Crosiers, appearing to the Mariners as they sail
toward the South Sea, in the form of a Cross, whereupon they have their name.
The four Stars which are in the Garnish of the Centaurs Spear, are accounted by
Proclus as a peculiar Constellation, and are called by him Thyrsilochus which
was a Spear compassed about with vine leaves: but they are called by
Copernicus, and Clavius, and other Astronomers, the Stars of his Target. It
should seem that they were deceived by the old translation of Ptolomy, wherein
Scutum is put for Hasta (i. e.) the Target, for the Spear, as it is well noted
by our Countryman Mr. R. Record, in his Book entitled The Castle of Knowledge.

12. LUPUS, the Wolf, or the beast which the Centaur holds in his hand,
contaneth 19 Stars; the Poetical reason is this, Chiron the Centaur being a
just man, was greatly given to the worship of the Gods: for which thing, that
it might be notified to all posterity, they placed him by this beast, which he
seems to stick and thrust through with his Spear (as it were) ready to kill
for Sacrifice.

13. ARA, the Altar, it is also called Lar, or Thuribulum (i. e.) a Chimney
with the fire, or a Censor. It consists of seven Stars, and is affirmed of
some Poets to be the Altar whereon the Centaur was wont to offer up his
sacrifice. But others tell the tale thus. When as the great Giants called the
Tytans labored as much as might be to pull Jupiter out of Heaven, the Gods
thought it good to lay their heads together, to advise what was best to be
done: Their conclusion was, that they should all with one consent join hands
together to keep out such fellows, and that this their league might be
confirmed, and thoroughly ratified, they caused the Cyclops (which were workmen
of Vulcan) to make them an Altar: about this Altar all the Gods assembled, and
there swear, that with one consent they would withstand their enemies;
afterward, having gotten the Victory it pleased them to place this Altar in
Heaven as a memorial of their League, and a token of that good which unity does
breed.

14. CORONA AUSTRINA, the South Garland, it has 13 Stars. Some say that it is
some trifling Garland which Sagittarius was wont to wear, but he cast it away
from him in jest, and therefore it was placed between his legs; others call it
the Wheel of Ixon, whereupon he was tormented for that great discourtesie he
would have offered unto Juno, thinking indeed to have gotten up her Belly: but
Jupiter seeing the impudency of the man, tumbled him out of Heaven (where by
the license of the gods he was sometimes admitted as a guest) into Hell there
to be continually tormented upon a Wheel: The Figure of which Wheel was
afterward placed in Heaven, to teach men to take heed how they be too saucie
to make such courteous proffers unto other men's wives. The Greeks call this
Constellation by the name of Vraniscus, because of the Figure thereof: For it
represents the palate or roof of the mouth, which they call Vraniscus.

15. The last is PISCIS AUSTRINUS, or Notius, the South Fish, which
comprehends 11 Stars, besides that which is in the mouth thereof, belonging
to the water, which runs from Aquarius, and is called by the Arabians
Fomahant. The reason why this Fish was placed in the Heaven, is uncertain: yet
some affirm, that the daughter of Venus going into a water to wash her self,
was suddenly transformed into a Fish the which Fish was afterward translated
into Heaven. The unformed Stars belonging unto this Constellation are six.

Thus much concerning the Constellation of the Northern and Southern
Hemispheres; now follow the Poetical Stories of the Zodiacal Constellations.

Thirdly, Of the Zodiacal Constellations.
1. ARIES, the Ram, it is called by the Greeks Criot, it contains in it 13
Stars, which were brought into this Constellation by Thyestes, the son of
Pelops, and brother of A^reus. This is the Ram, upon which Phr^xus, and H^lle
his sister, the children of Athamas did sit, when they fled from their
stepmother Ino, over the Sea of Hellespont: which Ram was afterward for his
good service, translated to Heaven ven by Jupiter Others say, that it was that
Ram which brought Bacchus unto the spring of water, when through drought he was
likely to have perished in the desert of Lybia. Novidius will have this to be
the Ram, which Abraham offered up instead of his Son Isaac. The Star that is
first in the head of the Ram, is that from whence our later Astronomers do
account the Longitude of all the rest, and it is distant from the head of
Aries, in the tenth Sphere, 27 degrees 53 minutes. The unformed Stars belonging
unto this Constellation, are five.

2. TAVRVS, the Bull, which consists of 23 Stars. This was translated into
Heaven in memorial of the Rape committed by Jupiter on Europa the daughter of
Agenor, King of Sidon; whom Jupiter in the likeness of a white Bull stole away,
and transported into Candia. Others say, That it was Io the daughter of Inacus,
whom Jupiter loved, and turned into the form of a Cow, to the intent that Juno
coming at unawares, should not perceive what a part he had played: Jupiter
afterward in memorial of that crafty conveyance, placed that Figure in Heaven;
The reason why the Poets name not certainly whether it be a Cow or a Bull, is
because it wants the hinder parts; yet of the most of them it is called a
Bull. In the Neck of the Bull there are certain Stars standing together in a
cluster, which are commonly called the seven Stars; although there can hardly
be discerned any more than six, these are reported to be the seven daughters of
Atlas, called Atlantiades, whereof 6 had company with the immortal Gods, but
the 7 th. (whose name was Merope) being married unto Sysiphus a mortal man, did
therefore withdraw and hide her self, as being ashamed that she was not so
fortunate in matching herself as her sisters were. Some say that that star
which is wanting is Electra, eldest Daughter of Atlas, and that therefore it is
so dim, because she could not abide to behold the destruction of Troy; but at
that time and ever since, she hid her face. The reason why they were taken up
into Heaven, was their great pity toward their Father, whose mishap they
bewailed with continual tears. Others say, that whereas they had vowed
perpetual Virginity, and were in danger to lose it, by reason of Orion, who
greatly assailed them, being overtaken with their love; they requested Jupiter
to stand their friend; who translated them into Stars, and placed them in that
part of Heaven. The Poets call them Pleiades, because when they rise with the
Sun, the Mariners may commit themselves to the Sea. Others will have them to be
so termed a pluendo, because they procure rain. Others give them this name, of
the Greek word Cleiones, because they be many in number; they be also called
Virgiliae, because they rise with the Sun in the Spring time: likewise
Athoraiae, because they stand so thick together. Our men call them by the name
of the seven Stars, or Brood Hen. The Astronomers note this as a special thing
concerning these stars, that when the Moon and these Stars do meet together,
the eyes are not to be meddled withal, or cured if they before: their reason is,
because they be of the nature of Mars and the Moon.

Moreover, there be five stars in the face of the Bull, representing the form
of the Roman letter V, whereof one (which is the greatest) is called the Bulls
Eye, They be called Hyades, and were also the daughters of Atlas, who so long
bewailed the death of Hyas their Brother, slain by a Lion, that they died for
sorrow, and were afterward placed in Heaven, for a memorial of that great love
they bare to their Brother. The ancient Romans call the Bulls Eye Parilicium,
or Palelicium; of Pales their goddess, whose feast they celebrated after the
conjunction of this Star and the Sun. The unformed Stars belonging unto this
Constellation, are eleven.

3. GEMINI, the Twins consists of 18 stars. The Poets say, they are Castor
and Pollux, the sons of Leda, brethren most loving, whom therefore Jupiter
translated into Heaven. Some say that one of them is Apollo, and the other
Hercules: but the most affirm the former. The unformed Stars of this
Constellation are seven, whereof one is called Tropus, because it is placed
next before the foot of Castor.

4. CANCER, the Crab, it has 9 Stars. This is that Crab which bit Hercules by
the heel as he fought with the Serpent Hydra in the Fen Lerna, and for his
forward service, was placed in Heaven by Juno, the utter enemy of Hercules. In
this Constellation there are Stars much spoken of by the Poets; although they
be but small, whereof one is called the Crib, other two are the two Asses,
whereof one was the Ass of Bacchus, the other of Vulcan, whereon they rode to
Battle, when as the Giants made War with the Gods; with whose braying and
strange noise, the Giants were so scared upon the sudden, that they forsook the
field, and fled. The Gods getting the Victory, in triumphing manner translated
both the Asses, and their manger into Heaven. The unformed Stars of this
Constellation are four. It is called animal Rerrogradum, for when the Sun
comes into this Sign, he makes Retrogradation.

5. LEO, the Lion; it has 27 Stars, this is that Lion which Hercules overcame
in the wood Nemaea, and was placed in Heaven in remembrance of so notable a
deed. Novidius says, this was one of the Lions that were in the den into which
Daniel was cast, and was therefore placed in Heaven, because of all other he
was most friendly unto Daniel. In the breast of this Constellation is that
notable great Star, the light whereof is such, as that therefore it is called
by Astronomers Bazileus or Regulus (i. e.) the Viceroy or little King among the
rest. The unformed Stars belonging to the Lion are eight, whereof three make
the Constellation which is now called Coma Berenices that is, the hair of
Berenice. This Constellation was first found out and invented by Canon the
Mathematician, but described by Calimachus the Poet. The occasion of the story
was this. Ptolomeus Euergetes having married his sister Berenice, was shortly
after enforced to depart from her, by reason of the Wars he had begun in Asia:
whereupon Berenice made this Vow, that if he returned home again in safety, she
would offer up her hair in Venus Temple. Ptolomy returned safe; and Berenice,
according to her Vow, cut off her hair and hung it up. After certain days, the
hair was not to be found; whereupon Ptolomy the King was greatly displeased;
but Canon, to please the humor of the King, and to curry favor with him,
persuaded him that Venus had conveyed the Hair into Heaven. Canon attributes
seven Stars unto it, but Ptolomy allotteth it but three, because the other be
insensible.

6. VIRGO, the Virgin, it has 26 Stars. This is affirmed to be Justice, which
among all the Gods sometime living upon the Earth, did last of all forsake the
same, because of the wickedness that began to multiply therein, and chose this
place for her seat in Heaven.

Others say, that it was Astrea, the daughter of Astreus, one of the Giants
that were called Titans, who fighting against the Gods, Astraea took their
parts against her own Father, and was therefore after her death commended unto
the Heavens, and made one of the 12 Signs.

Others say, that it was Origone, the daughter of Icarius, who for that her
Father was slain by certain drunken men, for very grief thereof hanged her
self: but Jupiter taking pity of the Virgin for her natural affection,
translated her into Heaven.

In her right wing there is one Star of special note, which by the Astronomers
is called Vindemiator, (i. e.) the gatherer of Grapes. This was Ampulos the son
of a Satyr and a Nymph, and greatly beloved of Bacchus unto whom in token of
his love, Bacchus gave a singular fair Vine, planted at the foot of an Elm (as
the manner was in old time.) But Ampelos in Harvest gathering Grapes, and
taking little heed to his footing, fell down out of the Vine, and brake his
neck. Bacchus in memorial of his former affection, translated him into Heaven,
and made him one of the principal Stars in this Constellation. There is another
great Star in the hand of the Virgin, called of the Latins Spica, of the
Greeks Stachus, of the Arabians Azimech (i. e.) the Ear of Corn: whereby they
signify, that when the Sun comes to this Sign, the Corn waxes ripe.
Albumazar the Arabian, and Novidius, take this Constellation for the Virgin
Mary. The unformed Stars in this Constellation are six.

7. LIBRA the Balance, it contains eight Stars, Cicero calls Jugum the
Yoke, and here it is to be noted, that the ancient Astronomers that first set
down the number of the Constellations contained in the Zodiac, did account but
eleven therein, so that the Sign, which now is called Libra, was heretofore
called Chelai, that is to say, the Claws of the Scorpion, which possesses the
space of two whole Signs. But the latter Astronomers, being desirous to have 12
Signs in the Zodiac, called those eight, whereof the Claws of the Scorpion do
consist, by the name of Libra, not that there was any Poetical Fiction to
induce them thereto, but only moved by this reason, because the Sun joining
with this Constellation, the Day and the Night are of an equal length, and are
(as it were) equally poized in a pair of Balances. Yet (as I remember) some
will have this to be the Balance, wherein Justice, called also Astraea,
weighed the deeds of mortal men, and therein presented them unto Jupiter. It
has 9 unformed Stars appertaining unto it.

8. SCORPIO, the Scorpion, called of the Arabians, Alatrab; of Cicero, Nepa. It
consists of 21 Stars. The Fiction is thus; Orion the son of Hyreus greatly
beloved of Diana, was wont to make his boast: that he was able to overcome what
Beast soever was bred upon the Earth: the Earth being moved with this speech
brought forth the Scorpion, whereby Orion was stung to death. Jupiter thereupon
(at the request of the Earth) translated both the Scorpion and Orion into
Heaven; to make it a lesson for ever, for mortal men not to trust too much unto
their own strength; and to the end he might signify the great enmity between
them, he placed them so in Heaven, that whenever the one arises, the other
sets; and they are never both of them seen together above the Horizon at
once: Gulielmus Postellus will have it to be the Serpent which beguiled Eve in
Paradise. The unformed Stars about this Scorpion are three.

9. SAGITTARIVS, the Archer. It has 31 Stars. Touching this Sign, there are
among the Poets many and sundry opinions. Some say that it is Crocus, the son
of Paphene, that was Nurse unto the Muses. This Crocus was so forward in
learning of the Liberal Sciences, and in the practice of feats of Activity,
that the Muses entreated Jupiter that he might have a place in Heaven. To whose
request Jupiter inclining, made him one of the 12 Signs: And to the end that he
might express the excellent qualities of the Man, he made his hinder parts like
unto a Horse, thereby to signify his singular knowledge in Horsemanship: and
by his Bow and Arrow, he declared the sharpness of his Wit. Whereupon the
Astrologers have this conceit, that he that is born under Sagittarius, shall
attain to the knowledge of many Arts, and be of prompt wit, and great courage.
Virgil affirms this to be Chiron the Centaur, who for his singular Learning
and Justice was made the Master of Achilles. At which time Hercules coming to
visit him (for he had heard both of the worthiness of the Schoolmaster, and of
the great hopes of the Scholar) brought with him his quiver of Arrows dipped in
the blood of the Serpent Hydra; but Chiron being desirous to see his shafts,
and not taking heed of them being in his hand, let one of them fall upon his
foot, and being greatly tormented, not only by the anguish of the Poison
working in the Wound, but much more because he knew himself to be immortal, and
his wound not to be recovered by Medicine, he was enforced to make request unto
the Gods, that he might be taken out of the World, who pitying his case, took
him up into Heaven, and made him one of the 12 Signs.

10. CAPRICORNVS, the Goat, it consists of 28 Stars. The Poets say, that this
was Pan the God of the Shepherds, of whom they feign in this manner: The Gods
having War with the Giants, gathered themselves together into Egypt, Typhon
the Giant pursued them thither, whereby the Gods were brought into a quandary,
that well was he that by changing his shape might shift for himself. Jupiter
turned himself into a Ram: Apollo became a Crow: Bacchus a Goat: Diana lurked
under the form of a Cat: Juno transformed her self into a Cow: Venus into a
Fish: Pan leaping into the River Nilus, turns the upper part of his body into
a Goat, and the lower part into a Fish. Jupiter wondering at the strange device,
would needs have that Image and Picture translated into Heaven, and made one of
the 12 Signs. In that the hinder part of this Sign is like a Fish. It
betokens that the latter part of the month wherein the Sun possesses this
Sign, inclines unto Rain.

11. AQVARIVS, the Waterman: it has 42 Stars, whereof some make the Figure of
the Man: othersome the Water-pot; and some, the stream of water that runs
out of the pot. This is feigned to be Ganimedes the Trojan, the son of Oros and
Callirhoe, whom Jupiter did greatly love for his excellent favor and beauty,
and by the service of his Eagle carried him up into Heaven, where he made him
his Cup Bearer, and called him Aquarius. Others notwithstanding think it to be
Deucalion the son of Prometheus whom the Gods translated into Heaven, in
remembrance of that mighty deluge which happened in his time; whereby mankind was
almost utterly taken away from the face of the earth. The unformed stars
belonging unto this Sign are three.

12. PISCES, the Fishes: these together with the line that knitteth them
together, contain 24 Stars. The Poets say, that Venus and Cupid her son coming
upon a certain time unto the River Euphrates, and sitting upon the bank
thereof, upon a sudden espied Typhon the Giant, that mighty and fearful enemy
of the gods coming toward them; upon whose sight, they being stricken with
exceeding fear, lept into the River, where they were received by two Fishes,
and by them saved from drowning. Venus for this good turn, translated them into
Heaven. Gulielmus Postellus would have them to be the two Fishes wherewith
Christ fed the 5000 Men. The unformed Stars of this Constellation are four.

Thus have I briefly run over the Poetical reasons of the Constellations: It
remains now that I speak of the Milky Way.

VIA LACTEA, or Circulus Lacteus* by the Latins so called; and by the Greeks
Galaxia; and by the English the Milkey Way. It is a broad white Circle that is
seen in the Heaven: In the North Hemisphere, it begins at Cancer, on each
side the head thereof, and passes by Auriga, Perseus, Cassiopeia, the Swan,
and the head of Capricorn, the tail of Scorpio* the feet of Centaur, Argo the
Ship, and so to the head of Cancer. Some in a sporting manner do call it
Watling-street, but why they call it so, I cannot tell; except it be in regard
of the narrowness that it seems to have; or else in respect of that great
high way that lies between Dover and St. Albons, which is called by our men
Watling-street.

Ovid says, it is the great Causey, and Highway that leads unto the Palace
of Jupiter, but he alleges not the cause of the whiteness; belike he would
have us imagine that it is made of White Marble.

Others therefore alledg these causes: Jupiter having begotten Mercury of Maia
the daughter of Atlas* brought the child when he was born, to the breast o^
Juno lying asleep: But Juno awaking threw the child out of her lap, and let the
milk run out of her breast in such abundance, that (spreading it self about the
Heaven) it made that Circle which we see. Others say, that it was not Mercury,
but Hercules; and that Juno did not let the milk run out of her breast, but
that Hercules sucked them so earnestly, that his mouth run over, and so this
Circle was made.

Others say, that Saturn being desirous to devour his children, his wife Ops
presented him with a stone wrapped in a clout, instead of his Child: This stone
stuck so fast in Saturn's Throat as he would have swallowed it, that without
doubt he had therewith been choked, had he not been relieved by his wife* who
by pressing the milk out of her breasts saved his life: the milk that missed
his mouth (whereof you must suppose some sufficient quantity) fell on the
Heavens, and running along made this Circle.

Dr. Hood Commenting upon Constellations says; the Stars are brought into
Constellations, for Instruction sake, things cannot be taught without names; to
give a name to every Star had been troublesome to the Master, and for the
Scholar; for the Master to devise, and for the Scholar to remember; and
therefore the Astronomers have reduced many Stars into one Constellation; that
thereby they may tell the better where to seek them; and being sought, how to
express them. Now the Astronomers did bring them into these Figures, and not
into other, being moved thereto by these three reasons: first, these Figures
express some properties of the Stars that are in them; as those in the Ram to
be hot and dry; Andromeda chained betokens imprisonment, the head of Medusa
cut off signifies the loss of that part: Orion with his terrible and
threatening gesture, imports tempest and terrible effects. The Serpent, the
Scorpion, and the Dragon, signify Poison: The Bull insinuates a melancholy
passion: The Bear infers cruelty, etc. Secondly, the Stars (if not
precisely, yet after a sort) do represent such a Figure, and therefore that
Figure was assigned them, as for example, the Crown, both North and South, the
Scorpion and Triangle, represent the figures which they have. The third cause
was the continuance of the memory of some notable Men, who either in regard of
their singular pains taken in Astronomy, or in regard of some other notable
deed, had well deserved of Mankind.

The first Author of every particular Constellation is uncertain; yet are they
of great antiquity; we receive them from Ptolomy, and he followed the
Platonicks; so that their antiquity is great. Moreover, we may perceive them to
be ancient by the Scriptures, and by the Poets. In the 38 Chapter of Job there
is mention made of the Pleiades, Orion, and Arcturus, and Mazzaroth, which some
interpret the 12 Signs: Job lived in the time of Abraham, as Syderocrates
makes mention in his Book de Commensurandis locorum distantiis.

Now besides all this, touching the reason of invention of these
Constellations, the Poets in setting forth those Stories, had this purpose, to
make men fall in love with Astronomy: When Demosthenes could not get the people
of Athens to hear him in a matter of great moment, and profitable to the
Commonwealth he began to tell them a Tale of a fellow that sold an Ass; by
which Tale he so wrought on the Athenians, that they were both willing to hear
his whole Oration, and to put in practice that whereunto he exhorted them. The
like intent had the Poets in these Stories: They saw that Astronomy being for
commodity singular in the life of Man, was almost of all men utterly neglected:
Hereupon they began to set forth that Art under these Fictions; that thereby
such as could not be persuaded by commodity, might by the Pleasure be induced
to take a view of these matters, and thereby at length fall in love with them.
For commonly note this, that he that is ready to read the Stories, cannot
content himself therewith, but desires also to know the Constellations, or at
least wise some principal Star therein.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of GLOBES Coel^stial and Terrestrial, Spheres, Maps, Sea-Plats,
Mathematical Instruments, and Books, with the^r Prizes, Made and Sold by J.
Moxon at the Sign of Atlas in Warwick Lane.
GLOBES 26 Inches the Diameter. The price 20 l. the pair.

GLOBES near 15 Inches Diameter. The price 4 l.

GLOBES 8 Inches Diameter. The price 2 l.

GLOBES 6 Inches Diameter. The price 1 l. 10 s.

CONCAVE HEMISPHERES of the Starry Orb, which serves for a Case to a
Terrestrial Globe of 3 Inches Diameter, made portable for the Pocket. Price 15
s.

The English GLOBE, invented by the Right Honorable the Earl of Castlemain, 12
Inches Diameter. The price ordinary made up 40 s. and with the Projection at
bottom 50 s. Best made up 5 l.

SPHERES, according to the Copernican Hypothesis, both General and Particular,
20 Inches Diameter. Price of the General 5 l. of the Particular 6 l. of both
together 10 l.

SPHERES, according to the Ptolomaick System, 14 inches Diameter. Price 3 l.

SPHERES, according to the Ptolomaick System, 8 Inches Diameter. Price 1 l. 10
s.

Gunter's Quadrant, 13 Inches Radius, printed on Paper, and pasted on a Board,
with a Nocturnal on the backside. Price 5 s.

Gunter's Quadrant, 4 Inches Radius, printed on Paper, and pasted on Brass,
with a Nocturnal on the backside, and a Wooden Case covered with Leather fit
for it: A new Invention contrived for the Pocket. Price 6 s.

A large Map of the World, 10 Foot long, and 7 Foot deep, pasted on Cloth and
colored. Price 2 l.

A Map of all the World, 4 Foot long, and 3 Foot deep, pasted on Cloth and
colored, Price 10 s. in Sheets 2 s. 6 d.

A Map of the English Empire in America, describing all Places inhabited there
by the English Nation, as well on the Islands as on the Continent. Price 15 s.

Six Scriptural Maps, 1. Of all the Earth, and how after the Flood it was
divided among the Sons of Noah. 2. Of Paradise, or the Garden of Eden, with the
Countries circumjacent inhabited by the Patriarchs. 3. The 40 years travel of
the Children of Israel through the Wilderness. 4. Of Canaan, or the Holy Land,
and how it was divided among the twelve Tribes of Israel, and traveled through
by our Savior and his Apostles. 5. The Travels of St. Paul, and others of the
Apostles, in their propagating the Gospel. 6. Jerusalem, as it stood in our
Saviors time; with a Book of explanations to these Maps, entitled, Sacred
Geography. Price of the Maps 6 s. useful to be bound up with Bibles. Price of
the Book 1 s. 6 d.

A New Map of the Kingdom of Ireland, in one Royal sheet of Paper, price 1 s.
by J. Moxon.

A New Map of England, showing the Roads from Edinburgh to London, in 2 sheets;
price 1 s. By J. Moxon.

A New Map of Scotland, in one Royal Sheet, price 1 s. by J. Moxon.

A Sea Plat, or Map of all the World, according to Mercator, in two large Royal
Sheets of Paper; set forth by Mr. Edward Wright, and newly corrected by Joseph
Moxon, etc. Price 2 s.

Sea-Plats for Sailing to all parts of the World. Price 6 d. the Sheet.

The famous City of Batavia in the East Indies, built and inhabited by the
Dutch, curiously Engraved, and Printed on four large Sheets of Royal Paper.
Price 2 s. 6 d.

A small Map of all the World, with Descriptions, on one Sheet. Price 6 d.

BOOKS.
A Tutor to Astronomy and Geography, or the Use of both the GLOBES, Celestial
and Terrestrial; by Joseph Moxon, A Member of the Royal Society, and
Hydrographer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. Price 5 s.

The Use of the English Globe, by the Right Honorable the Earl of Castlemain.
Price 5 s.

The Use of the Numbering Nines. By the Right Honorable John Lord Naper. Price
1 s.

The Use of the Copernican Spheres, teaching to salve the Phenomenon by them,
as easily as by the Ptolomaick Spheres; by Joseph Moxon, etc. Price 4 s.

Wright's Correction of Errors in the Art of Navigation. Price 8 s.

New and rare Invention of Waterworks, teaching how to raise Water higher than
the Spring. By which Invention, the Perpetual Motion is proposed, many hard
Labors performed, and varieties of Motions and Sounds produced. By Isaac de
Cause, Engineer to King Charles the First. Price 8 s.

Practical Perspective, or Perspective made easy Teaching by the Optics how to
delineate all Bodies, Buildings, and Landskips, etc. By the Catoptricks, how to
delineate confused Appearances, so as when seen in a Mirror or Polished Body
of any intended Shape, the Reflection shall show a Design. By the Dioptricks,
how to draw part of many Figures into one, when seen through a Glass or
Crystal cut into many Faces. By Joseph Moxon, etc. Price 7 s.

An exact survey of the Microcosm, being an Anatomy of the Bodies of Man and
Woman, wherein the Skin, Veins, Nerves, Muscles, Bones, Sinews, and Ligaments
accurately delineated. Engraven on large Copper plates, Printed and curiously
pasted together, so as at first sight you may behold all the parts of Man and
Woman; and by turning up the several Dissections of the Papers, take a view of
all their Inwards; with Alphabetical References to the names of every Member
and part of the Body. Set forth in Latin by Remelinus, and Michael Spaher of
Tyrol; and Englished by John Ireton, Chyrurgeon; and lastly, perused and
corrected by several rare Anatomists. Price 14 s.

Vignola, or the Complete Architect; showing in a plain and easy way, the Rules
of the five Orders in Architecture, viz. Tuscan, Dorick, Ionick, Corinthian,
and Composite; whereby any that can but read and understand English, may
readily learn the Proportions that all Members in a Building have to one
another: Set forth by Mr. James Barozzio of Vignola, and Translated into
English by Joseph Moxon, etc. Price 3 s. 6 d.

Christiologia, or a brief but true Account of the certain Year, Month, Day and
Minute of the Birth of Jesus Christ. By John Butler, B. D. and Chaplain to his
Grace James Duke of Ormond, etc. and Rector of Lichborough in the Diocese of
Peterborough. Price 3 s. 6 d.

A Tutor to Astrology, or Astrology made easy; being a plain Introduction to
the whole Art of Astrology; whereby the meanest Apprehension may learn to Erect
a Figure, and by the same to give a determinate Judgment upon any Question or
Nativity whatsoever. Also new Tables of Houses, calculated for the Latitude of
51 degr. 32 min. Also Tables of Right and Oblique Ascensions to 6 degr. of
Latitude. Whereunto is added an Ephemeris for three years; with all other
necessary Tables that belong to the Art of Astrology. Also how to Erect a
Figure the Rational way, by the Tables of Triangles, more methodically than
has been yet published; digested into a small Pocket Volume for the
convenience of those that erect Figures abroad. By W. Eland. Price 2 s.

The Use of a Mathematical Instrument called a Quadrant, showing very plainly
and easily to know the exact Height and Distance of any Steeple, Tree or House,
etc. Also to know the time of the Sunrising and Setting, and the Length of
every day in the year, the Place of the Sun in the Ecliptic, the Azimuth,
Right Ascension, and Declination of the Sun: with many other necessary and
delightful Conclusions: performed very readily. Also the use of a Nocturnal,
whereby you may learn to know the Stars in Heaven, and the Hour of the Night by
them; with many other delightful Operations. Price 6 d.

A brief Discourse of a Passage by the North Pole, to Japan, China, etc.
pleaded by three Experiments and Answers to all Objections that can be urged
against a passage that way: As 1. By a Navigation into the North Pole, and two
Degrees beyond it. 2. By a Navigation from Japan toward the North Pole. 3. By
an experiment made by the Czar of Muscovy, whereby it appears, that to the
Northward of Nova Zembla is a free and open Sea as far as Japan, China, etc.
With a Map of all the discovered Land nearest to the Pole. By Joseph Moxon,
etc. Price 6 d.

Regulae Trium Ordinum Literarum Typographicarum; Or, the Rules of the three
Orders of Print-Letters, viz. the Roman, Italica, and English, Capitals and
Small; showing how they are compounded of Geometrick Figures, and mostly made
by Rule and Compass. Useful for Writing Masters, Painters, Carvers, Masons, and
others that are lovers of Curiosity. By Joseph Moxon, etc. Price 5 s.

Geographical Playing Cards, wherein is exactly described all the Kingdoms of
the Earth, curiously engraved. Price Plain 1 s. Colored 2 s. best Colored and
Gilt 5 s. the Pack.

The Genteel Housekeepers Pastime; or, the Mode of Carving at the Table,
represented in a Pack of Playing Cards. By which, together with the
Instructions in this Book, any ordinary Capacity may easily learn how to Cut
up, or Carve in Mode, all the most usual Dishes of Flesh, Fish, Fowl, and Baked
Meats: and how to make the several Services of the same at the Table; with the
several Sawces and Garnishes proper to each Dish of Meat. Set forth by several
of the best Masters in the Faculty of Carving, and published for public use.
Price 6 d.

Carving Cards. By the best Carvers at the Lord Mayors Table. Price 1 s.

Compendium Euclidi Curiosi. Or, Geometrical Operations, showing how with one
single opening of the Compasses and a straight Ruler, all the Propositions of
Euclid's first five Books are performed. Translated out of Dutch into English.
By Joseph Moxon, etc. Price 1 s.

An Introduction to the Art of Species. By Sir Jonas Moor. Price 6. d.

Mechanic Exercises: Or, the Doctrine of Handy-Works, in Fourteen Monthly
Exercises. The first Three, viz. Numb. I. Numb. II. Numb. III. teaching the Art
of Smithing. The second Three, viz. Numb. IV. Numb. V. Numb. VI. teaching the
Art of Joynery. The third Three, viz. Numb. VII. Numb. VIII. Numb. IX. teaching
the Art of House-Carpentery. The fourth Five, viz. Numb. X. Numb. XI. Numb.
XII. Numb. XIII. Numb. XIV. teaching the Art of Turning. Accommodated with
suitable Engraved Figures. By Joseph Moxon, etc.

Mechanic Exercises, the Second Volume applied to the Whole Art of Printing,
being 24 Exercises. By Joseph Moxon, Hydrographer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, and Member of the Royal Society. Price of each Monthly Exercise 6 d.

Mechanic Dialling; Teaching any man, though of an ordinary Capacity, and
unlearned in the Mathematics, to draw a true Sun-Dial on any Given Plane,
however situated; only with the help of a straight Ruler and a pair of
Compasses; and without any Arithmetical Calculation. By Joseph Moxon, etc.
Price 1 s. 6 d.

Mathematics made easy: Or, A Mathematical Dictionary, Explaining the Terms
of Art, and Difficult Phrases used in Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy,
Astrology, and other Mathematical Sciences, wherein the true Meaning of the
Word is rendered, the Nature of things signified Discussed, and (where Need
requires) Illustrated with apt Figures and Diagrams. With an Appendix, exactly
containing the Quantities of all sorts of Weights and Measures: The Characters
and meaning of the Marks, Symbols, or Abbreviations commonly used in Algebra.
And sundry other Observables. By Joseph Moxon. Price 2 s. 6 d.

At the place aforesaid, you may also have all manner of Maps, Sea-Plats,
Drafts, Mathematical Books, Instruments, etc. at the lowest Prizes.

FINIS.

