GULIELMUS D: Gratiae, Angliae, Scotioa* Franciae, et Hiberniae REX Fidei
Defensor etc, F. H. Van. Hove. Sculp:



AN EPITOME Of the Whole Art of War.

In TWO PARTS.

The First of Military Discipline, Containing the whole Exercise of the Pike
and Musket, etc. with plain Directions for the various Postures. Also the
Drawing up of Battalions, and way of Forming them; with the Art of Doubling,
Wheeling, Forming and Drawing up an Army into any Figure. The way of Conducting
Armies in Hilly, Woody or Plain Countries: Of Encampings, Besiegings, giving of
Battle, etc.

The Second of Fortification and Gunnery, which shows the Principles and
Practice of Fortification, as now used, as well by the English, as several
other European Nations, (Especially by Their Majesty's Army) at the late Sieges
of Athlene, Galoway, Limerick, etc. The Measures and Dimensions of Rampires,
Parapets, Moats, etc.

Of Casements, Cittadels, Crownworks, Ravelins, etc. Of Gunnery, the
qualifications of a Gunner. Of Ordnance, Morters, Demy-Cannon, etc. with the
manner of Batteries, etc. All Illustrated and further Explained by 18
Copper Plates, curiously designed and Engraven.

LONDON, Printed for J. Moxon, at the Sign of Atlas in Warwick Lane, 1692.

To the Honorable CHRISTOPHER SEATON, Brother to the Right Honorable George
Earl of Winton, etc. And my Worthy Friend.
Honored Sir!
I Here present you this Epitome of the whole Art of War, and recommend it to
your serious Inspection and Approbation; Depending more upon the Worth of the
Subject, than my own Deserts: 'Twas chiefly designed for the Use and Benefit of
Young Gentlemen and Others that delight therein: And though it is but small in
Bulk, yet great in Matter; and at this time of as good use, when the greatest
part of Europe are engaged in War. What can be more Acceptable in a time of
such Eminent Action, than Plain and Practical Instructions in the Military
Arts, here comprehended under these two Heads, viz. Military Discipline, and
Fortification. Sir, I need not endeavor to inform you of its most excellent
use, under the Fortitude of whose favorable Aspect, this small Piece craves a
shelter from the Malevolent Rays of Detractions. These are the Arts
Mathematical (or Branches thereof,) and in the Mathematics the two main
Pillars are well known to be Arithmetic and Geometry; and these also have the
Pre-eminence above all other Arts, because they leave no Hole to creep out at,
or any Querk for Descent, but an Everlasting Addition of new Inventions to what
has been happily demonstrated before. This last Age does enjoy the Benefit of
more admirable Inventions, than many former Ages; and we see daily that new
ones are still added, both in the Art of War, as well as diverse other Arts and
Sciences. Have we not in our Age seen the spots in the Sun first discovered by
the famous Galareus, with his most excellent Telescope Observations; also his
Conversion upon his own Axis, the Lateral Guardians or Satillites of Saturn and
Jupiter, the various Phases of Mars, the Horns of Venus and Mercury, the
Mountains and Seas of the Moon, the Generation of Comets, cum multis aliis? But
I fear I have run out too far for this small Treatise. Sir! it is the Censure of
You alone which I value, the Popular voice, like other Agents, never acting
beyond their proper sphere of activity. Thus craving the Continuance of Your
Favor and Respect, I shall ever remain,

Honorable Sir! Your Devoted and very Humble Servant, J. M.

A CATALOGUE OF Globes, Celestial and Terrestrial Spheres, Maps, Sea-Plates,
Mathematical Instruments and Books, Made and Sold by J. Moxon, at the Sign of
Atlas in Warwick Lane.
GLOBES 26 Inches the Diameter. The Price 20 l. the pair.

Globes near 15 Inches Diameter. The Price 4 l.

Globes 8 Inches Diamer. The Price 2 l.

Globes 6 Inches Diameter. The Price 1 l. 10 s.

The English Globe, invented by the Right Hononrable the Earl of Castlemain, 12
Inches Diameter. The Price ordinary made up 40 s. and with the Projection at
Bottom 50 s. Best made up 5 l.

Concave Hemispheres of the Starry Orb; which serves for a Case to a
Terrestrial Globe 3 Inches Diameter, made portable for the Pocket. Price 15 s.

Spheres, according to the Copernican Hypothesis, both General and Particular,
20 Inches Diameter. Price of the General 5 l. of the Particular 6 l. of both
together 10 l.

Spheres, according to the Ptolomaick System 14 Inches Diameter. Price 3 l.

Spheres, according to the Ptolomaick System, 8 Inches Diameter. Price 1 l. 10
s.

Gunter's Quadrant, 12 Inches Radius, printed on Paper, and pasted on a Board,
with a Nocturnal on the backside. Price 5 s.

Gunter's Quadrant, 4 Inches Radius, printed on Paper, and pasted on Brass,
with a Nocturnal on the backside, and a Wooden Case covered with Leather fit
for it. A new Invention contrived for the Pocket. Price 6 s.

A large Map of the World, 10 Foot long, and 7 Foot deep, pasted on Cloth and
colored. Price 2 l.

A Map of all the World, 4 Foot long, and 3 Foot deep, pasted on Cloth and
colored. Price 10 s. in Sheets 2 s. 6 d.

A Map of the English Empire in America, describing all Places inhabited here
by the English Nation, as well on the Islands as on the Continent. Price 15 s.

Six Scriptural Maps, 1. Of all the Earth, and how after the Flood it was
divided among the Sons of Noah. 2. Of Paradise or the Garden of Eden, with the
Countries circumjacent inhabited by the Patriarchs. 3. The 40 Years travel of
the Children of Israel through the Wilderness. 4. Of Canaan, or the Holy Land,
and how it was divided among the twelve Tribes of Israel, and Traveled through
by our Savior and his Apostles. 5. The Travels of (...), and others of the
Apostles, in their propagating the Gospel. 6. Jerusalem, as it stood in our
Savior's time; with a Book of Explanations to these Maps, Entitled, Sacred
Geography. Price 6 s. Useful to be Bound up with Bibles.

A Sea-Plate, or Map of all the World, according to Mercator, in two large
Royal Sheets of Paper; set forth by Mr. Edward Wright, and newly corrected by
Joseph Moxon, etc. Price 2 s.

Sea-Plats for Sailing to all Parts of the World. Price 6 d. the Sheet.

The famous City of Batavia in the East Indies, built and inhabited by the
Dutch, curiously Engraved, and Printed on four large Sheets of Royal-Paper.
Price 2 s. 6 d.

A small Map of the World, with Descriptions, on one Sheet. Price 6 d.

A New Map of the Kingdom of Ireland, in one Royal Sheet of Paper. Price 1 s.
by J. Moxon.

A New Map of England, showing the Roads from Edinburgh to London, in two
Sheets. Price 1 s. by J. Moxon.

A New Map of Scotland, in one Royal Sheet. Price 1 s. by J. Moxon.

North and South Hemespheres 16 Inches Diameter, projected on the Poles of the
World; the South, according to Mr Haley's Observation, with a Horizon. Price,
in Sheets, 2 s. 6 d. Made up 6 s.

BOOKS.
A Tutor to Astronomy and Geography, or the Use of both the Globes, Celestial
and Terrestial; by Joseph Moxon, A Member of the Royal Society, and
Hydrographer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. Price 5 s.

The Use of the Copernican Spheres, teaching to Solve the Phoenomena by them,
as easily as by the Ptolomaick Spheres; by Joseph Moxon, etc. Price 4 s.

Wright's Correction of Errors in the Art of Navigation. Price 8 s.

New and rare Inventions of Waterworks, teaching how to raise Water higher
than the Spring. By which Invention, the Perpetual Motion is proposed, many
hard Labors performed, and varieties of Motion and Sounds produced. By Isaac
de Cause, Engineer to King Charles the First. Price 8 s.

Practical perspective, or Perspective made easy. Teaching by the Optics how
to delineate all Bodies, Buildings, and Landskips, etc. By the Catoptricks, how
to delineate confused Appearances, so as when seen in a Mirror or Polished
Body of any intended Shape, the Reflection shall show a Design. By the
Dioptricks, how to draw part of many Figures into one, when seen through a
Glass or Crystal cut into many Faces. By Joseph Moxon, etc. Price 7 s.

An exact Survay of the Microcosm, being an Anatomy of the Bodies of Man and
Woman, wherein the Skin, Veins, Nerves, Muscles, Bones, Sinews, and Ligaments
are acurately delineated. Engraven on large Copper Plates, Printed and
curiously pasted together, so as at first sight you may behold all the parts of
Man and Woman; and by turning up of several Dissections of the Papers, take a
view of all their inwards; with Alphabetical References to the Names of every
Member and part of the Body. Set forth in Latin by Remelinus and Michael Sapher
of Tyrol; and Englished by John Ireton, Chyrurgion; and lastly, perused and
corrected by several Anatomists. Price 14 s.

Vignola, or the Complete Architect; showing a plain and easy way the Rules of
the Five Orders in Architecture, viz. Tuscan, Dorick, Ionick, Corinthian, and
Composite; whereby any that can but read and understand English, may readily
learn the Proportions that all members in a Building have to one another: Set
forth by Mr. James Barrozzio of Vignola, and Translated into English by Joseph
Moxon, etc. Price 3 s. 6 d.

Christiologio, Or a brief but true Account of the certain Year, Month, Day,
and Minute of the Birth of Jesus Christ. By John Butler, B. D. and Chaplain to
his Grace James Duke of Ormond, etc. and Rector of Lichborough in the Diocese
of Peterborough. Price 3 s. 6 d.

A Tutor to Astrology, or Astrology made easy: being a plain Introduction to
the whole Art of Astrology; whereby the meanest Apprehension may learn to Erect
a Figure, and by the same to give a determined Judgment upon any question or
Nativity whatsoever. Also New Tables of Houses, calculated for the Latitude of
51 degr. 32 minutes; Also Tables of Right and Oblique Ascentions to 6 degr. of
Latitude. Whereunto is added an Ephemeris for three Years, with all other
necessary Tables that belong to the Art of Astrology. Also to Erect a Figure
the Rational way, by the Tables of Triangles, more methodically than has yet
been published, digested into a small Pocket Volume, for the convenience of
those that Erect Figures abroad. By W. Eland. Price ^ s.

Mathematics made easy, or a Mathematical Dictionary, Explaining the Terms of
Art, and Difficult Phrases used in Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy, Astrology,
and other Mathematical Sciences. By Joseph Moxon, etc. The 2d. Edit. Corrected
and much Enlarged. Price Bound 3 s.

The Use of a Mathematical Instrument called a Quadrant; showing very plainly
and easily to know the exact Height and Distance of any Steeple, Tree, or
House, etc. Also to know the Hour of the Day by it; the Height of the Sun,
Moon, or Stars; and to know the time of the Sunrising, and the Length of every
Day in the Year; the place of the Sun in the Ecliptic, the Azimuth, Right
Ascension, and Declination of the Sun; with many other necessary and delightful
Conclusions: performed very readily. Also the Use of the Nocturnal, whereby you
may learn to know the Stars in Heaven and the Hour of the Night by them; with
many other delightful Operations. Price 6 d.

A brief Discourse of a passage of the North Pole to Japan, China, etc. pleaded
by three Experiments, and Answers to all Objections that can be urged against a
Passage that way. As, 1. By a Navigation into the North Pole, and two Degrees
beyond it. 2. By a Navigation from Japan toward the North Pole. 3. By an
Experiment made by the Czar of Muscovy, whereby it appears, that to the
Northward of Nova Zembla is a free and open Sea as far as Japan, China, etc.
With a Map of all the discovered Land nearest to the Pole. By Joseph Moxon,
etc. Price 6 d.

Regulae Trium Ordinum Literarum Typographicarum; Or the Rules of the three
Orders of Print-letters, viz. the Roman, Italick, and English, Capitals and
small; showing how they are compounded of Geometrick Figures, and mostly made
by Rule and Compass: Useful for Writing-Masters, Painters, Carvers, Masons, and
others that are lovers of Curiosity. By Joseph Moxon, etc. Price 5 s

The Use of the Astronomical Playing-Cards, teaching an ordinary Capacity by
them to be acquainted with all the Stars in Heaven, to know their Places,
Colors, Natures and Bignesses. Also the Poetical Reasons for every
Constellation. Very useful, pleasant, and delightful for all lovers of
Ingenuity. By Joseph Moxon, etc. Price 6 d.

The Astronomical Cards, by Joseph Moxon, etc. Price plain 1 s. Colored 2 s.
best colored, and the Stars guilt 5 s.

Geographical Playing-Cards, wherein is exactly described all the Kingdoms of
the Earth, curiously engraved. Price plain 1 s. colored 2 s best colored and
gilt 5 s. the Pack.

The Genteel Housekeepers pastime; or, the Mode of Carving at the Table,
represented in a pack of Playing-Cards. By which, together with the
Instructions in the Book, any ordinary Capacity may learn how to cut up, or
Carve in mode, all the most usual Dishes of Flesh, Fish, Fowl, and Baked Meats:
And how to make the several Services of the same at the Table; with the several
Sawces and Garnishes proper to each Dish of Meat. Set forth by several of the
best Masters in the Faculty of Carving, and published for public use. Price 6
d.

Carving Cards, By the best Carvers at the Lords Mayors Table. Price 1 s.

Compendium Euclidis Curiosi: Or, Geometrical Operations, Showing with one
single opening of the Compasses, and a straight Ruler, all the proportions of
Euclid's first five Books are performed. Translated out of Dutch into English,
by Joseph Moxon, etc. Price 1 s.

An Introduction to the Art of Species; by Sir Jonas Moor. Price 6 d.

Two Tables of Ranges, according to the Degrees of Mounture; by Henry Bo^d,
Senior. Price 6 d.

Mechanic Exercises: Or, the Doctrine of Handy-works, in 9 Monthly Exercises.
The first Three, viz. Numb. I. Numb. II. Numb. III. teaching the Art of
Smithing. The second Three, viz. Numb. IV. Numb. V. Numb. VI. teaching the Art
of Joynery. The third Three, viz. Numb. VII. Numb. VIII. Numb. IX. teaching the
Art of House-Carpentery. Accommodated with suitable Engraved Figures: by Joseph
Moxon, etc. Price of each Monthly Exercise 6 d.

Mechanic Dialling; Teaching any man, though of an ordinary Capacity, and
unlearned in the Mathematics, to draw a true Sun-Dial on any Given Plain,
however situated; only with the help of a straight Rule and a pair of
Compasses, and without any Arithmetical Calculation: by Joseph Moxon, etc.
Price 1 s. 6 d.

At the place aforesaid, you may have also all manner of Maps, Sea-Plats,
Drafts, Mathematical Books, Instruments, etc. at the lowest Prizes.

There is Invented by the Right Honorable the Earl of Castlemain, a new kind
of Globe, called (for distinction sake) the English Globe; being a fixed and
immovable one, performing what the Ordinary ones do, and much more, even
without their usual Appendancies; as Wooden Horizons, Brazen Meridians,
Vertical Circles, etc. For it Composes it self to the Site and Position of the
World without the Mariner's Compass, or the like Foreign help; and besides
other useful and surprising Operations, (relating both to the Sun and Moon, and
performed by the Shade alone) we have by it not only the constant proportion of
Perpendiculars to their Shade, with several Corollaries thence arising, but
also an easy, new, and most compendious way of describing Dials on all Plains,
as well Geometrically as Mechanically: most of which may be taught any one in
few Hours, though never so unacquainted with Mathematics.

To this is added, on the Pedestal, a Projection of all the appearing
Constellations in this Horizon, with their Figures and Shapes. And besides,
several new things in it differing from the Common Astrolabe, (tending to a
clearer and quicker way of Operating) the very Principles of all
Steriographical Projections are laid down and Mathematically demonstrated; as
is of every thing else of moment throughout the whole Treatise.

AN EPITOME Of the whole ART of WAR, etc.
In two Parts.
THE extraordinary Benefit of the Noble Science called Military Discipline,
with that Mathematical Art called Fortification, or Military Architecture, is
so well known, that it stands not in need of my commendation: and therefore to
speak any thing thereto were but to light a Candle before the Sun. In the
managing of these Subjects I shall endeavor to be very plain and easy;
calculating them so as to be understood even by the meanest Capacities; And
first.

Of Exercising.
AS soon as the Regiment is drawn into Battalia, the Commander in Chief is to
place himself before the Center of the Pikes, about six Paces from them, that
he may be more easily understood by the whole Body; and that he may the better
observe what is done, he is to be on Horseback. The Sergeants are to be placed
two on each Rank, the Right and Left; The remainder always to be in the Rere,
making a Rank parallel to the Soldiers at three Paces distant from the last
Rank. The Drums are to be disposed of, one half on the Right, and the other on
the Left, ranging directly with the first Rank of the Soldiers. The H^boys to
be on the Right of the Drums. The Commission-Officers* are to take their Posts
at the head of the Battalions as the Colors are drawn.

The words of Command ought to be given very leisurely and distinctly; and
silence is to be kept very strictly: And in order thereunto the first word of
Command before you begin the Exercise is Silence.

The next word of Command is Files open to the Right (or to the Left) to your
Order, March.

At which word every Man turns to the hand named, and the Sergeants on the
Flank lead the Ranks, which are then Files, directly forward with their
Halberts advanced. In this order no Man is to stir till his Leader be at least
four foot from him, and then to move keeping at that distance; when the Officer
sees the Files are opened enough the next word of Command is Halt, as you were,
or to your Leader.

The Captains and Lieutenants always carry their Pikes Comported when they move
to the Right or Left, and the Colors are advanced. The Sergeants are to be
very mindful to keep the Ranks even, and at 12 large feet distance, and the
Files at three.

The next thing is the Chief Officer gives this word of command, to the
Officers at the Head of the Battalion ( Have a care of the Exercise;) at which
word of command the Musketeers are to pull off their right hand Gloves, and
put them under their Girdles; and the Pike-men are to join their lest hands to
their Pikes even with their Shoulders. Then ( Officers take your Post of
Exercise in the Rear, March.)

The Officers facing to the right about, the Captains marching in one Rank, and
the Lieutenants and Ensigns in another, till they come into the Rear, and place
themselves in Ranks, the first thirteen, and the other eleven Paces from the
Soldiers. And at the same time six of the Sergeants at the Rear, march through
the intervals of the Files into the Front, and post themselves six paces
advanced before the chief Officer, where they are to range themselves into a
parallel Line with the Battalion to keep the Front clear.

The Musketeers being shouldred, the Pikes advanced, and silence commanded,
the Officer in chief proceeds as follows. Viz. Order your Pikes, to the
Right, to the Right, to the Right, to the Right, to the Right about; as you
were. To the left, to the left, to the left, to the left: To the left about; as
you were.

Rules for the Exercise of the Fire-Lock.
THE Soldiers must take care of the carrying their Arms; and be sure that they
make no motion until the word of command be given and ended.

Musketeers have a care of the Exercise; carry your Arms well. Here you must
note that if it be a single Exercise, the Command is: 1. Soulder your Muskets.
2. Lay your right hand to your Muskets. 3. Poise your Muskets. 4. Rest your
Muskets. 5. Cock your Muskets. 6. Guard your Muskets. 7. Present. 8. Fire.
9. Recover your Muskets. 10. Half bend, or half cock your Muskets. 11. Clean
your Pans. 12. Handle your Primers. 13. Prime. 14. Shut your Pans. 15. Blow of
your loose Corns. 16. Cast about to Charge. 17. Handle your Chargers. 18. Open
them with your Teeth. 19. Charge with Powder. 20. Draw forth your Scowrers. 21.
Shorten them to an inch. 22. Charge with Bullet. 23. Ram down Powder and Ball.
24. Withdraw your Scowrers. 25. Shorten them to a Handful. 26. Return your
Scowrers. 27. Poise your Muskets. 28. Shoulder your Muskets. 29. Poise your
Muskets. 30. Order your Muskets.

Rules for the Exercise of the Pike.
PIke-men take heed. Advance your Pikes. To the Front, Charge. To the Right (4
times.) Charge. To the Right-about. Charge. As you were. To the left (4 times)
Charge. To the Left about. Charge. As you were. Charge. Advance your Pikes.
Shoulder your Pikes. Charge to the Front. As you were. Charge to the Right. As
you were. Charge to the Right about. As you were. Charge to the Left. As you
were. Charge to the left about, As you were. Port, Comport. Charge to the
Front. Traile. Charge. As you were. Advance your Pikes. Musketeers take heed.
Poise your Muskets. Shoulder your Muskets. Musketeers make ready.

The manner of the Exercise of the Pike and Musket together.
MVsquetiers make ready. At the pronouncing these words of Command (the Pikes
being advanced, and the Muskets shouldred) the Musketeers are to perform
distinctly every posture of the Musket together, and being ready (which is
understood to be Cock't) they are to guard them with their thumbs on their
Cocks, and bring up their Muskets straight before them, their left hands the
height of their mouths. Both Pike-men and Musketeers always observing when
ever they recover their arms before them, to bring their right heels to their
left insteeps; and when the Pikes charge, and the Muskets rest, to fall back
with their right feet in a direct line. Then to the Right (4 times) Charge. To
the Right about, Charge. As you were, Charge. To the left (4 times) Charge. To
the left about. Charge. As you were. Charge. Recover your Arms. Half bend your
Muskets. Poise your Muskets. Shoulder your Muskets. Here the Pike-men are to
bring their Pikes from their Recover to their Advance. Poise your Muskets.
Here the Piekmen are to join their left hands to their Pikes even to their
shoulders. Then, Order your Arms is the next word of command. In ordering their
Arms they must be sure to make a little stop before the But-end comes to the
ground, that they may come down altogether at once. Pikes to your inside Order.
Lay down your Arms. Quit your Arms. After laying down their Arms and quitting
them, they are all to stand up together. To the right about. March. When the
Soldiers have laid down their Arms and quitting them, upon beat of Drum, they
are all to draw their Swords, and run to their Arms observing always to keep
the points of their Swords upright for fear of mischief. When they lay their
right hands on their Swords, they must take hold of their Scabbards with their
left hand. Then, the next word is. Return you Swords. When they return their
Swords, they must do it all at one motion. Handle your Arms: Pikes to your
outside order. Poise your Muskets. Shoulder your Muskets. Advance your Pikes.

Officers take your Posts at the head of the Battalion* March. Here all the
Officers are to march back in the same method to the Front of the Batalion as
they went from it.

Directions for the several Postures in exercising of the Musket and Pike;
and, first, of the Musket.
HE that designs to be a Soldier, or become an Artist in Arms, ought, in the
first place, to learn and practice the Postures of his Arms, a Posture being a
Mode or Garb that we are used unto in the well-handling of our Arms. 1. Silence
is an excellent Virtue, and observe for all, That in the Exercise both of Pike
and Musket, the Feet are to be at a moderate distance; for if they are too
wide asunder, or too near together, it weakens* and be sure to keep your left
heel fast, and to set your feet exactly, or else you can never handle your Arms
as you ought.

Lay your right hand on your Musket. Turn the Barrel toward you, the Lock
uppermost, and lay your right hand, (the fingers extended) just behind the
Lock, close the but-end of your Musket to your shoulder, that the Muzzels may
be all of a height.

Poise your Musket. Grasp your Musket hard, facing to the right with a quick
motion upon your left heel, keeping your Musket directly before you the height
of your Cravat, your right elbow on your side, your feet neither too near nor
at too great a distance, but so, that by turning the point of the left toe to
the Front, and that of your right as you face, your left heel being exactly
against the middle of your right foot, you are in the posture for resting;
which is the reason of facing to the right, that you may be in a readier
posture to rest.

Rest your Musket. Let your Musket sink down to your left hand, and receive
the Musket into it, just where the Scowrer enters into the Stock, not touching
the Barrel, keeping your right hand upon your Musket, behind the Lock, let
your Musket be held a little sloping, about half a foot from your side, as low
as you can without stooping.

Cock your Musket. Place your right thumb upon the Cock, and your fingers
behind the Trigger, and with the help of closing it to your thigh, you cock it,
keeping it still rested with your thumb upon the Cock.

Guard your Musket; keeping your thumb upon the Cock, and your fingers behind
the Trigger, you bring up your Musket with a very quick motion straight before
you to the Recover, your left hand as high as your mouth, about half a foot
from it, without stooping, bringing your right heel to your left in step.

Present. Fall back with your right foot, so that the left heel be against the
middle of it, raising the but-end of your Musket to your shoulder, your right
elbow not higher than your Piece, bending your left knee, and keeping the right
very stiff, and your Musket being levelled breast-high, with your fingers upon
the Trigger.

Fire. Then be sure to draw the Trigger at one motion, keeping your body
steady, taking good aim, and keeping your Musket fast to your shoulder, until
you have the Word of Command.

Recover your Arms. Sink the but-end of your Musket, till you hold it upright
in both hands, the left hand always as high as your mouth, and the right under
the Lock, bring up your Musket with a very quick motion, and your right heel
to your left instep.

Half bend your Musket, falling back with your right Leg, bring your Musket
to the Rest, laying your right Thumb upon the Cock, and your Fingers behind the
Trigger, half bend it, by putting it close to your Thigh, and then keeping your
Musket rested.

Clean your Pan; pressing the Ball of your Thumb into the Pan, you wipe it:
having done that, hold your Musket in your right hand behind the Lock.

Handle your Primer: Take hold of the great end of it, between the Thumb and
forefinger of your right hand, your Arm backward.

Prime. At which time you must level your Musket, to be exactly upon a line,
and then put Powder into your pan.

Shut your Pan with your two first Fingers, and casting back your Primer, bring
your Musket to the Recover, as there directed, keeping your Thumb on the top
of the Steel

Blow off your loose Corns. Be sure to blow all together: bring your Pan up to
your mouth, standing upright, blow off the loofe Corns, then let your Musket
sink into the posture it was in before.

Cast about to Charge: you advance with your right leg, turning your Musket,
the barrel downwards, bringing it to the left side a little backwards in your
left hand, keeping your right-foot-toe directly to the Front, and your right
heel over against the middle of the left foot, ballancing your Musket in the
left hand, the right hand joined to the Muzzle, which must be held directly to
the front, a foot from your body.

Handle your Charger. Take it full in your hand, and place it underneath your
Musket, about an inch from the Muzzle.

Open it with your Teeth. Bring it up to your mouth, standing upright with your
Head, and not to bring your Head down to it: As Soon as you have done this,
bring the Charger within an inch of the Muzzle underneath, as before, and cover
the mouth of your Charger with the Ball of your Thumb.

Charge with Powder. Put the Charge of powder into the barrel, then hold your
Charger again underneath your Musket, as before.

Draw forth your Scourer. Now let fall your Charger, and turn your hand, your
little-finger next the Muzzle, and draw it at three motions; being drawn, dart
it, that is, hold it level to the height of your Eye, your Arm extended.

Shorten it to an inch. Turn the great end of your Scowrer toward you, and
slip your hand till within an inch of the end, letting it rest against your
body, a little below your right breast, sloped all of a height.

Charge with Bullet. Take the Bullet out of your mouth, putting it into the
barrel, and then put the great end of the Scourer after it, just into the
Muzzle of the Piece, and so stand till the next word of command.

Ram down Powder and Ball. Which is done by holding a handful of the Scowrer in
your hand, and your thumb on the top of it.

Withdraw your Scowrer. Turn your hand, your thumb and forefinger toward the
Muzzle, and when your Scowrer is clear, which is to be done at three motions,
dart again as before.

Shorten it to an handful. Turn the small end of the Scowrer to your breast,
and slip your hand till within an handful of the end of it, holding it to your
body, as before directed.

Return your Scowrer. Re-place it in the Stock of your Musket, pressing it
down with your thumb; then always remember to grasp the Muzzle of your Musket
with your right hand, your thumb straight out upon the Scowrer, keeping your
Musket clear from your side some half a foot, the Muzzels all of a height,
directly to the front.

Poise your Musket. With your left hand bring up your Musket before you, and
falling with your right leg even with your left, grasp your Musket under the
Lock with your right hand, and poise as before.

Shoulder your Musket as formerly: Poise as before.

Order. Sink your right hand a little; take hold of the Stock with your left
hand upon the place where the Scowrer goes into the Stock, then sinking that
hand, take hold of the Muzzle with your right hand, and let the but-end sink to
the ground, close to the right foot, the Lock outward.

Lay down your Musket. Turn your Musket with the Lock upwards, and step
forwards with your left leg and right hand, and lay it upon the ground in a
straight line.

Quit your Musket. Fall back with your left leg even to the right, and stand
up.

Handle your Musket. Step forwards with your left leg, and lay your right hand
near the Muzzle of your Musket.

Order your Musket. Lift up the Muzzle of your Musket, and fall back with
your left leg even to the right, turning the Lock of your Musket outward, by
the middle of your foot.

Directions for the several Postures in exercising of the PIKE.
ADvance your Pikes. With your right hand lift upright your Pike as high as you
can well reach, and take it with your left hand as low as you can, and raise it
till the but-end comes into the right hand, then bring it between your breast
and shoulder upright close to your thigh.

To the Front. Lay your left hand on your Pike even with the top of your
shoulder, and bring the Pike straight upright before you with a quick motion*
drawing in your right heel to your left instep.

Charge Fall back with your right leg, so that the heel of your left foot may
be directly against the middle of your right foot: Bring down your Pike extreme
quick, with a jerk, and charge Breast high; your left Elbow under your Pike to
support it, yielding your body forwards, and bending your left Knee, with your
feet at a convenient distance, that you may stand strong, always holding the
But-end of your Pike in the Palm of your right hand, and your left foot
pointing in a strait line with your Pike.

To the Right four times. Turn your left Toe to the right; Bring up your right
heel to your left Insteps and your Pike recovered straight before you with as
quick a motion as in Charging: Then having turned, fall back with your right
leg as before. Charge as before.

To the right about. Turn your left Toe to the right about; bringing your right
Heel as before, and your Pike recovered charge before.

As you were. You turn your left Toe to the left about, bringing up your Pike
recovered, your left hand never to be higher than your Mouth, and your right
Heel as before; and being turned, you fall back with your Right Leg and Charge.
You must be sure always to bring your Pike straight up, and not to swing it
about, for then 'twill clatter against the other Pikes.

To the Left, Four times. To the Left about. As you were. Advance your Pikes.
Bringing up your Right Heel to your Left Instep, and your Pike first before
you, you fall out with your Right Foot even with your Left, and bring your Pike
to your Shoulder.

Shoulder. Lay your Left Hand on your Pike even with your Shoulder; fall back
with your Right Leg, and put back your Right Arm as far as you well can,
holding your Pike half a Foot from your side, then taking off your Left Hand,
bring up your Right Leg, and lay your Pike on your Right Shoulder, your Elbow
close to your Body, the butt-end half a Foot from the ground.

Charge to the Front. Fall back with your Right Leg, and put back your Right
Arm as far as you can, be sure to keep the Spear directly to the Rear, and your
Pike sloaped at the same height with the Spear as when it was Shouldered,
neither higher not lower. Vide Charge.

Shoulder, as you were. You must now raise your Pike with both your Hands, then
leaving it with the Right Hand, and turning the Head backwards with the Left,
take hold again with the Right, as high as you can reach with ease, bringing up
your Right leg, taking off your Left Hand from your Pike, Shoulder as before.

Charge to the Right. Bring your Pike up, and turn the butt-end backwards by
your Right side, taking it in the Palm of your Right Hand, turning your Body to
the Right upon your Left Foot, with your Right Leg behind your Left, and Charge
as before.

Shoulder, as you were. Raise your Pike with both Hands, then turn about to the
Left, bringing your Feet as formerly directed, then with your Left hand turn
your head of the Pike to the Right: Then taking hold of it with your Right
Hand, hold it in both hands, at a little distance from your Body as before,
sloped at the same height as when Shouldered, then bringing up your Right Leg,
lay it on your Shoulder.

Charge to the Right about. Fall back with your Leg and Hand as before, and
stand with your Pike in the same Posture, then upon your Left Foot, turn to the
Right about, bring the Butt-end of your Pike to the right side, falling back
with your right Leg, level your Pike Breast high, and Charge.

As you were. Turn to the Left about, and with your Left Hand, bring the
Butt-end of your Pike by your left side, keeping the Speer-point exactly to the
Rear, the same height as before, then laying your Right Hand as high as you can
well reach, hold it from your Body as before, then bring up your Right Leg and
Shoulder.

Charge to the Left. Fall back with your Leg and Arm as in the rest, and turn
to the Lest, and with your Left Hand turn the Butt-end of the Pike to the
Right, and bring up your Right Leg. Charge.

As you were. Bring your Pike over your Head with your Left Hand; falling back
with your Right Leg, and putting back your Right Arm as before, bring up the
Right Leg, and Shoulder.

Port. As Charging to the Front, but that you sink not the Spear of your Pike
so low, and instead of letting the Pike rest upon your Left Elbow, it is to rest
between the Thumb and Forefinger, and your Elbow close to your side.

Comport. You bring your Left Hand as far back as you can, and stretching out
the Right at the same time, step forwards with your right Foot, grasp your Pike
with your Right Hand, then leaving it with your Left Hand, fall back with the
Right Leg even with your Left, close the Pike to your side, the Spear of your
Pike about the height of your Head.

Charge to the Front. Extend your Right Arm as much as you can, advancing your
Right Leg at the same motion, and putting your Left Hand as far back as you
can, bring forward your Pike; then stepping back with your Right Leg, take hold
of the butt-end of it with your Right hand, when you Charge, Charge always
Breast high.

Trail. Face to the Right about, and let the Spear of your Pike fall behind
you; quit your Right Hand from the butt-end of it, without stirring your Left.

Charge as you were. Turn to the Left about, and taking the butt-end of the
Pike on the Palm of your Right Hand. Charge.

Advance your Pikes. Bring up your Right Heel to your Left Instep, and your
Pike before you to the Recover, you fall out with your Right Foot even with
your Left, and bring your Pike to your Right Thigh.

Order your Pikes. Lay your Left Hand on your Pike, even with the top of your
Shoulder, then sinking your Left Hand, take hold of it with your Right Hand so,
as when the butt-end of it is upon the Ground, your Right Hand may be against
your Eye, keeping your Pike near your Head, and the butt-end near the Latchet
of your Shoe.

Pikes to your inside Order. Move the butt-end of your Pike on the inside of
the middle of your Right Foot.

Lay down your Pike. Step forward quick with your Left Leg, lay it down strait
with your Right Hand.

Quit your Pikes. Bring back your Left Leg even to your Right, and stand up
altogether.

Handle your Pikes. Step forward with your Left Leg quick, placing the middle
of your Right Foot against the but-end of your Pike, lay your Right Hand on
your Pike as far as you can reach.

Order your Pikes. Raise the Pike with your Right Hand only, and fall back with
your Left Leg.

Pikes to your Outside Order. Place the butt-end of your Pike at the middle, on
the outside of your Foot. Advance, As before.

PLATE I.
The Way and Method, how to form and order Battalions of Foot.
THIS Excellent Art of forming the Foot, instructs how to draw up a Body of
them in such excellent order, and with so much precaution beforehand, that it
may be able to withstand (...) another Body of Infantry, though of a (...)
greater number; or a Body of Cavalry alone; or else a Body composed both of
Cavalry and Infantry, when attacked in a Plain, Down, or in an open Field,
where there are neither Defiles as Hedges nor Ditches, nor any rising Grounds
to defend them from the Enemy. Now the Pike and Partisan, being the only Arms
proper to stop (...) fury of the Cavalry, and to prevent their breaking in upon
the Battalion, the first thing that is to be done in drawing up this Battalion,
must be to form a Body of all Pikes, and it must be the chief care of the
Officer that commands the Party, to dispose his Men in such a form, that they
may be able not only to defend the Musketeers, but the Colors also, and the
Baggage, if there should be occasion.

Now in ordering a Battalion in this manner, the three following Rules are to
be observed. Plate I


1. The Men must be so ordered, as to stand with their Arms presented every
way, and to make a Front on every side, to the end, that whatever of their
Fronts be assailed, or attacked, they may be able to defend themselves.

2. The Soldiers must be so ordered, that the Angles of the Battalion may be
very obtuse; in such a manner, that the two sides that form the Angle, join
together, but with one right Line only. For the Angle is the weakest part of
the Battalion, as being least strengthened by the Pikes. For the Soldiers which
are next the Angle, present their Pikes in Front, and not being able therefore
to present, lie open to the Enemy. So that our Forefathers, with whom squ(...)
Battalions were in great use, flanked their Angles with little Bodies of
Musketeers marked ABCD, which are small Bodies posted in the middle of the
Fronts of the Battalion, and with which sometimes they secured the Angles. True
it is, that these little Bodies being easily cut off by the Horse, and beaten
off from the Body of the Battalion, the farther use of them has been laid aside.

3. You ought to leave void a space of Ground in the Center of the Battalion,
or middle of the Pikes, sufficient to receive and secure the Musketeers, the
Colors, and Baggage.

The manner of ordering any number of Soldiers into any Square Form of Battle.
1. These are to be considered either in respect of the Form of the Ground, or
of the Number of the Men.

A Square Battle of Ground is that which has the Rank as long as the File,
notwithstanding the Men in Rank be more than in File.

A Square Battle of Men, is that which has an equal number of Men both in Rank
and File, though the Ground on which they stand be longer on the File than on
the Rank.

2. In respect of the number of the Men, it is called either a Square Battle or
a Double Battle, or a Battle of the Grand Front, which is Quadruple, or a
Battle of any proportion of the number in Rank to the number in File.

3. So that if you are to form a Square Battle of Men, extract the Square Root
out of the whole number of Men, and the same shall be the number of Soldiers to
beset in a Rank. As for Example, 570 are to be formed into a Square Battle,
that there may be as many in Rank as in the File. Take the Square Root of 576;
which (...) ^4, the Number that are to be in Rank, and also in a File.

To order any number of Men into a Battle of the Grand Front.
SUppose 16900 Soldiers were to be Marshalled into a Battle of the Grand Front.
First divide 16900 by 4, which gives me (...) out of which I extract the Square
Root, which is 65, the Quadruple whereof is 260, so that I have 6 for a File,
and 260 in Rank.

Any number of Men, with their distance in Rank and File, how to order them
into a Square Battle of Ground.
SUppose 2500 Soldiers, were to be (...) Square Battle of Ground, so that their
distance in File should be 7 Feet, and in Rank 3 Feet; How many Men must be
placed in Rank and in File.

Say, by the Rule of Three, as 7 to 3, (...) 2500^ to ^^71, the Square Root
whereof is 32, which is the number of Men in a File, and 3 over. How to find
the number of Men that are to be in Rank, divide 2500 by 32, the Quotient is
78, which is the number of Men to be placed in a Rank, and 4 over.

The manner how to order the Square in time of Battle.
THE Square being formed as aforesaid, the Officers are to take care, that
every Front of Soldiers do their Duty; and the Captains that are in the Center
of each Front, are to retire into the first Rank, when the Musketeers make
ready, and are to kneel when the Soldiers kneel, and to perform the same with
their Pikes as the Pikemen do: Then Command; Granadiers take your Posts in the
Angles.

Here your Granadiers are to be divided in 4 equal parts, and are to be placed
without at the 4 Angles; but if there be not room enough, you may place some of
them within the Angles with their Daggers in their Firelocks: Those without the
Angles are to be 3 deep. The 2 last Ranks of which are to fire with the
Musketeers. And the Front Rank are to make ready their Grenades. And as soon
as the two last Ranks have fired, they are to put their Daggers into their
Firelocks, and stand Charged; and when the first Rank of Musketeers present,
the first Rank of Granadiers are to deliver their Granado's; which done, they
are to unsling their Firelocks, and put in their Daggers, and stand Charged as
the rest.

2. Face Square. Here the Musketeers on the Right and Left are to face
outward, and those to the Rear, to face to the right about. The 3 outwardmost
Files of Pikes on the right and left, are to face outward, and the Rear half
Files of the rest of the Pikes are to face to the Right about. Those in the
Angles are to face to the points of the Angles.

3. Musketeers make ready. Here the Pikes are to Port very low, and to
continue so, and not to Charge when the Musketeers Present.

4. First Rank Kneel. Which they must do, holding their Muskets, so that the
two last Ranks may fire over them.

5. The two last Ranks Present. Fire. As soon as ever the second and third Rank
have Fired and Recovered their Arms; the first Rank is to stand up without any
other Word of Command, with their Muskets Cocked and Guarded, ready to Present.

6. Recover your Arms. Here the first Rank stands up with their Muskets
recovered strait before them, ready Cocked and Guarded, and the two Ranks that
have fired load.

7. Front Rank Present.

8. Fire.

Recover your Arms. At which Word of Command, the Pikemen are to recover their
Pikes from their Port. To your Leader, March, Halt, Face, Square, etc.

According to this Method, they may be made to March and to Fire to every Front.

PLATE II.
The General Rule for the blunting or filling up the Angles of the Battalion.
EVERY Body, whether lesser or greater, that requires the blunting of its
Angles, ought to be composed of a Square number of Men, as of 4, 9, 16, 25, 36,
49, etc. Therefore you must place the Men in Rank according to the Arithmetical
Progression, or Proportion, of which the Interval, Excess, or Difference of the
Terms must always be two: Thus, having placed the first Man at the Angular
Point A of the Figure 1. the second Rank shall be of three Men, as being a
number of which, the Excess, Interval, and Difference is Two in respect of one.
The third Rank shall be of five Men* which is a number that exceeds three by
two. The fourth shall be of seven; the fifth of nine, and so forward, still
increasing every Rank by two Men, more than the Rank which is before, according
to the same Arithmetical Progression, which has always two for the Interval,
and difference of the Terms.

Now to place these Men in due Order, you must imagine that the Square little
Body ACBD; moves off the Ground T, upon the left of the Plate II
Fig 1

Battalion Q; and when its last Rank AD, is advanced one Pace beyond the Wing
AD of the same Battalion Q, it turns to the right, and then the Soldier A of
the Second Figure comes upon the Ground A of the first Figure. The sides AD,
AC, of the small Body meet together upon the sides that answer one another, AD,
AC of the Angle. Then you Command the Men of the little Battalion to make a
Front toward the Angle, and when they are drawn up according to this
Arithmetical Progression, you cause them to make an outward Front.

PLATE III.
The manner of framing an Octogon Battalion with Eight Fronts.
SUPPOSE it a Battalion of 40 Pikemen, drawn up four deep, and 10 in Front. You
may, according to the same Method, draw up like an Octogon, any number of
Pikemen that shall observe the same Proportion of 4 to 10, between Front and
Depth, as 8 in Depth, and 20 in Front, 16 in Depth, and 40 in Front, or 32 in
Depth, and 80 in Front. For in this Example I have chosen this little number of
Pikemen, to give the more light to the ordering and disposing of a far greater
number.

The Words of Command.
1. The two right hand Files, and the two left hand Files stand fast. AB, IL.

2. The half File of the two right hand Files, face to the right, B.

3. The half File of the two left hand Files, face to the left L.

4. Files of the Wings, March.

The half File B moves into the ground 4, L moves into 5, A moves into 7, and I
into 8; which four Bodies are designed to blunt the Angles. Plate III
Fig III

Fig I

Fig IV

Fig II



There remains afterward upon the ground of the Battalion, the six Files CD,
GH, which must be opened by half Ranks, and half Files, to form the Cross of
the third Figure, and to clear the ground of the Center, by a quarter Wheeling.

5. The half File of the right hand half Rank C, half turn to the Right. Order
your Pikes.

C makes a Front toward the Rear, and keeps his ground.

6. File-leader of the right hand half Rank to the right, G. March. Stand.

The three Files G, make a Front toward A, upon the right Wing, and advance on
that side, two or three Paces beyond their Ground; and so thar which was a File
is become a Rank.

7. They that marched stand fast; G to the Right, a Quarter Wheeling.

The three Files G, make a quarter turn to the right, and wheel about the
Soldier R, in like manner as the right Wing TY of the first, and became placed,
as you see the 2d Figure; where the three Files G, are marked with the same
Letters as they are in the Body of the first Figure.

And because* that after the Wheeling, they make a Front toward VR, to the end
they may make the Front outward on the side of VXY. (The next Word of Command
is:)

8. To the left. -- Order your Pikes.

9. File-leader of the left hand half Rank, stand upon your Guard, H. March.

Take notice in the 2d Figure of the three Files H, marked with little Points.
These you cause to march forward along the Line marked PM, QF, to gain the
ground H, marked with three great Dots in the same Figure. But to gain this
ground, they march beyond the ground of the Battalion, till the second Rank
pointed PN, have advanced three Paces farther than the Flank YT, of the three
Files G, which then make a Wheeling, which will happen when the Soldier P,
shall be upon the ground Q, and that the Soldier M, shall come upon the ground
F, at what time the Word of Command.

10. To the Right. -- March.

To make a Front toward the three Files G, and when they shall come to be three
Paces from the Rear of the three Files G, then Command them.

11. To the Left. Rest your Pikes.

Then they will make a Front outward, and so shall keep their ground.

12. The half File of the left hand half Rank, stand fast, D. March. Stand.

The half File D, advances two Paces beyond its ground.

13. To the Right. -- A Quarter Wheeling.

The half File D, makes a quarter Wheel about the Soldier Z, and because that
after the Wheeling, they make a Front inward toward the Center, therefore to
change the Front outward, the Word of Command is:

14. They that made the Quarter Wheeling, wheel by half Conversion to the Right.

The Cross being thus made, you bring the four Files upon the Ground, 4, 5, 7,
8, and blunt the Angles according to the foregoing General Rule.

PLATE IV.
The manner of drawing up a Battalion in a Hexagonal Figure, with a void Space
in the Center, and the Front of the Battalion five times exceeding the Depth.
WE suppose the Battalion to consist of 720 Pikemen, 12 Deep, and 60 in Front,
which is to be drawn up into an Octogonal Figure like that marked.

The Battalion being drawn up in the large black Draught of the first figure,
to bring it to the Square marked with Points in the^ same figure, the following
Words of Command are to be made use of.

1. The twelve Files of the Right wing, of the twelve Files of the left wing,
stand fast, C. D. Q. P. A. B.

2. The six Right Hand files of the Right-wing, and the six left hand files of
the Left-wing, C. D. A. B.

3. They that have advanced double their Files inward to the Front and Rear.

A, Takes the Ground V. B. takes the Ground T. G. takes the* Ground G O, and D.
possesses R.

4. They that had the word of Command, and they that have doubled, stand fast,
VPT, OQR.

5. Middle files stand fast ME.

6. Advance you Pikes, Middle files EM.

7. The half file of those that advanced their Pikes, wheel by half Conversion
to the Right M.

8. March those that advanced their Pikes, till the first Rank be advanced one
Pace further than the first of the files that doubled Front and Rear.

M and E move and change into the Ground marked with the points M and E, and
from the square represented by the same points, which is afterward to be
considered in the figure K.

9. The six right hand Files and the six left hand Files that marched wheel, by
half Conversion, into IF, HH, which done, Face toward the Center of the
Battalion.

10. They that have wheeled by half Conversion to the Right, march toward the
Center till the last Rank be all entered.

I and F come upon the Ground Y, and HH upon the Ground GG where as they stand,
they are caused to turn to the Right and Left, to advance forward, that is, Y
fronting Y. and G. fronting G, by which means YY. GG. possess the Ground of
NNNN.

The Ground IY. and FIE becomes void.

Then the word of Command is to be given to the two particular Battalions, OQR,
VPT, which in regard they make a front inward, you must order the Battalion
OQR, to make a half wheel to the Right, and the Battalion VPT, to make a half
wheeling to the left, and by that means they will make a front inwards, and you
shall cause them to march to the Center, and the O and V shall possess the
ground Y, Y, and R and T shall possess the ground GG.

Then you must cut off eight fourths of the Ranks ORVTLLLL, and reduce them
into Triangles, to blunt the four Angles that are next them, and the Battalion
shall be formed after an Octogonal figure, as in the figure marked, where you
see the same letter made use of here, they answer to the same letters in the
two other figures.

You have 532 Musketeers at 12 in depth, and 44 in front, there will remain 4.
The 532 Musketeers shall serve for the Flanks of the Battalion of Pikes, and
to that purpose you shall take 12 files of the right Wing, which will make 144
Musketeers, and as they will be equal in front to the Body of the Pikes marked
E, you shall march them to the head of the said Body, and cause them to enter
into the Center through the Intervals of the Pikes.

When they are advanced toward the Center, divide the Ranks into half, so that
one half Rank shall march toward the Body of Pikes marked Q, and the other
half Ranks toward the Body of Pikes marked P.

After this take from the left Wing of the Musketeers 12 files more, which
make 144 men; and cause them to advance toward the Center through the
Intervals of the Pikes E, and then divide them by half files.

One half File shall advance toward M, and the other half File shall stand
their ground behind the Pikes E.

For the 304 Musketeers that remain, they shall make the two Files that
surround the whole Body.

PLATE V.
The way and manner of reducing a Battalion with a void space in the Center.
YOU begin with the Musketeers which you command from the Center through the
several fronts MPEQ, which together with those that surrounded the Body, you
cause to rank and file themselves as they were.

As for the Pikes that form the Octogonal Body, you give them the following
words of Command:

1. They that stand in the Angles to your Places, O, and R. resume their
distances, and make the same front at Q. The files V and I do the same in
respect of P, and the files LL observe the same order; in regard of the Pikes
ME.

2. The twelve files of the right wing, and the twelve files of the left wing,
that doubled Front and Rear, stand fast OQR, VPT.

3. March files of the wings that have received the word of command; OQR and
VPT, move off and march forward.

4. They that doubled Front and Rear, to your places, O and R, return to the
ground which is marked in the first figure, by the letters CD and VT, return to
the ground A and B of the first figure. Plate IV:
Fig 1.



5. The Files that marched toward the Center, to their places; the four small
Squares NNNN, return to the Front of M. and E.

6. The middle Files stand upon your Guard E. M.

7. The half File, of the middle Files, half a Turn to the Right, M makes a
Front toward the same Center.

8. File-Leader of the middle Files, half a Turn to the Right, E makes a Front
toward the same Center.

9. March middle Files E and M, move forward till they come upon the Front CDQ,
and PAB of the first Figure.

10. File-Leader of those that marched, half a Turn to the Right, E returns to
its first Front, and the Battalion is reduced.

Directions for Firing.
1. In keeping of Ground: This way of Firing may be performed either by two
Ranks at a time, or three Ranks; The first Kneeling, and the second Stooping,
or the two first Stooping; or else thus, Musketeers make ready all, at which
time the Musketeers are to be Cocked and Guarded* and their Arms strait before
them, the Pikes Ported, and when the Musketeers Present, the Pikes are to be
charged. Then

The five first Ranks Kneel, The Rear Rank Present, Fire; Fifth Rank stand up,
Present, Fire; Fourth Rank Stand up, Present, Fire. And so of the rest.

And as they have fired, they are to charge again, and to be in a readiness
against the next Word of Command.

2. For Fire gaining Ground, the Command is, First Rank and Musketeers make
ready, Halt: Then Present and Fire. Here they are to recover their Arms without
any command, and to file off to the Right and Left into the Rear. When the
first Rank presents, the next Rank is to make ready without any Command, and as
the first Rank files off, the next make good the Front, and so the Battalion is
to March again, and every Rank to Fire in this order; And when every Rank
presents, the Pikes are to charge without any command.

3. Of Firing to the Front retreating. The best way is to Fire by single Ranks,
in the same method as in gaining Ground, only after every Rank has fired and
filed off to the Right and Left into the Rear, instead of the next Rank
advancing to make good the Front of Pikes, the Pikes are to retreat to the
Musketeers, who stand still till the Pikes make an even Front with them.

PLATE VI.
The best Way and Method of Marching an Army in a Flat and Plain Country.
THE General having given out Orders the Night before he designs to March the
Army, let every one be ready to march the next Morning by break of Day. The
Horse and Foot shall repair betimes in the Morning, under Plate V.
A Regiment of 12 Companies Encamped
Officer in Chief

Captains

Saba^terns

Soldiers

Sergeants

Muskets and Pikes

Profile for Trenches

Profile for Redoubts

their several Colors and Ensigns, to the place where every Company is to be
drawn up.

All the Companies being drawn up, they shall begin to March, and must range
themselves in Squadrons and Battalions, to be afterward embattel'd in the
Ground marked out by the Marshal of the Camp, or his Assistants.

The Marshal of the Camp ought in the first place to be exactly informed of the
condition of the Country through which the Army is to march; taking his
Instructions from the general and particular Maps of the Country, or from the
Information of the Country People.

He shall draw up his Men in Battel-Array, according as he thinks most
convenient, or as the General shall have given him Order. If it be through a
plain and open Country, which is convenient for the Cavalry, the Artillery and
Wagons, then let him extend the Wings of the Army, and observe the following
Order.

He shall divide his Army into three Bodies, that in the middle must consist of
three Thirds of the whole Infantry, drawn up in great Bodies and Battalions,
each consisting of two or three Regiments.

Upon the Wings or Flank of this Infantry, must be placed the great Artillery,
guarded by some Battalion of the Infantry.

Upon the Right and Left Wing of this middle Line shall the Cavalry march, in
little Squadrons, each consisting of two Cornets. The rest of the Infantry
marching in little Bodies, shall enclose between it and the Cavalry, the
Baggage and Ammunition of the Army, with some Field. Pieces; as may be observed
by the March represented in the Figure.

PLATE VII.
Of the March of an Army through an Enemies Country.
IF there be a Necessity to carry the War into the Enemies Country, either to
Besiege some place therein; or else for the Relief of some place already
besieged, whether the Enemy be beaten in the Field, or whether he still keep
the Field to put new Supplies of Men and Provision into the Garrison, or hinder
Provision from being brought to the Enemies Camp.

Upon all these Occasions whether he encamp in the Field, or Quarter in
Villages, the General must take care that the Commissary General of the
Victuals, and the Treasurers at War be diligent and faithful in their Charge,
in providing and furnishing the Army with Victuals.

If the Enemy has been routed, and be not in a condition to recruit, then you
may march as in the preceding Pages, whether the Country be open or streighter.

But if after a Rout the Enemy be rallied again, so that they are able to make
Head against the Victor, then it behooves the General to march close; and to the
end the Army may be in a condition to open their Passages and make their own
way, it must be divided into little Bodies. Plate VI.
Plate VIII



The Cavalry must be placed upon the Wings, in Front and in the Rear of the
Bodies. The Infantry must march in the middle, and in a gross Battalion. The
Artillery upon one side, guarded by some old Regiments, as you see in the Plate.

PLATE VIII.
General Directions for Encamping an Army.
WHEN the Camp-Master General, or Major General has read the Number of the
Horse and Foot that are in the Army, he must proportion and cast up what space
of Ground will suffice to encamp them with all their Provision, Carriages, and
so that neither for due Room the Soldiers be pestered, nor by over large Spaces
the Camp not sufficiently fortified.

This being of great Importance, it will be requisite for him to understand
well Arithmetic and Geometry, and to have in readiness sundry Plats and
Models, and Forms of Camps whereby he may suddenly resolve for any Number or
Situation, what Form and Quality is most convenient, and presently stake it
out; assigning due place for every Regiment of Horse and Foot.

Before Encamping he ought to consider, if the Army consist much of Horse, that
there be good store of Forage nigh the Camp, and that the Camp be not subject
to any Hill from whence the Enemy may with his great Artillery incommode it:
Nor that it be so separated from Water, that the Enemy may easily cut you from
it; nor that it be so low, as that the Enemy by cutting the Banks of any River,
may drown the Camp. And if there be no great Rivers, but only Fountains or
Wells of Water, then must good Watch be kept that they be not poisoned nor
infected by the Enemy. In a running or moveable Camp, the readiest
Fortification is to impale it round with the Carriages chained together,
bending the Artillery that way where most suspicion is the Enemy will approach;
and if time permit, to cast some Trench also without the Carriages.

PLATE IX.
The manner of Ranging a Battle in order to a present Engagement.
A General is sometimes constrained to a Battle when he is in an Enemies
Country, upon the false reports of his Spies; especially of such as play fast
and loose, receiving pay from both sides, which are a sort of People very
dangerous. Sometimes through the ignorance of those that command the Parties,
who seeking to get intelligence of the Enemy, never inform themselves thoroughly
of their March. Plate IX.


Sometimes he engages himself voluntarily, designing to relieve some place that
is Besieged. But what way soever it be, that he is forced to come to a Battle,
he must endeavor to order his Men after the following manner.

He shall range his Infantry in Battalions, every one consisting of five or six
hundred Men, or a thousand Men, which are the most convenient Numbers, with the
Numbers between, to form a just Body. For those Bodies that exceed the number
of a thousand, can never be drawn up conveniently upon all sorts of Ground; and
such as are under 500 will never be strong enough to resist at the same time
the fury of the Enemies Horse.

His Cavalry which should be always drawn up upon the Wings of the Infantry,
must be drawn up in Squadrons, consisting of an hundred and twenty or
thereabouts. But the best and those that are most serviceable to break the
Battalions of the Enemy, are those that consist of 150 or 200 at most; for if
they exceed the number of 200, they are not easily, nor conveniently drawn up
by reason of the length of their Ranks, and the number of Horses. And thus it
was that the late Duke de Schonberg Embattled his Forces at the Battle of
Montesclar, which he won from the Marquess of Caracene.

An Army which is Embattelled in small Divisions of Horse and Foot, is not so
easily routed as that Army which is Embattelled in great Divisions. And small
Divisions are much more ready than great: For besides seconding one another,
and wheeling upon all occasions, they will likewise outfront an Army which is
Embattled in great Divisions: The which is one of the greatest advantages that
can be taken in the Embatteling of an Army. Small Divisions of Horse and Foot
are also much readier for service, where you cannot Embattel them according to
the Rules of Art by the nature of the place, or with Enclosures, or where the
brevity of time will not give you leave; besides, small Divisions are much more
troublesome for an Enemy to deal withal, than an Army that is Embatteled in
great Divisions.

FINIS.
OF FORTIFICATION.
PART II.
Of general Maxims or Rules observed in Fortifications.
IN the handling of this Part I shall be plain, yet brief as possible.

1. General Maxim is, That all the parts of the Place, be of Cannon Proof
Flanked, i. e. defended from another place, which place is not further distant,
than the reach of a Musket Shot from the place to be flanked or defended.

2. That in all the Place, there may be no part of the Wall, or outside of the
Rampire, that is not seen from the top to the bottom of the Mote or Ditch.

3. That the Bastions are large, and full of Earth, and not empty; the bigger
they are, they are the more to be esteemed, there being the more room to
entrench in case of necessity: whose Gorge let be at least 35 fathoms, and
their flank at least 18 fathoms.

4. That the Angle of the Bastion or flanked Angle, be not much above 90, nor
much less than 60 Degrees, for in the former it would be too very Obtuse, and
open, at the Point, and in the latter it would be too slender, and so easily to
be battered down by the Enemies Cannon.

5. That the Angle of the flank may be somewhat Obtuse; neither is there any
more virtue in a Right-Angle, than any other, for the defense of the Fort.

6. That the length of an extended Curtain be not above 135 Fathoms, nor the
single above 80* Fathoms, nor be less than 40 Fathoms, to be well defended from
two Flanks.

7. That the Rampire be so wide, that so a Parapet of Earth Cannon-proof may be
erected thereon, and a Teraplane left, full wide for the Ordnance to be
recoiled.

8. That the Mote or Ditch be at least 20 Fathoms broad, and as deep as
possible. Now dry Motes in great Cities are to be preferred before others that
are full of Water, to facilitate the Sallies, the relief and retreat of the
Besieged; and in small Fortifications the Motes full of Water are the most
esteemable, because in such, Sallies are not necessary, and Supplies are very
much to be feared.

9. That the Parts that are most remote from the Center, be commanded by those
which are nearest to it.

10. That the Defense of a Face is much stronger, when the Angle made by the
Face and Exterior Polygon is a great Angle; this Maxim is so very essential,
that it will try the goodness of any Fortification whatsoever. Thus I have
described the Ten chiefest Maxims, necessary for good Fortifications.

PLATE I.
Of Cazemates.
BEFORE I give you the Measures of my Cazemates, I shall explain all the parts
of which they are composed.

A is the winding pair of Stairs to descend from the Rampart into the first
Cazemate, which is six foot high above the bottom of the Mote; And this is that
which I call the Great Cazemate.

B is the Great Cazemate seen in part by the Besiegers when they are lodged
upon the Level of their Paropets and Courtains.

C. Is the Paropet of the Cazemate, 3 or 4 fathom thick to cover the Cannon and
the Cannoneers from the sight of the Counter-Batteries of the Besiegers, when
they have either raised or earthed them within the Counterscarps.

D. Is a part of the great Cazemate wrought farther in, always covered and
defended by the Great Ear, and flanked Angle of the opposite Bastion.

E. Is its Paropet or Breastwork 3 or 4 fathoms thick.

F. Is the Magazine for Powder, Bullets and other Ammunition belonging to the
Cazemate, it must be covered and hollowed inward, into the solid substance of
the Bastion.

G. Is the pair of Stairs into the second Cazemate.

H. Is the second Cazemate that lies out of sight, as being about two thirds of
it, not to be seen by the Enemy, though they should come to be lodged upon the
Counterscarps themselves.

I. Is the Paropet of the blind Cazemate, 2 or 3 fathom thick.

K. Is its Magazine, made like the Magazine belonging to the former.

L. Is the third Cazemate not seen, and raised even with the Platform of the
Bastion. Upon this may all sorts of Artillery be planted, to shoot as well
above the Paropets, as through the Holes that are cut through the thickness of
the Paropet, which is from 2 to 3 fathoms.

M. The Draught of a Platform for the planting of Cannon, called a Cavalier
with its peculiar Magazine.

The Structure or Manner of making the Cazemates, according to M. Mallet:
I shall not here go about to entangle my self in a vain Dispute with those
that would have the word Cazemate to be derived from the Spanish words Caze and
Mata, as if we should say, A House of Murder; And therefore without more ado, I
come to show you how my own are made.

Suppose the Bastions to be drawn out in white lines, that the Scale be made
full the length of one of the sides of the Polygon; and that it be divided into
as many equal Parts as it contains fathoms, as has been explained. Then extend
the Defense of the Bastion AB, from 6 or 7 fathoms at most, from B to C, from
the Point C draw CD parallel to the flank BE, then divide the flank BE into two
equal parts, at the Point F to draw from the Point G, which is the middle of
the opposite Front AH the Line GF, to the inside of the Bastion, observing
where it cuts CD, as in I, purposely to carry on one fathom from I to L,
afterward draw the Line MLN parallel to FI, the length of which from M to N,
must be 11 fathom: That done, make NO parallel to the flank BF, the length of
which from N to O must be 4 fathom. Lastly, make OP parallel to FI, and then
all the void space BMNOPC shall be the extent of the Cazemates, as well of the
large Cazemates, as those which are more private.

To make the Shoulder or Ear of the Bastion, draw upon the Line of Defense PS 6
fathom from E to I, and upon FG 6 fathom; also from F to V and then joining V
and T together, you have the whole Shoulder or Ear FVTE which must be all one
solid piece. For the Paropet of the first Cazemate, you must allow within side
one Toise of height from 3 to 4 in thickness, with 8 firing Places for the
planting of so many great Guns, observing that the Paropets of the Cazemates,
more especially all that which is next to the Gorge, and lies always hid from
the Besiegers, do not require a length and thickness so precise.

A Ravelin is a Bulk of Earth almost like a Bulwark, cut off lying beyond the
Ditch for the covering of the Courtain, Bridge or Gate, and is surrounded with
Water, and separated from the Fortification by the breadth of the whole Ditch;
it is raised but a little height above the level of the Ground; toward the
Enemy it is built with a Rampire and Breast-work, but lies open toward the
Fortification.

PLATE II.
The Raising of Cittadels with five Bastions, which are built upon the Walls of
Cities.
WHEN Cities are well peopled, and that the nature of the Ground will suffer
it, it is usual to lay the Cittadels toward the open Field, to prevent the
ruining of the Buildings of the place; so then after you have agreed upon the
number of Bastions, as here for Example upon five to make a Pentagon.

Divide one Courtain of the City AB, into 4 equal parts, of which AC
comprehends three. This Overture being designed at the Point of the Bastion D,
draw the Circumference EFHGF that you may have the five sides of the Polygon
EIIHHGGF and FE putting the Point E directly where the Circumference cuts the
Center-Line of the place, which passes through the Point D. This will produce
two Bastions on the City side, and three toward the open Field.

This Citadel will be finished after the Ramparts, Plate II.
Paropets, Motes, Covert-ways, and their sloping Paropets are completed, as
also a Ravelin just before the Gate.

OBSERVATION.
Remember that you are always to throw down the Defenses of the City of the
City side, to the end that if the Inhabitants should happen to revolt, or the
Enemy to become Masters of it, they may not be able to make any advantage of
their own Fortifications, especially the flanks L and M, which must be ruined,
continuing their Faces in a Right Line, and sloping down the Ramparts to the
Mote of the Citadel, to the end she may be able to command the whole City.

Observe moreover, That there may be a great space between the Mote of the
Citadel, and the Houses of the City; for this space is of great importance to
prevent any designs which the Citizens may have upon the Citadel, as not able
to approach undiscovered, or without entrenching themselves.

PLATE III.
Of Irregular Fortification.
SINCE most Cities are of an irregular Figure, it is evident, what great use, or
rather necessity, there is of this part. I shall comprehend all the matter
briefly, but plainly in the following Heads.

First, Such Figures as have not their Sides and Angles equal to one another,
are called Irregular.

Now forasmuch as the Forms of Towns are so various and subject to so many
Cases, their Fortification cannot be comprehended under certain Rules, neither
can the Principles of Regular Fortification be exactly observed here; It is
therefore requisite that the Engineer make a Map or Draught of the whole, with
all the Ways, Passages, Rivers, Pools, Enclosures, and all other matters fit to
be known, and then consider what Designs and Works he shall think most fit and
proper for the place. To this end let him know,

1. That the same Laws and Maxims for Regular Fortifications, stand and be in
force, as for the Irregular; and that the nearer an Irregular Figure comes to a
Regular, the stronger and better it is.

2. That none of the inward Angles of his Figure be less than 90 degrees; if
less, then they must be changed, by making the Point, the outward Point of a
Bastion.

3. That the Angles of the Bastion be not less than 60 degrees.

4. That the Line of Defense, or side of an Irregular Figure, must not be more
than Musket Shot.

5. The Sides of an Irregular Figure, which is too long for two Bastions, and
too short for three, may be fortified with two great Bulwarks.

6. When the side is above 70 Rod, there may be a Ravelin erected between the
two Bulwarks, or a flat Bulwark built between.

7. When an Angle of the Figure is between 80 or 90 degrees, it ought to be
fortified with a Horn-work.

8. All the differences between Regular and Irregular Fortifications, consists
in the rectifying the Sides that are too short or too long, and altering the
Angles that are too little, by cutting off from the length, what is too much,
or adding to it, what is necessary, to make them in their just and true
proportions, as in the Regular.

More Rules might be given, but there being so much variety in this sort of
Fortifications, the Engineer must practice by himself, by drawing several Plats
of Irregular Places, and fortify them. And he should also peruse all the Books
he can get of this Subject, as Marolos, Fritach, Dogen, Dilichius, Travax de
Mars, etc. where he will find variety of Examples which will help to inform his
Fancy, and rectify his Judgment.

For the Raising the Ramparts, Paropets and other Works, you must observe the
same Rules, and proceed in the same Method as in Regular, and no otherwise.

A. Is a Regular Bastion, and here I shall give one Rule to find the Capital
Line in all irregular Angles, viz. At the end of each Courtain, as a^ e d,
cross an Arch at c and f. and draw the line c a, which shall be the Capital
Line, which may be about 243 Feet, a little more or less, and the Gorges may be
one hundred forty five or 150, Feet, or thereabouts.

B. Is a double Bastion, that is, upon the Plane of the great Bastion, another
Bastion is built upon it higher: This has the use of a Cavalier, and overlooks
the Campaign; there may be about 12 or 18 feet left between the Paropet of the
lower Bastion, and the foot of the higher Bastion.

C. Is a Bastion composed, that is, when the two interior Polygons are much
unequal, then the Gorges will be unequal.

D. Is a Bastion deformed, that is, if one of the interior Polygons be so short
that it can have no Demigorge.

E. Is a Plat Bastion, that is, if the distance from the Points of the interior
Polygon be double to the usual length.

F. Is a forked Bastion, cut off with a Tenaile, that is, if the Angle of the
Figure be less than 90 degrees; and because of Water, or some other Accident,
it cannot be changed, then you may cut off the Angle, and join it with a
Tenaile.

G. Is a Bastion cut off, that is, separated from the Rampire, so that its
Gorges are in a Right Line with the two Points of the flanks HF.

H. Is a Demi-Bastion, that is, such as have their Gorge and Capital equal, and
its flank half of the Gorge.

I. Is a Platform upon an inward Angle, for the placing of great Guns to scour
the Ditch.

L. Is a Mount upon Piles for a Corpse du Guard, with a Paropet, like that of
the Outworks, Cannon-proof, necessary to hinder the Under surprises when the
Mote is frozen.

M. Is an indented Line, often used upon the Bank af the Counterscarp, or upon
a River.

N. Is a Counter-Guard, or Demi-Bastion, built in some watery place before the
main Bastion.

O. Is a Scillen, or a Tenail with a Breast-work placed in the Mote, called
also a Counterguard.

P. Is a Bonnet, that is, an advanced Work, like a Ravelin, sometimes placed on
high Ground, sometimes on low.

Plate IV.
For the Constitution and Ground-lines of a Fortification, some things ought to
be known or given; The things here, said to be given, are those Data's, which a
skilful or experienced Engenier knows to agree best with the Rules or Maxims
before mentioned; and from these Data's, once ordered, the rest of the Parts,
in proportion, follow sure and determined, according to the Reason of things
given; for which use the Two following Tables are made, by which may be laid
down any Fortification required: The proportion of the Lines, serving for any
form, the quantity only for the Royal; the Numbers are Rhynland Rods, and
Centesmes of a Rod of 12 Feet.

First Table for the Lines.
Semidiameter. Pol gone Inter. Gorge. Capital Flank. Second Flank. Courtin Face.
IV 42 76 60 57 12 24 15 83 7 74 8 94 36 00 24 00 V 52 34 61 54 12 77 17 33 9 09
13 10 36 00 24 00 VI 62 39 62 39 13 19 18 71 10 07 14 02 36 00 24 00 VII 72 68
63 07 13 53 20 03 10 83 13 89 36 00 24 00 VIII 83 15 63 64 13 82 21 29 11 44 13
27 36 00 24 00 IX 83 70 64 10 14 05 22 99 11 61 12 41 36 00 24 00 X 103 38 63
89 13 94 24 07 12 00 12 41 36 00 24 00 XI 114 14 64 33 14 16 24 49 12 00 14 02
36 00 24 00 XII 124 77 64 39 14 29 24 85 12 00 15 22 36 00 24 00

Second Table for the Lines.
Semediameter. Polygon inter Gorge. Capital Flank. Second Flank. Courtin Face.
IV 38 4 53 94 8 97 20 01 8 00 06 14 36 00 24 00 V 48 8 56 53 10 26 21 03 9 00
10 58 36 00 24 00 VI 59 19 58 19 11 8 22 15 10 00 11 86 36 00 24 00 VII 68 47
59 4^ 11 71 23 31 11 00 12 03 36 00 24 00 VIII 78 60 60 31 12 16 24 48 12 00 11
67 36 00 24 00 IX 90 3^ 61 77 12 89 24 64 12 00 12 95 36 00 24 00 X 101 84 62
94 13 47 24 66 12 00 13 90 36 00 24 00 XI 113 38 63 90 13 95 24 76 12 00 14 63
36 00 24 00 X^I 124 77 64 59 14 29 24 85 12 00 15 22 36 00 24 00

For the Angles first Table.
Angle of the Center. Angle of the Figure. Angle of the Bulwark. Angle C F A
Angle A C F IV 90 98 65 12 30 77 30 V 72 108 72 17 00 73 VI 60 120 80 20 00 70
VII 51 25 43 128 34 17 84 17 03 22 8 34 67 51 26 VIII 45 135 87 30 23 45 66 15
IX 40 140 90 00 25 65 X 36 144 90 00 27 63 XI 32 13 38 147 16 22 90 00 28 18 11
61 12 11 XII 30 150 90 00 30 60

For the Angles second Table.
Angle of the Center. Angle of the Figure. Angle of the Bulwark. Angle C F A
Angle A C F IV 90 00 90 60 15 75 00 V 72 00 108 69 19 30 70 30 VI 60 00 120 75
22 30 67 30 VII 51 25 43 128 34 17 79 17 09 24 38 34 65 21 26 VIII 45 00 135 82
30 26 15 63 45 IX 40 00 140 85 27 30 62 30 X 36 00 144 87 28 30 61 30 XI 32 43
38 147 16 22 88 38 11 29 19 05 60 40 55 XII 30 150 90 30 00 00 60 00 00

How to Delineat any Fort, according to the Proportions in these Tables.
1. To make a Square Figure, a Pentagon, Hexagon, Heptagon, etc. Having no
Scale or Sector, then you may make a Scale large or small, as you design to
make your Polygon; dividing it into ten equal Parts, and every 10 th. into ten,
then the Scale will be divided into 100 equal parts, then supposing each part
subdivided into 10, so the whole Scale will be 1000. Plate 4. Fig. 1.

2. To delineat a great Royal, according to the proportions in the first Table,
take out of that Table the Semidiameter, or Radius, of that Polygon, which you
intend to draw; (for Example, an Hexagon;) which is in the Table, 62. 39. that
is, 62 Rods, 3 Foot, and 9 tentbs of a Foot, or 62 Rods, and 39 Centesmes of a
Rod, which take off from the Scale, and de^cribe a Circle, as 1, 2, 3, 4* 5, 6.
as in Fig. 2. Plate the 4 th.

3. Take off the Scale the length of the interior Polygon, 62. 39. or side of
the Figure, which the Table shows that distance, apply it to the Circumference,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8 or 9 times, as the Polygon is that you intend to draw, which is 6
times in the Hexagon; draw the blind lines from the Center, and through the
several Divisions 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and Lines from 1 to 2, and from 2 to 3, and
from 3 to 4, and from 4 to 5, and from 5 to 6.

4 Take off from the Scale, the Capital Line, 18. 73. as in the Table, and set
it off at all the Angles of the Ground-plot, viz, from 1 to 2, and from 2 to 3,
etc.

5. Take the length of the Gorge, 13. 79. from the Table upon your Scale, and
set it off from 1 to 7, and from 6 to 7; and on the two points 7 and 7, raise
perpendicular Lines, as 7, 8, and 7, 8.

6 Take off from the Table, the length of the Flank, viz. 10. 07. upon your
Scale, and set it off from 7 to 8.

7. Draw the Face from the uppermost part of the Capital Line d. to the
uttermost part of the Flank 8. and so for the rest of the Lines, they are
easily set off, and transferree from these, and so the Draught is finished.

Thus you may by these Tables, with a Scale of equal parts, delineate any
regular Figure, two several ways, according to the first or second Table, and
by the Rule of Three; these Tables may serve for any Proportions.

But these Data's may be varied without prejudice to the Maxims of
Fortification, and the Constitution of the Ground-lines will be various,
according to the Experience and Opinions of several Engeniers: Therefore I
shall show the Constitution, and making the principal Ground lines of any
Fortification, in several ways, use by other more famous and modern Authors.

And First, of the Dutch or German ways, who, although they have filled the
World full of Books, of several ways of Fortification, yet Maralois, Fritach,
Goldman, and Dogen, all agree, to make the Courtain 36 Perches, or 432 Rhinland
feet; the Face 24 Perches, or 288 of the aforesaid Feet, so that the proportion
of the Curtain, to the Face, is as 3 to 2. the Angle forming the Flank, is
always 40 Degrees; the Angle of the Bulwark is half the Angle of the Figure,
increased with 15 Degrees, Goldman, Marolois, and Fritach, agree in the Angle
of the Bulwark; but Dogen makes the Angle of the Bulwark, equal to 4 of the
Angle of the Figure; so that all the Data's are very near the same, with those
the Author has laid down before.

For English Authors, I shall only mention Mr. Norwood, who in his Maxims
differs very little from our Author; the Duich Fortification being then most
used. And Sir Jonas Moor, who was an able Mathematician, and well experienced
in this Art; after he had showed the several ways of all Modern Engeniers,
says, That the interior Polygon is most agreeable to Practice, being 1000.
to take 333 Feet, for the Capital 200, for the Gorge and Flank, and 600 for the
Courtaine, so that he agrees with Manassen Mallet, Author of Travax de Mars;
and, for a general Rule, take, says he, 1/^ of the interior Polygon, for the
Capital 1/^ of it, for the Gorge and Flank, where there is no second Flank, and
where the Flank and Capital stand at Right Angles.

The Emperor, Ferdinand III. sets down (as Schotus that learned Jesuit says)
an Universal way to lay down the Lines of any Fort, viz to divide the interior
Polygon into 22 parts; of these, take 5 for the Gorge, 8 for the Capital, and 4
for the Flank; or supposing the Polygon to be divided into 1000, the Capital is
363, the Gorge 227, the Flank 181, this proportion is good, and for such as are
not well skilled in Trigonometry, may very well be used.

Of the Italian Fortifications.
First, of Signior Pietro Sardi, who makes the interior Polygon 800 Venetian
Feet, his Gorges and Flanks 150, and determines the Face of the Bastion, by the
Line of Defense, razing which in a Square, or Pentagon, falls upon the 10 th.
part of the Courtain; in a Hexagon, on the 4 th. part; in a Heptagon; Octagon,
^Enneagon, on the 3 d. part, in all above on the half, to lay this down:
suppose an Hexagon, whose interior Polygon is 1000, then 187 will be the
proportion for the Gorges and Flanks, which prick off, from 4 to 7, and from 5
to 7, and raising a Perpendicular at 7, set off the same distance, from 7 to 8,
for the Flanks; then for the Face a. d. divide the Courtain 7, 7, into 4 parts,
and set off 1/^ from 7 to e. then lay a Ruler from e, to b, and draw a, b, for
the Face; but had it been Square or Pentagon, then 7 c. had been 1/10 of the
Courtain, if it had been an Heptagon, Octagon, Enneagon, then 7, e, had been
1/^ of the Courtain, if above 1/^ from the opposite Flank

2. Tensini, in small Forts above the Pentagon makes the Gorge and Flank equal,
and ^0th a 7 th. part of the interior Polygon, and ^e Face in all Figures one 3
d. of the said ^olygon. To draw this: Suppose a Hexagon whose interior Polygon
5, 6. is divided into ^000. the Gorge and Flank will be as in the ^able 143.
the 7 th. part, which set off from ^ to 7. and from 6 to 7. and raising 7, 8.
at Right Angles, set the same distance from 7 to 8. then take 1/3 part of p. p.
and setting one ^oot of the Compasses in 8. cross the Capital Line in d. and
draw 8. d. which do to every Bastion, till all be finished.

Of the French Fortifications.
The chief of these are M. de la Mont, and Manasson Mallet, both these divide
the interior Polygon into 5 parts, and take one for the Gorge, and also divide
the interior Polygon into 3 parts, and take one for the Capital Line; only De
la Mont takes ^4 of the Courtain for the Flank, and M. Mallet makes the Angle
of the Flank and Courtain to be 98 degrees, (leaving no second Flank,) and so
lays the Courtain more open for use, and yet not so much as to subject it to
ruin of the Besiegers.

I must not forget D. Ville, and Furneirs, who divide the interior Polygon into
6 parts, one for the Demigorge and Flank, both being equal, and at Right
Angles, if the inferior Polygon be 1000, the Gorges and Flanks will be 166.

By this Table following may be laid down any Fortification, according to these
Authors.

Capital Gorge Flank Courtain Fritach. 400 220 200 560 Dogen. 351 167 200 666
Emperor. 363 227 181 546 P. Sardi. 187 187 626 Tensini. 143 143 714 G. Maria.
125 138 750 De la mont. 333 200 150 600 Manesson. 333 200 200 600 Fren.
Conquest. 200 240 600 Furnoir, etc. 228 166 166 666

In this Table you have the Proportions for the Capital, Gorge, Flank, and
Courtain, supposing the length of the interior Polygon 1000 English Feet,
according to these several. Authors But if the interior Polygon be less than a
1000, the Proportion in this and the former Tables may be reduced to any other
Polygon required, by multiplying the length given by any of those Numbers, and
cutting of the 3 last places. Example. A Polygon given is 750, what shall be
the length of the Capital, Gorge, Flank, and Courtain, according to any of the
aforesaid Authors. For Example, to De la Mont. multiply 750 by 333, gives 249
Feet for the Capital, so for the Gorge, then multiply 750 by 200. and there is
150, for the Gorge, then multiply 750 by 150, and there will be 112 for the
Flank, and after the same manner 450 for the Courtain. And thus you may
proportion any of these Authors to any interior Polygon, which must not exceed
800, nor be less than 500, for if less, your Fort will be fit only for
Cittadels, or Field works, but if more than 800 Foot, too big for a Fort-Royal,
and must be well stored with great Guns.

I shall mention only Count Pagan's way which was once much approved of here in
England; he was indeed a great Mathematician, and well experienced by many
Campagnes and Seiges, he works by the exterior Polygon, and his chief
Proportions are in the following Table.

Exterior Polygon. the half. 1200 1080 1000 960 820 720 600 600 540 500 480 410
360 300 Length of the Courtain. 425 364 334 304 375 234 164 212 1^ 182 167 152
137 1^ 117 82 Length of the Perpendicular. 180 180 180 180 150 144 138 Length
of ^he Face. 364 336 308 288 242 222 200 Complem. of the Line of Defense 222
192 162 162 162 90

To draw a Fort after this way, draw the exterior Polygon C. D. divide it into
two equal parts at E. which suppose 600 each, and raise the Perpendicular E. L.
upon which set off the length of the Perpendicular in the Table, viz. 180.
which will terminate in the Point F. then from either Point D. and C. draw
Lines to F. viz. C. F. and D. F. then look in the Table for the length of the
Face, viz. 364. which set off from C. to I. and from D. to K. then (measure out
the length of the Courtain, viz. 212 1^ from L. to H. and G. or else) take out
the Compl. of the Line of Defense, viz. 217. and set it off from F. to H. and
from F. to I. then from H. and I. and from G. K. draw the Flank. Thus following
the same Method, from each Base or exterior Polygon, you may draw any
Fortification; but to fortify a Square, the Proportions must be altered thus.

Base or exterior Polygon 600 550 640 520 Perpendicular 161 146 173 137 Face
364 326 384 296 Compl 222 211 243 211

And may be drawn by the forementioned Directions.

Having now set down the several ways for laying down the Fundamental
Ground-line, from the most considerable Engeniers of this Age. I shall here
show how to draw out Mechanically, in the Field, any Regular or Irregular
Fortification, either from the Exterior or Interior Polygon, according to Count
Pagan.
And first, from a Pentagon to a straight Line from the exterior Polygon.

The Base, or exterior Polygon a. c. given, divide as in Plate the 4 th. into
equal parts in the Point b. from the Point b. raise the Perpendicular e. b. of
a sufficient length, then divide a. b. the half Base into 3. 6. or 9. equal
parts, and take thereof for the Perpendicular b. d. so is d. a Point, through
which draw the Line a. d. and d. c. which done, divide the Perpendicular b. d.
into 8 equal parts, and make d. h. and d. f. equal to 9 of those parts, then
from the points h. and f. let fall the Perpendiculars h. g. and f. p. till they
cut the Lines a. f. and c. h. in the Points g. and p. then join the Points a.
g. h. and f. p. c. and so you have a. g. and c. p. for the two Faces g. h. and
f. p. for the two Flanks, and h. f. for the Courtain of the Fortification,
Plate 4. Fig. 3.

From a Square to a Pentagon.
The Method of this is the same as the former, only instead of dividing the
half Base a. c. into 3. 6. or 9. and taking the thereof for the Perpendicular,
you must here divide the half Base a. c. into 15 or 30 lengths, and set off 4
or 8 for the Perpendicular d. b. and instead of dividing the Perpendicular d.
b. into 8. you are to divide it into 5, and of these parts, you are to set off
7 upon both the Lines d. f. and d. h. and this is all the difference.

Or note, that having raised your Perpendicular, take any measure whatsoever,
be it Pole, Staff, Line or Stake, and mark out 3. 6, 9. 12. 15. 18. 21. etc.
upon the Line a. c. to the Point l. upon which Point erect a Perpendicular l.
k. equal to of a. l. so is k. a visual Point, through which is to be drawn the
Line a. f. cutting the Perpendicular c. e. in the Point d. and e. a visial
Point, through which is to be drawn the Line c. h. then proceed as before
directed for the Pentagon; but for the Square instead of marking out 3 lengths
upon the half Base, you must here mark out 15 for the Line a. l. and instead of
you must allow 4 of those Parts for the Perpendicular k. l.

To do this by the interior Polygon, and that from the Square and Pentagon, to
a Right Line, let the interior Polygon given be A. B. which divide into 12
parts, and make d. e. 1/12 and a. i. 2/12 for a Square, and a. k. ^^12 for a
Pentagon, p. k. l. and p. i. g. right Angles, and proceed as directed before,
Plate the 4 th. Fig. 4.

Note also that the exterior Polygon should be about 1150 Feet, never less than
1024, nor more than 1280, that so the Line of Defense, may not be too short,
nor longer than Musket Shot, and that the Angle of the Bastion be not less
than 60 degrees; but where either the Situation of the place, or the old Walls
or Rampires of a Town will not admit any such equality either of Bases or
Angles, then the Engenier may either open or sharpen his Angles, or lengthen or
shorten his Lines as necessity shall require.

Plate the 5th.
Here note that the Encampment is figured with Paces, and the Profiles with
Feet.



OF GUNNERY.
Plates IV. V. VI. VII. VIII.
Of the Names of the Principal Members of a Piece of ORDNANCE.
1. Defin. A CANNON is a long round Body, either of Brass or Iron, formed and
made hollow by Art, and proportion, to offend afar off, with a Ball of Iron,
Stone, or any artificial Substance, charged with Gunpowder in its charged
Cylinder, which being fired, in an instant performs its desired Effect. This
Machine was invented by an Englishman, and first put in practice by the
Venetians against the Genoueses at Chiezza, Anno 1376.

2. The superficies of the Metal, is the outside, round about the Piece.

3. The Body is the substance of the whole Mass of Metal.

4. The Chase is the concavity of the Piece, in which they put the Charge.

5. The Muzzle is the extremity of the Chase by which you load and unload the
Piece.

6. The Calibre is the Diameter of the Muzzel or Mouth.

7. The Touchhole is that little Vent, which passes from the Unequal
Superficies, to the very Chamber of the Piece, made to give fire to the Powder
within; that which encloseth the extremity of the Chase about the Touchhole,
is called the Breech or Covl.

8. The Cascabel is the Pammel at the Breech or Coyl.

The Tunnions are pieces of Metal fixed unto the exterior superficies of the
Gun, on which he moves in the Carriage.

The Body of the Piece, is that which is comprehended betwixt the Center of the
Tunnions and the Cascable.

The vacant Cylinder is comprehended betwixt the Center of the Tunnions and the
Muzzel.

The Frees or Muzzel-Ring, is that thick Cornish which incompasseth the Unequal
Superficies, or the Piece.

The Dispart Line of the Piece, is the difference betwixt the Semi-diameter of
the Muzzel and Base Ring.

The Vent of the Piece is the difference betwixt the Diameter of the Shot, and
the Mouth of the Piece.

The Chamber, or charged Cylinder, is that part of the Chase toward the
Touchhole equally large, nor narrower in one place than in another, and does
contain the Powder and Ball.

How to know the different Fortification of a Piece of Ordnance.
In fortifying any Piece of Ordnance, there are three degrees observed, as
first, Legitimate Pieces, which are those that are ordinarily fortified;
secondly, Bastard Pieces, Which are such whose Fortification is lessened;
thirdly, Double fortified Pieces, or extraordinary Pieces.

The Fortification of any Piece of Ordnance is accounted by the thickness of
the Metal at the Touchhole, Trunnions, and at the Muzzel, in proportion to the
Diameter of the Bo^e.

The Legitimate Pieces, or the ordinary fortified Cannons have 7/8 at the
Touchhole, 5/8 at the Trunnions, and 3/8 at the Muzzel, of the thickness of
the Bore, in thickness of the Metal. Bastard Cannons or lessened Cannons have
at their Touchhole, or 12/105 and 9/16 at their Trunnions, and at their
Muzzel: The Double fortified Cannons have full one Diameter of the Bore in
thickness of the Metal at the Touchhole, and 11/16 at the Trunnions, and 7/16
at their Muzzel. Now all double fortified Culverins, etc. are 1 1/8 at the
Touchhole, 15/16 at the Trunnions, and 9/16 at the Muzzel, and the Ordinary
fortified Culverins, are fortified every way as double fortified Cannons, and
lessened Culverins as Ordinary Cannons in all respect.

How to know how much Powder is fit for Proof, and what for Service for any
Piece of Ordnance.
For Cannon take of the weight of their Iron Bullet of good Corn Powder for
Proof, and for Service the weight of the Iron Bullet is sufficient, especially
for Iron Ordnance, which will not endure so much Pow^^r, as Brass ones will
receive by in weight. For Culverins allow the whole weight of the Shot for
Proof, and for Service. For Sakers and Falcons take of the weight of the Shot,
and for lesser Pieces the whole Weight may be used in Service, until they grow
hot; but then there must be some abatement made at discretion, and take 113 of
the Weight of their Iron Bullet for Proof.

To know what Bullet is fit to be used in any Piece of Ordnance.
The Bullet must be somewhat less than the Bore of the Gun, that so it may have
vent in the Discharge: so Authors affirm, that of an Inch less than the Bore,
will serve all Ordnance; but this vent is too much for a Falcon, etc. and too
little for a Cannon; therefore I approve them not, but commend Mr. Phillips's
proportion (set down in his Mathematical Manual, page 165) to your Use, which
is to divide the Bore of the Gun into 20 equal parts, and let the Diameter of
the Bullet be 19/30 thereof.

Of the Qualification of an able Gunner, and necessary Operations before
Shooting, and in Shooting.
A Gunner ought to be a Man of Courage, Experience, and Vigilant; he ought to
have good skill in Arithmetic, to know the extraction of the Roots, etc. He
ought to have skill in Geometry, to take heights, distances, etc. to know the
Divisions and use of his Circle, Quadrant, and Quadret; to know how to level
and to lay Platforms, and to raise Batteries. He must know the Names of all
sorts of Ordnance, their Weight, the Height of the Bore, the height and weight
of their Shot, the length and breadth of their Ladles, how much Powder to use
for Proof and Action; the Shots Level, and the Shots Random; He must know the
Names of all the Members of a Piece of Ordnance; he must also know the length,
thickness and breadth of all manner of Carriages, and must know all the parts
thereof, viz. the Cheeks or Sides, the Axtree, Spokes, Nave, Hoops, Transomes,
Bolts, Plates, Drawing-Hooks, the Clout, the Hole for the Linspin, the Shafts,
the Thill and Thill-Bolt, the Forelock and Forelock Keys, Cap-squares, the
Forelock pins and Chain, the Pintle and Bolt-hole, Fellows, Nails, Fellow-bars,
Stirrups, the Ruts of the Wheel, Dowledges, Bed, Conies, Leveres, Handscrews,
etc. He must also know how to make his Ladles, Spunges, Cartridges, whether of
Paper, Vellum, or Canvass, and to have by him Farmeres of all sorts,
Sheepskins undrest to make Spunges, Powder, Shot, Needles, Thread, Paste and
Starch, Marlin, Twine, Nails, Handspikes, Crows of Iron, Granado-shells, and
Materials for Composition, Fasces, Budg-Barrels, Cannon-Baskets, etc. These
being general things he is to know, and at all times to have ready by him, and
he is more particularly to know these following parts of his Art, as,

How to Tertiate, Quadrate, and to Dispart a Piece of Ordnance.
1. To Tertiate a Piece, is to find whether it has its due thickness at the
Trunnions, Touch hole and Neck, and if the Trunnions, Touchhole and Neck are
in its due order, and the Chase straight.

2. To Quadrate a Piece mounted, is to see whether it be directly placed, and
equally poized in the Carriage; which is known by finding in the Unequal
Superficies of the Base and Muzzel-Ring, the Point which is Perpendicular, over
the Soul of the Piece, which may be found by the Gunners Instrument, called a
Level; an Instrument whose use is so vulgarly known, that it needs not my
Explanation.

3. To Dispart a Piece, is to fix, or elevate on the Convex-point of the
Muzzel-Ring, a Mark as far distant from the Cylinder, or Soul of the Piece, as
is the Point of the Base-Ring; to the end, that the Visail-ray which passes by
these Marks, may be parallel to the Chase, Soul or Cylinder of the Piece. Now
the Dispart, i. e. the difference of the Semidiameters of the Cornishes, may be
by a pair of Calliper Compasses attained, which found, place on the top of the
Cornish Ring, near the Muzzel, over the middle of the Inferior Cylinder.

To know how far any Piece of Ordnance will shoot, etc.
As to the several shootings in Artillery, Authors differ much in their
Judgments and Opinions, but they all unanimously agree, that the Ball being
shot forth, flies through the Air, with a Violent, Mixed and Natural Motion;
describing a Parabolical line, in whose beginning and ending, are lines
sensibly straight, and in the middle curved; In the beginuing the impressed force
driving forward by the Fire, the natural gravity of the Ball does describe a
Right Line, called the Direct Line, or Ranges of the Balls Circuit.

In the middle that force diminishes, and the Natural Gravity prevails, so
that it describes a curved line, called the Balls middle Helical or Conical
Arch; In the end, the Natural Gravity overcoming the impressed violence, (which
becomes altogether weak and faint) describes a new right line, called the Balls
declining line, in which the Ball tends toward the Center of the Earth, as
toward a Place natural unto all heavy bodies. See Figure 92. These motions are
somewhat longer, according as the Piece is mounted from the Level unto the
Angle of 45 degrees. which is called the Utmost Random. The Elevation of which, is
regulated by the Gunner's Quadrant, the use of which Instrument is so generally
known, and by so many Authors, fully explained, that I here crave leave to omit
it. But take these for general Rules.

1. That a Shot at Right Angle, strikes more violent and furiously than at
Oblique Angles; therefore Gunners use when they are to batter down a Tower,
Wall, or Earth-work, to shoot point blank at the object, Tire by Tire; by
discharging all the Pieces in Battery against the self same object, in the same
instant, holding it for a Maxim, that ten Cannons discharged together, do far
more Execution, than discharged one after another. Now at Oblique Angles they
shoot either Cross-ways, or by rebounding.

2. That the speediest way to make a Breach in a Wall, etc. Is by shooting at
the Object from two Batteries, which ruins far more speedily than by striking
the Object with one Battery at Right Angles, although that one Battery has as
many Cannon as the other two has.

3. That if you were to Batter a flank covered with an Orillion, (which because
you cannot possibly Batter it right forward) you must therefore of necessity
batter it obliquely, by way of Rebounding, thus: Choose a fit place in the
Courtain to be your object, on which you may play with your Battery obliquely,
so that by a rebound the shot may leap into the flanks, holding for a Maxim, in
this operation, That the Angles of Incidence and Reflection are equal.

Of shooting in Mortar-Pieces.
A Mortar-Piece is a short Piece, with which they shoot Bombs, Granado-shells,
Stone-Balls etc. not by a Right Line, but from a Curved, from on high, so that
it may fall where it should, be desired: Now this Mortar is placed in the
Carriage, (...)

Bombs are great hollow Balls of Iron or Brass, in which are put fine sifted
Gunpowder, which by a Fuse, they proportion to them a due Fire, that so they
may break as soon as they fall amongst the Enemies. These Fusees are small
Trunks of Wood, Tin or Iron, filled with a prepared Composition for that
purpose. Grenades are of the same form with Bombs, only smaller, and are many
times cast by hand, and are made of Iron, Brass, Glass or Earth. Now in order
to the well shooting in those kind of Machines called Mortars, it is requisite
to observe these following Rules: as 1. That before you make a Shot at any
place, you find the distance thereof from your Mortar. 2. That the Bombs or
other Bodies that are to be shot, be of equal weight, otherwise the Shots will
fail. 3. That the Carriage in breadth be always on a Level, and without any
descent, that so it may not leap in discharging fail. 4. That the Powder with
which the Mortar is loaded be always of the same force and weight. 5. That the
charge of the Mortar, as well in Powder, as in Wadding, be always rammed in
with blows equally heavy, and of equal number. 6. That the Wadds be always
either of Wood or Tompeons, or else of Oakam, for the strongest drives it
farthest. 7. That the Fusees be newly made, in those days that they are to be
used, and that they be made of a Composition proportionable to the Range that
the Shot shall make in the Air, so that the Bomb may break in the very moment
it falls; which Composition must be such, that though it fall in the Water, yet
not to extinguish, but the Bomb there to break.


Now before we proceed any farther, I think it necessary, to show how to
compose your Ingredients for your Fusee.

To make Fuses for Bombs, etc.
The Composition for. Bombs must be of a slow motion, that so time enough may
be given to throw either Bombs, Grenades, Fireballs, Thundering Barrels, etc.
They are compounded of these Ingredients, thus: Take a pound of Gunpowder, 416
of Sulphur, 416 of Saltpeter, well beaten, dry and sifted separately, then mix
it and make up your Fuse hereof. Or, Take Powder of Benjamin and small-Coles,
all well beaten and mixed together with some Oil of Piter, and so fill the
Fusee therewith.

Now the use of Mortar-Pieces, being for the most part to shoot up at Random,
therefore the Randoms of these Pieces is very necessary to be known. Therefore
I have hereunto annexed a Table of Randoms for the twelve Points of the
Quadrant, calculated by Diego Vffano Zutphen, and to be found in his Works,
printed 1621.

A Table of Randoms for Mortar-Pieces, to the twelve Points of the Gunners
Quadrant, calculated by Diego Uffano Zutphen.
583 570 534 468 377 248 100 6 5 4 3 2 1 0....... 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 583 570 534
468 377 248 000

Now suppose the Mortar to be placed at, the Pricks in the middle line
represents the several Randoms, numbered with the Degrees of the Quadrant,
forward and backward, unto which the several Randoms, are set; so you see that
the Mortar being levelled point blank, throws the Bomb 100 Paces, if the
Mortar be mounted one Point, it throws the Bomb 248 Paces, etc. until it is
monnted to the 6 th. Point, 583 Paces, which is the utmost Random. Now if the
Mortar be mounted higher to 7, 8, 9. etc. Points, the Randoms decrease again,
as before they did increase, as you see in the Table.

But in th^se latter Randoms there lies a great mistake, as shall be made
appear. For if as they are distant from the sixth Point, you make them equal
unto one another, then the Random of the 0 Point, or the Level Random, which is
100 Paces from the Mortar. Now it is contrary to all Art and Reason to think
that if the Mortar be elevated to the 12 th. Point, i. e. bolt upright, it
should shoot the Bomb 100 Paces from the Mortar; no, it cannot be, but
according to all Reason, the Bomb must fall down either on. or near the Mortar,
and not 100 Paces distant, as is most erroniously conceived.

The foregoing Rules and Precepts are necessary to be known by every Gunner,
who intends to be serviceable to his Prince and Country.

The Exercise of the Foot-Granadeer's, and Explanation, beginning with the
Fire-Lock.
OBSERVATION.
OBserve that Granadeers standing in a Body with Musketeers, must make only the
same Motions as they do, because they meddle not with their Granades, or
Bayonets. The Facings are here omitted, being the same with the Musketeers.

Granadeers take heed to Exercise your Firelocks.
1. Join your right hand to your Firelocks: as in the Exercise of the Musket.
2. Poise your Firelocks: as in the Musket. 3. Rest your Fire locks: as in the
Musket. 4. Cock your Firelocks, Guarding at the same time: as in the Musket.
5. Present: as in the Musket. 6. Fire: as in the Musket. 7. Recover your Arms:
as in the Musket. 8. Handle your Slings: With both hands turn the Fire-lock,
the lock outward, holding it with your right hand before your body, the Thumb
upwards, draw with your left hand your Sling quickly in an equal line, with
your Fire-lock to the left side, the Thumb upwards, standing thus till the next
Command. 9. Sling your Firelocks: Bring your Sling with your left hand just
above your right shoulder, at the same time bring your Fire-lock with your
right hand under your left elbow, bring the Sling over your head, draw the
Sling with your left hand in letting loose the right, that the Fire-lock hang
upon your right shoulder, with the muzzel up, and the butt end downwards; then
let loose your left, and let it hang down as the right hand. 10. Handle your
Matches: Bring both hands readily with half outstretched Arms before your Body,
about the height of your shoulder, at the same time, take with your right hand,
the lowest end of the march, your thumb under, and the two foremost Fingers
above, then bring it over the back of your hand between your thumb and your two
fore-fingers, then thrust out the left hand with the match quickly forwards,
letting at the same time the right hand hang down upon the bag. 11. Handle your
Granades: Keep your left hand as before, nimbly facing on the left foot to the
right, at the same time lifting up the cover of the Granade Pouch with your
right hand, take the Granade and bring it with an out stretched arm, in a
straight line with your left hand, your thumb against the Fuse, standing in the
same Posture. 12. Open your Fuse: Hold your left hand still, bringing the
Granade to your mouth with your right, open the Fuse with your teeth, and
thrust it nimbly from you to its former place. 13. Guard the Fuse with your
Thumb. 14. Blow your Matches: Bring up the Match before your mouth, blow it off
hard and quick, and thrust it at the same time to its former place. 15. Fire
and Deliver your Granades: With the left hand meet the Granade a little
downwards toward the right side, unconstrained, to which side your face and
body must be a little turned, fire the Fuse, bringing back the right hand a
little, with the Granade, deliver it with a stiff arm, stepping forward with
the right foot equal with the left, bringing down the left hand with the match
to the former place, letting the right hand hang down by the Pouch, so
continuing till the next Command. 16. Return your Matches: Bring both your
hands before your body, as in Explanation 10. Take the match, put it in its
place, then let both hands hang down by your body. 17. Handle your Slings: Take
hold of the midst of the Sling with your right hand, and with the left about a
hands breadth, from the Fire lock below, lift up the Fire-lock with the left,
so that the elbow comes through under the Fire-lock, lying on the arm and
shoulder; let go the left from the Sling, and take hold of your Fire-lock about
a hands breadth above the lock, let the stock come to lie between the thumb and
the two foremost fingers, your arms stretched with the butt* end before you.
18. Poise your Firelocks: With the right hand bring the Sling over your head,
and with the left your Fire-lock, and with half stretched arms mount it, the
barrel turned forwards, let go your right hand from the Sling, turn your
Fire-lock with your left hand, that the lock come outward, and at the same
time put your right hand under the cock, the thumb upwards, then thrust the
Fire-lock quickly from you, let go your left hand, and observe that your right
hand be equal with your shoulder. 19. Cast about to Charge: Take the Fire lock
with your left hand, a hands breadth from the lock, the thumb upwards, turn it
about that the barrel come outward and proceed, as in the musket. 20. Draw
forth your Bayonets? Take your Bayonet with your right hand, draw it, and with
an out stretched arm bring it before you in a right line with your shoulder,
holding the Bayonet, the thumb upwards, and the flat of the blade toward your
body. 21. Screw your Bayonets in the Muzzels: Put your Bayonet in the barrel,
turning about the guard toward you, that it may lie fast, and flat, take hold
of the muzzel of your Fire-lock with your right hand, the thumb upwards,
thrusting it with both arms nimbly from your body. 22. Rest your Bayonets:
Mount your Bayonets with both hands, turning at the same time, without resting
upon the left heel, to the right; as you face let go your right hand, and bring
it under the cock, turning the barrel toward your body, then fall back hand
and foot, and keep the posture shown in resting your Musket. 23. Charge your
Bayonets: Bring your Bayonet nimbly up with both hands; and bringing up of your
right foot, in which bringing up, you bring your right hand under, so that the
butt rest on your fingers, the the thumb outward upon the but end, fall back
with your right foot, charge your Bayonet breast high, in which charging the
butt end lies in a full right hand, and the thumb upon it. 24. Cast about your
Bayonets to the left side: Bring up your Fire-lock straight before you, with
the bringing up your right Foot; letting loose at the same time your right hand
from the butt, and bring it under the cock, turn your Fire-lock with both
hands, so that the barrel comes outward, then do as in casting about the
Musket. 25. Recover your Bayonets: Bring your Bayonet with both hands to your
body, draw it out of the barrel, hold it out with a stretched arm as before 26.
Put up your Bayonets: Put your Bayonet into the Scabbard, then take hold of
your Fire-lock with your right hand by the muzzel, thrusting it from you, as
has been shown. 27. Half cock your Firelocks: Bring your Fire-lock with both
hands mounted before your body, facing to the right upon the left heel, in
which turning you let go your right hand, take hold of the cock with your right
thumb and proceed, as in the Musket. 28. Blow your Pans: as with the Musket.
29. Handle your Prime^s: as in the Musket, only the muzzle held a little lower.
30. Prime: as with the Musket. 31. Shut your Pan: as with the Musket. 32. Cast
about to Charge: as with the Musket. 33. Handle your Cartridges: as with the
Musket 34. Open your Cartridges: Bringing the Cartridge to your mouth bite of
the top and bring it again to its place, holding the Cartridge with the thumb
upwards. 35. Charge with your Cartridges: Put it into the barrel, keeping your
two foremost fingers on the barrel, till the next Command. 36. Draw forth your
Scourer: as with the Musket. 37. Shorten them to an Inch: as with the Musket.
38. Ram down Powder and Ball: as with the Musket 39. Withdraw your Scourers: as
with the Musket 40. Shorten them to a handful: as in the Musket. 41. Return
your Scouerers: as with the Musket 42. Poise your Firelocks: as with the
Musket. 43. Shoulder your Firelocks: as with the Musket 44. Rest your
Firelocks: as with the Musket. 45. Order your Firelocks: as with the Musket.
46. Laydown your Fire lock: as with the Mus^et. 47. Quit your Fire lock: as
with the Mus^et. 48. Handle your Fire lock: as with the Musket 49. Order your
Fire-lock: as with the Musket 50 Rest your Fire lock: as with the Mus^et. 51.
Club your Fire locks: Keep your Fire-lock f^rm in your left hand, bring up the
right foot at the same time that the butt-end is upwards, and the muzzel
downwards; at once ta^ing hold of it with the right hand about a foot from the
muzzel, that the right thumb come upwards, and the left downwards, then let
loose the left hand, and ta^e hold again at the same time with a full left hand
an inch from the muzzel, hold it with outstretched arms against the left
shoulder, and bring it upon your shoulder, with the Lock upwards, quit your
right hand nimbly and let it hang down by your side. 52. Rest your Firelock:
Turn the ^ire-l^c^ with your left hand inwards, and at the same time take hold
with the right above the left, the thumb upwards, and the elbows in a straight
line, bring the same nimbly with both hands before your body, then let loose
your left hand, sin^ing the right hand and Fire-lock a little, and ta^ing it at
the same time with the left hand turned, both the thumbs turned one against
another, then loose your right hand, and turning the Fire-lock, bring the butt
end down, and rest your Fire-loc^. 53. Shoulder your Fire-lock: First poise
your Fire lock bringing up your right foot at the same time, then meeting it
with your left, lay it on your shoulder.

Take heed to make ready to give fire at three words of Command.
1. Make Ready: This is done as in the three first Explanations is shown at
large. 2. Present: This is done as in Explanation 4 and 5. 3. Fire: This is
done as in Explanation 6. and 7.
Take heed to make ready to Fire, and Deliver your Granades at three words of
Command.
1. Make Ready: This is done as is shown from Explanation 8. to 13. Inclusive.
2. Blow your Matches: This is done as in Explanation 14. 3. Fire, and Deliver
your Granades: This is done as in Explanation 15.
Take heed to make ready to use your Bayonets.
1. Make Ready: This is shown as from Explanation 16. to 22. Inclusive. 2.
Charge your Bayonets: This is done in Explanation 23.
Take heed to make ready your Firelocks again.
Make ready your Firelocks: This is done at large in this Exercise, from
Explanation 24. to Explanation 27. Inclusive.

FINIS.

