MVLTVM in PARVO, aut VOX VERITATIS: WHEREIN THE PRINCIPLES, PRACTICES, AND
TRANSACTIONS OF THE English Nation: But more especially and in particular BY
THEIR Representatives Assembled in PARLIAMENT Anno Domini 1640, 1641: As also
1680, 1681.

ARE Most faithfully and impartially Examined, Collected, and Compared together
for the present seasonable Use, Benefit and Information of the Public.

AS ALSO, The Wonderful and most Solemn Manner and Form of Ratifying,
Confirming and Pronouncing of that most dreadful Curse and Execration against
the Violaters and Infringers of MAGNA CHARTA in the Time of HENRY the Third,
King of England, etc.

All which is earnestly recommended to the most serious and impartial
Consideration, and perusal of all His MAJESTY'S most Loyal, and most Obedient
Subjects (the true Tory, Phanatick, and Bloody Papist only excepted) within His
Realms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories
thereunto belonging.

By THEOPHILUS RATIONALIS, a Person of Quality, and a most true Lover of his
King and Country.

LONDON: Printed for Rich. Janeway, in Queens-head-Alley in Paternoster Row.
1681.

THE Epistle Dedicatory.
To the KING'S most Excellent Majesty, CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God,
of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Protestant King, Defender of the
Faith, etc.
Most Dread Sovereign!
I Have presumed to prostrate the ensuing Lines at Your Majesty's feet, in
regard you are the only Person in all your Three Kingdoms, that is most nearly
and principally therein concerned. And I dare be bold to affirm (although they
are very high, proud and lofty words), viz. That if Your Majesty shall be
pleased, without prejudice, prepossession and partiality, most solemnly and
seriously to peruse the same, and will be pleased to take your future measures
accordingly: I say then, I am very confident, and fully assured (unless I have
no reason nor understanding remaining in me, but am delivered over into a
reprobate sense), That Your Majesty may yet be (unless the Decree be already
gone out against us for our total ruin and destruction) one of the greatest
and happiest Monarchs this day in the Christian World. Verbum sapienti, etc. I
have done my duty, and have discharged my Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy unto
your Sacred Majesty (whom God long preserve), and am

(GREAT SIR) Your Majesty's most Loyal, most Obedient, and most Faithful
Subject and Servant, to Love, Honor, and Serve You and my Country usque ad
Mortem. Theophilus Rationalis.

THE INTRODUCTION AUT LIBER ad LECTOREM.
STand off proud Rebels: Royalists draw near,
To see your Prince in the front, the Pope in the rear.
Let not the Pope affright you, nor dispose
Your thoughts to wander after Charles his foes:
The Center clears all doubts that shall arise
From Hellish Plotters, under a disguise
Of State-reformers; though at the self-same time
Both Church and State, their principal design
Is for to ruin: But still in Masquerades,
The Pope and Devil being chief Comrades
Unto these Hellish Monsters, who would bring
Destruction to your Church, confusion to your King.
Heavens bless your Head, with such as will now please
To guard him from such Sycophants as these;
Who doubtless will, by their inveterate hate,
At length prove ruin both to Church and State,
If not prevented by Gods liberal hand,
Under Great Charles, who has the sole Command
And Power to save you, if he will but call
His Council once again near to Whitehall,
And let them sit for to dispatch this Crew
Of Wolves and Tigers; Then will straight ensue
A lasting Peace 'twixt Him and People both.
I must conclude, to speak the rest I Am loath.
This Book it self will speak enough, to bring
Peace to the People, Honor to your King.
AMEN.
To all the truly Loyal-Hearted Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty of this Land:
The most grave, sober, serious, and truly Religious People, and most faithful
obedient Subjects unto his present Majesty; though called by the Nicknames of
Fanatics, Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, Arminians, Socinians,
Latitudinarians, etc.
ROwze Loyal Fannees, look well to your Guard,
The bold God-damme's are in your Rear-ward:
Pray do not budg, keep close within your Station,
These men of late have poisoned half the Nation
With bloody Tenets under a disguise,
To make you Traitors, and a legal Prize
The Sovereign Tree of Tyburn to advance,
Where Ketch their Foreman, must lead up the dance
Called Towzer's Mole-trap, and the Tories Gin,
(Now have at all) to catch poor Fannees in.
God help you now: They swear they will you kill,
Because of you they cannot have their will.
You have (say they) disturbed both Church and State,
For which they love you with a mortal hate.
And now they will hang you t'rid themselves from evil,
And send you packing to Old Nick the Devil
By some Sham-Plots. This is the only way
To slay such Rebels as have gone astray
So long a time from their most holy Church,
And now Old Nick shall leave them in the lurch.
Damm them and Sink them all, they shall not live:
There Is not a man whom our Great Charles shall give
To him his Life, If we may have our will,
This is the time to use our utmost skill.
We'll tell Great Charles, that if he now should spare
But one of these, all his three Kingdoms are
In danger to be lost; and with this hellish hook
We'll catch the Fish, and then how will they look
Like Sons of Whores, when Ketch shall them befool,
And mount them up upon his three legged Stool?
Courage, brave Towzers, Here Is a noble Plot,
Effect but this, the first will be forgot:
Make King and Council both to understand,
That damned Rogue Godfrey with his proper hand
Did slay himself: Our work will then be done,
And we shall shine like to the glorious Sun
At his Meridian height; and ever after
We'll break our Fasts with merriment and laughter,
To see what Fools we made the Tory Crew,
Who to the Plot did straightway bid adieu.
And swore to boot that we were innocent,
Of all the Impeachments which the Parliament
Did fasten on us, whom we have outdone,
Although as guilty as our rising Sun
Will show himself, when as he shall appear
Before his Equals, to bring up the Rear
Of all the Plots and Sham-Plots that have been
Contrived by us er'e since his Coming in.
Here stop you Helhounds in your full career,
These Loyal Fanns will make you quake for fear.
Their God above will surely them defend,
And bring your Rogueships to your fatal end.
Who then shall smile, and have you in derision,
For all your Libels, and your late Misprision
Of Treason on them; from your bitter Gall,
To make them Rebels to their Kings Whitehall.
But hark!
You shall be Summoned before the Council Board
Of the next Parliament, where a wise word
We shall not hear from you, only Evasions,
Lies, Shifts, and Stories, Mental reservations,
For to evade your guilt, which shall appear
As clear as Crystal in our Hemisphere.
When as bright Sol shall mount his Royal Steed,
To give us light, whereof we stand in need;
Heavens say Amen now; If it be your will,
When this is done, let Peace continue still.
This, oh dear Heavens, is now my plain request,
That so poor Fanns at length may have some rest.
(Bellum dat litem dat pax bona quaeque Deorum,
Vt tandem redeas, jain peritura preor.)
I am, Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, and well-beloved Commoners, Your
most Humble, most Faithful, and most Obedient Servant to be commanded,
Theophilus Rationalis.

Multum in Parvo, AUT VOX VERITATIS, etc.
THAT we are fallen into an Age wherein almost all sorts of Men amongst us are
still settled upon their Lees, there is none of us all so happy as to be ignorant
thereof; and how that the Judgments and Sentiments of Men (and more especially
in this latter Age of the World) are most strangely degenerated, biassed,
enslaved, and almost overwhelmed with pride, vainglory, hypocrisy,
self-interest (that great Diana and Goddess of this World), ambition, passion,
prejudice, partiality, faction, rebellion, the espousing of a party, Et cum
multis aliis, etc. And yet that which is most wonderful, and matter of
astonishment, is this, viz. That all these Parties, in general, or particular,
do declare and pretend, That as to their several Transactions in the World,
wherein they are concerned, and in opposition to the rest of their Neighbors,
is purely to manifest their great and fervent Zeal to the Honor and Glory of
Almighty God, and to promote (as much as in them lies) a most firm; exact, and
uniform Obedience (not omitting at all times their specious pretenses of their
steady and untainted Loyalty to their Prince) both in Church and State.

But how these Gentlemen, and specious Pretenders before mentioned; will come
off at the long run (for as we usually say, Finis coronat opns) without a
scratch't face, and a blot in their scutcheons, when as their several
Transactions shall be impartially examined and searched to the bottom, is a
kind of a pretty question to be started; and indeed it would be a very
ingenious and pleasant divertisement to any person that would make it his
business to study the point, and thoroughly and impartially to make an
experiment thereof.

This small Treatise (Courteous Readers) peradventure may give you some small
satisfaction, in relation to the premises; and it is more than probable, that
others hereafter of a more learned and more ingenious capacity, may take
example by this small and well-intended piece to enlarge thereupon, and farther
to explain what I have here succinctly intimated only for my own, and for some
others (which I shall forbear to name) present and seasonable satisfaction, as
to those grand Debates, Councels and Transactions which are now in the midst of
us upon the wheel, (and here I must beg, that the Lord of his infinite Grace
and Mercy would be pleased to send us at length a good issue upon them all)
both in Church and State.

This I thought requisite to cite by way of Introduction, and now will take
leave to conduct you somewhat closer and nearer to our matter in hand, Et honoi
soit que mal y pense); and herein we shall proceed in manner and form as
follows.

That we are fallen at present, not only into a degenerate, rebellious,
ambitious and stubborn Age; but in particular, into a very curious, critical,
and obnoxious time in that age, viz. Anno Domini 1680, and 1681, wherein (as by
experience is manifestly true) a man is almost made (though not in the edg of
the Law, but in the edg of some others who would be Lawmakers) a Capital
offender for some words placing or speaking, which peradventure may be very
good, orthodox and loyal in themselves, until they come to be scanned, weighed,
and interpreted by others in a quite different and contrary sense. (I know,
Courteous Readers, you are most of you, at least the best of you, able, and I
hope willing to join issue with me herein, as Attestators to the truth hereof).

But whether there be a fatality in these present years, as there was about 40
years since, which are bypast and gone, and all things buried (or at least
ought to be forgotten) in an Act of Oblivion as to the Transactions of those
(as we do usually call them) rebellious times; or whether this critical time
does portend good things to his Majesty of Great Britein's (whom God of his
infinite mercy long preserve for our peace and quietness sake) affairs and
concerns as to his present Government in particular; or whether of any good
consequence to the Subjects of his Three Kingdoms in general; or whether this
year the Lion and the Lamb shall not lie down together (according to an ancient
Prophecy); or whether His Majesty's just Prerogative, and his Subjects
Privileges shall go hand in hand together, I am not able to determine
(although some pretend to give a shrewd guess thereunto as to future
contingencies), yet I will hope the best, as being fully persuaded and
convinced, that the God and Father of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, who is the Author of Peace, and Lover of Concord; and of the Souls of
them who are willing under their Magistrates (whether Heathen or Christian) to
live quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty, will be pleased at
length to bring forth peace, tranquillity, and order, out of all our disorders,
animosities and present confusions. And herein let every true and Loyal-hearted
Subject and English man say, Amen.

But, however, this I am sure of (as being able to attest that truth in
particular), viz. That humble Petitions and Addresses to His Majesty of Great
Britain, this year Anno Domini 1681, is A-la-mode, and the very newest fashion
(and in my slender judgment and apprehension, is a very comely, decent, and
commendable fashion) since the Dissolution of the late Parliament at Oxford,
and His Majesty's late Declaration to all his Loving Subjects, and Ordered to
be read (by the Reverend Clergy of the Land) in all Churches and Chapels;
since which time Addresses and Humble Petitions have swarmed in a main, from
all Points of the compass ( viz. from Cities, Buroughs, Towns-Corporate,
Lieutenancies, Trained-Bands, etc.) as if they were resolved to storm
White Hall, VVindsor-Castle, Hampton Court, and His Majesty Himself (God of
Heaven preserve Him), with no other weapons than steady and untainted Loyalty,
and with all dutiful and humble Allegiance unto His Majesty's Government, as it
is now by Law established both in Church and State: And for the which the Lord
High Chancellor of England, in the Person of His Majesty, has given them all
his true and hearty Thanks for their so numerous and seasonable appearing at
this present conjuncture, in opposition to some others, who, it seems, have not
the good-hap with the rest of their Neighbors (sure it was by the malevolent
aspect and influence of some auspicious male-contented Planets), to form and
word their Humble Addresses and Petitions according to the pattern in the
Mount; and of these Loyal persons that had been of the forlorn hope, and had
marched in the front of the battle, and being weighed in the balance of the
Sanctuary (I do not, neither dare I say, in the balance of the Scriptures and
right reason), they were found too light, and for the which they have a mark
and a stamp put upon them by way of distinction (I had almost said like unto
that, Revel. 13.15, 16, 17.) whereby they are branded and stigmatized as
factious and disloyal Subjects (Sed affirmatis est probare), and are therefore
registered and recorded to be conveyed down by the Pens Militant to future
posterity, as persons disloyal and disaffected to the present Government, and
to all those Noble Emoluments and Privileges which our Forefathers never yet
saw, nor did enjoy (as some of the Addresses do most happily and emphatically
word it) in so plentiful a measure, as under the present Reign of His most
Sacred Majesty (whom God long preserve). The which I must needs say is a very
hard case to those poor Petitioners, and many of them good Gentlemen, able
Citizens, and Persons of Quality, who peradventure did all mean well, though
their luck was bad; and therefore all the comfort that I can give them in this
particular (in regard Solamen miseriis is a very acceptable companion), is only
this, That they would be pleased to consider, That if their hearts and hands
went together, and had no base, nor rebellious, nor factious design therein
whatsoever; and that they were conscious to themselves, that they did their
King and Country good service in their late Humble Addresses and Petitions
(although misconstrued and misinterpreted); That our blessed Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, when he was upon Earth (although the best person that ever
breathed in the common air), yet he could not escape reflections and hard
censures from his Countrymen the Jews, upon the like account: For some of them
said (and but a few, God knows, in comparison of the whole Nation) that he was
a good man, when others of a more dissolute and loose conversation said, Nay,
but he was a Mountebank, and an Impostor, and deceived the people; therefore
what shall we say to all things, but only Monstrum horrendum, etc.

But to proceed, and come yet a little nearer unto the matter in hand,
according to the Contents of the Title Page, viz. most faithfully and
impartially to examine and compare together the Principles, Practices and
Transactions of the English Nation (but more especially by their
Representatives Assembled in Parliament) Anno Domini 1640, and 1641. and Anno
Domini 1680, and 1681. (The complete and exact distance of time the Children of
Israel, the peculiar People of God, were wandering, rebelling and provoking his
Divine Majesty in the Wilderness, before they were actually possessed of the
land of Canaan): And wherein persons and things do now look and represent
themselves almost with the very same face (nay I had almost said with a
Ten-times more ominous, ill-featured, and dismal aspect than formerly). But yet
notwithstanding I can by no means apprehend the same dreadful fate and
consequence will ensue now, as did de facto in those preceding years ( viz. a
Nation wading and wallowing over head and ears in hot Christian blood, and
sheathing the naked sword in each others bowels, and appealing to Law of Arms
to decide the grand Controversy in those days, which so unfortunately happened
between the Commons of England Assembled in Parliament, and his late Majesty of
deplorable Memory, the chief Magistrate thereof), although the true Phanatick,
Tory and Tantivy-men of the Age, both in Press and Pulpit, do endeavor Might
and Main (and leave no stone unturned in order thereunto) to possess our
Governors, and those that sit at the Helm, with this vain, frivolous, and (I
hope) ridiculous belief. But, blessed be God, there are yet some few Wise men
among us, who are of the contrary persuasion, and can penetrate as far into a
Millstone as themselves, and who understand their black designs and meanings
herein well enough (and how that they would willingly, and with all their
hearts and souls be warming themselves at such a fire): And there is a just and
righteous God above, who will at the last (as he has in some good measure done
already) countermine, bring to light, destroy and confound all their Plots and
Sham-plots of this and the like nature whatsoever, and will make them to be
rendered in his own good time, the very off-scum, scorn, contempt and derision
of our English Israel, and shall be handled and translated down to future
posterity as the firebrands and principal fomentors of all our animosities and
unhappy divisions.

And here to come to a right understanding of those precedent Transactions, we
must make a Digression, and by a retrograde step take a transient view of the
many Precursors of our late unhappy Troubles and Revolutions, and which were
engendring and fomenting in the Body Politic from the time of the Death of
King James, until the beginning of those years, wherein by reason of a Long,
long, long Interval of Parliements (or rather as some would have it, a long
interregnum of two vital parts of the Constitution it self) our English
Monarchy (although the best and well-tempered Government, when the exercise of
the vital parts thereof be not obstructed in its due circulation, this day in
the Christian World) received for some time among us its Mortal wound.

And herein, as I would not for my right hand vindicate or justify any
Illegal, Unwarrantable, or any Tyrannical Proceedings of any particular Number,
or numbers of men whatsoever, and who were actually concerned in those late,
most dismal, and most deplorable revolutions; so, on the other side, I would
not altogether condemn all them who were then in the Vogue of the people, the
esteemed Patriots of their Lives, Liberties, and Properties, and the grand
Assertors of the Kings Majesty's most Legal and Just Prerogatives both in
Church and State; and those that are yet inter vivos of them, do most solemnly
protest and declare, That in process of time, Persons and Transactions were
stretched forth to preternatural Dimensions, and Diametrically opposite to the
primary intentions and inclinations of the House of Commons themselves; and His
present Majesty that now Reigns (whom God long preserve in the midst of us)
was pleased from Breda most graciously to observe, viz. That through mistakes
and misunderstandings, many inconveniences were produced, which were not
intended. And that the Long Parliament, so called (although there has been a
much longer since) had no design in the least measure in their primary thoughts
and intentions to shake off the Monarchy (although there are some particular
men at this present conjuncture of time in the Pulpit that make them to be all
King Ahab's, and that Naboth's Vineyard and Inheritance was their principal
design, although slily couched under the specious and godly pretense of Liberty
and Property; wherein I think they are true Tory-men indeed, and very
uncharitable in the highest measure), but only to prune and pare off some
Luxuriant and overgrown branches ( viz. Court Parasites, evil Councels, who
were great Favorites, corrupt Judges, and suchlike Sycophants) which had
well-nigh sucked (like so many idle Drones) the very sap from the root of our
most Noble, Magnificent, thrice happy, and never enough to be admired
Triple-Constitution.

And in order to the accomplishment of the aforementioned premises, I have
consulted several Authors for my best satisfaction, that are now extant, as to
the Transactions of those times, wherein, I must confess, I do find them at a
very great distance and opposition one to another, and very various in their
several sentiments and apprehensions, according to their particular
inclinations as to the merit of the cause on either side; wherein, by the way
(although with all due submission to the more grave, acurate and discerning
Judgments of the Learned) I do humbly conceive, some of these have erred too
much on the right, and others too much on the left hand; but yet as to matter
of fact, as to what was really done and transacted in those days, they do in
the main generally all agree. And among the rest I have perused one piece in
particular, which in my slender apprehension has avoided both extremes (and as
we do usually say, In Medio consistet Virtus), and has passed Scilla and
Charibdis without any danger of too much reflecting upon either side: Him I
have made choice of in particular, as one of the ablest Pilates to steer my
course through the Channel (whereby to avoid those many Rocks and Quicksands
which a man may suddenly run upon, if he have not the Conduct of an experienced
guide), and so God send the good Ship of Vox Veritas unto her desired harbor;
A Ship, though but small in bulk, yet pretty handsomely and tight built for
Public service, and I hope will be able stoutly to defend His Majesty's
particular Person and Government, by King, Lords and Commons, against all bold
Assassinates, against all crafty Incendiaries, against all cursed Achitophels,
against all absolute Monarchical Tories and Tantivies, against all
Blood-thirsty and Hellish Papists whatsoever, who would not only pervert, but
utterly destroy the present best established Government this day in the
Christian World, by stretching of it forth beyond its legal and due bounds,
proviso's, restrictions and limitations. And from such notorious and malicious
persons in grain, let every good and loyal Subject, and every true Englishman
insert it in his Quoditian Litany and private Devotion, Libera nos Domine.

The Title of that particular piece I have even now mentioned is, viz. The
Reign of King Charles: By H. L. Esquire.

London, Printed by F. L. and J.G. for Henry Seile, Senior and Junior,
over against St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet; and Edward Dod at the Gun in
Ivy-Lane, Anno Domini 1656.

And that the said person was not biassed, you may perceive by the Date
thereof: It was in the time when the late Tyrant Oliver Cromwell had assumed
the seat of chief Magistrate; and at that time of day to have dipped his Pen in
gall, might have been very grateful and complesant to that grand Usurper, who
having such a puissant and dreadful Army of well-disciplin'd, victorious and
well-paid Janissaries at his Command, made the Lion so impudently bold, as to
call our grand Charter of England, Magna Charta, Magna F. -- And in a small
space of time after that, it pleased God to snatch him away from us in a high
tempestuous wind, as an example to all future Tyrants who shall offer to
attempt the like boldness upon our fundamental Laws, Liberties and Properties.

And that you may be the better satisfied as to the impartiality of this
ingenious and fair Historian (what he was, or is, if as yet inter vivos, I
cannot tell), Pray do but peruse his Preface to the said History, and you will
find in his Verbis, in his own Apology, viz.

What Oblique Descants will come to Traverse upon this honest Narrative, I
already prejudicate. The fate of those who write of Times within ken, Time's
better for the History, than for the Historian.

For while they render truth more resplendent, they usually bring the Relator
under a cloud, whence the bane of all faithful Tradition, that an Historian is
rarely found, until the truth be lost: And what is History without its Idium?
Truth, but a mere Romance: And if so, what Pen will undertake the History of a
King? Kings in their Functions so nearly resemble the Divine Nature, as God
himself has styled them Gods. And as in many respects they represent it, so
also in that of Cyprian, though not in his sense, De Deo etiam periculosum est
dicere verum. Though as man they are within the incidence of frailty (for as
that Emperor said, Imperium non tollit affectus, Sovereignty does not proscribe
humane affections), yet their failings have been in former times accounted like
their Persons, so sacred, that to touch them, though never so tenderly, has
been esteemed Petty-Treason: But in King Charles (the grand concernment of
these Annals) the danger is counter-changed, and to exhibit in him any thing of
merit and importance less than a Nero or Domitian, many will not endure. And
these two extremes make my passage through this History, like that of Jonathans
to the Philistines, a sharp Rock on the one side, and a sharp Rock on the other
side. Which consideration has moved me to decline many things, otherwise
remarkable, and not commonly known, and to content my self with saving truths;
nor should I have adventured a modest Vindication of this King in some
particulars, (not reflecting upon the fatal proceedings against him) had not
the ingenuity of some eminently disaffected to him led me the way.

But if in relation to these perils I have been studious to bear my self erect,
yet in other concernments some will censure me for too strong a Biass.

Some will say, peradventure, I seem no friend to the Clergy; and lest my
silence should make this an Accusation, which is but a mere Calumny, I answer,
Churchmen I honor (no man more), and this I do for their Sacred Orders sake:
But if their Order be Sacred, it does not (I wish it did) make all such who are
initiated in that Order; too many of that holy profession are, ever were, and
will be Sacred in another, and worse sense.

The unsanctified lives of some officiating at the Sacred Altar, have been the
complaint of all ages. Read we not (to their shame) of the sons of Eli, whose
impiety made them abhor the Offerings of the Lord? Does not Chrysostom tell us
of some of his Contemporaries, who, had Canonical Discipline, been punctually
observed, should not have been permitted so much as to step over the threshold
of Gods house, were notwithstanding advanced to the highest grison of
Church-Dignities?

And if this Narrative presents some Ecclesiastics blameworthy, the inference
is fallacious, that therefore our times are worse than former, or that the
accrimination overspreadeth all: No, what St. Augustine said of some Enormitans
in his time, is no less true of ours; That though our Church had cause to
grieve for the blemishes of some, yet might she glory in the Ornaments of more.

And so much shall serve for my present purpose as to the former part of this
Authors Preface, Et si constristamur de aliquibus. Purgamentis tamen consolamur
de pluribus Ornamentis. Aug. Epist. 137.
wherein he does endeavor to satisfy his Readers, that he will carry an even
hand between either side, and steer his course aright; and so far I shall
endeavor (as much as in me lies) to write after his Copy: But yet where
persons are blameworthy, I shall not be Mealy-mouthed, but let them know their
failings and embecillities, until they give me better satisfaction than I have
at present concerning their Reformation.

And now to transcribe some of this Authors Narrative, concerning the Reign of
King Charles the First; so wise, so virtuous, so temperate, so chaste, so
learned, and so religious a Prince, and a strong assertor of the Doctrine and
Discipline of the Church of England against the Old Gentleman at Rome, and all
his adherents; yet that this Prince after his Death by the Pens-Militant,
instead of inserting this Parenthesis concerning him, (as they have done of
many Princes after their decease) of Ever blessed Memory, should be constrained
to counterchange their Dialect, and say of Ever unfortunate and deplorable
Memory; I must confess is so profound a mystery unto me, that I am not able to
search and penetrate into the depth thereof, and therefore must leave this (I
could wish I were not able to say so much by experience) most unfortunate
Prince (though of Ever blessed Memory in some sense) unto the searcher of all
hearts (and before whom all things are naked, bare and open), who works, and
wisely disposes of all things both in Heaven and in Earth, according to the
infallible and most unerring Council and Dictates of his own Will.

But to proceed in my intended design, to Transcribe from my Author some of the
particular and most material Transactions as to matter of fact in those days
(and should I have transcribed the whole, it would have been a new Edition of
the said Narrative, and would have swelled this small piece (which was intended
for no other in my primary cogitations) unto a very large Bulk, the which you
may please to peruse in manner and form as follows, viz.

King James surrendered his Soul to God (and his Three Kingdoms to his Son) at
Theobalds, Anno Domini, March the 27th, 1625.

And now it will not be amiss (says the ingenious Historian) nor vary from the
usual ceremony ordained to the body of extinct Princes, if I here represent in
brief the pourtraicture of this Famous Monarch, which I will do freely,
sincerely, and with a spirit which equally disdains to libel or flatter him.

In the style of the Court, His Character.
he went for Great Britains Solomon; nor is it any excursion beyond the
Precincts of verity, to say, that neither Britain, nor any other Kingdom
whatsoever could ever since Solomon's days glory in a King (for recondite
learning and abstruse knowledge), so near a match to Solomon as he: And though
he was a Universal Scholar, yet did he make other Sciences (their most proper
employment), but drudges and servitors to Divinity, wherein he became so
transcendently eminent, as he notoriously foiled the greatest Clerks of the
Roman See: Nor did his Theological abilities more advantage the Cause of
Religion abroad, than at home, they keeping the newfangled Clergy aloof, and
at a distance, as not daring to infuse into so solid a judgment their upstart
and erroneous fancies, no nor disquiet the Churches peace with Heterodox
opinions (by which it appears this Author and King James were both Calvinists,
as to their particular Sentiments in matters of Religion); A stout adversary he
was to the Arminians and Semi-Pelagians, whom he called as Prosper before him
(and so does the whole tribe of them ever since) the Enemies of Gods grace.

And as slender a friend he was to the Presbytery (here he intends in matters
Ecclesiastical, as to the form of Church Government and imposed Constitutions),
of whose Tyrannical and Antimonarchical principles he had from his cradle smart
experience; He was an excellent Speaker, the Scheme of his Oratory being more
stately than Pedantick, and the Expressions argued him both a King and Scholar:
In his apparel and civil garb he seemed naturally to affect a Majestic
carelessness, which was so hectic and habitual in him, as even in Religious
exercises (where the external demeanor is a grand part of that sacred homage)
he was somewhat too incurious and irreverent: He was indulgent a little to his
Palate, and had a smack of the Epicure: In pecuniary dispensations to his
Favorites he was most excessive liberal, yea though the exigence of his own
wants pleaded retention: Nor was Solomon himself more a Solomon, according to
the true notion of the word, which imports a man of rest, than he, selecting
for his Motto, Beati Pacifici, or the seventh Beatitude, as most agreeable to
his genius and natural constitution; He was studious of peace somewhat
overmuch for a King; in pursuit whereof, Virtue flew to a lessening, and (in
the opinion of many) out of sight, he incurring thereby the note of
Pusillanimity, very suspicious from his managing the Cause of the Palatinate;
for had not the thought of War been terrible unto him, would he so long have
endured his Son-in-law, exterminated from his Patrimony, while the Austrian
Faction (to his great dishonor) cajoled, and kept him in delusory chat with
specious fallacies? Would he in those feveral Negotiations of Carlisle,
Bristow, Belfast and Weston, have spent so vast sums, the moity whereof, had
they been disposed in Military-levies and preparations, would have Modeled an
Army able (when Hidleburgh, Manhrein and Frankindale defended themselves) to
have totally dissipated all the forces of the Usurpers, to have Mastered the
imperious Eagle, enforcing her to forego her Quary, and reinstate the
Paulsgrave? Would he so tediously have courted the Alliance of Spain, to the
very great regret of his Subjects, whom his Predecessor had so often baffled,
and whom England ever found a worse friend than enemy? What stronger Evidence
can be given in of a wonderful defect of courage?

As this faint-heartedness lost him the reputation and respects of his People,
so his heavy pressures upon them, and undue Levies by Privy-Seals, and the
like, alienated their affections, especially considering how those Moneys were
misemployed, indeed rather thrown away, partly in the two dishonorable
Treaties of Spain and Germany, and the consequential Entertainments, and partly
in Largesses upon his Minion Buckingham. Between this disaffection and contempt
in his People, there was generated a general disposition to turbulent and
boisterous darings, and expostulations even against his darling Prerogative.
And though those dismal calamities which after befell his Son, were ampliated
doubtless by a superfetation of causes, yet was their first and main existency
derivative from those recited grounds: Let Court-Pens extol the calmness of his
Halcion Reign with all the artifice of Rhetoric: Let them conclude the
Parable, and tell us, God gave King James also as he did Solomon, rest from all
his enemies round about; yet can they never truly deny, but that admired
severity had its set in a cloud, and that he left to his Successor a Crown of
Thorns, as being engaged to contend with two puissant Enemies: First the mighty
Monarch of the West, the King of Spain. Secondly the more invincible of the
two, an empty purse; For that King who has this Enemy to encounter, shall
never archieve any thing of glorious production.

The death of this Famous Monarch caused no other interregnum, than of joy, his
Son Charles being immediately by Sir Edward Zouch (then Knight Marshal)
proclaimed at the Court-gate, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland. His
first Act of Regality was to dispatch Aviso's of his Fathers decease to Foreign
Princes and States, his Correspondents, with whom he was in Amity. Next, he
took into care the becoming Obsequies of the Royal Corpse, which removed from
Theobalds to Denmark-house in London, April the 23d, was thence, the 7th of
May, conveyed to Westminster, and there inhum'd with the greatest Solemnities,
and most stately Ritualities could be devised.

Though grief had taken up the principal Lodgings of King Charles his heart,
yet did it not quite turn love out of doors: but he had still an eye to France,
and held himself concerned to let his Agents know he was mindful of the stock
he had going there; and to rear a firm assurance of his serious intentions, He
sent over Letters of Procuration for the Duke of Chevereux to espouse the Lady
Henrietta Maria; only he added this especial precaution, That those Letters
should not be resigned up until May the 8th, when the Celebrities of his
Fathers Funeral would be over; for he would not that grief and joy (things
incompatible) should justle. But these instructions (for what cause I know not)
were not in all points precisely observed: for on May the 11th, as others; and
the first, as we compute, six days before King James his Obsequies, the
Espousals were solemnized in the Church of Nostredame in Paris, the Queen being
given by her two Brothers, the King and Monsieur; the Nuptials past, the Royal
Bride prepared for England; and to wait upon her with the greater splendour, his
Majesty dispatcheth over the Duke of Buckingham, with the Earl of Montgomery,
and other Persons of Quality. May the 24th they arrived at Paris, and June the
2d the Queen (after the iteration of most affectionate adieux reciprocated and
interchanged between the King and her self), set forward for Amiens; where
being attended with a most Princely retinue, she was under the restraint of a
Magnificent Entertainment till the 16 of that Month; thence she dis-lodged for
Bulloigne, where she was to Embarque for England (the Contagion then being much
at Calais); there she found ready to receive her 21 tall Ships sent from her
dearest, with a gallant Convoy of the Duchess of Buckingham, and other Ladies
of Honor and Eminence to serve her.

June the 22d she set Sail for England, and Landed safe at Dover, after a
turbulent and tempestuous passage. His Majesty lay that night at Canterbury,
and next morning with joy incredible greeted his Royal Consort, and conducted
her to Canterbury, where the Marriage was finally completed; the Duke of
Chevereux, his Majesty's former Representative, consigning up his precious
charge to the King, etc.

I have heard some who undertake to mate all events with their proper causes,
passionately ascribe Englands Calamities to those Internuptials, and fetch that
ireful stroke of Divine vengeance upon his late Majesty, from his Marrying a
Lady of mis-belief.

Grant I do, that both England's and his Majesty's Sufferings may (in some
sort) be reductive to the casualty of that Match; but that there was any
intrinsic noxiousness in it, either as French or Popish, I am not yet
convinced.

The same time, while His Majesty was thus busied in his Amorous Negotiation
abroad, he plied as well his Interest at home; and while he Wooed his Royal
Mistress there, he made Love to his People here, by Summoning a Parliament;
that League being not more important to him as Man, than this as King; for as
Man is without a female Consort, so is a King without his Supreme Council, an
half-form'd steril thing; the natural Extracts of the one, procreated without a
Wife, are not more spurious than the Laws, the politic Descendents of the
other, without was commenced at Westminster, June the 18th. At first interview
it appeared under the scheme and fashion of a Money-Wedding, and, in truth, the
public affairs did then implore no less. Upon the opening the Parliament, the
King imparted his mind to the Lords and Commons to this effect.

My Lords and Gentlemen!
YOU are not ignorant, that at your earnest entreaty, March 23. 1623, my Father
(of happy Memory) first took up Arms for the recovery of the Palatinate; for
which purpose, by your assistance, he began to form a considerable Army, and to
prepare a goodly Armado and Navy-Royal: But death intervening between him and
the achievement, the War with the Crown is devolved upon me. To the
prosecution whereof, as I am obliged both in Nature and Honor, so I question
not but the same necessity continuing, you will cherish the action with the
like affection, and farther it with a ready contribution. True it is, you
furnished my Father with affectionate supplies, but they held no symmetry or
proportion with the charge of so great an enterprise, for those your Donatives
are all disburs'd to a penny; and I am enforced to summon you hither, to tell
you, That neither can the Army advance, nor the Fleet set forth without your
aid.

Consider, I pray you, the Eyes of all Europe are defixt upon me, to whom I
shall appear ridiculous, as though I were unable to out-go Muster and
Ostentation, if you now desert me; it is my first attempt, wherein, if I
sustain a foil, it will blemish all my future Honor.

If mine cannot, let your Reputations move, deliver and expedite me fairly out
of this War, wherewith you have becumbred (let it never be said whereininto you
have betrayed) me. I desire therefore your speedy supply; speedy I call it, for
else it will prove no supply. The Sun you know is entering into his declining
point; so it will be soon too late to set forth, when it will be rather not too
soon to return. Again, I must mind you of the Mortality now Regnant in this
City, which should it (and so it may, and no breach of privilege neither)
arrest any one Member of either House, it soon would put a period both to
Consultation and Session, so that your own periclitation necessitates an early
resolution.

In sum, three of the best Rhetoricians, Honor, Opportunity and Safety, are
all of a plot, and plead, you see, for expedition. Perhaps it may be expected I
should say something in way of Account of my Religion, as also of the Temper
and Tenure of my future Government. But as I hope I have not been guilty of any
thing which may justly start the least question in either, so I would desire
you to repose in this assurance, That I will in neither vary from those
principles, wherein I have been instituted at the feet of that Eminent
Gamaliel, my late Father.

The Speech being ended, the King Veiled his Crown, a thing rare in any of his
Predecessors.

Though denied it could not be, but this Speech was elemented of very rational
materials, and ponderous arguments; yet it did not cause such a precipitation
of resolution, but that the Parliament did descend to the consideration thereof
by degrees.

That which retarded the Debate, was this: They had in store by them two
Petitions; one for Religion, the other against Grievances; to which having been
molded in King James his time, and preferred to him at the close of the last
Sessions of the last Parliament, they (as yet) never received answer. They said
it was the ancient, and as they conceived, a most prudential practice, to
present Petitions at the Commencement of Parliaments; or so long before their
Dissolutions, as the King might have time to return a deliberate Answer; That
the same course they were resolved strictly to pursue, and give priority of
dispatch to those Petitions, before any other business whatsoever; which
accordingly they did.

To the several Heads against Grievances, His Majesty gave a distinct and
satisfactory answer, and promised largely upon the Petition for Religion; and
the better to draw on Supplies, he did audit unto them the several
Disbursements, both relating to the Army and Navy, that so all jealousies of
mis-employment might be removed; which produced so good effects, as that the
Laity gave him freely, and without condition, two Subsidies from Protestants,
and four from Papists, as a mulct from the House upon their Recusancy, and the
Clergy three.

This was upon July the 8th; and the next day the King signified, That he took
notice of the slender appearance in the House, by reason of contagion; and that
therefore having a tender regard to their healths, he declared his intention of
Adjournig them upon Monday next, being the 11th of that Month, which
accordingly was performed to the 1st of August; and Oxford named for the place,
which gave disgust to some Members of the House.

In this Sessions of Parliament was Mr. Montague questioned for Publishing
certain Books prejudicial to the Protestant Cause; for which he was ordered to
be brought to the Bar; to whom the Speaker declared the pleasure of the House,
That they would refer his Censure to the next Meeting; and in the interim, in
respect of his notorious contempt, he should stand committed to the Sergeants
Ward, entering Bail for his then appearance.

But Mr. Mountague had, by the cunning artifice of his Court-friends, crept
into the Kings service undiscerned; and the King signified to the Parliament
two days after, That he thought his Servants (whereof Mountague was one) might
have as much Protection as the Servant of an ordinary Burgess; nevertheless his
Bond of 2000 l. whereupon he was Bailed, continued uncancell'd.

August the 1st the Parliament met again at Oxford; the Divinity-School was
appointed for the House of Commons, and the Galleries above for the House of
Lords.

The 4th of the same Month, both Houses were called together to
Christ-Church-Hall by the King, where he laid open unto them his wants, for
setting forth the Fleet; but the Parliament, before they would return any
Answer, presented him with a Petition against Recusants, to this effect.

Most Gracious Sovereign!
IT being infallibly true, that nothing can more establish your Throne, and
assure the peace and prosperity of your People, than the unity and sincerity of
Religion; We your Majesty's most humble and loyal Subjects, and Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, observing that of late there is an apparent,
mischievovs increase of Papists within your Dominions, hold our selves bound in
conscience and duty to present the same unto your Sacred Majesty, together with
the dangerous consequences, and what we conceive to be the most principal
causes, and what may be the remedies thereof.

1. Their desperate ends, being the Subversion both of Church and State, and
the restlesness of their spirits to attain those ends, the Doctrines of their
Teachers and Leaders persuading them, that therein they shall do God good
service. 2. Their evident and strict dependence upon such Foreign Princes, as
no way affect the good of your Majesty and State. 3. An opening a way of
Popularity, to the ambition of any who shall adventure to make himself Head of
so great a party.
The principal causes of the increase of Papists in those times, and the
remedies proposed by the Parliament, I shall refer you to the Book it self for
your farther satisfaction. To all the several branches thereof the King, August
the 7th, gave such a plausible and satisfactory answer, as nothing could be
desired more.

One good turn, requires another: And as the King had given the Parliament
ample content by this Answer, so he hoped they would be as cheerful in
supplying him with Moneys, for which he earnestly importuned them, and more
especially for his great Naval preparation; whereupon ensued a great Debate in
the House; some were very prompt to give, without delay; some would give, but
in convenient time, but not then; others would give, but they complained that
the design was managed by young and single Council; that Sir Robert Mansell, a
man of singular judgment and experience, had declared against the Plot, and had
tendered to the Council of War a project of much greater advantage, and less
expense, which was approved by the Lord of Chichester; to the which the
Solicitor replied in the Dukes behalf, That the Council of War (for the
generality) much disliked the project of Sir Robert, and concluded upon what
was then intended; but the greater part agreed not to give, and to make an
humble Remonstrance, declaring the Causes and Reasons of their not giving.

Most of the Voters of this Remonstrance flew high, and impetuously pressed in
upon the Duke; some would divest him of his Offices, the Admiralty especially;
others of his Revenue, by resuming what he possessed of the Crown-demeans; others
demanded an account of what public Moneys he had been entrusted with. This
being signified to the King, he soon prognosticated of what quality the
Remonstrance would prove; therefore immediately in distaste, he determined to
Dissolve the Parliament.

The House of Commons were Resolved into a Grand Committee, when the Usher came
from the Lords House with that Message; and before they would permit the
Solicitor then in the Chair, to leave his seat, they agreed upon a
Protestation, which Mr. Glanvill stood up and declared to this effect.

First, To give his Majesty Thanks for his Gracious Answer to our Petition for
Religion. Next, For his care of our health, in giving us leave to depart this
dangerous time. Lastly, A dutiful Declaration of our affections, and loyalty,
and purpose to supply his Majesty in a Parliamentary-way, in a fitting and
convenient time.
This being done, the Speaker took the Chair, and admitting the Usher, he
declared his Message from the Lords concerning the Dissolution of the
Parliament.

Now had the King an opportunity for his Summers past-time, but that his own
progress might not impede that of his affairs, his Council were commanded to go
along with him. By whose general advice, two things were most considerably
resolved upon: First, That the Fleet should speedily be put to Sea. Secondly,
That a more strict Amity should be entered into with the States of the United
Provinces.


Several were the Descants of such as pretended to judicious censure, as fancy
and affection swayed the balance; some blamed the Parliament for not supplying
the Kings necessities, whereby the Fleet put forth too late; some reflected
finisterly upon the Duke, saying, It never was, nor never will be well with
England, while the Sea is under the Command of an Admiral so young, and withal
so unexperienced; others also made deduction from this miscarriage of Gades
Voyage, in reference to the King; that because Commencements do often forespeak
the qualification of future contingencies in the series and row of succeeding
affairs; they much feared this was but the earnest of some inauspiciousness
which would attend the residue of his Reign: Nor, among the rest, was Captain
Brett's conjecture vain, who told the Duke, That the Fleet was never like to
speed better, wherein there went a long Bag without Money, Cook without Meat,
and Love without Charity; for so were the three Captains named; and a great
default there was doubtless of sufficient pay, of wholesome meat, and unanimity.

The Michaelmas-Term was by reason of the infection at London, translated to
Reading; from whence the King, according to late Answer in Parliament, issued
out in November a Commission to the Judges, to see the Laws against Recusants
put in Execution.

This Commission was read in all the Courts of Judicature at Reading, and
withal a Letter was directed to the Archbishop of Canterbury, enjoining him to
take special care within his Province, for the discovery of Jesuits,
Seminary-Priests, and other Recusants, offenders against the Laws. It was, in
truth, high time for severe Proceedings against them, they having contracted so
much insolence, and presuming upon protection, by reason of the late Match;
that at Winchester, and many other places, they frequently passed through the
Churches in time of Divine Service, hooting and hallowing, not only to the
disturbance of that duty, but to the scorn of our Religion; yea, and one Popish
Lord, when the King was at Chapel, was heard to prate on purpose louder in a
Gallery adjoining, than the Chaplain prayed; whereat the King was so moved,
that he sent this Message too him, viz. Either let him come and do as we do, or
else I will make him prate farther off.

On February the 2d, this year, Anno Domini 1625, the King was Crowned at
Westminster with the usual (though I cannot say Magnificent) Ceremonies and
Solemnities.

The Coronation being past, the King prepares for a Parliament now
approaching; the last he thought was somewhat uncivil toward the Duke; and the
Delinquents (as he thought) must be made examples: Upon this account the
Lord Keeper Williams, soon after the Dissolution of the late Parliament, fell,
and his place was disposed of to Sir Thomas Coventry, etc.

On the 16th of this February, the Parliament met; the Commons began their
work, where they last broke off at Oxford, making Religion their first, and
which was their superlative care; recollecting what a full and satisfactory
Answer the King gave to their Petition against Recusants, and his Commission
issued out in pursuance of that Answer, appointed a Committee for Religion,
impowring them most strictly to examine what abuses of his Majesty's Grace had
occurred since that time, and who were the Authors and Abettors of the same.

The House of Commons being in expectation of some Discovery from their
Committee, at length Mr. Prin made a report of a Letter written to the Lord
Mayor of York, for reprieving some Jesuits, Priests, and other Recusants. This
Letter being under the Signet, a sub-Committee was ordered to search the
Signet-Office, and compare it with the Original.

These Proceedings inwardly much displeased the King, yet he smothered the
indignity for a time, though he did after intimate the same unto them among his
other regrets: And plying his more important affairs with a most steady temper,
he sent a Message unto them by Sir Richard Weston, to this effect, viz.

That his Fleet is returned, and their Victuals spent; the Men must of
necessity be discharged, and their wages paid them, or else mutiny will follow,
which may be of dangerous consequence.

That he has in readiness about 40 Ships, to be set forth upon a second
service, which want a present supply of moneys.

That the Armies, quartered on the Coasts, want Victuals and Clothes; and they
will Disband, if not furnished.

The Companies of Ireland lately sent, must speedily be provided for, else they
may be subject to rebel.

Lastly, The season for providing healthful provision will be past, if this
Month of March be suffered through negligence to elapse.

And therefore he desired to know without more ado what present supplies he
must depend upon from them, that so accordingly he might shape his course.

Instead of a supply to his Message, Mr. Clement Coke (Son to Sir Edward Coke)
a Member of the House of Commons, let fly this reply: It is better to dye by a
Foreign Enemy, than to be destroyed at home; and as if the Prerogative had not
been sufficiently alarmed by that expression, one Turner, a Doctor of Physic,
re-assaults it in these six Queries: 1. Whether the King has not lost the
Regality of the Narrow Seas since the Duke became Admiral? 2. Whether his going
in the last Fleet as Admiral, was not the cause of ill success? 3. Whether the
Kings Revenue has not been impaired through his immense liberality? 4. Whether
he has not engrossed all Offices, and preferred his kindred to unfit places?
5. Whether he has not made sale of places of Judicature? 6. Whether Recusants
have not dependence upon his Mother and Father-in-law?


This was uncouth language to a Princes Ear; but who can expect that in so vast
a Body and Mass of men, all parcels should take salt alike, and that no part
should have rancidity in it? Yet perhaps this clamor and noise might be the
rudeness of some few, newly admitted into that great School of Wisdom, the
greater part continuing (it is possible) sincere and loyal; therefore the King
sends Sir Richard Weston to them, requiring satisfaction: But the House was
flower in the work, than was agreeable to his Majesty's mind, so intent upon
some severe Proceedings against them. Upon this he called the Lords and them
together, and by the Lord Keeper, his proper Speaker, thus conveys his
displeasure to them; which being somewhat long, and afterward the Kings Speech
also to them, I shall refer you to the Book it self, Page 24, 25, 26.

The Commons nothing moved with those tart and vinacre expressions, kept close
to their proper stations, and by way of Remonstrance replied: the which you may
peruse Page the 27th of the same Author.

To the Remonstrance the King answered briefly, That he would have them, in the
first place, consult about matters of the greatest importance, and that they
should have time enough for other things afterward.

But the Parliament accounted nothing of so great importance, as a vigorous
proceeding against the Duke. In order to which, all encouragement is given by
both Houses to any who would inform against him. The Earl of Bristol vigilantly
listened for this call, and presently Petitioning the House, he might be
admitted to prefer an Accusation against him; His request is readily granted.
The Duke alarmed with this Petition, Plots amain (and high time) either to
divert or encounter him: He persuades the King to send the Earl a
Premonitary-Letter, framed as a Memorial, minding him of all the miscarriages
relating to the Spanish Treaty, and a Breviate of what became of his future
charge; and demanding withal his positive Answer, Whether he would sit still
from being questioned for any Errors past in his Spanish Negotiations, and
enjoy the benefit of the Pardon granted by the late Parliament; or waving the
advantage thereof, put himself upon a Legal Trial.

To this the Earl answered, That it became him not as a Subject to urge a Trial
against himself; but if His Majesty should call him to it, he would willingly
submit, being confident his innocence would mediate for his future favor: As
for the Pardon, he would not disclaim it, though he was confident he should not
need it for any Crime of Disloyalty to His Majesty, or Treason against the
State.

The King perceiving by this Reply the Earl resolved to persist, commanded the
Attorney General to Summon the Earl to the Lords Bar as a Delinquent, May the
1st. Bristol appearing, the Attorney told the Peers, That he came thither to
accuse the Earl of High Treason; with that the Earl said, My Lords, I am a
Freeman, and a Peer of the Realm, unattainted; I have somewhat to say of high
consequence for his Majesty's Service; I beseech your Lordships give me leave
to speak: The Lords bidding him go on: Then, said he, I accuse that Man the
Duke of Buckingham of High Treason: the Articles of his Charge you may read
Page 28. ut supra.

When the Earl had ended his Charge, up starts no upstart Lord, the Lord
Spencer, Is this all (said he) you have to say against the Duke? The Earl
replied, Yes my Lord, and I am sorry it is so much: Then quoth the Lord
Spencer, if this be all, Ridiculus Mus; and so sat down again.

Upon this a Crotchet took the Lord Cromwell in the Crown, and out he goes to
Mr. Richard Spencer, a younger Son of that Lord, and a great Zealot in the
lower House against the Duke: Dick, said he, what is done in your House to day
against the Duke? My Lord (said he) he is charged with no less than
High Treason: Tush Dick, quoth the Lord, High Treason! if this be all,
Ridiculus Mus.

This high and daring challenging by the Earl, prompted the Attorney to speed
his Accusation against him; which having Modeled into Eleven Articles, he
brought in the next day, Vide page 28. ut supra.

The Commons having presented their Accusation, presently after sent a Message
to the Lords, desiring that the Duke might be Committed; declaring, that it did
mis-beseem their House to permit a man so deeply Impeacht to sit in Council
with them.

The Court-party, who had nimble Intelligencers, understood this design from
the very first result, and plotted to treat the Commons with uniform
Proceedings; for at that very time Sir Dudley Diggs, and Sir John Elliot were
sent for out of the House by two Messengers of the Chamber; who upon their
coming forth, showed them Warrants for their Commitment to the Tower; but it
was resolved by the Judges, that by their restraint (no reason being given to
the House for it) the whole House was arrested, and a Remonstrance was made to
the King of their Privilege; whereupon they were released.

The Commons having sped so well, the House of Peers began to claim their
immunities; making an Order, that nothing should be transacted in their House,
until the Earl of Arundel were restored; upon which instantly ensued the Earls
Postlimination and re-admittance.

Popular disgust began now to break in upon the Duke, with such a running and
sweeping-tide, as drew along with it, by way of Concomitancy, the Peerage; nor
could his new Dependents and Allies keep the Balance Horizontial, and even
much less sway it; and because his fate must result from them, but not by
weight, but tale; the old Trick of the Council of Trent was thought upon, and a
new Summons of Persons former Confidents to the Duke (as the Lords, Mandevil,
Grandison and Carlton) into the row of Nobles.

But this project would not take; for the House of Lords found an ancient
Order, That no Lords created sedente Parliamento, shall have Voices during that
Session, but only shall have privilege of sitting among the rest; upon which
their suffrage was excluded.

This gave the Duke a taste (a bitter one) of their inclinations; so that
finding but small favor to trust to, he magnanimously stood upon his
Justification. And having his defense to his contentment, June the 8th, 1626,
he presented it to the Lords; who upon receipt thereof, sequestered him from
sitting any more as a Peer of the House, until his Cause was determined;
whereupon he went away much dejected.

The Dukes Defense, and the Commons Impeachment being long, I shall not here
insert, but refer you to the Annals it self, from whom I do transcribe this
small Narrative.

This weighty Cause was managed by six Gentlemen, viz. Mr. Glanvil, Mr. Seldom,
Mr. Pim, Mr. VVansford, Mr. Sherland, to whom was added Sir Dudley Diggs as
Foreman and Prolocutor, and Sir John Elliot to bring up the rear.

Sir Dudley Diggs his Prologue, for the extraordinary Elegancy of the frame,
and conciseness of his Metaphors, I shall crave leave to insert as it was
delivered unto the Lords before the Gentlemen of the House of Commons did
present the 13 Grievances, expressly this.

My LORDS,
THere are so many things of great importance to be said in a very little time
this day, that I conceive it will not be unacceptable unto your Lordships, if
(setting aside all Rhetorical affectations) I only in plain Country language,
humbly pray your Lordships favor to include many excuses, necessary to my many
infirmities.

In this one word, I am commanded by the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the
Commons House to present unto your Lordships their most affectionate Thanks for
your ready condescending to this Conference; which out of confidence in your
great Wisdoms, and approved Justice for the service of his Majesty, and the
welfare of this Realm, they desired upon this occasion.

The House of Commons, by a fatal and universal concurrence of Complaints from
all the Seabordering parts of this Kingdom, did find a great and grievous
interruption and stop of Trade and Traffic: The base Pirates of Sally
ignominiously infesting our Coasts; taking our Ships and Goods, and leading
away the Subjects of this Kingdom into Barbarous Captivity, while to our shame,
and hinderance of Commerce, our Enemies did (as it were) Besiege our Ports, and
Block up our best Rivers Mouths, our Friends on slight pretenses made Embargoes
of our Merchants Goods, and every Nation (upon the least occasion) was ready to
contemn and slight us: So great was the apparent diminution of the ancient
Honor of this Crown, and once strong reputation of our Nation; wherewith the
Commons were more troubled, calling to remembrance, how formerly in France, in
Spain, in Holland, and everywhere by Sea and Land, the Valors of this Kingdom
had been better valued; and even in latter times, within remembrance, when we
had no Alliance with France, none in Denmark, none in Germany, no Friend in
Italy, in Scotland, to say no more, united Ireland, not settled in peace, and
much less security at home; when Spain was as ambitious as it is now under a
King ( Philip the Second) they called their Wisest; the House of Austria as
great and Potent, and both strengthened with a Malicious League in France of
persons ill-affected, when the Low Countries had no being; yet by constant
Councels, and Old English ways, even then that Spanish pride was cooled, that
greatness of the House of Austria, so formidable to us now, was well resisted,
and to the United Provinces of the Low Countries, such a beginning, growth and
strength was given, as gave us Honor over all the Christian World.

The Commons therefore wondering at the evils which they suffered, debating of
the causes of them, found they were many, drawn like one Line to one
Circumference of Decay of Trade and Strength, of Honor and Reputation, in this
Kingdom, which as in one Center, met in one great man, the cause of all, whom I
am here to name, the Duke of Buckingham.

Here Sir Dudley Diggs made a stand, as wondering to see the Duke present; yet
he took the Roll, and read the Preamble to the Charge, with the Duke's Titles,
which I shall here, for the Readers Satisfaction, insert, and so proceed.

For the speedy Redress of the great evils and mischiefs, The Preamble to the
Impeachment against the Duke of Buckingham.
and of the chief causes of those evils and mischiefs, which this Kingdom of
England now grievously suffers, and of late years has suffered, and to the
honor and safety of our Sovereign Lord the King, and of his Crown and
Dignities, and to the good and welfare of his People; The Commons in this
present Parliament, by the Authority of our Sovereign Lord the King assembled,
do by this their Bill, show and declare against George, Duke, Marquess, and
Earl of Buckingham, Earl of Coventry, Viscount Villers, Baron of Whaddon, Great
Admiral of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and of the Principality of
Wales, and of the Dominions and Islands of the same; of the Town of Calais, and
of the Marches of the same, and of Normandy, Gascoin, and Guyen: General
Governor of the Seas and Ships of the said Kingdoms, Lieutenant General,
Admiral, Captain General, and Governor of his Majesty's Royal Fleet and Armado,
lately set forth. Master of the Horse of our Sovereign Lord the King, Lord
Warden, Chancellor, and Admiral of the Cinque Ports, and of the Members
thereof, Constable of Dover-Castle, Justice in Air of all Forests and Chases
on this side of the River of Trent, Constable of the Castle of Windsor,
Lieutenant of Middlesex and Buckinghamshire, Steward and Bailiff of
Westminster, Gentleman of his Majesty's Bedchamber, and one of his Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council, in his Realms both of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter.

The Misdemeanors, Misprisions, Offenses, Crimes, and other matters comprised
in the Articles following: And him the said Duke do Accuse and Impeach of the
said Misdemeanors, Misprisions, Offenses and Crimes.

And now my Lords,
This lofty Title of this mighty man, methinks does raise my Spirits to speak
with a Paulo majora canamus; and let it not displease your Lordships, if for
Foundation I compare the beautiful Structure and fair Composition of this
Monarchy, wherein we live, to the great work of God, viz. the World it self, in
which the solid Body of incorporated Earth and Sea, as I conceive in regard of
our Husbandry, Manufactures, and Commerce by Land and Sea, may well resemble us
the Commons; and as it is encompassed with Air and Fire, and Spheres Celestial
of Planets, and a Firmament of fixed Stars, all which receive their heat,
light, and life, from one great glorious Sun, even like the King our Sovereign,
so that Firmament of fixed Stars I take to be your Lordships; those Planets,
the great Officers of the Kingdom; that pure Element of Fire, the most
Religious, Zealous, and Pious Clergy; and the Reverend Judges, Magistrates, and
Ministers of Law and Justice, the Air wherein we breathe, all which encompast
round with cherishing, comfort this Body of the Commons, who truly labor for
them all; and though they be the Footstool and the lowest, yet may well be said
to be the settled Center of the State.

Now (my Lords) if that glorious Sun by his powerful Beams of Grace and Favor,
shall draw from the bowels of this Earth an Exhalation, that shall fire, and
burn, and shine out like a Star, it needs not be marvell'd at, if the poor
Commons gaze and wonder at the Comet, when they feel the effects, and impute
all to the corruptible matter thereof: But if such an imperfect Meteor appear,
like that in the last Age, in the Chair of Casiopea, among the fixed Stars
themselves, where Aristotle and the old Philosophers conceived there was no
place for such corruption; The Meteor in 1680. is worth your observation upon
this very account.
then as the learned Mathematicians were troubled to observe the irregular
motions, the prodigious magnitude, and the ominous Prognostics of that Meteor,
so the Commons when they see such a Blazing-Star in course so exorbitant in the
affairs of this Commonwealth, cannot but look up upon it, and for want of
Perspectives commend the nearer examination to your Lordships, who may behold
it at a better distance. Such a prodigious Comet the Commons take this Duke of
Buckingham to be, And so the Commons do the Duke of York now, and cum multis
aliis, etc. Anno Domini, 1680 and 1681. and will doubtless several more, when
they shall meet and sit to redress the present Grievances of the Nation.
against whom and his irregular ways, there are by learned Gentlemen legal
Articles of Charge to be delivered to your Lordships, which I am generally
first commanded to lay open,

First, The Offices of this Kingdom, that are the Eyes, the Ears, and the Hands
of this Commonwealth, these have been engrossed, bought, and sold, and many of
the greatest of them holden even in the Dukes own hands, which severally and
apart, gave in former times and ages sufficient content to the greatest
Favorites, and were work enough for the wisest Counselors: By means whereof
what strange abuses, what infinite neglects have followed? The Seas have been
unguarded, Trade disturbed, Merchants oppressed, their Ships, and even one of
the Navy Royal by cunning practice, delivered over into foreign hands, and
contrary to our good Kings intention, employed to the prejudice (I had almost
said to the ruin) of Friends of our own Religion.

Next Honors (those most precious Jewels of the Crown) a Treasure inestimable,
wherewith your Noble Ancestors (my Lords) were well rewarded for eminent and
public service in the Commonwealth at home, for brave exploits abroad, when
covered all with dust and blood, they sweat in service for the honor of this
Crown: What back-ways, what by-ways have been by this Duke found out, is too
well known to your Lordships; whereas it was anciently the honor of England
(as among the Romans) the way to the Temple of Honor was through the Temple of
Virtue: But I am commanded to press this no further, than to let your Lordships
know, one Instance may (perhaps) be given of some one Lord, compelled to
purchase Honor.

Thirdly, as diverse of the Dukes poor Kindred have been raised to great
honors, which have been and are likely to be more chargeable and burdensome to
the Crown; so the Lands, and Revenues, and Treasuries of his Majesty have been
intercepted, and exhausted by this Duke and his Friends, and strangely
misemployed with strange confusion of the Accounts, and overthrow of the
well-established ancient Orders of his Majesty's Exchequer.

The last of the Charges which are prepared, will be an injury offered to the
Person of the late King of blessed memory, who is with God, of which (as your
Lordships may have heard heretofore) you shall anon have farther information.
Now upon this occasion, I am commanded by the Commons, to take care of the
honor of the King our Sovereign that lives (long may he live to our comfort
and the good of the Christian world) and also of his blessed Father who is
dead, on whom to the grief of the Commons and their great distaste, the Lord
Duke did, they conceive, unworthily cast some ill ordure of his own foul ways.
Whereas Servants were anciently wont to bear (as in truth they ought) theit
Masters faults, and not cast their own on them undeservedly.

It is well known the King (who is with God) had the same power and the same
wisdom before he knew this Duke; yea and the same affections too, through which
(as a good and gracious Master) he advanced and raised some Stars of your
Lordships Firmament, in whose hands this exorbitancy of Will, this
transcendency of Power, such placing and misplacing of Officers, such irregular
running into all by courses of the Planets, such sole and single managing of
the great affairs of State, was never heard of.

And therefore only to the Lord Duke, and his own procurement, by
mis-informations, these faults complained of by the Commons, are to be imputed.

And whereas for our most gracious Sovereign that lives, whose Name has been
used, and may perhaps now be for the Dukes Justification: The Commons know
well, that among his Majesty's most Royal Virtues, his Piety unto his Father,
has made him a pious nourisher of his Affections ever to this Lord Duke, on
whom out of that consideration his Majesty has wrought a kind of wonder,
making Favor hereditary. But the abuse thereof must be the Lord Dukes own; and
if there have been any commands, such as were or may pretend, his
misinformations have procured them; whereas the Laws of England teach us, that
Kings cannot command ill or unawful things whenever they speak, though by their
Letters Patents or their Seals: If the thing be evil, these Letters Patents are
void; and whatsoever ill event succeeds, the Executioners of such Commands must
ever answer for them.

Thus, my Lords, in performance of my duty, my weakness has been troublesome
unto your Lordships. It is now high time humbly to entreat your pardon, and to
give way to a Learned Gentleman to begin against him a more particular Charge.

Sir Dudley Diggs his Prologue being ended, the Impeachment of the Commons it
self was next read; the which, if you please, you may peruse Page 40. in the
said Narrative before mentioned; with the Dukes Answer, Defense and Reply to
every particular Article thereof.

The Answer of the Duke to his Impeachment, was a kind of a new Grievance to
his Adversaries; for it being contrived, and so inlaid with modesty and
humility, it was like to have a powerful influence toward the conversion of
many, who expected a Defense of another and more disdainful spirit. Again, it
seemed to instate him in impunity; and the Commons having charged him as they
thought, through and through, loath they were to fall short of Victory: And now
having pursued him with such vehemence, thought themselves worsted, should he
now at the last make a saving game of it; wherefore resolved they were to ply
him with a speedy Reply: But while they were hammering of it, the King sent
them a Letter, demanding, without farther delay, their speedy producing their
Bill of Subsidy to be passed; to which, to prevent their Dissolution, they
immediately conformed. But first they had drawn up a Declaration of the same
make and mind with their former Impeachment, of the miserable estate of this
Kingdom, and not without some high Contests it was allowed by the House before
the Bill of Subsidy: Whereupon his Majesty was so exceedingly incensed, King
Charles his Second Parliament Dissolved.
as on the very next day, June the 5th, he Dissolved the Assembly, though the
Lords sent four of their House unto him, beseeching him most earnestly, that he
would permit them to sit but two days longer; but he answered, Not a Minute.

The same afternoon the Earl of Bristol, Arundel and Bristol confined.
the Dukes grand Prosecutor, was committed to the Tower, and the Earl of
Arundel confined to his own house. There came also forth from his Majesty a
Proclamation, for Burning all the Copies of the Commons Declaration, made
before the Parliaments Dissolution.

This Rupture of the Parliament, The King charged with Imprudence.
being supposed to issue from the Kings great affection to the Duke, I find him
charged with deep imprudence, and high oversight, to hazard the Love of
Millions for him only.

On Monday, before this doleful disaster, there happened a terrible and
prodigious spectacle upon the Thames: The Water near Lambeth-Marsh began about
Three of the Clock in the afternoon to be very turbulent; and after a while,
arising like a Mist, it appeared in a Circular form about Ten yards Diameter,
and about Ten foot elevated from the River. This Cataract, or Spout of Waters,
was carried impetuously cross the River, and made a very furious Assault upon
the Garden-Walls of York-house (where the Duke was then building his new
Water-Stairs); at length, after a fierce attempt, it brake asunder, sending up
a fuliginous and dusky smoke, like that issuing out of a Brewers Chimney, which
ascended as high as was well discernable, and so vanished; and at the very same
instant there was in the City of London so dreadful a storm of Rain and Hail,
with Thunder and Lightning, as a great part of the Churchyard Wall of St.
Andrews Church in Holbourn fell down; and diverse Craves being thereby
discovered, many Coffins tumbled into the middle of the Channel.

Not long after this there fell out a difference between England and France;
and his Majesty, in process of time, being on every side on the losing hand, he
was much distressed in mind, what course to take to discharge himself of those
impendent Calamities; should he call a Parliament, The King in great want.
the time (whose every moment was precious unto him) would not permit to stay
for their Convention; and when met, should they prove (as it was odds they
would) as Dilatory and disgustful as the former, he were in a worse condition
than before. In this perplexed difficulty, at length his Council agreed to set
that great Engine, his Prerogative, at work: Many projects were hammered on
that forge, but they came all to small effect.

First, they moved for a Contribution, by way of Benevolence; but this was soon
dashed. Then a resolution was taken to advance the value of Coin Two shillings
in the pound; but this also was soon argued down by Sir Robert Cotton: But that
which the Council stuck closest to, was the issuing of a Commission, Raises
money by Loan.
dated October the 13th, for raising almost Two hundred thousand younds by way
of Loan; and the more to expedite and facilitate this Levy, the Commissioners
were instructed to represent to the Subject the deplorable estate of Rochel,
then closely beleaguered by the Duke of Guise; and if not speedily relieved,
would fall irrecoverably into the hands of the Enemies of the Protestant
Religion.

These were plausible insinuations: For Rochel, though situated in another
Country, yet was looked upon as in the same parallel Belief with us. And what
will not men suffer for others of the same persuasion, especially when Fame
reports them sufferers because of the same persuasion?

But all would not smooth the asperity of this most Illegal Tax. Rochel, and
all other Foreign Considerations must stand by, and aloof off, when homebred
Liberty is disputed; so thought the almost Majority of the Kingdom, who opposed
it to Durance. Many refuse.
Upon this account of refusal, Prisoners, some of the Nobility, and most of the
prime Gentry, were daily brought in by scores, I might almost say by Counties;
so that the Council Table had almost as much work to provide Prisons, as to
supply the Kings necessities.

This year Learning lost two Luminaries of the greatest Magnitude that ever
this Nation enjoyed, viz. Dr. Andrews, Bishop of Winchester, and Sir Francis
Bacon, Vicount St. Albans, Lord High Chancellor of England.

The Commission of Loan not answering in its product his Majesty's expectation,
the Papists began now to plot their own advantage from the Kings wants; and
under pretense of Loyalty, they of Ireland propounded to him, That upon
consideration of a Toleration of their Religion, they would at their own charge
furnish him with a constant Army of five thousand Foot and five hundred Horse.
But this project to their great regret proved Dow-baked, the Protestants
countermining them: For in the next Spring Doctor Downham, Bishop of
Londonderry, Preaching before the Lord Deputy and the whole State, April 22.
1627. taking for his Text, Luke 1.74. That we being delivered from the hands of
our Enemies, might serve him without fear. In the midst of his Sermon, he
openly read this Protestation, subscribed by the Archbishops and all the
Bishops of that Kingdom.

1. That the Religion of the Papists is Superstitious and Idolatrous. 2. Their
Faith and Doctrine Erroneous and Heretical. 3. Their Church in respect of both,
Apostatical.
To give them therefore a Toleration, is to make our selves accessory to their
abominations, and to the perdition of their Souls.

But to sell them a Toleration, is to set Religion to sale, and with that their
Souls, which Christ has redeemed with his most precious blood.

The Bishop having ended this Protestation, added: And let all the People say
Amen, which they did so as the Church almost shook with the noise. The Deputy
required of the Bishop a Copy of both his Sermon and Protestation, who answered
he would most willingly justify it before his Majesty, and feared not to read
it.

And now although moneys came in but slowly, yet was the Naval Force completed
for expedition about Midsummer; whereof the Duke appeared Admiral; as ambitious
of some meritorious service to earn a better gust, or to correct the universal
odium against him.

June the 27th he set Sail from Portsmouth with about six thousand Horse and
Foot; and July the eleventh he published a Manifesto, declaring the impulsive
causes of his Majesty's present Arming.

But the Duke had very ill success in this expedition; for the English were
routed at the Isle of The: The English routed at the Isle of The.
the sum of their loss were about fifty Officers (but the greatest loss was
that gallant man, Sir John Buroughs, who was slain by a Musket Bullet from
the Citadel, while he was viewing the English works;) of Common Soldiers few
less than two thousand, Prisoners of Note thirty five, Colors taken forty
four, hung up as Anthems at Paris in the Church of Nostredame, our Honor lost.
The Prisoners Lewis graciously dismissed home, as an affectionate offertory to
his Sister the Queen of England; which made up another Victory superadded to
the former, and a conquest over us as well in the exercise of civilities, as in
feat of Arms; only the Lord Montjoy was ransomed, for the which he offering to
the French King a round sum; No my Lord, it is said the King replied, your
Redemption shall be only two couple of Hounds from England: Some interpreted
this a slender value of that Lord, to be exchanged for a couple of Dogs; but it
was only in the King a modest estimate of his courtesy.

The Rochellers being besieged by the French King, The Rochelers crave our
Kings aid.
in their distress hurrieth and serrieth over their Deputies to England to
solicit our King for fresh supplies, before the prodigious work should be
completed; who (good Prince) affected with their Miseries, and desirous rather
to protect them from being slaves, than to enable them to be Masters,
condescended to assure them of what assistance he could make.

But, alas! what could his assistance signify, who was as necessitous as
themselves? Did they want Men, Ammunition-Ships? So did he, seeing he wanted
that which was all these, Money; and how, and where should that be had? His
last borrowing Commissions, was a course so displeasing to the Subject, as
would not admit of repetition, and it would prove an odd payment of that Loan
arrears, to demand another: But the King was now the Subject of a greater
Potentate than himself, Necessity; and this Necessity put him upon several
projects: First he borrows of the Common Council of London, One hundred and
twenty thousand pounds; for which, and other debts, he assures unto them
Twenty-one thousand pounds per annum of his own Lands: and of the East India
Company Thirty thousand pounds; and yet he wants. Next, Privy-Seals are sent
out by Hundreds, and a new way of Levy by Excise, resolved to be executed by
Commission, Dated the 3d of February; and yet he wants: but the best and most
taking project of all, was a Parliament; whereby he hoped not only to supply
his necessities, but also to give some better repose to his troubled spirit;
for he felt no inward contentment, whilst he the Head and the Body were at a
distance, or like intersects and flies, tackt together by a Mathematical line,
or imaginary thread; therefore he seriously resolved for his part to frame and
dispose himself to such obliging complacency and compliance, as might
re-consolidate, and make them knit again.

This Parliament was Summoned to meet on the 17th of March, 1627; King Charles
his Third Parliament assembled, March 17, 1627.
and the Writs being issued out, the Loan-Recusants appeared the only men in
the Peoples affections; none thought worthy of a Patriots title, but he that
was under restraint upon that account; so that the far greater number of the
Parliament was formed of them: And as their Sufferings had made them of Eminent
remark for Noble Courage, so did they for External respects appear the
gallantest Assembly that ever those Walls immured; they having Estates modestly
estimated, able to buy the House of Peers (the King excepted), One hundred and
eighteen, thrice over. Thus were all things strangely turned in a trice topside
the other way: they who lately were confined as Prisoners, are now not only free,
but petty Lords and Masters, yea, and petty Kings.

Some few days before this Session, a notable discovery was made of a College
of Jesuits at Clerkenwell. The first Information was given by one Cross, a
Messenger to Secretary Coke, who sent a Warrant to Justice Long, dwelling near
enjoining, to take some Constables, and other aid with him, and forthwith to
beset the house, and apprehend the Jesuits; entering at first door, they found
at stairs-foot a Man and a Woman standing, who told them, My Masters, take heed
you go not up the stairs, for there are above many resolute and valiant Men,
who are well provided with Swords and Pistols, and will lose their lives rather
than yield; therefore if you love your lives, be gone. The Constable took their
counsel, and like cowardly Buzzards went their way, and told Secretary Coke the
danger; whereupon the Secretary sent the Sheriff to attack them, who coming
with a formidable Power, found all withdrawn and sneakt away; but after a long
search, their place of security was found out, it being a Lobby behind a new
Brick-wall, Wainscoated over; which being demolisht, they were presently
unkennel'd, to the number of Ten. They found also diverse Letters from the Pope
to them, empowring them to erect this College under the name of Domus
Probationis (but it proved Reprobationis) Sancti Ignatii; and their Books of
Accounts, whereby it appeared they had Five hundred pounds per annum
contribution from their Benefactors, and had likewise purchased Four hundred
and fifty pounds per annum; they had a Chapel, Library, and other Rooms of
necessary accommodation, with Houshold-utensils and implements marked S. What
became of these Jesuits, will fall in afterward: and what would have become of
the Secretary for his double diligence in their prosecution, you should have
heard, had not the Duke been cut off by an untimely end to himself, but timely
to the Popular Gust.

The Parliament being met, the King began thus to them:

My Lords and Gentlemen!
THese times are for Action: The Kings Speech.
for Action I say, not for Words; and therefore I shall use but few; and (as
Kings are said to be Exemplary to their Subjects) I wish you would imitate me
in this, and use as few, falling upon speedy consultation. No man is, I
conceive, such a stranger to the Common Necessity, as to expostulate the cause
of this Meeting, and not to think Supply to be the end of it: And as this
Necessity is the product and consequent of your advice; so the true Religion,
the Laws and Liberties of this State, and just defense of our Friends and
Allies, being so considerably concerned, will be, I hope, arguments enough to
persuade supply: For if it be, as most true it is, both my Duty and yours to
preserve this Church and Commonwealth, this exigent time certainly requires
it. In this time of Common danger I have taken the most ancient, speedy, and
best way for supply, by calling you together; if (which God forbid) in not
contributing what may answer the Quality of my occasions, you do not your
Duties, it shall suffice I have done mine, in the conscience whereof I shall
rest content, and take some other course, for which God has empowered me to
save that which the folly of particular men might hazard to lose.

Take not this as a Menace (for I scorn to threaten my Inferiors), but as an
Admonition from him who is tied both by Nature and Duty, to provide for your
preservations: And I hope, though I thus speak, your Demeanors will be such as
shall oblige me in thankfulness to meet you oftener, than which nothing shall
be more pleasing unto me.

Remembering the distractions of our last Meeting, you may suppose I have no
confidence of good success at this time: but be assured, I shall freely forget
and forgive what is past, hoping you will follow that sacred advice lately
inculcated, To maintain the Unity of the spirit in the bond of peace.

The Parliament seemed at first exceeding prompt to close with the Kings
desires, and as complyingly disposed as could be wished; but they had not
forgot the many pressures, which made the subject groan; something they must do
for them who sent, as well as for him who called them thither; and to
anticipate all manner of dispute in point of Precedence, between the Subjects
grievances, and the Kings supplies, they make an order that both should proceed
pari passu, cheek by joul.

Upon full consideration of the Kings wants, The Parliament grant liberally.
they presently and cheerfully agreed to give him five Subsidies, whereof
Secretary Coke was the first Evangelist, and Porter of that good news to the
King, who received it with wondrous joy, and asked the Secretary by how many
Voices it was carried? Sir John replied, but by one: At which perceiving the
Kings countenance to change; Sir, said he, your Majesty has the greater cause
to rejoice; for the House was so unanimous therein, as that they made but one
voice; whereupon the King wept, and bad the Secretary tell them, He would deny
them nothing of their Liberties, which any of his Predecessors had granted.

The stream of affairs running thus smoothly, The Subjects Libetty under debate.
without the least wrinkle of discontent on either side; the House of Commons
first insisted upon the Personal Freedom of the People, and resolved for Law,
That no Freeman ought to be imprisoned, either by the King or Council, without
a legal Cause alleged. This opinion of the House was reported to the Lords, at
a Conference by Sir Edward Coke, Sir Dudley Diggs, Mr. Seldom, and Mr.
Littleton; Sir Dudley Diggs citing Acts 25. verse. 27. It seems an
unreasonable thing to send a Prisoner, and not withal to signify the Crimes
laid against him.

This business stuck very much in the Lords House, The Lords nice in the
business.
who were willing that the Nails should be pared, not the hands tied of the
Prerogative; several and great Debates there were about it. The Attorney
pleading eagerly (though impertinently) for the King; and the ancient Records
were so direct for the People, and so strongly enforced, as the Attorney had no
more to say, but only, I refer my self to the Judgment of the Lords; and when
these Lords were to give Judgment concerning it, the Ducal, or Royal party (for
they were both one) were so prevalent, as they who leaned the other way, durst
not abide the Trial by Vote; but calling the Lord Keeper down, molded the
House into a Committee, until the Lord Say made a motion, That they who stood
for the Liberties (being effective about fifty) might make their Protestation;
and that to be upon Record: And that the other opposite party should also with
Subscriptions of their Names, enter their Reasons, to remain also upon Record,
that so Posterity might not be to seek who they were, who so ignobly betrayed
the Freedom of our Nation; and that this done, they should proceed to a Vote:
At which the Court-party were so daunted, as that they durst not mutter one
syllable against it.

Personal Liberty being thus settled; next they fall upon Liberty of Goods, the
unbilleting of Soldiers, and nulling of Martial-Law in times of Peace; and
finding Magna Charta, and six other Statutes explanatory of it, to be expressly
on their side, they Petitioned the King to grant them the benefit of them;
whereupon he declared Himself, by the Lord Keeper, unto them in his Verbis:

That He did hold the Statutes of Magna Charta, and the six other insisted upon
for the Subjects Liberty, to be all in force; and assured them, that he would
maintain all his Subjects in the just freedom of their Persons, and safety of
Estates; and that he would govern according to the Laws and Statutes of the
Realm; and that his People should find as much security in his Royal Word and
Promise, as in any Laws they could make; so that hereafter they should have no
cause to complain; and therefore he desired no doubt nor distrust might possess
any man, but that they would proceed speedily and unanimously on with their
business.

This Message begat a new Question, Whether or no his Majesty should be trusted
upon his Royal Word? Some thought it needless, because of his Coronation Oath,
binding him to maintain the Laws of the Land: That Oath was as strong as any
Royal Word could be. Others were of opinion, That should it be put to Vote, and
carried in the Negative, it would be infinitely dishonorable unto him in
Foreign parts, who would be ready to say, The People of England would not trust
their King upon his Royal Promise.

At length, in the height of this Dispute, stands up Sir Edward Coke, and thus
informed the House: We sit now in Parliament, and therefore must take his
Majesty's Word no otherwise than in a Parliamentary-way; that is, The King
sitting on his Throne in his Royal Robes, his Crown on his Head, his Scepter in
his Hand in full Parliament, both Houses being present, all these Circumstances
observed, and his Assent being entered upon a Record, make his Royal Word the
Word of a King in Parliament, and not a word delivered in a Chamber, or at
second hand by the mouth of a Secretary or Lord Keeper; therefore his Motion
was, That the House should (More Majorum) according to the custom of their
Predecessors, draw a Petition (De Droict) of Right to His Majesty; which being
confirmed by both Houses, and assented unto by the King, would be as firm an
Act as any.

This Judgment of so great a Father in the Law, The Petition of Right presented
by this Parliament.
at this time ruled all the House, and accordingly a Petition was framed, and
at a Conference presented unto the Lords, the substance whereof (after the
recital of several Statutes relating to the Privilege of the Subject) was
reduced to four Heads.

The Petition being presented to his Majesty after two several Answers
thereunto (which did not please the Parliament), he did the third time give
them this Answer (the Petition being read) thereunto.

Le droict soit faict comme il est desire. This I am sure is full, yet no more
than I granted you in my first Answer: you see now how ready I have showed my
self to satisfy your Demands, so that I have done my part; wherefore if this
Parliament have not an happy conclusion, the sin is yours, I am free.

The King having ended, the Houses testified their joy with a mighty shout, and
presently the Bells rung, and Bonefires were kindled all the City over: Nor was
the true cause so distinctly known; for many apprehended at first, that the
King had delivered the Duke up to them to be sent to the Tower; on which
misprision, some said the Scaffold on Tower Hill was instantly pulled down; the
People said his Grace should have a new one.

It is said that the House of Lords made Suit to the King upon this happy
accord, That he would be pleased to receive into Grace those Lords who were in
former disfavour; which he readily yielded unto: And admitted the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, Bishop of Lincoln, the Earls of Essex, Warwick,
Bristol, and the Lord Say to kiss his hand.

The Petition thus granted, the Commissions of Loan and Excise were instantly
outlawed, and at the entreaty of the House of Peers, cancelled in the Kings
presence.

Having thus secured the faults, they removed the faulty, and resolved upon a
large Remonstrance to the King, ripping up the Grievances themselves, and the
Authors of them. This Remonstrance consisted of six Branches, in sum these.

1. The danger of Innovation and Alteration in Religion: The Parliaments
Remonstrance.
This occasioned by, 1. The great esteem and favor many Professors of the
Romish Religion receive at Court. 2. Their public resort to Mass at
Denmark-house, contrary to his Majesty's Answer to the Parliaments Petition at
Oxford. 3. The Letters for stay of Proceedings against them. Lastly, The daily
growth of the Arminian-Faction, favored and protected by Neal Bishop of
Winchester, and Laud Bishop of Bath-and-Wells, whilst the Orthodox party are
silenced, or discountenanced. 2. The danger of Innovation and Alteration in
Government, occasioned by Billeting of Soldiers, by the Commission of procuring
One thousand German-Horse, and Riders, for the defense of the Kingdom, by a
standing-Commission granted to the Duke to be General at Land in times of
Peace. 3. Disasters of our Designs, as the expedition to the Isle of The, and
that lately of Rochel, wherein the English have purchased their dishonor with
the waste of a Million of Treasure. 4. The want of Ammunition, occasioned by
the late selling away of 36 Last of Powder. 5. The decay of Trade, by the loss
of Three hundred Ships taken by the Dunkirkers and Pirates within these three
last years. 6. The not Guarding the Narrow Seas, whereby his Majesty has
almost lost the Regality.
Of all which Evils and Dangers, the principal cause is the Duke of Buckingham,
his excessive power, and abuse of that power; and therefore they humbly submit
it to his Majesty's Wisdom, whether it can be safe for Himself, or his Kingdom,
that so great Power should be trusted in the hands of any one Subject
whatsoever.

This Remonstrance being finished on Tuesday June the 17th, they presented it
as an Appendix, with a Bill of Subsidies, to the King in the Banqueting House;
who having heard it out, He told them, That he little expected such a
Remonstrance, after he had so Graciously passed the Petition of Right: As for
their Grievances, he would consider of them, as they should deserve. Some say,
that at his passing out, the King gave the Duke his hand to kiss, which others
only suppose was no more than the Dukes low congy to his Majesty's hand.

It is also reported, That the King being informed that Mr. Denzil Hollis had
an hand in this Remonstrance, he replied in the words of Julius Caesar, Et tu
Brute, I wonder at it; for we two were fellow-Revellers in a Masquerade.

Three days before this Dr. Manwaring was questioned for some Seditious
passages in two Sermons preached, one before the King, and the other at his own
Parochial Church; wherein he asserted, viz.

1. That the Kings Royal Command in imposing, without common consent in
Parliament, Taxes and Loans, does so far bind the Conscience of the Subjects of
this Kingdom, that they cannot refuse the payment of them without peril of
Eternal damnation. 2. That the Authority of Parliament is not necessary for the
raising of Aids and Subsidies.
These things being too evident to be denied, and too gross to admit of
qualification; his Sentence was, 1. Imprisonment during the pleasure of the
House. 2. One thousand pound Fine to the King. 3. To make such submission and
acknowledgment of his offense, as shall be set down by a Committee in Writing,
both at the Bar of the Lords House, and at the House of Commons. 4. To be
suspended for three years from the exercise of the Ministry. 5. To be disabled
from ever Preaching at Court hereafter. 6. To be disabled for ever from having
any Ecclesiastical Dignity, or Secular Office. 7. That as his Book is worthy to
be burnt, so his Majesty may be moved to Grant a Proclamation for the calling
of it in; as also for the burning of it.


According to the third particular, of which Sentence two days after, he made
his submission on his knees.

Whilst the Parliament was busy about this Doctor, the King was as busy
about the late Remonstrance; to which he formed a formal Answer, traversing and
denying all their charge; wherewith the Commons being somewhat irritated (for
it was a smart one) fell downright upon another Remonstrance against Tonnage
and Poundage: But the King was unwilling to hear of any more Remonstrances of
that nature, and therefore resolved to frustrate it by Proroguing of the
Parliament unto October the 20th. And June the 26. 1628, being the last of this
Session, his Majesty calling both Houses together, before his Royal Assent to
the Bills, delivered his mind unto them, as you may read Page the 84th of the
aforesaid Narrative.

The Parliament being thus Prorogued, the Commons were exceedingly
Malcontent; for they desired only a Recess and Adjournment, whereby all
matters then depending might be found in the same station and condition, as at
their next meeting wherein they at present left them.

In this Month Dr. Lamb, a creature of the Dukes, Dr. Lamb his Exemplary Death.
commended to him by Bishop Williams, suffered for the testimony of a lewd
conversation. Having been at a Playhouse, at his return some boys began to
affront him, and call him the Dukes Devil; whereupon he hired some to guard him
home; and taking in at a Cooks shop, where he supt, the people watched his
coming out; but he was so strongly guarded, as they durst not venture on him.
Then he went to the Windmill-Tavern in Lothbury; and at length coming forth,
the tumult being much increased, gave the onset, and assaulted him, so as he
was forced to take refuge in the next house; but the enraged multitude
threatened to pull down the house, unless Lamb were speedily delivered unto
them: The Master of the House was a Lawyer, and fearing some sad consequence of
this uproar, discreetly sends for four Constables to guard him out; but the
furious multitude flew at him in the midst of his Auxiliaries, struck him down;
and mauled him so, as that they beat out one of his eyes, and left him half
dead upon the place.

In this plight he was carried into the Counter in the Poultrey (no other house
being willing to receive him), where the next morning he changed this life
either for a better, or for a worse.

On August the 23d. following, the Duke of Buckingham (by one John Felton) was
stabbed at Portsmouth, The Duke of Buchingham Murdered.
who being at breakfast with Soubire and others of principal quality, this
Felton (sometimes a Lieutenant to a Foot-Company in the Regiment of Sir John
Ramsey) who had but about a week before meditated the Act, but had not yet
contrived the means, sneaks into the Chamber vigilantly to observe every
opportunity serviceable for his purpose; and finding the Duke ready to rise
from the Table, he withdraws into an Entry through which the Duke was to pass,
who coming by with Sir Thomas Friar (to whom he declined his ear in the posture
of attention) in the very instant of Sir Thomas his retiring from the Duke,
Felton with a back blow stabbed him in the left side into the very heart,
leaving the Knife, which was a Tenpenny Coutel, in his Body.

Some now thought, that though his Majesty disliked the mode of this great man's
dispatch, yet with the thing he was well enough satisfied, as if Providence had
thereby rid him of the Subject of his so great perplexity whom he could not
preserve with safety, nor desert with honor; but such as these were soon
convinced of their error, when they observed how his Majesty did treat his
relations with so intense respect.

But whatever satisfaction the King received thereby; certain it is, the Common
man was well enough pleased thereat: For though Christianity and the Law found
the Act Murder, yet in vulgar sense it rather past for an Executioner of a
Malefactor, and an Administration of that Justice, dispensed from Heaven, which
they thought was denied on Earth: And because all those storms, or public
miscarriages, generated in the lower Region of the Parliament, had of late been
terminated in him as their grand efficient; every man would now be wise, and
forespeak fair weather and a sweet harmony between the King and his Subjects;
but how truly, a few Months will discover.

November the 29th, Felton having been arraigned and found guilty at the
Kings-Bench-Bar, suffered at Tyburn: His Confession was as sincere, and full of
remorse as could be wished; the fact he much detested, and renounced his former
error in conceiving it would be for his glory to sacrifice himself for his
Countries good. And whereas other Motives were suggested by report, he
protested upon his Salvation, that he had no other inducement thereunto, than
the Parliaments Remonstrance. His body was from thence transmitted to
Portsmouth, and there hung in Chains.

January the 26th, The Parliament meet.
1628, the Parliament meet again, who soon found they were like to have work
enough; for Complaints came thronging in, especially against the Customers, for
taking and distraining Merchants Goods for Tonnage and Poundage; which the King
taking notice of, called them to the Banqueting House, and told them, viz.

That the occasion of that Meeting, was a complaint made in the lower House,
for staying of some men's Goods, for denying Tonnage and Poundage; which
difference might be soon decided, were his words and actions rightly
understood: For if he did not take those Duties as an Appendix of his
Hereditary Prerogative, and had declared he challenged them not of right, and
only desired to enjoy them by the gift of his People; Why did they not pass the
Bill, as they promised to him, to clear his bypast actions and future
proceedings, especially in this his time of so great necessity.

Therefore he did now expect they should make good what they promised, and put
an end to all questions emergent from their delay.

The House of Commons said, That Religion is above Policy, God above the King;
and that they intend to reform Religion, before they engage in any other
consideration: Nor was it agreeable to the Liberty of Consultation, to have
their Transactions proscribed; so that they would at present lay aside the Bill
of Tonnage and Poundage, till they thought convenient: and they were as good as
their words. For the first thing they resolved upon, was the appointment of
Committees (which the Courtiers called an Inquisition), one for Religion,
another for Civil Affairs; and these to represent the abuses in both.

The Abuses then in the Church, and likewise in the State, as represented to
the Commons by their Committees, you may read at large, Page 97, 98, 99, 100,
101. in the said Narrative.

But the distempers continued so long, and with so quick and high a pulse, as
the King having every day notice of them, He forthwith sent for the Sergeant of
the Mace, but the House would not permit him to depart; but taking the key of
the door from him, gave it to Sir Miles Hobart, a Member of the House, to keep:
The King deeply incensed at these Exceedings of contempt, sent Maxwell, Usher
of the Black Rod, to Dissolve the Parliament; but neither he nor his Message
would be admitted: Whereupon the King, much enraged, sent for the Captain of
the Pensioners, and the Guard, to force an entrance: But this passion that shut
out the King, yet let so much reason in, as persuaded them it was good sleeping
in a whole skin; and understanding the Kings intentions, they suddenly voided
the House.

Soon after this, the King came that very morning into the House of Lords, and
making a short (though smart) Speech unto them, Commanded the Lord Keeper to
Dissolve that Parliament.

The King having thus Dissolved this Parliament, The King sends forth a
Declaration.
or rather broke up School, those whom he now called Vipers, had not in the
House of Commons spit up all their Malignity, but reserved some to disperse and
dispose of in the Country, whereby an ill odor might be cast upon his
Government, and the hearts of his People alienated from him. As an antidote
therefore against that poison, and to anticipate all misunderstanding, he
speedeth out a Declaration, setting forth to all his Subjects the Motives
persuading him to Dissolve the Parliament, and a breviate of all the
Transactions in this and the former Session; withal, minding them in the close
of all, that the Duke of Buckingham was decried while he lived, as the solitary
cause of all bad events in former Parliaments; that he is dead, and yet the
Distempers not in the least abated, which he takes as an argument that they
were mistaken in the cause; and, that it was rather resident in some few
Members of Parliament.

The King having, as he hoped, disabused his Subjects by his late Declaration;
next intended to proceed severely against those who had offended him, and whose
punishment he said he reserved to a due time upon this account; the 18th of
this Month he sent for Ten of the late Members to appear at the Council Table,
viz. Mr. Hollis, Mr. Seldom, Sir Miles Hobart, Sir John Elliot, Sir Peter
Hayman, Mr. Stroud, Mr. Coriton, Mr. Valentine, Mr. Long, Mr. Kirton: These
appearing, Mr. Hollis was interrogated, Wherefore (contrary to his former use)
he did the morning the Parliament was Dissolved, place himself by the Chair,
above diverse of the Privy-Councellors?

He answered, That he had some other times as well as then, seated himself in
that place; and as for his sitting above the Privy-Councellors, he took it to
be his due in any place whatsoever (unless at the Council Board); and for his
part, he came into the House with as much zeal for his Majesty's Service, as
any one whatsoever; and yet nevertheless finding his Majesty was offended with
him, he humbly desired that he might rather be the subject of his mercy, than
of his power. To the which the Lord Treasurer answered, You mean rather of his
Majesty's Mercy than of his Justice.

Mr. Hollis replied, I say of his Majesty's Power, my Lord.

Sir John Elliot was next called in, who was questioned for words he spoke in
the lower House of Parliament, and for producing the late Remonstrance.

To this he answered,

That whatsoever was said or done by him in that place, and at that time, was
performed by him as a public Man, and a Member of that House, and that he was
and ever will be ready to give an account of his Sayings and Doings in that
place, whenever he should be called unto it by that House; where (as he takes
it) he is only to be questioned; and in the mean time being now but a private
man, he would not now trouble himself to remember what he said or did in that
place, as a public Man.

Sir Miles Hobart was also questioned for locking the Parliament House Door,
and putting the Key in his Pocket; to which he pleaded the Command of the House.

The other Gentlemen were questioned for reproving the Speaker, and not
permitting him to do that the King commanded him, who all alleged in defense
the Privilege of the House.

After this they were committed some to the Tower, and some to the Gatehouse,
and some to the Fleet: And May the first, the Attorney sent a Process out
against them to appear in the Star Chamber, and to answer an information to be
entered there against them; but they refused as denying the Jurisdiction of that
Court over offenses done in Parliament, which created the greatest and longest
Controversy in Law that had been started in many years.

April the tenth, Anno Domini, 1630,
dyed William Earl of Pembroke, Lord High Steward of England, of an Apoplexy.

He was the very Picture and vive Effigies of Nobility; His Character
His Person rather Majestic than Elegant; his presence whether quiet or in
motion, full of stately gravity; his mind generous and purely heroic; often
stout, but never disloyal; so vehement an opponent of the Spaniard, as when
that Match fell under consideration, he would sometimes rowze even to the
trepidation of King James, yet kept in favor still; for that King knew well
enough that plain dealing was a Jewel in all men, so in a Privy Councellor was
an ornamental duty; and the same trueheartedness commended him to King Charles,
with whom he kept a most admirable Correspondence, and yet stood the firm
confident of the Commonalty, and not by a sneaking cunning, but by an erect and
generous prudence, such as rendered him unsuspected of Ambition on the one side,
or of Faction on the other.

This universality of Affection made his loss most deplorable, but men are lost
when all turns to forgotten-dust: That affection would not that he should be so
nonpluss'd, but kept his noble Fame emergent and alose, and if this History
shall bear it up, I shall esteem it not more his felicity than my own.

April the twenty fifth of this year, was Arraigned, Convicted, Anno 1631.
Condemned, and on May the fourteenth Executed upon Tower Hill, Mervin Lord
Audley, Earl of Castle-Haven, for Rape and Sodomy.

In England fell two great Favorites of different parties, Anno 1634.
of the Commonalties one, and of the Kings another: Of the Commonalties, Sir
Edward Coke, who died about the latter end of this Summer; Sir Edward Coke
departs this life.
full of days he died, most whereof he had spent in eminent place and honor.
His abilities in the Common Law, whereof he passed for an Oracle, raised him
first to the dignity of Attorney General to Queen Elizabeth, Then of Lord Chief
Justice of the King's Bench under King James: His advancement he lost the same
way he got it, viz. by his Tongue, so rare it is for a man very eloquent, not
to be over loquent; long lived he in that retirement, to which
Court-Indignation had remitted him, yet was not his recess inglorious, for at
improving a disgrace to the best advantage, he was so excellent; as King James
said of him, he was like a Cat, throw her which way you will she will light
upon her feet. And finding a Cloud at Court, he made sure of fair weather in
the Country, applying himself so devoutly to popular Interests, as in
succeeding Parliaments the Prerogative felt him as her ablest, so her most
active Opponent; upon which account he was 1 Caroli made High Sheriff of
Buckinghamshire, on purpose to exclude him the ensuing Parliament; there being
an especial Nolumus and clause in his Commission, prohibiting his Election; not
withstanding which Elected he was in Norfolk, and those words of Restraint upon
the debate of the Question in the House of Commons, Voted void.

On the Kings, the Great Lord Treasurer Sir Richard Weston, Sir Richard Weston
Lord Treasurer of England dies.
Earl of Portland, this year and he almost expiring together, he ending this
life March the thirteenth, a sad loss to the King, and the sadder because he
thought it irreparable. The truth is, he was a Person very able for the Office,
and the Exchequer was in the mending hand, while he enjoyed that place; for he
had a most singular Artifice, both in improving the incomes, and in a frugal
moderation of his Masters expense. But the Kings forrow was not so extreme for
him, but the Peoples joy was full as great; for there was now grown so sad an
antipathy between his Majesty and his Subjects, that like those two Emperors,
Antonine and Geta, they were always of contrary Senses and Minds, rarely
agreeing in any one particular. The deportment whereby he so much disobliged
the Commonalty, was his promoting Monopolies and other advantages of Regality.

The Archbishop and he were usually at great odds; this vacant place was at
present entrusted to Commissioners, until the King should otherwise dispose
thereof.

September the 29th, the Earl of Arundel brought up to London, out of
Shropshire, one Robert Parr, as the wonder of our times for long life, he
having attained to the age of near 160; and probably might have continued
longer, had not so tedious a journey and overviolent agitation of his aged Body
accellerated his end; so that it may be said, he sacrificed some years to
others curiosity.

In Michaelmas-Term was canvassed and debated the grand Controversy between
the King and Subject about Ship Money; Anno 1635. The great Debate about
Ship Money.
for the Ship-Writs having been issued out August the 11, to diverse Counties,
many Inhabitants, and among the rest Mr. Hambden of Buckingham-shire, assessed
by the Sheriff, made default of payment; whereupon the King, equally hating to
be either flattered into, or frighted from the belief of its Legality, wrote a
Letter to the Judges, demanding their Opinions upon the case stated.

To which the Judges delivered their Opinions as follows:

May it please your most Excellent Majesty,
WE have, according to your Majesty's Command, severally, and every Man by
himself, and all of us together, taken into our serious consideration the Case
and Questions signed by your Majesty, and enclosed in your Letter. And we are
of opinion, That when the good and safety of the Kingdom in general is
concerned, and the whole Kingdom in danger, Your Majesty may by Writ under your
Great Seal of England, Command all the Subjects of this your Kingdom, at their
charge to provide and furnish such number of Ships with Men, Victual, Munition,
and for such time as your Majesty shall think fit, for the defense and
safeguard of the Kingdom from such peril and danger: and that by Law your
Majesty may compel the doing thereof in case of refulsal or refractoriness. And
we are also of opinion, That in such case your Majesty is the sole Judge, both
of the danger, and when and how the same is to be prevented and avoided.

John Bramston, John Finch, Humphrey Davenport, John Denham, Richard Hatton,
William Jones, George Crook, Thomas Trever, George Vernon, Robert Barkley,
Francis Crauly, Richard Weston.
These Opinions being subscribed by all the Judges, and enrolled in all the
Courts in Westminster Hall, the King thought he had now warrant sufficient to
proceed against all defaulters, and especially against Mr. Hambden; who being
summoned by process, appeared and required Oyer of the Ship-Writs; which being
read, he demurred in Law, and demanded the Opinion of all the Judges upon the
Legal sufficiency of those Writs.

This great Case coming to be argued in the Exchequer, the Major part of the
Judges delivered their Opinions in favor of the Writs, and accordingly gave
Judgment against Mr. Hambden; yet did not the question altogether so repose;
but Mr. Hambden observing some Judges, viz. Crook and Hatton of a contrary
sense, held up the Contest still, though all in vain; all his inquietude not
gaining him the least acquittal, until an higher Power interposed.

About the beginning of January, this year, Anno 1639. Sir Thomas Coventry
dies:
dyed Sir Thomas Coventry, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England; a Dignity
he had Fifteen years enjoyed; if it be not more proper to say, That Dignity had
enjoyed him so long; this latter affording not one every way of more apt
qualifications for the place: His front and presence bespake a venerable
regard, not inferior to that of any of his Ancestors: His train and suit of
followers was disposed agreeably to shun both envy and contempt; not like that
of the Viscount St. Albans, or the Bishop of Lincoln, whom he succeeded,
ambitious and vain: His port was State, theirs Ostentation; they were indeed
the more knowng men, but their Learning was extravagant to their Office; of
what concerned his Place he knew well enough, and which is the main, acted
according to his knowledge; for in the administration of Justice, he was so
erect and so incorrupt, as captious malice stands mute in the blemish of his
fame; a miracle the greater, when we consider that he was also a Privy
Councellor: A Trust wherein he served his Master the King most faithfully, and
the more faithfully, because of all those Councils which in those times did so
much deceive his Majesty, (and I pray God there were fewer at this juncture of
time than there is) he was an earnest disswader, and did much disaffect those
Sticklers, who rather labored to make the Prerogative tall and great, as
knowing that such men loved the King better than Charles Stuart: so that
although he was a Courtier, and had for his Master a passion most intense, yet
had he also always, of passion, some reserve for the public welfare.

An Argument of a free, noble, and right principled mind; for what both Court
and Country have always held as inconsistent, is in truth erroneous; and no man
can be truly Loyal, who is not also a good Patriot, nor any a good Patriot,
(the Balance indispensably ought to be kept even) who is not truly Loyal.

To this worthy Gentleman succeeded Sir John Finch, formerly Lord Chief Justice
of the Common Pleas.

The Here Somerdick, An Ambassador from the States of Holland.
Ambassador from the States of Holland, in the Month of January had Audience of
the King: He had with him Count William of Nassaw and the Rhine-Grave, with a
very splendid train; his business was to give his Majesty satisfaction
concerning the late Attack made upon the Spaniards by the Dutch Fleet in the
Downs, and the Embassy was sweetened by some overture of Marriage between the
young Prince of Orange and the Kings Eldest Daughter.

On the Thirteenth of April, A Parliament fits in England after near 12 years
interval, April 1640.
A Parliament met and sat, and the Deputy of Ireland being not long before
Created Earl of Strafford, and made Lord Lieutenant of that Kingdom, was lead
into the upper House by two Noblemen, where he gave an account of his service
in Ireland, where he had obtained the grant of four Subsidies for the
maintenance of an Army.

Mr. John Glanvil was chosen Speaker of the House of Commons, and generally the
choice of Members to that House was so good, that great probabilitles were
given of a happy Union betwixt the King and the Parliament.

Some few days after, a Report was made to the Lords, by the Lord Cottington,
(who with Windebank and the Attorney General, were sent by the King to the Lord
Lowden, to examine him concerning a Letter before mentioned) that the Lord did
acknowledge the Handwriting to be his, and that it was framed before the
pacification at Berwick, and was never sent to the King, but only prepared in a
readiness, should need require; and that it was suppressed upon that
pacification; nevertheless it was thought fit he should continue in the same
state, until clearer Evidence should be given either for or against him.

Soon after the King sent a message to the Lower House about Supplies,
representing unto them the intolerable indignities and injuries wherewith the
Scots had treated him; and withal declared unto them, that if they would assist
him suitable to the exigency of his sad occasion, he would for ever quit his
claim of Shipmoney, and into the bargain give them full content in all their
just demands.

But they replied (as being somewhat deliberate in this affair of Money) that
they expected first security from his Majesty in these three particulars, viz.

1. For the clearing the Subjects Property. 2. For the Establishment of
Religion. 3. For the Privilege of Parliament.
Many Conferences there was had between the Lords and Commons, as to this old
Contest, which should precede: The Lords after a strong division among
themselves, at length Voted for the King, and the Commons for the Subject. But
it was not long before this unhappy difference was unhappily decided: For
Secretary Vane who was employed to declare the particulars of the Kings
desires, required twelve Subsidies, whereas it was said his express order was
for only six; some there are who suspect this mistake to have been not
involuntary, but industrious in him as to his Majesty's service; but leaving
that undetermined, the House of Commons was raised by this Proposition, to such
animosity, as the King advising with his Juncto, The Parliament dissolved, May
the fifth, 1640. having sat about 3 weeks.
their compliance was represented to him so desperate, as that May the fifth he
ordered the Dissolution of the Parliament.

Thus expired this short-lived, or rather thus ended this still-born
Parliament, (although we have had a much shorter, Anno Domini 1680.) A
Parliament, I know not whether more unfortunate in beginning so late, or ending
so soon: A Parliament which had Power (and probably Will) enough to impede the
torrent of the late Civil War; for the breaches between the King and People
were grown so high, as one might already discern all the lineaments of an
Insurrection in Embrio (but by my Authors good leave, the wisest head could not
foresee contingent actions; for who could foretell but that his late Majesty
might have been advised by his Grand Council, and not by his Court Favorites)
whose abortion nothing could cause but a happy union in Parliament, a thing not
very difficult, much less impossible at that time, had the King yielded to a
detrenching some luxuriances of his Prerogative, to the reducing Episcopacy to
its primitive institution, that is, to the frame by Divine Right (a Root which
had not sap enough to maintain so spreading and flourishing a Top as was
contended for) to a more frequent and sociable communication with the grand
Representative. In short, so much fluent and spontaneous concessions as being
resolved upon too late, were (in reference to his personal security) lost and
thrown away in the ensuing Parliament, of the which we shall now very suddenly
come to give a very succinct account as to their particular proceedings and
transactions, and compare both these Parliaments together with those that have
been assembled of late, Anno Domini, 1680. and 1681. And after that shall draw
toward a conclusion, as I presume it will be high time, lest my Multum in
Parvo and Vox Veritatis, should prove at the long run, Vox Contractitionis. But
this only by the way.

And moreover the dissolution of this Parliament was ascribed (though perhaps
wrongfully) to the advice of the Archbishop of Canterbury; Archbishop Laud
beset by the Rabble, in his House at Lambeth.
so that on the ninth of May a Paper was posted upon the Old Exchange, by one
John Lilburn, exciting the Apprentices to rise and rifle his House at Lambeth
on Monday following; of which he having notice, made provision against them for
his own defense; and many of them upon enquiry, having been actors therein,
were apprehended and imprisoned in the White Lion in Southwark, but within
three days after some of their Accomplices got together, and came to the Prison
and brake it open and set them free; yet nevertheless one of the chief
Ringleaders was Taken, Arraigned, Condemned, and Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered,
on the 21 of May.

This Convention was not more unhappily dissolved, The Convocation sits.
than another was continued, that is, as a witty Gentleman said well, A new
Synod made of an old Convocation; which by new Commissions from the King, were
empowered to sit still, the Impulsives to it are very easily collected from
what resulted from it, as you read more at large in the aforesaid Author, Pape
189.

The Parliament being blown away without affording any thing in nature of a
supply to the Kings wants: All the wheels of the Prerogative are put into
motion, to carry on the War against Scotland: First, the City of London were
invited to a Loan; then all Knights and Gentlemen, who held Lands in Capite of
the King, were summoned to send Men, Horses, and Arms, agreeable to their
abilities.

In September, the Lords Mandevil and Edward Howard, delivered to the King, at
York, this Petition.

To the King's Most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of Your Majesty's most Loyal and most Obedient Subjects,
whose names are underwritten, in behalf of themselves and diverse others.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
THe Zeal of that Duty and Service which we owe to your Sacred Majesty, and our
earnest affections to the good and welfare of this your Realm of England, have
moved us in all humility to beseech your Royal Majesty, to give us leave to
offer to your Princely wisdom the apprehension which we and others your
faithful Subjects have conceived of the great distempers and dangers, now
threatening the Church and State, and your Royal Person, and of the fittest
means by which they may be removed and prevented.

The evils and dangers which your Majesty may be pleased to take notice of, are
these, viz.

I. That your Majesty's Sacred Person is exposed to hazard and danger in the
present Expedition against the Scottish Army, and by occasion of this War, Your
Majesty's Revenue is much wasted, your Subjects (with Coat and conduct Money,
Billetting of Soldiers, and other Military Charges, and diverse Rapines and
Disorders committed in several parts of this your Realm, by the Soldiers
raised for that Service) and your whole Kingdom become full of fears and
discontents. II. The sundry innovations in matter of Religion, the Oath and
Canons lately imposed upon the Clergy, and other your Majesty's Subjects. III.
The great increase of Popery, and the Employing of Popish Recusants, and others
ill affected to the Religion by Laws Established, in places of Power and Trust,
especially in commanding of Men and Arms both in the Field and sundry Counties
of this your Realm; whereas by Law they are not permitted to have any Arms in
their own Houses. IV. The great mischiefs which may fall upon this Kingdom, if
the intententions which have been credibly reported of bringing in Irish and
Foreign Forces should take effect. V. The urging of Ship Money, and prosecution
of some Sheriffs in the Star Chamber for not levying of it. VI. The heavy
charge upon Merchandise, to the discouragement of Trade, the multitude of
Monopolies and other Patents, whereby the Commodities and Manufactures of the
Kingdom are much burdened, to the great and universal grievance of your
People. VII. The great grief of your People and Subjects, by long intermission
of Parliaments, and the late and former Dissolving of such as have been called,
without the happy effects which otherwise they might have produced.
For remedy whereof, and prevention of the Dangers that may arise to your Royal
Person and to the whole State, they do in all humility and faithfulness beseech
your Most Excellent Majesty, that you would be pleased to Summon a Parliament
within some convenient time, whereby the causes of these and other great
Grievances, which your People lie under, may be taken away, and the Authors and
Counselors of them may be brought to such legal and condign punishment as the
nature of their several offenses shall require; And that the present War may be
composed by your Majesty's wisdom, without Blood, in such manner as may conduce
to the Honor and Safety of your Majesty's Person, the the comfort of your
People, and the uniting of both your Realms against the Common Enemy of the
Reformed Religion.

And your Majesty's Petitioners shall ever pray, etc. Francis Bedford Robert
Essex Mulgrave Say and Seal Edward Howard William Hartford Warwick
Bullingbrooke Mandevil Brook Paget

Concluded the 28th of August. 1640.
The King's Answer.
BEfore the receipt of your Petition, His Majesty well foresaw the danger that
threatens himself and Crown, and therefore resolved the 24th of this Instant,
to Summon all the Peers, and with them to Consult, what in this Case is fittest
to be done for his own honor and fafety of the Kingdom, where they with the
rest may offer any thing that may conduce to those ends.

According to this Resolution, the Lord Keeper had Directions from the King to
issue out Writs of Summons for their appearing at York on the day prefixed,
which he punctually pursued.

Soon after the presenting of this Petition from the Lords, came another from
the Scots, the substance whereof was a Desire, That His Majesty would call a
Parliament, for settling a firm peace between the two Nations.

To this Petition the King replied, with signification of what he had ordered
before, in reference to himself and to the welfare of both Kingdoms.

And the Truth of it is, it was high time for an Accommodation to be effected;
for Lesley now began to rant it in New Castle and the parts adjacent, as
Brennus did at Rome, with a Vae Victis: He imposed a Tax of 350 pounds per diem
upon the Bishopric of Durham; and 300 pounds upon Northumberland, upon pain of
Plundering; and yet permitted Soldiers to rifle Houses, break open Shops, and
act what insolences they pleased; seized upon four great English Ships laden
with Corn, as lawful prize, they not knowing in whose possession the Town was
till they entered the Haven.

The first day of the Lords Assembling at York, it was resolved that a
Parliament should be Summoned to convene at Westminster, November the Third.
Then a Message was sent to the Scots, desiring a speedy Treaty at York. The
Scots replied, They held that no place of security for their Commissioners,
considering that the Lieutenant of Ireland, who commanded His Majesty's Army,
was one who had proclaimed them Traitors in Ireland, before the King had done
the same in England, and who had threatened to destroy their Nation both Root
and Branch, and against whom, as a chief Incendiary of the late Troubles, they
intended to complain; whereupon it was concluded, that the Treaty should be
held at Rippon, which accordingly took place.

The Parliament now approaching, whose Convening was attended by this Kingdom
with so much longing, such impatience of desires, as every moment which
retarded it, was interpreted as a kind of Grievance to the Subject; for we
began now to think, that nothing could make us a happy People but a Parliament,
and that no Parliament could make us miserable. This was the Sense of the
greater part of this Nation; and if this Parliament succeeded not adequate to
some Men's Vote, perhaps the miscarriage of their hopes may be somewhat imputed
to this Sense; Overruling Providence delights often to order the Operations of
free and natural Agents, counter to Man's Expectations, to teach us the vanity
of that Faith which is founded upon Causes subaltern.

And oh! that I could here but express to the life, the high Expectations of
the People from this Parliament, which came with such a terrible swing, after
so long an Interval, and so many Dissolutions, that put the whole Nation into
such a Consternation, as, I presume, the like President cannot be produced out
of the Records of Antiquity, since William the Conqueror did first invade our
English Territories.

But however (Courteous Readers) for your present Divertisement, I will here
make a small Attempt, to express the present Thoughts and Expectations of that
Parliament, which in process of time brake forth into a Civil War, (and I pray
God I may never live to see the like again) the which I shall represent under
the Emblem of a new, tight, and wellbuilt Ship, which upon the Launching, was
named, The Bon Resolution, (although some would have it called, The House of
Commons, others, The Three Estates, and others, The Swiftsure) and was
immediately employed in His Majesty's Service, but being for some time
wind-bound within the Harbor, ( viz. about 12 days) the Captain of the said
Ship coming early out of his Cabin one morning, and finding the Wind tackt
about, and blowing fair for his intended Voyage, being upon the Quarter Deck,
he knocks up his Seamen, and salutes them after this manner: viz.

ARise you Mortals, from your Dens of Sleep,
Neptune now calls, to launch into the Deep,
The Wind blows fair, it is lately turned South-west,
And we must Sail directly to the East:
For Pearls and Diamonds, Jewels of great Rate,
Which in the Acquest, sometimes a broken Pate
Has been our Lot; yet still we venture must,
You know our Shipwrights (wherein so great a Trust
Is now reposed in us, comes from Whitehall)
Our late Commission; whence we may learn All
Which way to steer our course, and will direct
Whom we must crush; and whom we must protect
In this our Voyage. It Is the Commonweal
Of these Three Kingdoms, That a Roaring Peal
Of Small and Great Shot now aloud must Ring
From this our Vessel. To preserve the King
In all His Legal Rights. But to advance
Against all those, who have lead up a Dance,
As will, in time, if Heavens do not prevent,
Destroy both King, and all the Parliament,
And in their stead set up a Scarlet Whore,
Of whose sweet Nature we have long before
Known by Experience, and now for to be cheated
By their Sham-Plots again, and to be defeated,
Huzza, Brave Lads! This thing shall never be,
We'll rather choose upon a Triple Tree
To take our chance, and now Heavens crown the Event,
And bless our Vessel, and our good Intent;
Heavens bless us from the Sally Men of War,
Heavens bless us likewise that we do not jar
Among our selves. If such a thing should be,
And that our Seamen now should disagree,
And fight for Thimbles, Bodkins, and Gu-gaws,
Instead of fighting for the Good Old Cause
Of Liberty and Property. Oh! this Evil
Would make us Zealots for the Pope and Devil,
More than for Christ's true Church, which now does stand
In danger much, if these should have Command
Within our British Isle; which to prevent,
God bless our King, and His next Parliament,
Which now approaches, whom we must defend.
And so our Ship, the Lord Almighty send
Into safe Harbor, when that we shall bring
Peace to the Church, and Honor to the King;
And when our Pearls and Diamonds shall arrive,
We'll fix them fast upon King CHARLES his Hive,
His Crown shall glister like the Rising Sun.
Courage, Brave Boys! Our Wars shall then be done,
When we shall see those Fellows sent from hence,
With all their Tories, to that place from whence
They first did rise, which was from that Grand Sire,
Who claims the Patent, to be the great Liar
And Forger of all Mischiefs, both in Church and State;
But will, at length, get such a Broken Pate
As will confound him, and his Holy Church,
When as Old Nick shall leave him in the Lurch:
To him I Will leave him, and his Tory Crew,
And now proceed to what does here ensue.
Tuesday, November. 3. being the day prefixed, and the Parliament assembled, His
Majesty bespake them in these words:

My Lords,
THE knowledge that I have of the Scottish Subjects, was the cause of my calling
of the last Assembly of Parliament, wherein if I had been believed, I do most
sincerely think, that things had not fallen as We now see; but it is no wonder
that men are so slow to believe, that so great a Sedition should be raised upon
so little ground.

But now (My Lords and Gentlemen) the Honor and Safety of this Kingdom lying so
heavily at stake, I am resolved to put My Self freely upon the Love and
Affections of my English Subjects, And had His Majesty kept close to this
resolution, some think things had never come to that extremity that afterward
they did.
as those of my Lords that waited upon me at York, very well remember, I there
declared.

Therefore (my Lords) I shall not mention Mine own Interest, or that Support I
might justly expect from you, till the Common Safety be secured; though I must
tell you, I am not asbamed to say, those Charges I have been at, have been
merely for the securing the good of this Kingdom, though the Success has not
been answerable to My desires: Therefore I shall only desire you to consider
the best way for the Security of this Kingdom, wherein there are two things
chiefly considerable: 1. The chasing out the Rebels. 2. That other in
satisfying your just Grievances, wherein I shall promote you to concur so
heartily and clearly with you, that all the World may see my intentions have
ever been and shall be to make this a glorious and flourishing Kingdom.


There are only two things more that I shall mention to you, the one is to
tell you, That the Loan of Money which I lately had from the City of London,
wherein the Lords that waited on me at York assisted me, will only maintain my
Army for two months, from the beginning of that time it was granted. Now (my
Lords and Gentlemen) I leave it to your Consideration, what Dishonor and
Mischief it might be, in case for want of Money my Army be Disbanded before the
Rebels be put out of this Kingdom. Secondly, The securing the Calamities the
Northern People endure at this time, and so long as the Treaty is on foot: And
in this I may say, Not only they, but all this Kingdom will suffer the harm;
therefore I leave this also to your Consideration, for the ordering of the
Great Affairs whereof, you are to Treat at this time. I am so confident of your
Love to me, and that your Care is such for the Honor and Safety of the
Kingdom, that I should freely leave to you where to begin. Only this, that you
may know the better the State of all Affairs, I have commanded my Lord Keeper
to give you a short and free Account of those things that have happened in this
Interim, with this Protestation, That if his Account be not Satisfactory, as it
ought to be, I shall, whenever you desire it, give you a Full and Perfect
Account of every Particular. One thing more I desire of you, as one of the
greatest means to make this an Happy Parliament, That you on your part, as I on
mine, lay aside Suspicion one of another, as I promised my Lords at York; It
shall not be my Fault, if this be not a Happy and Good Parliament.

The King having ended, the Lord Keeper, in pursuance of His Majesty's
Commands, gave them a Summary Account and Relation of all Things relating to
the Scottish Invasion, I dare not say Rebellion; for, that the King represented
them under that Disgustful Character, was very ill resented by some
considerable Peers; whereof His Majesty having notice, told the Parliament two
days after, He must needs call them Rebels, so long as they have an Army that
does invade England.

The remainder of this Week was spent partly in settling Committees for General
Grievances, and partly in set Speeches, Rhetorically declaiming against, and
dissecting them.

The remainder of the particular Transactions of this year of the Commons of
England Assembled in Parliament, and of the year succeeding, 1641. I shall not
here relate at large, but refer you to the Annals of King Charles the First,
written by this ingenious Author (from whom I have borrowed and transcribed the
major part of my precedent Relations) who ends at the Death of the Earl of
Strafford, which was May the 12th, 1641. And after that, I must refer you for
the remainder of that year unto Sir Richard Baker's Chronicle of the Kings of
England, etc. But the particular heads of those Transactions, as to matter of
fact, I shall be willing here to recite for your (Courteous Readers) present
satisfaction in manner and form as follows, viz.

1. Several Petitions against Grievances. 2. Privileges of the Lords House
Vindicated. 3. The Lieutenant of Ireland Impeached of high Treason. 4. The
Northern Armies in want. 5. Bishop of Lincoln Enlarged. 6. Justice Howard
assaulted by a Papist. 7. Prinn and Bastwick enter London in Triumph. 8.
Secretary Windebanck flies. 9. Votes against Ship Money. 10. The London
Petition against Bishops. 11. The late Canons Damned. 12. The Lord Keeper Finch
defends his Innocence. 13. He is Voted Traitor upon four Considerations, and
thereupon he flies beyond Sea. 14. The Kings Speech for Bishops. 15. One
Goodman a Priest reprieved. 16. A Remonstrance against Goodman the Priest. 17.
The Kings Answer to that Remonstrance. 18. The Scottish Commissioners Demands,
and the Answer thereunto. 19. A Match propounded between the Lady Mary and the
Prince of Orange. 20. The Kings Speech to the Lords concerning that Match. 21.
Some Plots of the Papists. 22. The Earl Berkly Impeacht of High Treason. 23.
The King passes a Bill for Trienial Parliaments, and his Speech concerning it.
24. The Bill of Subsidies passes at the same time, and Bonefires and other
tokens of joy were made that night in the City of London, by Order of
Parliament. 25. William Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury, accused of high
Treason in fourteen Artieles. 26. The Lord Digbyes Speech for Episcopacy. 27.
The Charge against the Earl of Strafford is given, and his Answers thereunto,
and Westminster Hall is appointed for his Trial. 28. The Commons justify their
Charge by Law. 29. The Earl answers by Council. 30. The Commons Vote him
guilty of High Treason. 31. The Commons Petition the King against Papists, and
the King's Answer. 32. The Kings Speech to the Parliament in defense of the E
of Strafford 33. The Prince of Orange Marryeth the Lady Mary. 34. A Tumult in
Westminster crying for Justice against the Earl. 35. A Protestation framed by
the Commons. 36. A Bill propounded for the continuation of the Parliament. 37.
The Earl of Strafford Vored by the Lords House guilty of High Treason. 38. Two
Bills tendered to the King, who is much perplexed what Answer to return. 39. The
Earl himself, by Letter desires the King to pass the Bill. 40. Censures upon
the Kings passing the Bill for the Parliaments continuation. 41. The Kings
Letter in behalf of the Earl to the House of Lords; and their answer thereunto.
42. The Earl brought to the Scaffold, and his last Speech before his Execution.
43. The Earls Character. Here I must refer you at large to Sir Richard Baker,
p. 511. etc. 44. The Earls Children restored to their Honor and Estates. 45.
The Earls of Hartford, Essex, Bedford, Warwick, Lord Say, with some others,
made Privy-Councellors. 46. The Lord Treasurer and other great Officers resign
up their places. 47. The Star Chamber abolished, and the high Commission Court
put down. 48. Ship Money relinquished by the King. 49. Five Judges for
Ship Money Impeached of high Misdemenours, and Berkly accused of high Treason.
50. Several Laws passed by the King for regulating abuses and disclaiming
Privileges. 51. The Treaty between the two Kingdoms confirmed. 52. The Earl of
Holland made General of the English Army, and a Pole raised for the payment of
them. 53. Both Armies are Disbanded, and the King takes a Journey into
Scotland, and there confers honors upon several persons of that Kingdom. 54. A
Bloody Rebellion breaks forth in Ireland. 55. Owen O Conally, an Irish
Protestant, discovers the Plot, prevents the seizure of Dublin Caestle. 56. The
Earl of Leicester chosen Deputy of Ireland. 57. The Irish Rebellion occasioned
by the insurrection in Scotland. 58. The King receives Intelligence of what
happened in Ireland, and sends Sir James Stuart with instructions thither, and
moves the Parliament of Scotland for Aid, which they Excuse. 59. The Irish
pretend the Kings Commission for what they did, thereby to dishearten the
English, and also feigned Letters that the Parliament would compel them to
Protestancy. 60. The Irish Rebels possess themselves of all strong places in
Vlster. 61. They contrary to Articles of Surrender, Massacre the poor English,
but save the Scots. 62. The Parliament of England designs Money for Ireland.
63. Forces raised to go against the Rebels. 64. The Earl of Ormond made
Lieutenant General of the Forces there. 65. A Regiment sent to Ireland under
Sir Simon Hartcourt. 66. The King returns out of Scotland, and the Parliament
present a Remonstrance to him at Hampton Court, as also a Petition with the
Remonstrance. 67. An Act published in Scotland against Levying Arms without the
Kings Commission. 68. The King receives the Parliaments Petition, but desires
them not to publish the Remonstrance. 69 The Remonstrance is Ordered to be
published in all parts of the Kingdom, and the King answers the Petition, and
Vindicates himself from the Aspersions of the Remonstrance. 70. The Commons
pass a Bill for disabling all in Holy Orders to exercise temporal Jurisdiction.
71. The tumult upon the Lords slighting the Bill, comes to their House, and
clamor againg the Bishops, and some of the Commons justify those tumults. 72.
The Lords sends a Writ directed to the Sheriffs and Justices to suppress those
tumults. 73. Whereupon the Constables and Justices are sent for by the Commons.
74. The Bishops Protestations against the actions of the Parliament, and they
are charged with high Treason, and committed to the Tower, where they continued
about four Months. 75. The Parliament Petition the King for a Guard. 76. The
King denies the Petition, and charge Kimbolton and five Members more of the
Commons with high Treason. 77. The Commons justify the accused Members. 78.
The King comes to the House to demand the Delivery of the five Members, and the
Commons Vote this a breach of Privilege. 79. The King removes to
Hampton Court, and sends a Message to the Parliament. 80. The Commons Petition
the King for the Militia to be put into their hands. 81. The Queen accompanies
the Princess Mary into Holland, and the King removes to York, and there issues
out Commissions of Array. And so, Finis Coronat Opus, I have proceeded to the
last day of 1641. For I find March 28. 1642. The King and Parliament differ
about who shall be chief Commander at Sea; where I am willing to leave them,
and dare not launch out any farther, as to the Merits of the Cause.
And now in the close of all, if you will please to give me leave faithfully to
examine and compare together the Transactions, Principles, and Practices of the
Commons of England (in particular, as being Assembled in Parliament) Anno
Domini 1640, and 1641, as also Anno Domini 1680, and 1681. (whose Transactions,
Debates, and Speeches, are all so lately Printed, that I need not here insert
the Particulars, but refer you unto the Debates themselves) And I do clearly
find the same English Spirit, so far as 1641. (pray take notice I proceed no
further in this Multum in Parvo) runs almost exactly Parallel with the present
years of 80, and 81. And when you have perused and seriously considered them
within your selves, I do presume (and am very apt to conjecture) that you who
are of a sober mind, and wish from your Heart and Soul all Peace, Prosperity,
and Happiness to your King and Country, That you will say with me, That
although they are not enough to satisfy and silence an high Tory and bloody
Papist, yet they are Arguments and Demonstrations strong enough in Conseience
to convince any Atheist in his sober mind, of the Reality and good Intentions
(against Popery and Slavery, many times slily introduced by some unworthy
Sycophants, and corrupt Ministers of State) of the beforementioned precedent
Parliaments.

And although we live at present in an Age of Wonders, viz. of wonderful Signs,
wonderful and most prodigious Comets and Blazing Stars, and wonderful
Apparitions (for a particular whereof, viz. of such as have happened in the
last year 1680 pray read Mr. Christopher Ness his late Book, the Title whereof
is, Wonderful Signs for Wonderful Times) yet I say the major part of us do turn
all these things into perfect Ridicule and Scorn, and are far from deterring us
from the evil of our ways, but do still run on, ( Jehu-like) and persist in our
accustomed Sins, and Dalilah-like Provocations against God, and are all of us
(the Lord of Heaven knows) in a very unprepared frame, temper, and disposition,
to meet him (and to kiss the Rod) in the ways of his Judgments, when they shall
come suddenly upon us, like an armed Man, and there shall be none to deliver us
out of his avenging hand. Him that has an Ear to hear, let him hear.

And among the many Wonders which we have already had, I have made bold here to
insert one more, which for ought I know may suddenly come to pass in the midst
of us, (and pray pardon my plainness and well-meaning, and hearty wishes
therein) the which you may please to peruse, in manner and form as follows,
viz.

A Wonder strange I will you tell,
From Heaven 'twill be, and not from Hill,
When as King CHARLES shall be content,
In Love to meet his Parliament,
And let them sit, For to Redress
All Grievances, both more or less,
Which in our Church and State have been,
Ever since our Blessed Virgin Queen
Until this day, Which make us bleed,
And cry, We want some nursing seed,
To Cool us in our Scarlet Fever;
This is the time, or else for ever
Adieu to Peace. War will begin
In this our Land. The man of Sin
Begins to Rant. And to declare
Against us all, He will make War,
Who will not stoop unto his Power,
The Sword or Smithfield shall devour
Such Northern Bastards which have done
Such Mischief to his Triple Crown.
But when our Prince, King CHARLES the Great
Shall Dissipate this Southern Heat,
And when our Trustees shall declare,
A War against Saint Peter's Chair,
(And him that does Possess the same,
Whom Christ himself at last shall blame)
And so secure us from those Brats
Which to the Church and State are Rats,
And still do Plot to keep us under,
And Gnaw our Church and State in sunder;
Oh! then Sweet Peace shall Enter in:
And after that, the Man of Sin
Shall soon be Routed, out, from hence
By the Powerful Charms and Influence
Of Prince and People, Joined in one,
Like to the Father and the Son;
Till then, and not till then, will here ensue
A Lasting Peace; till then, Reader, Adieu:
And know till then that I am well content
To suffer for an Honest Parliament,
So long as they shall prove so Loyal,
As we of late, have had the Trial
Although miscalled all Bugbears
By some proud Rascals, whose soft Ears
May yet in time perchance to feel
The Dint of their Provoked Steel,
And make them stop their mouths for fear
A Triple Tree should them besmear,
Who have so boldly here of late
Belcht out against our Triple State
Such Spite and Venom, in one hour
Enough (say some) for to devour,
Our Triple League within our Land,
Where CHARLES the Second does Command,
By Laws Established with Consent
Of three Estates in Parliament
King Lords and Commons, Oh this State
Cannot be Crushed without a broken Pate
Given to some, who still do Lurk.
Within our Bowels, who much like the Kirk
In other Countries, and would straightway bring
All to their Bow, and likewise every thing
Which Thwarts their Humors, And whose fair pretense
Is still their Zeal unto Omnipotence,
Although in this (Heaven knows) they are all evil
And Pope and they may shake hands with the --
As all infallible in their own proud sense:
God keep us from their power and Influence
Within our Land, and let all Christians say
To this Amen. And here we will part the Fray!
Although continue Praying Till we see
This Unity made visible in Three
And that you may see as unlikly a Wonder and Prediction may come to pass, I
will relate unto you who have not already seen or heard of it, a strange and
most wonderful Prediction, the most part whereof is already come to pass, (and
that within our Times and Remembrance) the which said most wonderful Prediction
is of many hundred years standing, the which I did formerly take out of a Book,
the Title whereof is Britains Genius, Printed here in London about 1646. or
1647. long before His Majesty's most wonderful Restoration, and some space of
time before His late Majesty's most inauspicious and most astonishing
Decolation. The contents of the said most wonderful and ancient Prophecy out of
the said Book, you may please to peruse as follows., viz.

WHen here a Scot shall think his Throne to set
Above the Circle of a British King,
He shall a dateless Parliament beget,
From whence a furicus Armed brood shall spring;
That Army shall beget a wild Confusion,
Confusion shall an Anarthy beget,
That Anarchy shall bring forth in Conclusion
A Creature which you have no name for yet;
That Creature shall Conceive a Sickly State,
Which shall an Aristocracy produce;
The many-headed Beast not liking that
To raise Demoeracy shall rather choose;
And then Democracies Production shall
A Moon Calfe be, which some a Mole do call;
So acting for a while, few men shall know
Whether among them there be a Supreme or no.
Five of them, shall subdue the other five,
And then those five shall by a doubtful strife
Each others Death, so happily Contrive,
That they shall Die, to live a better life
And out of their corruption rise there shall
A true Supreme, Acknowledged by ail, His Majesty's Restanration plainly
foretold.

In which the power of all the Five shall be
With Unity made visible in Three,
King, People, Parliaments, with Priests and Peers,
Shall be a while your Emulous Grandees,
Make a Confused Pentarchy some years,
And leave off their distinct Claims by degrees;
And then shall Righteousness ascend the Throne,
Then Love, and Truth, and Peace, Re-enter shall;
Then Faith and Reason shall agree in One,
And all the Virtues to their Council Call.
Then timely after this, there shall arise
That Kingdom and That happy Government,
Which is the Scope of all those Prophecies
That further Truths obscurely Represent.
But how this shall be done, few men shall see;
For wrought in Clouds and Darkness it shall be:
And ere it comes to pass in Public View,
Most of these following Signs shall first Ensue:
A King shall willingly, himself Unking,
And thereby grow far greater than before;
The Priests their Priesthood to Contempt shall bring,
And Piety shall thereby thrive the more:
A Parliament it self shall overthrow,
And thereby shall a better being gain;
The Peers by setting of themselves below,
A more Enobling Honor shall obtain:
The People for a while, shall be Enslaved,
And that shall make them for the future free;
By Private Loss the Public shall be saved;
An Army shall by yiedling, Victor be.
Then shall God own his People and their Cause,
The Laws Corruption shall Reform ths Laws.
And Bullocks of the Largest Northern breed
Shall fatted be, where now scarce Sheep can feed.
And here although I cannot Divine, heither dare I assume to my self so much
boldness as to prescribe the way and means, in order to the accomplishment of
this most strange and wonderful Recited Prophecy, yet I am apt to Conjecture,
and do persuade my self (if ever it shall come to pass) That it will be in a
very Critical time of Common and Eminent Danger (peradventure the Dread of a
Popish Successor, and the Dismal Consequence thereof) when some good Prince or
other shall be so far graciously pleased to condescend to his grand Council, as
to make three Kingdoms by his Royal Fiat, (aut Le Roy Le Veult) for the future
Elective, and so they may still introduce the Royal Blood and Legitimate Line
ad Infinitum, that are truly Protestants.

And now Courage (most Noble Loyal and Courteous Readers) what say you if his
present Majesty of Great Britain should be this Person of Quality here
intimated and described in this most wonderful and Ancient Prophecy (a
Prediction I must needs Confess most proper for such wonderful times as we now
live in) would you not all unanimously and with loud Acclamations throw up your
Caps and Beavers into the Air, and cry, Vive le Roy, (or, Currat Lex and vivat
Rex?) And if so, for my own part I should yet hope to see (if it shall please
my Gracious God to lend me a little longer time of health and strength) many
Halcyon and most happy days in the Land and Nation of my Nativity before I go
away hence and shall be seen no more. And that an happy union and good
correspondence between his present Majesty and his future Parliaments, without
the least suspicion or jealousy one of another, may yet come to pass in our
days, I do most humbly beseech thy Divine Majesty, who are the Lord God
Almighty, to grant for thy great names sake, and for thy Vicegerents sake, and
for his Peoples sake (who are truly Loyal and obedient Subjects) in and through
thy most dear and well beloved Son the Lord Jesus Christ, in whom thou art well
pleased, and whom (by thy free grace, goodness and most stupendous mercy and
compassion to thy poor creatures) is the Lord and giver of everlasting Life, to
all those who shall most faithfully, and most sincerely, though but imperfectly
obey him. And now to him with thy eternal Majesty; who art King Immortal,
Invisible, and only wise God, by the assistance of thy holy (and for ever
blessed) Spirit of Grace, I do most humbly desire to render, give, and ascribe
all honor, glory, laud and praise, might, Majesty, reverential fear, and all
humble adoration, from this time forth and for evermore, Amen.

And now in the close of all, Whereas in my Title Page I have there intimated
how Magna Charta was most solemnly and most wonderfully (even to the
astonishment of the Spectators) ratified, pronounced and proclaimed, and
therefore must not now leave you in the dark, as to that particular; but refer
you to the Packet of Advice from Rome, Number 50. (the which, in my slender
apprehension, deserves to be written in Letters of Gold upon the Walls of both
Houses of Parliament) And for your present (and I hope pleasant) satisfaction I
have here inferted and presented you with the same at large.

HAving presented the Reader with the most remarkable Transactions of Papal
Tyranny in Foreign Parts down to the year 1254, it is time to look homewards,
and observe Ecclesiastic Occurrences in England; our last Discourse of that
kind terminating with the death of King John, to whom succeeded his Son Henry,
the third of that name; for though by reason of the Fewds between John and his
Barons, they had invited over Lewis the French King's Son, and many had to him
sworn Allegiance; yet the Father being dead; and his faults buried with him;
they did not think fit to yield up themselves to the French Man's Yoke, who
already began to exercise an insufferable Tyranny wherever he had Power: And
although the Pope had at first encouraged the Barons in their Rebellion, yet
when once he had hectored King John into a Resignation of his Crown, he became
his Patron, and forbad Lewis from intermedling with the Kingdom, as being then
(forsooth!) part of S. Peter's Patrimony, and therefore excommunicated Lewis
for the Invasion, which engaged most of the Clergy to oppose him: And so Henry
on the 28th of October, 1216. was Crowned, being then in the 10th year of his
Age; and Lewis being routed at Lincoln, was glad to come to a Treaty, quit his
Pretensions, and most dishonourably retreat into France. Yet it is observable,
that the Clergy were then such fast Friends to their Head the Pope, and so
little regardful of the Descent in the Right Line, that they would not accept
Henry for their King, without making him first do Homage to the Holy Chureh of
Rome, and Pope Innocent, for his Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and swearing
to pay the 1000 Marks per Annum which his Father had promised to that See.
(Matthew. Paris, fol. 278.)

And besides, to bring Grists to the Roman Mill, the Pope's Legate at that time
in England, immediately on the Departure of Prince Lewis, sent his Inquisitors
all over the Realm, and whomsoever they would discover to have sided with him,
Consensuetiam Levissimo, Though in the least degree, must atone the Crime with
a large Sum; insomuch as the Bishop of Lincoln before he could be restored to
his Bishopric, was forced to pay 1000 Marks to the Pope's use, and 1000 to the
Legate, (for the little Rogue would have suips in the prey with the great One)
and many other Bishops, and Religious Men, were glad to empty their Pockets to
him at the same rate. Matthew. Paris, fol. 218.

In the year 1220. the Pope was pleased to make Hugh, formerly Bishop of
Lineoln, a Saint; and since the manner of his Vn-Holiness's declaring the same
may be Divertive to the common English Reader, I shall give you the very words
of his Letter (Translated) as I find it in Matthew. Paris, fol. 298. Honorius,
Servant of the Servants of God, to all out well-beloved Sons; the Faithful of
Christ, that shall inspect these Presents, Greeting and Apostolic Benediction:
The worthiness of Divine Piety does make famous his Holy Ones and Elect, placed
in the Bliss of the Celestial Kingdom, by the shining forth of their Miracles
still upon Earth, that the Devotion of the Faithful being thereby stirred up,
may with due Veneration implore their Aid and Suffrages; since therefore we are
fully satisfied, that the Bounty of Heaven has illustrated Hugh Bishop of
Lincoln, as well in his Life, as after his Death, with a multitude of Famous
Miracles: We have thought fit to Enroll him in the Catalogue of Saints, and
admonish and exhort you all in the Lord, That you devoutly implore his
Patronage and Intercession for you with Almighty God; farther Commanding, That
the day of his Decease be henceforwards every year devoutly Celebrated as a
Holyday. Dated at Viterbium the 13th Calend of March, in the fourth year of our
Popedom.

But how much a Saint soever he was, we meet with another Bishop as very a
Devil; for about this time a Quarrel happening between Richard Bishop of
Durham, and the Monks of the same Church; they complained of him to the Pope,
who seemed much concerned at his many horrid Crimes, and presently sent over a
Letter in these Terms -- Honorius Bishop, etc. to the Bishops of Salisbury,
Ely, etc. Greeting and Apostolic Benediction: It is fit for us to be so be so
delighted in the sweet Savor of a good opinion of our Brethren and
Fellow Laborers, as not to connive at Vices in those that are Pestilent, since
it becomes not us for the Reverence of the Order to bear with Sinners, whose
Guilt renders them as worthy of as many Deaths, as they transmit Examples of
Perdition to those that are under them, who are too apt to imitate only the
Depravaties of their Superiors. Hence it is, that since things too far
dissonant from Episcopal Honesty, have very often been suggested unto us
concerning our Venerable Brother the Bishop of Durham, being moved with such
repeated Complaints, we cannot suffer the said Bishop to continue in his
Enormities to the Destruction of many, for we are informed, That since he was
advanced to the Office of a Bishop, he has been guilty of Blood, and Simony and
Adultery, and Sacrilege, and Rapine, and Perjury, [A pretty parcel of Virtues
for a Bishop, and somewhat different from those 1 Timothy 3.] That he has
oppressed Clerks and Orphans, obstructed the Testaments of the deceased; that
he observes not the Statutes of the General Council, nor ever preaches the Word
of God to the People, ['Tis a wonder that small fault was mentioned] has often
sworn before many, that the Church of Durham shall never have Peace as long as
he lives: That a Monk complaining to him, that his Servants had drawn him out
of a Church, and beat him till the Blood came: He answered, It had been well,
if they had beat out his Brains, etc. We therefore, that we may not be guilty
of the faults of others, if we should wink at such Offenses, since the Clamor
thereof has ascended, so that we can dissemble it no longer; think it agreeable
to our Office to go down and see whether these things be so or no: Therefore by
these our Apostolical Writings, we Command you our Brethren to examine and
enquire into the premises, and report the same to us under Seal, that we may
Decree therein as God shall order. Dated at Viterb. etc.

You see the Pope can Cant, and pretend great Zeal to correct the Criminal, but
pray observe the end on it; These Bishops being met to examine the Business, the
Bishop of Durham presently Appeals to the Pope in Person, and then they could
proceed no farther, but away both he and the Monks his Adversaries must trudge
to Rome, whither he privately sent beforehand two of his Clerks with a good Sum
of Money, which so sweetened the Pope, that he received him very kindly: Et
post multas coram Papa Altercationes, Immoderatis profusis Expensis, etc. And
after many Wranglings before the Pope, and vast Expenses, both Bishop and Monks
were sent back (as wise and honest as they were) to agree together as well as
they could.

But that which was most memorable in this Kings Reign was an Act, which though
respecting the temporal Good of the Kingdom, yet it being Transacted chiefly by
the Clergy, and with Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, it may not be improper to
insert it into this Work.

The Reader must note, That when K. Hen. III. was become 16 years old, the Pope
took upon himself, for a small Spill, privately sent him by some corrupt
Courtiers, to declare him of Age to Govern himself, and therefore all Castles
were to be rendered up into the Kings hands. This proved the Rock of Offense,
whilst some obeyed the Pope, and opposed those as Rebels that put more
confidence in their Castles, than in the Kings good nature, or rather in that
of his upstart Counselors. Hence first sprang a Civil Broyl, thence want of
Money, then a Parliament, wherein the Grand Charter of England's Liberties once
more was exchanged for a Sum of Money: For only upon condition of renewing the
same, would the Estates allow Supplies; many Promises the King makes, and after
that, Oaths; yet no performance, but pretends Wars in France, in Scotland, and
against Infidels. But still his people finding them all but pretenses, and ill
success to attend all his Enterprises, refuse to supply him for the Holy War:
Then he seems penitent, and pours out new promises to observe Magna Charta, and
Seals it with the most solemn Execration that is to be found in the Womb of
Story, and so punctually Recorded, as if God would have all Generations to
remember it as the Seal of the Covenant between the King of England and his
people: It was done in Parliament, where the Lords Temporal and Spiritual,
Clergy men, Knights, etc. all standing with Tapers in their hands burning, the
King himself also standing with a cheerful Countenance, holding his open hand
upon his Breast; the Archbishop of Canterbury pronounced this Curse, as it is
verbatim Recorded by Matthew. Paris, fol. 839.

By the Authority of God Omnipotent, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and of
the Glorious Mother of God the Virgin Mary, and of the blessed Apostles Peter
and Paul, and of all other Apostles, and of the Holy Martyr and Archbishop
Thomas, and of all the Martyrs, and of the Blessed Edward King of England, and
of all Confessors and Virgins, and of all the Saints of God: We Excommunicate,
and Anathematize, and Sequester from our our Holy Mother the Church, all those
which henceforth knowingly and Maliciously shall deprive or spoil the Church of
her Right; and all those that shall by any Art or Wit rashly violate diminish,
or change secretly or openly in Deed, Word, or Council, by crossing in part or
in whole, those Ecclesiastical Liberties, or ancient approved Customs of the
Kingdom, especially the Liberties and free Customs which are contained in the
Charters of the Common Liberties of England, and the Forests, granted by our
Lord the King to the Archbishops, Bishops, Prelates, Earls, Barons, Knights,
and Freeholders. And all those who have published, or being published have
observed any Statutes, Ordinances, or thing against them, or any thing therein
contained, or which have brought in any Customs to the contrary, or observed
them being brought in, and all Writers of such Ordinances, or Councils, or
Executioners, and all such as shall presume to judge according to such
Ordinances: All and every such persons as are, or at any time shall be,
knowingly guilty of any such matters, shall ipso facto incur this Sentence; and
such as are ignorantly guilty, shall incur the same, if being admonished, they
within 15 days after amend not. For everlasting Memory whereof, we hereunto put
our Seals.

Thus far the words of the Curse, nor was the manner of pronouncing it less
dreadful; for immediately as soon as the Charters and this Sentence was read
and signed, they then all throwing down their Tapers extinguished and smoking,
said, So let all that go against this Curse be extinct and stink in Hell: And
the King having all the while continued in the posture before mentioned, said,
So God me help, I will observe all those things sincerely and faithfully, as I
am a man, as I am a Christian, as I am a Knight, and as I am a King Crowned and
Anointed.

Pare but away some few Superstitions, and search the History of all Ages, you
will not find a parallel hereunto, so seriously composed, so solemnly
pronounced with an Amen from the Representative Body of the whole Kingdom, put
in Writing, under Seal, preserved to Posterity, and (give me leave to add)
vindicated by God himself in the Ruin of so many Opposers; for never has any
Prince, Favorite, Councellor, or corrupt Judge, from that time to this,
endeavored to act contrary to the Essentials of the said great Charter, but
first or last it has crushed them into Ruin, or great Calamity. Yet how little
this King Henry regarded it, I shall acquaint you in the very words of the
Historian -- Soluto Concilio Rex Confestim pessimo usus Concilio omnia
praedicta Cogitabat Infirmare, etc. The Grand Council (or Parliament) was no
sooner broke up, but the King following lewd and pernicious Council, contrived
how to weaken and undo it; for 'twas told him, That he would not be King, or at
least not Lord and Master of England, if all those Liberties should be
observed, as John his Father had experienced, who rather chose to dye, than
thus to be shackled and trampled on by his Subjects: And these Whisperers of
the Devil ( Susurrones Satanae, so honest Matthew. calls them) added -- You need
not value it if you do break your Vows, and incur this Curse, for the Pope for
an hundred or two of Pounds will Absolve you. It Is well enough, that by signing
the Confirmation of these Characters you have got a Tenth, which will amount to
many thousand Marks; and if you will but give the Pope a little portion of it,
he will Absolve you, even though the Curse be ratified by himself, for he that
has Power to Bind can Loose.

Thus by the villainy of ill Ministers, and the knavery of the Pope, this Prince
was led into Deceit, Perjury, Injustice, and Tyranny, to his own continual
Trouble, and the unspeakable Damage of the Realm.

And if this honest and well intended Narrative, either in the whole or in
part, shall be deemed necessary and convenient at this juncture of time, for
the present and future satisfaction either of Prince or People, or shall
contribute any thing toward a firm and solid Foundation and Establishment upon
the true Basis of Universal Love, Charity, and good will, among the many
contesting Parties at this day in the midst of us, (for sine procul dubio we
shall never be happy till that time be accomplished) I have my desire. The
height of whose real ambition is, to render my self worthy of my Sovereign Lord
the King and my Countries acception. And having now ventured to expose it unto
public view, I have in Cognito (by my honest and trusty post Pidgeon)
conveyed it into the hands of a Loyal Subject and good Citizen, as I am
informed, (and if my Information be not true, pray let me not therefore be
Libeld) called by the name of honest Dick Janeway, for the Publication thereof.

And what though he be buffeted and baited, For I must confess I have not
perused it.
in every pitiful weekly (I had almost said Quotidian) Pamphlet, like an Vrsa
Major and Vrsa Minor, (This being the Title of a Book newly Printed, and newly
come forth, which I presume does face in opposition to mine, and peradventure
it may serve by the way of Post Ponae, as a Responce thereunto) by a company of
high-flown scurrilous Tories, Tantivies, and Towzers, who only bark where they
cannot bite; yet I say, I do not look upon honest Dick, to be a worse Subject,
a worse Citizen, or a worse Commonwealths-man, for all that; for I do persuade
my self (having some small and little acquaintance with them, although I could
wish toto cord, I had less) their most venomous and malicious tongues are no
slander (toto in toto et in quilibet part) and blessed be God; that we do yet
live (but how long the Lord of Heaven only knows if these men should rule the
roast,) under so mild limited and well tempered Government. Wherein as honest
man and a Loyal Subject may be Protected, and Defended from the furious and
bold Attempts of these blood thirsty Assassinates, who make it their business
(journelament se vous asseure) not only to Libell the present and best
established Legislative Government this day under the Sun, ( viz. by King Lords
and Commons) but also if by any probable or possible means they can, by their
continual charging the most Loyal Subjects of His Present Majesty with
Republican plots, and sham-plots, (Although by the overuling and good
Providence of Almighty God, constantly found out and betrayed) on purpose to
render them most odious to the Government and to bring us all at last (if they
can) into a most miserable state of horror and confusion, and from such Loyal
Subjects, Tantivy Abhorrours, and most Profane and Dissolute Debauchee;, Isay,
iterum atque iterum. Libera nos Domine. Amen.

The CONCLUSION.
TO that most high and lofty proud Prelate (if these lines should ever fall
into His Unholy hands) the Fallible and Infallible Pope of Rome in particular,
and to all the rest of his Fanatical, Athestical, and Papistical adjuncts and
adherents whatsoever.
GIve ear, proud Rebels; Blood-suckers draw near;
Add to this doleful Piece your brinish Tear;
To see a Nation poisoned in their Blood,
With Pride and Faction, not well understood
By our Great CHARLES: Oh Rome, it is such as you
Would crush our Captain, and his Kingdoms too,
By your accursed Caballs; which to prevent,
God send our King and his next Parliament,
So fully to agree, that so at length they may
Condemn you all, as Ravenous Beasts of pray,
Who worry would, our Sheep and Shephered too,
If not prevented, by a most Noble Crew.
Of Loyal Subjects, that will faithful be
Unto the Death, for English Monarchy.
Which is so bounded by the Supreme Law
Of God and nature, which will over Awe
Your Plots and Shamplots and your Trusty Friend
Who fain would bring our Captain to his end:
But Heavens forbid so base an Act as this,
Should ever take place within this Realm of Bliss,
England I mean, an Earthly Paradise,
Before infected by such bold Dormice,
And Sons of Scarlet Whore, the which are all
Sworn Enemies to the State, and to Whitehall:
Unless you get a King, who straight must pay
Homage to you, and by your Scepter sway
His future Legal rights, and he must Dance
After your Pipe, like Italy, Spain, and France:
And many places more when you shall send
Servus Servorum to your Trusty Friend;
Who must your Benediction soon observe,
Or else Incur displeasure, to deserve
Your Thundering Bull of Excommunication when
But once Pronounced, straightway Allegiance then
Must veil their Top Sails, to your Bloody Flagg
Or else by the Mass you will catch them by the Crag
And hang them up, as Traitors to your State,
Since you have sworn to admit of no such Mate.
By holy Cross and by Saint Peter's Chair
(Whose Vicar general under Christ you are
If lies be true) who being his Successor
In faith and virtue, Montebanck not Peter
You are, who never could dream of such a doting Fool
Should er'e succeed upon his sacred stool
(To feed Christ's Lambs, but hark, instead of that
You fill your Coffers, with their Blood and fat)
When as Christ said, upon this Rock I Will build
My Holy Church, look Pope have you fulfilled
His Sacred Word, which was not on that Bone,
(You have so often built up your tottering Throne)
Of super hunc Petrum, You are a Liar,
'Twas super hanc Petram, I Will build my Quire.
Of thy confession Peter, over which the Gates of Hell
Shall never prevail, either by Pope or Spell,
Of Magic Art, or any Devilish Plot,
They all shall stink, and burn, and die, and rot.
When e're they shall attempt my Churches weal
To undermine, I Will ring them such a Peal
Of thundering Volleys, that shall straightway make
Them quake for fear, or else pray do not take
My Royal Word again, but say I am Evil,
And Pope and I are Partners with the Devil,
Which Heavens forbid, that ever such a race
Should spring from thence, and after some small space.
Of his return again, should straight proclaim
Rebels to all that draw in Charles his Wain,
And will not buckle to our devellish pride
Of Popery and Slavery, to Ropes they shall be tide,
Or else old Smithfield flames shall them devour,
To mount us up unto our stately Tower,
Of pride, ambition, avarice, and blood,
Treason, rebellion, faction, a sweeping flood
Of Lies, and Forgeries, Blasphemies and all,
Against Magna Charta Laws of Heavens Whitehall.
Here stop, thou doting fool, and do not think
At thy deceits and juggling tricks I Will winck,
For ever and a day, It Is time to work when you
Attempt to poison King and Kingdoms too,
By your pernicious Councels, Witness of late,
The many Loyal Presents you anticipate,
And will not let those Loyal Subjects see
With their own eyes, Oh Monstrous Prodigy!
You are the Moles that turn to every shape,
And on our Reasons would commit a Rape
And rob us of our Senses, and pretend
For holy Church you do so much contend.
To free us from all errors and from evil,
Although your power here is from the Devil.
And not from Christ, who never gave Commission
Unto Saint Peter by his holy Mission,
To feed his tender Lambs, but not to kill,
This was the substance of his sacred will,
Which you pervert, and by your sovereign power,
Instead of feeding, you do still devour
This little Flock for whom he spent his blood,
Although by you it is not understood.
But hark you Rebels, the time will shortly come,
Wherein you must receive your fatal doom,
Of, Go ye cursed into flames of fire,
With fallen Angels, and your cursed Sire,
Which you begat, and now for your reward,
Within his Arms, he strongly will you guard;
To him I leave you, and your bold Comrades
Who when on earth did act the Masquerades,
Your trusty Roger's makes your ways so plain,
To darken Goshen by their numerous train,
Of croaking Frogs, arising still from Hell,
To charm poor Lambs, by Heraclitus spell
Of spite and malice, and inveterate hate,
Against all those that would preserve the State
From ruin and destruction. But in this they are,
So libelled daily by these shrubs of War,
Who arm themselves with Paper, Ink, and Plume,
Those innocent Lambs (called Phans) for to consume,
If possibly they can, and will them straight devour,
When once they come within their verge and power.
But stay bold Towzers, People are not blind.
And though to them you have proved ever kind,
The clean contrary way, as does appear
By all your Libels both in front and year;
Yet still they say that of our English Nation,
You are the Phans, and stand in admiration
To see how boldly you infect the blood
of Prince and People, which much like a flood
Of lofty Billows, purposely to drown
Our Ship, our Pilate, and our Captains Crown.
Which yet sits fast, and firm as Laws can make,
Unless you poison him on purpose to partake,
Of Divine Vengeance, which is coming coming on,
And near at hand, to pluck you from your throne.
Which Heavens accomplish in their own good time,
I Will wait till then, the Lords time shall be mine.
I am, Pope and Adherents, etc. Your humble Servant, but most irreconcilable
Antagonist to dis-serve you, ^^ly helping to pluck down your Kingdom of
darkness, if by any fair and probable means I can. Theophilus Rationalis.
From my Study An. Dom. 1681.
FINIS.

