A REMEMBRANCE FOR THE LIVING TO Pray for the Dead.

Made by a Father of the Soc. of Jesus.

By the Prayers of the Holy Cath. Church, and the wholesome Sacrifice of the
Altar, and by Alms given for their Souls, it is not to be doubted, but the
DEAD are helped, that they may be dealt withal more mercifully, by our Lord,
then their Sins have deserved. S. August. Sermon. 32. de verb. Apost. tom. 10.
symbol of Society of Jesus

Permissu Superiorum. Anno 1641.

TO THE Devout and Charitable READER.
LORD (says holy David, Psalm. 8.) What is man that thou art mindful of him?
The Hebrew word Enosch, which David in this place uses to signify Man, does
most properly signify a most miserable forgetful Creature: So that in the
language of Scripture, a Man and a Creature most miserable, and most
forgetful, is all one. This forgetfulness is chiefly in things of the other
life, which though they be never so important never so much inculcated; yet
they find either no place at all, or the very least and last in our thoghts.

I did not therefore without particular reason entitle this brief Treatise, A
Remembrance for the living to pray for the dead: for I think (dear Reader)
that if thou have the heart of a Man, and not a stone in place of a heart, that
this Remembrance will stir thee up, to affoard far more assistance to these
distressed Souls in Purgatory, then thou did use to do, merely for want of
due Remembrance, Reflection, and Consideration of this matter.

I have in this Treatise made much use of a little Book lately set forth in
Latin of the same subject; for I found in it diverse points briefly touched
which seemed to me most worthy of longer Consideration. I have done my best to
observe that method, and use that plainness of style, which might most help my
Reader to carry away my whole discourse. Sweet IESV, who did love all Souls
so dearly, that thou did power out the last drop of thy sacred blood for
them; grant I beseech thee, even by this excess of thy Charity, that we may
not be so uncharitable to those very Souls, whom thou did love so tenderly,
as to neglect their complaints, to slight their sufferings, and to leave them
without due assistance in their miseries.

A Remembrance for the Living, to pray for the Dead.
The Preface.
BEsides many who erroneously think there is no such matter is a Purgatory, and
consequently that it is a vain thing to pray for the dead; there be many who
either for want of sufficient instruction in that which they believe, or by
inconsideratio^ of what they believe, do pass over this important business of
praying for the dead so coldly, as that they think they do enough to help their
own ye a Christ's own, Brother, if they do but say, God rest his soul; which
is a most unmerciful manner of proceeding For if we saw our little Brother
fallen into the fire, we should never be so hard-harted as to see him broile
there, and persuade our selves it were charity enough to throw a little drop of
water into the fire, somewhat to assuage his torments. And so, I know not how
it comes to pass, that many flatter themselves with the name of good-natured
and kind-harted Creatures, who notwithstanding take so little to heart this
extreme necessity of their Brethren, that their thoughts are busied about
nothing less, then relieuing them. The intention therefore of this present
Treatise is first (though very briefly) to rectify the understanding of those
who think, and believe amiss of Purgatory. Secondly more at large to stir
up in the will of all faithful belieuers an ardent desire to redress the
unspeakable miseries of these distressed Souls.

CHAP. I. PVRGATORY proved by all kind of sacred Authority.
1. FIrst, I must put my Reader in mind, that it comes all to one, to prove
that Prayers do profit the Dead, and to prove a Purgatory; for prayers can
neither profit those dead who are in Heaven, nor those dead who are in Hell,
and are past our help. Those dead then who can receive profit by our Prayers,
must neither be in Heaven, nor in Hell, but in a third place which we call
Purgatory; where being detayned to suffer for their sins not fully satisfied
for, do stand in need of the help of their living brethren. To pray for these
souls we hold it Piety, Impiety to deny them this relief.

2. This we prove, first by the authority of the old Testament. In the second
Book of the Machabees Cap. 12. it is recorded, how the most pious and valiant
Judas Machabaeus, having to this end made a gathering of twelve thousand
drachmes of silver, did send this money to Jerusalem, That sacrifice might be
offered for the sins of the dead. And this Scripture adds: A holy therefore,
and wholesome thought it is to pray for the dead, that they may be freed from
their sins. Hence it is clear that the Jews did hold prayer for the dead,
and consequently a Purgatory, seeing that they did all contribute for the
making up of this great sum of money to procure, that sacrifice might be
offered for the sins of the dead. And this pious custom of praying for the
departed, is until this very day kept, and observed by the Jews. Lastly and
chiefly, this custom is recommended by Scripture, as holy, and wholesome.

3. The Protestant will perhaps say that these two Books of the Machabees be not
Canonical Scripture. I answer, that a thousand and almost three hundred years
ago, these books were defined to be canonical, by the Council of Carthage: in
which S. Austin himself being present, did subscribe to this definition of the
Council. The words of the Council can 47. are: The Canonical Scriptures be
these: Genesis, Exodus etc. the 2. Books of the Machabees. And S. Austin says
l. 18. de Ciuit. c. 36. The Books of the Machabees not by the Jews but by the
Church are held for Canonical. And S. Hierome in Prolog. Although the books of
the Machabees be not in the Canon of the Jews, yet by the Church they are
reckoned among the historyes of divine volumes. If therefore we will receive the
Canon of Scripture from the Church, our question is at an end; if we will not,
we may make questions without end. So we see Luther himself calls into
question the authority of the Apocalypse, and says in Praefat noui Testam. that
he esteems this book, neither written with a Prophetical, nor Apostolical
spirit, and yet our Gospellers, who are so well skilled in the spirit, scarce
esteem more any one book of scripture. But by the way, I would ask of them
how (if the Apocalypse be true Scripture) Luther can be a true Saint? For in the
end of the Apocalypse cap. 22. it is said: If any man shall diminish from the
words of the book of this Prophecy, God shall take away his part from the
book of life. But Luther took away all the words of this Prophecy, saying it
was not written with a prophetical spirit. Ergo, God shall take away his part
from the book of life. So dangerous a thing it is to discard Scripture.

4. Secondly I answer, that no Protestant can deny these books of the Machabees
to be at least of far greater authority, the^ be the writings of any profane
Author in the world, and that far more credit is to be given to the writer of
them, then ought to be given to any man that ever did, or shall write history.
For you your selves give these Books a place in your Bibles: which honor you
would deny to the faithfullest history-writers in the world: Neither can you
deny, but that there may well be made a doubt whether these books be the word
of God or no, seeing we have brought so great proofs, to prove that they are
Gods Word. Well then say I, if credit be to be given to any history that ever
was written, much more is it to be given to this. It is therefore true that
Judas Machabaeus, who was then high Priest and the chief man amongst Gods
only people, did cause this great sum of money to be gathered and sent to
Jerusalem that Sacrifice might be offered for the sins of the dead. It is true
that the people, and the only people of God did contribute money very
liberally to this end. It is also questionles true, that the Priests of
Jerusalem having received this money, did offer Sacrifice for the sins of the
dead. And it is most true, that the ancient and most grave writer of this
history does commend it as a thing, Holy, and Wholesome to pray for the dead,
that they may be freed from their sins. And all this by the Counsel of
Carthage, by the whole Church of God in her purest age, as S. Austin and S.
Hierome do witness, was held so true, that they believed it to be Scripture.
Shall we think, that both the Church of the Jews (which then was the only
true Church in the world) and of the primitive Christians (the purest Church
that ever Christ had) did so generally maintain an Error fond, and
superstitious, as Protestants call Prayer for the dead?

5. As for the new Testament I shall have a necessary occasion in the next
Chapter to cite many places: therefore now I will content my self with this
one. S. Paul writing to the Corinthians brings this argument, to prove the
Resurrection: What will they do, who are baptized for the dead? if the dead do
not rise at all, to what end are they baptized for the^? 1. Cor. 15. As if he
would say, to what end do men do penance for the dead? If there be no
resurrection, why do they do penance for them? This and no other can be the
sense of these words: For what other Baptism, but the Baptism of penance (so
S. Mark and S. Luke do call it) can with profit be taken for the dead? And
here S. Paul takes his argument from that which is profitably done for the
dead; for else when he presses so hoatly those words, To what end are they
baptized for them? one mighty easily answer, to no end. This much for
Scripture.

6. That the Apostles did ordain Prayer to help the souls of the dead, is
taught in plain words by S. Chrysostom: It was not rashly ordained by the
Apostles, that in the dreadful mysteryes, Commemoration should be made of the
dead: for they knew that from thence, there comes to the dead much gain and
profit. Hom. 69. ad pop.

7. But if we would wish an evident proof, that the Apostles did ordain
Prayer for the dead, to the end they might be freed from their sins; what
proof could we have greater, then to have this written by some Disciple of the
Apostles themselves? This you shall see how abundantly it is performed. The
Scripture tells us, that among the true Belieuers who did cleave unto S.
Paul, Denis the Areopagite was one, Act. 17. The same S. Denis spends the
whole seaue^th Chapter of his book de Ecclesiastica Hierarchia, in telling us
such things, Quae diuino instituto super sancte quiescentibus fiunt, as by
divine ordination are done over those who have reposed holily. And among
others, this is one, that, Venerabilis Praesul precem super eo sacratissimam
peragit: the venerable prelate does say over the dead party, a most holy
prayer. And afterward he tells us the contents of this most holy prayer.
Precatur oration illa diuinam Clementiam, vt cuncta dimittat per infirmitatem
humana^ admissa peccata defuncto. That prayer does beseech the divine Clemency,
that he would pardon unto the dead man, his sins committed through humane
frailty. Thus writes this great disciple of S. Paul. Is it prudence to believe
him, or no? Did the prime disciples of the Apostles use superstition?

8. I come now to the authority of the whole Church in her purest age. The
Council of Carthage, of which I spoke before, not only approves the Books of
the Machabees for true Scripture, but by name imbraceth prayer for the dead. In
the first council of Nice. l. 3. c. 65. it was ordained, That when a Bishop
died, notice should be given of his death to all Churches and Monasteryes in
the parish, that prayer might be made for him. But who can tell us better the
universal custom of the Church, then the greatest doctor of the Church, who
did see with his eyes that which he wrote with his pen; and therefore although
he were a man and might err in other things, yet of this which he did see
shine before his eyes, he could not be ignorant; and it cannot but be
imprudence not to believe him, for else whom may we prudently believe? S. Austin
then writes thus, l. de cura pro mort. c. 1. We read in the books of Machabees
sacrifice offered for the dead, but although it were no where at all read in
the old Testament, yet notwithstanding the authority of the universal Church
is not small, which shines with this custom, where the remembrance of the
dead has place in the prayers of the Priest, which are powered out to our Lord
God at the Altar.

Here you see first the Machabees accounted part of the old Testament.
Secondly, that although sacrifice for the dead were not Scripture, yet being
practiced by the whole Church we have sufficient warrant to think it well
done. Thirdly that the universal Church did shine with this custom of
offering sacrifice for the dead. Let us grant that S. Austin as a man might
err in the two first points; yet in this third, that the Church did shine in
his days with this custom of sacrificing for the dead, he could not be
ignorant, no more then the greatest Doctor of Oxford or Cambridge can be
ignorant, that in England service is said in the English tongue. Wherefore I
say, it must needs be imprudence not to believe him, who ought in prudence as
much to be believed, as any man ought to be in a thing which he cannot but
know. Now, if I believe that the universal Church did shine with this custom
of offering sacrifice for the dead (as in prudence I must) how can I in
prudence think that the universal Church, even in that her golden age, was
stained with such a profane Error, as Protestants hold this to be? It is
(says the same S. Austin Ep. 118. ad Januar.) insolent madness to dispute
against that which is practiced by the whole Church all the world over. And why
so? Because, he that will not hear the Church, let him be unto thee, as a
Heathen or Publican. Matthew. 18. Because, the gates of hell cannot prevail
against her. Matthew. 16. Because, the is the pillar and foundation of truth. 1.
Tim. 3. The Church then being the foundation of truth, may we not well cry out
with S. Paul; O madmen who has be witched you not to obey the truth? Gal. 3.
For was not John Calvin, think you, bewitched when he spoke these words:
Before a thousand, and three hundred years (says Calvin above an hundred
years ago) it was by custom received, that prayers should be made for the
dead: but they all, I confess were ingulfed in an error. lib. 3. Iustit. c. 5:

Thus Calvin, as boldly, as if it were clear that for thirteen hundred years
together none of the^ all understood the Scripture so well as he. But by his
leave, I think I may be of the contrary opinion, and I am very confident that
S. Austin had as good a wit, studied as much, was assisted as much by the holy
Ghost, and consequently understood the Scripture as rightly as M. John Calvin,
and yet this profound Doctor, and great Saint writes these very words which I
do most faithfully translate out of him: By the prayers of the holy Church and
the wholesome sacrifice, and by the alms which are given for their souls, it
is not to be doubted, but the dead are helped, that they may be dealt withal
more mercyfully by our Lord, then their sins have deserved; for this delivered
from our Fathers, the universal Church does observe, that for those who are
dead in the Communion of the body and blood of Christ, Prayer should be made,
when in the Sacrifice it self they in their place are remembered; and that,
that Sacrifice should be remembered to be offered up for them. But when works of
mercy are offered up for their sakes, who can doubt but that they avail them,
for whom prayers are not in vain offered up to God? It is not to be doubted in
any case, but that these things do profit the dead. Sermon. 32. de verb. Apost.
Thus writes S. Austin, repeating over and over again in so few lines; It is
not to be doubted; who can doubt; It is not to be doubted in any case, that
these things do profit the Dead. This being so clear, all other authorityes
may seem superfluous. He who desires more testimonies may read in Bellarmine
(de Purgatorio) the words of S. Athanasius, Basil, Nazianzen, Cyril,
Chrysostom, Tertullia^, Cyprian, Ambrose, Hierome and others: we also shall
have frequent occasions to cite many other places.

CHAP. II. Purgatory proved by Reason grounded in Scripture.
1. AS it is a great Argument against Atheists who deny a God, rewarder of good
and punisher of evil, that all the world but they acknowledge such a God: so it
cannot but be a strong argument against Protestants, who deny Purgatory, that
all Heathens, Jews, Turks, and all civil nations do use Prayer for the dead.
The reason why all agree so universally in this point, must needs be grounded
in the light of natural Reason; which as it teaches, that there be some men
very good, who deserve nothing but reward, others very bad who deserve nothing
but punishment; so it teaches, that there is a third kind of men, who with the
good they do worthy of reward, do also some ill, worthy of some (though not
eternal) punishment; and consequently it will belong to higher Powers to give
these men due chastisment: which as we see they escape often in this life, it
must therefore be given them in the next. S. Austin thought this to be so
manifest, that he says in Euchir. c. 109. It is not to be denied, but that the
souls of those who are departed, are much relieved by the pity of their
living friends, when either the Sacrifice of our Mediator is offered for them,
or Alms are given in the Church, in their behalf; because there is a certain
state of life neither so good, but that they may have need of these helps after
death, nor yet so evil, but that these offices may profit them. And on the
contrary, there is another state of men so good, that they need not this help,
and of others so evil, that they cannot be helped by it when they are dead.
Wherefore here in this life all merit is gotten, whereby after this life a man
may be relieved, or not.

2. The answer which Protestants use to make is very weak; for they say, that
although some men live so that they do not deserve Hell, and yet live not so
well but they deserve some punishment; yet these men, say they, shall not go to
Purgatory, but by the only undergoing of the pains of death, they shall be
sufficiently punished for their sins. This answer for two reasons is
apparently false. First for that the undergoing of death, is a punishment due
unto all men for original sin; For (says S. Paul Romans 5.) by one man sin
entered into the world, and by sin death, and so unto all men death did pass,
even unto sucking babes, who for no other cause undergo this punishment.
Secondly we see the pains of death equally shared among the good and bad: and
in the flood of Noe all me^ suffered the same death of being drowned, and yet
the sins of many were most unequal.

3. This proof drawn from natural Reason is exceedingly illustrated and
confirmed by three principles certain in holy Scripture. The first is, that
there are some sins only venial, and not liable to eternal torments, and yet
liable to some torments. That servant (says S. Luke cap. 22.) who knows the
will of his Lord, and does not according to his will, shall be beaten with many
stripes: but he that knows it not, and does things worthy of stripes, shall
be beaten with few stripes. Hence it is evident, that there be some men who do
things worthy of stripes, which they shall not escape, but yet they shall be
beaten with few stripes. But if these stripes be to be laid on for all Eternity
(as all stripes be, which are paid in hell) they will not be few; because being
everlasting, the number of the^ will be without number: will any one call these
stripes few? Or can any man persuade himself, that a God, who is all mercy,
will in this unmerciful manner punish the speaking of one idle word? yet
Christ himself says, that we shall be accountable for every idle word we
speak. Matthew. 12. Wherefore we must be liable to some punishment for every
idle word; so that if a man of full age converted from idolatry be baptized,
and by and by after killed, before he commit any other sin then the speaking
of one idle word only; shall this man be tormented for ever and ever, so long
as God shall be God? And shall the Father of mercyes give this unmerciful
sentence? Doubtless if any man can do a thing worthy of stripes, and for doing
it deserve only to be beaten with few stripes, this man may hope for this
mercy: but for greater the^ this he cannot hope, seeing that Christ says that
some account is to be given for that idle word. Some punishment therefore he
must suffer, but not eternal, and consequently not in hell, but in Purgatory
for he must be beaten with few stripes, not with many, or everlasting stripes.

4. The second Principle is taught us in the Apocalips cap. 21. to wit, That
nothing defiled shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: and consequently a man
defiled with one only idle word, and so dying shall not enter into the
Kingdom of heaven, until he be cleansed in Purgatory-fyre; For, he who
builds ^tuble upon the foundation shall be saved, yet so as by fire, says S.
Paul 1. Cor. 3. But (says S. Ambrose) whereas S. Paul says, yet so as by fire,
he shows indeed, that he shall be saved, but yet shall suffer the punishment
of fire; that being purged by fire, he may be saved and not tormented for ever,
as the Jnfidels are with everlasting fire. Sermon. 20. in Psalm. 118. Most
agreeable to this doctrine be the words of our Savior: Be at agreement with
thy Adversary betyme whilst thou art in the way with him, least perhaps thou be
cast into prison: Amen, I say unto thee, thou shall not go out from thence,
till thou repayest the last farthing. Matthew. 5. That is, until thou shall have
made satisfaction for every one of thy least sins, according to the exposition
of S. Hierome, who tells us: This is that which he says: Thou shall not go
out of prison, until thou shall pay, even to thy little sins. In c. 5. Matthew.

5. The third Principle is, that although our sins both mortal and venial be
forgiven us, whenever we are truly penitent for them; yet all the pain due
to these our sins, is not always forgiven, together with the sins. This may be
demonstrated by many examples in the Scripture. For breuity sake I will specify
only two. The first it this: Original sin is forgiven us by baptism, and
yet the pains which are inflicted for original sin, be not wholly taken away
by baptism, but even those innocent infants, unto whom by baptism original
sin was forgiven, do suffer the punishment of death due unto them, for no
other cause, but for that very original sin, which was forgiven them by
baptism; for that, I say, they endure death: because, by one man sin entered
into the world, and by sin death, and so unto all men (even unto innocents)
death did pass. Romans 5. The second example is this: David did so truly repent
him of his sin of adultery and murder, that God told him by the Prophet
Nathan: Our Lord has taken away thy sin. 2. Reg. 12. Behold here the sins
of David forgiven, and yet presently God tells him: Nevertheless, because thou
have made the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, for this thing the son which
is borne unto thee dying, shall dye. Behold here a punishment inflicted upon
David, even for this thing, for which God had pardoned him.

6. Out of this Principle it clearly follows that there is a Purgatory. For
seeing that (as we have proved) there remains many times some punishment due
to the sin which is forgiven; and seeing that a man may dye before he has
suffered this punishment due by justice unto him; it does necessarily follow
that this punishment must be given him in the world to come: not in hell,
because the sin is forgiven, but yet in the prison of Purgatory, out of which
he shall not go, until he has paid the last farthing.

7. But here it may be demanded, how this doctrine agrees with the saying of
God: When the wicked man shall be converted from his impiety, I will not
remember his iniquities. Ezech. 18. I answer, that God is said not to remember
them in his wrath and vengance, by remitting the eternal pain due unto them.
So he did not remember the sin of David, but did take it away from him: yet
nevertheless, for this thing, he took from him, by an untimely death, his
son, whose life he begged so earnestly. The matter may fitly be declared by
this similitude. If a man should owe me a millio^ of pounds, and should beg of
me to forgive the debt, I might be most truly said to grant his request, though
I should forgive the debt on this condition, that he should pay me only twenty
shillings, as it were for a fine. Now we know our sins be our debts: for one
mortal sin only a man is liable to everlasting torments; but if this man
being truly penitent, beggeth pardon of this his sin, God is so merciful
that he will forgive and forget it; yet withal he is so just, that in place of
it he will impose some small fine, as I may say, though this fine be far
smaller then twenty shillings in comparison of a million of pounds; for one
pound a million of times doubled will come to be a million: but a Purgatory,
even of a million of years, though it should be never so often doubled or
redoubled can never come to make a sum of years equal to the years
contained in the Eternity of pains, due to this sin, before it was forgiven.
This I have set down at large, that all may see how mercifully God does deal
with us, when for one act of true penance he exchangeth an Eternity of pains,
into the temporal punishment of some years in Purgatory: for this cannot be
but a great mercy, though this Purgatory were to last never so many years in
number, because the years of Eternity be without number.

CHAP. III. The first Motive to pray for the Souls in Purgatory which is, The
greatness of the sensible Pains they suffer.
1. NAture does teach us, that the most forcible Eloquence to move compassion
is that, which sets forth the greatness of our misery. The miseryes which
these poor souls suffer are reduced to two. The one Paena sensus, which is
the sensible pain they feel caused by the excessive bitterness of their
torments. The other is called Paena damni, which is that inexplicable anguish
of mind and grief arising from the lively apprehension of the loss of God,
which for a time they are to sustain. To which we may add the long continuance
of their torments. From these three we will draw the motives, which (if they be
well pondered) may make the hardest Pharao-like heart in the world to take some
compassion on these poor souls.

2. The first Motive then, is the greatness of that sensible pain, caused by
the excessive sharpnes of these torments. How great and how bitter the torments
be, speaking of that which happens for the most part, and not of that which
sometimes may happen to some few innocent Souls, (whose sins were small and
whose penance great) how great I say these torments be, speaking of them as
they are for the most part, may be showed.

3. First because the torments of Purgatory exceed all even the very greatest
torments of this life. S. Austin upon these words of S. Paul, but yet they shall
be saved as by fire, writes thus in Psalm. 37. Because S. Paul does say that
these men shall be saved by fire, therefore this fire is contemned: but surely
although they shall be saved by it, yet this fire is more grievous then
whatsoever a man can suffer in this life, albeit you know how great and how
intolerable things men have suffered or may suffer. And, l. de vera and falsa
paenit. c. 18. the same S. Austin says: This fire, I tell you, though it be
not everlasting yet it is passing grievous, for it does far pass all pains
that any man can suffer in this life; never was there yet found out so great a
pain in flesh as that is, though Martyrs have suffered strange torments, and
many malefactors exceeding great punishments. Again, the same holy Father
makes us a very excellent and necessary exhortation out of this his so often
delivered doctrine. Some men (says he) use to say, J care not greatly how long
I stay in this passing fire, seeing that at last, I shall attain to life
everlasting: But (alas) dear Brother, let no man say thus, because this
Purgatory fire is more sharp, then any punishment which in this life can be
seen, imagined, or felt. He that now will be loath to put one of his fingars
into burning fire, ought to fear the torment of that fire.

4. Other holy Doctors have had the like feeling of this matter. The great S.
Gregory writes thus, in 3. Psalm. paenit. I know that after this life some must
be cleansed by purging fire, and others must receive sentence of eternal
damnation; but because I esteem that purging fire, though it be transitory, to
be more intolerable then all the tribulation that in this life can be
suffered, I greatly fear to be purged in the wrath of transitory vengeance.
And Venerable Bede, in eund. Psalm. affirms, That no torture either of
martyrs, or malefactors can be compared with the pains of Purgatory.

5. Secondly, it is an opinion not improbable that the very least torment in
Purgatory does surpass the very greatest in this world. Of this opinion is our
learned S. Anselme, who (in Elucidat.) speaking of these torments says: De
quibus, minimum maius est quam maximum, quod in hac. vita excogitari potest: of
the which the least is bigger then the biggest, which in this life can be
devised. Amongst the Epistles of S. Austin there is one, which some think S.
Cyril to have written, in which there be these most fearful words: There is
not a man living who had not rather be tormented with all the pains and
torments together, which all the me^ in the world from Adam until this time
have suffered, then be for one day tormented with the least pain which is
either in Hell or Purgatory. Epist. 206. Yea S. Thomas prince of the Deuines,
does prove this to be most true in 4. d. ^^. J. 1. a. 2. because there is not
one in Purgatory, who during the time he is there, is not deprived of the sight
of God, and that for his own fault. Now the suffering of this banishment
culpably, is a pain greater then all the pains of the world are, or can be.
Out of which discourse it follows that there is not any one in Purgatory, who
does not every instant that he is there suffer more then is or can be suffered
in this world, though all myseries should meet in one. Others may be of a
contrary opinion, but their opinion may be perhaps more contrary to truth.

6. Thirdly it is an opinion most commonly received amongst the greatest
Deuines, that the torments of Purgatory for the time they last be as grievous
as the torments of Hell. The pains of Hell and Purgatory be of one greatness,
but those of Hell expect no end, those of Purgatory have an end, says the
author of the Epistle which now we cited out of S. Austin. And Denis the
Carthasian is much of the same opinion. l. de iud. anim. These opinions I
thought good to set down, not as if they were articles of faith (for the^ they
were not opinions) but to the end we may see, what feeling these great Saints
and Doctors of Gods Church have had of this point. And I add,

7. Fourthly, that reason it self enlightened by Faith does convince these
torments to be exceeding great, because these Souls though they be saved, yet
are they saved, so as by fire. 1. Cor. 3. Now, of all the torments which can be
suffered none is more painful then those of fire, and perhaps all the other
torments which our world has, can scarce so bitterly torture a poor creature,
as it would be tortured, if it were possibly for it to be kept without
consuming in the midst of the merciless flames of a glasse-furnace, the fire
of which would soon as it were penetrate it self with the very in most parts
of that afflicted wretch; his bones would glow like red hot bars of iron, his
marrow would scorch him more fiercely then melted lead, his blood would boil
more furiously then high-seething oil, his nails, his teeth, his grisses, his
very skull would be like plates of bright flaming brass all on burning fire.
But alas! dear Brother, there be many differences between our hoatest fire
and the scorching flames of Purgatory. Our fire was created by God merely for
our comfort and commodity: that fire is made for no other end, then to afflict,
pain, and torment those guilty Souls. Our fire by being out of the proper
sphere, by being mingled with grosser and duller elements, by contrary
qualityes which be round about it, and the contrariety which it finds in the
very matter it feeds on, has the native force, actiuity, and fiercenes much
abated. That fire has not one of these hindrances, but exercises continually
in the highest degree all the force of native fury. In fine, our fire in
comparison of that fire, by holy Doctors, and namly by our worthy Countryman
Sir Thomas More in the end of his rare work called, The supplication of the
Soul, is styled, and esteemed a kind of painted fire rather then true fire.
These considerations made the devout S. Bernard break into these patheticall
words: O would to God some man would now before hand provide for my head
abundance of water, and to my eyes a fountain of tears, for so perhaps the
burning fire would take no hold, where running tears had cleansed before. de
6. tribul. 16. and 55. in Cant

8. Two other considerations may be added unto these; the one is the cause why
these torments are inflicted, which is the making of due satisfaction for
sin, which though it be but venial, yet being that it is an offense of God,
is a thing so detestable, that it cannot be committed either for the gayning of
ten thousand worlds, or the avoiding of the greatest evil possible: because
the goodness of God is not to be violated and displeased, his sacred majesty is
not the least to be dishonored (being that it is sovereign and infinite) for
the good of any inferior creature, that is, or may be. Wherefore the so light
commission of so many venial sins as men daily and hourly commit, cannot be
expiated but by punishment of a higher rank then we can imagine. And this is the
reason why the learned Doctors and holiest Saints, who had most light of Gods
greatness, had also greatest feeling of the pains due to every little offense of
so infinite a Nature: and this is the reason why they, whose vnderstaddings are
either clouded with natural ignorance, or obscured with sinful affections, or
wholly darkened with heresy, are as dull in apprehending these pains, as they are
blockish in framing a worthy conceit of Gods infinite goodness and supreme
Soueraingty.

9. The other thing here considerable is, that the day of mercy ending with
the day of our life, we are after to expect nothing else but justice, and
therefore our Savior does verily say unto us, that we shall not go out of this
prison, until we have paid the last farthing. Math. 5. Which is a terrible
consideration if we have a due feeling of our debts; whereunto what we are to
say in the fifth Chapter, will exceedingly help. Neither can Protestants be
scandalized at what has here bin said, if they remember, that according unto
their faith, all sins are mortal, and therefore deserve everlasting pains.

10. Well the^, these distressed souls suffering such things as none who has
the heart of a man, could endure to see a dog suffer if he could ease him; and
these souls being the souls of our Brethren, the souls of Christ's
Brethren, the souls which he loved so dearly, that he most joyful spent the
very last drop of blood in his body for their sakes; how can we thus slight
their complaints with a deaf ear. O if we were in this pitiful case, how
hoatly should we cite those words of our Savior, that voice, that outery of
nature her self: All that you would that men should do for you, do also for
them. Matthew. 7. Denis the Carthasian relates the words of one, who by divine
revelation was admitted to see these torments, and indeed they be worth
relating. God is my witness (says he) that if I did see any man, though this
man had as cruelly, as man could, either misused, tortured, or killed my
dearest friends, and had done me all the mischief, which one man could do to
another; yet if J did se this man condemned to such pains as there (in
Purgatory) I beheld, I would a thousand times, if it could be done, suffer
death for his delivery. l. de iudic. Anim. art. 23. Such force has this
Consideration lively apprehended.

CHAP. IV: The second Motive, drawn from the intolerable pains the souls
suffer, by being banished from the sight of God.
1. TO understand how great a pain it is to be banished, though but for a
time, from the face of God, is a thing wholly impossible, until we come to
know, what an infinite good it is to possess God, but we may have some little
scantling of it by these considerations.

2. The first Consideration: All the joy, pleasure, dainties, riches, and
honors of this world, yea and of a million of worlds, though they were a
million of times more excellent then this world is, and all this joy and
happiness were eternal; yet all this put together, and enjoyed as perfectly as
might be, is a thing no ways co^parable to that happiness which the possession
of God for one only moment does bring with it; so that to be deprived of this
possession, debarred of this happiness, restrained of this Bliss (when we are
in an estate capable of it, and requiring it) is a misery without all
comparison greater then should be the loss of all the riches, honors, and
pleasures which the eternal possession of a million of worlds, a million of
times more pleasant then our world could affoard. What grief then must the
loss of this good, cause in a soul that knows her loss?

3. The second Consideration. All the torments of this world though they were a
thousand times greater, ought according to right reason to be joyfully
suffered, if by the suffering of them altogether, we might be able to purchase
the sight of God but for one moment: for to see God is such a good, that it
would seem cheap bought with all those evils, his sight being a good of a
far higher order the^ any evil can be an evil. Hence it follows, that the
suffering (though but for a moment) the loss of this good, is a misery
inconceptible. How clear is this, and yet how little understood?

4. The third Consideration may be taken from the lively and clear manner with
which these souls have their whole mind and attention fast bent both night and
day upon the greatness of this their so infinite a loss. We know by experience,
that in matter of pain, anguish, and misery, nothing torments more the^ wholly
to give our selves over, or rather to be carried by the violence of them, to
the continual consideration of the bitterness of our afflictions. All other
comforts which may be thought on, for the ease of those desolate Souls, are no
more then enough to keep their minds in a perfect patience amidst a world of
so great miseryes.

5. The fourth Consideration. The souls do most perfectly love God, and they
do penetrate, in a far perfecter manner then they could do in this life, the
reasons (which are all most forcible) moving to love that infinite Goodness.
Wherefore seeing themselves on the one side in an estate capable of enjoying God,
and on the other debarred of enjoying him (whom they love so affectionatly,
that it is a death to be separated from him) their minds are as it were torn
asunder on the rack of love. Love (says the Scripture Cant. 8.) is as strong
as death, and emulation as hard as hell, the torches of it be torches of fire
and flames, many waters cannot quench it neither can rivers ouerwhelme it etc.
Eue^ in this world where we have so little knowledge of God in our
understanding, and where we follow this knowledge so faintly with our wills;
some choice servants of God suffer strange things in this kind through the
absence of their beloved, though as yet they are not in an estate fit to enjoy
him. Father Baptista Sanctius of the Society of Jesus, was one of these; For
when he manifested his conscience unto his Superior, he professed he was
really of opinion, that very grief would kill him out of hand, if he should
come to know for certain that his life should be prolonged for the space but
of one whole day: so truly strong as death was that love which inflamed his
heart to the enjoying of his beloved. Ludou. de Ponte in vita P. Baltas. c. 17.
Few can believe, and fewer can understand this; but those who indeed love God,
see it with their eyes. If the ruthefull moanes of such true lovers deserve not
compassion, there is no such thing, as they call Mercy, in the world.

6. The fifth Consideration. These souls know they are deprived of this infinite
good (which they so ardently love) for no other cause but their own fault,
their own carelessy committed sins, sins which did offend and affront this
infinite goodness, which now they love so tenderly. And this it is which cutteth,
as deep as the sharpest edge of grief can cut into the softest heart which
weepeth with tears of blood as often as it thinks (and it can never cease from
thinking) that it was not only a trifle which separated it in this manner from
God, but a wickedness abominable in his sight, an offense of such an Excellency,
a contempt of such a Majesty, a displeasure of such a Goodness, an ingratitude
against such a Benefactour. All this it is that goes to their very heart, this
all the powers of their Souls bewail, and lament to the uttermost of their
power, with tears which neither can nor will admit of comfort, until due
satisfaction be made even to the least, and last farthing.

7. The sixth and last Consideration differs in this from the former, that as
those souls are tormented with such unspeakable grief whilst they ponder the
miseries of this banishment for their own offenses as they are displeasing to
him who^ they so purely love; so they are also put on a new torture, when out
of natural love unto themselves (which now well-ordered charity does much
increase) they attentively consider and deeply penetrate what it is to be
deprived of such a good, such a joy, such a bliss, for such a small, such a no
good, such a mischievous evil as they sinned for, a pleasure so vain, so
short, so ugly, so irrational, and so pernicious to their souls, and yet (to
use their language) such was my folly (ah wretch, not only miserable but mad)
as to forgo even such a good, for such a bare, such a shameful, such a
pestiferous trifle as that was: so many degrees of glory which would have made
me so happy for all eternity, are wholly and irrecouerably lost for a pure (ah
most impure) nothing! How often was I inspired to do this thing and yet etc.
These and far more miserable then these be the anguishes of those souls, far
greater then either those of Esau selling his inheritance for a mess of
potage, or those of Adam for making away Paradise for the taste of an apple, or
any other this world ever had, or shall have.

8. Sum up now in thy mind all these considerations together, and think, in
what a sea of sorrows that heart must be, into which day and night so great
and so many floods do unlade their waves, and yet can thou not find in thy
heart to affoard them some small relief? He (says S. John cap. 1.3.) who
possesses the substance of this world, and shall see his brother to have
necessity, and shuts his bowels from him, how does the Charity of God
remain in this man? He says not, how does the charity toward his neighbor
but how does the Charity of God remain in him? And if thou whosoever thou art,
thus shuttest thy bowels in a necessity, as extreme almost as a necessity can
be, of thy own and Christ's brother, I am sure that the charity of thy
neighbor has no place in thee: but as for charity toward God, it is not I,
but S. John, who does as it were denying ask, how does the charity of God
remain in thee?

CHAP. V. The third Motive taken from the long time that these Pains do endure.
1. IF these pains were to be ended in a short space, our hard-hartednes might
the^ have some excuse: but (speaking still of what happens for the most part)
it is a thing scarce to be doubted of, that they continue very long: for the
holy Church is accustomed to keep the Anniuersaryes of those who dyed a
hundred, or two hundred years ago. Whence it appears, that there is reason
to fear that many have a long stay in Purgatory. The learned Bellarmine l. 2.
de gemit. columb. cap. 2. does recount some histories very authentical (as he
excellently proves) out of which it appears that diverse souls are condemned
to Purgatory even till the day of Judgment. And Tertullian, one of the
ancientest fathers, speaking of these pains of Purgatory says, Thou shall not
depart perhaps until the day of thy Resurrection. lib. de anima c. 17.

2. Now, if we require why God does hold this manner of proceeding, in rather
deteyning us long time in our punishments, then in adding to the bitterness of
our torments that which is taken out in length of time; we can devise no other
reason, then that our sins have deserved this misery also, and men would
little apprehend to suffer all that could be suffered in one moment, if the next
moment they were to be eternally happy; and therefore God, who in his severe
judgment had a merciful regard to that which would work most with our dull
apprehensions, did ordain that (as S. Augustine speaks, hom. 15. ex. 50.
hom.) Quanta fuerit peccati materia, tanta esset tra^scunti mora; so great as
the matter of our sins shall have bin, so long should be the stay of our
passage. The best way therefore to make us have some conceit of the long
continuance of these pains, is to see how great the matter uses to be on which
they feed; that is, what a kind of quantity the sins of men use most commonly
to amount unto.

3. A little Arithmaticke will give us a great insight in this matter. The just
man is said to sin seven times a day: wherefore we may easily allow thrice
more a day to one of those whom we call good and honest men, such as the world
has but few of: such a man therefore as this is, does sin (venially) ten
times a day, taking one day with another. The days in a whole year are three
hundred sixty five, wherefore he who every day sins ten times, must at the
years end have sinned ten times as often as there be days in a year; which
sum is easily found out by only putting one cipher to the number of the days
in the year, which are 365. add now one cipher and we shall have 3650. So that
the sins of this good man, eue^ in one year come to no less, then three
thousand six hundred and fifty. But if this honest man should live even in this
good manner ten years, he should at ten years end have committed the former
sum ten times, because he does double it every year, which su^me also is
easily had by adding one cipher to the former sum of 3650. which if we do,
we do find 36500. What a thing is this? An innocent man, not a man but a youth
does commit thirty six thousand and five hundred sins all in ten years;
wherefore if the youth should for ten years more continue this his virtuous
course of life, he would double the sins of his former life, and make them
amount to seventy three thousand, before he came to be a middle aged man. O,
says S. Augustine, perhaps when thou do consider a little sin a part, and
by it self, thou do slight it; yet says he, si comtemnis quando appendis,
expauesce quando numeras: Jf thou contemnest thy little sins when thou do
weigh them; yet tremble when thou do number them. in epist. Joan. tract. 1.

4. Let us reflect now a little, before we go any further, what a kind of
Purgatory this man, a man not fully of middle age, a man very pious, a man who
never committed one mortal sin, would be liable unto, if he should die at
this age: for perhaps of those seventy three thousand sins, he has not fully
satisfied for the odd three thousand; or if he has, he has done more then
most men use to do: for of all miseryes one of the greatest is, that those who
sin most, have least care to satisfy for their sins: now what a Purgatory
think you, seventy thousand sins will deserve? Thy judgments (O God) are a
deep bottomless pit! Psalm. 35.

5. But why put we a case which so seldom happens? The ordinary course of men
is to commit many and enormous mortal sins, and venial without all scruple,
and consequently without all number; yea many hold on this strain until they
come to be very old, and unable by reason of their years, and unwilling by
reason of their ill habits to do any Penance, and so they content themselves
with spending some few hours to deplore and confess those sins, which
amount to far more thousands, the^ there be minutes in the hours which they
spend in lame^ting the^. Consider now how insufficiently the grief of one
minute is to cancel out all the pains due to a whole thousand of sins, and
many of them very enormous.

6. There is also another thing in this reckoning to be much reflected on: that
he, who should have but one only mortal sin, would be liable after the
forgiveness of it, to a punishment far different (and God know's how far) from
that which he is liable unto who has only venial sins to satisfy for,
though their number be exceeding great; for if one mortal sin before it be
forgiven, be liable unto an eternity of punishment, and most bitter punishment,
and consequently to such a punishment, as all the venial sins a man can
commit, would never deserve the hundredth thousand part of it; I will leave it
to a right valuing judgment to esteem how much more pain God is like to
impose upon him who has this one forgiven mortal sin to satisfy for, then
on him, who has only venial sins, and those also forgiven, to satisfy for,
though the number of them should be exceeding great. Well then, if one mortal
sin brings with it such a dreadful Purgatory, how are they like to be
dealt withal, who every day run upon the score, and thus continue not for many
days, but years together, during which time they being always in sin never
make satisfaction for the least they commit. If holy David said, Psalm. 39. My
iniquityes have laid hold on me, J was not able to see them (they were so
many,) for they were multiplied above the hayres of my head; what may these men
( who drink up iniquity like water, Job. 15.) think of the multitude of their
sins, who perhaps have a hundred for David's one? Such like considerations as
these made the devout S. Bouaue^ture cry out; I have sinned above the number of
the sands of the sea. How then shall J number that which is without number? How
shall I suffice when I shall be enforced to pay my debt to the very last
farthing? S. Bonau. in paruo bono.

7. But let us mark a little what satisfaction is usually made by those that
stand in so great need of it. The ordinary ways to satisfy be these, Fasting,
Prayer, and Almesdeeds, and sometimes by Indulgences; and all these things must
be done in the state of Grace, in which these men are seldom long together,
and therefore most of these works (of which they do so few) come wholly to be
lost: but when they are not thus cast away, let us see what they will come to.
As for fasting, when it cannot be shifted of by any pretense, fast they do, but
God, knows how many times they loose, either the whole or the greater part of
this good work: for they have so many inventions to sweete^ their fasts with
such variety of dainty dishes, that it is much to be feared, least in place of
satisfying for their old sins, they commit new sins of gluttony, which
require a new satisfaction. Now for prayer it is commonly performed by them
with so many distractions, irreuerences, and other imperfections, that the
world may seem not to go amiss if there be enough of their Prayers made so
well that it may suffice to make due recompense for that which is made so ill.
Almesdeeds the poor cannot give, and the rich will not, for they do live and
mean ever to live, say what you will, at so high a rate, that they think they
do a great matter, if they can get enough honestly to maintain their bravery,
and to discharge their debts: For as for paying the debts they owe to God they
are resolved that he shall be paid last. Indulgences indeed are one of the great
mercys of God, which in how great need we stand of, any man of judgment will
see clearly by this whole discourse; but such is either the infidelity, or
strange carelessness of most men (especially of such as have most need) that
perhaps the gross neglect of them, may well be reckoned for one of the chief
causes, why many broyle so long in the flames of Purgatory.

8. It is now high time to end this discourse, and I humbly and earnestly
beseech the reader to take so^times into his consideration the points
mentioned, as well for his own spiritual profit, as for relief of his poor
brethrens souls burning in Purgatory-flames, and supplicating to his Charity
for succor: which if he do, I doubt not but he will be moved to compassion, and
to a speedy and liberal contribution of many satisfactory good works.

CHAP. VI. That for the love we bear to God, we ought to be much moved to help
the Soulet in Purgatory.
1. HItherto we have only treated of such Motives as Charity toward our
neighbor does force upon us: Now we will pass to the motives which pure
Charity toward God does present unto us; and afterward we will come to those
motives, which well-ordered Charity toward our selves does offer us. To our
present purpose then: A Soul which is enamored on Perfection, and desires to
please God in the highest manner, has very many, and efficacious motives to
make her forward, to aid the souls in Purgatory.

2. The first motive: God is of an excellency, worth, and perfection so
infinite, that he deserves all possible love, and honor. This consideration
makes us cast about to see how we may procure, that this Excellency may be
more perfectly loved and glorified: wherefore considering that on earth we know
him so imperfectly, and love him so couldly, and glorify him so meanly; we rest
little satisfied with all which can be done by us on earth; and so we seek yet
further, and consider how perfectly God is known by the blessed in heaven, how
they love that Goodness, how they glorify that Majesty. Hence we burn with an
ardent desire, that God may in this sublime manner be more known, loved and
honored: and then marking that it is in our power to procure this, by
obtaining the delivery of some soul, or souls out of Purgatory, which, being
freed from thence by our means, would for ever and ever love and honor God in
that most perfect manner; we bend our selves wholly to procure the deliverance
of these souls out of pure love to Almighty God.

3. The second motive. When we consider our infinite obligations to God for his
manifold benefits showred down upon us, and being inflamed with a restless
desire of showing our selves truly grateful, though wholly unable, during the
time of this mortal life, to thank him as it is fitting; we use the best
means we can devise, to procure worthy thanks to be given him by some Soul,
or Souls freed by our means, which both day and night may praise, extol, and
thank this divine Goodness.

4. The third Motive. When we consider how great a Majesty, how infinite a
Goodness, how great a benefactour we have so often and so grievously offended,
we feel in our selves a strong and working desire of repayring this dishonor
done to that Majesty, and cancelling our own ingratitude, by the greatest
honor we can invent to procure; and therefore we employ cheerfully our best
good deeds in working the releasme^t of as many souls as we can, that by their
perpetual glorifying God, a perfecter recompense may be made for the dishonor
we have done him.

5. The fourth Motive is drawn out of the precedent put together, in this
manner. God whose excellency is so great, whose goodness so infinite, whose
benefits so many fold, whom I am obliged to satisfy for so many and so great
sins: this God, I say, takes all that is done unto his brethren for his
sake, as gratefully as if it were done unto himself; as Christ has taught us
in plain words, As long as you have done these things to any one of my
Brethren, you have done them unto me. Matthew. 25. How can I then hold my self
from using any means, by which I may perform a thing as grateful to my dear
Lord, as if he had endured the excessive torments of Purgatory, and I had
released him? My Heart is hard, but I must confess that this consideration does
make it yield, and if there were no argument but this, this alone might
convince all men.

CHAP. VII. That, by offering our actions for the Souls in Purgatory, we
purchase many great Commodities for our selves, and sustain no Jncommodity.
1. TO make this title good I will show, that by this Devotion we do not merit
less but more. Secondly, that thus our actions are not less but more
impetratory. Thirdly, that thus we do not less, but more satisfy for our
sins. Fourthly, that thus we have great hope to escape either all, or part of
the pains of Purgatory. Fifthly, that thus we do nothing against Charity
toward our selves; but that we should do against the perfection of this
Charity, if we should not thus offer our actions for the souls in Purgatory.
All these five points we will (by Gods grace) endeavor to make clear in the
next ensuing chapters, treating a part of every one of them in order in a
peculiar chapter; and that all which hereafter we are to say, may be better
understood, we will spend this present Chapter in declaring how the business
does pass, when we offer any works for the souls in Purgatory.

2. It is therefore most diligently to be noted, as the ground of all we are to
say, that our virtuous actions may have these three several proprietyes
together. They may be meritorious, they may be impetratory, they may be
satisfactory. They are meritorious when they are good works performed in the
grace of God, having an eternal reward promised unto the^. They are
impetratory, for they do obtain ( besides the crown of justice, which the
just judge lays up for the^ against the day of his coming. 2. Tim. 4) many
other favors bestowed upon them by the bountiful hand of our merciful
father: As for example, the life of our friend; as David hoped to obtain, when
he prayed and wept, and fasted a fast, and went in aside, and lay upon the
ground. 2. Reg. 12. to beg the life of his son: Or the conversion of others,
as the prayer made by S. Stephen did obtain of God the conversion of S. Paul.
Act. 7. as S. Augustine teaches; in fine, ask and you shall have. Luc. 11. Our
good works also are satisfactory, either always (as many excellent Deuines
hold) or (as all hold) if they be works of any labor, pain, or difficulty,
as fasting, Prayer, and Almsdeeds; yea what good works are there, which our
corrupted nature feels not difficulty in? Let us see what foundation this
ground of our discourse has in holy Scripture.

3. That our good works are meritorious, is expressly taught in the 6. of S.
Matthew: and those good works are put by name, which make more for our
purpose, to wit fasting, prayer and Almesdeeds the reward of which works we are
there said to loose, if we do the^ publikly out of vanity; but if thou do
them in humble secrecy, Thy Father, who sees thee in secret, will repay thee.
And least any man should think, that only great works should be rewarded, our
Savior in plain terms does tell us, that he who gives but a cup of cold
water, shall not want his reward, if it be done for his sake: and we may see
how mindful our Lord is of his promlse, for in the last judgment day to those,
who shall have done such good works as these are, he will say: Come you
blessed of my Father possess the kingdom prepared for you from the making of
the world, for J was hungry, and you gave me to eat, thirsty and you gave me
to drink. Matthew. 25. Mark how God does give them heaven for the doing of good
works. Possess, says he, the kingdom, for you gave me to eat, to drink
etc. And somewhat before in the same Chapter: Because thou were faithful over
a few things J will place thee over many; enter into the joy of thy Lord. Mark
this causall, because thou were faithful. This is the cause for which Christ
says, he gives heaven. Let Luther, let Calvin, let those who care for no good
works, name what other cause they please.

4. That our good Works are impetratory, that is, have virtue to move the
liberality, goodness, and mercy of God, to bestow, in regard of them, the
grant of many favors, when by prayer they are offered up for this end (for if
they be not thus offered up, as they are joined and applied to this end by
prayer, perhaps not any good works at all are impetratory, excepting only
prayer it self; and not all prayer, but such as contains some petition:)
That, I say, good works are impetratory, when they are thus joined with
prayer, is evidently proved out of that fast of David, who with the Prayer
made for his sons life, joined also other works of penance, lying on the
ground, fasting etc. For the child, says he, whilst he did yet live, I did
fast and weep, but now seeing he is dead, why should I fast? 2. Reg. 12.

5. That our good works are satisfactory, that is, that they (performed and
dignified by Grace granted through Christ his merits) have virtue to cancel
out sin, and the pains due to sin, is most clear in Scripture; and Heretics
(if loathnesse to make satisfaction for their sins did not blind them) cannot
but see it. Almesdeeds free from death: and Almsdeeds it is, which purges
sin, and makes us find mercy, and life everlasting. Tob. 12. Almsdeeds
free from sin, and from death, and they do not suffer the soul to go into
darkness. Tob. 4. Water quenches the burning fire, and Almsdeeds resist
sin. Eccl. 3. In the eleauenth Chapter of S. Luke our Savior speaking to the
Scribes and Pharisees says, that they shall be condemned in the day of
judgment; that the blood of all the Prophets slain from the beginning of the
world, shall be required at their hands: and six times one after another he
pronounces Woe against them; and to those unclean men our Savior at the very
same time said: Nevertheless, for that which remains give Alms, and behold
all things are made clean unto you, as sinful people as you are. Wherefore let
my counsel please thee (it is the most excellent counsel of the Prophet
Daniel) redeem thy sins with Almsdeeds, and thy iniquityes with the works
of mercy. Dan. 4.

6. This being thus declared, it may easily be understood, how things do pass
when we offer up any work for the souls in Purgatory. For first, the good
work thus offered up is meritorious, and therefore we always merit by it:
neither can we give this merit away, because reward is only due, and Scripture
promises it to those only, who shall have done well; wherefore we loose not the
least parcel of the merit of our good works, if we do them for the souls in
Purgatory, yea we much increase it, as shall be showed. Secondly, the good work
thus offered is impetratory, that is, it is apt to move Gods mercy to grant
that favor, for obtaining of which it is offered w^^ as a happy death, peace
among Christians, the long and happy life of our noble King, or such like
things. Now the obtaining of all these requests is not the least hindered, but
very much (as we shall show) furthered, though these works, which we do, be
given to the souls in Purgatory, and offered up to God for the satisfaction of
the pains due unto their sins not fully satisfied for. Thirdly and lastly,
this good work, which we offer for the souls in Purgatory, is satisfactory,
and according to this satisfactory virtue which it has (and not as it is
either meritorious or impetratory) we do commonly apply it to the souls in
Purgatory, because the thing which these poor souls stand most in need of, is
making satisfaction for their sins not fully satisfied for: which satisfaction
we make in their behalf, as holy Job did in behalf of his sons, when he
offered daily sacrifices for their sins. How this is not against Charity
toward our selves, shall be declared hereafter.

CHAP. VIII. That by offering our actions for the Souls in Purgatory, we do
not merit less, but more.
1. THat we do not merit less, is evident out of the last Chapter: that we
merit more then otherwise we should have done, if we had not applied these our
actions to the souls in Purgatory, is taught by the Prince of Deuines S.
Thomas l. 3. cont. Gentes c. 158. in these words: The affection of Charity in
him who suffers for his friend does make his satisfaction more pleasing to
God, then if he had suffered for his own self. And it is certain out of holy
Scripture, that Charity does add an exceeding worth and value to our least
actions; for only Charity it is, which makes a cup of cold water given for
Christ's sake, to be rewarded in the life to come. And only Charity it was,
which made the poor widows mite of greater price, then the richest gifts.

2. Now then all meriting has for reward some higher degree of celestial
glory; which degree should not have bin purchased without that meritorious
work had bin done: so that if there be two men, who before were of equal
merits, and the one of the^ should but give a cup of cold water more for
Christ's sake, then the other should give, this man for this so small a good
work, should have a higher degree of glory then the other, and consequently he
should see God for all eternity more perfectly, and be for ever more happy then
the other. So that if we did truly love either God or our selves, we should
think all sufferings whatsoever, even those of Purgatory, to be a small price
for the least degree of glory, for indeed the least is a good so great, that
the suffering of never so long a Purgatory for purchasing it, would not be so
much as suffering a flea-bite to purchase the Empire of the whole world. It
would make a man bless himself to see, how stark mad men are in neglecting
such a good.

3. To our purpose the^, I say, that by applying our actions to the souls in
Purgatory we do merit more, then if we had not applied them to this end; and
not only more, but very much more: and therefore though we did sustain other
many, and great inconveniences, yet they were all to be accounted as nothing in
comparison of these inestimable treasures of merit, which by this devotion we
purchase. The causes which make this act of so high merit, may be many, for as
we have showed in the sixth chapter, this devotion may be a work of most
singular Charity, most admirable Gratitude, most rare Contrition, most tender
love toward our Lord and Savior. But that which in a particular manner does
raise the worth of this actio^, is the most ardent charity, and pious mercy
toward our Neighbor, which here is so resplenda^t, that it does contain, and
surpass all and every one of those works of mercy which our Savior esteems so
dearly, that unto them by name he shall give the eternal possession of heaven,
when he shall come to judge. For he shall say unto those who stand at the right
and: Come ye blessed of my Father and possess the kingdom prepared for you
from the making of the world, for J was hungry and you gave me to eat, I was
thirsty and you gave me to drink, a pilgrim and you entertained me, naked and
you clothed me, sick and you did visit me, imprisoned and you came unto me.
Matthew. 25. This act, I say, both conteyneth, and surpasses all those works put
together. For who relieueth a soul in Purgatory, though he gives not a piece
of bread to the hungry, yet he gives the food of life and bread of Angels to
one, who was tormented worse then death with the hunger of it. He gives not a
cup of cold water to the thirsty, but he gives the fountain of living water,
which runs into life everlasting, unto him, whose thirst of it was so
intolerable, that no pain in the world can be compared to it. He does not
lodge a poor harbourles pilgrim in a barn for a night, but for the whole
long day of eternity, he lodges in the heavenly mansions, a poor soul, which
wandered from this her home ever since her creation. He gives not a few cast-of
rags to cloth the naked, but he gives the marriage garment unto him, who for
want of it was cast for a time into outward darkness. He does not give a
comfortable visit unto one who lies sick of a burning fever; but him, who
burns with Purgatory flames, he carries to visit for ever God, and his
Angels. In fine, he does not go to the imprisoned to afford them some small
assistance, but he brings one out of the fiery dungeon of Purgatory into the
liberty of the children of God.

4. Another cause there is, which does wonderfully exagerate the worth of all
these things, which follows in the above cited Scripture. For when the
Blessed shall say: Lord when have we seen thee hungry, and fed thee? our Lord
shall answer them: Verily I say unto you, as long as you have done any of
these things to one of these my least brethren, you have done them unto me. O
what reward shall be have of so liberal a majesty, who has done so grateful
a service, as the very freeing of Christ himself from Purgatory (if so he
could be liable unto it) would be.

5. The cause which may make the merit of this act to amount to an
inconceptible greatness, is this, that those who are truly devoted to assist
these souls, receive daily such copious showers of divine graces, that, if
they be not very backward in corresponding unto them, they must needs go on
daily increasing the treasures of their merits? For though many doubt, whether
the souls whilst they remain in Purgatory do pray for him by name who does
pray for them (because they not seeing God, cannot know who they are who pray
for them) yet there seems to be all reason that they should make in a general
manner incessant prayer to Almighty God to bless all those, who shall pray for
them; for this opinion is both pious and probable, as Snares says, lib. 1. de
orat. c. 2. And Denis the Carthusian recounteth, how that in a divine
revelation, these words by a servant of God were heard to be uttered with the
common voice of the souls in Purgatory: O Lord God grant, out of thy
incomprehensible power, a hundred fold reward to all those in the world who
with their prayers do help us, and lift us up toward the light of thy deity.
(de indic. anim. circa finem.) Howsoever, no man can doubt, but when they come
to heaven, they will both day and night, as efficaciously as they can recommend
unto Almighty God the necessityes of all those, who were so charitable unto
them, as to obtain their delivery out of their horrible torments, and to
purchase for them the light of God, whom to see one moment sooner, they know
now what a good it is.

6. What grateful heart then, can ever forget such a benefactour, especially
when without any labor at all, yea with greatest pleasure and content, he can
abu^dantly requite his charity. Ingratitude is a vice, and has no place in
heaven. More gratfull therefore questionles will these souls be, most gratfull
will be all their friends, acquaintance, and kindred, their Angel-guardians,
and Patrons, yea all the whole Court of heaven; seeing that there is that
perfect charity amongst the Blessed, that every one of them is no less glad of
his neighbors good, then he is of his own: and this action is incomparably
more gratfull unto them, in regard that the honor of the divine Majesty is
much increased, and our Blessed Savior so singularly pleased by it, that it is
as acceptable unto him, as if he himself in person had bin the party delivered
from the pains of Purgatory, and brought to a more speedy fruition of eternal
beatitude. O my dear brother, deprive not these poor souls, of this relief,
thy self of these merits, the whole Court of heaven of this joy, Christ of
this comfort, God of this honor.

CHAP. IX. That our actions offered up for the souls in Purgatory, are not
less, but more impetratory of other favors.
1. FIRST I must entreat my Reader to call to mind that, which in the last
Chapter but one has bin said concerning the impetratory virtue of our actions,
which being applied to the souls in Purgatory according to their satisfactory
virtue only, reteyne notwithstanding the self same virtue to impetrate, which
they should have had, though they had not bin thus applied for as I satisfy for
my sins by that very Prayer, by which I beg my daily bread, and the obtaining
of this petition, is nothing hindered by this satisfaction; so the work which
satisfies for the sins of others, does not become less apt to move the
Goodness of God to the grant of any favor, for obteyning of which, this work
may also be offered. Wherefore they are in an error, who think that they must
cast all other devotions aside, and neither pray for themselves, nor for their
friends, nor for their own private, or the public necessityes, if they follow
our advice in praying, fasting, giving alms, and offering up all their other
good works for the souls in Purgatory; whereas all these things may be
performed without the least hinderance to the obtaining of any thing they ca^
request: for these works only, as they are satisfactory, may be applied for the
relief of these souls, and as they are impetratory, they may be offered up
for the obteyning of what we please.

2. True it is, that sometyms the very thing, which we do desire, and petition
in our prayers, is the relief of the souls in Purgatory, and we do actually
crave, entreat, and beg for this; and unto this our so earnest request we do
join other works of fasting, almesdeeds etc. to move the mercy of God to hear
graciously this our petition; and then we need not wonder if our prayers, as
they are impetratory, do not impetrate for us other favors, for we never did
demand them: so when I pray for the health of my Father, this prayer of mine
does not impetrate the health of my mother: and even as, when I pray for both
the health of my Father and of my Mother, this prayer of mine is not so
efficacious to obtain the health of my Father, as it would have bin, if it had
bin made for that end only and no other: so I pray for other things, and also
for the souls in Purgatory, this prayer of mine is not perhaps so efficacious
to obtain those other things, as it would have bin, if it had bin made for
those only, and for nothing else. I did say (perhaps) for there be many reasons
(as we shall see presently) for which Prayer, thus made, becomes very
efficacious for the obtaining those other requests, which I desire to have
granted, and which perhaps may further the grant of them, far more then praying
for them alone would do.

3. But for the present, let us suppose that such a prayer is less effectual
for obtaining of other things; yet this ought not to make men more backward to
pray for the souls in Purgatory; for shall I never pray for my Mother, because
by the same prayer I obtain some what less for my Father, then I should have
done, if I had prayed for him only? In the choice of these intentions, for which
we pray, we must regard many things, as the greater glory of God, the necessity
of our Neighbor, our own spiritual advancement, the common good of the
Church, and the like. Now perhaps all things well considered, there will scarce
be found any one thing, which ought so dearly to be commended to our devotions
as praying for the dead, in the which, among other things, there is also this
to be noted, that as S. Thomas says, in suppl. 3. p. q. 21. a. 5. God does
rather accept of prayers for the dead then for the living because they not
being able, as the living are, to help themselves, do more stand in need of the
help of others. To the which we may ad a worthy consideration of S. Denis, that
famous disciple of S. Paul (de Eccl. Hier. c. 7. p. 5.) to wit, that when we
pray for the living, our prayer many times, as it is impetratory, obtains
nothing at all, because the thing we pray for is not convenient to be granted,
or because (to use his example) the sins of those we pray for, do hinder this
effect: as the sins of Saul did hinder that the prayers of Samuel could not be
heard in his behalf, 1. Reg. 15.16. This in praying for the dead does never
take place, for those who are departed in Gods grace, as S. Augustine, in
Enchir. c. 100. teaches, deserved whilst they lived, that these helps of
prayers might profit them after their death.

4. Let us come now to the reasons for which (as I began to infinuate) our
prayers are far more impetratory when we remember the dead in them, then when
we omit this charitable remembrance. The first reason is, because this praying
for the dead, is an act of mercy so excellent, that it does in a super-eminent
manner contain and surpass all the corporal deeds of mercy put together, as
has bin demonstrated. Now, there is no more efficacious means to stir up the
mercy and liberality of God toward us, then the exercise of works of mercy and
liberality: For as our Savior says Math. 6. Blessed be the merciful, because
they shall obtain mercy. And again, Marc. 4. In what measure you shall
measure unto others, it shall be measured back to go again, (and adijcietur
vobis) and measured back with great increase. Will you know with how great? S.
Luke tells you: A good measure, a heaped measure, a measure pressed down,
and running over they shall give into your bosom. Luc. 6. With what words
could the largnesse of this measure have bin more fully set forth? And indeed
of so good a God we could expect no other: far be it from him that our
liberality should rather shut, the^ open his hands. His deeds will ever prove
his saying true: Give, and it shall be given unto you, in the measure declared
unto you, in this very place.

5. And we may be the more confident of this particular act, because our
Savior takes it as done unto himself; and therefore doubtless as those
souls, which we have delivered, cannot but be most ready to further any just
petition, which we shall make so our dear Lord, who counts himself to be
the person released, will never be wanting in the furtherance of whatsoever we
shall piously desire. Now, to have his good word so sure on our side, must
needs be of greater consequence for obtaining any reasonable favor, then any
thing we can devise. And as far as my capacity can reach, I cannot conceive in
what manner we may more efficaciously compass the grant of al our most
important requests, then by thus obliging (as I may say) Christ our Lord to
speak in our behalf with that earnestnes, which we may imagine those souls to
use whom we have relieved.

6. The R. F. Alexis de Salo writes thus of himself, Part. 1.. 2. One of my
particular denotions is, whenever I desire to obtain any favor for my
self, or any other, to say some few prayers for the dead; and J assure you, J
have experienced in my self and others, strange effects. Many have found and
still do find wonderful favors in their iourneys by offering the labor of
that days travel, or doing some other good work for the souls in Purgatory,
so that in some places this is very commonly practiced; and many such like
devotions are of more admirable effect then men will easily believe.

7. A further reason why our prayers, when we remember the souls of Purgatory
in them, do become of far greater efficacy to obtain our requests, is this:
Because (as has bin insinuated) this prayer, though of it self it has not
this greater efficacy, yet what it wants of it self, it procures to be far
more effectually performed by the help of those voices, which it wins,
among which the first place is to be given to the Word incarnate, whose words
cannot but be heard: I did know, that thou do always hear me, says this
our Lord Joan. 9. The voices also of Heavens whole Court cannot but join with
the Word, both because their affections are united with an inseparable
true-louers-knot, and because there is not one in heaven, who thinks not
himself to have particular interest in the furtherance of this cause; for all
that Blessed mansion love the soul released, eue^ as they love their own
souls, and therefore (as a grave Doctor says) they all rejoice at the felicity
of every one of their Brethren, as much as at their own. (Hugo l. 4. de anim.
c. 15.) and consequently all and every one of them will be in a manner as
forward to assist us, as those souls will be, who were released by our
prayers. And who ca^ express how ready these souls released, or releiued by
us, are to help us in all occurences? Tell me now, what means can you invent
more efficacious to make, in a manner, sure whatsoever you request?

CHAP. X. That by offering our Actions for the Souls in Purgatory, we do not
less, but more satisfy for our own Sins.
1. NOw we come to that point, which only has difficulty in this matter; for
it may seem clear that when we give away to others the fruits of our own
satisfaction, we cannot enjoy these fruits our selves, no more then we can pay
our debts with the same money which we pay for the debts of our friends. This
difficulty is very solidly answered by saying that, which is most true, to wit,
that to pray for, and assist the souls in Purgatory is an act so highly
meritorious of grace and glory, an act so impetratory of such things as may be
eternally beneficial to our own souls that the loss of the fruit of our
satisfactions is nothing to be valued in regard of the gain, which we
purchase, as may appear by what has bin said before Cap. 8. nu. 2. A second,
and sufficient answer might be, that this loss may fully be repaired by the
gayning of Indulge^ces for our selves. So though I cannot pay my own debts
with the same money which I pay out for the debts of my friends, yet I may by
favor, procure a releasment of my own debts, and so be as free from them, as
if I had paid them with that money, which I liberally laid out to discharge my
friends debt. That such favors or Indulgences may be obtained, we will prove at
large Chap. 14.

2. But these two Answers being for the present let pass, I intend to make
good the title of this Chapter, and to show that this devotion is a rare kind
of satisfaction. For understanding of which it is much to be noted, that when
we do any good work for the souls in Purgatory, for example when we fast or
pray, or give alms for them, we have such a kind of act, as this is, J do
offer this Fast, this Prayer, this Alms, for such a soul, or souls in
Purgatory. The thing therefore which we give away, is only such a fast, prayer,
or alms, and of the fruit of this work as it is satisfactory, we wholly
deprive our selves, and consequently as it is satisfactory, it makes no
satisfaction for our sins, but only for their sins for whom we did offer it:
yet that act, by which I, offering this Fast for another, deprive my self of
the fruit thereof, redou^deth wholly to my profit: neither does any part of it
benefit any one, but my self. Now I affirm that with this act, by which with
so great charity to God and my neighbor, I give away this fast, this alms,
this prayer, I do both satisfy for my sins, and satisfy in no mean manner,
but in a manner far more excellent then is ordinarily conceived.

3. For first this is an act most meritorious, and consequently most
satisfactory. For as the learned Vasquez teaches 2. p. q. 94. dub. 5. n. 3.
Every good work for the self same cause for which it does deserve to be
rewarded in heaven, deserves also freedom from such impediments as may hinder
the enjoying of this reward, such an impediment as the being in Purgatory would
be. Moreover, the more that we by our good deeds do endeare our selves to the
divine Majesty, the more we do recompense any former displeasure done unto him.
Grateful services cannot but abolish old offenses. Hence also Deuines of prime
note do auerre, that all good acts are in the self same degree satisfactory,
in which they are meritorious. So says Victoria, Soto, Ledesma etc. Now, we
have demonstrated that this act is in a very high degree meritorious, and
therefore by consequence it must be in a very high degree satisfactory.

4. But let us consider a little more this act by it self: First it cannot but
be hard and laborious to corrupted nature to be willing to fast for another,
pray for another, give alms for another: and if this be not very difficult,
why do you hold back so much, seeing it may be so beneficial unto you: If you
find no difficulty, because your Charity toward your neighbor is such, that
with joy you can do all these things for his sake; this pious disposition of
yours, does not lessen, but increase the satisfactory virtue of this act. For
as excellently S. Thomas, in suppl. q. 15. a. 1. The lessening of the pain
which proceeds from the readiness of the will caused by Charity, does not
diminish, but increase the efficacy of our satisfaction.

5. Again, this is an act of rare Charity toward God, whose glory we advance
by thus procuring the increase of his honor done to him in heaven by the
souls we release, and toward our Neighbor, to who^ we procure the greatest
good that may be. Now (as Konincke says, de Sacram. disp. 10. de satisf. dub.
4.) Not a few, but all Deuines do teach, that by an act of charity produced
with never so much ease and delight, a man may satisfy for all the pains he
has deserved. The Scripture tells us as much: Many sins are forgiven her,
because she has loved much. Luc. 7. Above all things having continual mutual
charity among your selves, because charity does cover the multitude of sins.
1. Pet. 4. And if this be not enough, Charity does cover all our sins. Prou.
10.

6. Lastly this act is one of the chiefest deeds of mercy, surpassing all the
works of corporal mercy put together, and therefore questionless it is an
act most highly satisfactory: for if of all corporal Alms it be written, that
they free from sin and death, and do not suffer the soul to go into darkness,
Tob. 4. That they resist sin as water does the burning fire. Eccl. 3. That if
you give alms all shall be clean unto you. Luc. 11. What shall we think of this
spiritual alms, by which heaven is given, and purgatory pains forgiven to a
poor soul, made of a most pitiful prisoner, a most glorious Saint. What a
work of mercy is this? Of the works of mercy in general S. Thomas says. 2.2.
q. 3. a. 2. The works of spiritual mercy are so much more excellent then the
works of corporal mercy, by how much the soul is more noble then the body. By
this it appears that all those who exercise these works of charity and
spiritual mercy frequently (as all do who do much for the souls in Purgatory)
are so far from depriving themselves of all satisfaction, that as often as they
give their satisfactory works away, they heap up great treasures of
satisfaction: so that here that which the Scripture says in the Proverbs, is
perfectly verifyed: Some men divide to others their own riches, and become the
richer thereby. Prou. 24.

CHAP. XI. That by offering our Actions for the Souls in Purgatory, we have
great hope of escaping either all, or a good part of Purgatory.
1. THE proof of this title may be in part drawn out of the precedent
chapters, for this act being so eminent if we regard merit, and so effectual
if we regard impetration, may with good ground be thought partly to deserve as
it is meritorious, partly to obtain by way of favor as it is impetratory,
that our merciful Lord should deal more mildely, then the ordinary course of
justice exacts, with all those who have both made a most noble kind of
satisfaction for their own sins, and have with a most heroical charity,
done many worthy actions to satisfy for the sins of others: neither be there
wanting many convenient reasons to persuade us to have this honorable conceit
of the divine goodness.

2. The holy Scripture it self gives us good ground to build this opinion.
Charity does cover the multitude of sins. 1. Pet. 4. And yet more clearly:
Charity does cover all our sins. Prou. 10. And what Charity more eminent then
this: Alms free from sin, and from death, and permit not the soul to go
into darkness? Tob. 4. Give alms, and all shall be clean unto you. Luc. 11. Now
if these prerogatives be to be granted to alms deeds, when they are plentiful
(which I add because S. Chrysostom says, Non dare, sed copiose dare,
eleemosyna est: Not to give, but to give plentifully, is an almeesdeed) if I
say almesdeeds be thus privileged, being a mere work of mercy corporal;
what shall we think of this alms so inco^parably surpassing all corporal
works of mercy, for it relieueth a greater misery then any corporal necessity
can be, and it bestows a gift no less then the possession of God himself?
Shall such an alms permit the giver of it to go into darkness? Now this alms
also will make all clear: for, He who gives to the poor shall not want.
Prou. 27. He shall not sustain this necessity the most grievous a poor soul
can be in, because as holy David says Psalm. 40. Blessed is he who
understands concerning the poor and needy, in the evil day our Lord will
deliver him. He shall be delivered in that day which to others is so evil.

3. And indeed how can we think otherwise, for be not these our Saviors
words: As long as you have done these things unto any one of my Brethren, you
have done them unto me? Now if our Savior takes the delivery of the Souls of
his brethren as gratefully as if his own soul had bin freed from Purgatory;
what shadow of likelihood is there, that he will not procure the delivery of
him whom he acknowledges to have bin his own deliverer? who of us can have
the heart (and our hearts are hard enough) yet who of us can have the heart, to
let him lie rosting in Purgatory flames, who has freed us from this misery,
especially if we could effect his releasment as easily as our Savior can work
ours, even without breach of the very rigor of justice, to wit, by offering in
our behalf his superabundant satisfactions for the supply of such satisfaction
as we stand in need of, that is, to bestow for his own sake a Plenary
Indulgence upon us, which though it be a favor extraordinary, yet the motive
to grant it bears proportion with such a grant; and to him who has showed so
extraordinary charity, liberality, and mercy, it ought not to seem strange, if
extraordinary charity, liberality, and mercy be showed by him whose bowels are
made all of Charity, bounty, and compassion: for if in punishing God observes
this rule: By what things a man sins by the same also he is tormented. Sap.
11. As he has done, so it shall be done unto him. He shall restore soul for
soul, eye for eye. Leuit. 29. May we not justly think, that in matter of
favor he does show greatest mercy to him, who has showed greatest mercy to
others? what other sense have those words, Matthew. 5. Blessed be the merciful,
for they shall obtain mercy? Wherefore, As he has done, it shall be done unto
him. As he has offered his satisfactions for the releasment of the Souls of
Christ's brethren, so Christ will offer up his superabundant satisfaction for
the releasment of his Soul, Soul for Soul shall be repayed to him, ransom
for ransom. As he has freed others so he shall be freed himself.

4. We must not here ouerslip in a cursory manner that evident text of
Scripture, which does almost demonstrate that which we have said, Give and it
shall be given unto you: but mark well in what measure. A good measure, a heaped
measure, a measure pressed down, and running over, they shall give into your
bosom. Luc. 6. The thing which we did give, was the fruits of our
satisfactio^s for supply of our Brethre^s want, by which gift he was released.
Wherefore that our Lord may return us equal measure, as great wants of ours
must be supplied by the fruits of his superabunda^t satisfactions, but that
this measure be a heaped up, a pressed down, and running over measure, we may
expect to be in that over liberal manner, made partakers of Christ's
satisfactions, that by them our debts being to the last farthing wholly
discharged, we may pass without impediment to the reward of our charity.

5. To all these so well grounded reasons we will add for a conclusion the
certain assistance which infallibly in this our necessity will be affoarded
us, by all those whom we have either released or relieved, and not only all
these happy souls, but also all, and every one of their blessed kindred,
Angel-guardians, Patrons etc. will favor us in our death, to requite the
favor by which we obliged them in our life: so that many of the Saints by
their glorious intercessions, and some by offering up for us their
superabundant satisfactions, will so prevail with the mercy of God, that we
need not much fear, all helps being put together, to be long left forlorn in
the flames of Purgatory.

6. And least perhaps this fear might have some little place left in any man's
heart, it has pleased the divine goodness by word of mouth to confirm all we
have said. S. Gertrude was one of the most renowned Saints for virtue, and one
of the most wonderful Saints for the miraculous favors which daily were done
unto her, that the Church has had. This blessed Saint (as Denis the Carthusian
relates) did with an admirable affection, give all, and every of her actions
wholly unto the souls in Purgatory, not reserving for herself the least fruit
of her satisfactions. Coming therefore to die she began not a little to be
afflicted in mind for fear, least that having many sins to satisfy for, and
having left herself destitute of all her satisfactory works, she might be
liable to grievous punishments. But Christ himself did vouchsafe to comfort
her with these words: That thou may understand how grateful that charity of
thine has bin unto me, which thou did show toward the souls, I do even now
forgive thee all those pains which thou should have suffered. And J who for
one have promised a hundredfold, will now show my liberality, and I will heap
up glory upon thee.

7. This comfort may they expect who have showed the like mercy toward the
souls of their brethren: but those who have slighted this devotion as
superstitious, or fit only for old wives, may justly fear to have those
dreadful words spoken unto them: Justice without mercy to him, who has not
done mercy. Iac. 2.

CHAP. XII. That it is not against charity to our selves to offer our Actions
for the souls in Purgatory but it is rather against it, not to offer them.
1. THE common and the only objection which any Catholic can make against this
liberality toward the souls in Purgatory is this: That though our prayers, or
other good works, offered up to God for the souls in Purgatory, be equally, or
rather more, both meritorious and impetratory then otherwise they would have
bin; yet it cannot be denied, but that they do not satisfy for our own sins:
which seeing that they be many and great, the pains due unto them will be
excessive; and therefore if our Charity were well ordered, we would not so
forget our selves, as to leave our selves in this manner deprived of those
satisfactions, for want of which we shall be liable to these torments which be so
very terrible. This objection I have differred to this place, because now the
answers unto it, out of that which has bin said, will be most clear.

2. I answer then first, that though we did become liable to these and greater
pains, yet they were not so much to be esteemed as a fleabyte for gaining of a
kingdom, if by this our Charity toward the souls, we might increase (as we do
most highly increase) the crown of our eternal glory. See Chap. 8. I answer
secondly, that by the gaining of Indulgences we may prevent this pretended
incommodity, as we shall prove at large in the 14. Chapter.

3. Thirdly, I give this direct and clear answer, that though by the works we
do for the souls, we do satisfy only for their, and not at all for our own
sins; yet by that rare act of Charity, by which we give these works away unto
them, we do satisfy in a most high degree, as has bin proved in the 10.
Chapter; yea in a degree so high, that by this satisfaction (and other helps,
as we did demonstrate in the last Chapter) we have great hope of escaping
either all, or greatest part of Purgatory.

4. To conclude this Chapter, in a word it is nothing against well-ordered
Charity toward our selves, to help these souls as much as we can; but it
needs must be against perfection of this Charity, not to assist them to our
full power; for that we loose the merit of so rare a charity, and the loss of
this merit is a loss of the perfecter sight of God for ever. If we love either
God or our selves, this will move us.

CHAP. XIII. By what means we may help the souls in Purgatory.
1. IF God has done us the favor to soften our hearts, we shall not now desire
any new motives, but rather seek by what means we may chiefly relieve these
poor souls. For those, who are thus disposed, we will declare what is to be
done in this matter.

2. That which in the first place ought to be recommended is, that if they will
indeed benefit either their own souls, or satisfy for the souls of their
neighbors, they must put themselves in the state of grace: for a dead member
can neither help the body, of which it is a member, nor any body else. And S.
Paul says, 1. Cor. 13. Although I should distribute al my goods, although I
should deliver up my body to burn, yet if I should not have charity, it
profits nothing. This supposed.

3. The ordinary means of relieuing the dead be these: Prayer, fasting, and
almesdeeds. As for prayer for the dead, it is a thing instituted by the
Apostles themselves, as we proved in the first Chapter; and so esteemed by the
holy Church, that at the end of every hour of divine office, she teaches us
to pray, that the souls of the faithful may rest in peace; for she would not
have us pray at any hour, without remembering these afflicted souls in our
Prayers. It would make one wonder to see, with what affection S. Austin in the
two last Chapters of his ninth book of his Confessions, does pray for the
soul of his dead Mother: and not content with his own prayers, he does
earnestly crave and beg the prayers of all, in these fiery words. Inspire, O
Lord, inspire into thy servants, that as many as shall read these things, may
be mindful at thy Altar, of Monica thy servant, that that which she did last
of all request of me, may be the more plentifully performed by the prayers of
many.

4. But among all kind of prayers there is none comparable to the oblation of
the dreadful Sacrifice of the Mass, for in this Sacrifice the self-same
Christ is offered in an unbloody manner upon the altar, who was offered in a
bloody manner upon the cross. So says S. Ambrose, in Hebr. 10. We offer
always one and the same Sacrifice, and not one Lamb to morrow, and another to
day, but always the same, one Christ is every where, here fully, and there
fully. And again, l. 1. in Luc. c. 1. When we sacrifice, Christ is present,
Christ is sacrificed. For as S. Austin says l. 4. de Trin. c. 14. The flesh of
our Sacrifice is made the body of our Priest. Wherefore that most ancient, and
glorious Martyr S. Hippolitus in his Oration de Consummatione mundi, brings
in our Savior thus speaking unto our Priests: Come you who daily sacrifice my
body, and my blood. And Christ says this to all Priests; for as excellently S.
Chrysostom hom. 2. in 2. ad Tim. The sacred oblation what Priest soever offers
it, is still the same: for men do not sacrifice this victime but Christ himself.
Wherefore the victime which in this Sacrifice is offered being true Christ, and
the self same Christ being chief Priest, which by his ministers and
substitutes does sanctify and offer this victime, can any one wonder, if all we
Catholics, together with S. Cyril of Jerusalem (Cath. mystag. 5.) Do believe
that the obsecration of that holy and dreadful Sacrifice, which is placed on
the altar, is the greatest help for the souls, for which it is offered. See
this place at large, for nothing can be spoken more Catholikly.

5. The Sacrifices of the old Law were esteemed by the chief and only true
belieuers of those times to have such virtue to relieve the dead, that when
soldiers were slain in battle, they made a gathering of no less then
twelve thousand drachmes of silver, and sent this money to Jerusalem, that
sacrifice might be offered for the sins of the dead. 2. Machab. 12. What
esteem then ought we to have of our Sacrifice? S. Austin l. 9. Confess. c. 3.
deservedly praised his dead Mother in these words; She did not think how to
have her body sumptuously buried, or embalmed, but she desired only that her
memory might be made at Gods Altar, at which she never omitted any one day of
her life to be present, knowing that from thence is dispensed the holy host or
Sacrifice, whereby is blotted out the guilt of the world. And this which she
requested was fulfilled, when the Sacrifice of our price was offered for her,
as S. Austin cap. 12. of the same Book, says it was.

6. This piety which so flourished in the primitive Church, cease not in the
prime parts of the world to flourish in these our days. No less then one
thousand and seven hundred Masses, upon one and the self same day, were in
Madrid celebrated at the funerals of Margaret, wife to Philip the third, King
of Spain: and besides a thousand Masses which this Queen by her will gave
order to have said for her Soul, the King of his liberality caused twenty
thousand more to be said for her. Gasman. in vita Margar. Austriac. p. 3. c. 3.
It is not very many years since the death of the Archduke Albertus Prince of
the Low-Countryes, whose most pious wife Isabell did procure for the relief of
his soul forty thousand Masses, and for thirty days together she herself
did hear 10. Masses daily for this her pious Lord and husband. P.F. Iac.
Curuoisier in Mansolaeo.

7. As for fasting most remarkable is that which we read in the Scripture: That
after the death of Saul and his sons, the men of Iabes Galaad did take his
dead body, and the dead bodies of his sons, and buried them in the wood of
Jabes, and fasted seven days. 1. Reg. c. vlt. Under the name of fasts all
other mortifications, and austerityes are comprehended, as disciplines,
hayre-cloath, lying on the ground etc. But because some men's silken ears
cannot endure so hard language, as the naming of these things; and others under
pretense of health will plead inhability to perform such works, I will add
some few acts of mortification, which no man, or woman can be too weak to
exercise. For example, to debar themselves of some less necessary
recreations, to abstain from some sweet morsels, for some small space to keep
silence, not to see, not to hear such, and such curiosities. But one act of
Virtue there is, which the weakest creature in the world may practice, and it
is an act of so high worth, that the stro^gest man in the world can scarce
practice a better. It is this: for Christ's sake to forgive all those, from your
very heart, who have done any injury, or injuries unto you. This is not my
doctrine, but the doctrine of S. Austin Sermon. 41. de Sanctis, in these words:
Those who desire to be delivered from this temporal purging fire, let them by
continual prayers, and frequent fastings, and large alms, and especially by
forgiving them who have offended against them, redeem their ordinary daily
sins. This act which S. Austin does so especially, above all other, commend,
has a better recommendation in the word of God, which does in plain terms
promise to this act a plenary Indulgence, a Iubily, a full Remission of all
sins in this large form of Grant: Forgive, and it shall be forgiven unto you.
Luc. 6. And again: For if you forgive unto men their offenses, your heavenly
Father also will forgive your sins unto you. Matthew. 6. This pardon you may
gain for the souls in Purgatory. Hear then a memorable example to this
purpose.

8 The only son of an honorable Widow was murdered by a wicked fellow, who
being for this his murder in danger of being apprehended by the Officers, had
hid himself: but the officers, and the widow had intelligence where he lay.
The Officers went to the place to take him, but the pious widow did, for Gods
sake, so truly pardon this greatest mischief which could have been done her,
that she did not only certify the murderer of his danger, to the end he might
fly away in time, but for this end did she furnish him also with money, and
gave him the horse of her dead son, that he might escape the better. After
this she retired herself to pray for her Sons soul, when behold her son
all in glory appeared unto her, and told her that for so great Charity toward
his murderer, God had already freed him from the fire of Purgatory, which for
many years he should have suffered. Orosius fer. 6. post Cineres. Thus much
for this point. We may also much relieve the souls in Purgatory by suffering
for them such crosses as it shall please God to lay upon us: as sickness, loss
of goods, of friends, trouble of the mind, and all kind of afflictions, which
are exceeding satisfactory, if we accept them willingly, or bear them
patiently.

6. A third kind of satisfaction most auailable to the souls in Purgatory, is
to exercise Almesdeeds, which be most effectual to abolish all pain due to
sin, and therefore most profitable to those poor souls, both when they are
given to any sort of poor men, and most of all when they are given unto those,
who are voluntarily poor, as all religious both men and women are: for they
will be sure to pray devoutly for the dead. So that they receive a double
benefit, both by the gift of the alms it self, which is a work highly
satisfactory, and also by the prayers of those to whom the alms are given, who
often are very great servants of almighty God, and their prayers most powerful
with him. Hence is that excellent advice of S. Ambrose l. 1. de fide and
resurrect. who exhorts the Parents to bestow the portions which they intended
to have given their children which now are dead, in almesdeeds for the relief
of their souls. Excellent also is that Counsel which some give to rich men:
They advise the^ as often as they hear a poor man knocking at their door, to
imagine themselves to hear the voice of a poor soul in Purgatory begging for
relief: and if they have any mercy in them, this imagination will stir them up
to bestow some small alms both for the spiritual relief of the soul in
Purgatory, and the corporal relief of their poor neighbor.

10. How grateful to God and beneficial to the giver those alms are, which
are bestowed upon the souls in Purgatory, or upon others for their relief,
will appear by a strange example, which I have read in several Authors, of one
Eusebius Duke of Sardinia. This good duke was so devoted to the souls in
Purgatory, that he bestowed all the tithes of his Dukedom in masses,
Almesdeeds, and other pious works for their delivery; and moreover gave one of
his best Cities (which was therefore called the City of God) with all the
reuenews thereof, to be employed for the same end. It happened that Ostorgius Duke
of Sicily, being at wars with this Eusebius, surprised this City. The news
whereof being brought to Eusebius he was so sensible of the loss, that he
protested he had rather have lost half his Dukedom, and so with all speed
drawing his men together (which were but a handful in regard of the enemy)
marched boldly on to recover the same. In the way his Scoutes discovered a
great Army approaching with armor, horses, banners, all as white as snow; at
which report the Duke was somewhat stricken, yet reflecting better on the matter,
conceived hope of good from that joyful color. Wherefore se^ding out four
choice men to learn who they were, and what they intended; they were answered
by four more of the white army coming to meet them, that they need not fear,
for they were soldiers of the King of Heaven, friends to Eusebius, and Enemies
to his Enemy. The Duke was much comforted with this answer and ^ thereupon
riding in person toward the army was presently met, and kindly saluted by some
of them, who confirmed what had bin said before, bidding him fear nothing but
march on with his army after theirs. So he did. Then the white army, which
seemed to be 40. thousand strong, making a stand near to the camp of
Ostorgius, came presently to a parley, and gave him to understand that they
were the soldiers of the King of Heaven sent to revenge the iniust surprisall
of that City belonging to their Master, and to put Eusebius again in
possession, adding with all such threats, that Ostorgius was extremely
terrifyed, and humbly demanded peace, promising all possible satisfaction. By
this time Eusebius was come up, to whom Ostorgius readily offered to restore
the double of what he had taken, and to make himself, and his people tributary
unto him. These conditions being agreed upon, Eusebius applied himself to the
white Army with such signs of gratitude as were fitting in that occasion, and
then beginning to inquire more particularly what they were, had for answer,
that they were all souls delivered by his pious liberality out of Purgatory:
so that he had just cause of much content in what he had done, and of
encouragement to proceed in those charitable works, by which doubtless many
more souls would be delivered out of that place of punishment: and then taking
a kind leave, they returned the same way they came. [ Spec. Exempl. tit.
Defuncti. exemplo 25. Pinellus de altera vita l. 1. c. 28. De Bonniers in
Aduocat. Animarum. c. 2. Histor. Sardiniae, and alij.]

11. We need not doubt but Eusebius was unspeakably comforted in this strange
occurrence, and must needs increase in devotion and liberality toward the
souls, which he found by experience to be so mindful of paying, and
ouerpaying their debts. And I pray God others who have bags of gold, and whole
Lordships to cast away at Dice and Cards, and wast in bravery, and Epicurean
feasting, may learn by this example, and by what has bin said before, rather
to spend their riches hereafter with assurance of getting a hundred for one,
then with mighty probability of loosing thousands for nothing, and their own
souls into the bargayne. I wish also that wealthy Parents would give care and
credit to the exhortation of S. Ambrose cited before in this Chapter; which
doing, they will certainly be ashamed to bestow more thousands upon a Daughter
wedding to the world, then hu^dreds on another choosing Christ for her spouse.
And if they had read, and pondered well the complaint made by S. Austin (l. 2.
Confess. c. 13.) of his own Father, I believe they would make a scruple to be
so close-handed in breeding their sons to learning and virtue, and so very
prodigal in contributing to vain, and sometimes vicious courses. If God, and
his Saints be so liberal, and loving to men; how ungrateful, and ill-natured
are those men, who deal so niggardly with God, and with the souls of Saints
crying out for help in the fiery flames of Purgatory?

CHAP. XIIII. Of Indulgences.
1. AMongst the means of relieuing the souls in Purgatory, one of the
chiefest is, to gain such Indulgences for them as are so granted that they may
be applied unto them. Now because either for want of instruction in this point
(which is not so easily understood) or for dulnes of belief in it, (because
we, who are so bad, are hard to believe God should be so good) very many are
lamentably negligent in the use of so great a treasure; I have thought
convenient to handle briefly this point, which indeed is necessary to be
declared, to solue the objection made in the 12. Chapter.

2. For the perfect understanding of this matter, we must call to mind that,
which has bin sufficiently proved before in the 2. Chapter, how that after any
sin is forgiven, there does commonly remain some guilt of pain due to so
foul a crime. Well then, the grant of an indulgence is the grant of the
remission of this pain remaining after the sin is forgiven, which grant is
communicated unto us to supply graciously our want of due satisfaction by
applying the superabundant satisfactio^s of Christ our Lord, which by his Vicar
on earth are to this end applied unto us, by the performance commonly of some
work enjoined us for gayning of this indulgence.

3. So that you see here arise three things to be explicated. First that the
satisfactions of Christ are so superabundant, that they are sufficient to
supply any want of satisfaction, which any man, or men can have. Secondly, that
there is a Vicar of Christ on earth, who has lawful power to apply these
superabu^dant satisfactions of Christ for the supply of any want of
satisfaction, which we may be in. Thirdly, something also must be declared of
the things, which by Christ's Vicar use to be enjoined, that those satisfactions
of Christ may be applied in this manner unto us.

4. First then, that the satisfactions of Christ are so superabu^dant that they
may be a cause sufficient to supply any, though never so great want of
satisfactions, is easily granted by all, and clear of it self, if we do but
remember that the blood of Christ was the blood of God, and consequently of so
inestimable worth and value that the shedding of one only drop of it was an act
abundantly satisfactory for the sins of a whole world. Now then, our Savior
shedding this his diuinely-pretious blood, not by small drops, but pouring it
forth by plentiful showers, did heap up an immense treasure of satisfactions,
superabundantly sufficient to satisfy for any pains due to any sin, or sins
whatsoever; for else our offenses might have bin greater then his
satisfactions: there wants not therefore a cause even superabundantly
sufficient, to supply any possible want of satisfaction which any man can be
in, so infinite a treasure is this.

5. Secondly, there is in the Church lawful power and authority to apply to
such as want satisfactions, these superabundant satisfactions of Christ: for
otherwise this infinite treasure of the superabundant satisfactions of Christ
our Lord, heaped up for us, and for us only, would be wholly unprofitable to us
and merely superfluous. It would be like the treasure which that miserable
wretch in S. Luke did keep lapped up in his handkercher; or the talent which
that other in S. Matthew hid in the ground. Now as the holy Scripture says; A
hidden wisdom, and an unseen treasure what profit is there in either of them?
Eccl. 41.

6. Wherefore, that this treasure may profit us, as it is superabundant, there
must be left on earth power to dispense forth out of this superabundancy, as
much as our necessities may require. Which being so, to whom should we think
this power to have been given, rather then to him, to whom it was said Joan.
20. Feed my sheep: rather then to him to whom it was said Matthew. 15. To thee I
will give the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. For it is all one to have the
keys of heaven, and to have authority to remove the bar of the lock, which
shuts heaven door; such a bar as sin is, not fully satisfied for: I
would know, I say, in whom we should put this power, if not in him? for to him
the words following do clearly give this commission: Whatsoever thou shall
loose on earth shall be loosened also in Heaven. Mark that word, Whatsoever,
that is, what thing soever it be which can bind a Soul, whether it be guilt of
sin, or guilt of pain due to sin, if thou do loosen this band on earth,
it shall be loosened in heaven. This was a promise, which doubtless Christ, who
always made good his word, did perfectly keep.

7. Out of this which we have said, ^ this conuincing argument may be taken.
There is power left in the Church to forgive sin it self, which does deserve
the pains we speak of; therefore it is no wonder that there should be power to
forgive the suffering of these pains. That there is power left to forgive sins
the text of Scripture does literally affirm. The Protestant if he stands to
the words of the Scripture has not a word to say: He must fly to his own
exposition of the Word; which exposition why should any man in prudence follow,
rather then the exposition of the most learned, and most holy Fathers of the
Primitive Church, who studied the Scriptures day and night, and may be far
more prude^tly thought to have understood them aright, then those who live in
an age so far from Christ, entangled with so many uncertain opinions, or
rather certain errors?

8. If the Protestants tell us, they were men, and might err, we will defire
them to remember that they are also men, and at least as likly to err as they
were. If the Protestant says he follows Scripture; the plain words of
Scripture are clear against him in this point, which is a point fundamental
concerning the forgiveness of sin, a thing wholly necessary to salvation. That
the Fathers teach, Priests to have power of forgiving sin, I will show in a
word. S. Chrysologus Sermon. 84. writing upon those words, Whose sins you
forgive shall be forgiven them, says thus: Where be those men that affirm
sins cannot be forgiven by men unto men? Peter does forgive sins, and with all
joy does receive the penitent; and he imbraceth this power granted by God unto
all Priests. S. Leo the Great writes thus Ep. 91. ad Theo. Christ Jesus gave
this power to the governors of the Church, that by the door of reconciliation
they should admit them to the communion of the Sacraments being now purged. But
what more clear then that of S. Chrysostom, l. 3. de sacerd. initio? It was
only lawful to the Priests of the Jews to cleanse, or (to speak more truly)
not to cleanse, but to approve as cleansed, the leprosy of the body: But to our
Priests it was granted, not to cleanse the leprosy of the body, but it was
granted unto them, I do not say to approve for cleansed, but thoroughly to
cleanse the filth of the soul. Here you see condemned, in as clear words as
can be spoken, the error of the Protestants, who say that the power of our
Priests is to declare our sins forgiven and not to forgive them: but S.
Chrysostom says, that he does not say this: J do not say, to approve for
cleansed, but thoroughly to cleanse the filth of the soul. This being proved,
let us proceed.

9. If Christ's Vicar upon earth has power to forgive the sins which did
deserve eternal pain, and consequently to loosen the band of eternal pains,
can it seem much that he should have power to loosen the bands of temporal
pain with which the sinner is tied after his sins are remitted? The contrary
surely would seem the greater wonder. Yet because (and so I come to declare
the third point which I undertook concerning the thing enjoined to be performed
for the gaining of Indulgences) because, I say, all power given by Christ unto
his Vicar, is well ordered, and granted for the edification, not for the
destruction of the Church, this authority of dispensing the treasures of
Christ's superabundant satisfactions was given so, that it might be dispensed
forth, with prudent liberality, not powered out with lauishing prodigality.
Wherefore all Protestants and Catholics are to understand, that our most
esteemed Deuines in this age are of opinion, that it is not in the power of the
Pope to grant an Indulgence for the performance of a good work so little, that
it cannot be a proportionable cause to grant this favor. As for example (and
it is the example of S. Bonauenture, 4. did. 20. q. 6.) to grant a great
sinner a plenary Indulgence, for giving an Alms of three half pence.

10. But it is exceedingly to be marked, that when the Pope grants a great
Indulgence, which may be obtained by doing of something, perhaps as small as
giving an Alms of three half pence, the reason of the grant of this
Indulgence is not merely that so little a good work should be performed: for
then (as S. Bonauenture teaches) it would be an imprudent, and an impossible
grant; but the reason of the grant of such an Indulgence is the obteyning of
some very great good, and a good so great (for this Bellarmine seems to
require,) that the obteyning of it makes more to Gods glory, and is more
grateful to him, then it would be to have our forgiven sins punished in
Purgatory with due rigor of justice. For example such a good would be the
conversion of Infidels, Extirpation of Heresies, constant Peace in the Church
of God, the notable advancement of some great, or some necessary act of piety,
faith, Religion, Charity etc. The obteyning of such goods as these, is the
thing which moves the Pope to grant these Indulgences, and to dispense forth
the treasure committed unto him by Christ, for the greater glory of Christ,
which is a very prudent, and well-ordered dispensation; for so those who are
put in charge with others goods do most faithfully exercise their charge, if
they lay them out for the greater benefit of those who did put them in trust.

11. I see well, that it will be objected, that though the Pope does piously
and prudently to employ the treasure committed to his charge for obteyning of a
greater good, yet it seeemeth that he does imprudently to use, for obteyning of
it, such an unproportionable, and unfit means, as is to inioyne only the
performance of a good work so little, to be done for this end; as for example,
to inioyne only the saying of 5. Pater Nosters for obteining so great a good as
is the Conversion of Infidels, extirpation of Heresies etc. And therefore though
the cause of this Grant be reasonable, yet the means applied seem most
unreasonable. I answer, that the performance of so little a good work, as is
the saying of five Pater Nosters, for obteyning the good for which the
Indulgence is granted, may be a very effectual means for obteyning of so great
a good. Which that I may show, let us but consider what does daily happen, when
the Pope grants such an Indulgence as this is. The grant of this Indulgence
is no sooner made known unto the Church, but presently you shall see all
faithful people, by thousands, with one heart, and one soul, doing that which
is necessary for gaining of this Indulgences: that is, by a true, entire, and
hearty Confession and contrition putting themselves (if they fear they were not
in it before) in state of grace, and friendship with God, and then after this
(for this must be done for gaining of Indulgences) devoutly performing the good
work enjoined them to be performed and performing it to the end, for which it
was enjoined. Now, though this good work be but little, though it be but the
saying of five Pater Nosters for the foresaid intention; yet when even so few
prayers are said with one heart, and one soul, by so many thousands of
thousands, as use (by the grant of so great an Indulgence exacting only the
performance of so small a work) to be stirred up to the devout recital of
these prayers, the quantity of all these prayers put together, amou^teth to an
immense sum, a sum so great, and made up by such an uniform devotion of so
many faithful people, that it may in prudence be thought to be a means
sufficient to effect the good intended.

12. Hence it appears that the performance of a little thing may be an
effectual means to obtain a great good, when by the exacting of a thing so
small, every body is invited to do what is necessary to the perfect performance
of it; whereas if they were invited by a small Indulgence, or by a great one
which could not be gained but by some great good work, as fasting many days,
saying many prayers etc. very few would be induced to gain this Indulgence.
And so it may well happen, that Christ's Vicar ca^ scarce use any means more
effectual to obtain a good which makes so much to Gods glory and the benefit
of his Church, then by granting some great Indulge^ce which may be gained, by
doing some small good work for his intention. For it is very likely that a
far greater quantity of good works will be raised, whilst every one
contributeth a little, then when almost every body lays aside all care of
doing any thing, because without he does a great deal, he is never the nearer,
for as much as concerns the gaining of the Indulgence. We use to say, it is
well for poor men that brass farthings go currently, for now every body coms
easily off with a farthing, whereas their charity would hardly be great enough
to part with a penny.

13. All which we have said, has far less difficulty when an Indulgence is
granted, to bring in public practice some important act of piety, or to
hinder decay of some great devotion, especially of some virtue necessary to
salvation, as Faith, Charity, Contrition etc. Because in this case not only all
these things do make more to Gods glory, then that ordinary severity of
punishing by the pains of Purgatory; but it is easily understood how these so
important things may effectually be procured by the performance of things but
small in themselves, though great in their effects. For example, it is a thing
most important, that all faithful people should profess union with their
supreme Pastor, and also the decay of this union is much to be feared, by
reason of the power of Heresy. Again this union may be effectually brought
into great request by making sometimes in a year some public and solemn
profession of it, which may be done by coming humbly to receive his
benediction in some great festiuity: therefore the Pope both may, and does most
piously and prudently in granting a great Indulgence for performing an act in
it self so easy and little, as is to ask his benediction.

14. In like manner true faith, without which it is impossible to please God,
is lost by obstinately rejecting the authority of the Church, though in matters
otherwise of no exceeding great consequence, therefore the maintayning of faith
in all such matters, when there is danger of the loss of it, makes very much
to Gods glory, and the good of souls. Now, the pious belief of these points
so important may efficaciously be vpholden, and brought into public practice
and veneration, by the practice of some acts, which are most easily performed:
for example sake, Prayer for the dead, veneration of Relics, gaining of
Indulgences, are points of faith, which Heretics seek by all means to
overthrow. Again, they may be efficaciously maintained in a continual; and
most devout practice, if the Pope would grant some great Indulgence for making
some frequent pious acts, which may revive these deuotio^s, and keep the
practice of them in daily use.

15. Now, to stop in a word the mouths of Protestants, which are so wide open
to cry down these Indulgences, I will only put them in mind of their own
Doctrine. They say, A man is justified by faith only; in so much that if a man
were as great a sinner as could be, yet this man if be would but make one act
of true Faith, should be in a moment justified, and not so much as liable to
the least punishment for all his innumerable and enormous sins. Is any pardon,
Indulgence, or Iubily so easily obtained, or so incredible as this? Do but
believe (which will not pain your bones the least) and All, All, though it
were a thousand times more, is wholly forgiven you; And sin as much to morrow,
(if it be possible) as you have sinned in all the days of your life, and you
shall not cease for all this to be justified, if you do not cease to believe,
which (as they say) you cannot cease to do. Was there ever the like devise to
make wide the strait gate of heaven? Whereas if you will obtain a Catholic
Indulgence, First you must believe: but this is not all, as it is with
Protestants: Secondly you must have true hope: Thirdly you must be in perfect
Charity, and in the state of grace, and consequently you must have had true and
hearty repentance of all your sins: you must have a firm purpose to forsake
them; you must have made an entire and contrite confession of them; you must,
if you have wronged any man, have made him due satisfaction; and after all
this, you must do the thing which is required for obteyning of the Indulgence;
which (though in some occasions it be little) yet many times it is the fast of
three days, the visiting of Churches, the devout praying in them, the giving
of Alms etc.

16. And all this being duly performed, that which is wanting to the full
satisfaction of the pain due to your forgiven sins, shall be graciously supplied
by the superabundant satisfactions of Christ our Lord, applied by his Vicar
unto you to this end; So that, even after all this, no one sin is by the
Indulgence forgiven you: for all Catholics teach, that all the Indulgences in
the world cannot forgive the least mortal sin, no nor venial, as most
affirm; but all that is forgiven by way of Indulgence is the pain to which
the sinner was liable, even after his sin was forgiven him. And therefore if the
sin remain still vnforgiuen, the pain due unto it cannot by any Indulgence be
forgiven. And this is a great reason why so few do obtain a perfect plenary
Indulgence of all that pain which they were liable unto, because there be but
few who use due diligence to procure all their sins even venial to be fully
forgiven them, and therefore they do not obtain the remission of the pain due
to those sins which remain vnforgiue^, though they obtain the remission of
the pain due to all which are forgiven them. The importance of this matter
has made me more to enlarge my self then I intended.

CHAP. XV. Two other means of higher Perfection, by which we may relieve the
Souls in Purgatory.
1. THe first is, to offer up all our good actions, thoughts, words, and
sufferings, desiring God to accept of them for the relief of such a Soul or
Souls in Purgatory; to offer them up all, I say, as they are satisfactory, for
so they do either only or chiefly profit them; and so we remain free to apply
the same works, as they are impetratory for obteyning any thing we desire to
pray for: yet I would not have this so understood, as though we were not in the
first place to satisfy any obligation which perhaps we might have of employing
some part of our works for other intentions. Neither would I advise any man to
perform the pennances enjoined him in confession, for satisfaction of the sins
of any other besides himself. But out of these or such like cases, I know not
how we can better apply our actions, as they are satisfactory: for thus all our
actions are not less but more meritorious, not less but more impetratory, not
less but more satisfactory: Thus we may hope to escape all, or the greatest
part of Purgatory pains. Wherefore it is not against charity toward our selves
to be thus liberal. All these things have bin proved in the former chapters.

2. A man would think it were not possible to proceed any further in this
charitable devotion. But Charity is so witty in her inventions, that she has
found out a way to give more then she has, or ever had in this life. You shall
see this verified in a strange mannet, and an unheard of example, which cannot
be well understood, without we first let all know that whenever any one dies
in the Society of Jesus, even the meanest Brother in the house, it is ordained
by the Constitutions of the same Society, that all of that house, where the
party deceaseth, who are Priests, are to say three Masses for his soul, and
those who are not Priests three pair of beads, and throughout the whole
Province (which many times consists of seven, or eight hundred persons) every
Priest is to say two Masses, and each one of the rest two pair of beads for
the same intention. And besides all these prayers every Priest of our Society
throughout the whole world is obliged every week to say one Mass, and each one
of those who are not Priests, one pair of beads for those of their Order
deceased out of their particular Provinces; for if the deceased be of the same
Province, then they are to say for them two a piece, as eue^ now has bin said.
Hence it appears, that there dies not any one in the Society, for whom a
very great multitude of Masses, and prayers are not said. Let us put a probable
supposition: Suppose there be sixteen thousand persons in the So^^ety, and
that one half of this number be Priests, the rest either Students, Nouices, or
lay-Brothers: Let us also suppose, that taking one week with another, there die
out of this number four a week. This supposed, it follows that every one of
these four shall have for his part alone, near two thousand Masses, and as
many pair of beads said for his soul, out of the Province where he dyed,
besides those which are said for him in the House, and Province in which he
dyed. This being so, hear now a rare act of Charity.

3. Father Ferdinand Monroy of the Society of Jesus, a man of rare sanctity,
when he came to dye, knowing, and in that hour lively apprehending, what
Comfort he might take in the multitude of Masses, and prayers which he knew
should after his death be said for his soul, according to the rule of his
Order, was notwithstanding so inflamed with ardent charity toward the souls
of his, and Christ's brethren suffering in Purgatory, that he bequeathed unto
them by Will and Testament all the Masses, and other prayers, which after his
departure should be offered up for his soul; and so departed this life either
directly toward heaven (as is most probable) or a welcome guest to the souls
in Purgatory. (Eusebius. Nierembergicus tract. de Purgatorio.) Can charity proceed
any further? Let then the imitation of this example be a second means for them
whose charity burns so much hoater then Purgatory. If a third means of
relieuing these souls, perfecter then this could be found, yet all that could
be done, ought not to seem too much, seeing it is done for Christ's sake, for
his brethren, for souls so esteemed by him, that what is done for them, he
takes it as done unto himself.

4. If any demand whether these two devotions may be securely practiced by all
kind of men, what quality soever they be of? I answer that they may, with great
profit of their own, and their neighbors souls, and advancement of Gods
glory, if for more caution this condition be added: As far as it is suitable to
Gods holy will, and makes to the greatest increase of his glory, I offer up,
for the relief of the souls in Purgatory, the whole satisfactory virtue of
whatsoever good I shall do, or evil J shall suffer, all the time of my whole
life, and all the prayers and other good works whatsoever which shall be
performed for me after my death; so far I say, as this shall be most pleasing to
God. For what danger can there be in this Act? Can that be any way subject to
be done amiss, which is wholly subjected to the divine will? Two extremes might
be dangerous in that which concerns devotion for the souls in Purgatory: The
first, by showing them too little charity: the second, by forgetting
wel-ordered Charity toward our selves, and our neighbors here on earth. As
for the first, this charity cannot be to little, because we do for the souls
as great a part of our actions as God would have us, for we offer them all, so
far as is most agreeable to his holy will: and as for the second we forget not
to reserve as great a part of our works for our selves, and our neighbors on
earth, as God would have us; for we give away no more then best pleases him,
and makes most to his greatest honor. So that I cannot discover the least
shadow of danger in practicing these devotions in the manner above said, for
would any man do more for himself, or less for these poor souls, then God
would have him?

5. The Reverend Father Eusebius Nierembergicus, in a Treatise be wrote of
Purgatory, did handle this point so well, that two worthy Doctors and
Professors of Divinity at Lions in France, diligently examining the force of
his reasons, were so convinced thereby, that both of them, together with diverse
of their scholars gave all the satisfactions of their whole life to the souls
in Purgatory. (Libell. de modo se cito ditandi.) This devotion in fine has bin
practiced by many great servants of God, highly recommended for their piety by
most grave Authors; and God did reward S. Gertrude for it in that liberal
manner before mentioned: and if it be ^^sed with the caution now spoken of, no
man can suspect it, neither can there be any want of devotion in adding a
condition so pious.

CHAP XVI. To what Souls in Purgatory we are chiefly to apply our satisfactory
works.
1. I know not how to begin this Chapter better, then by answering an objection
which some speculatiue witty may chance to stumble at. Alas, will some say,
what good, will all my poor works do, when they come to be shared among so
many thousand souls as be in Purgatory? They will be like a little loaf of
bread amongst a great multitude of beggars, which if it be equally cut, every
one will scarce receive a crumme. These men seem to suppose themselves the
only men in the world who show charity to the souls in Purgatory. For if
there be others (and many others) who by Gods grace are no less charitable and
liberal then they, it is not hard to understand how by the help of many, many
may be helped. That which Thomas, or William does contribute toward the
maintenance of a whole army, will not affoard every Soldier a farthing; and
yet because others in great multitudes contribute as well as they, whole armies
are easily maintained in a flourishing estate. So whilst many devout souls
relieve these helpless souls many helpless souls are relieved.

2. And indeed we have great reason to show charity to all: For first the law
of Nature cries out unto us: All things that you would men should do to you,
do you also to them. Matthew. 7. Secondly, the written Law in plain terms
says: Love thy neighbor as thy self. Thirdly, our Savior adds a strange
force also to this Precept: This is my precept, that you love one an other as J
have loved you. Joan. 15. Now how he loved us, all his life, and most of all
his blessed death does testify. Fourthly, all souls are so esteemed by Christ,
that he takes that Charity, which is showed to the least of them as kindly as
if it were done to himself in person. In fine the virtue of Mercy calls upon
us to assist all who are in extreme necessity, as these poor souls are.
These be forcible reasons moving us to assist all that be in Purgatory.

3. Yet it is in no case to be misliked, but it is rather a most recommendable
devotion to pray for some souls in particular, and in the first place for
those, to which, besides those general reasons now alleged for all, we may
have some peculiar obligation. For some we may be bound to pray by our own
oath, promise, compact, rule etc. For others by the virtue of Piety, as our
Parents, spiritual Fathers, kindred, friends, and acquaintance etc. For some
again out of gratitude, as our benefactours spiritual and temporal etc.
These reasons be more particular, and therefore they ought to prevail more with
us, then those other general reasons, for which we are to pray for all men,
because the general reasons make as much for these as for any others, and
besides they have also their particular reasons.

4. But when we know not such particular reasons as these are, yet it will be
piously done, to pray for some souls in particular, though in a manner more
general: for example, for that soul whose delivery makes most to Gods glory,
whose relief, or releasement the glorious Virgin Mary most desires, for those
who were most devoted to her, for those who be in greatest necessity, most of
all forlorn etc. For those who are so near their delivery, that by our small
devotions they may be perfectly set free, and consequently immediately glorify
God, pray for us etc. In fine here every man may do what is most suitable to his
private devotion, which notwithstanding is best, when it is ordered by the most
perfect rule of Gods greater glory.

CHAP. XVII. The perfect practice of all contained in this Book.
1. Whosoever to Gods glory, the good of his own soul, and relief of those
in Purgatory, desires to put in practice all which has bin treated of in this
book; must first above all things have a care to put and keep himself in
state of grace, for if he has not the grace and charity of God, though he
should distribute all his substance to the poor, or all his works to the
souls in Purgatory, it would profit him, and them nothing at all.

2. Secondly, he must not slubber over this devotion in a careless manner,
giving his works away, and little marking why, or what he gives: but he must
take some short time to consider the Motives set down in this Treatise, and
must ponder each motive by it self, until his will be stirred up effectually
to affoard all relief he is able to the distressed souls. Neither is this any
long business, because even the reading attentively these motives, is sufficient
to move any heart to help such help-les souls: and this is the thing we
desire, for we little regard the being moved to a soft and tender compassion,
which God know's is often very fruitles, and soon vanishes away.

3. Wherefore that all may perform this with little or no difficulty, we will
set down in plain and full words the manner of making perfectly all those
acts, which in any part of this Treatise have bin reco^mended. But let no man
think unless he would make a meditation of this matter (as he may do with great
fruit in the space of half an hour) that we would have him make all these
acts at one time, but rather that he exercise now one, now another, more or
fewer according to his leisure and devotion: yet it will be best to exercise
often the most perfect. Now, for the Readers commodity, we will cite the
Chapters, where the matters are treated at large, which here are only touched
in a word.

4. The first Act answerable to the third, fourth, and fifth Chapter may be
thus made: O how excessive is the bitterness of those pains which these
afflicted souls do suffer in Purgatory! What a misery is it to be banished
(though for a time only) from the face of God! In what a sea of affliction must
that poor soul be, which for a long space is condemned to remain in this
pitiful state! Wherefore, O my Soul, affoard these souls of thy Brethren all
help thou can: Pray for them, exercise acts of penance for them; procure the
holy Sacrifice of Mass may be offered for them; give alms that they may be
prayed for: relieve them by all Indulgences which may be gained for them; let
all thy satisfactory actions and sufferings of thy whole life be offered up for
them, so far as it is suitable to Gods holy will; and so far as it makes to his
greater glory bequeath unto the^ all the good works which after thy departure
out of this life shall be done for thee. O Lord accept of this my most hearty
oblation, made in behalf of my distressed Brethren.

5. The second Act, answerable to the sixth Chapter n. 2. O my God how great is
thy Excellency, Worth, and Perfection ^ All honor and glory is due unto thee.
I poor creature know not how more perfectly to procure thy divine Majesty to
be praised, honored, and glorified, then by doing al I am able, to deliver
some soul or souls, which being released by my means from Purgatory, may
honor, praise and glorify thy sacred Majesty in the highest manner. Wherefore O
my Soul, to this end affoard these souls of thy Brethren all the help thou
can: Pray for them etc. as it follows in the former Act.

6. The third Act, answerable also to the sixth Chapter nu. 3. O most merciful,
liberal, and good God, how many, and how great benefits, have thou with
unspeakable love heaped upon me! How shall I be able to requite this thy
bounty, mercy and goodness! I poor Creature know not how more perfectly to
procure thy divine Majesty etc. all as follows in the second Act.

7. The fourth Act, answerable to the sixth Chapter n. 4. How many and how
enormous have bin the sins, by which I have dishonored thee my good God! Thee,
O infinite Excellency! Thee O imme^se Goodness! I poor Creature know not how
more perfectly to procure thy divine Majesty etc. as before, in the second Act.

8. The fifth Act, answerable to the sixth Chapter also, nu. 5. O my dear
Jesus, thou love the souls of my Brethren so dearly, that whatsoever for
thy sake is done unto them, thou accountest done unto thy self. Wherefore O my
Soul to this end affoard the souls of thy Brethren etc. as before in the
first Act.

9. It is very good to renew these Acts often, and to make every morning, some
one of these oblations: for this is a devotion, by which we may purchase many
great commodityes, and suffer no disco^modity; by which our works may become
more meritorious, our prayers more impetratory, our actions more higly
satisfactory; and finally by which we may have great hope, to escape either
all, or at least a great part of Purgatory.

10. Neither is there any danger of violating Charity due to our selves by the
practice of this devotion; but we may rather offend against charity by making
slight of a devotion, which might have bin so beneficial to us. For it is
clear we ca^ loose nothing, and must needs gain much: much for our selves,
much for our neighbor, and much for the glory of Almighty God: to whom be all
praise and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

A TABLE Of the Chapters of this Book.
Chap. I. PVrgatory proved by all kind of sacred Authority. page 7. Chap. II.
Purgatory proved by Reason, grounded in Scripture. page 21. Chap. III. The
first Motive to pray for the Souls in Purgatory, which is, the greatness of the
sensible pains they suffer. page 32. Chap. IV. The second Motive, drawn from
the intolerable pains the souls suffer, by being banished from the fight of
God. page 44. Chap. V. The third Motive taken from the long time that these
pains do endure. page 53. Chap. VI. That for the love we bear to God, we
ought to be much moved to help the Souls in Purgatory. page 64. Chap. VII. That
by offering our Actions for the Souls in Purgatory, we purchase many great
Commodities for our selves, and sustain no Incommodity. page 68 Chap. VIII.
That by offering our Actions for the souls in Purgatory, we do not merit
less, but more. p 77. Chap. IX. That our Actions offered up for the souls in
Purgatory, are not less, but more impetratory of other favors. page 86. Chap.
X. That by offering our Actions for the Souls in Purgatory, we do not less,
but more satisfy for our own sins. page 96. Chap. XI. That by offering our
Actions for the Souls in Purgatory we have great hope of escaping either all,
or a good part of Purgatory. page 104. Chap. XII. That it is not against
Charity to our selves, to offer our Actions for the Souls in Purgatory, but it
is rather against it not to offer them. page 112. Chap. XIII. By what means we
may help the Souls in Purgatory. page 115. Chap. XIV. Of Jndulgences. pa. 132.
Chap. XV. Two other means of higher Perfection, by which we may relieve the
Souls in Purgatory. page 153. Chap. XVI. To what Souls in Purgatory we are
chiefly to apply our satisfactory works. page 161. Chap. XVII. The perfect
practice of all conteynd in this Books. page 166.
FINIS.
THREE AND THIRTY most godly and devout Prayers or Salutations, to be recited
in honor of the Sacred Life and Passion of our Blessed Savior sweet Jesus,
for faithful Souls departed: After each whereof, must be said the Psalm,
Miserere.
The Preamble, or Introduction.
O Most sweet Lord Jesus most merciful pardoner of our sins, and Savior of
our souls, we humbly beseech thee, by all the mercies that ever thou have
showed to sinners from the first instant of thy birth unto this present hour,
that thou will not refuse the prayers of us poor sinners for this Soul (or
these Souls) but be pleased to deliver them from all pain, and grant the^
eternal rest, through thy botto^les mercy, for that to save us thou did
assume our poor humanity.

THE I. PRAYER.
WE salute thee Eternal word and wisdom of the Father and beseech thee, by
that infinite charity which drew thee from the bosom of thy eternal Father to
chose the pure immaculate Virgin to be thy mother, as also through that
admirable work thou wroughtest in her sacred womb, when thou did cloth thy
Glorious Divinity with our base flesh, and in that sort becamest our brother,
and did give thy glorious mother unto us for an Advocate and mother, for
which cause we humbly have recourse unto her, hoping what our own merits
cannot obtain, to impetrate by her; confident whereof we convert our selves to
thee, o sweet Mother of mercy, and by that inestimable treasure which was
enclosed in thy Virginal womb which neither heaven nor earth could contain: O
daughter of the eternal Father, mother of the son, and spouse of the holy
Ghost, we beseech thee that thou will vouchsafe by thy intercession to open
unto us the same divine treasure, and beseech thy beloved son, that through
the love he bore thee, he will receive our petitions for this Soul, (or these
Souls) and forgive the^ in whatsoever they have offended, and by his holy
birth, by which he has broken Adams chains, will be pleased to unloose these
poor Souls from the chains of their sins. Miserere mei Deus etc.

THE II. PRAYER.
WE salute thee O most sweet Lord Jesus, fountain of mercy, and bright Mirror
of al virtue, and beseech thee through the extreme poverty and other afflictions
that thou did endure in thy holy birth and tender infancy, as also by thy
great humility, penance, fasting, watching, praying, and other austerities,
that thou did living here upon earth for the space of 33. years and by thy
painful footsteps going bare-foote and bare head, through the hunger and thirst
cold and heat, labor and wearines, and the other miseries thou sufferedst
every hour and moment during thy life for our salvation, and that immense
charity whereby thou did offer all those thy sufferings to thy celestial
Father for the satisfaction of our sins, that thou will mercifully pardon
these Souls all the offenses they have committed against thee in pride,
vainglory, covetousness, sensuality vain cares of temporal things and
vanities, and impure thoughts words and actions, through the merits of all thy
sufferances and labors, and most holy life and conversation. Miserere.

THE III. PRAYER.
WE salute thee, o Eternal comfort and sweet solace of our souls, and beseech
thee by that infinite love and mercy thou have awayes showed to sinners, so
immense that no understanding is able to comprehend it; by that love which made
thee who art an incomprehensible treasure to permit thy self to be sold for
thirty pence; and by that infinite charity wherewith thou did give thy self
in the divine Sacrament to thy Apostles under the species of bread and wine,
and to us all as a pledge of our salvation; through this thy liberality we
beseech thee o bread of Angels and Savior of souls, the giver and the gift,
that thou will mercifully pardon these Souls all the offenses they have
committed against thee by unworthy receiving of this holy Sacrament without due
contrition, right confession, and entire satisfaction, forgive the^ o Lord
through thy infinite mercy. Miserere.

THE IV. PRAYER.
WE salute thee o bread of Angels and comforter of sorrowful hearts, and
beseech thee by thy profound humility with which thou did bow down thy knees
at thy disciples feet and washed them, as also through that holy Sermon thou
did make unto them; and the sorrowful words thou spakest, saying, My soul
is sorrowful unto death; until now you have not prayed; pray, for whatsoever
you shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you: O loving Lord,
through this thy promise we beseech thy blessed Father, through thee his only
dear beloved son, that he will remember the great anxiety thy sacred humanity
did endure when it beheld all those intolerable torments and death it was to
undergo, and by the bitter anguish thereof we beseech him and thy sacred self
mercifully to pardon these Souls all they have offended in vain solace, and
admit them into thy eternal glory. Miserere.

THE V. PRAYER.
WE salute thee o most merciful Lord Jesus, sweet shepherd of our Souls,
who for our redemption have drunk the chalice of thy bitter passion, and
beseech thee by that painful agony which thou did willingly endure when
kneeling and prostrate on the ground thou did pray three several times to
thy celestial Father saying, Father if it be possible let this Chalice pass
from me, yet not my will but thine be done; at which time thou did sweat
water and blood, through the bitterness of thy anguish, and an Angel came
from heaven to comfort thee saying, Arise, go forward coragiously, you shall
appease your Fathers wrath, you shall break Adams bands and redeem mankind;
after which thou wentest to thy Disciples and finding them a sleep said, do
you sleep now? Arise let us go, for he that betrayeth me is at hand: O dear
Lord, through that thy willing resignation to suffer death, to fulfill the will
of thy heavenly Father, and through thy dolourous agonye and blouddy sweat we
beseech thee mercifuly to pardon these poor souls all the offenses they have
committed against thy divine pleasure or the Obedience of their Superiors, and
through thy holy and fervent prayer, receive our humble prayers, and petitions
for them. Miserere.

THE VI. PRAYER.
WE salute thee o most sweet Lord Jesus, and beseech thee by that inflamed
charity wherewith thou did go to meet the traitor Judas, asking him and the
rest who^ they soght, and they answering Jesus of Nazareth, thou answeredst I
am he, through the power of which words they all fell two several times down
to the ground; after which giving them power to rise thou did meekly receive
the kiss of the traitor Judas, saying to him, Friend whereto art thou come,
do thou betray the son of man with a kiss? We thank thee, O most sweet
Savior for all these mercies, and beseech thee through the merits of them to
forgive these souls whatsoever they have offended in detraction, murmuration,
unprofitable friendship, or any other offenses, and beseech thee by that
infinite love and charity wherewith thou did desire to have pardoned Judas,
that thou will have mercy upon these poor Souls, and pardon them all the
sins they have committed against thee. Miserere.

THE VII. PRAYER.
WE salute thee o most sweet Lord Jesus, and represent unto thee that Patience,
wherewith thou did suffer thy self to be furiously apprehended by the wicked
Jews, who seized upon thee as thou had been some thief, or wicked
malefactor, and bound thy sacred hands so cruelly behind thee, that the blood
sprung forth of thy nails; then were thou forsaken of all thy friends and
left in the cruel hands of those impious and most inhumaine slaves, who
pulling and haling thee gave thee many cruel buffets, spurns and blows, and
in that manner led thee unto the house of Annas the high Priest, who
imperiously examininge thee of thy Disciples and doctrine, thou answeredst, I
have taught openly in the temple whither all the people resort, and in secret
I have said nothing, why ask thou me, ask those that heard me; for which
one of the servants that stood by gave thee so cruel a blow on the race that
thy teeth loosened in thy head saying; answerest thou the high Priest so?
Others spurned thee, struck thee on the neck and spit upon that divine face
which celestial spirits are never satisfied to behold: O dearest Lord Jesus,
we render infinite thanks to thy immense charity for all these thy
sufferinges, and humbly beseech thee by them, and by those merciful eyes
wherewith thou did behold S. Peter, that thou will with the same eye of
pity, look upon these souls, and loose them from all their chains, and
forgive them all their sins, through the manifold torments thou did endure
that night. Miserere.

THE VIII. PRAYER.
WE salute thee o most sweet Savior, sole comfort of sinners, and represent
unto thee how furiously those cruel Tigers led thee bound to Cayphas, before
who^ thou stoodest like a meek Lamb and heardest the false witness they
brought against thee; How thou wentest about to seduce the people, and taughest
them false doctrine; That thou said thou could destroy the temple, and in
three days readify it: Then Cayphas adjured thee by the living God, to tell
him if thou were Christ the son of the living God, unto whom thou answeredst,
thou say that I am; Whereupon he rent his clothes, and said, He has
blasphemed, what need we any more witnesses; at which they all cried out, he is
worthy of death, and furiously running upon thee vnmeasurably spit in thy face,
buffeted and beat thee cruelly, striking thee on thy holy neck, and face, and
head, blindfolding thee, and giving thee cruel blows, and saying in derision
and scorn, Prophesy o Christ who it is that stroke thee: for all which
sufferances, pains and most in human injuries we render thee infinite thanks,
O most sweet Lord Jesus, and humbly beseech thee by the merits of the^, to
forgive these souls if at any time they have detracted, and through all thy
torments pardon them whatsoever they have committed against thee. Miserere.

THE IX. PRAYER.
WE salute thee o sweet Jesus almighty power and in comprehensible wisdom of
God, and represent unto thee how these raging dogs led thee furiously unto
Pilate, demanding the sentence of death against thee, he then sent thee to
Herod who greatly rejoiced at thy coming, hoping to have seen some miracle
wrought by thee, but thou did not answer him one word, but stoodst like a
mild la^be holding thy peace, which Herod seeing he caused thee to be mocked,
scorned, and clothed in a white garment like a fool, setting in derision a
crown upon thy head and spiting in thy face, striking thee and saying. All
hayle king of Israel: After which he sent thee back to Pilate saying, he
thought he had sent him a wise (...) saw he was a very fool O sweet Savior
how many (...) did they to thee by the way casting stones and filth at thee! O
eternal wisdom of the Father how art thou derided, how art thou defiled and
injured! O dearest Lord we render infinite thanks to thee for all these thy
co^tumelies, scorns, and injuries, and humbly beseech thee by them to pardon
these souls all their vnthankefulnese, for thy bitter passion, and all want of
charity toward their neighbor. Miserere.

THE X. PRAYER.
WE salute thee o most sweet Lord Jesus eternal God and true man, and
represent unto thee the great humility wherewith thou stoodest before Pilate,
meek and silent, ready to suffer all shame and confusion, outrages and
injuries they could do against thee: Pilate said unto thee what have thou done
that all the world is thus offended against thee; as also many other questions
he asked thee, unto which thou did not answer any thing; then Pilate said,
he found no cause of death in thee; but they all cried and exclamed against
thee, saying, Thou were a breaker of the law, and calledst thy self the son
of God; unto whom thou answeredst, Thou have said that I am, for this cause
came I into the world, that I should give testimony of the truth; after which
Pilate said again to the Jews, I find no cause of death in this man; but they
with furious clamors said He is worthy of death; Pilate then answered, I will
correct him and dismiss him. O good Jesus, o son of the living God, o
sovereign king of glory we render thee infinite thanks for all these thy
sufferings, and humbly beseech thee by them to pardon these poor Souls all
the offenses they have committed against thee, through false, bitter, angry, or
vain words. Miserere.

THE XI. PRAYER.
WE salute thee o most sweet Lord Jesus, and represent unto thee thy shamfull
vncloathing, when the cruel soldiers with furious have pulled off thy
garments, and thou meekly helpedst them, it being thy desire to suffer for us;
who having striped thee naked bound thee to a Pillar with such unhuman cruelty
that thy blood gushed forth at thy nails, and they scourged thee so
barbarously with whips wherein were Iron hooks, laying stripe upon stripe, and
wound upon wound, that they rent and tore thy sacred body all over, and left
not so much as one whole piece of skin upon thee; then they unbound thee and
turning thy breast forward, bound thy hands over thy head, and scourged thee
again so cruelly on that side, that all thy sacred flesh being rent off, thy
bones and bowels were discovered; then they unloosed thee from the Pillar, and
in that lamentable manner all-ouer wounded and imbrewed with thy blood they put
an old purple robe in scorn upon thee: O dearest Lord I render thee infinite
thanks for all these thy sufferings and intolerable shame and torments, and
humbly beseech thee by all the merits of them, and of thy sacred wounds, and
all the dropps of thy most precious blood that thou will have mercy on these
poor Souls, and pardon all their sins and offenses which they have
committed against thee. Miserere.

THE XII. PRAYER.
WE salute thee o most sweet Jesus souerain king of Angels, and shining crown
of the Saints, and represent unto thee how those cruel miscreats after they
had so inhumanly scourged thee, set upon thy sacred head a Crown of sharp and
pricking thorns, which they struck with cruel blows into thy head, and
kneeling down before thee in scorn, saluted thee saying, All hail king of
the Jews; after which they pulled of the Crown of thorns and set it on
again with intolerable torments to thee, spitting on thy divine face which
was all over imbrued with blood, swelled, disfigured, and deformed, giving thee
cruel buffets, scorning and deriding thee; O dearest Lord Jesus, O most
merciful Father and Savior, we represente unto thee, all these pains, and do
give thee infinite thanks for all these thy sufferings and those most cruel
torments thou enduredst in thy sacred head, most humbly beseeching thee by the^
mercifully to pardon these poor souls all they have offended by their head,
either in hearing, seeing, speaking, eating, drinking, or vain attyring of
their heads, or by evil using the three powers of their soul; forgive it the^
sweet Lord through thy infinite mercy. Miserere.

THE XIII. PRAYER
WE salute thee o most sweet Jesus eternal king of glory and represent unto
thee the intolerable shame, and torment thou did endure when Pilate led
thee out to the people, wearing the crown of thorns and purple garment, and
said, Behold the man, and the cursed multitude seeing thee so miserably
disfigured, wounded, rent, and torn, had no compassion on thee, but most
vnhumanly cried out, take him a way, take him a way, crucify him, crucify him:
O dearest Lord we render infinite thanks to thee for these thy cruel
torments, shame, and ignominies, and beseech thee to present now thy self with
them and all thy other merits unto thy heavenly Father for these souls, for
their eternal reconciliation, and cloth them with thy merits, and so present
them to him, as a fruit of thy better passion. Miserere.

THE XIV. PRAYER.
WE salute thee o most sweet Lord Jesus, God of infinite Power and Majesty, and
represent unto thee how Pilate going to his Judgment seat, caused thee to be
brought again before him (where thou stoodst humbly with declined head and
eyes) and said to the Jews, I have corrected him, will you that I dismiss
him, but they al cried out crucify him, crucify him: then Pilate said, Will you
that I dismiss Barabbas, and crucify Jesus? they all cried out, yes, let him
be crucified for he has deserved the shamfull death of the Cross; then Pilate
washed his hands and said, I am innocent of the blood of this just man; but
they all cried out, let his blood be upon us and upon our Children. O dearest
Savior, O fountain of all goodness, O Father of mercy and God of all
consolation, we call upon thee with all our hearts, and with our soul, powers,
forces, and affections, most humbly beseeching thee, that thou will vouchsafe
to let thy precious blood, come as truly upon these poor souls to the
forgiveness and remission of all their sins, as it has done upon the Jews to
their eternal condemnation. Then Pilate gave the sentence of death against
Jesus: O dearest Savior through this sentence of death, which thou receiuedst
with so great humility, we humbly beseech thee mercifully to pardon these poor
Souls, in whatsoever they have offended by any evil or rash judgment of their
neighbor either in thought, word, or deed. Miserere.

THE XV. PRAYER.
WE salute thee o most sweet Jesus, most meek bearer of our infirmities, and
offer unto thee that great charity wherewith thou did embrace the heavy
Cross that the cruel Jews laid upon thy wounded shoulders, the weight whereof
caused thee to bow down even to the ground, being so faint that thou could
scarce go or draw thy breath, in which pitiful plight thou were dragged
forward by the Jews, who often struck thee on thy sacred head, and cast
stones and filth at thee: O dearest Lord through the heavy burden of the
Cross which thou so willingly cariedst for our sins, we beseech thee that thou will deliver these Souls from all their pains, and through the great wound
that the heavy Cross made in thy wounded shoulder, we beseech thee to comfort
them in the same holy wound; and by thy painful footsteps, forgive them their
sinful footsteps, and lead them into thy eternal glory; and through the
sorrow of thy blessed Mother and compassion thou had of her, pardon these
poor Souls whatsoever they have offended by omission of their duty toward
their parents either corporal or spiritual. Miserere.

THE XVI. PRAYER.
WE salute thee o most sweet Lord Jesus Christ who cloathest the lillyes and
flowers with colors and beauty, and represent unto thee thy painful
vnclothing, when before so many and so great a multitude of people they so
furiously pulled of thy garments, which stuck so fast to thy wounds that with
the force of pulling them off they tore off also thy skin and flesh, with most
intolerable pain and torment to thee, who stoodest in that miserable plight
all over wounded rent and torn naked and trembling with cold and shame in the
view of all the world, pouring from all parts of thy sacred body streams of
most precions blood. O most sweet Jesus, never did Bridegroom go to the
chamber of his spouse with so great a love as thou wentest toward the Cross:
O dearest Savior never did Prince go to receive his Crown more willingly then
thou we^test to the cross, whereon those impious vile miscrea^ts most furiously
cast thee, and thou most willing did stretch forth thy holy body upon it,
suffering them most inhumanly to stretch forth, and to nail thy right Hand
thereunto, with a rough and boystorous nail. O sovereign Lord and sweet
Redeemer we render infinite thanks to thy goodness, for all these thy cruel
pains and torments, and beseech thee by them all to forgive these poor
Souls, all they have offended through pride of clothes, or any other offense or
sin. Miserere.

THE XVII. PRAYER.
WE salute thee o most sweet Jesus, dear Father of our souls, and present to
thee that furious cruelty wherewith those barbarous wretches drew thy other Hand
with a cord unto the hole they had made in the Cross, in such sort that thy
bones were disioynted, thy wounds rent wider, and all thy veins and sinews
broken, and then they nailed that hand unto the Cross as they had done the
other. O dearest Lord we render thee infinite thanks for that intolerable
torment thou did endure in that cruel nayling of thy Hands unto the cross,
and beseech thee by it and by the sacred wounds of them that thou will
mercifully pardon these poor Souls all the sins and offenses, which by
their hands they have committed against thee. Miserere.

THE XVIII. PRAYER.
WE salute thee o most sweet Lord Jesus, merciful Mediator between thy
heavenly Father and us sinners, and represent to thee that cruelty wherewith the
cursed Jews stretched forth thy sacred legs so violently with a cord, that
all thy veins and sinews were broken, and nailed thy holy feet unto the
cross with great and boystrous nails, through thy great patience suffering
them to do to thee whatsoever they would, as if thou had said, I lie here to
the end I may accomplish my Fathers will, and redeem mankind. O what great and
excessive pain caused every stroke of the hammer unto thy heart, and also to
the tender heart of thy blessed Mother! O dearest Savior, we render thee
infinite thanks for that most intolerable torment which thou did endure in
that dolourous nayling of thy sacred feet, and that immense love and charity
wherewith thou did suffer it, most humbly beseeching thee thereby to pardon
these souls all they have committed against thee by sitting, or lying,
sleeping, or waking, knowing or not knowing, or in what sort soever, through
thy painful lying on the cross and extreme torments shame and ignominy.
Miserere.

THE XIX. PRAYER.
O Most sweet Lord Jesus we humbly salute thee, and represent unto thee that
pitiful rearing up of the cross, whereby thy cruel enemies did miserably
shake thy sacred body, using many clamours, opprobries and injurious despites
against thee, letting the cross fall, after they had raised it, violently
down into the hole they had made for it in the ground, through the force
whereof all thy wounds were renewed and most cruelly rent and torn, out of
which as from rivers, flowed forth thy precious blood in great abundance. O
dearest Savior with what infinite Charity did thou hang there to make
satisfaction for all sins past, present, and to come, for which we render
thee immortal thanks and humbly beseech thee, to let one drop of that thy
precious blood which thou did then sheed, descend upon these Souls for a
full satisfaction of all the sins they have committed in the whole course of
their life. Miserere.

THE XX. PRAYER.
WE salute thee o most sweet Lord Jesus who know the desires of our hearts
before they be declared by words, and represent to thee that great charity
wherewith hanging on the cross thou did pray for thy enemies, saying,
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do, which merciful prayer of
thine was of such force that it converted many of them that were guilty of thy
blood: O true comforter of all sorrowful hearts, we beseech thee through the
merit of that thy Prayer, that thou will vouchsafe now to pray to thy heavenly
Father, for these poor souls that they may be as fully pardoned of all their
sins and offenses, as those who were then received into grace through the
merit of thy precious blood. Miserere.

THE XXI. PRAYER.
WE salute thee o sovereign Lord Jesus sweet Father of mercy, and represent to
thee how hanginge between two thee us, the one whereof blasphemed thee, the
other besought thee to be myndefull of him when thou came in thy kingdom,
whom thou did bountifully pardon and receive into thy mercy, in such sort as
he was the first unto whom thou did promise paradise, through which
bottomless mercy we beseech thee, as also through the merits of thy precious
blood which thou impartedst to the Thief, to let the same precious blood
descend now upon these souls unto a full forgiveness of their sins, and
through thy infinite mercy bring them into thy everlasting glory. Miserere.

THE XXII. PRAYER.
WE salute thee o most Blessed Lord Jesus, sweet solace of the sorrowful, and
offer unto thee all that internal suffering thou had, seeing thy dear
Mother standing under the cross overwhelmed in a sea of deadly anguishes
through love and compassion toward thee, whom thou did commend to thy
beloved Disciple S. John, which greatly renewed her grief and bitter sorrow
for thy death; O dearest Lord through this love and care thou haddst of thy
sweet Mother in thy torments, we humbly commend unto thy merciful goodness
these souls, beseechinge thee to deliver them for all pains and torments,
through thy merits, and the merits of thy blessed Mother. Miserere.

THE XXIII. PRAYER.
WE salute thee o most sweet Lord Jesus soueraign shepherd of thy holy Church,
and faithful forgiuer of sins, and offer unto thee that sorrowful Prayer
thou made unto thy heavenly Father when thou saidest, my God my God why have
thou forsaken me? he having left thy holy Humanity destitute of all help and
comfort in those thy bitter angushes and torments, for all which we humbly
thank thee, and beseech thee by them, and the merits of thy sacred Prayer,
that thou will mercifully hear our humble prayers which we now present to thee
for these poor souls and deliver them through thy infinite mercy and merits
from all their pains and torments. Miserere.

THE XXIV. PRAYER.
WE salute thee o sweet Jesus fountain of living waters, and represent unto
thee, how thou said, I thirst, which thirst must needs be excessive great,
for that there was not left one drop of blood in all thy whole body, but
chiefly did thou thirst for our salvation, for which we humbly thank thee,
as also for the bitter gall and eysell thou did take, and the secret sorrow
thou had, remembering that thy bitter death should be lost on so many souls,
all which we humbly offer to thee o most sweet Savior, and beseech thee that
thou will let thy precious blood descend on these poor Souls to refresh them,
and to deliver them from all their pains. Miserere.

THE XXV. PRAYER.
WE salute thee o most sweet Jesus, inestimable treasure of the divine riches,
and represent unto thee, how in the end of thy life thou calledst to mind all
the holy works thou had done all thy life, and in one sum offeredst them
all up to thy celestial Father, saying, It is consu^mate; we most humbly
beseech thee to offer that inestimable treasure of thy merits which never
diminishes, unto thy heavenly Father for these Souls, and therewith pay all
the debts of their sins, and all other they are charged with. Miserere.

THE XXVI. PRAYER.
WE salute thee o most sweet Jesus, giver of life to all creatures and
sovereign commander of life and death, and represent unto thee thy lamentable
hanging upon the Cross all deformed with bleedinge wounds, and a deadly
palenesse at the time of thy death, when casting down thy heavenly eyes which
were dimmed with tears and began to break with the anguishes of death, and
declining thy head which was compassed about with thorns, to show thy
Obedience to thy heavenly Father and reconcile thy Church to him, thou
rendredst thy sacred soul crying with a loud voice, Father into thy hands I
commend my spirit. O crucified Lord as thou did commend thy sweet spirit into
thy Fathers hands, so we commend these poor Souls into thine, beseching thee
to reconcile them unto thy heavenly Father, and offer thy precious blood and
bitter death unto him for a full pardon and remission of all their sins. O
Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, we beseech thee through
thy seven words which are full of mercy and mystery, that thou will mercifully
pardon these poor souls whatsoever they have offended in the seven deadly
sins, or any branch of them. Miserere.

THE XXVII. PRAYER.
WE salute thee o most sweet Lord Jesus the vanquisher of death, descending
with the banner of thy cross into hell: O how were those Prisoners which so
many years with longing desires had expected thee comforted, when as they saw
thee, and knew thee to be God and man, their Lord and redeemer, and that Adam
said, I see here that hand that framed me: O dearest Savior, we beseech thee
through the Joy those holy souls had when thou did lead them out of that
Infernal Prison, and by that unspeakable gladness thou had when thou
beheldest the first happy fruit of thy death and passion, through al thy
merits, that thou will lead forth these poor souls out of all captivity.
Miserere.

THE XXVIII. PRAYER.
WE salute thee o most sweet Lord Jesus fountain of love and mercy, and
represent to thee how Longinus furiously opened thy side with a spear, which
transpeirced even thy Sacred heart, of out which flowed both water and blood: O
dearest Lord, we humbly thank thee for this most liberal effusion of thy
precious blood, and humbly beseech thee by it, to receive these poor Souls
into thy sacred wounds, and heart, and cleanse them with thy precious blood;
and by the five wounds of thy hands, feet, and heart, and all the other sacred
wounds of thy most precious body mercifully to pardon all their sins.
Miserere.

THE XXIX. PRAYER.
WE salute thee o most sweet Lord Jesus the innocent sacrificed Lamb, and
represent unto thee how thy wounded body was taken down from the Cross, and
laid in the lap of thy sorrowful Mother, from which cross thou would not
descend until thou haddst accomplished the worlds redemption. O dearest Lord,
through that thy infinite mercy, and all other merits of thy bitter passion,
we humbly beseech thee to unloose these poor souls from all the chains
wherewith they have bound themselves by their sins: and we humbly beseech
thee also, O Sacred Mother of God, through the sorrow and tender compassion
thou had to see the wounded body of thy dearest son lying dead in thy lap,
that thou will offer his and thy merits for these poor Souls unto the
eternal Father to obtain a full pardon and remission of all their sins.
Miserere.

THE XXX. PRAYER
WE salute thee o most sweet Lord Jesus, and offer unto thee thy holy burial,
how after all thy labors and miseries, thou did rest in thy grave; We
humbly beseech thee, to give these souls rest in the holy City of heaven, and
forgive them who have so often times withdrawn their soul from thee, by the
distraction of temporal things, and not suffered thee, their peaceful king,
to rest in their hearts. Miserere.

THE XXXI. PRAYER.
WE salute thee o most sweet Lord Jesus, the joy of Angels and salvation of
men, and represent to thee thy glorious resurrection and joyful apparitions to
thy holy Mother, and dear friends, through which we humbly beseech thee, O
conqueror of death, that thou will with thy divine power show thy self to
these poor Souls, and finish all their bitter pains. Mise.

THE XXXII. PRAYER.
WE salute thee o sovereign King of glory, and represent to thee thy Glorious
Triumphant Ascension, and Assumption of those Souls which in Limbo so long
time had expected their Redemption, most humbly beseeching thee sweet Savior,
that thou will be pleased, through thy infinite goodness; to lead these Souls
into thy eternal glory, where for ever they may behold thy divine and heavenly
face. O good Jesus and dear Savior we beseech thee by thy holy conversation,
and painful passion, to pardon them all their sins and bring them into thy
eternal rest, and fruition of thy glory. Miserere.

THE XXXIII. PRAYER.
WE salute thee o eternal increated Son of God, full of grace and mercy, the
reward of all those that hope in thee, most humbly beseeching thee, mercifully
to forgive us all our omissions of intention in these prayers, and let the^ not
be, through our coldness, less meritorious to these poor Souls, but receive
them according to the worthinese of the sacred mysteries mentioned therein,
through that infinite love wherewith they were accomplished, and the
worthiness of the person that wrought them, by all which we humbly beseech
thee to deliver these poor souls from all pains and rejoice them with thy
heavenly presence for all eternity. Miserere.

The Conclusion.
O Most sweet Lord Jesus, sovereign Lord and life of our souls, we humbly
beseech thee to incline thy ears to our prayers, and deliver these Souls (or
this Soul) from all pains and admit them into thy eternal glory; Let thy
preciou^ blood, thy deep wounds, thy cruel torments, thy bitter passion,
innocent death, thy Nobl^ Soul, and the prayers and merits of thy sacred
Mother, and all the holy Angels and Saints* be unto them a full satisfaction
for all their sins, negligences, and omissions; and suffer no^ their Souls,
whom thou have redeemed with thy preciou^ blood, any longer to be separated
from thee. O Redeemer o^ the world we humbly offer these prayers for them, to
thy ttanspeirced Heart, beseeching thee to grant them the fruition of thy
eternal Glory. Amen.

FINIS.

