THE INJURED LOVERS: OR, THE Ambitious Father. A TRAGEDY. Acted by Their
Majesty's Servants AT THE THEATER ROYAL.

By W. MOUNT FORT, Com.

Licensed, March 8. 1687/8. To. L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed for Sam. Manship at the Black Bull in Cornhill, MDCLXXXVIII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JAMES EARL of ARRAN, Son to his Grace the Duke of
Hamilton; One of the Lords of his Majesty's Bedchamber, and Knight of the
Honorable and Ancient Order of the Thistle.
My LORD.
THE abundance of indulgent Favors I have received from your Lordship, and the
Noble Family to which you are now allied; made me presume, humbly to crave your
kind Acceptance of this First Fruits of a Young Muse: And tho I cannot assure
my self of deserving so great an Encouragement as your Lordship's Espousal of
this Trifle; yet I will, to my utmost Endeavors, satisfy the World, how much a
generous Patronage may increase a natural Genius, and that an indifferent
Beginning may, by the Assistance of so great a Person extremely improve it self.

For what bold Censurer (tho never so Malicious) dares question what your
Lordship takes into your Protection: Safe, I Am sure, it will remain, as placed
upon an Altar: And indeed, when I call to mind how many, less deserving than
your Lordship, have been styled Hero's, and Demigods, it makes me accuse the
Ingratitude of our Age, and call much in Question its Judgment.

Give me leave, my Lord, but to call to mind (tho far too worthy for my Pen)
the famous, and never to be enough praised Actions of your Ancestors, the
Douglasses, whose personal Valors have always been so great, that they seemed
the Souls of Armies, as having Life only where they charged: And whatsoever
Quarrel they espoused, Victory always dwelt there: Their Courages were such,
that what is in ancient Legends of others Romantic, was really justly true of
them.

And since they are gone to increase the Number of the Hero's above, who does
not see the true Image of their Souls in your Lordships: Every thing you
undertake must have Success, for what you do is with such a noble Assurance,
that Fortune seems afraid to contradict it; and you carry her with you always
bound, and in Subjection to your Pleasure.

Indeed every thing in you is Extraordinary: To witness only your first early
Valor with a Person of Honor, which showed an Example of your exact Niceness
in Gallantry, and was the true Test of Courage.

Give me leave to add to the rest of the Virtues, the Loyalty of your self and
Family; the never to be forgotten Transactions (now fresh in Memory) of your
Two illustrious Relations, the Dukes of Hamilton; One sacrificed for his
Prince, by the barbarous and detestable Rebels; and the other, regardless of
his Life in so meritorious a Cause, dying in endeavoring the late King's
Restoration.

And tho their Sufferings are as well set forth as an original Collection, and
an ingenious Historiographer could well model: Yet the secret Virtues of that
inestimable Pair, which, but themselves, and the glorious Martyr they lived and
died for, knew: Imagination cannot reach, of if known, 'twould tire Fame to
sound 'em.

And still to add to your Never-dying Name: This last happy Union, with a
Family of such Worth, that Fortune seemed proud of the Match, and contrived it
as an Honor to both Parties.

What a vast Happiness do I enjoy that have a Person of so unparalleled a
Family as your Lordship, to countenance my feeble Endeavors; and tho the
Worthies of the World might justly claim the Honor I sue for; yet, as the
Widdow's Mite was acceptable, so may this poor Performance be to your
Lordship's unbounded Goodness.

Perhaps some Momuses of this Time, may immediately (without farther Thought)
decry this Paper, and call it Flattery; but those that will impartially judge,
must own that Flattery and Truth were never allied; and I have said nothing
here but what the well-known Merits of the Persons will justify.

May the noble Partner of your Heart live like her Virtues, which were a
sufficient Security (if Heaven would suffer her Absence) for an Immortality on
Earth: May the Excellencies o^ both Generations wait on you two; may Goodness,
Honor, and Loyalty never depart, from whence they have seemed to take their
Dwelling, but with tha^ untir'd Sincerity (which your Predecessors have still
performed to their Sovereign) attend you; whilst I, at a Distance, shall
rejoice, and with all Humility crave the Title of,

Your Lordships most Obedient and Dutiful Servant, Will. Mountfort.

PROLOGUE To the Injured Lovers, spoken by Mr. Mountfort.
JO Haynes's Fate is now become my Share,
For I Am a Poet, Married, and a Player:
The greatest of these Curses is the First;
As for the latter Two, I know the worst;
But how you mean to deal with me to Day,
Or how you will Massacre my harmless Play,
I must confess distracts me every Way:
For I Have not only Critics in the Pit.
But even in the upper Gallery they sit,
Knaves that will run down Mr. Mountforts's Wit;
Pm the unlucky'st Dog that ever Writ.
Some Care then must be taken, that may save
This Dear, my First Begotten, from the Grave:
Some Friends Advise, like Brother Ben declare,
By God it is Good, deny't the Slave that dare.
Were I but sure 'twould Take, I Would do my best;
But to be kicked, you know, would spoil the Jest.
However I must still my Play maintain,
Damn it who will, Damn me, I Will write again;
Clap down each Thought, nay, more than I can think,
Ruin my Family in Pen and Ink.
And though my Heart should burst to see your Spite,
True Talboy to the last I Will Cry and Write,
That Is Certain.
Or since I am beset so by my Foes,
I beg your Favors, Friends, Brother Beaux;
Join with the Ladies, to whose Power I bow,
Where I see Gentleness on every Brow;
To whose acuter Judgments I submit,
O! Save me from the Surlies of the Pit:
Those Nauseous Wretches which have not the taste
Of Wit or Gallantry, if nicely dressed.
I never writ till Love first touched my Brain,
And surely Love will now Loves Cause Maintain,
Besides my Natural Love to write again.
Yet as you Please, Ruin or Pity bear,
Sir Courtly fears no Enemy so Fair:
Execute as you please your Tyrant-Will,
His Character's, Your humble Servant still.
Dramatis Personae.
King of Sicily. Mr. Williams. Rheusanes, his General, and betrothed to
Antelina. Mr. Betterton. Ghinotto, the Ambitious Father. Mr. Griffiin.
Dorenalus his Son, Friend to the General, and in Love with the Princess. Mr.
Mountfort. An old Colonel belonging to the Army. Mr. Sanford. Several
Soldiers. Mr. Lee. Mr. Jevon. Mr. Underhill, etc. The Princess Oryala in Love
with Rheusanes. Mrs. Barry. Antelina, Daughter of Ghinotto. Mrs. Bracegirdle.
Pages and Attendants.
Scene SICILY.

THE Injured Lovers.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Discovers the King lying on a Couch; After a Song he Rises. I.
LUcinda Close or Veil your Eye,
Where thousand Loves in Ambush lie;
Where Darts are Pointed with such Skill,
They Are sure to Hurt, if not to Kill.
Let Pity move thee to seem Blind,
Lest Seeing, thou destroy Mankind.
II.
Lucinda hide that swelling Breast,
The Phoenix else will change her Nest:
Yet do not, for, when She Expires,
Her heat may light in the soft Fires
Of Love and Pity, so that I
By this one Way may thee Enjoy.
King, OH Love! like Death no Difference thou know,
The Heart thou strik'st must to thy Power submit,
Tho satisfied the Yielding Ruins it:
Not Alexander could withstand thy Dart,
Yet he had baffled Millions with his Shield;
The God of War thy Arrows did Disgrace,
Making him languish at thy Mothers feet:
No wonder if our Heroes were thy Slaves,
When you subdued the Deity they served.

Enter a Gentleman. Gent. Ghinotto waits your Majesty's Commands.

King, Bid him Enter.

Enter Ghinotto. Oh my Ghinotto, do thou bring me Comfort?
Or must Despair consume thy Master, speak?

Ghi. What might be urged to serve your Majesty
This Brain has studied, and this Tongue persuaded;
But still the Coyness of a slighted Maid,
Seduced by the false Vows of her first Lover,
To all besides she bears;
Nor Power, nor Pomp can bring her to my Will.

King, Thou do not sure the Art of Courtship know,
That can not with Preferment win a Woman.

Ghi. Perhaps Proposals from your Majesty might tempt her;
But from me, tho Duty should instruct her to obey;
Yet she despises the utmost hopes
My Cunning can invent.

King, I Will see her then my self;
They say there is a Power in Majesty,
Which Woman cannot withstand;
And if a Crown can win her, Aside.
I will exchange it for the moments Bliss,
And be content to serve my after Days.
How does she bear the Marriage of Rheusanes?

Ghi. As gaping Courtiers do the Rise of those
Who take it over their Heads: she sighs,
And coldly says, She Is glad Rheusanes Fortune
Has provided a beauty in all Points
So much above her to share his Heart,
So much more worthy in his Masters eye, so --

King, What now?


Shout. Ghi. It Is for Rheusanes, Sir.
The Crowded streets smoke with his Aclamations,
And He their Sun sucks up the ambitious Fogg.

King, Ghinotto he must be Clouded, set in a Winters Sky,
Where sometimes he may shine, but weakly warm.

Ghi. Success in Soldiers makes 'em Popular,
Nay often disturbs the State which once they served:
So it is a Prince's safety to remove 'em
Still as they grow familiar with their Country,
Into a private Life;
Which to the full shall recompense the Public,
And keep 'em with just duty to their Prince.

King, It Is well advised.
You once were great in the Military Cause,
Deserved, and did receive Applauses too.
Thy Son being grown fit for the honored Field,
I took thee to my self my bosom Friend.

Ghi. So warm a Climate virtue does increase,
My care have ever been to serve my Masters.

King, Thou art a worthy Statesman.
Rheusanes on his Marriage shall resign his Staff,
Which to thy Son descends: Let him Example
From his Father take, and well I shall be Guarded:
This Night I Will see thy Daughter.
If thou can bring her to accept my offers,
I Will make thee Father of thy Prince, Ghinotto,

Enter Gentleman. Gent. The General waits for admittance, Sir.


King, Conduct him in Ghinotto. Exit Ghi. and Gent.
I must Enjoy her:
Great is the interest of this General,
As great I know the Love is he bears her;
My Sister first presented him to me,
And now expects to reap what she has sown,
Tho Kings would Glory in so rich a Bride:
Yet for my own content she Marries him;
I have no hopes to compass Antelina
But by this snare:
For when Love once for Greatness is Despised*
Still the neglected by that scorn's advised,
And when Rheusanes falsehood she has known,
How will she catch the offer of a Crown.

Enter Ghinotto, Rheusanes, Dorenalus, Attendants, Rheusanes Kneels. The.
Success and Plenty wait upon my Prince,
And still when e're his Country wants relief,
May Fortune prove as favorable as now.

King, Welcome most fortunate, most wished for man*
Thy Prince's Guardian, and thy Countries Prop:
Rise and look like the conqueror thou art.

The. You pay my duty much above its merit,
Nor could my Life, tho lost in your defense,
Be worthy of such Title, or such Praise;
I Have served my Prince but as a subject ought,
When he commands his serviee;

King, Dorenalus! you are welcome, Dor: Kneels,
May still good fortune wait upon thy Youth,
Encouraging thy Endeavors with success.

Dor. Long as the favor of my Prince waits on me;
I need not fear the want of Heavens assistance.

King, Rheusanes, since Heaven has blessed us
With Victory, and thy safety,
I think it were presumption more to tempt it;
Thou have discharged thy Office well and Nobly;
And how to recompense thy Merit we have studied:
But if thy fancy would reward thy service
With a particular choice it most delights in,
Proclaim thy wishes to our grateful ear,
With a most worthy and just assurance.

The. So well I know the goodness of my Master,
That on his choice I wholly will depend,
For fear my wishes meet with his intentions,
Which rudely might interptet that I knew
My own deserts as well as does my Prince.

King, My wishes hope to agree with thy desires.
Goes to the door and brings in Oryala. Can this reward thee?

Dor. Ha!


Aside. King, Why so surpised Rheusanes? it is real and thy Merit,
Here take her, and the next sun shall see you
Joined much faster. -- still senseless!

The. Such blessings, Sir, must be received
With all humility and admiration.

King, Courtship, I know, is troublesome in Public;
We Will leave you to the Eyes and Ears
Only of each other.

Ex. King* Dor. Ghin. Manent Ory, and The. Dor. The use of mine forsake me
At this Moment.

The. What shall I do, or, how shall I approach her?
Most gracious Princess!

Ory. Most worthy Lord.


The. By Heavens, she spoke as if she liked my answer,
And prompts me to go on.

Aside. Ory. Some pitying God now stand a Virgins Friend,
Inspire him with affection toward my Love,
That neither my desires may be refused, Aside.
Nor Greatness slighted.

The. Since, Madam, by the King I here am left
To win your favor, or receive your scorn;
I would entreat (e're I presume to talk
Of that nice subject we must enter on)
You would resolve me one material Point, Kneels.
Which my fears urge me thus to beg of you.

Ory. Rise, My Lord, so well I know the goodness of your soul,
That whatsoever it dare ask, I need not blush to grant;
I guess his Measures, and am prepared to meet 'em.

Aside. The. Oh, Antelina! Aside.
It Is, Madam, whether by inclination or command
You do permit this single Conference?

Ory. My Lord!


The. Pardon me, Princess, if I err, impute it to respect,
And much of Honor:
It Is probable your Choice is made already;
If so, what happiness can I expect
From an entangled Love, or forced compliance?

Ory. If it were so, (tho you have no cause to doubt)
But if it were, I say,
In kind obedience to the Kings Command,
I would correct the errors of my Will,
And with content accept what he thought fit.

The. Load me not, Madam, with too many favors*
Lest I want power to recompense your goodness.
Honor and Beauty I have fought for long,
Yet never did my Ambition swell so high,
To think my Duty worthy of such Greatness.

Ory. Since, General, it is the Opinion of your Prince,
Your Princess too complying with his Thoughts,
You should be Proud that he esteems so well;
And blow the Flame which kindles thus your Glory.

The. Hold, now my Honor, Faith, and Love stands fast.


Ory. Why pause you so?


aside. The. My fortunes, Madam, crowed so fast upon me,
I am surpised and puzzled to receive 'em,

Ory. It Is probable your Choice is made already;
Else, why this subtle distance in your speech?
Why, palls your Spirit when I grant it freedom?
Think to what envied Glory thou art climbing,
Kings, have been Proud, but to be thought my Suitors;
And he was happiest whom I smiled on most.

The. If happily from Kings I had descended,
With a bold Joy I should embrace this offer;
I but indifferent Parentage can boast;
A private Gentleman by you preferred,
Your favor was the Sun that warmed my hopes,
And ripened with applause my undertaking^;
I am a Cloud will fully the bright Glory,
Which from your Eyes gives comfort to the World.

Ory. Honor archiev'd is Reckoned the most Noble,
The Romans thought the merits of the Sword,
Excelled the Nobleness of long Succession;
The famous Marius of Plebian Race,
The dignity of Consul bore seven times;
Why should not Diamonds bear their worth in dirt,
Equal with those the flattering Artists set?
But in this Age fantastic Ornaments,
^a^^les the Honest, Plain, and solid Virtue.

The. There Is no avoiding of her meaning how,
Through all my Cunning shiftings she has Cours'd me,
And hunted my Excuses to a Bay: aside.
Madam, like all your former favors, is this last,
The Generous encouragement you give me,
Upbraids my sense for wanting words to thank you;
Grant me a little Time to weigh this Goodness
And I will study how to Answer it.

Ory. Had Antelina made this invitation,
You would have had one ready.

The. I do not understand. --


Ory. 'Twere better if you had:
But remember and Curse your folly.

The. I have disturbed her Soul, and in her Eye
I see neglected greatness threaten high.

Ory. Make me no lower stoop thou Tyrant Love,
I thought no possibility for this: aside.
Does your Guilt make me Dumb?

The. I dare not speak, I see your Anger,
And I dread your Frown: would I had never been.

Ory. Why?


The. Or else been yours.


Ory. Ha!


The. Oh! do not strike me Dead, but Mercy show: kneels
I see Revenge preparing for the blow,
And fear there is no Avoiding of it now.

Ory. Shame and Dishonor of my Soul, What am I?
What is a Princess slighted by a Slave?
But think you I will bear it tamely Traitor?
No, if my Power can Purchase me revenge,
Your Antelina quits the World this Moment;
In everlasting Solitude shall dwell,
And Cloistered be for ever from Mankind.

The. Oh hold! I had forgot her Power, and with my Forward Zeal undo my Hopes.


Ory. Unhand me.


The. I cannot till you recall your Doom.


Ory. Till you renounce her, my Decree stands firm.


The. Take then, O* take the fatal secret from me,
For Death I know must wait on the Confession;
My Faith to her was Plighted long before
I knew the least intentions for this Match:
Give me some Time then but to weigh this goodness;
For though I see my Fortunes mended much,
I cannot forget she once was all I hoped for.

Ory. Will you resolve? or, --


The. I will. --


Ory. What?


The. Study to Love. --


Ory. Whom?


The. Oh! Antelina!


Ory. Villain.


Stamps. The. Yet stay.


Ory. I will not, Mercy nor Love, my Passion shall control,
But as thou have mine, I will Torment thy Soul.

The. Yet mercy.


Ory. Antelina.


The. Mercy.


Ory. Forsake her then.


The. Would you not think it hard to have a claim
Below your own, deprive you of the Crown?
In love Pretentions like to those take place,
Nor durst I think of any to your Highness.

Ory. Can thou neglect the Glories of a Princess For mean delights in her
indifferent Arms?


The. Indifferent beings should their Equals choose; The meanest sort: --


Ory. Can then thy Soul be stinted to a being
And Covet nothing more beyond a Woman?
This mean Confession has alarmed my Pride,
Ignoble Wretch! go Lanquish by her side:
The Honors which my favor on thee set,
Go lay 'em all at Antelinas feet:
Forget the Court and to a Cell retreat.
Oh! I betray my self, I must not stay;
Least I want Power to take my self away.

Exit. The. How cross a fate has Heaven appointed me, Exit.
Was I preserved abroad to perish here,
Through all the hazards which my life has run,
Fortune befriended me, and led me on,
But now when most I want her, she is gone.

Enter Dorenalus with his Sword drawn. Dor. So is Dorenalus.


The. Ha!


Dor. Draw Rheusanes.


The. Wherefore?


Dor. Oh! thou have bought a spot of Earth so cheap,
That the whole World will envy the vast Purchase
The Fruit it bears, like that of the first Tree,
Which did betray mankind, has poisoned me;
If therefore you would keep it undisturbed,
The everlasting springing sweets still Chaste,
Immortal, like the power designed 'em so.
Cut off the Serpent which would blast its virtues,
Would leave it a corrupted Root of Lust,
Where sins would multiply with every Thought.

The. Your mystic meaning yet I cannot guess;
But if in me There Is ought can make you happy,
By all our Friendship you shall reap the blessing.

Dor. Friendship be ever banished from our Hearts,
I hate thee more then thou can love thy Comfort;
Draw, or by the power which thus distracts my Temper,
I Will kill thee like a Slave which wrongs Man's Honor;
And then wants Courage to redress theaffront.

The. Thou know I do not fear: draws.
But, for thy Sisters sake whom I have Loved. --

Dor. Whom thou have Loved, -- thy Heart.


The. Through it ungrateful, have I nursed thy Youth
With all the tender Care of friendships Eye;
And this my Recompense disclose your heart:
Lay forth the Troubles which afflict it thus,
Then if I have the Power to heal your wrongs,
And do refuse, I Will meet thy Passion
As becomes, Rheusanes.

Dor. Thou will not.


The. Try me, you never found me Faithless yet.


Dor. Do not Urge me.


The. I must.


Dor. Let thy Sword rip my Breast up.
And in my Heart thou wilt find the secret written,

The. Friendship forbid it;
Delay no longer.

Dor. Oh! I am lost.


fall in The. Arws. The. Thou art not, here is thy Guide.


Dor. Oryala.


The. What of her?


Dor. You Will laugh at me.


The. Hate me then justly,


Dor. Do you not love her?


The. No.


Dor. But she does you.


The. Is it my fault, would you kill me for that?


Dor. No, I would not now, but long since I could;
I love her Friend.

The. Thy Friend resigns her to thee.


Dor. Oh! she has given Rheusanes all her heart;
And for Dorenalus she has no room.

The. Approach her, make thy sufferings known,
Who knows but Heaven may plead in thy behalf,
Or, she when knowing how our Loves are crossed;
May by they Tongue be moved to set 'em right.

Dor. Ye pitying powers befriend me but in this,
And all my days I Will sacrifice in Thanks.
Can you forgive?

The. What?


Dor. The Unruly Method which I used just now.


The. Fogive, I thank the occasion which has set us right,
And proved how strong my Faith is to your Sister.
No more: have to the Princess, and relate your Passion,
May all the charms of Love and Youth wait on thee.

Dor. I have full power to work her as I please.


The. I Will bless the skill that cures my Friends Disease.


Exeunt. End of the First Act.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Rheusanes and Antelina. The. OH! Antelina, why this strange disorder?
Why, are thy Eyes in which our loves have played,
And moved with Pleasure as thy fancy taught 'em?
Now overcast with such a dismal change,
As quite confounds my senses with the wonder.

Ant. How can you ask the cause of my Affliction,
When you the Author of it know too well?

The. By all our Vows you tax me most unjustly,
Oh! may I perish when I wrong my Love;
Or never more be happy in my Wishes.

Ant. Oryala, the Princess, Oh! that mighty Name,
Has canceled all your Promises to me;
A Crown, a Crown Rheusanes is your Mistress now.

The. Be witness for me, he that made us love,
I would not leave thee for an endless life;
Of endless Youth.

Ant. Oh! you flatter me.


The. Unkind suspector.
Durst my Tongue express my prompting fancy,
I fear I should Blaspheme in praising You;
So much above all things I do esteem you.

Ant. Oh! for Rheusanes too, I Have that esteem:
The original impression of my heart,
Who first taught Fondness in my tender Soul;
And linkt it to unspeakable desire:
But you will not have the power to shun her love,
For there is such Temptation in her Face;
It might persuade a second Angels fall.

The. Not have the Power, Yes?
Were she bright as the first Glorious Angel,
Fair as Imagination could Present her?
Could tire fancy to relate her Beauties,
I have a Soul that would despise her Charms.

Ant. My Soul disdains a greater then the Princes;
The King Rheusanes has declared he loves me:
This Night I am Commanded to receive him;
Nay, ordered to approve his Royal Offers.

The. By whom?


Ant. My Father what he intends, I yet am ignorant;
But I must meet him.

The. Must Antelina?


Ant Yes, I must, Rheusanes.
Yet though my Fathers Will side with the Kings,
And the King thinks he may compel through him;
I Will meet him with such Faith to what I love,
That he shall never cherish hope in me.

The. I find the Purpose now of the Kings kindness,
And separating Mischiefs are Contriving;
Oh Antelina! therefore hear me swear,
If our intentions should be frustrated,
By the designs I guess in Agitation;
By that most glorious Ornament of Heaven,
Which beautifies the Coeling of the World;
The Moment that I loose thee, Points to his Sword.
This ends me.

Ant. And here I swear by the dear, kneels. Pulls out the Viol.
Freedom which this Glass contains:
(Which I designed for ease had thou been false)
By all the hopes we may not be prevented, if we are,
This Spirit gives me a Release from being.

The. The Gods prevent the fatal proof of it.


Ant. Amen with all my Soul.


The. Your Brother now is with Oryala,
Thou art not dearer to my Soul, then is that Name to his;
I promised him Assistance in his Passion,
And he has vowed the same where I am Captive;
This Night then Oh! my comfort lets remove,
All fears that may afflict us with our falsehoods.

Ghinotto appears in the Balcony. Ghi. Ha!


Ant. I fear it will be difficult to do,
For since the King has published his Intentions;
The Clergy will refuse to License us.

The. Without the Walls, you know, there is a Chapel,
That is confirmed to the Worship of our Swains;
There only, and only theirs:
This is their time of Feastival and Marrying,
With Rural Sports the Nimphs the Shepherds treat;
And it is the custom of that happy Race,
To choose their Lovers by their Excellence.

Ant. As how?


The. As thus, their Ceremonies are attended,
With Antic measures by the Nimphs performed;
Whose motion best delights the eye,
Is pitched on for a Bride, the Swain whom
She affects is straight made hers:
So they proceed to others in their turn,
Continuing Celebrating for three days;
So masqu'd and dressed we will perform amongst 'em,
So chose the Priest shall ratify our Vows.

Ghi. They shall be ratified to my desires.


Ant. Then are you constant? Oh! you abused dear Man,
My fearful Soul with doubts has been perfect;
Persuaded by my Father thou were false.

The. Would he were half so just as I shall prove,
Were less Ambitious. --

Ant. Or would let us Love.


The. In spite of him we will our Loves complete,
Then Triumph over the envy of the great;
This night at nine within the Cyprus Grove,
Your Father will be busied then at Court.

Ghi. Do you think so?


Ant. Fail not, the everlasting Peace or Troubles of my life,
Depend upon thy Truth.

The. Off with these needless fears,
Oh! that the hour were come to Usher in
The yet untasted Joys, how I will gaze upon
Thy Charms, and dye in the admiring.

Ant. You must not. --


The. What?


Ant. Behold me till to morrow.


The. Ha!


Ant. Virgins have Eyes too tender for the Light,
Prithee excuse my Modesty some time:
Let us in the Dark receive each others Love.

The. Thou shall, I will not shame thee with a Lovers
Question, I will not speak to thee; the thought
Of what is to come does almost silence me;
If apprehension has such influence,
How will the real pleasure wrap my sense?

Ant. Away.


The. I cannot.


Ghi. I must.


retires from the Balcony. Ant. This will not hold thee long;
I shall grow Old.

Embrace her. The. Thou will be ever Young.


Enter Page. Page, Madam, your Father and the King.


Ant. Then we must part.


The. Adieu.


Ant. Till nine.


The. That happy Hour,
Shall lead our Loves beyond thy Fathers Power.

Exit. The. Ant. Now for this King, O! my Ambitious Father.
Destructive greatness has bewitched his Soul;
And mine must be a Sacrafice to gain it:
Hard fate of Children which are bound to love,
Not what themselves, but Parents do approve.

Enter King and Ghinotto. Ghi. It Is the securest way that can be thought of,
About it then use all thy Art, my Power,
Or what thou shall think fit.

Exit. Ghi. Ant. How he surveighs me?
Ye Powers that favor constant Lovers,
Direct his heart to one not yet engaged.

King, Fair Excellence.


Ant. My most honored Prince.


King, What brings me here, I Am sensible you know?
Your Father having told you by my Order;
Oh! slight not therefore thou all conquering Maid,
The faithful offerings of a love-bound Heart;
Unhappy only in not being the first,
Was taken Prisoner by those restless eyes.

Ant. Since by your Royal Order I am sent,
By my one Father here, to wait upon your Pleasure;
To hear (as you are pleased to say) your love
Far fitter for an equal Royalty;
With such respect I Will entertain your story,
As does a double Duty now require.

King, The entertainment of a double Duty,
Can never satisfy my greedy Passion:
Oh! give me but your single love to feed on,
'Twill gratify my Soul Luxuriously;
But Duty without Inclination serve me.

Ant. To love my Prince I ever was instructed,
'Twas in my early grounds of living taught;
And nourisht by a natural Inclination.

King That love is but an awful Duty still,
Which for a Love like mine I will pay you;
Thus, be Commanded, thus, becomes your Subject, kneels
Thus, ever pay your Tribute as my Sovereign.

Ant. Justly you do disgrace me with this usage,
Putting my backward Duty in Remembrance, kneels
Of its neglect in doing thus no sooner.

King, How cunningly she seems to avoid my meaning;
Rise subtle Beauty, I know this Part's as hard
For you to act, as me to like:
Throw off this art of distance in behavior,
And give my plain and worthy meanings welcome!
Oh! do not shun the merits of my love,
But meet 'em with a generous Gratitude.

Ant. Impossible!


King, Pity a Prince who never begged before;
Nay, never loved till Antelina charmed him:
As the rich Indies in their secret Pride,
Whilst undiscovered flourisht and were great;
So was my heart till love surpised it quite,
My richer Peace was fatally betrayed;
And by thy powerful Beauty captive made.

Ant. The Spaniards who that Wealthy soil subdued,
As the first Conquerours still their Title keep;
I was besieged long time ago by one,
Who came in the persuit of unknown Land:
It was my heart, he was first that found it,
He put such strong Passion in the place,
That nothing e're can Master it again.

King, Why, I can force thee, storm thee, and destroy
His weak resistance and thy obstinate will;
As easily as I can take my Rivals life:
But I by gentler means would gain thy heart,
And mercifully treat so fair a Foe;
Prithee resign.

Ant. I dare not.


King, I will Protect thee for it;
I Will make thee all Ambition can invent,
My Crown, my Glories at thy feet I Will lay.

Ant. I will not yield, though for the crime I perish.


King, Do not provoke my rage,
Think on thy Duty, on my Power.

Ant. They Are great Temptations, but they cannot Conquer,
There Is something Irresistible within,
Which baffles reason by stubborn fancy;
The rules of what we ought to do dispises,
Or coming all with positive desire.

King, When two desires both positive alike,
Meet with a Resolution to destroy each other,
Or bring both to one oppinion;
It Is certain one must loose,
Mine has a Power to back what it pretends to;
And erring beauty thou shall find too late
What slighted Love joined with that power can do.

Ant. Alas, I know it makes a dreadful Tyrant,
Yet I will beat its utmost persecution,
Rather than prejudice my plighted Faith.

King, Its Persecution will not light on you;
Suppose I longed to taste of a fair Fruit,
A sordid Miser would not part with,
Should I for that destroy the Tree that bore it,
No, cut the Keeper off whose interest guards it,
Then satisfy my longings uncontrolled:
Rheusanes is the Dragon guards this Tree,
Which e're I can possess, first he must die.

Exit. Ant. He Is gone, yet wherefore should I dread him,
Rheusanes interest cannot want Protection,
Nor dare this King without good grounds destroy him;
The hour draws on will make him ever mine,
And banish all my cares: Oh Time!
Thou ever marching, yet untired Spirit
Of unaccountable Eternity, start from thy
Constant course to help my Love;
Have but this once, to give my longings ease,
And be as slow hereafter as you please.
Exit Enter King and Oryala.


Ory. I beg it may not be* yet break it off*


King, It must be done, Oryala, it is too far gone
To be prevented now; you know he has forsaken
Antelina.

Ory. Indeed he has not, Sir, she still remains
The Idol of his heart; it is not an hour since
He parted from her with all the assurance of
His constancy.

King, No matter for his Constancy;
You follow my directions;
Embrace the offers which I have proposed,
Or all your interest to the Crown forsakes you*

Ory. For Honor sake, Sir, let me stand at distance*
Let me not make so mean a Condescension*

King, State Policy enforces me to do it;
He Is grown too popular* and shakes my safety,
Unless I do unite his Power with mine.

Ory. What comfort can I hope from one that hates me?


King, I know that you Love him.


Ory. I must acknowledge my desires are toward him,
Did but his inclinations wait on mine.
But when I think* of future disrespect,
Hereafter slights, and distant entertainment,
I of my Love will make a Sacrifice,
Rather then wed the least of these Disturbers.

King, When it is done, as well he may curse Heaven,
As meditate indifference toward thy merit.

Ory. I fear the Event.


King, Whom I Protect methinks should scorn to fear*
No more of these Excuses, but accept it;
Heirs I must have: I will not Marry for 'em,
Unless thy obstinacy force me to it.

Ory. Be witness Heav*n in what I must perform;
I cross my own desire to pleasure yours*

King, About it speedily;
If you refuse, consider I must Wed,
Accept, my Crown devolves upon your head.

Exit. Ory. What shall I do? I long* and yet I fear,
Hate him when present, fond of him not near;
Oh! I am lost between these harsh extremes,
Love drives me downward its impatient strems,
And e're a perfect Voyage I can make,
My will against the Rock of Pride does shake*
Ambition storms, and Honor drives me back.

Exit. Enter Ghinotto at one door, Dorenalus at another. Ghi. Why this
disordered carriage in my son?
Heavy disquiet sits upon his brow,
With an unusual solitude admired
I will observe him.

Dor. How am I cursed with that disturber Love?
My wretched Heart 'twixt hope and fear is wracht,
And yet I dare not own what may ^^^ieve me.

Ghi. How Is this?


Dor. If I should tell her of my sufferings,
This eating Feavor which consumes my Youth,
And then instead of pitying, she should scorn me;
Why what a Mock of mankind would it make me;
Who'd Point, and say, That is the haughty Thing,
Who thought his Passion worthy of a Princess,
And fond of the conceit, Undid himself.

Ghi. Dorenalus!


Dor. My Lord.


Ghi. You seem surpised.


Dor. I did not think of any one so near me.


Aside. Ghi. You were discoursing with your self Dorenalus,
What was the Subject?

Dor. Only contriving something for the Army.


Ghi. Is it in Love then?


Dor. Sir.


Ghi. My Son!


Dor. The Army in Love!


Ghi. Ay in love; you talked of Passion, Princess, and Conceit,
Are such things proper for an Army?

Dor. Proper for an Army!


Ghi. Ay proper Boy; Why do thou baulk my Questions
With these shiftings, unmannerly repeatings?

Dor. Duty forbids ill manners to my Father.


Ghi. Give proper answers then.
What is the cause of your Retirement?
Your shunning Conversation?
Somewhat usurps the custom of your Heart,
Which sullys all your manly Qualities.

Dor. We are not always Masters of one Temper,
It Is as the bloods inconstant method pleases:
For from its Springs the fa^cy takes her current.
Still changing with its Motion.

Ghi. But still there is a Reason why it changes:
The Ocean never storms without a wind,
Nor does hot Aetna burn without a Fire;
But why this strong imperrtinent argument?
Do you distrust the friendship of your Father?
That Erringly you would conceal your Troubles.

Dor. I never had a thought so base within me;
I was considering on Rheusanes falsehood;
The Injuries my Sister would receive*
By his proud Marriage with Oryala.

Ghi. He has this Night* in private, sworn to Marry her.


Dor. Whom, Sir*


Ghi. Your Sister, It Is near his hour of Promise,
And see he is coming this way; although I wish the Match*
I will not own it, nor would I have you seen in it,
Let him accomplish his Designs alone*
Least the Displeasure of the King should seize us;
I must attend him instantly.

Exit. Ghi Enter Rheusanes* Rheu. Dorenalus!


Dor. My Lord!


The. My friend, what still in sadness?
How does the progress of your Love succeed?
How does Oryala take the charming sound?

D^r. By Heaven I could not tell her that I loved;
My Resolution was with fears over pressed,
And I stood gazing only on a Picture*

The. Had you no talk*


Dor. A few uneasy Passages of the War,
Joined with the troublesome praise of your desert;
How many excellent faculties were in you*
She asked me if you were not brave (...)
Sincere, gentle, impartial* friendly* pitiful;
I know not what; her whole discourse*
All questions were of you, and much ado
I answered yes to all*

The. Come, lead me to thy Sister when I;m (...)
Who knows but the exchange may (...)
The Passion of the deluded Princess to that height,
She may in scorn to me accept thy love*
Thinking thy Greatness may my Ruin prove*

Dor. The hope of that is all my comfort now.
I must attend my Father, who though he knows
The depth of your design would have it thought,
He does not; that when the business is declared
To the King, he may with equal strangeness be surpised*

The. Farewell, then till to Morrow;
Oh Dorenalus! the fears I have my wishes may,
Miscarry nothing can recompense:
But Antelina.

Dor. She is by this time in the Cypress Grove,
May secresy and safety wait upon you.

The. Like a Rich Miser with his hoarded store,
Bound to remove it to some distant part;
Which e're he can arrive at must pass through*
All necessary Ways for Villains purposes:
His fears Transform each Bush into a Foe,
Waiting to Plunder him of all his Wealth;
So will my passage with your Sister be,
But when the uneasy timorous March is past*
And I attain my wished for Home at last:
With greedy Joy my Treasure I Will survey,
Whilst Love shall pass* the safe got Hours away.

Exeunt severally* End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
Enter Dorenalus meeting a Page. Dor. IS your Lord* stiring


Page, He Is coming forth, Sir.


Enter* Rheusanes. They Embrace Dor. Good morning to my Friend, Health to his
Pleasures,
May everlasting comfort Crown his choice;
With fresh delights still growing with his days.

The. Oh! my friend.
Blessed be the Obligation made us Brothers;
May thy desires like mine be gratified,
With all the abundance of a Covetuous Love.

Dor. Let fortune entertain me as she pleases*
Since I am satisfied my friend is just:
Doubly you have obliged our Family,
That could forgo so charming a Temptation;
To make my Sister and my self thus happy.

The. Doubly I have obliged my self in that,
Serving my Friend and blessing of my self;
The comfortable joys I have received,
Nothing can match but this ensuing night,
Greedy of Love I cursed the hasty day:
Wishing the Sun his Thetis lap might want,
When he most longed to cool his eager ^ire.

Dor. Lets see this happy Bride?


The. I have not that my self nor must till the,
King enters; in the Dark* I was conducted to her;
And cause I should not see her in the Morning,
She hurried me into an outward Room:
Begging in whispers that I would obey.

Dor. Maids the first night are liable to shame,
And would not have their bashfulness perceived;
But quickly use instructs 'em to be bold,
Knowledge inflames what ignorance made cold.

The. You are experienced Brother where is the King?


Dor. The King is coming full of his gratitude,
For your great Merrits, the Princess too,
They says as fond as he to recompense 'em;
The affected Court looks like a Theater,
Where gaudy greatness struts in ample manner;
Each seeming Courtier that could (...) get,
Looks like an heir of Quality*

The. Though to my longings happily I*m matched,
I must the goodness of my Master Honor;
Since his intentions were so full of greatness,
He did surprise the Merrits of my ^^^vice;
As much as he o'reweigh'd 'em,
When he the Princess offered to reward 'em.

Dor. The best of Honors Offices you had,
And well he knew 'twas she alone could mend 'em;
Yet, if I thought Rheusanes did repent. --

The. Repent! You cannot think so basely of your friend,
It Is an incumbent debt upon our Duty,
To thank the good affections of our Prince;
That when the just acknowledgment is made,
The honest Conscience rests secure from censure;
So far I Am from repenting what is done,
That had I Antelina never seen,
With decency I would have shunned the Princess.

Dor. Why?


The. Such Royal Matches have to Subjects given,
Fatal Pretentions to disturb a State:
And private families have factions raised,
To question that which if they had a right to;
So much Precedence was then in being,
That probably their distant Alienation
Might perish e're a second heir was Crowned.

Dor. These Reasons Oppositions are to me,
Not to desire the Princess.

The. If without jealousy I might persuade,
I Would beg thee to desist; Oh! my Brother,
Ambitions portion is Tumultuous cares,
Endless disorder, never resting forecast;
Still plotting to maintain their envied greatness*
And how to make it greater:
Seek out some Beauty equal to thy Birth,
Even in temper charming in decent Duty;
Whose courteous care shall still her Lords attend,
Endeavoring to divert those do disturb him.

Enter Page. Page, My Lord the King.


The. Now my Brother let us stem this storm,
And fear shall never disturb us for the future.

Dor. Twere fit I should retire till the discoveries over.


The. Do then, and pray for our success.


Exit. Dor. Enter King, Ghinotto, Attendants. King, Not ready yet Rheusanes?
trust me were some to
Wed so rich a Bride they would not be so backward;
For shame more speed.

The. I Am ready, Sir, -- come forth my blessing,
I could not loose a Night of so much goodness;
My Love o'recame my Manners and my Duty,
Which here I must implore a Pardon for.

kneels. King, For what?


The. For stealing of a Bride without your presence,
And though the Mercy of my Prince forsake me;
Here is a Father sure will plead for me.

Ghi. My Lord!


The. My Father, will you not own me, Sir?


King, What means he?


Ghi. I cannot guess?


King, Rheusanes.


The. Ay, Sir, Rheusanes, your Loyal Subject,
And that good Man's Son; why art so slow?
My joy in what must be, come forth
And stand it with thy Lords assurance.

King, Thou art not well, Rheusanes.


The. Never so well so happy or so blessed,
Since the first airing of my senses, Sir.
Goes and leads in Oryala, veiled. This is the happy Author of my Transport,
Here must we sue for Pardon; here for
Blessing. --

Points to the King and Ghi. she unvails her self. King, Unvail this Ridle

Oryala.


Ghi. The Princess!


The. Convulsions choke me*


aside. King, Rise my intentions Fair,
You might have trusted General your Prince;
I should not have prevented what is done:
Credit me Sister, you were in have for love,
That could not stay till morning to confirm it,
But I forgive your secrecy, Rheusanes:
And here I own thee Brother to the Crown.

The. And Heir to all Misfortune.


King, When were ye Wedded?


Ory. Last night, Sir, at the Shepherds Chapel;
We did perform too in their innocent sport,
And were according to their custom married,
Being disguised as Partners in their Living.

King, Pretty diversions sure and innocent:
It shows the Emblem of long happiness.

The. Of long Confusion.


Aside. King, Be not dismayed, Rheusanes, I am pleased.


The. I know it.


King, And for a Proof, my liking is with thine;
Three days we dedicate to Revelling;
And to divert the intervals of Feasting,
We Will have the Ceremony of the Swains,
By the best Artists of our Land performed.
And you Oryala must instructions give;
Triumphant pleasures shall our streets adorn;
Our Altars shall with richest Incense burn;
A general Feastival the Land shall keep,
And waking Joy deny the God of Sleep:
I will give Orders for the vast delight,
And wait my self as Brideman to this Night.

Exeunt all but Rheusanes. Rheu. A fatal meaning bore that pampered speech,
And his pretended Honors for this Match,
Are butas Prologue to his own Performance,
The fancied Scene 'twixt him and Antelina:
Methinks I bear my losses evenly,
With an indifferent Temper till my Ruin,
As if my faculties were tired with raving;
Why should I not curse out on all above,
To draw a Bolt that might destroy the Curser.
Enter Dorenalus. Dorenalus comes! why let him come,
No Plague can go beyond the store I have.
Crosses the Stage looking at Rheusanes.
Now I am poor indeed; not worth a Word
From him I have most wronged,
When a brave Soul's oppressed does it not speak,
Does it not strive to rectify its wrongs,
With a just punishment on the Inflictor;
I am beneath his wrath, cursed Wretch indeed,
Too base to live, and yet too loathed to bleed.

Re-enter Dorenalus. Dor. I cannot go till I have told my wrongs,
How much I suffer by his Perjury,
And when I Have lasht his Soul with my Complaints,
I Will ease my own of care, and of the World.

Rheu. He comes again; Oh! thou just fearful heart,
Which trembles like a Wretch who dreads his Sentence,
When his own Conscience tells him he is guilty.

Dor. Sir.


The. How Awkardly he does affect this strangeness!


Dor. General.


The. Again.


Dor. My Lord, Rheusanes!


The. Ridiculous.


Dor. Will you not speak?


The. To whom?


Dor. A Friend.


The. There is but one has Title to that Name,
And him I Have too much wronged to see his face.

Dor. Turn, Oh persidious! for you cannot shun me;
As well may Sinners, at the last sad Day,
Endeavor to obscure themselves from Judgment,
As you avoid my Injuries accusation.

The. What would thou have?


Dor. I would relate the story of my wrongs,
Than part for ever from thy Perjured presence.

The. Go on then and be quick;
And when you have scourged me as you think enough,
Send Antelina to correct me more.

Dor. Oh! Thou have wronged that Innocence
Beyond the hope of all repentance
To the Gods for mercy.

The. I know it, and therefore do despair of any:
Alas, Iv'e shaken hands with Hope long since,
Have taken leave of Comfort; there is nothing
That Is related to Content but I have quarreled with.
I have made a League with Anguish and Despair;
The Devil drew the Articles, all Hell witnessed 'em,
And I despise the malice of the Stars.

Dor. Grown mad! or do affect it?


The. Neither; but have I not enough to make me so,
To find thee here a worrying of my Conscience.
To hear thee bark my Perjuries against me;
To see thy Sister lost to all recovery;
To find my self betrayed I know not how;
Yet to be thought designer of the Plot,
Would make a mortal temper sure distracted.
But mine is Prodigious!

Dor. This will not do, Rheusanes, I call to mind
Your reasons lately urged against my admiring Oryala,
Could any but a Husband Preach such Doctrine;
Jealous of losing what was in possession.
Endeavoring to divert my thoughts elsewhere,
The Imposition is so gross and base,
You cannot think me man to hear the Lie.

The. By all my Woes, I am as ignorant as you.


Dor. Impossible!
Oh! how you hung on the related Joys
You had possessed the last dear happy night.
With such delight you dwelt upon the Tale,
You tasted 'em again in the description;
Yet Ignorant! Curses blast thee.

The. Do.


Dor. The Curse of Expectation without success,
Of inward Love not daring to discover,
The Curse of Want, with Pride to hide its longings,
Gaul thy false heart, and rot thy cankered Soul.

The. As heartily as home; Oh! for some means.
To work him to a height, might make him
Quite forget all bounds and kill me. Aside.
Thou have done well, disgraced my Honor as thy
Heart desired; but say no more, lest my roused
Temper should forget all mercy, and pay thy folly
With a sad Revenge.

Dor. If I would fight with you, your Guilt's so great,
Your Sword would never pierce my honest flesh.

The. That shall be tried, for now I recollect,
Your Sister was before designed the King's;
And when I asked you to go with me to her,
You did deny it as your Father's Order.
By Heaven you were assistant in the Cheat;
You were the Bawd, the Mercenary Bawd,
And chaffer'd with Preferment for your Sister.

Dor. Your Oath to this* resembles those you swore
To that deluded Maid.
Ashamed of Life, you would provoke a Death,
To drive you from the Terrors of your Conscience,
Thou have a Fiend now whispers in thy ear,
Thou art damned, Despair and die.

The. Audacious upstart, dare thou talk unarmed?
Draw, or through thy breast I will pursue my Sword,
Till the sharp Point find thy false heart.

Dor. Sooner you will bury it within that breast;
But here is a faithful one would fain embrace it;
Keep me not on the Wrack thus miserably,
But give the stroke of mercy and relieve me.

The. Thou art a Coward.


Dor. Therefore kill me lest I spoil the Army.


The. A Slave would sell thy Country for a Dollar.


Dor. Let thy Sword prevent it*


The. Procurer for thy Sister!


Dor. Now revenge thy self for I did steal her

For the King and Robbed thee.


The. Oh! I desire no more, you Sup this night in Hell,
With all your Sins attending you with Torments;
But first I Will as a Villain and a Coward use thee.
Thus we deal with Cowards.

strikes him. Dor. Hold thee a Minute.


The. Draw then.


Dor. I will. draws.
And that I may not be provoked by any
Usage you will inflict on me, I here resign
What might protect me from it,
throws him his Sword. Now Rheusanes --

The. Death, Hell, and Vengance I Will endure no longer,
Come to my Arms thou injured Innocence: kneels
Oh! Pardon, Pardon, my last frantic Measures.

Dor. Oh! rise my Lord, and do not mock my Sufferings*


The. By all thy martyred Patience it is real;
Nor will I rise till I hear Pardon from thee.

Dor. For what?


The. I struck thee Friend.


Dor. I have forgot it.


The. Disgraced thy Honor.


Dor. I think not of it -- Oh! Rheusanes but no more.


The. Yes, I will talk for ever on thy goodness,
Angels Protect and Guide thee in all thy Ways;
And everlasting happiness attend thee.

Dor. Now I am happy, the utmost I desired was to part
Friends, to make you sensible of what you had
Done and then to leave you.

The. Leave me.


Dor. For ever, and for ever, we must part,
Oh! Rheusanes to stay in sight of such a loss as mine;
Would tempt me to do something Base and Damnable.

The. Time may alter.


Dor. Nor Time, nor Fate, can alter my condition,
Would the Law serve so far as to divorce you;
Would the King after give Oryala
To these (Oh! cursed remembrance) once most longing arms;
It would not bear the name of recompense;
The Treasures gone which I so much adored,
And though she may that never can be restored,

The. Are there no means to help us.


Dor. None but parting if thou art Innocent,
The Gods reward thee with some future blessing*

The. How can you bless what you so lately Cursed?


Dor. 'Twas only to provoke you to destroy me.


The. My usage had the same design on you.


Dor. Farewell.
How hard it is to part with what we Love,
Oh! had the Princess never been thy wife;
Had she been any others, had she been lewd,
As the worst Woman's fancy,
This bosom would have given my Troubles ease;
But Oh! Rheusanes,
Who will not pity that shall read my end,
Robbed of my Mistress by my only friend.

Exit. Doren. falls down. The. Will thou not hide me Earth?


Enter Oryala. Ory. Yonder he lies; Cursed, Cursed, Ghinotto, how have
Thou betrayed me
Thou irresistible and Cruel Power?
Which has so partially confined my heart,
If you would have it faithful to your Worship;
Give ear to the Intercession of my Love:
And make me happy in this Lords affection.
For if that scorn does still possess his Soul,
I Will fly to the refuge of a just revenge,
And will despise thee equal to his slights.

The. Oryala, how my Plagues grow upon me!


Ory. Oh! Rise Rheusanes, is this a Bed for a Royal Bridegroom.

The. No, but for a Perjured one it is
Made wretched by thy means.
Prithee befriend me and withdraw thy terrors;
There are ten thousand Mischiefs in thy presence.

Ory. I am no Basilisk.


The. Oh! that you were, you would be comfortable to
These Eyes, and ease 'em of the Torment of beholding.

Ory. Are these the Pleasures I must hope from Marriage?


The. Why did thou Marry me?


Rises. Ory. Because I loved, because I could not live
In peace or rest without you.

The. Oh! you will never with me,
My wrongs to Antelina cry for Justice;
And Envy grins to see me so unhappy.

Ory. Oh, Rheusanes!


The. Oh, Oryala! I dare not call thee Wife,
It is too much to know thou art that thing.
With what afflictions have thou loaded me,
I groan beneath the burden of my thoughts,
And am not able to endure the Torture*
Hell! Hell that owns me! why do let me live!

Ory. Oh! Chide me if you must a little gentlier!
I cannot suffer these unequal Passions
From one I Love so much.

The. What would thou have me do?
There is no Medium in my Miseries;
My Friend to my Dorenalus my promised Brother;
That Soul of Honor, Constancy, and Friendship
Have I beyond recovery lost and ruined.

Ory. How have you ruined him? I can perceive
No ruin but my own.

The. He loved you Princess, he indeed adored you,
Your Name was his delight, your sight his food;
I swore to him I Would never wrong his hopes,
And the same Night for ever ruined 'em.

Ory. His Love was only known to himself and you,
I could not answer what I never knew;
Yet if I had been acquainted with his Love,
You could not think I would have cherisht it;
You were the only Subject I could stoop to,
Look back upon my Generosity:
Reflect upon my Care for your Preferment,
Private you came unheaded to the Court,
Till my regarding Eye your Person chose,
And to my Brothers favor did present you.

The. You have sold that goodness at too dear a Rate.


Ory. Oh! say not so,
Since you are sensible of the weight of love,
Pity what under the same load does move;
By all the Joys you coveted last night,
When with your eager Arms you Pressed me close. --

The. Those Joys do prove my greatest Torments,
Oh! if our scattered Loves have chance to meet,
And filled thee* with the Image of thy wishes;
May it be blasted at its dawn of light,
And stifled as it is crawling to the World.

Ory. Consider who I am.


The. Thou art my Wife, my Wretched unintended Wife,
Fortune that Bawd to accidents has
Slur'd thee on me.

Ory. I am thy Princess too.


The. No, you were, Oh! that you still had born
That awful Name, I still had paid Obedience*
To your will; but now I Rule, I Reign,
And Lord it over thee as becomes my pleasure;
What have thou done? thou have sold thy freedom,
To a Tyrant Husband, who always will misuse thee.

Ory. When I entreat again I give thee leave,
Oh! where has all my injured Honor slept,
Or how have I been charmed into Submission?
Rouse, Rouse, my temper shake thy fondness off,
And punish the offenders of thy quiet,
Thou little less than Man, how I despise thee?

The. Thou something more than Woman, how I hate thee?


Ory. By the resentment of an Injured Love,
I will have justice done me;
Thou Weed of Nature crept into the Earth,
To Canker and Disturb the Royal seed.
Villain Ghinotto, thus to wrong my Honor,
Had thou been Faithful, but I find thee now,
And will prevent thy hopes if possible;
The poor deluded and forsaken Queen,
When she beheld her false Eneas sail;
Felt nothing like the anguish of my heart,
Like her I Will die to give my troubles end;
But Monster think not by my self I Will fall.
Thy Antclina, she shall be the Pile
On which I Will burn, and as I burn I Will smile.

Exit. The. How much we both are wronged
By one cursed Villain, Ghinotto is the Instrument
Of mischief, which wrought us to the ruin of
Each other: for Royalty he has his daughter
Kept, and in her room contrived this wretched Princess.
In what have I offended Heaven, that it should suffer
Such injustice toward me. Shout.
Hark! there may be Comfort
In that Aclamation.
Oh! for a general Insurrection now,
That I might plunge into some terrible Confusion,
Where I might hide my self in multitudes,
And lie forgotten amongst the dirty Crowd.

Enter Antelina. Shout. Ant. Where e're I go the Joy disturbs my ears,
That is Proclaimed for false Rheusanes Match;
These Ceremonies once were meant for me,
And all the Land called me the Generals Love,
But now his Scorn; Oh, Potent oppositions
How have you prevailed?
Rheusanes kneels and takes hold on her. Ha! my destruction here some Power
protect --


Offers to go The. Turn thee, Oh turn, thou injured Innocence,
Incline thine Ear to a repenting Sinner;
I Am in a Maze of crooked Miseries lost,
Nor can I find the thread that leads to rest,
Unless thy merciful forgiveness guide me.

Ant. Pray give me freedom.


The. Gods! what a look was there!
The Sword of Justice Threatens in her eyes,
And my Soul fears to look on her again.

Ant. Pray let me go, my Lord;
Suppose the Princess saw you in this posture,
The Jealousy 'twould raise might fatal prove
And I should be more cursed than now I am,
And I would be more cursed than now I am,
To make a difference 'twixt man and Wife;
Pray loose me.

The. I cannot like a poor* Wretch whose Soul
Has given him Warning; I grasp my hold
With all the wracking cramps of Life's Convulsions.

Ant. Disgrace grow to thee.


The. Well said.


Ant. The Curses that thy Perjuries deserve,
The punishment that is due to thy false Sex,
May Heaven reserve them all for single Thee.

The. Go on.


Ant. Let me then.


Pulls to get from him* The. Not that way; but in thy Curses
In thy rage go on; curse till fierce Jove
Thy Combatant step forth and strikes this Villain
Breathless at thy feet -- Yet stay.

Ant. I will not.


The. You shall.


Ant. I must not.


The. I am innocent; betrayed by Fortune,

By your Father --


Ant. Away.


The. Will you not hear me then?


Ant. Nothing, nothing, the King --


The. The King!


Ant. Ay, the King stays for me; stays to make me

Great, to make me -- Off, or I Will call for help.


The. Then go. He lets go. Exit. Ant.
The Pomp you seek, wait for you;
I find it all, and yet I am not mad;
Oh! I was born sure when the Gods were angry;
And in their Rage they fixed this curse upon me.
Hark! I am called Music Flourishes.
To the Banquet: I must go
With all the unwillingness of gaul'd aversion;
But with what Joy should I my Senses Feast,
If I were sure to be a Poisoned Guest.

Exit. Re-enter Antelina. Ant. I did not well to leave him unresolved,
Surely there was sincerity in's Carriage;
It looked Romantique, yet it might be real.
He talked of Father, Fortune, being betrayed;
My fears provoke me strangely to think ill.
Oh! if their purpose should be proved, I Am lost,
With poor Rheusanes equally undone!
What he entreated me to hear, I Will know,
And if I find him cheated, as I guess,
I will go Partner in his Resolutions.

Enter King and Ghinotto. King, Fair Antelina!


Ghi. Daughter?


Ant. Sir.


Ghi. Do you not hear the King?


Ant. The King!


King, Once he was so, but Love has stripped him of his Royalty,
Invaded are his vast Prerogatives,
By thy deposing beauty.

Ant. Invaded are my vast Prerogatives,
The power I had over Rheusanes heart,
Your rigid pleasure has undone for ever.

King, My rigid pleasure!


Ant. Whose else? Oh! you have undone me!
Upon my youthful hopes stamped old Despair:
In one pernicious hour ruined the purpose of my
Laboring Soul, which since my eyes could judge,
Prayed for Rheusanes.

King, You prayed for one who little did deserve it,
And scorn the only person truly loves you:
Would I had been Rheusanes, and he King,
I never had left the blessings of thy Love,
For all the Pomp of the spacious Universe.

Ant. I fear Rheusanes knew not the Design,
But was betrayed into the dark mistake,
Else why was I locked up that very hour
I was to meet him to confirm our Vows.

King, Can you believe that Husbands were so scarce,
My Sister wedded him for fear of none.

Ghi. How e're his flatteries have prevailed
Upon your Credulous and inclining heart,
The Cheat is plain to an impartial mind.

King, Were she unprejudic*d, I could produce
Such natural and un^rring demonstration
As credit could not sh^^.

Ant Could I be satisfied with a belief
Raised from a Reasonable and unbyassed Test,
Rheusanes were consenting to the deed --

King* What recompense shall wait the satisfier,
If I should prove he were the sole Contriver.

Ant. I Will never think on the false Wretch again.


King, May I not hope advancement for my sufferings.


Ant. Oh! Press me not too much;
If you should justify what you have said,
My Task will be sufficient to forget him.

King, I will not press thee more my longed for Bride,
But rest in the assurance of his falsehood,
Which shall alone plead for me.

Ghi. By Heavens I Will force her --


King, Forbear, Ghinotto, and divert a while
My Absence from the Banquet; be free
In welcoming the Bridal Guests, and represent
Your Prince (you Son that shall be, if this
Lady pleases) with an untir'd bounty toward all.
Come hard Believer, if I do not prove
Rheusanes false, I Will quit my claim to Love.

Ghi. Now Princess sink, and Daughter Ride above.


Exeunt severally. End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Enter King with Antelina disordered. King, NOw stubborn beauty curse your sly
disdain,
Curse your rash will which tortured me so long
With the utmost rigor of a proud neglect.
Think not that face nor shape above reward,
Nor think that Crowns are Subjects Toys to play with.

Ant. If ever you would have my heart your own,
Let those cursed hands which forced me to dishonor,
Tear it from whence it ever must abhor you.

King, When my fond heart with springs of longing leapt,
As it would beat thorough the breast it bruised,
To rest upon the Bosom it adored.
You stopped your ears to my entreating Soul,
And scorned it as the vilest in the Land.

Ant. I think it now the worst that Hell er'e punished.


King, Think what you will, the Game is now my own,
Nor value I your Curses or Reflections.

Ant. Do thou not dread the fatal consequence
Must issue from revealing of this mischief?

King, Not I;
Were thy souls dotage here with all the Army,
Thy Father and thy Brother at their Head,
Had every wrong a Champion from above;
Nay, were thy self before 'em all disordered
In the most moving posture of abuse,
I Would twine about thee like a curling Snake,
And cling till by degrees I was cut off.

Ant. Heaven, if I wait, will surely do me Justice.


King, When first I loved, I Nobly did design,
Nor could your Wishes make you more than mine;
But when I found you deaf to my Complaints,
Resolved Rheusanes should not boast my loss;
I caused Oryala to perform your Part,
Whilst your ambitious Father locked you up
As a reserve for me.

Ant. Thou breeder of destruction.


King, Think you I would have matched my Sister
To one did Hate her, and below her birth;
But to remove the obstructions of my pleasure,
By the desires which I have gratified,
I would have staked my Country, and my Life
To Have gained the pleasure I compelled even now.

Ant. Oh, ruined Antelina! Wronged Rheusanes!


King, Despise a Slave when you may have his Lord:
Wait not on Fortune, when you may command her;
Give me your Love, and by my own I swear,
Thou shall become the Wonder of the World.

Ant. Your Villainy has made me thus already.


King, The Eagle shall not soar above thy Power;
The Indies shall be Plundered for thy sports,
To keep thy Extravagancies in perpetual Play;
Thy Garments all shall be Originals,
The finest, and the richest Art can finish;
I Will have the Sea turned off to digg up Rocks
Shall furnish thee with Gems to blind the admirers.

Ant. And what shall wait on this Romantique Pomp?


King, My Love.


Ant. Thy Lust and Heavens eternal loss;
Would thou to the Confusion thou have made,
Add my Damnation, Monster, Vengeance will catch thee.

King, Consider better, and be better used;
Nor do I fear my Subjects, nor the Gods,
If they should punish me for this dear action,
It Is 'cause I have enjoyed the bliss before 'em.
Once more consider, weigh well your idle Coyness;
And if a just repentance I can find,
I may, to quiet what you have lost, be kind.

Exit. Ant. Do then and end me, Tyrant, Ravisher:
He Is gone, and so am I from Honor ever gone;
Oh! how shall I look Virtue in the face,
Or keep my countenance when it is accused;
My conscious blushes on my cheeks will blab.
And tell the inward touches of my Soul.
Earth, Earth, thou general Mother of all beings,
Let not my evil Footsteps wrong thy bearing,
But take what is too vile to walk upon thee.

Sits down Enter Rheusanes. The. It Is done, I do believe the happy deed is done:
The King came pleased and flushing to the Banquet,
As if the Priest had warranted his Joys,
And he had tasted of my Antelina.

Ant. Oh! I should know that Voice.


The. What Fate directs me always to this place!
This Melancholy Grove but sooths me in my Thoughts,
And Drowns me in Despair. Or, is it perhaps
That this most conscious Grove nourished my ruin:
Oh! the happy time!
Even I that am undone: undone by that;
Bless those so happy, happy moments past,
And fond the Memory that makes me wretched.

Ant. Oh, Heavens!


The. What means that Voice of Sorrow? do the Woods
Pity me? or is it that mourning Lady!
'Twere vain for me to offer Services,
Or Complement her Miseries with mine.
If she be truly Wretched, I rob her of her Solitude.
For sure when Grief grows to that monstrous height,
That none can equally Comiserate.
Next to the Quiet Slumbers of the Grave;
To be alone, is all a Wretch would have.

Ant. Oh! Rheusanes!


The. Or my Sense fails, or Antelinas voice.
But that is impossible.

Going off. Ant. Rheusanes.


The. Again, Madam, by calling on my Name;
I Judge you think it in my Power to do you Service.
Accept it thus, and rise from this sad Place,
I will not trust my Eyes, it cannot be
What Antelina and without the King;
Or is this grief because without the King.

Ant. Unkind Rheusanes do I merit this.


The. Why, Madam, I can guess no other Cause;
Yet Oh! my Antelina, if e're you Loved,
As often you have Sworn you did Rheusanes;
Not all the Royalties that deck a Throne,
Nor the gay Bridegroom King with all his honors,
Not in your Arms, nor in the unspeaking Minute of delight,
Shall give you half that Peace or Calm your Soul,
Equal to what beneath Yon Myrtle Tree,
You owned with Tears of Joy you felt from me.

Ant. I know thy Truth and that thus sinks my Soul,


The. She faints, Oh! thou Epitome of Heaven return,
Revive my Love, my Life, my Antelina.

Ant. Ah! me, if you would e're have Peace.
Wake me no more.

The. Oh! if thou know my Truth,
Live only to Convince me of thy own;
That Antelina Loves the the lost Rheusanes,
And my Soul soars immediately with thine.

Ant. How can your Eyes so carelessly surveigh me?


The. What say thou?


Ant. Do these torn Robes and hair look well, Rheusanes.


The. Hh!


Ant. Should you meet one thus Ruffled on a Road,
Stretched on the Ground or fastened to a Tree,
Would you not judge they had been Robbed, Rheusanes?

The. Horrors eternal choke my eager thought,
And stifle my unnatural Suspicion;
I will not guess at all, go on, be plain,
What meanest thou by a Road, bound to a Tree, or Robbed?

Ant. When e're a Shepherd leaves his tender Flock,
Does not the Wolf devour the helpless Lambs?

The. Yet Plainer.


Ant. Let my Original disorder speak.


The. Enough, Enough, ye Mighty, Merciful good guards
Of innocence and virtue it is enough:
Give me thy hand, thou beautiful decay,
Let us sit down like Children quite undone,
And pratle over the falsehood of our Guardian,
Thy Father. -- Oh, do not turn away;
That wretched motion does inform too much.

Ant. Oh, my Rheusanes, I own I sin to look you in the face,
So vile am I: But pity me,
If threatened and entreated by a Father,
Urged by the wrong I thought you had done my Love,
And tempted by a Prince I seemed to accept
What as I wish for Heaven my Soul so abhorred,
I would have chose the vilest Death on Earth,
Rather than live, Rheusanes being lost,
The greatest Empress story e're could boast of.

The. Oh, dismal sound!
The only blessed news I wished to hear,
Doubles the wrack of my despairing Soul,
And marks me for a Wretch to future times*
Had thou been false, (...) or a just resentment
Might have cured: but now my spit^ful fate
Has made a flaw, not Heaven it self can mend;
Nor do I fear a Curse, nor ask a Blessing.

Ant. Oh Rheusanes!


The. Speak on, speak all, for I Would be more a wretch,
Admire the witty cruelties of Heaven,
And wonder at the newness of their Curse.

Ant. My Father!


The. Curses blast him! Hark, I hear some coming,
Perhaps the King, to appease a second time;
His pressing blood retire my Love,
And when I call,
Approach.

Ant. Oh, hide me where I never may be found.


Leads her off. The. Now for this lustful brand,
This Fire that blister'd Antelina's virtue.
Enter Ghinotto. By the fell Author of her Miseries,
It is the greater mischief.

Ghi. The King with Joy deals round the brim-swel'd goblets,
His Gay behavior signifies success;
But he is engaged so strictly with his Guests,
I cannot know the full particulars.

Rheusanes takes him by the Shoulder. The. Ghinotto, though I know thee Ambitions
dotard,
Yet not so blinded, but thou can Judge,
What Death deserves that Execrable Dog,
Who would to please a bold Hot Blooded Prince,
Expose the unspotted Honor of a Daughter.

Ghi. What Death? Equal with him, the unambitious Fool,
Who would to please the sondness of a Girl,
Refuse to be the Father of a Prince?

The. Are not Vows binding, do we mock the Gods,
When our Protestings summon 'em to Witness,
Whether our Words keep measure with our Hearts?
Have you forgot, when to the Wars I went,
You joined my Antelinas Hand and mine,
And blessed me as yours? Have you forgot,
When on my Sword, I Swore Eternal Faith?
You made her Kneel, and Kiss the hollow blade:
Preferring me to any Prince on Earth.

Ghi. The Princess was not named Perfidiou, Man!
Do you upbr^id my Wrongs, or flout my Age?
Your fiery Pride, Young Conqueror, rides so high,
'Twill throw you on your Back: your false
Deluding Tongue, the Tricks you used to break the
Match, and Antelinas Peace, shall mount her to a Throne:
A Diadem my Daughter shall adorn.
Oryala and thou shall be her Scorn:
Thy slighted Passion, shall at distance move:
It shall be Treason, but to own thy Love,
Whilst the most favor, thy poor State shall meet;
Shall be to pay Obedience at her Feet.

The. Rage keep thy Bounds, and Oh instruct me Gods,
Which way to satisfy my Love and Honor,
And not destroy this Murderer of 'em both.
Upbraidst thou me with breaking off the March?
Does not thy base Heart know its own Contrivane?

Ghi. Vain Lord, thy threats are vain; my Heart know this*
Its Blood run cheary now, as 'ere it did, nor to
Be child with words, but sensible of Wrongs.
Apt to revenge, and with this withered Arm.
To justify the Honor of my Name.

The. The Honor of thy Name: Ha! ha --


Ghi. Ay, upstart Prince, the Honor of my Name
Equal with thine, much dearer than my Life,
And precious as the Offsprings of my blood.

The. Precious indeed, and yet by Hell it is sold.


Ghi. By whom?


The. By thee.


Ghi. Thou Lie.


The. Thus quarrel Boys and Girls:
Thou twice a Child!

Ghi. Thou not beyond it yet.


The. Who left his Daughter here?


Ghi. I did.


The. To meet the King.


Ghi. On purpose?


The. To hear his Love.


Ghi. Ay, and receive it too.


The. He has been here Ghinotto.


Ghi. I Am glad on it.


The. He has made Love too.


Ghi. Better.


The. High, mighty, pressing Love.


Ghi. More like a Prince.


The. More like a Fiend of Hell. Fetches her in.
Come forth thou Sacrifice to his Ambition,
And with thy Ruins sink his haughty Soul.

Ghi. My Child!


Ant. My Father.


Ghi. What mean these swollen Eyes, this torn Hair,
These ruffled Garments, these all marks of Horror?

Ant. The King.


Ghi. Shall do thee right for this affront:
Tell me the Authors.

Ant. Oh! he can never do me right.


Ghi. Why, Child, I know he Loves thee.


Ant. So loves a Goatish Satyr of the Woods,
A wandering Virgin of Diana's Train,
When to his Den, he Hurries her by force,
And Grins at her Resistance, and her Prayers.

Ghi. Ambition, Oh Ambition! thou Nurse of Mischief;
How thou have lash't my Pride.

Aside. The. What say thou now Ghinotto, does not this Object*
Make thy inwards Sweat? Does not her Tears?
Pierce through thy yielding Pores, and scald thy Heart?
Can thou be still, when such a Wrong provokes?

Ghi. Is this the Coronation of my Daughter,
Villain Ghinotto? Curse thy self alone:
Accomplice, Cause Author of thy Disgrace;
Nor look on him whom next Heaven must revenge,
And equally with Heaven thou have abused.
The Armies his, and sure a Cause like this,
Will shock the Loyalty I know he bears.

Ant. Oh! Father!


Ghi. Peace Girl, a while; and I will do thee Justice*
Rheusanes, it is now no time to ask you Pardon:
Nor can my Life afford me time enough.
The King and I: mark me, the King and I,
Are equally concerned in thy undoing*
Oh! do me Justice there, I Will give thee
Ample satisfaction here.

The. Let me Reflect.
The Man who made this Wretch of Poor Rheusanes,
Lives still, and I must honor him; he is my Prince,
Therefore I must not meditate revenge,
Or Compensation just to such a Wrong:
Because he is my Prince: Nay, by my Soul,
That Name aws me so much,
That had he stripped me bare of all my Honors:
Reduced me to the meanest State of Life:
Nay, took my Life, and that the Vilest way*
I could have blessed him still, and bore it all.

Ghi. I have heard him boast your Loyalty indeed:
Own you the Prop, and Honor of his Kingdom.
Yet there lies your reward.

Points to Ant. The. Nay, had he attacked me in that tender part,
And knowing that my Life twisted with hers:
Had Stabbed her at my Feet, my Blood might
Sally me to some rash thought, which soon I
Should have grieved for on my Knees, to have begged
The Favor of a Second Stab. Thus would I treat
His Cruelties with Life, the utmost stake a Mortal
Has to loose.

Ghi. And charged by Heaven, and Nature to Protect;
To Right if Wronged by any mortal Power.

The. But Sacriligiously to spoil my Love:
To violate the Altar of my Vows, he has Stabbed my
Soul, nor can your vain Eliziums do me Right:
A Melancholy poor Dishonored Ghost;
Abandoned, Branded, Scorned by Noble Souls,
And shunned by Antelinas unrevenged.

Ant. Where then, Oh! where shall Antelinas fly?
In what dark Mansion, cover her Disgrace?
A Ravished Virgin in a stranger World;
Where bold Rheusanes durst not show his Face.

Ghi. By Heavens, the Cods sit smiling at our Follies,
And mock at our Ridiculous Enduring.

The. Oh Father!


Leans on him. Ghi. Oh! do not Sink my Soul with so much goodness:
I loath the World, I hate my self for Living;
To find thy Blood, awed with the Name of King:
Baulk a Revenge, would make me Young again:
Nor can I hope it from my Arm alone.
The Conscious King has Guards enough,
To Fence him from my Rage: which shall end here.
Rheusanes, I told you, and I own it once again:
The King and I, only the King and I,
made thee the Wretch thou art:
Thy Honors Stabbed in his hot Blood, and Lust,
And thus in Blood must pay thee, if he is just.

Offers to stab himself. The. Oh! hold Ghinotto, I vow Revenge;
Live and look up, such Revenge as our
Lean Sorrow shall grow Fat withal:
Live and look up.

Ghi. Rest not my Dagger then, but leave it with its Master*


Ant. Swear not to use it then.


Ghi. Not to my Death I vow.


The. Thus join then Hands with me in a revenge


Kneel. Lucretia, Brutus, Collatine, and all the gloriously revenged.
Immortal Souls, inspire the equally abused Rheusanes;
And Promp't this Noble Fury in my mind.

Ghi. Oh! Rheusanes, rise not yet, accept this
Moiety of Blood I pay you; and Daughter Swear, Swear,
Since the World, Man, Woman, Child, and all should join
In such a Cause, Thou'it have revenge, the King and I,
We owe ye blood my Children: Oh! Lend me
But my Eyes to see him bleed here on this Spot
I make this solemn Vow, where thy dear Honor lies;
In thy Fathers Blood, I Will pay the due just Forfeit:
Of my Life!

Ant. And as I wind
This Linen round your Arm, to save
The Noble drops, which feed that Life:
I Swear no opportunity shall escape,
In which I may revenge my Virgin Loss.

The. Come to my Arms, thou noble Penitent, To Ghi. To Antes.
And Oh thou precious Rack of my sad Fate:
Cleave to my Soul;
Ye Gods, which know no difference of Men;
But Ride in Clouds, Kings over Earthly Kings:
I claim revenge: Look down upon our Sorrows:
And if in opposition to your Law;
My Sword against my Sovereign I draw.
Oh! Crush this Young Rebelling in its Birth:
Some Judgment strike this Traitor to the Earth.
But if as you have thought fit in former Times,
By mortal Hands, to punish mortal Crimes.
Help me my injured Honor to redress:
Crown all my Undertakings with Success.
Resentment does my blood to Action charm,
Revenge inspires the Glorious Alarm,
And Conquest waits the Thunder of my Arm.

Enter Dorenalus. Exeunt. Dor. What is there in this World, should make men fond
Of breathing in its falsehood: Our inclinations
Always are denied, or if we think to morrows Joy
Shall make amends for this days Sorrow: some
Evil accident does Intervene, and our Intentions
Still are interrupted: Oh! we were lost sure in the
Primitive folly, since the first Man allowed the
Woman Will, we have been the Sexes May Game,
And Derision, and Fortune, which does favor
None but Fools is constantly their Champion:
The only thing our griping Fates allowed,
To the sore Prentiship of Woes we are bound to,
Was healing Friendship; and that now is most
Corrupted and uncertain found. How happy
Did that Surly Cynick live, who knew no Joy,
Nor Grief beyond the want or presence
Of the Sun?

Enter Ghinotto. Ghi. Dorenalus?


Dor. My Father.


Ghi. The same, are we alone?


Dor. Why, Sir?


Ghi. Cause I have business, that is a secret boy.
You know there are many private Nooks about
The Court, and at this time of Night, Young wanton
Girls Sculk with the Lords in Corners for instructions:
And I am loath to Sing, whilst they beat time.

Dor. I cannot Sound you Sir.


Ghi. But I, will thee, I have a Plumet to a Line of wrongs,
Will reach thy Heart, were it as deep as the
Unfashioned Sinkings of the Ocean.

Dor. I have a Heart, which to a Noble wrong,
Will swell, and save the sounding of it.

Ghi. Well said, then hear me, and stop one Ear;
Least it fly from thee, thy Sister?

Dor. What of her?


Rhi. Is Ravish*d basely, seduced, and Ravished by the King.


Dor. The King.


Ghi. Ay the King, that Essence of Brutality;
Has Robbed her of her richest Portion.

Dor. We may revenge, but never retreive the wrong.


Ghi. That Is right, but how? how to revenge that we must Study.


Dor. Why thus?
I long have Doted on Oryala,
My quiet long has been at Pawn for her;
Now I have Power to gratify my Love,
And pay my Sisters loss.

Ghi. As how?


Dor. I Will Ravish her.


Ghi. Will thou?


Dor. By all her Scorn I will,
I Will force her till tired Nature does refuse;
And my desire is bassled by my Weakness.

Ghi. I feel my Vitals sicken at this Motion,
Yet I could have provoked him to this deed;
Had I not made a league with brave Rheusanes.

Dor. What ruminate you on, Sir?


Ghi. Don't you Consider she is Rheusanes Wife.


Dor. I do: and for that very reason do resolve it,
Consider who has blassed all my hopes, Rheusanes
Who lest my Sister slighted openly* Rheusanes
Who was the occasion of her Treacherous Rape;
Rheusanes still, for had he faithful proved,
Your Daughter had been happy* and Oryala in (...)
Might have been wrought to answer my
Entreatings.

Ghi. I must inform him better, tho the (...) every ruins,
What I long for, the General was betrayed (...)
This Action by the Kings lust contrived to take,
The Princess that he might easier compel
My Daughter.

Dor. By Heaven you have eased my Spirits of a load,
Lay heavier on 'em than the Love that wrackt 'em;
Now as the Kings relation I will force her,
And as he has sowed his Poison in our Blood,
I will corrupt with equal Pleasure his.

Ghi. So far it is well; nay farther, I Will proceed:
Rheusanes hates her as I do the King:
Nay, could he live till Time did rest his Glass,
He would not own her.

Dor. Oh! how I Will surfeit in the Luscious Joys:
His Lust has made my Sister's Honor bleed;
Mine in Oryala shall match the Deed.

Exit. Ghi. His Blood is in a Flame, and as a Fire
Long stifled, having Vent, breaks out with fiercer,
More consuming Have, so does his Passion,
Whilst all my little Oppositions moved,
Served as Combustibles to feed its Fury.
Oh Virginius! How happy was thy Arm
That frustrated the lustful Will of Appius?
Like him, I to the Army will retire,
And to redress my Wrongs their Aid require.

Exit. Enter Rheusanes with a Dagger. The. Now is the Time, now all within is
fast:
The busy feasting Guests are cloyed with Riot,
And glutted into Sleep: The King himself long
Time ago retired, remorsless went to Rest, as if
Some Angel rocked him to Repose:
My Antelina too,
Doz'd with her Wrongs, has sighed her self to Quiet.
Oh Sleep! thou only Cordial, next thy Neighbor Death,
For injured and disordered Souls, how feign would I
Enjoy the: This only takes Possession of my Heart;
This careful Tenant strictly will repair what
Time has run to Ruin; but e're I make it Master
Of my Life, it must have a Lodging in the Heart
Of The King.

Enter Dorenalus. Dor. I find my Spirits falter in this Action,
For when my Will is urgent to go on,
Against the Bar of Friendship it recoils;
Which bruises my Intentions.

The. I heard a Voice, sure.


Dor. If I should ravish her --


The. By Darkness, it is King contriving to regal,
His Lust again; blessed be the Means that keeps
Me undiscovered, and the Occasion brought me to
Over hear him.

Dor. She is Rheusane's Right, although I love her;
The Word Revenge will give no Countenance,
For wronging of my Friend:
I hitherto have kept my Name untainted;
Why should I then out of a rash hot Fit,
Lose in a Minute, what my Life has toiled for.

The. What, does he mutter now?


Dor. I will not Ravish her.


The. Thou shall not, if Rheusanes can prevent it*
Up thou, unused to Mischief for a Moment;
And forth thou never failing Instrument of Slaughter:
My Hand embrace thee with its former firmness,
And by Instinct let me find out his Heart.

Dor. Who ever thou art, Runs Dor. through*
Dorenalus huggs thee for this mighty Favor.

The. Mistakes confound me, what is it I hear, within There, Treason, Murder,
Lights, you Sleepers.


Enter Gentlemen. Lights. Gent. It was the Prince's Voice.


The. Oh! lend a courteous Glance this way, it cannot Be my Friend sure.


Dor. Never so much thy Friend as at this Hour.


The. How have I traced the Footsteps of Destruction* Away with your unwelcome
Witnesses.


Dor. Oh! 'twas Charity to end my Life,
When you denied me Nourishment to keep it.

The. Yet ere thy Soul forsake thee, let me clear it:
I was betrayed by thy ambitious Father,
Who placed the Princess, as thy Sister, for me:
Disguised and silent we performed the Deed;
And when I brought her home to feast on Love,
She swore I should not taste it in the Light:
Pretended Virgin Modesty refused;
So by the Assistance of the fatal Darkness,
I grasped her as the Longings of my Soul.

Dor. I do believe thee: Oh! Death hunts my Soul,
And drives it from its mortal Mansion.

The. I thought it was the King now in thy place,
Hearing thee talk of Ravishing;
Thought 'twas some fresh Design upon your Sister,
Which my mistaking Arm endeavored to prevent.

Dor. I am satisfied, and pray be you; I never meant you Ill;
Wickedness once invaded my fallen Temper,
But I at last o'ercame it, Oh Rheusanes!

The. What are thy last Desires?


Dor. Take Pity on my Sister, and keep her from the future
Evil of this cursed Tarquin has dishonored her.
I Am going, and if to Happiness I am preferred,
I will entreat for Thee.

Dies. The. Blessings unenvi'd wait upon thy Soul,
And mount it to the Glory it deserves:
Remove this Body to my Chamber,
And over it I will lament its Fate.
Heaven! Thou have shown thy Care on thy Vicegerent,
And in my Bloom of Wickedness have cropped me:
Ghinotto worked upon my yiedling Soul;
When it was dulled with suffering then he preyed on it;
But sadly have I answered the Offense,
Slaying his Son in aiming at my Prince.

End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
A Camp. Several Soldiers appear confusedly. 1st. Sold. A Pox o'these
peaceable Times, we shall certainly be starved in 'em.


2d. Sold. A Pox on our Folly for suffering peaceable Times, have we not the
Power in our own hands?


1st. Sold. For what?


2d. Sold. Why, to make what time we please: Mutiny, my dear Dogs.


Corp. A Plague upon those who let us beat 'em so soon; neither is there an
Officer destroyed, not so much as a fat Serjant, or a lean Ensign; no Hint of a
Hope for a Vacancy to any man's Merit.


2d. Sold. Why look you, Corporal, our nearnest way to Preferment, (since they
will not die in the Field, nor decently of themselves) is to make Mischief
among 'em, and let 'em destroy one another.


Corp. Ay, but they will not take our Words for it; Superiors have found out the
Tricks of Inferiors, and have made an Agreement, tho Truth, not to mind it.


2d. Sold. But why must we be kept in our own Country? If we were abroad we
might plunder.


Corp. We steal here, which is all one.


2d. Sold. No, it is not, for we are hanged for it.


1st. Sold. Hark, you fellow Soldiers, now cannot I for my Blood understand
why this is our own Country; I Will be choked if there be a man among us has a
Foot of Land in it.


2d. Sold. No more than he stands upon. Well, it is a brave thing to be an
Officer.


1st. Sold. What because you can march Five Miles on Horseback?


2d. Sold. No: But to be even with the Government.


Corp. As how, old Dry-Bobb?


2d. Sold. Why, as we marched from our Quarters, we came through the City to
the Camp; and a turbulent Dog that was gaping to see us as we past by his
Shop, cried out, Ay, there goes the Plague of the the Nation: His Wife strait
replied, The Comforts, you Block-head.


Corp. So.


2d. Sold. The Captain immediately tip'd her the Wink, And made him a Cuckold
before it was dark.


All. Oh brave Captain!


1st. Sold. Nay more; She has promised on her Honor,
To be revenged on her Husband, she will bring,
All the Females of both Generations,
For the Use of our Regiment.

Corp. Then the Government's settled again.


2d. Sold. No; prithee let us Mutiny, for I am damnable Hungry.


1st. Sold. Well then let us Mutiny, for my Heart's even broke:
We Have abundance of Victuals upon the Plain,
But the Devil a bit on the Spit.
Would it not make a man mad, to see a Flock
Of Sheep grazeing at the head of one's Regiment,
Baaing and making Mouths at us, whilst we
Dare not cut their Throats for the Affront.

Corp. Ay, or to see a Battalion of Oxen march by
In State, and dung at our Tents Mouths, yet must
Not knock 'em down to teach 'em better Manners.

2d. Sold. I say Mutiny.


All. Ay, Mutiny, mutiny.


Corp. Ay, but for what? Pox on it we have our Pay;
If they would but stop our Pay once,
The Devil should not stop our Mouths.

1st. Sold. Then Corporal we'll Mutiny for our Rights and Privileges.


2d. Sold. To kill and take what we like.


1st. Sold. Ay, and to eat and keep what we kill.


Corp. Right, here they send us abroad to be knocked on the Head,
When they have nothing to do for us at home. --

2d. Sold. Else knock us on the head, and starve us at Home.


1st. Sold. When there is nothing to do for us abroad.


2d. Sold. 'Twould be a pretty Sight to see us run away, Likw Moses's Lions at
the crowing of a Cock.

1st. Sold. Or lose the Field as the Capitol was saved, By the gagling of a
Goose: Ounds I say Mutiny.

Corp. The Devil take it, this will never serve for an Occasion; I am not so
unreasonable to desire A just one, if we had any.

Enter Colonel and Two Officers. But mum! here comes the old furious Colonel
With Two Officers; they will wonder what a Plague
We all do together: Now will half of us be hanged,
To confess whether the rest had any Design,
To mutiny or no.
Coll. These Fellows have some Mischief in their minds;
A fit time this to work 'em to our Purpose;
My old tough Heart melts at my General's Wrongs;
There needs no Oratory in this Tale:
In downright Words I Will tell how he is abused;
And downright Blows can only do him Justice.
Why, how now fellow Soldiers?

Corp. Ud's Death, the old Rogue's in a good Humor.


Coll. What, wishing for the Wars? You hate to be idle, When a brave Action
calls.

1st. Sold. And under your Honors Command.


Coll. My Command! Under the Generals, my
Fellow Soldiers, the brave Rheusanes;
He that first fleshed your Swords in Conquest,
And marched you over the Ruins of your Foes:
Rheusanes; He, that Father to us all,
Who now, by me, to crown his last of Deeds,
Bequeaths the Grecian Generals Pavillion;
With all that Mass of Riches, his by Lot;
Without one Doyt to any nigh Relation;
But all to you, his stout bred Sons and Heirs.

All. Humm.


Coll. Whilst he, tho bold as Justice ever made Man;
Injured to that prodigious height he is
Reflecting on his Duty to his Master,
Retires to mourn alone at his Disgrace.

Corp. How Colonel! The General disgraced! that
Must not be; here is an Occasion you Dogs --

Coll. If after all his Service to his Country,
To have a Wife slurr'd on him by his Prince,
Or see his Mistress ravished before his Face,
Be a Disgrace, it is his.

2d. Sold. How, ravish my General's Mistress!


1st. Sold. Who was it Colonel? For we'll make an Eunuch
Of him, and he shall marry her after.

2d. Sold. And then we'll come in for Snacks.


Corp. We'll tear him Piecemeal.


Coll. Away ye giddy-headed Slaves, it was the King.


2d. Sold. And sure the King may ravish whom he pleases.


Corp. Hark Rogues! a rare Opportunity;
Did any of you ever see the King*

2d. Sold. Not I.


1st. Sold. Nor I.


Corp. Nor you don't know the King, if you see him?


Omn. Not we.


Corp. Then take my word for it Rheusanes is your King.


Omn. Rheusanes, Rheusanes!


Coll. Forbear ye Rebels, or I Will hang ye all:
Rheusanes is no Prince, he was indeed your General;
Your much abused Commander.

1st. Sold. I say he is our King, the other Fellow has been Prince, so long
enough.


Corp. Ay, ay* Therefore, I say, let all who love their Rheusanes, or their
Corporal, draw their Swords.


Omn. Rheusanes, Rheusanes.


They all draw. Enter Ghinotto. Coll. They Are finely wrought, see here, behold
the Father.
Of the unhappy Lady, and your General's Mistress:
Poor Man he weeps.

2d. Sold. Truly he has had a very sad time on it.


Coll. Do you not know this Face? can fifteen Years,
Such Alteration make? Can you forget
Your Major General?

Corp. The Noble Ghinotto.


Ghin. That wretched thing am I.
But why in Arms my old well tried Acquaintance?

Coll. Warmed with my General's Wrongs and yours;
Of My Conscience I think we are grow all Rebels.

Ghin. Indeed our Wrongs will call for a Revenge,
And justify it any way but that:
But sure the King commands in what he pleases:
Were he my Equal, I Would scorn to show
This base dishonored Head;
Till I had fixed my Dagger in his Heart,
Deep as the Wound it gave this wretched Arm,
Which came too late to save my Daughter's Honor;
And stop the Hell-bred Fury of his Lust.

Corp. Look you Fellow Soldiers: This Lord has been
A brave Fellow, has led us out and brought us home,
With Honor, his Son's the General's Friend,
And a kind Officer; therefore for all their Sakes,
I cry Revenge.

Omn. Revenge, Revenge.


Ghin. My Son alas;
That precious Comfort of my unhappy Age;
Whom you are pleased to call the General's Friend,
The Tyrant has destroyed.

2d. Sold. We lose Time, Sir.


Pulls the Colonel. Coll. The General perhaps may be so too:
His Daughter in his Absence forced again,
And by Degrees we all may feel his Envy.

Corp. On, on Sir.


Coll. Nay more --


2d. Sold. We'll hear no more.


Coll. I say the King.


1st. Sold. Ounds will you lead, Sir.


Coll. I will, and let us wear our Injuries on our Swords,
Nor sheath 'em till we wholly are redrest,
But rather perish in our just Endeavors.

1st. Sold. Plunder, Sir.


Coll. Do any thing, the City ever were our Enemies,
Tho we have saved their Freedoms and Estates.

2d. Sold. March then.


Ghin. Fight as ye all had Daughters to relieve.


Coll. Or Fight like men condemned for a Reprieve.


Corp. All Wives, by my Consent, turn out of Doors.


1st. Sold. Then I am sure the Cits will have no Whores.


Exeunt hollowing. SCENE. II.
Enter King and a Gentleman. King. DOrenalus killed by a Mistake in the dark,
and by Rheusanes?


Gent. Here in the Gallery, Sir.


King. Ghinotto sled to The Army too?


Gent. Yes, Sir.


King. Arrived there?


Gent. So writes my Brother, Sir; he has some small Employment in your Forces,
and thought it was his Duty to inform your Majesty.


King. Send to him either to seize or else dispatch the Villain, and I Will
prefer him for his Loyalty.


Gent. I shall, Sir.


King. Give order too Rheusanes be secured;
Let him not stir beyond the Princes's Lodgings:
Confine Ghinotto's Daughter too;
In the Antichamber keep her till I come.

Gent. It shall be done, Sir.


Exit Gent. King. It Is good to make 'em sure:
Or let the worst my Fears can threaten come;
Let this Ghinotto with the Army march
Up to my Palace Gates; I easily can quell
The Rebel, if I accept his Daughter for my Bride;
But it must come to that ever I comply or pardon:
If this man's Brother but dispatches him,
My Jealousy's released.
Enter Oryala. Oryala in Tears! The Cause which draws this Grief?


Ory. The fatal Cause I ever feared and told you: Rheusanes Scorn.


King. Still stubborn?


Ory. Not only still, but ever will be so;
Upon the Floor he past this tedious Night,
Sighing and mourning over Dorenalus;
Whom, his mistaking Arm, he said, destroyed:
Muttering Revenge; repeating his Deserts,
And cursing the Ingratitude of's Prince.

King. I do begin to apprehend him now;
And what Dorenalus by chance received,
I guess, was meant for me.
His Life is, to appease our Laws, required,
Which our Prerogative can spare, if courted;
If not, for want of such Humility
I Will leave him to its rigid Persecution:
I Will humble his Resentments.

Ory. Oh never, never!
His Woes are swelled to that prodigious heap,
No Rage can terrify, no Vengeance hurt:
To die is what he sues for; He craved, even now,
Some Judgment from the Gods, to separate
His united Sufferings; and finding that they
Did not mind him, swore, they seemed ashamed,
And could inflict no more.

King. Her Sorrows trouble me.


Aside. Ory. What Pleasure could you take in such Revenge,
To ruin those who never did you Wrong?

King. I cannot help my Purposes miscarriage,
But they designed you well.

Ory. Oh vain Excuse! you knew he was disposed of
To Ghinotto's Daughter, but loving her your self,
You put me on him as a Security
For your own Lust.

King. Ha!


Ory. If your hot Blood provoked you to that height,
That a poor Virgin's Honor must allay't;
Rheusanes sure sufficient Plague had found,
In loosing her; but likewise to be ti'd
To what he loathed; how could he bear that Weight?
Now I, like him, wish we had never met
And curse the unequal Usage of our Fate.

King. She strikes my Conscience strangely.


Aside. Ory. Look back upon the Ruins you have made,
And Curse the Will which has dethroned your Goodness.

King. I feel Reflections thronging on my Soul,
And Penitence is crowding for Admittance.

Ory. What Reparation can you make her Virtue?
Or what Amends my Freedom, which you have sold?

King. I will make Reparation; forbear Oryala!
And let Discretion act the careful Pilot,
To guide thee through this Tempest of Misfortunes:
Thy Wrongs into my Heart have shot my Sin,
And marked it for Destruction: Oh man!
Most liable to Vice, therefore most Beast!
When we desire, the Will runs headlong on,
Despising all Instructions of Forbearance;
But Oh! at last betrayed in the sure Snare;
That Will, that forward Will, which ruined us,
Converted by Regret to Thoughts impartial,
Too late considers and condemns it self.

Ory. Think on some means to mitigate your Crimes,
Or your Soul's lost with your pernicious Life.

King. Oryala, thy Virtues have prevailed,
And made me see, with Shame, the want of mine:
But if our future Actions can repair,
What our foregoing Measures have disgraced,
Such Satisfaction for your Wrongs I Will make,
That every one their full Amends shall speak: Confess,
That I can give no more, nor they can take.

Ory. Impossible!


King. Why do thou court me to be good,
Yet doubt my Power?

Ory. I fear 'twill not redress; Death, death I know
Must be my Sorrows Cure.

King. Talk not of Death, we may live happy yet;
Monarchs Repentance never comes too late:
I Will send Rheusanes hither, you work on him,
And I Will contrive to soften Antelina:
But if our Propositions cannot succeed,
It Is I must die, I who have done this Deed;
My Death alone the mischief can remove;
Which wronged her Honor, and Rheusanes Love.

Exit. Ory. He thinks his Flattery will beguile my Griefs;
But the Impression is too deeply cut;
I Am sure his Art will never eat it out:
Oh Rheusanes! Thou much beloved,
And much of Misery, how wretched are our Fates!
Yet it is a Comfort to be Innocent:
If I in ought my self can guilty find,
It Is loving him perversest of his Kind.

Enter Rheusanes. Rheu. Is there no End then of my Miseries?
My Heart's too stubborn for my Wrongs to break;
Nor will the King destroy his Enemy:
Oh Dorenalus! if that Saints can hear
The Intercessions of unhappy Mortals,
Implore the Assistance of the higher Powers,
To seal the Warrant of my Liberty.

Ory. Rheusanes!


Rheu. What are your Orders, Madam?


Ory. Say rather my Desires, which entreat
A happy Reconcilement to your Love.

Rheu. Alas, the King has ravished all my Love;
Nor have I for my self so much
As to preserve my Life.

Ory. Have thou no Pity then?


Rheu. If your ill used Affection can desire
A wretched Share in a disordered Heart,
Command my Crimes immediate Punishment;
Let Death reward the merits of my Folly,
Which can despise the Offers of such Goodness,
And till I Am dead I Will bless the noble Mercy.

Ory. Why? would thou die then?


Rheu. With as much Joy I would receive my Doom,
As the dishonored Antelina:
For since Dorenalus and she are lost,
There are no Plagues my Sufferings can receive,
To match the miseries of a Reprieve.

Ory. Here then, Rheusanes, feast thy Scorn and Hate;
If thou will die, season thy Dagger first,
In the uneasy Bosom of Oryala.

Offers him a Dagger. Rheu. Your cruel Fate, by all those Woes I grieve,
Could wish that Antelina you had been;
Or, that I Would Antelina never seen.

Ory. Oh! talk not of her; her very Name,
Withers my Hopes, and blasts me with Despair.

Rheu. All ours you did destroy.


Ory. I did not, 'twas the King; had I but known
The evil meanings of his Soul, Rheusanes;
Or that my Fondness would have met this Usage,
I never had destroyed my Peace or yours.

Rheu. You knew I was engaged.


Ory. The more ungrateful and unjust, Rheusanes,
Knowing the merits of my Obligations:
Let my preceding Actions come in view;
The faithful Diligence my Love has used,
Particularly to advance your Cause,
Might easily persuade you my Designs
Courted your Inclinations to reward 'em.

Rheu. I do acknowledge all my Honors yours,
Confess my self your Bounty's Creditor;
But my Endeavors in my Countries Service,
I hoped in time might cancel all those Bonds.

Ory. To The King, but not to me:
Virtues when secret kept are none at all;
Kings know not, but by Favorites, who deserve:
Had not my Love encouraged your Deserts,
By kind Entreaties to your Prince to try 'em,
Your Name had never conquered Antelina;
You had remained indifferent to the World.

Rheu. Would I had lived a Stranger to it ever,
Since I want Power to recompense your Goodness.

Ory. You do not want it.


Rheu. Oh! I do; my Vows to Antelina bind my Heart;
And tho I never can be happy in her,
I hear her sighing to my Soul, take heed,
This Conference seems a Violation,
And she upbraids my Conscience for the Sufferance;
There is a struggling Contest in my Breast,
Even now betwixt my Love and Gratitude;
Both seize my Heart, and tugg for the Possession,
Let me depart, or it will split between 'em.

Ory. Give me my Share then.


Rheu. Divide it with thy Dagger.


Ory. No, let thy Gratitude but combat for me;
Weigh but my Friendship, and I yet shall conquer.

Rheu. It will not be; off, or I must be rude.


Ory. Thus I release thee then, and right my self.


Stabs her self. Rheu. Oh! whither has thy barbarous Honor led thee?


Ory. To everlasting Freedom; my tedious Lease of Life
Is out, and I shall groan beneath thy Scorn no more.

Rheu. Why would thou do thus rashly?


Ory. Why would thou hate so long?


Rheu. Heaven might have changed the purpose of my Soul,
For certainly thy Faith had wondrous merit.

Ory. Not equal to thy Antelina's tho;
Yet I have got the start of her in Love,
And in Rheusanes cause I perish first.

Rheu. Oh Nature ^ lend a Life to mend this Breach,
And Death shall have a Thousand in its room;
I Will heal it with my own.

He snatches the Dagger: She holds him. Ory. Forbear, I do conjure thee,
By thy Antelina hold thy fatal Arm:
Oh Rheusanes! my Lord, my Life, my Husband
And my Soul.

Rheu. What would my dear Vexation?


Ory. When Fate shall Summon thee to leave this Life,
Give order that thy Bones may sleep with mine;
Though we have lived at distance in this World,
I hope we shall be nearer in the next.

Rheu. Curse on my froward Soul.


Ory. Oh do not curse thy self my Senses Blessing,
Believe I loved you, I desire no more.

Rheu. Too sadly you have engaged my Credit.


Ory. May Heaven be Judge 'twixt me and Antelina,
And give Rheusanes to the best deserving:
Oh! I Am going, the light of Peace is glimmering
On my Soul, and Heaven is in its view; give
Me thy Hand, or thou will lose thy Way.

Dies. Rheu. Stay then, Oh stay,
Thou mighty Sufferer, in the cross Paths, which lead
Our giddy Souls to everlasting Joy or Woe:
Stay to direct me; the Soul is out of call,
I Will not be long behind thee; the King, the King,
Who has done all this mischief must give me Death:
For him my Friend was in the dark destroyed;
By him my Love was barbarously enjoyed;
By him this worthy Princess was betrayed;
By him my Honors in Disgrace are laid;
By him then let these Debts to Heaven be paid:
For since he only can be tried by you,
Do Justice, or, like him, you will want it too.

Exit Rheusanes. SCENE. III.
A Chamber, with a Table set out with Sweetmeats. Enter a Lord, leading in
Antelina* Lord. MAdam, the King will instantly be here; This small Collation is
for you provided.


Exit Lord. Ante. This Banquet seems most luckily provided;
For unsuspected now I can destroy
His Life, who robbed mine of its Glory:
I swore no opportunity should escape,
In which I might revenge my Virgin's Loss:
In then thou bane of Mortals, Pours Poison into a Bowl of Wine.
Thou Enemy to Life, and Friend of Death;
Thy fatal Virtue mix so curiously,
That the most cunning Sense may not distrust thee.
Hark, the Royal Thief approaches.

Enter King and Lord. King. Are all things ordered as I gave directions?


Lord. Your curious Fancy is obeyed in all.


King. Leave us, let not the Princess
Nor a Soul disturb us.

Lord. I shall be careful, Sir.


Exit Lord. King. The Subtilety of the most experienced Lovers
Which have subdued the chastest of the kind,
The Eloquence of Cicero affect me; Aside.
Thou Mother to the Deity of Love,
Into her Breast convey thy yielding Soul,
And give me Charms to conquer all Resistance.

Ante. Thou Goddess of unspotted Castity;
Thou worthy Patroness of Injured Virtue, Aside.
Right me on this Imperial Ravisher.

King. Fair Injury!


Moves toward her and bows very low. Ante. How flily does this Devil masque
his Falsehood:
So looked the First, when credulous Eve he tempted,
And of her blessed Paradise deprived her.

Aside. King. Thou moving Token of thy Prince's Mischief,
Look on me with compassionate Observance;
I groan beneath the Burden of my Crimes;
Thy Pity only can the Weight remove,
Which Cloggs my Soul, and sinks it to Destruction.

Ante. I shall have Justice, worrying Flatterer.


King. By all my Hopes of Quiet, noble too,
Such Justice as shall heal your wounded Honor,
And calm the worst Resentments of your Father:
I Will set thy Virtues in a Sphere so high,
Shall make 'em yet outshine thy Sexes Pride.

Ante. As well the Oak may flourish like the Elm,
When Ivy has debased its noble Trunk.

King. When Mortals beg Remission for their Sins
With an unfeigned Desire, Heavens Ear enclines:
Be thou like Heaven to my entreating Prayers,
And let my just Repentance claim some Pity.

Ante. Thou have been basely Cruel.


King. The greater will thy Mercy show to Pardon;
Do not upbraid me ever, but relent; Kneels.
My Sins, which like a Leprosy ran over me,
The Tears of Penitence have washed away;
Nor can I think my Soul inclined to The Act:
Some Fiend admiring of thee, entered me,
And with his Charms forced me act his Will.

Ante. I must seem yielding; to bring him to my Ends
Requires Belief I may be brought to his.
Rise, Sir.

King. Will you sit down then?


Ante. I will.


Sits. King. Will you salute this Bowl, or in a
Friendly Draught drown what is past?
Oh bless me with the Sound of thy Forgiveness,
And my sad Soul shall shake its Sorrows off,
And dance to th'joyful Music of thy Mercy:
Drink my Hearts Trouble.

Gives her the Bowl. Ante. Peace to our Wrongs.


She drinks. King. I thirst for it: Takes the Bowl and drinks.
May all our Sorrows shrink as this decays.

Ante. May it wash out thy Sins, I do forgive thee.


King. Souls banished Heaven, could not be better pleased
To be called back again:
Some Music there to humor this sweet Softness.W A Song.
Eat, my Comfort, here is Food delicious,
As the Gods delight in, luscious as Loves desires;
Let Us feast and revel till we have wearied Luxury,
And with our Appetites Extravagance made Craesus poor.

Ante. Thou will be poor anon.


King. Will thou not eat, my Queen?


Ante. I am not well.


King. Let us retire, my Life; within are Cordials,
Masters of all Sickness.

Ante. Make use then of 'em, for thou art mighty ill.


King. Not Paris was in better Health, when he,
His dear stolen Helen first embraced:
I feel my pious Purposes decay,
And I am lost again in vast Desire.

Ante. Is this thy faithful Sorrow?


King. Would have me weep my self
Like Niobe into a Stone?
I Have sighed sufficiently for what is past;
Therefore thy Joys must make my Grief amends.

Ante. Oh Monster!


King. Throw off this foolish Virtue and be kind;
My Blood boils high.

Ante. Thy Soul will sink as low.


King. I Will sink it in thy Arms then.


Ante. Good Gods!


King. Could those good Gods transform thee to a Tree,
Like Daphne, when Apollo did pursue her;
Thus should my twisted Arms grow to thee,
Whilst every Branch which sprung from our fair Sides,
Were royal Issues of each others Pleasure.

Ante. Thou bitter Curse on Virtue, thou art poisoned.


King. This will not save thee.


Ante. By the Honor thou have destroyed, not the Worlds Art,
With thy own Nature, were it strong as Cruel,
Can carry off the Venom in thy Blood.

King. If I am poisoned then my Time's more precious,
And on thy Bosom shall my Life expire;
So blessed I Would willingly my Life resign;
In Ecstasies of Bliss I Will upwards climb:
Upon thy Lips I Will leave my parting Soul,
And giddy with my Joys to Darkness roll.

Enter Lord. Lord. To Arms, or fly immediately;
The Army's at your Palace, bellowing loud,
Rheusanes is our King; down with the Tyrant:
There Is not a Citizen but arms the Cause,
And vows to share their Fortune.

Ante. I cannot live to see my Wrongs revenged; She sinks and sits on the
Ground.
Fear Tyrant, for Heavens Vengeance
Crowds upon thee.

King. This message like Qualm comes cross my Blood,
And chills the Heat her Beauties had inspired.
Draw up our Guards, lets meet 'em with the utmost
Force we have, and back it with an equal Resolution.
This Cunning shall not save thee, here thou shall remain,
Till I the worst Event of Fortune know;
And if I find my Crown I must resign,
I will return in spite of all thy Art,
And perish in thy Arms.
Rheusanes and thy Father shall behold it,
Whilst both their Swords shall want the Power to part us;
For as my Wounds successively are made,
As they stab me so will I kiss thee dead.

Exit. Ante. Oh Rheusanes! some unseen Power
Whisper in thy Ear,
How nobly Antelina keeps her Vow:
I feel the Mischief coursing through my Veins,
And like a Town attacked from every side,
It does surround my Heart, feign 'twould hold out
To parley with the General,
And after some Conditions give it up.

Shout without. Enter Rheusanes. Rheu. I hear my Name cried up by all for King,
And zealous mutiny comes fiercely on;
I long to know my Antelina's Fate,
Whilst doubtful of her Safety I remain:
I cannot die, but hover hereabout,
Like a poor frighted Bird about her Nest,
When she suspects the Danger of her Young.

Ante. Who Is there?


Rheu. Again upon the Ground; Runs. to Antelina.
How are my Fears confirmed?

Ante. Rheusanes!


Rheu. The same, but tell me, (Oh my Doubts!)
Why do I find thee thus?

Ante. A Bed of Honor this, not of Disgrace;
The King no more my Virtue shall destroy,
Nor live to boast the Rape of Antelina.

Rheu. What do thou mean?


Ante. I drank thy Health in the same Draught
The King did his Destruction;
The Thoughts of thee sweetened the bitter Cup,
And* made the Potion pleasant to my Taste.

Rheu. Thou art not poisoned?


Ante. Forgive me if I Have robbed thee of thy Justice;
Jealous of losing it I'made it sure,
And gave him what will thoroughly revenge us.

Rheu. The Action troubles me, although I cannot live
To see the Event: I wish thy Sufferings may quit
Thy Crimes, for Heaven has great Regard to Princes.

Ante. And has it none for injured Subjects think you?


Rheu. Not when they offer to Revenge themselves;
Fired by thy Wrongs, and worked up by thy Father,
I went to end him; But Oh the sad mistake!
I slew thy Brother for him.

Ante. Hard Usage truly, but it is done, and I must wait
My Sentence: Live thou (Oh my intended, but
Unhappy Lover!) and prithee, dear Rheusanes, prithee
Befriend the Troubles of thy Wife:
Credit me, wondrous Goodness dwells within her;
And since the King and I are both removed,
Reward her tedious Sufferings with thy Love.

Rheu. Not Three Hours since she perished by my Side.


Ante. Then I expire too late.


Rheu. Rally thy Spirits Strength, and stay a little;
Oh do not fly so soon!

Drums, Trumpets, and the Noise of a Battle without. Enter King Mad, with his
Sword drawn. King. All Is lost, no Words on it; let Furies laugh and
Rattle Chains for Joy, I Am coming; Oh how I burn!
The ambitious Boy that set the World on fire,
And perished in the Flames his Folly kindled,
Died in a gentle* Sweat to what I feel.

Rheu. He Is come, Heaven let his Madness find me.


King. The Toils of Sysiphus, Prometheus's Pains,
And all the Poets Tales of tortured Sinners,
Are Fictions to the Punishments I suffer:
I Will sue to Proserpine to quench these Fires,
Her Arms have Power.
Ha Pluto! here come to compel my Love?
Die, Devil, die; Runs Rheusanes through.
And I Will be Prince of Hell.

Ante. Rheusanes, Oh!


Dies. Rheu. I follow thee; blessed be the Hand that sends me.


King. Give me some Water there, some Water, Dogs;
Pour down my Throat an hundred thousand Tunns
To cool my boiling Blood; let Winter lay me
In his frozen Lap, and weep Snow on me;
My Heat would melt his Hoard upon the Alps,
And make a second Flood for Italy:
My Fever would thaw Charity.

Shout without. Enter Ghinotto. Ghin. He Is here.


Ghin. runs at him, the King drops his Sword as they are struggling. The K.
draws a Dagger and stabs Ghin. King. What art thou?


Ghin. This shall inform thee.


King. Am I ta'n Prisoner then? O, Treason:
Fly to my Rescue, this I think will free me:
There, there, there.

Enter Colonel with Soldiers. Coll. How is it, Sir?


To Ghinotto. Ghin. Why, not well.


Dies. Coll. Oh dismal Spectacle! General, look up;
Oh how he has crossed our Purpose?
Behold your Colonel, Sir, with such Relief,
As will recover your lost Life and Time.

Rheu. Do not disturb me.


Coll. How came this, Sir?


Rheu. By the Kings hand: This Lady in a Bowl
Of Poison drank to him, and in its rageing Madness
He destroyed me: Ghinotto is the Cause of all:
I can no more; Heaven forgive it: Hold fast
My Hope, and to the Stars conduct me.

Dies. Coll. Now sets the Sun of Glory; the World
Is darkn'd by thy Lights decay, which never
Will rise to bless this Land again;
Cursed Ambition! what Slaughter have thou made?

King. My infected Blood flows swiftly forth, and
Reason now torments me more than Poison.

Coll. What Mercy can thy Wickedness expect?


King. Had I but time, I Would tell thee.


Dies. Coll. Oh Death! Oh thou luxurious Thief!
How has thy vicious Appetite been feasted?
Wretched Ghinotto! had thou been more just,
This Wrack had never happened.
Would I were in my Grave, I should not see
The Miseries this Land must feel for thee.
The sad Remains of this unhappy Crown,
Have much to do to fix their shaking Throne.

EPILOGUE,
Spoken by Mr. JEVON.
MY Brother Mountfort in the Scene-Room sits,
To hear the Censure of your sharp quick Wits;
Expecting a most dreadful damning Doom:
My Third Day's past, but his, poor Soul's to come.
Encourage him, Faith do, it is Charity;
Poets, you know, are poor, and so are we:
Let this though give no Offense to'th' Brother-Writers;
But if it does, there is few of 'em are Fighters:
Those that are so, he does exclude his Pen,
For like Town Bully, he would know his Men.
He beggs but one thing, be not so uncivil,
To scan his Play, for then 'twill be the Devil:
Not but he dares stand by it, but to prevent Evil.
For Nice Sr. Courtly's so well bred, you know,
He would not question it, and pray don't you.
The Plot I Am sure is good, or if it be not, fie,
Your Chair-Men now a days plot Tragedy.
Pardon but this, and I will pawn my Life,
His next shall match my Devil of a Wife.
We'll grace it with the Imbellishment of Song and Dance;
We'll have the Monsieur once again from France,
With His Hoope and Glasses, and when that is done,
He shall Divert you with his Riggadoone. Dances like him.
Pluck up de Petticoat above de Knee,
To show de fine show string and de dapper Thigh,
And not make one Blush, no begar not in one Lady:
With tawny Gullet, Face as ugly too,
As a fresh Awkard Covent Garden Beau.
Hey de brave French Man Mon foy he can fly
Home again he has into his own Country.
So fare him well, of him no more,
But to the Poet, be kind to* him, as I said before,
Else to stand by him, every Man has swore.
To Salisbury Court we'll hurry the next Week,
Where not for Whores but Coaches you may seek;
And more to plague you, there shall be no Play,
But the Emperor of the Moon for every Day.
FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by Sam. Manship at the Black Bull in Cornhill.
THE Lives of the most famous English Poets; or the Honors of Parnassus: In a
brief Essay of the Works and Writings of above Two hundred of them, from the
Time of King William the Conqueror, to the Reign of his present Majesty, King
James II.

The Gallant Hermophrodite; an Amorous Novel, translated from the French; of
the Sieur de Chavigny.


