Love's a Jest. A COMEDY, As it is Acted at the New Theater In Little-Lincolns
Inn-Fields. By his MAJESTY'S Servants. Written by Mr. Motteux.

-- Manent vestigia ruris. Horat. LONDON, Printed for Peter Buck at the
Inner-Temple-Gate; John Sturton at the Post Office; and Alexander Bosvil at the
Dyal in Fleet Street. MDCXCVI.

To the Right Honorable CHARLES Lord CLIFFORD OF LANESBOROUGH.
My Lord,
I Humbly* Dedicate my first Endeavors for the Stage to your Lordship, whose
powerful Patronage so generously supports it. The Ancients thus devoted the
first Fruits to their Tu^elary Divinities. It Is true that what I offer comes
from a foreign Plant, and is not ripened to that Delicacy that should recommend
it to your exquisite Taste: Yet I hope your Lordship will be kindly prejudiced
to a liking of the Fruit that was produced where you reign. While your Wit and
Judgment awed me no less than your Greatness, your indulging Smiles emboldened
me to the honor of this Address. It Is to that condescending Goodness that I
presume to Devote this Essay, as an Earnest of what I will strive to do, to
gain a better Title to your generous Encouragement. Nor could I easily have
secured a Patron to so general a Satire, had I not happily fixed on your
Lordship, whom all allow to be not only free from the Defects it exposes, but
en^o^'d with all their opposite Perfections. Thus your very name will stamp a
value on the Piece, and recommend it to the most Difficult, who will fear to
mislike what they will know has been graced and made authentic by your favorable
Reception.

Here, my Lord, the Custom of Dedications calls upon me, prompting me to put on
the Poet, to draw the Patron; and though most Performances of this kind are as
full of Flattery as the Plays are of Satire, I might attempt your Lordships
Character without being obnoxious to that Censure. But what Pen will dare
engage so Lofty and Difficult a Theme? Some of the Best have modestly declined
it, and been reduced to speak like the rest of the World, who strive to give
some Idea of your Lordship, by that of The Fine Gentleman; a Character you
maintain among the Brave, the Witty, and the Fair, by so undisputed a Title as
confirms you a living honor to your great Ancestors, even to the glorious Name
of Boil, that has so long been an honor to this Island and its Neighbor.
There are sublime Beauties that admit of no shadow, which, like the Sun, dazzle
even while admired by Reflection: Things so conspicuous are not to be
illustrated with Ink. Besides, I ought to consider that I speak of you to your
self; and though you still most unwillingly suffer your self to be moved out of
your admirable temper, it is known how dangerous it is to make you exert your
Patience beyond the Bounds you prescribe it. The Bravest are the most modest;
thus Praise too often offends those to whom it is most due, and they shun it no
less than they seek to deserve it. This Consideration, my Lord, checks my
presumptuous Zeal, and confines me to a silent Admiration of that Worth, which,
as it endears you to all mankind, makes me ambitious of being known,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble and devoted Servant, Peter Motteux.

PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Am almost ashamed to mention the extraordinary Success of a Play which I my
self must condemn; yet I am glad I was not mistaken in my opinion of the
generous Audience, which was so indulgent, that I Am willing to think I was the
more kindly used for being a Stranger. I will strive to deserve the Favor
better by attempting something more correct than this Play, which, tho it makes
no unpleasant Figure on the Stage, and is thought sufficiently entertaining, is
not altogether disposed as I could have wished. For, I would have the Plot,
Conversation and Humor begin and run through the whole Play together, a thing
but seldom practiced of late. I could not follow that method in this, because I
began it upon two Acts supposed to be written by a person now dead, and given
me by Mr. Verbruggen. Though there is no manner of Business in 'em, nor the
least prospect of any, I liked 'em so well as to continue 'em and fit a Plot to
'em, but as the Lovers were not brought together yet, and there are none but
genteel Characters in 'em, I was obliged to make my three Acts so very long,
that (when I brought 'em to be acted) without the other two, they were found to
exceed by above an Act the due length of a Play. This obliged ^e not only to
strike out entirely Mr. Verbruggen's two Acts, but to shorten mine, and with
some alterations make 'em Five. I also altered some Characters that I might use
those two Acts another time: (For, I think 'em too pretty to be lost.) But I
have not borrowed the least word or hint out of 'em; for, tho there is a
satirical Wit and a mercurial Spark in them, as well as in this Play, they are
somewhat different, besides those are general humors which almost every Writer
takes a privilege of bringing in where he pleases. I thought my self obliged
to say so much, because some People either maliciously or through a mistake
have reported that the two first Acts are not mine. I am willing to own a Debt,
when I borrow, contrary to the Example* of most Dramatick Writers. Plantus and
Terence borrowed from the Greek; I would borrow, from my own Countrymen, but
Moliere and most of 'em have been so gleaned, that there is scarce any thing
left. I have fared better among the Italians, for I must own my self indebted
to 'em for the hint of the two Scenes where Love is made in Jest, as also for
some Speeches and Thoughts here and there, and were their Author known I would
name him. When ever any thing in foreign Plays will seem to me fit to divert us
here, I will freely make use of it, and as freely acknowledge it. Mr. Shadwell
said very justly, that we do not borrow from Foreigners out of Poverty, but out
of Laziness. Nor will I value the base and notoriously false Insinuations of
envious impotent Poetasters, and, least of all, those of a pitiful conceited
noisie scribbling wou'd-be-quack, below naming; one whose wretched Riddles,
Songs, etc. were denied a place in my late Miscellanies, tho, like other things
of his, recommended by himself, as if written by a Lady. Such an invidious
Traducer is well coupled with an idle sharping Dialoguemonger, whose Zany he
is; like him, so base as to detract, in the most barbarous manner, from those
who never wronged him, and so cowardly as to deny it: But they might as well
charge those of ruining themselves by Marriage who have not yet committed that
Folly, as of ruining a Bookseller by Books, by which he owns he was a gainer:
Had I but room, I would stigmatize that Brace of Libellers; for, how despicable
soever such Scoundrels may be, they are to be feared as well as hated; for,
what is more to be hated than a professed Liar, or more to be feared than a
public Slanderer.

Let me leave this ungrateful Subject to acknowledge my obligations to Mr. John
Eccles, who not only set my three Dialogues to most charming Notes, but
humored the Words to Admiration; we need not fear Music should decline, while
we have so fine a Genius to support and raise it.

PROLOGUE Spoken by Mr. Bowen in a Riding-Dress.
I Have been to invite our Friends at Epsom hither,
But fear we must expect but* few this weather.
Here for a triple scarcity we pine,
Of Wits, of Beaux, and what is yet worse, of Coin.
Lord! what a Crowd I met upon the Road!
Tried Virgins, going to lay down their Load,
Squires, Bullies, Rakes, and Fops, in jolting Coaches stowed.
Sharpers like Captains; Lawyers Clerks, like Beaux,
And freckled Country-Wives, in new old fashioned Cloths.
New Married Fools, with hollow* Eye and Cheek,
Going to see their Uncle for a Week,
And battered Sinners that have sprung a Leak.
Kind Cuckolds, to see Spouse's Brat at Nurse,
And College Quacks, to purge the Body and the Purse.
Fat Priests, who Coach it while lean Curates drudge,
And their Parishioners on Foot must trudge.
Setters, and Brothers of the Oak and Dice,
And Masks new plaster'd, Cullies to entice.
Cits, who s^opt Payment, to take Country-houses;
Some, slyty riding with each others Spouses:
For, Sparks so scarce this time of Action grow,
Cits must even Cuckold one another now.
Even Prentices, on Hacknies themselves priding,
Now Whip and Spur to run out Cash are riding:
Then fairly runaway for fear of Chiding.
I fancy, none but those will stay in Town
Who, like us here, want Money to go down.
Let Us see! shall we have Charges at this Play?
Faith that is more than some had at their Third-day.
We must Prorogue the House, should this not take,
In Pity then pray spare it for our sake.
A young Play-writer, when we act his first,
Without Damnation here enough is Cursed.
Oh! he has then a most Poetic Face,
And looks* stay, let me see -- just like an Ass;
Nay, what you will scarce believe, a Poet prays.
Then the next minute, with a frightful mein*
Vds bloody Bones he cries, they spoil this Scene.
If you seem dull, like him, he is mighty sick,
Cut off a Line, you cut him to the quick.
At the least hiss you would swear his Soul were fled,
But a round Clap can raise him from the Dead:
He Is Cock-a-hoop, and scarce can talk to you,
E'gad he cries, I knew the Play would do.
But if another hiss his Ears but reaches,
Down sinks at once his heart into his Breeches.
Yet scorns our Writer threatening Foes to fear;
The generous Britons will a Stranger spare:
Thus low the Frenchman bows -- then learns of you to dare.
His Satire bites but like a Lovers kiss,
And none of you, he is sure, can take it a miss.
THE EPILOGUE.
Mr. Underhil. NOw for the Epilogue.


Mr. Bowen There Is none I think!


Mr. Underhil. Let down the Curtain then, and let us go drink.


Enter Mr. Mynns, one of the Gypsies. Gypsy. -- -- -- Hold!
I must here tell Fortunes e're you stir;
For I Am a Gypsy, tho no Conjurer.
First, Critics, here in pain you will always sit,
And swear, all'^ as Damn*d stuff, as tho by you 'iwere writ*
You Will strive not to be pleased, and, while we 're playing,
Asses will chat, or hiss instead of Braying.
Poor Masks, who lay out half Crown to get Cully,
You Will often sit alone damned Melancholy.
You Will Paint like Hell; but yet you will have some grace,
In this lewd Playhouse, you will never show your Face.
You, Rakish Sparks, shall jogg from House to House,
Look big, shift Boxes, and not pay a Souse.
When drunk, you will reel out with some tawdry Miss,
And, when at last sh' unmasks, to drink, and kiss,
Sh^'ll cool your Courage with her damned old Phiz.
Or, if you're kind, she will prove a grateful VVench,
She Will get the Guinea, but you will get the French.
Tho the price of some Flesh is out of Reason,
Whores will be cheap, but ticklish ware this Season.
Close Sparks, who in our Gall'ry lead lewd lives,
You Will pick up Masks, yet dread they will prove your Wives.
And, you, their wives, will vow you go to pray,
When you're at this or at another Play.
You Vpper-gall'ry Beaux, may hope to find
Masters wise as your selves, some Ladies kind,
And your Sons in the Coach, while you're behind.
You nice Gallants, (I dare not call you Beaux,
That Is threadbare, like your Cast-off-wenches Cloths)
You Will still be Beaux, and, while you're lashed in Plays,
Cry, Them the Clapping Mob; smile, and take snuff with grace.
Still to pursue the Fairest you will delight,
Tho you, like smoke, will but offend their sight.
To conquer hearts you will to the Park repair,
And, while your Prince takes Towns, you will take the Air.
Bright Ladies, Fortune must your wishes Crown,
You save, or damn us, as you smile or frown;
Save him that spared your Blushes here to day;
But Damn his next, if not a better Play!

Dramatis Personae.
Lord Lovewel, in Love with Francelia. Mr. Hodgson. Sir Thomas Gaymood. Mr.
Freeman. Sam Gaymood his younger Brother. Mr. Bowen. Railmore, my Lord's
Friend. Mr. Betterton. Airy, Friend to Railmore. Mr. Bowman. Sir Topewel
Clownish. Mr. Underhill. Squire Illbred his Nephew. Mr. Trefusis. Humphry
Doddipole his Man. Mr. Trout. Humdrum a Country Parson. Mr. Eldred. Major Buff.
Mr. Harris. Plot, Lord Lovewell's Man. Mr. Bright. Frankly, a young Gentleman
in Chambermaids Cloths, in Love with Kitty. Mr. Bailey.
WOMEN.
Lady Single. Mrs. Barry. Kitty her Sister. Miss Howard. Francelia, Sir Thomas
Gaymoods Eldest Daughter. Mrs. Bowtell. Christina her Sister. Mrs. Bracegirdle.
Doll Hoydon. Mrs. Perrin.
Servants, Gypsies, Clowns, and Attendants.

Scene Sir Thomas Gaymood's Seat in Hertfordshire.

Time of Action from Noon till Night.

Love's a Jest* A COMEDY.
ACT I.
Scene a Garden.
Enter Gaymood Singing: A Servant with him: Gay. SLaves to London, I Will deceive
you.

Sings. E'gad I Have as good a voice as most Composers! Prithee sing it me once
more, that I may have it right.


Servant Sings. A SONG.
I.
Slaves to London, I Will deceive you;
For the Country now I leave you.
Who can bear, and not b^mad
Win^ so dear, and yet so bad?
Such a noise, an Air so smoaky,
That to stun ye, This to choke ye,
Men so selfish false and rude,
Nymphs so young, and yet so lewd?
II.
If we play, we are sure of losing;
If we love, our Doom we are choosing.
At the Playhouse tedious sport,
Cant in City, Cringe at Court,
Dirt in streets, and dirty Bullies,
Jolting Coaches, Whores and Cullies,
Knaves and Coxcombs every where.
Who that is wise would tarry here?
III.
Quiet harmless Country Pleasure*
Shall at home engross my Leisure.
Farewell, London, I Will repair
To my native Country Air:
I leave all thy Plagues* behind me --
But at home my wife will find me?
O^yee Gods! It Is ten times worse!
London is a milder Curse.

Enter Railmore. Rail. Mad Sam Gaymood!


Gay. Covent Garden Railmore come to ease his Spleen in Hertfor^shire!


Ra. What, my thoughtless merry talking old acquaintance, come to eke out a
scanty Income with elemosinary Maintenance at an Elder Brothers!


Gay. Even so, by Mercury; and I think 'twas high-time to go after my Credit,
when my Credit was gone after my last Quarter. Faith I wisely tick'd for the
Coach down, resolved the Padders should get no more by Sam, than they would by
a cast P^et, when he steals into the Country after his Damnation in Town.


Rail. Sure thou might have borrowed of thy acquaintance?


Gay. Of any body sooner I fancy. Why, thou know my Conversation is amongst
the Wits, and they commonly have too little Money or too much Wit to lend a
Brother any thing. Toast me, if I durst so much as ask my man to do it, for
fear the Rogue who has formerly carried a Wit's Cloak should ask me Security
for his Wages.


Rail. Faith I Am come to be your neighbor much for the same Cause; I mean, to
recruit, and Dun Tenants, that I may be Dunn'd less my self; for I am not like
most of our fine Sparks, that are ashamed of Dunning, but not at all of being
Dunn'd.


Gay. Prithee, old Wormwood, when did you leave the Town?


Rail. Two days ago, and hearing this morning, my Lord Lovewel would be here to
day, I came to see him; but I found him so deep engaged with your eldest Neice,
that, after a moments converse, I even left him.


Gay. To come to me: ay, he courts her with my Brothers encouragement, but
she is so reserved, and he so observant that I dare* lay my* modesty to *thy
good* Nature (which is no very great Wager*) that you cared as little for their
Company as they for yours.


Rail. Or any body for thine, when there is any other to be got.


Gay. That Is like thee! mere Spleen and Envy, Jack, because my Tinsel
out-shines thy Lead. Why, there is your Idol* Tom Airy, who is come to pass the
Summer near us, and is now yonder with my Cousins; he is a pretty smart Fellow,
we own it; but, if you will be judged by our Country Sparks, he shines no more
when I am by than some slovenly Wit by your glittering Queens of the Stage.


Rail. Why, the little Wit he has is his own, Sam; but thine is as false as
their Jewels, and as borrowed as what they speak on the Stage.


Gay. Like thee again! It Is well thou know I never take any thing ill from
my Friend -- Oh here comes my Brother!


Enter Sir Thomas Gaymood. Sir Tho. Mr. Rail^^^^! I longed to have you at my
House: Come* let us go take another* Glass or two of Hock before Dinner!


Rail. No more till then, Sir Thomas.


Sir Tho. Why, my neighbor Sir Topewel Clown^sh and Squire Ilbred who will be
here after Dinner would have made you T^psy before they would have granted you in
Truce.


Gay. Ay, they are sonder here of knocking down a Friend, than some of our
Bea^-Compainers of knocking down an Enemy.


Rail. A very honorable way of sighting in time of War.


Gay. Ay, or in time of Peace either. First, they ply you by Break of Day with
a Bumper of Cherry-Brandy to heal you; next two Bumpers of Stingo to to warm
you; then as much Mead or Sider* to cool you: Stale-Beer and Sugar for
Breakfast; a Flood of bad Port for Dinner; an Ocean of worse Punch, for Supper;
and a dose of raw Brandy to settle you: Much smoking, and more drinking;
little Eating, and less talking; unless I Am there, e'gad, scarce any thing
comes out of their mouths but Smoke.


Sir Tho. But pray what News at London? I should want such a friend as you to
send down the News; for your News-mongers are such Liars!


Rail. Why, truly, in the land of the Wise, they say little; and write less:
News is as partially spread as Religions; so, I Am as careless about it as the
credulous Crowd, or you Country Gentlemen are inquisit^v^.


Sir Tho. Yet you may tell one how things go in the City? I hate it as a smoaky
Kitchen, but yet good things come out of it sometimes, tho it is bad living in
't.


Rail. Why, the the City stands where it did; and that is a wonder to the Godly!
But the Sub^rbs are like to overtake you in Hertfordshire: As for the Citizens
they follow their own way, I think.


Sir Tho. As how, Pray?


Rail. Why, they cheat, to build Almshouses; break, to get Estates; rail at
Courtiers, yet trust 'em, load Ships, for the Privateers; take Prentices, to
learn 'em nothing: Get Money by venturing to lose that of other Folks; take
Wives for other Folks, and have Children that are other Folks's. They wear
Swords, but n^^^r draw 'em: The Court-end of the Town Extravaganue is getting
into the City, and the City Trade^ to ^he Court-end of the Town: They play at
the Game of Stock jobbing at the old Exchange, and play away their Money, and
their health near the New; Pray for Wealth, but damn themselves to get it;
spend little, to leave much; turn Insurers when they have nothing to lose; and
Gentlemen when there is nothing to get; lower the price of Goods to make it
rise; have store of Bank-Bills, and the Banks, store of empty Chests.


Sir Tho. Pray tell us something of the Court? you have been a Courtier, and they
say, the best way to have a good malicious account of it, is to ask one that
has been turned out.


Rail. Why, there they are plagued with impertinent Suitors, but plague 'em
worse with disappointments. Lords sell-off, and Stewards Purchase; just as
Officers set up their Coaches, and you Country Gentlemen lay 'em down:
Preferments are plenty, but Money scarce: Acquaintances elbow one another out
without Conscience, smile without joy, embrace without Friendship, flatter
without Moderation, promise without Reflection, and break their Words without
Consequence. Beggars grow Courtiers, and Courtiers Beggars.


Gay. Why, that is no news man; begging was the Courtiers Trade from the
Beginning.


Sir Tho. But how do thy drink at London now; for there are modes for drinking
as well as for other things?


Gay. Oh I Will tell you that better than he; first, your Politicians drink
Coffee; Wits, Beaux and Women, warm Tea, and some of 'em. cold: We Rakes, drink
Red, and then Small-beer; Bawds, Snapdragons; Whores what they can get, but
Mead and Rhenish and Sugar to choose; Stewards the best Champain, and their
Masters the worst, Merchants smuggl'd Claret; Wenchers Chocolate, and sometimes
Dyetdrink.


Sir Tho. And what do Black-Coats drink?


Gay. Oh any thing, any thing.


Rail. I see our two Lovers moving this way, I would avoid 'em, and find out
Airy, and the other Ladies.


Sir Tho. My Cousin Single, with her Sister Kitty, and my Daughter Christina
are that way with him.


Gay. It Is a wonder my Lady Single would steal any time from her Books she
loves so much, to walk with any of our Sex, she loves so little.


Rail. Why, truly there is so little good Society, that Books are often the best
Company. It seems the falsness of our Sex has frighted her into an aversion to
Marriage as much as the Infidelity of Women has deterred me from that fatal
Noose; but it grieves me to hear, she impairs her health and good humor by too
much reading. I Will strive to persuade her at least not to hate us all, that she
may converse with some, and so help me to rail at the rest of mankind.


Exeunt. Enter Lord Lovewel, and Francelia. L. Lo. Ah Francelia! should your
modesty make you doubt your Power of reconciling Libertines to Truth, sure
you have too much Charity, not to believe, but some of these may become Converts
to constant Love at last.


Fran. At last indeed, and very few I doubt. Some who roved in their youth may
do at and become constant, but it is as most sinners repent, when they grow old,
my Lord.


L. Lo. Oh! believe me one of those Few that could repent betimes; I sought in
others what I Have found in you, and have only known their Falseness to prize
your worth the more.


Fran. I must confess I wish I could believe you, tho yet I think you mean not
to deceive me: But in Love's disease* as in others, sometimes Libertines seem
converted, and make vows, which they then intend to ^^ep* but commonly forfeit
as soon as they are eased.


^. Lo. Even Gratitude alone can secure you a heart, but you have Charms to ^ix
a Rover, tho he should want that Virtue.


Fran. Alas! my Lord, Love is a sickle Passion, but Beauty is a transitory
Charm, and Gratitude a weak chargeable Virtue, which Men shake off, or
wilfulfully forget. No, since we must think of throwing away many Favors
before we can expect to place one well, I dare not run the venture.


L. Lo. I swear by all --


Fran. Oh do not swear, my Lord; a Lover's Oaths like Confessions on the Rack,
are still recanted, when the Pang is over. If you will accept my friendship, it is
your own* But name not Love, I tremble at the word.


L. Lo. Why, Friendship is Love refined! Ah! Madam --


Fran. Come, we'll walk on, my Lord: I dare not grant you more; and if you
prize that Friendship, ask no more: Oh name not Love, I tremble at the word.


Exeunt. Enter Gaymood, Railmore, Airy, Lady Single, Christina, and Kitty. Gay.
Yonder they are walking!


Rail And will be these four hours if you will let 'em: He, only to say, I Will
love eternally; and she, I Will never love -- Both true alike.


La Sin. I wonder Lovers are never ti^'d of each others company.


Gay. No wonder at all, Cuz; they always speak of themselves.


Chr. As you love to read all day, many love to hunt all day, my Lady Single;
now Love they say is a kind of Chase.


La. S. A Wild*goose Chase.


Chapter And the Woman the Goose, when it is caught the Game is ended. Ay, it is well
to keep you men at a distance; Forms in Love, like Mysteries in Religion, make
Reason truckle, but advance your Zeal.


Rail. Asses, they say, run the faster under a Load. For my part, I am like the
Fireship that scorns to burn, till sure to kindle Flames in something worth
burning for.


Airy. So that like most of ours you're in no great danger of burning; for the
Enemy is not more afraid of *em than Women are afraid of Wits, or ^ond of Beaux.


Chapter Beaux! Why, we hear nothing so much railed at now as those tame Animals!
Pray, what do you properly call a Beau, Mr. Airy?


Airy. A Beau is --


Gay. Stay, let me tell that -- Why, a Beau is a kind of a two-legg'd thing,
that talks, and walks, and dances, and sings, and dresses, and looks like
something between a Man and a Woman, that seldom keeps a secret better than the
latter, and strives to outdo 'em in taking care of the outside, conscious
there is little within. It rises to go to Bed, is two hours at the Toilette a
dressing, dispatching of Duns, and spoiling gilt paper to dispatch it as
Billets Doux, sometimes to its sweet self, and all day making Love to its dear
Carcass and sweeter Cloths.


Chapter Ay, but there are other sorts of Beaux?


Gay. Oh, yes; now Beau is every thing: there is your Town, Court, Camp, Sea,
Church, and Country Beau. Sometimes Beau is Mr. Smerk with his diminutive Band
and powdered Bob: sometimes Dash a Lawyers Clerk, that pomatum's his Face,
washes it with Milk and Water, and is two hours turning up his hair at night,
that it may sit in Curls the next morning. There are dirty Beaux, and Beau
Footmen too, and old Beaux in abundance! Nay, now a Man's a Beau if he has but
a clean Handkercheif.


Chapter Methinks it is time the Name were abdicated.


Rail. The Name may be laid down, but the thing will continue, as long as
Women's Inclinations continue the same.


Chapter Nay, if you begin with us, I must put in for the honor of our Sex.


Rail. Which is just like the honor of ours, and that is so little I Am ashamed
to tell you.


Chapter Come, those Wits ought to be fooled who make their Addresses to Fools; how
fine it is to see one of you follow some foolish Celia like her Shadow, and go
even to St. James's or St. Ann's, for a single look cross a Pew; pelt her with
Billets Doux commonly stolen, Nonsensical, or Romantic, write dull Madrigals on
her, and get 'em sung to duller Tunes at your weekly interviews in
Yorkbuildings; and lose his rest for her, while Miss Celia all the while either
sleeps or laughs at him.


Rail. Ten to one but he has his turn to laugh at her: Look you, Madam, one
half of the world first banters the other, then one half of the world lies with
the other, and at last one half of the world laughs at the other.


La. S. Therefore I would not have our Sex trust the other.


Chapter Not so fast Cousin; I believe of you and Mr. Railmore as I do of both
Sexes.


La. S. What Is that, dear Christina?


Chapter Why, the one is in the wrong, and the other is not in the right.


Airy. Ay, Madam, were the world such as they would both be thought, a married
pair would be as great a rarity as --


Rail. A self-denying Priest, or a couple that never repented after the Honey
Moon.


Airy. Have a care, Sir; all people marry at one time or other.


Rail. Ay, Sir, and repent it at one time or other; look you, when two marry,
both part with their Freedom to each other, yet neither of them gets it.


La. There I agree with you: For my part a Husband's Inconstancy and
Ingratitude are no less my aversion than a Wife's lazy subject way of living. I
could not waste half my time at my Glass, and the rest on Children, Nurses, and
mean household affairs; and on a Drunkard, a Gamester, a Debauchee, a jealous
Coxcomb, or an illnatur'd Blockhead, who would look on me only as a means to
mend his Fortune, or an Obstacle to his Pleasures.


Rail. Nor would I become a property for the sake of a little Dross or fancied
Charms, which like a Will in the Wisp vanish when they have deluded us into a Pit
whence there is no getting out; then the seeming Angel proves a real Devil,
neglects her self for her Fool, and adorns her self only for others.


Chapter Oh, say no more; were not you Men to be caught by mere outside as well as
we, we should seldom take such care about it, and were you not so blind when
caught, we would not be so careless before you afterward. But let us talk of
something else. What if we should sit down yonder.


La. With all my heart.


Exeunt all but Airy and Kitty. Airy aside This is young Frankly's little
Mistress: I Have a mind to try how she bears my Friend's absence -- Stay dear
pretty creature, I must call you to an accoun^^


Kit. O Lord, Sir! for what?


Airy. Why? for making me love you whether I will or no; such an Air, such
Eyes, such blooming Beauty, will make more Men run mad than Poetry, Plotting,
or Phanaticism.


Kit. Nay, as I hope to be saved, Sir, I cannot help it. Would you have my Eyes
put out?


Airy. Thy Eyes! why, Child, I had rather the Sun were put out. Oh I would
still gaze on those dear damned bewitching Eyes, and hear that sweet pretty
prattling Tongue.


Kit. O Law! the Man's mad indeed! -- Yet methinks I like this kind of Madness
mightily.

Aside.
Airy. Why, don't I tell you you'^l make the whole Nation a Bedlam, if 't^s not
one already -- Nay, you must not go yet.


Kit. Why, Sir, you own you are mad, and I should be mad too should I stay with
you -- Let me go.


Airy. Oh mine is a Madness that will hurt none but my self, dear Creature;
come, you must stay, you can never have an opportunity to appear fully
beautiful but alone with a Man that loves you.


Kit If you love me, why don't you let me go? Yet methinks I could stay to grow
handsomer.

Aside.
Airy. I will not let you go, because I love you. Why, you are grown infinitely
more charming in an instant.


Kit. Ah! why must we dissemble. Methinks it is a pretty innocent thing to be
talked so to!

Aside. Well* Sir, tho they tell me I Am too young to be courted, I Am old enough
to know I Am flattered.


Airy. Were you before your Glass you would find it truth: but a Kiss or two will
make you incomparable. Dear lovely Sweetness.


Kit. Oh; no, no, no, no; no kissing at all.


She sings; he presses till he kisses her. Enter Lady Single. La. Bless me!
he is kissing the Girl, and she refuses it as faintly as if she desired he
should do more! Aside Kitty, is this what I taught you? 'S death, Sir, you
ought to pay dear for this presumption.


Kit. Why, Sister, the Gentleman is a very civil Gentleman; he only tried to
make me handsomer.


La. I think he has done it indeed; he has put a color in your face. O my word
you shall go into a Nunnery speedily.


Airy. Ay, Madam, so she should; for she will be the Torment of both Sexes if she
is not locked up.


Lady. Why, Mr. Airy, I did not think you would have taken so much pains with a
Girl, while so many Women would have thanked you for the Office?


Airy. Truly, Madam, Girls have often more Wit than Women, they seldom refuse
what they like. And then while you have Mr. Railmore with you, who is a Master
in that Profession, why should you grudge your Sister those innocent
Improvements which you deny your self.


La. He a Master in that Art! he is too surly to have any Scholars.


Airy. And your Ladyship too scornful to be taught. But I suppose it is because
your Charms admit of no increase, Madam.


La. Oh, your Servant, Sir; no more of this, I pray; I would have my Sister,
like me, shun such dangerous Instructions.

Love is a Foe by Flight alone subdued;
So Daphne gained the Laurel when pursued:
The God was fired, and owned and urged his Flame;
The Virgin blushed, and fled, and overcame.

ACT II.
SCENE A Dining Room.
Sir Thomas Gaymood, Lord Lovewel, Railmore, Airy, Young Gaymood, Francelia,
Christina, and Kitty are discovered ready to rise from Table. Frankly in Maids
Cloths and other Servants waiting. Sir Tho. HEre, take away! Nay, Girls, what
need you rise? I Have a Dance and some Music for the Company.


A Dance. While the Dance is performing enter Sir Topewel Clownish, and Squire
Illbred, who make Antic Gestures, as if they would be dancing too. They all
rise. Sir Top. How is it, old Boy? how fares it with thy body? hale and lusty,
full of juice, full of gravy, hah?


Claps Sir Tho. hard on the Shoulder, and shakes him by the hand. Sir Tho. Sir
Topewel Clownish! Adad stand off* or I Will beat thee* a Peasecods on thy
Shoulder of Mutton Fist; why did not you come to dine with me, old Suckface? I
have the rarest Hock now! Many a German Prince gets drunk with worse; and as
for Red stuff, here is* that would make a divided County vote one and all, by
old England! here is to you, old Sot!


Drinks to Sir Topewel. Sir Top. Thank you Brother: Look you, Mum^s the word.
I Will tell you what it is in the twinkling of a Bumper. Here, John, John, do you
fill me yonder Beer Glass, only for a Taste, John.


Servant fills him Wine. Sir The. Squire Illbred, I Am glad to see you; you're
welcome!


Illb. The like to you, Sir Thomas! Odsme, I shall never be able to break my
mind to my Mistress: my Heart beats like any Mill-clapper; it is e'n sinking
into my Breeches, e' says.

Aside.
Sir Top. Cousin, don't hang on Arse: Odsooks, show your head, Man, and go buss
the Women, if thou ^ou'dst.

Illbred going, ^e st^ps him. But hold, here is to thee: Do nothing rashly, as
the saying is, soft and fair, as Lawyers go to heaven, drink first.


Drinks. Illb. Mistress Frances, your Health: Sir Thomas here is toward you.
Tastes, and spurts it out. Humh! it is so, so; I think it is almost as good as
our Stale Beer.


Ga. Sir Topewel, thou right worshipful Bumkin, thou glorious Phiz painter,
thou walking Cellar of March Beer, and Terror of Sippers and Flinchers, egad
I Am as glad to see thee sober in this House, as thou art to see a stranger
drunk at thine.


Sir Top. Thank you, Squire Prate-apace.


Ga. Egad, old Tough-hide, I Am come to have to other bout with you.


Sir Tho. Why, I Have only made some, stay, let me see, ay, ay -- No, ay, some
ninety nine as drunk as Cuckolds (I mean as Londoners) since I knocked thee
down, and you are come just time enough to make up the hundred.


Ga. I Have a couple of Seconds here, you old Toast, they will stand by me.


Sir Top. Ay, and full by thee too, before I Have done with 'em. I don't know
'em: I never know a man till I Have drunk with him -- Odsooks I had even forgot
bussing. Cozen, follow; methinks I Am a dancing the New Vagaries.


Sings part of that Tune, as he goes to kiss the women, who seem unwilling.
Fran: Fie, Sir Topewel, since you Men kiss one another like Children, to kiss
Women grows out of fashion at London.


Sir Top. Then it is a sign it is in fashion in the Country. Odsooks, I had
rather kiss a Hog's Snout than slabber a bristly fellow who makes a Hen's
Breech at you with his Chaps. I Will warrant, that is outlandish.


Rail. The Booby kisses like a Nurse; here is a Smack as loud as that of a
Carriers Whip

Aside.
Chapter A Dewse take you and your Dutch Buss! Were you to kiss thus at London,
'twould cost some Women half their outward face.


Kit. Foh! you stink of Wine.

To Sir Topewel after he has forced a Kiss from her.
Sir Top. Odsooks, you young Sucker, you proud Titbit of Flesh for your
Children, does Wine stink? give me my Buss again. Bir, bir, bir.


She runs from him, and he strives to catch her. Kit. I Will owe it you, I Will owe
it you.


Illb. I Have a coming stomach to Kisses, e' faith! By y'r leave, Miss.


Kit. By yours, Master!


He offers to kiss her; she hits him a slap of the face. Illb. Thank you; but
what is that for, tho?


Kit. Why, that is for you: My Lips are bespoke, but my hand's at your service;
do you want another?


Illb. No, you young Light-skirts, I have too much by one -- Go, munch Oatmeal!
What Is the Girl afraid of? a Horse Buss? Why, the Parson's Daughters, nay the
Justice's Wife, let me smack 'em again and again, and welcome; and there is our
Susa^ says, I Have a breath like a Cow's it is so sweet -- Well, if the Mistress
will not the Maid shall* e'faith.


Goes to kiss Frankly. Airy. He Is in the right on it; when we cannot get into the
Town we must even take up in the Suburbs.


Sir The. Now you shall hear a Song set by my Daughter's Music-master.


Scotch SONG.
FRom Aberdeen to Edenbrough
I trudged it with my Bearn,
And thence to London Town did go,
News of my Love to learn.
II.
And now the bonny Lad is come
To Royal Willy here,
So I'se even gang contented home*
Sin I have got my dear, etc.
Chapter Pray, how does your Lordship like the composing?


L. Lov. I like it extremely, Madam.


Illb. Oh! is that a Lord!


Staring on Ld. Lovewel. Sir Top. Like it! Why, there is not a word of drinking
in it. Odsooks one merry Drinking Catch is worth a hundred on it; as, Oh the
little House that lies under the Hill! Thrilo, lilo, lilo, lilo, liloh!


Sings. Sir Tho. Well, here is something will fit you to a Hair.


Enter Mr. Redding in a Smith's Habit, a Bottle in his hand. He sings;
seemingly drunk. SONG.
Man. Should I not lead a happy Life*
Were but my Bottle like my Wife!
My Bottle empties when I swill,
But my Wife swells up when we bill.
Would (when I drink) my Bottle fill,
And (when I kiss) my Wife not swell,
All would be well:
I would so bill,
So fill, so swill,
That daily gaily I would spend my Life,
Sucking, filling,
Hugging, billing,
My merry Bottle and my Wife.

Drinks; then throws away his Bottle, and takes up a Quart Pot. Enter Mr. Lee
dressed as the Smith's Wife and big-bellied. DIALOGUE.
Wom. STill at your Pot,
You drunken Sot?
You till I come
Will never go home;
And when you're there,
You curse and swear;
Then prove a Bed
A lump of Lead.

Man. D' you think, you Scold,
I Will be controlled?
No more be said:
Or at your Head,
As I Am a Sot,
Souse flys the Pot!
But first, I think,
I Will save the Drink.

Drinks. Wom. Hold, leave a sup,
Don't drink all up.

Man. Here, taste and know
Why I Will not go.

He gives her the Drink, she drinks. Wom. How sweet! oh how it chears my heart!
O dear! methinks I suck my Mother.
Here Is t'you, my Love! have to other Quart,
And then --

Man. -- What then?


Wom. -- And then another.

Both. Come, now we are Friends, and all is right.

Man. Drink, drink all day:

Wom. -- -- -- But love at night.

Both. Drink, drink all day, but love at night.

Both going off lovingly.

Sir Top. Now this is something like a Tanzy: here Friends, there is a couple of
Shillings for you to drink.


Throws down 2 shillings. Chapter Fie. Sir Topewel, you affront 'em, and us too;
they never sing under a couple of Guineas.


Sir Top. Well then, if they will come to Clownish-hall they shall be drunk for a
month together -- Here, John, do thou take up the Shillings, and then fill me
to other Brimmer, you old Cuckold!


Airy. Why, this is treating indeed; let the Ladies but be kind, and there will
be Chere Entiere.


Ga. Pshau, my little H^tspur, the whole kind will be kind, if we are not too
kind. They are like Fruits, Man; if they are dear even thank your impatience,
you might have enough else for little or nothing in due season; there is plenty
and they will not keep; when the Pears are ripe, do He shakes one of the Women but
shake the Trees, and down they tumble -- What say thou of this old grinding
Mill, hah!


Rail. Why, I only say, that is old; thou steal'st Trash out of Books, as
impudently as Boys do out of Orchards; nay, the worst on it is, that like other
Thieves thou spoil'st what thou steal'st, lest thy Roguery be found out.


Ga. Pshau, pshau, a mere Poetic License, by Mercury. The God of Wit is the God
of Thieves too. Why, Man, every body steals: the Country Levite steals Sermons,
nay the very Invectives he uses against stealing: the younger Brother with his
pious Dad's abetting steals a Fortune, the Hypocrite steals a good Name, the
common Soldier steals Hens and Geese, the Commander Towns and Countries, and
both, like the cozening Citt, call that Getting. The busy ignorant steals a
Preferment, and the sly Cuckold-maker steals your Wife.


Rail. And thou thy Speeches.


Ga. I deny the major: I pay for the Books out of which I take 'em, ha, ha, ha!


L. Lov. We'll take a Walk in your Gardens, Sir Thomas.


Ga. What are they all a going? A Pox of these peticoated Implements; they
spoil Company worse than Business, Politics, or Religion. Well, I Will be with
you; but first let us smoke a Pipe.


Exeunt Ld. Lov. Francelia, Christ. Kitty, Rail, and Airy. Manent Sir Tho. Sir
Top. Illbred, Gaymo^d, Frankly, and another Servant. Sir Tho. These seem clever
fellows, Squire? hark you, can they drink?


Ga. Just as you talk, Knight.


Sir Top. How Is that?


Ga. Why, so, so; you only talk to promote drinking, and they only drink to
promote talking -- Where are they now? They could not say that is stolen! Aside,
Now this is lost here; mere Pearl before Swine, by Mercury.


Sir Top. What say thou, hah?


Claps him of the back. Ga. Nothing, nothing, I was only thinking of some of you
Country Squires.


Sir Top. Odsooks one Country Fellow of Threescore is worth threescore of your
spindle-shankt washy finical Town-whipsters, with scarce a Penny in their
Pockets, or any Pith in their Backs, but the Devil and all of Maggots in their
Noddles, and of C^^^ent-garden Gout in their Bones.


Ga. Can they --


Sir Tho. Brother, not ^^^ord against the Country. You Town Changelings ar^ ^^^
froward Children; you're always biting your Nurse: Can you live without the
Country?


Sir Top. Well said, e' faith. Now look you, Neighbor, here is no body too much:
You see my Cousin Illbred* Is he not a elever sort of a body, for an elder
Brother? Here Is a Man now! I Will warrant him as sound Wind and Limb as any he of
his inches: Odsheart, he will wear well and live long!


Claps Illbred on the back Ga. Not live, but last long* e' gad, one would swear
he were commending his Horse to pack it off to some Fool at a Fair.

Aside.
Sir Top. He hunts, hawks, or whistles, about his ground three hours in a
morning, feeds like a Plough-jobber, and drinks like a Tinker: As silly as he
stands he made 14 Lawyers drunk last Assizes.


Ga. You Have a rare Pupil of him.


Sir Top. In short you have him as true bred a Countryman as my Worship, and
wanting nothing but a Wife, by the Pleasure of Drinking: nor shall he want that
long, if my Neighbor here is willing to be rid of his eldest Daughter; for
that is what we come about.


Sir Tho. My Daughter Francelia! There are more words than one to a Bargain,
Sir Topewel, my Friend.


Sir Top. An you be not willing to get rid of that Cattle, you're the only Man
of your mind in seven Counties. Why, they are mere Rubbish, Father Dry-boots,
we must pay those that take 'em away.


Sir Tho. Ay, marry, but every Man shall not be the Scavenger. What, I must bestow
my Jewel upon a Fool, an Idiot, a Booby, a senseless Clown?


Illb. Odsbobs, I shall have her, I Will lay five pounds to a Nut Cracker he
means me, for every body calls me so.

Aside. Thank you, Father-in-law that is to be.


Sir Tho. Adad, Sir, you had best keep your Thanks till you have her.


Sir Top. Hark you, Neighbor, Mum's the word. I guess where the Shoo wrings;
you grudge to untye your Pursestrings to him, you old Micher; now we want none
of your Muck.


Sir Tho. Humh! I may save a Portion! Aside Adad that is more than I thought.


Sir Top. Did I not tell you, you old Hunks, that my Cousin wants nothing but a
Wife? See how he sniggers at it! how arch the young Whoreson looks! Whee, Man!
he is not the Fool you may take him for.


Illb. No more I an't: I Am none of your raking, scraping, sneaking Fools,
although I may not say so much where I an't acquainted.


Sir Top. Can he be a Fool with three thousand a year, besides eighteen hundred
more which shall be his -- When they can no longer be mine.


Ga. He Is a Wit, he is a Wit; I Will bring 18 Dedicating Poets will draw their
Pens to vouch it to the last drop of their Ink, by Mercury: But if that will not
do, how d' you think I Will make him a Wit?


Sir Top. What you will beggar him, or you will --


Ga. No, stay, I Will tell you my self. First, he shall read half a score Plays,
that is, if he can read: then I Will teach him to make Rebus's, Quibbles,
Semiquibbles, Quarterquibbles, Conundrums, Carwitchets, Longinquopetits,
Clinches, Puns --


Sir Top. Heigh day! what is all this?


Ga. Do you know what is Cross Purposes, or Questions and Commands.


Sir Top. Yes.


Ga. Why Puns, Carwitchets, and coetera, are not at all like that -- But they
are all the wit in fashion, and as easily learned as Fornication; your very
Country Parsons are as capable of it as any Men.


Illb. I Am sure that must needs be easy then: Susan, Sister's Chambermaid,
might teach one that in a quarter of an hour.


Ga. Then he shall go to every new Play* and when he hears a good sharp Kiss,
he shall lug out of his Pocket the Terror of Scriblers, that is, a Musical
Instrument called a Catcall.


Pulls out a Catcall. Sir Top. A Catcall!


Ga. Ay, a Catcall egad; with a touch of this* I Will blow you a poor Devil off
the Stage in a trice, after he has been a whole year drudging on a Farce.


He makes a Noise with the Catcall. Illb. Ods my heart, I fancy I could do this
my self.


Takes the Catcall and blows. Ga. Look you, he is half a Critic already.


Sir Top. Ay, ay, all in good time: but to the point. What say you Sir Thomas?


Sir Tho. I must confess you bid fair, but I have given my Lord Lovewell leave
to court her; and then, who knows whether she may fancy the Squire?


Sir Top. I Am sure she will soon like him, he is so good natured a Lad* he has a
Lord's Estate, and prithee what is a Title? why, you can no more know some young
Lords now from Citizens Heirs, than most of us from Graziers; then they are
somewhat apt to outrun the Constable they say.


Sir Tho. But my Lord's none of those, and loves her well.


Sir Top. Ay, now perhaps: but hark you me, when did you hear of a Lord that
loved his Wife six weeks together? Here, John; where is John? Come Sweetheart
To Frankly fill me a Streaker of Wine.


Sir Tho. Well, you have my leave, Mr. Illbred* and I Will do what I can to
prevail with my Daughter. I fancy you had best send her a Letter, and come an
hour or two after.


Sir Top. So he shall; we are a going to Mother H^mp's, he shall write it there,
and send it anon --. Here, Huzzy, fill as you love me; fill as 'twere for thy
self, and no body by: Odsooks, fill it full! What Is the Brim made for else?

Nods to Sir Thomas, and drinks. Well, Sir Thomas, God be with you.


Shakes him hard, and claps him on the back. Illb* God by t'you, Sir Thomas! My
Love to your Daughter! I long mightily to he in with her. Thank you for your
good Company.


Sir Tho I Will see you out, and then I Will go look for her?


Exeunt Sir Tho. Sir Top. Squire Illbred, and Frankly. Ga. And I for Railmore,
to tell him what hopeful Bargain's a* driving to put my Lord's N^^^ out of
jo^*nt* then heigh for a juicy Country Lass! I Am for easy work ^ga^; and I
^ancy she that waited now might do; she is somewhat raw that is the truth on it:
but we are in the Country, where a kind Wench is as scarce as a ^ound one in
Coventgarden: she may mend there like others ^or^^^ly of no higher rank.

Some, not ^ar off, as ill became their Cl^^ths,

Who now set up for Settlement and B^a^x.


Exit. ACT III.
SCENE A Room.
Enter Gaymood on one side, Frankly on the other. Ga. OH! here is the Game! what
a buxom Bona Roba she will make! Well, I may safely venture I hope; yet I have
heard of a Town Spark who made a Token of his Kindness go round a whole Country
Parish. My young Master peppered the Dairy-maid, the Dairymaid peppered the
Groom, the Groom peppered the Chambermaid, the Chambermaid peppered his
Worship, his Worship peppered my Lady, my Lady peppered the Parson, and the
Parson's Wife peppered my young Master again! And what a circulation of blood
was there! aside. To Frankly. Hark you, Child, come hither; come, don't be
bashful, that grows out of fashion now as much as honesty. She blushes; that is
a wonder! I thought nothing but Spanish Wool could make Women red now a days!
what is thy Name, my Dear?


Frank. Frances Pinngown, Sir.


Ga. How long have thou lived here, Child?


Frank. But two days, Sir: I came upon liking, and am to go to morrow. I found
they were turning me away, so I was resolved I would not stay.


Ga. Gad those that don't like thee must be more difficult than I.


Frank. There Is a deal of Linen to be washed, and I an't si^ for that work.


Ga. Hark you, come and live with me, do; I Have work you are sit for; then there
will be but little washing, for I wear a ^hirt a fortnight.


Frank. Maids must not live with single Gentlemen, Sir.


Ga. Pshau, pshau, that is a mistake, Child. Come, if thou can but make a Bed
I Will teach thee to unmake it: A days thou shall be my Maid, but my Mistress a
nights, according to the laudable Custom of City VVidowers and Batchelors.


Frank. Oh! sye, Sir!


Ga. Come and live with me, I say, thou wilt live like a little Queen.


Frank. No indeed, Sir, I dare not; I have learnt to know better things: then
who'd be so foolish do you think, as to hearken to one whom his elder Brother
talks of marrying out of hand?


Ga. Why, Child, he may talk on it, but I mind him as little as most Daughters
do their Mothers: but suppose I should marry 'twill be the better for thee; for
I Will no sooner have fingered my VVise's Portion, but I furnish thee stately
Lodgings in some creditable House, at least a Churchwarden's or a Head
Constable's; keep thee a Footman and a gilt Chariot, and make thee outshine a
Lord's public Mistress, or a Bankers private Friend.


Frank. Let me go Sir -- You must not -- let me alone* I cannot do as you would have
me -- Pish! You shall never make a Harlot of me. Oh fie, Sir! some body sees
you.


Ga. What need you care? you are not to stay.


Frank. Not with you if I would prosper.


Runs off. Ga. Fool! what way have Chambermaids to prosper but that?


Exit after her. Enter Sir Thomas Gaymood and Francelia* Sir Tho. Come* Girls,
now I have thee aside, let me ask thee a question; what think thou of a
Husband, hah?


Fran. As most Women do, Sir.


Fran Which is as good as to say thou always think of it, hah?


Fran. I mean, Sir, I think it is dangerous venturing on one


Sir Tho. Ay, and more dangerous being without one. Why* it is as bad as having
arable Land lie ^allow -- In short I have agreed to marry thee speedily.


Fran. Sir, there needs no haste; I Am not weary of my condition.


Sir Tho. But thy Father's weary of seeing thee so long courted tho; besides I
fancy a Husband is a kind of a pretty play thing for a Child of thy size, heh!


Fran. My Lord has spoke to him I find.

Aside. You are resolved, Sir, to put me to the Blush.


Sir Tho. So, she smiles, I think. Adad, these women can as little hide their
Joy before Marriage, as we our Sorrow afterward -- Well, silence gives
consent. It must and shall be so.


Fran. I must like what you like, Sir; and would even sacrifice my inclinations
to your pleasure.


Sir Tho. You Are my good Girl! Well, I have settled matters to my mind, and
thou shall be a Bride to morrow.


Fran. It Is very sudden, Sir, but you're absolute.


Sir Tho. Look you, you will have a Letter from him just now; and he will come and
pay you a Visit an hour after. It Is Squire Illbred: Oh he will make a rare
Husband!


Fran. Illbred! my mistake has undone me.

Aside.
Sir Th. Prithee what makes thee look so odly of a sudden?


Fran. I am thinking, Sir, that Marriage brings many cares.


Sir Tho. Prithee, what cares can Wives have, while their Husbands live, unless
it be how to cuckold them? C^^e leave this dissembling.


Fran. But indeed, Sir, I do not dissemble.


Sir Tho. Humh! Now I understand you: You don't mislike Marriage, Mistress, but
the Man you should marry. He mimicks her. I must like what you like, Sir; and
would even sacrifice my inclinations to your pleasure! hah! is it come to that?


Fran. I must confess, I fear I should live unhappy with such a Man: I Am afraid
he is a Fool.


Sir Tho. What then? will he make ever the worse Husband?


Fran. A mere Clown!


Sir Tho. Prithee, who but Clowns love their Wives now a days? -- Look you,
don't provoke me: you know my hu^our that is enough: as for my Lord, as he came,
so let him go; he wants Money, now the Squire wants none. Come along, come
along.


Enter Humphry Doddipole. Hum. What pity it is I wa'n't bred a Sc^olard! I
fancys I Would have made as good a Man as our Parson* I have not forgot one word of my
Message: I Will say it now as if Meester's Sweetheart was by* He moves his Hat,
and bows awkardly. Forsooth* Squire Illbred remembers his kind Love to you, and
has sent you a Letter.


He starts, seeing Dol. Hoydon. Enter Doll. Hoydon. Hum. Od^nig^* here is my
Jade Doll that I loved so once, till she took out John the Thresher to dance!
I Would as leive have met a mad Cow in a narrow Lane.


Dol. What d' you want hah?


Hum. I don't want you, goody Trollop, I want to come at you^ betters.


Dol Marry, come up, Looby! I Will know why you come creeping like a Dog under a
door for all your haste? You come at my betters? I think you're before your
betters now.


Hum. Come, help me to thy Dame's Speech an' thee w^^d*st; then go thy ways to
John the Thresher, like a so^^y hollow hearted dirty Slut as thee art.


Dol. I care n't an he were hanged, and you too.


Enter Christina. Chapter What does this fellow want?


Hum. An't please you, forsooth; an't please you, my Meester -- Aside. Oh the
sight of this Jade has daunted me so, I don't know what I say or do; I Have quite
and clean forgot my Errand -- I have a Letter forsooth Searches for it Odsnigs,
either I forgot my self, or Meester forgot his self -- I Am come away without it
-- No, stay, I took it of the Parson. I Will look again. Marry* I lost it -- No,
marry, but I have not -- Ay, marry, I have -- No marry but I have not -- Here it is;
Gives it her. Meester gave me strict charge to give it Sir Thomas's handsomest
Daughter, forsooth.


Chapter aside. We seldom think others handsomer than our selves -- Let see -- It Is
for my Sister; but dear Curiosity, Woman's favorite Vice, cannot be withstood
-- I Will open it -- heigh day! what stuffs this? o'th my word the Parson's
unlawful Issue tho the Booby Squire fathers it.


Hum. An you will send an answer by me, forsooth* I Will deliver it safe to Meester
(I can deliver a Message passing well, you see) Else he bade me tell you, he will
come for*t anon, he is somewhat busy at present.


Chapter Where is he?


Hum. Why, if you must know, ^orsooth, I left him hard at it, smoking hi^ Pipe
yonder at Mother Humps.


Chapter Nay* then he is busy indeed; stay, I Will bring you an answer presently.


Exit Christina. Hum. Well, and what business had you to stand and state in a
body's face, and put a body out? I ^e're was half so shamed in my born days,
not I.


Dol. What did you cast a Sheep's Eye at me for?


Hum. Because I was a Fool I think. OF my Conscience you're nothing in the
varsal world but mischief: But if e're I set Eyes on thee again while I have
breath to draw, may the Crows come and peck 'em out!


Doll. And so say I: Goodb'y to ye.


Going, casts a look at him. Hum. What do look at me so for?


Doll. What do you look on me for?


Weeps, and wipes her Eyes with her Apron. Hum. What do thou cry for? Oh*
it is a peerless Jade!


Dol. Oh that I should live to be used thus!


Hum. Why did you serve me so then with that sneaking Whelp John the Thresher,
who is no more to compare d' you see (thof I say it, that should not say it) than
a Hog's to a Bullock* -- You know I would have broken Silver with you once, but
that the plaguey Collectors had not left one broad Shilling in the County.


Dol. I only took him out to try thee, Humphry.


Hum. I Will be hanged then, and my Horse too.


Dol. Nay, prithee don't pout, Humphry; don't spoil that sweet face of thine:
if I e're do so again, may IN be churning and churning all days of my Life, and
Butter never come.


Hum. Ay, marry, hang you; I Will trust you no further than I can hurl you.


Dol. Don't be dumpish, Humphry, I Will dance with you now; we have Minstrels hard
by.


Hum. Not I, even dance with somebody else, and thou would.


Dol. Well then I will, Humphry; any thing to please poor Humphry Doddipole.


Exit. and Reenters with Fiddlers, Country Lads and Lasses. Hum. Oh that John
the Thresher sticks plaguily in my ^izzard still.


A Country Dance. Hum. Oh brave Doll. Hoydon! That wag of the Butto^k has won
my heart.


Runs and kisses her. Exeunt Dancers and Music. Re-enter Christina. Dol. Be
quiet! Aloud, seeing Christina -- Here Is Mistress Aside to him. Cannot you let a
body alone?


Aloud, and then Exit. Chr. I find every body has his own little private
business in this world! Aside. Here, fellow, give thy Master this.


Gives him a Letter. Hum. I will, forsooth: This is a lucky day. Ods me, I
warrant this good News will renew Father's Lease for nothing.


Exit Hum. Enter Railmore. Chapter Mr. Railmore, just now this thing* in the shape
of a Letter, was sent by my Lord's new Rival, the Squire you saw here. I was
taken for my Sister, and as the hates him, and I have a respect for your
Friend, I sent a short drolling answer, in her Name, as kind as a Billet Doux
writ by a Town Beau to himself.


Rail. I hope he will make it as public, be as little believed and worse used:
Look you, Madam, you do well; it is your interest to disappoint the Squire; for,
after all, were my Lord dismissed, I guess you must stay for a Husband as long as
she will be te^z'd with such Fools. Be generous then as all the world is, and be
thanked for obliging your self; but you must do more.


Chr. What Is to be done?


Rail. Write two or three Lines as from your Sister to my Lord, as it were to
assure him, that tho she weds the Squire she will favor his Lordship never the
less. I Will take c^^e the Uncle and the Nephew shall see it instantly. I Have
already set some other Engines at work?


Chapter But what if my Sister hears of this? I Am sure she will not only disown it
utterly; but will hardly forgive my Lord.


Ra. He must know nothing of it himself, till it has taken* Effect* then we'll
easily reconcile 'em, if she hears on it, and, like other Women, seems angry for
being pleased.

None can a Good, the got by Tricks, disdain,
When others reap the Blame, and she the Gain.

Exeunt. Enter Kitty and Frankly. Frank. I have not had an Opporunity to ask you,
Why you're so Melancholy, Madam? I love you better than any Body, so nothing
could please me more than to see you cheerful.


Kitt. Thank you, good Fanny, but you cannot make me so.


Frank. You may be mistaken, Madam; come, do but discover the Cause of your
Sadness to me, and if I don't serve you effectually, may I never deserve a
Lady's good Opinion!


Ki. What would you have me say? I protest I don't know why I Am so*


Frank. Oh! that is a Jest; but we Maids are so bashful! Come, I fancy, your
Secret will out the more kindly, if I ask you a few Questions. Are you not in
Love? Nay, I my self would be one of the first to laugh at you* if you did not
know what it is to love.


Ki. Well* don't laugh at me, good Fanny, I know what it is well enough, but my
Sister must not know of it for the World.


Frank. Good! I like you now* Plain dealing becomes us Maids, when we are among
our selves no less than Dissimulation before Men: Come then, be free, and
believe I Will keep your Secret as well as your Lover himself.


Ki. But why don't you ask me Questions then, F^^ny, that I may answer you?


Frank. That Is well said! you love some young Gentleman, do you not?


Ki. When I was at London, there used to come with my Cousin Will Gaymood a
pretty fine dressed* Gentleman, who came from the College; his Name's Mr. Frankly.


Frank. And do you love him very well?


Ki. I loved him mightily then* but I did not tell him so; for, they say, We
must not tell Men our Mind till they find it out; yet I fancy he guest it; for,
he promised me he would come, or let me hear from him: But he has not done it.
Now as my Sister threatens me with a Nunnery --


Frank. Pray go on, I Am impatient, to know the rest.


Ki. I am ashamed; I had rather you would ask* me Questions* Fanny.


Frank. I fear you have got a new Lover in his Absence.


Ki. I vow, I could not help it, Fanny* But* I Am mightily concerned, and don't
know what to do; for he is to come to me by and by, and I am afraid my Sister
should see him with me. Now, if thou woudst help me a little, good Fanny.


Frank. I had rather serve the other; but what is this new one's Name?


Ki. Major Buff; I like him but so so; but he teez'd me, and would not let me
alone till I had promised to meet him; and any thing is better than a* Nunnery,
you know. Yet I would not have talked to him had Mr. Frankly come to me.


Frank. The Absent are always in the Wrong, I find.


Ki. But, Fanny, there is Doctor Kill-^lown too* whom I promised to meet* and
I Am mightily afraid they will come at the same Time.


Frank. Another Appointment! a forward Child, truly! But why did* you appoint
him at the same Time?


Ki. What shall I say to you? I did not think on it: I Am so concerned for Mr.
Frankly's not coming, and so afraid of the Nunnery, that I don't know what I
do* But as I grow older I hope I shall manage things better* and have more Wit*


Frank. More Wit* why you're a Prodigy already! But, what if Mr. Frankly should
come at last? For, I am sure he will come, since he promised* I know him.


Ki. Oh! let me kiss thee again and again for that dear, dear Fanny kisses
Frankly* Well is he not a pretty sweet Man? Methinks he favors thee mightily.


Frank. He Is well enough* I think* But* would you marry him if he could get you
out in Page's Clothes, and had a Parson ready?


Ki. Heh! truly, I know nothing to the contrary, Fanny. Yet there is another
pretty fine Gentleman --


Frank. Another yet!


Ki. That Is all indeed* Fanny* One Mr. Airy: I Am sure you would like him,
Fanny: But yet dear Mr. Frankly was my first Love, and if I were but as sure he
would come --


Enter Airy and Gaymood. Ai. As you are sure of a Kiss.


Kitty and Franly shriek and exeunt. Ga. You have lost her, and I my little
Chamber-Utensil: Well* no matter for that* I Have had her already* B^^, tho she
seems so skittish now* I gad, true Mo^es^y is as great a Stranger to these
Chambermaids* as to a Midwife* a Hedge-Poet, or a Side-Box Mask, by Mercury.


Ai. Well, let us go find out Railmore: You say you will serve my Lord, Sam, and
help us to defeat the Squire his new Rival.


Ga. Fear not, I Will do it, tho 'twere but to fret my covetous old Brother, be
revenged of the Uncle, and laugh at the Nephew: I long to do some good generous
Action worthy being Chronicled. This shall be the first, Egad; and if the Fool
should marry my Neice, to make it more meritorious, I Would drink him dead in Three
Months. What a Pox* do you think I Have no Conscience? I shall save nothing by
old Thomas's saving a Portion, and Nephew for Nephew, I Would rather have a witty
Lord than a foolish Squire, by Mercury.


Ai. A Pox of all such Men of Clay and no Sense! They are the Terror of those
who want only to be married to raise Portions and pay Debts. Women should be
ob^ig'd not to use such rich Fools better than if they had Merit and nothing
else: But then

How many Heirs would sue, while none would grant!
How many Nymphs would their best Bubbles want!

Exeunt. The End of the Third ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE A Walk.
Enter Gaymood, with Airy; and Christina, meeting. Ga. HOw now, Mad Cap,
whither so fast?


Chapter Not to look for you, my Wi^e Uncle, you may be sure. I Am looking for my
Lady Single: Do you know which way she went?


Ga. Look you, you know the Passage that leads to the Stairs that are on the
Right Hand, near the Back Yard, as you go up to the Gallery, don't you?


Chapter Ay, ay, What then?


Ga. Why, she did not go that way -- that is all laughs you did not look for
that neither, Ha* ha, ha!


Chapter Dear Uncle, will you never leave this Folly?


Ga. Ay, ay, Child, when it leaves me, and thou thy self art wiser: Come, like
to like; stay with us, and be Company; hang thinking! Too much Reflection is the
Folly of the Learned.


Chapter Ay, and too little Reflection the Folly of the Ignorant.


Ga. Ignorant! Why, I don't trouble my self with what is past or what is to come.
I enjoy the present* and let the World rub, and who wiser than Sam?


Chapter You do well to praise your self, Sir.


Ga. Ay, seeing no Body will do it for me, Madam* Pshau, it is the Fashion now:
Show me the Man that never talked ill of others, nor well of himself, and I Will
be bound to show thee a Plain-dealing Courtier, a Peacemaking Lawyer, a silent
Woman* an honest Tailor* a witty Alderman, a --


Ai. A what?


Ga. Nay* Faith, I cannot tell what: Help me out if you can*


Ai. Why, you are never out nor in* Man: Neither will you give me leave to put
in a Word, or be happy in exchanging a Speech or two with this Lady.


Ga. Nay, now I think on it, thou have not had thy share of Talk, this one Time:
Well, make thy self amends, if thou can: Come, let me see you box about a
little amorous Nonsense; for it is what you would be at*


Ai. Can a Man talk of any thing but Love* when there is so strong an Incentive
to it before him?


Chapter Why, Uncle, would you have me be a Courting-Stock?


Ai. You need not, Madam, if you're willing to be in earnest.


Chapter That would not be fair, Mr. Airy, for I fancy Love it self is a Jest.


Ai. Then give me Leave to pass that Jest upon you; there can be no harm in a
little Jesting.


Chapter I Am not much inclined to find Fault with a Jest, provided it be not
carried too far.


Ai. What think you of Platoni^ Love?


Chapter That Is a Jest indeed, but it is a dull one.


Ai. Shall I court you like an eldest Son, sold by his Father to redeem a
Mortgage?


Chapter That Courtship is indeed much in fashion, but there is no Jest in it.


Ai. Shall I court you then like some first-rate Spark, between a Rake and a
Beau; a pleasant modern Medly, like Punch; for there is the strong and the
insipid, with the sweet and the sharp?


Chapter That will go down better than the rest, but it is a dangerous Mixture, and
not fit for common use: However, I Will venture on a Taste to try your Skill.


Ga. By the Blessing of Freedom, I Will stay on the Stage, and will see that
Scene for nothing.


Ai. I bar that, Sir, No Person to stand on the Stage.


Ga. The Play-Bill says so, but we'll suppose it is the Poet's Day; besides* we
Beaux will show our selves to the Audience, in spite of the Bill and the
Audience.


Ai. Ay, tho some of you are as dirty* Beaux as your self.


Ga. Egad, I Will clap that Jest, he claps We Wits and Beaux love to be satiriz'd
in a Prologue; but if you don't begin, now it is over, I Will ^iss.


Ai. Well, Madam, suppose me one of those Sparks just coming to see you, and
your self one of those airy Women of Honor they court en passant.


Gaymood and Christina sit, Airy comes forwards, seemingly fuddled; humming a
Song and combing his Wig; then stops and speaks as to a Servant. Ai. Solomon,
speaks affectedly and in another Tone Tell the Coa^hman I will not discharge him
these eight Hours, let the Dog drive away and lose his Fare, if he will --
Demme, Madam, you're a very happy Person; you don't know, perhaps, that I Have
been peeping into every Coach in the Park for you, ferretting the Boxes at both
Houses, refused to go to Le Begue's with Three or Four Rakes of Honor, balk'd
poor my Lady Love-all, who stayed for me to hand her out of the King's Box, and
Two Masks, who waited for me by the Chocolate-house; I Am sure they are Quality;
and at last I Have been forced to drive hither. Confound me, if I did not break
the Coachman's Head for his Fare, because the Rascal did not keep a Lover's
Pace.


Chapter Oh your Servant speaking affectedly sweet Mr. Airy; I easily believe
you have been Side-Glassing in the Park, Side-boxing at the Playhouse, Acting in
the Pit, nay on the Stage too, but no more for me, I dare swear, than for any
Human Thing in Petticoats. Some little forgetful Mask has disappointed the no
less forgetful Mr. Airy, and I may thank her for this Visit.


Ai. No, demme, Madam, I begin to leave off Masks; they are grown doubly
dangerous of late. Sits down in an odd careless Posture But, pray, why have not you a Couch here*


Chapter A Couch! Bless me! A Couch! What for?


Ai. Is that a Question to be asked a Gentleman? why, for many Uses, my Dear*
tho 'twere but to loll on.


lolls, picking his Teeth. Chapter Spoken en Gallant Homme, as I Am a Christian;
respectful and civil to amazement! Hark you, Spark* are you still as mad as you
used to be?


Ai. I was just going to ask you the same Question. But hark you, have NOT I
forgot to tell you how damnably I love you?


Chapter Love me! Bless me! how abruptly you expose a Declaration of Love! This is
the first happy Moment I ever heard of it, as I Am a Christian.


Ai. Yet I Am confoundedly in Love with you to Day. But we young Fellows are all
so full of Mercury, and one Thought drives out another --


Chapter Just as one Mistress drives out another.


Ai. No, I Am a Dog if I don't think I shall love you, even after* I am dead.
There Is something in you so janty, so j^-n^-s^ay-quoyish! Tho methinks you look
worse to Day than ever I saw you look in my Life! Why don't you lay on a little
more Red? Stay, is that your Hair or a Tour?


Chapter O good Mr. Whatd'you call, for Gad-sake don't look upon me to Day; I Am not
a Creature: I should have kept my Bed, as Sir Finical Self-love does, to rest
my Features: I Have been so sick these Two Nights, that instead of causing a Love
without Remedy, I Am a mere Remedy for Love.


Ai. 's Blood, Madam, what what do you mean to speak thus of the finest Woman*
in England, and my Mistress too? I Am only afraid you're fallen in love with
some starched Fop, in Love with no Body but himself. Well, Woe be to him when I
know him! I Will do his Business: Demme, I hate a Fop.


Chapter What, are you jealous?


Ai. Oh, like a Devil, it is the best Quality I have.


Chapter It Is true, a Dose of Jealousy rouses up your sleepy Passion, just for
the* World, as a Pinch of Snuff revives the Senses: But the Remedy loses its
effect when often used.


Ai. Gad you're witty* Never let her be your Wife. sings. Now you talk of
Snuff, do you take any? Here Is the best plain Dust ever came from Sevil! I
begin to leave it off; I take but Twice or Thrice this little Box full every
Day -- Look on the Inside, it is prettily painted.


Chapter O hideous! I look on your filthy obscene Box! I would not touch it for the
World.


Ai. Look you, it is to show you I love to be free and sans facon. When shall
you and I dine at Pontac's or the Rummer?


Chapter Ruder than Rudeness it self! what, talk of Taverns to a Woman of
Condition, Monster!


Ai. Pshau* I go there every Day, with Twenty that are as Nice as your
Ladyship. Let Us see that Indian Fan, I fancy it turns two ways, and has as
pretty Figures on the Inside as my Box.


Chapter You shall no more see it than I would your Box: Fans are as useful to us
for Action, and when we have nothing to say, as your Boxes are to you. Fie,
Gallanting of Fans is as much out of Fashion as Gallantry.


Ai. But not tearing of 'em, to get you to some Indian House, on pretense to
give you better. Throl lollolol!


hums a Song, and tears the Fan. Chapter What, I suppose you have a Mind I should ask
you to Sing?


Ai. Why the Devil don't you then? Gad, I fancy you are as fond of being asked
as I. Why, you sing almost as well as I do. Come, let us sing the last Dialogue
our Master set.


DIALOGUE.
Man. Hark you, Madam, cannot I move you?
why the Devil do you run?
Have Not I told you twice I love you?
come then, kiss me, or I Am gone.

Wom. Foh! I hate a Rakish Lover,
Do not discompose my Dress:
Good familiar Spark, give over!
how on Quality you press!

Man. From the Countess to the Cit,
every Beauty for me dies:
Demme, why should I submit
to do at on this Woman's Eyes!

Wom. Fifty Beaux expire for me,
ogling, sighing all the Day;
Yet not one dares be so free,
tho they let me win at Play.

Man. Sure we Rakes can better move you;
see this Shape and Leg, my Dear!
In one Minute more I Will love you
than those Fops can in a Year.

Wom. But your Love will soon be over.

Man. Then you will get a fresher Lover.
Come, to Bed! I long to embrace.

Wom. Leave my Hand!

Man. -- Then lend your Face!
First the Hand, and then the Face,
Then the Breast,
And then the rest,
Then the Breast, and then --

Wom. -- The Face.

Gives him a slap 'othe Face. Man. 's Death, I Have a good mind to beat you;
No; to vex you more, I'llgo.
Thus I puff you -- I Will go say,
I refused your Love to Day.

Wom. Then I Will say how I did treat you.

Both together Man. None will believe you could do so.

Wom. All will believe I used you so.



Ai. Pretty well, pretty well, all but that damned Slap on the Face -- Well, I
shall run mad for you in Two Days, that is certain.


Chapter Poor Mr. Airy! what, gone so far of a sudden?


Ai. It Is the Fashion now: What, would you have me court like a formal Cit, or
freeze you with dull whining Stuff, and die in Simile like a mere Beau? We
brisk Fellows push on in Love as in War, egad. Towns must quickly yield or be
insulted with Bombs, that ruin them as Slander does Reputation, Demme.


Chapter O fie! the intolerable Presumption of Fellows! Had not you better make the
Campaign in Flanders than in Pelmel and at the Wells and Bath?


Ai. Pox, I played away my Equipage-Mony at Piquet, and that damned Bassette --
But tell me, dear Creature, how long must I still sigh in vain for you?


Chapter Exceeding Pretty, as I Am a Christian! Why, you have not begun yet, that I
know of.


Ai. What a Pox, do you reckon this Visit nothing?


Chapter When you can be constant, perhaps I may think you deserve Encouragement.


Ai. 's Death, at that rate I might wait long enough, Child! I find I must
storm the Outworks, in order to a General Assault -- Thus then I invest the
Town, my fair Enemy.


Embraces her. Chapter Nay then it is Time to call for Relief -- Who Is there? Uncle!
What were you asleep?


Gaymood starts up. Ga. You may swear it, or how* could I have been so long
without talking? Pox, this Wine is got into my Head! Well, what is the Matter?


Chapter When a Woman begins to cry out, you may believe the Jest is over.


Ai. Why, 'twas but just going to begin.


Chapter I find we have jested too long, I must leave you.


exit Ai. I fear I have, for I must follow you in earnest.


exit Ga. Jest or Earnest, it is all one to Sam: If he is caught let him take it
for his Pains: They say there is no fooling with the Devil, but I fancy that
Saying will hardly hold good of Women, Egad.

Bewitching Woman's a resistless Evil,
The Devil fools us, but she would fool the Devil.

Exit. Enter Railmore, seemingly drunk, Sir Tope, and Ilbred, with his Sleeves
tucked up, as from the Club Sir To. Nay, since you have got your Load elsewhere,
and will not stay, prithee tell us here, in good sober Sense?


Ra. Then, in no sober Sense, if this Nephew of thine has her, he will be a
Cuckold; 'twou'd be a Shame if he were not, he has the best Qualifications
for it, and wants that to be in the Fashion.


Il. Heighday! I Will warrant you then, your Londoners have brought up that
Fashion, these dead Times, for want of Trade; a Cuckold!


Ra. Ay, or a Husband, that is all one, I think: Look you, you Put, I Will stand
to what I say. reeling, flings down a Letter, the Squire takes it up Can thou
read Squire? Here Is a Letter, I took it up by Chance; from whom and to whom
do you think it is, hah?


Il. Ods me, it is from Francelia! It Is the same Hand as mine: Let see -- he
reads scurvily My dear Lord, tho your Francelia is condemned to marry a Fool --
(that is me) you may help her to revenge on him the Wrong that is done you -- In
spite of all slavish Bonds, she vows to be my Lord Lovewel's while she is
Francelia -- Ods bob^! who'd have thought it?


Sir To. May the Curse of small Beer, in an Evening light on me, if I don't go
and rattle her to some Tune anon!


Ra. Hang her, Man! never go to her, 'twill spite her more: Besides, my Lord
is a bloody-minded Devil, he makes no more of killing a Man than a Doctor of
Physic does.


Sir To. Odsooks, it is all a Case, I Will go -- but I Will consider on it first.


Enter Major Buff. Ma. Odsbobs, Sirs, why do you leave us so? you're Three
Bumpers behind-hand. There Is Justice Dolt swears at you like any Carrier in a
Slough. Come, Master of mine, come in; don't stand here holding of a Parley.


Ra. Not I; I am not such a Sot; I have enough: I Would as soon go to a
County-Feast, or a Punning Club at London.


Ma. Why, there are not so many Fools here as at London, Friend of mine!


Ra. There are fewer Fools here indeed, because there are fewer People.


Ma. Odsbobs, that Shall Not serve turn, you shall drink with us for all that.


Ra. I Would sooner go back to London among the Rabble for, there tolerable Wine at
least is had, in good Rooms, if not in good Company; but here your Room is
wretched, your Liquor bad, and your Company abominable; and so farewell, Brother
Sots.


Exit. Sir To. Well, go thy ways, Nutmeggrater! what pity it is, Major Buff,
that such a tart witty Knave cannot drink!


Enter Plot, dressed like a Gypsy. Two or Three Gypsies. Plot. I tell you your
Fortune, you pretty Man; you live well, you be good Fortune.


Ma. What Vermin ha'we here? Gypsies! nay then mind your Pockets.


Plot. An angry one, an angry one!


Il, Gad, Uncle, they shall tell me my Fortune, for all that, but I Will mind 'em.


Plot. Ay, presently; cross you my Hand with one piece of Silver, I tell you
all then.


Il. Here it is, old Egypt!


gives him Money. Plot. Let me see your Head! Oh the good strong Head, fit for
the Country Justice!


Il. What! tell a Man's Fortune by his Head?


Plot. Yes, we tell the Lawyer the Fortune by both the Hands, the pretty Woman
by the Eye, the Lover by the long Nose, the Drunkard by the Copper-Nose, the
Dancing Master by the Foot, the Tailor by the Calves of the Leg, the Alderman
by the Forehead, and you by the whole Head together.


Il. Why, what do thou take me for then?


Plot. Let see! You no be the Gentleman.


Il. How! no Gentleman?


Plot. No, but you be the Squire.


Il. Oh ho! well, I Will try your Skill e'Faith. Come, when wan't I well last,
hah?


Plot. You have not been well lately.


Il. Now you are a greater Liar than Patridge's Almanac.


Plot. No, I ben't, I see by your Hand that 'twas -- the Itch.


Il. The Itch! Thou lie like the Devil's Tooth-Drawer.


Plot. I mean the Itch of Love. You be troubled with it yet. You love the very
fine Woman, but you be jealous of her, and will not have her for fear --


Il. Hum! if thou can but tell me how old I am, I Will believe thou know
whether she would be honest or no.


Plot. Let me see your Mouth! How old was you when your Father Died?


Il. Sixteen.


Plot. Don't stir! and it is now since he died.


Il. Five Years.


Plot. Look you, I find that if you marry this Woman that you design to court
to Day, you be one very great Cuckold by some great Person; but if you not go
to her, and take no notice at all, you soon will have another more to your
Mind, with great deal Money; but this is not to bring you one Cross: And for a
Proof of this, I will tell you your Age as you ask me -- You be -- you be --
just One and twenty, as I find by your Mouth.


Sir Top. stops Plot, Ilbred and Major Buff run after the


Gypsies. The Gypsies steal off, having first picked Ilbred' s Pockets and Sir
Topewel' s.


Sir To. Odsooks, the Gypsies have picked my Pocket -- stop 'em, I have one fast
-- Ah Rogues! You tell Fortunes, but could not tell your own. You shall be
trust up next Assizes, hanged in Chains, and shown for a right Egyptian Mummy.


Plot. Good Sir, hear me! As I Am an honest Man, 'twas not I picked your Pocket;
besides, I Am no Gypsy, an't please you. Oh! Good your Worship, let me go; I Will
discover a Plot to you.


Sir To. A Plot! no more Plots, we have had too many already.


Plot. It Is a Plot against Squire Ilbred to fool him out of his Mistress.


Re-enter Ilbred and Major. Il. Fool me! The best Lord in the Land make a Fool
of me, I will not marry.


Ma. The Devil helps th^se same Gypsies, they were too nimble for us.


Sir To. Nay, now I smell a Rat; well, speak Truth and thou shall go free.


Plot. I am my Lord Lovewel's Man, Sir, set on by Mr. Railmore, who even now,
pretending to be drunk, got you out, and kept you a talking till he saw us, to
give me an Opportunity to make the Squire believe he will be a Cuckold if he
marries Mrs. Francelia: He was to show you a Letter; that is a sham-one, upon my
Honor* as well as that the Squire received.


Sir To. Why, this was no Sham-Plot tho; this was a Plot indeed: Well, I set
thee free for this Discovery; but can thou not tell me more?


Plot. I shall be turned away, Sir.


Sir To. Come, fear not; we'll provide for thee.


Plot. Well, you are such good natured Gentlemen that it goes against my Heart
to see you deceived. I will tell you, whatever comes on it.


Sir To. I Will reward thee to thy own Content; believe me, I am no Courtier.


Plot. You must know, my Lord is to marry Mrs. Francelia very privately to
Night; not that she hates the Squire, but because my Lord is a Lord, I think: I
know no other Reason; for I know some Women that have staid Twelve Years for a
Lord, and now would be glad to take up with a Squire, or any thing. Now I
fancy* I could put your Worship in a way to put his Nose out of Joint, but --


Sir To. Come, but me no Buts! serve him, and I Will do thy Business; thy Lord
himself shall not live better than thou shall. Cousin, give him some of the Broad
Pieces thou have for a Taste.


Il. Odsme! they are all Gipsied away: My Pocket has been gutted already. Well,
till anon, take this Ring, and that Tobacco Box.


gives 'em to Plot. Plot. Pray excuse me, Sir; I hate to take any thing for
doing good -- will not this look like a Bribe? -- These real Gypsies, whom I got
to come with me* could not forbear stealing -- Your Worship's most humble
Servant -- Well, I believe I might easily convey you, when it is dark, into the
Room by the Hall, where my Lord intends to be married to your Mistress, unknown
to any Body but my self and the Chaplain; there will not be so much as a Light,
and they are to whisper all the while, for fear Sir Thomas should come and
spoil all.


Il. O rare! We'll come, we'll come.


Plot. 'Twill be dark about an Hour hence, Sir, I Will wait for you near the
Hall, but then you must be very private: Your Worship's most humble Servant.


Ex. Pl. Sir To. Now, Lads, let us go Drink!


Going. Enter Lord Lovewel and Airy. Ai. Here they are!


L. Lov. A Word with you, Sir.


Stopping Illbred. Sir To. Make haste then, for we are a dry.


L. Lov. I hear, you raise your Pretenses to a Lady, whom I Court with her
Father's Consent.


Sir To. Ay, and he shall Wed her, and Bed her with my Consent, and her
Father's Consent. Do you come to be Invited to the Wedding?


L. Lov. No, we come to forbid the Ba^es, Sir, and to desire you to desist.


Il. But what if I wont, Sir?


L. Lov. Then I must try to make you.


Ma. So, here is like to be otherguess fighting than we have on our Muster-Days:
I Will go get a Reinforcement, and then boldly march up -- in the Rear of it.

Aside.
Exit. L. Lov. You wear a Sword, Sir!


Il. Nay, it is but a Hanger neither. Look you, I a'n't for Single Rapier; we
scorn your little Spit-frog Play: That Is a French Trick: But for Wrestling,
Cudgels, or good downright Backsword slashing, may haps I will not turn my Back to
the best Master of the Science in the County.


L. Lov. Why, that is only fit for Butchers and Hedge-Fencers, to fight sham
Prizes before a Bear-Garden Rabble.


Il. I Will Drink with you for her then, and Uncle will be my Second.


L. Lov. Sir, if you would show yourself a Gentleman, get a Sword and --


Il. My Bay Gelding shall run* with the best Horse in your Stable for her,
three Heats, Weight him and Inch him -- Methinks I should not want Courage, I
drink Stout and Cherry-Brandy ^'ry Day.

Aside.
Sir To. Odssooks, say no more, Cuz, Lug out, we'll make their hollow Blades
fly in shatters about their Coxcombs.


Ai. Say you so, Sir? Then have at yours.


They draw and fight: Sir Top* and* Ilb* give way till the Clowns come, then
they come forward, and are, by a Mistake, knocked down by their Party, and
crawl off: The Clowns are beaten off the Stage. Enter Humphrey and two Clowns
with Flails and Quarterstaffs, Major Buff behind 'em, Hallowing, and Parson
Humdrum while they are fighting. Hum. Odsnigs, Thrash 'em thick and threefold;
have among you blind Harpers, fall Back fall Edge.


Pars. Hold, hold, Gentlemen, Pax* est bona res, says a Learned Father; Peace
is a good Thing: Knock 'em down, Humphrey, Peace is a good Thing: Knock 'em
down, Humphrey.


Exit* with the Clowns. Ai. Come, my Lord, we have got the Day, as most Generals
do, by Chance* You Will scarce be made one, though we should win the other Battle;
so, let us away to think of other means to defeat your Rival effectually; for,
after all, he is but the more dangerous for being a Blockhead.


Ex^unt. Enter Lady Single; with a Book in her Hand; her Woman at a Distance.
La. Oh, why do we complain we live too little! When even the Wise want
something more than Wisdom to fill up the long useless Blanks of Life! Tired by
our selves, with others soon uneasy, a while with Books we trifle Time away;
but even that solitary Pleasure grows insipid, and often wakes the Cares it
should beguile; whereas, he that knows nothing, doubts of nothing! So, Cowley,
thou say right, and Life is an incurable Disease.


Enter Railmore. Ra. Pardon me, Madam, if I am so selfish as to break in upon
your Meditations! Hearing that my Lord and Mr. Airy were gone to the Club, I
was walking this way till they* come back; for I guess they will hardly be able
to stay there longer than I did: Well, I should be sicker yet of the Country
than of London, were there no better Society there.


La. You Will find that scarce enough, I doubt, Mr. Railmore.


Ra. Yes, Madam, yet some few Men and Women of Sense, I hope will make me
amends.


La. Women here! Why, Romances, Chaplains and Simplicity, or rather Rusticity,
spoil more of 'em for Conversation, than Affectation does at London.


Ra. Nay, as for Simplicity, Madam, it is a Stranger to this Family at least; if
it is not one in so fair a Lady as your self to be an Enemy to Man.


La. Not while Man is such an Enemy to Woman.


Ra. It Is pity you're so prejudiced against us all; for some one might have
Loved you on the Square, and thus have prevented that Rough, Scornful,
Melancholic Air that frightens away the Love your Face and Sense attract.


La. What, do you believe Love makes us more agreeable* Mr. Railmore?


Ra. Certainly, Madam, it wears away gently all our Native Roughness, gives a
pleasing Turn to our Expressions, a taking Air to our Person, and winning
Graces to all our Actions; nay, I Will maintain it makes a Woman more Beautiful.


La. More Beautiful! Nay, now I doubt you are more a Dissember than I thought
you.


Ra. Why, Madam, as I speak to a Woman of Sense, I can prove my Assertion: Pray
is not the Face the Mirror of the Mind?


La. Without doubt it should be so.


Ra. Does not then a Mind given over to cold Indifference communicate a certain
Lethargy to the Face, that makes every Feature lifeless and unactive, and
spreads a chilling unlovely Air over the whole Person?


La. This is somewhat likely, I think.


Ra. Now on the contrary, a single Spark of Love happily kindled in a youthful
Heart, makes the Imagination quicker, the Wit more free, the Conversation more
lively, the Eyes more sparkling, and diffuses over the Face that sprightly
moving Je-ne-scay-quoy, whose Charms it is impossible to resist.


La. Since I was Born, I never was so strangely tempted to make a Trial of
this. -- Aside. -- But seriously do you believe, Mr. Railmore, I should look
more tolerably if I showed less Averson to your Sex?


Ra. Give me leave to convince you now of what I said; but first be pleased to
let your Woman give us a Song that may divert you from more serious Thoughts:
Your Dress too should be artfully loose, and carelessly Genteel; for Love
neglects us, when we neglect our selves.


La. Well, for once I Will humor you in your Frolic: Sing us a Song!

To her Woman.
Ra. 'Sdeath, what I am doing? I like this Woman strangely, but then I --
Aside. -- hate the Nuptial-Noose as much. She Is vastly Rich too, and I have
scarce enough left to Live. What shall I do? If I Court her in Earnest, I may
be made her Jest, and all the World's. Thus Love begins by Fooling, till we
Fool our selves; and what is worse, we know it, yet go on.


A RONDEAU.
MOrtals, learn your Lives to measure,
Not by length of Time, but Pleasure.
Now the Hours invite comply;
While you idly pause, they fly:
Blessed, while a brisk pace they keep,
But in Torment when they creep.
Mortals, learn your Lives to measure,
Not by length of Time, but Pleasure.
Soon your Spring must have a Fall:
Losing Youth, is losing all.
Then you will ask, but none will give,
And may linger, yet not Live.
Mortals, learn your Lives to measure,
Not by length of Time, but Pleasure.
La. Well, Master, am I now as I should be?


Ra. You only want seven or eight Patches: They are to Women what Shades are to
Pictures, or Stars over the Face of Night; a Beauty's no more complete without
'em, than a Beau is without Powder.


La. Fie, they should be as scandalous now as Velvet-Scarfs, or Velvet-Faces
those greater Patches: Sempstresses, Barkeepers, Chambermaids and City Beaux,
wear 'em.


Ra. There Is no harm in a few for all that; but I would not have you like my
old Lady Tawdry, whose fat Face looks just like a Gammon of Bacon stuck over*
with Cloves, with more Patches on than she is Years old, over her double Mask of
Hypocrisy and Paint.


La. Well, how do you like me now?


She puts on some Patches, and makes Sign to her Woman to leave her, and she
leaves 'em. Ra. Why, you will soon bid fair for a Place among the First Rates;
chiefly now there are so few! Well, be pleased to sit, and do but remember to
Hear me, Believe me, and Answer me sincerely. I intend to speak to you, as it is
supposed a Person would do, whose Wealth and Merit might embolden him to make
his Addresses to your Ladyship.


They sit. La. I set little Value upon Wealth, true Merit affects me much more;
so Mr. Railmore, pray speak as of your self, and do not personate another.


Ra. Since you are so kind, Madam, as to prevent my hopes, and give me leave to
profess the Love I have for you, I Will wave all those Hyperboles, so commonly
lavished in Declarations of Love, and all the Hell of Pain which whining Fools,
and designing Knaves pretend to feel, and really deserve.


In a very Respectful manner. La. All exploded threadbare Cant, to be cast
off, like dull Romances, and only used by Pedants and Abigails.


Ra. I Will neither meanly Cringe nor sawcily Presume; neither magnify your
Worth by Flattery, nor debase my own by affected Dispraise, or
Self-Commendation: No, Madam, the only Eloquence, I ought to use to persuade a
Woman of your* Sense, is my sincerity in doing Justice to your Merit: Thus I
only urge the Esteem I have for you, to claim your Ladyship's.


La. It Is the surest way to gain it.


Ra. And if I ever obtain that Blessing, you will never find the least Unevenness
in my Temper, the least Contradiction in my Sentiments, or Decay in my
Affections.


La. Were this possible, Sir, I must own 'twou'd be as singular, as sweet.


Ra. Can you wrong me so much as to doubt it, Madam?


La. We easily doubt of what we wish.


Ra. Think more favorably of a Man whom you have always found to speak his
Thoughts, and who being tired with long Wandering, and ripe for a Retreat, would
fix a grateful Heart, and be for ever True.


La. Sure you forget you are a Man, Mr. Railmore! What, could you Love a Wife,
none but a Wife, and that for ever too?


Ra. Yes, Madam, could that* Wife resemble you so much as to be thought your
self: But that is above my hopes: Yet our equal Aversion hitherto to Marriage,
to Fools* Flattery, and the Hurry of the World, shows two Humors so suited to
each other, that they would seem but one, if both were joined: And as each of
us at once would Conquer, and be Conquered, such an Union of two
Marriage-Haters could be but Honorable and Sweet to both. We'd pity wretched
Couples, linked by the poor Sympathy of Interest, or Frenzy; while you and I,
clasped in each other's Arms, would think we two engrossed all the Delights
they forfeit, and Life and Love can give -- Oh do not turn that Lovely Face
aside; or I shall think you're made of Ice indeed, and hate my self for being
not like you.


She turns aside, and looks in her Glass, and sighs. La. By Heaven! He has kept
his Word: I Blush to think on it, yet almost wish he might be in Earnest. --
Aside. -- I Vow, Mr. Railmore, you act your Part so well, that Truth it self
could scarce have moved me more.


Ra. By Heaven, Madam, it is real all; and to prove it with a Witness, I Will send
for some living Form of Sanctity to confirm it.


La. What, are you then come to the End of Love already?


Ra. No, no, dear Madam, I would only come to the Seal of it. Consider if our
Sexes Passion ends before yours; it is chiefly through your Coldness at first,
and your Fondness at last. We set out too soon, or you too late; and you either
Starve Love, or overload it so, that the poor Thing seldom holds out to its
Journey's end: But you and I setting out together, our Loves shall keep pace
with each other, and their Race, and that of Life be the same.


La. But will not the whole World laugh at us?


Ra. The Thought on it moves me a little, I must confess: But what is the World,
the Vile Mad World to us? Besides we may be a while as private as you please,
and Laugh at those who vainly hope to Laugh at one of us.


La. Well, I must needs own you're an excellent Master, since you have in so
little a Time made me look less disagreeably, and almost persuaded me, a Man
may be worthy of being Loved. Could I believe you such -- --


Ra. Oh! I am wild to convince you of it more feelingly. Let me seize that fair
Hand, and bribe it with fond Kisses, to be a Pledge to mine of a Return. Ah!
let me, let me in this sweet, this wise Extravagance of Passion, kindly force
you to come and make it lawful now.

Too long in vain against your Heaven you strove:
The only Care that should a Woman move
He draws her along half complying. Is to be fair, to be beloved, and love.

Exeunt. ACT V.
SCENE, a Room.
Enter Kitty in Page's Clothes, and Frankly in Chambermaid's. Kit. WELL, you
have made me put on Page's Clothes, but I cannot put on Page's Assurance. I
tremble, and have not power to go.


Frank. What! afraid to go and be married to the man you say you love?


Kit. No, rather afraid my Sister should hinder it.


Frank. There Is a grave Gentleman in black hard by, who will soon put that out of
her Power, and then you may easily get out in this Disguise.


Kit. Nay, I was forced to tell her a fair Story to get from her: she believed
me presently, for, I thank Heaven, she never could catch me in a Lie, and yet I
tell I don't know how many every day: But what will she say when she finds I
have deceived her?


Frank. Psha, whom do we not deceive to be married? Think of the Nunnery.


Kit. Well, let us go, I fancy I was not made to be a Nun.


Exeunt. Enter Sir Tho. Gaymood, Sir Topewell, and Illbred. Sir Tho. I tell you
I have taken care my Daughter shall entertain him as she ought: I have enjoined
her to think no more of my Lord Lovewel. But see! here she comes.


Enter Francelia. Sir Tho. Daughter, you know what I said to you: Make much of
Squire Illbred for my sake, more for his, and more still for your own. Come,
Sir Topewell.


Sir Tho. Go go, get you gone, I must stay a little to hearten him up.


He sits. Exit Sir Thomas. Illbred walks in odd Postures. Fran. Will you be
pleased to sit, Sir?


Ilb. Thank you, Madam, I am well as I am: I love to be in a standing Posture.


Sir Top. What, will not you sit by your Mistress, man?


Ilb. Now I think on it, I don't much care if I do; nay, and lie by her too.


He sits. Sir Top. Mark that! heighboy! To Fran. -- Say something to her!


To Ilbred, jogging him. Ilb. We Have had a fine day to day.


Fran. But an odd one, Sir, in my Opinion.


Sir Tope. Speak to her, good Lad!


To Ilbr. aside, and Ilbred jogs him again angrily. Ilb. Why, the Roads are as
dry as these Boards.


Sir Top. Ay, and the dryer they are, the dryer they make us: Would I had a
Bumper or two of that *Hock! Aside. Speak to her, I say.


To Illbr. Ilb. Pray, Madam, what News do you hear?


Fran. Truly, Sir, none that is good: A Friend of mine is importuned to marry a
man she does not love.


Sir Top. Is that such ill News? Why, it is as common in Marriage to hate at
first, and then love, as it is to love at first and then hate. Cosen, to her!
Odsooks you are at least a quart too low. When first I went a wooing, I made my
self half drunk, and then I spoke up as boldly as a Member that either scorns
or wants a Pension.


Ilb. Well, when once we are got acquainted, I Will mend my Hand. -- Pray, Madam,
how old may you be?


Fran. You should never ask a Woman her Age, Mr. Ilbred, lest she answer you
false, or disoblige herself.


Ilb. Cry mercy, I meant no more harm than a man that cheapens a Horse or a
Mare does, when he asks how old it is: I asked, because I fancy you and I are
much of an age, and thus may the better be yoked together.


Fran. It Is not likeness of Age, but of Inclination, that makes the Yoke easy,
Sir.


Ilb. I Have nothing to say as to that; but if Somebody loves Somebody, as well
as Somebody loves Somebody, I know what I know.


Fran. What Is that, Sir?


Ilb. Why then Somebody will have Somebody, or Nobody, inspight of Every body.


Fran. It Is well if any body can understand you.


Sir To. Look you, that is, if you love him as well as he loves you, it is a
March; though this same Lord we saw here thought to have huff'd him out of you,
and forged a Letter as from you, to make us believe you will Cuckold my Cosen,
yet he dares venture on you, nay, and take you, though you had not a Smock to
your Back.


Fran. My Lord, contrive a Letter as from me.


Sir Top. Ay, that he did; his surly Companion showed it us. Well, what say
you? Nothing? Well! I find there is one Woman in the World has not too much
Tongue. Cosen, say as I tutored you.


To Ilbred, jogging him. Ilb. Look you, Madam, I an't used to make Love, and
may not talk so much like a Courtier (never the worse man for that) I am
downright Dunstable, I Have for these many Months hoarded up -- --


Sir Top. A Barnful of good hearty Country Love for you.


Ilb. Uncle, hold you your prating Tongue, will you; or rather get you gone;
John the Butler, your old Pot-Companion wants you: I Am in now, man.


Sir Top. Then push it home, Boy. God b'w'ye.


Exeunt. Ilb. I fancy I can talk better now the old Sot my Uncle has left us.
Faith and troth, I loved you this great while, and if you will be ruled by a
Fool, even have me, I dare say you will be Mother of many Children* What say you?
Come, as the new Song has it, Here Is my Heart, and here is my Hand too; all
that is mine shall be thine, Body and Goods at thy Command too. Sings. Odsbobs,
now I Am in, you shall see me jig it away: I Have got Musicianers just by: Soho
Fiddlers! play me a Lesson; come, Roger a Coverly, a Jig, any thing, play your
May Day Tune, Tom Crowder.


Enter Fiddlers, and Ilbred dances. Ilb. Now go about your business, and leave
me to manage mine: O sweet Mistress Frances, I long to be at another sort of
Dancing with you; faith and troth I Have loved you this great while.


Fran. I Am afraid the Clown will prove as impudent at last as he was
shamefaced. A^ide -- Sir, you surprise me with the News of your Love.


Ilb. Odsbobs, is it a News to you? Why, I Have been at Church, and what business
could I have there but to see you, think you? I Have hunted by you*all* along to
the same intent, and used to hollow in a Morning, to wake you, that you might
know on it, thus, So-ho!


Hollow^* Fran. The noise was the only Instance of your Love that ever
disturbed me to this day; but I Will beg another: It Is my first Request, so I
hope you will not deny it.


Ilb. Nay, to be sure I must do as you would have me, that you may do as I Would have
you.


Fran. Then, Sir, that first Request is, That you would be so kind as to leave
me, and think no more of me.


Ilb. Look you, Madam, I was told you would be as shy as a high-metal'd Filly when
she is to be backed first; but troth, you may kick and wince, and stand up an
end, but I will not be thrown off the Saddle, I will not budge a Foot as long as my
Name's Ilbred.


Enter Lord Lovewel. Ilb. Ilbred starts, seeing him Now I think better on*t I
must humor you. A good Evening to you; but I Will be with you sooner than you
think.


Fran. Sir, Sir!


Ilb. I Will be with you anon; I must go look after my Horses.


Exit. Fran. You have a mighty Ascendant over this Gentleman, my Lord; he
leaves the Room as soon as he sees you.


L. Lo. You have a greater over me, Madam; nothing* could make me leave you.


Fran. But my Father, who ought to have the greatest Ascendant over me,
commands me to leave you to entertain him.


L. Lo. But my Rival is kinder than your Father, and leaves me to entertain
you. Ah, Madam! while you stint me to bare Friendship, must he engross the
Treasure of your Love, which he wants Sense to value as he ought?


Fran. The less Sense a Man has* the more he prizes Things whose worth is only
imaginary. And after all, my Lord, he gives me no small Proof of his Esteem, in
offering to ease my Father of the Charge of my Person, without a Portion to
support that Charge. He uses no ill means to obtain me; he did not cause a
false immodest Letter, written as by me to himself, to be shown his Rival, to
deter him from pursuing his Intentions.


L. Lo. I do not know that he did so.


Fran. I say he did not, but I know who did.


L. Lo. Tell me who did, that I may punish him.


Fran. He needs no other Punishment but Neglect. Farewell.


Going. L. Lo. Going! What can this mean? Stay, Madam, explain your Riddle.


Fran. You, who did all this, need no Explanation.


L. Lo. I! by all that is true, I know nothing of this, and blush to think you
can suspect me of it.


Fran. There Is more than Suspicion, I Am assured of it.


L. Lo. Hold, Madam, do not persist in thinking me so base as to deny the
Truth, or I shall cease to think you what I thought you, and strive to grow
indifferent. But tell me, who laid that mean Contrivance to my charge?


Fran. You would show your Resentment of the Discovery, but I need not tell you.


L. Lo. Nay then, I am convinced this is a mere Pretense for leaving me. It Is
kind however to lessen my Sorrow for so ^^n^^ble a Separation by ill usage.
Well, Madam, I am yet too much disordered to have power to expostulate
postulate with you: Farewell. Be as happy as you make wretched; I Have nothing
now to court but an honorable Death.


Going. Fran. Stay, my Lord, let us reason a little more calmly of this business.


Enter Gaymood singing, Railmore, and Plot. Ga. Ah! give me more, give me more,
etc. Heyday! Gravity has doubled her Guards here to day! Of My word they both
look as sullen as a new-married Couple, that find they have cheated one-another.


Ra. Perhaps they find they have done so without marrying.


Ga. What, still sighing, my Lord?


L. Lo. Still sighing, because still unhappy.


Ra. And still unhappy, because still in Love.


Ga. Gad, if I were in your place, I Would no longer be in Love, that I might no
longer be unhappy.


L. Lo. Those that are in Love, and blame others for loving, are like those who
are in Health, that blame others for being Sick.


Ga. Well, well, have a little Patience, we have been plotting that you may be
quickly cured.


L. Lo. How! perhaps then you may know something of a Sham Letter! say, do you?
Nay, quickly tell me, I Am all Impatience.


Ga. Why, perhaps we do, perhaps we don't; I will not tell you.


L. Lo. But the Lady accuses me of showing.


Ga. Psha, Psha, showing is necessary sometimes; the Lady is a Fool, My Lord:
keep your Breath for her; go, get you gone together, be addressing and
redressing, pressing and caressing, trying and denying, flying and lying,
cooing and showing; but first be you going, that we may be doing.


L. Lo. But my Innocence --


Ga. Shall appear as white as Curds and Cream in nine and twenty minutes. The
Grove is a pretty place for cooing Lovers; would you had the Wit to make use
on it so long.


L. Lo. But -- -- --


Ga. Lord, will you never have done? I hate a man that makes so many words.


Exeunt L. Lov. and Francelia. Rail. Well, Plot, are all things ready?


Plot. Yes Sir, but I fear your Tom will scarce be taken for Mrs. Francelia,
though the Squire's as dull and credulous as a London Mob: If you could but get
one of the Maids to pass for her in the dark, my Comrade can marry 'em by Rote,
as well as the best Hedge-Parson between Marybone and Dukes-Place: The Rogue
has such a mind to be married, that none can have the Form by Heart better than
he; no, not a Maid of eight and twenty, nor a Widow of three Husbands.


Ra. What shall we do? Ilbred and his Uncle will be here presently, I suppose.


Enter Frankly. Ga. Catso! we wanted some body to fit a Squire, and who should
come in the nick but a Chambermaid! Leave me to manage her: Away. Exit Railm.
Plot, listen you Dog, and come in when you judge it is time.


Plot. Ay, Sir, we Waitingmen need not be bid to listen, we do it as naturally
as Drawers, Landladies, Chambermaids, or Informers.


Plot goes and peeps by the Door. Ga. How now, my skittish piece of
Chamber-stuff, have I caught you at last?


Frank. Pray Sir, let me alone.


he holds her by the Arm. Ga. To Morrow Morning.


Frank, I vow and protest Sir, I Will call.


Ga. Let it be so softly then, that no body may hear thee.


Frank. Let me go Sir, what will you get by keeping me here?


Plot. Not a Maidenhead, I dare swear.


Gay. Come, fear not, I Will be very kind; I swear I love thee.


Plot, So do I, as a Politician loves an Informer, for our own Ends.


Frank. I assure you Sir. I Am none of those; Pshau, let me go; are there not
Citizens Wives, Masks, and other naughty Women enough?


Ga. Toast me, if they ben't as scarce of late, as honest Attorneys. What for
Sea Captains, Land Officers, and City Beaus, there is scarce a Wench to be had
for Love or Money.


Plot. That Is a Lie, as too many can justify.


Ga. Have a care, thou'^t have the Green Sickness; gad, I love mightily to
prevent it, Child, but the Devil shall cure it for me. But I have another
Proposal to make to thee.


Frank. Pray Sir, don't keep me here; I assure you I am honest.


Plot. What will this World come to! O the Impudence of a Chambermaid that
would scandalize her Calling!


Ga. Hark you, Prithee what woudst thou be honest for? hah! Don't hundreds of
battered Town Wenches get rich Husbands at last? Don't notorious Rascals jump
into good Places, and detected Knaves keep their old ones, or get better? Don't
we see cheating Collectors, squinting Bribe-mongers, embezling Pursers,
long-winded Pay-masters, saggoting Officers, Brokers and Retailers of Offices
and Benefices, Pimps, Stallions, Catamites, and the Devil and all of Rogues
look big, ride in Coaches, respected and waited on by the Crowd of honest
scoundrel Fools, that trudge it on the hoof? honest! ha, ha, hah!


laughs. Frank. Well, when you can make me live like one of these fine Folks,
perhaps I may talk to you.


Plot. So, I knew 'twou'd come to that: Upon my honor, we poor Rogues cannot
afford to be honest.


Ga. Look you Child, I Will put you immediately in a way to do it. Thou shall
marry Squire Ilbred, whom thou saw here to day, a Man of 3000 l. a Year;
Nay, and a Fool to boot. That is, provided thou'^t let me confirm him my Fool,
as soon as Marriage has made him thine.


Frank. Sure Sir, you jest, it is impossible.


Ga. To deny me, you mean. Look you, he loves my Neice Francelia; and we have
contrived it so, that he believes she is to marry my Lord this Evening in the
dark, for fear of my Brother. The Squire is to come in my Lord's stead and wed
her. Now you shall be introduced in her Place by my Lord's Man, who manages the
Intrigue, and so she will be secured to my Friend, and the Squire to you.


Frank. Oh! but Sir. --


Ga. Oh! but 3000 l. a year! say no more, it must be so; or -- Oh! here comes
the Man shall direct you


Frank. Well, I cannot avoid complying, as things stand; the Consequence cannot
be bad, what ever comes on it


aside. Re-enter Plot. Ga. Plot, Here Is Fanny shall act my Neice, and Wed
Squire Ilbred; be sure the Parson and you whisper all the while. As soon as you
have done, we'll all come in and be Witnesses But hark you, Sir Pandarus; if
you offer to be familiar, take notice, I Will make a Capon of a Craven.


Plot. O-law, Sir! upon my honor, I Am not so ill-bred as to offer to be served
before my Betters: I Will immediately leave her with the Parson.


Exit Plot with Frank. Ga. Hah, ha, hah! I can but laugh to think how I shall
fool both Parties with one Plot, just as all other Matchmakers do. The
Chambermaid shall fool the Squire, but I Will fool the Chambermaid. The Jade
was honest just as others are, till a good Bribe came in the way.


Enter Sir Topew, and Ilbred. Sir To. What, alone, Squire?


claps him hard on the back. Ga. Not till you came, Knight; I was a thinking.


Sir To. That Is a wonder! prithee, thinking of what?


Ga. Why, only of bribing a Woman to cuckold the Fool her Husband on her
Wedding Night; for I find nothing but a Bribe will do it. A Love Suite now is
like a Law Suite, he that courts without Fees, starves his Cause, and sues in
forma pauperis.


Sir To. Did not you tell me once you never gave a Wench any thing?


Ga. True, there is the business, I would bribe her at another Man's cost; for I
love as little to f^e Wenches, as to bribe Lawyers; dam me, I hate to encourage
Vice.


Ilb. Well, Sam, will it speak a good word to thy Neice for honest Bob.


Ga. Between you and I, honest Bob, 'twill be needless; I fancy my Lord Lovewel
will have her before to Morrow Noon, if he has her not by this time, and so I
leave you.


Exit Gaymood. Sir To. I find this same Gypsie-fellow told us true, Cuz. she is
to be married in hugger-mugger. I wish he would come and make good his promise.


Ilb. Ods bobs, though she frumpt me, I fancy she is only strange at first, like
other Cattle; but she has a strange way with her, let her say what she will, I
cannot but like her. Well, I Would be content to leave off riding hard, and
drinking hard, a whole Week, so I might but get her in a Corner, or on a
Hay-cock, and no body* by.


Enter Plot. Plot. Oh! Sir, are you come? you're too late*


Ilb. Ods lidikins, don't tell us so Man: Why, it is not half an hour since I
left her. O law! O law! I could weep like any Calf now.


Sir To. If it is done, it is done; come away, and drown Sorrow; thou shall go
home as drunk as if thou came from an Election.


Plot. Hold, hold Sir, I did but Jest with you; but a Moment later had been too
-- Well, Mrs* Francelia waits for me to take her aside, and my Lord is with her
Father, discoursing about you and her. Come* now is your time, make no noise.


Ilb. Come along, I Am as still as a Mouse.


Exeunt. Enter Airy and Christina* Chapter Here my Uncle desired us to stay for
him; but I cannot guess his Design.


Air. Design! Why, he has as seldom any, as our Modern Play-Writers, unless it
be to make us talk as he does himself.


Chr. To no purpose.


Air. But '^will not be my Fault, if we do not talk to the purpose* Madam.
Love, Love, Madam! Nothing's to the purpose but that.


Chr. Nay, no Love in earnest; good Mr. Airy; don't I know you're a mere
Weathercock?


Air. Yes, Madam, I may be like the Weathercock; for I never change till that
which moves me changes; and all my Motions wait upon your Breath. But here*
most Women are like our Weather, scorch us and chill us the same day: And
others make Love so tedious a Plague --


Chapter As if there were not Plagues enough in Life, without making one of Loving;
but some of you make as much haste to get out of Love, as they do to get in
Debt.


Air. I am not for running so fast; for as one said, going to his Wives
Funeral; What need we make a Toil of a Pleasure?


Chr. Come, come, most of you serve your Mistresses as all People do their
Guests: At first the Entertainment is warm and costly, but soon grows as cold
as dull indifference or jaded Matrimony can make it.


Air. But I am for a love easy and agreeable, like your humor, and that must
be lasting. Such a Love, Madam --


Chr. Is as indifferent a Love as one can wish, and in Truth, no Love at all*


Air. No, Madam, it is a pretty, sociable Passion, like modern Friendship. It
cheers a loving couple when together; yet is no pain to 'em when asunder. It Is
like Fire in a Flint, it lies till it is urged, but then it never fails to
sparkle.


C. H. Never Court One of our reserved Beauties, Mr. Airy, she would expect a
stricter Duty from her Lover.


Ai. Yes, First he must be a Slave to Dress as much as she is to her
Complexion, and never see her unless he is as Spruce as a Dancing* Master at his
breaking up, or a politic Beau on a Birthday at Court.


Chapter Ay, for I heard of a Beau that lost a Lady for offering to approach her in
a Coat with Pocket-holes an Inch too high, and Button-holes but Three Inches
wide.


Enter Gaymood, who goes toward the Door and opens it. Sir Topew, Square
Ilbred* and Frankly appear, and Parson Humdrum behind 'em. Gay. Now you shall
have sport.


He says this, and goes toward the Door. Air. To promise Sport, is the way to
spoil it.


Chapter What Is he going to do?


Gay. Hold, hold, Sir, you must not Marry her.


pulling Frankly from Ilbred. Sir To. No more he must not; he has Married her
already.


Ilb. Yes, Faith Unkle-in-Law that is now; you come a Day after the Fair;
Here Is my lawful wedded Wife, and your --


Gay. Brothers Maid, Brother-Sterling that shall be.


laughs. Ilb. Ha, ha, ha! You're merry disposed Uncle: Why, don't you know your
own Neice?


Gay. Yes, better then you know your own Bride, it seems: Look on her in the
light.


Ilb. Hah! What art thou?


a Candle is reached to 'em. Frank. Even what you said just now, my Dear, your
lawful wedded Wife.


Ilb. The Devil's rather. Ods bobs, do you take me for a Changling? I was
Married to Mrs. Frances.


Gay. Nay, thy Wife's Name's Frances; She Is the Changling: But my Cousin
Francelia has not been in the Room this Evening.


Sir To. I Am in Amaze! Or, I Dream, or, I am Mad, or else I Am Drunk.


Frank. You have had my hand ever since the Good Man joined us, and Here Is the
Ring.


Ilb. Nay, then I Will hang my self, O-law! O-law!


Gay. Oh fie, what a filthy Death you have chosen? Remember you're a Gentleman.


Sir To. What, cheated! There Is Conjuring in it. Hah! is it so, thou young Witch?


Gay. Come Knight, speak more kindly to your Niece; he has Married her you
know, you're a Witness to it your self.


Enter Railmore and my Lady Single, and Plot behind'em Ra. What Is the matter,
Gentlemen?


Ga. Why, Mr. Ilbred has committed Matrimony with One of the Maids, and would
persuade us 'twas my Neice Francelia* that is all.


Sir To. This shall not pass so, do you see.


Ga. No, it is past already, do you see: How will you help your selves? The
Gudgeon that is caught in the hook may flounce, and flounder, but that wont do.
He hugs it, and tugs it as a Man does his Wife.


Sings this. Ra. Hark you, Sir Topewel, and you Mr. Ilbred, I Will show you I Am
not so much your Enemy as you Imagine: I fancy, I have One way to bring you off.


Ilb. How? ah, would you could*


Ra. If you will bind your self in a Bond of Twenty Thousand Pounds, never to
pretend to Mrs. Fran^elia, I Will try what I can do for you.


Ilb. Ay, with all my Spirit, and thank you too.


Ra. Here Is a Bond ready drawn; look on it, it is but Signing and Sealing.


Sir To. Ay, ay, he shall Sign it and Seal it, and with more joy than any ever
Signed a Contract of Marriage; here Cuz, Sign, Sign and Seal; but lets see if
it is right first? heigh ho! how soon care comes upon a Man that is Married! he is
no sooner noos'd but he would give his Ears to get off. Here it is Signed and Sealed.


Ra. Take off the Seal; you deliver this as your Act and Deed, for the use of
the Party therein mentioned.


Ilb. I do. Well, now, dear Friend of ours, prithee tell us quickly, how shall
I get off? Pray put a Body out of pain!


Ra Look you, before this Company, I declare you free to Marry any One that
will have you, except Mrs Francelia: For, as we got this Maid to Personate her,
we got also One of my Lord's Men to Personate the Chaplain.


Ilb O-law! o-law! Is that all you had to say? You're good to help a lame Dog
over a Style.


Ra. Where is he? This is not the Man.


looking about and seeing Humdrum. Frank. That Is the Man that married me.


Ga. Ods death, this is none of Dick; this is Parson Humdrum.


Ra. Plot, Rogue, Dog, how is this? Why sure you did not let the Gentleman
Marry a Serving* Wench in earnest?


Plot. As I Am an honest Person, Sir, I could not help it. I had got my Comrade
ready according to your directions, and told the Squire and his Uncle so, but
they would needs have a Parson of their own, whom they had brought: I did all
in* the World to persuade 'em not to have him (they know it) but they were
positive, and for fear of spoiling my Masters Match, I durst not hinder 'em.


Sir To. Rogue, Villain, Dog, let me come at him.


Plot. Nay, then, your humble Servant, though I know what I know it is time to
scamper.


Enter Sir Thomas Gaymood. Sir Tho. What Is the matter Sir Topewel? Mr. Ilbred
what ails you?


Ga. Why, nothing, he would have taken a Wife with nothing, and he has One with
nothing; so there is nothing lost: Though he has mistaken your Maid for your
Daughter; sure the Maid will be kept Cheaper than the Mistress.


Chr. Not when the Maid comes to be the Mistress.


Ba. True; an Usurer's rakish Son, after his Dad's Damnation, or a half starved
Seaman after his Pay-Day, is not more Expensive,


Sir Tho. Well if he has Married her, let him make much of his blind Bargain.


Enter Humphry, and Doll. Ham. What, and is Meester sped already! Wish your
Worship Joy! Here Is Doll Hoydon and I are Friends again, an't please you, and
want but your Worship's Consent to be Married too.


kicks him and thumps him. Ilb. Here Is the Consent I give you, with a Horse-pox.


Hum. ^iey day,! What time of the Moon is it? What Wasp, or Nettle has stung him?


Ga* Why, thy Master ha^ married thy Mistresses Fellow Servants through a mistake,
and he is mad at it.


Hump. What, yonder* Minx! Odsnigs, I know what I know; now could I help him at
a dead lift, but I have a good mind not to do it, for the sake of this same
kick of the breech he gave me.


Illb. How! can thou help thy Master off of this ugly Job, Humphrey?


Hump. Mayhaps I can, mayhaps I will not; what then? You Would give me such another
Kick as you did even now, would you?


Illb. Prithee, good Humphrey, don't take it in dudgeon; I Would have done as much
to mine own mother. Why man, I Am mad. Here, hit me Two Kicks for my One; pray
do, pray do; do but bring me off, and kick me till thou'st lost me, an'thee
would.


Hump. Well, now you cry pectcavi* I Will tell you: I and Do^ was looking for Sir
Thomas's Chaplain, to tell him we should want him to give us a Cast of his
Office; when who should we see* as Luck would have it, but this same Lass there
in the high Topping, and a tidy Skip, a little tiny go-by-ground, not passin
thus high. (I Am sure* she is no higher than a Horse-block) with the Chaplain
mumbling over them out of his book; so we listened, and found he was making 'em
as fast as a Parson can make Two Folks.


Ga. Pshau, pshau, sure this cannot be.


Hum. Why, you would as good tell me a Bailiff's no Knave* I know her Face main
well; Do You think I Am like your London-Folks? tell Lies? I Will take the Bibled
Oath on it, an^ so shall Doll; will not you Doll?


Doll. Ay, as I Am an honest body, that I will


Kitty peeps. Illb. Ah boys!


He jumps, and plays ridiculous Tricks. Sir Tho. Ah boys! Cousin, dance, dance,
I say: This brings thee off, boy; and as for you, Mistress Chouse, we'll have
you hanged for marrying Two Husbands.


Sir* Tho. How! is this true, Sweetheart?


Frank. Why, what, shall -- as I hope to be saved -- no -- for fear -- I cannot
tell --


Sir Tho. You cannot tell what to say; I find it is true.


Humphrey brings in Kitty. Hum. Look you, an't please your Worship* here is the
Young Smock-fac'd Hobberdehoy she had picked out for a Cloak: I spied him now
peeping in here* See, he is hardly big enough to go a nutting. I wonder how the
man could have the conscience to marry'em. But some of 'em don't value a straw
whom they cause to rue, so they are grees'd in the fist* Tho I fancys too, they
Two had been at other sport than Push pin* else he durst not have don't*


Ai. A beardless boy! Fie, a Husband without a Beard is as unseemly as a Wife
with VVhiskers.


Chr. He Is very Young indeed; but stay -- sure* I should know that Face* It
must be my Cousin Kitty! Cousin Kitty!


Air. Gr. Mistress Kitty!


Sir Tho. What, one Female Marry another! Do you make a Jest of Marriage?


Ilbred. Pray, don't you be Mistress Kitty! Pray don't, pray don't.


Sir Top. and Illbred, O Law! all is spoilt again; undone, undone!


Enter Lord Lovewel and Francelia. Fra. What do I hear, Mr. Illand. Is it
possible you have Married my Maid for spite?


Illbr. Only a little by chance* I thought to have made sure of you: They have
tantaliz'd me twice with the hopes of being my own man again; but that, I fear,
I never shall while I live: Yet perhaps you being her Mistress may persuade her.


Fra. Truly, Sir, she is no more my Servant, since you are her Lord and Master;
but tho you should never have been mine, I Am sorry for you: Even take her with
you when you will.


Franckly and A^ry whisper. Illb. What, is she whispering already with another
man?


Ai. Nay* 'be not jealous, Mr. Illbred; our whispering cannot be so fatal to
you, as that you had with her, and Doctor Humdrum.


Sir Tho. Nay, then it is time to be gone! To be thus ensnared, and then fooled
over and over again with sham promises of getting free is too much for Flesh
and Blood to bear. 'Owns! ^'ll be revenged, if I live; come, come away.


Going with Illbred. Ai. Hold* you must take care of your Bride, Mr.
Bridegroom, for all your huffing.


Frank. Nay then if the Bridegroom must take care of the Bride; you and Mr.
Illbred must give me leave to take care of this pretty little Partner of mine.


Sir Tho. Take care of h^^ and be hanged; the Devil a bit we'll take care of
either.


Kit. Well, well, good angry red Nosed Gentleman, we'll take care of one
another.


Sir To. What, affront my Nose; you little Snipper Snapper? Odsooks, it cost
more a Painting than all the Saffron Faces in a Playhouse.


La. An. How Sister Kitty, are you mad?


Kit. No madder than your Ladyship.


Frank. She Is only Married* Madam, and to a person that will strive to show
himself not altogether unworthy that happiness.


La. Sin. How! married in earnest?


Illbr. Uncle, mind, mind a little!


Airy. Dear Madam, be pacified; the Chambermaid is Mr. Frankly, no more a Woman
than my self; but a very worthy young Gentleman, whose Wealth and merit entitle
him to a young Lady that has both: He discovered himself to me now, and told me
he was forced to use this Disguise to secure pretty Mrs. Kitty to himself.


Sir Tho. What the Chambermaid prove a man at last!


Illb. Huzzah!


Skips about for Joy. Sir Tho. Huzzah, Cuz, you are unmarried now: Odsooks
let us go and be bloody Drunk for Joy.


Illb. Hollows. Odsbobs I Am more glad now I Have missed the wrong, than if I had
got the right.


Frank. I was informed your Ladyship would not suffer your Sister to entertain
the least thoughts of a Husband; I got admittance here as a Maidservant two
days ago; and as you threatened her with a Nunnery, she consented the more
easily to be joined to me in more suitable Bonds.


La. Sin. You mean Spirited wanton Girl! Did you then regard my Admonitions no
better? It Is true, I threatened you with a Nunnery, but 'twas but to deter you
from marriage, the more fatal Prison of the two. See me no more.


Kit. Jeeringly. Come, Madam, we guess your Aversion to Marriage is somewhat
abated, pray let your Anger be so too. Mr. Railmore, you will interceed.


Smiling. La. Sin. How!


Frank. In short, we know that the same Spiritual Executioner that dispatched
us had done as much for you two just half an hour before: So now it is about an
hour too late for your Ladyship to use that style.


Chr. What, my Lady Single married!


Exit. Frankly with Kitty. Ld. Lo. Railmore married!


Fr. The two marriage haters married!


Ga. Nay, then miracles are not ceased!


Ai. Why a miracle? I never heard any one rail at the Courtier's Slavish Life,
but what would at one time or other Sacrifice his Liberty to it.


La. Sin. The two extremes Love and Hate touch one another, like Laughing and
Weeping.


Rail. You are all Ephesian Matrons one way or other.


Ga. What a Pox, are you capping of Sentences? Wish you Joy -- of a thousand
Pounds a year, Jack; for as for a Wife I know better Things than to wish a
Friend Joy of that.


Ai. Wish you Joy of your Chambermaid here! Did not you say you had had her
already, Sam? hah?


Ga. Pshau, Pshau, so I would have had her, man; had she been a Chambermaid.


Chapter Cousin, shall I laugh at you two a little, for railing at matrimony?


Ld. Lo. Pray spare 'em, Madam, they have done well* Their Inclinations agreed
before, and consequently will now* tho a much better way. But now, Madam, to
Francelia since I hear, my Rival has obliged himself never to raise his
Ambition to you, let me beg of you to condescend to make me happy. Sure, Sir
Thomas will no longer be an obstacle to this; I had his Leave to urge my suit
to you.


Sir Tho. Ay, But I Am loath to part with so much money at a Time that there is so
little.


Ld. Lo. While Sir Thomas seemed disposed to part with his money, as well as
with his Daughter, it would have been imprudence to have bated him the first.
But we'll not differ about it: So, Madam, if you will but at last add your
consent to your Father's, I Will ask no other Treasure but your Person, which is
indeed too valuable to need any addition to recommend it.


Fran. This so generous Offer, my Lord, convinces me of the reality of your
Esteem; but to make the best Return I can, I solemnly declare, That if my
Father will not be pleas*d to part with what he promised should be one
Consideration of his parting with me to you, I will never consent to marry
while I live.


Sir Tho. How! Adad, tho I love money, I love Generosity too* Here, my Lord,
take her, she*s yours; the money I promised shall be yours too. I must confess,
I was tamper*d with, and tempted; but there are few here would not have been
tempted to break their word for Ten Thousand Pounds.


Lord Lo. I humbly thank you, Sir.


Ga. Wish you Joy* Squire.


Illb. Thankyou; but Joy of what?


Ga. Why, of being not married; o^ rather, of being married, yet no Husband:
I Am sure many would be glad to be greeted thus.


Ai. I Am so little afraid of being one of those, Madam, that if I can be so
happy as to prevail with you to approve of my Love, as well as I hope your
Father will of my Circumstances, I shall have nothing more to wish but to be
yours for ever.


Chr. What, are you making Love in Jest again? To be serious is a Jest. First,
let us be sure you can continue some time in a mind: Mistresses, they say, are
valued by most of you like Plays, only for being New; You hardly come to see
'em after the Third Day, and it must be an extraordinary one, or an
extraordinary Favor, if you come to the House Three Days after, tho your
Company's wanted there never so much.


Ai Oh* I shall still discover New Beauties, Madam, and love you more and more.


Ga. Pox, you grow too serious on a sudden, man; had you not better make Love
in Jest still? The very Boy and Girl in the House will teach you to keep to
that. Oh, here they are. -- Come Sing the Dialogue my pretty Rogues!


A Dialogue between a little Boy and Girl.
Boy. PRetty Miss* let us talk together,
I play truant to come hither,
To go with you up and down,
I Would leave all the Boys in Town.

Girl. My dear Jemmy, how do you do?
I Would leave all the Girls for you,
Throws her Baby away. Nay, my finest Baby too.

Boy. Come, let us play at Man and Wife*

Girl. Fie, you know that is full of strife.

Boy. No, we'll kiss and hug each other,
Like my Father and your Mother.

Girl. Ay, that is better, come, begin,
When you're out, I Will put you in.

Boy. Pray, be not so shy, my D^ary.
Amorously.
Girl. Keep your distance, or I Will tear you!
Scornfully.
Boy. Are thy Bubbies coming, Child?
Let me see!

Girl. -- -- Oh, Pray.

Boy. -- Be mild.
Kisses her. None can see us, do not fear.
Now a little more, good Betty.

Girl. Fie, you make me blush I swear;
Yet methinks it is very pretty.

Boy. Well* we'll Marry e're it is long.

Girl. You're too little.

Boy. -- -- You're too young.

Both. Oh! I cannot, will not tarry.
Quickly, quickly let us Marry,
For I cannot tarry long.



Ga. Very well* but I find they are seduced as well as the rest, by the evil
Spirit of Matrimony.


Ra. What, cannot our Example make a Convert of you?


Ga. No, says; I should be afraid of the Matrimonial Curse, ^^ ^^^ without
stomach, walk about without ^ase, sing without ^i^th, go to bed without desire,
enjoy without pleasure, lie without Rest, be Cuckolded without mercy, ^ught at
without pity, and plagued without end.


La. Sin, What, will you never have better Thoughts of our Sex?


Ga. Ay, when you all cease to go to Prayers without Devotion, to fawn without
Love, to weep without sorrow, to be chaste without Virtue, and to get Children
without your Husbands.


Re-enter Frankly dressed like a Gentleman, and Kitty in her own Clothes. Plot
behind 'em. Ai. Mr. Frankly, now your Friends may know you; you're your self
again.


Frank. Dear Airy, help me to obtain Sir Thomas*s, and my Lady Single's Pardon
for using a Stratagem that may seem somewhat inhospitable to those who never
felt the violence of Love. As for Mr. Illbred, he must not only forgive me, but
honest Plot also, to whom I had made my self known before I was to wed the
Squire; so that there was no danger on either side.


Illb. The short and the long of the Stor^ ^^ that between Jest and Earnest I Am
fairly choused of my Mistress among you, e faith.


Sir Tho. Come, come, we'll get thee another* Cuz.


Illb. Get thee another, Cuz! Odsbobs, it is all along of you* Gnaw, gnaw, you
Old Fool: Before George, I Have as good a mind as e're I had in my life, to have
Susan, Sisters Chambermaid, for spite.


Frank. O fie, Sir, no Chambermaid in earnest* I beseech you; come, be
thankful; those who take our Mistresses from us, improve our Parts; first we
love as Learners, but afterward like Masters.


Ra. Hark you, Sir Topewell, let me give you some Counsel which several men in
your station should follow; Allow some needy man of Sense a Genteel maintenance
to give your Young Squire good Education by degrees. Let him read good books
moderately, but chiefly the great book of the world, not to be found with
Pedants. It costs so little more to breed a man like a Gentleman, than it does
to breed others like Clowns, that I wonder there are so many of the latter with
good Paternal Estates.

Good Education must our Youth improve,
And fit a man for Business and for Love.
Wealth may be lost, but never what we gain
By reading Books, and most by reading Men.
Thus we grow wise, and raise and use our store;
While Fops and Squires, amidst their Wealth, are poor.

FINIS.

