Much A-do, about Nothing:
A Song made of Nothing, the newest in Print:
He that seriously minds it, shall find All things in it.
To the Tune of, Which no body can deny.
HINC LUCEM ET POCULA SACRA - ALMA MATTER CANTA BRIGIA
printer's or publisher's device

I Will sing you a Sonnet. that never was in Print,
It Is truly and newly come out of the Mint,
But I Will tell you before hand you will find Nothing in it;
That any man can deny
On Nothing I think, on Nothing I Write,
It Is Nothing I Covet, yet Nothing I slight,
And I care not a Pin, if I get Nothing by it,
It Is all one to me, cry I.
Fire, Air, Earth and Water, Beast, Birds, Fish and Men,
Did start out of Nothing a Chaos, a Den:
And all things shall turn into Nothing again:
Which no body can deny.
It Is Nothing sometimes that makes many things hit,
As when a Fool amongst Wisemen does silently sit,
A Fool that says nothing may pass for a Wit:
Wise Solomon sound it so.
That one Man does love, is another Man's loathing,
This Blade loves a quick thing, and that loves a slow thing
And both in the very coclusion loves Nothing:
So fickle are Humors now.
Your Lad that makes love to a very fine smooth-thing,
And thinks to obtain her with sighing and soothing,
Does frequently make much a-do about Nothing:
Experience finds it true.
At last, when his Patience and Purse is decayed,
He may to the Bed of a Whore be betrayed;
But she that has nothing must needs be a Maid,
For she can have Nothing to do.
Your Slasing and Clashing, and Flashing of Wit,
Does start out of Nothing, but Fancy and Fit;
It Is little or Nothing to what has been Writ,
There Is Nothing invented new.
When we first together by the Ears did fall,
Then Something got Nothing, and Nothing got All,
From Nothing it came, unto Nothing it shall:
This Kingdom has found it true.
That party that Sealed to a Covenant in have,
Who made King and Kingdom, and Churches lie wast,
Their Project and All came to Nothing at last:
It Is well we have found it so.
They raised an Army of Horse and of Foot,
To tumble down Monarchy, Branch and Root.
They Thundered and Plundered, but nothing would do it,
And vive le Roy, cry I.
The Organ and Alter, and Ministers Clothing,
In Presbiter-Jack did beget such a loathing,
That he must needs set up a Petty-new-Nothing:
Which Loyalty did deny.
And when he had robbed us in Sanctified Clothing,
And Perjured the People, by Faithing and Trothing,
At last he was Caught and all came to Nothing:
I wish they had had their due.
In several Factions we Quarrel and Brawl,
Dispute and contend, and to fighting we fall,
But I Will lay All to Nothing, that Nothing wins All,
Conclusion will make it true.
When War and Rebellion, and Plundering grows,
The Mendicant-man is the freest from Foes,
For he is most happy has Nothing to lose:
We frequently find it true.
Brave Caesar, and Pompey, and Great Alexander,
Whom Armies did follow as Goose follows Gander,
Have Nothing to say to an Action of Slander:
Which nobody can endure.
The wisest great Prince, were he never so stout,
Could he conquer the World, and give Mankind a Rout,
Did bring Nothing in, nor shall carry Nothing out,
There Is Nothing that can be truer.
Old Nol that did Rise up to High-thing, from Low-thing
By Brewing Rebellion, and Nicking and Frothing,
In seven Years distance, was All-things and Nothing:
Which every Man does know.
Dick, (Olivers Heir) that pitiful Slow-thing,
UUho once was Invested with Purple Clothing,
Now stands for a Cipher, and a Cipher is Nothing,
King Dick he has Nothing to do.
If King-killers are Excluded from Bliss,
Old Bradshaw (that feels the Reward on it by this)
Had better been Nothing, than what now he is:
The Devil will have his due.
Blind Colonel Hewson, that lately did Crawl,
To a lofty Degree, from a low Coblers-Stall,
Did bring Awl to Nothing, when Awl came to All,
With Oakey and Baxter too.
Your Gallant, that lives by fine Meat, Drink, and Clothing
UUho was, the other day a pitiful Low-thing,
Pays Butcher, and Baker, and Draper with Nothing,
The City does find it true.
The nimble tongued Lawyer that Pleads for his Pay,
UUhen Death does Arrest him and Carry him away,
At the General Bar, will have Nothing to say;
To you, nor you, nor you.
If any here Tax me with weakness of UUit,
And say, That on Nothing, I Nothing have UUrit:
I shall answer, Ex nihilo, nihil fit,
Of Nothing, comes Nothing, ye know.
Yet let his Discretion be never so tall,
This very word Nothing, shall give it a fall,
For in UUriting of Nothing, I Comprehend All,
That is in Creation made.
Let every Man give the Poet his Due,
'Cause then 'twas with him, as now it is with you;
He Studied it, when he had Nothing to do:
For Nothing was then his Trade.
This very UUord Nothing, if took the right way,
May prove Advantageous; For, What would you say,
If the Uinter should tell you, There Is Nothing to Pay?
As good as if all were Paid.
London, Printed for T. Vere, at the sign of the Cock in St. Iohns-street.


