THE Honor of Kings Vindicated and Asserted.

In a Sermon preached before the Right Honorable Sr. Patrick Drummond, late
Conservator of the Privileges of the Scots Nation in the Netherlands, togeter
with a considerable number of Merchants, Masters, and common Seamen from
several places, the 3. of May 1661. Stilo Novo, being his Majesty's Coronation
Day.

By Mr. THOMAS MOWBRAY Minister of the Gospel at the Stapel-Port in Camp-veer.

Reddite quae sunt Caesaris, Caesari.
An nescis longas Regibus esse manus?
printer's or publisher's device

MIDDELBURGH, Printed by Thomas Berry, dwelling near the English Exchange. 1663.

TO THE Right Honorable the Commissioners of the Royal Broughs within the
Kingdom of Scotland, the undoubted and unquestionable Patrons of the Scots
Church, at their Stapel-Port in Camp-veer.
Right Honorable,
IT may seem very strange that this Sermon after two years lurking, and above,
should now in this simple, and poor dress begine to show it self, to your
judicious eyes, and censure, like a thing born out of due time, I hope the
meanness of its strain, not being adorned with the fair floorishes of humane
eloquence, does sufficiently proclaim to all ingenuous spirits, that neither
pride, nor vanity has brought it to this public view: But to satisfy your
Honors and all Men of Candor, be pleased to take notice of the true reason of
this my present attempt, which indeed is to obstruct and (if possible) to
overturn some Men's misrepresentations of me in the point of fidelity, and
loyalty to his Majesty, and that to Men of eminency and great trust both in
Church and State. I shall accuse no Man, I pray that the Lord may forgive them,
and I do heartily, and freely forgive them also: Only as the sad imputation of
disloyalty to his Sacred Majesty, is a most grievous burden, to an honest
Man, especially of my coat, who has been even in the worst of times
endeavoring loyalty so for as he might, with the hazard of life, and what else
is most precious; so I think its lawful for me, yea altogether necessary (and
therein I wrong no Man) to Apologize for my self, and no other defense shall I
use for my own vindication, then this following Sermon, wherein (how mean
soever) your Honors, and every Man else, who will be pleased to peruse it, may
see what is my manner of Doctrine in reference to that obedience, and
submission, which every good Subject ows to his Sovereign, the Kings sacred
Majesty, and to this present Government, as it is now established. It may be
presumed, that a loyal Man in the Pulpit, will not be disloyal out of it: and
houever a sound Judgment, and a right Practice are not alwaeis inseparable,
according to that old Saying, Video meliora, proboque, deteriora sequor, yet I
hope Christian charity will plead at your Honors hands, and every one else
that shall see this Paper, to think the best of me, until you have sufficiently
informed your selves of me, and when that shall once be, I trust that your good
opinion of me will be confirmed. I know that this Paper shall meet with no
better entertainment then others of a more elaborate, and Judicious composure
have done before, but let prejudice, malice, and obliquie speak what they can,
I hope there is nothing contained here, but sound Truths consistent with
Scripture and the judgment of Orthodox Divines, both ancient and modern, which
truly I have set down very faithfully, as I found them scattered here and there
in their Writings. Let it not offend your Honors, that I have sheltered this
worthless piece under your Names; to whom should I fly for Patrocinie, if not
to my Patrons? The experience of your Honors kindness has imboldned me to
cast my self upon you, and to expect a favorable acceptance of the first
fruits of my weak labors, which in reason you may challenge as yours, and (so
far as equity will persuade) to countenance me in the discharge of my Ministry
here. I am afraid (if I should enlarge) to meet with that of the Cynick, Close
your gates, lest your City run out, and therefore I shall wind up all with
this, that the Lord would power out upon every one of you, the Spirit of your
callings, that as at home, so here, by your Godly, and unanimous Counsels Piety
may be advanced, and Trade may flourish, which shall be for a Name that will
not be forgotten, So prays

Your Honors much obliged Servant in the Gospel, Mr. Thomas Mowbray.

The Honor of Kings Vindicated and asserted.
1 Pet. 2.17. Honor the King.


IT is not unknown to you (I suppose) why we are here so solemnly conveened at
this time, our duty to God, our duty to our Sovereign, our duty to our
Country, our duty to those amongst whom we live for the time, and and generally
to the whole Christian World, the duty we owe to our selves if we would be
accounted loyal, faithful, and honest Subjects, all calls aloud upon us, this
day to contribute our endeavors for the solemnization of it, and that in
regard of that much longed for action, this day with so great Triumphs, and
acclamations performed, the Coronation of His Majesty, the happy effects
whereof, I hope shall endure so long as time shall last. A long and a dark
night of confusions, and horrible oppressions, when there was no King in our
Israel, every man doing what seemed good in his own eyes, has sore broken and
affrighted us, and who is there that had the least spark of loyalty in his
breast, and any sense of Religion, that did not see the horror of it? Now may
we sing, the night shaddows are blown away, the day appears, and the Beasts
of prey are retired to their dens, where I hope they shall not long lodge in
security, yea the Sun is risen, and is going on toward the midday; do we
not begin to feel his heat? And is there not much more good laid up for us,
which we may warrantably expect, if we will carry our selves as Christian and
Loyal Subjects? Well then seeing all (next to Gods most free, and undeserved
favor) flows from the happy Restoration of our King to that which always in
regard of birth, and a most just, free, and absolute title of Inheritance was,
(even in the worst of times) his; has God (I say again) blessed and honored
us with a King, and set the Royal Diadem this day upon his sacred Head? have
we not then reason, to bless God for it, to rejoice in this day which the Lord
has made, and to Honor our King, doubling and redoubling our cries God save
the King? Certainly if Samuel did but judge it a reasonable requeast of Saul,
(whom yet God had rejected from being King, because he had rejected the Word of
the Lord) and that was to honor him before the Elders of his People, and
before Israel, least they observing Samuel's slighting of him, should happen to
despise him, while he held the Throne. Shall we not much more look upon it as a
thing most reasonable to honor our King, whom the Lord has graciously
restored, and that in the sight and presence of strangers, that they may also
learn to fear, and to honor him. It is true, all that we can do this way is
but little, but if our myte be bestowed, with a willing mind, and a cheerful
heart, it shall be as acceptable as a greater gift from these who is more able
to give. But I will not longer hold you up in the entry, let us next see how
we are to perform this days work in Honoring our King.

The words read, and the rest of this Verse, are a conclusion of an Exhortaiton
laid down in the 13. Verse, Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for
the Lords sake, whither to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto
them, that are sent by him, etc. where the Apostle holds forth the duty of
Subjects toward their Superiors, and here again does repeat, the Substance
of a Subjects duty to his Sovereign, and withal does commend to those to whom
he wrote, the description of an absolute Subject or Citizen, in all his
relations, and tells them in a few words, what would make a Christian, living
in humane Societies, eminent for exactness of his behavior; for, he in these
words forms him in his carriage to all men, to good men, to God, and to the
King, and so his charge enjoins First courtesy to all men. 2. Charity to Godly
men. 3. Piety to God. 4. Loyalty to the King. And of this last am I (God
willing) to speak at this time, Honor the King. Before I fall upon the
particular opening up of this Duty, we may observe something from the Connection
of it, with what goes before, which is.

Observe. That the Fear of God, and the Honor of the King are very consistent,
the one of them does not hinder the other; a man may be a very pious man, and
yet a very Loyal Subject, see the Apostle does immediately join them together,
Fear God, Honor the King. So Solomon, Prove. 24.21. My son fear thou the Lord,
and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change. Our Savior
also, Mat. 22.21. tells us that the doing of our duty to God, does not hinder
the doing of our duty to the King; for he, in the matter of Tribute joins both
together, Render unto Caesar, the things which are Caesar's, and unto God, the
things which are Gods. He who has commanded the one has also commanded the
other, to wit, God himself, and his Commandments, are most consistent. Again,
how shall our Piety to God be manifested, but by our Loyalty to the King, Gods
Vicegerent, and Deputy here upon Earth? And how can we indeed be Loyal to the
King, if we be not Pious toward God? This is a thing impossible, there may be
indeed a show of Loyalty, and fair pretenses, but still for our own ends, we
shall never look upon this as a matter of Conscience, to submit our selves for
the Lords sake, which will only make a man fixed, and resolute in this his duty
come what may; whereas wicked, impious men, let them pretend what they please
to Loyalty, they have treacherous hearts within them, which will when the
occasion offers soon discover it self, as woeful experience in our own times
has plentifully manifested. But which is much to be wondered at, that they who
pretends to Piety should so much show themselves disloyal, as if to be Pious,
and Loyal were not at all consistent: It was the glory sometime of the Primitive
Christians, to be most Loyal, and faithful to their Kings, and Emperors, for
which many of them was advanced to Places of great trust: but in these latter
times Christianity has been disgraced, and the glory of the Protestant
Religion never before bespotted with this infamous note of disloyalty, has
been and is much impaired with those who are without, and our Country and
Countrymen overloaded, with disgraceful reproaches amongst the Nations; I wish
that now while the occasion is offered, they may redeem their credit, by some
fair, and manifest token of their Loyalie, which in some measure may be
equivalent to their former oversight, and failings, being led away with the
fair shows, and pretenses of Religion, and liberty, which did directly lead
them to a base slavery, and almost to the loss of all Religion, and to a
destable Anarchy; who was the first Plottets and Contrivers of this, the Lord
will in his own time find out, when they shall perish in the gainsaing of Core.

I come now to speak to the Duty it self, Honor the King. In handling whereof
I shall observe this order, First I shall clear the words, and remove some
Objections which may here be moved. 2. I shall show you wherein the Honor of
the King consists, and how we are to honor him? 3. Why we are to do this?
Where we shall see that this is not an arbitrary thing, but an absolute, and an
express Duty lying upon us. Lastly, I shall apply this Doctrine according to
our present state, and condition.

For the First, Honor the King, the Vulgar Translation reads it, reverence the
King, make him honorable, Regem honorificate, but in the Greek the word is one
and the same in the beginning, and ending of the Verse, (...), honor all men,
and honor the King. Hereby is understood, a particular, and a special kind of
honor which we are to give to the King, not such an honor only as we are to
give to all those amongst whom we live indifferently, whither good, or bad,
religious or profane, acquaintance or strangers, shunning that which justly
may give offense, and doing that whereby we may gain them, by our respectful
speeches, and behaviors, showing our selves always meek, and courteous, yet
never to justify the Wicked, nor to condemn the Rightous. I say it is another
kind of honor which we are to give to the King, which is especially honor
obsequii, as you shall afterward (God willing) hear.

But it may be here asked, whom the Apostle means by the word King? Such as
understands the Epistle to be written to the Jews, may perhaps conceave, that
the Kings that ruled by deputation in Judea should be meant, such as was Herod
and Agrippa. But for as much as the Jews were scattered through the Provinces,
and those Provincial Jews were most in quiet, and seeing also it is like, that
the Epistle was written to all Christians, both Jews and Gentiles, therefore by
the King he meant Caesar. And if so, another doubt may arise greater then the
former. The Romans hated the name of a King, and Caesar was an Emperor.

Now to this diverse things are answered. First, That though the present
Governor was an Emperor; yet the Apostle knowing by some Divine instinct,
that the most Monarchies in the World in all Ages, would rest in the title of
King, therefore he uses that title, which may most concern the Elect in all
Ages.

2. Though amongst the Romans; the title of King was not used, yet the Grecians
in whose Language he did write, did familiarly use the word (...) which we
translate King.

3. The Apostle might have respect to the signification of the word, as unto a
word which was most effectual to note the highest dignity amongst men; for it
notes him, who is the stay and foundation of the People or Commonwealth, (...)
id est (...), and though ambitious men sought new titles, as higher, yet the
Apostle knew, that this was most majestical, and honorable: whereas the term
of Emperor, in the signification of it may agree to any subordinate rule, who
governs, or commands over men.

4. It may be that the Apostle knowing the hypocrisy of these Emperors, (who
only disclaimed the name of Kings, to avoid the hatred of the people, and yet
sought the full right of Kings, so to destroy the liberty of the people) gives
the name they sought in substance, though not in term.

5. The Apostle may name Kings, to prevent Rebellion in the Subjects, which
either should fear such as affected the title, or live under such as professed
themselves to be Kings, and so the meaning is that he would have them even to
obey Kings, how hateful soever naturally that kind of Government did seem unto
them.

Lastly, the Apostle makes mention of Kings, as the last kind of Government. A
Monarchy being in many respects the most excellent form of Government, as
coming nearest to the similitude of God, who is not only one in Nature, but one
in Government also: and is most agreeable to Nature which does affect Unity, as
well in the body Politic as in the body Natural.

Thus of the Reason why the Apostle uses this term, and whom he means by this
word King? For it is indefinitly set down, and so it shows that this honor
belongs to all Kings in the substance of it, whither he be King of one City or
many, whither he be a Jew, or Gentile, a Christian, or Pagan, Heretical, or
Orthodoxal, young or old, virtuous, or vicious.

Hence we may know how to resolve that doubt which may be propounded by some
concerning the repetition of this Duty here commanded, it was said before that
we should submit our selves to the King as Supreme, which is the same honor
that is required of us in our Text, (Honor the King) is not hier a Tautologie,
may some say? I Answer not, there is not a word in all Scripture set down in
vain, the reason hereof is, the Apostle here is writing to Christians, the
Emperor under whom they lived, was a Heathen, and a Pagan, profane and
dissolute, now least they should think, that they were not bound to give that
same due honor, and obedience to them as to Christian Princes, and Kings,
therefore the Apostle as is said, does again particularly make mention of this
Duty, whereby he shows that difference in Religion does not make void the Kings
lawful Authority, as it is in the Confession of Faith, we are to honor him
though a Turk or Heathen, as much as if he were one of the same Religion with
us, and one of the most sincere Professors of that Religion, whose actions in
every point were answerable to his Profession.

The words thus cleared, and these doubts being removed, holds forth unto us
this Doctrine and Lesson, which is and ought to be the Duty of this day, and
always, and that is briefly this.

Doct. That if we would be eminent for exactness in our disposition, and
continual carriage, then must we study, and endeavor as Piety toward God, so
Loyalty toward the King; we must (I say) as fear God, so honor the King. For
the better clearing of this, I shall first let you see, wherein the honor of
the King consists, and how we are to honor him? 2. Why we are to do this? And
lastly, I shall apply.

For the first, We are to honor the King these three ways, 1. In our hearts.
2. In our words. 3. In our works.

First I say we are to honor the King in our hearts, which is to be manifested
these two ways.

First we must not curse the King, no not in secret, no: not in our thoughts,
we must not revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of our People. Exodus 22.28.
Which Law prohibeteth not only imprecations and seditious railings, (which is
an Hellish impiety, though it be never so secret) but also all base, and
irreverend usage of the King in our thoughts, and rather then Transgressors of
this Law should go unpunished, Solomon tells us Eccles. 10.20. that the birds
of the air, shall carry the voice, and that which has wings shall utter the
matter, therefore curse not the King, no not in thy thought.

2. When the King commands any thing, that seems to others, or to us, harsh,
inconvenient or doubtful, we must honor the King by interpreting his Laws, in
the best sense. If Love must not think evil, but hope the best things of all
men, then much more of Kings. It were greatly to be wished, that this Note
might enter into some men's breasts, they would then be afraid to charge so
much evil upon the Kings Ordinances, not only when they might find a fairer
sense, but oftentimes expressly against the intent, and meaning of the
Ordinance. How guilty have those among us who in this particular should have
been directers, and informers of others, I leave to all men who knew any thing
of the late proceedings with the King to judge, I am sure a Schoolmaster did
never more narrowly examine his Scholars Theme, or Version to see what was
right or wrong in it, then the Letters, and Declarations, both of the late
martyred King, and of this, have been searched, and canvassed by these to whom
they came; here was a backdoor, and there was an evasion, here was too great
strictness, there was too great liberty, and still some one thing, or another,
(I dare say which was never intended,) hindered that there could be no right
understanding, such jelousies, fears, and suspisions, never, or seldom ends
fair, as we have well seen by woeful experience.

Secondly, as we must honor the King in our thoughts, so also in our words.
First by reverend speeches, to them, and of them. God has engraven so large
and fair a character of his Imperial Image in their Forheads (says Augustine)
as must be sacred in the hearts of all, and bind not their hands only but their
tongues also to the good behavior, and that for ever; Invectives, and
contumelious speeches against an equal, or inferior are ever odious, but
against a Prince intolerable. Is it meet for a child to snap up his natural
Parents, although they should deserve a sharp reproof? Does not the Apostle
forbid Servants so much as saucily to answer their Master again although
provoked? Says he it is such as have good, and gentle Masters? Doubtless he
says it to such as are under froward, and wicked Tyrants. And is it fit then
to say to a King, thou art wicked, and to Princes ye are ungodly? as Elihu said
to Job, Cap. 34.18. Princes may not before others be discovered to be so
wicked, as perhaps they be, care must be had of their honor, and fame, says
Wise, and Judicious Calvin, in Job 34.18. what ever their conversation be,
their place requires it, though their actions should not deserve it.

2. We must honor the King in our words, by a thankful acknowledgment of the
good that is in them, and we receive from them. The Apostle writing to Timothy,
1 Epist. 2.2. sets down the blessings which a People enjoyes by means of
their good Kings, which are three, Peace, Godliness, and Honesty, each of these
is a great blessing. First Peace if we respect deliverance from Enemies abroad,
is a great blessing, therefore Arabia was called Foelix, because the People
lived in continual Peace, and had their Towns unwalled; how happy was the
Government of Numa Pompilius, when the Bees made their byves in the Soldiers
Helmets, ^hen men brake their Swords into Mattocks, and their Spears into Plow
shars; but they prise the Olive Branch of Peace best, who have had long
experience of the scourge of War.

Again, Peace is a great blessing if we respect quiet from discords at home: an
intestine War in many respects is worse then a foraigne, especially because it
is betwixt Brethren, and such War taro senecit, ira fratrum acerbissima, and
therefore (sacys Solomon, Prove. 18.19.) a Brother offended, is harder to be won
then a strong City: and there contentions are like the bars of a Castle. There
is less hope of a composition here, then if it were with strangers. It was
therefore good counsel which Joseph gave to his Brethren, fall not out by the
way: and that Moses gave to the two Hebrews when they were at odds, and he
would have made them one again, Sirs ye are Brethren, why do ye wrong one to
another? Now this public and private Peace, we enjoy under good Kings, and who
does enjoy it more then we, under our own King? We have been for many years
whirled about with tumultuous broils, and covered with a deluge of War. Now
the Dove has found an Olve leaf, and a resting place, our Motto may be Aequova
tuta filent, and by whom have we this, if not by (next to God,) our King? whose
presence like the Sum at moon-day has dissipated these dark, and thick clouds,
which not long since darkened the whole Island of Britain: have we not then
reason to Honor our King, and that by a thankful acknowledgment, that by him
under God, we enjoy this great quietness? You merchants, and Seamen, and
generally all of us who resids here must acknowledge our selves bound to honor
our King: it is scarce past twelve Months yet, when you could not without
great hazard of Pirates, and Capers pass to and fro about your business, unless
you had been beholden to Strangers, and that at your own charge too, for
Convoyes: Now there is none more free then you, and I am sure if we will not
acknowledge this as a benefit, by demeaning your selves as good Subjects, you
will show your selves most unthankful, and the very stones in the strees should
cry out against you.

2. The second benefit mentioned by the Apostle is Godliness. A good Prince
like Canutus before the Conquest, makes Laws by Counsel of his Sages, binding
his Subjects to one Rule of Christian Religion, he will have but one Christ,
one Creed, one Religion, one Faith, one Baptism; he will not have Diana, and
Paul's Preaching, the Philistines Dagon, and God's Ark, nor the Gospel, and
Popery to stand together, nor will he light one candel ^o God and another to
the Devil, no composition, no confusion of Religions, as there was Languages at
the building of Babel. Have we not seen much of this, since our Kings happy
Restoration that damnable Tolleration once past in an Act has received its
deaths wounds, Uniformity in the true Religion commanded, and by that we have
seen, we have reason to expect, that all shall be well, and Popery as much
discourted as the vvorst of the Fanatics, which is the only fear now. Is it
not manifest that our King has begun his Reign well, like another Josias
passing Acts for the suppressing of Drunkenness, and swearing, and night
walking, the predominant sins of all Courts? By which we may warrantably
presume, that as he increases in strength and power, so the vigor, and force
of such Acts, and many other as good shall be seen, and felt, to the danting
and overturning of all those who presumptuously dare control them.

The third benefit is Honesty, A good Prince has a care, that there be just
and honest dealing betwixt man, and man, that he that has much (setting
Honesty aside,) does not tyrannize over him that has little, that does not by
fraud and violence, (holding that which is not his) convert that which is
another to his own use: that People live not like beasts, but Honestly, and
Uprightly one with another. These three I say are great blessings, which we
enjoy under good Princes, and the want of any of them is a great blemish in the
Commonwealth; Peace without Godliness is but Security, and Godliness without
Honesty is but Hypocrisy, Honisty without Godliness is but Paganism, and a
glistring sin, neither Godliness and Honesty without Peace can be well
maintained; Godliness is the sum of the first Table, Honesty the sum of the
second, Peace a happy manner of enjoying both.

Thirdly, we must honor the King in our words, by praying to God for him, I
exhort therefore that first of all, Prayers, intercessions, and giving of
thanks, be made for all men: For Kings, and all that are in Authority, that we
may lead a quiet, and a peaceable life in all godliness, and honesty, 1 Timothy
2.1, 2. Certainly if we will consider the great and weighty charge of Kings,
how all depends upon them, we will never refuse to pay them this honor: if we
would consider the great commodity and profit, which we enjoy under their
happy, and peaceable Government, (as you have now heard a part of it,) we could
not but be earnest with God in their beha^^, that the Lord would give unto them
the Spirit of Wisdom, and Understanding, and of the fear of the Lord, that they
may know how to go out, and in before us, that Religion may flourish, Virtue
advanced, and Vice may be curbed, and punished, this moved David, Psalm 72.1.2.
to pray thus in the behalf of his Son Solomon, Give the King thy Judgments O
God, and thy righteousness unto the Kings Son. He shall judge thy People with
righteousness, and thy poor with judgment. And for this end also we must
entreat God that he would remove far from him wicked, base flatterers, who
seeks nothing but themselves, that so his Throne may be established in
Righteousness, Prove. 25.5. fauning flattery is an occupation fitter for a Dog
then a Man: and Princes have no Traitors like to flatterers; if treachery
against the Soul be more perilous, then that against the body, I am sure no sin
in the Book of God has more woes attending it, then this. Have we not then
reason to honor the King this day by praying for him, that he may be preserved
from such; assuredly so long as such are in power, and place, the Throne will
be but in a tottering condition; but let mercy and truth preserve the King, for
his Throne is upholden by mercy, Prove. 20.28. and whosover will not thus pray
for the King, let his tongue cleave to the roof of his mouth, and let him be
noted as one that will not Honor the King.

The third way how we must honor the King is in our Works, and that first by a
reverend gesture, and carriage while before him, in regard of this it was not
lawful so much as to laugh in the Court of the Areopagits, and the Roman
Censurs disgraded a Burges for yaunig too wide in their presence, and not only
owe we this reverence in regard of an Oath, but we are bound unto it by Nature,
in token of which God has given to Kings three especial ensigns of honor, a
Crown of Gold, a Scepter of Righteousness, and a Sword of Vengence.

2. We must honor the King in our works, by paying Tributes, and Customs, for
the necessary maintenance of his Estate. Render to all their dues (sacys the
Apostle, Romans 13.6, 7.) Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom
is due, this way (as the Apostle says in the same place) do we manifest our
subjection to, and honoring of them even by paying Tribute to them; for they
are Gods Ministers attending upon this very thing. Therefore our Savior rather
then he should be deficient in this Duty, he commanded a Fish to pay it, Matthew.
17.27. Christ does not say (speaking of this Tribute paying) date, as if it
were a free voluntary gift, but reddite quae sunt Caesaris Caesari. It is a
due, and their proper good, and therefore as one says upon these self-same
words, to withhold that which the Parliament grants, or to value our selves at
less then we are worth, that so we may pay the less, is no less then theft, and
these who goes about to deceive the Kings Customers, and grudges at his
necessary, and lawful impositions are thieves, not such as are honourers of
the King. And how will this stand with that ordinary practice which (as I am
informed,) you have at your Washings, (as you call them) I leave to your selves
to judge, I wish that there were no more of it, it is base, and I am sure
contrary to every good Subjects Duty.

3. Not only must we honor the King with our goods, but in serving him with
our lives for his defense; the People will not have King David adventure
himself in the War, but put their lives in hazard to save him harmless. The
two Tribes Judah and Benjamin to show their valor, and fidelity, will fight
against the other Tribes though their Brethren; for Rhehoboam their King. I
read in the English History that King Henry the Second, being at the siege of a
certain Castle in Schropshire, had been struck through with an Arrow, had not a
certain Nobleman put himself between the Arrow and the King, and so received
the Arrow with his own death. What shall we then say to these who are so far
from hazarding their lives for the King, that they will adventure their lives
to make him away, as Brutus, and Cassius, who slew Caesar in the Senate house:
but much more to be abhorred are these who under the color of a Law will bring
their King to a Scaffold, as these most notorious, and Treacherous Rigicids of
late did, an act which cannot be paralelled in any History either Sacred, or
profane since the beginning; I am sure though this indeed did one way tend to
the honor of the King, that he was the Martyr of the People, whose remembrance
shall be always famous, fresh, and odoriferous; yet no other thing was
intended by them, but his great dishonor, and by that fatal blow to put an end
to all Kings for ever in BRITAIN, and as they dealt with the Father, so they
resolved to deal with the Heir if ever he came in their hands, but some of them
did live to see themselves arraigned at his Bar, and to receive the just
reward of their for ever to be abhorred treachery, and murder; So let all such
perish, O Lord, that others may henceforth fear to strech forth their hands
against the Lords Anointed.

Lastly, we must honor the King by yielding, and submitting to their
Ordinances, preferring obedience to sacrifice, or to the censures of any Man
whatsoever, the Kings will must be done aut a nobis, ant de nobis, either of
us, or upon us, when their Laws agrees with Gods Laws, then must we be
Agents, when they are dissonant Patients. The Conscience cannot be tied by any
Law of Man to do that which in it self is sinful, here we acknovvledge no
Superior but God himself, in such cases it is better to obey God then Men, yet
in not obeying the Ordinances and Commandments of the King though bad, we are
to submit our selves to the punishment which shall be laid upon us, for our
not obeying, because the Laws of Men do bind the utter man properly; It is
more Christian to suffer thus, then to raise Arms against the Magistrate upon
any account, though we may have sufficient Forses and strength so to do. As
for things indifferent, which are commanded, or things not clearly known to
us, as bearing a double sense, and ambignous; we must construct the Kings
Commands in the best sense, and albeit we are to do nothing doubtingly, yet it
is better to give obedience, believing that which is commanded to be lavvfull,
then by supposing the contrary to refuse the Command; for this certainly is a
greater evil, then possibly is imagined. Suspision, or doubting of the
lavvfulnesse of things is no discharge for obedience; what confusion this has
brought into the Church and Commonwealth our times does afford instances
enough. If we refuse to obey when things unlawful, and sinful, (as being
either against the Law of God, the Law of Nature, the fundamental Laws of
the Kingdom) are commanded, as we alvvaies ought and should; yet (as I have
said) we must submit our selves to the punishment which shall be laid upon
us; bad Magistrates are tempters, and we must receive our trials with
patience. We must look upon it as the just punishment of our iniquities, and
we must willingly accept of the same.

Thus have you heard of the way and manner how we are to Honor the King. It
follows next, that I show you why we are to Honor the King, where you
shall see that it is not an arbitrary thing, but a Duty of an absolute
necessity laid upon us. This will appear in these seven or eight things,
whereby the excellency of K ngs in regard of their outvvard condition above
all others, may be seen.

First, The Creation of Kings is from God, they are a special sort of Men,
raised up in a peculiar manner to their places by God, who pleads it as his
glory, that Kings reign by him, Prove. 8. and Romans 13.1. The Powers that be, are
ordained of God.

2. God has communicated to Kings the Image of his own Majesty, and printed
in the natures of men a natural form of Kings, as Vicegerents to God himself.

3. A Divine Sentence is in the mouth of the King, as Solomon says, Prove.
16.10. their Judgment is Gods Judgment: and God would have the People to
believe that what they say in Judgment, God himself says it.

4. They take account of all other men, but are countable to none but to God.

5. They are the Original, and Fountain of all Honor, from them all the
Honor which any of the Subjects have, flows, and so do all Offices of Honor,
and Government in their Dominions.

6. They are the Basis, or the Foundation or Stay of all their Subjects, who
are maintained in Religion, Justice, and Peace by their means.

7. God himself was a King, and is delighted to rank himself amongst men of
that degree: and as he takes to himself the name of a King, so Kings has his
Name again put upon them, for their greater Honor, I said ye are Gods, Psalm
82.6. to wit Gods by Office; for they are Gods Deputies, and Vicegerents here
upon Earth.

Lastly, They have a power above all other men, therefore is that Romans 13.1.
Let every Soul be subject unto the Higher Powers, the words imports that the
King is Superior to all, he is Supreme, as Peter calls him verse. 13. of this
Chapter, the word signifies one that has above the havings of other men, and
so the King has more then all his Subjects, not only in matter of mantenance,
but also in matter of Authority and Supremacy. That the King is Supreme is so
manifest that it needs no poof. Princes therefore in the Old Testamant, are
called Heads of the Tribes or of the People, to signify that they were not
only higher in place, but had a Sovereign and a Supreme Authority over all
the People, and therefore this Supremacy of Kings gives them Authority in all
causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil. I do not say that the King by virtue
of his Supremacy may determine of matters of Faith, and Doctrine, this is
merely Ecclesiastical, and belongs only to Ecclesiastical Persons; nor do I say
that the King may set up a Ministry in the Church, that for the substance of
the calling was not institute by Christ, from whom only all the Ministers of
the Gospel have their mission, as is clear from Ephesians. 4.11, 12. Nor yet do I
say that Kings by virtue of their Supremacy, may take upon them to execute the
Office of a Church Minister, he may not Preach, nor administer the Sacraments,
nor execute Church-Censurs: This was the presumption of Uzzias, and therefore
was justly punished, and far less has he power to bring in Idolatrous Service
into the Church as a part of Gods Worship; and therefore was Jeroboam condemned
for the Calves, and Ahab for Baal, and Ahaz for the Altar at Damascus, and all
the Kings for the High Places.

Nevertheless it is evident, that the Kings Authority, may and ought to be
extended in Spiritual things for the good of the Subject, and therefore in
respect of Religion, they are said to be Nursing Fathers, and Nursing Mothers.
The Apostle, Romans 13.5. says of the Magistrate, he is the Minister of God for
thy good. Now the good of the Subject is not only a Civil, but a Spiritual
good, which is the greatest, and therefore to be most sought for by the Prince.

Now then the Kings Authority, and Supremacy in things Ecclesiastical may be so
far extended.

First, He may, by his Laws enjoin the Profession of the true Religion, and the
Confession of Faith according to the Word of God.

2. He may provide according to his power, that the Churches be furnished with
able Ministers, and that they likewise have power to call, and ordain other
Ministers, to dispose or depose as may be most for the good of the Church.

3. He may provide by his Laws, that the Word of God may be sincerely, and
purely taught, and the Sacraments rightly administered, and the Censures of the
Church executed according to the Word.

4. He may, forbid by his Laws, and accordingly punish Blasphemies, Heresies,
Idolatry, Sacrilege, and the like.

5. He may appoint and determine the Circumstances of Gods Worship, which are
not determined in the Word, as he may appoint the time, place, and outward form
of Prayer, Administration of the Sacraments, Fasting, Alms, or the like; For in
reference to the External Regiment of the Church, the Supreme Gubernative
Power is in the Supreme Magistrate. These things must not be done
tumultuously, or confusedly, but in order, and that order the Magistrate may
prescribe.

And as the Kings Authority and Supremacy is thus so far extended in
Ecclesiastical thing, so also over Ecclesiastical Persons, Every Soul must be
subject to the Higher Powers, and therefore if Churchmen have Souls they must
be subject also. We find that Princes have executed their Authority over
Churchmen, Examples whereof we have in the Word, as David appointed the Order,
and Offices of the Levites. Solomon put down Abiather from the Priesthood.
Josias burned the very bones of the Priests upon the Altar, and so purged the
Temple, and restored the Passover. Christ himself was subject to the Authority
of Princes, and appeared at their Tribunal; Paul was subject and appeared
before the Magistrates, and used their power when he appealed to Caesar. For if
Churchmen be Citizens, or Members of the Commonwealth, then they must be
subject to the Rulers, and Laws of the Commonwealth. To this also is the
Doctrine of the purest times since the Apostles agreeable; for Chrysostom upon
Romans 13. says, that all Churchmen yea Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets
must be subject to the Secular Power. And Bernard reasons out of that place
thus. If every soul must be subject, then yours also that are Churchmen; who
has excepted you from this all? If any man goes about to except you; he goes
about to deceive you.

Thus then in regard of all these, whereby the King Excellency eminently
appears we are to honor him, and whosoever will refuse this, it is an evident
token that the Devil who is the author of Confusion, and the Prince of
Darkness, has his chief residence, and dwelling in him.

I come now in the last place to give the Uses of this Doctrine, which I shall
perform with as great brevity as may be.

Use. 1. And first, must we honor the King, as you have heard, then this
serves to fetter the Romish Colt, which kicks at Princes with his heel, who
will depose Kings and dispose of their Kingdoms as he thinks good, and lifts up
himself so high, as that he may command over the greatest Princes in
Christendom, so far is he from giving that honor, which our Text requires.

Use 2. Again, to be condemned are the Anabaptists, and generally the whole
body of the Fanatics, who liking best an Anarchy, like untamed Horses also
lifts up their heels against Government; they will acknowledge no King, but
King Jesus: but certainly if they did acknowledge him, they would also
acknowledge those who are sent of him; for all the Powers that he are ordained
of God. As upon the one hand a Popular Government which they aim at is
burdensome, where in stead of one King many Kings are set up, which is a great
Judgment, and hurts the Commonwealth, as when many Master-Pilots desire to hold
the Rudder they hinder one another, and therefore that Commonwealth where many
will rule, unless it be subordinatly one under another, is like Plinies
Amphisbena, a Serpent, which had a head at each end of her body, and while both
strived which should be the Master-head, the body was toyled miserably and at
length torn, and rent loathsomly. So upon the other side no King is a Judgment;
for when there is no King, every one would be a King, one cause of great
confusion, and disorder, as we to our sad experieence have seen of late, when
there was no King in our Israel, and therefore it may be noted as a just
wonder, Prove. 30. that the Grasshoppers have no King, yet they go forth by
bands; for the body of the Commonwealth which wants a chief Ruler, is like the
body of Polyphemus without an eye, and in such a State, Men like Fishes dovour
one another. But let the Anabaptists, and the rest of that confused rabble say,
and pretend what they please against Kings, and chief Governors, yet we see
that in all their Insurrections, and Rebellions, popular equality has been
always burdensome unto them, and therefore they have always appointed one to
be Head over the rest, who like Beelzebub amonst the Devils guids, and rules
all, as Cromwell that notable Imposture, and Arch-Traitor did of late.

Use 3. Thirdly, Must we Honor the King, Then let every one of us enforce upon
our own hearts an increase of care, and Conscience in acknowledging the Honor
and Right of Kings, and a loyal and sincere observance, and obedience to their
Laws. I think I need not use many motives to prove this, remember what I have
said, and you shall find them motives sufficient; I shall ad a few more.

1. Honor the King for the Lords sake, which imports both the cause and manner
of it. Kings are ordainded by God, and who is so blind, that may not see Gods
miraculous hand in setting up our King, and therefore for his sake, who has
thus set him up, honor, and obey him.

2. God has commanded that we should Honor our King, therefore do it for the
respect of that Duty we owe unto God.

3. God has endued him with a Sovereignty, and a great Majesty, he has
subdued the People wonderfully under him, and that without blood, except of a
few, who have perished in the gainsaying of Core, this Sovereignty, and Majesty
is Gods Image, this has made him a little God upon earth, therefore Honor him.

4. God has been gracious to us in restoring our King, therefore for the love
we bear to him, who has laid upon us this Duty, let us in requital of his
goodness obey him in Honoring the King.

5. Gods Glory will be much advanced, and our Profession well spoken off, if we
will Honor our King, and live as loyal, and obedient Christians, if not, we
dishonor God, and brings great storms of wrath upon our selves by the fury of
Princes.

6. We must give an account to God for our carriage toward our King, as well as
for our behavior toward the Lord himself, let us therefore Honor our King.

Lastly, Our King is bone of our bone, and flesh, of our flesh, he is of the
same Protestant Religion with us, he has been the greatest Sufferer of all his
People, this way every faithful Subject who has been a Sufferer in these times
are interessed in the King: but I add he has been a Sufferer by his own, and
for his own, and shall we not then for all this Honor him? Did he not stand
immovable as a Rock against all temptations, to draw him to Popery during his
Exile, and should we not Honor him for this?

Let us then endeavor by all means to give him all the Honor that is due unto
him, no more to rebel against him, nor to assist by any mean, no not by advice
or counsel any of his Enemies, but let us rather learn to submit our selves
unto him, and to obey him; for that is the chiefest Honor we can give unto him.

1. Let us obey him from the heart, because God has an Interest in this Service.

2. Let us obey him with fear, because God will be an avenger of disobedience.

3. Though our Obedience, and Subjection should be to our loss or discredit, or
hurt any way, yet for the Lords sake we should do it. If we thus obey him we
Honor him, and by this means shall the Crown be long continued with him, and
we, and our Posterity shall enjoy many good days under his happy Reign and
Government, which God grant. Amen.

God save the King.
MIDDELBURGH, Printed by Thomas Berry, dwelling near the English Exchange. 1663.


