The LOVES OF MARS and VENUS. A Play set to Music, As it is Acted at the New
Theater, IN Little Lincolns Inn-fields. By His Majesty's Servants. Written by
Mr. Motteux.

Fabula narratur toto notissima Coelo. Ovid. LONDON, Printed, and are to be
sold at the New Theater, in Little Lincolns-Inn-fields. 1696.

TO THE HONORABLE Colonel Codrington.
SIR,
I Cannot more effectually enforce the Moral of this Piece which exposes the
Frailty of a VVarrior, than by prefixing to it the Name of one who with the
Bravery and Gallantry of Mars has no allay of his Vices: And as among the few
living Exemplars of such unsullied Virtue I know none more universally, nor
more justly allowed than your self, I must appeal from your Sentence to all the
world, should your Favorite Modesty bias you to condemn the Necessity of this
Address. While so many of our Youth are neglectful of their Ancestors Glory and
their own, and indeed of every Thing but Effeminacy or Libertinism, it is fit we
should set before their Eyes not only the Deformities with which they are
familiar, but the Beauties to which they are Strangers, that they may at once
be shamed into a Loathing of the one, and charmed into an Admiration of the
other. This would require a Panegyric rather than an Epistle, if studied
Ornaments, often injurious to prevailing Charms, were not as prejudicial to
convincing Truth, which is most engaging in its innocent Nakedness, at which it
needs not blush, since it never fell like man To those that know you, your Name
alone will imply more than the best Oratory could display, and even an
imperfect account of your Excellencies will seem almost incredible to others.
You set out so soon and so vigorously for the Race of Glory, that in your early
Morn we see you gain the Prize. Thus even at those years when others of your
Birth and Fortune made no other use of the opportunities they had to improve
their minds but to impair 'em, the general ill Example could not affect you,
unless it were with Compassion; you despised their false Pleasures for the
chaste Love of that Celestial that Alma Venus of your own Lucretius, and that
sublime Truth of your admired Malebranche. You even then reapt the Muses
Laurels, as now you do those of Mars, while your brave Father in the New-world
was gaining a Name that spreads over the old, as yours now flys from the one to
the other. The World with amazement saw you arise in full Glory, and reconcile
Qualities thought almost incompatible; at once a nice and impartial Critic, yet
a polite and excellent Master of Fancy; a Man of Wit and Conversation, yet a
Respecter of sacred things; a Courtier, yet the best of Friends; a forward
Soldier, yet a good Officer; and in short a profound Scholar, yet a fine
Gentleman. Such partly Caesar was; thus he exerted the Writer and the Hero; but
with this difference, he fought to enslave his Country, you to free Yours: and
't was but just that as your Studies have advanced you to an honorable Post
among the Learned, so your Courage should give you one among the Brave, that
you might be at once a singular Honor to either Station; the more, as you seek
no other Benefit from both, but that of doing the more good to men of both
Professions. For, far from being like those whose Pleasures engross their Youth
and Wealth, you cannot be happy with yours, unless it makes others so; and I
could instance some whose needy Modesty has found it self unexpectedly relieved
by you, without being exposed to any other Blushes than what so surprising a
Generosity could raise. I know Sir, you would have your Bounty concealed; but
pardon me if I sav, it is too often employed, not to be discovered; besides it
acts in so obliging a manner, that it is a pain to a grateful Spirit to conceal
it; insomuch that he foregoes the Pride which waited on his Want, to own
favors that humble him, if it can humble a man to be relieved by you: For my
part, I am so far from thinking that possible, that I have long been ambitious
of having this opportunity of owning my self,

SIR, Your most devoted, most Obedient, and most Obliged Servant, P. Motteux

PREFACE.
THis Musical Play or Masque was written to be inserted into a very short Farce
written by Mr. Ravenscroft, called The Anatomist, or the Sham Doctor; without
any other Expectation than that of being serviceable to my Friend. For I am too
well acquainted with that way of Writing, and my own Incapacity, to aim at
Reputation by it. The Rhimer here must sacrifice that to the Musician, or
rather to the Audience's Ear, if there be any Reputation to be challenged from
Trifles of this Nature. I chose a subject never managed in a Dramatic way
before; tho gallantly handled by Ovid, from whom I borrowed it, as I have a
couple of Songs from my self, formerly inserted elsewhere. I was prevailed witk
to bring in a Song and Dance of Cyclopes, tho I knew there is one in Psyche,
borrowed almost verbatim from Moliere's, as he borrowed his from an old Italian
Opera called Le Nozze de gli Dei; but mine is wholly different, which was more
difficult than to have invented another. Whatever the Critics may think of the
Lines, if any will honor them so far as to find fault with 'em, I dare assure,
from the little judgment I have, and much more from the general approbation of
the best Judges, there has not been more agreeable, nor more masterly Music
performed upon our Stage. The two great Composers having, as it were, nobly
strove to outdo one another, and thus excelled even themselves.

By reason of the Symphonies and Repetitions some Lines are left out in the
Singing, which may easily be known by the Marks prefixed, and past over, when
the Music is performing.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE. In the Introduction or Prologue.
ERato, the Muse that presides to Love Songs, etc. Mrs. Hodgson. Thalia, the
Muse that presides to Comic Sports, Mrs. Perrin. Terpsichore, the Muse that
presides to Dancing, etc. Mrs. Ayliff. Chorus of Singers and Dancers their
Followers.

In the Play.
MArs Mr. Bowman. Vulcan, Mr. Reading. Gallus, ( Mars's Pimp, designed for Mr.
Dogget) Mr. Lee. Cupid, Iemmy Laroche. Cyclopes.
Brontes, Arges, Steropes, Pyrachmon,
Mars's Attendants.
Fear, Anger, Noise,
Chorus of Cupids. Chorus of Warriors, some of 'em Dancers. Jupiter. Momus
(with other Gods only seen) Mr. Sherburn. Venus, Mrs. Bracegirdle. Aglaia, one
of the Graces, Mrs. Hodgson. Enphrosyne, another of the Graces, Mrs. Ayliff.
Hora, one of the Hours that wait on Venus, Mrs. Perrin. Juno, (with other
Goddesses only seen) Four of the Cyclops Wives that dance. Iealousy, Mrs.
Hudson.
Prologue spoken by Mr. Betterton.
To day expect no Pageant Decoration,
This Lord May^rs Show began the Reformation:
Yet is our Entertainment odd and new;
We Have in our Show the First of Cuckolds too:
And what we call a Masque some will allow
To be an Op'ra, as the World goes now.
So is your poisoning Quack miscalled a Doctor,
And your worst Mimick calls himself an Actor.
So your dull Scribbler (to our Cost we know it)
Writes a damned Play, and is misnam'd a Poet.
Once Song and Dance could buoy up want of Thinking,
But now those Bladders cannot prevent its Sinking:
Plays grow so heavy, that those helps are vain;
Three times they rise, and never rise again.
Well, if our Neighbors the Precedence claim,
For good dull Stuff we'll not dispute with them.
Our Medley is perhaps as much too light,
But let it pass -- We don't take Money yet by weight.
By Sympathy, 't should please the Beaux, I know,
For in all things an Opra's like a Beau.
Both Beau and Op'ra on the Stage are seen;
Both odd in Dress, and shifting still the Scene;
Each dances, sings, and moves like a Machine.
To be admir^d, it is at a vast Expense;
It loves soft words, but cares not much for sense;
For by its Nature 'twas designed for show;
Why, it is an Op'ra but to dress a Beau.
But one unlucky difference stands between;
Op'ra's are paid, but Beaux pay to be seen,
(Those who don tcome to sharp an Act I mean)
For your own sakes, we beg Applause of you;
Since 'twill revenge you on the Scribbling Crew.
For, if this takes, strait cries each senceless Elf,
Them me, I Would write as well as this my self.
With that he writes a thing, which we refuse,
Then, wondering how we durst affront his Muse,
Strait in a huff he gives it to other House;
Who either slight it, or twill be its Lot
To get as much as their last Op'ra got,
Epilogue spoken by Mr. Bowen.
GOod People! save the Body of our Play,
From those who to dissect it Yonder stay;
Like Surgeons on an Execution day.
Even e're it dies they ll mawl it, I m afraid;
And you would think t hard, like me, in such a dread,
To be dissected, e re you're hanged, and dead.
The fear of this our trembling Scribbler kills;
I dare say they have no need to take my Pills.
Pray spare 'em: Learn of Vulcan to forgive;
Or else, egad, few Plays or Wives will live.
Even he, methinks, too late his wrath did smother,
Here, Wives and Husbands keep not such a pother,
But fairly strive to out-Cuckold one another.
Why, should all dye that follow the Occupation,
Oonds! twere the way to cut off half the Nation.
Besides, Horns are not seen; should they appear,
Gadsooks, yon Place would even outhorn Horn-Fair.
You Would see your Surly Dons toss their Bull's Feathers,
And your tame poor Contented bleat like Weathers.
Lewd rakish Husbands, butt with Goatish Horns,
And half-made Cuckolds with an Unicorn's.
Now as all have to Cuckoldry a Call,
So will the Curse of scribbling on you fasl;
'E gad these Times make Poets of us all.
Then do not damn your Brothers of the quill;
To be revenged, there is hope you will write as ill.
For nere were seen more Scribes, yet less good writing,
As there nere were more Soldiers, yet less Fighting.
Both can do nothing if they want supplies.
Then aid us; and our League its neighboring Foes defies;
Tho they bribed lately one of our Allies.
Sure you would not have us, for want of due pittance,
Like Nicompoops sneak to them for admittance.
No; prompt by you our fears and dangers cease,
Here firm, tho Wealth decay, and Foes increase,
We'll bravely tug for Liberty and Peace.
PROLOGUE, or Introduction.
Set to Music by Mr. Finger.
Performed after the Prologue that is spoken.

The Overture: A Symphony of Trumpets, KettleDrums, Violins and Hautbois.

Scene the New Theater.

Erato, Thalia, and Terpsicore, with their Attendants on both sides the Stage,
are discovered.

Acoompaniments of Instruments.

Erato. COme, all, with moving Songs prepare
To Charm the Witty and the Fair!
Ye Trumpets softly breathe, or cease!
Love may in Britaiu raise a War,
But 'twill be sweeter far than Peace.

Chorus repeats the foregoing Stanza. One of Erato's Followers. I.
Love alone can here alarm us,
And he only strikes to charm us.
Gazing, liking, and admiring,
Firing, panting, and desiring,
Fearing, daring, trying, flying,
Feigning, pressing, faint denying,
Still reviving, fierce Delights;
This is Love, and these his Fights.
Ritornel of Flutes. II.
Eager Kisses,
Fiery Glances,
Balmy Blisses,
Melting Trances,
Kind Complying,
Kinder Dying,
Happy Days, and happier Nights,
Still reviving fierce Delights,
This is Love, and these his Fights.

Ritornel of Violins. Two others. Love, like War, has noble Cares:
War sheds Blood, and Love sheds Tears.
War has Swords, and Love has Darts;
War takes Towns, and Love takes Hearts.
Love, like War, the bold requires:
Love, like War, has Flames and Fires.
Love, like War, does Art admit;
Love, like War, for Youth is fit.

Ritornel of Violins. Erato. Scorn, tho Beauty frowns, to tremble.
Lovers, boldly urge your Flame:
For a Woman will dissemble,
Loves the Joy, but hates the Name:
Her refusing, your pursuing
Yield alike a pleasing pain,
Ever curing and renewing,
Soon appeased, to rage again.
II.
'If the Soldier storms and rages,
'Face him with a lovely Maid:
'This his Fury soon assuages,
'And the Devil soon is laid.
'He never conquers but by Toyling,
'But the Fair subdues with Ease:
'Blood he sheds with hatred boiling,
'But the Fair can kill and please.

Ritornel of Violins. Thalia. To double the Sports to Thalia belongs;
I Will join Comic Scenes to your Amorous Songs:
To heighten Life's Pleasures, to soften its Cares,
No Charm like a Farce, no Physicians like Play'rs.

Ritornel. Terpsichore. To treble the Pleasures,
With regular Measures,
My Train shall advance:
Some join in a Chorus;
While, gayly before us,
Some join in a Dance.

Ritornel. Grand Chorus. Let Scenes of Mirth and Love,
With Songs and Dances joining,
The fleeting hours improve,
And banish dull repining.
He who those Joys refuses,
When kindly they invite,
The End of Living loses;
Life's business is Delight.

Exeunt. While the Grand Chorus is performing, there is an Entry of
Dancing-masters, teaching their Scholars, and making Love to 'em: and a
Harlequin mimicking 'em with a She-Harlequin, which expresses the business of
the Prologue. This Dance cannot be performed, the Master who made it being
sick. Another Entry is danced instead of it. The First Act.
Set to Music by Mr. John Eccles.
Scene a Palace.
Overture. Violins and Hautbois. Enter Aglaia and Euphrosyne. TO meet her Mars,
the Queen of Love
Comes here adorned with all her Charms
The Warrior best the Fair can move;
And crowns his Toyls in Beauty's Arms.
Symphony of Flutes. Enter Venus improving her Dress; attended by Hora, the
Graces, and others. Say, ye Graces, am I now
Fit to make Immortals bow?
Are my Dress, my Face, and Air
Fit to charm the God of War?
Say, ye Graces, am I now
Fit to make Immortals bow?

Hora. You Have been scarce five hours a dressing;
Yet you're charming past expressing.

Venus. Let me see once more the Glass!
So! -- I fancy it may pass.

She looks a while in the Glass while a Ritornel is played. Euphrosine and
Aglaia. 'Women seldom like their Faces,
'Tho they long consult the Glass;
'But, if you dare trust the Graces,
'You now even your self surpass.
'And when Beauty's self engages,
'Arm'd with such a Dress and Air,
'She may conquer rigid Sages,
'And even the rough God of War.

Venus. How slow the Warlike God I find!
On Love's expanded Wings expecting Lovers move
But slow as palsied age expected Lovers prove;
Love flags, and leaves the heavy mass behind.
Fly, ye hours; haste, bring him here
Swift as my fond Wishes are!
When we love, and love to rage,
Every Moment is an Age. Enter Cupid, to the same Tune, and smiling.
But when blessed with what we love,
Ages but a Moment prove.
Beauty's Goddess, cease to mourn:
Soon to your Arms,
From War's Alarms,
Your Lover will return:
Your Grief will then be lost in Kisses,
Melting Blisses,
You will gaze and laugh and toy:
As gloomy night
Adds Charms to Light,
So Absence to our Joy.

Ritorne. Venus. Will my Soldier then be here?
Where was he? come, tell, my Dear?

Chucks Cupid under the Chin. Cupid. The rough Warrior roved a while
In the lovely British Isle.
Had not I his Flame renewed,
He could scarce have now been here;
For such Beauties there I viewed,
As might even with You compare.

Venus. Tell me, gentle Cupid, how
In that Isle I Am worshipped now?

Cupid. There the kindest Husbands are,
And the kindest-hearted Fair.
Each in Hymen's Bonds is free;
And, when Wives with Lovers go,
Cuckolds, not to disagree,
Thank the Men who make 'em so.
Ritornel. Others, fond of roving Lives,
Love all Women but their Wives.
Painted Beauties there abound;
Nay, some Men are painted too:
Crowds are in all Temples found,
But come most to worship You.

Venus. Happp Isle! and happier far,
If thou knew'st no other War!
Venus's Attendants repeat this Distich Happy Isle! and happier far
If thou knew'st no other War!

A March to a rough wild Tune.

Enter Vulcan with Brontes, Steropes, Arges, Pyrachmon, and other Cyclopes.

Vulcan looks about with his Spectacles.

Vulcan. Where Is my damned Wife? hoh! here she stands!
Methinks she is plaguey fine to day!
And this in spite of my Commands:
There Is something in it; she looks too gay.

Cupid. the grumbling Husband here?
Love no longer then can stay.

Exit Cupid with his Followers. Euphrosyne. When the jealous Coxcomb's near,
All the Graces must away.

Exeunt the three Graces. Hora. Now an hour will seem a day.


Manent Horae. Vulcan. Thou Plague of my Life,
Thou Devil, thou Wife!
Come, tell me, why did you
Dress so like a Crack? you know I forbad you.
Why d' you Patch thus and prink?
What, you're Painted I think!
Why this Head six foot high?
S Blood and Fire, who am I?

Venus. My Fool; for what else can that Property b
That Is ugly, and old, and ill-natured, like Thee?
I Will dress when I please, nay I Will Cuckold Thee too:
What else have young Wives with such Husbands to do?

Vulcan. If ever you dare,
I Will make the World know what a Strumpet you are.

Venus. Nay, what do I care?
You Will make the World know what a Cuckold you are.

Both at the same time in a scolding manner. Vulcan. I Will make the World know
what a Strumpet you are.


Venus. You Will make the World know what a Cuckold you are.


Ritornel. Vulcan. Join, and curse the Tie with me,
That confines us to one Bed!

Venus. Thus at least we'll once agree;
Cursed be he that made us wed!

Vulcan repeats that Verse three times with Venus. Enter some Cyclopes and
their Wives, at the noise of Vulcan and Venus's quarrelling. Chorus of all.
Join, and curse the Tie with me
That confines us to one Bed!
Thus alone you can agree,
Cursed be he, cursed be he, cursed be he that made you wed.

Some of the Cyclopes and their Wives dance, while the others are singing; and
in the Dance they frown, jolt, and threaten each other, wring their hands, and
kick backwards, and the Women make Horns at the Men. The End of the First Act.
The Second Act.
The Music of the Second Act composed by Mr. John Eccles.
Scene the Garden of Venus.

A March, with Trumpets and Kettledrums, and then with Hautbois, alternate.

Enter Mars, followed by Gallus, Fear, Anger, Noise, and a Body of Soldiers
marching.

Mars. HAlt!


Fear. -- Halt!


Noise. -- Halt!


Mars. -- None but Gallus further comes. Now face about.

They all face about, except Gallus. -- Sound, beat

A Retreat,

Ye Trumpets, and ye Drums.

March all to Quarters; March, and there remain, Till my Command renews the
rough Campaign.


They all march out in Military order, except Mars and Gallus, who stay. The
Drums, Trumpets and Hautbois continue the March alternate, till they are all
gone. Mars. Thou watchful Sentinel of Love,
Gallus, my trusty Spy,
By whom secure in amorous Wars I move,
And all surprising Foes defy,
Procure thy Master new Delight;
Go, bring my Goddess to my sight!
Gallus, looking sneekingly. What if the limping Cuckold's nigh?
I may be banged,
And may be hanged,
And then, god' b' y*,
Gallus your trusty Spy!

Mars. No more: I on thy Vigilance rely.


Gallus. I shall be killed.

Mars, offering to draw his Sword. -- By me.


Gallus. -- Hold, hold, I fly.


Gallus exit running. Symphony. Mars. Oh! Rival! you must happy be;
You every day my Goddess see.
Perhaps in vain you sigh and sue;
But you, at least, my Goddess view.
For such a dear bewitching sight,
Who would not gaze away the Light?
Oh! tho I see her every where,
I too too little see the Fair.
n vain to shun her sight I strove:
Here, in my Heart it is fixed by Love.
None can the Charming Image blot,
I see her, when I see her not.
And who can from her Chains be freed?
She looks; and Gods themselves adore.
She smiles; then I Am a God indeed.
She Is in my Arms; Oh then I Am more!

Enter Venus followed by Cupid and his Train, and Gallus after them.

Venus running into Mars' Arms.

My Mars!


Mars. -- My Venus!


Mars and Venus. -- Oh!


Mars. My Life!


Venus. -- My Soul, my dearest Mars!


Mars. -- My dearest Venus! oh!
'Now let the World a Truce from Wars and Tumults know
'While Mars is here, it is Peace below.
'O Absence, now I see
'Unjustly we complain of Thee;
'Without Thy Power could I have hoped to find?
'Even Beauty's Queen so charming and so kind.

Venus. My Life!


Mars. -- My Soul!


Venus. -- My dearest Mars!


Mars. -- My dearest Venus!


Venus. -- Oh!


Cupid, while dumb Courtship passes between Mars and Venus. Come, you Loves,
clap every Wing;
Io Triumph! dance and sing!
Cupid's Followers dance. 'Come, you Loves, clap every Wing;
' Io Triumph! dance and sing!

Mars and Venus. How sweet, how pleasing, when returned,
The lovely Object whom we mourned!
Recruited Fires more fiercely warm,
And Absence heightens every Charm.
The Blessing that a while was lost,
When it is regained is valued most.
'How sweet, how pleasing, when returned,
'The lovely Object whom we mourned!

Venus. My Life!


Mars. -- My Soul!


Venus. -- My dearest Mars!


Mars. -- My dearest Venus!


Venus. -- Oh!


Enter Vulcan while Venus is in the Arms of Mars, and saying -- Oh! Vulcan. So!
so!


He offers to knock 'em down with his Hammer, but is hindered by Gallus.
Gallus. Hold; Let the God of Anvils know,
My Master's Arms must be just so.

While he sings the last Verse, he puts his Arms about Vulcan s Neck, and then
about his Body and Thighs, making motions to show him how a Coat of Armor
should be made to fit Mars. Vulcan. You saucy Varlet, I say no.
Come, Bully Mars, let go, let go!
Your Arms must be just so, just so.

While he sings this, he takes Mars by the Arms, and lays 'em along his sides.
Gallus. Hold, fiery Smith, I mean those Arms
Which you must frame for War's Alarms:
Those Arms must o re his Shoulders close just so,
As he now did to Venus show,
Only that she might let you know.
He Is somewhat rough, she somewhat tender,
His leaning on her might offend her;
So she cried, Oh! That Is all.

Vulcan. -- -- -- Oh ho! is it so?


Gallus. Now since you're come, if you're at Leisure,
An't please your Godship, take his Measure

Ritornel. Mars. Here Vulcan, Arm me, Cap-a-pie!
And let my Shield impenetrable be.
Let future Heroes there appear;
Place Greece's, Rome's, and brave Britain's there.
Let Alexander, Caesar, Arthur meet,
And all their Laurels lay at greater William's Feet.
' William, more God like, and as brave,
'Shall only fight the endangered World to save:
' William, my other self shall be;
'Inspir'd by The Goddess Justice.
Themis, and by me.
'Immur'd in Steel now Warriors safely fight;
'But Balls unseen with rapid Flight
'One day shall deal Destruction through the Field:
' William, with Breast unarmed, shall face those fiery Foes;
'And Mars must kindly interpose,
'His Representative to shield.
Here, Vulcan, Arm me Cap-a-pie!
And let my Shield impenetrable be.

Gallus. But good your Godship, know,
His Arms must be just so, just so.

Vulcan, hindering Venus from holding Mars; who, while Gallus sings, talks to
her, making signs as if he gave her Directions about the Armor. 'Hold, I don't
like my Wife should feel
'This ample Back of Brawn like Steel.
Come, Mistress, pray, what Business had you here!

Venus faultring. I only-came-to -- take -- the Air, my Dear.


Vulcan. You rather came to Arm my Head, I fear.


Venus wheadling. Go, now I hate you, now go to!
And could you, could you think I Would do
As I in jest did threaten you?
Go, now I hate you, now, go to.
Dull Fool! had I designed to try,
Would I have told you so before?
Besides, you see my Son was by.

Vulcan. Your Son's a Pimp, and you --


Venus. -- -- -- No more.


Vulcan. 'Why, sure some Fiend must have possessed you!
''Tis but a Month since I caressed you.

Venus. 'Ungrateful Dear! could you believe
'I would my self and you deceive?
'What with that Forehead can compare?
'Can any one read Cuckold there?
'That Leer! that Hip, that Heel and Toe!
'What though you're old? most Beaux are so.

Vulcan. 'Nay, when I Am smugg'd up, I Am so comely,
'I know you cannot think me homely.

Mars. Come, for her Pardon humbly sue!
Though she were not so true,
She^^ (...) too good for you.
Come; for her Pardon humbly sue!

Vulcan. What shall I do?
I fear this Mars, and love and fear her too,

Mars. Come, for her Pardon humbly sue.

Vulcan. It must be so, My Deary, Deary!
My Love! my Soul!

Venus. -- -- -- My hate, my Fool!

Vulcan. Pray, Chuck, don't frown, let me come near you!
Come, it is a Folly to repine,
You Have had your Jest, pray pardon mine.

Venus. First ask his Pardon as you ought.

Vulcan to Mars. You hear her, pray good Mars forgive my Fault.

Mars. Well, for her sake, no more of this be thought.

Vulcan 'Now, Dear, a Kiss in sign of Grace!

Venus. 'Not till you have got you a new Face.

Vulcan. 'Come, Buss'e; come, it must be so!

Venus after he had kissed her. 'Pish, you're so troublesome! Now go.

Gallus. 'Shou'd he not beg my Pardon too?

Mars. 'Ah! how sweet is Reconciling,
'When a loving Pair is smiling,
'Free from Spleen or jealous doubt!
'O that we could still be smiling,
'still thus kindly reconciling,
'And yet never falling out!

Vulcan. Now all is well, my Cyclops shall advance
With their newest Anvil-Dance.

Vulcan exit. Mars. 'Let's a while renew our Blisses
'In a sweet exchange of Kisses:
'Thus the Lover comes in Play,
'When the Husband is away.

Venus. 'But alas he will not stay!
'Soon be gone; but soon return.
'Soon? no, I a whole tedious hour must mourn!
'I a whole tedious hour must be
'Depriv,d of Heaven, deprived of Thee.

Enter Vulcan, with several Singing and Dancing Cyclopes. They lay an Anvil en
the middle of the Stage. Brontes, Arges, Steropes, and Pyrachmon, the four
chief Cyclopes, Sing, while others Dance and strike on the Anvil. Vulcan. Come,
away; strike and sing,
Ting, ting, ting, terry terre, terry ting, etc.
Let us make the Caves ring,
Ting, ting, ting, ting, ting, ting,
While we forge Thunderbolts for Heaven's King.
Ting, ting, ting.

-Steropes holding a red hot Bolt. This he will fling,
Ting, ting, ting.
At Cowards at Sieges, and Atheists at Prayers.
At a Husband, who by his Wife's Chastity swears.
This he will fling, ting, ting, ting.

Chorus of Cyclops. At promising Courtiers, and Fools that believe 'em;
At poor Rogues that give Bribes, and rich Knaves that receive 'em,
This he will fling, etc.
'At a Weathercock Priest who nere thinks as he teaches.
'At a Cit in his Buff with his Heart in his Breeches.
This he will fling, etc.
'At Beaux who protest they of Favors nere boast,
'Yet drink the Fair's Health every Night with a Toast.
This he will fling, etc.
'At Masks, who at Fifty would follow Love's Trade;
'At a Female of Twenty that swears she is a Maid.
This he will fling, etc.
At a Couple who swear that they never repented;
At a Briton who says, he can long live contented.
This he will fling, etc.
At a Ninny who finds a Gallant with his Wife,
Then begs both their Pardons for making a Strife.

Vulcan. 'How! then I am fooled I doubt?


Mars. 'No, he jests; come, still be smiling,
'Free from Spleen, or jealous Doubt,
'Still be kindly reconciling,
'But be never falling out.

The Cyclopes with the rest join in a Chorus, and Dance, striking on their
Anvil. 'Thus may your Joys for ever last,
'The Charms of Peace best after Wars we taste.

The End of the Second Act.
Act Third and Last.
The Music Composed by Mr. Finger.
Scene a Grove.

Symphony. Enter Vulcan, and Jealousy behind him.

MY Courage comes, now Mars is gone.
I Will not be Bullied into Patience.
I should be jeered, should he go on,
By Gods, and Godlins, and all Nations.
No, I Will be bold, now Mars is gone.
How shall I use this Rampant Creature?
Jealousy imitating Echo -- -- hate her.
What if I valiantly should beat her?
Jealousy like Echo, -- -- -- beat her.
But when she wheadles I believe her.
Jealousy like Echo, -- -- -- leave her.
Will she still Jilt my kind Endeavor?
Jealousy like Echo, -- -- -- ever.
How! Echo! what am I? speak Echo?
Jealousy like a Cuckoe, -- -- -- -Cuckoe.
Symphony. Vulcan, thinking it to be the Cuckoe's Note. Vile Bird, be cursed for
thy unwelcome Tongue!
Hence, let the lustful Sparrow hatch thy Young,
And Cuckoe be thy Name, and Cuckoe be thy Song!
Let Married Wretches dread, yet share thy Name,
Their Wives the Guilt, yet theirs the Shame,
Till Cuckoe spreads through all the Universal Frame.

Jealousy discovers her self. Symphony. Jealousy. See, Vulcan, Jealousy
appears!
Though not to ease, but raise thy Cares.
Still restless round the World I run,
To rack the wretched Lover's Mind:
I watch and journey with the Sun,
To search for what I dread to find.
Thence sliding on a Beam, my Eye
Saw Mars with Venus loosely toy.

Ritornel. Vulcan. Revenge me Hell, new Pains invent!
To plague 'em, all thy Racks I Will steal.
No, that is too mild a Punishment;
Let Them both share the Hell, the greater Hell I feel.

Exeunt Vulcan and Jealousy. Enter Venus and Mars following her, and Gallus
and Euphrosyne after 'em. Mars. Yield, my Dear, let f^ll possessing
Crown my Love, and Charm my Sense.

Venus. No, I must oppose your pressing
With as gallant a Defense.

Mars. When Love's Harvest should be reaping,
Will you waste the Time in Doubt?

Venus. Every Town that is worth the keeping,
Keeps a while the Invader out.
Cheap Embraces quickly cloy;
Easy Conquest seems a Toy:
But denying,
Struggling, flying,
Wanton playing,
Wise delaying,
Raise us to a Sense of Joy.

Mars and Venus. Love's a Hawk, and stoops apace:
We all hurry
For the Quarry,
Though the Sport ends with the Chase.

Ritornel. Exit- Venus and Mars after her. Gallus to Euphrosyne. Come Child,
let us kiss, hang dull silly wooing,
It Is time, like our Betters, we two should be doing.
Kind Fate still assigns, as a Custom that is common*
To the Mistress, the Master, the Man to the Woman.

Euphrosyne. Be still, I hate your wanton Play,

Gallus. Yet on a wanton Mistress wait?

Euphrosyne. What others can be found of late?
If now we cannot still obey,
See all, hear all, and nothing say,
'Twere pity we should serve the Great.

Gallus. What, would you have me dully woo?
I cannot flatter, cringe, and sue:
Yet if high Love must pass between us,
Come, I Will be Mars, do you be Venus.
Like a Soldier. Dear Madam, you're so damned inviting,
Rot me, I love you more than Fighting.
There cannot be a better sport,
Than to besiege so fine a Fort:
Your Eyes strange Execution do;
Yet I must dye, or conquer you.

Euphrosyne. Hold, or my Hands will prove to you
Offensive, and Defensive too.

Gallus. It Is vain, make what defense you please,
These two white Rising Towers I Will seize.

Gal. Yield.

Struggles with her. Eu. -- No.

Gal. -- -- I must storm then.

Eu. -- -- Do, do, I defy you.
Be quiet, nay don't you; I Will cry out.

Gal. -- -- -- I Will try you.

Eu. Do, do, I defy you; do, no Body's by you,

Eu. Hold, hold!

Gal. -- -- -- I hold you.

Eu. -- -- Hold, hold, or I Will fly you.

Gal. I hold you.

Eu. -- I Will fly you.

Gall. -- -- -- Do, do, I defy you.

Gallus carries her off. Ritornel. Re-enter Vulcan, having laid a Net by the
Couch. Vulcan. My Wife and her Bully are coming this way;
Though kill them I cannot, expose 'em I may.
Since Chains of hot Lust, their dark Union have made,
In Fetters as subtle they will here be betrayed.
Ritornel. Well, let ev'y Fumble,
Who like me will stumble,
Be soon made as humble
As I!
And may his Wife fly him,
Or court others by him,
And Fate then deny him
To dye.

Exit. Ritornel. Re-enter Mars and Venus. Mars very Amourously. How my Passion
is increased
With imperfect Pleasure toying!
I Will no more starve at a Feast,
Nor enjoy without enjoying.
Venus running into his Arms. Ah! my Dear, my Soul, my all!
Thus for ever let me lie!
In thy Arms I ravished fall,
Tranc'd in melting Joys I dye.

Mars and Venus sit upon the Couch. Mars. 'O bless me less! the Almighty Joy
'Will even Divinity destroy*
'It shakes and labors with the Bliss,
'And wastes, and wastes with every stronger Kiss.
Wild Music. It Thunders, and at the same time, The Net spreads over 'em, The
Scene opens and discovers in a Glory, Jupiter, Juno, and other Heavenly
Deities. Mars, roused out of his Ecstasy, and finding himself caught. 'Hah! am
I fallen from Heaven to Hell?
'No, still it is Heaven bright Goddess where you dwell.
How! trapt in Chains! Jove here! Cursed Vulcan too!
Ye Gods, what Being ever fell
So low, from high'r than you?
To Gallus. Dull Spy, by whose Neglect I Am caught,
'Turn to a Bird, and by thy early Call,
('Lest secret Lovers like me fall)
'Prevent the prying Sun, and thus atone thy Fault.

Vulcan. 'Here for ever thus remain:
'Strong as Fate is Vulcan's Chain.
'Curs'd be the Pair that brand my Front with Shame!
'Most cursed my Wife! Damn, all Adult'rers, Damn,
'May my worst Fires boil their Salacious*Blood,
'Corrode their Flesh, dry up the tainted Flood;
Prey on their Bones, their inmost Marrow fry,
Till they curse Heaven, like me, and vainly wish to dye!

Momus laughing to Mars. Dear Bully, you are fitted; long may you lie thus!
It Is sweet to make Cuckolds; but why one of us?
What Is cheaper than Women? Look, yonder appears
A World of kind Wives, and of She Volunteers!
Not one here but wishes to have been in your place:
Yet, Vulcan, you are wise thus to spread thy Disgrace:
Thus Jealousy's cured, and Men gladly will know,
There are Cuckolds above, as well as below.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, hah! as well as below.

The Chorus, Repeat the last two Lines. Symphony. Enter Cupid with a Train of
Cupids. Cupid. Thus all unequal Unions break.
Thus Hymen without Love is weak.
But I Will exert my Power anew,
Make Vulcan kind, and Venus true.
Her Gratitude will soon Improve,
And Friendship shall resemble Love.
Where Hymen wove unequal Ties,
Love to no higher Pitch can Rise:

Cupid strikes Vulcan with an Arrow. Venus. Compelled by Love and Fate's
resistless Power,
We loved, we failed, your Pardon I implore.

Vulcan. Well, I Am a Fool! will you do so no more?

Venus, Mars, and Cupid. No more, no more, no more.

Vulcan goes to set 'em free. A March with Trumpets and Kettle-Drums, etc.
Enter the Followers of Mars. Immediately after the Warlike Music, Flutes, and
other soft Music, are heard. Rouse, God of War, to Arms, to Arms!

Cupids. To Love, to Love, to Love's Alarms!

Warriors. To War, to War, to War's Alarms!

Cupids. Hark! Flutes are warbling Love!

Warrior. -- -- -- Hark! Trumpets answer War.

Mars. War, Battles, Conquests, Triumphs, Glory, War,
None but he is worthy Love,
Whom the Charms of Glory move.

Cupid and Mars hand in hand. None but he is worthy Love,
Whom the Charms of Glory move

Grand Chorus of all the Voices and Instruments. Hail! Great Gods of Love and
War!
Thus the World's vast* Empire share!

Cupids. -- Glory without Love is vain.

Warriors -- Without Glory Love's a Bane.

Cupids and Warriors. None but he is worthy Love,
Whom the Charms of Glory move.
Hail! Great Gods of Love and War!
Thus the World's vast Empire share!

While the Grand Chorus is performed, several of Cupid's Followers Dance to
Flutes, and other soft Music; and several of Mars's Followers Dance to
Trumpets, and other Warlike Music Alternately; the Warriors strike on their
Shields a kind of Tune with their Scymitars, and Dance a Pyrrhick Dance, by
Fits fighting off the Stage suddenly, and then immediately the Cupids come in
and Dance, with their Bows and Arrows seeming to aim at each other, then also
go off, and re-enter by Fits, which ends the Entertainment.

An Explanation of the Fable of Mars and Ve^^^. Out of Mr. Motteux's
Gentleman's Journal, Month of January, Vol: 3.
THE oldest of the Heathen Gods was Coelus, whose Son Saturn is sometimes
described like an old man devouring his Children, and at others with Wings and
a Scyth; with which having spoilt his Father's propagating Faculty, lest he
should produce other Beings, some of the Blood fell into the Sea, and mixing
with the foamy Waves give birth to Venus.

By Coelus the Ancients seem to have meant the Heavens, whose motions give
birth to Time, which is figured by Saturn, made old because first created; and
said to devour his Children, Time devouring its Offspring. The Wings imply its
swiftness, and the Scyth that it mows down all. Saturn castrating Coelus shows,
that Time soon takes from things the power of multiplying their Kind, lest they
should increase to too great a Number, and that the Destruction of one is the
production of another* also, that even after the loss of the Power, Desire
fluctuates, and creates Venus.

Fair Venus is the Wife of limping Vulcan, and Cupid is her Son; Mars is the
Son of Juno, who by the advice of Flora, begot him, having touched a Flower, to
be even with Jupiter, who begot Minerva out of his Brain without any other
help. Mars is charmed, courts and enjoys Venus, but Phoebus discovers this to
Vulcan, who frames so artificial a Net, that he ^^cures Mars and Venus in it,
who are exposed to the laughter of the Gods.

Venus is libidinous Pleasure, which is always wedded to the Fire of Lust,
which is the reason that Vulcan is made ugly, because Lust is so; li^ping like
too (...) its infected Votaries; and supporting himself with a stick, because
Fire cannot subsist without Fuel; made* God of Smiths, because Lustful flames
(...) to forge and sharpen the first points of Love, that is, the Arms of
Cupid; (...) it, made those of the Trojans and Greeks in another sense, the
Loves of Paris and Helena having caused those two Nations to take up Arms. And
as Venus is daughter of the Sea* Vulcan's Wife, and Mars's Mistress, she is apt
to cause stormy commotions, Fire and Bloodshed.

As for Jupiter' s having without any help produced out of his Brain Minerva
the Goddess of Arts and Sciences, called Pallas and Bellona, when she presides
to defensive arms, this means the omnipotent Deity, who by his supreme wisdom
has formed all states, and given to Man Arts and Sciences, with the means of
defending himself against his Enemies. Juno is Riches Jealousy and Envy, that
beg at Mars, which is War, in opposition to Minerva, that is the flourishing
condition of Governments. Flora by whom Juno is advised, means Youth, to whose
rash advice War often ows its beginning. By Mars Warriors are to be understood,
who gazing on Venus, or libidinous Pleasure, are enticed; and abandoning
themselves to an ignoble sloth, lose their martial vigor, which is only
preserved by military Discipline. Now this cannot be hid from the piercing eyes
of a prying observer, meant by the Sun, whose light discovers all the i^tr^ague
to the Enemy: Thus they are surprised in the snare which the Fire of Lust, the
Husband of unl^wful pleasure has laid for them, and expose to the censure of
the Gods, that is, their Superiors and the World.

FINIS.

