WORDS For an Entertainment at the MUSIC-FEAST, ON St. Cecilia's Day, Being the
22d of November, 1695.
Set to Music by Dr. John Blow.
Written by Mr. Motteux.
Performed by Two Choirs.
GReat Choir of Heaven, attend, and bear a Part;
We praise our heavenly Patroness and Art.
Be grave, our Lays, then sprightly; soft, then strong;
Like the great Double Subject of our Song.
I. For St. Cecilia.
Cecilia, great by native Right,
As Angels pious, and as bright,
Raised charming Music's Fame.

II. For Music.
Music, by native Right divine,
Makes Beauty with new Glory shine,
And raised Cecilia's Name.

I. Cecilia did our Art improve.

II. Our Art increased her sacred Love.

The Charms of Music made her long
To join in the Seraphic Song,
And her Example drew the ravished Throng.
So, when the Trumpet sounds to Arms,
Britons, whom Native Valor warms,
Are doubly fired, and doubly run to Arms.
To Arms, they cry, and all around
Ten thousand Braves return the welcome warlike Sound.
I. Cecilia taught new Graces to the Choir,
And made all Instruments in one conspire.

II. By Music taught, in her harmonious Mind,
All Virtues in full Consort joined.

Faith, Hope, and Love the Trebles were:
Reason the Tenor still was there;
And every Part to grace,
Humility the Basse.
I. While the Musician served the Saint,
What could she ask but Heaven would grant?

II. When Pray*rs on Music's Wings arise,
Heaven* granting, does but sympathise.

I. Let such a Beauty sing and play,
Angels themselves will run astray!

II. None by such heavenly Beauty strayed,
'Twas Heaven where e're Cecilia played.

Music's best Image was her Face:
In every Feature* an harmonious Grace
Disclaimed the Ear, and through the quicker sight*
Informed the Soul with fierce delight:
Nay, Music's self in silent State was there.
There reigned the peaceful softness of the Flute;
The melting sweetness of the Lute;
The Violin's prevailing lively Air;
And moving Charms diffused around,
Inimitable like her Voice;
With something solemn, like her Organ's Sound,
At once to give and heal a wound,
And, grieving, to rejoice.
Grand Chorus.
Hail, Music! still our Thoughts employ,
Love's Food divine, Life's purest Joy,
Blessed Speech of the Celestial Throng,
Thou best and universal Song,
Thou Wing of Zeal* and every Passion's Queen,
Thou Spring, thou Rule, and Soul of Nature's grand Machine!
FINIS.

