SAVING FAITH AND PRIDE Of LIFE INCONSISTENT.

Delivered in a SERMON, preached before the then Commissioners of the
Commonwealth of England for the Affairs of Ireland at Christ-Church in Dublin.

By John Murcot one of the Preachers in Ordinary, to the Lord Deputy and
Council of Ireland.

HAB. 2.4. Behold his soul which is lifted up, is not upright in him: but the
Just shall live by his Faith.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Tho. Underhill at the sign of the
Bible in Paul's Churchyard, near the little North-doore. 1656.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE CHARLES FLEETWOOD Esquire; Lord Deputy General of the
Dominion of IRELAND: THE LORD HENRY CROMWELL, Major General of the Army:
RICHARD PEPYS, Lord chief Justice of the Upper Bench in IRELAND: MILES CORBET,
Lord chief Baron of the EXCHEQVER: ROBERT GOODWIN Esquire; MATTHEW TOMLINSON Esquire;
Counselors of State for the Affairs of IRELAND.
May it please your Honors,
THe Sermon we now present your Honors with, as it was preached with the
highest evidence and Power upon the Hearts and spirits of those that heard it:
so accordingly we believe, it may continue the same effect now published in
those, whose frail memories may have lost a great part of the sense of it; and
by an humble reading and meditation of it, may do much more good, to those that
have altogether been unacquainted with it. Of what value the Author was both
for his Conversation and Doctrine; that honor and respect that all had to his
words, both in Public and Private, as to Jobs, Job 29.21, 22, 23. together
with that general expression of sorrow from all persons high and low, good and
bad, upon his death, and at his Funerals, is the most effectual Testimony. We
shall not therefore spend your Honors time in giving our commendations of him;
He being above them; we also knowing that his Name and memory is still fresh,
and will continue precious upon your hearts.

For the Discourse; the sutablenesse of the Argument to the Distempers of the
Age, and that height of spiritual zeal and prudence in managing of it, speak
it worth the publishing: We therefore hearing that it was the earnest desire of
many to have the sight of it; it being by the conscientious care and labor of
his Widow, with several others of his Labors prepared for view; we thought it
our duties to commend it to your Honors, as your due; and to the Saints and
all that make profession of the Name of our Lord Jesus, as a most necessary
piece of Christian knowledge, in this day of pride and formality; whereby all
may examine themselves, that call themselves Believers, whether they be in the
faith, yea or no.

We leave your Honors and this Sermon to the blessing of God; and with our
daily prayers, that your Honors may be faithful and prosperous in the great
work of your Generation, the settlement of this poor Nation upon the sure Bases
of Truth and Justice.

Your Honors Most humble and obedient servants in the Ministry of the Gospel,
SAM. WINTER. (...)OTTON. ROBERT CHAMBER.

SAVING FAITH AND PRIDE Of LIFE INCONSISTENT.
JOHN 5.44. How can ye believe, which receive honor one of another, and seek
not the honor that comes from God only?


NEver more cause to complain, Isa. 53.1.
(Brethren) then now, Who has believed our report, and to whom has the arm
of the Lord been revealed? It is applied to our Saviors own preaching, whom
very few received. But there the obstruction lay altogether in the hearts of
the people; they were locked up against the Lord Jesus as by other things, so
especially by this, their ambition, and seeking honor one of another. Our
Savior himself was not guilty. No marvel if we have more cause now to
complain (Brethren,) then he then; for there is a double bar: one in the
hearts of the people, and the other in the hearts of the Preachers: this
seeking honor one of another, makes our chariot wheels drive so heavily, the
work of Christ go on so slowly. I desire therefore this day to act the part of
the Baptist, to prepare the way of the Lord, to endeavor to level one of the
mountains of our hearts, and swellings of our spirits, which is the great
hindrance of believing, as you have it plainly in the Text.

Our Savior being now come into the world, added a new Article to their Creed,
that they must believe in Jesus already come, Joh. 8.24.
and that he was the Messiah: That I am he, except ye believe it, you shall die
in your sins. The Jews could not receive him, would not come unto him, that
they might have life. Our Savior at once reproves them for their unbelief,
and lays down several grounds wherefore they should believe. Not only his own
witness; Ver. 35.
but the witness of John, whom they all took to be a Prophet sent of God, and
he owned him by sending unto him, to know if he were the Messiah, Ver. 36.
and they rejoiced in his light for a time. As also the works he wrought
testified of him, Ver. 37.
yea the Father himself did testify to him, partly by these works, partly by
the rejoicing of the Angels at his birth, and partly at his Baptism by that
voice from heaven: This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. This
our Savior spoke, that they might be saved: though he reproved them, yet he
tendered their poor souls. But alas all would not do! Life could not be
conveyed to them from the Lord, because the pipe was choked up; they could not
believe, they could not receive him, ver 43. And he deals faithfully with
them, tells them what is the reason, the root of their unbelief, or the
hinderance; Because they sought honor and glory one of another, and not the
honor which is only from the Lord. As if our Savior had said, it is an
impossible thing, you should believe, while it is thus with you. The
interrogation affirmative, implies a strong negative; as is most familiar in
Scripture.

There is not much difficulty in the words. They are in their nature, our
Saviors assignation of one of the grand causes of their unbelief, in that they
received honor one of another, and not the glory only which is of God. The
word (...), a participle, is taken causaliter, as I could give you other
instances in the new Testament; seeing that you receive honor of one another.
Receiving of honor here Brethren, is not simply to be understood of an
admitting of honor and praise from others; or the suffering of themselves to
be well spoken of: but it is meant of a catching at it, by hunting after it; a
desire, a hunger, a thirst after such things as these are. Therefore some read
it captantes, not accipientes, and the antithesis clears it in this verse,
[and seek not the praise or glory which is only from God.] Not seeking of the
glory which is of God, and seeking honor one of another, usually go together.
If the one be followed, the other is neglected. And so, ver. 34. I receive not
testimony from men, but these things I say, that ye might be saved. Not that he
did not admit John's Testimony he there speaks of; but he did not captare, he
needed it not, sought not after it; only this he speaks for their sakes,
because they had a good esteem of John, and so his testimony might be of force
with them; and so ver. 41. I receive not honor from men; not that he did not
admit men to speak well of him: though sometimes he did charge them straightly
they should not speak, yet sometimes he did admit them to speak of him, and to
His honor; but he catched not at it, he sought it not, and in this sense we
take it here.

The Doctrine shall be this.
The seeking honor from men, with the neglect of that honor whi h is of God,
is a great impediment to our faith; or a great reason why poor creatures do not
believe. How can you believe, seeing you receive honor, seek honor one of
another?

There are two considerations especially wherein the truth of this will appear.

Isa. 59.15.
and he that departs from iniquity, makes himself a prey, as the Prophet
speaks: then the desire of honor among men, keeps them off from believing,
and closing with him. This was the great stumbling block in the Jews way. Why
did not they believe? We know the way of truth was disgraced, Jesus Christ came
in such a mean manner, He was born in a stable, had a manger for his cradle,
because there was no room for Christ in the Inn. He had a Carpenter for his
supposed father, He had not a house to put his head in, and is this like to be
the Messiah? What? he whom they afterward crucified? is this like to be the
Deliverer, and Savior of his people? The Jews would have believed, if their
great men, or their Rulers had believed in him, so that there might have been
any credit by it.

There was a double danger did arise from their seeking honor of men;

1. This carnal affection did bribe their understandings, that they could not
see the Lord Jesus to be the Messiah; they were all for pomp and glory, and
therefore could not believe, nor be convinced, that such a disgraced person
should be the Messiah. It is the nature of all corrupt affections, to bemist
and cloud the understanding, so that conviction is hindered by that means. If
any other come in his own name, says our Savior, if it be but the way to
honor, if a great person and esteemed among you, him you will receive. What
was the reason, the people did not see the error of the false prophets? Jer
5.31.
alas they did love to have it so.

2. If they were convinced that the Lord Jesus were the Messiah; and so that
they must have salvation in him, if ever they were saved; yet this desire of
honor amongst men, it choked it, it smothered it; they durst not own it, and
that either altogether, or else in part. Altogether: so we find in many of the
Jews, in that place of John the twelfth, in the chief Rulers; many believed in
him: they were convinced and persuaded that he was the Messiah; but they did
not confess him, says the Text, for fear of the Pharisees, lest they should
be shut out of the Synagogues; John 12.42, 43.
For they loved the praise of men more then the praise of God. They esteemed it
more to be one visible in the Church of the Jews, then one of the invisible
Church of Jesus Christ. Romans 10.10.
With the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession
is made unto salvation. [(...), it is an open; free, ingenuous profession of
Jesus Christ amongst men, before men] now for shame, for fear of reproach,
they durst not do it. And as altogether, so in part, Nicodemus believed in
Jesus Christ, Joh. 3.1, 2.
but at first he durst not openly acknowledge him, but came to him by night for
fear of the Jews; that was, because he was not rid of this desire of seeking
honor among men. And thus now, while the way of God is in reproach, as you
know it is not long since it was, when it may be many wel-wishers to the people
of God, and ways of God in their hearts, yet durst not confess for fear of
idolaters, who would have excommunicated them, made them a reproach and scorn
to the people. And thus you see in this case how it hinders believing.

Joh, 6.26.
as those that followed for the loaves in another case. And this rather
represents our condition at present, because now the reproach of Christ is
rolled away in great part: and it is rather a reproach, to be a profane
wretch, and to have no profession of Christ. Every one will now profess, but
in the mean time, while they are acted by such a desire, and seeking honor of
men, that (being the great inducement) and matter not the glory which is of God
only, they cannot believe. How can you believe indeed, whatever profession you
make? for as a man may believe, and not profess, so may a man (and doubtless
many do) profess, that never believed; and upon this very reason in these
days. Some were guilty in the very days of persecution, of this: many
believed in him, Joh. 2.23, 24.
but he committed not himself unto them, for he knew their hearts then, as
much as now in these days.

To give you an Argument or two for the Doctrine;

Reas. 1. The first I shall take from the very nature of faith, which is to
empty the creature. There is nothing in the world more self-emptying, then
Faith is; Gal. 2.20.
I live, says the Apostle, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. Who had a
greater Faith then the Apostle? and who was less in his own eyes? A man never
comes to know himself to purpose, until he believes. Before, he thought
himself to be something, and sought honor of men as well as the rest of the
Pharisees; but when he came to believe, all this vanished; then nothing you
have from him but the greatest of sinners, and the least of Saints. 1 Timothy 1.15.
And though he labored more abundantly then the rest; yet not he, but the
grace of God in him: and he is nothing, 1 Cor. 15.10.
when all is done. Oh, when a poor soul comes to be acquainted with the
height, and depth, and breadth, and length of the love of Christ toward him;
then he comes to see the dimensions of his sins to purpose, then he abhors
himself in dust and ashes.

Faith is one of the wonders of the world indeed. For as the Lord hangs the
world upon nothing, only his word of command, bidding it stand there, therefore
it is immovable and bears all that weight we can possibly add unto it, if we
could add any more then is of it self and from it self: so it is in faith; it
is founded upon nothing in the creature, and yet bears up all: though never so
many temptations, corruptions, assaults, fightings without, terrors within;
yet faith, though founded upon nothing, bears up all. Now ambition or desire
of honor, and seeking of it among men, is directly contrary to the very nature
of faith: for it being an act of the will and affections, it would be something
in it self, and faith would be nothing in it self: therefore (I say) as
contraries destroy one another, so do these. Make a white wall black, the
whiteness is gone; so vice versa. Faith destroys ambition where it comes,
it emptieth the creature of all its fullness in the will, in the desires; and
ambition keeps out faith; as that which will empty a man, will take down
every high thought, will captivate every desire to the Lord Jesus.

think well of him. Why now, the love of the world is enmity against God. It is
true, God is an enemy to resist every sin, every lust: But above all others,
Ps. 138.^.
this of pride. He resists the proud, and resists him afar off, as the Psalmist
has it: Jam. 4 6.
And mind you that of the Apostle, he resists him with such a resistance, as
is opposed to giving of Grace. He resists the proud, but gives grace to the
lowly. And how shall a man have faith, except it be given him from on high? It
is not of your selves, (says the Apostle) it is the gift of God. Phil. 1.29.
To you it is given not only to believe, but to suffer. Can any believe, except
it be given in a way of Grace? except the Lord open their hearts, as he did the
heart of Lydia? and will the Lord do it while he resists the proud, and
resists afar off, cannot endure the sight of them? Men, if they will put away
from them a thing that is filthy, and what they abhor; they will not touch it
scarce with a long fork, so God resists the proud afar off. Though it may be
embalmed with some name of honor, and though covered with excuses, all will
not hide it from him. Therefore no marvel, Brethren, if it be a great
impediment. In so much as this lust prevails in any heart, even of his own
people; so far is the work of their faith hindered.

Reas. 3. Thirdly, it is a great impediment to believing, because poor sinners
through this corruption, are most unwilling to own their condition, to be so
vile creatures as they are. They seek honor one of another: and if so be they
carry it fair, give every one their due, and go for such among their
neighbors, all the Preachers in the world shall not persuade them they are in
such a filthy loathsome condition. They are loath to have their fair skin ripped
up, lest their lusts do appear, their garbage, Phil. 3.8.
their dogs meat, (...). Oh if they should acknowledge their sins, either to
God or men whom they have offended against; they shall be ashamed for ever,
they will never have good esteem of them again. Was not this the reason that
kept the Jews off from believing in Jesus Christ? If they receive the Doctrine
of repentance, they must acknowledge themselves sinners, they must forgo their
own righteousness, and this they were very loath to come unto. What? they
sinners? the Pharisees that walked so exactly after the Law of God, fasted
twice in the week, Luke 18.10, 11.
made long prayers, were not as the Publicans and sinners were; what, shall
they own it that they were so filthy, that they did lie in their blood? no,
they would not. This were to lose their esteem among men, and therefore they
did with both hands earnestly build their own righteousness, whereupon their
estimation with men was founded; And so would not submit to the righteousness
of Christ, Romans 10.3
the righteousness of God by Jesus Christ, and so would not receive Jesus
Christ. And these are some of the Arguments, whereby this truth may be
confirmed.

Now for the Application of the Point.
Use 1. Then Brethren, see what cause we have to fear, that there is little
faith among us. If it be impossible that a man should believe, while he seeks
honor of others, was ever the world fuller of it then now it is? look into
whatever condition of people you will, Brethren, and you will find how much
seeking of honor there is, one of another.

The poor carnal Gospeller, that takes himself to be a Christian, to be of the
Church of Christ, he enjoys the Ordinances, etc. and for any man to tell him
of being in a loathsome undone estate, notwithstanding all this, he can no more
receive it then the Pharisees could. What is the reason? Alas, his seeking of
honor among men. What? they accept of freedom from the Lord Jesus, who are
Abraham's seed, Joh. 8.33
and never were in bondage to this day? Shall they acknowledge themselves to be
in bondage? They will not stain their own glory so, as to look upon themselves
as such. I tell you Brethren, I doubt thousands of souls perish upon this
account. They will be accounted the Lords people, and all holy, and have no
difference made between the precious and the vile: And others do account them
so, and receive them as such, though never so vile. And does not this
strengthen the hands of the wicked, while they thus receive honor one of
another? one thinks well of another, and he as well of him, and so both are
kept off from believing, from coming to Jesus Christ, from closing with him.

Look we among Professors, Brethren, and is there not an abundance of this
seeking of honor one of another? Do they not many times claw one another to an
high conceit one of another? Do they not affect great swelling titles of
honor, that never were duly put upon them? Was not this one of the great
sins of the Pharisees? they loved to be called Rabbi, Rabbi; Master, Master:
Was not this a seeking of honor from men? and did not this keep them off from
Christ? did not this seal them up? and then the Lord knew them afar off.
Brethren, I envy no man's titles of honor that are due and justly his: but I
cannot but take notice what affectation there is of titles of honor amongst us.
Except men be raised in their titles many steps higher then ever their deserts
carried them, they are not honored. Look to it Brethren. I thought, and I am
sure it has been professed by some, they have done much to pull down these
things. But (for ought I see) the spleen was more at the Persons who had them,
then the titles themselves. Why? we desire them not, you will say; we cannot help
it, if they will put it upon us.

Say you so Brethren? but take notice of your hearts; are not they more
acceptable to us, and do we not take them more to favor us, who scratch our
itching distemper, then such as are more sparing in them? Mind it: do not your
hearts sometimes rise against such within you, that give you not all the
respect you expect, though it is more then is due happily? and do you stomach
this? and will you say you cannot help it? Will you think thus to mock God, and
deceive your own souls? This is but a fig-leafe, not broad enough, nor thick
enough to cover the nakedness. If thou were not willing, nor glad of such
clawing; how easily might thou drive away such a flattering tongue, with an
angry look? Be not deceived, God will not be mocked: if there were no receiver,
there would be no thief; if there were no ambition of those honors among men,
there would be no sycophants, who to please them would say any thing. And now
while it is thus, can we think this is a time of so much faith as we pretend
to? Surely no, Brethren: you cannot believe while you seek honor thus one of
another.

Use 2. In the next place Brethren, it shall be a Word of trial to every one of
us, how the case stands with us, whether or no we be such as seek honor one of
another. It is of very great moment brethren; you see it keeps off a soul
from believing and closing with the Lord Jesus. This is most clear; and if we
believe not, we must perish. And if it hinder our believing but in part, so
that we cannot serve him so much as otherwise we might; how much glory does it
rob him of? and how much comfort, and peace, and strength, and sweet communion
with God does it rob us of? Therefore I beseech you, let us mind it a little,
and see if we be not many of us guilty.

First then, he that seeks not the glory which is only from God, he seeks
honor from men; for there is such a principle in man, Brethren, that there
must be some approving of him, some to think well of him, or else he cannot be
quiet. See how our Savior opposes them here; Ye seek honor one of another,
and not that which is of God. If they had sought that honor, that glory which
is only from God, they had not sought that which is of men. Romans 2.29
I suppose the meaning will very well be opened by that parallel Scripture: He
is not a Jew which is one outwardly, neither is that circumcision which is
outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew that is one inwardly, whose praise is not
of man, but of God. The Jew outwardly, his praise was of men; but the Jew
inwardly, his praise was only of God, and not of men. So that he which never
cares for the inward circumcision, the circumcision of the heart, not that of
the flesh; The meaning is, He that seeks not after the mortification and
sanctification of the Spirit, by the power of the Spirit of the Lord Jesus, but
lives after the flesh only; he has the name of a Jew, the name of a
Christian, and the outward sign of the Covenant of God, and rests in this,
and makes his boast in this; this is to seek honor of men. What is the reason
else Brethren, that so many follow and adhere to them, who will not, nor do
make any separation of the precious from the vile among us? because alas they
seek honor from men. If those that teach them will account them for
Christians, so look on them, and accordingly receive them to all manner of
communion, to all Ordinances; they never look further, never look whether they
have Christ within them, whether they be born of God.

Ah dear friends! I wish none of us that have come under a narrower search,
and have been more strictly sifted, deceive not our selves in this point. If we
deceive men, mind it, God is not deceived: O how will some take on, if the
people of God look not upon them as such, as godly, as fear him. But though
they live much without God, enjoying him not in his Ordinances, nor without
them; though they live in much close and secret hypocrisy and iniquity, they
never take on for this. Is not this to seek the honor of men, and not that
glory which is only of God, that inward glory, that inward approving of the
soul and conscience to him?

Secondly, if there be any among us, (Brethren) that teach the peopl, that we
would reign in men's consciences, and be accounted as Gods, take upon us his
privileges; when all we say must be Gospel, though happily not a word in the
Gospel to prove it: when we expect that our own dictates uttered from us,
should be believed without any authority from the Gospel of Jesus Christ: Is
not this seeking of honor from men with a witness? If we are ready to take it
ill, if our bare affirmations be not more believed then all the Scripture, and
reason produced by another to never so good purpose: Are we guilty any of us
herein? we seek the honor which is of men.

Thirdly, he that speaks of himself, (our Savior says) seeks his own glory,
(...). Joh. 7.^^.
Let men pretend what they will of revelations, new lights and higher
dispensations; if they speak not according to the Law and the Testimony, etc.
if they speak of themselves, from themselves, any other doctrine then what they
have received from the Lord Jesus, they seek the honor of men. Let us not be
so silly as to swallow down any man's opinion, because he is thus and thus holy
in any appearance. The Devil never deceives so dangerously, as when he is like
an Angel of light. But judge according to the rule that Jesus Christ has given
us to judge; He that speaks of himself, and from himself, he seeks his own
glory, he would be singular, he would be somewhat more then others, and by that
means be some body. Alas, were it not for some singularities of opinion, there
are many whose honor would hardly ever reach its present pitch it is at. Is
not this a seeking of honor which is of men? look to it, try your selves
Brethren.

Fourthly, for a man to hold any opinion or practice, because it pleases the
people, is of account with them, is to seek the honor which is of men.
Doubtless, this was the great reason wherefore the Jews would not believe in
the Lord Jesus; it crossed the old doctrine (as they thought) which they had
received, and would have been looked upon as innovators, and therefore they
made their boasts, We are Moses his Disciples. Joh. 9.26.
We have ^^tiquity on our side, though they were mistaken, as our Savior tells
them. For if they had been his Disciples, they would have believed what he
wrote concerning Him. He that has no better grounds for his opinion, or
practices then this, Because it is pleasing to the people; he seeks the honor
of men. He that has no better grounds for it, but this, is the maine thing
that moves, or else he would easily forsake his other grounds, he seeks the
honor of men: let us look narrowly to our hearts.

Fifthly, when a man will sometimes speak meanly of himself, and of his own
unworthiness, on purpose to draw from others a commendation of himself: is not
this to seek the praise of men more then the praise of God? Are there not some
hearts that will seem to lament these things before men, that they never lament
before the Lord, and complain much more of their hearts before men, then
before him? Is not this to seek the praise of men more then the praise of God?
Isa. 57.15.
God loves and delights in, dwells with, and approves of the humble
broken soul that lies low before him indeed, in secret that mournes for his
abominations. Now when a man shall have little of this, and many times will be
speaking to others meanly of himself, to give them occasion to speak better of
him; is not this hypocrisy? is not this to love the praise of men more then
the praise of God? Beloved, many times a man will speak so meanly of himself,
as if another should speak half so much of him, what unkindnesse would there be
taken? what alienation would there be in affection? Oh the mystery of iniquity
that is in the heart! Brethren, except we look narrowly to it, it is that which
will undo us.

Sixthly, do thou chew the cud upon any commendation that is past upon thee,
and roll it up and down under thy tongue, as a sweet morsel? Oh what
nourishment here is for this pride to feed upon? such a one thinks well of
me, speaks well of me, and such a one says so and so of me, that am thus low
and heavenly, another Moses for Meekness, another Solomon for Wisdom, another
Job for Patience, another Joseph for Chastity, another John for Love. Oh! how
does the heart feed upon this, chews it in secret, delights to call it to
remembrance again and again? Is it not thus with us Brethren? and is not this
to seek the honor that is of men, to seek honor one of another?

Seventhly, he that seeks more after gifts and parts, then after Grace,
Brethren, seeks the honor which is of men. For men usually judge according to
others gifts, and not their faith, which is the hidden man of the heart, and
not discernable. Oh how earnest are some of us after the gift of prayer, the
gift of prophecy, and why? That we might set forth our selves to men; not to
edify our brethren, not that we might have more communion with God our selves.
I must confess, To covet, and that earnestly, 1 Cor. 12.31.
the best gifts, is a duty, and rather the gift of prophecy. But for what end?
To edify. I show you a more excellent way, That is to say, Love, without which
all knowledge and tongues, and gifts are nothing, for it is love that edifies.
Oh! here search your hearts with candles, for a man's ends lie deep, as the
marrow in the bones lie deepest, and most hard to be discovered, beg of God by
his Spirit to search you, try you herein, else we shall be deceived. But you
will say, But do we not desire gifts not to edify others? for that is a sweet
frame of Spirit, that would not be for himself alone, but for others as well as
himself: But is it not that we might be some body, might be renowned? and mind
not so much growing in faith, in love, in humility, in self-denial, in the
graces of the Spirit which are the main things, and without which the rest are
nothing? I am afraid herein we fail m ny of us very much.

Eighthly, you may know Brethren, whether we seek honor one of another; if
there be in us a spirit envying others well spoken of; if more then our selves,
we cannot endure it, and take every commendation of another to be a
discommendation of our selves. It argues we place much of felicity in it, else
we should not envy them for it: for we envy only for some excellency, and
therefore you shall find such a one with his Buts; he is so wise, and so
humble, but he fails in another point. Oh Brethren! when one member is
honored, all the rest should rejoice. Shall one member envy, 1. Cor. 12.26
because another is honored, because more honor is put upon the head, then
upon the hand, or foot, shall they envy? no, but they should rejoice in it. A
shoe of leather becomes the foot as well as a Beaver does the head. Shall our
eye be evil, because that Gods eye is good? Ah! that is a sweet spirit indeed,
that is a man of another spirit; that can, when another is honored more in the
work of Christ then himself, bless the Lord; can rejoice in it, that the Lord
has any fit to honor him, though himself be notable to do it. This is not to
seek the honor which is of men, but the praise which is of God,

Ninthly, it is an argument, That a man seeks the honor of men too much, when
he cannot go on cheerfully with the work of Christ, if he have not the applause
of men. When a man has it, and is great in the eyes of men, and they lift him
up, and he is lifted up in his own heart, then he goes on with a full sail in
the ways of God, and his calling he is called to: but alas let that cease from
him, and his spirit is down and flags; And what is the reason of this? Alas
poor creature, he was ready to think it was the breathings of the Spirit of
God that filled his sails, and it was nothing but a little popular breath. Take
it away, and the sails fall flat, there is no motion any more; When the
affections of a people toward a man are the chariot wheels; take them but off;
he drives sadly and heavily, as Pharaohs chariots did. Ah poor soul! This is
their penny, they will not serve the Lord, cannot walk nor work his works,
except they have their penny, except they be so, and so thought of, have so
much, and so much the hearts of his people. Well, such they have their penny,
Mat. 20.9. But it is their all, and a poor reward it is, as our Savior
speaks; it will not serve at the last day; when they cast up their reckonings,
they will find it to be a poor thing. Says Luther, Haud velim gloria aut
nomine vehi, majus enim gaudium in maledictis and blasphemiis. Well, this is
our condition; the Lord make us sensible of this deceit of our hearts. I doubt,
if we were well searched, many of us would be found guilty before the Lord; to
be such as seek the honor that is of man, and therefore our faith must be of
necessity hindered. How can ye believe, etc?

Tenthly, a man that cares not what becomes of him, so he have honor from
men. So Saul, 1 Samuel 30 Honor me now before the people.



was cleansed, Mat. 9.30.
Mat. 8.4. See thou go, and tell no man. And two blind men whose eyes he
opened; Jesus straightly charged them saying, let no man know it. Alas, when
our Savior perceived they would come and take him by force, and make him King
(dreaming of an earthly kingdom the Messiah should have) he withdrew himself,
he had no mind of such things, he came not to seek his own glory, but the glory
of him that sent him. Which of us should have kept such Revelations as the
Apostle Paul had, 1 Cor. 12.2
so long a time together, even fourteen years, as he did.

Heb. 11.24
The examples of other Saints that have gone before us, Moses cared not to be
accounted the son of Pharaohs daughter, her adopted son; he accounted the
reproach of Christ greater gain then the pleasures of sinful delights, 1 These.
2.6
and their honors. We sought not glory of men, says the Apostle, neither of
you, neither of others. Alas, however you account of me, whether as a Minister
of Christ or no, or as not approved, as some would exclude us out of your
affections; It is a small thing for me to be judged of you, or of man's
judgment, 1 Cor 4.3.

Surgunt indecti and rapiunt coelum. Oh! the Lord knows where is the
circumcision of the heart. Brethren, where is the believing soul, the humble
soul indeed? where is the fruitful soul, full of love and of good fruits? this
is the soul that shall be accepted with him; and he knows the ambition of the
heart, that would feign rise higher upon the wings of fame and renown. Oh
brethren, remember this: when we are any of us cried up, what will this avail
us, if the Lord cry us down? That which is of high esteem with men may be
abomination in the eyes of God. Oh therefore, above all brethren, Luke 6.15.
Phil. 4.8.
let me beg of you that we may mind the things that are praiseworthy indeed:
If there be any virtue, if there be any praise, think on these things; that is
to say, such things as will rather approve us unto God, then unto men.

Hab. 2.4. because of them, where is the sincerity; for so says the Spirit of
God, whose heart is lifted up, is not right within him: so that (alas) poor
creatures, when we seek our own glory, by our parts, or gifts, or whatsoever
sets us off in the eyes of men, and not the glory of the Lord Jesus; we
boast of that which is not our own, are proud of that which we have received,
and spend it upon our own lusts, upon our own pride and ambition. This is the
reason wherefore the Lord denies such parts to many that desire them to their
own hurt, not knowing the baseness of their own hearts. Oh therefore, let us
study our own hearts Brethren, in this particular, and what ever men speak of
us, look to it that it be found within us, that it be good, built not upon
their sayings, upon their charitable thoughts, but upon what we find upon
serious searching of our own hearts. Be sure to make it your great work, to
grow inwardly. Oh look to the circumcision of the heart, that which God only
sees, and which he approves and commends, and is praiseworthy indeed. For
what will it avail us, to be never so much celebrated amongst men, and when we
appear before the Lord Jesus, to be cast off as an abominable thing. Oh seek
the glory which is of God!

Scipio and others? was it not for honor among men, and merely for that? Caput
omnium peccatorum. Primo enim vitio lapsa est anima; hoc ultimum vivat, says
Aug. upon Psalm. 7. And therefore the perfect or grown Christian should take
heed of this above all others.

The second Branch of this Exhortation shall be to take heed then of laying
snares in one another ways. I mean by loading a poor creature with honor
and respect. It may be that which may undo him, away then with this base
flattery in swelling and undeserved titles that is amongst us. If such as will
have honor amongst men seek it, let them seek, but not find. If there were no
flatterers, ambition would quickly flatten; bring not fuel to the fire, but
rather cast on water. You had more need Brethren, still to be putting on one
another in mind of something to humble us, then feeding one another humor
with honors. What do thou know but the applause and honor thou through
flattery put upon such a one, may be the deadly snare to his soul, to undo
him for ever? for if it lift him up, and the Lord then know him afar off, what
is become of him then? It is a great folly in us to think it is any advantage
to any man, or to our selves, to flatter them into any high conceit of
themselves, to puff them up with great titles and honors; for if they be
puffed up, their hearts are not right within them, and what then can you expect
from them? Ah Brethren, you that know how catching corruption is, what tinder
it is, that will take the least spark! for Christ's sake be more tender one of
another souls. I know indeed in some cases, when the soul is indeed dejected
and cast down, and ready to cast away all comfort, sees nothing good in him;
it may be an act of charity then, yet with sobriety and tenderness: but alas,
this is not the ground of our speaking highly one of another, and to another.
Therefore take heed of this.

Gallio, cares not for any of these things; I should be afraid such a one
cares not for his conscience, neither to keep a good conscience before God,
nor before men: or toward men as well as toward God. Therefore take heed of
this.

1. Such evil speakings of thee, are a chastisement, a rod: can Shimei curse
David, and the Lord has not bidden him curse? Can a dog move his tongue
against them, and the Lords hand is not in it? Can a man be outed of the hearts
of the people of God, and he has not done it? And has not every rod a voice?
and is it a child-like spirit, not to matter what it speaks, nor how many rods
are laid upon thy back?

2. Through thy name Religion may suffer: if thou be disgraced and profess the
Lord Jesus, it reaches further then thy self, specially if a public person.
Crudelis enim qui famam negligit. Therefore the Apostle spent so much pains in
vindicating of himself from those aspersions that false Apostles cast upon him,
as of being burdensome to them, being poor, and mean, and contemptible in his
bodily presence. He knew that hereby the Gospel suffered much disadvantage, and
his Ministry was prejudiced, and therefore he bestirreth him. But it was not
because he had an ambition to be thought highly of by men, but because he knew
his endeavors, would not be so effectual for the Lord Jesus in his Kingdom, 1
Cor. 9.15
as otherwise they would. Therefore it is better for me to die, says he then
to lose my glorying, to make his glorying void in those former respects. And
that though born out of due time, yet he had the Gospel by immediate revelation
from God, as well as the rest of the Apostles.



For answer to this: 1. The best of Gods people have some of this corruption
remaining in them, Brethren; some more, and some less. It is not thy case
alone. There is a desire of vainglory at the bottom, and many times we are not
aware of it. Sometime we feel it sensibly. Therefore it is possible thou may
be a believer, though it be thus with thee. It is not the having, but the
affecting of this, or any other sin that stands not with the Covenant of
Grace.

2. There is a contrary principle within that strives against it, at least
where it is known. And is it not so with thee? Is it not thy burden? is it not
thy trouble? The Disciples had very much of it, when they would be striving
which should be greatest among them.

3. It does indeed more or less hinder faith Therefore pray against it, be
humbled for it. Act faith upon the Lord Jesus, and the Covenant of Grace, That
he should subdue all our iniquities for us. Mic. 7.8.
But be not discouraged because it is in thee, if it reign not, if thou love it
not, delight not in it, please not thy self in it; for it is that which is the
ruin of poor souls in this particular.

FINIS.

