Corporation-Credit, OR, A BANK of CREDIT made Current, by Common Consent in
LONDON.

More Useful and Safe than Money.



London, Printed by John Gain, for the Office, Anno, M.DC.LXXXII.

Corporation-Credit, OR A Bank of Credit made Current, etc.
Whereas the Right Honorable, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons in Common
Council Assembled, did refer the Consideration and Examination of the State of
the Chamber of London, unto a select Committee of Aldermen and Commons, giving
them power to receive all such Propositions as should be made by any Persons
for the Improvement of the Revenue of the Chamber.

And whereas in pursuance thereof the said Committee did take into their
Consideration certain Proposals which were made for the Erecting of a Bank of
Credit, which might be made Current by Common Consent in London, and serve in
many Cases to supply the want of present Money for the better Maintenance and
Increase of Trade, and be a good means also to secure Traders from those
hazards, which common Experience tells us, do ordinarily befall unwary people,
when they give Credit to Insolvent Persons, as well as it may serve to improve
the Revenue of the Chamber, if the same were reduced into Practice.

All which being well weighed, seriously considered, and duly examined by the
said Committee on the Behalf of the City, they did agree, That the said
Proposals should be reduced into Practice and Execution by the Proposers, so as
the Books of Accounts, Books of Register, the Iournals, and other Books
relating to the said Bank of Credit be duly and orderly kept, and Balanced,
that they may be made subject at all times to the Care and Inspection of the
Common Council, or of any two or more of such Persons as shall be from time to
time by them appointed thereunto.

And that all Clarks, Accomptants, Deputies, Agents, Officers and Servants,
that shall be employed for the reducing of the said Proposals into Practice,
give good Security for the faithful Discharge of their Respective Places.

And further, That no Reward or Sum of Money be given or taken, but that the
Person giving or taking any Sum of Money for any Office in that Bank of
Credit, shall be for ever disabled to manage or put in Practice any of the said
Proposals.

All which being mutually agreed unto by, and between the said Committee and
the Proposers. It pleased the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor and Court of
Aldermen, after several Debates concerning the Premises among themselves, to
conclude and agree that the said Proposals be put into Practice by such
Trustees as should be thereunto Commissionated and appointed ^oithin the City
of London, and Liberties thereof for the Benefit of the Chamber, and the
furtherance of Trade there. In Testimony whereof they have cau^ed the Common
Seal of the Lord Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens of London to be affixed unto a
certain Writing containing the said Pro^osals and other Articles. Bearing Date
at Guild Hall the 29th. day of August, in the 34th. Year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith: And in the Year of Christ, 1682.

NOw for the reducing the said Propositions into Practice, diverse Noblemen, and
other Persons of Honor and Interest, many Considerable and Wealthy Citizens
and Inhabitants of London, as well Merchants as others, (although they stand
not in need of Money or Credit from the Bank) yet they knowing well that no
man's Credit ought to be larger than his Estate. And that it will be as
necessary to have a Common Measure or Standard in the Bank of Credit, for the
Trial of Credit, as it is to have Weights and Measures of Standard Assize kept
in every Warehouse or Shop, for the measuring and weighing of Goods, and the
Preservation of Commutative Justice between Man and Man.

And having further considered also that the Sum of Money they or any man
else have Subscribed, or do intend to Subscribe as his and their Proportion of
Credit in the Bank, is, and will be within his and their own Power, and at his
and their own Pleasure at all times hereafter to increase or diminish, alter
and transfer, as he or they shall think fit, according to Emergency of Trade;
as much as it is in the Power and Pleasure of any Man to increase or diminish
the number of Weights and Measures in his own Warehouse or Shop. And they
having further considered that although by this means any man may know the
Currency of another man's Credit, yet no man can discover thereby the Balance
of another man's Estate.

Therefore they have been pleased in the first place to Subscribe several Sums
of Money which they will cause to be brought in as a Fund or Foundation of
Honor, either in English Tin, or Lead, Copper, Steel, or Iron, Raw Silk, Wool,
or Cotton, or in Brass or Iron Wyre, Linen Cloth or Callicoes, or in some
other Goods of sufficient value to raise the Sum of Money by them Subscribed,
and to cause the same to be brought into the Warehouse belonging to the Bank
of Credit, on, or before the first day of January next ensuing, or within one
Week next after notice shall be given them of the day when the Bank of Credit
shall be open: and to continue the same there, or some other Goods in their
Place, of the same, or of a greater value, for the full Term of one whole Year,
paying for the use of the said Credit, Warehouse Room, Salvage and
Book-keeping of, or upon the said Goods or Wares, after the Rate of 6 l. per
Cent. per Annum, for the first Year.

Secondly. All such Persons as have more Goods than their own Warehouse can
contain; and all such as desire to have their Goods secured against the danger
of Fire, and hazard of Thieves, may deposit them in the Warehouse of this
Bank, where they shall have Ware-house-Room, if they be not too Bulky, and be
secured against those Hazards, paying only 2 l. per Cent. for Ware-house-Room
and Salvage, according to the value of the said Goods, as they were appraysed
when they were taken in.

But in case any Person comprised under this Article shall desire to make use
of Bank-Credit for the said Goods, or any part thereof, then there shall be
paid four per Cent. further for the use of the Bank-Credit by them employed.

Thirdly. All Credible Persons who have more Goods, Wares, or Merchandises by
them than they have present use or Market for, may upon the Fund of them, be
supplied from the Bank with Bills of Current Credit, which may be as useful,
and more safe than Money, to serve their Occasions and Emergencies of Trade.

Fourthly. All Persons that have received any Bank-Credit, may transfer the
same, or any part thereof to whom they please. And all Persons to whom such
Bank-Credit shall be tendered, may be well assured at the Bank of the Currancy
of that Credit which has a good Foundation there, where it shall from time to
time be accepted and taken in discharge of any Debt, as well as in the Release
of Goods.

Fifthly. If any Subscriber or other Person that has received more Bank-Credit
than he has occasion for at the present, he may be directed at the Bank how to
dispose thereof with profit, by transferring the same unto others upon valuable
Consideration, and to have Money for the same if it be required.

This being the true Constitution of the Bank of Credit, it will be the
Interest of every man of Credit in his Trade, to have his Name, and some
Interest therein. But such as either have no Credit, or deserve none, because
they can deposit no Fund, may speak against it, and shun the Bank, because it
is a Touchstone, as the Workers in false and counterfeit Metal will shun the
Assay and Trial.

And although some others who have taken unconscionable Rates for the Loan and
Procuration of Money, may be angry, because they must be content with less
Gains: yet will this Bank of Credit be found to be a great benefit unto Trade,
and recommend it self to the Judgment, Approbation, and usage of every
unbiassed man.

Advertisement.
ALL Persons that are desirous to Subscribe, may come either to Garro-way's,
Jonathan's, Kemp's, or the Amsterdam Coffee-Houses near the Exchange: to the
Rainbow, or to Richard's Coffee-house near Temple Bar: Peter's Coffee-house in
Covent Garden: and Man's Coffee-house at Charing Cross: at all which Places
Books shall lie ready, and Persons attend from Ten to Twelve in the Morning,
and from Five to Seven in the Evening every Weekday for that Purpose, and to
answer Objections, if there be any made by such as do not understand, or are
not so well satisfied about the Usefulness and Advantages of the Bank of Credit
unto all as the same is set forth in a Printed Paper, called, Englands
Interest, On the great Benefit to Trade, by Banks or Offices of Credit in
London.


