A PROPOSAL For the more Easy Advancing to the Crown, ANY Fixed Sum of Money,
To Carry on the War against FRANCE; And Payment of the DEBTS Contracted thereby.
By ROBERT MVRRAY, Gent.
WHEREAS the Crown is often forced to take up great Sums, on Borrowing Clauses,
at heavy Interest, to the Clogging the Revenue; whereby, and by slow Comingin
of Money, the Service of the Crown has been, and may be greatly Obstructed:
And what the Crown now gives for Security of Money, for Stores or Service, as
Tallies, Orders of Treasury, Privy-Seals, etc. is, in a manner, dead and
useless, till Actual Payment; which is a great Bondage upon Trade, and Damage
to the Subject; from which they ease Themselves, whatever They can, by Raising
the Price of Stores and Goods, to the Public Loss and Dis-service.

AND, since Tallies are the best Security His Majesty can give, because always
placed on some Branch of the Royal Revenue; which does as much oblige the Crown
and Exchecquer, as Bonds and Sealed and Delivered Deeds, does Personal Debts,
and Real Estates:

It is therefore Proposed,
THAT some Branch of the Royal Revenue, already Settled, or to be Settled on
the Crown, be Charged, by Act of Parliament, with an Annual Payment, for a
limited Term; For Instance, 400000 Pounds, for Eleven Years.

THAT Tallies of Pro be struck upon This Fund, for the Revenue of the whole
Term of Eleven Years.

THAT Doubling the Annual Sum, abates Half the Time; or, Doubling the Time,
abates Half the Annual Payment: that is to say, 200000 Pounds for Twenty-Two
Years, or 400000 Pounds for Eleven Years, pays Four Millions, with
Contingencies.

THAT Trustees, or Commissioners, be appointed and empowered by Parliament, to
Give out Bills of Credit, upon these Tallies, by Order of the Treasury.

THAT these Bills of Credit be made Current, in all manner of Payments, To and
From the Crown, for the said Term of Eleven Years; and a Surplusage of Six or
Twelve Months, to be allowed for the entire bringing of them in; of which
Public Notice to be Given by Proclamation.

THAT the said Bills be from an Hundred Pounds, down to Five Pounds, for the
greater Coveniency of Trade and Dealing; and that they be made Payable to A. B.
or Bearer, and Indented; which will render them as Useful and Current as Money.

THAT, upon Payment or Tender of these Bills, in any Dues to the Crown, none to
be liable in his or their Persons, Goods, Possessions, or Estate whatsoever, to
any Extent, Distress, Seizure, Sequestration, Forfeiture, or other Legal
Process; but shall be Reckoned a Good Tender.

THAT every Year the Trustees do take up, from the Exchecquer, One Years
Revenue of the said Tickets, and Cancel and Deface them, returning the Tallies
for Them; by which Means, at the End of the Term, the Debts, Tickets, and
Tallies, will be all Satisfied and Cleared, without the Use of any Actual Money.

THAT Counterfeiting of these Tickets be made as Criminal, as to Counterfeit
Money: But that Provision be made, to cause Them to be next to impossible, to
be Counterfeited; which may be several Ways done.

THAT the Act ascertain the manner of Giving out the said Tickets, or Bills, to
any of the Persons, that either have had, or have (as yet) no Tallies; and to
any others, for Stores, Service, or otherwise.

THAT the Form of the said Bills, and Method for Management, be declared by the
Act; and that all Commissioners, or Farmers of any Branch of the Revenue, be
obliged to take the said Bills, viz.

The FORM of the said BILL: LONDON, The (...) Day of (...) 1696.
By his Majesty's Commissioners, or Trustees, etc.
This Indented BILL, Tally 522 Bill 59.
Current to C.D. or Bearer, for Five Pounds, being Part of the Sum of One
Thousand Pounds, Charged by Tally upon His Majesty 's Exchecquer, Payable to A.
B.

[The Mark and Number of the Tallies, or Bills, to be Incerted in the Margent.]

AS to the Objection, That it seems a Diminution of the Honor of the
Government, to Supply the Defect of Money by Bills; It is Answered,

THAT the Fund or Capital, and Reputation of Merchants, is always Esteemed to
be Firm and Solid, when the Credit of their Bills is Good and Current; of which
they have the most nice and tender Regard, as being else accounted rather
Bankrupts, than Bankers or Merchants: So, by Parity of Reason, it will prove in
the Government, when it shall come once to have fixed the Method of it.

Benefits arising by this Method, are many: Instead of Paying Interest at Six
per Cent. for Two Millions for ever, which is 120000 Pounds per Annum; that, by
the Method Proposed, a Debt of Two Millions, and an Advance of so much, will
both be Cleared in Eleven Years: That Interest-Money is this Way saved, the
Bilis being as Useful as Money.

THIS Proposal will assuredly remove all Jealousies between the Government and
People, in matters of mutual Dealing; answers all Ends of speedy Raising Taxes,
appointed to be paid by Act of Parliament: It makes the Public Credit as safe,
as between Private Persons; and secures the Government all necessary Stores as
cheap, as those that Buy for ready Money.

ALL Postponing and Delays of Payments by the Crown, are prevented, a quick
Motion, and Circulation of Trade will naturally follow.

SHIPS of War may be cleared without Demurrage, and the Seamen thereby greatly
Encouraged.

THAT these Tickets, thus made Current, will be as readily Exchanged for Money,
as Guineas are, and with as little Charge; and that these Tickets are as an
Addition of so much ready Money to the Stock of the Nation; and, in the Annual
Rotation of Trade, will gain the Nation at least Cent. per Cent. besides the
Augmentation of the Royal Revenue, by increase of Customs, etc.

THE Sum of this Proposal, is, That the whole Two Millions is paid by its own
Interest, with Contingencies, in 22 Years time, at 5 l. per Cent. which must
needs be allowed to be more Eligible, than to pay 6 per Cent. for ever.

IT will beget an assured Confidence in the People, of the great Honor,
Tenderness, Justice, and Regard of the Crown toward them; and will add a new
Obligation of Interest to their bounden Duty of Allegiance.

THAT these Bills, (being thus grounded on Tallies, which, by Authority of Law,
are placed upon some Branch of the Royal Revenue, and only issuable for real
Money Paid in, or Goods and Stores Delivered) will be of great use to the Crown
and People, by being made Current in all Payments, to and from the Crown; for
that these Bills do exceedingly enlarge the Benefit of these Tallies, because
divided into smaller Sums: Yet if the Wisdom of the Parliament shall make these
Bills universally Current, and Payment and Tender therein to be as good and
effectual, as if made in the present common Money; the Benefits to be reaped
thereby will be vastly enlarged to the Crown and Kingdom; for that it will do
the Office of so much additional Money, brought into the Stock of the Nation;
and, by being universally Diffused, without Obstruction, through all the Veins
of the Political Body, it will give fresh Vigor throughout the Whole, instead
of being restrained only to some Parts: The Reasons for making these Blls
generally Current, are Obvious, and Cogent.

1. It will extend their Benefit to all. All are equally safe in them, as in
Money, they having all the Essential Qualities, and Conveniences of Money; and
consequently, will as readily be taken up at Inierest, as (if doubted) can
easily be made out; They are more safe than the present general Money, which
usually falls short 30 or 40 per Cent. of what it ought to be; and therefore,
were it called in, there would be a Loss of about one Third; whereas there is no
possibility of any Loss by the Bills, because placed on a sure Fund, by the
Sanction of a Law.

AND, though by the Intended Regulation of our COIN, it will be Reduced to its
former Standard, both for Fineness and Weight; yet, seeing our Stock in Cash is
very much Sunk, and like to be Sunk much more, upon the Calling-in and
Melting-down our Light and Clipped Money, till the same can be Re-supply'd by the
Mint: This Expedient seems to be of like Absolute Necessity, to Supply the
Deficiency of it, and to Prevent a Stagnation in the Circulation of our Trade
and Commerce; which may else Expose us to Foreign Attempts.

THAT, by the Issuing out of Credit, the Exchecquer is not only Excused the
Issuing so much Money; but, instead of Ready Money, much of the Taxes, and
other Impositions, will this way be, in great Part, Answered in Commodity, by
Furnishing the Crown with Stores and Provisions for His Majesty's Royal Navy
and Land Forces; whereby the Nation will be vastly Gainers, and that small
Stock in Cash remaining, found Sufficient to make good the Balance; and yet
the Exchecquer better stored with Cash, than heretofore.

THAT, without This, or some such like Method, it is impossible for the Crown,
Rebus sic Stantibus, to be Accomodated, or the Current of our Trade Maintained,
and Kept on Foot: For Trade is not managed so much by our Stock in Current
Cash, and Ready Money, as Credit; which is, and has been ever accounted the
great Engine and Support of all Trade, not only Here, but in all the known
Trading Parts and Places of the World: There being the same, if not greater
Disproportion and Inequality between Coin and Credit, as between Copper^ Tokens
and Silver: So that all Coyns of Gold and Silver, are not otherwise to be
Reckoned or Esteemed in the Body of Trade, than as the Fractions, and smaller
Particles of Credit, ordained only to Answer it in the most Minute Occasions
thereof; and Answers to Credit, as Silver to Gold, and Tokens to Silver; which
are, and ever will (notwithstanding) be necessary to Even such Reckonings, as
cannot otherwise be Adjusted.

THAT since the Public Revenues are founded in the People originally, and flow
from them to the Crown; and that the Credit of the Crown is a Consequent of it,
and derived from the same Fountain; and being secured by Law, as aforesaid,
whereby it has all the Uses and Qualifications of Money; and since the Public
Good is hereby greatly Furthered, and without Damage to Particulars: If the
Wisdom of Parliament should think fit to use the Coercive Power, it may not be
unreasonable to impose the General Currancy of such Credit on the People,
whence it is derived, as from its proper Root and Fountain; and to whom Immense
Benefits will certainly accrue by it: For whose Ease, in Conjunction with His
Majesty's Service, this Credit is wholly intended: Nevertheless to Restrain the
Credit of such Bills to the Crown only, is sufficient to Render it Eligible
among Traders and Merchants, as if made Current at large, as Coin.

Wherefore, to Conclude, This Great Design will have the Greater Effect, being
Assisted under the Management and Direction of a Well-Constituted, and Truly
National Bank, to be Established by Law, under Check and Inspection of the
National Magistracy and Government: And nothing can be more Safe, nor more
Honorable; for that the Nation is its own Trustee; and consequently, neither
can, nor will Betray it Self, or Government; that being Unnatural to suppose:
And whatever Change of Government, or State-Convulsions should happen, none
can seize a Treasure thus Secured, without drawing the Justice and Vengeance of
the whole Nation upon them: And for the Government, or Nation, to stoop to
little Banks, carried on by Private Persons, is to do them too much Honor, and
subject the Public to Danger and Loss, from Designing Spirits; And, at the
same Time, to forget, that the Wisdom, Power, and Integrity of a Nation, is
certainly its own Best, and most Natural Refuge and Safety; and are Fittest and
Ablest to Assist the Government in all Emergencies: The Credit of such a BANK
must needs Obtain both at Home, and Abroad, through all Parts and Places of the
World, where we hold any Commerce, or Traffic; when Private Banks cannot be
Trusted by our nearest Neighbors, the other Side of the Water.

All which is Humbly Offered to the Wisdom and Consideration of the Honorable
HOUSE of COMMONS.

FINIS.

