The Mystery of Iniquity UNFOLDED: Or the Reason why all those Jesuits,
Priests, and others, of the Romish Church, that have been lately executed for
High Treason, in Conspiring the Death of the KING, the Subversion of the
Government and the Protestant Religion, have so impudently declared their
Innocence of all and every the Matters laid to their Charge, even to the last
Gasp: And why the same may be very well expected from all that shall follow
them of the like Principles.
By way of Reflection upon their Last Speeches.
I Shall divide their Speeches into two Parts or Branches: 1. Their flat Denial
of those Crimes and Matters laid to their Charge: viz. The Conspiring of the
Death of the King, the Subversion of the Government and the Protestant
Religion. 2. Their Protestations against all manner of Pardons, Absolutions, or
Dispensations for Lying, Swearing, or Equivocating, etc.


As to the first part, viz. The Denial of those Crimes, etc. I think it may be
answered, and the reason given, without any manner of difficulty.

1. That it has been their Doctrine and Practice in all Times to hold, The
Deposing of Princes, Murdering of them and their Subjects, and Disposing of
their Dominions, to be lawful; is sufficiently proved by that Worthy Prelat the
Lord Bishop of Lincoln, by numerous Examples out of their own Authors; and also
see the Jesuits Catechism.

2. That the King of England was actually deposed, and his Dominions disposed
of (according to their real apprehensions and understanding) has been proved
before the Parliament; where it was sworn, That the Pope in the Congregation De
Propaganda Fide, held about December 1677, declared His Majesty's Dominions St.
Peter's Patrimony, as forfeited to him for the Heresy of Prince and People;
and so to be disposed of as he pleases.

To this end he appointed Cardinal Howard, as his Legate, to take Possession of
England in his Name.

And that at a Consult held in May 1678, by the Provincial and Society of
Jesuits, They declare the King an Heretic, they depose him and condemn him to
be murdered: And at some other Consults, They appointed the Chief Officers of
State, as the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasure, etc.

By which it appears, That from that time our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second
has not been King of England, but his Holiness the Pope, and the Government
his.

Now this being granted (according to their Conclusion) they cannot be guilty
of those Crimes laid to their Charge; viz. The Conspiring the Death of Charles
the Second King of England, and Subversion of his Government, etc.

1. Because there is no such Person, The Pope being King. 2. There being no
such Government, it being the Popes.
So that I think it is plainly made out the reason of their Denial of the
Crimes, etc. according to the first part of their Speeches; wherein they all
concur and agree.

And that notwithstanding Mr. Gavon was pleased to say, That there was not one
Jesuit except Mariana the Spanish Jesuit, that allows of King-killing Doctrine;
it is fully evidenced to the contrary.

Now as to the second Part of their Speeches, which consists of Protestations
against all manner of Pardons, Absolutions, or Dispensations for Lying,
Swearing, etc. Asserting also, That no Power on Earth can Authorize any body so
to do.

It is true, It is very strange to us that are Protestants, that there can be
any Salvo for such horrid Impieties, As the making of such Solemn Protestations
at the very Brink of Death, and in such Comprehensive Terms too, That the Art
of Man could never invent more, to make the matter more obvious to common
understanding; and yet all most notoriously false: as has been sufficiently
proved, according to their Doctrines; which allow, That they may Swear,
Forswear, Lie, and Equivocate, in Defense of the Right, and for the Utility and
Benefit of the Church: For which see the Bishop of Lincoln, where he tells you
out of their own Authors, That the Pope can and does usually dispense with
Oaths, and that he can dispense against the Law of Nature, and against the
Apostle.

So that Papists may take as many Oaths as they please, yet the Pope (when he
pleases) can dispense with them, and set them free.

And he says further, That if all these ways of Nulling the Obligations of
Oaths fail, yet the Popes Janissaries the Jesuits, had a new way to prevent all
such Obligations of Oaths without any Dispensations; and that is by
Equivocations, Rectifying Intentions, and their Doctrine of Probabilities:
Pernicious Errors, destructive of Humane Society: And (says he) so notoriously
known to the World, That he need not go about to prove them, or show the
pernicious Consequences of them.

They teach, That a Man may swear to Positive Untruths, by the Law of Directing
the Intention.

And therefore Father Southwell (a Jesuit) taught a young Gentlewoman, That if
she were examined, If the said Mr. Southwell were at her Fathers House? She
might swear No, with this Intention to her self, That he was not there, so that
she was bound to tell them.

In time of the Plague a Man comes to Coventry, at the Gates he is examined by
the Officers upon his Oath, Whether he came from London, or no? The Traveller,
though he came directly from London, may swear positively he did not come from
London: The Reason is, Because he knew himself not infected to endanger
Coventry by his Entrance; which answers the final Intent of the Demand.

If you be sworn to any thing contained in such a Paper; you may safely swear
to them (let them be never such Untruths) and that you do believe all things
written in the Paper to be true; meaning the Paper in your Bosom: where you
must write what you intend to swear to.

That Father Garnet (a great Master in this Faculty) upon his Arraignment being
asked by the Court, Whether he did well, to swear upon the Holy Evangelists,
That he had neither writ or sent to the Jesuit Tesmond; which he knew to be
false? He replied, That he swore so lawfully enough, because he did not think
that his Letters had been discovered; and so they could not have disproved him.

That the Use of Equivocation is held a good sort of Prudence, and that they
ought to be prized highly, who knew to make use of it rightly, and to serve
themselves of it. And Gregory de Valencia calls this Science a Prudent Defense,
and does much commend the Practice of it.

See The Practical Divinity of the Papists, destructive to the Souls of Men.

As for Indulgences and Pardons for Lying, Swearing, Forswearing and
Equivocating; it is most certain they are granted by the Church of Rome; Nay
for all manner of Sins: Of which take some few Instances.

At St. Peter's Church in the Vatican, from the Ascension Day to the Calends of
August, in every day Pardons for 14 years are granted.

In St. Paul's Church in every day Pardons granted for 18 years.

And so in diverse other Churches for a certain number of years.

And for a better provision for Sinners, when a less number of years are
expired, the Holy Roman Catholic Church, out of her tender regard toward
Sinners, has enlarged her bounty to Thousands of years.

As in St. John's Church in the Lateran, is a Chapel called Sancta Sanctorum,
not far from which is an Ascent of 33 Steps; and if a Man shall ascend them,
for every Step he shall have 1000 years pardon; in all 33000 years.

And so in diverse other Churches for a great number of years.

The Rates of all which Pardons are set down in the Taxa Sanctae Cancellariae
Apostolicae: Viz.

Absolution for Him who lies with a Woman in the Church, and committed other
Crimes, is rated at 6 Grosso's. A Grosso is about Four pence farthing English.

If a Priest keeps a Concubine, he must for his Absolution pay 7 Grosso's.

And Absolution for Perjury is but 6 Grosso's.

For all which see Jesuits Catechism.

Abundance of Variety of Examples are mentioned, of which I have only given you
a Taste, and recommend you to my Authors for a fuller satisfaction; where you
will find all their Books quoted.

I shall therefore conclude with this (which I intend only as a Breviate) That,
notwithstanding all that ever these Gentlemen have said with their last Breaths
to the contrary (which indeed were enough to startle and amaze any one that
has not known or heard any thing of their Principles) it is most evident, That
the Doctrine of the Church of Rome does allow of Lying, Swearing, Forswearing
and Equivocating: And also that the said Church does grant Pardons,
Indulgences, and Absolutions for the same.

FINIS.

