DEATH AND LIFE, OR Sins Life, the Sinners Death; Sins Death, the Saints Life.
BEING The Sum of Eight SERMONS on Romans. 8.13.

By Samuel Malbon, Preacher of the Word of life in Amsterdam.

Deuteronomy. 32.29. O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would
consider their latter end. London, Printed for John Allen, living in
Wentworth-street, near Bell-Lane, 1669.

Christian Reader,
THe Author of these Sermons having for several years been absent from this his
Native Country (being Pastor to a Church of Christ at Amsterdam) may be under
some disadvantage as to his esteem in the hearts of those that fear the Lord,
by reason that neither his person nor his name is well known unto them; And so
through ignorance or misapprehension they may omit the purchase of this Book,
which may (through grace) be of much use and benefit to their souls. Therefore
we have thought it meet and a duty, for thy good; to prefix a few words in a
way of recommendation of the person to thee, that, as his name is sweet and
precious amongst those Saints and people to whom he Preaches, so both himself
and this his work may be readily and cheerfully received by Thee and others of
God's life-breathing ones here in England. He is a man ready in the Scriptures,
and much acquainted with the mind of God therein: painful, spiritual and
powerful in his Preaching to the conviction, conversion, and edification of
many souls. Having large experiences of God's goings in, and dealings with his
own soul in a way of grace by his Spirit; And one who lives in the Spirit, and
walks up exemplarily to that light and life which is communicated freely and
richly to him by Jesus Christ the Mediator, who is the soul fountain of both.
And as for this his work, it carries its own praise with it, and needs not our
Testimony; only give us leave to say thus much, that it is plain, sound,
spiritual, lively, and practical, well suited to every capacity. You will find
the Text with many other Scriptures, truly and clearly opened; The Doctrines
genuinely deduced, rightly stated, fully proved and Illustrated; doubts
assoiled; Mistakes rectified; Errors enervated; Objections answered; and the
Application faithful, home, searching, pathetical, full of persuasion and life.
In sum, the Design and Endeavor of this sweet Preacher, in these Sermons, is
very glorious, viz. To discover lurking, soul beguiling and destroying
Hypocrisy; To lay open the false bottoms that many stand upon for eternity; To
bring souls to a full and entire close with Jesus Christ by faith, the only
foundation of eternal salvation; and to entertain and cherish the Holy Spirit
in its workings; To eradicate soul-polluring corruption, and further the true
mortification of internal bosom lusts: By showing whence and how it is
effected; what is the power that produces, carries on and perfects it; And to
work up Saints to a living unto God in the life of God, that they may escape
death and attain at last everlasting life in the vision of God. The footsteps
of which design are manifestly apparent in these Sermons; And the fruits of his
faithful and laborious Endeavors are to be seen and read in the hearts and
lives of many of his hearers: which, through the blessing of God upon thy
diligent and serious perusal thereof, may be experienced by Thee also; so as
Thou may, in Christ's strength, come in as a Conqueror over all thy
spiritual enemies, and join with those mentioned in the close of this Book, who
have the Palms of victory, and Harps of joy in their hands, to sing praises to
the Lord, and say, Glory, Honor and Dominion be unto our God, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost: Father, who has sealed and freely sent his only begotten and
dearly beloved Son into the world, that by his death I might have life: Son,
who has finished the work the Father gave him to do, who has dyed, is risen
again and ascended, and as a fruit of all, has received and sent the Holy
Ghost to apply and produce that spiritual life: And Holy Ghost, who as the
Comforter is come, and has sweetly, graciously, wisely, faithfully, and
all-prevailingly accomplished that living work in my soul. Therefore buy and
read this Book; Reading, meditate; Meditating, pray; and Praying, remember

Thy real Friends, and Soul's Welwishers William Greenehill, Joseph Caryl
Thomas Malery. Richard Lawrence.

To the Reader.
YOur greatest good is aimed at in this little Book, Let me ask you a plain but
serious question, how fares your Soul, that precious, that immortal Soul
within you? As by natural sense you could soon answer a like question
concerning your Body; so by a quick spiritual sense may this be answered.
Christ our Savior speaks, Luke 16.11. of the true riches, outward riches are
not the true riches; so there is a true health, bodily health is not the true
health; 3 Ep. John v: 2. Beloved (says that beloved Disciple) I wish above all
things, thou majest prosper and be in health, even as thy soul prospers; but
to the generality there is cause to wish that they may prosper and be in health
as their body prospers, for the most have far more prosperity and health in
their outward than in their inward man. Either you are under the foot of your
natural Lusts, or they are in a good degree, under your foot; either you are
overcome by them or you overcome them; If the former, either you are so, and
yet senseless and secure (which is the miserable condition of the greater part
of men) then here is a word of conviction continuing as you are, the word of
truth says you shall die; or being sensible and awake you do strive and strugle
against your corruptions without victory, (which is the sad case of many) then
here is a rule of direction, all your endeavors against your sin must be
through the spirit. If the latter, if you are victorious over your lusts which
war against your souls (which is the happiness but of a comparative few) then
here is a Cup of consolation for you, he who cannot ly, says you shall live;
Take thine own portion, learn thine own Lesson.

In that great day when the Books shall be opened, then shall this Book with
all other have a far more open publication, and how it came to be printed, and
what my end in it is, and what the fruit of it shall be, will be revealed;
men's writings are called their works, (we say the works of such a one and not
without reason) according to these works, shall it be rendered, by that just,
that wise Judge, in that day, to every one who works in this kind; I had much
rather therefore write that which is profitable though not honorable, than
that which is honorable and not profitable, or that which is good meanly, than
any thing that is evil eligantly. Seeing the Scriptures themselves are so
dislik't, and found fault with by so many, no wonder if this piece meet with
hard censures Romans 14.4. Who art thou that judge another man's servant? to his
own Master he stands or falls; so may it be said of another man's service.

I have sometime thought, why did not all the Apostles write something for
public common use? or why have we not somewhat of the writing of them all? who
since like them? yet what volumes have been written and preserved, and brought
down to us through the several ages since their time? No doubt more things
were written by the Penmen of Scripture than we have; more Epistles by the
Apostles than are come to us, some of which, (it is very like) we would have
judged mere useful, and should have preferred before some that we have. (Luke
1.1. For as much as many have taken in hand to set forth in order a declaration
of those things which are most surely believed among us, V. 3. It seemed good
to me also, though many, yea, because many had written, be wrote too, and that
about the same things.) Had printing been found out in Christ's time or the
Apostles days, how much more of their sayings, doings, and writings might we
have had? But God's providence over-ruleth all things in infinite wisdom, not
to be fathomed by the short line of our reason, or understanding, How
unsearchable are his ways?

To say the truth, as these Sermons were preached upon the desire of a Friend,
so are they published upon the serious request of several, (backed with some
remarkable passages of providence) and by grave advice; otherwise I had not any
mind, or thought in my mind, to let them pass the Press, than which even
nothing farther from my thoughts when I preached them

As they were delivered in my constant course of preaching (so near as well
could be) come they here to you in a homely dress, Eccl. 11.6. In the morning
fow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thine hand, for thou know not
whether shall prosper, either this or that, or whether they both shall be alike
good; So may it be said, read one and read another Book, for thou know not
whether shall advantage thee, either this or that, or whether they shall be
both alike gainful, or succesfull. They say it is an ill wind that blows no one
any good; I am not without hope those things printed may do some good (as I
have ground to believe when preached they did) If they become beneficial to
any I shall account that alone a great reward, and he that shall say
contemptuously p^sh, they had better never seen the light, does he not s^y
withal, better that good, some may gain thereby, had not been done? but when
the least good is done to the least, Christ will not say so, for he says,
Verily he that gives a Cup of cold water to a Disciple in the name of a
Disciple shall not lose his reward: so does he love Disciples, Christians, and
it is his saying, Feed my Lambs as well as feed my Sheep, and he will have him
that has but one talent to improve it, That place has many times given me
great encouragement in my hard work, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27. etc. For ye see your
calling brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty,
nor many noble are called, but God has chosen the foolish things of the world
to confound the wise; and God has chosen the weak things of the world to
consound the things which are mighty; and base things of the world, and things
which are despised has God chosen; and things that are not to bring to naught
things that are, that no flesh should glory in his presence. We read, Luke
24.11. Their words seemed to them as idle tales, because they believed them
not; Pray, O therefore pray much for Faith (lest these words of truth be but to
you as idle tales) and therewith mix all the truths of God. The way to
experience prom^ses and the goodness of Scripture counsels is to believe them,
but he that believes not shall feel in due time the certainty of all Scripture
threatenings. If every idle word spoken, must be given an account of, then sure
every good and useful word heard or read must be accounted for, Hos. 2.8, 9.
She did not know that I gave her Corn, and Wine, and Oil, etc. therefore will I
return and take away my Corn, and my Wine, and will recover my Wool and my
Flax, etc. Does the Lord regard what use men put his Corn, Wine, Wool and Flax
to? and does he not observe how men entertain, and deal with his Words?

The good Lord deliver thee from that wosull, yet prevailing frame of Spirit,
to be serious about trifles and triflng about serious things. He in whom are
all the Treasures of Wisdom, make you wise to Salvation, your own, your
everlasting Salvation from the worst death to the best life, and cause you to
know savingly in this your day, the things that concern your peace, lest the
night, the dismal night come, wherein they will wholly and for ever be hid from
thine eyes. Skin for skin and all that a man has will he give for his life,
the fountain of light and life give you proportionably (O that at least it
might be so much) to value life spiritual and eternal. In a word (my Pen
already having run too far and beyond my purpose.) If thou art a careless
sighty one, O that thou would sit down and ponder, till thou feel those
words come home with power to thy heart, Prove. 1.24.25. etc.; art thou one that
mournest because of the prevalency of sin in thee, remember the Spirit is a
Spirit of love, and power, therefore ready and able to enable thee heartily
seeking it, to tread upon the n^ck of all thy sins (as they did upon the necks
of those Kings, Josh. 10 24.) and to lead thee in the way everlasting, till
thou attainest to the full possession of that never ending Life of Glory. If in
reading thou find thy heart stirred up to pray, then lift up a request for
him, who is,

Thy hearty Soul-Friend, S. M.

Romans 8.13. If ye live after the flesh ye shall die; but if ye, etc.


AS Moses told the people he had set life and death before them, Deuteronomy. 30.19.
upon the account whereof he there calls heaven and earth to record against
them, so are these two great things Death and Life set before us in the
Scripture throughout, especially in some places, among which my Text is one;
what is the great question that all do, or should put and labor to get
answered? Is it not this? which of those two things shall we have? shall we
have Death, or shall we have life? to which grand enquiry, the Apostle here
from the Lord, gives a short but full answer in two conditional propositions;
The first has the force of a Divine threatening, and is a plain Character of
those who shall dye: The other carries in it a sure promise from God, and
gives a certain note of such who shall live. I begin with the first, If ye live
after the Flesh, ye shall dye.

The Apostle does not say they who live after the flesh, shall dye; But, If ye,
etc. he speaks home to their Consciences; It is to be minded to whom this is
spoken; that may be known by observing to whom this Epistle was written, Chap.
1.6, 7. Among whom are ye also the called of Jesus Christ, To all that be in
Rome, beloved of God, called to be Saints. By the way you may take notice of
three things. 1. The Apostle Paul wrote this Epistle, not the Apostle Peter, v.
1. though the Pope that great As a Prophet was called a man of God, and
Timothy, 1 Timothy 6.11. so Antichrist a man of sin, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. Or one made up
of sin, inward part very wickedness Ps. 5.9. and his outward part also; eyes
full of Adultery, hands full of blood, etc.
man of sin, that Giant, that Monster of iniquity, does pretend himself to be
Peter's not Paul's Successor, yet we read not that Peter did ever so much as
write an Epistle to any in Rome, and some learned men prove by diverse arguments
that he never was there, but Paul wrote this Epistle to them in Rome, and it is
expressed, Acts last, (...) that there he dwelt and preached in his own hired
house two years; besides it is considerable, Peter was the Apostle of the
Circumcision, Paul of the Uncircumcision, and so of the Romans Chap. 15.15, 16,
Nevertheless Brethren, I have written the more boldly to you in some sort, as
putting you in mind; because of the Grace that is given to me of God, that I
should be the Minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, etc. Secondly, There
are diverse passages in this Epistle that seem to have been purposely expressed,
by the guidance of the Holy Ghost, with respect to that great Apostasy he
foreknew would be, and have its chief seat in Rome; which is the rather to be
noted because some Jesuits make use of certain expressions in it, uttered in
commendation of the Christians then at Rome, to defend their Sect and Party in
their present wickedness (though the Apostle do as much or more commend others
to whom he wrote) It is observeable in this Epistle, the Apostle disputes
largely concerning justification by faith without works, whereas they now cry
up works in justification, and he by way of warning (perhaps also of Prophecy)
tells the Romans Chap. 11. that if they continued nor in the goodness of God
(which they have not) they should be cut off from being a Church of God, as the
Jews were, and Chap. 12.3. I say (faith he) through the grace given unto me, to
every man that is among you, not to think of himself more highly than he ought
to think, but to think soberly, according as God has dealt to every man the
measure of faith. Now of all men on earth no man does, or even can transgress
that rule more than the Pope, who boasts himself to be infallible (at least
in his Chan) and to have power to forgive sins, to dispose of Kingdoms, to
dispense with the Law of God in diverse cases and the like. Oh how highly does
he think of himself above what he ought to think, how far are such thoughts
from sobriety? would he think of himself according to the measure of his faith,
must he not think himself among the meanest, if not the lowest of those who
make any profession of the name of Christ? Ag. Chapter 13.1. Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers, viz. Magistrates, Civil Rulers, it is not said,
let all, but every soul, yet that great Antichrist, would have the highest
powers on earth subject to him, and he says they are or ought to be so, he
exalts himself above all that is called God (2 Thessalonians. 2.4.) I shall add only
that one place more, Chap. last, 17.18. Now I beseech you Brethren, mark them
which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have
learned and avoid them, for they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ,
but their own belly, and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of
the simple. Who are they that cause divisions and offenses contrary to the
Doctrine of the Apostle, more than they at Rome, and their fellow Idolaters,
enemies of the Cross of Christ? who do more manifestly than the generality of
that sort of men, serve their own belly? and who by good words and fair
speeches (as by other means) do more grosslly deceive the hearts of the simple?
Thirdly, observe the Apostle does not in the dedication or superscription of
this Epistle, say, to the Church which is at Rome (as in other Epistles he
says to the Church in such or such a place) but he says in that first Chap.
6.7. v. To all that be in Rome, beloved of God, called to be Saints: He does
not so much as make mention of a Church at Rome, much Iess does he speak of it,
as the Mother and chief Church, much less does he once mention, or direct his
Epistle to, a Pope there; No, nor does he give the least hint of Peter's being
there, or to be there, which most probably he would, had Peter ever been Bishop
of Rome, as Papists conceit, But (says he) to all, etc. called Saints (as the
Greek has it) not called to be, but called Saints, or Saints by calling,
though now they at Rome Canonize persons for Saints, after they have been long
dead, and speak as if there were no Saints on earth (being conscious perhaps to
themselves that they are far from being such) yet at Rome in Paul's time, there
were called Saints, who were beloved of God; to these the Apostle directed and
sent this Epistle, and therefore to these he speaks in my Text.

If ye beloved of God, called Saints, live after the flesh ye shall dye, It may
seem strange he should speak of dying to such as these, but the Spirit of truth
who guided the Apostle in his writing, is the great teacher, and well
understands himself, and to dislike that which was written by the Spirit, is no
small evil; Nor is it strange that the Apostle should thus write to such,
considering how he expresses himself, with an If, If ye live after, etc. as
it is no way improper or unfit to say to ungodly men in general, if ye repent,
if ye believe ye shall live, ye shall be saved, No more has it any unfitness
in it, or strangeness of speech, to say to believers, If ye live after the
flesh ye shall dye. As there are conditional promises to unbelievers, so
conditional threatenings to believers; and hereby it appears, were that Apostle
here to Preach as once, diverse would not like his preaching, for there are, who
love not to hear, but cry down such Doctrine.

The Doctrinal proposition which I am to Discourse upon is this,

D. That if any whoever they are, do, or shall live after the flesh, they shall
dye, whatever their privileges or enjoyments are. Five doors I shall open, or
five questions I shall briefly Answer, to make way for, and let in the
Application of this truth, I shall show briefly, 1. What Is meant by flesh, and
why it is so called. 2. What by living after the flesh. 3. What by dying, ye
shall dye. 4. How does it appear that they who live after the flesh shall dye.
5. Why should such Doctrine as this be preached to believers, to Saints by
calling.

Q. 1. What Is meant by flesh, and why it is so called?

A. By flesh here, as often in other places, corrupt nature is understood, or the
corruption of nature, as when it is said, that which is born of the flesh, is
flesh, flesh is opposed to the new man, the new creature, the image of God, the
Divine nature.

And corruption of nature may be called flesh for diverse reasons, such as these,

1. Because it is derived to us with our flesh, our body, from Adom; We have
bad, says the Apostle, Fathers of our flesh who corrected us, Fathers of our
fleshly part, of our body, and they who are fathers of that, are fathers of our
corrupt nature, i. e. we have it from them, for when any are conceived, in sin
are they conceived.

2. Corruption of nature is naturally as dear to men as their flesh, their very
body, and as near to them; No man hates his own flesh, but cherishes it; so no
man naturally hates his corrupt nature which he brings into the world with him,
but every one cherishes and nourishes his corruption, and makes provision for
it, (till he be renewed) Yea, how many show more love, more tenderness toward
their Corruption, than to their very body? how many endure much, suffer greatly
in their bodies, and venture and lose not unusually their life it self, from
their love to some vile lust? which is to them as their right eye, their right
hand, or right foot, and as their life it self; skin for skin, and all that a
man has will he give for his life, only a man's lust that is many times so dear
to him, he will hazard his life to satisfy it, rather than lay it aside, or part
with it.

3. Corruption grows with the flesh, and as the flesh is strong or weak so
frequently are the workings of lust, hence the Apostle says, he kept under his
body, in fickness, in bodily weakness, this and that sin does not ordinarily
move so much, or stir so strongly.

4. Corrupt nature does never quite cease in any till they lay down, put off
the tabernacle of their flesh, while the best are here in the body, much sin
abides in them, the old man will in part remain in all, until the Tabernacle
of their body be quite pulled down to the ground; as we read concerning the
Leprosy among the Jews, it getting into their houses, would not out, till they
were took quite down and destroyed.

5. Corruption of nature inclines men to do many things pleasing to their
flesh, and which give the body ease, content, and delight; so that sin seems a
great friend thereto, hence excessive eating, drinking, sleeping; hence
slothfulness, uncleanness and the like, though these things are really hurtful
to the body, not only as to hereafter, or in their desert, but in their present
effect, yet are they pleasing to it, all which arise from corrupt nature.

6. Corruption prevailing, and reigning, turns the soul of man as it were into
flesh, it makes a man's mind fleshly, Col. 2.18. so it makes his will,
affections all fleshly, so that though the soul of man in its own nature be a
Spirit (God is the father of Spirits, of men's souls that is) yet through inbred
sin it minds not, regards not spiritual things, but fleshly bodily things,
which are delightful to the outward senses; Sin when it has Dominion in a man,
makes him to God ward, and the things of God as if he were all flesh, all body,
not spirit at all in any part of him, it makes man backward to, heavy and dull
in spiritual duties, and whatever tends to the Souls good; It makes him dull in
hearing, in understanding spiritual things, it makes him unfit for Communion
with God, unfit to receive spiritual good, as if he were spiritless, or had no
better spirit than that the beasts have; In many cases Lust takes away the use
of a man's reason, it causes him to act as unreasonably, irrationally, as if he
had not a reasonable Soul, it makes many a man like Nebuchadnezar when his
understanding went from him, fitter for the Society of beasts, than of
reasonable creatures living like themselves, when a lust prevailed in the
Psalmist, he says, I was as a beast before thee, and hence graceless men under
the full power of iniquity, are compared to beasts in Scripture, and called
Dogs, Swine, etc. -- Sin also makes the Soul liable to (and unless subdued) it
brings the Soul unto death, the worst death, the second death; though the Soul
be immortal in its essence and dies not as the body, yet sin makes it mortal in
a sense, it makes it subject to a death of misery.

And farther, corruption lies much in the body, therefore the Apostle prays for
the Thessalonians, that they might be sanctified in their body, as well as in
their spirit,

And may it not be said that corruption is first in the body, the body being
shaped e're the soul comes into it? and if the soul be (as the Scripture seems
to teach us) immediately from God, then it is by the body, not by the soul,
that sin is propagated; God is the Father of Spirits, but he is not the father
of sin, that the soul gets from, by, or upon its union to the body, though its
difficult to apprehend how it is. For these and such like reasons the
corruption of nature may very fitly and significantly be called flesh.

Q. 2. What is it to live after the flesh, how is this Phrase, live after the
flesh, to be understood?

A. To live after the flesh, is the same with walking after the flesh, spoken
of some verses before my Text; It is to live an ill life, to live sinfully, as
we say such a one does not live well, he lives an evil life, he lives loosely,
etc. He that so lives, does live after the flesh. The flesh gives Council (as
it were) to men so and so, that they live thus and thus, I consulted not, says
the Apostle with flesh, and when a man does order his conversation according to
the Counsels of the flesh, then lives he after the flesh, when a man does
those things the flesh says are best to be done. The flesh has many motions,
Romans 7.5. It Is scarce ever still, but is moving this way or that way, and when
any one, does follow the evil motions thereof, when a man acts according to
them, then does he live after the flesh. Corruption of nature is called a Law,
Romans 7.21. I find a Law, that when I would do good, evil is present with me;
which Law he calls, ver. 23. a Law in his members, and the Law of Sin; This Law
gives many commands, every motion is as a command: Now, when any one obeys the
commands of sin, when he runs on sins errand, does the work that sin commands
to be done, this is living after the flesh, Ephesians. 2.3. Among whom also we all
bad our conversation in times past, in the lusts of the stesh, fulfilling the
desires of the flesh, or (as the Margin has it) the wills of the flesh, they
who do so, who fulfill the wills of the flesh, these men, these women, live
after the flesh.

Yet this must be noted, it is not any or every act or acting according to the
motions, commands or wills of the flesh, that is intended in my Text, for then
who so good in this world, as that he does not live so? No man but does at
times go so far along with the flesh, and does after its motions and wills, as
the Apostle himself in the place forecited, confesses he did too much, he
says, he was brought into Captivity to the Law of sin in his members;
therefore he did sometimes in some things act after the flesh; but he was far
from living after the flesh, as he also himself else where declares.

Wherefore more particularly and distinctly, take the Answer to this second
enquiry in five things.

1. Living after the flesh imports willingness in doing what the flesh moves to
and commands, when a man feeling such or such sinful motions, does wilingly
yield himself thereto; when a man fulfills with his will, with his heart upon
choice, the wills of the flesh; As no man lives after God (though he do such
things outwardly as God commands) except he obeys willingly, with his whole
heart, choosing to do what he does in obedience to God; so a man does not live
after the flesh, though he do diverse things the flesh moves to, except his will
be in the doing thereof; Men usually, live willingly, they live and will to
live, they choose life, so they that live after the flesh obey its wills
willingly, they not only do what the flesh would have them, but they will, they
choose to do it, Hos. 5.11. Ephraim is oppressed and broken in judgment,
because he willingly walked after the Commandment, i. e. The Kings Commandment,
the King was the more pleased because they willingly walked after his
Commandment, which thwarted the Commandment of the Lord, but this provoked God
the more, that they not only did so, but did it willingly, so to walk after the
Commandment of Sin, that is to live after the flesh; when a man's heart says
(though never so secretly) to the flesh, thy will be done; Should you hear it
said of one, he lives basely, niggardly, you would understand thereby, that he
is not constrained, but he wills and chooses to live meanly, as a poor man,
when he is not poor; if a man only follow the motions of sin as one drawn,
dragged and forced on, really against his will, if he be only as led Captive,
brought into captivity to the Law of sin, when he can truly say, what I do, I
would not; then he lives not after the flesh, (though he do such things as are
after the flesh) no more than a man lives niggardly who would fain live in a
better fashion if he could.

Secondly, Living after the flesh, signifies acting according to the Law of
the flesh readily, resolvedly, and wilfully; gracious obeying is to do what God
commands without murmerings and disputings, Phil. 2.14. so wicked living after
the flesh, is to do what the flesh commands without resistance or opposition
thereto, without any contradiction, or considerable gainsaying, when a man
sells himself to do wickedly; the Apostle says, Romans 7.14, He was sold under
fin, but he does not say or mean that he sold himself to sin, No, he was sold
as a captive is ^^ld, which he would not be, if by any means he ^ould help it,
therefore he withstands it, so long, so ^ar as he may.

A man makes no opposition to his living, he does ^ot (if himself) strive
against his life, rather he ^rives to live, he endeavors by all means the
preservation and lengthening out of his life, speak what ^ou can to a man to
set him against his life, will he ^ot turn a deaf ear to you? will he not seek
its con^inuance the more, rather than the less? and will ^e not be greatly
displeased with you for speaking any thing that way? will he not count you his
enemy? ^o he that lives after the flesh, strives not against it, ^ather he
strives for the flesh, he strives to maintain ^t, to fulfill its motions; he
moves his flesh to move ^im. he stirs up that corruption that is in him, ^as
the Apostle exhorts Timothy, to stir up the gift that was in him) He provokes
himself to sin, he ^wakens, he calls forth his Just, by looking, think^ng,
conversing with sinful objects, and by drawing high to occasions of sin, etc.
and nothing can pre^ail with him to stop him, to turn him, to cause ^im to make
head against his evil affections; he is ^eaf to all counsels, arguments and
persuasions used ^o engage him against his lust; He Will no more fight against his
sin, than against his life; no more endeavor to stop the movings of sin, than
to stop his breath; No, but often he is the worse for what is said to him, he is
the more mad upon his sin, the more eager, as a horse that is rushing into the
Battle, Jer. 8.6. he hates one who hates his sin, and is earnest with him to
leave it, as Ahab said of Micaiah, I hate him; he accounts such a one his
enemy. If then any do resist the flesh, if they fight, if they wrestle against
it, if they have contrary lustings to the lustings of the flesh, if they seek
its ruin, if their heart rise against its wills, if the commands of the flesh
are contradicted, and disputed against by them, if they like well, arguments,
and persuasions, calling them off from the way corruption puts them on to, then
do they not live after the flesh.

Thirdly, (which is employed in the former) living after the flesh, notes
affection to the commands thereof, a doing what corruption wills with love
thereto, and delight therein. As to live, is that which most men, and all
naturally affect, desire, love, and delight in.

He that likes, and is pleased with the lustings of the flesh, he who obeys
them with approbation, pleasingness, and pleasure, his life is after the flesh,
Rev. 18.7. Babylon lives deliciously, she enjoys many outward delicacies
with delight, with pleasure; therefore it is said, how much she lived
deliciously so much torment and sorrow give her; so when any sin delightfully,
pleasantly, pleasurably, when they rejoice to do evil (as we read the wicked
do) when it is a sport to them to do mischief, they take pleasure in evil ways,
then live they after the flesh. If a man do some things the flesh wills, and
his doing thereof be a real trouble, a heart grief to him, if the flesh its
commands be grievous, as the overflowings of the gall very bitter, as the
workings of a sick Stomach; if a man's heart be afflected and humbled, if it
mourn, and sigh when he is led away at any time by any fleshly motion, then
does he not live after the flesh, but rather dies after it, or is dead to it,
for it is as death to him that he sins, Eccles. 7.26.

Fourthly, Living after the flesh takes in constantness, continualness, doing
the will of the flesh continually; as while life lasts, a man lives daily
hourly, though not always alike, and he be not still busied about the same
things, but sometimes he is more lively, sometimes lest, now he eats, then he
sleeps, sometimes follows his calling, or talks, or walks; Thus a man who
lives after the flesh, he is even continually fulfilling one Lust or other
thereof, one way or other, either more or less openly, vigorously, actively,
still he acts according to the dictates or movings of sin within him; according
as the flesh commands and moves (which is sometimes more, sometimes less
strongly, absolutely, peremptorily and forcibly) so he obeys; that is ever
commanding something as there is opportunity, occasion, temptation, and the man
who lives after it, is even ever doing inwardly if not outwardly something in
obedience to its command. When you say of a man he lives after a high rate, he
lives prodigally, you do not mean that only now and then he makes an
extraordinary meal, or is at some extraordinary expense, but that in his
ordinary course he is extravagant, expensive above his estate, ability and
quality; so to live after the flesh is not now and then in some extraordinary
case to follow the flesh, but for a man to act according to it in ordinary.

Fifthly, Living after the flesh includes continuance and perseverance, as
every man lives till he dies, so that man who lives after the flesh and shall
dye, he does live after it, till he dye: for if any man has followed his lust
though very much as before expressed, willingly, freely and wilfully,
affectionately, and continually for a long time; yet he at length truly
ceasing while here, so to live, if he heartily turn, and alter his course,
notwithstanding all that is past, he shall not dye, in the sense of my text,
Ezekiel. 18.21.22.

In a word, if you spend your life as the fresh moves you to spend it, if you
order your conversation, while you live, after the inclinations of that
corruption that is in you, then ye shall dye. I desire that this may be well
understood, what living after the flesh is (for on your right understanding
thereof depends you profiting by this truth) two things are necessary tha^ this
Doctrine may become effectual, and do us good the one is that we believe in our
hearts that if w^ thus live, the end thereof will be our death; the other is,
that we be enlightened rightly to perceive and judge what living after the flesh
means therefore I purpose to lay this open more particularly when I come to
the use of examination.

Q. 3. How shall they dye, who do live after the flesh? A. I suppose none of
you need to be told a mere natural death is nothere intended, seeing it is
appointed once to all men to dye that death, whatever their life be. But a
spiritual dying is understood that respects the soul, and whole man in a
spiritual sense.

Sometimes to dye in Scripture is used for being near death, liable to, or in
danger of dying, so the Apostle says, I dye daily, we are killed all the day
long; thus it is true, ye shall dye, ye will be in great danger of dying, yea,
though ye live after the flesh only in some degree, you will deserve death, you will
be deservedly liable thereto, whenever you do but begin to step after the
flesh, into the hands of death (even the worst death) will ye fall unless
infinite mercy prevent. But my Text speaks of more than a bare lyableness or
danger, as in the following words, if ye through the spirit mortify the deeds
of the body, ye shall live, more is meant than barely a hope of life, so, by,
ye shall dye, more is intended than danger of death; ye shall dye actually,
certainly, unavoidably, but how?

A. First, Ye shall dye in this world, as to the loss of Gods special gracious
presence, God is our life, so far as God leaves us and departs from us, so much
death; but if we live after the flesh, God will depart, his soul will depart
from us, Jer. 6.8. He Will leave us as he left Saul, who thereupon dyed, before he
dyed, because God was gone, his life was gone; so God will go from us, he will
draw in the beams of his favor, he will hide himself, he will take his good spirit
from us. And thereupon,

Secondly, You Will dye as to all Spiritual good, that you have or seem to have,
you will by degrees lose your light, your convictions, gracious motions, I, and
your very profession it self or the liveliness of it, and that good that may
have been in your conversation, it will be with you at best as with the Church
of Sardis, Rev. 3.1. if you retain a name to live, yet will you he dead, dead
as 1. Tim. 5.9. she that lives in pleasure, is dead while she lives, you will be
twice dead, as it is said elsewhere some are dead, dead by nature, dead in sin,
and dead as to the loss of that conviction, that light, that affection, that
holiness they made a show off.

Thirdly, Ye shall dye as to inward peace, comfort, joy, as Nabal's heart dyed
within him, it lost that comfort, mirth it had before, and through grief became
as dead, so your heart will dye, you will either have no peace, no joy, or none
that is worth the having, none but such as you had better be without, such as is
rather the death than the life of the soul, Romans 7.9. Sin revived, and I dyed,
and the Commandment which was ordained to life, I found to be unto death, he
intends, he lost his former considence, hope, peace and joy, so shall ye dye.

Fourthly, Ye shall dye, ye shall lose the blessing of God in all you are, all
ye have, and all ye do; whatever any have, without Gods blessing, they are dead
in the possession of it, whatever they do, they are dead in doing it, it is a
dead enjoyment, a dead work that is not blessed of God; life is but a death if
it be not blessed, every comfort of life, is as without life, it is not a living
comfort, if not blessed to us; but living after the flesh, removes the blessing
far from us, and brings a curse upon us, as it is said I Will curse thee in thy
basket, in thy store, in all thou set thy hand to, and I will curse thy
blessings, there is it not a manifest yet a secret curse upon all that live
after the flesh, upon all they have, all they do? which curse, is a sore death,
all who are cursed, are dead while they live.

Fifthly, If ye live after the flesh (so as has been declared) ye will at last
not only dye a natural, but a cursed death, when you come to dye naturally,
you will dye cursedly, wretchedly; as Christ says, ye shall dye in your sins, if
you live in them, you shall dye in them, under the curse of God due to them.

And so ye shall dye the second death, when your bodies shall dye and go to the
grave, your souls shall dye and go to hell, when your souls shall leave your
bodies, God will wholly leave them, when they shall be separated from their
earthly Tabernacle, they shall be shut out from that building which is eternal
in the heavens, and from God perfectly, ye shall so dye, that ye shall be
killed, and killed with death, Rev. 2.23. death will come upon you, and hell at
the heels of it, Rev. 6.8. So shall ye be killed with death, and Devils. In
which condition your souls will abide to the appearing of Christ, and then your
bodies shall be raised to partake with them in misery, raised to the
resurrection of damnation, which is opposed to the resurrection of life, Joh.
5.29. so your whole man, your souls and bodies together, will remain in a
forlorn, dead; woeful state, without end, for ever and ever.

Q. 4. How does this appear, how may it be proved, that they who live after the
flesh shall dye? A. It appears many ways, by many arguments from Scripture and
sound reason, take a hint of some.

1. They who live after the flesh are not truly in Christ, Romans 8.1. they who
are in Christ walk not after the flesh, therefore they who do live after the
flesh are not in Christ, they have no interest in him, no part in him, so they
must needs dye for not being in Christ, they are not under Christ's
righteousness, they have nothing to do with that, v. 4. the righteousness of
the Law is fulfilled in us (in our nature for us) who walk not after the flesh.
Christ performed righteousness only for such, It is applied, accounted to such
and no other, therefore they who live after the flesh are unrighteous in the
sight of God, they stand guilty before the justice of God, dye then they must,
because not partakers of that righteousness which justifies to life; and as
they are not in Christ, so Christ is not in them, Christ has not taken hold of
them, his spirit is not in them, therefore they belong not to him, they are
none of his, Romans 8.9. and if they are none of his, then life is none of
theirs, the Fathe bath given to the Son to have life in himself, he quickens
whom he will, but none have life from him, unless they belong to him.

Secondly, They who live after the flesh, are in the flesh, they are in its
hands, under its power, therefore shall dye, as one who is in the hand of his
mortal enemy; and while any are in the flesh, they cannot please God, Romans 8.8,
and whoever cannot please God, shall not be pleased with life by God, but shall
dye.

Thirdly, To live after the flesh, is to live in a direct contrariety to God,
to his will, his law, his nature; He is a pure spirit, not flesh at all in any
sense, much less in the worst sense, he is holy, holy, holy, in him is no
darkness at all, not any appearance or shadow of sin; so that whoever live
after the flesh, do turn their backs upon God, they depart, they go far from
him, they live most directly contrary to him; how then can they but dye?
forasmuch as God is the fountain of living waters, the living God; for they who
live not, shall dye; none can live unless God give them life, God will not give
life to any who continue his enemies, to depart from him, in a direct
opposition to him; Gods soul cannot but depart from such, his wrath cannot but
be kindled against them; shall they not then dye? for as, in his favor is
life, so in his wrath is death.

Fourthly, They who live after the flesh are the servants of it, living after
it being a doing service to it, the flesh is their Lord and M^ster, therefore
they must have the wages of the flesh, Romans 6.16. his servants ye are to whom
ye obey, if of sin, then unto death, how so? v. last, for the wages of sin is
death. God in justice as the Judge of the world is engaged to see to it, that
they who live to sin, have the wages of sin;

Dest^uction and misery are in the ways of the flesh, Romans 3.16. therefore
they who live in those ways, cannot but dye, as surely as he that drinks and
continues to drink the most deadly poison, -- He that walks in any way will
come to the end of it at last, therefore the end of the ways of sin bring
death, they who continue therein, will surely dye in the end, -- If the wind
blow direct to the shore, and the Ship sail just before the wind, the helm not
being turned, where will it be by and by, will it not be on shore, on the
ground? if the Boat still continue going down the stream, it will be in the Sea
e're long, into which all Rivers run; the flesh, that is as the wind, that
blows direct hellward, as the stream that runs directly into the bottomless
pit, he that lives after the flesh, he sails before the wind, he goes down with
the stream, think then where will he be after a little while, if he turn, if he
stop not? That which every man sows, that shall be reap, reason and experience
say, that is past question beyond any doubt, if a man sow tares, he cannot reap
wheat, but must have his harvest of tares, so he that sowes to the flesh, shall
of the flesh reap Corruption, destruction, Gal. 6.7, 8. Be not deceived (which
intimates many are so) God is not mocked (couzened, though men often are so)
whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap, (you know it is so outwardly,
and so it is, as sure spiritually) for he that sows to his flesh, shall of
the flesh reap Corruption, spiritual Corruption, which is the worst.

Ag. If any live after the flesh, it has their heart, it has seized on their
heart, it has possession and dominion there, therefore they will dye: as when a
grievous Disease gets to the heart, suppose the Plague, if once it get to the
heart, you know what follows, unless it be speedily expelled or driven thence.
Lust is to the soul that which the Plague is to the body, if ye live after the
flesh, the Plague is now already at, in your heart, it has the command of your
will and affections.

Moreover to live after the flesh, is to live after Satan, 1 Timothy 5.15. some
are already turned aside after Satan, though he be not flesh in one sense,
because he has no body, yet he is altogether Flesh in a spiritual sense, i. e.
sinful, and he draws those and leads them after the Flesh, who live after it,
they do follow him (though they think not so, they know it not) Ephesians, 2.2. they
who walk according to the course of this world, they do walk according to the
Prince of the power of the air, so v. 3. they fulfill the desires or wills of
the flesh, therefore they shall dye, for Satan is a dead creature, and he is
reserved to a farther degree of death and misery, Satan also is a deadly enemy
to men, he seeks with all diligence to entice, allure and draw us to his
condition; will he not be killed, who follows a subtle enemy that plots his
death?

Shall not he dye who yields himself up to his enemies who christ to have his
blood, and are implacably bent upon his ruin? but thus do they who live after
the Flesh, they yield themselves up to Satan who (as I may say) has sworn, and
more chan sworn the death of all he can prevail against, and they give up
themselves into the hand of the Lusts of the Flesh, which war against their
souls, 1 Pet. 2.11. Dearly beloved abstain from steshly Lusts, which war
against your souls, how then can he escape death who surrenders himself thereto?

Lastly, Those many threatenings of the God of truth against such who live in
sin, that he will whet his Sword against them, wound their hairy sculp, turn
them into hell, Ps. 9.17. the word into, is doubled in the Hebrew, either to
note the certainty thereof, as if he had said the wicked shall be turned into,
yea surely into hell, or to signify the greatness, and the endlesseness of
their punishment, they shall be turned into, and into hell over head and eats
(as we say) they shall be cast deep, very deep into the bottomless pit, they
shall still be falling as it were lower and lower, or their souls, and at last
their bodies shall be cast into hell, their souls into, and their bodies into
hell, or when their bodies into the grave, then their souls into hell; and the
like. they all demonstrate and establish this truth, so sure as God is true,
those threatenings are true.

So then it is abundantly manifest, most undeniable, as clear as the Sun, as
sure, as sure can be, that if we, if any of us all, live after the flesh dye we
shall, perish we shall without remedy.

Sermon 2.
Q. 5. Why should such Doctrine be preached to believers? A. Not as if they
who have true faith, shall ever any of them so live after the flesh as at last
to dye the second death, this is not intended, nor employed, either in my Text,
or any other like Sentence of Scripture; for it is certain nothing is meant, or
can by right consequence be deduced from one place of Scripture, which is
contrary to any thing expressed in another; but it is expressly asserted that
God who has begun a good work in his people will perform, carry it on, to the
day of Christ, Phil. 1.6. he that lays the foundation of true grace in any
soul, will go forward with his work, till he has laid the top stone, and that
because he is faithful, 1 Cor. 1.8, 9. Who shall also confirm you to the end,
that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ, for God is
faithful by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of Jesus Christ our Lord,
so, 1 Thessalonians. last, 24, and 2 Thessalonians. 3.3. and as God is faithful, so it is sure
he is able, otherwise he would never have begun his work in us, as may be
argued from those words of Christ, Luke 14.28, 29, 30. which of you intending
to build a Tower, sits not down first, and counts the cost whether he have
sufficient to finish it? lest happily after he has said the foundation, and is
not able to finish it, all that behold it, begin to mock him, saying, this man
began to build and was not able to finish. How much wiser is God than man? none
shall have cause to mock him, therefore he both can and will finish his
building the Church, and the work of grace in every one of his effectually
called ones.

But why then is it said to Believers: If ye live after the Flesh, ye shall dye?

A. 1. All Believers are not such in truth, all who make a profession, have not
been under the power of God to their saving Conversion; when God sows wheat,
the Devil sows tares, when God makes true Converts, the Devil makes Hypocrites,
Mat. 13.38, 39. Hypocrites especially are the Devils Children, the tares are
the Children of the wicked one, all wicked ones, are Children of that wicked
one, chiefly Hypocrites, these are as his first born, and have most of his
likeness. There ever were, and will be, during the state of things, such as
Judas, Simon Magus, Demas, etc. hereafter all such shall be gathered out of
Gods Kingdom, No Hypocrite shall be in the New Jerusalem, but now there are
foolish as well as wise Virgins, workers of iniquity who hear Christ's word, and
eat and drink in his presence, at his Table; with respect to this it is
needful there should be such Doctrine Preached now in the Church, ye shall dye
if, etc the rather because men know not the hearts of those to whom they
Preach, Mal. 3. last, Then shall ye return and discern between the righteous
and the wicked, now there is not a certain Infallible discerning; and false
unsound hearted ones are frequently very confident of their state, that it is
good, that it is safe; As men in a dream while dreaming are very confident of
this or that concerning themselves, the contrary whereto they find true when
they awake; hence this truth is to be taught to awaken such if it may be; and
to show them their great and sad mistake.

Secondly, Though it shall never be (because of Gods faithfulness, as also
because of Gods election, Christ's death, etc. (that true Believers shall so
live after the flesh, that they shall perish, yet the thing is possible in it
self, and as to themselves. Did not Adam in innocence fall, and come under the
sentence of death? so would the best men fall into perdition, if left to
themselves; as Peter had sunk quite down and drowned, if left to himself, and
when he denied Christ so far, he had denied him utterly. Corruption because
natural, has great advantage against grace in us, and Satan by all means lays
about him, to draw it forth, so that if we had no keeper, no guide, or better
Pilot than our selves, we should live after the Flesh, and split, dash in
pieces on that rock; therefore that none may have confidence in themselves, but
all of us be kept constantly trusting in the living God, in Christ the power of
God, and that we may not be high minded, but fear, hence the Apostle having
given that exhortation, Romans 11.20 be not high minded but fear, he adds v. 21,
22. if God spared not the natural broaches, take heed lest he spare not thee,
behold therefore the goodness and severity of God, on them that fell, severity,
but toward thee, goodness if thou continue in his goodness, otherwise thou
also shall be cut off. As a Mother leading her little Child, it goes toward
the fire or water, and though she hold it fast, sure, that it shall not fall
in, yet to make it careful, she says take heed, if you fall into the fire,
you will be burned, if into the water you will be drowned; so that we may not be
secure and careless, and self confident, we have diverse such If's in Scripture
spoken to Gods Children.

Thirdly, True Believers may have, and too often have (through compliance with
the Flesh) great falls, though they live not after the Flesh, they act much
according to it, therefore to cause them to maintain a continual sight against
the Flesh, and to keep at the farthest distance from it, and to quicken them to
repentance when they have turned aside, therefore are they to be put in mind
what an enemy the Flesh is, even such that if they do live after it they shall
dye eternally, and so far as they act according to it, they do dye spiritually.
For such reasons as these the Apostle speaks, that, Heb. 10.26. If we sin
wilfully, (he faith not you, but we, if we sin wilfully) after we have received
the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a
certain fearful looking for of judgment, etc. that is, even for us, if we so
sin.

It may be objected, is this a sit and proper argument, to work upon true
Believers to keep them from the ways of the flesh, or to bring them to
repentance when they are seduced thereby? should not such rather have other
things Preached to them? A. Other things should be Preached, and that chiefly,
as the death of Christ, love and grace of God, etc. but this also, ye shall dye
if, etc. all considerations are needful in this world to keep us awake; God
thought it a proper and fit argument to lay before Adam when he had no Flesh,
no corruption in him, in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall dye; why then
is it not a proper and fit argument to be propounded to those who have much sin
remaining in them? though they being in Christ, are not under that Covenant,
under which Adam was, and cannot fall as he did, yet is this argument rather
more suitable to them, than to Adam, even the argument of death, in this
respect, because they have much Flesh in them, which both in it self deserves
death, and enclines them, or moves them to walk in the ways thereof; sweet
arguments may more take with the renewed part, but this may more curb,
remaining Corruption, and work upon the heart when in a fearless, careless
frame; and if the soul be in never so good a frame, to hear that they who live
after the Flesh shall dye, may stir it up to thankfulness, that through and in
Christ it is secure, and the more thankful, the more obedient shall we be to
God; If any say that grace most works upon them, I answer, the more any are
drawn by Grace, the less do they need to be driven by this truth, yet even this
truth minds us of, and sets forth to us the grace of God, in that, but for it,
we had all lived after the flesh, and there is love in this very truth, that
the Lord is thus pleased to warn us. It may again be said, but is this right,
to avoid or turn from the ways of the Flash, because they bring to death? A.
We are bound to believe all the word of God, and it is the nature of true faith
to Believe all, believing all things says the Apostle that are written in the
Law and the Prophets, Acts 24.14. therefore all Scripture truth is to be
Preached, and whatever we do in faith, from true faith, is as so, well done,
and acceptable to God, as Noah's building an Ark, because through faith he was
moved with fear, etc. besides, death implies separation from God, and this is
very good, it is love to God, to avoid sin, that by it we may not be separated
from him.

Application.
Use. 1. Whether do you, or any of you live after the Flesh? It is as great a
question as whether you shall dye; Be the more inquisitive each one as to
himself, because multitudes are strangely mistaken; some seem as if they did
live after the flesh, yet really before God they do not, 2 Cor 10.2. I beseech
you, that I may not be bold with that confidence wherewith I think to be bold
against some, which think of us, as if we walked according to the flesh, the
Apostles themselves seemed to some so to walk, yet were they far from so
walking. On the other hand there are, and that many more, who make a show as if
they did not live after the flesh, yet in truth, after it do they live. Thus
men also mistake concerning themselves, thinking that of themselves which is
contrary to truth. It Is like if the question were put in the general to any of
you, whether think you not there are some here present who live after the
Flesh, you would every one say (if you should speak your thoughts) yes, some
here do so live, or I fear there are some whose life is such; but let every one
be asked as to his own particular, probably he would say, I do not, or I hope I
do not live after the Flesh. I beseech you, Brethren, deceive not your selves,
for if you do thus live, whether you think so, or no, of your selves, you will
find this true that ye shall dye. I would be helpful to you in this enquiry,
for which purpose I shall (briefly offer) diverse things to your serious
thoughts, to be made use of in self examination, I say, self examination, for
you know it is not that, God requires of you, nor that, which concerns you, (or
not so much) to try others, as each one himself, and her self.

1. Whoever has not had a great change in his heart, a mighty turn, he does
live after the Flesh, however he may seem to live, for all by nature are dead
in their sins, and the uncircumcision of their Flesh, Col. 2.13. all naturally
are born of Flesh, and are Flesh, having no good thing in them; and if the tree
be bad, the fruit cannot but be bad also, if any are dead in the Uncircumcision
of their flesh, it is certain they live after it.

Secondly, To live in the doing of any of the works of the Flesh, though it be
but in some one or two of them is to live after the Flesh. Q. What are the
works of the Flesh? A. They are very many, and they are all or most of them
very manifest, as the Apostle tells us, Gal. 5.19. The works of the Flesh are
manifest, they are manifest to Conscience, to right reason, as declared in
Scripture, and because they so abound in the world, they may easily be known by
those who have a mind to know them; and he there reckons up about 16 or 17 of
them, which you shall do well, to read again and again, and pondering
seriously, thereby to try your selves; The works of the flesh (says he) are
manifest, which are these, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness,
Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions,
Heresits, Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like. Though he
mention so many, yet he adds, and such like, intimating those named, are but
some; the Flesh is exceeding fruitful, it has a numerous issue, a great swarm
of brats, an abundance of vile fruits. Now, if there be any one of us, any man
or woman here, who lives in any one of those works, or in any such like thing,
such a one lives after the Flesh; though thou avoid and (after a sort) hate
drunkenness, witchcraft, Adultery, etc. yet if thou live in some other of
those works, if in hatred, if in variance, if in emulations, or wrath, or
strife, or heresies, or envyings, or covetousness, or any such other, thou,
even thou, do live after the Flesh, and consequently shall dye (unless thou
speedily repent) therefore the Apostle adds, v. 21. of that Chap. of the which
I tell you before, as I have also told you in time past (you need to be often
told, and can hardly be told too often) that they who do such things shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God.

Thirdly, If you live in the doing any work of the Flesh inwardly, though not
outwardly, to the eye of others, yet do you live after the Flesh in the eye of
God; If your affections are still working according to the Flesh, and you give
way thereto, though they break not forth, or seldom in open actions to be taken
notice of by men, If the flesh command this and that affection in you, your
love, and desire, your hope and fear, your joy and sorrow, as if any one live
in love of money, in heart covetousness, though he do not such things, as
others, Neighbors, Acquaintance can charge him with, if thy heart be set upon
the things of the world, if thy comfort come in only from them, if the stream,
the main chanel of thy desire run out to them. The Apostle calls the things of
this life carnal, 1 Cor. 9.11. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it
a great matter, if we shall reap your carnal things? why calls he these things
carnal, not only because they are of use to our bodies, but perhaps also
because they are such things as carnal hearts take up, and are satisfied with.
Or, if a man live in pride of heart, being as the Apostle says, Col. 2.18.
vainly puffed up by his Fleshly mind, though with outward voluntary humility.
Or if the flesh have the rule of a man's thoughts, then does he live after the
flesh, Romans 8.5. they that are after the flesh, do mind the things of the
flesh, their minds are kept going, still set on work by the flesh, as the mill
by wind, or water.

Fourthly, If in any thing you live contrary to your Consciences, then you live
according to, or after the Flesh, Conscience says you must not act so or so,
yet you do, and will, this is your way, your course to contradict Conscience;
It Is true the best in this life sometimes displease their Conscience by some
things they do cross to its Councels and Dictates, so that they have smiting of
Conscience as David had; but if this be the practice of any to walk
disobediently to their Conscience, this is living after the Flesh, therefore
the wrath of God (we read Romans 1.18.) is revealed from Heaven, against such who
hold the truth in unrighteousness, that is, who walk contrary to their
Conscience, what though you please men, please your Neighbors, Friends,
Relations, if you displease your Consciences, this is fleshly and deadly.
Whatever is contrary to Conscience, that as so, is of the flesh.

He that lives after God does exercise himself to keep a good Conscience in all
things, as the Apostle Paul says he did, he that does not so, lives after the
Corruption of his heart; It is a matter of great consequence to be well skilled
in discerning the commands of the Law of sin, to know what is of the flesh, and
what not, this may be known by the Law of God, and of Conscience; there are
indeed diverse things that are of the flesh, which are not against some men's
Consciences, because their Consciences are bribed, blinded, seared, or not
rightly informed, but whatever is against Conscience, if done, as so done, is
from the flesh.

Fifthly, They live after the Flesh, who live in the neglect of those things,
the Flesh would not have them to do, as the Flesh wills some things to be done,
so it wills other things not to be done, every Lord gives negative as well as
positive Commands, so does the flesh; as God says thou shall do this, thou
shall not do that, so the Flesh enjoins and prohibits or forbids, it moves to,
and pulls back from, the doing diverse things; Now I say, when a man lives in
the neglect of those things which are against the wills of the flesh, they live
after it; but what are those things? A. Whatever God positively commands, that
the Flesh commands negatively; God says, pray continually, the Flesh faith,
pray nor at all, or only now and then; God says, worship me fervently, the
Flesh says, be not fervent in the Duties you perform; God says, look well to
your souls, above all keepings, keep thine heart, seek the good of your souls
above all the world, prize esteem them more than all the world, for so much is
employed, in those words of Christ, what is a man profited if he gain the whole
world, and lose his own soul? the Flesh says, never mind your souls, or be
least careful about them; God says, seek first my Kingdom, and the
righteousness thereof, the Flesh says, seek not those but other things first,
time enough hereafter for such things; God says, be careful to maintain good
works, the Flesh says, goods, are better than good works, money is better than
charity, therefore trouble not your selves about such works, wrong not your
selves by your charity, empty not your purse by your liberality, etc. which of
these two Lords are you wont to hear and obey in these and such like things,
the blessed Lord God, or that cursed Lord, the Flesh? Though you do no body any
wrong, though you are neither Drunkards, unclean, envious, malicious, nor
wrathful; yet if you use to forbear doing the things the Flesh bids you not do,
what are you, but servants of the Flesh? As it is as true, as much obedience to
God to avoid, what he forbids, as it is to do, what he enjoins, so is it as
truly obedience to the Flesh, to pass over those things it prohibits, as it is
to do what it moves you to.

Sixthly, They live after the Flesh, who are lively in sinning and that
ordinarily; all sin, but all are not lively in sinning; when any are alive in
the doing of evil, as in their element, they sin with liveliness, these are
like to dye, especially if they are lively in sinning, and they use to be as
without life, lifeless in serving God; they are lively in speaking idely,
vainly, but dead hearted in all discourses about spiritual matters; lively in
reproaching, revileing, backbiting, but dead hearted in reproving,
counselling, exhorting according to rule; lively in murmuring, repining, but
dead hearted in praying to and praising God; lively in harkening to evil or
vanity, swift to hear what is foolish and sinful, but dead slow in hearing the
things of God, and of salvation; ready to evil, and backward to good works,
Tit. 1. last, to every good work reprobate; yea, if a man be lively in worldly
affairs, outward businesses, and as without life in spiritual services, and
this be a man's daily or ordinary temper, he lives after the Flesh.

Seventhly, They live after the flesh most assuredly, who boast, glory in the
flesh, or any works of the flesh, Phil. 3 19. they glory in their shame, they
mind earthly things, their end is destruction. They glory in what they have got
of the world, thus much they have, so and so rich they are, so they thrive in
their trade, which is their shame, considering that though they gain much
outwardly, they being worldly persons, gain nothing spiritually; while they are
rich toward men, they are poor toward God, they thrive in their earthly, but
not in their heavenly trade, or else because that they gain of the world is got
unjustly, by bribery, by extortion, oppression, or some ways of covetousness,
therefore it is their shame, and they glorying, be it in their words or
thoughts, with their mouth, or their heart, or both, they do glory in their
shame; whoever glories in any sin, or in any thing won, or attained by sin, as
so glorying, it is in his shame. Some they glory in their excessive drinking,
other's in their swearing, others in their over reaching, some in their
lewdness and filthiness, others in their persecuting, others in their
Idolatrous or superstitious ways; Gal. last, 12.13. As many as desire to make
a fair show in the Flesh, they constrain you to be circumcised, only least they
should suffer persecution for the Cross of Christ, for neither they themselves
who are circumcised keep the Law, but desire to have you circumcised, that they
may glory in your Flesh. When they had constrained others to be circumcised
(which was their great sin) then they gloried in it. How frequent is this for
men to sin, to cause others to sin, to oppose good, to hinder the work of God,
to further evil, to do mischief, and when they have done, they glory in it. Let
all such expect death.

Eighthly, They live after the Flesh, who live after a fleshly rule, there are
diverse rules the Flesh teaches men to live according to, viz their own will,
imagination or fancy, the pleasing bodily senses, custom, example of men,
these with other, are the rules that the flesh teaches men to live by, yea,
education it self though not very bad in it self, or Conscience it self, is a
fleshly rule, or any other thing, if looked to, and followed without respect to
the Word of God, without consideration of, or regard to the Divine Law. If then
any thing be your rule, unless with an eye, and insubordination, to the will of
God revealed in his Word, you live after the flesh, for that which gives you
your copy is your Teacher, Master; that which gives you your rule is your Lord,
Gal. 6.16. Peace, happiness, is only for them who walk according to this rule,
that is, the rule of Scripture, of God in this Word, Isa. 8.20. If they speak
not (so if they live not) according to the Word, this law and testimony of God.
It is because there is no light in them, the flesh reigns in them, which is
darkness, in which there is no true light at all.

Ninthly, They live after the Flesh, who do what they do, though in it self
good, from carnal fleshly principles, to a carnal fleshly end, such as the
principles are from which we act, and such as the end is, to which we live,
such is our life.

What are fleshly principles? A. They are fear of Man, or tear of God which is
not accompanied with, and rooted in love, pride of heart, love of money, love
of the praise of men, if a man be acted by such like principles, if he allow
them, then he lives after the Flesh. Or if a man's end be fleshly, his aim in
what he does be taken by the direction of the flesh, as if it be, mere self; if
outward good; honor, esteem with men, worldly gain, or barely to quiet
Conscience, if our design be for the attainment of such things, and not to
honor God, and please him; then though we abound in good duties, religious
performances, yet are we livers after the Flesh before God, as really as they
who live in the most abominable Lusts of the Flesh. For the flesh has the
command and government of our hearts, if our principle and end in acting be of
and from the flesh, though the thing in it self considered which we do, be
contrary to the Flesh, yet is it thereby served and pleased.

Tenthly, They live after the flesh who upon choice live with those who are in
the flesh, according to the company a man chooses such is his heart, such his
life, though he do not all things which they do, whom he makes his Companions,
yet in the general he lives after the same manner, when was it that
Nebuchadnezar accompanied with the beasts? then when he was like them, void of
understanding. A companion of Fools, says Solomon shall be deflroyed, why?
because he is a Fool, Prove. 13.20.
and will be so more and more, very sojourning with the ungodly ( Psalm. 120.5.)
in Mesech, in the Tents of Kedar, was as death to the Psalmist; why? because
they and he lived a contrary life, How can two walk together, unless they are
agreed, Amos 3.3. that Italian Proverb has truth in it, tell me where thou
go (that is, what company thou keep) and I Will tell thee what thou do;
to be intimate (as one says) with sinners, is to intimate you are sinners.

Lastly, Whoever lives not after the spirit, does live after the flesh, Romans
8.1. there is no condemnation to them who walk not after the flesh, but after
the spirit, there is no middle between these two, when any cease living after
the flesh, they begin to live after the spirit, when any come from under the
power and dominion of corruption, they do come under the power and dominion of
grace, holiness, and the spirit of God; either therefore the spirit of grace
rules and bears sway in us, or we do live after the Flesh. Thus much for the
first use, let not these things be spoken in vain, make application of them to
your selves, try your selves by them, pray over them, rest not till you know
what your life is, how it is that you do live, for this is one Word of God by
which we shall be judged hereafter, when the great Judge shall come to execute
the final, dismal Sentence of Death, then will it be enquired and published who
have lived after the flesh.

Use 2. Let the second Use be to convince those whose life is after the flesh
of their misery, art thou such a one, and yet do think thou shall not dye,
not dye the second, the worst death? thou deceivest thy self, thou do
contradict my Text, belie the Word of the Lord, so art thou the more guilty,
and while senseless of thy miserable state, that thy senslessness is a bar to
thy repenting. How art thou like to turn, who walk in the way of Death, and
wilt not believe it is such a way, or that thou art in it? No wonder if all
calls are ineffectual, though God says turn ye, turn ye, why will ye dye? yet
thou art like the deaf Adder. Therefore let me persuade thee who do live
after the flesh, to receive this as a truth, (though uncomfortable, yet
profitable) should thou dye presently a natural death, thou would in
dying, dye; dying naturally, thou would dye everlastingly, and unless thou
live a new life thus will it be whenever death comes, It will come double,
when a visible death shall arrest thy body, an invisible death will arrest thy
soul, even thine, for God will stand to his word, he will not forget any one
word that he has spoken by any of his Servants, Isa. 44.26. he confirms the
word of his Servant, and performs the counsel of his Messengers.

God never goes back from any word that he absolutely utters, as this,
without any If, expressed or intended, only this if ye live after the flesh ye
shall dye, certainly, unavoidably. It is most undeniable God is able to execute
his word, he is able (as Christ says) to destroy soul and body. If a man, a
beast, a small creature, a very gnat, or a disease can kill thy body, how much
more can he who made thee, kill thee, soul and body, destroy thee with an
everlasting destruction; what are we to the Angels that sinned? yet the Lord
God has clapped them all (though many Legions, though mighty spirits, though
very subtle and cunning) he, that almighty only wise one, has put them all
under everlasting chains of darkness; How able then is he to crush us as moths,
to trample under his feet us poor worms, to break us as a Potters Vessel? and
as God is able to fulfill his threatening, so is he resolved to do it, his word
tells us his settled purpose, his eternal will, and unalterable Counsel; as his
threatenings are written in the same book with his promises, so have they the
same confirmation, his oath, as well as his bare word and determinate counsel,
Am. 8.7. The Lord has sworn by the excellency of Jacob, surely, I Will never
forget any of their works, I Will, that is, eternally punish impenitent sinners,
for all their iniquities; Solomon says, where the word of a King is, there is
power, much more where the word of the great King is, the Lord of Heaven and
Earth, there is power, all power, to put his Word in execution, but, behold
here is the Word of God, see it, read it, ye shall Dye, Almighty power is tied
to see this word accomplished. Bear with me a little, I beseech you, while I
speak in love, for good.

Who, what, shall, can let or hinder thy death, If thou live after the Flesh?
shall thy riches, estate, any thing of this world? No, Riches profit not (we
read) in the day of wrath, what is Gold and Silver, what is all the rubbish of
this world, when the Lord shall come forth as a consuming fire? when the earth
shall be burnt up and the works thereof? will fallen Angels who now deceive,
help? they could not save themselves, they seek to devour; but will good
Angels, they will be evil Angels (in respect of the execution of evil) to evil
men, they always hearken to God's voice and obey the word of his Command,
they, Christ says, shall gather the tarts and cast them into unquenchable
fire; or will Christ himself stay the execution of this word? No, he will see it
executed, he will come in flaming fire taking vengeance on all who know not God,
2 Thessalonians. 1.8.
and obey not the Gospel of his Son, though Christ has dyed for sins, he has
said, impenitent sinners shall dye in their sins, and he puts the question
himself to such, how can ye escape the damnation of hell? Mat. 23.33. I may say
Christ himself could not answer it, how they who continue living in their sins,
shall escape, because it is not to be answered. there is no answer can be given
to that Quaerie. Shall sinners be able to save one another? Nay, no more than
the men of the old world, than the men of Sodom did, who perished all together.
Shall sinners prayers, shall all that they can do, or say, save them? No, all
will be charged upon them as sin; Is. 1.15. God declares, though they make many
Prayers he will not hear, whereof Christ also gives assurance, testifying before
hand, when they shall hereafter say, Lord, Lord, open to us, etc. he will say,
depart, I know you not. Shall the mercy of God save such? No, for it is holy,
faithful mercy, therefore cannot save any against his word. How sure then is
the death of all who live after the flesh? Therefore if thou so live, and yet
think, thou shall not dye, thou art deceived by sin, by Satan, yea, thou art
a self deceiver, and wilful in thy deceiving thy self. Do ye not know? I pray,
remember this day; God said to Adam, in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall
dye, but he deceived by Satan thought, though he did eat, he should not dye;
Now does not woeful experience to this day teach us, the truth of Gods Word?
for, hence we were all born in sin, hence the grave so filled with the bodies
of Adam's posterity, hence the world so full of misery, as now, and as it has
been in all ages, hence you women bring forth in sorrow, hence we men get our
bread with the sweat of our brows, hence all our labor, all our toil, hence
the earth brings forth briars, and thorns, hence all afflictions. And as sure
as that word proved true which God spoke to Adam (notwithstanding what Satan
insinuated to the contrary) so sure is this word true, if thou O man, if thou O
woman, live after the flesh thou shall dye, whatever Satan may whisper in
thee to the contrary; wherefore shut thine ear, to all thoughts that contradict
this truth, and take it into thy heart, as that which all who are disobedient,
will feel at last to be most true.

I might here desire you to think, or ask you what you do think in your souls,
whether (in your consciences) you think not, (this word being true,) there be
not a multitude of poor creatures, high and low, rich and poor, who are
woefully deceived? Does it not appear there are great swarms and droves of men
and women, many and many in all places, who live evidently after the flesh,
yet, who (almost) but thinks he shall escape death, though he live as he does?
How sad is this? O sadness, lamentation, that so great a number of our father
Adam's Children are so deceived, not taking warning by his being deceived! and
Alas, alas, that such a number of people must dye, eternally dye, even all that
multitude who live after the flesh; Did you hear of a 1000, or a 100, to be
executed on the Scaffold, to be broken upon the wheel; would not your bowels
earn? should you not be much troubled? and shall not this move you, and cause
you to weep and pray much, to hear from the word of truth, that all those many
and many who live after the flesh, shall dye the second death, be tormented in
that lake which burns with fire and brimstone, for ever, and ever. Ah, how
great our unbelief? how little our love to those made of one blood with us? how
rocky our hearts? O our want of bowels, that this affects us no more! But,

Use 3. Hear me, O precious, immortal soul, every one who lives after the
flesh, give ear, turn, O turn, repent, O repent, (I beseech thee for thine own
good, for thy greatest good) Live a new life, that thou may not dye. Be not
angry with the Word of God, be not angry with him that speaks it, but be angry
with thy sinful life, God says Ezekiel. 38.18. It shall come to pass at the same
time when Gog shall come against the Land of Israel (says the Lord God) that
my fury shall come up in my face, so, when any lust stirs in thee, and warreth
against thy soul, O let thy fury come up in thy face, deal with it, as with thy
worst enemy; be entreated, so to love thy self as to turn over a new leaf, to
write after a new Copy, Turn thy face from the flesh, turn thy back upon it.
Should I tell you that if you live after such a custom, such an old new fashion
or the like, ye shall dye by the hand of man, would you not be persuaded to
leave that custom, that fashion, and thank me for my pains in persuading you?
can you think dying by the hand of man, worse than dying by the hand of God? is
not the hand of the Almighty heavier than the hand of man? have you not heard?
have you not read what the Apostle says? It Is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God, even of him in whom ye live, and move, and do you not
believe he says true, that it is so indeed?

Truly, friend, if thou art one who live after the flesh, it is a wonder
thou art not actually dead, under the second death already, in the paws, Jaws
of everlasting death, that that is not now at this day feeding upon thee; but
God has spared thee hitherto, why, why, think thou is it? Is It not that
thou may repent? Yes, the long suffering of God, says the Scripture, is
salvation, and so thou thouldest account, 2. Pet. 3.15. account that the long
suffering of our God is salvation, even as our beloved brother Paul also,
according to the Wisdom given unto him, has written unto you, Romans 2.4. or
despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and longsuffering,
not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance?

Is not this mercy? O great mercy that yet, that after so long a time, God
waits for thy turning, and thou have once again a fair warning. How woefully
guilty will thou be of thine own death, if being thus warned, thou shall turn a
deaf ear? How inexcusable will thou be? whatever thou shall plead for thy self,
It will be answered, thou were plainly told what would be the end of thy
fleshly life; thou thoughtest thou should not dye, but thy thought
contradicted that word of truth which was Preached to thee. Does not this word
sound terribly in thine ears, thou shall dye, dye in thy soul, dye in thy whole
man, dye a death of the greatest, of unspeakable misery, dye eternally? why
then, let it awaken thee to repentance; how can thou sleep in thy sin, how
can thou rest and be quiet, with such a terrible word sounding in thine ears?
will not dying it self, be far more dreadful, than to hear of it, is, or can
be? I shall not now stand to use more words, if any soul will not hear, the
blood of such a one will be upon his own head; and let me mind thee, my friend,
that the longer thou live in thy sin, before death comes to thee, the more
sore, grievous and tormenting will it be when it comes. I wonder what
impenitent sinners think, of that word, Romans 2.5. But after thy hardness and
impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath,
and revelation of the righteous judgment of God, who will render to every man
according to his deeds, will thou believe it, and turn from the ways of the
flesh? If not, thou must experience it, and shall find it to be as true, as he
is true whose word it is.

It may be some one may think, Is there hope, yet hope for me, after all my
sinning for so long a time? A. There is a certain hope, have thou a mind, a
heart, to turn in good earnest? lift up thy head, fear not, doubt not. Turn
heartily, God is ready to receive thee, and he will receive thee graciously,
for so he has promised, 2 Cor. 6.17. Come out from among them (come away in
thy heart and life from all that live after the flesh) touch not the unclean
thing, (Let thy repentance be through and sound) what then, if I so turn who
will receive me? God answers, I will receive thee, I will, that is, receive
thee graciously, I will receive thee to my mercy, into the bosom of my grace,
as the Prod^gals father received him, therefore it follows, and I will be a
Father to you, says the Lord God Almighty, yea, and ye shall be my Sons and my
Daughters, I Will receive you as a most tender father his Children, when they are
in great streights and and dangers, consider the Lord's promise, think, how a
Father does catch his dear Child when falling into the water or fire, or when
his Child runs to him from one that would kill him, so even so, and with much
more readiness, and tenderness, will the Lord God receive you, if ye run to him
in Christ from your sins, he will speedily receive you into the arms of his mercy,
with all his heart and soul will he embrace you, and hold you fast, and keep
you till he has brought you to heaven, observe well how that good promise is
shut up, thus says the Lord Almighty, He who is as able to save, as to
destroy, he that is almighty to pardon thy many sins, he who is almighty to
subdue thy mighty Corruptions, and to deliver thee from the most mighty
temptations, he says he will receive thee, and that as Almighty, so as to show
himself Almighty for thy salvation. If thou desire yet another Scripture to
encourage thee, read and ponder that word full of sweetness, Jer. 31.18, 19,
20. and be assured Jesus Christ has dyed, that thou might not see death, not
taste the worst death, or feel the curse of death, if thou turn'st from the
flesh to God in him.

Use 4. Let me press you all to take great heed that you never at all live
after the flesh, never take one step after it; Beware, my Brethren, beware of
that flesh that is within you, of that corruption that is in you, because it is
so dangerous to live after it, it is a deadly thing, it is a subtle, deceitful
thing, alluring, ensnaring and powerfully moving, let us all be very watchful
against it. consider a few words.

First, so far as you give way to the flesh you will hinder your assurance; what
assurance (considering this truth) can I, or you have, unless our Conscience
acquit us, and bear witness in us, that we live not after the flesh? but you,
Christians, know the worth of assurance, say, is it not a sad thing to have
your assurance (though but in some degree) weakened, clouded? is it not very
ill to have your evidences blotted, to have any ground, or so much as seeming
cause to doubt concerning your state, and to fear that you are among them that
shall dye; They who know not what it is to dye spiritually, everlastingly, may
be in a state of death, and make nothing of it, but you who understand what
this dying means, cannot live comfortably, without good assurance that you
shall not dye. O let there be nothing of the reprobates mark found upon you.

Secondly, So far as you yield to the flesh, so far you feed, you nourish it;
but would you feed a deadly disease? If you feed your Corruption you starve
your souls; every degree of living, all acting after the flesh, all complying
therewith, strengthens it, and weakneth your souls, do not you, O do not,
strengthen your enemy against your selves.

Thirdly, so much as you are led by the flesh, and let it have its will, you
honor it, you commend, you praise it, as if it were a good thing, a good
Teacher, a good Master; but, will you honor such a shameful thing? will you
commend, will you praise, that God so much condemns, and abhors? you
honoring it, dishonor your selves, commending it, you shame your selves.

Fourthly, To fulfill the desires of the flesh, is to speak as if you were
Debtors to it; as is intimated in the verse before my Text, where we read thus,
Therefore brethren we are Debtors, not to the flesh to live after the flesh,
No, how can we be Debtors to it, for it is a poor thing, it is not worth any
thing, we never had or could have good by it, therefore we cannot be Debtors to
it, except it should be by Gods Command, or by compact and agreement or
promise, but Gods command runs contrary, and as for agreement, we have
covenanted with God, and promised often to have nothing to do with the flesh,
therefore we are no way Debtors to it, unless it shall be said, we owe it
hatred, and all that we can do for it is destruction, so indeed we are Debtors
to the flesh, we owe it all possible hatred, and the utmost of our endeavour's
for the utter extirpation and ruining of it; whereas if we let the flesh have
its will, then we act as if we owed it service, and were indebted to it by the
bond of love. But this is sure, you believers are exceedingly by all bonds, and
obligations engaged in love, thankfulness, obedience, to the Father, and Son,
and holy Spirit, who have made you, preserved you, redeemed, called, and chosen
you. So far as you serve the flesh, you rob God, you do as pay money where you
owe none, and refuse or neglect to pay what you greatly stand indebted for.
Besides, you believers have a principle of grace in you, to that you are
Debtors, for it has done you great good, by the new man created in you, your
condition is altered, of Children of Satan, you are become Children of God, by
it you are fitted for fellowship with God, by it you have had much peace,
comfort, and God commands you to live after it, and have you not promised so to
do? therefore spend not the money of your time, strength, service, in acting
according to the Flesh, to which you owe nothing, but pay your Debts to the new
man, that seed of grace that is in you, quench always the motions of the
Flesh, but blow up, nourish, cherish all holy motions, grieve the flesh as much
as ever you can, but please the spirit to the utmost.

To live after the flesh is to countenance the old, and discountenance the new
man; to give way at all to the flesh, it is to favor, to smile upon your
corruption, and frown upon the seed of God in you.

Yea, it is to resist the spirit, for that draws you from the flesh; a contrary
way to that wherein the flesh would lead you;

Ag. To comply with the flesh speaks no, or little, love to Jesus Christ, for
the flesh it was, the corruption of man that murdered him, and it is against
the death of Christ, for the Gospel tells us Christ dyed, that we should not
live after the Flesh, but to him that dyed for us.

I shall not hold you longer on this, only do you make good use of the Apostles
argument, though you are sure that you are in Christ, yet make use of this
word, if ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye; but remember to use it
lawfully, 1 Timothy 1.8. We know that the Law is good, if a man use it lawfully,
so is this truth good, very good if it be used lawfully, not to hinder, but to
help to a right grounded assurance, not to terrify, but to awaken your
spirits, not to overses, but to ballast them, to poize them; -- and this word
is to be made use of seasonably; There is a great deal of Christian wisdom in
the seasonable making use of truths; sometimes your souls may be in a
desponding, fainting, sinking frame, full of discouragement, and fear, then
call to mind promises, gracious invitations, the comfortable words of
Scripture; but too often your spirits are in a light, vain temper, inclining to
carnal confidence, presumption, fearlesseness, and carelessness, they begin to
be somewhat bold, and ventrous upon evil; then is a fit season to meditate on
this truth, and to think, what do I do, why am I so heedless, what mean I, to
show any friendship to, to hold correspondence with, or at all to countenance
the flesh, that Traitor, to the Majesty of heaven, that deadly enemy to my
soul, does not the Scripture say, if I, whatever I am, live after the flesh, I
shall dye?

O that the Lord would make use of this word (pray you, that he would) as he
did of the Stone that David slung, whereby he killed that Giant Goliath, our
flesh, corruption is as a mighty Giant, he that speaks the word, is of no
strength, but if God set in with it, it shall knock our flesh on the head, and
lay it dead, as that stone little David slung, run into the head of that
Philistine, and brought him down dead to the Ground, so that David (whom he
defied) came, and stood upon him and cut off his head.

In a word, when ever the flesh calls you after it, answer it with this,
whenever Satan tempts you to follow it, let this be your reply, so and so the
Scripture says.

And do you Parents Preach this to your Children, you friends and companions
tell one another of this, when you see one another acting sinfully, Children,
Friends, Companions, the Lord God by his Apostle has spoken it, If ye live
after the flesh, ye shall dye.

Lastly, See what cause you have to bless the Lord, who once did live after the
flesh, but now do not, O mercy, rich mercy, that God has turned you, from that
way wherein had you still lived, it would have carried you from God, from
Heaven, into the bottomless pit, that place a thousand times worse, than
Nebuchadnezar's fiery Furnace when heated seventimes hotter than it used to be,
while you live, praise God for this, that you live not after the flesh.

And let this bear up your spirits under all afflictions, though you live a
life of affliction now, yet not a life of corruption, though an afflicted life,
yet not that life, that will end, in endless death.

Sermon 3.
I shall now fall upon the second part of the Text, [But if ye through the
shirit, do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.]

IN these words we have a Character and evident sign of those who shall live,
with a promise of life to them; or this sentence has three things contained in
it.

1. A necessary, constant duty that is incumbent and lies upon us all, that is
to mortify the deeds of the body. 2. The great means prescribed for our doing
this, and that is through the spirit. 3. The great advantage that comes by so
doing, and that is life, ye shall live. I intend to speak to these three things,
in three Doctrines distinctly, the first whereof, (the Doctrine now to be
discussed) is this.

Doct. 1. That it is a necessary and constant duty incumbent, or lying upon us
all to mortify (that is, to kill, slay and destroy) the deeds of the body.

In the management of this truth, I am to show, First, What Is meant by the
body, and why it is so called. Secondly, what is meant by the deeds of the body,
and why they are so named. Thirdly, what is it to mortify the deeds thereof,
and how is that to be done. Fourthly, why is this a necessary duty. Fifthly,
why is it, a constant duty.

Q. 1. What Is meant by the body, and why is it so called?

A. Body here signifies (the same thing, with flesh in the foregoing part of
the Text) corrupt nature, or the corruption of nature, natural corruption, that
sin we all brought into the world with us, in us, which is called, the body of
the sins of the flesh, Col. 2.11. in whom also ye are circumcised, with the
circumcision, made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the
flesh, and this is that which is termed the body of Sin, Romans 6.6. Knowing
this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be
destroyed, where by our old man, and the body of sin, the same thing is
understood, our old man (corrupt nature) is the body of sin, it is altogether
made up of sin, it is nothing else but sin; this also is that the Apostle
calls the body of this death, Romans 7.24 O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death, or (as it may be read) from this body
of death.

But why is the corruption of nature called the body? A. For the same reasons,
before given, why it is called the flesh: and besides those, corrupt nature may
be called the body, for these reasons following.

1. The body has many parts, and members, which being united make one body
together, and each of those members differ the one from the other in their
proper nature and use, Romans 12.4. We have many members in one body, and all
members have not the same office, so is the mystical body of Christ, his
Church; and thus is it with the body of sin, it has diverse parts and members,
and therefore may be called in that place to the Colossians even now cited, the
body of the Sins of the flesh; There is pride, hatred, hypocrisy,
covetousness, unbelief with many more, all which are as members of the body of
sin, there is a kind of union between them, they all together make one corrupt
nature; and each of them differs in the proper nature thereof, and in its
working, or acting; as the hand is one thing and acts in one manner, the foot
another thing and acts in another manner, the eye differs from the ear, and
the ear from the eye; so is it with the several parts of corrupt nature.

And it may be observed, as some parts of the body are inward, not ordinarily
seen, or easy to be seen, others are outward, without, and manifest to all, so
some lusts are more secret, and not so commonly, or easily perceived, as others
are, which daily show themselves; as also the being and subsistence or life of
the body lies chiefly in those parts that are within (as the Heart, Liver,
Lungs which are more necessary to the body it is subsisting, than the outward
parts, as hands, legs) so the body of sin has its being principally in those
sins that are more secret, less obvious, such as hypocrifie, unbelief,
formality, covetousness, vanity of mind, these are as the Heart, Liver, and
Lungs of the body of sin, it would no longer subsist were there nothing of such
sins within us, whereas the body of sin may and often does continue, and that
strong, and lusty without some outward more manifest sins, such as Drunkenness,
Adultery, Swearing, and such like.

Moreover a man has all the members of his body from the womb, though he does
not use some of them so soon as others, the Child uses not its tongue, and
legs so soon as its eyes and ears, though it be born with them all; so we bring
all lusts into the world with us, though some show themselves and are exerted
much sooner than others, as pride, anger, lying; some Lusts in some men lie
unacted long, and at last apppear, as some seed is much longer e're it come up
than other, though sown at the fame time, hence it is sometimes said, I wonder
that such a man should so fall, do such an evil, I thought it had not been in
him;

And I may add as the Apostle says, some members of the body are more, others
less comely, and these we cover; so some members of the body of sin, have a
kind of comeliness in the eye of men, others appear shameful to all, these men
especially hide, and cloak.

Secondly, as the body of every man is alike in the main, the body of one man
has the same parts that the body of another man has, and there is a likeness
between the several parts of the body of one and of another, yet so that there
is some difference also, whereby one is known from another; The body of one is
bigger, taller, stronger, fairer, than the body of another; some are of one
Constitution and Complexion, some of another; thus is corrupt nature the body
of sin; in the main all bring into the world with them, the very same
corruptions, lusts; therefore says Solomon, as face answers to face in
water, so does the heart of man to man, look what lusts and corruptions there
are in one man's nature, there are such in another's;

Yet with some difference, the body of sin in some is naturally (as I may say)
bigger, stronger, fairer than it is in others, corruption vents it self, and
works (in one) differently from what it does in another, in some it acts more
covertly, closely, in others more obviously, openly, in some more smoothly and
pleasingly, in others more roughly, offensively, and to displeasing;

So that one man may as well think himself not to have such a body as another
man has in the main, because he is less, and more fair, as he may think
himself not to have such a corrupt nature, because it does not show it self so
grossly, evidently, or just in that way or manner, as in another.

As one man excells in one member, and another man excels in another member
of his body, one has better eyes, another better ears, another better legs,
but still they have the same kind of parts;

So one man is more notable or notorious in one lust, another in another lust,
one is famous (or rather infamous) for his pride, another for his dissembling,
a third for his covetousness, but all have the same lusts by nature. You may
say, some men never commit some sins, some are never drunk, never commit
fornication, therefore corrupt nature seems to have more members in one than in
another, A. A man may have hands, and legs, or ears though he never use them,
because of some weakness or impediment, so some may not put forth this or that
lust, and yet have it in them, for it may be impeded or hindered through their
bodily constitution, education or some other cause, so that they don't
exercise, exert or show it as others do. And though all men are not outwardly
guilty of all kinds of sin, yet there is hardly one sin, but they are sometime
or other, less or more guilty of it inwardly (before Conscience, though not
before men) or before God, though Conscience see it not at present, (for as the
Apostle, John says, God is greater than Conscience, and sees all things,
whereby he insinuates, that Conscience sees not all) There is a committing
Adultery with the heart, as well as with the body, as you know Christ says, he
that looks lustfully, he has committed Adultery already in his heart, there is
also spiritual Adultery, spiritual Whoredom, spiritual Drunkenness, spiritual
Idolatry, of which all are too guilty one way or other before God (happy he,
who is duly sensible thereof.) Yet perhaps as some have monstrous bodies, such
as are not usual, they have some parts extraordinary, some have six Toes, six
fingers, instead of five, so the body of sin may be in some as a monster, in
respect of something extraordinary that is to be found in it, or because of
something unusual it moves, and causes (those in whom it is) to do.

Thirdly, Corruption of nature acts in and through the whole body of man, in
all the members and parts thereof, Romans 6.19. I speak after the manner of men,
because of the infirmity of your flesh, for as ye have yielded your members
(not this or that member, but your members) servants to uncleanness, and to
iniquity, unto iniquity, etc. Corruption issues forth through the eyes, hence
we read of the lust of the eyes, and Job made a covenant with his eyes; through
the ears, hence the Scripture speaks of itching ears, deaf, heavy ears, stopped
with sin; through or by the feet, hence we have mention made of feet swift to
evil, and of the foot of pride; through or by the tongue, therefore says the
Apostle James, the tongue is a world of evil, set on fire of hell, and the
Scripture tells us of a lying tongue, a false tongue, and a tongue that has
as the gall of Asps under it, so as to all other parts of the body, sin within
sets all on work, and that not only the outward, but the inward parts also, it
stirs a man's blood, moves his heart, it opens and shuts, it empties and fills
the heart, etc.

Fourthly, Corruption of nature chiefly acts in every one according to the
temperament, or constitution of his body, if a man be of a sanguine complexion,
his corruption works sutably to that, as is observed in David who was of a
ruddy countenance, or if a man be of a choleric, melancholy, or phlegmatic
temper, accordingly natural sin does discover it self, and it is fruits are
answerable;

Fifthly, As the body and soul of man are separable, so corruption and man's
soul, though it be natural, yet it may be separated from the soul, and the soul
may be quite rid of its sin, as of its body, corrupt nature may be killed as
the body, and so the soul released from it, though not so easily; an easy
matter is it, to kill the body wherein the soul dwells, not so, to kill that
sin that naturally dwells in the soul; yet both are alike easy to God, it is
as facile or easy to him to destroy our body which we have as sinners, as it
is for him to kill our body which we have as men, he can run it through and
pierce the very heart of the body of sin in us, by the sword of his spirit much
more easily, than Goliath, had he been near David, could have run him through
with his Sword.

Sixthly, As the body does nothing, acts not, moves not without the soul, and
if the soul be once gone, it is dead without any motion, or ability to move; so
corrupt nature acts not without our soul, it works by the understanding, by the
will, by this and that affection; had not a man an Immortal soul, he would have
no corruption, as beasts have none; and let the heart be once taken off from
sin, then corruption dies, and when the heart shall be perfectly separated
from it, then corrupt nature will be quite dead, and we shall be perfectly
freed from it.

Seventhly, As the body is still breeding filth, phlegm, choler, and diverse
excrements, hair, nails and that which is not handsome plainly to mention, but
Christ says, it goes to the draught, so the body of sin is still breeding that
which is filth in the sight of God and the eye of an enlightened Conscience,
it is still sending forth diverse excrements, whereto the Apostle James may have
respect when he says, lay aside all filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness.

Eighthly, As there is a natural inclination in the body to generation, to the
propagation of its kind, so in the body of sin to beget its like; hence the
Devil (who has, though no visible body, yet a body of sin) tempted our great
Grandmother, or first Mother Eve, and (as I may so say) begat the body of sin
in her, he knew her in a spiritual sense, e're Adam knew her in a natural way,
and then by Eves help, he knew Adam and begat the body of sin in him; and all
sinners under the power of sin, seek to make others like themselves, they
compass, says Christ, Sea and Land to make a proselyte, Mat. 23.15. Woe unto
you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye compass Sea and Land to make one
proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him two fold more the Child of hell
than your selves (where Christ speaks of an Apostate; or Christ speaks of one
who having been openly profane, and grossly wicked outwardly, becomes a close
Pharisaical Hypocrite. The Apostle Paul says, 1 Timothy 1.13. he was before a
blasphemer, and what did he do, when he was a blasphemer? Acts 26.11. he
compelled others to blaspheme.

9ly. There is such an union between the soul and body while together, that the
soul no where, in nothing acts without it, the soul acts much according as it
is with the body, whether it be sick or well, weak or strong; and the soul is
much hindered in acting according to its own proper nature as a spirit, by the
body, so while corruption is in the soul, the soul acts not without it, all the
actings of the soul have a tincture and defilement more or less from it,
according to the strength or weakness of corruption, so the soul acts less or
more sinfully, and it is mightily hindered in acting according to its own
nature as a spirit thereby. But not to carry this too far.

Lastly, As the body is still craving one thing or other, meat, drink, sleep,
clothes, the cool shade, or warm fire, etc. So corrupt nature is still craving,
now to have this, and then to have that just satisfied, this or that motion
fulfilled. And as Solomon says, the eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the
ear with hearing, so corrupt nature is never satisfied with sinning, but as,
the more, many times, a man sees and hears of that which delights, the more he
desires to see, and to hear, so the more corrupt nature in its lustings is
answered, the more does it call, the more does it lust, it is like the
Horse-Leech, that still cries give, give, and like the fire and those other
things which Solomon says, never say it is enough.

Q. 2. What are we to understand by the deeds of the body?

A. The deeds of the body of sin must needs be sinful deeds, what are the deeds
of your natural body as men? they are natural deeds, suitable to it, such as
seeing, speaking, laughing, weeping, going, running and the rest: So what are
the deeds of the body of corruption? they are deeds agreeable to it, corrupt
deeds, such as coveting, lying, boasting, vain glorying, murmuring,
dissembling, with those many other of that evil kind, that cursed generation.

The deeds of the body, are the fruits and births of it, which are sometimes
called the works of the flesh, as in that, Gal. 5.19. sometimes, the members of
the flesh, or our members which are upon the earth, Col. 3.5. Mortify
therefore your members which are upon the earth, uncleanness, inordinate
affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness which is Idolatry, these are
the deeds of the body, or the deeds of the old man, as it is expressed, Col. 3.9.
lie not one to another, seeing ye have put off the old man with his deeds. In
other places these deeds, are called the desires, or wills, and motions of the
flesh, in those places formerly cited.

It is to be noted well, that the Apostle calls all the outgoings and movings
of corruption, deeds and works, though they break not forth into outward
actions;

If some were bid or exhorted to repent of their wicked deeds and evil works,
they would be ready to say, what? what evil deeds, what wicked works, have I
done, or do I? because, it may be, they cannot be charged with any great matter
by man.

But consider, look inward, have you not had many lustings, many motions of
corruption, this way, and that, many evil affections stirring? these are deeds
and works before God, they have as real evil, and offensiveness in them in Gods
eye, as any outward actions, and therefore ought not to be made light, but our
hearts should mourn, be ashamed, humbled, and broken for them, as well as for
outward sins.

Some one may here ask, why says our Apostle, if ye mortify the deeds of the
body, why says he not, if ye mortify the body? it may be thought he should
rather have spoke of mortifying the body of corruption it self, than the deeds
of it,

I answer, 1. The Apostle may thus express himself, because the deeds of
corrupt nature are those we are sensible of, we are not sensible of the body of
sin it self directly, but by some or other of its deeds, but for its lustings,
affections, and motions we should not know it to be in us.

Secondly, the way to mortify the body of sin it self, is to mortify its
deeds, we cannot come at it to give it a blow, but in its affections, and
motions, and so far as the deeds of the body of sin are mortified, so far is it
mortified. As break a man's head to pieces, or stop his breathing, and you kill
his body.

If any say, rather the way to mortify the deeds of the body is to mortify
the body it self, to mortify the root is the best way to mortify the fruit,
then I answer, the Apostle intends that, that we mortify the deeds of the
body, by mortifying the body, corrupt nature it self which must be done, for if
any could mortify the deeds of the old man barely, the body of sin still
remaining unsubdued, that would not avail.

Thirdly, It is by the mortification of the deeds of the body, that we know
whether it be mortified, yea or no, as by the movings of the natural body, by
the eyes, hands, and nostrils we know a man's body to be alive or dead.

Fourthly, the Apostle may hereby teach us we must fight against the body of
sin in a particular distinct way, taking our aim now at this, and then at that
member of it, working and motion of it, according to its stirring in us. Or
perhaps the Apostle might choose to say the deeds of the body, because the body
of sin it self will still abide in a great measure all our days here, but
diverse of the deeds of it may be even wholly mortifyed in this life, and
particular motions, they may be quite mortified, the moving of this and that
lust, at this and that time may be quite destroyed.

Q. 3. What is it to mortify, kill and destroy the deeds of the body, and how
is that to be done?

A. No one of us but has a body of sin in him, as really as every one has a
body of flesh visible, wherein his soul dwells, so really has every one an
invisible body of sin dwelling in his soul, which body of sin has had many
deeds, lustings, evil motions, in time past; and it has many still, and so
still will it have while we are here, for it is even ^ontinually lusting,
stirring one way or other. I shall therefore, 1. speak somewhat concerning the
mortifying the deeds of the body past. 2. Concerning the mortifying of the
deeds of the body of sin, as to time present. 3. Concerning the mortifying
thereof, with respect to time to come.

1. For the deeds of the body of sin past, those lustings, those evil
affections, sinful motions, that heretofore you have had, they in a sense are
to be mortifyed. How is that to be done? How shall they that are past be
destroyed. Ans.

By a hearty confession before God, with Godly sorrow, and faith acted in
Prayer, on the Word of God, and blood of Christ, for the pardon of them through
his grace.

This is the way to mortify any, and all the deeds of the body, that have been
found with you in times past, you must get them forgiven, and then they will be
mortified, they are as dead in Law, they are as if they had never been, they
will not, and cannot be charged upon you. When a suit is commenced, a charge
brought against any, and it is discharged, no more to be meddled with, it is then
mortifyed in Law; so when your sins are pardoned to you by God, they are then
buried, they are blotted out, they are cast into the depths of the sea.
Therefore, the way to get what is past mortifyed, is to get it remitted, taken
off the file, to seek to have the book of Divine Justice cross't, where your
debts and offenses stand as fair written, till forgiven. And the way for that
is, heartily to confess (so far as you may) before God, all the former
stirrings and workings of your corruption, which have been in you, and which
have shown themselves in your conversations; if we confess, God will forgive,
but then our confession, must be with contrition, brokenness of heart, and
humiliation; and we must act faith on the sufferings of Christ, and the
promises of the Covenant, we must also beg the remission of our past sins
through the grace of God in Christ. Do this in truth, so will all the deeds of
your corrupt nature be done away by the hand of pardoning grace, and so will
they be mortifyed, as Debts are, when the Debtor is acquitted. Which though it
be not directly intended in my Text, yet is it employed, for without this, the
deeds of the flesh present or to come will never be truly mortifyed; None have
any corruption indeed subdued, unless they are pardoned and justified.
Mortification of sin, is included in sanctification, and sanctification, is
never without justification.

Nor ever did, will, or can any set upon the destroying the deeds of the flesh
present and to come, unless they confess, and mourn for what is past, and sue
out a pardon according to the Gospel. Therefore look to this, that you seek to
have what is past forgiven, so as has been expressed.

2. For the mortifying the deeds of the body as to time present.

This must be, or nothing will be done with respect to time to come. There must
be a beginning, and setting upon the laying dead, present sinful motions.

If ye mortify (says my Text) it speaks in the present tense, If ye now stir
up your selves in this work;

What is this to mortify the deeds of the body, present? A. It is to put a
stop to the movings of sin, so that they may cease, as the Psalmist, Ps. 73.15.
If I say, I will speak thus, (that is sinfully as before in the foregoing
words) behold, I should offend against the generation of thy children; He found
envy because of the prosperity of the wicked stirring in him, and discontent,
because of his own afflicted condition; whereupon he set himself to mortify
those lusts in the present motions thereof, and he did so, he stopped their
mouth. So when unbelief moved in him, Ps. 77. and caused him to begin to say,
will the Lord be favorable no more, has he forgotten to be gracious? he tells
us he said this is my infirmity, v. 10. thus he put a bar against the working
of his unbelief, so we should still mortify every lusting, and motion of sin,
as men mortify a sore, or disease, by using all means, to put a stop to it,
that it increase, and spread not. We should not rest till corruption be
silenced, and give over its solicitations, and if it will be stirring still,
we should labor to weaken the strength of it as much as possible; so far as
it is weakened, it is mortified, as the weaker our body grows, the nearer it is
to death, there is a degree of death in weakness.

But how shall we thus mortify the present deeds of the flesh? A. In a few
particulars at this time.

First, Keep an observing eye upon the body of sin, mind carefully, observe
diligently, what deeds it brings forth, what motions it has at this and that
time; as in sight, they eye and mark every motion of the enemy. There are who
though they have many and mighty workings of corruption, they are ignorant of
them, or they little regard them, except in some more than ordinary case, but
forasmuch as we have a body of sin that is very fruitful, we should still take
good notice what fruit it does yield, which way it moves.

How shall we mortify the things we are unacquainted with? How often is it, that
the body of sin works covetously? How often that it moves proudly? How frequent
that it lusts enviously in this or that man? and he is not apprehensive, or
sensible thereof, and then how is he like to do any thing toward the killing
its fruits, to bar its outgoings?

Secondly, When you perceive any rising or motion of corruption, it is good to
consider what it is that gives occasion thereto, or by what it is that it
takes occasion, whether it be some object of sense, something you see, or hear,
or feel, or something that you think of; whenever lust stirrs, there is
something which administreth occasion to it, or whereby it takes occasion, what
that is, must be noted, and being known it must be avoided; If it be your
looking on any thing, you must turn away your eye, if it be your hearing any
thing, you must stop your ear thereto, as soon as may be, except it be such a
thing as you are bound in duty to hear, for sin takes occasion sometimes by
that which is good, even by the Word of God it self, as the Apostle faith, Romans
7.11. Sin took occasion in him by the Commandment, sin took occasion in those
that heard Stephen Preach (though he spoke in the Holy Ghost) to fill them with
madness and cause them to stone him, Acts 7.54. When they heard these things,
they were cut to the heart, and they gnashed on him with their teeth. Sin took
occasion often in those that heard Christ to work the more enviously and
maliciously against him; therefore I say, when any thing you hear stirrs your
corruption, turn away your ear, unless it be that which you ought to give ear
to, and if it be any thing you are thinking of, that kindles any lust in you,
by all means divert your thoughts to something else. (except also it be a thing
whereof it is your duty to meditate, and then other means is to be used, or an
other time more fit is to be taken for those thoughts) The same may be said of
place, and company or any thing else, which awakens your sin, and calls it
forth, put it away speedily, or turn from it, take away the fuel that the fire
may go out; as Christ says, cut off your right hand, your right foot, pluck
out your right eye, if it offend you, if it cause you to offend, if it draw out
your corruption, divorce your selves, be sequestered from it, whatever it be,
how dear, or near soever it be to you; and as Solomon says, look away from the
wine, when it is red in the cup, when thou beginnest to be so pleased with it,
as to have thy appetite too much raised and set on edge by it.

3. When corruption any way acts in you, then should you call to mind something
of the Word of God, which is most proper and fit, something that the Scripture
speaks against it, or concerning the evil of it, or that which will follow upon
it, if you give way thereto. This has been, and will be found a very notable
help in mortifying any present motion of sin, a seasonable remembrance of some
suitable Scripture, hence says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.1. Moreover brethren, I
would not have you ignorant, etc. v. 6. these things were our examples, to the
intent we should not lust after evil things, as they also lasted, etc. and often
when he speaks against any sin, he minds them of some Scripture saying, Let
your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with such things as
ye have, (Heb. 13.5.6. for he has said I will never leave thee, nor forsake
thee, so that we may boldly say, the Lord is my helper and I will not fear what
man shall do unto me. and Romans 12.19. Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves,
rather give place unto wrath, for it is written vengeance is mine, and I will
repay, says the Lord, by which and other like places we are taught this, when
we feel this or that lust moving in us, to call to mind, and give our selves
seriously to ponder on some Scripture that has an aptness for the quelling of
it.

Fourthly, At all times when any evil affection breaks out, or lust bubles up,
thoughts concerning God are a great help to the subduing thereof, if they are
with seriousness. It may be when Joseph's Mistress tempted him, he might at
first find some stirring in himself not good, but he mortified it, by
remembering God, for first he thought of God, e're he said, how shall I do this,
and sin against God. God says of those who are carried away by their lusts
they have forgotten him, because the living, and prevailing of their sin
arises from their forgetting him, Jer. 13.25. This is thy lot, the portion of
thy measures from me, says the Lord, because thou have forgotten me, and
trusted in falsehood; how came they to trust in falsehood, because they
remembered not God and his faithfulness, Jer. 18.15. Because my people have
forgotten me, they have burnt incense to vanity, and they have caused them to
stumble in their ways from the ancient paths, to walk in paths, in a way not
cast up, to make their Land desolate, a perpetual hissing.

Thoughts concerning Gods Majesty, loftiness, Almightiness, jealousy,
omnipresence, or his filling Heaven and Earth, all places with his presence,
his all seeing eye, his holiness and other his properties and attributes are an
excellent means to curb a lust, and give it a deadly wound, to quench the fiery
motions of sin as with water. Find me a place said one when tempted where God
sees not, or is not, then will I yield. Jam. 5.9. Grudge not one against
another brethren, lest ye be condemned, but how shall we stop our hearts when
they begin to grudge against a brother, it follows, behold the Judge stands
at the door, as if he had said, remember, the holy just Lord is near, he sees,
he hears, he stands at the door of your heart, and looks in, for its always
wide open to him, and he will judge righteous judgment, e're you are aware
he will be upon you, even now already he is at the door.

Fifthly, You should go to God, if it may be, especially if corruption stir
very much, then it is exceeding good speedily to get alone, and fall down before
the Lord, and spread thy heart before him, as Hezekiah did Rabshekahs railing
letter, and lament and say, behold Lord, see in mercy and pity to me, see what
a heart I have, how it needs thy grace, see how my corrupt nature works; and so
cry out for help as Jehosaphat when the Assyrians surrounded him, thinking it
had been Ahab's Chariot, 2 Chronicles. 18.31. Jehosaphat cried out and the Lord
helped him, and God moved them to depart from him; when we cannot get alone,
and in all ordinary cases, it is good to lift up the heart to God, with an
inward sigh and groan, heart sighs and groans have very much in them to
mortify a stirring, lively lust, when the soul sighs inwardly, O wretched man
that I am, that sin thus remains, thus works in me, Lord deliver me. Some say
every sigh fetches a drop of blood from the heart, I may say every hearty sigh
fetches a drop of blood from the heart of sin, if it be for sin, but we must
not only sigh because of the present working of corruption, and ask the death
of that, but also sigh because of the spring whence the evil stream flows, and
beg the drying up of that, the pulling up the root, and killing it, as well and
more, than the destruction of the fruit.

Sixthly, Ever have this settled in thine heart, as a sure truth, when any sin
stirs in thee, and lust flames, or burns, it is better to think thy self more
guilty of it at that time than thou art, rather than less, to think thy self
more guilty will hardly hurt thee, but to think thy self less guilty will
harden thee, and make thee less active against thy sin. Yea, I should advise
thee, that thou would look upon thy self as more guilty than thou seem to
thy self to be, at that time when thou art under the workings of this or that
lust, for it is seldom or never, but a man under the strong motions of
corruption, seems to himself less guilty than he is, because sin when working
(especially) blinds a man's mind, puts out his eyes, or casts a mist before
them, hence, if pride act outwardly in a man, others see it more than he
himself, so a man's covetousness (ordinarily) appears more to others (if it
vent it self) than to himself, so a man's anger, wrath, etc. As often when men
are drunk, or far gone in drink, they perceive it not, or nothing so much as
others, who are sober, and look on them; a man in drink thinks himself
sometimes, then best and most himself, when his wits are just upon being
drowned. So is it with a man when he is as drunk with any lust; therefore still
think in thy self when any lust is up in thee, that thou art more guilty than
thou appearest to thy self, or fear it at least, that thy corruption works more
strongly than thou art sensible of; this will further its mortification, by
stirring thee up the more against it.

Seventhly, When sin kindles, or is stirred up in you, it is good to remember
what thoughts you have had thereof formerly, when alone, and most serious, and
nearest to God, humbling your selves before him, for usually our thoughts of
sin differ much, when we are under its present working, actually now captivated
by it, from what they are of it, at such times, when we are serious, when near
God, when humbling our selves in his sight, therefore we should endeavor to
keep the thoughts, then we have of our sin, fresh in our minds, and to recall
them when sin renews its assaults.

It Is good also to remember, the former ill fruit, and sad effect of such a sin
as now works, when heretofore it has got the upper hand of us: as experience
of God's goodness, mercy, faithfulness and power works hope, so experience, if
well thought of and considered, of the mischievousness, folly, and hurtfulness
of sin in its former issuings forth, works shame, fear, hatred, whereby the
consideration thereof, tends much to the mortification of it, in its present
acting.

Father, it is very useful to think, how such a sin which at this or that time
you feel rising, stirring in you, has looked in your eye, when you have seen
it breaking forth in another, how have you then disliked it? what thoughts have
you had of it? how have you spoken against it? yea, perhaps I may say, what
indignation did you show against it, at such and such a time? remember these
things; for though sin be the same, of the same nature in all, we naturally are
prone to conceit otherwise, and to imagine such a sin in our selves, is not so
bad as it appears to us when we see it in another.

Moreover, your former purposes, promises, resolutions against your sin should
not be forgotten, but be duly weighed. But, not to add more.

Lastly, Have this persuasion fixed firmly, and deeply rooted in your hearts,
the sooner you step back in an evil way, the better, and that it is a matter of
great danger to go forward therein; when corruption is up, and we are in the
hands of a lust, thoughts many times come in from Satan and Sin, as if we had
as good go forward, as there is a Proverb, over shoes, over boots, being gone
so far as good venture further, it is all one, at least we may take some steps
more in that dirty path, but this thought is very naught, exceeding evil, and
strengthens sin. Shall a man think because I have stumbled, i will throw my self
down, because I have slipped poison, I Will drink a full draught, or I Will sip yet
again, because I am fallen into the water, I had as good go in over head and
ears, because I have run somewhat in debt, I Will run more, and more? Prove.
17.14. the beginning of strife, is as when a man lets out water, therefore
leave off contention before it be meddled with; thus it is as to any sin, it is
as the letting out of water, which the sooner it is stopped the better, for if it
begin to break through the bank, you know nor when it will be turned back, and
the longer it has its course through this or that place, the harder it is to
turn it, and the wider the breach will be. Therefore ever think it is best to
leave off sin quickly, the sooner, the better, That also which Solomon says of
the lips of a fool is true of every lust, if not timely stopped, Eccl. 10.12,
13. the Lips of a fool will swallow up himself, the beginning of the words of
his mouth is foolishness, and the end of his talk is mischievous madness. And
that of the Apostle James may be remembered, Jam. 1.15. therefore have this
always in thy heart as a rule of wisdom, step back speedily in a bad way.
Solomon (you may remember) brings in the sluggard saying, a little more steep,
a little more slumber, a little more folding of the hands to sleep; to whom he
gives this answer, so shall thy poverty come as an armed man, etc. So, when
thou say of any sin, a little more, a little more, a few steps more, one
step, and another step more, thus will thy misery, thy shame and sorrow come as
an armed man unavoidably. We also read, he that loves his Son chasteneth him
betimes, so, be that loves his soul, and hates his sin, will make head
against it, and seek it is 'ruine betimes. It Is easier to kill a thing that is
young, as a young Serpent, a young Lion, than one that is grown and great.

3. For the deeds of the flesh, the affections, or motions of the body of sin
with respect to time to come.

To mortify these is to prevent them wholly so far as we can, and to endeavor
that those which will be, may be as few, and as weak as possible, for which
purpose, I shall at this time give you only six or seven short rules.

First, Fear thy self, fear least this, and that lust or corruption break forth
in thee, Prove. 28.14. Blessed is the man, that fears always, but he that
hardneth his heart, shall fall into evil. That is, blessed is he that fears
himself always, that fears least he be overtaken with evil, carried away by sin,
why is that man blessed? A. because he does not harden his heart, and so shall
not fall into mischief, as the following words teach; but he that hardens his
heart shall fall into mischief; he that fears always is not self confident,
but watchful, and wary, circumspect, and careful, and so he will be kept from
those transgressions others fall into, therefore he is truly wise, Prove.
14.16. A wise man fears, and departs from evil; the Scripture knows and
owns no other as a wise man, but such a one, who fears himself lest he sin, and
fears God, so as to watch against sin.

Wherefore fear thou, do so, as to former iniquities which have prevailed in
thee; consider how often thou have offended so and so, consider how subject
thou art in thy self to transgress, consider how watchful Satan is to cause
thee to transgress, so fear lest, as it has been, it be again. Yea, fear thy
self as to those evils which hitherto thou have seldom or not at all been
overtaken with; Though thou be as good a Disciple as Peter thou should
fear lest some time or other thou deny thy Lord and Master; though thou be as
Patient as Job, thou should fear lest under some notable trial that may
come, thou show great impatience: though thou art as meek as Moses, thou
should fear, left thou be overtaken with unadvisedness, and sinful anger;
though thou art or were as Righteous as Lot, as holy as David, thou should
fear, lest thou be captivated by such corruptions as they were; though thou
were as strong in faith as Abraham, thou would have reason to fear the
prevailing of unbelief; and no doubt one great end, why the miscarriages of
those and other good men are recorded, is to keep all, even the best, fearful
of themselves, watchful and careful, while they live in this evil world.

Secondly, Store your minds with the principal Scriptures against the several
deeds of the flesh, Jer. 23.29. is not my word, like the fire, (says the Lord)
and like the hammer that breaks the rock in pieces? Yes, God's Word, is like
the fire, and like the hammer, that breaks the rock in pieces; so thou shall
find it to be to thy corruptions if thou make a right use thereof; chiefly
should you treasure up in your hearts Scriptures relating to those sins,
whereto you are more especially inclined, either by constitution, calling,
education, custom, or some temptation.

Whatever thou read, or hear against any such deed of the flesh, lay it
up, take it home to thy self, and apply it to thine own sin, principally labor
to retain, and often think of that which at any time thou have found, or find
most to work upon thee, for one word, works most upon one temper, another
word, upon another temper most, and that which has at any time done you good,
or affected you, is more likely to prevail with you, and keep you from such a
sin for time to come.

Thirdly, Seek to the Lord to help thee, not only as to the present, but with
respect to hereafter, and seek earnestly, seek as for thy life, as thou
would beg to be kept from Thieves, and Robbers, and Murderers, lying in wait
for thee. Be sure also to trust in God for his preservation, his keeping thee
from all evil deeds, as thou would trust in the Lord to be kept from the
arrows of the Pestilence, in a very hot time of the sickness, or from a great
storm, in the midst of the rocks; but let your trust in God be upon the
account of his Word, such and such promises as he has made for the keeping his
people, and the subduing their iniquities. As Jehosaphat exhorted the people, 2 Chronicles. 20.20. Jehosaphat stood, and said, Hear me, O Judah, and ye Inhabitants
of Jerusalem, believe in the Lord your God, so shall ye be established, believe
his Prophets (that is believe in him because of his Word spoken by his
Prophets) so shall ye prosper; thus do ye, O Christians, so shall ye prosper in
this blessed work of mortifying your sins.

Fourthly, When thou see any one fall into sin, bless not thy self, as if
thou were in thy self better than he, nor despise him, nor revile him, these
things are themselves from the flesh, fruits of corruption, and they will
harden thee, and they will provoke the Lord to leave thee to the like or worse.
Above all, take heed that thy heart be never secretly glad of another's
falling, as sometimes the heart of some is, either because they desire their
shame, whom they see to sin, or because they think themselves commended by the
fall of others. But let us ever remember when we see others sin, to bless God,
God who keeps us from doing the same things, and let us pity those who sin, as
we pity such who are carried captive by some cruel enemy, or such who are
besides themselves, and therefore hurt, and wound themselves; Let Us also pray
much for those that sin, and let us by the sin of others take occasion to humble
our selves for the corruption of our nature; as that good man, who saw no man
so bad, but he would say such a one am I, as bad by nature. And as that father
who seeing one fall, would say, he to day, and I to morrow.

Fifthly, Consider well before hand what temptations you are like to meet with
for the stirring up any sin in you, and do what you may to prevent them. As
whatever may cause any sickness in your bodies, so far as you can, and know it,
you by all means avoid it, lo, and much more (if more can be) you should avoid
whatever may excite or draw forth any lust in you. When a man takes no care of
himself, but heats, and cools, eats any thing, drinks unseasonably, as when
he is very hot, throws off his clothes without any regard to the season, or the
like; will you wonder if he be sick? so when a man takes no care of his soul,
when he goes into and continues in any Company, runs himself without heed into
any Company, upon occasions of sin, needlessly doing things which stir up
corruption; No wonder if he abound in deeds of the body.

Sixthly, When thou go about any work, into any Company, use thy self to
think what sin thou art most like to be tempted to, where Satan is most like to
get in, or on what he most probably will take hold, and fore-arm thy self, by
some suitable thoughts, and serious arguments, particularly praying against that
sin thou art like to be drawn to, or to have stirred up in thee.

And be sure to be always well employed, about some lawful profitable thing,
either advantageous to thy self or others, diligence in good, is a good help to
mortify sin,

Lastly, Look upon the greatest friends of thy sin as the worst enemies of thy
soul, which it is sure they are, for Satan is the greatest friend of thy
corruption, and the worst enemy of thy soul; ever also look on the greatest
enemies of thy sin, as the best friends of thy soul, as thou have reason, for
God and Christ are the greatest enemies of all to thy sin, and they are the
best friends of all to thy soul, therefore the more any one is a friend to thy
sin, the worse enemy he is to thy soul, and the more any one is an enemy to thy
sin, the better friend he is to thy soul; do thou so account, be so persuaded,
this will help to the mortifying thy sin, for it will keep thine ear open to
reproof, and make way, for the sinking of wholesome words into thine heart,
whereas if thou think, he that hates thy sin, hates thee (which is too
ordinary) and he that flatters and humors thee in thy evil affections and so is
a friend to them, loves thee, this will keep thy sin alive, and nourish it
greatly, for it will cause thee to give ear to those things that will feed thy
corruption. Much more might have been said, and more may be spoken afterward,
let thus much suffice at present.

Sermon 4.
Q. 4. WHy is it a necessary duty to mortify the deeds of the body?

A. It is most manifest that this is a necessary duty, that there is an
Absolute necessity lying upon us all, and upon me, and thee, every one of you;
not only because it is commanded, but it is necessary in it self, and for our
own good; It is necessary that we may escape death, for if we do not mortify
the deeds of the flesh, we shall live after the flesh, and so dye at last. They
say a Crocodile and a man seldom meet, but one of them dies for it, if the man
kill not the Crocodile, the Crocodile will kill the man, This is true of every
deed of the body of sin, either a man must kill it, or he will be killed by it,
kill, or be killed, is most true as to all sin. The words I am upon, teach,
this is necessary to life, and that must be, if it be necessary to the escaping
death.

But to evince this by some particulars.

First, Is it not necessary that a deadly disease be mortified? you know it is,
it will mortify if it be not mortified, but sin is the disease of the soul,
and it is deadly, as the Apostle James says, when it is finished it brings forth
death, and as the Apostle Paul says, it brings forth fruit unto death. No
disease whatever more deadly to the body, than every unmortified deed of the
flesh is to the soul; a bodily disease hurts not the soul, but an unmortified
lust hurts soul and body with the greatest hurt, is it not necessary then to be
mortified? or is it not necessary that a metal enemy that is near a man be
slain if possible, there being no other way to avoid death by his hands, but to
lay him dead at ones feet? much more is it necessary to destroy our sins, there
being no other way to escape death by them, or no way effectual without this,
and no enemy hurtful as our lusts unsubdued are. It is indeed only sin
unmortified that can do us any hurt, real, or abiding hurt, the world could not
mischief us, Satan could not prejudice us, were all our lusts laid dead, as
they should be; therefore well said one of the Martyrs, in a letter to his
Wife, be always an enemy to the world, and to the Devil, but especially, to
your own flesh, your own corruption. But we lie open to the malice of all
enemies, if any sin be suffered to live in us; a lust unmortified is as an open
door to let Satan into our souls, it gives him hold of us, it is as dry tinder
whereby we may presently be set on fire, or as a Barrel of Gunpowder (as I may
say) within us, whereby he may come and blow us up. If we mortify our sins,
then do we mortify the world, and Satan in their power over us, but if we do
not, then will the world be our Master, and Satan will be Lord over us.

Secondly, Is it not necessary that we love God, and Christ, and his
Commandments, and our own souls, and one another; but we love none of these,
unless we mortify the deeds of the body, we love not God, because he hates
those Deeds, he is dishonored by them, offended, and provoked, and his Spirit
is grieved and quenched thereby, Jam. 4.4. the friendship of the world is
enmity to God, whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world, is the enemy
of God, so as to every deed of the flesh, the friendship thereof is enmity to
God, whosoever therefore is a friend thereof, is an enemy of God.

Nor do we love Christ, because the deeds of the body put him to death; and are
quite contrary to the deeds which he did, If ye love me, says Christ, keep my
Commandments, and if we keep his Commandments, we must needs break the
Commandments of sin, and so mortify the deeds of the body.

Nor do we love the Commandments of God and Christ, because all sinful deeds
are directly opposite thereto, and this is one of the Lords Commandments; that
we mortify our sins, yea every Commandment implies this, in that we can keep
no Command truly, heartily, unless our lusts are mortified,

Nor do we love our own souls, because all the deeds of the body, war against
it, and are destructive to it, to let sin live quietly in us, is too plainly to
hate our souls, for it is to give entertainment to the enemy, the worst enemy
of them. Prove. 29.24. he that is partner with a Thief, hates his own soul, he
hears cursing, and bewrays it not, so does he hate his own soul, who has
this and that lust stirring in him, and destroys it not.

Nor do we love, or can we love one another in truth, for true love only
grows in a pure heart, hence it is said, 1 Pet. 1.22. Seeing ye have purified
your souls in obeying the truth through the spirit, unto unfeigned love of the
brethren, see that ye love one another, with a pure heart fervently, but no
heart purity, except the corruptions of the heart be slain, Jam. 4.1. from
whence come wars, and fightings among you, (he means quarrels, strifes, and
contentions which are caused by want of love ( come they not (says he) even of
your lusts, that war in your members? Yes, thence it is sure they come, there
would be no wars nor fightings of any kind, but for the lusts that are in men,
and whence is it that men's lusts do cause any such things but because they are
not mortified?

Thirdly, Let me ask, is it not necessary that we hate our corruptions? either
we must hate them or we shall love them, but we do not hate them in good
earnest, with a right hatred, except we seek the mortification of them, no
hatred of sin is true and right which is not deadly, which does not carry us
forth in endeavors to trample it dead under our feet, to crucify it, and let
out it is heart blood. As when Cain hated his brother, he killed him, all heart
hatred inclines a man to wish, and if it may be to seek the death of its
object. Hence we read 1 John 3.15 Whosoever hates his brother is a Murderer, and
ye know that no Murderer has eternal life abiding in him.

Fourthly, Is it not necessary that we escape condemnation in the day of
judgment? but this we cannot unless we mortify the deeds of the body, for the
Scripture assures us in that day the Lord will render to every one according to
his deeds, Romans 2.5, 6. Now is the day of salvation, now is the accepted time,
2 Cor. 6.2. but yet after a little while there will be a day of wrath, and
revelation of the righteous judgment of God, and then, O then, even then, will
the Lord God himself, render to every one of us according to our deeds; but
what are our deeds? A. The deeds of the body of sin are our deeds if we
mortify them not, for then we allow them, as they say the receiver is as bad
as the thief, so, if we entertain and give way to the lustings, and outgoings
of corrupt nature, we make our selves even as bad as it, we are as guilty as
the old man the body of sin is, they are as partners with their corruption, who
seek not its destruction, therefore according to all the deeds of our
corruption will the Lord render to us in that day if we mortify them not, but,
O! Alas! what a recompense? what woe? what sore punishment? when God, even the
most High and Almighty one himself; and that in the day of wrath; shall render
to a poor creature, a miserable man, according to all the lusts, and lustings
of sin, all the members, and motions, and works of the body of sin in him.

Fifthly, Is it not necessary that we perform acceptable service to God? This
will not be, cannot be, that we serve or worship God, so that what we do,
should be accepted of him, unless we mortify the affections and motions of sin
within us, for our iniquities if not subdued will defile all we do, so that it
will be loathsome and abominable to God, our lusts if suffered to live in us,
will either quite draw us off from serving God, or they will mortify all our
services, they will make them as dead services, altogether odious and hateful
to the Lord, Isa. 1.11, 12, etc. To what purpose is the multitude of your
sacrifices unto me, says the Lord, etc. bring no more vain oblations, Incense
is an abomination to me, the new Moons and Sabbaths, the calling of Assemblies
I cannot away with, it is iniquity, the solemn meeting. Your new Moons, and
your appointted Feasts my soul hates; they are a trouble unto me, I am weary
to hear them. Why? because their lusts were unmortified, therefore it is said,
v. 16. Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings, from before
mine eyes, cease to do evil. And no wonder, for if our lusts are let alone, and
entertained as friends, not dealt with as enemies, then are not our hearts
upright with God, we are no better than Hypocrites in all that we do.
Corruption living and prevailing keeps our hearts from God, it fetters,
imprisoneth, and shackles our souls that they cannot follow after God. Every
lust, any one sin not mortified, it does bind a man hand and foot, as to any
right performance to God; so it will be most just for Christ to say to all
whose sins are not mortified (as he foretells us he will say) Take them, bind
them hand and foot, and cast them into outer darkness; because they suffered
themselves, as if Christ should say, to be taken and bound hand and foot by
their corruptions, And would not endeavor by destroying them, to set
themselves at liberty, that they might walk in the light, therefore, take them
you Executioners of my wrath, take them, and bind them, hand and foot, and cast
them into outer darkness.

Sixthly, Let me add but this, is it not necessary that we should have
Communion with God, fellowship with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ?
but how shall this be? sure our sins must first be mortified, because the
Father is most holy, and the Son is most holy; should God grant us Communion
with himself, while any of our corruptions are harbored, and not wounded, not
brought under, but have dominion in us, he must have fellowship with them, even
with our sins, which is impossible, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15. What fellowship has
righteousness, with unrighteousness? and what Communion has light with
darkness? and what Concord has Christ with Belial?

We are exhorted to have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness,
but we have fellowship with the deeds of the body of sin, if we comply with
them, and mortify them not, and we thereby, have Communion with Satan; It is
as sure some have Communion with Satan in this world, as it is that some have
fellowship with God, and who are they who have Communion with Satan, but such
whose hearts are in league with their sins, therefore such can have no
fellowship with God, nor can it be that God should draw nigh to them in a way
of Communion. So then, I need say no more, it abundantly appears it is
necessary, of exceeding great necessity that we do mortify the deeds of the
body.

Q. 5. Why is this to be done constantly?

A. This is a duty and work about which we must be conversant, wherein we must
be exercised continually, all the days of our life, therefore the Apostle
says if ye mortify, not if ye have mortified, noting to us, that this is a
business we are daily, all our life long, to be employed in. And the reasons
hereof are manifest.

First, Because (as has before been said) the body of sin continues in all,
while their natural visible body lives in this world, the Apostle Paul himself
complains, and cries out because of this body of death, of sin which is as
death, and this body of sin is still bringing forth sour grapes, vile fruit,
there are new lustings of corruption every day, hence we read, the flesh
lusts against the spirit, that is constantly, daily, and Jam. 4.5. the spirit
that is in us lusts to envy, so it lusts to worldliness, to discontent,
impatience, pride, wrath, etc. Therefore we must constantly keep warring
against our sin, its motions are still renewed, therefore we must still renew
our blows, our opposition, our endeavor for their mortification, a if fire
break forth, and it be beaten in, or quenched, yet so that it is still burning,
still flaming and issuing forth again, then there is greet need, why there
should be still endeavors to extinguish it. But the bare continuance, and
constant working of corruption is not all.

Secondly, Satan is still endeavoring to quicken the deeds of the body, he is
still seeking to stir up this and the other lust in us, to engender, hatch, or
beget new sinful motions in us, in our corrupt nature. The body of sin, is (as
I may call it) Satan's daughter, yet harlot, he is still doing all he can to
cause new births, to make corruption fruitful, therefore we should still be
mortifying our sins, or we give him encouragement, we yield to him, if one be
endeavoring still to burn down your house, your city, had you not need still
to stand ready with water, and whenever any flame appears, to bestir your
selves.

Thirdly, What ever arguments or reasons there are, why we should begin, and at
any time mortify the deeds of corruption, the same arguments, the same reasons
there are, why we should continue, and hold on in so doing; our lusts are still
the same in their own nature at one time, as at another, God abhors them
always alike, they are still as contrary to him, as full of enmity to our
souls, the lustings of sin at all times deserve death, and have a tendency to
bring us unto death; so in all other respects, we have the same motives to
quicken us in the carrying on this holy war.

Fourthly, they who have begun to seek the death of their sins, have more
reason to go forward even than they had to begin, have thou begun to destroy
the viperous brood of lusts in thy soul, reason enough thou had to begin, and
woe had been to thee, if thou had never begun to destroy these Vermin,
Serpents, and much worse, but yet thou having begun, have more reason to go on,
and continue destroying them while thou liv'st. For,

First, The more thou have done, the less thou have to do, if thou hold on,
or the more thou have done, the more easy will it be for thee to go forward,
in so doing, every work is hardest at first, and so is this; the longer the
Soldier has been in the war and the more execution he has done, the better
may he hold on in his warfare, and ordinarily the more is he encouraged, the
more resolute and courageous is he, as also the more able, old Soldiers are
looked upon as the best.

Secondly, The longer thou have been occupied or busied in this work, the less
while have thou to sweat in it, Romans 13.11. Knowing the times, that now it is
high time to awake out of sleep, for now is our salvation nearer than when we
believed. So the utter destruction of our sin, is nearer than when we began to
make war upon it, so long as thou have been mortifying thy lusts, so much
shorter thy life, and therefore the life of thy lusts also, thy end, and
therefore their end, is so much the nearer, and thou art so much the nearer
heaven where thou shall have no more such work to do, where thou shall neither
have any sinful lusting, nor any sin remaining in thee.

Thirdly, To give over, having begun, is a heinous crime, a greater evil than
to have never begun; he that never lists himself, or never marches forth,
offends less than he that does, and runs from his Colors, or returns before
the fight be ended, (unless his Captain send him back, which the Captain of our
salvation never does any) but in this spiritual warfare it is yet much worse,
for he that desisteth, who holds his hand, he (as it were) enters into a new
league, and makes a new composition with his sin, and that after light and
conviction, for none begin, but such who are enlightened, and convinced, which
aggravates greatly their Compliance with their sin, He mortifieth his
convictions, who keeps not on in mortifying his corruptions. Yea, if thou
yieldest thy self after resistance made against thy sin, to be carried down the
stream, thou do then resist the spirit, for that it was that put thee on at
first to strike at and attempt the death of thy lusts.

Fourthly, Thou will lose all thy former labor, and endeavor, and worse than
lose it,

Lose it it is sure thou will, for thou will be overcome by thy sins, he that
does his utmost, may be and is sometimes captivated, as the Apostle says he
was by sin, but they who lay down their Arms, or stand still, will be quite
conquered; as suppose an Enemy scale the Walls of a City, if those within only
knock down and kill for a while those who seek to enter, and don't continue to
slay, while there are more and more still powered in upon them, notwithstanding
all that have been slain, the City will soon be taken, mastered, and brought
under the Enemies power; So it is here, and if any are quite overcome by their
corruptions, they will perish by them, notwithstanding any former conquest
gained against, or over them. Though thou have mortified a 100 and a 100
lustings of the flesh, though thou have kept under thy sins never so long, if
after all, thou sit still, they will become thy Master, and they will strangle
thy soul, they will stab thee to thy heart, and carry thee to perdition.

So will all thy former pains and warring be lost, be as if it had not been.
Yea, I say, it will be worse than lost, for thy corruption will grow the more
violent, as a stream that is stopped a while; thy lusts will become the more
furious, as an Enemy that has been often beaten, and at length gets the upper
hand, he is the worse he is the more cruel. And God will punish the more sorely,
all who don't continue but let fall, the war against their lusts. If any think
this not true, but shall bless themselves in what is past, and grow secure,
slothful, careless and take their ease, giving their corruption leave even to
work as it will, and putting themselves under the feet of their flesh; let such
read (and reading tremble) those words of the Apostle Peter in his 2 Epistle,
2. Chap. 19 and 20 v. while they promise others liberty, they themselves are
the servants of corruption, for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he
brought in bondage, for if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world,
through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again
entangled therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them than the
beginning, the more a deadly disease is meddled with, if after it be let alone
and prevail it will kill the sooner. But I pass to the Application.

Uses.
Use 1. It is a great mistake if thou O soul think thy condition good who
have not as yet begun this work, who have not as yet struck one stroke in it,
who have not to this day given thy lusts one blow, but have suffered them to
live quietly and peaceably in thee, without any disturbance, or opposition.
Know thou, thy condition is not good, for thou have not yet begun to do that
which is necessary to be done. Or if any one have begun and given over, (be it
through weariness, laziness, wordliness, or carelessness) let such know, this
speaks ill concerning them; It may be the time was when thou did bestir thy
self against thy sin, but now though thy sin stir mightily in thee, thou movest
not against it, thou art taken as with the dead Palsy, or Lethargy, thou
stirrest not, make no head against thy corruption, or thon art as retired out
of the field, and layest the reins on the neck of thy lusts; thou did seek to
cut down, and destroy these Briars and Thorns, but now thou let'st them grow,
believe it this is a black mark and character upon thee, look upon thy self,
see thy self marked with it, consider what it portends, or presageth; It at
least gives cause to suspect thy condition, to fear that God intends not to
save thee, yea, be zealous and repent, awake, and fight against those enemies
within thee, or they will destroy thee, the Sword of destruction hangs over thy
head, thou art in the hands of thine enemies which thirst for thy blood.

Use 2. The way of life and happiness is not an easy way wherein one can walk
lazily, asleep, without care, labor, pains and industry, for, he that attains
happiness must still be fighting, warring, killing and slaying many great, and
potent enemies, strong lusts, and corruptions, a numerous issue of evil
motions, which sure, is no easy matter to do. Had a man only one lust to
grapple with, it were no easy thing to keep it under, how then can it be easy
to subdue many evil affections? many there are in every one, all which must be
mortified; Therefore the Apostle says not, if ye mortify this or that deed,
but the deeds of the body, that is, all of them though many.

God said to Adam when he had sinned, in sorrow shall thou eat of the ground
all the days of thy life, thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth, in
the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread till thou return to the ground. The
earth it is bringing forth thorns and thistles seems to be spoken as one reason,
why Adam's life, should be a life of sorrow and labor, and this is one thing
that makes the life of a husbandman laborious and painful, when their ground
is still bringing forth thorns and thistles or such like things, which must be
destroyed time after time. It Is sure this makes the life of a Christian, one
that is truly set, and bent heavenward, full of trouble and labor, he has
lustings within, far worse than briars and thorns, more hard to be subdued, and
yet more necessary to be mortified. By this then (for one thing) it may be
known that many people are not in the way to heaven (because they live (as to
all spiritual soul work) a lazy, slothful life, sure such are not wont daily to
mortify the deeds of the body; therefore are they not such who walk in the way
of life, unless we shall think (which Scripture permits not) that they have a
privilege above all others, to be quite freed from the body of sin, which if
they had, they would be more favored than any man ever was in this life. What
a work have we with a disease when it gets rooted in our bodies, what pains,
what means, Purging, Sweating, Bleeding? and what time e're we can get it
mortified? much more difficult to get a lust subdued, which is natural, which
was in the seed of it, bred and born in us. Is it not hard work to deal with a
strong enemy, who has got into the heart of the Country, who has diverse
strong holds, and is often sallying forth?

Use 3. Doleful, and next door to desperate is their case, who are so far from
mortifying the deeds of the body, that they nourish and cherish them, they help
and quicken them, they make provision for the flesh, which the Apostle warns us
not to do, Romans 13. last, Make no provision for the flesh, but some even make
all provision for it, they feed their corruptions, they stir up their lusts, by
giving themselves to think of those things that tend thereto, by running upon
occasions of sin, ventring boldly upon manifest temptations, by their excessive
using the good creatures of God, and other ways, Jam. 5.5. they live in
pleasure, and nourish their hearts as in a day of slaughter, they so live, that
they make the body of sin in them exceeding strong and lusty, plump, and fat,
and accordingly its deeds are the more numerous, gross, and notorious, as the
most strong and lusty people have commonly the strongest, and lustiest
Children. Sad is their case, who do not mortify their lusts, exceeding sad
then, sad with a witness, is their case, their condition who do the contrary,
when their flesh lusts, they heap fuel on the fire, and if corruption stir
not of its own accord, they venture to call it forth, as if they should (like
mad men) call to their worst most inveterate enemies to come and hack and hew
them, cut their throats, or stab them through the heart.

Use 4. Be not you discouraged, who are daily exercised in this work of
mortifying your sins; though you cannot at present quite win the field, and
drive your enemies out, but they are still rallying their forces and assaulting
you, yet while you keep combating, and beating them down, be not discouraged;
because this is a work not to be issued, till you have finished your course. It
is not therefore to be expected, that you should so subdue your corruption as
no more to be troubled with it, while you are in this evil world.

Use 5. Hinder not one another, but rather, as you may, help each other in this
work, because it is so necessary to be done; do nothing (so far as you can help
it) that will stir up corruption in another, but do what in you lies to
prevent, and stop the workings of sin in those with whom you live, walk and
converse. It is too common a thing, and a great evil among men, they blow up
sin in one another, they stir up lust in one another, and strengthen one the
other in evil, by ill council, enticement, and persuasion, or by some vain
naughty discourse, or by provoking and vexing, or by ill example, by laying
stumbling blocks, etc. be you ware of all such things;

And whenever you see any under the working of any sin, so speak, so walk, so
carry it toward them, that you may be helpful to them in the mortifying
thereof, for this purpose remember these counsels, and such like, Gal. 5.26.
Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one
another. 1 Cor. 8.9. take heed lest by any means, your liberty become a
stumbling block to them that are weak. Romans 12.21. Overcome evil with good. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. Now we exhort you, brethren, warn them that are unruly, comfort
the feeble minded, support the weak, be patient toward all men, etc.

Use 6. Consider and try each one as to himself, do you indeed mortify the
Deeds of the body?

You may here take notice of four or five things;

First, The Apostle says not, if ye mortify your selves; a man may himself in
his natural visible body be mortified, and yet his sins not be mortified, some
have made away with themselves, but they carried their lusts away with them, as
Ahitophel, and Judas; some have macerated themselves, almost starved
themselves, yet the body of sin and the deeds thereof, have been fat and
flourishing, they have put themselves to much suffering, and yet their lusts
have lived still, and some are much mortified in their outward man, by great
afflictions, by old age, yet their sinful affections have had no wound thereby,
though perhaps through the weakness of their bodies, some of them have not so
much appeared, as they were wont. Yet in some cases, keeping under the body is
a helpful means to the subduing of lust, (so be it, it be not in a
superstitious way) hence that, 1 Cor. 9.27. I keep under my body and bring it
into subjection, lest that by any means when I have preached to others, I my
self should be a cast away.

Secondly, The Apostle speaks not of mortifying your temptations to sin,
(though these are to be avoided) a man may not have those temptations ^^ich he
had, his temptations may be as mortified, (...) ^emoved, and yet his
corruptions be the same; as (...) is the same in a storm and in a calm, when
(...) and is still, that is still, but the nature of the sea is not changed; so
a man's corruption may not work as it did, though it be the same that it was,
because he is not tempted as he was.

Thirdly, The Apostle speaks not of hiding, covering and cloaking the deeds of
the flesh, so that they should not appear to men, this may be, a man's sins may
be hid, and yet be as and more lively in him, than when they did show
themselves; Absalom hid his malice against his brother Amnon, but it lived and
increased in him all the while; the Scribes and Pharisees covered their malice
against Christ, when they came to him and gave him good words, but never more
malicious than at that very time; so Judas cloaked his covetousness; the truth
is, this hiding and cloaking sin, is a great deed of the flesh, it is
Hypocrisy; a Hypocrite through his shows and pretenses may seem to others, yea
and to himself, (for many Hypocrites deceive themselves) to have his lusts in a
great degree destroyed, and yet they have as much and more life than ever.

Fourthly, The Apostle says not, if ye restrain, hold, or stop the working of
sin, this may also be, corruption may be a while restrained, through
afflictions, conviction, common workings, and yet be far from any degree of
death, as Readiness envy was restrained, and stopped, insomuch that he ceased his
pursuing David, yet his heart was full of envy still.

Fifthly, The Apostle speaks not of changing the deeds of the body one for
another, as Prodigality for covetousness, open profaneness for formality, or the
like, this often is, a man steps out of one dirty path into another, he leaves
one way of death, and walks in another, but so that he is never the nearer
life, because, though his sin be changed, it is not mortified. These things
might have been enlarged, but I have only hinted them, yet are they worthy of
great consideration, it is not said if ye mortify your selves, nor if ye
mortify your temptations, or they be mortified, nor if ye cover and cloak your
sins, nor if ye restrain and stop your lusts in their workings, nor if you
change your corruptions one for another, but if you mortify your iniquities,
if you kill, and truly destroy the deeds of the body of sin; it is this, and
nothing less than this, the actual real slaying our lustings, and lusts, that
is necessarily required to life.

See then that you mistake nor, search, examine, prove your selves concerning
this, is it so that ye do actually truly kill, slay your sins, take away their
very life? are you really bent in your hearts to this work, and intent upon
this business?

Q. How shall we know that?

A. 1. If so, you make use of all means you know or hear of, in seeking the
mortification of the deeds of the flesh. If men seek to kill any hurtful
creature, to destroy an enemy, they not only do something, but every thing they
know or are told may conduce thereto till their design be accomplished. If one
means do not do, they use another, and another, till there be no more that they
can do. So you use all means to destroy the deeds of sin in you, there is no
one thing, you know, or are told that is a good lawful means for the ruining
the lustings of the flesh, but you give your selves to the practice thereof;
yea, you are inquisitive still, what is yet to be done, as that young man said
to Christ. What lack I yet, so you say, what is more to be done for the slaying
my sin. And you have a readiness to embrace any direction, that from Scripture,
or good and warrantable experience you may be acquainted with. Yea, it is no
small joy and delight to you to hear how you may overcome your iniquities; if
you hear any thing you before have not known, or taken notice of, it is to you
as if you heard some means to cure a sore and deadly disease.

Secondly, You endeavor to mortify inward secret sins, as really, as
cordially as outward open sins, those which are known only to God, as well, and
as much as those which are manifest in the sight of men. And you do follow
every sin to its natural seat, to your heart, and there seek to destroy it, as
men that follow their enemies to their doors, and seek to ruin them there
where they dwell, or are entrenched, so you follow your corruptions, and do
your utmost to destroy them, not only in their appearances abroad, but within,
where they dwell and lodge.

Thirdly, You search after your sins, not being content your selves to mortify
those you know, but you enquire, and look without, and within, and round about,
whether there be not some that you know not, as one who in war searches after
his enemies, to find out those that hide themselves in the hedges, behind the
bushes, among the trees, or in any secret place. It Is said of ungodly men they
make a diligent search after the sins of those they bare ill will to, Ps. 64.6.
they search out iniquities, they accomplish a diligent search. So a gracious
soul, who hates his sins with a perfect deadly hatred, he searches out his own
iniquities, he accomplisheth (not only begins, but goes through stitch with) a
diligent search; diverse sins lie secret, so deep, and stick so close they are
not easily to be perceived, therefore one whose heart is truly stirred in holy
zeal against his sins, he searches narrowly diligently, (as that woman Christ
speaks of for her lost groat) that he may come to the knowledge of them, in
order to their mortification.

Fourthly, If you are engaged with your whole soul in this work, then you do
get ground upon the deeds of the flesh, they are really weakened, and impaired
(as the house of Saul before David) right endeavors wherein the whole soul is
employed are not in vain, if they are in outward matters, yet are they not in
spiritual things; a man may with all his heart do his utmost to get rid of a
sickness, and yet it grow upon him, and increase. But it is otherwise as to our
lusts, he does prevail and prosper, who in sincerity and good earnest is
engaged against them.

Q. How shall we know that, whether we get ground upon our corruptions or no?

A. 1. If your spirits are more constantly, than they use to be, in a gracious
holy frame, the breakings forth, and strong workings of any corruption spoileth
the present graciousness, and spiritual frame of our spirits, if then you are
more constantly in a godly heavenly temper, as if you have more holy thoughts,
if your minds do more frequently and freely work upon God, the words, and
things of God, if you have more constant breathings after God, if you now have
a more continued readiness to do good works, etc. then do you gain upon your
lusts, if you are not so often (as we say) off the hooks, out of tune in your
spirits, in a carnal, vain, listless, careless, drowsy and sinful temper.

Secondly, If when corruption moves and gets advantage against you, it does
less mischief, than it use to do, though it does hurt, yet not so much, it may
discompose you, put you besides your Bias somewhat, but not in so great a
degree, it alters the frame of your spirit, but not altogether, not so as to
lay all wast, as formerly. But even then, when sin stirs most, you find grace
with all stirring much, as fear of God, dislike of sinful lusting, and rising
of heart against it more than at such times was wont to be.

Thirdly, If you find your heart upon reflection, and a review of the workings
of your spirits, and your conversations more ready to see the miscarriages
thereof, and what of sin has been therein, as also more enlarged in confessing
and judging your selves for the deeds of the flesh, and more grieved, broken,
ashamed, and humbled for them; the more of these things, the more are your sins
mortified, the more do you prevail against them.

Fourthly, If you are more fearful of sin, lest it should break forth, and so
more careful to prevent the stirrings of corruption, and more fervent in crying
to God, day by day, to order all your steps in his paths, to keep your hearts,
and to enable you to order your conversations aright, according to his will, if
you can, and do more earnestly and frequently present that petition, Lord, that
thy will may be done by me on Earth, as it is in Heaven, or to that effect.

Fifthly, If when sin does stir, it is more speedily suppressed than heretofore,
you find perhaps the same sinful motions ever and anon, but then they don't
continue so long as they did; you sooner quench them, or get them down
underfoot. It speaks a full victory coming on, when the enemies attempts are
more sudde^ly quasht, so if the workings of sin are more speed^ ^asht and
turned back; And when you sooner reco^er your selves, and come to a right
frame; I may add,

Sixthly, If it be now more easy to you to withstand temptations, and to stand
out against the risings and movings of sin, this speaks corruption has some
considerable wound, and that it is dying, when a man has a less ado to quell
it, and master it. Yet consideration must be had of a time of special
extraor^^^ary temptation, It is possible, a man's sin may be sorely wounded, and
yet out-reach him, and give him such a fall as it never did before, because he
may meet with such a trial as all things laid together, he had not before,
which was Noah's, Lot's and David's case.

Use 7. Let me speak a little to excite you to give your selves more and more
to this necessary Duty, Necessity (they say) has no Law; Nothing must be
hearkened to, or regarded, to stop a man in a case of absolute necessity, which
is very true, as to the matter in hand: because this is most necessary, nothing
must let us, we must break through all opposition and shake off all
discouragement, whatever we neglect, this must not be neglected. How ost is
necessity pleaded as to the things of this world, I am necessitated, says one,
says another, I am under a necessity to do this or that, O remember no
necessity in any worldly matter like to this. Some plead a necessity of
sinning, as Esau for the selling his birthright, I am at the point to dye
(said he) Genesis 25.32. but we know there can be no true necessity to sin, unless
we shall say it is necessary for a man to provoke God, and destroy himself, or
such a necessity shall be pleaded as this, it is necessary to save a penny,
though thereby a man beggar himself, It Is necessary for a man to save his
clothes though thereby he lose his life. But behold necessity indeed, this is
true necessity; this is necessity in the language and judgment of sound
wisdom, to mortify all the corruptions of our souls: and what need more be
said? Yet take a word or two besides what has been spoken.

First, If we do not mortify the deeds of the body, they will mortify all
Ordinances to us, we shall not get good by any Ordinance of God, all will be as
dead to us, Baptism will become as no Baptism to us, Romans 2.25. The Lords
Supper will become as no Lords Supper to us, 1 Cor. 11.20. This is not to eat
the Lords Supper, to eat it with sin unmortified; hearing the Word will be as
no hearing the Word of God, Christ tells us, Briars and Thorns choke the Word,
and stones, lusts unsubdued, cause it to wither, by hindering its taking root.
It Is true, Ordinances are appointed for the mortifying our corruptions, that is
one great end of them, but if our hearts be not set upon the mortifying our
sins, if we let them alone, and give way to them, what hope that Ordinances
shall profit us? The first good any get by Ordinances (unless any are brought
to it by afflictions) is to stir them up to make War upon their lusts, or
nothing is done to purpose, except this be done. Hence it is said, Jam. 4.8.
Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you, cleanse your hands ye sinners, and
purify your hearts, ye double minded. No good, no advantage by Ordinances, no
life in them, unless God draw nigh to us in them, and if we would that God
should draw nigh to us in any Ordinance, we must draw nigh to him therein; but
this we cannot unless we give our selves to the cleansing of our hands, and the
purifying of our hearts; that is, in a word, to the mortifying of our sins,
both outward, and inward; chiefly Hypocrisy; therefore he says, purify your
hearts, ye double minded, but if we give way to any of our sins, we give way to
Hypocrisy, we are double-minded, and double-hearted, in our approaching the
Presence of God.

Secondly, If we do not mortify our corruptions, they will, yea they will cause
us to mortify whatever good motions or purposes are in us, one of these two
must be, either we must destroy our sins, or through them, we shall destroy
that which is contrary thereto; for good and evil cannot both be together in
the soul with allowance, if we so allow that which is evil, as not to seek the
destruction of it, we shall so disallow all good that is contrary to it, as not
to suffer it to live in us; And so we shall join hands with Satan, for that is
it he seeks, Rev. 12.4. The Dragon stood before the woman, which was ready to
be delivered, for to devour her Child as soon as it was born, so he stands
ready to devour the child of every good motion, purpose, conviction, or working
that is at any time in us: Take heed therefore that you do not put that good
that is in you, as it were into Satan's mouth.

Thirdly, Have you not listed your selves under Christ's Banner? have you not
taken Christ's Name upon you? therefore you ought to war against, and seek the
death of all sin in you; Christ Jesus, the Captain of our Salvation expects
this of all who enroll their Names as Soldiers under him, Col. 3.9. Lie not
one to another, seeing ye have put off the old man with his deeds, Ye who make
a profession of Christ, have done this at least by profession, professing
Christ, ye do profess to have put off your former corrupt nature, with the
deeds thereof: if then you mortify them not, you contradict your profession.

And if you are, as you would seem, Christians indeed, then are you members of
Christ, therefore are you obliged to mortify your members that are on the
earth; you are of the Mystical Body of Christ, therefore should withal industry
seek to destroy the deeds of the body of sin; and that the more, because this
was one end of Christ's death, Romans 6.6. Knowing this, that our old man is
crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we
should not serve sin, and consequently that we should morrifie it, for either
we are, shall, and must be the enemies of sin, or we are, and shall be the
Servants of it, 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on
the Tree, that we being dead to sin, should live unto righteousness; but we are
not dead to sin, nor can we live unto righteousness, if we subdue not the evil
deeds of the Flesh.

Fourthly, This is acceptable service to God, because our corruptions are
enemies to him as well as to us, and he calls us forth to war against them:
therefore when we endeavor their ruin we serve God; and God takes it as
service to himself, and he will graciously therefore reward it at last with his
blessings, Heb. 7.1. Melchizedeck, King of Salem, Priest of the most High God,
met with Abraham returning from the slaughter of the Kings, and blessed him.
Melchizedeck was a type of Christ, who is said to be a Priest after the order
of Melchizedeck; In the foregoing words, chap. 6. last verse, Abraham the
Father of the faithful signifies all Believers, his seed, his children. The
Kings may signify our lusts which naturally reign as Kings in us. Lot whom the
Kings took captive, notes our souls captivated by our lusts; Abraham's
destroying those Kings imports our destroying our corruptions, as Believers
through faith; Melchizedech his blessing Abraham thereupon, speaks and gives
assurance of a blessing to us from Christ, we so doing. Would you that when you
have finished your course, and fought the good fight of Faith, Christ Jesus
should so come forth and meet you, and bless you; then up and be doing, up and
be fighting; smite, kill and slay all your iniquities: This is fighting the
Lords battle, therefore as it is said of Meroz, Curse them because they came
not forth to the help of the Lord against the mighty; so cursed is every one
that goes not forth with all his might against his mighty sins; But blessed he
that takes Babylon 's children, yea her little ones (as the Psalmist speaks)
and dasheth them against the stones.

In a word, though to wound your natural visible body, or any member thereof be
an unnatural thing, causing grief and pain, to destroy the body of sin, and its
deeds is a gracious work, from whence flow peace and joy; Great peace have they
who love thy Law, says the Scripture, but the more any fight against their
sins, and destroy them, the more they do, and the more they thereby will, love
the Law of God; Therefore awake to this good work.

Use last, Be ye constant in this work; Never give over in any case, any place,
at any time, for you carry the body of sin about you wherever you go, and there
are allurements every where, and baits to draw it forth in evil lustings.

It is too common a thing, and one of the greatest faults amongst Christians,
that they are no more constant in this blessed work, sometimes they bestir
themselves herein, but at other times how negligent are they! they sit down and
fall asleep at this great and necessary duty. Which how dangerous is it to
stand still though but one hour, one quarter of an hour? in a hot close fight
hand to hand, is it not full of danger? ten to one the man that does so is
knocked down dead. But if by negligence in this work you should get no deadly
wound, you would not escape some wound, which perhaps you shall not have cured
a long while, it may be not while you live, and you will find the work harder when
you begin again, then you left it, when you left off; Some they grow weary and
faint in this spiritual combat, but let them remember if they stop they must
renew the fight again, and then however difficult it be now, it will be more
hard to them, for sin gains ground when we sit still.

But hold on, and thus shall you find the work easier, and thus shall you have
constant peace without any considerable, or long continued breach thereof;
though sin stir strongly, yea though it prevail much, yet while you keep
diligent and constant in resisting, and opposing, and beating it down, your
peace will abide. There is no inward true peace, but where there is inward war
against sin, and while this war is maintained and carried on, heartily, and
vigorously, there is inward peace; for this is exceeding pleasing to
conscience, that sits as it were looking on, and is greatly pleased, delighted
to see the soul lustily wrestling with, contending against, and pursuing to
death its lusts and sinful lustings. Yea the Lord the Captain of our salvation
is highly pleased to behold this, and therefore will speak peace to those thus
employed, and daily exercised. Go over your experience, and say, when have you
the most peace? is it not then when you are most eagerly engaged against and
hot in the pursuit of sin, plotting, contriving, and by all means you can
working its death? The experience of all Christians, I doubt not, gives in
restimony that this is true.

Sermon 5.
THe second thing in the latter part of my Text now offers it self to our
serious consideration, this necessary duty is to be performed through the
Spirit, whence the Doctrine is this.

D. 2. That the great work of mortifying, killing or destroying the deeds of
the body of sin, is to be managed through the Spirit: when we are called upon
to mortify our sinful affections, our evil motions, and the corrupt lustings
within us, the meaning is, that this is to be done through the Spirit. No truth
more useful than this, if well understood and received, this is the principal
thing that I would commend to you. All know, or generally it is confessed that
sins must be mortified, but that this is to be done by, in, with, or through
the Spirit, few in comparison understand. I know nothing that needs to be
taught among, and pressed upon Christians, and more frequently to be inculcated
than this.

There are three Queries concerning the truth now proposed, which call for some
Answer for the explication of it. 1. What Is meant by the Spirit? 2. Why is this
work to be done through the Spirit? 3. How is it thus to be done?

Q. 1. What Is meant by the Spirit?

A. Spirit signifies diverse things in Scripture, it has several
acceptations, 4 of which I shall here take notice.

1. By spirit, is meant, our spirit, our heart and soul, so the Apostle says
he did serve God with his spirit, and Christ says, God is to be worshipped in
spirit, so we must mortify the deeds of the body of sin, in spirit, with our
whole heart, and soul, otherwise we shall not prosper in what we do, all will
be to no purpose, if we have not a through will and sincere endeavor, Christ
says, many shall seek to enter in at the strait gate, and not be able, so many
seek to mortify their sins, and are not able, because they are not thoroughly
willing, and resolved. And then our main endeavor must be to mortify sin
within (of which I spoke before) when sins are only kept from outward
outbreakings, they are no more mortified, than Lions, and Bears, or such wild
creatures, when shut up and kept from ranging abroad.

Secondly, Sometimes by spirit in Scripture is understood, new nature, the new
man, as it may be taken and seems to be in that, 5. Gal. 17. where the Apostle
says, the spirit lusts against the flesh, and the flesh against the spirit,
thus we must mortify our sins in, by, or through the spirit, by the new
creature, through a principle of true grace acted, and stirred up in us. This
is most certain, no man can mortify the deeds of sin, without he have a
contrary principle of grace, for till the new man be formed in one, there is no
good, nothing but flesh, but sin, and the flesh neither will, nor can mortify
it self, as Satan casts not out Satan, neither does lust cast out or destroy
lust; though it is true, sometimes one lust does keep under another, and hinder
another working this or that way, as a man's pride may put a stop to his
covetousness, though he have a covetous heart, yet through predominant pride,
he scorns to be base and niggardly; so covetousness may hold in pride as to
it is showing it self in such or such a way, because the man is coverous
therefore he will not wear such cloths, or do some other things, which pride
otherwise would cause him to do, that he might have respect among men. But sin
cannot truly subdue sin, no more than water can dry up water, though one
stream being stronger, may stop, and turn the course of another, that has less
strength, so pride may command covetousness, or covetousness pride, yet do they
both live before God, as the greater light may drown the less, yet does not
extinguish it. He that has not a principle of true grace is under the power of
fin, therefore is not at liberty to mortify, or to will the mortification of
his lusts in truth. If there be war, if there be killing, and slaying, there
must be two parties, the one against the other, but in a graceless man there is
only one party, one nature, one kind of principles, all sinful; therefore he
cannot kill, or in truth set upon the slaying of his sin, though he may
possibly upon some outward account, or to quiet conscience seek to curb some
evil motions. As it is against our nature as men to hurt our bodies, so is it
against our nature as sinful men to do any thing in good earnest, and truth of
heart, toward the death of our sin. Therefore a man must have a new nature,
which whosoever has, then he cannot but be striking at, and wounding the deeds
of corrupt nature, because these two are perfectly contrary. Yet they who have
true grace need to be awakned and excited thereto more and more to lay out
themselves therein, through that grace they have received; could it be that the
actings of sin should be destroyed without contrary workings of grace, it would
little avail, a man would not thereby be in the way of life, but no lusting of
corruption can be truly killed without a lusting and stirring of grace in
opposition thereto, as darkness is only dispelled, removed by the shining forth
of some light. Therefore look O soul well to this, that thou have a new nature,
that thou be a new Creature in Christ Jesus.

Thirdly, Spirit is sometimes taken for the Gospel as opposed to the Covenant
of works, 2 Cor. 3.8. where the Apostle speaks of the ministration of the
Spirit in opposition to the ministration of Death, mentioned in the foregoing
verse; and verse 6. he says, we are Ministers of the New Testament, not of the
Letter, but of the Spirit, for the Letter kills but the Spirit gives life,
and thus some take Spirit, 1 John 5.8. There are three that bear witness on
earth, the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood, i. e. the Word, the Gospel,
Baptism, and the Lords Supper; If we take Spirit in my Text, in this sense;
It Is true the deeds of the body are to be mortified through the Gospel, by
Gospel truths and considerations, for it is the Gospel only that is effectual
to destroy our sins, the Law is not sufficient to kill any Lust in us. It may
be by legal truths men may be frighted, and chained (as it were) with the heavy
chain of slavish fear, so that they dare not sin as they used to do; but the
Law alone never was or can be sufficient to lay any sin dead: The Law alone
rather quickneth and stirs up sin, than destroys it; sin is thereby
revived, not mortified, Romans 7.8. Without the Law sin was dead, i. e. it lay as
if it had been so in comparison of those stirrings of it, which he found when
the Law came to his conscience, verse 9. When the Commandment came sin
revived, and I dyed, and the commandment which was ordained to life, I found
to be unto Death, to his own death, the death of his former hope and comfort,
not the death of his sin; and thus he says it was with others before
converted, verse 5. When we were in the flesh the motions of sin which were by
the Law did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death; the motions of
sin which were by the Law, i. e. which were begotten or drawn forth by the Law
through our corruption. Therefore they are Gospel Truths especially, and no
Truths without these, that are an efficacious means for the mortifying of sin;
These are the weapons of our warfare (as the Apostle calls them) 2 Cor. 10.4.
which are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong
holds, they are spiritual, and so effectual, through God, to the subduing our
carnal affections. As the work of mortification is begun, so it is carried on,
but it is begun in regeneration, and that is by the Gospel, as we read we are
begotten again by that, 1 Cor. 4.15. In Christ Jesus, I have begotten you
through the Gospel. Therefore the Gospel and the truths thereof should
principally be made use of; The curse of the Law should be considered, but if a
man would get his sin indeed destroyed, let him seek a spiritual understanding
of, and let him be much in meditating on the grace of the Gospel, the doctrine
of Christ.

Fourthly, By the Spirit is understood the Holy Ghost the third Person in the
Trinity, thus it is taken both before my Text, ver. 9, and 11. as also after my
Text, ver. 14, 15, and 16, etc. and in this sense we are to take it in the
words I am upon, if ye through the Spirit, through the Holy Ghost, i. e.
through the Spirit of God do mortify the deeds of the body. Yet this includes
the three other acceptations of the word Spirit, for, whoever do mortify any
sin through the Holy Ghost, they are engaged in the work with their whole
souls, their whole heart is in it; and they do destroy the deeds of the flesh
by acting and exercising grace, and this they do through hearing, considering,
and acting Faith on Gospel Truths, as will be shown afterward.

Q. 2. Why is this work of mortifying our sins to be done by the Spirit of God?

A. 1. Because it cannot possibly be done without the Spirit of God: Whatever
is done against sin without the Spirit, gives it no deaths wound; it only
covers, or somewhat curbeth sin, but does not at all destroy it: Christ says,
John 6.63. It Is the Spirit that gives life, or that quickneth, so it is the
Spirit that mortifieth, the Spirit quickneth the Soul, and the Spirit
mortifieth sin in the Soul: A dead carcass shall as soon maintain a fight
against, and kill a powerful enemy, as any man slay his sin, any one lust
without the Spirit of God: As it is natural to our visible body to save it
self, and every member thereof, so is it natural to the body of sin, and every
member of that to save it self; and as it is natural to a Father to save his
Child, so to Satan to do his utmost to defend and preserve fin in us; Therefore
it cannot be that we should of our selves, or by the help of any creature
alone, mortify any lust: could we without the Spirit of Christ destroy our
sin, then might we be in a great part our own Saviors; He that knows not the
necessity of the Spirits special assistance in this work, is certainly a great
stranger to the mortification of sin, that is most true in this case; Zech.
4.6. Not by might nor by power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts; It
is too great a work, too mighty, and too honorable, for any one of himself to
get the victory over sin, which is our strongest, and our worst enemy: Outward
enemies cannot be destroyed without the help of God, especially when many and
potent, much less can spiritual enemies which are the worst and strongest,
Psalm. 33.16, 17. There is no King saved by the multitude of an host, a mighty
man is not delivered by much strength, an horse is a vain thing for safety;
neither shall he deliver any by his great strength; So all Means, Duties,
Ordinances, Power and Ability of the Creature, is vain, weak, and to no purpose
to deliver and save a man from his sin, unless the Spirit of the Lord put its
hand to the work, and by its might effect it.

Secondly, As this cannot be done without the Spirit, so may it be done by the
Spirit, what though our lusts are never so many, It Is all one (as we read) with
the Lord to save with many or with few, so is it all one with him to destroy
many or few, what was that great Host of Senacherib, which came against
Jerusalem, one Angel of the Lord destroyed it in one night: we read of the
deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3.13. Exhort one another daily, while it is called
to day, lest any be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin; every sin is
exceeding deceitful, (besides how deceitful is the heart? how deceitful is
Satan? how deceitful is the world?) which is one great reason why we cannot
mortify our evil affections of our selves, we want not only strength, but
understanding also; our Lusts seem dead, while in truth they live; they make us
think we wound them, when the blow falls quite beside, we seem many times to do
all we can against our sins when its nothing so, that sin seems least in us
which is greatest and most hurtful.

Now the spirit of God is a spirit of wisdom, therefore through it we may
destroy our sin notwithstanding its deceitfulness; though we often are, the
spirit of God cannot be, deceived. What though our iniquities are never so
mighty, the spirit of God is Almighty, Ps. 74.15. thou driedst up mighty
rivers, yet dried, and dried up though rivers, though mighty rivers, or (as the
word is) rivers of strength; what great things did the spirit of God do in the
creation, when it moved on the face of the waters, such like things it can do,
and does when it moves powerfully in our hearts, Psalm. 93.3. The floods have
lifted up O Lord, the floods have Dfted up their voice, the floods lift up
their waves, what then, who can still them, can any man? No, they (as the
Psalmist speaks) make the Mariners at their wits end, they know not how to
save themselves, much less to quell and calm the floods when they do lift up
their voice, and their waves to the highest, I but the Lord, the Spirit of our
God is able to command them silence, as it there follows verse 4. The Lord on
high is mightier than the noise of many waters, yea, than the mighty waves of
the Sea, so is no man ( Darius found himself too weak to deal with the waves,
when they broke his bridge of boats though he had a hundred thousand men at his
command) and is but laughed at for his attempting by shackles, and stripes to
tame the tempestuous waters, but Christ by commanding the sea to silence,
showed and made manifest, the power of God; Thus when our lusts lift up their
voice, when our flesh lifts up its waves (as it were) in our souls, the Lord
is more mighty, we are too weak to grapple with them, but the spirit of the
Lord is mightier than the strongest motions, and most mighty lustings of sin
within us. It is sometimes thought by some when they feel this or that lust
stirring strongly, and when they have labored long against it, without
conquest over it, can this lust be subdued? can it ever be mortified? and sure
it is we are all too full of unbelief as to God's power, (However some imagine
they believe it enough) hence they said, can God prepare a Table in the
wilderness? yea, Moses himself (notwithstanding all he had heard, seen, and
experienced of the power of God) yet once spoke doubtingly concerning it; Numb.
11.21, 22. for which God rebuked him, v. 23. saying, is the Lords hand waxed
short? and hence though the Prophet makes a full confession of Gods power, Jer.
32.17. Ah Lord God, behold thou have made the heaven and the earth by thy great
power, and stretched out arm, and there is nothing too hard for thee, yet
observe in the following verses he seems to speak too unbelievingly concerning
God's power, so and so says he it is with us, yet v. 25. thou have said unto
me, O Lord God, buy the field for money, and take witnesses, for the City is
given into the hands of the Caldeans, therefore v. 26.27. Then came the word of
the Lord unto Jeremiah, saying, Behold I am the Lord, the God of all flesh, is
there any thing too hard for me? As if the Lord had said, thou say indeed
there is nothing too hard for me, but thou have not so much faith of my power
as thou ought to have, thou have too much doubting, too much unbelief
concerning my power it self. But above all things, a soul under a deep sense of
the power of natural corruption, is prone to doubt of Gods power as to the
destruction thereof, and were there reason to doubt of the power of God in any
thing, there would be cause to question it in this, if even any thing were too
hard for the Lord, this would, to slay those lusts which grow in our corrupt
nature; the difficulty of destroying sin in us the Apostle intimates, when he
says, who shall deliver me from this body of death. Wherefore this is needful
to be declared, and to be urged, whatever our fins are, the spirit of the Lord
can mortify them, it can cause the body of sin and all the lusts thereof to
wither, and dye away, as Christ did that fig tree which he cursed, so that they
should no more bring forth any fruit.

And the spirit of the Lord can so strengthen and assist us, that though we be
weak, we shall be strong enough in its strength, to lay dead every deed of sin,
1 Cor. 1.27. God has chosen the weak things of the world to confound the
mighty; out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings he can perfect praise; There
have been many who have had such like lusts as ours are, who have been able,
through the spirit to tread them under their feet; we read of seven Devils cast
out of Mary Magdalen, not that she was possessed in her body, but she was a
notorious sinner, she had mighty lusts whereby the Devils had great power in,
and over-her soul; If I says Christ by the spirit cast out Devils, there are
no Devils, and so no lusts but may be cast out by the spirit, so strong was
Paul's envy, and malice before his Conversion, that Acts 26.11. he was
exceeding mad against the Christians, yet by the spirit he of mad was made
sober, those his lusts were destroyed, and instead of being mad against Christ
he became as besides himself for Christ, 2 Cor. 5.13. whether we be besides our
selves it is to God, some accounted them because of their self denial, and
fervency in Preaching the Word, whereby they spent themselves, as besides
themselves, what lusts had they? 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. they were some of them,
for nicators, Idolaters, Adulterers, Abusers of themselves with mankind,
Thieves, Covetous, Drunkards, Extortioners, the worst of sinners, yet were they
sanctified by the spirit of our God, and if they were sanctified, then their
lusts were mortified through the spirit.

Therefore believe that your sins by the spirit may also be destroyed, it is a
good step toward the doing this, to believe that through the spirit, it may be
done; and the believing this is necessary, Mat. 9.28, 29. Believe ye that I am
able to do this? they said, yea Lord, then touched he their eyes, saying,
according to your faith be it unto you, ( i. e. according to their faith of
Christ's ability) so were their eyes opened.

Thirdly, All whom the Lord has chosen to salvation, he has elected them to
this way, through mortification of their sin by the spirit, 1 Pet. 1.2. elect
according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through sanctification of the
spirit unto obedience, through sanctification, and therefore through
mortification, how? by the spirit, so 2 These. 2.13. We are bound to give thanks
always to God for you, Brethren, beloved of God, because God has from the
beginning chosen you to salvation through sanctification of the spirit; but no
more sanctification of our souls, than there is mortification of our lusts.

Fourthly, Jesus Christ dyed for this, 1 John 3.5. he was manifested to take
away our sins, and in him is no sin; to take them away, that is not only in the
guilt of them, but in the power and life of them, and it is of the latter he
there speaks, as the context shows v. 6. whosoever abides in him sins not;
that is, he has his sins taken away by him, and so he sins not as he did,
nor as others do, not with his whole man, not with delight, etc. and as Christ
came and dyed for this, that our sins might be mortified, so that this might be
done by the spirit, in that it cannot be done without it, and hence Christ
speaks of sending the spirit after his Crucisixion, Resurrection, and
Ascension, to deal with men about their fins, and why? but in order to the
subduing them, and that because for this he dyed, and also rose, and ascended
and interceeds, that those whom he saves may have the spirit, to help them in
this work.

Fifthly, God has promised his spirit to his people for this, Ezekiel. 36.27. I
will put my spirit within you, for what? v. 29. I will save you from all your
uncleanness, that is, God will put his spirit within his people to save them
from their sins, and when are we saved from our sins? when they are killed, we
are saved from them, this also is promised, v. 25. I Will sprinkle clean water
upon you, I Will give you, that is, my spirit, and ye shall be clean from all
your filthiness, viz. spiritual filthiness, or sinfulness. This also is
included in that promise, Isa 44.3, 4. I Will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and
they shall spring up as among the grass, as willows by the water courses, that
is, they shall thrive and flourish spiritually, they shall grow in knowledge
and grace, go forward in good, but there is no thriving spiritually, increasing
or growing in grace, without the mortification of sin, only so far as sin
dies, does grace grow, therefore God there, by consequence or in effect,
promises his spirit, to slay sin in his people.

Sixthly, God has actually given his spirit to his people, all who are
effectually called, all who are in Christ: for this end, have thou the spirit
of God in thee? it was given thee, as by God, so for some end, what end? partly
this, that thereby thou might mortify the deeds of the body of sin. For
that, for which God promises his spirit to his people, for that he gives it
to them, yea, and it does work powerfully in the Saints of God this way, Ezekiel.
39. last, neither will I bide my face any more from them, for I have poured out
my spirit upon the bouse of Israel, says the Lord God; Gods hiding his face,
is for fins unmortified, therefore when he says, I will not hide my face from
them, for I have poured out my spirit upon them, this is signified, I have
given them my spirit to subdue their sins, and it shall subdue them, and so I
will not hide my face any more (as heretofore) from them; and from these things
it follows that it is the work and business of the spirit, it is part of its
office, to help the people of God, in slaying their lusts, the spirit has
undertaken to be our helper therein, that work for which God has promised and
given his spirit to us, that work it has undertaken, and is engaged to help us
in the doing of;

Lastly, We honor the spirit when we give our selves through it to mortify
out corruptions, as it is an honor to the spirit, that it is promised and
given to help us in this work, so do we honor it, when accordingly we make use
of it.

But if we seek the destruction of our sins, and not through the spirit, then
do we highly dishonor it, we put it out of office; As if any shall think to
satisfy for their sins, they greatly dishonor Christ, so if any think to
mortify their sins of themselves, this is a high dishonor to the Holy Spirit.

Q. 3. How are the deeds of the body of sin to be mortified through the Spirit.

A. This is to be done through the help, by the assistance of the Spirit, As
that good that is in men is frequently mortified through the evil Spirit,
through him the Image of God was mortified in our first Parents, so (though
with a difference) that evil that is in Gods chosen is mortified through the
good Spirit. There are two things I shall speak to, in answering this enquiry.
1. I shall endeavor to show, what it is that the Spirit does in helping us to
mortify our sins. 2. What we are to do that we may have the help of the Spirit
in this work.

1. What is it that the Spirit does in enabling us to mortify the deeds of the
body?

A. 1. The Spirit of God does show a soul its sin, we are naturally exceeding
unwilling to behold our iniquities, and we are very blind at home, more apt are
we (as our Lord teaches us) to see a more in our Brothers, than to perceive,
or be sensible of a beam in our own eye, many of our evils lie quite out of our
sight, though great and heinous, as Readiness persecuting Christ, till he was
convinced thereof from Heaven (as himself says) he verily thought he ought to
do what he did, so naturally men sin foully and think they ought to do as they
do, or they see no evil therein; hence those speeches, what hurt is there in
this, and what hurt is there in that? and as for those sins, we do see we have
naturally a weak and slight sight of them, we do'nt think them to be so evil as
indeed they are, Mal. 1.6. Where is my fear says the Lord of hosts unto you O
Priests, that despise my Name; and ye say wherein have we despised thy Name?
chapter 2.17. Ye have wearied the Lord with your words; yet ye say wherein have we
wearied him? Chap. 3.13. Your words have been stout against me, says the Lord;
Yet ye say, what have we spoken so much against thee? Some sins they denied
quite, and others they denied in part, though they had spoken, yet not so much
against the Lord, as an Ancient says, men use to deny and excuse their sin,
saying, I have not done it, or if I have done it, I have not done ill, or if
ill, not very ill, or if very ill, not with an ill intention, etc. therefore (a
sight of sin being necessary to the death of sin) the Spirit comes and opens
the eyes of our understandings, sets our transgressions before us, points (as
it were) to this and that sin, and holds our thoughts upon it, 1 Cor. 2.10. The
Spirit searches all things even the deep things of God, so it searches the
deep things of our hearts, discovering our secret evils to us, as hereafter,
all the hidden things of darkness shall be brought to light, and in that day,
the councels of the hearts shall be made manifest, 1 Cor. 4.5. So now, when the
Spirit gives its assistance to any in destroying their sins, it does bring to
light unto them those lustings that were secret to them before, it does make
manifest to them the evil councels of their heart, it declares and makes
evident to them their secret purposes, desires, and the other hidden workings
of sin in them, the Spirit evidenceth both that they are guilty of such sins,
and it reveals the sinfulness of them, causing the soul to view them, till it
be soundly convinced, John 16.8. when the Spirit comes, it reproves, or
convinces the world of sin.

Secondly, The Spirit does bow our wills, and make us sincerely willing to have
our sins subdued, no man by nature has a true will to this, the destruction of
his sin, hence such ado in men to save their sins, when they are told of them,
or the word meets with them, never did any one seek so or more industriously to
save the nearest relation, the dearest friend as a natural man his sin, by
using all cuning to hide it, by denying it, or cloaking and excusing it, as a
man at Cudgels seeks to save his head, so does a natural man to save his sin;
But when the spirit comes, then it makes the soul willing to have its lusts
slain, Psalm. 1^0.2, 3. Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies, thy people
shall be willing in the day of thy power, willing to what? willing to this that
Christ should rule in the midst of his enemies in their souls, so as to beat
them down, and destroy them as he pleases. Naturally men defend their lusts as
the Benjamits those filthy persons who ravished the Levit's Concubine, but when
the spirit comes, and deals with the soul, (as that woman with the men of Abel,
2 Samuel 20.22. who by her wisdom persuaded them to cut off the head of Sheba the
Son of Bichri, who rebelled against David, and to cast it out to Joab, so) then
is the soul willing, yea, it desires and by all means seeks to have the head of
every lust cut off, it being an enemy to Christ the Son of David.

Thirdly, The spirit does help our infirmities in prayer, by sighs and groans
which cannot be uttered (as the Apostle says some verses after my Text) it
causes us to sigh because sin is in us, and so works in us, and to groan to
the Lord to be delivered from the bondage of this, and that corruption; till
the spirit comes, a man rather sighs, when his sin is discovered and reproved,
he groans when he is stopped in the fulfilling of his lusts, but if the spirit
once begin to work thoroughly, then the man sighs to be rid of his sin, and
groaneth because he is so led captive by it, it was by the spirit that the
Apostle said, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of
death, None can say so, as he did, but by the spirit, and when any are enabled
so to say, sighingly and groaningly as he, then does the Lord hear, and help,
as he did the Israelites against the Egyptians, Exodus 2.23, 24. the children of
Israel sighed by reason of the bondage, and they cried, and their cry came up
unto God, by reason of the bondage. and God heard their groaning, and God
remembered his Covenant, and God looked upon the Children of Israel, and God had
respect unto them, so God hears much more, groanings because of spiritual
bondage, and the cry of souls wrestling against their lusts, comes up to him,
and God looks with an eye of pity on such, and has respect to them, and so
comes their deliverance, by the death of the Egyptians, their corruptions,
through the hand of Christ (tipyfied by Moses) and their sins not only in the
guilt, but also in the power of them are destroyed in the red sea, by the
virtue of the blood of Christ.

Fourthly, The spirit causes and enables the soul to hearken and listen to the
Word of God, when it reads, or hears, or thinks thereof, and it makes a
suitable application of truths to the soul, according as it knows is best and
most proper for it, so that a man looks upon, and takes this or that word as
belonging to him, as spoken to him, with respect to his sin; we are very
subject to pass over the truths of God slightly, and to put them off, as not
appertaining or spoken to us, but the spirit opens the heart (as we read it did
Lydia's) it causes the soul to hear, and to hear diligently for it self, and
to apply such and such words to it is own case, and its own corruptions; such a
threatening belongs to me, and will surely be executed upon me, if such a sin
still live in me and have dominion over me, such a promise is to me, and will
be fulfilled to me if I repent; these and these sins crucified Christ, he bare
them, they lay as a heavy weight upon him, they joined with other, to squeeze,
to press out the very heart blood of Christ, and the like, thus says the soul
by the spirit, when the spirit helps it in mortifying its sins; the soul does
Preach to it self, argue and plead with it self in order to the slaying,
leaving and casting away its sins.

And because we are very apt to forget things especially then, when the
remembrance of them is most needful, when sin is stirring in us, therefore the
spirit strengthens our memory, or helps it, by bringing things formerly read
and heard to our remembrance, seasonably, when we most need them, when Just
prevails in us, Joh. 14.26. the Holy Ghost whom the Father will send in my
name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance,
whatsoever I have said unto you.

Fifthly, For as much as believing is very necessary to the subduing our sins,
this is our victory (says the Apostle John) even our faith, therefore the
spirit helps us in overcoming our sins, by working in us a spirit of faith, by
stirring up faith in us, and causing us to act faith on the sufferings of
Christ, by whose stripes (as we read) we are healed; as our bodies are healed
by the destroying our diseases, so our souls by the mortifying our sins, which
is by the virtue of Christ's stripes, but not without faith acted thereon,
therefore the spirit helps in this, and also in acting faith on the several
truths of Scripture, to believe what the Scripture speaks concerning our sins
themselves and the fruit of them, what will follow if they dye not, to believe
the threatenings, and the promises, which is a special means to destroy sin,
especially faith acted on the promises, for by the promises we escape the
corruption that is in the world through lust, 2 Pet. 1.4. and hence that
exhortation, 2 Cor. 7.1. having these promises let us cleanse our selves from
all filthiness, etc. but the promises unless mixed with faith, profit not.

Sixthly, the spirit does in a secret way, powerfully, by the Word smite and
wound our sins, as with a sword, for the word is the sword of the spirit, Ephesians.
6.17. as a man in fight takes up his sword, puts to his strength, and lays on
upon his enemies therewith, so the spirit takes the word, or accompanyeth it:
and puts to its own power smiting our lusts thereby, hence we read, Heb. 4.12.
the word of God is quick and powerful, sharper than any two edged sword, not
that the bare word written, or spoken, is so in it self alone; it has no life,
nor power, nor edge without the spirit, or it can do no execution without it,
but the spirit makes it effectual, Psa. 110.4, 5. the Lord at thy right hand
shall strike through Kings, so the Spirit when it pleases, strikes through our
King-like lusts that have had dominion over us; and thus it does by it is own
sword, the word; the Spirit is to our sins a Spirit of judgment and a Spirit of
burning, as it is called, Isa. 4.4. as a Judge to a malefactor, yea and as
Executioner too, as fire to fuel, so is the Spirit in it is working with the
Word to our Lusts. As it is said in another sense, I have slain them by my
Prophets, and hewn them with the word of my mouth, so the Spirit by Scripture
words slayes, hacks and hews our sins, as Antichrist is consumed by the breath
of the Lords mouth, so is sin within us, which is the worst Antichrist of all,
and but for which there had been no Antichrist at all.

Lastly, The Spirit mortifieth our sins by producing, and begetting fruits in
us contrary thereto, such as those, Gal. 5.22, 23. the Apostle in the foregoing
verses declares what are the fruits of the Flesh, and thereupon makes mention
of the fruits of the Spirit, such as love, peace, long-suffering, goodness,
faith, meekness, whereby he teaches us, that the Spirit by causing these good
things in us, does expel and destroy, the fruits of the Elesh which are
contrary thereto, and there is one fruit of the spirit not there mentioned (but
employed in love) which the spirit works, whereby the power and life of Sin is
greatly abated, yea even taken away according to the measurc and strength of
it, and that is hatred, hatred of all Sin, which makes us eager in seeking the
utter extirpation of it out of our Souls.

I might have added, The Spirit breaks the force of Satan's temptations, who
seeks to defend Sin, and keeps it upon the throne in us, and therefore tempts
violently, stirs up and does all he can to kindle it and feed it, by pouring in
such and such thoughts, as by other means, but the Spirit opposes and
withstands him, to which that may be applied, Isa. 59.19. When the enemy shall
come in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a Standard against
him. The Spirit well understands all Satan's wiles, and what correspondence he
has with Sin in us, and the Spirit either drives him away and makes him flee
from us, or counterworks him, dictating answers to all his temptations, and as
casting water on the fire which Satan endeavors to blow up in us.

Sermon 6.
I Am now in the second place to show what we are to do, that we may have the
help of the Spirit in mortifying the deeds of the body. For answer whereto,
briefly in a few particulars.

First, We must receive the Spirit, we can do nothing this way through the
Spirit unless it be in us, dwelling and abiding in our Souls, which it will not
be except it be received by us, 1 Cor. 2.12. We have received the Spirit which
is of God. So have all we who truly believe; and they who have not must receive
it, or never will they give any of their sins a deadly wound through it. If any
keep their hearts shur against the Spirit, they cannot have the help of it, in
the work of mortification, or any other work to their Salvation. As till the
Soul come into the Body and dwell in it, the Body does not, cannot work, act,
or do any thing by it; so till the Spirit come into the Soul, and be received
to dwell there, the Soul does nothing by it to the subduing it is lusts.

Secondly, They who have received the Spirit, must call in, or call for it is
help and assistance; when you find corruption stirring, when you go about the
killing your sins, you must desire and ask the Spirit's co-working with you; O
that the Spirit of the Lord may now work with me! O that it may now assist me!
let it now please to help me, in destroying this evil affection, in mortifying
this and that sinful motion, I feel stirring in me! You must never attempt any
thing without looking for, and seeking the Spirit's assistance, Ps. 143.10. Thy
Spirit is good, (it is a good guide) lead me into the Land of uprightness, by it
O Lord! be pleased to lead me in the good and upright way, in the strait path,
the way everlasting, till I shall come to that place appointed for upright
ones, and where nothing of hypocrisy is, but all uprightness, and sincerity
only grows. So you should pray, Lord! thy Spirit is holy, and mighty, it is
every way able to help me, O let it assist me in mortifying mine iniquities,
till they shall be all destroyed, till I come to that Country, where no such
poisonous, and hurtful thing as sin, does grow, or live, or has any being.

Thirdly, You must wholly rely on and trust in the Spirit for its direction,
and powerful cooperation with you in this work, not having any thought as if
you could put to death, or do any thing for the destruction of any sin of your
selves; but knowing, remembering and acknowledging also, your own utter
weakness, and insufficiency; your trust, confidence and relyance must be
altogether on the Spirit. As Jehosaphat said, We know not what to do, but our
eyes are to thee, which implies trust and dependence on God; so your eyes must
be to the Spirit.

Psalm. 38.19. Mine enemies are lively, and they are strong, i. e. they are too
strong for me, what then? V. 15. In thee O Lord do I hope. So when our
Spiritual enemies are lively, and when they are (as indeed they always are)
too strong for us, we must hope in the Spirit of God, for strength from it. Ps.
47.3. He shall subdue the People under us; and the Nations under our feet, we
will not think or attempt it in our own strength, but as elsewhere it is, In
the name of the Lord I will destroy them, yea in the Lords name will I destroy
them: I will not trust in my bow, nor shall my sword save me, etc. So we must
not think that any means we can use, can lay dead any sin, but we must still
purpose, resolve and endeavor the slaying of every sin, in the power and
strength of the Spirit.

Fourthly, You must lie in the way of the Spirits working, as Mariners do lay
their Vessel in the way of the wind, or the Miller turns his Mill that way the
wind blows, because the Ship will not sail, nor the Mill grind without the
wind, So you must lay your selves in the way of the Spirits breathing, and turn
your Souls to that blessed wind, that way it blows. I mean you must attend
under Ordinances, you must give your selves to religious holy duties, to hear,
to read, to meditate on the Word of God, to confer with others, and join in
prayer with them as you have opportunity, etc. John 3.8. The Spirit works, As
the wind blows where it lists, not where we list, but where it self
pleases, and where is it, that the Spirit lists to work? sure it is in the
way of it is own appointments.

Fifthly, We must yield up our selves to the Spirit, to be acted, moved and
ruled according to it is pleasure, as Soldiers, follow your Leader, observe his
Commands, yea every beck or wagging of his head, or hand, and accordingly order
themselves, so we must well mind all the dictates, take notice of all the
movings of the Spirit in us, and comply therewith Gal. 5.16. This I say then,
walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lust of the flesh; So say I,
yield to the Spirit, to along with it, so shall ye mortify any deed of the
Flesh. If the Spirit go one way and you will go another, if the Spirit call and
you will not hearken, if that speak and you will not hear, if that move and you will not
follow the motions thereof, then will the Spirit leave you to your selves.

See the V. following my Text, the Apostle having said, if ye through the
spirit mortify the deeds of the Body, he adds in the next words, Romans 8.14.
For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, whereby he teaches us, that if we
would mortify the deeds of the Body through the spirit, then we must be led by
the spirit, we must resign our selves to the conduct and guidance thereof.

Sixthly, We must wait on the spirit, if it do not come in to our assistance,
if it do not help us as we desire, we must continue waiting, hold on looking
for it, begging it, and using the means it has ordained. As they waited at the
Pool of Bethesda for the moving of the waters by the Angel that they might be
healed. If the Angel came not and moved not the waters one day, nor the next;
yea, though he stayed one week, and another, still they waited there, till he
should come. When Saul waited not for Samuel, Samuel told him he did foolishly,
and he should lose his Kingdom. So do they exceeding foolishly who wait not
for the spirit of God, and hence it is that many lose the Kingdom of Heaven,
and never get victory over their corruption, because they will not continue
waiting till the spirit come in to their assistance.

These six things we are to do, that we may mortify our sins through the
spirit, but it is to be remembered that neither can any of these be done without
the spirit, therefore we must ask it, that we by it, may be enabled to do these
things. Yet must we not sit still, but we must put forth our selves, stir up
our selves, and go as far as we can, as well as we can.

It should be well noted, The Apostle says not, If the spirit do mortify the
deeds of the body in you, but if ye through the spirit do mortify them;
plainly declaring and testifying to us, that though we can do nothing of our
selves that shall be effectual, we must not be idle, we must not sit still,
but we must rouse up our selves, and as the little child that cannot go alone,
yet strives to go, when lead, it moves it is legs, and does what it can toward
it is going; so must we do to the utmost what lies in us, toward the
mortification of our sins, and so look for the spirit, to carry us on in the
work prosperously.

Application.
USe 1. Learn by the Truth to understand aright the councels, exhortations, and
commands of Scripture, this and that the Scripture says you must do, and you
are often called upon to do such things from the Word of God; but how is it that
you are to do them? Remember always, though this be not every where, or every
time expressed, this is meant, this is always understood, you must do so and so
through the spirit, you must get the spirit, and give up your selves to the
spirit, that you may do all and every of the things whereto you are counseled,
exhorted, or commanded. For this work of mortifying our sins is a general work
that has an influence into even all other things that concern us to do, or
whereto we are obliged in our whole conversation; nothing can be done as God
requires if this be not done; every command of God implies the subduing of
some lust or other, even lust being contrary to some command. If then we are to
mortify our sins through the spirit, through it therefore we are to yield
obedience to all the commands of the Lord.

Use 2. Learn whence it is that the purposes, resolutions, and endeavors of
men against their sin, are so fruitless and ineffectuall, how often is it that
men purpose, resolve and take great pains to bring under this or that lust in
them? yet it retains it is strength, yet it continues your master
notwithstanding. Why? whence is this? It is because they have not learnt to put
themselves into the hand of the spirit, and to take that along with them in
what they do. They resolve but not through the spirit; they strive, they weep,
but they trust in themselves, they call not for, their eye is not to the spirit
of God; so all their resolutions vanish and wither away, all their attempts,
pains, and industry prove abortive and in vain. As it is said concerning prayer,
Jam. 4.2.3. Ye lust, and have not; ye kill and desire to have and cannot
obtain; ye fight and war, yet ye have not, because ye ask not; ye ask and
receive not because ye ask amiss: so many do much, they make a great deal of
stir about the conquering their corruptions; yet prevail not, because they do
all amiss; and as Christ says, Many shall strive to enter and shall not be
able, so many strive to destroy their sin but are not able, because they have
not learnt to go forth against their evil motions under the conduct, and in
the power of the Holy Ghost. Has it not been thus, sometimes with you? Such a
sin you have found working strongly in you, and you have made war upon it,
sought it is death, resolved upon it is destruction; but to no purpose? It has
continued still living, lively and stirring as before; learn then this day, and
learn it well, what has been the cause, even this, know this to have been the
reason; you have not taken the right course, you have not duly sought, and
therefore have not truly had the spirit helping you, which only has power to
strengthen, and skill to direct you in that you have endeavored. As the
Apostle says, the spirit helps our infirmities, for we know not what to pray
for as we ought. So the spirit must help our infirmities, or we know not in any
case, or matter relating to the good of our souls what to do, as we ought. When
any labor against their sin without the spirit, they do as one that takes a
great deal of pains to open a door without the right key, or to cause a vessel
to sail against the stream without any wind, in a calm. And perhaps you have
observed that others they have got great victory over their sins in much less
time; you have striven long and yet are as trodden under foot by this and that
base lust, and another who began to look heavenward a great while after you, is
able to trample his sin under his feet; How so? because he is wise, and being
taught by the spirit, has taken the spirit along with him in all his
endeavors; and then no wonder. As suppose two vessels set forth to one Port,
from several harbors, the one long after the other, having diverse leagues
more to sail, yet if this vessel have a good gale of wind, and the other be
becalmed, and have only the strength of the mariners to put it forward by
Poles and Oars, you will not marvel, if that which set out last, and has the
longest way to go, be first at the intended haven, leaving the other behind,
basking and tossing in the waves, possibly till she be foundred or wrackt,
through a great storm arising.

Use. 3. Let this cause you to magnify the Gospel, the Doctrine of Christ,
because this tells you how you shall slay your worst, most hurtful, deadly and
powerful enemies, and lay them dead at your feet. The Law, that discovers sin,
Romans 7.7. I had not known sin but by the Law, for I had not known lust, except
the Law had said, thou shall not covet; The Law also denounces a sore curse to
them who walk after their lusts, but the Law tells us not of a remedy, how we
shall have help against them; it is the Gospel that teaches us to mortify the
deeds of sin through the spirit. The mere light of nature says of many sins,
they must be mortified, but is at a stand as to this, the only way for the
mortification of them; hence those great Moralists, and wise Philosophers who
speak much against many impieties, and give diverse rules (good in their place)
for the getting rid of them, yet are silent in this; some of those wise men
gave strange rules for the mortifying of lust, (as that of Crates, famish thy
self) noting that it was not feasible, and all their precepts are ineffectual
for the real destroying any lust; therefore the best of those men are noted to
have lived under the dominion of some destroying corruption, covetousness,
ambition, envy, or such like; They write of one Democritus he put out his eyes
because he could not look without lusting, but did that mortify his sin? No,
though his eyes were out, his corruption continued still within.

There are two great things only to be known by the Gospel, the one is how we
may have peace with God, be accepted of him, and justified in his sight? the
Gospel only holds forth justifying righteousness. the other is this I am now
upon, how we may get our sins destroyed, and so our hearts purified?

Use 4. You may make use of this truth by way of trial, whether you have the
spirit of Christ in you or no; The greatest question in the world is, whether
you are in Christ Jesus, the Answer to that is, he that has not the spirit of
Christ (as the Apostle says) is none of his, but he that has the spirit of
Christ in him, is in Christ. And if you would know whether the spirit of Christ
be in you, this is one answer, if it be in you, it works in you, it helps and
assists you; and that in mortifying your sins. Have your sins deadly wounds? is
there any thing done really and considerably toward the ruining them? If so,
then you have the spirit of Christ in you, because this is to be done only
through the spirit.

Use 5. Adore the Lord, and greatly praise him, that he is pleased not only to
acquaint us with the necessity of mortifying the deeds of sin, but also to
direct us how we shall do it, and that in such a way as this through his own
spirit. God might have told us of the desert of our sins, the danger of living
in them, and what would follow thereupon, and so left us to pine away in them,
which had been a most woeful, doleful case. But behold, the riches of his
grace, he shows us a way in the Gospel both for our attaining pardon of our
transgressions, and victory over all our corruptions! It may be objected, Alas
what is this, that we hear, we must mortify our sins through the spirit, we
may hear of this as many do, and yet be far enough from being freed from the
power of our sins. I answer, true, no doubt many hear of this, who yet continue
to live after the flesh, and so dye eternally, having not one of all their
lusts destroyed. But then, it is their own fault, because they follow not the
Counsel of God in his Word; it is the love and goodness of a friend, if be tell
you a sovereign effectual remedy for any mortal Disease under which you labor,
though at length you dye thereof, because you will not use the means he
prescribes, or directs you to. So is it the grace of God that he declares to us
how our sins may be killed, and our souls saved, though many hear thereof, and
yet dye in their sins, because they take not the good counsel given them. It
may be again objected, is the spirit at our command? can we mortify our sins
through it, if we will? I answer, Though the spirit be not at our command, it
is at our entreaty, so be it we heartily seek it as we are directed. (which how
it is, will after be shown) So that this truth leaves all those utterly in
excusable who still live in their sins, (after their hearing it) and it will
aggravate their condemnation, in that though they heard from the Word of God
how they should destroy their lusts, they continued still enslaved by them, and
lived under the power of them all their days. Yet is this Doctrine a great
discovery of the grace of God, to all men in general to whom the Gospel is
published. Especially does this speak the grace of God to you who are in
Christ, for he has already actually given you his spirit, and all that he now
requires of you is, that you improve it, and make use of it, as of a great and
most Noble friend, who is able and ready at all times upon all occasions to
help you. Know therefore the Lord your God is full of grace toward you; He
indeed calls you to great work, to warring and fighting against your strong
corruptions, from which if he pleased he could easily, suddenly, altogether
perfectly deliver you while here, as he will hereafter; This may seem hard, and
seem to speak some want of fatherly love and kindness; but think not so, seeing
he has given you an all sufficient helper, fully answerable to the greatness
of the work which he puts you upon.

Use 6. Let the sixth use be to convince all such of great error, who think
they can mortify their sins of themselves, or that any thing they can do, can
be effectual to the mortification thereof without the spirit. It is one of the
grand errors of the Antichristian party, to think that their vows, fastings,
penance, etc. can mortify sin, and they give themselves diverse of them, to
severe courses, and put others on to such and such things, as effectual means
to slay their lusts without looking after the spirit of Christ for it is
assistance. Wherein, too too many who oppose Popery are too like to Papists,
(as in other things) for are there not many who hearing the absolute necessity
of having their sins slain, do thereupon resolve, and strive, with their eye
off from the spirit? and how frequent is it, for sins to be cried down, and
people to be stirred up, to put away, leave, forsake, and destroy their sins?
but as to the spirit's help, and men's seeking that, there is a deep silence.

It is evident that men commonly imagine there is no necessity of any help, or
at least that there is no necessity of any special help of the spirit in this
work.

But remember you, I pray, these three words.

1. Such a thought is full of falsehood and deceit, very cross to plain
Scripture, exceeding contrary to the Gospel, so it has much sin in it. 2. It Is
very injurious to the blessed spirit, it derogates from his honor, denies it
that which is it is prerogative, and it affronts Christ who has obtained the
spirit to help in this work, yea it makes the promise of the spirit vain and
needless, and so its full of wickedness. 3. Such a thought is exceeding
prejudicial to all in whom it has place, for they who conceit, or imagine they
can deal with their soul enemies without the spirit, are not like to have its
help, nor will they look for, nor do they care for its assistance. When we
suppose we can do a work that concerns us of our selves, we look not forth for
a helper. Is it not said sometimes, I care not whether you, or he, or any one
will afford me help, I Will do such a thing my self, I can do it without you,
etc. O look to your own hearts, for ordinary is it, that men have truth in
their heads and tongues, yet the contrary error deeply, strongly rooted in
their hearts, and thriving there; As in other things so in this, an usual evil
is it for men to hold the truth in unrighteousness, they say they cannot
mortify any sin without the spirit, yet let them but faithfully examine
themselves and they shall find that they do attempt to get the conquest of this
and that sin, and imagine that they shall without the spirit. Wherefore let the
seventh use be,

Use 7. To put you upon considering, whether is this Doctrine printed in your
hearts, have you a sound conviction; have you a heart persuasion of it, that
none, no not one of your sins, not the least of your many iniquities, evil
affections, and sinful motions, not your worldliness, not your vanity, not your
pride, not your unbelief, not any other sin can be executed, crucified and
slain, but by the spirit of the Lord. How shall we know (you may say) whether
our hearts are thus instructed, and possessed by this truth? I answer,

1. If you are thus persuaded, then you do honor the spirit in your hearts,
and greatly prize it, value and highly esteem it; there is a generation who
notoriously slight the holy spirit, yea who scoff at and deride it; such (say
they jeeringly) are men of the spirit, all for the spirit; but let such profane
and brutish ones say what they will, you who are indeed convinced that you can
get no real conquest over any sin without it, you make exceeding much of it
upon that account, and had much rather be men of the spirit, than men of estate
and honor. Therefore the great thing you pray daily for is an abundance
thereof, as the Psalmist says, take not thy holy spirit from me, you pray,
Lord give thy holy spirit to me, O continue it with me, let me be filled
therewith. And when you pray against your sins, you do not ask the destruction
of them directly or not only, but you ask the spirit, that through it you may
mortify them.

2. The promise of the spirit is exceeding precious to you, no promise more
sweet and refreshing to your souls, no promise of forgiveness delights you
more than a promise of the holy spirit; every such promise you embrace, and lay
up in your hearts, as there is great reason why you should, and that rather
more than other promises, because it is by the spirit that other promises are
accomplished, all promises of grace are included in the promise of the spirit,
they all being fulfilled thereby.

3. When you find you cannot get any sin under, that any lust is too hard for
you, then you not only are troubled, mourn and sigh, by reason of the life and
strength of sin, and your own weakness to master it; but also as much or more
for want of the spirit, whence your weakness to mortify it does arise. A man
not gracious, not truly enlightened may be much (upon some accounts) grieved
because some lust in him is so strong and prevalent, but an ungracious man
hardly comes to this, to mourn for his want of the spirit.

4. You make much of the convictions of the spirit; you do not seek to smother
them when it convinces you of sin, but you are glad of them, and cherish them:
As you entertain a good friend whose company you desire, whose help you need,
and whom you would fain have to abide with you though he be somewhat free with
you in telling you of some things he likes not: Or as wounded persons (if they
are bent to have their cure) receive with kindness a skilful Chyrurgion, though
he open their wounds and in his work put them to pain.

So you give entertainment to the spirit, though it work for the causing you to
see, and for the humbling you for your sins.

Use 8. In the eighth place let me put you again upon the trial whether you
have learnt and do follow this necessary counsel, do you? does every one of
you, mortify your sin through the spirit? I hope there is no one of you so
fearless of the great only true God, so faithless of the word of truth, so
careless of his precious immortal foul, so mindless of his future eternal
condition, so wedded to and, in league with sin, as that he is wholly negligent
in seeking to get it mortified. Therefore the question I now put to you is, how
is it that you endeavor this, is it in a right manner? is it according to the
Gospel as my Text directs? It may be said, I hope yes; but how shall I
discern and prove to my self, or any other if need were, that I indeed so do?
for answer to that, take these things in short. If so then,

First, you have felt your need of the spirit, and from soul hunger and thirst
after it, you have gone to Jesus Christ for it; he says, John 7.37. If any one
thirst let him come to me and drink, now you thirsting, have gone to Christ and
drunk, received from him, this water of life, the spirit, which is as a water
of death to the sins of those in whom it dwells, and so as water of life to
their souls.

Secondly, If you mortify your sins through the spirit, then you seek the
mortification of them universally, and thoroughly, even of all your sins in all
the workings thereof, so that if it might be you could wish, yea do desire that
nothing of them, or of any one of them might remain. The holy spirit is an
enemy to one sin as well as to another, and to every degree of sin, and all the
outgoings or workings thereof: therefore he that goes forth against sin by the
spirit, he warreth against all sin one as well as another; A sign Saul was not
carried forth by the spirit against the Amalekits (as to the frame of his
spirit) because he spared some he should have slain; so a sign a man seeks not
the death of his sin through the spirit if he spare any lust, evil affection or
motion. And if the spirit act you, then you lay out your selves, will and
labor to mortify every sin in all it is outbreaking, which way soever it vents
it self and moves. For instance, pride that works many ways and shows it self
by a man's habit, gate, looks, thoughts, etc. Now if you only mind to destroy
your pride as issuing forth or working one or two of these ways, and not all,
you have reason to doubt whether you are acted by the spirit in what you do
against your pride. So for covetousness, that lust has many streams and ways
of working, as making have to be rich, not giving to good and charitable uses,
buying under, and selling above the Market or due price, not allowing a man's
self or his Relations what is fitting, thirsting after gain, discontent because
a man has or gets no more of the world, etc. Now if you only seek to destroy
your covetousness as moving and acting some and not all these ways, that
speaks what you do against some, is not of the spirit. Or if you will and
strive to mortify any sin only in part, in some degree, that is a bad token,
but this is a good sign, when you are set against every sin, in every motion,
in all the ways of its working, and less than its heart blood, its utter ruin
will not, cannot content you.

Thirdly, You use none but such means as the spirit has prescribed for the
slaying any lust, you will not meddle with unlawful, superstitious means, nor
any other but such as the Word of God directs to, as praying, reading, hearing,
meditating, good Company, and such like, for the spirit of God works not by
unlawful means; if any do war spiritually by the spirit, they war lawfully;
whereby it appears that Papists, and other superstitious persons who seem very
strict, are not led out against their sins by the spirit, because they leave
the right path, and take strange courses, which God has not commanded. Yea,
which he has forbidden, such a means is that, when any mew themselves up in a
Cell, or lay aside their Calling, avoid the Society of Relations, and others
with whom they ought to accompany, etc. I may add to this, you chiefly use
those means wherein the spirit principally delights, as looking to the
promises, the sufferings, the holy example of Christ, etc. It appears by the
Apostles arguing, Romans 6.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. to what he especially looked, and we
ought to look for the destroying our sin, even the death, the crucifixion of
Christ; which also may be gathered from Gal. 6.14. God forbid I should glory in
any thing save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom (or whereby, by
which Cross) I am Crucified to the world, and the world to me.

If you mortify the deeds of the body by the spirit, then this work is in a
good degree facilitated and made easy to you, though exceeding difficult in it
self and grievous to the flesh. It Is easy for one very weak to do a great
work, if he have a strong able helper, it is easy for a young beginner to make
good Letters, and write well, if his hand be guided by a skilful Master. So for
a soul to beat down its lusts when it has the powerful assistance of the
Almighty most wise spirit. And hence they who have the spirit helping them,
fight against their sins with delight; it being a good work, and they having
good help, what they do is not burthensom, wearisom and irksom as it is to
others, therefore they are not apt to be discouraged, and give over as others
are, Neh. 4.8, 9. They conspired all of them together to come and to fight
against Jerusalem, nevertheless we made our prayer unto our God, and set watch
against them day and night; Nehemiah was not disheartened, because he was acted
and assisted by the Spirit in the work whereto he was called; Thus when a man
is set on work against sin by the Spirit. Only that none mistake, let two
things be here remembered.

First, The Spirit of God seldom or never does assist any in this life, in
their combating with sin as it can, it puts not forth all its ability to the
utmost in helping any here, if it did, farewell all sin presently; but because
it is the will of God we should still be kept in exercise in this world, and
fight it through all the way to heaven, therefore the Spirit of God helps those
who have its help only in some degree so far as it pleases.

Secondly, The Spirit strengthens some more, others less, and the same persons
sometimes more, sometimes less, sometimes the Spirit almost quite leaves those
who have it and are acted by it, as to their sense they are even altogether
left to themselves, either because they have grieved the Spirit, or for their
trial, and to cause them to know more their own weakness, and pray more
earnestly for the Spirits help. Hence it may be that they who have the Spirit
and have gone far in the war against their sin by it, may find the work so hard
as to begin for a time to sink under it. As Moses though in governing the
people of Israel he was mightily enabled by the Spirit, yet once we read, Deuteronomy.
1.9. he complained of the burden of his work and said he was not able to bear
it. But it is not ordinarily, or usually thus, for the most part they who have
the Spirit with them go forward courageously and delightfully, and thus is it
still so far as the Spirit does lead and carry them in what they do.

Fifthly, If you mortify your sins by the Spirit, then as really as you
endeavor the death of any sin, you do labor to exercise that grace that is
contrary thereto, every lust has a grace opposite to it, he that mortifies his
lust by the Spirit, does also quicken his grace that stands in opposition to
it, for the Spirit is as great a friend to grace, as it is an enemy to sin, and
by stirring up grace in us (as was formerly said) the Spirit does help us in
beating down our sin, if then the Spirit help you to mortify envy and malice,
it does put you on to exercise charity, kindness, and mercy. If it assist you
against coverousness, it does enable you to exercise contentedness, and thus as
to other things. Therefore they hardly have the Spirit (in a special saving way
at least) working with them, who only seek to get sin down, but mind not to get
grace up.

Sixthly, This is a sure rule, whatever the Spirit helps us to do, it causes
us to do from a gracious principle to a gracious end, so in the present case,
if the Spirit stir up any to mortify their sins, it causes them to endeavor
the death thereof from a principle of hatred of sin, love to God, and faith of
his Word; and if the Spirit work with us, it causes us to strive to ruin sin,
not only as contrary to us, but as contrary to the law, nature, and name of
God, and honor of Christ. Whoever aims only at himself in what he does, he
acts from and of himself, and is not acted by the Spirit. For though the Spirit
love all in whom it is, it loves God more, and Christ more than it loves us.
Though the Spirit aims at our good, yet more at the honor of God and Jesus
Christ.

Seventhly, Though the Spirit, if you are acted by it, do put you on to pursue
all your sins to death, yet some of them principally, as, the more strongly and
lively any sin is, the more it steals or keeps the heart from God, the more it
hinders you in religious services, the more hurt it causes you to do to others
by offending, by hardening, and causing them to stumble, and whatever sin it be
by which Gods name, your profession and your souls most suffer, that you
especially strike at, and war upon; chiefly your chief sin, your iniquity, your
master corruption, which is in you the worst; for the Spirit of God is a Spirit
of wisdom; and when it affords its assistance it is according to true wisdom.
Therefore it spoke Saul to be acted by his own Spirit in that he spared Agag,
the chief of the Amalekits against whom God sent him, whereas of all other, he
should have put him to death, so when any indulge and are tender to their head
sin, that which sits upon the throne in them which above all should be
mortified.

Eighthly, If you have the Spirits assistance, then you do ordinarily mortify
your sinful motions under strong temptations, as well as under weak, for all
things are alike to the Spirit, whose power and whose understanding are
infinite. Strong and weak temptations differ as to us, not as to the Spirit,
therefore when it vouchsafes its assisting presence, it does help under and
against all sorts and kinds of temptations. It may be objected, has it not
been known and do we not read, that the best men under very strong temptations
do greatly miscarry? For answer to that, it is true, but it is also true that
even they who have the Spirit of God do sometimes turn out of the way under
weak temptations, (God so ordering it that they may the better know themselves
and be the more humbled) yea it is known that they who stand out against very
mighty temptations, are for a time born down by some that are of no great
strength, compared with those which they withstand. David's temptation to take
away the life of Shimei (who cursed him, flung stones at him then when he was
King and had reigned long, his Servants also pressing him to let them go and
take off the head of that dead Dog) seems much stronger, than his temptation to
cut off Nabal and all the males of his house, because he refused to show him
kindness; yet David absolutely refused to give way that Shimei should be meddled
with, whereas he vowed the death of Nabal, and of all the men of his house, and
armed himself and marched forth to execute his purpose against him, which he
had done, had he not been stopped as himself confesses, 1 Samuel 25.34. In very
deed, as the Lord God of Israel lives, which has kept me back from hurting
thee, except thou had hasted and come to meet me, surely there had not been
left unto Nabal by the morning light, any that pisseth against the wall. So
then, it is not barely the greatness of the temptation that makes a good man to
stumble, but the withdrawing of the Spirit at such a time, and then whether the
temptation be small or great, he is carried away thereby. Wherefore, I say, if
the Spirit of God be in you and work with you, for the most part you mortify
the motions of sin under all kinds of temptations; as you usually stand out
against small, so usually against great temptations also.

Lastly, You ascribe all that victory that at any time you gain against any
sin, to the Spirit, if you are acted by it, for when the Spirit helps, it makes
the soul sensible that it could not do, what it does, of it self, Luke 1.49. He
that is mighty has done for me great things, and holy is his name, so says
the soul that is in a truly gracious frame and is carried forth against sin by
the Spirit; Not I have done great things to the curbing, quelling, and killing
my sins, but he that is mighty, the mighty Spirit of God, has done great things
in me, for me, and by me, as Isa. 26.12. he has wrought all our works in us,
not we our selves of our selves, but he, yea, he has wrought not some, but all
our works in us.

Sermon 7.
Use 9. SEe how great need they have to seek the Spirit who have it not, so
necessary as the mortifying any sin is, so necessary is the having of the
Spirit, for (as has been said) we must have the Spirit e're we can do any
thing by it to the slaying our sins, therefore so many lusts, so many evil
affections and motions, so many sins, as are in any one of us, so many
engagements to seek the Spirit, without which not one of them can be subdued;
They who have not the Spirit of the Lord, they do, they will walk after their
lusts, nor can they walk otherwise, Jude. 17, 18. Beloved, remember ye the
words that were spoken before of the Apostles of our Lord Jesus, how that they
told you, there should be mockers in the last time, who should walk after their
own ungodly lusts, how so? v. 19. these be they who separate themselves (i. e.
from ordinances, from the Societies of Saints) sensual, not having the spirit;
hence they did, they could not but walk after their lusts, because though they
pretended high, as if they had the spirit, and that in a larger measure than
others, yet in truth they had it not. Whoever are without the Spirit, are in
the flesh, Romans 8.9. Ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be the
Spirit of Christ dwell in you, but (which is employed) if the Spirit of Christ
dwell not in you, then are you in the flesh; in the hands, under the power of
corrupt nature, therefore cannot possibly mortify the deeds of the flesh. But
get the Spirit once, so shall you (through it) be able to bring under, and
tread under your feet every sin that is in you. God is able, says the Apostle,
to cause all grace to abound toward you, so the Spirit of God is able to cause
all sin to decay, wither and dye in you, Judge. 15.14. When Samson came to Lehi
the Philistines shouted against him, and the Spirit of the Lord came mightily
upon him, and the cords that were upon his arms, became as flax that was burnt
with fire, and his hands loosed from off his hands. Thus, when the Spirit comes
into any soul and works mightily in it, all its lusts are as nothing, of no
strength.

Wherefore, whoever yet has not the Spirit, let such a one be persuaded to
look out for it with all earnestness and diligence to seek it, should you (not
having the Spirit) set your selves to mortify your sins, this (as so) would
not be obedience to God, nor pleasing to him, because he requires you to do
this work through the Spirit, and consequently to get the Spirit that you may
do it; therefore they who have not, and seek not the Spirit, do not obey nor
please God by the things they do against their sins; yea, they disobey God and
highly offend him, in that they take not his Counsel, that holds true in this
case, Isa. 30.1. Woe to the rebellious children (says the Lord) that take
counsel but not of me, and that cover with a covering but not of my spirit,
that they may add sin to sin, It is rebellion against God, it is adding sin to
sin, when men think to help and save themselves outwardly, much more, when any
think to save themselves spiritually from their sins without the spirit, such
do bring a heavy woe upon themselves.

Q. What then should one do, that has not the spirit that he may attain?

A. 1. It is a good step for one that has not the spirit to (...) convinced
that he is without it, and that he stands in a most absolute necessity of it,
so that he is utterly and eternally undone if he have it not. Many, void, empty
of the spirit dream and strongly fancy that they have it, yea many times when
men are filled and acted by the evil lying spirit, they are very big with a
vain conceit, that they have much, an eminent measure, of the holy spirit of
truth, 1 Kings 22.24. Zedekiah (a man filled with the lying spirit) went to the
good Prophet, and smote him on the cheek, saying, Which way went the spirit of
the Lord from me to speak unto thee, he verily supposed himself to have and to
be moved by the good spirit of God, and he seems to speak as if he only had it,
so that none could have it but from him, or at least that he had it first,
Which way (says he) went the spirit of the Lord from me to speak unto thee,
Which he spoke scoffingly, deriding the holy Prophet, even thus are men often
most woefully deluded, a strong persuasion have they, that Gods spirit is in
them, whereas the truth is, the evil spirit, not the good rules and works in
them. Others they have no sense, feeling or conviction of their need of the
spirit, so they have no desire after it, hence they continue without, and while
it is so with any, they are not like to become partakers of it, labor then to
know your want, and to feell your need of the spirit, in order to your seeking
and attaining it.

Secondly, The great thing of all to be done for the gaining of the spirit, is
believing, Gal. 3.14. the promise of the spirit, is received through faith,
there must be a heart receiving the Gospel, and Jesus Christ held forth
thereby, there must be a soul settled persuasion of the undoubted certainty of
the doctrine of Christ, and a soul trust and rest on him, to the receiving the
promise of the spirit, a right to that great promise, and the fulfilling
thereof. That is a famous promise diverse times repeated, 1 Pet. 2.6. Behold, I
lay in Zion a chief cornerstone, elect, precious ( i. e. Jesus Christ) and he
that believes on him shall not be confounded, by what shall he not be
confounded? Not by any thing; not by Satan, not by sin in it is guilt or power,
not by any lust. But how so? For, as he that believes in Christ is clothed
with his righteousness, so he is made partaker of his spirit. Put then thy
trust in Christ Jesus, fasten upon him by faith, and that for this end that
thou may through and from him receive the spirit. For these two things,
Christ is to be believed in, for his righteousness to justify us in the sight
of God, before the justice of God, and for his spirit to mortify our sins and
so to sanctify our souls, and whoever beileved in Christ, in good earnest, and
in truth for these things, but they received them their persons are clothed
with his most perfect righteousness, their souls are endowed with his most
holy blessed spirit. Rev 4.1, 2. I looked and behold a door was opened in
heaven, and the first voice that I heard, was as the voice of a trumpet,
talking with me, which said come up hither, and immediately I was in the
spirit, So when a soul does hear the voice of God in the Gospel powerfully and
effectually, saying, come up hither in thy heart, come to Christ in Heaven by
hearty faith, then the soul obeying this voice immediately has the spirit from
Christ communicated to it. There should be also a believing in particular the
promises which God has made of giving the spirit, who ever embraces by true
faith any promise of the spirit as made in Christ, he receives the
accomplishment of that promise by Christ, Christ graciously, bestows the
spirit upon him.

Thirdly, None receive the spirit to dwell in them without turning from their
evil ways, for there is no true faith, without a heart turn from known sin,
and while any give up or yield themselves to sin, they do vex the spirit, Isa.
63.10. They rebelled and vexed his holy spirit, But who is like to receive the
spirit to dwell in him, while he rebels and vexes it? Wherefore that word is
to be remembered, Prove. 1.23. Turn ye at my reproof, Behold, I will pour out my
spirit unto you. Then I Will pour out my spirit unto you, when you have a heart
to turn: till this be, a man is a down right enemy to the spirit, his heart is
locked and barred up against it, who will go and dwell in the house of an
enemy, while he continues in open hostility against him? A man must lay down
arms, and not maintain fight against him whom he needs, and desires to come and
dwell with him, and if his desire be right he will do so. A man cannot truly
will to receive the spirit, unless he will to leave his sin,

Fourthly, That sweet word of Christ should be thought on, Luke 11, 13. How
much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy spirit to them that ask him?
If asking follow or go along with believing and turning, it is then sure to
prevail, receiving will be the fruit of such asking. So then, the Scripture is
full and plain in declaring how you may attain the spirit, what you should do
that you may gain it. Which things though (it is granted) they cannot be done
without the spirit, yet are they not spoken in vain; To all whom God intends to
save, he vouchsafes a heart to hearken to these counsels, and so affords them
the indwelling and constant assistance of his spirit while they live, (though
it work not always alike in them. Therefore my advice is to any one sensible of
his need of the spirit and desirous of it, that he would take those Scriptures
mentioned, and spread them before the Lord, and hold on so doing, till he feel
the power of his spirit, and be made sensible of the influence of his grace in
his heart. O Lord, gracious God who delightest in mercy, who art a God hearing
prayer, thy word says, the promise of the spirit, is received through faith,
be pleased I pray thee to give me faith, for it is thy gift. Thy word says,
turn at my reproof and I will pour my spirit out unto you; I beseech thee turn
me and I shall be turned, for turning is thy work; thy word says, to them that
ask thou will give thy holy spirit, O cause me to ask as I ought, open my mouth
and my heart, that I may so ask as to receive according to thy word, for none
call upon thee in truth unless thou be pleased to quicken them thereunto.
Did ever any soul think you do thus, and continue so to do in uprightness, who
was denied? No verily, the Lord our God, is a God full of compassion, he will
not let any one that sincerely waits at the door of his mercy, perish for want
of living water, his holy spirit. Is not God more merciful than you are? would
you let any one (though an enemy) ly and starve and perish at your door, if he
should (throwing down his arms) come and lay himself at your threshhold, crying
for a draught of water? or put case a man through distemper, phrensy, or
madness, should have done you much hurt, if he at a time coming to himself a
little, should entreat with earnestness, that of you, which would cure him, and
therefore desire it, that he might no more do you wrong, would you not give it
him? we read when the Prodigal came to himself he went to his Father, and his
Father with all readiness, pity and love received him; when any go to God for
his Spirit in Christ, then begin they to come to themselves.

God says to us, if thine enemy thirst give him drink, sure then, if any soul
though it have been a great enemy to God, do thirst for his Spirit, and lie at
the door of his mercy crying for it, through Christ, There is mercy enough in
the heart of God to look out upon it, as it were to come forth to it, and
bestow his spirit upon it; Prove. 8.32, 33, 34. Now therefore hearken unto me, O
ye Children, for blessed are they (says wisdom) that keep my ways, hear
instruction, and be wise, and refuse it not, Blessed is the man that hears
me, watching daily at my Gates, waiting at the posts of my doors. Why is such a
one blessed? (...) for who so finds me, finds life, intimating they that so
seek shall find. Does not Christ commend the good Samaritan who had compassion,
on the wounded man, who could not help himself, and poured in oil into his
wounds? Luke 10.33, 34. surely the Lord is as good himself, I, and much more
compassionate toward poor sinners who are far more miserable and helpless. If
then thou wounded soul by thy sins, and no way able to heal thy wounds, to
subdue thy sins, shall indeed look to him, cry unto him, will he not pour the
Spirit (which is called the oil of gladness) into thy heart? Yes, no doubt he
will.

I dare say this (to thee O soul) if thou have a heart to go sensibly and
sincerely to Christ, and to tell him of that himself has spoken concerning the
good Samaritan, and humbly to ask him whether he have not a more loving tender
heart, (not doubting whether he has or no, but being persuaded that he has)
and to plead what the Samaritan did with Christ, entreating that he would do
the like for thee spiritually; Christ will not take it amiss, no his bowels
will be troubled for thee, as the Lord says his were for Ephraim, and he will
surely have mercy on thee, so as to vouchsafe the spirit to thee, even to thee,
as it is, Hos. 11.8. How shall I give thee up Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee
Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboim? Mine
heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together. So will the Lord
say concerning thee, how shall I give thee up to thy lusts, wounded soul? how
shall I deliver thee to the rage of thy deadly corruptions, crying heart? how
shall I make? how shall I set thee as the reprobates? as those who are drowned
in perdition and destruction by their foolish and hurtful lusts? mine heart is
turned within me, my repentings are kindled together, they are as all up, and
on a flame together, all my bowels yern toward thee, here is my spirit for
thee, take it, receive thou the holy Ghost; is not that Christ's own word? Rev.
21.6. I will give unto him that is a thirst of the fountain of the water of
life freely.

Use 10. Seeing it is through the spirit that our sins are to be mortified,
take the spirit's time for the mortifying of them. What time is that? it is the
present time. The spirit loves no delays in a matter of so great consequence,
it hates our sins, therefore would that we should seek to destroy them
immediately without any putting off. O! Alas, how many have been ruined by
their sins, because they have deferred to seek the ruin of them? They have
never had the Spirit's help, because they would not take the Spirit's time.
Beware that be not true of any of you, Romans 10. last. But to Israel, (observe
that, to Israel a people enjoying the word, and living under ordinances) he
says, all day long I have stretched forth my hands unto a disobedient, and
gain saying people. I have tendered mercy, offered help and assistance, to a
people who have all day long from morning to evening of the day of grace,
slighted my mercy, and refused my help, the teaching and leading of my Spirit.
No delay past shall be charged upon you, if now you have a heart to yield your
selves to the Spirit, for the subduing your iniquities, but take heed of
delaying still. Now, even now, the blessed Spirit offers you its help, now in
the Gospel, now in the Word Preached, my Spirit (says God) shall not always
strive with man, believe it now the Spirit striveth with you, and makes a
tender of its assistance. But more especially does the spirit offer its help,
when it begins to move, and breath and work in any soul, Give ear I pray, have
you no movings, no workings, no stirrings or convictions of the Spirit? do you
barely hear a sound of words? do you feel ^^thing within? does not the Spirit
many times convince you? does it not frequently stir you up against your sins,
and against this or that sin in particular? have you not now some stirrings of
the Spirit?

Remember this, whenever the Spirit moves in you, it offers you its
assistance, therefore if you have any hatred of your sins, any love of your
souls, any desire to be helped by the Spirit against your corruption, accept its
offer, now accept it, and set upon this good and necessary work forthwith, take
up arms, and use them against your sin, giving up yourself to the Spirit, that
it may enable you to do that, for which you are utterly impotent and
insufficient in your selves. Go along with the Spirit, that way it moves you,
that way go; what it puts you on to, that do. It is a most dangerous thing
to neglect the offer of the holy good Spirit of God, to slight or let slip any
of its counsels or motions, as Christ said to Jerusalem, so may the Spirit now
say to many a one, ( Mat. 23.37, 38.) how often would I have helped you, and you
would not? behold your soul is left unto you desolate.

Use 11. Take heed all you who have the Spirit, that you do no way provoke it,
no way grieve it, because the great war you are still, while you live, to carry
on against corrupt nature and its lustings, can only be effectually managed by
the help thereof. Why is it that the Spirit of grace does assist us no more in
this warfare? whence is it, that the enemies of our Spirits so often prevail and
get us under? Is it because the Spirit in us, is not able to help us? that
cannot be, it has given our souls life when quite dead, therefore it can lay
our sins quite dead at its pleasure, and give our souls life more abundantly.
Is it because the spirit is not willing or ready to afford us its assistance?
neither can that be, it being given to us to help us; to think it unwilling, is
to think it unfaithful, but the holy spirit cannot be unfaithful, and to think
it unwilling, is to think it unloving, unkind, uncompassionate, but that spirit
that works all kindness, love and compassion, that is gracious in every soul,
must needs be exceeding loving, kind, and full of compassion it self. What Is
the reason then, that this, that, and the other sin so often gets the mastery in
us, who have the spirit in us. Whence is it, that spiritual slothfulness so
much prevails in some, worldliness in others, lukewarmness, pride, envy, etc.
in others? whence are some so unstable in the truth, so unconstant in that
which is good? whence such dead heartedness, such carnality, such vainglory,
such discontent and uncircumspect walking among us? Sure, the Spirit is not
kindly entertained by us as it ought to be, we grieve it, we offend and
displease it. As Israel was never beaten by their enemies, but still prevailed
against them, unless God were some way greatly provoked by them, and so left
them in a great degree to themselves, to their own strength and counsels, which
ever proved too weak, short, and foolish to hold them up when the Lord was
withdrawn from them. So it is, when our foul enemies prevail, the Spirit of God
is displeased by us. Therefore be more kind to, be more tender toward it, Let
us ever be careful as for our lives, that we never grieve our great and only
helper.

There are many ways that the Spirit is offended, one is that even now
mentioned, neglecting its motions, not working when it calls upon, and puts us
on to work, not fighting when it moves us, or not as it moves us to fight
against our lusts. Besides which, there are five or six ways I shall now
mention of grieving the Spirit.

First, Running upon temptation, when you do so, you tempt the Spirit, which
tempting it, is grieving it, when you needlessely run upon an occasion of sin,
and venture upon any foreseen temptation (having no call) hoping the Spirit will
help you against it.

Secondly, Willing or careless neglect of any duty, Believe, (O that you would
believe me, when I speak truth) you never willingly, or carelessely neglect a
duty, but you grieve the Spirit. You may pretend one and another thing, but the
Spirit cannot be deceived; it searches all things, and as for you in whom it
dwells, know you, it does more especially observe, your whole conversation, and
all the workings of your spirits.

Thirdly, Yielding to any thing at any time against your conscience; when you
offend conscience, you grieve the spirit; if conscience be displeased, the
spirit is displeased, though not always in the same respect, thy conscience
says, doing such a thing, thou do not do well, yet will thou do it, now do
thou provoke the spirit.

Fourthly, Not trying those motions that are in you by the word, what they are,
or whence they come. For hereupon, (you oftener then you are aware of) give
entertainment to Satan's motions and yield to them, as if they were from the
spirit of holiness, (especially then when Salan transforms himself notably into
an Angel of light) and what a grieving the spirit this is, it is easy to
conceive, for you through negligence, rashness, or inconsiderateness, and not
trying things as you ought, to follow the wicked one, instead of the Holy one.

Fifthly, Despising the counsel of such who have the spirit, which is too
ordinary a case. I suppose it will be confessed this is a grieving the spirit,
and it must be granted it is too too common. Either the counsel of such is
despised by not seeking it, when it is needful, (the law should be sought at
their mouth who have the teaching of the spirit, Mal. 2.7. Hagg. 2.11.) or when
good counsel is given, and is not followed, but is neglected, be it through
flightiness, obstinacy, conceit of your own understanding, or a being bent to
your own mind, 1. Cor. 7. last, it is so after my judgment, and I think I have
the spirit of God, (he means as to that his Advice) and therefore (as if he
should have said) beware that you despise not my counsel, lest you grieve the
spirit, whose counsel it is by me.

Sixthly, Giving way to unbelieving thoughts, the suffering to lodge in you any
evil thought grieves the spirit, particularly and especially, a thought of
unbelief, when you entertain it, nourish it, or strive not to turn it out. Now
let the consideration of your need of the spirit and the great work you have to
do by it, which can by no means be done without it, make you heedful that the
spirit, be not grieved by you, these, or any other ways. And if you find not
the spirit helping you against your sin, you may conclude one of these two
things, either you have it not, and then you must seek it as before, or you
have some way grieved it, and then you must consider wherein, make confession,
beg pardon, and amend.

Use 12. Be persuaded every one who has the spirit, in all you do against your
sin, to do it, always through the spirit, for as much as this is a sure way and
the only way of doing any thing successfully. All (remember it) all is lost
labor, and worse than labor barely lost, if not through the spirit, for to
attempt any thing without it, is a slighting it, and the mercy of God in
bestowing it. And this indeed is one principal way of grieving the spirit, to
seek or think to tread down your lusts without its help; when any have a good
friend, who can assist them in a difficult matter necessary to be done by them
for their good, which they cannot bring about without him, it is an offense to
him, it will grieve him, if he be not made use of; its a part of friendship,
and a precept thereof, to use our friend in a time of need; a true friend is as
much offended, if you will not use him, when you need his help, as he is
displeased, if you refuse your assistance when he needs help from you. I am apt
to think, we grieve the spirit as by nothing more greatly, so by nothing more
frequently than by this, we forget the spirit, we beg not its helping presence
enough, we trust not in it as we ought, we have too much a secret considence in
our own endeavors, resolutions and duties, or in grace received. Thus the
spirit is grieved, so it assisteth us not as else it would, hence our lusts are
so strong, what we do, proves in vain; If one sin be somewhat kept under,
another rises up in its room, and that retains its life also still, and breaks
forth again; if outward acts of sin are somewhat prevented, yet sin it continues
and prevails within.

Hence also we are so often almost quite discouraged in opposing sin, and even
sometimes ready to think it unconquerable, and hence we undergo more
difficulty than we need (as has been said) like as when one combats with an
enemy alone, too strong for him, when he may have help, he has more trouble
than he need to have, this is folly, it is as when a Child will attempt and
force it self to carry that alone, which is too heavy for it, and above its
strength; and is it not dangerous to set forth against an enemy too hard for
us, without that help we may have, and God has graciously afforded us? This is
presumption, this provokes God to let us fall into and under temptation, this
encourages Satan against us, and strengthens him, this is a wrong to the death
of Christ whereby the spirit has been obtained for us. Therefore receive the
counsel given you, into your hearts, let it be written and engraven there,
whenever you resolve against sin, let it be through the spirit, whenever you
strive against any sin, let it be through the spirit, give your self up to the
Spirit, that you may be conducted, led forth, guided, and strengthened by it.

This is an honorable way of spiritual fighting, under the conduct of such a
leader, the mighty glorious Spirit, our lusts are the basest enemies (the worse
is it to be overcome by them) but the Spirit is a most excellent Leader.

Some may say, I have endeavored through the Spirit, seeking it, and trusting
in it for the mortifying of my sin, yet is it not mortified.

I answer, don't you know, it is so sometimes that a sick man thinks himself
worse than he was, when his Disease is much abated, because he is more sensible
of it than he was, so is it as to sin; And it is one part of Satan's work to
belly the work of the Spirit. As when men go forth against their sins without
the Spirit, Satan endeavors to cause them to think their sin dead when it
lives as much as ever, having no deadly wound at all, so when any do resist and
fight against their sin by the Spirit, he bestirreth himself to cause them to
think that their sin retains it is former life and strength, when indeed it is
dying and much weakened. It cannot be, but, if you have truly opposed sin
through the Spirit, that it is mortified in a good degree, it is mortifying,
dying though not quite mortified and dead altogether. As you should not think
your corruptions weaker, so neither should you look upon them as stronger than
they are. It is a disgraceful injury to a Physician, when his Patients get good
by his prescriptions, and are really better, for them to say they are as bad,
as sick as ever, they have gotten no good thereby. So is it a dishonor and
wrong to the blessed most precious spirit of grace, for those who have it, and
are acted by it, or make use of it, to say they are never the better, that
their sins retain their former strength notwithstanding, as if the Spirit of
God were either weak, unskilful, or unfaithful. It Is good for us to think and
confess the worst of our selves, and we should be humbled and ashamed that our
sins are no more subdued, but we must beware that we dishonor not the spirit,
nor speak more against our selves than is true; as we must not speak falsely for
God, so not against our selves, all false witness is a transgression of the Law.

Yet let me say, our hearts are very deceitful in this thing, we do not always
act through the spirit, nor are we sensible of our need of it, nor do we so
heartily seek it, or rely on it as we sometimes suppose; I doubt not, there are
many who can testify that they have experienced the deceitfulness of their
hearts in this, as well as in other things; they have thought that they did
resolve and strive through the spirit, but afterward they have found that they
did look too much to themselves, and too little to the spirit, that they had
more self confidence than they were aware of.

Some may here desire farther advice how they shall do this work through the
spirit, how their hearts shall be brought to a through trust in the spirit, that
they may have its help against their sins. To which I answer,

First, When sin prevails in you, not only confess that, but this, that you
have not made use of the spirit, nor relied on it as you ought; it will be a
good help to your having more of the assistance of the spirit hereafter, if you
be sensible of, and acknowledge with brokenness of heart, your neglect of the
spirit heretofore, that you have not gone forth against your sin through it as
you should. There is too little of this confession, we confess the stirrings
and breakings forth of corruption, but we forget altogether or too much to
acknowledge this cause thereof.

Secondly, Remember to seek not only the spirit's powerful, but also its
counselling and directing assistance, we greatly need both, we are weak,
therefore need the Spirit's strength, we are unwise and foolish, therefore need
its counsel. As we have not power to do, so neither understanding to discern
what we should do against our sins, what is the best way and course to mortify
them; It is not unusual for men to take such a course for the destroying their
sin as rather strengthens, than weakneth it. Enemies are overcome as often, if
not oftener, by policy, than by main force; so our sins are to be conquered by
wisdom as well as (if not more than) by strength. Therefore look for the spirit
to help you both, as a spirit of power, and also as a spirit of wisdom.

Thirdly, Beg that the spirit would not only help you against your sins, but
that it would cause you to make use of, and trust in it self for its help, that
it would show you more and more your need of it, convince you of your own
weakness, and foolishness, that you may have no confidence in your selves, but
wholly depend on it.

Fourthly, Set your selves against every sin through the spirit; it may be you
look for and desire the spirit's assistance against some special strong
corruption, but you must seek its help against all, or you will hardly have it
against any; you must not think any sin so small that it needs not to be
mortified, nor any so weak that you can kill it of your selves, it offends the
spirit if you so think. It Is much what a like evil to think any sin too strong,
to be subdued by the spirit, and to think any so small that it need not, or so
weak that without the spirit it may be mortified.

Fifthly, Make sure of this that you are in Christ, and have received the
spirit from him, and then steadfastly expect its conduct, powerful assistance,
and counsel for the destruction of your sins; Look upon it as your helper, and
have a raised firm expectation without wavering of its help, as the Apostle
says, 2 Timothy 4.18. the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will
preserve me unto his heavenly Kingdom, so you may and should say, the spirit of
the Lord shall deliver me from every lust, and will preserve me from the
dominion of every corruption, yea and destroy all my sins, it will never leave
me, nor forsake me, till it have brought me off victorious, it will help me, it
will give me a full complete victory overall mine iniquities.

But let this your confident expectation be rightly grounded. How is that? I
answer, you should confidently expect the spirits full help, upon these and
such like grounds.

First, As it is the spirit of the Father, that which the Father has promised
and given you, the promise of the spirit is called the promise of the Father,
Acts. 1.4. and Christ says, it proceeds from the Father, therefore look for
it, as so; think not it will help you only or so much, because you need it, or
will to be helped by it, (or for any other reason with respect to your selves)
as because the Father wills it should help you, and has promised and given
it for that purpose, and so it is the Father's work to do in you, and with you.

Secondly, Expect it is help as the spirit of Christ, as that which proceeds
from the Son, and which Christ has obtained, and sent to you from the Father,
Christ dyed and ascended to interceed that you might have it, he shed his blood
also that your sins might be destroyed through it, he has sent it into your
hearts, therefore look for it is, help upon Christ's account, and as you belong
to Christ, as you are in him, his members, so that what the spirit does for
you, it does for Christ, as they who show kindness to any of Christ's members,
feeding, visiting, clothing them, he says show kindness to himself, so the
spirit helping you, helps Christ, as you are of his mystical body.

Thirdly, Expect the spirit's help also for it is own sake, because you are it is
Temple, 1 Cor. 6.19. It has freely come to you, it does dwell in you, and it
is to abide with you for ever, John 14.16. therefore the spirit is concerned in
your welfare, it helping you to mortify your sins, honors itself,
destroying your sins, he destroys his own enemies, the enemies of his own
habitation, his own temple.

Fourthly, Expect it is assistance upon the account of the everlastingnesse and
freeness of the Covenant, wherein God has said he will give us his spirit,
and cause us to walk in his statutes, which is to be understood for all our
life long, the Covenant gives assurance of the constant assistance of the
spirit to the end; upon such accounts as these steadfastly look for, strongly
expect the spirits help, so certainly you shall not miss of it, you may upon
the grounds mentioned, say of your sins, as David to Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.46, 47.
The Lord will deliver thee into mine hand, and I will smite thee, and take
thine head from thee, and all shall know that the Lord saves not with sword
and spear, for the battle is the Lords, and he will give you into mine hands.
Our trust in the spirit is not right, if we expect not it is help; the greater
our expectation is, the greater our trust, and the greater engagement upon our
friend to help us.

Fifthly, If after all, you at any time find sin prevailing yet be not out of
heart, if you are, that is the way to have it prevail again, and more, but stir
up your selves to your duty in your spiritual warfare, renew your trust in the
spirit, be more earnest in calling for it is help: As Israel when they fled
before the men of Ai, they went and humbled themselves, fasted and prayed, so
when you as flee before your sin, when beaten by your spiritual enemies, go to
God, be more importunate and urgent for help, say with the Psalmist, Psalm.
35.1, 2. Plead my cause O Lord, with them that strive with me, fight against
them which fight against me take hold of shield and buckler, and stand up for
my help, draw out the spear and stop the way against them, say unto my soul,
(speak it feelingly to my sense) I am thy salvation, let them be confounded
that seek after my soul, etc. And as it is in the Prophet, Awake, O arm of the
Lord, put on strength, etc. By no means give way to discouragement, for that is
unbelief, and a dishonor to the spirit, as also to your selves, what is it but
cowardice when a man is worsted, and he falls down under discouragement, in
this he is more conquered, than in the other: A right soldier, will stir up
himself when foiled, and prepare for a new assault with the more eagerness.
That you may not at any time sinck under discouragement because of the
prevalency of sin, keep these three things in your mind.

First, Though sin has overcome you, it has not overcome the spirit in you,
had he pleased he could have prevented it is having the mastery, a sure truth
but not thought of in discouragement.

Secondly, You are never so mastered by sin, but the spirit can easily,
suddenly help you to recover your ground, and to trample under foot that sin
which has got you under, it is as easy with the spirit to subdue your sin, as
it was before it prevailed, yea he will, he surely will help you to repent
which when you do in truth, then you get the day of sin, repenting (if hearty)
is overcoming, and call to mind, have you not often, after the prevailing of this
or that sin, soon recovered your selves (through the spirit) when even as
beaten out of the field, have you not regained your ground? and sometimes been
stronger than before and more successful in your combat.

Thirdly, The spirit would never suffer you at any time to be worsted by any
sin but for some wise ends, with respect both to your good, and it is glory.

First, Your good, though to be foiled by a base lust be not good, the effect
of it may be good, and the spirit would not permit it, but that he intends your
good thereby, even your sins getting the upperhand of you, the spirit intends
to make use of for the subduing it, by humbling you, by making the blood of
Christ more precious to you, by causing you to hate your sin the more, etc.

Secondly; With respect to the spirit's own glory, we by being mastered
dishonor the spirit, so far as it is our fault (which it always is, one way or
other too much) but the spirit will thereby take occasion to glorify it self,
by beating down that sin, which has so strongly wrought in us, to the throwing
us down. The spirit's power against sin, and it is love to us, will be the more
manifested, it coming in to our relief when wely (as it were) under the feet of
such a corruption, ready to have our throat cut, or heart stabbed thereby. When
one comes in to the help of a friend who is beaten out of the field, or just
upon being killed at his strong enemies feet, and recovers the field for him,
lifts him up, and strengthens him to drive out and destroy that his enemy, this
is more honor to such a one, and evidenceth his valor, strength, and
friendship more, than it would if he had been present to help before.

Use 13. When you pray for any that their sin may be destroyed (as you should
make this prayer for your relations, friends, and others) then pray for the
spirit for them, seeing through it your prayer for them, only can be answered.
It Is a great argument of the carnality of Christians, if they pray that the
bodies of their children and other relations may be healed when sick, they pray
not for the healing of their souls, or if they ask any outward gift for them,
and not the spirit, (it were well if some would give fewer blows and angry
provoking words to their children, and put up more and more fervent prayers for
them.) And it speaks to little understanding of the Gospel, when any pray for
themselves or others that they may sin less, be delivered from the power of
sin, but ask not the spirit, to help them. All your prayers must be according
to scripture, for that you seek, in that way the word declares God uses to
grant it.

And in all counsels and exhortations which at any time you give to any
concerning their getting rid of their sins, be sure to instruct them in, and
mind them of this, tell them this and the other sin in them it must be
mortified, but through the spirit. Otherwise you do but teach them to skin over
the sore and keep the disease inward, but not to heal it, (which may be more
dangerous, than if it were left to break forth, as it is with some diseases
when they strike out they are not so dangerous, as when kept all within; the
breaking forth of sin may help to conviction, whereas if kept in unmortified,
one is ready to say or think what do I, who can lay any thing to my charge? he
is clean to appearance, but not cleansed from his filthiness) or stirring up
any to mortify their sin, and not through the spirit, but in their own
strength you teach them so to sin, you put them upon an impossibility, your
counsel may do more hurt than good, how can you expect it should be blessed by
God, when it is not according to his word? And no wonder, if the person to whom
it is given sight it, putting it off with this, I cannot, I am not able, etc.

I believe Satan may move men against some sins in their own strength to seek
freedom from them, that he may weary and vex them, and make them desperate, as
I think it not improble that he may rather further than hinder some in the
preventing the breakings forth of this or that sin outwardly, that so they may
bless themselves as if all were well with them, and not seek to have their sin
truly mortified, and killed in the root through the spirit.

Use 14. See what cause you have to be humble, very humble, though you do get
great victory over your sins, there is even nothing a soul is more subject to
be lifted up by than this, when he begins to get the better of those sins which
have much prevailed in him, when he feels a strong corruption weakened: But let
us remember the Angels who never sinned are exceeding humble, Rev. 7.11. John
saw all the Angels standing round about the throne, and falling on their faces,
and worshipping God, surely then, we who have sinned greatly, who do sin daily,
though we sin much less than we did or then others do, should always fall on
our faces before God, we should be very humble before him, I and before men
too. The rather because whatever we have done against sin to any purpose has
neither been by our own power, nor understanding, but by the strength and
wisdom of the spirit of God. If a man do a great work by another's help, has
he any cause to boast? if one should heal a great and sore Disease by another's
prescription, or write well having his hand guided by another, has he reason
to glory, Ps. 44.3. their own Arm did not save them, but thy right hand and
thine arm, so not your power, but the power of Gods spirit has brought under
your sins, and saved you from them; wherefore all the glory is due to him, you
should be as humble, as if there were nothing done. We read of a crown of life
and glory promised to them who overcome: How so? not because they deserve it by
their overcoming; therefore when Saints shall be crowned they will ascribe all
the glory unto God and to Jesus Christ by whose spirit, they have been made
victorious, Rev. 4.4. I saw twenty four Elders sitting clothed in white
raiment, and they had on their heads crowns, of gold, That is, durable glorious
crowns given them with respect to their conquering.) And what then? V. 10. They
fall down before the throne, and wo^ship him that lives for ever and ever, and
cast their crowns before the throne, saying, thou art worthy, O Lord, to
receive glory, honor, and power, as if they had said, though we are crowned,
yet we in our selves are not worthy of our crowns, but thou art worthy of
glory, honor, and power, for by the power of thy spirit, it is that we have
vanquished our enemies, and have won these Crowns. It Is another principal way
of grieving the spirit, when we mortifying any sin through it, do take the
glory to our selves, which we do, when we grow high minded and puf't up in our
spirits thereby. And it is one of the best evidences, that our sins are indeed
mortified by the holy spirit, when our pride is mortified, so that we are still
humble, as well when we overcome this or that lust, as when we are overcome by
it. There is no sin more hateful to the spirit of God, than pride is,
therefore it helping us against other sins, it will surely smite that.

Lastly, Be exhorted to get more of the spirit, you who are endued with it, who
have it dwelling in you, Ephesians. 5.18. Be filled with the spirit, the spirit is
given by degrees, and in diverse measures, the more you are filled with it, the
more you will be emptied of your lusts through it, the more effectually and easily
will you prevail against every sin, that has been too hard for you.

But how shall we gain more of the spirit? I answer, The same way the spirit is
received at first, more thereof is to be attained, and that is by faith; The
more we act faith on Christ, and on the promises, and the more we earnestly
pray in faith, the more shall we receive and be filled with that mighty
sin-killing, lust destroying, spirit of the Lord.

Sermon 8. and Last.
I Am now come to the last thing to be considered in this Text, which I shall
briefly dispatch and put an issue thereto.

D. 3. That they who do mortify the deeds of the body of sin through the
spirit, they shall live. As they who live after the flesh shall die, so they who
do mortify the affections, lusts and motions of the flesh shall live, so be
it, that they do this through the spirit, because else its not done in truth,
and to purpose. And there is this difference to be remembered, they who live
after the flesh deserve tody, they earn the wages of death, it is not so here,
that they who mortify the deeds of sin, do deserve to live, for, though (as
the Apostle says, To. 6. last) The wages of sin is death, yet the gift of God
is eternal life through Jesus Christ. God freely gives life, and Christ has
by his obedience to death obtained it, 1 John 3.9. In this was manifested the
love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the
world that we might live through him, Christ was sent to dye, that we might
live, otherwise we could never by any means have had life. yet is this, (the
mortification of sin) the way to, though not the cause of life, it necessarily
preceeds life.

Two things I shall speak a little to, before I come to the Application.

1. Show how they shall live who do this. 2. Give some reasons for the
confirmation of the truth.

How shall they live who do this? answer, look how they shall dye who live
after the flesh, in a contrary way shall they live who mortify the deeds of
the flesh.

First, If we do this we shall live the life of grace, of holiness, which is
called the life of God, Ephesians. 4.18. Having the understanding darkened, being
alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because
of the blindness of their heart. How excellent, how desirable is their life,
which is the life of God, even that life shall we live, let us but get our sin
dead through the Spirit of God, Christ the Son of God will live in us, Gal.
2.20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, He did through Christ
dwelling in him live a spiritual holy life, so shall we live; it is true none
can do any thing this way (to purpose) till they are quickened, and have some
spiritual life in them, can those who lie dead in their graves, kill the worms
that feed upon them? No more can any while they lie dead in their sins,
mortify their sins, they have not the spirit, therefore cannot act through it.
But if we do destroy our corruptions through the spirit, then we are quickened,
and we shall retain that spiritual life we have, 2 Pet. 1.10. If ye do these
things, ye shall never fall, never fall as Adam did, so as to lose, our
spiritual life, as they of whom the Apostle speaks that they are twice dead,
(though he means not that ever they had a real principle of spiritual life)
should it be that any of us (who have the spirit) should grow quite negligent
in this work of subduing our sins, should we altogether give it over, then
should we become like those twice dead; sin, as I may say, would choke, would
strangle our souls, or the new creature in us. But we continuing to keep under
and to slay our sins, so the life of grace we have, shall be retained, and we
shall not fall into a dead frame, yea thus shall we have life more abundantly,
we shall be more lively Godward in all duties and good works, Rev. 3.2, 3.
Christ exhorts the Church of Sardis, to strengthen the things that did
remain, which were ready to dye, and for that end bids them repent, mortify
their sin; through the neglect whereof some good things were even as dead
already, and others were in a dying case, it will not be so with us, if we
herein do our duty, but all good will live in us, and it will grow more lively,
so we shall be farther, and farther from dying.

Secondly, We shall live a life of peace and comfort, as it is, Gal. 5.25. we
shall live in the spirit, in the peace, comfort and joy thereof, the Kingdom of
God, we read, consists in righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, but
the more we mortify our sin through the spirit, the more of the Kingdom of God
as it consists in righteousness, whereupon also we shall have the more of the
Kingdom of God as it consists in peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, we shall
have the more sense of our justification, and of our peace with God, a more
clear discerning of the forgiveness of our iniquities, a more quiet and
acquitting conscience, more of the rejoicing of the testimony of a good
conscience, (and the very slaying of our corruptions because they are enemies
will administer joy) yea peace shall we have in great trouble, joy in the midst
of great sorrow, for its not affliction, so much as corruption that deprives
our heart of comfort, peace and joy; Nor can any trouble drown our consolation,
and cheerfulness of spirit wholly, if our sin be but mortified by the spirit, 1
Pet. 1.6. though in heaviness by manifold temptations, yet shall our hearts
greatly rejoice. As Solomon says of the worldly man's mirth ( Prove. 14.13.)
even in laughter the qeart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is
heaviness, so as to a Godly man's sorrow (if he keep constant and diligent in
warring against his sin) even in his mourning his his heart is joyful, and the
end of that heaviness, is gladness.

Perhaps God may withdraw, and much try such a one, and ^o his heart will have
great sorrow, yet not without a secret mixture of joy, and if his comfort seem
to be dead, it is but as a sleep, it will soon awake, and no true joy or peace
can be while sin is permitted to bear sway in the soul, and is not heartily
opposed.

Thirdly, We shall live a life of all true spiritual happiness while we are
here, we shall have God's favor, wherein (as the Psalmist says, there is
life) and which is better than life, yea for the most part (at least) we shall
or may have the shining of it into us, the light of God's countenance ever and
anon lifted up upon us; we shall have the blessing of God, all things will be
blessed to us, many afflictions will graciously be prevented, those that come
will be sanctified to us, so that they shall not hurt us (spiritually, no more
than the fiery furnace did the three Children outwardly, our souls thereby
shall not be so much as singed, as their clothes were not by that devouring
fire) nothing shall befall us, that will be evil to us in it is effect; No good
thing shall be wanting to us, we shall thrive under ordinances, we shall hear
and live, we shall be fed with and feed on the bread of life, our duties and
our labors shall live, we shall experience the truth of those, (and other like
words) Psalm. 1.3. we shall be like a tree planted by the Rivers of water, that
brings forth its fruit in its season, our leaf shall not wither, and
whatsoever we do shall prosper, so the blessing of God will attend us, and his
favor compass us.

Fourthly, When we come to dye a natural death we shall live much better, we
shall presently live in our souls perfectly, and so shall we after a while live
in our whole man, Joh. 5.29. we shall come out of our graves to the
resurrection of life, as Christ lives, so shall we live, (and O how does he
live now, there above!) 2 Cor. 13.4. though he was crucified through weakness,
yet he lives by the power of God, we also are weak in, or with him; but we
shall live with him, if sin dye in us through the spirit of Christ, thereby we
have great assurance, that we shall live with Christ, Romans 6.8. if we be dead
with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him, to him that
overcomes, says the faithful and true witness, Rev. 2.7. will I give to eat
of the tree of life which is in the midst of the Paradise of God, which words
seem to have respect to that spoken to Adam, after he had sinned, Genesis 3.22,
23. lest he put forth his hand and take also of the tree of life, and live for
ever, therefore the Lord God sent him forth out of Paradise, now says Christ,
though Adam having sinned, (and being mortified by sin) might not eat of, or
touch, or come near the tree of life, that he should live for ever (as he hoped
or supposed he thereby should) yet to him that overcomes his temptations and
corruptions, will I give to eat, (I Will not only permit him to eat, but I Will
give him to eat) of the tree of life in the midst of the Paradise of God (even
the third heavens, that best place of all the creation, as Paradise was of all
the earth) and so he shall live for ever (far better than Adam in that state
could have lived.) Hear men, and brethren; thus (O thus!) shall ye live, if ye
will so fight against your sins, as not to let them live in you. They said of
Paul, Acts. 22.22. it is not fit that he should live, so the world may say of
us, (and we considered in our selves have great reason to acknowledge we are
not fit to live any life, no not here in this present evil world) but, through
grace, we shall live a life ten thousand, and ten thousand times ten thousand,
much better, a life glorious and everlasting, 2 Pet. 1.11. we shall have an
entrance administered abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

Now for a few arguments to demonstrate, and help faith, as to this truth, that
they who so do (as is expressed) shall so live, as is declared.

First, it must be so, because otherwise the spirit's work in us should be
lost, the spirit's helping and assisting us against our sins, should be in
vain, to what purpose should the spirit of the Lord enable us in this work, if
we being helped should not live, but dye at last? Therefore shall we live, for
the spirit's almighty special work cannot be lost, our working alone might well
be, and would be in vain and disowned by God, but that which we do through the
powerful assistance and effectual workings of the Holy Ghost, will surely be
owned by the Father, for the spirit's sake, and his own sake who sent it to
strengthen us, and Christ's sake also who obtained it for us.

Secondly, The Spirit is the Spirit of life, it is he that quickneth, Joh. 6.63,
it is the living water the Scripture speaks of, and if we mortify our sins
through it, it has quickened us, we begin already to live through it, and it
dwells in us, therefore we shall live, more and more, till we come to live
the life of perfection and glory, Romans 8.11. If the Spirit of him that raised
up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that has raised up Christ from the
dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit, that dwells in
you; and in the mean time it will be quickening our immortal souls as to that
death whereto by sin they are obnoxious or liable.

Thirdly, Having the Spirit of Christ we are in him, we are one with him, and
this is a sure evidence, and infallible testimony that Christ has dyed for us,
he has so taken our sins upon him, that he has taken them away, he has so
born them, that he has born them away for ever from us; he has satisfied
divine justice as to all our iniquities, and fulfilled the law, and now appears
in the presence of God for us. Romans 8.3, 4. God sent Christ, that the
righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us (in our nature for us) who
walk not after the slesh, but after the Spirit, and it is sure we do walk after
the Spirit, if we mortify our sins through the Spirit.

Fourthly, the Apostle gives us another Argument, in the words next following
my Text, Romans 8.14. for (says he, As many as are led by the Spirit of God,
they are the Sons of God, for, that is, for this reason it must be so, that if
we through the Spirit, mortify the deeds of the body, we shall live, because,
we so doing are led by the Spirit, which ever leads souls led by it to life,
(as Satan leads souls that walk after him to death) and our being led by the
Spirit, proves that we are the Children of the living God, whose Children shall
surely live; the fountain of life will give life, the best, all life to his
Children; and those whom he makes his Children, are therefore so made by him,
that they might live in him, to him, and with him for ever. As Christ faith,
God is not the God of the dead, but of the living, so he is not the Father of
the dead, but of the living, only of such to whom he does and will give life,
all his Children shall have life from him, he will be their life.

Fifthly, Either we shall dye or live, there is no middle between death and
life, but if we through the Spirit put sin to death, if we mortify it, then we
shall not dye, because none dye but it is by sin, as by the guilt, so by the
power of sin, sin kills all who perish, but if sin be killed in us, we shall
not be killed or destroyed by it. He that slays his enemies, shall not be
slain by them. He that mortifieth the diseases that seize on his body, shall
not by them be mortified in his body.

It may be said, if we could mortify sin, so as never to sin more, then no
doubt we should live, but, Alas, whatever we do against sin, still we sin, yea,
even continually one way or other. A. But it shall not be always so, the day
will come when you shall sin no more, and in the mean time there is a party in
you that sins not, the Spirit sins not, nor does the seed of God in you,
the new man, the new creature, and if you through the Spirit do seek and are
set upon a hearty endeavoring the death of sin, then the sin that comes from
you, is rather to be looked upon, as from corruption remaining, than from you,
because you have a contrary principle, and the sin that flows from you is
against your will. as it is not the Palsy man that shakes his head, or hand,
but the Palsy, Romans 7.16. If then I do that which I would not, it is no more I
that do it, but sin that dwells in me, should any one take your hand and
smite another therewith against your will, would you not say, you did not smite
him? so your sin (whose hearts are in truth bent against it) is not accounted
to you, that it should prejudice you, and hinder your attaining life, but you
shall live, as surely, as if you were wholly freed from sin, and did never sin
at all. I know that speech of the Apostle may be, has been, and is (no doubt)
much abused, by such who understand it not, or use it to harden themselves, to
stop the mouth of conscience, and of such who justly reprove them, as it was
wrested and misused by that Antinomian Maid, who being asked how stolen Clothes
came to be in her Chest, answered, it was not I, but sin that dwells in me.
But if that Scripture be rightly understood, and applied, it is of great good
use, and it does establish and confirm the present truth.

Sixthly, The Apostle says, if God be for us, who can be against us, but if we
through the Spirit make war to purpose against our sin, then God is for us, we
are on God's side; who is on my side, who? (said Jehu) whereupon one looking
out at a window he bid him throw Jezabel down, who was his enemy, whereby that
man showed himself to be on Jehu's side; so when we heartily seek to throw out
and break the neck of that Jezabel, sin that is within us, (which is enmity to
God) then are we on God's side, and God is on our side, he is for us, if we are
for him. As he is cursed who helps not the Lord against the mighty, so he is
blessed that does go forth against his sin, that may be applied to sin which is
spoken of Babylon, Ps. 137. 2 last. O corruption, O lust which art to be
destroyed, happy shall he be who rewards thee, as thou have served us, happy
shall he be that takes and dasheth thy little ones against the stones, who
seeks thy utter destruction!

In a word, sin has not dominion over those, who mortify it through the
Spirit, therefore they are under grace, therefore they shall live through
grace; they are in the covenant of grace, which is a covenant of life,
therefore they shall have life according to, and by the covenant.

Application.
Use 1. LEarn hence a reason of that deadness that is upon the Spirits of men,
of professors too commonly; how many have a name to live, yet are dead? and how
many are under great deadness as to all holy duties, all ordinances, all good
works, reprobate, or much like such who are reprobate to every good work, Tit.
1. last, speak to them, call, cry aloud and tell them, this, that, is their
duty, show it them by Scripture, yet (O sadness) they have no life, no heart to
it; you had even as good call upon a dead man to eat, to drink, or hear and do
any thing you shall say to him. Why, what is the matter with men that they are
thus dead, their hearts, their consciences, their wills, and affections dead?
the cause is palpable, their sin lives, lust is unmortified. Know it, whoever
of you are under prevailing deadness of spirit to, or in that which is good,
and your duty, deadness of heart Godward, there is some lust or other that is
lively in you, seeing they shall live who do mortify the deeds of sin. And as
for those who are dead at heart (especially if they are daily so) be it as to
any good, or as to joy, peace and comfort, let them consider, whether it arise
not hence, the prevalency of some sin in them, the death whereof, they have not
industriously sought, through the Spirit. Or if any are without the life of
happiness, by God's countenance shining upon them, look well into thy self,
search and see, is there not earthly mindedness, worldliness, love of the
world, pride, impatience, hypocrisy, envy, or some other iniquity unmortified,
and which through the Spirit, thou seek not the destruction of. Or if any
are born down with fear, overcome with doubts concerning their living
hereafter, (though this, through temptation may be the case of a very gracious
soul) yet it is not without ground to advise and persuade such also to try
themselves in this matter, whether there be no lust they seek not the death of,
or whether what they do be not through themselves, rather than through the
Spirit. Because this is given as an evidence of life, therefore (usually) the
Spirit of God does bear witness with their Spirits, who do through it mortify
their sins, that they shall live. In the general this is a truth, and (setting
aside some particular special cases) it will be found true as to all; whatever
death or deadness any lie under, it is caused by some sin open or secret which
they don't use means by the Spirit to destroy. And therefore, let the second
use be.

Use 2. To persuade you all (yet once again) to this so great a duty, be
persuaded one and all (particularly you who are under deadness) to mortify
your sin through the spirit, you who have not yet begun, O that you would enter
upon this combat, you who have begun, hold on, go forward, and be more
industrious here in, in this time of wars and rumors of wars (which may as yet
increase with other destroying killing judgments) let this be your war, your
daily fight because this is the way to life. Is there any one of you, but
desires to live in the sense of my Text? Can you be content with a short,
uncertain natural life, and not look after that which is far better, seeing it
may be attained, and the way to attain it is laid plain before you?

Say (I pray) say in your hearts, say before God, Would you not? Do you not
desire to live a life of holiness, a life of spiritual peace, comfort and joy,
a life of happiness under the warm, most refreshing beams of Gods face and
favor? Would you not? Wish you not that you may live for ever with Christ in
glory, when your natural life shall end? Does not thy heart sometimes (at least
say) O that my Soul may go into life when my body shall die, and that my body
may be raised to the resurrection of life? Some (possibly) may think it strange
that I propound such queries, saying in themselves, who is there but would, and
desires so to live? I answer, well is it for those who have a through will and
desire thereto, for they will undoubtedly industrously seek to walk in the way
of life, they will hearken to this counsel, and make it their study and
business to mortify their sin through the spirit. It was the saying of one
(as I have read) that he would swim through a Sea of Brimstone to get to
heaven; strong desires causes strong endeavors, and carries through great
difficulties, hunger (we say) breaks through stone walls, but if thy heart be
right, that which is required of thee, being to be done through the spirit, is
not of extreme difficulty. I beseech you, what think you, has that man a mind
to live in good earnest, who will not seek the life of his deadly enemies, who
unless destroyed, will surely destroy him? Or, who will not give himself to
the use of good and effectual means prescribed to him, for the removing a
disease, or healing of a wound, which unless cured will certainly be his
death? verily, no more have they a through, sound will, or fervent desire to
live spiritually, happily and eternally, who hearing what must be done in order
thereunto, cast the counsel of God behind their back, not giving up themselves
to the obedience thereof. But will thou O Soul be so unwise? be not thou
(whatever any other is) so foolish as not to thirst after such life. If thou
say thou do long for it, show the truth and strength of thy desire, by thy
diligence in practicing daily this exhortation; which if thou do not, but
shall neglect and despise instruction, then truly thou will not can not
live, that is employed, (when it is said, He that does this shall live) he that
does it not shall not live. Remember, says Christ, Lot's wife; So remember
other Scripture examples, particularly that, 1 Kings 20.35. One of the Sons of
the Prophets, said to his neighbor in the word of the Lord, smite me I pray
thee, and the man refused to smite him, then said the Prophet, because thou
have not obeyed the voice of the Lord, as soon as thou art departed from me, a
Lion shall slay thee, and it was so, as soon as the man was departed from him,
a Lion sound him, and slew him; So it is said to thee this day in the word of
the Lord, smite I pray thee, kill, destroy thy sin, if thou refusest, then ere
long (thou know not how soon) a Lion will slay thee, thy lust, and Satan
that devouring Lion, yea the wrath of the Almighty worse than a thousand Lions
will slay thee with a slaughter far more terrible and dreadful, than that was,
wherewith that man was slain; thou will find and feel the truth of this, as he
experienced to the loss of his life the truth of the Prophet's word. You may
also observe in the same Chapter V. 42. The Prophet said to Ahab King of
Israel, (Thus says the Lord) because thou have let go out of thine hand, a man
whom I appointed to utter destruction, therefore thy life shall go for his
life. So assuredly, if thou shall let thy sin escape, which God has appointed
to utter destruction, in the ruining whereof thou may have the assistance of
the spirit, then shall thy life go for it is life. Must it not needs be so, if
the not smiting a Prophet, when God commanded it, cost a man his life, (against
the doing of which he had a seeming fair objection and excuse) if the not
slaying Benhadad a King, when God would have him slain (though we read not God
had so expressly declared) cost Ahab (a King) his life; then how sure, the not
slaying thy sin, which God so often calls upon thee, and presses thee to
mortify, will cost thee thy life? Fain would I (may it please the Lord to
work) that this counsel may become rivered and rooted in all our hearts.
Therefore I shall hint a few moving persuasions.

First, Set forth, up and be fighting courageously and constantly against your
corruptions, and iniquities by the spirit, so shall you have many victories,
you will often get the better of them, and every victory will be a cordial, a
cup of consolation to your hearts, much joy will you thereby have now, and much
more hereafter, when the fight shall be quite ended. Nothing gladdeth more in
this world, than victory over strong mighty inveterate enemies, how did Deborah
and Barak rejoice when they came off victorious, with Palms in their hands,
Jud. 5.1, 2. etc. Then sang Deborah and Barak the son of Abinoam, on that day,
saying, praise ye the Lord, for the avenging of Israel, etc. Then they sang,
When? Chapter 4. last, The hand of the children of Israel prospered, and prevailed
against Jabin the King of Canaan, until they had destroyed Jabin King of
Canaan, i. e. (as if it had been said) that great, that potent destroying King
Jabin, therefore his name is so repeated. Therefore that thou may sing now,
and much more hereafter, and sing for ever, stir up thy self, take hold of the
Lord, march out against every sin in his name and strength, for so shall thou
prevail, be not discouraged. Read and consider, weigh that well, Jud. 6.12, 13.
The Angel of the Lord appeared to Gideon and said unto him, the Lord is with
thee, thou mighty man of valor, Gideon replied, Oh my Lord, if the Lord be
with us, why then is all this befaln us? etc. V. 14, 15, 16. And the Lord
looked upon him, and said, go in this thy might, and thou shall save Israel
from the hand of the Midianites: have not I sent thee? and he said, oh my Lord,
wherewith shall I save Israel, Behold my family is poor in Manasseth (a poor
Tribe) and I am the least in my Fathers house, and the Lord said unto him,
surely I will be with thee and thou shall smite the Midianites as one man.

Secondly, If God intend to save us, he will take some severe course, or other
with us for the destroying our sin, if we will not be persuaded by fair means
by his word, to seek it is destruction; whence was it that the incestuous
Corinthan was delivered up to Satan, and thereupon had so much sorrow, that he
was ready to be swallowed up thereby, it was for the destruction of his sin,
the ruining whereof he neglected; the Psalmist says, fools because of their
transgression are afflicted, because they countenance their sin and are too
tender toward it, which is their folly, therefore God makes them smart.
Hence David's bones were broken, because he did not mortify the lustful
motions that were in him, but gave way thereto. Remember what Christ says,
Rev. 3.19. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten, be zealous therefore and
repent.

Thirdly, What is the end, aim and tendency of every deed of the body of sin,
every sinful motion? It is your death, Abstain, says the Apostle Peter, from
fleshly lusts which war against your souls, Why do they war? but to kill your
souls, and so far as Satan has a hand in stirring up your lusts, he directly
aims at your utter ruin; therefore seek the death of your lusts. Is it not
better for sin to die, than for your souls to die? No man can be so irrational
as to think and say plainly, that it is worse for him to slay his sin, than it
will be to be slain by it. This is even the farthest step from wisdom, for
any to please his flesh, and Satan, his vvorst enemies, to his own eternal
undoing.

Fourthly, While any sin is in you unmortified you cannot be so useful to
others; you will not have a heart no^ (...) capacity or fitness to do that good
you might in your generation, that you say or do will not be so advantageous
to others: yea sin being unmortified you will thereby do much hurt, by
stumbling them, hardening them, causing them to blaspheme (as David by his sin
opened the mouths of the enemies of the Lord in blaspheming.) And how sad is
this, for a man that ought still to do good, to do much hurt? for a man to be
an instrument of Satan, as every one is, who does hurt to others souls? it may
be by some one corruption in you not subdued, but prevailing, you may be in a
great degree a means, through your ill example, or otherwise, of the damnation
of some of your Relations, Acquaintance, or such with whom you have to do,
certainly a man that understands himself, had rather lie rotting in the grave,
than live to do mischief, especially so great hurt.

Fifthly, there cannot be the least show or shadow of reason why we should
spare any sin. Good reason there may be for a man to spare outward enemies, and
to do those good who hate him: This may be an honor to a man ( Theodosius the
Emperor is highly commended, for that when he was moved to execute one who
reviled him, he said that were it in his power, he had rather raise his dead
enemies, than put to death his living.) Or there may be hope that a man's
enemies will grow better in time if spared, or they living may be of some use
one way or other, or some friends may interceed for them, etc. But if you let
go your sin, this is the greatest disgrace, shame and dishonor that can be to
you; it is impossible sin should grow better, but the longer you let it live
unmortified, it will still grow worse as to you. Sin it self cannot be of any
good use; There is no one who will be pleased by your sparing sin, unless you
shall take Satan for your friend, or some one in whom he rules. Nor is there
or can there be any other reason why you should forbear, or defer to seek the
death of every sin.

Again, Consider the smallest sin not mortified, is far worse than the greatest
grossest sin that has never so often broke forth, if it be at length brought
under; for the least deed of the body of sin let alone is mortal to you, it
will kill you; but the greatest, being mortified, will be no bar to, or at all
prejudice your salvation; for if ye mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall
live, how great, heinous, mighty, prevailing and provoking soever those deeds
have been.

Therefore be fully resolved (through the spirit) to endeavor the death of
every of your sins, seeing sin has already done us so much hurt, by wounding,
by defiling (...) souls, by separating between God and us, and causing many
ways much sorrow to us, it is but just revenge to seek its death, it is said
indeed, avenge not your selves, but you know that is not spoken as to our sins,
the Israelites were to destroy the Amalekits, and Midianites (when God
commanded them) and that utterly because of the hurt they had done to Israel,
and the Apostle makes holy revenge one sign of true repentance, 2 Cor. 7.11.
How do wicked men mortify the deeds of the Spirit, its motions and
convictions, how much have we all been guilty thereof? O that for time to come,
we may wholly addict our selves to the mortifying of the deeds of the body of
sin.

Remember, be you faithful in this combat for a while, and yet after a little
time it will be perfectly dead, and buried (as I may say) and that never to
have any resurrection; our visible body shall rise again, not the body of sin,
nor any member thereof, when once quite destroyed.

I shall here add three or four directions, besides those formerly mentioned.

First, Look upon and account this to be one end of all Gods providence
toward you, to stir you up to this duty; hence your afflictions which you
(perhaps) speak of, as so many, so great, they are to take away your sin, hence
your mercies (which when fewest and least, are more and greater than your
afflictions) they also are to excite you against your sins, for the goodness of
God leads to repentance; and if you thus account and reckon, it will be a
good help to awaken you thereto, 2 Pet. 3.15. account that the long suffering
of our Lord is salvation, account so, thus think, and judge in your selves, but
why should we so account, because this will be a means to put us upon our duty,
as may appear by the 14 v. upon which he brings in that exhortation, be
diligent that ye may be found of him in peace without spot and blameless, then
comes in that, as a help thereunto, and account that the long-suffering of God
is salvation, do so, and thereby you will be quickened to be diligent that you
may be found of him in peace, so you should account of all God's providence,
they are salvation, in order to the salvation of your souls, and consequently
to the destruction of your sins.

Secondly, Think not a little pains enough for the mortifying any sin; though
all our pains be nothing without the spirit, yet the spirit will have us not
only to do, but to do with all our might. There must be violence used against
our sin, which Christ teaches, when he says, cut off thy right hand, right
foot, and pluck out thy right eye that offends thee, touching it, a little
smiting it is not enough, it must be cut off, and plucked out, all that we do
should be done with all our might, much more this. If we did strive more, the
Spirit would help us more, But,

Thirdly, Let nothing quiet thee unless thy conscience tells thee thou art
hearty and zealous in this work, and do get some ground upon thy sin, it is
cross to Scripture for a man under the power of sin, (he not bearing up and
wrestling sincerely and stoutly against it) to bless himself in, or quiet
himself by any thing; and this hardens the heart, nourishes sin, strengthens
and increases it, when a man upon any account, speaks peace to his soul while
he lives in sin, hence that terrible word, Deuteronomy. 29.20. God says his anger and
his jealousy shall smoke against that man (who giving way to sin, blesses
himself) and all the curses shall lie upon him, etc. if a man flatter himself
that he shall do well, because he has had such comforts, does perform such
duties, God is merciful, Christ has dyed, etc. though he live after the flesh
in this or that evil deed or motion thereof, then will that man's sin prevail
more and more, and it is not like to be mortified, or that he should seek the
mortification thereof.

Fourthly, Beware of all lessening and extenuating thoughts of your sin; to
beget such thoughts in us, is Satan's way to defend our sin, and deaden our
hearts to the seeking the death thereof, as that we cannot help it, (which is
no extenuation but an aggravation of sin, when it arises from the strength of
sin in our hearts, 2 Pet. 2.14. it is expressed to aggravate, or show the
greatness of their sin, they cannot cease to sin) or that our sin is not so
great as some others ( I am not, said the Pharisee, like this Publican) or I
have such a temptation (the woman said, Adam thou gave me, she gave me, and I
did eat) or any other excuse, while a man's mind is so exercised and busied to
make his sin appear as little as possibly he can, it roots and grows in him;
he will not strike hard at it, if he think it small; he will give it a weak blow, if
he think it weak; no great stroke, if he imagine it not to be great, as if a
man be to kill a little creature (a fly suppose) he will put forth but little
strength, for that he thinks enough. Labor therefore to see your sin as it is
in its greatness, heinousness, and utmost sinfulness so far as may be; and for
that purpose, view your sin in the glass of the word, see how it is set ^^^th
there in the word of truth, applying all that is spoken against such and such a
sin to your sin, that sin in you, -- consider how it is in God's eye, how he
looks upon it, as also how it will appear to you, when you come to dye, or
stand in judgment; and lo^k round it, weigh the aggravating circumstances of
it, the love, the goodness of God to you, your knowledge, means of
sanctification, and checks of conscience, your profession, your hope, your
prayers, with other such things.

Use 3. All you who do mortify your sin in truth, through the Spirit, be
assured this day you shall live; for you to believe is as really your duty, as
it is for you to do any thing against your sin, and the more you believe it,
the more will you do against sin; a man may conceit he shall live, and
therefore let his sin live; but he that has a true faith grounded on the Word
of God, particularly my Text, that he shall live, he will become thereby more
industrious in warring against sin, for faith is a purifying grace. Believe
then, live you shall, spiritually, while you live naturally, if at present you
have not, you shall have peace and joy.

God's favor is toward you, and you shall have a sense of it, if now you are
without it, and eternal life is yours, you are heirs of it. Dye you may a
natural, but not a cursed death, not the second death, as she said, who going
cheerfully to Prison, and hearing one say to her, you have not yet tasted
death, true answered she, nor ever shall I, for Christ says, ( Joh. 8.51. if a
man keep my saying, he shall not see death, so you who keep this saying, shall
not see death, but you shall see life and enjoy it for ever, you are written
among the living in Jerusalem, Isa. 4.3. or (as it is otherwise read) you are
written unto life, your names are in the book of life, see by faith, there is a
book of life, where the names of all that shall live are fairly indelibly
recorded, and among others, there even there stands thy name, your mortifying
your sin through the Spirit, is a sure evidence to you hereof, therefore by it,
mortify your doubts, and let your assurance be raised, and let it give life to
your hearts, even the life of comfort; This promise ye shall live, contains in
it more than tongue can express, it is comprehensive of all you desire, or can
reasonably wish for, Let not thy soul refuse to be comforted by it, it matters
not much what now is, think thou of what shall be. Now, thou may be as dead
as to thy name, estate, health, this or that good, but doubt not, thou shall
live, so live, that there shall not any shadow of death remain in thee, upon,
or to thee.

You may say, this is a good word to them who can rightly apply it, and me
thinks I could drink in the comfort of it abundantly, did I know it belongs to
me, but I fear whether I do truly mortify my sin through the spirit, or no.

I answer, the Apostle spoke this by the Spirit, which had never moved him so
to speak had it not been a thing knowable, it is manifest this may be known, and
questionless they who have the help of the Spirit in mortifying their sin, may
(if they have not) have the testimony of it, that they so do. who helping his
friend in any great work, is unwilling he should know it?

A few things I shall propound over and above what you have heard, that may be
somewhat helpful to you in your knowing this.

First, Is your eye much upon your sin, is it much in your thoughts, especially
your chief iniquity; have you many thoughts of that, is your mind much
exercised upon it? Ps. 51.3. my sin is ever before me. When a man sights
against an enemy, he keeps him in his eye, looks steadfastly on him; so he that
is bent upon the mortifying his sin, has his thoughts much on it, not as some
to be pleased therewith, but so as to grieve for it, to sigh because of it, and
to consider what he should do for the preventing and destroying it.

Secondly, Does the breaking forth of sin and your being at any time mastered
hy it, sadden your hearts, as really and more than affliction? sickness causes
sadness, Neh. 2.2. Why is thy countenance sad, seeing thou art not sick? so
does other affliction, but nothing saddeneth one who is intent and heartily
engaged in war, so much as the prevailing of the enemy; if that question should
be put to a gracious person, why is thy countenance sad, seeing thou art not
sick, nor in other great affliction, he could often answer, it is because of my
sin that has prevailed against me, though my body be not sick, my soul (which
is worse) alas that is sick through the prevalency of this or that iniquity.
The Apostle Paul (upon occasion) gives us a large relation concerning his
exceeding great sufferings, but says not because of them, but because of his
sin, O wretched man that I am. Now, can you say? the breaking forth of
worldliness, troubles me more than the loss of the world; the prevailing of
pride, grieveth me more than contempt and disgrace; my neglecting to show love
and kindness to others, afflicts me as really, as much and yet more than
others not showing love and kindness to me; the coffeehouse of my Spirit,
lies heavier upon me, than any worldly disappointment, and the like; this is a
good demonstration that you mortify your sin through the Spirit, and the more,
if you can say the very stirring and moving of sin in you sadneth you heart,
though it do not outwardly show it self, and is known to none, but God alone.

Thirdly, The more sin is mortified in any, are they the dearer to you? or the
more you perceive any are careful and watchful against sin, does your heart go
forth the more in love and affection to them? It may be the less this or that
sin appears in another, which is contrary to your temper, humor or interest,
the more you may love him, and yet be under the power of your sin, but if your
affection be drawn out to others according as you perceive them to be engaged
against all their sin, this speaks well, and the sign is the clearer, if you do
in your hearts esteem and rejoice in such who have got a greater conquest over
their sin, than you have yet attained to.

Fourthly, It is a hopeful evidence, if you have much tenderness toward such
who are struggling and striving against their sin, when you see them sometimes
foiled thereby, yet it appearing that they do wrestle against their sin, your
hearts are full of pity toward them, you have a tender respect to them, and
bear them upon your hearts before God. When any are seen to be favorers of
their sin, and manifest that they nourish or countenance a lust, then your
hearts are offended, and rise against them upon that account, but for those who
are enemies to their sin, these you compassionate, this speaks you know what it
is to fight against sin, and that the Spirit acts you therein.

Again, it is a good mark, if you have strong breathings after the motions of
the Spirit, if you long much for its moving in ordinances, and that in order to
the destroying your corruptions. O that the holy mighty Spirit, would move and
work in this and the other duty, that my sin may have some deadly blow thereby;
and it this be one principal thing you look at in all your duties, and waiting
on God in Ordinances that through the Spirit, your iniquities may be mortified.
I shall now only give a short answer to three Objections, and conclude this
subject, and shut up this Text.

Obj. 1. Some sincere heart may object, were my sin quite subdued, I should not
doubt, but woe is me, it lives still.

Ans. We read, Heb. 11.17. Abraham offered Isaac, yea it is there repeated, he
offered up his only begotten son, yet his son lived still, How so? because in
his will he did actually offer him at God's command, and went a great way in
offering him, he took his son, bound him, and having built an Altar, and laid
on wood, he laid his son thereon and took his knife in his hand, and had gone
farther, had not God stopped him. So if thy heart be indeed set against sin, and
they will, thy purpose and resolution be utterly to slay thy sin, and thou
go as far as ever thou can therein, though as yet it have life, thy sin
may be said to be mortified, yea altogether so, as to thy will, thy desire and
purpose.

Obj. 2. I have a long time labored against this and that sin, yet does it often
get the mastery of me, it has much life, much liveliness and strength after
years struggling against it, had I the spirit helping me, sure I should before
this, have gotten, if not a perfect, yet a greater victory over my sin.

Ans. When an enemy prevails frequently, greatly, and holds out long, very
long, it is more honor to him that continues fighting against him, when at last
conquereth that his enemy; and this gives good hope the spirit does help thee
that thou have so long wrestled against thy corruption, and yet hold on,
thou faintest nor, but maintainest the fight, sighing crying, out against it.

Obj. 3. But I see that some have got much more ground upon their sin, and have
it more under than I have, though they began the fight, a good while after me.

Ans. It Is good to be lowly minded, to think others better than thy self, but
perhaps their sin whom thou think of, may have more strength than thou
know; or though one fin be less in them than in thee, another may be less
in thee than in them; or thou may have done much more against thy sin than
they, though it break forth more in thee; yea, thou may in a great degree
have mortified thy sin, and some who seem to have out gone thee in
mortification have done nothing in it to purpose; either because thy
temptations are stronger, or thy disadvantage greater through natural
weakness, badnesse of constitution, bodily distemper, want of such education,
or some other cause. Many a man whose sin never had one wound, or stroke
toward it is death, never sined to appearance outwardly so much as Lot, Noah,
David, Jonah, Peter and others in whom sin was truly mortified. Some ground
through it is natural quality, or because more dunged or better watered, may
have it is weeds often cut down, and yet at times have more than another piece of
ground which was never weeded at all. The not knowing or not considering such
things makes some go blessing themselves to Hell, and others to go trembling to
Heaven, and causes diverse to become exceeding guilty by their self
conceitednesse, and proud censo^iousnesse. However sincerity in this (as in all
things) is that God accepts, though the more it be done the better.

For a Conclusion of all.
Praise the Lord greatly, ye upright in heart, Rev. 5 8. We read, The 24 Elders
have every one of them Harps, and Golden Viols full of Odours which are the
Prayers of Saints, teaching us, that Saints are not only much in praying, but
much in praising also, they have every one Harps, and V. 9. they sung a new
song. Take you your Harps and sing a new song, give great glory to God. For
what? (you may say) for these five things. First, Bless God for Christ who has
obtained, and as your Head received the Spirit for you. Second. Bless God for
his Covenant wherein he has promised his Spirit to you, and your interest
therein, as also in Christ's. Third. Bless God for the Gospel which teaches
you this use of the Spirit, to mortify your sins through it, this excellent
direction, and only effectual means for the destroying all your lusts. Fourth.
Bless God that he has given you his Spirit, and that you do (at least many
times) feel it helping you against your iniquities, and that you have begun to
destroy them through it. Last. Bless God for the promise of Life, and that you
have this Scripture evidence and certain assurance that you shall live.


