RITES OF FUNERAL Ancient and Modern, IN USE Through the Known WORLD.

Written Originally in French by the Ingenious Monsieur MVRET.

And Translated into English by P. LORRAIN.

LONDON, Printed for Rich. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty, at
the Angel in Amen-Corner, 1683.

Men's cujusque is est Quisque.
SAM PEPYS C^^ ET IAC ANGL REGIE ^^^CRETIS ADMIRALIA



To the Honorable SAMVEL PEPYS Esquire;.
SIR,
TO apologize for this Dedication under the worn pretense of a desire of
Protection, were at once to do violence, both to the Character of my Author
(whose Fame has raised him above the need of any) and my own Modesty, who am
too conscious of what the best performances of this kind amount to, not to
know, That Pardon only (without Protection) is Indulgence sufficient to the
frailties of a Translation.

THAT then which alone emboldens me to the inscribing this to YOUR REVERED
NAME, is a belief I have, that the Copy cannot be disagreeable to YOU of an
Original, in whose diversities of Entertainment and Reading, You have been
sometimes pleased to own so much satisfaction, especially upon a Subject of
such singularity as this, touching the different Rites of Funeral in practice
with Mankind.

OF which Rites, however entitled YOUR VIRTUES have long since rendered YOU to
those of the most Solemn, or YOUR severer PHILOSOPHY may nevertheless make YOU
partial to others of the less studied Methods mentioned in this Treatise; GOD
grant Your arrival at either may be as late for the benefit of Others, as YOUR
KNOWN INTEGRITY and FORTITUDE render impossible its coming too soon with regard
to YOUR SELF. Which is the most fervent Prayer of,

HONORED SIR, Your most Faithful and most Obedient Servant, PAVL LORRAIN.
November. 6. 1682.
THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
THE Wisest of Kings tells us, that Eccl. 7. 4.
it is better to go to the House of Mourning, than to that of Laughter; And
those who have well considered the grounds he had for this his Judgment, will
not by the Title of this Book (as melancholy as it appears) be affrighted from
the perusing it. I might indeed acquaint the Reader, that in the translating
thereof, I have consulted nothing more than his pleasure and diversion (which
he cannot miss of, amidst so great a variety of Relations, concerning the
magnificence of Sepulchers, with other Honors bestowed upon, and manners of
disposing of the DEAD) but I will not insist on this, my design being rather to
profit, than delight; for else it would have been more proper for me to have
ushered my Reader to a Theater, than a Churchyard among Graves and
Charnel-Houses. I must confess that a Skeleton, how neatly soever hung and
wir'd together, is not an Object so entertaining as a Venus drawn by some
Maisterly Hand; but withal it must be granted, that as much as Delight carries
it on this side, so much does Advancement of Knowledge overbalance it on the
other; the one feeds our Vanity, the other composeth us to Sobriety, and
teaches us the best of Lessons, To know our selves. What we read to have been,
and still to be the Custom of some Nations, to make Sepulchers the Repositories
of their greatest Riches, is (I am sure) universally true in a Moral sense,
however it may be thought in the Literal; there being never a Grave but what
conceals a Treasure, though all have not the Art to discover it. I do not here
invite the covetous Miser to disturb the Dead, who can frame no Idea of
Treasure distinct from Gold and Silver; but him who knows that Wisdom and
Virtue are the true and sole Riches of Man, as he is an intelligent Creature,
and the Image of his Glorious Creator. Is not Truth a Treasure, think you?
Which yet Democritus assures us, is buried in a deep Pit or Grave; and he had
reason; for whereas we meet elsewhere with nothing but paint and deceit, we no
sooner look down into a Grave, but Truth faceth us, and tells us our own. It
was not by chance that the Primitive Christians joined their Coemeteries to
their Temples, or Places of Divine Worship; they well understanding that the
Instructions communicated to them through their Ears in the one, were enforced
by those they took-in from their Eyes in the other, and that both tended to the
same blessed end, of rendering them Wise and Religious. Of which Truth Plato was
so convinced, as to define Wisdom the Meditation of Death; ratified by the
Divine Oracle in that Pathetick Wish, Deuter. 32. 29.
Oh that they were wise, that they would consider their latter end! And with no
slight confirmation given it also by the Wisest of Preachers, even where the
Libertine seems least to apprehend it, namely, in his declaring Eccl. 9. 10
no Wisdom to remain in the Grave whereto we are going; for as much as in so
cautioning us against a too late expectation of finding it (when dead) in our
own, he directs us the more forcibly to the seeking for it (while living) in
the Graves of others.

WHICH having said with regard to the valuableness of the Subject, I shall only
add, for the Reader's fuller information, my having taken the liberty of
retrenching one Chapter of this Book, under the Title of [The Funerals of
Hereticks] as finding the same little less or more, than an Invective against
Protestants, in reference to their Rites of Burial. Nor can I think my so doing
will be judged any blameable imposure upon my Catholic Author: For as much as
by covering the Mistakes whereto the partiality of his Zeal has too visibly
betrayed him in this particular, I shall be found to have best consulted the
general Credit of that Truth, which the Reader will observe him a most strict
Pursuer of, through every other part of this his History.

ADIEU.
ERRATA.
PAge 4. in the Margin, read Sext. Empiric, p. 11. l. 13. r. Place. p. 12. l.
ult. r. Cypres. p. 14. l. 6. r. Tutelar. p. 22. in Marg. r. their attending. p.
32. l. 9 r. Veij. p. 42. l. 8 r. Offices. p 49. l. 22. r. Justinian. p. 72. l.
21. for of r. in. p. 77. l. 11. r. sounding on Trumpets. p. 86. l. 10. f. the
r. an. p. 92. l. 2. r. take it. l. 8. r. may be. p. 123. l. 4. r. and. l. 5. r.
him. p. 140. l. 8. r. extends. l. 10. f. were. r are. p. 146. l. 4. dele a. p.
147. l. 12. and 167. l. 2. r. Water. p. 161. l. 22. r. lamentings. p. 191. l.
12 r. there. p. 199. l. 24. f. by r. at. p. 203. l. 7. dele also* p. 226. l.
15. r. Crimes. p. 244. l. 10. f. shut r. stop. p. 293. l. 1. r. Scipio's.
Throughout for Corpses read Corpse.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. Page I. THE Funeral Rites of the Egyptians. 1 II. Grecians. 11 III.
Romans. 20 IV. Persians. 45 V. Turks. 56 VI. Chinese. 68 VII. Americans. 93
VIII. of some Islanders. 119 IX. of the Tartars. 139 X. Living Sepulchers. 148
XI. Fiery Sepulchers. 157 XII. Water-Burials. 167 XIII. Airy Obsequies. 171
XIV. Burials above Ground. 177 XV. The Funeral Rites of the Ancient Jews. 180
XVI. Modern Jews. 198 XVII. Schismatics. 234 XVIII. Christians. 243 XIX. A
Discourse concerning the Right of Burial, and Laws on that behalf. 271

THE FUNERAL RITES AND CEREMONIES OF ALL NATIONS.
CHAP. I. Funerals of the Egyptians.
I DESIGNING to treat of the Funeral Rites of all Nations, shall begin with
those of the Egyptians, because that People has always been acknowledged for
the most ancient; and from whom Laws, Arts, Sciences and Ceremonies were first
derived to other Countries. As Soon as any one was dead amongst them, Diod. lib.
2. Hist. Officers employed by the Egyptians at their Funerals.
the Funeral Officers, which were three, viz. the Clerk, the Anatomist, or
Dissector, and the Embalmer, presented themselves to the Kinsmen and Relations
of the Departed, and after they had agreed upon the price (for according to the
expense they were willing to be at, they diversely treated the Corpse) the Clerk
set down upon a paper, or marked on the Body it self, the Parts that were to be
opened, viz. the Flanks on the left side. Then the Anatomist made the incision,
and forthwith ran away; because the standers-by did most commonly fling stones
at him, as abhorring to see him exercise this seeming cruelty upon their Friend
or Relation. At last the Embalmer drew forth all the Intrails, but the Heart
and Kidneys; and after he had washed the Body very well, he inwardly anointed it
with a composition of all sorts of sweet-scented drugs and spices, except
Frankincense, because that was by them consecrated to the Gods; and most
commonly the chief ingredients of this ointment, were Myrrh and Cassia. This
done, he with an Iron-hook pulled out all the brains through the Nostrils, and
filled up the void space with Aromatical drugs.

AS for the remaining Duties, they were performed by the kinsmen of the
Deceased; who as soon as these Mela l. 1. ch 9. The manner of their Burying and
Embalming.
Public Officers had done their part, and withdrawn themselves, took the Corpse
and laid it in Salt, where they let it abide for the space of seventy days: at
the end of which they washed it very carefully, and then neatly sowed up again
the incision which the Anatomist had made; afterward they anointed it
outwardly all over with a certain Gum; wrapped it in swathing-bands of very fine
linen, which by reason of the foresaid glutinous ointment, stuck close to the
body; and so they shut it up in carved and painted wooden frames, which were
made for that purpose.

Their common Sepulchers
NOW these Corpses thus ordered and embalmed (which we call Mummies) some kept
in their houses, others shut them up in some Repositories under ground, made in
the fashion of little vaulted rooms, into which the descent was through a round
or square hole, like unto that of a Well; over which they erected a large
Lucian de luctu. Their mourning and lamentations for the common sort.
stone in manner of a pillar, loaded it with many garlands, and embraced it a
thousand times, giving the Deceased their last Adieus.

I HAD almost forgot to mention, that in carrying the Body to the grave, both
men and women made very Sixth. Empyric. l. 3.
horrid lamentations and outcries, tearing their clothes, and uncovering their
breasts, which they bruised with many reiterated strokes. But these bewailings
were far more extraordinary upon the Death of any of their Kings; For their
Kings.
the mourning continuing no less than seventy two days, during which time all
manner of rejoycings and festivals were forbidden; they all bedawbed their
faces with mire and dirt; walked in troops together along the streets, without
any thing but a linen cloth wrapped about them, mixing the Name of their
deceased Prince with their sighs and outcries: They abstained from wine and
delicate meats; denied themselves the use of baths and perfumes; they did not
so much as make their beds, nor accompany with their Wives, and expressed all
the signs of an extraordinary affliction.

Public Examination of the Lives of their Princes after their Death.
BUT it is to be observed, that before they paid him these Funeral Obsequies,
they caused all his actions to be very narrowly scanned and examined by the
Judges, and that in the presence of the People: and in case their doings were
adjudged bad and unaccountable; they deprived him of Burial, which they never
granted their Prince, in the manner as before mentioned, but when by a general
consent his Government and Conduct were approved of as good. For then they
erected a sumptuous Monument for him, or laid him in that which he had prepared
for himself, whilst yet alive; Royal Sepulchers.
upon which monumental Structure they lavished a prodigious treasure, as the
remains of their Pyramids do abundantly testify; which at this day are matter
of astonishment to all that behold them, and were not without great reason by
Antiquity reckoned amongst the Wonders of the World.

INDEED they were such Buildings as were never elsewhere to be found: Neither
is it at all likely, that any King at this day could go to the charge of them;
since besides three hundred and seven thousand men, who for the space of twenty
years were employed in building one of them, and eighteen hundred Talents spent
only in Turnips and Onions, the invention of those Engines whereby they hoisted
up so vast stones to such an incredible and prodigious height is quite lost.

MOST of these Bellon. Sing. Observat. l. 2. Their Figure and vast Dimensions.
Mausoleums, or costly and magnificent Structures, are made in the fashion of
Pyramids, and are no less admirable without, than within. There is one of them
that is mounted by two hundred and eight steps, and is six hundred and
fourscore and two foot broad, and six hundred and twenty foot high: In a word,
it is so high, that though the top of it be sixteen foot square, yet it does
show to those that are beneath, as sharp as the point of a needle. The entrance
into it, is through a little door three foot and six inches high, and three
foot and three inches broad: Next, you advance through a passage of the same
dimensions, where first you meet with a descent of sixty steps, and after that
again an ascent of about an hundred; at the end of which you enter into a
little Gallery, and through that into a Hall, in the midst of which stands the
Tomb, all of one piece, and of a stone as fair to look upon, and as hard, as
Porphyre, the whole Hall being lined with the same. These things might seem
incredible, were they not confirmed by all them that have traveled into those
Parts. The Inhabitants of that Country call these huge Buildings Pharaoh's
Mountains, by reason of their prodigious height; being no less wonderful for
the immenseness of their Bulk, than for the richness of the Matter of which
they are made.

The Sepulcher of a young Princess.
HERODOTVS tells us that one of their Kings, Herodot. l. 2. hist.
Micerin by name, caused a Tomb to be made for his Daughter, which was no less
astonishing than the foregoing. He having no children but her, and seeing
himself by her death deprived of Heirs, spared nothing which might express how
sensibly he was touched with this loss, and endeavored to immortalize her
memory by the most superb and sumptuous structure he could possibly devise.
Instead therefore of a Monument, he ordered a Palace to be erected for her,
with a great Hall in the midst of it, adorned with abundance of Figures and
Statues, all bespangled with precious stones: After this he caused her Corpse to
be laid up in a frame of incorruptible wood, fashioned into the likeness of a
Cow, which was covered all over with plates of Gold, and a Purple-mantle cast
over it. The figure of this Cow was kneeling, and had a Sun of massy gold
between her horns, and was enlightened by a Lamp whose flames were fed with a
most odoriferous oil, hanging before it, and round about the Hall nothing was
seen but perfuming pans and Censers, which continually cast out clouds of sweet
scents and perfumes.

BY these instances we may perceive what honors the Egyptians of old were used
to confer upon their Dead; and for conclusion of this Chapter I shall only
further add, that there were Three sorts of Burials.
commonly three sorts of Buryings in use amongst them, which were distinguished
into sumptuous, indifferent, and mean or poor. The charges of the first were a
Talent of Silver, and of the second twenty Mines; the expenses of the last
being very inconsiderable.

CHAP. II. Funerals of the Grecians.
THE Grecians have not always disposed of their Dead the same way: Burying and
burning of the Dead in use among the Grecians.
For at the first they used Burials, and after that, the custom of Burning
prevailed amongst them: Of both which ways we have several instances from very
credible Authors. Thucydides tells us, that Thucyd. l. 1. Diverse Examples of
Burials.
Themistocles being dead at Magnesia (where he was Governor) was buried in the
great P^lace of that City, and that some time afterward they took his bones
from thence, and carried them to Athens, his own Country, where they were
interred a second time. A like account he gives of Brasidas, viz. That this
brave General being dead of the wounds, which he received in the Victory by him
obtained over the Athenians, at Eon, was publicly carried by the Chief
Officers of his Army, upon their shoulders, to the place where a Monument was
prepared for him, in the midst of the Great Market, and that there they buried
him. He further acquaints us, that some time after, those of Antibe offered
many Sacrifices at his Tomb; instituted Games in honor of him, and ranked him
amongst the number of their Gods. The same Thucydides informs us, that they had
a special care to pay all due honors to such as died in the Wars in defense of
their own Country: And to that purpose tells us, that all those who were killed
at the several Battles fought in Morea were most honorably buried in the
manner as follows. First, for the space of three days they left their Bones in
a Tent, where every one of their friends made them Presents of what they liked
most when they were yet alive: Afterward they laid them, together with the
foresaid gifts, in Cyprus-Chests or Coffins, and every Tribe having placed the
bodies of those that belonged to them, on Chariots, they were drawn by men to
the place of Burial; being followed by an infinite number of Citizens, who
filled the air with lamentable wailing and outcries. Moreover the same
Historian observes, that besides those forementioned Coffins, they carried some
empty ones, in honor of them whose Bones they could not find.

Funeral Elogies and common Place of Soldiers Burial.
NEVERTHELESS they most commonly Demosth. cont. Eubulid.
buried the Soldiers in the very same place where they had fought and were
slain, rendering them their last honors, where they had purchased their
greatest glory; and employed one of the most honorable and eloquent of their
Magistrates to make a Funeral Oration in commendation of them.

AS for Plut. in Solon. Senec. in Oedip. Act. 1. Place of Burial for such who
died on their beds.
those that died on their beds, they were buried in the Suburbs. It was their
custom never to inter the Dead within their Cities, because they considered
them as cut off from the society of other men; Privilege of Heroes.
their Heroes only enjoying that privilege; whose Bodies they kept in public
Places, as so many Tutelar* Gods and Defenders of their Country. Laws that
excluded Spendthrifts from the Burying-place of their Fathers.
Every Family had their own Tomb, and he only was deprived of this right, who
had spent his Patrimony; the Laws appointing him to be buried elsewhere.

THE same Gruther. Kirckman. Guichard. Laws that directed the manner of
Burials, and laying of the Corpse.
Laws ordered and restrained the manner of their Burials, that they might not
be too sumptuous and prodigal. Demetrius Phalereus established a Magistrate to
have an eye to the regulating of them, and put a Fine upon those that exceeded
such a sum. The same Lawgiver ordered that no other Monument should be
erected over the place where the Corpse was interred, than a Pillar of three
cubits height, or an Urn of the same dimensions, and that the face of the dead
should be turned toward the East. Nevertheless, this custom was not alike
observed throughout Greece, for the inhabitants of Phoenicia laid the dead with
their faces Westward; and those of Megara buried them with their faces
downwards; and in this manner it was that Diogenes would be buried; he giving
this reason for it, that seeing all things were (according to his opinion) to
be turned upside down in succeeding Ages, he by this means should at last be
found with his face upwards, and looking toward Heaven.

Their Mourning, the manner of burying their Dead, and attending at Funerals
very various, according to the different Countries of Greece.
THEY likewise differed very much amongst themselves, in the Honors they
conferred on the Dead, before they carried them to their Graves, as also in the
way and manner of their Mourning. Some washed them with clean water, and others
with wine. Some poured upon them a thousand sweet perfumes, and others did only
cover them with Olive-leaves. Some clothed them in Crimson, others in White
with abundance of Garlands, and others (as the Galatians) put a Letter very
well sealed into their hand, that they might make known their intentions to
them in the other World, and that they had well acquitted themselves in
performing their last duties to them.

THEIR Mourning lasted seventeen days: And therefore they commonly cut off a
finger from the Dead Body, and on the same conferred all the Funeral honors
they thought due to the Party Deceased. In Lycia, men during all that time wore
women's clothes. At Argos they dressed themselves in White, and made great
Banquets, and offered many Sacrifices in honor of Apollo: In the beginning of
these Ceremonies they put out their fire, and afterward kindled it again. At
Delphos they sacrificed unto the Dead themselves. At Delos they cut off their
own hair, and laid it on the Grave. The Plateans did after many joyful
meetings, which lasted all the time of Mourning, at last make a kind of Funeral
pomp, in which a Trumpeter marched first, who was followed by some Chariots
laden with Bay and Myrtle-leaves; and after these Chariots, came several
persons, carrying bowls full of milk, and wine, which they poured out upon the
Sepulcher. The Lacedaemonians crowned themselves with Smallage, and sung Hymns
in praise of the Dead; and the Athenians made great and solemn lamentations
over them. From all which customs it plainly appears, that some rejoiced, and
others mourned at the Death of their Relations and Friends.

IN this point only they all agreed, viz. in burying Thucyd. l. 1. The Duty of
Burying inviolable amongst them.
their Dead; which Duty was accounted so sacred amongst them, that the
Athenians condemned several great Captains to death, because they had cast the
Bodies of some that were killed in a Sea Fight into the Sea. Upon this score it
was, that their General Nicias caused his whole Army to make a halt till they
had interred two private Soldiers, who died in the march. And the Illustrious
Cimon, son of Miltiades, made no difficulty to give himself up a prisoner into
the hands of his Fathers Creditors, who had after his Death seized his Corpse,
to deprive it of the honor of Burial.

Example of Woodpiles, or burning of the Dead.
IT IS matter of wonder, that Burying the Dead having been for some time in so
great veneration amongst them, they should all on a sudden abolish that custom,
and instead thereof commit their Corpse to the devouring flames: For it was they
who invented that hideous ceremony of Homer. Iliad.
Wood-piles; and were the first that turned those into Ashes, after their
Death, whom they had during their lives most dearly beloved. This we learn from
Lucian, who laughs at that custom; and Homer in many places of his Iliads
abundantly confirms it, who, to give us a perfect Idea of those Ceremonies,
sets down very particularly the Honors that were done to the body of
Patroclus: Telling us, that Achilles having ordered the whole Army to be ranged
in battel-array round about the Wood-pile, caused twelve young Gentlemen,
Trojans, to have their heads cut off; besides a vast number of Oxen, Horses,
Sheep, Dogs, and other beasts, which were butchered, and their bodies
confusedly laid about the Corpse of his Friend; and last of all he himself
having cast his Hair, which he had cut off with his own hand, into the flames,
all was consumed amidst the lamentable cries of the whole Army.

CHAP. III. Funerals of the Romans.
Burying and Burning of the Dead used amongst the Romans.
THE Romans having succeeded to the Grecians in the Empire of the World, as
they received from them many of their Laws and Manners, so most of their
Ceremonies: But to the end we may not swerve from our Subject, we shall only
observe how they were Imitators of the Grecians in the disposing of their Dead;
for both of them at the first buried, afterward burned them; and at last
abhorring those horrid Solemnities, they introduced again the custom of
interring them. Herodot. Dion. Herod.
Their History acquaints us, that the former Burials lasted from Romulus (who
was the Founder of their City) to the tyrannous Dictatorship of Sylla, Live. l.
12.
who having caused the Bones of his Enemy Marius to be dug out of his Grave,
and fearing that the like affront might be done to him after his Death, he by
an express Law made for that purpose, and many pompous Ceremonies, engaged the
People to burn their Dead to ashes, which were afterward gathered and shut up
in Urnes. This Law was observed until the Empire of the Antonin's, who being
Philosophers and Virtuous Princes, could not endure that this kind of cruelty
should be any longer exercised upon Humane Bodies; and therefore did abolish
the use of Wood-piles, and restored the former way of Burying.

Varro L. 4. de Lin. Lat. Ceremonies observed at their Departure.
WHEN the sick was at the point of Death, his nearest Relation drew nigh unto
him, waiting till he gave the last gasp, which he received with his open Mouth;
and then shut his Eyes, provided he were not a Son of the Deceased; for the
Manian* Law forbad Children to close their Father's eyes. And the same Kinsman
did open them again, after that the Funeral Officers had done their duty; that
is to say, after they had washed him well, clothed him with his own clothes,
and laid him in the Tomb, or on the Wood-pile. Some say, that the reason why
they closed the Eyes of those who were a dying, was, that they might not see
the affliction which they caused to the standers-by; and that they opened them
in the Grave, to the end they might behold the Beauty of Heaven, which was the
abode they wished them to all Eternity.

The manner and magnificence of the attending the Corpse to the Grave.
THE manner of accompanying the Corpse of one of the common People to the Grave,
was very plain and simple; but when the Person was of great Quality, the pomp
and state they used was very extraordinary. The march usually began with a long
row of the Statues of his Ancestors, dressed in their Apparel and Robes of
State; viz. in Consular Robes, if they had been raised to that Dignity; in the
Pretexta, if they had commanded in the Army; in Purple, if they had been Herod:
Censors; or in Cloth of Gold, if they had ever enjoyed the highest honors of
Triumph. After these Statues of his Ancestors, followed his own; with all the
marks and signals of the Employments he had discharged or Honors he had
obtained, viz. Bundles of Rods and Axes, Garlands of Laurel or Oak, and those
Coronets which were called Muralis and Civica; the former of which being given
as a mark of honor to those who had first scaled a Wall and entered the City;
the other to them who had preserved a City from the power of the Enemy, or
saved the Life of any Citizen. And to all these they sometimes added the
representations of the Cities or Provinces they had conquered. Next came all
his Domestics in mourning, and were followed by Musicians, who played to a sad
and doleful Tune; the Instruments being diverse, according to the age of the
Persons; for they made use of Pipes only for young People, and of Trumpets for
the ancient. Officers that carried the Bodies to the Grave.
These Instruments went immediately before the Corpse, which was carried by the
Vespillo's (so called, because they never buried the Dead but in the dusk of
the Evening or at Night) and was followed by a throng of the Relations and
Friends of the deceased, who had a company of young Boys and little Girls at
the head of them; the former of which had their heads covered with a black
Vail, and the latter went bare-headed with all their Hair spread about their
Ears: All these marched in great order, through the care which was taken by the
Designators, or Masters of Ceremonies.

Burying in Houses used amongst them, and afterward forbidden.
IN the beginning of their State they were wont, after they had attended the
Corpse abroad, to bring them into their Houses, and there interred them Varro.
l. 4
; from whence arose that great veneration they had for their Penates or
Houshold-Gods, which were nothing else but the Ghosts of those that belonged to
their Family. But this custom did not last very long, not only because of the
horror, which the continual presence of the Dead caused to the Living, but also
by reason of the infection and ill scents arising from them. Which gave
occasion to a Law, whereby it was enacted, that thenceforth no Dead should be
buried in the City, much less kept in their Houses, as they did before; that
Privilege being only granted to Vestals, to Emperors, and those who had been
Triumphators. Privilege of the Heroes and Vestals.


Burying-Place.
THE common place of Burial was the Via Flaminia or Latina, that is, the
Flaminian or Latin Road: Tacit. l. 1.
Where, as soon as they were arrived, one of the Relations standing in the
midst of the company, who made a ring about him, pronounced the Funeral Oration
in praise of the Deceased: Afterward they laid him in the Grave with an
ever-burning Lamp, and some small Vessels full of several sorts of Drink and
Meats (not forgetting to put in also a piece of money to pay Charon, for
wafting them over in his Ferry) and some Woollen Garlands, that they might with
decency and honor appear in the Elysian Fields.

Pliz. l. 7. c. 44.
AS soon as the Grave was shut up, the Weeping-women, which they called
Praeficae, Mourning-Women.
(who had no other employment, but to lament at Burials, and were usually to
that purpose hired for money) cried aloud Ilicet, that is, Every one may now be
gone. Upon which the Company three several times answered with a mournful
voice, Vale, Vale, Vale, giving the deceased Party their last Adieus, and so
withdrew.

Laws that ordered the manner of Burying of the Dead.
THEIR Tombs were ordered and limited by the Laws, the workmanship about them
being expressly forbid to exceed what ten men might finish in three days time
Cic. l. de Legib.
, or five at the most; neither were they suffered to be larger than was
necessary for the engraving of an Epitaph. It was upon this account, that
Licinius was declared an infamous Person, for having caused a stately Sepulcher
to be erected for him, wherein he had much exceeded the aforesaid bounds. At
first, the custom was to write their Epitaphs in Verse, which never exceeded
two Distichs: But afterward they found Prose to be the better way, because it
left them more at liberty, not only to express the Name of the Deceased, with
that of his Family and Tribe; but likewise the honorable Offices and
Employments he had discharged, his Profession, and the Legacies he had
bequeathed. They began these Epitaphs by consecrating the Monuments they had
erected, to the Dii Manes, that is, the Ghosts or Spirits of the Dead, or to
the Infernal Deities; and sometimes to Diana, Hercules, or any other Divinity,
for which they had a more particular devotion; and ended the same with
mentioning the Legacies the deceased had given by his last Will, which
consisted either in Feasts, or sums of money to be distributed to the people,
and sometimes Oil, Biskets, and such like viands; which the Executors were
bound every year to perform at the Tomb of the Deceased, the same day they
died, or else on their Birthday.

NEITHER did they that outlived them (in acknowledgment of benefits received)
forget any thing that might conduce to the preserving of their memory. Plin. l.
7. c. 44.
For presently upon the Death of any person of quality they ordered his Statue
to be made to the life; which after it had graced his Funeral pomp, was brought
home, set in a Niche, and was used to be taken thence (in case he had been a
Magistrate) upon days of great Solemnities, to accompany the public
Processions; Statues of the Dead kept in their Relations houses, and in public
places.
and if he were a private person, they adorned it in its Repository with
Garlands, and several other gallantries. Moreover, if he that was dead had done
any considerable services to the Commonwealth; then besides the Statue which
his Relations kept of him in their houses, there was another erected at the
charge of the public in some eminent Place of the City, in order to its being
exposed to the sight of all men. This honor they gave to Scipio the African,
whose Statue they set up in Jupiter's Temple in the Capitol. Whence it was,
that when his Posterity the Cornelii entered that Sacred Place to offer any
Sacrifice, they first approached his Statue, and asked his advice, as if he had
been there alive. Thus also the Statue of Cato was placed in the Senate House,
and that of Trajan was fixed upon a Pillar: As afterward they erected such
another Pillar on which they placed the Statue of Antonine, who was an Emperor
so generally beloved, that he was accounted infamous that had not in his house
some Pourtraicture or Figure of him, either in colors, embossed Work, or at
least in Medal.

Ap. de Bell. Punic. Games instituted in honor of the Dead.
BESIDES these Statues, they did, in order to celebrate their memory, institute
combats of Gladiators: which they did in imitation of the Grecians, who
appointed Games at Nemaea in honor of Archemorus; and celebrated annual sports
and exercises at Jolcos in Thessaly, in honor of Acastus. We read likewise in
History, that in memory of Sciron they decreed solemn Games, which they called
Isthmia, from the place where they were celebrated. Those Games were chiefly
Tilting, running at the Ring, Wrestling, Fencing, besides combats and
skirmishes both by Sea and Land.

Their mourning.
AS to the time of Mourning, it was either longer or shorter, according to the
Quality of the person; though commonly it lasted not above nine days, as
appears by their Novendial, or nine-day-Sacrifices, which they offered to the
Manes or Ghosts of the deceased. Nevertheless, the more scrupulous sort of
people amongst them, who were willing to observe religiously the Institutions
of the Ancients, did continue the mourning much longer. By the Laws of Numa
women were to lament the Death of their Husbands; and Children their Parents, a
whole year; that is (according to the computation of those times) the space of
ten months: But it was not lawful for Husbands to do the same at the Death of
their Wives, or Children when they died before they were three years old; but
from three years to ten, Parents were allowed to mourn for them as many months,
as they had lived years.

Varrol. 4. Public and private concerns that put an end to their Mourning.
IT is also to be observed, that their Mourning oftentimes was broke off before
the time appointed by Law, and that upon the account of public, as well as
private occasions. The public were, either the intervening of their Lustrum,
or Year of Expiation, which was kept every five Years, at which time a Tribute
was levied, and the City expiated by Sacrifices; or for the performing of some
solemn Vow made by the Generals of their Army, as was that of Camillus, for the
taking of the City Veji; that of Papirius; upon his Expedition against the
Samnites: Of Marcellus, for the Booty taken from the Carthaginians at Nola, and
such like: Or because of the occurring Festival solemnities of the Goddess
Ceres: As upon this account it was, that the Mourning, begun for the slain in
the bloody Defeat at Cannae, lasted but thirty days. But yet it was only to Men
that this was forbidden; for as to Women, they had leave to continue their
mourning all the year round.

THE private causes were either the Birth of a Son; or the arrival of some near
Relations, come out of prison, or freed from bondage; or else the marriage of a
Daughter. In all which occasions they ceased to mourn for the Dead, that they
might not deny such reasonable rejoycings to the living.

The manner of their Burning of the Dead.
THE same Ceremonies before mentioned were used to those they Burned, that is,
as to their attending the Funerals, their Epitaphs, and Mourning: The
difference was only in the manner of their Wood-piles. These were made of very
dry wood, and very often of such as was aromatical and sweet-scented, besides
an abundance of Perfumes and odoriferous Oils that were poured out upon it,
(after the Corpse was laid down thereon) and a great many Presents brought by
their Relations and Friends. The Body was wrapped up in an Asbestin-cloth, made
of the stone called Amiantos, which resists the force of Fire; and so kept the
Ashes of the Corpse from being mixed with those of the Wood. The nearest kinsmen
put fire to the Wood-pile, turning their eyes from it; and when all was
consumed, they gathered up the Ashes themselves, and put them in an Earthenpot,
which they laid in a Tomb.

AND to make this Discourse the more complete, we must not forget to insert,
amongst these funeral honors, which were in some sort sufferable, those which
superstition did afterward introduce, by ranking them amongst the number of
the Gods, whom they themselves but a little before acknowledged to be but men,
and subject to all the infirmities of this life; which Apotheoses or Deifying
Ceremonies and Consecrations were by them chiefly conferred on their deceased
Emperors. Mourning and funeral Pomp for their Emperors.


Herod. Plut. in Marcel.
AS soon as any one of these was Dead, they caused his Image to be made of wax,
and dressed in his own Clothes; afterward they laid it upon a Bed of State in
the entrance of the Palace, where all the Senators and great Ladies came to
attend it, some of them being clad in Mourning, and others all in White, but
very plain, and without the least ornament. The Senators having taken their
places on the left hand, and the Ladies on the right, they continued there the
whole day, without speaking one word; and for the space of seven days ensuing
they put on a very sad countenance. During which time one of the most proper
and handsome youths, that could be found, attended constantly at his Boulster,
to drive the Flies away with a Fan of Peacock-feathers: His Physicians also
visited him every day, felt his Pulse, still saying, that he grew worse and
worse; and at last having declared him Dead, all the Shops throughout the City
were shut up immediately, every one ceasing from his work, and striving to
outvie one another in expressing their grief and sorrow. At last several young
Noblemen of the highest Quality took this Bed (together with the Corpse of the
deceased Emperor) on their shoulders, and first carried it to the Place, where
they were used to elect their Magistrates: Here they set it on a Throne, which
was erected in the midst, the Senators taking their seats round about it, and
the Ladies having placed themselves in certain Galleries, two Quires began a
mournful concert, whereof the one was composed of Boys, and the other of Girls,
who sang by turns the Praises of the late Emperor from two scaffolds on each
side of the Throne. Their Funeral Elogy.
These concerts were followed with an eloquent Oration, uttered by his
Successor, which after having been often interrupted, by the applause, as well as
lamentations of the Auditors, ended at last in a general mourning, accompanied
with most doleful outcries.

NO sooner was this noise over, but the Funeral-pomp began to advance. The
first that set forth were those that carried the Statues of all the Great Men,
that had commanded in the City, viz. of their Kings, Dictators, Consuls, and
Emperors. These Statues were accompanied with the representations of plain
imbossed work on Brass, of all the Provinces and principal Cities subject to
the Empire: After these came several that bare Standards; there being as many
of them, as there were different Provinces under the Roman Government.

AFTER all these illustrious marks of their Grandeur, followed the several
Companies of Tradesmen, every one in their rank and order. Then came the
Archers; and after them the Regiments of the Guards, with their Trumpeters: And
in the rear of all came a Cavalcade, consisting of young Noblemen, and last of
all many Chariots laden with all the Ornaments, Perfumes, and precious things
that were to be spent and consumed at the Funeral.

WHEN all this train was passed by; the Priests, and the Magistrates elect, did
again lift up the dead Body with the Bed of State on which it was laid, and
delivered the same to some Roman Knights, who as soon as they had taken it up
on their Shoulders, the whole Company began their march out of the City toward
the Field of Mars, some of the Senators walking immediately before the Bed of
State, and others behind it. In the midst of this Field there was a kind of
Square Tower of Wood erected, and on the top of it were four little Towers made
Taper or Spire-wise, every one of them less than the other, and all of
different heights; and on the top of the second of these Towers they placed the
Corpse. After which all the Persons of Quality having seated themselves upon
several Scaffolds, erected there for that purpose, beheld the Tiltings and
Races, that were run about the Wood-pile; the sight of which was very pleasant
and delightful: For besides the activity and nimbleness of those on Horseback,
and the several exercises of Footmen, there were many Triumphal Chariots,
which they did drive with the greatest swiftness imaginable, and then turned
them about in their full career. At length these Games, which they called
Pyrrhica, being ended, the new Emperor attended by the chief Magistrates, came
down from his Scaffold, and all of them having with their Torches set this
wooden Tower on fire, an Eagle flew out of the top of it; which was the mark of
the Divinity of the Deceased. The Apotheosis, or Canonization of their Emperors.
For they did persuade themselves, that this Eagle carried his Soul into
Heaven, there to take his place amongst the Gods: And from that time forwards
they gave him the compellation of Divus, which signifies a Demy-God; they
dedicated Temples and Altars, consecrated Priests, and ordained Sacrifices in
honor of him.

Val. Max. The Canonization of Empresses.
THE Apotheosis of Empresses was the same in all circumstances, except that
instead of an Eagle a Peacock was made use of, to mount their Souls to Heaven,
as we learn from the Medals of Live. l. 12.
Livia, Maximina, Faustina, Paulina, and several others, with this word on the
backside of them, [ Consecratio] which is the same with Apotheosis, or
Canonization.

Canonization of private Persons.
NEITHER were the Emperors only ranked amongst the Gods, but private Persons
also (as History acquaints us) have had the same Honors done to them. And
without speaking of the two Gracchi, to whom the People dedicated a Temple,
because they had lost their lives in their Service; don't we read that the
Emperor Adrian did the same to that beautiful Antinous, whom he so
extravagantly loved? For he did not content himself to confer on him the honor
of being Canonized after his Death; but he also built a City, which he called
by his Name, thereby to immortalize his Memory.

The common way of Burying their Vestals.
NOW a word or two must be spoken of the Ceremonies used at the Burial of the
Vestals. In how great esteem and veneration these Virgins (to whose care the
keeping of the Sacred Fire was committed) were amongst the Romans, is well
known. For they not only rendered them the highest marks of honor they could
possibly express, whenever they chanced to meet with any of them in the
Streets; but also gave them the first places in all Assemblies, both in their
Temples and Theaters. They had always a Gentleman Usher going before them; yea
so great deference was given to their presence, that if they accidentally met
with a Criminal, led to the place of Execution, he could not then be put to
Death; this happy encounter procuring the poor wretch his Pardon.

THERE was also the greatest care imaginable taken in the choice of them: They
never consecrated any to this high charge, but from Six Years of Age to Ten.
Moreover they were to be without any blemish, neither stammering, deaf,
crooked, lame, nor maimed; Their Parents also were to be free, having never
been bound in any sort of Servitude, or employed in base and mean Offices, for
their Father was to have been either a Priest, Augur, or Epulo. The Girl, who
had all these advantages, was by her Relations conducted to the Porch of the
Temple of Vesta, where she was received by the High Priest, who consecrated her
for the space of thirty Years to the service of that Goddess; during which time
she was to keep her Virginity inviolable. Men were not suffered to speak with
them, except in the Daytime; and very severe punishments were decreed against
those, who entered their Lodgings by Night.

WHEN they happened to Decease in this state of Virginity, they were not only
Buried with great Pomp; but had also the peculiar privilege allowed them (as
well as Heroes) of having their Tombs within the City.

Manner of Burying unchaste Vestals.
BUT on the contrary, when any of them was found guilty of breaking her Vow, by
incontinency and whoredom, as it was looked upon as one of the greatest
misfortunes that could befall the City, so was she likewise severely punished
for it, by the most shameful Burial in the World. They laid her all at length
on a Bier, as if she had been Dead, covered all over with many Clothes, which
were tied fast and close about her, that she might be neither seen, nor heard.
And being thus swadled about, she was carried from the Temple of Vesta to the
Gate called Collina, attended by her Relations and Friends, all in tears; after
them came the Priests with sad and dejected looks, without speaking one word.
Hard by this Gate, within the Walls, there was a little hillock, and underneath
it a very deep Cave, which served for a Grave to the Plin. l. 7.
unchaste Vestals. As soon as they were arrived at this place, the poor wretch
was loosed of her Swadling-cloaths, and nothing left her save a great Vail,
which covered her Head and Face, that she could not be seen: Then she was taken
down from the Bier, and the High Priest having muttered a few words with his
back toward her, she was taken by the Executioner, and let down by a Ladder to
the bottom of this Grot or Cave, where was set ready for her a Bed, a burning
Lamp and a little Bread, with three Pots full of Water, Milk and Oil; and
having stopped the hole, there they let her perish without any pity; for it was
not lawful for them to shed their blood: And so solemn was the Mourning on
these Days, that none durst either work, or divert themselves; neither was any
thing to be heard throughout the whole City, but sighing, cries, and
lamentations.

CHAP. IV. Funerals of the Persians.
IT is matter of astonishment, considering the Persians have ever had the
renown of being one of the most civilized Nations in the world, that
notwithstanding they should have used such barbarous customs about the Dead
Diod. l. 17.
as are set down in the Writings of some Historians; and the rather because at
this day there are still to be seen among them those remains of Procop. De Bell.
Pers. l. 1. Agath. l. 2.
Antiquity, which do fully satisfy us, that their Tombs have been very
magnificent. And yet nevertheless, if we will give credit to Procopius and
Agathias, the Persians were never wont to bury their Dead Bodies, so far were
they from bestowing any Funeral Honors upon them: The Persians exposed their
Dead in the open field instead of burying them.
But, as these Authors tell us, they exposed them stark naked in the open
fields, which is the greatest shame our Laws do allot to the most infamous
Criminals, by laying them open to the view of all upon the high ways: Their
foolish Opinions.
Yea in their opinion it was a great unhappiness, if either Birds or Beasts did
not devour their Carcases; and they commonly made an estimate of the Felicity
of these poor Bodies, according as they were sooner or later made a prey of.
Concerning these, they resolved that they must needs have been very bad indeed,
since even the Beasts themselves would not touch them; which caused an extreme
sorrow to their Relations, they taking it for an ill boding to their Family,
and an infallible presage of some great misfortune hanging over their heads;
for they persuaded themselves, that the Souls which inhabited those Bodies
being dragged into Hell, would not fail to come and trouble them; and that
being always accompanied with the Devils, their Tormentors, they would
certainly give them a great deal of disturbance.

AND on the contrary, when these Corpses were presently devoured, their joy was
very great, they enlarged themselves in praises of the Deceased; every one
esteemed them undoubtedly happy, and came to congratulate their relations on
that account: For as they believed assuredly, that they were entered into the
Elysian Fields, so they were persuaded, that they would procure the same bliss
to all those of their Family.

THEY also took a great delight to see Skeletons and Bones scatered up and down
in the fields, whereas we can scarcely endure to see those of Horses and Dogs
used so. And these remains of Humane Bodies, (the sight whereof gives us so
much horror, that we presently bury them out of our sight, whenever we find
them elsewhere, than in Charnel-houses or Churchyards) were the occasion of
their greatest joy; because they concluded from thence the happiness of those
that had been devoured, wishing after their Death to meet with the like good
luck.

Sick Soldiers exposed to the wild Beasts.
THE same Historians inform us, that when any private Soldier was sick in
their Armies, and in outward appearance past recovery, they carried him to the
next Wood or Forest, leaving with him only a piece of Bread, a little Water,
and a Stick, that he might, as long as he should have any strength, defend
himself from the wild Beasts, which most commonly devoured Herodot. l. 3.
these poor wretches; and if it chanced that any one of them escaped, and came
back to his own house, all the people ran away from him, as if they had seen
some Ghost or Devil; and did not suffer him to converse with any body, till
after he had been purified and expiated by the Priests; as if having been so
near Death, he were thereby (according to their opinion) become unfit to live
any longer; for they supposed that he must needs have had great converse with
Demons, since notwithstanding his extreme sickness he had been able to defend
himself against the wild Beasts, and recovered his strength, without any man's
help or assistance.

AND howsoever barbarous and inhumane these customs may seem to us, yet were
Just. l. 19
they amongst them so strictly observed, that they condemned to Death one of
their most Illustrious Captains called Seosez, only because he had interred his
Wife; Exposing of Dead Bodies most strictly observed by the Persians.
Burial amongst them having (as they said) always been contrary to the Religion
of their Country. And for further confirmation of what has been said, the
Historian Menander Menand. in Excerpt. de Legate.
assures us, that one of the Principal Conditions in the Treaty of Peace,
concluded between the Emperor Justian, and Cosrhoez, one of their Kings, was
that the Christians of his Kingdom should be permitted to bury their Dead.

Burning of the Dead abhorred by them.
NEITHER did they less abominate the Burning of the Dead, which was the cause,
why in the beginning of that Monarchy, King Cambyses Just. l. 19.
had well nigh made his People to rise in Rebellion against him, for having
caused the body of Amasis King of Egypt, to be dug out of his Grave, and
afterward Burnt with great pomp and ceremony; they openly declaring, that this
was to give a very dangerous example to Posterity; since instead of being a
Conservator of Strab. l. 15. Cic. l. Tuscul. l. 1.
the Laws of the Land, which did not allow either of Burials or Burning, he was
the first that brake them.

HOWEVER (not to dispute the veracity of the forementioned Historians) certain
it is, that this inhumane custom of exposing the Dead was never long in use
amongst the Persians: Burying in use also amongst them.
For besides that stately piece of Antiquity, called the Forty Pillars, whereof
the magnificent Remains are seen in these our days, in the very same place,
where the famous Persepolis once stood; we read in Cicero's Tusculan Questions,
as likewise in Strabo and Herodotus, that in time past these People were wont
to cover the Corpses with Earth only, without any other ceremony or expense; or
else (after they had covered them over with Wax, to preserve their shape and
figure) shut 'em up sometimes in Caves and hollow places of Rocks, and
sometimes in Tombs. And Xenophon Xenoph. l. 2.
puts us out of all doubt concerning this matter, when he tells us, that Cyrus
expressly forbad his Children to put up his Corpse in any rich Coffin, but barely
to commit it to the ground. The same thing is confirmed to us by Justin and
Quintus Curtius, speaking of old Darius Son to Hystaspes, and Father to Xerxes,
who (says he) having subdued the Carthaginians, abolished the Custom they had
of Burning their Dead; and instead thereof ordained That of Burials. The other
( viz. Quintus Curtius) in the exact Description he gives of the Defeat of the
latter Darius, and the Conquest of his Country by Alexander the Great, tells
us, that this incomparable Conqueror having totally routed and destroyed the
Persian Army at the Pillars of Amanus, upon the News he received, that the King
was killed there, presently dispatched Leonatus, one of his principal
Courtiers, to his Mother and Wife, to condole with, and comfort them; and that
these Princesses in the trouble and confusion wherein they were, by reason of
their extreme affliction, thinking at first that he was sent thither to
dispatch them, fell down at his feet, and with tears besought him, not to slay
them, before they had buried the Body of that poor unhappy Prince. Which
Opinion is the more confirmed, because Alexander having afterward delivered
Bessus, who had killed Darius, into these Princesses hands, they thought they
could not inflict upon him a more cruel punishment, than by causing his Body to
be cut into a thousand pieces, and scattered abroad in the Fields. We also
learn from Appian and Plutarch, that Artaxerxes having made the Chief of the
Grecian Commanders his prisoners, who had taken the Party of his Brother Cyrus
against him, caused them to dye a shameful death, and exposed their Corpses to
the devouring Beasts. So that we must needs conclude, that at least in those
days the casting abroad of Dead Bodies was accounted a Punishment, and not an
Honor amongst them.

Their Mourning.
DURING the time of their Mourning they wore clothes of a brown color; and not
only the Men and Women were shaved, and had their hair cut off, but generally
all their Beasts and Cattle were shorn too. Ceremonies of the Persians at this
day.
But as they have in these latter Ages, embraced the Law of Mahumet, so have
they altered their Customs and Ceremonies. They can bury no Body, except they
have first demanded, and obtained the King's Leave for it; or if they be too
far from the Court, the Lord Lieutenant's, or Principal Magistrates; which
asking of Leave is but a Formality, it being never denied. As Soon as this is
granted, if the Party be never so little considerable, they carry some
Standards before his Corpse, which are followed by Saddle-horses, charged with
their Arms, viz. Swords, Darts, Arrows and Turbants. Those that lead these
Horses are naked to the Wast. Then come their Friends, who besides their
nakedness, give themselves large gashes, out of which the blood runs from all
parts. They all march before the Body, round about which their Priests are,
singing Dirges, or Prayers for the Dead, which are interrupted and blended with
the sad lamentations of the deceased parties Relations, who follow after the
Corpse, at the head of a great throng of people, who have all their Turbants
untied, and hanging loose on their shoulders. In this order they proceed, till
they come to a River, or any other place where much water is, and there wash
the Body, having first placed it under a Tent. Then they march on toward the
place of Burial, which is most commonly a Mosquee, in case the Person deceased
be of Quality, or if of a low rank, the next Churchyard. As for their Kings,
they are all intombed by themselves, in a particular Mosquee, which is covered
without with green Tiles, and within with plates of Silver; their Tombs being
ranged all along the wall in a most curious order, and over-laid with the most
rich Silk, Stuffs, and cloth of Gold, that can be had.

CHAP. V. The Funerals of the Turks.
HAVING just now spoken of the Mahometans, with respect to their Ceremonies
about the Dead, we shall now (to avoid confusion) proceed to the Funerals of
the Turks, who are the principal Sect among them.

Their bewailing of the Dead.
IT is not a hard matter with them to know how many dye in a City; For as soon
as any one is Dead, the Women begin with loud cries to bewail them, and by this
sad noise they gather their Neighbors together, who continue the same doleful
Lamentations, relating with tears in their Eyes, the good and noble Actions of
the Deceased. Thevet's Voyage.
And these Lamentations which may be heard very far off, are continued to the
very Place where the Corpse is designed to be buried: Which mourning solemnity,
some do recommence at the Years end, and so continue the same by intervals for
several Years together, proportionably to the Love they bear to the Party
deceased. They carry also many good things, and varieties of Meats to the
Grave, which they distribute to those that pass by, that they may mourn with
them; and do hire Weeping-women, to make this Ceremony the more doleful.

Their way of Burying the Dead.
AS to their way of Burying, it is no less singular. They wash the Corpse, and
shave all its Hair off; Then they wrap it in a Linen Cloth, which they have
besprinkled with Soap-suds, and afterward with Rose Water; and thus lay it
down stretched out at length in a Coffin, (which they expose to the view of all
comers, in the Entry of their House) not lying on its Back, or Belly, but on
its right side, with the Face turned to the South, as if looking toward Mecha;
a City, which they have a great veneration for; it being the Native Place of
their Prophet. This Coffin is covered with a Canopy of diverse Colors,
according to the different Rank or Quality of the Person. If it be for a
Soldier, it is red; if for a Priest, green; and if the Party was neither of
these, then they make use of a black covering.

IT is likewise to be observed, that when they wrap their Dead in a
Winding Sheet, they let their Feet and Heads be at liberty, that they may the
better, and with the more ease kneel down, when the Angels come to examine
them; leaving them a lock or tuft of Hair on the top of their Heads, that the
Angels, who make them kneel whilst they interrogate them, may by that Lock lay
hold of them: Their foolish Fancies touching the Examen of Souls.
For they are of opinion, that as soon as the Dead is in the Grave, his Soul
comes into his Body again, and that two Angels in a dismal, horrid and
frightful shape, presenting themselves to him, ask him these Questions, Who is
thy God? What is thy Religion? Who is thy Prophet? To which he ought to answer
thus; My God is the true God; My Religion is the true Religion, and my Prophet
is MAHVMET. This is the only answer, that can secure him at this pinch; and the
very same (as they say) which all those, who have lived well, do return to the
Angels. Now as soon as he has given this answer, a lovely Creature is brought
to him (which are his good Deeds) and remains with him, to comfort and delight
him until Doom's Day, when they shall both enter into Paradise.

BUT if the dead Person know himself guilty, he is so possessed with fear, that
he cannot give so just and satisfactory an Answer; and thereupon is presently
severely punished; for those black Angels (as they say) strike him with a fiery
Club; and that with such violence, that the fierceness of the stroke makes the
ground to sink under him, where he is so extremely pressed and squeezed, that
all the Milk he has sucked from his Nurse, runs out through his Nose. After
all this comes to him an ugly Creature (which is nothing else but his evil
actions) and abides with him, to torment him until the Day of Judgment, when
both of them are to be cast into Hell, there to endure greater Punishments.
Wherefore, to the end the deceased may be delivered from these Black Angels,
their Friends, that come to weep and lament at their Graves, do encourage them,
crying continually with a loud voice, Be not afraid, but answer boldly.

Their foolish Opinions concerning Good and Bad.
ANOTHER distinction no less ridiculous than this, do they make between good
and wicked Persons. They say, that at the day of Doom Georg. eprer. Turc. c. 5.
Mahumet shall come to the Valley of Jehoshaphat, to see whether JESUS CHRIST
shall judge Men in Righteousness; and that after Judgment past, he shall be
changed into a white Sheep, in whose Fleece all the Turks shall be hidden, as
so many small worms; and that those who shall fall off at his shaking of
himself, shall be damned; but that such as shall stick close to him, shall be
saved; because he will carry them along with him into Paradise.

Their attending the Corpse to the Grave.
AS for what concerns their manner of accompanying the Corpse to the Grave, it
is very plain and simple. They carry it out of the House, the Head foremost;
the Lonicer. Chron. Turc. lib. 2.
Priests go before it, singing Hymns or Prayers; and the Relations and Friends
follow after, bitterly wailing and lamenting. At their return, they feast the
Priests, and reward them with a Piece of Money, if the Party deceased was rich;
but if he were poor, they go through the Streets and other public Places, and
beg of the People what is due to them on this account.

The Graves of great Persons, and the manner of their Burials.
AS for great Personages, they differently make choice of their Sepulchers,
according to their various inclinations and fancies: Some of 'em cause
themselves to be buried in curious and pleasant Gardens, planted with abundance
of Trees, and embellished with Leunclav. Hist. Musul.
Flowers; which Gardens they encompass about with strong Walls, that no Beasts
may enter them, walk over their Graves, or annoy and defile them with their
dung; this seeming an insufferable thing to them, even after their death, as if
they supposed themselves to be sensible in their Graves. Besides, they build
great Almshouses near the place where they intend to be buried, and bequeath
large Revenues to the same, for the relief and maintenance of the Poor.

OTHERS order their Coffins to be carried into Bellon. 3. Singul. Chron. Turc.
l. 2.
Mosquees, where they are placed on the ground, covered with their Canopy and
Turbant, with several Lamps, continually burning about them. After this manner
are the Graves of all their Emperors most commonly adorned, and particularly
that of Mahumet himself at Medina. True it is, that his Coffin has no Alcorans
fastened to it, because he being looked upon as their Prophet, they don't think
it necessary to pray for his Soul, since it is he that saves others; Elias
Gramma^.
though those Books are always affixed to all other Tombs, for the convenience
of them that come to pray there; and some of these are continually attended by
people, who out of the said Books read prayers by turns, both day and night;
for which they are paid out of a large revenue the deceased Prince has
appointed for that purpose, to the end the Prayers for the Rest of his Soul
might never cease.

The place and manner of Burying the common sort.
AS to the common sort, holes are dug for them in their public
Burying-places, wherein they being laid down, and covered over with Earth, two
small Pillars, or two pieces of Wood, are Bar. Dec. 1. l. 1.
erected upon their Graves; the one being set at their feet, and the other at
their head. But there are some, who being desirous to distinguish themselves
from others, and able to be at some cost, have Tombs made for them, much after
the fashion of Altars, in the said public places.

Their respect for all manner of Graves.
AND so great is the Veneration they have, not only for their own Sepulchers,
but those also of all other Nations, that the robbing, or violating of any of
them, is held amongst them the highest Crime a man can commit: Georg. ep. rer.
Turc. c. 7.
As we may plainly see in Thevet's Cosmography, who tells us, that one of their
Ottomans, called Selim, in his Expedition against Egypt, from whence he
returned Victorious, and Master of the whole Country, caused several of his own
Soldiers to be severely punished in Syria, only for having opened the Grave of
a Jewish Physician, upon the hopes of finding some treasure there; fourteen of
which were hanged; three empaled, and the rest put to death by diverse Torments.

Several instances to this purpose.
BESIDES, the same Emperor seeing many Graves of the Eulog. l. 1.
Christian Princes in Jerusalem, who under Godfrey of Bouillon did recover the
Holy Land from the hands of the Turks, and who had been the cause of so great
defeats they had received in several bloody Battles, did nevertheless, under
great penalties, prohibit the touching, or disturbing of them: For (said he)
all Graves, even those of our Enemies, are esteemed in our Religion as Sacred
things. In short, they are so tender and nice in this Point, that they will not
suffer any body on horseback to ride through their Churchyards. Which was the
reason why Monsieur de Villamonte hardly escaped being stoned to death in the
same City; because he had rid through a Place where some poor Turks were
formerly Buried; the Place being still accounted Sacred by them, though there
was not the least sign of any Grave there.

To be deprived of Burial accounted a great misfortune amongst them.
MOREOVER, they account it one of the greatest misfortunes that can possibly
befall them, to be deprived of Burial. Thus we read, that that famous General
Zubienzar (who continued the siege of Constantinople for seven years together)
being shot with an Arrow, and finding himself ready to give up the Ghost,
charged his Soldiers courageously to continue the Attaque, till they had laid
his Body so deep in the ground, that his Foes might not be able to discover,
and find out the place where he was Buried. And it was upon the same account,
that Solomon dying in the territories of the Christians, into which he was
advanced with a potent Army, designing to spoil and make havoc of them,
strictly commanded his Captains to convey his Body into his own Dominions, that
the Christians might not offer any injury to his Tomb.

BUT what does fill me with greater wonder, is the respect which one of their
Princes, Noradine by Name, had for the Sepulcher of Baudouin, the Third King of
Jerusalem; for he being dead at Beryte, and his Body with great pomp carried
from thence to the Burying place of his Ancestors, some advised him to take
that opportunity, to invade the Christian Countries, and avenge himself of the
many affronts he had received from them. But so far was he from acquiescing in
their advice, which seemed very promising and advantageous, that he reproached
them with the little respect and consideration they had for the Dead; adding,
that for his part he had rather lose the Empire of the World, than disturb the
Grave of any one whatsoever.

CHAP. VI. Funerals of the Chinese.
NEVER were any People in the World so nice and scrupulous in this Matter, as
the Chinese: For Pint. Voyag.
they not only (every one of them) keep in their houses a Book containing all
the Rites and Ceremonies used at their Burials, which they read over as often as
any one is Dead, Their mourning.
to the end they may the more exactly pay every the least punctilio of Duty and
Honor due to the Deceased; and rather love to exceed what is prescribed in the
said Ceremonial, than to omit any the least circumstance therein set down: But
though their Mourning be very long and tedious, it lasting no less than three
years, and very troublesome, as tying them to the strict observation of most
severe Laws; yet none amongst them has, to this day, ever complained of their
rigor; but on the contrary, they think themselves most happy, if they can but
return their Parents an acknowledgment suitable to the pains they have taken
for them in their infancy; in bewailing them the space of three whole years,
because during the same term of time they took so much care of their education,
in their most tender and helpless years. They cut off part of their Hair, and
dress themselves in a course linen cloth; they are never seen at public
Sports, and solemn Rejoycings; they cease from prosecuting their Adversaries,
and suing for Judgment against them; and if they be Magistrates, they lay down
their Office, during the whole time of their Mourning; and he would be esteemed
a most base and infamous person, who should omit the least of these
circumstances. Besides, Children are not permitted to marry, before they are
out of Mourning; and if any during this time contract a marriage in private,
and it come to the Justice's knowledge, besides the fine laid upon them, the
Marriage is declared void. Neither is it lawful for those that are married to
lie with their Wives, there being penalties appointed by the Law against such
Women, as are found with Child within the foresaid interval. In short, all
manner of rejoicing is, during all that time, so strictly forbidden, that they
who ride on horseback are not permitted to use a Collar of Bells, wherewith
they adorn their Horses, though they be so much in fashion there among
Travelers, that neither rich nor poor do ever ride without them.

Marin. relat.
AS for the Fathers mourning for their Children; Brothers for Brothers, and
Nephews for Uncles, it does not last so long. But the mourning of a Husband for
his Wife, or Wife for her Husband, is as long and tedious, as is that
forementioned of the Children for their Parents.

Feasts for the Deceased.
THE first Duty they pay to their Deceased Relation, after they have closed his
Eyes, is to furnish two Tables with all sorts of Meats, and the best Wine; one
whereof they set near the Bed, on which the Dead is lying, his Kinsmen and
Friends discoursing him, and inviting him to eat and drink with them, as if he
were still alive; and the other in the Antichamber, which is no less well
decked and provided, for the entertainment of those that come to condole with
them. But true it is, that these Viands that are equally dainty, are eaten in a
very different manner. Some hours after the Table spread for the Relations of
the Deceased is taken away, little of the Meat being touched; because these
poor Creatures, in the midst of their affliction, and at the sight of so sad
and doleful an object, find more ease and satisfaction in weeping, than in
eating; whereas the other, though plentifully and splendidly furnished, is
scarce sufficient for the Guests; who for the most part are smell-feasts, and
good-fellows that repair thither, rather to make good cheer, and stuff their
bellies, than to express any sorrow for, or share in the affliction of the
Family.

THEY keep the same Feasts also, though they be far from their own Country, as
soon as they are informed of the Death of any of their near Relations: Upon the
first news they receive of it, they cause the Name of the Dead to be written on
a board; to which they address themselves, and speak, as if the Body were
present, and make all the haste they can to recover home, in order to acquit
themselves in their Duty. And in case it happen, that for a long time they
receive no news from their Relations abroad, insomuch as they have reason to
suspect their death, if after they have advised with Soothsayers, and made all
possible enquiries, they cannot procure their Bodies (being Dead) then they make
an Image of Plaster, and pay to it the same Honors, which they would have paid
to the Corpse it self.

Their Singing and Praying for the Dead.
AS soon as these Feasts are over, the Bonzes, which are their Priests, are
called in, to rehearse the usual Prayers, which they do in so sad and mournful
a tune, and withal so extremely harsh and frightful, that one would rather
think it to be the howling of Devils, than the singing of Priests. This done,
they appoint the day and hour of the Burial; after which, every body being
withdrawn, they leave the Corpse in the hands of such, who are to take care of
preparing it, in order to its Interment.

Their way of Burying Corpses.
THESE do wash it with sweet waters, dress it in his finest Clothes, and put it
up in a Coffin, Nic. Trig. de reb sing.
with several precious things, which are given to the Deceased by his
Relations. And to the end that neither Devils, nor Men should dare meddle with
them, they also put into the Coffin some horrid and frightful shapes, which
they say are very sure Guardians, and scarecrows against all manner of Robbers.
How great Riches are consumed and spent in these Funerals, is almost
incredible; for besides that these Coffins are often of Gold or Silver, many
Jewels and precious Stones of great value are together enclosed with them.

Their Superstition about the time of their Burials.
NOR do they ever bury their Dead in those Years where the last number is the
same with that of the Year of their birth. For example, Idem ibid.
if the Party were born in one thousand six hundred and five, or fifteen if you
will, and he happen to dye in the Year one thousand six hundred thirty five,
forty five, or in any of a like denomination; they keep the Corpse all that Year
over, being in continual expectation, that as his Soul came first into his Body
in a Year of that number, so may it the same Year return and be reunited again
with it. And this foolish belief does so far prevail with them, that when ever
it happens so, they dare not inter the Body but the year after.

Their foolish fancies touching the return of the Dead.
WITH a like ridiculous and vain Opinion do they entertain their fancies,
concerning the return of the Dead into their Houses once a Year, which they
imagine comes to pass in the very last Night of the Year; and to the end their
deceased Friends and Relations may, without any more ado enter-in as soon as
they come, they leave their Doors open Pint. relat.
all that Night. In the mean time they make their Beds ready for them, and set
a Basin full of Water in the Chamber (to wash their feet) and whatsoever else
they may have occasion for. Thus with great stilness and silence they expect
their coming till Midnight, when supposing them arrived, they complement them,
by telling them how glad they are of their Company; and thereupon light several
Wax-Tapers, that are placed on an Altar, which they have for that use; on which
they burn a composition of sweet-scented Drugs, with a thousand like Perfumes;
then they with great reverence bow themselves to them, praying them to remember
their Children, Nephews or other Relations that Year; that by their means they
may obtain of the Gods, health, strength, and a long and prosperous Life, with
plenty of worldly Goods. Now though this may seem a ridiculous custom, yet the
neglecting or omitting of the same, is reck'ned amongst them a most high and
unpardonable crime; and of which, if any should be guilty, they would not fail
to lie under a continual apprehension, that the Dead would some time or other
avenge that impiety, and severely punish them for the same.

BUT to return from this digression; we will now speak of the end and upshot of
their Funeral Ceremonies. The manner of their attending the Corpse to the Grave.
The day on which the Corpse is to be Buried, they early in the Morning give
public notice of the Hour, when it is to be carried to its Grave, to have the
greater concourse of People to attend it. Didac. relat.
In the front of all this Procession, march Colors and Standards, which are
followed by Men playing on Instruments, some on Drums, others on Ho-boys,
others on Bag-pipes, and others on Trumpets; after these come up a Company of
Dancers, who are dressed in mighty strange and antic habits, like Stage Players,
leaping and dancing all the way in a very ridiculous manner. After this third
Company, comes another, that is no less singular in its kind: They are a number
of Men, armed with several sorts of Weapons, some with Symetars, others with
large Shields and Bucklers, and others with Clubs, whose massy end is stuck
full of Iron-spikes; these are seconded by others that carry Firearms, which
they continually discharge; and the Priests, who come next after them, do cry
and bawl as loud as ever they can; which noise though very great, is still
increased by the sad and sonorous lamentations both of the Relations and People
attending; insomuch, that if there ever was a mad concert, this may well be
called so; besides that, this antic mixture of Players, Dancers, Soldiers,
Musicians and Mourners, makes it the most ridiculous show in the World.

AS to the Bodies of the Rich, they are most commonly carried into the Country;
every one of them making choice of a place of Burial for himself in his own
ground; by reason they hope to enjoy their Estates in another life, and
accordingly take possession of the same, by their being Buried there. Upon
which account it is, that when a Grave is once made in any Land or Possession,
the Kindred of the Dead are, from that time forward, divested of the liberty to
dispose of it to others. And as during their Lives they spend much time and
money toward the preparing of those Graves, which after their Death are yet
further enriched and embellished by their Friends and Relations, so are they
the most magnificent and stately structures that can ever be seen.

Foolish and superfluous Expense about their Dead.
BESIDES all this, the Relations of the Dead, do put themselves to other great
expenses, to Id. ibid.
supply them with goods in the other world. In the midst of some public place
they erect vast Buildings, whose Fabric is both curious and costly; and having
written the Name of the Deceased upon them, they burn them to ashes, being of
that belief, that the same pass to the other world, and that their departed
Friends take possession of them, as if they were made over to 'em by a Letter
of Attorney.

IT remains yet, that we speak of two sorts of Burials which are in use among
them, viz. of the meaner sort, and of their Kings. The former of which are
interred in public Burying-places, without much ceremony or expense, their
belief being, that they must be poor in the other World, as they have been in
this.

Peculiar Ceremonies used at the Death of their Kings.
AS for their Kings, though they be interred according to the way prescribed by
the Religion of the Country, yet there are particular Ceremonies observed
Marin. relat.
for them, which are not used to any other, though they be of the highest rank.
As Soon as they have given up the Ghost, they are with a great deal of pomp and
splendour, laid on a Bed of State, placed in the midst of the great Hall of
their Palace; for besides that the said Bed is made of the most rare and costly
wood, it is all lined and garnished within with cloth of Gold, whose edges hang
down to the ground. Then comes his Successor accompanied with his Brothers (if
he has any) all of them clothed in Sackcloth, and girded with Ropes, with a
small twisted Cord about their heads, who after they have, with humble
obeisance, paid their reverence to the Corpse, and by their weeping and dejected
countenances, declared how sensibly they are afflicted for the Death of so
great, and so good a Prince, they presently withdraw, and cause their Hair to
be cut off, by one of their chief Mandarins, or Courtiers.

IN this mourning habit they return again the next day to the Palace, where
having a second time, in the same manner as before, paid their duty to the
Corpse, they transfer it themselves into a portable house, where they lay the
Coffin on a Table gilded all over, round about which are set several pots of
Flowers, that together with a great number of Censers, and Perfuming-pans,
exhale a sweet scent all over the place, wherein nothing is wanting, that may
render it every way admirable; there not being ought else to be seen, but the
dazzling luster of Gold, Silver, and precious Stones, intermixed with the light
of many thousands of Virgin-wax-Tapers.

Their Funeral procession, and attendance.
THEN the Funeral procession is appointed in order to the burying of the Corpse.
But before it commenceth, the Princes call to them three Persons of the highest
Quality in the whole Kingdom, whom they choose to attend the Body to the Grave
(because they cannot do it themselves) and take their Oaths of them, that they
shall not only discharge their duty therein, with all possible Glory and
magnificence, but withal hide the place so carefully, that none but those of
the Royal Family may ever come to the knowledge of it. Which Custom of
concealing the Sepulchers of their Kings, is by them observed, because they
apprehend the immense Treasures they bury with them, would otherwise be stolen
away.

THUS having by the solemn Oath of these Commissioners, provided against that
fear, they cause the signal of the procession to be given by the confused noise
of a great number of Drums. And the Soldiers of the Guard, both Musketeers
and Halberdeers, to the number of fifteen thousand, every one of them clad in a
long dark blue Gown, with a Cap of the same, rank themselves into rows, making
a lane down to the River, where the Corpse is to imbark; for commonly the Bodies
of their Sovereigns are transmitted into remote Countries. The ways being thus
cleared of people, and open for a free passage, the Funeral March begins, with
a Chariot charged with a great Column, a-round which the King's Life, Age, and
Virtues, with the most remarkable of his Exploits, are written in Gold and
Silver Letters, and on the top of it three Globes of Gold and Silver are set,
one upon another. After this comes another Chariot, in a manner all of Gold,
which carries the imbossed picture of a City. Then advances a third, that bears
the Royal Throne, all of Gold and Ivory, whereon is laid the Crown of the late
King. But all these Machines, though mavelous rich and costly, are not to be
compared with that Mausoleum, or portable House, in which the Corpse is laid:
Immediately before which, advances a great number of Musicians, who, without
singing, play in concert to the sighs and lamentations of the Assembly; on
either side of it, the Eunuchs, and other chief Officers of the Crown do
attend; and the new King, with the Princes his Brothers, dressed as you have
heard before, walk after barefooted, having false Hair on their heads, and
counterfeit white Beards, with a Pilgrims Staff in their hand, as if they
intended to signify by this poor equipage, that in losing their King they had
lost all. The Queens and other Ladies of the Court, to the number of eight or
nine hundred, clad all in White, with Vails of the same color, accompany them,
together with more than a thousand Mandarins, wh have a course linen cloth
carelessly wrapped about their body, much like a hair-cloth; or else are apparel'd
with a covering made of barks or leaves of Trees. And last of all, four
thousand Armed men bring up the rear of this great and pompous Procession.

AS soon as the Body arrives at the River, it is saluted with the discharging
of the Guns from three Galleys, which attend there on purpose, and with great
volleys of shot from the band of Musketeers. The chief of which, called the
Galley Royal, that is appointed to carry the Corpse (besides that a great part
of it is covered with hangings of Cloth of Gold) has all its Rowing-benches
decked with the most rich Persian Carpets, and the Rowers in the most splendid
garb imaginable, of diverse colors. As for the other two, whereof the one
carries the City, and the other the Mausoleum, they are both gilt all over
without and within, from the Stern to the Prow.

AS soon as these Galleys are put off, from shore, the King and all his Court
vying to outdo one another, in demonstrations of the affliction they conceive
for losing so great, and so good a Master, follow them with their Eyes, as far
as they can, with all possible expressions of (...) excessive sorrow; and when
they are got out of sight, they return to the Palace, from whence the King
issues out his Proclamation for the solemnizing of a general Mourning
throughout the Kingdom; which Mourning lasts three whole Years, during which
time no body dares, either dance, sing, or play upon any Instrument.

SOME time after, the King, to discharge himself of the obligation of a Present
he ows his Predecessor, causes the representation of a whole Kingdom, or of an
Army encamped under their Tents, or of a large City only, to be erected in the
midst of some large place; and after having spent abundance of riches about the
building and furnishing of these Machines, they are by his order set on fire,
to the end his Father or Predecessor may receive and enjoy them in the other
World.

AND what is yet more ridiculous in this ceremony, is, that before he thus
foolishly cause the aforesaid Machines to be set on fire, he formally buys the
same of some persons that are on purpose appointed to be within them. The
particular circumstances of which take as follows: The King advances to the
door, and by his order, a Musician delivers himself with a tunable singing
voice to this purpose. There was some time ago a most rich, wise, and Puissant
King, who having laid down his life in this World, to enjoy Immortality in the
other, and consequently divested himself of all his Estates and Dominions, in
favor of his Children, without reserving any thing to himself of all those
immense Estates he possessed here: And it being noised abroad, that he is now
solitary and wandering in a strange Country, without Soldiers to guard him,
without Horses or Elephants, wherewithal to defend himself: Without a Train and
Equipage suitable to his Grandeur, and without a Palace for the place of his
abode; the report of this sumptuous Building has drawn us hither, with
intention to purchase it: If therefore he be willing to part with it, whom it
belongs to, he will very much consult his own interest in so doing, we being
resolved to spare nothing to procure it, that thereby we may express the love
we have still for our deceased Father. To which the people that are within
answer in a like musical tone, that they are fully satisfied with the offer;
and thereupon the price being agreed on both hands, the Prince makes his
entrance into, and takes possession of it, in the Name of his Father. After
this placing himself in the Tent Royal, if it be an Army encamped; or in the
chief City, if it be a Kingdom; or in the Palace, if it be only a City; he
there, together with his whole Court, hear kneeling the recital of the old
King's Life, which being ended, he causes the Machines to be set on fire,
amidst the confused noise of Trumpets, and other Instruments.

The magnificence of their Graves.
AS for the magnificence of their Graves, it is such, as cannot be sufficiently
described. Nothing like or near it, has not only ever been seen in Pint. Voyag.
Europe, or recorded in History; but it is even hard to imagine what we are
told concerning it, by those that have seen them. Anthony de Faria, a
Portuguese, who in his Voyages accidentally discovered and landed in this
concealed Isle, where their Royal Tombs are, has left us a most stupendous
account of them. He calls the Isle Calempluy, which he says lies at the mouth
of a large River, where it disembogues it self into the Sea, in the extreme
parts of China Eastward; being a place, which by rocks is made, in a manner,
inaccessible, and which the lofty Cliffs, that surround it on every side, do
conceal from the Eye of those that sail by it; the swift current of the River
contributing also very much to its secrecy. He adds, that that Isle is but a
mile round, and is environed on the waterside with a wall of Jasper, flanked
with a rampart of Earth; on the top of which there is a Walk, or Gallery faced
with Balusters of bright shining Copper, with several intermixed Pillars of the
same Metal, and behind them, at a convenient distance, the figures of abundance
of Animals of molten Copper, almost of all the kinds that can be found, which
make one side, as the Balusters the other, of a most curious and delightful
Gallery. Within the precincts of which, you see nothing but little Groves of
Orange Trees, and other the most delightful and sweet smelling Trees, with
several Temples and Hermitages.

IT is in these Temples and Hermitages they deposite the Bones of their Kings,
and other Princes of the Royal Blood; which are built not only of Marble,
Porphyre, and Jasper, but with variety of other Stones, which with us are
accounted precious, both because of their beauty and rarity. Neither are their
Coffins less rich; the matter whereof they are made, being Gold or Silver,
besides the vast Treasures enclosed in them. These Coffins are always attended
by Hermits, who continually pray for the Dead, being themselves persons of the
highest Quality; for none are sent thither, but great Lords, who seeing
themselves arrived to a great Age, are glad to retire, and end their days at
their Princes Graves; thereby hoping to anticipate their favor, and procure
for themselves to be their Courtiers in the other World, as they have been in
this. There are also many young Gentlemen, who by some misdemeanors, being
fallen into disgrace at Court, take for a great favor to have the liberty of
going, and retiring themselves for ever in these delightful Hermitages, where
they make it their business to supplicate those Illustrious Deceased, to make
their peace with the King, that they be readmitted to his Grace and favor.

CHAP. VII. Funerals of the Americans.
THE Inhabitants of America always took a particular care to bury their Dead,
because they believed, that on that Ceremony depended the rest of the Soul
departed. They were all of them generally persuaded of the Souls immortality;
though to this truth (which Nature taught them) they added a thousand Fables of
their own invention.

Their foolish Opinions concerning Souls.
THEY fancied almost as many different places for the Dead, as there were
different kinds of deaths, as well as different sorts of crimes.

Joan. Leri. hist. Americ.
For example, they were of opinion, that good and honest Men, as those that had
been killed in Battles, or had devoted themselves to be a Sacrifice in honor
of their Gods, went directly after their Death, to the House of the Sun, which
they placed near that Luminary: This was the highest degree of happiness among
them. As for the wicked, they said that they remained here below on the Earth,
and were yet more unhappy there, than they had been during their lives: That
those who had been Thieves were continually pursued by Demons, that never left
them at quiet: That the Adulterous were scorched with the Flames of their
unlawful Lusts; and though they had always many handsome Women before their
eyes, yet they were the only Dead, to whom it was forbidden to marry again in
the other World, because they had indulged, and given themselves too much
liberty in this: That those who had killed their Fathers, their Wives, or
Children, were eternally slain by the same Persons, and with the same kind of
Death wherewith they had formerly destroyed them: That they who had murdered
their Kings, met after their Death with a company of mad riotous fellows, with
whom they were fain to fight incessantly, giving and receiving large wounds
continually, without having so much liberty as to lay down their Arms for one
moment, or stop the blood gushing out from all parts of their Body. And
finally, That those who had put any of their Priests to Death, were perpetually
praying to the Gods, without any hope of ever being heard.

ANOTHER opinion they had concerning those that died without having committed
any crime, and who otherwise were neither good nor bad. If they were young
Children, who had lived but a short time, or died before they were weaned, they
believed that they met with an invisible Mansion upon Earth, where they enjoyed
that life they had been deprived of, and that there they attained to such an
extreme old age, that they could no more tell their Years: And if they were old
Men, their opinion was, that they began to grow young, as soon as they were
arrived in the other World, and that at length they became so very young, that
their former old age was by them wholly forgotten. If any died of a sudden
death, they supposed him to go to a place, where he was most delightfully
surprised, and struck with a ravishing admiration, to see in that Region every
thing contrary to, or at least very different from what he had seen in this: in
the admiring of which strange and agreeable Metamorphosis he was employed to
Eternity. And lastly, if any were drowned, they fancied him to pass from the
Water into a dry place, where he immediately voided the water he had let down,
and where he was no more in danger of meeting with the same misfortune, the
Gods having taken care to leave neither Sea, River, Brook, nor any Spring
there, lest the sight of water should occasion any trouble to them who had
miscarried thereby.

Their manner of apparelling the Dead.
THEY had also several ways of decking their Dead, which were generally very
rich and pompous, and suitable to the Place or Office they had discharged, or
to that Id. ibid.
which in their lifetime, they were most taken with. For example, they put
upon their Priests the Ornaments of the Idol they had ministered unto: Courtiers
they arrayed in such a garb as their Prince most affected, and apparelled the
common sort in such an habit, as was most agreeable to the condition, trade, or
fancy of every one of them. These were their ordinary ways of dressing the
Corpse. But they had others which were extraordinary, wherewith they set forth
the Bodies of debauched and wicked fellows: for they clothed Drunkards in the
habit of Ometotchtli, the God of Wine; and Adulterers in that of Tlaxolteutl,
the God of Lust. They had also particular manners of apparelling those that
perished by Shipwreck, or in Battle, dressing the former like to Tlacot, the
God of Water; and the latter in the warlike Ornaments of Vitzilopuchtli, the
God of War.

Their Mourning.
NOR was their Mourning less different and various; Bellef. in Cosmog.
it being more or less according to the age of the Party deceased; for they
were extremely sorrowful for the Death of their Children, and almost not at all
concerned for the Departure of aged Persons; insomuch that as they spared
nothing to take care of the nourishment and education of the one, so they did
much neglect the other. And what I find most remarkable therein, is this, That
their Mourning for Children, was not only very long, but universal also, they
being generally bemoaned by the whole City or Town in which they were born. On
the day of their Death, no Body durst come nigh their Parents or nearest
Relations, who carried themselves like furious and mad People, and made a most
dreadful noise within their Houses, howling and crying like Persons in despair,
plucking off their Hair, biting, scratching, and tearing their Flesh. On the
next day they flung themselves down upon their Beds, and bathed them with their
own tears. On the third day they began their lamentations, which continued the
whole Year; during which time neither the Father, nor Mother of the Child, ever
washed themselves; and the rest of the whole City, to condole with them for
their loss, did weep three times a day, till the Corpse was carried to the Grave.

AS concerning their Mourning for others, it was regulated according to the
number of the Years they had lived; lasting eleven Months, if the Party had
lived but five Years; ten, if he had lived ten Years; nine, if fifteen; eight,
if he had attained to twenty Years of age; seven, if twenty-five; six, if
thirty; five, if thirty-five; four, if forty; three, if he was above fortyfive;
two, if he passed fifty; one only, if he was sixty; and (as I have said before)
they scarcely mourned at all for such as were very old and decrepit.

The richness of their Tombs and Monuments.
MOST commonly they buried the Dead; and Thevet. l. 22.
some of them placed them sitting up-right in their Graves, leaving with them
some Water, Bread, Salt, and Fruits, together with the Weapons they used in
their lifetime. Others shut them up in most rich and curious Coffins, whereof
some have been found at Cusco in Peru, of the value of above sixty five
thousand golden Ducats. Others did bury them after a plain and simple manner,
and erected on their Graves four Pillars (in the form of a gallows) whereon
they hanged their Arms, Crests and Plumes of Feathers, together with a great
number of Flagons of Wine and several sorts of Meats. Others after having let
the Body lie in the ground, for the space of a whole Year, at the end thereof
took it up out of the Grave; and paid a Duty or Service to it, which was so
much the more ridiculous, because it was made up of weeping and laughter. Their
Songs, Lamentations and Feasts.
And not to speak of other barbarous ceremonies which attended it, they first
began these Obsequies with Songs, that contained a relation of the whole life
of the Dead; which were often interrupted with the doleful noise of wailing and
lamentations. After which they sat down to eat the Provisions they had brought
along with them; and having thus feasted themselves, they rose and danced a
kind of Jig round the Corpse, which they concluded with huge cries, roaring out
as loud as ever they could, stamping their Feet against the ground, and lifting
their Eyes toward Heaven. At last they burnt the Bones of the deceased, and
gave his Head to his Widow, or nearest Relation, that they might keep the same
as a Relick.

Their opinion concerning the abode of Souls.
AND for the Souls, they believed that they Johan. Leri. ibid.
retired themselves into a pleasant and plentiful Region, where they ate the
best Meats, and drunk the most delicious Liquors; they also fancied that these
Souls were the Eccho's that answer People when they cry or speak aloud.

Particular Ceremonies for Physicians.
NOR ought we here to omit some other ceremonies of theirs, which are no less
curious and observable. Those among them that considered their Physicians as
petty Gods, because of their procuring and preserving of health (which of all
temporal blessings is the greatest) that they might show them a proportionable
honor at their Death, did not Bury them as others, but burnt them publicly
with solemn rejoycings; Men and Women confusedly singing and dancing together
round about the Fire; and when the Bones were burnt to ashes, every one
endeavored to get some part of them, to carry to his own House, which they
afterward drunk in Wine, as an Antidote against all manner of Diseases. Now,
though these ashes did by the Law of the Country, belong to the Relict, or
other nearest Relations of the Deceased, to the end they might by drinking the
same, preserve his skill and knowledge in their Family; yet they, for the most
part, had much ado to save them from the Rabble, especially if the Physician
had been a Person of great repute for curing of Diseases: For as every one does
naturally love his health, they believing that this was an infallible Remedy to
preserve it, we need not admire that they used their utmost endeavor to
procure some of these Relics, which they often snatched by force out of the
hands of his Kindred and Relations.

The ashes of the Dead, drunk.
NEITHER was this Custom of drinking the ashes of their dead Physicians, so
peculiar to the Inhabitants of Panuco, for I find that alike Ceremony was
commonly used in the Country of Venessuela, at the death of all manner of
Persons, Lep. Hist. Ind. Acost. Hist. Amer.
whose Bodies they generally roasted, cut them out into small pieces, and then
brayed them till they came to the consistence of a thick Jelly, which they
dissolved in Wine, and drank with great pleasure; this being accounted the most
delicious drink among them, who fancied they could never make any splendid
entertainment, but when they had some of this high Cordial to render it
complete. Whence it was, that all the grief they had conceived from the death
of their Relations, was soon washed away, by the delight they took in drinking
the remainder of their Bodies.

Corpses kept at home.
THE Custom of the People of Florida, seems somewhat more civil, though full of
superstition; who keep the Bodies of all their dead Friends within their
Houses, fearing that if they should come to lose one of those Relics only,
some great mischief or other would befall them. As Soon as any one is dead among
them, they place his Corpse near a great Fire, turning it from time to time, to
the end it may be well dried; and when it is thoroughly dried, and the Flesh
become stiff and hard, they deck it the most gorgeously they can, not sparing
any thing that is costly or curious, as Cloth of Gold, Plumes of Feathers, and
precious Stones to set it forth, and then enshrine it in a Niche or hollow,
made in the Wall for that purpose; which they look upon as the greatest
ornament of their Houses; those being reckoned the finest and most richly
furnished, that have the longest rows of these Mummies; with which also they
often entertain several discourses, recounting all that they know of the
Deceased. And so great a comfort is the presence of these Objects to them, that
it soon makes their mourning to cease; for by having their Friends continually
before their Eyes, they can scarcely believe, that they have lost 'em by Death.

The dead Bodies of great Captains, car^^ed to ^^ttels.
ALMOST the same Custom is used among the inhabitants of Nova Granada,
specially toward the Bodies of their great Captains, whose Mummies they
carefully preserve, carrying them along with them in all their warlike
Expeditions, as being persuaded that they can never be vanquished, whilst they
have those Relics in their company; and if they chance to be so unfortunate,
as to lose the day, they attribute it to the injustice of their cause, and with
tears beg pardon of the Corpse of their General, for the shame they have exposed
him to. But when they prove victorious, they offer many Sacrifices to him, in
acknowledgment of his aid and assistance.

Particular Ceremonies for the Kings of Mexico.
AND not to pass by the account of the Burials of their Kings, Barth. de las
Cases, Hist. Americ.
I shall (only) mention those of Mexico and Mechuacan, which are the two most
considerable, and civilized Countries in all America; that thereby I may give
the Reader an Idea of their most magnificent Funeral Pomps and Obsequies. And
first of Mexico.

AS soon as their King was fallen sick, they put a Mask upon the face of their
principal Idol, and did not take it off, till he was either Dead, or perfectly
recovered. If he Died, they presently published a solemn Mourning for him, not
only in the City, but throughout the whole Kingdom; to every part of which
Expresses were sent, to give notice thereof, to the end that all manner of
rejoycings might immediately cease. Upon which notice given, all the great
Lords repaired to Court, to attend his Funerals: and in the mean time his Corpse
was well washed and embalmed. Now when the Court was full and complete, and all
the Grandees were met together in the Palace, the Body of the Prince was taken
out of his usual Bed, to be laid open to the sight of all, on a Straw-bed, in
the midst of the Hall: And this sad object, which drew tears from the Eyes of
all the standers-by, was in this manner exposed for the space of three days,
during which time it was not lawful for any Lord to absent himself from the
place; and to that purpose every one of them ordered their Necessaries to be
brought thither to them, by their Servants and Vassals; nor did they take any
rest, but in their Chairs.

HAVING thus attended and watched him, they put on his face the Vizard of the
Idol, for which he always had the greatest devotion; they stopped his mouth with
a large Emerald, and covered him with seventeen very rich Carpets or Coverings;
upon each of which the name of the Idol, in whose Temple he had chosen to be
Buried, was written. Then they cut a handful of his Hair, which they laid up as
a precious Relick, saying, that the memory of his Soul remained in that Hair;
and sacrificed a Slave to him, whose office it was, during his Life, to light
his Lamps, and burn his Perfumes; that he might do him the same service in the
other World.

Humane Sacrifices in honor of their Kings.
THOUGH indeed this humane (or rather inhumane) Sacrifice was not solitary, but
was attended by an infinite number of others, that were never a whit less
cruel; yet this was the first of all that was slaughtered, to the end he might
go before, and prepare all things for the reception of so great a Prince; for
they believed, that his Soul did not depart this World, till his Body was
burnt; and that whilst they were making preparation for his Funeral pomp, it
staid with the Body, to observe if they punctually paid their duty-to it. Upon
which score they were careful not to omit the least circumstance thereof, for
fear of being punished for it upon the spot.

Their Funeral Pomp.
THIS first Sacrifice being over, some of the chief Lords carried the Corpse
upon their shoulders, having round about them a multitude of others, who with
feigned lamentations made a most dreadful noise; for those that were appointed
to weep, were fain to do it, though never so much against their heart, unless
they would incur the rigorous punishments, that were by the Law ordained in
that case; insomuch as they thought themselves very happy, who could escape
this Office; and to avoid all discontents, and disputes on that account, they
before the Funeral March begun, cast lots, who should bear the Corpse, who
should weep, and which of them should carry his Arms, and Presents ordained for
him; which last marched in great numbers at the head of the Company, making a
fine show of all sorts of Arms in use amongst them, and those of the best that
could be; as Bucklers, Darts, Arrows, Bows, Clubs, Colors, Plumes of Feathers,
and a thousand other things, no less beautiful and pleasing to the Eye, than
rich and precious.

IN this order they approached the Temple, where at the entrance of the Yard,
or Court which compassed it, they were received by the High Priest, who with
the whole Clergy, attended there for that purpose, having aforehand prepared a
large Wood-pile in the same place, Their Woodpile.
which being kindled, and the High Priest having, with a mournful accent,
pronounced certain words over the Corpse, commanded it to be cast into the Fire,
where whilst it was consuming, the whole Nobility drew near, in the same order
in which they came, and threw their Presents into it. In the mean time the
Priests were not idle on their part, being employed in butchering two hundred
Slaves, both Men and Women (most of them being designed for particular services
of their Sovereign in the other World) besides some Dwarfs and Jesters, sor
their Princes diversion; the Hearts of all which persons they flung into the
Fire, to the end that every one of those Servants they sent to accompany their
Prince, by having their Hearts burnt together with him, and their Ashes mingled
with his, might the more cordially be devoted to his service.

The manner of their burying the Ashes.
THESE Ashes they gathered the next day, and laid them up in a vaulted Grot,
all painted within, which after they had well closed, they placed upon it the
imbossed figure of their Prince, that they might still, from time to time,
offer the like Sacrifices to him. For on the fourth day after his being Burnt,
they Sacrificed fifteen Slaves to him, in honor of the four Seasons of the
Year, that he might always have them fair and pleasant in the other World. On
the twentieth they sacrificed five others, that he might to all Eternity enjoy
the same strength and vigor, which a man has at twenty years of Age. On the
sixtieth, three, that he might feel none of those three distempers that attend
old Age, viz. Weakness, Cold and Dullness, or Heaviness. And at the end of the
year, they sacrificed nine other Slaves to him; that number being the most
proper to express Eternity, by reason that beyond it we still begin anew.

Particular Ceremonies for the Kings of Mechuaca^n.
AS for the Funerals of the King of Mechuacan, they were yet attended with more
Ceremonies. As soon as he felt himself sick to death, he declared his
Successor; and this new Prince Id. ibid.
, in acknowledgment of it, did immediately thereupon give order for putting all
things in a readiness, to pay him his last duty, in the most pompous and
glorious manner imaginable. In pursuance whereof, he, as soon as the old King
had given up the Ghost, assembled all the Nobility of the Realm, and ordered
them to bring rich Presents along with them. The Palace in the mean time was
kept close shut, all the while the Corpse was embalming, which being done, they
laid it upon a Bed of State, decked with all their usual ornaments, viz. with
Feathers curiously stitched and plaited together upon a very fine linen Shift
(wherewith his back and breast were covered) a pair of Kid-leather-shoes on his
feet, a set of small Golden-bells a little beneath his Knees, Rings on his
fingers, Bracelets about his arms, a Necklace of Turquois-stones about his
neck, and Pendants in his Ears. They also laid by him upon the same Bed, on the
one side of him, his Bow and Quiver full of Arrows, and on the other side a
Puppet, or Baby all covered with precious stones.

ALL things being in this order, the Gates of the Palace were set wide open,
and the Nobility being entered, they all went and laid their hands upon the
Corpse, making very great lamentations; and having be-sprinkled it with sweet
water, they set down upon the Bed by him, the Presents they had brought along
with them.

IN the mean time all sorts of Officers were provided and made ready, to serve
him in the other World; and among them seven young Virgins, the most beautiful
that could be found; one of which was appointed to keep all his Jewels, another
to be his Cup Bearer, another to serve him with Water to wash his hands,
another to reach him the Chamber Pot, another to be his Cook, another to take
care of his Clothes, and last of all, another to be his Laundress. And in order
to the fitting of them for the Service they were severally designed to, they
bathed and washed them well, shaved off all their Hair, fed them with variety
of dainties for the space of many days, painted their bodies with a yellow
color, and adorned their heads with Chaplets or Garlands.

ON the day of the Funeral solemnity, these poor wretches, together with all
the rest designed for Sacrifice, marched in procession before the Corpse, some
of them making a noise, by clapping certain Shells together, others playing
upon Instruments, some whistling, and others singing after their manner. The
Corpse was carried by the Prince himself, who was immediately followed by the
principal Officers of the Crown, and others of the King's family; next after
them came the Nobility, and last of all the common people.

Their Funeral pomp.
NEITHER did they begin their Funeral March, till twelve of the clock at night;
the blaze of many thousand burning Torches supplying them with light, and the
Streets through which they were to pass, being carefully swept and cleansed.
Humane Sacrifices in honor of their Kings.
As soon as they were come to the Temple, they went thrice a-round the
Wood-pile; and then having laid the Corpse upon, and put fire to it, they with a
Club knocked down all these poor unfortunate Victims, which were to accompany
their Prince into the other World, and to that end were in the same Fire
consumed with him. This Fire lasted till daylight, and then they took up the
Ashes in a large Blanket, in which they brought them to the Gate of the Temple,
where two Priests having consecrated them, a Paste was made thereof, which they
shaped into the fashion of a great humane figure, adorning it with the most
precious things they had, and afterward buried it in a large Hole or Cave, all
lined with Mats; The manner of their burying Ashes.
placing round about it, not only all manner of Weapons, and several Coffers
full of Treasure; but also great variety of all sorts of most dainty Meats.

IN this Ceremony they spent five whole days, during which all manner of
Commerce and Trade ceased, none durst stir abroad, or be seen in the Street,
and it was prohibited to light a fire in any house, but in the Palace and
Temples. And as they accounted all those defiled, who had touched either the
dead Body, or Ashes, they were very scrupulous of coming nigh them, till after
they were purified. In a word, to make an end of this Chapter, the greatest
part of the Nobility did both sleep and eat in the Court of the Temple, all the
time this Solemnity lasted, expressing an extraordinary sadness and affliction
in their countenances, without daring to speak a word.

CHAP. VIII. Funerals of some Islanders.
Affliction of the Japannees when their Friends are sick. and their joy when
Dead.
THE Inhabitants of Japan seem to have Sentiments and Opinions quite contrary
to those of all other Nations. For generally in other Places, as long as a
Friend or Relation is yet alive, though he be never so sick, people endeavor
to comfort themselves, because they are not without hope he may recover;
neither do they wholly abandon themselves to sorrow, but when Death has cut off
all these their pleasing hopes and expectations. But that which makes others
give the reins to tears and lamentations, does afford to these Islanders matter
of joy and solace, who are as merry and cheerful at the Death of any of their
Friends, as they were sad and afflicted, during his sickness. And indeed they
commonly exceed in both these; for as they with an extraordinary dejected
countenance and grief of heart lament him, when sick, sparing neither care nor
charge to endeavor his recovery, when in danger of losing his life; so on the
other side, when he has lost it, they frame to themselves a thousand pleasing
and flattering Ideas, to his advantage, omitting nothing that may express their
joy and comfort on that occasion.

Their mourning for the sickness of Persons of Quality.
IF the sick Party be a Person of great Quality, if he possess Lands, and be
invested with Offices, all his Domestics and Vassals, or Tenants are bound to
put themselves in Mourning, to keep long Fasts and tedious abstinences, and a
thousand other expressions of sorrow, to declare the share they take in his
misery, and how sensibly they are afflicted for his sickness. His Relations
also would be looked upon as infamous and unworthy Persons, should they, during
the whole time of his illness, take any the least pleasure or diversion; they
being by the custom of the Country obliged to abstain from all manner of
dainties, and some of 'em lie all that time upon the bare ground, whilst others
are watching with and attending upon him; and to the end that nothing may
divert them from this duty of waiting upon the sick, they cast off the care of
all their other affairs.

For common People.
WHEN the sick Person is of an ordinary condition, or of the common sort of
People, his Shop is presently shut up; so as nothing of his Trade is driven all
that while; and his whole Family are so sad and comfortless, that they even
neglect themselves in their necessary repasts. They are always in tears, and
wander up and down the Streets, enquiring for Remedies, that may give him some
ease. They aggravate his sickness to those of his acquaintance they meet with
in their way. They curse a thousand times the Malady, which is the cause of his
sufferings; Their Complaints and Petitions against Sickness and Diseases.
they accuse it of injustice, and endeavor to prove from the actions of his
life, that the never deserved to be so severely handled. For they fancy all
Diseases are invisible Officers of a Sovereign Judge, whom they adore: Upon
which account, they very often present Petitions against them in the Temples
consecrated to that Supreme Judge: Which Petitions are generally answered with
good success, and such as gives them all the satisfaction imaginable. For if
the sick recover, they doubt not but that the said Officer has been turned out
of his Place, since he can no more exercise his cruelties by sickness upon
their Friend; and if he dye, as they are persuaded, that he is presently
received into the rank and number of the Gods, they comfort themselves in hopes
that he will highly revenge himself upon that petty fellow, who has been so
bold to make him suffer unjustly, whilst he was in this life. Apotheosis, or
Consecration of their Dead.
And Franc. Solier. hist. Japon, l. 1. c. 14.
therefore as soon as their Friend has closed his Eyes, their grief is at an
end, and kneeling down they adore him.

HAVING performed this Ceremony, they go and publish the good news of his Death
throughout the City; and the Bonzes, which are their Priests, upholding them in
these errors, do from that hour dispose themselves to come and take the Corpse
away, and with great pomp carry it to their Burying-places; the Priests at
their own charges providing a great number of Torch-lights, with a decent
Coffin for to lay the dead Body in, and dressing themselves in their best and
richest Ornaments, the better to grace the Solemnity. For all which trouble and
cost they desire no reward from the Relations of the Deceased; because they
would have the People believe, that there is not a dead Body but is to them an
holy Relick, and for which they stand highly obliged to the Family.

Funeral Ceremonies of the Maldives Islands differing from those of other
Mahometans.
THE Inhabitants of the Maldives, being Mahometans, do observe the Law of
Mahumet: but by reason their Country is far remote from Persia and Turkey, which
are the two most civilized Nations of that Sect, it happens that not having the
opportunity of being furnished with able Men, who might fully instruct them in
the Doctrine contained in the Alcoran, they mix with it several inventions and
particular Ceremonies of their own. But I shall here only mention such of them,
as relate to Funerals, these alone being the subject of my present Discourse.

Public Officers for burying of the Dead.
THEY have in every one of their Cities public Officers, that are appointed to
bury the Dead, viz. six Men and six Women, who meddle with none but those of
their own Sex. Which Office they buy of the King; and at their entrance upon
it, they give (besides what it cost them) a Sum of Money to be distributed
among their Brethren or Fellow-Officers. The manner of their burying the Dead.
Their Duty consists in washing the Body very well, and laying it up in a
Coffin made of some sweet-scented Wood, with the usual Circumstances; which
are, First, the laying his right Hand upon his Ear, and his left all along his
Thigh, to intimate that if he has contracted any sin by his birth, Their
reasons.
he has made it his business to purge and repent himself of it, by listening to
the Voice, and observing the Commandments of God. Secondly, the preparing a
Cotton-bed for him; which represents the sweet and pleasant rest, that he is to
enjoy in the other World. Thirdly, the sowing him to this Bed, by means of a
strong double Linen Cloth wrapped about him, to signify that the Rest he is
gone to take possession of, cannot be shaken, and that nothing thenceforth can
disturb or interrupt it. Lastly, the making him lean on his right side, to show
that he has not deserved to enter into this Rest upon any other account, but
because he has supported all his actions with justice and equity, and has never
taken pleasure in any unjust thing.

How great an esteem and care they have of their interment.
THEY esteem this duty of burying the Dead of so great importance, that it is
the first thing they take care of, as soon as they are come to an Age, in which
they are capable of minding their own affairs. Wherefore when they are become
their own Masters, and from under the tuition of their Fathers, either by being
sent forth to shift for themselves, or by Marriage, their first business is, to
look out a place where they intend to be Buried; and the next, to prepare a
Stone on which their Epitaph (containing a short account of their Life) is to
be engraven; as likewise to lay up in some Trunk or Chest the Garments, and
other necessaries for their Funerals, together with such a sum of money, as
they think fitting to allow for the charges thereof; which money is by them
esteemed so sacred, that they dare not meddle with it, what exigency soever
might afterward seem to call for it.

The manner of their accompanying the Corpse to the Grave.
SO great a concourse of people does always resort to their Burials, that it
were needless to invite any body to them, since every one invites himself, even
strangers, and the most unconcerned persons, joining themselves with the
company, and in compassion of their affliction, muttering several prayers,
whilst others almost kill themselves with striving, who shall weep most; and
this for the space of three whole hours, for so long commonly this procession
lasts; their custom being to carry the Body quite round the City, or if it be
but a small Town or Village, they take a great compass in the fields; the Air
all this while resounding with nothing but doleful cries and lamentations. They
who march first, carry the Funeral Presents; some of them have bottles of sweet
water, which they sprinkle upon those that pass by; others fling about a vast
number of small Cockle-shells, Relat. Pyraerd.
which is the most usual money of that Country, as Farthings are with us: And
others (when they are arrived at the place of Burial) distribute Millet and
Rice to the poor.

Their Ceremonies at the Interment of the Dead.
AS soon as the Body is laid in the Grave, they cast a great quantity of white
Sand upon it, together with a bottle of Water, thereby to signify, that they
desire he may be cleansed from all sorts of filthiness; and the reason why they
make use of Sand, rather than Earth, to cover the Dead is, that it might easily
give way to his departure thence into Paradise. For the same cause they do also
often change this Sand; for fear that if it should grow hard, it might hurt the
Dead, and hinder him from rising again, when he should be called to the abode
of the Blessed. Moreover they do surround the Grave with wooden Rails, to the
end that no body might go over it; which among them is accounted the greatest
irreverence imaginable.

Prayers and Feasts for the Dead.
AS for the common sort of people, they hire Priests three Fridays after
another, to say a great number of prayers for a whole day and night together;
insomuch as they are fain to take their Meals there at the Grave; neither do
they stir thence, till four and twenty hours be past: After which they treat
the Priests very splendidly, and return them their thanks, for admitting their
Relations or Friends into Heaven.

AND for what concerns Persons of greater Quality; their custom is for a whole
Year together, to carry every day diverse sorts of Meats to their Graves; with
which the Priests having feasted themselves, the remainder is afterward
distributed among the poor.

Their mourning.
LAST of all, for their Kings, they continue their Prayers and Alms during the
whole Reign of his Successor, who wears no other Mourning, but that on the day
of the burial of his Predecessor, he goes bare-headed, and without his Turbant;
which according to his example, is also imitated by the Nobility and People,
who upon like occasions show the same respect to their Dead relations.

Their custom when any dies at Sea.
IT is likewise to be observed, that when any of these MALDIVIANS die at Sea,
they make a kind of open Coffin for them, of three boards fastened together, on
which they lay the Body, that it may swim upon the Water, putting into one of
his hands a Writing, which contains his Religion; and in the other a Purse with
money, to pay the charges of his Funerals; and after they have done this, they
are as well satisfied, as if they had Buried him themselves, they making no
doubt but that duty will be discharged by the inhabitants of the first place,
where the Body shall arrive.

The manner of Burying among the Caribees.
THE Caribees, who inhabit the Antilee-Islands, do observe other Ceremonies,
which are no less remarkable, as well for the manner of ordering the Body, as
the laying of it in the Grave. After they have wept over the Corpse, they wash
it carefully, then color it red all over, rub his head with Oil, and comb out
his Hair: This being done, they bind his Legs to his Thighs, and put his Elbows
between his Legs, tying down his Face upon his Hands, much after the same
posture as an Infant lies in the belly of his Mother, and thus they wrap it up
in a linen cloth.

Their lamentations.
TO their lamentations they add discourses, wherewith they entertain the Dead,
which are the most ridiculous and non-sensical that can be imagined. They talk
to him of the best Fruits their Country does afford; telling him that he might
have eaten of them, as much as he would. They put him in mind of the love his
Family had for him, and the reputation he lived in, with a thousand such other
things, reproaching him above all for dying, as if it had been in his power to
prevent it. For example, they tell him, Thou might have lived so well, and
made so good cheer; thou did want neither Manioc, nor Potato's nor Bananes,
nor Ananas; how is it then that thou diedst? Thou did live in so great esteem
with all men, every one did love and respect thee; what is the matter then that
thou art dead? Thy Friends and Relations were so kind to thee, their greatest
care was only to please thee, and to let thee lack nothing; pray tell us then,
why did thou think of dying? Thou wast so useful and serviceable to thy
Country; thou had signalized thy self in so many Battles; thou wast our
defense and security from the assaults and fury of our Enemies; why is it then,
that thou art dead? Which last words is always the burden of their song, and
the conclusion of all their complaints, which they repeat a thousand times;
reckoning over all the actions of his life, with all the advantages wherewith
he was endowed.

The form of their Graves.
THEY make their Graves round like a Tun, four or five foot deep, in the bottom
of which they place a small stool, Their Ceremonies at the Enterment of the
Dead.
whereon they set the Corpse, leaving it there unburied for the space of ten
days, during which they bring him Meat and Drink. At last seeing that he will
not touch any of these Viands, nor return to life again, they fling them down
upon his head, and having filled up the Hole, they kindle a great Fire over it,
round about which all the standers-by, both Men and Women set themselves down
kneeling, and begin to bemoan and lament the Deceased, with dreadful howlings,
whilst some of them cast all the movables and housholdstuff into the flames,
which were used by him during his life. For example, if the Deceased be a Man,
they burn, together with him, his Bow and Arrows, his Club, Crowns of Feathers,
Pendants, Rings, Bracelets, Baskets, Vessels, and whatever else he was used to
wear or serve himself with; all the company in the mean time not ceasing their
cries and lamentations, till all the foresaid things be entirely consumed.

Their mourning.
THEIR Mourning consists in shaving their Heads, and observing severe and
strict Fasts, until the time they judge the Corpse may be putrified; which that
they may be the more certain of, they often look into the Grave; and finding it
so, they cover it again, and tread down the place Hist. mor. and not. Antil. c.
24.
with their feet, sighing and sobbing in a most sad manner. When all this is by
them performed, they go and make themselves merry with feasting and drinking
even to excess, that they may drown their sorrow, and drive it from their
hearts.

THE Inhabitans of the Fortunate Islands, as likewise those of Comagra had no
such pity for their Deceased friends; Rejoycings of the Inhabitants of the
Canaries at the Death of their Relations.
for the Canarians, who inhabited the former, were so far from weeping, that
they did nothing else but sing, dance, and divert themselves at the Interment
of their Dead; and the latter clothed them with their richest wearing Apparel,
A like practice of those of Comagra.
and congratulated them upon the account of the happiness that was fallen to
their lot, in being freed from all the miseries of this life.

Respect and Privileges given by those of Candia to their Sextons.
AS for the people of Candia, though they did not use any great Ceremonies at
the Burial of their Dead, yet was that last duty looked upon by them as a thing
so important and Sacred, Plut. quaest. Graec. 21.
that those that were appointed to make the Graves for the Dead, and to lay
them therein, enjoyed great Privileges amongst them, and were by every one
reverenced and honored, as much as the Priests themselves, above whom they had
this advantage; That whereas the Candians did commonly rob one another, without
being punished for it, not sparing even those that were consecrated to the
service of the Gods; yet would they never meddle with any thing belonging to
the public Funeral Officers, for fear they should in revenge have let them
want a Grave after their Death, in case they had done them any wrong; which
they dreaded as the greatest of all misfortunes, that could possibly befall
them; insomuch that it was good being a Sexton amongst them, because that
employment, which generally with others is very abject and contemptible, was
the most privileged, and respected in that Country.

The Burial of the Cyprians.
THE Inhabitants of Cyprus did first anoint the Dead with Honey, and then
pasted them over with Wax; by which means they preserved their figure and shape
several years together, during all which time the Ael. l. 6.
corruption of the inward parts did not exhale the least ill scent: Their
Graves.
And last of all, having carried them into Caves made in some Rocks, and set
them up there as so many Statues, their Relations from time to time came and
visited them, discoursing with them of things that passed in their Family, or
other occurring matters. Reasons for these their Ceremonies.
An ancient Author makes this observation upon the forementioned Ceremony, viz.
That they Buried their Friends in Honey after their Death, as they had given
them Gall to taste at their Birth, and coming into the World; and that, because
Gall is a very significant symbol of the miseries and afflicting sorrows of
this wretched life, which is full of bitterness; as Honey is an Emblem of the
sweet enjoyments and happiness of the other, wherein is found an infinite
variety of ravishing pleasures and delights.

IT will not be improper to add something here concerning the Custom of the
Inhabitants of Greenland, which is the coldest Country in the World Relat.
Holand.
; that Island lying in the midst of the frozen Sea; and because the Ice never
thaweth there, on that side that lies toward America, the Sun being not hot
enough to melt it, it has made some to conclude, that it was joined to the
Northern part of the West Indies, and consequently that it was part of the
Continent, and no Island. Burials of the Greenlanders.
Now the Inhabitants of this Country, take no other care of their Dead, than
that they draw them out of their Caves, in which they live under ground, and
expose them naked to the open Air, where they soon grow as hard as stones: And
to the end they might not, by being thus left in the open Fields, be devoured
by Bears, or other wild Beasts, they shut them up in great Hampers, which they
hang upon Trees.

CHAP. IX. Funerals of the Tartars.
THESE People which were formerly called Scythians, and are still in our days
accounted barbarous, by reason of their rude, savage and wandering way of
living, having no home, or settled dewlling place as others; but herding
together Relat. var.
in Woods and Fields, like Brute-beasts; sometimes in one place, and sometimes
in another, according to the variety of Seasons, and convenience of Pasture; I
say these very People all wild and brutish as they are, have notwithstanding
excelled many other Nations in the Piety they have shown, and duty they have
paid to the Dead.

Doubtful relations of the Cruelty the Tartarians use toward the Dead.
I KNOW that some accuse them of cruelty in this matter, saying that they
either hang the Dead on Trees in the remotest and coldest places, to harden
them thereby, or (what is much more horrid) devour them, after they have felled
them down with their own Hands: though indeed the same Historians do tell us,
that this their cruelty extends only to Persons of seventy years of age, and
that they bury all that ^^re under those Years: Yet I do find that anciently
the custom of burying the Dead was so universal, Herodot. ^. 4.
that nothing was reckoned more sacred among them. And Herodotus informs us,
that Darius Son of Hystaspes, having made an Invasion into their Country with a
most puissant Army, and seeing that they fled continually from him, resolved to
send one of his Principal Officers to them, to know the reason of their
cowardly running away, and whether they would not at length stop somewhere, and
stand to a Battle, which he had so often fairly proffered them; To which they
returned this answer, That they had no Cities nor Lands to defend: but that
whenever they should advance so far as their Fathers Graves, that then his
Master would be aware with what courage and resolution they could fight for
securing of any thing that was considerable or dear unto them. With which
answer (as Val. Max. l. 5.
Valerius Maximus adds) they for-ever cleared themselves of that foul blot of
monstrous barbarity, which was before thought to be so natural to them; since a
more pious reply could not possibly have been given by the most civilized
People in the World. Which passage also proves that they were wont to bury
their Dead, and that their Graves were in remote places, far from the commerce
and resort of any that were borderers upon them.

SOME of the R^lat* Var.
most barbarous customs related of them in Histories, Barbarous Funeral Pomp.
are the Funeral Ceremonies, wherewith they, in ancient times, honored their
Kings; of which I find two several accounts, both equally horrid. As soon as
any of their Princes was Dead, they opened his Body to take out the entrails,
which otherwise might have corrupted it, and after having washed it well, they
poured melted Wax all over it, both within and without. Then they filled it
with Thyme, mixed with Chervil, Sellery and Anniseeds bruised together; and
after that having sowed it up again, as neatly as possibly they could, they set
it stark naked upon a Chariot, which was to carry it not only through all his
own hereditary Provinces, but those also which he had subdued and made
tributary. When they came to the Frontiers of any Country, those that had
conducted, and attended it so far thither, returned back, and others of that
Province received and took care of it, thus conveying it from hand to hand,
till it had gone round the whole Kingdom. Now it was lawful for the Inhabitants
of every Province to do what outrage or injury they pleased, to revenge those
wrongs which the Prince in his life time had done them: So that some cut off
his Ears, others his Hair, others his Nose, others struck him on the Forehead,
others slashed deep and large gashes in his Arms, and others pierced his Hands
with Arrows; every one insulting on that part, which he conceived he had been
agriev'd or injured by. For example, those that could never obtain a hearing
from him, revenged themselves upon his Ears, which had always been deaf to
them; they that were scandalized with his debaucheries and luxury, tore off his
Hair, that was his chief Ornament, and after they had shaved him, to make him
look ugly and ridiculous, they made a thousand flouts at him. They that
disliked his too great delicacy and effeminateness, slit his Nose for him, as
supposing that he could never have been such, but because he loved and
delighted too much in Perfumes and pleasant Scents. They that were offended at
his Government, broke his Forehead, the place where all his Tyrannical Laws and
Ordinances had been hatched. Those to whom he had done any violence, regarding
his Arms as the Instruments of his strength, and the Executioners of their
miseries, did with several blows break the very Bones of them. And they who had
suffered by his covetousness, either because of the heavy Taxes and Subsidies
he had levied upon them, or else because he had not rewarded their services,
did slit open his hands, for having been too griping or close fisted.

IN the end, when all had thus wreked their spleen upon him, by punishing him
according to their pleasure, and the wrong they had received from him, they
brought him back to the place where he died, and having erected a great
Woodpile, they burnt him, with one of the most beautiful of his Mistrisses, or
Concubines, together with his Cup Bearer, his Cook, his Master of Horse, and
the chief Groom of his Stable, with some Horses; besides fifty others of his
Servants, all whose throats they cut, whilst his Body was a burning, and buried
them about the Grave, wherein they laid his ashes.

Barbarous Mausoleum, or Royal Tomb of the Tartars.
THE other Solemnity I am to mention, is yet more barbarous. When generally no
complaints were heard of the deceased Ibid.
Sovereign, they then took no care to embalm him, because there was no need to
preserve his Body, in order to the taking a progress about the Kingdom. In this
case, I say, they erected his Tomb in the midst of a vast Plain, and raised it
upon great Pieces of Timber, to a very considerable height, after the manner of
a Scaffold. This Tomb was nothing else but a very large Bier or Coffin; for
besides the Body of the King, it was to contain all the Officers, and others
abovementioned, which were flung into it, as fast as they were slaughtered. To
which they added several Ornaments of the deceased Prince, with great store of
Vessels of Gold; covering the whole with a large Carpet, upon which they, last
of all, laid abundance of earth above three foot high.

AT the Years end, they met in great numbers at the said Tomb, where they
killed fifty Pages of the late King' s with as many Horses; both which they
stuffed up with straw, after they had unbowell'd them; and then they placed
these Horses upon several wooden arches, as if they had been running a galop,
and fastened the Bodies of the Pages upon them; which was in their opinion, the
most magnificent pomp they could fancy or think of, wherewith to honor the
memory of their Kings; which indeed suited very well with their barbarous
manners, as more becoming Beasts than Men.

AND now we are speaking of such barbarities as these, it will not be a-miss to
give an hint of several other Nations, which have left us very sad and amazing
tokens of their cruelty in this behalf, though they were of opinion they could
no better way express their respects to the Dead. Some did provide for them
Living Graves, causing them either to be devoured by Beasts, or eaten by Men.
Others gave them Fiery Sepulchers, by consuming them several ways by fire.
Others Water-Burials, by casting them either into the Sea, Rivers or Lakes.
Others made use of Airy Obsequies, by hanging them in the Woods, or in their
own Houses; and others, Terrestrial ones, by letting them lie unburied on the
face of the ground.

CHAP. X. Living Sepulchers.
WE need not have our recourse to Fables, to find out instances of Living
Graves, or Sepulchers; nor with the Poets, to advance here the story of Saturns
eating his own Children: Neither is it necessary to go as far as Caria in
search of the famous Arthemisa, who being not able sufficiently to express the
love she had for the King Mausolus her Husband, did not content her self to
erect him a most magnificent Tomb, after his Death (which has been accounted
for one of the wonders of the World, and from which the stateliest Monuments of
all succeeding Ages have derived their name) but moreover mingled his very
Ashes with her drink. Graves in the Bodies of Men.
There are so many Historians, that relate a thousand instances of greater
cruelty, than these, that the truth of them Herodot. l. 4. Strab. l. 11. Mela
l. 2. Solin. c. 19.
can scarcely be questioned. Herodotus, Strabo, Mela, and Solinus tell us, of
several Nations of Asia, Cruel piety of some people.
that would have thought themselves guilty of the greatest impiety, should they
have let their Dead corrupt in the Graves, and become a repast for worms.
Wherefore as soon as any one was Dead amongst them, they did cut the Body to
pieces; and mixing it with their usual Meats, Mutton, Beef, or the like, they
ate it with a singular gust and devotion. Yea, the nearest relations of the
Dead, made this a matter of much joy, and with a great deal of ceremony,
invited one another to these Feasts, to eat the Body of such a one, much in the
same manner, as we invite our Friends to attend the Funeral of a deceased
Friend or Relation. In a word, to devour the Dead, was to pay him their last
Duty, and the highest mark of the respect and affection they had for him; in
which they out-vied the Doctrine of Pythagoras; that Philosopher maintaining
only a Metempsychosis, or the transmigration of Souls into other Bodies,
whereas these put in practice the transmigration of dead Bodies into living
ones. Horatius Horat. l. 1. Od.
tells us in his Poems, that the old Irish-men and Britains used this in-humane
cruelty only on the Bodies of Strangers: Tertul. cont. Marc.
but Tertullian assures us, that this monstrous piety was universal among, and
exercised by them upon all sorts of men; and as they used neither Interments,
nor Burnings, they devoured the Bodies of their own Countrymen, as well as
those of Foreigners, when they were Dead. So that what those forecited
Historians do relate only of the Inhabitants of Pontus, of the Massagetes,
Hyrcanians, Derbices, and several other Asiaticks, we find confirmed in Europe,
to demonstrate, that however barbarous this Custom seems to be, yet it cannot
well be doubted, but that such there have been. Nay, their cruelty went further
in respect of old people; for as soon as they were come to seventy years of
Age, Zenodot. in Collect. Cent. 5.
without staying for Death's call, they rid them of the miseries of old Age, by
knocking them in the head, or cutting their throats, and then made a Feast of
them; and Hieron. contr. Jovin.
what was yet more horrid, was, that the Children only were thought fit to
discharge this bloody office, being obliged by the Laws of the Land to take a
Knife and murder their Parents themselves: Neither were they wanting to defend
and maintain this their extreme inhumanity, with many specious reasons and
pretenses. For example, they, to justify their impious murder, alleged, that
Man's life, after seventy years of Age, being nothing else but a composition of
pain and trouble, they were in duty bound to free those from it, who had
brought them into the World, that they might thereby prevent their miserable
languishing; and added, that after their Death they could give them no higher
expression of gratitude and duty, than by feeding upon them; because by that
means their Parents became one and the same substance with them, as they
themselves were before they were born.

Hyg. Fab. 274.
THE Parthians and Medes, The bodies of wild Beasts made use of for Sepulchers.
as likewise the Iberians, and Inhabitants of the City Taxyla in the East
Indies, had such an horror and averseness for the corruption of the Dead, and
their being eaten by Worms, that they exposed them in the open Fields, to the
end they might be there speedily devoured by the wild Beasts; accounting
nothing more unworthy, and unbeseeming the excellence of man, than to rot and
putrify in the Earth; and become the prey of such pitiful and loathsome
Insects after his Death, who while alive could not suffer so much as one of
them about him. Besides they believed, that if he were devoured by Beasts, he
would not be totally extinct; and that being no more able to live in an humane
Body, he would at least enjoy a life in the bodies of those Animals, that had
fed upon him.

Graves in Dogs bellies.
FOR this very purpose also the Bactrians Sil. l. 23. Agel. l. 10. Just. l. 41.
fed Dogs, which they called Canes Sepulchrales (or Grave dogs) and took a very
particular care of them, that after their Death their Souls might not want a
healthful, strong and lusty Body to reside in. Oh unheard of folly and madness!
thus to cherish those Creatures, that were one day to tear and rend them with
their teeth; and (what was more) to make much of them only upon that account!
We naturally abhor an Hangman, because his sole employment is to butcher Men;
how then (may we think) can those people look kindly on Creatures, that are to
be their own Executioners? Or how can they with premeditated deliberation keep
and feed them on purpose for this inhumane and barbarous piece of service?
Nevertheless most certain it is, that they regarded this as a great point of
their felicity: For Cicero tells us, that they made it no less their glory to
feed those Dogs very high, in order to make them grow fat and lusty, than the
Romans did to build sumptuous Tombs. And S. Hierom adds, that so great a
veneration they had for this kind of Burial, that Nicanor, who by Alexander the
Great, was made Governor over them, going about to suppress and abolish this
inhumane custom of there is, had like, not only to have caused a revolt of the
whole Province, but also to have been by them massacred, as an impious and
sacrilegious person.

Burying in the bodies of Birds.
TO which we may add the Custom of the Barceans, which seems no less
extravagant; who Aelian. l. 10.
were of opinion, that the most honorable Burial was to be devoured by
Vultures: And that, not only because those Birds by their long lives did
represent Eternity, but chiefly because they were consecrated to Mars, and that
Nature appears to have appointed them for that very use; they being continually
seen hovering about dead Bodies: So that all persons of Worth and Quality, that
either died amongst them, or fell in War, fighting courageously for their
Country, were immediately exposed in such places, where Vultures might readily
come at, and make a prey of them. As for the common people, together with those
that died on their Bed, of a Natural death, they were (in a manner) out of
contempt, flung into a Grave, as not being esteemed worthy to have a Burial in
the bellies of these sacred Birds.

THE Hyrcanians, which I have above mentioned, made some distinction between
Men and Women; for they did eat the former; whereas they buried the latter, as
thinking them unworthy to have their bellies for their Graves. Though methinks
these above all deserved that honor (supposing this barbarity might be so
called) since they had but done the like for them, as having carried them nine
months in their wombs.

CHAP. XI. Fiery Sepulchers.
People that used to Burn their Dead.
THE Grecians and Romans were not the only Nations that used to Burn their
Dead; the Germans and Caes. de Bell. Gal. l. 6.
Gauls were also wont to do the like. But we intend not to speak here of any,
except of those people which we account Barbarians, because their Custom herein
is much more cruel, than that of the forementioned. The Reader then may please
to know, that some of them Burnt themselves, casting themselves alive into the
Fire; others caused themselves to be stabbed before, upon the Wood-pile; and
others were reduced to Ashes after their dead Bodies had lain a good while
corrupting in the Fields, amidst a huge heap of other stinking and rotten
Carcasses.

People that burned themselves. Tacit. de mor. Germ. Sidon. apol. Ap. 2. Sil.
l. 10. Plut. de Placit. philos. Cic. quaest. acad. l. 4.
THEY who were wont to Burn themselves, were a certain Sect amongst the
Indians; who therein imitated their Doctors, called Brachmans, who by an
extraordinary courage and fortitude, or to speak more properly, by a kind of
madness and frenzy, sought in the flames that Life of light, which they
preached to the people, who seeing them thus desirous of Death, and with so
great joy thrust themselves into the Fire, were soon won to this strange
Doctrine and Opinion, That there was no greater happiness attainable, than that
to which men were ushered-in through the flames.

Their foolish Opinions.
THEY also believed that their participation of that felicity, was different,
according to the more or less healthful condition they were in, when they thus
sacrificed themselves; that is to say, That they were the most happy, and
eternally enjoyed a Quintil. Declam. l. 10.
most pure light, without the least mixture of darkness, who burned themselves
in their youth and the full vigor of their age; whereas they that put it off,
till a further date* did proportionably, as they grew old, and their strength
diminished, lose some degrees of those enjoyments; that old people did only
partake of a dim and obscure light; and that they who were Burnt after their
Death, very seldom saw that light but asleep, and as it were in a dream. Whence
it was, that in former times very few Aged persons were found among this
People, most of them preferring the beauty of that Eternal Light, which they
expected to enjoy in another Life, before the pleasures and contents of this;
so that very few of them ever died in their beds: And when it accidentally fell
out, that any did, if it was the Husband that died of sickness, his Wife, if he
had but one, or his most beloved, if he had many, did burn her self alive with
his Body; and if it were a Woman that was Dead, her Husband did the like. For
which strange custom of theirs they alleged this reason, That as one of the
two by burning himself alive, would enjoy a perfect happiness, and be
continually with the other; so he might from time to time awake his yoke fellow
out of that deep sleep, which had seized him in this Life, and would as much as
in him lay, make him consider and take notice of the variety of lustrous
objects and pleasures of the Light. Which Duty, if one of the Couple refused to
pay to the other, he was the rest of his days looked upon as an infamous and
unworthy person, and scarcely admitted into any company.

NOW as it would have been a great default, and very unbeseeming the felicity
they had in their Eye, for any one to cast himself unwillingly, and with
reluctance, into the Fire, or to utter any sighs or outcries whilst they were
burning; so their custom was to repair to the place where they were to devote
themselves to the devouring flames, accompanied with the noise of musical
Instruments, being embraced, hugged, caressed, endeared and applauded by all the
spectators, who made no other show, than as if they were jealous of their good
fortune; earnestly praying them to be favorable to them in the other World.
Besides, Means used to hide somewhat of the horror of this solemnity.
those Wood-piles on which they were to be consumed, were usually made in holes
and deep places, and abundance of Wood was flung upon them, as soon as they had
leaped into the Fire, amidst the applauses and rejoycings of the whole company;
who with their loud shoutings, together with the depth of the place, and
extremity of the fire, made that the party could not possibly be heard,
whatever their outcries or lamen tings might be, when they felt the cruel
flames invading of them.

People that begged to be Burnt.
THE Herules, who in ancient times dwelt along the River Danubius, were burnt
after another manner, when they were grown either old or sickly: Senec. de
clem. Curt. l. 8.
For being of a Warlike humor, and not able to endure a languishing condition,
they were wont to go and beg their nearest Relations to rid them of a life,
which was become burthensom to them, and so put an end to their miseries and
suffering. Which was never denied them, or gainsaid; but on the contrary, every
one commended and applauded them, for having taken that resolution of
themselves; because in that state of extreme old age or sickness, they were
looked upon by all with scorn and contempt: Besides, if they had died in that
condition, they must have been buried without any Ceremonies, as cowardly and
base persons. Wherefore when any thus freely offered themselves, all their
Relations met together with great joy, to appoint a day for the solemnizing of
these Living Obsequies, and in the mean time, made preparation of all things
for it.

The form of the Woodpile, with its furniture, or settingforth.
THESE preparations consisted of a Wood-pile (which was made after the fashion
of a Bed) of diverse dishes of such Meats, as the person to be sacrificed loved
most, and in looking for a Godfather to take away his life; for it was not
lawful for his Relations to do him that Office, but only to kindle the fire
under him when he was Dead.

Saxo. Gram. hist. Dan. l. 8.
AT last the fatal day being come, the party concerned was laid down on his
side upon the heap of Wood, leaning on his Elbow; and then they served before
him the several Meats he had desired, which whilst he was eating with pleasure,
his Godfather took his aim so well, that running him through the heart, he
killed him immediately. Which was no sooner done, but they made a great noise,
hollowing and shouting for joy; and the Wood being set on fire on all sides,
they in great merriment walked round about it, till all was burnt to Ashes, all
the while discoursing of the particulars of his life, and extolling this his
last courageous resolution to the skies.

The Thracians nasty way of treating the Dead.
THE Thracians were not so crucel in this point; for they let people die of
themselves: But they had a most filthy way of heaping great store of putrified
Carcasses upon the dead Bodies, before they burnt them. As soon as any one was
Dead, they carried him to the open Fields, where they left him all naked for
the space of many days, without taking any care of him; that is to say, without
washing or embalming him; Lact. l. 2. c. 10.
so that within a short time he began to stink. On the morrow, and following
days, they came to see in what condition the Corpse was; and as often as they came
to view it, they sacrificed diverse Creatures, whose bodies they flung upon
that of their deceased Friend; insomuch that the place became at last so noisome
and stinking, by means of all those putrefying Carcasses, that there was almost
no coming near it. Then the Friends and Relations of the Deceased brought
Faggots, and other combustible matters, and heaping the same upon the
forementioned Bodies, they burnt them all to Ashes, which they afterward
buried in a Grave, they had to that end dug hard by.

Their reasons for so doing.
SOME say, that the reason why they let them thus putrify, and added to their
own corruption that of other stinking and loathsome Carcasses, was to show, that
fire cleanses, and takes away all manner of filthiness and impurity from Man,
as well as other Creatures. But the chief and main reason of all those, who
burned their Dead, was grounded upon Heraclitus's opinion, who held the Fire to
be the Principle of all things; so that consequently, to the judgment of that
Philosopher, by burning the Dead, they only returned them to that very original
from whence they proceeded at first. Others were of opinion, that because the
nature of Fire is to mount upwards continually, until it insensibly vanishes
away in the Air, it carried the most Spiritual and Volatile parts of the Body
with it to Heaven.

CHAP. XII. Water-Burials.
THOUGH the custom of casting the Dead into the Diod. l. 5. Plin. l. 4.
Water be no less barbarous than the former, yet has it been practiced by
several Nations, as the Hyperboreans, or those who inhabit near the Artick
Pole, the Pannonians, some Inhabitants of Ethiopia, called Ichthyophagi,
because they lived altogether upon Fish, as also they of Chios; who
nevertheless differed among themselves, as to the place: for some of them flung
their Dead into Lakes; others into running Waters, and others again into the
Sea; every one of them having, for his so doing, particular reasons.

Particular reasons of those that cast the Dead into the Sea. Rivers or Lakes.
THEY that cast them into the Sea, did it, that they might the longer be
preserved by the Salt and sharpness of that Water. Those Laert. l. 9.
that flung them into Rivers, would thereby intimate, that as by the current of
the Water they were carried into the vast Ocean, so by the whole course of
their lives they had been passing toward Eternity, into which they were now at
last launched by Death. And they who committed them to Lakes, which are
standing Waters, intended thereby to express the rest and repose the Dead meet
with in the other World, after all the tempests and traverses of this, which is
nothing else but a boisterous and raging Sea.

Universal reasons for their casting the Dead into the water.
BESIDES those particular reasons, they had some that were more general and
Mela. l. 3.
common. The first of which was, that seeing the Dead turn to corruption, and
become very loathsome and filthy, they persuaded themselves they could make no
better provision against the said noisome putrefaction, than by casting them
into the water, because that washes and cleanses every thing. Another reason
(as Clemens Alexandrinus relates it) was, Clem. Alex. in protrept.
because the water being accounted a sacred Element, they thereby thought to
hallow and consecrate the Dead. A third was, that since according to Thales's
opinion, who was one of the Seven Wisemen of Greece, all things were made and
consisted of Water, the Bodies of Men were by this means resolved into that
first principle, from whence they had their beginning. And lastly, because
being for the most part People that inhabited the Seacoasts, and fed generally
upon Fish, Cic. l. 1. de not. Deor. Agath. l. 1. Arist. 1. Metaph. 3.
they conceived it but reasonable, that their Bodies should, after their death,
be the food of Fishes; as during their lifetime, they had made them their
nourishment.

Such as cast themselves into the water.
AND so sweet and easy did many of them fancy this way of Burial to be, and
had so much respect for it, that not being able to wait for their natural
Death, when in an orderly way they might be made partakers of it, after having
made themselves merry by excessive eating and drinking, they went and cast
themselves, of their own accord, either into the Sea, or some River, thereby to
antedate their conceited bliss and happiness.

CHAP. XIII. Airy Obsequies.
IT is a strange thing, that the Gallows, which by us is looked upon, as the
most infamous of punishments, should with some People be esteemed so
honorable, that they give no other Sepulchers to their dead Friends; and which
amongst others is had in such veneration, that they grant this advantage only
to their Sovereign Princes and great Lords.

I KNOW that Woods have been formerly had in great reverence, Sil. l. 3.
Aelian. l. 4 Woods accounted Sacred.
and that they were accounted most Sacred Places: not only from the testimony
of profane Authors, who give this character of them; but this truth is also by
several Texts of Scripture confirmed to us. For we read in Genesis, that
Abraham planted a Wood in Bersabe, [This savors of Idolatry and Superstition.]
where he called upon the Name of the Lord; and that Jacob thought he could not
give a more decent Grave to Deborah (Nurse of his Wife Rebecca) than by burying
her under an old Oak.

INDEED this veneration for Woods and Solitary Places, is in a manner natural;
for the Pagans themselves, which were led only by the light of Nature, have
acknowledged this verity; and amongst others; Virgil speaks of all Woods and
Forests, as so many Temples: In these our Druids erected Altars for their
Sacrifices; and here also it was all Antiquity believed the Gods made their
Apol. l. 3. Nicol. ap. Stob. sermon. 122.
usual abode. For besides the Oreades, or Nymphs of the Mountains, the Dryades,
those of the Woods, and the Fauns and Satyrs, or Gods of the Fields; we read
that some of them were consecrated to Apollo, others to Diana, and such like
pretended Divinities. Whereupon Pausanias tells us, that Persons of the highest
Quality, in ancient times, had their Sepulchers in Woods; and Plato was of
opinion, that none but Men of great worth and excellence ought to be interred
there: Cicero in his Defense of Milo, takes the Woods to witness, as being Holy
places, and the usual Coemeteries of great and virtuous Men.

Profanation of Woods, by making them serve for Funeral Gibbets or Gallows.
BUT if we ought to commend this custom of burying the Dead in the Woods, which
were formerly accounted very Sacred; we must needs abhor the practice of those
that profaned and polluted them, Var. 1.
by making them serve for Gallows, and thereby exposing them to the character
of the most Olaus. l. 16.
infamous places imaginable. Thus the Inhabitants of Colchos, and the Tibarens,
a People of Scythia, made a piece of Religion of it, to hang the dead Bodies of
their Relations upon Trees, for an horror to Spectators, and for a prey to the
Fowls of Heaven; and the ancient Goths and Swedes, could think of no better way
to show the veneration they had for their Princes after death, than by fixing
them to a Gibbet. Surely we must suppose these Men worse than Barbarians, to
fancy that an honor, which indeed is the greatest infamy in the World; and to
esteem that a Religious and Pious duty, which indeed is the extremest impiety
and undutifulness that can be conceived. What honor can a Body be thought to
receive, by suffering a loathsome corruption in the Air, or by being exposed in
a shameful nakedness, which daily grows more ugly, discolored and frightful,
or to be tossed to and fro, and become the sport and may game of the wavering
Winds? Certainly it appears to me, that even according to the dictates of
Nature, nothing can be more horrid or inhumane. This is the reason why our Laws
appoint the same as a Punishment and just reward of the most heinous offenders
and notorious Criminals; and which makes as great an impression on our minds,
to deter us from like crimes, as to see a Man lose his life by the hands of the
Hangman. Neither can I imagine what way these barbarous People have to punish
the wicked, since they make use of Gallows to honor Persons of worth; except
one should say, that being Barbarians, Vice is had in esteem and veneration
amongst them, as Virtue is with us, and that according to their natural
brutishness, they pay the Duty of Burial only to such, who by their wicked
actions have made themselves famous amongst them.

Bodies hung up in Houses instead of Burial.
AGAIN, what a fine show is it, to see a Room hung full of dried Carcasses or
Mummies? Surely these are rarities, that one would think cannot give much
satisfaction or delight to those that have them continually in their Eyes. It Is
true, that we preserve some Mummies amongst us, which we consider rather as
curious Figures, than as humane Bodies, that ever had life, because they are
from remotest Countries brought to us, who never knew the least thing of the
Persons they once were. But there are none to be found, how cruel soever he may
otherwise be, that ever went about to make such Mummies of his Friends or
Relations, in order to keep them in his House, and continually have them before
his eyes. The sole Idea of which impiety we abhor, and cannot blame them
sufficiently, who have acted such things: which they could never have done, and
thus infamously dishonored their Relations, had they not shaken hands with all
Humanity and Moral respects.

CHAP. XIV. Terrestrial Funerals.
IT is a difficult matter to relate all the ridiculous ways, which several
barbarous Nations had to dispose of their Dead, and to pay their Friends and
Relations their last duty. And though we can see nothing in their Funeral
Ceremonies, but what is either foolish, impious or cruel, yet were they by them
looked upon, as solemn and necessary performances. For can a body imagine any
thing more brutal and extravagant, Extravagant manner of burying the Dead, used
among the Troglodites
than the custom of the Troglodites, a People of Africa? who stripped the Corpse
stark naked, bound up Mela l. 2.
the Feet to the Head with a great rope, and having thus made a kind of round
Ball of it, they exposed it upon some high place, turning its backside to the
Spectators, by which ridiculous posture, the whole Company was put into a fit
of merriment and laughter, instead of weeping and mourning for him; and in the
midst of this merriment, they began to cast stones at him, till at last they
had covered him under the heap, on the top whereof they planted a Goats horn,
and then turned their backs upon it, without any the least sign or sense of
grief or regret.

Cruel custom of those of Majorca and Minorcae.
THE Inhabitants of the Islands of Majorca and Minorca, which lie on the Coasts
of Spain, had another custom yet more cruel, and as extravagant as the former.
Ortel. ad fin. theat.
They took the dead Body, and chopped it into a thousand small pieces, which
they carefully gathered, and put up in an Earthen Pot, and afterward
overwhelmed, and covered it with a great heap of Stones.

Pleasant manners of some other People.
THE three other ways of Burying, I have yet to speak of, are very pleasant:
The first is that of the Phrygians, who, to give more honor to their Priests,
than to Laypersons, were used in ancient times, when any one of them was dead,
to set him upright upon a Pillar of ten fathoms high; as if he were to
continue, from thence, to instruct the People. The second is of the
Nasamonians, that inhabit some parts of Lybia, who in acknowledgment of the
perils and pains their Captains and Soldiers had undergone, for the good of
their Country, clothed them in White, Herodot l. 4.
after their Death, and instead of burying their Bodies, exposed them on Rocks
and other solitary Places. And the third and last, is that of the Macrobians, a
People of Ethiopia, who covered their dead Bodies all over with a fine shining
Plaster; and enclosed them in hollow Glass-pillars, keeping them in the best
part of their House, offering the first fruits of all things to them, and
carrying them at the end of every Year, in Procession, round about the City.

CHAP. XV. Funerals of the Ancient Jews.
TWO several times are to be distinguished in relation to the Ceremonies of
this People, which render them very different one from another. The first is
from their Patriarchs, or Lawgiver Moses, to the Birth of the Savior of the
World. And the other from that most Blessed Birth down to this day. For as
those of former times were well constituted, holy and reasonable, as being
inspired by God himself; so these which they use of latter days are most
ridiculous, being grounded merely upon the foolish dreams and idle fancies of
their Rabbis, or Doctors. Therefore we shall treat of both by themselves, not
only to avoid confusion, but to make us abhor the Superstitions of those
miserable wretches, who daily sink themselves deeper into darkness and
blindness.

What persons were appointed to Bury the Dead.
IN former times their Dead were buried by persons of the same Sex; Men only
being permitted to meddle with the Bodies of Men, and Women with Female Bodies;
which was very suitable and decent.

The manner of their Burial.
AS soon as any one of them was Dead, those who were appointed to pay him the
last duty, did first shut his eyes, closed his mouth with a Fillet, and cut off
his Hair. Next they washed his Body very well, and perfumed it with several
drugs, Buxtorf. Synag. Judaic. c. 1.
which were more or less costly, according to the quality of the Deceased; and
then wrapping it up in a Winding Sheet, they laid it in a Coffin.

Id. ibid.
IN the mean time, people from all parts, that is, as well those of the same
Town or City, as adjacent places, came to condole with, and comfort the
Relations of the Departed: And as the multitude was very great in the house of
the Deceased (where great lamentations were made) as likewise in the Streets,
through which the Corpse was carried to the Grave; and that in both places
people were very splendidly treated and feasted; so the expenses thereof often
amounted to such an excess, that many of them were thereby impoverished;
insomuch that several not being able to undergo such vast charges, absented
themselves from the City, under some specious pretense or other, for fear of
exposing their credit.

Instances of mourning.
WHICH Lamentations, together with the Multitudes of people attending the Corpse
to the Grave, were esteemed of so great moment amongst them, that they
accounted those accursed, who were deprived of either of them. L. 1. Reg. c. 31.
This we learn, not only from their Tradition, but from several Texts of the
Scripture. For instance in the two and twentieth Chapter of Jeremiah, that
Prophet speaking of that impious King Jehojakim, declares from the mouth of
God, that at his Funerals there should be heard no sad cries and lamentations
of his Brothers and Sisters, nor of the rest of the People. And likewise in the
fifth Chapter of the second Book of the Maccabees it is said, 2 Macc. c. 5. v.
10.
That that ungodly Jason was not mourned for, or bewailed at all. But on the
contrary, they were esteemed happy, who had those last honors paid them; as it
is recorded in the second Book of Chronicles, Chap. 25. concerning the Death of
the Illustrious Josiah, when nothing but sad moans and lamentations were to be
heard every where, all the people bewailing that good and Holy Prince, and
mixing his Name with their sighs and mournful outcries. Hence it was, that
they spared nothing to induce people to mourn with them for their Dead, and
desired nothing more, than to have a numerous Assembly to attend them to their
Graves.

Burials ever used by the Jews.
FOR the Jews did never approve, either of Wood-piles, or any other barbarous
ways, used by some Nations at the Talm. p. 4. l. 3.
Death of their Friends, but always committed their Dead to the ground; and so
Sacred a thing was Burial among them, that even Strangers and Executed persons
were not deprived of that privilege: Of both which we have so many instances,
that we cannot possibly doubt of it. For besides their common Coemeteries, or
Burying-places, by some called Polyandria, which were designed for Strangers
and the Poor, both of City and Country; we read in the GOSPEL, that the Thirty
pieces of Silver, that Judas had received for betraying his Master, were laid
out in buying of a certain Field, which, from that time forward, was appointed
and made use of to bury Strangers in.

The manner of Burying those that were Executed.
AS for those that were punished with Death for their Crimes, Moses left a Law
in the one and twentieth Chapter of Deuteronomy, expressly forbidding their
remaining on Gallows till the next day; and enjoining the taking of 'em down
from thence, and burying them before Sunset. Which Law has been ever since so
exactly observed, that had they omitted once to do it, they should have
apprehended, that the ruin and devastation of their whole Country would have
ensued. And Josephus in his Book of Antiquities, explaining Moses's meaning,
extends the force of this Law to Enemies themselves; saying, that that Divine
Legislator did thereby condemn all public exposing of the Dead to a ghastly and
noisome putrefaction, as an excess of cruelty; That the Death they had suffered,
was a sufficient Punishment for the Crimes they had committed; that therefore
it was a piece of high injustice to inflict a more severe penalty upon them,
than they had deserved, and (consequently) that they were not to be deprived of
Burial, which Nature and Humanity had taught us never to deny to any, though
the worst of our Foes, or greatest Malefactors. To which the same Historian
adds, that even the very Instruments wherewith they had been put to death, were
interred together with their Bodies; that is to say, the Gallows, if they were
hanged; the Stones, if stoned; or the Sword, if beheaded. And Joshua, who was
the Successor of Moses in the Government of the Jews, was very exact in the
observing of this Law; for he never caused any one to be put to Death, either
of the Israelites, or their Adversaries, but that he gave them Burial the very
same day.

Persons Executed, and such as killed themselves, might be Buried in their
Fathers Graves.
AND besides all this, they granted Malefactors, yea even such as killed
themselves, the favor of being Buried in the Graves of their Ancestors. Thus
we are told in the seventeenth Chapter of the Second Book of Samuel, that the
Unhappy Ahitophel, when he saw that his counsel was not followed, went home to
his house, where he hanged himself, and died; and that notwithstanding he was
buried in the Sepulcher of his Fathers.

AND as concerning persons that were Executed, we read, that David not being
able to deny the Gibeonites seven men of Readiness Family, because he had broke
the Covenant, that had been formerly made upon Oath, between Joshua and them;
those poor wretches being hanged on so many Gallows, were, by the order of the
same King, taken down from thence, and carried to the Grave of Cis, the Father
of that Family, in the Tribe of Benjamin.

Burying-places.
AS for such whose Funerals were celebrated with honor, their usual Graves
were hewn out of Rocks, in imitation of Abraham, who bought such a
Burying-place of the Children of Heth, in the Land of Canaan, for his Wife
Sarah, Himself, and Posterity. Of these Sepulchers or Graves, the Talmud states
the form and bigness, viz. That the Cave be no larger than six Cubits; that
there be eight holes at least in the bottom of it, to the end the Bodies which
are laid down there, may lie separately, and by themselves; and that there be a
little Porch, or Threshold at the entrance, where the Corpse may be set down,
till the usual Prayers be said over it, and the Friends and Relations of the
Deceased have given him their last Adieus, before he be shut up from their
sight.

Magnificent Sepulchers among them.
NOW though these forementioned Sepulchers were generally made use of, even
for Persons of the greatest quality; yet was it also Casaub. exercit. 16.
lawful to make them more stately and magnificent; of which latter we find
several instances among the Jews, that do not in the least come short of the
most sumptuous Mausoleums of other Nations: Such amongst others was the Tomb of
Helen, Queen of the Adiabenians, who left her own Country, to embrace the Law
of Moses. This Princess did cause this Monument to be built for her near
Jerusalem, as we learn from Josephus and S. Jerome, who saw the remains of it.
And Pausanias, who has described the same, says, that it consisted of three
Pyramids, made with so much art and contrivance, that they were accounted so
many wonders. Besides, he tells us of another curiosity about this Sepulcher,
which is no less admirable, and would (its like) be disbelieved, and pass for a
Fable, had it been recorded by an Author of less credit and reputation. This
Monument (says he) which was made all of Marble, had a door of the same Stone;
that did once a year, at a certain day and hour open it self, by means of some
secret Art, or hidden Springs; and shut again of it self, a little while after;
though at any other time it might have been sooner broke all to pieces, than
opened by any industry or strength whatsoever.

Joseph. l. 5. de Bell.
JOSEPHVS and S. Hierom do also speak of the Tomb of the Maccabees, which they
relate was erected by Simon the High Priest, in the City of Modin, the
Birthplace of that Illustrious Family. It was made of white Marble, well
polished, having a stately Piazza around it; at the entrance of which were
seven great Pyramids placed on the top of as many Pillars, all of one piece.
And yet this Structure, which indeed was very magnificent, was nothing in
comparison of the carved work wherewith it was embellished and adorned, wherein
were represented their Victories by Sea and Land, with several Trophies, and a
thousand other marks of their Grandeur, with the greatest Art imaginable.

IN the third place, I shall speak of that of Daniel Hegesip.
, who caused it to be built himself at Ecbatana in Media, at the time when he
was the Favorite of the King of Persia. He ordered it to be made in the fashion
of a Tower, which was wrought with such extreme curiosity and art, that the
World never yet saw its fellow, its contrivance being altogether stupendous
and inimitable. Josephus, whom I now quoted, and who himself saw it several
ages after, says, that in his days, it seemed to be yet stark new, and looked
then, as if it had been but just finished; adding, that a Jewish Priest had an
allowance given him to keep there both Day and Night, that no Body might spoil
or damnifie that admirable Building; with whose beauty and extraordinary
curiosity the Kings of that Nation were so much taken, that they since made use
of it for their Royal place of Burial.

NOR is that which Solomon caused to be built at Jerusalem, for his Father
David and himself, to be omitted here; who being a most wise Prince, as the
great and matchless things he achieved in his lifetime, do abundantly
testify, it is easy to guess; that this Monument of his was a surpassing,
curious and admirable Masterpiece of Art; and wherein neither skill, nor
riches were wanting, that might render it altogether wonderful and
extraordinary. There was nothing in, or about it, but what was wonderful and
surprising; Nature and workmanship having bestowed their utmost skill and
greatest Treasures upon it. But that which I find most remarkable in it, is the
place wherein he commanded the two Coffins for his Father and himself, to be
placed; because the same could never by any industry be found out; the inner
part of the Vault or Cave being made in the fashion of a Labyrinth. And History
informs us, that Herod being on a time obstinately resolved to find out this
secret place, commanded some of his Men to break down certain stones, whose
removal he thought might likely discover the concealed Royal Tombs, but was
soon affrighted from attempting further, by the fire that issued forth in great
flashes from it, and consumed two of his Men upon the spot; so that besides a
rigorous Edict he published, whereby he strictly enjoined, that for time to
come, none should dare to attempt a like re search, he caused a very mean
Sepulcher to be made hard by it for himself, by way of reparation of the wrong
he had offered to it.

Two sorts of Treasures enclosed in their Scpulchres.
NEITHER shall I speak here of the great Treasures found in those Sepulchers;
for none can be ignorant of the vast Riches of all kinds, that were laid up
therein, who considers, that those Places being looked upon as sacred and
inviolable among the Jews, every one of them carried thither the most rare and
precious things they had, thinking them more safe there, without Guards, than
in their own Houses or Coffers. They were most commonly Lords, and Persons of
great Estates, who did so; as finding it too cumbersome for them to keep their
Treasures at home, by reason of their great Riches: as likewise Widows and
Orphans, who were not capable of looking after, and managing what was their own.

BUT besides those riches which were kept there for the use of the Living, much
was also enclosed in honor of the Dead. Hence it was that the High Priest
Hyrcanus, seeing himself besieged within the City of Jerusalem, by Antiochus,
Surnamed Pious, took out of David's Sepulcher, nine hundred Years after his
Death, three thousand Talents, whereof he gave a part to that Prince, to make
him retire with his Army; and with the other he raised Soldiers, in order to
put himself in a condition of preventing the like disaster for time to come.
Out of which Sepulcher, Herod, a good while after, took a great number of
Vessels of Gold, Jewels, and other precious Ornaments. From whence we may
easily conclude, that his Son Solomon had spared nothing to honor his Father's
Memory. In like manner, we read in the Fourteenth Chapter of the Second Book of
the Kings, that the Chaldeans did in their Invasion of Judea, open all the
Princes Sepulchers, for the sake of the Treasures they enclosed. And Sozomene
tells us, that the Prophet Zachariah's Tomb being opened in his days, a young
Prince of the Royal Blood was found lying at his Feet, with a Crown of Gold
upon his Head, and arrayed in a most rich Robe, and other Princely habiliments.

Clearing of the first Objection.
THERE are two principal Objections, that may be made, concerning these Funeral
Ceremonies of the Jews, which we shall here briefly endeavor to answer. The
first is, How it comes to pass, that so great honors were by them paid to the
Dead, since according to the Mosaic Law, none could touch them, without being
polluted; insomuch that those who took care of their Burial, could have no
fellowship with any, till after they had washed and purified themselves? To
this all the Interpreters do unanimously answer, that Moses his intent was not
thereby to signify, that dead Bodies were abominable in themselves; but that
bearing the blemishes and stains of sin, by their being deprived of life, they
were to purify themselves, who had touched them, as if they had touched sin it
self; Death being its proper and natural effect and reward.

Clearing of the ^econd Ob^ection.
THE other Objection may be made concerning the honor of burning, so often
mentioned in the Scripture; from whence some infer, that the Dead amongst the
Jews were sometimes consumed in the Fire, but without any sufficient ground or
reason for it, nothing (as has been said) being more contrary to the Custom
of that People. Wherefore we answer, that those burnings mentioned in
Scripture, were quite of another nature, and must not be understood of Corpses,
but of sweet-scented Woods and Perfumes, which they consumed to a vast expense,
at the Funerals of their Kings, and other Persons of the highest Quality.

CHAP. XVI. Funerals of the Modern Jews.
IN the description I am about to make of the Funeral Rites of the Modern Jews,
I might be thought to amuse the Reader with an idle story, but that they are
well known to be authorized by the Talmud (which next to the Holy Scripture, is
the Book of most esteem amongst them) and daily practiced by all those of that
miserable Sect, who live in these our days. Nevertheless, I must here advertise
the Reader, that though indeed that which I relate be not a Fable (it being
their constant belief and practice) yet I shall have occasion to set down many
things here, that seem the most extravagant stories imaginable; which for all
that are the ground and foundation of these their Ceremonies.

BUT here we must needs observe some kind of order, to clear a matter that is
of it self very obscure and intricate, by reason of a great number of
punctilio's thereto belonging, which they account very essential: Therefore we
shall first of all speak of their preparation for Death, when they are Sick.
Next of their Death it self, with their Funerals: And last of all of their
foolish Opinion concerning the Souls and Bodies after Death.

The manner of the Rabbi's visiting the Sick.
FIRST then; As soon as a Jew is given over by the Physicians, and they
conclude he will die, the Rabbi, who has been called to take care of his Soul,
comes to him in company with ten other persons at the least, and in the first
place asks him, whether he believes the Coming of the Messiah; whereto the Sick
having answered in the affirmative, he sits down at his beds head, and the
standers-by ranking themselves round about him, he bids the Patient to make his
Confession with a loud voice; the Form whereof is as follows.

The Form of a dying Jew's Confession.
I CONFESS and acknowledge before thee, O Lord my God, the God of my Fathers,
the strong and mighty God of every Spirit, that quickens and gives life to
Flesh; That both my Life and Death are in thy hands; therefore I pray thee to
restore me to health, Buxtorf. Synag. Judaic. c. 35.
to remember me, and hear my prayers, as thou did those of King Hezekiah,
when he was sick. But if this be the time of thy last visitation upon me, and
that I must die, I beseech thee mercifully to receive me into that Paradise,
which thou have prepared for the Just: Show me the straight way to go to
Eternal Life, and satisfy me with thy blessed presence. Praised be thou for
ever, O Lord God, who hear the Prayers of thy Servants.

Declaration of his sins.
THIS Confession is accompanied with a public Declaration of his sins; though
it be not so particular, but that he may keep to himself some things he thinks
not fit to publish to all that are present, which he afterward whispers in the
Ear of the Rabbi, under pretense of asking him his advice touching the disposal
of his Estate, and making of his last Will and Testament.

Public satisfaction given to all he has offended.
WHEN this is done, he offers public satisfaction for all the injuries by him
done, or scandals occasioned, either by his debaucheries, violence, or any
private grudge or enmity, begging pardon of all those whom he has offended, and
protesting that he likewise heartily pardons them who have done, or intended
him any wrong. As for what concerns the satisfaction he is to make to GOD,
Satisfaction to God.
he offers him no other, but that of his own Death, as supposing the same will
sufficiently expiate all his Sins: Wherein he perhaps does not mistake, though
he interpret it in another sense; for besides that temporal Death, which is
generally allotted to all Men, for a punishment of their Sins, he is in great
danger to suffer an eternal one, as a reward of his obstinacy and unbelief.

Public Prayers on behalf of the Sick; and Alms.
SOME after they have given this satisfaction, desire the public Prayers of
the Synagogue, and send as much money as they think fit to be distributed to
the Poor. Change of their Name.
There are others, who besides these public Prayers have their Name changed,
as a mark of their entire and absolute Conversion; so that when they are prayed
for, their former Name is not mentioned, but that which they have assumed
during their Death-bed-penance. For example, the Synagogue applying themselves
to God on behalf of the Sick, speak thus; Id. ibid.
O Lord, we beseech thee, to have mercy on such a one; he has changed the Name
he went by, when he offended against thy Laws, and is now called N. N. Do not
therefore look upon him as an object of thy wrath; for if thou had resolved
to punish him as such, now thou must not, since he by this other Name he has
assumed, is become another man: Whereupon we do hope, that thou will hereafter
consider him as a new Creature, and as a Babe that is but newly born.

He gives and receives Blessing.
IN short, if the sick person be in his Fathers house, he craves his Blessing;
and if he himself is a Father of a Family, he calls his Children and Domestics
unto him, to Bless them

Their foolish Opinion concerning Death.
THEN from that time forwards they dare never leave him alone; because they
persuade themselves, that the Angel of Death, which is in his Chamber, would
offer violence to him, were there none present to prevent it. Neither can they
for all this so wholly oppose and hinder that evil Spirit, but that he does him
a great deal of mischief; for (as they tell us) he with a naked Sword in his
hand, looks so frightful and terrible, that the Sick is thereby much
discomposed. At this Sword hang three drops, all of them very fatal to the
Decumbent. The first that falls on him gives him his Death; the second changes
his color, making him pale, wan and ghastly: And the last rots and turns him to
corruption; so that he becomes noisome and stinking.

Rending of Clothes and Lamentations. Elias Grammat.
UPON his giving up of the Ghost, all that are present do, by rending their
clothes, and crying as loud as ever they can, express the greatest sorrow
imaginable; and immediately after, they fling all the water they have then in
the house, out of the windows; as being of opinion, that this malignant Angel
has washed his Sword in it, wherewithal he killed him: Reason why they fling
out all the water they have in the house.
And all the neighborhood under a like apprehension, do the same. Neither is
there need of any other notice, to make known to the rest of the Town or City,
that there is some body Dead in that part of it; for this abundance of water
poured forth on a sudden in the streets, makes near as much noise, as the
ringing of our Bells.

Another opinion as foolish as the foregoing, concerning the Angel of Death.
BESIDES they have another Opinion concerning this Angel, which is no less
ridiculous. They say, that some of their most zealous Doctors not being able to
endure, that this Angel should so cruelly torment and afflict the People (for
they believe he was formerly much worse than he is now) did by their continual
prayers, so far prevail with God, that he delivered him into their hands;
whereupon they having most straightly bound him, put out his left eye; insomuch
that being now half-blind he can no more do them so much harm as formerly.

The manner of their interring the Dead.
NOW to prepare the Corpse, in order to its Burial, they fetch fresh water, the
cleanest they can get, which they boil with Camomil, dried Roses, and such like
odoriferous, and sweet-scented Herbs, and Flowers, wherein they wash it very
carefully; thereby to intimate, that Death has not only purged him from all his
filthiness; but made him of a good and pleasant savor with God.

Concerning the white Tunick.
THIS done, they apparel him in a white Tunick, to signify the innocence where
with he now presents himself before the Tribunal of the Sovereign Judge: The
anointing of his face.
They anoint his face with the yolk of an Egg, dissolved and mixed with Wine;
thereby to show, that he shall not only taste of the joys and comforts of the
other Life, which are enclosed in Gods bosom, as the yolk of an Egg is in its
shell; Rab. Mos. in Talm.
but shall be made drunk therewith, as not being able to be satisfied; and
continually drink the same in great draughts, till he has by vomiting, The Vail
wherewith they cover his face.
besmeared himself all over. Then they put a Vail over his face, thereby to
signify, that since he is passed into the other World, he is no more concerned
to regard any thing in this. They likewise cover his head with his Talled, His
short Cloak of Ceremony.
or short Cloak of Ceremony; being in hopes, that as it has been subservient
to him in this Life, on every Holy Day, to say his Prayers in the Synagogue, so
will it likewise serve him still in Heaven, during the long Sabbath of
Eternity; and that he, after having adorned it with the ornaments of the
Blessed, shall over and above crown the same with Glory. Out of this Cloak they
pull several Threads, wherewith they tie his right Thumb, Tying and bending of
his Thumb.
bending and bowing it so, as it may in some sort express the Name of God in
the Hebrew Tongue; they making no question, but that with this Mark he is
secure from all the assaults of the Devil, who whilst he shall thus hold his
hand, can never drag him into Hell, where this Holy Name is not owned, or
acknowledged; and therefore it is, that to tie this knot, they make use only of
those Threads which are taken from that sacred Cloak; because they don't
believe there can be any other strong enough for that purpose. Last of all, His
Sheets, Coffin, and Pillow.
they lay him in a Coffin, with two clean Sheets, whereof the one is put under,
and the other over him; making his head to rest upon a great stone, or on a Bag
filled with Earth: To intimate by this hard Pillow, the steadiness of that rest
he shall enjoy in the other Life, and by the cleanness of the sheets he lies
on, and is covered withal, the Light and Purity of that Blessed Life.

The manner of their attending the Funeral.
WHEN the Body is thus ordered, they carry it to the Grave, in a most confused
and disorderly manner, by reason that every one of the company will bear it by
turns. Which they discharge with a great deal of Devotion, in a prospect of
those great advantages God has prepared for the party deceased: And being
arrived at the place of Burial, whilst they nail the Coffin on the side of the
Grave, the whole Company go seven several times, as it were, in procession
round about it; thereby to signify, Their reasons why they take seven turns
a-round the Coffin.
that as God created the World in six days, and rested on the seventh from all
his Works, so the pilgrimage of this transitory Life endures but for a very
little time, after which Men rest from all the pains and Labors they have
undergone, to all Eternity, which is represented by the number Seven.

Why they cause a wax-taper to burn at the Grave for the space of seven days.
Buxtorf. Synag. Judaic. c. 35. Why their great Mourning lasts seven days.
WHICH number they also observe, with regard to the Dead, in three other
Ceremonies. First, in placing a lighted Wax-Taper by his Grave, or in the
Chamber in which he dyed; where they let it burn for the space of Six whole
Days, and put it out on the Seventh. Secondly, in their great Mourning, which
lasts seven days. And last of all, in the restlesness they express at their
first coming into their House, after their return from attending the Funeral,
by starting on a sudden from their place seven several times, as if they did
not find themselves at ease, in the six former removes they had made. Why they
shift their places seven times when they are come back from attending the
Funeral.
Which restlesness and shifting of place, that is much like a piece of Mummery,
and very childish, not to say foolish, is notwithstanding by them asserted to
represent the inconstancy of worldly things, which their deceased Friend might
from the time of his Birth, to that of his Death, have easily taken notice of.
Elias Grammat. in Thesbit.
Their mourning shows, that he ought not to have done any thing else, but weep
and lament all the while he lived here: And the lighted Taper imports, that his
Temporal Life is extinguished at his arrival in Eternity. For, as I have above
observed, the six Days represent the duration of time, which is but a
reiterating or continuance of the first Week of the World. And the seventh
signifies the Sabbath Day, which is the emblem of Rest and Eternal Bliss.

The manner of their Burial.
BUT now let us return from this so curious digression, and speak of the manner
of their Burials. When the Coffin is nailed, they let it down into the Grave,
every one throwing in the Earth by handfuls, till it be quite filled up, and
nothing left behind of what they had dug out, to make the hole; upon which
account it is, that they beat it down and tread upon it, as hard as ever they
can, so as every bit of Earth may go in; Their reason.
for they fancy, that if but one handful of the Mould should remain, it were a
sign that the Ground would not harbor the Corpse, no more than it could the
Bodies of those reprobates, Corah, Dathan and Abiram, whom it having swallowed
into its Entrails, let them fall down to Hell, not being able to endure them.

Form of their Funeral Prayers.
WHILST the Body is burying, the Rabbi Buxtorf. ibid.
, who has muttered several prayers, does last of all speak to the whole
Company, to this purpose: We verily believe that the Foundation of the World is
laid upon three things; viz. on the Law of Moses, the Service of God, and Piety
toward the Dead. Blessed therefore be he who rewards those that are careful to
discharge this Duty. Reason why they pluck up grass at three several times, and
fling i^ behind their back.
Then all the People turning their backs to the Grave, pluck up some Grass at
three several times, and throw it over their Heads, rehearsing these words of
the Psalmist, Psalm. 72. 16.
They of the City shall flourish like grass of the Earth: That is to say, that
the Dead, by passing from this Mortal, to Eternal Life, shall rise again to
Glory; as the Grass grows and flourishes again, after it is mown and cut down.

Their reasons for taking the Bed to pieces, on which the Body lay, and
breaking of an earthen Pot.
MOREOVER it is to be observed, that as soon as the Dead is carried out of the
House; there are some in a readiness presently to take the Bed to pieces on
which he died, who hastily fold or double the Quilt, roll up the Coverings or
Bed-clothes, leaving them confusedly on the Mat, and run to the Windows to
fling an Earthen Pot after the Coffin; thereby to intimate, that every thing is
altered and broken now as to him, and that he has no more claim to any of the
Goods, which he formerly was possessed of.

Their great or close Mourning.
WHEN the Relations are returned from attending the Funeral, they have no
sooner recovered home, but they begin their great or close Mourning, which
lasts seven days, in the solemnizing whereof, they proceed in this order:
First of all, Buxtorf ibid.
they wash their Hands, put off their Shoes and Stockings, and sit down on the
Ground, where they pass their time in continual tears and lamentations, without
doing any manner of work whatsoever; no not so much as dressing Meat for
themselves, their Friends all that while taking care to send them from their
Houses, whatever they stand in need of, ready prepared, according to their
custom; on the first day of their Mourning therefore they serve them with
nothing else but hard Eggs, with a little Bread and Water, thereby to intimate
they are very sensible, that their affliction is hard and heavy, and by eating
of the same with them, how great a share they take in it. But on the following
days, they feast them well, eat with, and comfort them; and on the Sabbath Day
the same Friends come to accompany them to the Synagogue; from whence they
conduct them back to their own houses, as soon as Divine Service is ended.

Their second mourning.
THEIR second sort of Mourning, which they call mean or indifferent, lasts
thirty days, during which they are not permitted, to wash, perfume, or shave
themselves, or so much as cut their Nails. Neither do they all that time eat
with their Families, but the Men invite some of their Friends, and privately
take their repasts with them; as the Women also do by themselves (that is,
without the Men) with some of their she-neighbours, who come on purpose to keep
them company, and work with them; for it is not lawful for a Husband to
converse with his Wife, nor for a Wife to do the like with her Husband, until
the time of this Mourning be over.

The last and least mourning.
AS for the last sort of Mourning, it concerns only Children, who are not
dressed in black as with us; but are obliged for a whole year to wear the same
clothes, which they had on, when their Father died; not being permitted to
shift themselves, though they be never so ragged and torn. They also celebrate
a Fast every Year on the same day; and for the space of eleven months rehearse
the Prayer Kaddisch, for the deliverance of their Parents Souls out of
Purgatory; for they believe, that none but impious persons abide there a whole
year; but that the good do never remain in that place above eleven months,
provided their Children repeat this Prayer for them every day; which Prayer
they do not continue to rehearse beyond the time forementioned; because every
one of them has a good opinion of his Parents Virtue; there being no Child that
thinks his Father to have been a wicked and ungodly man.

Fabulous story concerning the Prayer Kaddisch.
THIS Prayer is grounded upon a fabulous story of Rabbi Akiba, who says, that
being one day a walking in a remote and solitary place, he met with a man, who
was laden with so great a burden of Wood, that no laboring Beast could ever
have carried more; and that upon his demanding, whether he was a living Man or
a Ghost, he answered him, that he was the Spirit of one Dead, and was forced
every day to cut down such a load of Wood, to feed the Fire, wherewith he was
tormented in Purgatory. Whereupon he further asked him his Name, and that of
his Family; which as soon as he had learnt, he repaired to the deceased's
Children, and taught them this Prayer; withal assuring them, that their Father
would in a little time be delivered from his sufferings, in case they would
rehearse it constantly every day; which they having begun to do, the Dead
appeared to them the next night, to return them thanks for the same, and let
them know, that he was already entered into the pleasant Garden of the
terrestrial Paradise: And thereupon, these good tidings, together with a Form
of this Prayer, were sent to every Synagogue in the World, insomuch as there is
not one now but makes use of it. When the Deceased has no Children, the whole
Synagogue assembled in a Body, by rehearsing this Prayer, do supply that want.
But if he has any, he dies with abundance of joy and satisfaction; because they
suppose the said Prayer more efficacious in the mouths of their Children, than
in any others.

Reasons of this their Superstition.
AND what makes them so superstitious and strict in the observing of so many
petty Ceremonies, is because their Rabbis tell them, Rab. Akib. in Talm.
that the Soul not being able to enter into Paradise, as soon as it is
separated from the Body, haunts sometimes its own house, sometimes Coemeteries,
or Churchyards, and sometimes the Synagogue it self, to observe and take
notice, whether in all these places they punctually pay their duties to their
deceased Friend or Relation; not doubting, but that if they should neglect any
the least circumstance therein, they would be severely punished for it: For
they do esteem them so essential and absolutely necessary for the Rest of the
departed Soul, that they are persuaded it would never be by the Angels carried
up into the Bed of God, there to repose to all Eternity, if but one single
punctilio should be omitted in this service; but that on the contrary it would
be fain to wander up and down in a Region where it must meet with troops of
Devils, that would most cruelly afflict and torment it.

THEY also believe, that when the Soul is upon the point, either of entering
Paradise, or going down into Hell, seeing it self obliged for ever to part and
shake hands with its dear companion the Body, reenters it again for the last
time, and makes it to stand up on his feet: Whereupon the Angel of Death, with
a chain in his hands (whereof one half is Iron, and the other Fire) gives him
three several strokes: With the first of which he puts all his bones out of
joint, making them fall confusedly to the ground; with the second he breaks and
shatters them; and with the last he turns them all to dust: After which the
good Angels draw near, who having taken up all these broken pieces, lay them
anew in the Grave.

Their foolish opinion concerning the Land of Promise, the first Principle of
their Resurrection.
LASTLY, they are persuaded, that those who are not Interred in some place or
other of the Holy Land, shall never rise again; and that all the favor God
will be able to do them, shall amount to no more than this, That he will open
some small chinks, through which they may (though imperfectly) behold the abode
of the Blessed; except they have by great merits, as continual Alms, and other
good works, rendered themselves worthy of it. And concerning these they say,
that God, who is most just, and never leaves goodness and virtue unrewarded,
shall provide for them hollow places in the Earth, through which their Bodies
shall roll continually, until they come to the Mount of Olives, which at the
time of the Resurrection, shall be cleft and divided into two parts, in order
to its giving them a free passage, and that being arrived in this blessed Land,
they shall rise again, as well as others, who were buried there; for they
fancy, that the mere touching of it, is sufficient to capacitate them for that
Bliss and Felicity. Upon which account it is, that when they dye abroad, they
give their Relations a strict charge to translate their Bones into Chanaan, as
soon as ever they shall be able to do it.

Three sorts of Persons that are to rise again.
NOR are their other Opinions concerning the Resurrection of the Dead, less
absurd and ridiculous, than these their Ceremonies. They hold it as an Article
of their Faith, that there are four things which God grants to none but
Israelites, viz. Prophecy, the Law, the Land of Promise, and the Resurrection;
all others, whether Heathens or Christians, being deprived of these advantages.
To which they add, that there will be three sorts of People which shall rise
again at the last day. The first shall be of those that are absolutely good;
The second of them who are stark naught; and the third of such as are both good
and bad. Their first opinion.
That the good shall be enrolled among the number of the Blessed ones; the
wicked reduced to nothing; and those that are partly good and partly bad, after
having remained for the space of a whole Year in the fire, where their Bodies
shall be consumed, and their Souls purified, they shall at the last be received
into Heaven.

Second opinion.
NEVERTHELESS, I find, that their opinion is not general, who think the wicked
shall be annihilated, for there are some of them that believe the Pains and
Torments of the Damned will be Eternal, and that they shall never enjoy any the
least rest, but on Saturdays, when (as they say) those miserable Souls have
leave to go out of the Flames, and refresh themselves. Whence it is, that they
take so much care of having Water ready in all their Vessels, on that day; to
the end the Damned may not be at the trouble of looking out for some, when they
come to cool their burning and scorching heat.

The virtue and efficacy of the word Amen.
BUT I must not here omit speaking of the virtue, which they attribute to the
word, Amen, or So be it Elias Grammat. ibid.
; there being some of them who make more account of it, than of all their
Prayers put together; for how long and prolix soever they be, they do not fancy
them to have any efficacy at all, The second Principle of their Resurrection.
except they conclude them with an Amen, most fervently and devoutly
pronounced; Insomuch as all those who frequent their Synagogues, may take
notice, that after these People have with the greatest have and precipitancy
(such as puts them out of breath) rehearsed whole Psalms, they on a sudden
stop, and recollect themselves at the end of each Psam, to say, Amen, with as
much devotion as possibly they can; or else after a little pause, they utter it
as loud as ever their strength will give them leave. Either of which ways they
think very fitting and becoming: for to speak it softly and demurely, shows
their great inward devotion; as to utter it aloud, their zeal and earnestness
in declaring the praises of God, which they are so transported with, that they
sound forth their Amen with all the might they have.

NOW they are in no doubt, but that having thus pronounced this Amen here
below, they thereby deserve eternally to pronounce the same in Heaven;
grounding this their Opinion upon two Psalms of David; in one of which, after
having given a large account of the greatness and glory of God, he concludes
with a Doxology or Blessing of the Divine Majesty, and Seals it with a twice
repeated AMEN. Blessed for ever be the Lord God of Israel, AMEN and AMEN. The
first Amen (say they) is the Amen of Faith and Devotion, which ought here in
this World to terminate all our Prayers, to the end, they may be meritorious:
And the second is the Amen of Reward, that shall make us give thanks to God for
all his Benefits vouchsafed to us. In the other Psalm the same Prophet having
spoken of all the Praises due to God, concludes it with exhorting the People
for ever more to bless the Holy Name of his Divine Majesty, and wishing every
one in his own particular to answer to it, So be it, So be it.

Buxtorf. ibid. c. 26.
MOREOVER they aver, that the pious pronunciation of this word is one of the
most certain tokens of Election; that it distinguishes the good Israelites from
the bad, and that it is impossible, but they must rise again to happiness, who
in their Prayers utter it with a great deal of faith and assurance, Nay, they
go further, and say, that a sinner, how great soever he be, shall nevertheless
deserve a glorious Resurrection, provided he does signalize his devotion in the
pronouncing of this Word. And that this may be apprehended, Rabbi Judah uses a
comparison, which is no less gross, than this opinion or fancy is ill grounded.

A gross comparison concerning this opinion.
Rab. Jud. in Talm.
THE Case is the same (says he) with a great sinner, as with a Maid, who has
given way to her being seduced and debauched in her Father's house, and thereby
got a great belly. Her Mother transported with wrath, and not being able to
suffer this blot and reproach to her Family, does at the first news thereof,
turn her out of doors. Nevertheless, when the time of her delivery is come, and
she hears her poor Daughter, amidst her extreme pains, a thousand times calling
upon her for help and pity; the Name of Mother, so often, and with so much
passion repeated by a Daughter in so great grief and suffering, does at last
move the Mother to compassion, and obtain her favorable regards: That only
Name makes her forget her Daughter's misbehaviour, and effaceth all the Ideas
of aversation formerly conceived against her; she causes her immediately to be
sent for home, and takes all the care of her imaginable, letting her want
nothing that may be requisite for her in that condition. Thus it is with a
great sinner; though God have cast him out of Paradise, by reason of his
crimes, yet he is sensibly moved with his Prayers, when they are concluded with
a most devout Amen. At this word alone he remembers his sins no more, and opens
to him again the doors of Heaven, which before he had shut upon him in his
wrath.

THIS is so true (adds he) that we our selves have a proof of it, of many Ages
standing, which cannot be questioned. For though we have often been driven out
of the Land of Canaan, when we were carried in bondage to Nineveh and Babylon,
and now are scattered all the world over, and we cannot rise again, Their
foolish Opinion concerning the travel of the Dead into the Holy Land.
but in that blessed Land; yet it is certain, that the Bodies of true
Israelites, after having been for some time buried in another place, are
rolling through deep Hollows and Caves, which God has made for that purpose,
till they are arrived so far as under the Mount of Olives; from whence they are
by the Spirit of God, that quickens them, transmitted into Paradise.

I HAVE thought this repetition would not seem tedious to the Reader; since it
comes from one of the most famous Doctors of their Sect, whom they esteem as an
Oracle of their Talmud; and besides, it confirms their extravagant and
ridiculous opinion concerning the Resurrection of such as die out of the Land
of Canaan.

The third Principle of their Resurrection.
WE will conclude this Chapter with a recital of the fabulous advantages they
expect from their Messiah, which are kept in store for those only who shall
rise again: It is indeed nothing else, but the Description of their Paradise
(properly so called) which has no other foundation, but what they have laid
for it in their foolish fancies. Rab. Jehos. in Talm.
They say, that as this Prince shall be invested with the Almighty strength of
God, so no Tyrant will be able to withstand him; that he shall obtain a full
and complete Victory over all the then Kings and Potentates of the World, and
deliver all the Israelites, who groan under the yoke of their cruel
Governments, out of their hands. That having gathered them all together, he
shall lead them in triumph into the Land of Canaan, where they shall upon their
first arrival, be supplied with rich and costly Garments, ready made to their
hands, and fitted for all statures and sizes. Advantages to be enjoyed by the
Jews in the Land of Canaan.
That there also they will find all sorts of desirable Meats that can be wished
for, which the Country shall bring forth, seasoned and dressed to every one of
their Palats: That there they shall enjoy a pure and temperate Air, with
moderate and pleasant weather, which shall for ever keep them in perfect health
and strength, prevent their falling into any kind of sickness, and lengthen the
thread of their life beyond that of the Patriarchs, who lived before the Flood.

Feast of the Messiah.
BUT all this is nothing, if compared with the Feast, which they fancy their
Messiah will make them, wherein among other rare and miraculous Viands, of
which that glorious Entertainment shall consist, the wonderful Behemoth,
Leviathan, and stupendous Bird shall be served. The first of which has been a
fatning ever since the World began; all the Grass that grows upon a thousand
hills being but a repast of one day for him. Monstrous Creatures that shall be
served at the foresaid Feast.
The second fills and takes up a whole Sea: And the last, when she spreads her
wings, clouds and eclipseth the Sun. Moreover concerning this Bird, they tell
us, that having on a time dropped one of her Eggs from her Nest, it beat down
three hundred tall Cedars, and being broke, overwhelmed sixty Towns and
Villages.

A Public show of these Creatures.
TO this they add, that before they be served at this great Entertainment, the
Messiah shall expose them for the sport and diversion of his people, by making
them fight together: Which certainly will be a very curious and extraordinary
show. For besides the monstrous and wonderful Bulk of these Creatures, which
are to combat one another, no Theater ever exhibited the like Antagonists, viz.
a Bull, a Fish, and a Bird, fighting together. Id. ibid. and Rab. Bab.
But it seems this extraordinary Messiah (as they fancy) must do extraordinary
things, even beyond all humane conceit and apprehension.

Monstrous Creatures in his Palace.
THEY likewise speak with a great deal of seriousness and wonder, of a Raven
and Lion, which for a mark of his Grandeur, he shall keep in his Palace: The
former whereof, they tell us, did at a certain time swallow down a Serpent,
that had devoured a Frog as big as a Village of sixty houses, making but one
mouthful of both, much after the same manner as a Fox would in a trice dispatch
a bit of a Pear, says Rabbi Babha, who assures us to have been himself an
Eyewitness of it.

AND as concerning the latter, viz. the Lion, my Author Rabbi Jehoshua says,
that a Roman Emperor having once heard of him, and taking the Report for a
Fable, commanded him, upon pain of death, to bring this Animal to him; which
Order he being, by the authority of the Commander, and strictness of the
Injunction, forced to obey, applied himself with Prayers to God to that
purpose, who having granted him leave to show this Creature to the Emperor, he
went in search of him in the Wood of Ela, where his usual abode and retreat
was; but that when he was advanced with him, within a thousand and four hundred
paces of Rome, he then began to roar so loud, that the dreadful noise made the
Women, that were with Child in the City, to miscarry, and like an Earthquake,
threw down the walls level with the ground. All which notwithstanding, trying
to proceed further with this Lion, and being come a thousand paces nearer to
the City, he fell a roaring a second time, with such an extreme violence, that
it made the Citizens lose all their teeth, and flung the Emperor himself down
from his Throne; so that he was fain to beseech the Rabbi to carry this Animal
back again to his Forest.

THESE are the great Truths on which all the Doctrine of the Talmud is
grounded, whereto we might have added several others of the same stamp: But as
they serve not for our present Discourse, we shall pass them by; only with this
brief remark, that the Modern Jews have never been more extravagant and
ridiculous, than in their Ceremonies and Opinions about, and concerning their
Dead.

CHAP. XVII. Funerals of Schismatics.
WE may distinguish the Schismatics into three different Nations, which make
the Principal Sects of them, viz. the Grecians, both natural and others, that
follow the Rites of the Greek Church; the Aethiopians, and the Moscovites, who,
as they have all of them particular Customs about the disposing of their Dead,
it will be fitting to speak to them severally.

Several ways of Burying used among the Modern Grecians, according to the
different Quality of Persons.
TO begin then with the first of these: The Ceremonies used by the Modern
Grecians, at the Interments of their Monks, Priests, those of the Laity, and
particularly of Women and Children are diverse, and much differing one from
another. For they strip the Monks of their Frock and Cowl, and let their Bodies
lie naked, covered only with an Haircloth: To show by their nakedness, that
they have lived in an absolute and entire abrenunciation and denudation of the
things of this World; and by the Hair-cloth, that the whole Series of their
lives has been nothing else but Penance and Austerity. As for their Priests,
they apparel them with their own Sacerdotal Garments, and Ecclesiastical
Ornaments; thereby to represent the high Excellency of their Employment, and
Dignity of their Character. As for the Lay People, they are, after their Death,
adorned with their richest clothes; and if they be such as have been
Magistrates, with their Gowns and Robes of State; as thinking they cannot be
too neatly and handsomely dressed, being to appear in the presence of God. Their
Women are all covered with a long Vail, which reaches down from their head to
their very feet; by this means to intimate the care Women ought to take to hide
themselves from the sight of all Men, except their own Husbands. Last of all,
they apparel their Children like Angels, because they believe they are going to
take their place amongst the number of those Blessed Spirits.

The reasons of three services they celebrate for the Dead.
THEY usually celebrate three Services for their departed Friends: The first on
the third, the second on the ninth, and the last on the fortieth day after
their Death; for the solemnizing of every one of which, they allege two
several reasons: As first, for that on the third day, because the Body does
then begin to change, Crus. in not. ad Turcograec.
and the Face to lose its features and lineaments; and also, because our
Blessed Lord rose again on the third day: For that on the ninth, because the
whole Body by that time corrupts, putrifies, and becomes noisome, the Heart
only excepted; and likewise, because our Lord, eight days after his
Resurrection, began anew to show himself to his Disciples. And lastly, for
that on the fortieth, because the very heart does then rot and putrify, there
remaining nothing sound and entire in the whole Corpse, besides the Bones only;
and moreover, because our Lord ascended into Heaven the fortieth day after his
Resurrection.

THESE Services consist in Songs or Hymns, Prayers, Ceremonious Breathings or
Insufflations, Liberalities and Alms. Whilst the Priests are singing, making
every foot the sign of the Cross, the Deacon rehearses some Prayers, and at
every turn breaths or blows upon the Offerings, begging of God, that the
departed Soul may rest in peace. Now these Offerings, which generally are of
all sorts of Pulse, and very good Wine, are afterward brought to the foot of
the Altar, and there distributed to the standers-by, for a token of the union,
which the Deceased had with them, when yet alive, and of that also, which he
still desires to have with them, by sharing in their Prayers and Suffrages.
Lastly, they conclude these Ceremonies with general Alms and Charities to all
there present, that stand in need of them.

The manner of burying the Dead among the Ethiopians.
THE Ethiopians are wont to accompany their Dead to the Grave, with diverse
Prayers, which they rehearse without singing; Ext. tom. 2. rer. Hisp.
and when the Corpse is set down on the side of the Grave, they read over it the
Gospel of S. John. The next day they begin to distribute many Alms for the Rest
of the Soul; and so continue for the space of eight days, during which, they
splendidly treat and feast the Relations and friends of the Deceased.

Discourse at their Funeral Feasts.
IN which Feasts their whole discourse is concerning the Dead; speaking of his
good works, if his Life has been exemplary; or of his repentance, if he had
been a great sinner, and was at last converted; of God's mercy toward him, if
he died in his sin without any signal Conversion; they charitably believing,
that before his last gasp, he might have performed some acts of Contrition, and
like the good Thief, saved himself at the end of his Schun^ig. in Hoda-port. l.
2.
life: And besides these Religious acts and dispositions of the deceased, they
also entertain themselves either with the discourse of his good manners,
whereby he rendered himself amiable in the sight of all Men; of his natural
endowments and lovely qualities, which made him to be esteemed and regarded by
every one; of the great Estate he had got by his industry and diligence; of the
honorable Offices he had born in the Commonwealth; or lastly, of his Noble
achievements, and famous Victories in War. From all which put together, they
conjecture that he must certainly be happy in Heaven: and therefore they
heartily rejoice, that he is past from the miseries of this transitory
Pilgrimage, to the felicity of Eternal Life. Which Duty they are so exact and
religious in performing, that if any one should happen to talk of any other
matters, he would presently, as an impertinent, be turned out of the company.

The manner of Burying the Dead among the Moscovites.
AMONGST the Moscovites Funerals are always performed and attended by
daylight; it being neither usual nor lawful with them to carry the Dead to
their Graves after Sunset: For which custom, they allege this reason, That it
is not becoming at all to carry them in the dark, who are entered upon Eternal
Light. Anonym. l. de Russ. relig.
As often as any one is Dead amongst them, they contend one with another, who
shall Bury him; as accounting that Duty, not only for a work of mercy, but
meritorious also. Therefore he reckons himself very happy, who by the Relations
of the deceased is appointed to discharge this last Office.

THEY do not Consecrate their Coemeteries, or Burying-places, because they say,
that it belongs to the Bodies anointed and sanctified by the Holy Ghost to
consecrate the Earth, and not to the Earth to consecrate the Bodies. These
Coemeteries of theirs are either in Woods, or open Fields; and every Grave has
a heap of Stones, with a small Cross on the top of it. Their Clergymen,
together with the Friends and Relations of the Departed, accompany the Corpse
toward the place of Burial; whereof some are singing certain Hymns and
Prayers, whilst others weep, and make great lamentation. They have besides,
this particular custom, that they burn Incense all along the way, by which they
carry the Dead, some of the Priests having Censers in their hands for that
purpose; for they believe, that thereby the Devils are put to flight, and
frighted from approaching the Dead. They also celebrate several Masses for the
Rest of the Departed Souls, though they hold no Purgatory; hoping that by means
of these Masses, and their Prayers, God will grant to the Deceased a better
place in Heaven, than that which his merits could otherwise have procured for
him. This being done, all the company sit down to eat Rice-cakes in the Church
it self; and after this sober and simple repast, they arise and mutually
embrace, and wish one another an Eternal satiety and fullness of Everlasting
pleasures in the Bosom of God.

CHAP. XVIII. Funerals of Christians.
AFTER what has been before said concerning Funeral Ceremonies, as common to
all the Nations of the World (even the most barbarous) none can doubt, but that
they are Sacred in themselves, since they are taught us by Nature, Reason, and
consequently by God himself, in order to give humane Bodies, the respect and
honor due to them, as being by means of the Immortality of the Soul, far
enobled above those of all other Creatures. True it is, that these Ceremonies
among some people are become superstitious and cruel too, proportionably as by
their own depravation and obstinacy they have more or less swerved from the
Truth, which inwardly did dictate tothem sentiments altogether contrary to
their extravagant actings. But thanks be to God, they have with us remained
pure and entire, as will plainly appear both from the continual practice of the
Church, from the first Centuries until now, and by Arguments no less strong and
solid, than holy, and religious, upon which they are grounded; so as to be able
to stop the mouths of the most obstinate Libertines and Heretics; in case they
have but the patience to read the unquestionable Instances and Authorities we
are to allege here.

The manner of apparelling and Burying the Dead among the Roman Catholics.
AS soon as any one is Dead amongst us, they close his Eyes and Mouth, kiss and
embrace him; afterward they wash, perfume and apparel him. When he is dressed,
they for some time expose the Body in the Entry of the House, or in some other
large Room, till the Priests come to take it away, in order to its Burial; at
which time all the Company march in Procession, attended with more or less Pomp
and Ceremony, according to the quality of the party Deceased. At the head of
this solemn attendance one advances with the Cross, who is followed by the
Clergymen, singing all the way: On this occasion the number of Lights and
Wax-Tapers is great, and greater is the crowd of People that accompany the
Corpse; whereof some are weeping and lamenting, whilst others repeat Prayers for
the Dead. Last of all, when they are arrived at the Church, and a Mass for the
Rest of his Soul has been celebrated, he is Interred there, or else in another
consecrated place, called the Churchyard.

THESE are all the Ceremonies we use in this particular; of which some one or
other are often omitted, either by reason of the poverty of the Party, the
negligence of his Relations; or lastly, because some do affect a more simple
and plain way of Burying their Dead. Nevertheless all of them may in an holy
manner be practiced; and for which we have reason to expect a Reward at the
last day, as being Works of Mercy, which by the Sovereign Judge are so highly
recommended to us.

NOW we must prove, that these have always, and are still used; and show the
reason of this Universal Practice.

Reasons why we shut the Eyes and Mouth of the Dead.
IN the first place then, we close the Eyes and Mouth of our deceased Friends
and Relations (which S. Denis the Areopagite tells us in his Hierarchy, is a
Custom that was observed by the Primitive Christians) to represent, that the
Death of the Faithful is, according to the Oracles of Scripture, but a Repose;
since after having been asleep for a while, they shall be awaked to Eternity:
Moreover, by shutting their Eyes and Mouth, we do intimate, that the Dead are
no more to take delight in the objects of this, their employment now being
steadfastly to behold all the ravishing beauties of the other World; and
continually to praise God, who is the glorious and bountiful Dispenser of them.

Reasons why we kissed the Dead.
TO which the foresaid Father adds in the same place (and S. Austin confirms it
in his 118. Epistle) that they kissed the Dead, either to congratulate them
upon the account of the happiness they were going to enjoy; or thereby to
signify the Eternal union, that God has appointed and ordained to be between
them and the Living, who both of them make but one and the same Church: Which
Communion all the power of the bottomless pit can never break or dissolve, nor
separate the holy Travelers, from those who are already entered upon the
possession of Everlasting Glory: As also to show the Natural tenderness and
love they had for the Deceased. But this Custom is now quite abolished with us
in many places, and not very strictly observed in others, though indeed it be
very commendable; and they who practice it, do thereby show their piety; since
the motives thereof are most Holy. Denis of Alexandria, and Eusebius in the
Seventh Book of his History, mentions the embracing of the Dead, which
questionless was grounded upon the same reasons.

Reasons why we wash the Dead.
AS for the usage of washing the Dead, S. Epiphanius in his Speech on this
Subject, and S. Chrysostom in his 84. Homily on S. John tells us, that it was
hallowed in the Person of our Lord and Savior, whose precious Body was washed
as soon as they took it down from the Cross. And we read in the ninth Chapter
of the Acts of the Apostles, that a Woman of Joppa, called Tabitha, whom S.
Peter restored to life, had been washed before she was laid in the upper room
of the house. S. Chrysostom also, whom I just now quoted, in his first Homily
upon Job, describing the Funeral Duty a Son ought to pay to his deceased
Father, tells us, that he must first of all wash his Body, which decent Custom
is confirmed by Tertullian in his Apologetick. Surius informs us, that S.
Martian took a particular care to search for the dead Bodies of the Poor, in
order to the giving them Burial, and that he never failed of washing them well
with fair water. S. Gregory the Great, does both in his Ritual, and several
other Works of his, speak of this Custom as universally approved of by the
whole Church: And though it be not at this day used in France, yet S. Gregory
of Tours gives us sufficient instances, that it was in his days religiously
observed amongst us. By which washing of the Body they intimated, that as the
Dead had by the Sacraments been cleansed from their filthiness, so they would
infallibly be received into Heaven, where no polluted or unclean thing shall
ever be able to enter.

Reasons why the Dead are perfumed.
NEITHER is the Custom of perfuming the Corpse less holy and reasonable, since
besides that it was (as well as that of washing) sanctified in the Person of
our Lord, it is authorized by an infinite number of instances among the
Primitive Christians, which without doubt may very well be imitated. We read in
S. Matthew, S. Mark, and S. John, that the three Mary's not contenting
themselves with the precious Drugs and Odours wherewith Joseph of Arimathea and
Nicodemus did perfume and embalm the Sacred Body of our Blessed Lord, speedily
repaired with sweet Spices to his Sepulcher, with an intent of paying that Duty
to him there. And indeed the reason why the Primitive Christians were so
careful to perfume the Dead was, because they regarded them as so many Members
of the Mystical Body of the Redeemer of the World. Tertullian in his
Apologetick, upbraiding the Heathens with their vast expenses of sweet Scents
and Perfumes, consumed in their Temples, tells them that those Odours would be
better employed in embalming the Bodies of Christians, than in perfuming their
Idols. Upon which account it is, that the Pagans, who knew that this pious
Custom was religiously observed by the Christians, reproach them in Minutius
Felix, that they neglected the Living, and took care only of the Dead; since
they reserved all their Perfumes for their Funerals. Clemens Alexandrinus
speaking in his Catachetical Instructions against Women, who lavished too much
Money in perfuming themselves, says, that that expense cannot be well allowed,
but only to the Dead. Prudentius and Orentius two Christian Poets, who have
made several Elogies in praise of those that died with the sweet Odor of
Holiness, do not omit mentioning among other Honors done to them, that of
perfuming their dead Bodies. S. Gregory Nazianzen does in his 18. Epistle say,
that this honor was paid to his Brother Caesarius. Several other instances of
the same kind might be produced out of S. Ambrose, Gregory the Great, Surius
and Baronius his Annals, concerning the Bodies of Martyrs: But to shun
prolixity, we shall to the Premises only add what Lactantius delivers on this
subject. The reason (says he) why we Christians do perfume the Dead, is,
because this honor did always attend the Apotheosis, or Canonization of any
Person; as it is obvious to observe both from Sacred and Profane Writers; and
therefore it is, that we render this kind of Divine honor to those whom we
believe (as it were) deified, by their passage from this life, to a blissful
Eternity.

Reasons why the Dead are clothed.
AS concerning the manner of apparelling the Dead, all of us are not in the
same practice: For some do only cover them with a large Winding Sheet, as we do
in France; and others dress them in the very same Clothes they were wont to
wear when yet alive, as in Italy and other places. Which latter way was
formerly esteemed more honorable, and much used in the first Centuries. For
not to speak of the Priests, who are always buried with us in all their
Ecclesiastical Ornaments: I find in the Roman Pontifical, that Pope Eutychius
did in his time order all the Bodies of Martyrs to be arrayed in a fair
Surplice: With reference to which, Pope Gregory in his 44. Epistle finds fault,
that some of his Predecessors had that honor done to them, which was only due
to Martyrs. Surius acquaints us, that an Egyptian Lady, Cleopatra by Name, clad
St. Maximinus, a Martyr, in a very rich Apparel, before he was laid in his
Coffin. And Eusebius in his History, tells us as much of Asterius, a Roman
Senator; who being informed that an Illustrious Captain of his time, called
Marinus, was Martyred at Caesarea in Palaestina, caused a strict search to be
made for his body, and when he had procured it, committed the same to the
Earth, adorned with very costly habilements. We read in the Lives of the
Fathers of the Desert, and namely, in that of S. Pachomus, that the dead Bodies
of all those Hermites were most richly decked. And St. Gregory Nyssen tells us,
that he himself bestowed very costly Cloth and Stuff, to array the Corpse of his
Sister Macrina, who died in a Monastery.

TO the foregoing instances of the rich Vestments bestowed by the Primitive
Christians upon the Dead, we may add the Description of two magnificent Tombs,
found in the Church of St. Peter, in the Vatican; The first of these was
discovered in the Year one thousand four hundred and forty eight, in the
Chapel of St. Petronilla, as they were digging a Grave for a Penitentiary then
lately deceased. It was all of Marble, and so purely white, and curiously
polished, that it passed for a wonder; in the inside of which there were two
Cypress-Chests or Coffins, over-laid with Plates of Silver, whereon the sign of
the Cross was engraved, and within the same were two Bodies apparel'd in
Vestments of Cloth of Gold, but so rich, that besides four-score pounds weight
of Silver, which the Plates weighed, the Gold of their Clothes, and other
Ornaments amounted to sixteen Pound-weight. The other Tomb was, that of the
Empress Mary, Wife of Honorius, which was discovered in the time of Pope Paul
the Third, and was likewise of Marble; in which, over and above the Gold, which
amounted to about forty Pound weight, there were enclosed several curious
Vessels of Crystal and Agate, with many other rich Jewels. As for the reasons
why we dress the Dead, they are very plain and obvious, for besides that Nature
teaches us to cover the nakedness of humane bodies, we do signify thereby,
that they have by their death put on immortality; and therefore the more rich
those accoutrements are, the more proper are they to represent those Heavenly
Robes of Glory, prepared for them.

NOR is it needful to have recourse to Antiquity for instances, that may
authorize the exposing of the Corpse to public view. We herein follow
Tradition, which with us is instead of a Law; and injoyns us to set the Body,
either in the Entry, or the principal and most public room of the House; and
that for two reasons. The first, that by this sight, those that pass by may be
taken off from Terrestrial things, and fix their thoughts on those that are
Heavenly, by being thereby put in mind of their latter end. The other, to crave
the Prayers and Suffrages for the Deceased; that God may be merciful to them,
and without suffering them to languish in the torments of Purgatory, receive
them the sooner into the abode of the Blessed.

Reasons of the Pomp and Ceremony wherewith they carry the Dead to the Grave.
IT is the belief of this Bliss and Felicity, which the Faithful enjoy after
their Death, makes us accompany them in a pompous Procession, with Hymns and
Lights. We give all these marks of joy at Burials (says S. Chrysostom, in his
Fourth Homily on the Epistle to the Hebrews) because we consider the Dead, as
so many stout Champions, that have courageously fought, and gloriously obtained
the Victory. Wherefore we give thanks to God, for his having so powerfully
supported them in all their needs and troubles; delivered them from all the
miseries of this Life, made them triumph over all their Enemies; and lastly,
for having banished all their fears, by crowning them with Eternal Glory and
Felicity. And indeed this Procession has something in it of a triumphal March;
the Hymns or Songs are so many public shoutings and acclamations; and the
Lights that shine every where, do by their splendour much add to the glory of
this Pomp. What can be more great and solemn (says S. Jerome, speaking of the
Interment of Sancta Paula, and S. Gregory Nyssen of that of his Sister) than to
see such a vast number of Persons, consecrated to God, clothed in their
Sacerdotal Ornaments, and who by their gravity and the orderly and decent
manner they proceed in, look like so many Princes, and are really so, of a
Kingdom far more glorious, than any on Earth? What is more charming and
pleasing to the Ear, than the melody and concert of their Songs? whereby they
imitate the Angels, who at the same time do with Hallelujahs and joyful
Acclamations, receive the Soul of the Departed? In short, what is more
delightful to behold, than the light of so many burning Tapers? This artificial
brightness giving us a weak Idea of that Eternally clear and shining day they
meet with in Heaven. We might here add many other reasons, why our Funerals are
attended with Lights; as first, That it is the emblem of Joy, Honor and Life,
which are the three chief advantages of that Eternal Beatitude, wherewith true
Christians shall be rewarded in the other World. Thither they pass (as the
Scripture expresses it) from the bitter waters of mortification and austerity,
to a river of pleasure; and from contempt and humility, to the highest degree
of Glory; in a word, from Death to Eternal Life. Secondly, we make use of
Lights on this occasion, to put all the powers of Darkness to flight, and to
show that Christians having never had any fellowship with those infernal
Spirits, which endeavor to hide all their actions; but on the contrary
exercised themselves in such works as deserve for their exemplariness to be set
before the eyes of the whole World; they are passed from one light to another;
that is, from the amiable brightness of Virtue, to the glory of its Reward. In
the third place, to intimate, that they have obeyed that Precept of our Lord,
which requires his Servants to be always ready, with their Lamps burning, that
they may be prepared, and in a posture to open to, and follow him whenever he
shall please to call upon them. And last of all, to signify, that they died in
the light of Faith, and that as they have in this life sought nothing but JESUS
CHRIST, who is the true Light, so shall they possess the same in the other, to
all Eternity.

Reasons why the Cross goes before.
AT the head of this Pomp the Cross advances, which is the Mark and Character
of the Elect, the Instrument of our Salvation, and the Key of Paradise. The
most ancient Writers of our Religion tell us, that it has always been carried
in great Solemnities, and was the chief Ornament in all Pompous Ceremonies.
Besides, that Constantine the Great caused it to appear at his Triumph, as it
did to him in the midst of the Fight; and his Successors in the Empire do still
in our days place it on the top of their Crowns; Socrates and Sozomene tell us,
that in the very first Centuries, it was seen at the head of all the
Processions, which the Orthodox made against the Arrians; That S. Chrysostom
caused some Silver-ones to be very curiously wrought for that purpose; and that
the Clergy never went forth in a Body, neither at Constantinople, nor any other
City of the East, without advancing the splendid Representations of that Sacred
Wood. And to the end, that Christians might never discontinue this holy Custom,
the Emperor Justinian established it by a Law; as we may read in his 133.
Novel: Which Surius also confirms by a thousand instances of Antiquity. It is
not therefore to be wondered at, that we carry it in all our Funeral Marches,
since it has ever been the Custom so to do in all Ceremonies and Pompous
Solemnities whatsoever. And I find there is more reason for it in this, than in
any other besides; nothing less than the Kingdom of Heaven (into which this
alone can procure us an entrance) being here at stake. Thus we see in the
Gospel, that when the Sovereign Judge shall come down in the Clouds, to give
all men their Doom and Reward, he shall cause this sign of our Redemption to go
before him, which shall be the touchstone of the Good and Bad; for as he will
receive all them into the number of his Elect, that have respected it; so will
he cast down to Hell all those Reprobates, who Devil-like have despised and
contemned the same.

Reasons why they weep there.
IT might seem strange to some, that after this pompous and triumphal
Procession, a quite contrary Quire should follow; there being nothing more
unsuitable to those Hymns, and other marks of rejoycings aforementioned, than
the Tears and Lamentations of the Relations of the Deceased, and that sadness
which appears in the countenances of all their Friends. But these Tears of the
Laity have their reasons, as well as the rejoycings of the Clergy: The one
express the sense of Nature, and the other that of Faith. Both which sentiments
are so just, that far from being opposite and destructive of each other, they
make up one of the most perfect Concerts and Symphonies in the World. This S.
Austin elegantly declares, in his Comment on the Epistle of S. Paul to the
Thessalonians, where that Apostle advises us not to be sad and dejected at the
Death of our Friends and Relations, as they are who have no hope. This Oracle
(says he) does not condemn all sorrow for the Dead, but only such as is
immoderate, and like that of the Heathens, who expect no Eternal Felicity in
the other World. It is impossible (adds the same Father) that we should have no
sense of, and feel no grief at all for the Death of Persons, who are so dear to
us; for though we are assured, that we shall one day meet them in Heaven, yet
this parting (besides that it is contrary to Nature) depriving us of them for a
time, cannot but be very grievous. Moreover, we do not only in Death behold the
destruction of the Body, but the horrid and frightful image of Sin, which is
the cause of it; so that far from being not to afflict our selves in this so
sad a juncture, we might (says he) be altogether comfortless, if Faith did not
awake our Hope, and Hope calm and allay this natural and just sorrow. So that
we are grieved, and cannot choose but be so, because of this separation: But the
bitterness of this affliction is sweetened and mitigated, by the steadfast hope
we have one day to see them again in Heaven, who for a time are departed from
amongst us. Nature afflicts, and Hope glads us; our own weakness casts us down,
and Faith raises us: Our miserable condition makes us mourn, and the Divine
Promise rejoices and comforts us. I forgive Parents (says S. Jerome) for the
Tears they shed at their Children's Death. No, I cannot (pursues he) blame your
mourning, when I consider you are the Father and Mother of them that are Dead.
But withal must blame you, if you do not cease your Tears, when I have put you
in mind that you are Christians. And S. Chrysostom on the same subject speaks
to this purpose; I do not absolutely forbid you to weep, but to weep
immoderately. I am not cruel, but rather sympathize with you, as well knowing
how much Nature suffers on these occasions. This I see commonly happens even to
the most Virtuous Persons; and not to mention those two great Patriarchs,
Abraham and Joseph, the one whereof wept over his Wife Sarah, and the other
over his Father Jacob; JESUS CHRIST, who ought to be our Pattern, wept at the
Grave of Lazarus; which the Jews perceiving, did attribute his Tears to the
love he had for this holy Person. You see therefore (concludes S. Ambrose) that
Tears, when moderate, may be the marks as well of our Piety, as of our Grief;
and that being made up of the weakness of our Nature, and certainty of our
Hope, they may well become our Christian Funerals.

Reasons why the Dead are prayed for.
BESIDES, I find that the Prayers the Friends of the Dead rehearse, are very
suitable to this Religious Solemnity. Some Sing, others Weep, and these last
Pray. Now this variety which seems so disagreeing and inconsistent, is
nevertheless most pleasing to God, and makes a most admirable Harmony, wherein
he very much delights; because these differing Voices are not so contrary one
to another, but that they are all equally good and holy. The Priests sing for
joy, in view of the great happiness and bliss of the Deceased; the Relations
weep to see themselves for a time deprived of him, and because they cannot
accompany him into Glory: Lastly, his Friends pray, that nothing might stop him
in his Journey, and that without calling at Purgatory, he might immediately
enter upon those Enjoyments and Blessings, which are prepared for him in the
Mansions of Eternity.

TO the same Motive we must also attribute those Masses which are afterward
celebrated, and Alms that are given. These pious Works, as well as Prayers, are
done for the Rest of the departed Souls. Which Custom has always been observed
by the Church, as we may collect from all the fore quoted Fathers, who speaking
of the Funerals of the Christians, mention also these charitable and holy aids.
But to avoid prolixity, I here omit to set down their words at large.

Burying-places of Christians.
NOW what remains, is to show, that Christians ever had particular Places to
Bury their Dead in, and that those Places were consecrated and hallowed. We
read in the Pontifical, that almost the same Ceremonies are used at the
Consecration of Coemeteries, as at that of Churches; both which have the same
Privileges, and the one may be polluted as many ways, as the other. St. Denis
the Areopagite, who lived in the time of the Apostles, does in the seventh
Chapter of his Hierarchy, call Coemeteries, Honorable and Sacred Places. The
same Appellation Tertullian gives them in the 51. Chapter of his Book of his
Soul; as well as Optatus Milevitanus, in his sixth Book; Saint Cyprian in his
68. Epistle; St. Ambrose in the Second Book of Offices; and Saint Austin in his
64. Epistle. Moreover S. Jerome, speaking of St. Ignatius, makes mention of the
Coemetery of the first Christians, which was at Antioch without Daphnis-Gate.
And Saint Chrysostom in his Sermon concerning Faith and the Law, assures us,
that in his time there was not one Christian City, Town or Village in the
World, which had not a Churchyard belonging to it. But besides this great
Number of Authorities, which cannot be opposed, all of them proving the
sacredness of these Places, by the holy Name which is bestowed upon them, we
shall be the more persuaded and convinced of this Truth, if we do consider that
the Mass, and other Divine and Ecclesiastical Services are here celebrated, as
well as in Churches. Neither do I speak only of those Places called Catacumbae,
where Martyrs were interred, but generally of all our Churchyards. Let us hear
what St. Clement the Pope says in his Apostolical Constitutions; Assemble your
selves in the Coemeteries, there read the Sacred Books, and sing your Spiritual
Hymns; be present at the Mass that is celebrated there, and after you have
received the Body of our Savior, continue the Harmony of your Songs. Next, let
us inspect the Acts of Pope Liberius, wherein we shall find, that having been
driven and cast out of the Churches, by the command of Constans, the Arrian
Emperor; he retired to Coemeteries, there to acquit himself in the Duties
belonging to his Charge. And S. Athanasius in his Apology to the same Constans,
says, that the People of Alexandria, who were Catholics, gathered themselves
together, to pray in the Churchyard, being unwilling to enter the Church,
because it was in the possession of George, the Arrian Bishop. So that it must
needs be a great matter of joy and comfort to us, to be Buried in such Holy
Places. Now all this shows, that it has been the constant belief of the
Church, that the Bodies of Christians were not to be looked upon, as those of
other Men, but as Relics, which were one day to be transported into the
Heavenly Jerusalem. Woe to them, who by their impenitence and obstinacy, shall
be found unworthy of this unspeakable Bliss: For, as their unclean and polluted
Carcasses have defiled and profaned these Sacred Places; so shall they be
Eternally punished for it in Hell; where, instead of a Holy Burial, they shall,
like the rich Man in the Gospel, for ever have no other Grave, than those
devouring, yet never consuming Flames.

CHAP. XIX. Concerning the Right of Burial, and Laws made in that behalf.
I HAVE reserved the speaking of the Right of Burial for the latter end of this
Treatise, as being a Matter that regards all Nations; because should I have
gone about to set down the Ceremonies of every one of them in particular, I
should never have finished my Discourse. Now as this Right among Heathens was
grounded upon the Will of the Gods, Grounds of the Right of Burial among
Heathens.
the Judgment of Wise men, and the Laws that had been made for that purpose; so
I intend to treat of all these three, to the end the Reader may have a full and
satisfactory information concerning this Subject.

The first Ground of this Right. viz. The Will of the Gods.
IF we herein consult their most ancient Poets, who were accounted as so many
Secretaries of their Gods, and Interpreters of their Wills; they all with one
accord will tell us, that Burial is one of the chief and most indispensable
Duties charged upon Mankind; of which none can deprive another, without a
manifest breach of the Law of Nature. Nay, they peremptorily assert, that
Conquerors themselves may not deny it their vanquished Enemies. Euripides
represents the Women of Argos, crying out against Creon, King of Thebes, as an
ungodly and Atheistical Prince, because he would not permit them to bury their
Sons, who were slain in the Battle, they had fought against him; not being able
to conceive, but that if he had acknowledged the Gods, he would have respected
their Laws.

AND Sophocles speaking of the threats, wherewith the same Creon menaced
Antigone, because she had (contrary to his order) buried her Brother Polynices,
introduces her, answering that Prince with an undaunted courage and constancy,
founded upon the Will of the Gods, which ought always to be preferred before
that of Men. Sophocl. in Antigon.
When I Interred (says she) the Body of my dear Brother, I did nothing but
discharge a Duty, to which the Celestial and Infernal Powers have indispensably
obliged us. It is a Law, which those Immortal Sovereigns have given to Men; and
I do not see that thou, who (though a King) art mortal, and their Vassal as
well as we, can oppose or hinder the performing of this sacred Devoir. It is
a Law that has ever been observed, and so ancient, that its Original is since
time out of mind. Wherefore I had rather do what it enjoins me, than obey thy
Commands; there being far more reason for me to apprehend the displeasure and
punishment of the Gods, than thy threats.

Isocr. in Hell. encom.
OF which truth Isocrates being persuaded, highly commends Theseus and the
Athenians, for the great care they took to bury the Dead; saying, that it was a
mark and token of their piety toward the Gods; since it is they, and not men,
who established that Law.

UPON which account it is, that the Sibyl among the other important advices,
which she gives Aeneas, about the design he had to take a Journey into Hell,
strictly charges him, not to set forth, before he had caused the body of
Misenus, that lay on the Seashore, to be Buried; telling him, that as on this
occasion he stood in need of the special protection of the Gods, so he must by
this piety endeavor to deserve the same.

Oracles in favor of the Dead.
TO the premises might be added several Oracles, which clearly speak in favor
of Burials. Diod. l. 3.
Diodorus informs us, that Cybele's Relations having caused Atys to be
murdered, upon the account of his too great familiarity with her, and left his
Body lying on the ground in the open fields, the whole Country of Phrygia,
which was the scene of that cruel action, was thereupon plagued with Sickness,
and afflicted with Famine: And that the Phrygians on this sad occasion
consulting the Gods, to find out some relief of these miseries, received no
other answer, but that the Body of Atys was to be interred.

NEITHER were the Caphyans in Arcadia Pausan. in Arcad.
less severely punished, for having barbarously slain some Boys, that did them
no harm, and given them no other Burial, but that of the stones, wherewith they
had struck them down; for their Women were immediately seized with a distemper
which made them all miscarry; insomuch as they would never have had any
Children born to them, had they not obeyed the voice of the Gods, who commanded
them out of hand to bury those poor Innocents.

Idem i^ Boco.
Pausanias, who recounts this History, tells us another that is no less
remarkable, viz. That after the dismal Death of Actaeon, whom his own Hounds
devoured, the inhabitants of Orchomenus were tormented by his Ghost, that
continually put them into cruel frights; of which they would never have been
rid, had they not (according to the advice of the Oracle of Delphos) carefully
taken up all that remained of the Body of this unfortunate Hunter, in order to
inter the same.

Aeneid. 6.
AND were not those of Luca by a like answer, obliged to make a strict search
for the Body of Palinurus, that they might be delivered from the Plague, which
had infected the whole Country; and did not cease to rage till they had
appeased his Ghost, by discharging that pious Duty toward him? For though they
could not find his Body, yet they consecrated a Grove, in which they erected a
sumptuous Tomb in honor of him.

Cenotaphia, or Empty Sepulchers.
THESE Sepulchers, which were called Cenotaphia, that is, empty Monuments, were
nevertheless, according to the foolish opinion of the Pagans, very useful to
the Dead; for they fansied, that provided they were not looked into, the Corpse,
for which they were intended, though never so far distant, entered into them:
But that if out of curiosity any one opened these Tombs, they presently
vanished away. Hence it was, that they erected Monuments as well for such as
perished at Sea, were devoured by Beasts, or died in foreign parts, from whence
they could not procure their Bodies, as for those that were present with them.

Poets Fables concerning Burial.
AND indeed how could they have omitted this Duty, since the Gods themselves
often made it their particular care and business? Hom. Iliad.
For if we will believe Homer, Jupiter gave order to Apollo to inter the Body
of Sarpedon, whom Patroclus had killed. Thetis buried Ajax her self, as
Lycophron reports: Lycophr. in Cassand.
And this Goddess was also by Jupiter sent to Achilles, Hom. Iliad.
to command him on his behalf to deliver the Body of Hector, that he might be
interred: He likewise at the same time dispatching Iris to Priam, with orders
to agree about the same with the Enemy for a sum of money. Last of all he sent
Mercury, safely to guide this Prince by night, through the Host, to conclude
the Treaty. Moreover, Homer assures us, that the Children of Niobe, whom the
Gods caused to be slain, were by them Buried nine days after.

Plin. l. 7. c. 29.
BUT what I find more remarkable, is the care that Bacchus took to bury the
Body of Sophocles. Pliny says, that this Poet being Dead at Athens, at the very
time when the General of the Lacedaemonians, Lysander by name, besieged that
City; this God several times appeared to him in a dream, commanding him to
raise the siege, to the end the Athenians might be at liberty to pay their last
Duty to this great Man, whom he had always regarded as his Darling.

Gods among the Heathens, that took the care of Funerals.
TO this we may add, That there were three of their Principal Gods, who took
the care of Funerals. Pluto Jupiter's Brother was worshipped only as Sovereign
over the Dead; upon which account it was, that his Temples were only opened at
night. Summanus Diod. l. 2.
He was called Summanus, that is, the Supreme God of Manes, or Departed Souls.

NOR was Venus less concerned to see Men buried, than she was for their being
begotten; and for this reason they kept in the Temples that were consecrated to
her (under the name of Libitina, Senec l. 6. de Benef. Val. Max. l. 5.
that is to say, the Goddess of the Shades) all such things as were requisite
and necessary at Funerals, as Winding-sheets, Biers, and Instruments both to
dig Graves, and erect Monuments withal; for all manner of Tools were not
indifferently to be made use of on this occasion; since the employing other
than those that were consecrated to that service, would have been looked upon as
a kind of profanation.

Horat. l. 1. Od.
AND last of all, Mercury's charge was to receive those shades, whose Bodies
were but newly interred, and lead them into the Elysian Fields, or elsewhere,
according as they had deserved; he driving before him, with his Golden Rod,
this Troop of Ghosts, like a Flock of Sheep. And for a further proof, that it
was the will of the Gods, that this pious Duty should be performed to the Dead;
I might here observe, that they themselves commonly punished those that denied
this Right, or did any the least injury to them: And on the other hand, they
most bountifully rewarded such as signalized themselves by this piety.

Id. ibid.
WE read in Horace, of the Astrologer Archytas, who was cast away at Sea, that
his dead Body being by the Waves driven to the shore, his Ghost threatened all
that past by, who did not throw a handful of Earth upon him, with the like
misfortune, after their Death, besides several other miseries during their
lifetime.

Antholog. l. 1. c. 22.
WE also read in a Greek Writer of Epigrams, that some Persons having found a
dead Man's Skull, most of them fell a weeping; and that there was only one of
the Company, who laughed and flouted, and through an unheard of Cruelty, flung
stones at it: which stones by a strange wonder rebounding back to his Face,
wounded him very much.

Cic. l. 1. de divin.
BUT on the contrary, the Poet Simonides having met in his way on the
Seashore, a dead Body, as he was about to go on Shipboard, in order to an
intended Voyage, desired the Master of the Ship to stay till the next day, that
he might have time to bury the same; which proved a great good fortune to him:
for that night the Ghost of the Dead, having warned him in a Dream, not to
proceed on his Voyage, he accordingly did not embark in that Vessel, which
miscarried at Sea, together with all that were on Board her.

Val. Max. l. 1.
AND was not that poor Fisher very lucky, and his Piety well rewarded, who
leaving his Nets, to go and bury a Corpse, as he was digging a Grave for it,
found a Treasure that made him rich for ever after?

Antholog. l. 1.
NOW whether these things fell out by chance, or otherwise, however it is
enough for us to observe, that the Ancients were persuaded, instances of this
nature were the effect of the grateful acknowledgment of the Dead, and that the
Duty of Burial was founded upon the Will of the Gods, and consequently
considered by them as indispensable and inviolable, it being a principal point
of their Religion. And indeed the very same Priests, who taught them the
Service of the Gods, taught them also all their Funeral Ceremonies.

Explanation.
I KNOW some have been of opinion, that Priests were forbidden to meddle with
the Dead, and that the sight only of a Corpse deprived them of their Office, and
ranked them with the Laity. Aul. Gel. l. 10.
This is the Sentiment of Aulus Gellius, and Fabius Pictor; who ground their
Opinion upon this, That Augustus being High Priest, at the time when he
pronounced the Funeral Oration in praise of Agrippa, Tacit. annal. l. 3.
caused a Curtain to be drawn between him and the Corpse, that he might not see
it. But besides that this appears to have been done only with regard to the
tender love he bare to his Friend and Favorite, lest the sight of that
mournful object giving occasion to his sighs and tears, might have interrupted
his Speech; Dion who mentions this very passage in his History, and was well
acquainted with all the Roman Ceremonies, having himself been Senator, and
twice Consul, does expressly say, that this was not because of his Priesthood
(for it is not true that it was unlawful for Priests to look upon dead Bodies)
and that he never could guess at the reason why that Emperor ordered a Vail to
be drawn before him, whilst he was delivering his Oration.

BUT do not the same Aulus Gellius and Fabius Pictor contradict themselves, who
in another place own that Augustus, for all he was High Priest, went to meet
and accompany the Body of Drusus* Father of Germanicus, and that he did not
leave it, till he had paid him at Rome all the Funeral Honors, he thought due
to him?

Id. l. 2. Appian. Dion. l, 36.
MORE such like instances we have in Tacitus, concerning Tiberius, who though
he was but newly elected High Priest, at the time when he entered upon the
Government, did nevertheless attend the Funeral of his Predecessor, and of
several other Persons of Quality, whom he had a respect for.

Appian. l. 1
APPIAN, who describes the Funeral Pomp of Sylla, tells us, that all the
Priests and Vestals accompanied it. And Plutarch, in the Life of Numa, assures
us, that after his Death, the Priests followed his Body to the Grave.

BUT I should be too prolix, should I mention all the particulars Antiquity
furnishes us withal on this account; which are so many convincing Arguments,
that the Burying of the Dead has ever been reckoned one of the chief of
Religious Duties. Wherefore I shall conclude this Head, and come now to speak
of the Judgment of Wise men, who have fully and clearly explained themselves
concerning the indispensableness of the Right of Burial, The second ground of
this Right.
by which all are obliged to give the Dead their due.

Plat. in Phaed. and Cratil. and Dial. 5. de repub.
PLATO in that excellent Idea, which he was framed of his Common wealth, does
not forget amongst the several kinds of Justice he there speaks of, to mention
that which we owe to the Dead.

Arist. l. de Virt.
HIS Disciple Aristotle teaches, in his Book of Virtue, that one part of
Distributive Justice does belong to the Dead; Id Probl. Sect. 29.
and in his Problems, he asserts, that it is more just to pay them their due,
than to the Living.

Pind. in Olymp. Od. 3.
PINDAR, who was a great Philosopher, as well as Poet, says, that the things of
this World are not so entirely assigned to the Living, but that the Dead may
claim their lawful share in them; and that besides a special place which they
ought to have to be Buried in, we are bound to bestow a part of the means and
Estate they leave behind them, to celebrate their Funeral with honor and
decency.

Cic. in Topic.
CICERO, in the division which he makes of the parts of Justice, marks one to
respect the Gods, the other the Dead, and the last the Living.

Aen. 6.
SERVIVS does observe, that Virgil, who so often calls Aeneas by the name of
Pious, in the Poem he has writ to immortalize the memory of that Hero, does
chiefly give him this Character, because of the Funeral Honors, which he with
so much care and application, always paid to his Relations and Friends; wherein
he spared nothing, nor himself neither, doing many actions that would have been
unworthy of him, had they been done upon any other account.

BUT on this occasion all is honorable, even for Persons of great Quality, to
carry the Dead on their shoulders, because the motive of Piety and Humanity
that engages them to do it, highly raises that action, which is but low and
mean of it self. Senec. 5. de Benef.
When I Inter a Dead Body (says Seneca) though I never saw or knew the Party
when he was alive, I deserve nothing for my so doing, since I do but discharge
an Obligation which I owe to Humane Nature.

WHICH Duty even to unknown persons is so just, that the Latin has given it no
other appellation than that of Justice, and the Greek of a Lawful Custom, Piety
and Godliness. So that amongst the Romans and Grecians, which have been the two
most potent and civilized Nations in the World, when they would express, that
one had been interred, they said that they had done him Right or Justice.

Essential Ceremony.
THIS Duty consisted in casting three several times a handful of earth upon the
Corpse; which was to be done by one of the Priests, when any could be had; or
for want thereof, by any other Person whatsoever. This is that which the
Ancients called the Sacredness of Burying, Hom. II.
without which no Soul (as they believed) could enjoy any rest for a long
season. It availed nothing to the Dead, Delr. in Seen. Herc. Aete. and Cerd. in
Aen. 6.
that he was buried in a deep Grave, or laid in a Tomb, if the Funeral Ceremony
were not begun with these three handfuls of earth, for lack of which a poor
Soul, though it had lived never so well, was fain to wander up and down, for
the space of an hundred Years, before it could be admitted into the Elysian
Fields. And on the contrary when these three handfuls of earth were flung upon
the body, though it was never after interred, they thought the Soul did
nevertheless enjoy its rest. But as it would have been a piece of cruelty thus
to leave the Corpse exposed to the open view of all, so the one was seldom
performed without the other: for the poorest and most inconsiderable fellow in
the World (as a Slave or a private Soldier) could not be denied the usual
Garments, Coffin, and other Necessaries for his Funerals.

Privilege of Slaves after their Death.
IF any Master was so inhumane, as not to discharge this pious Duty toward his
Servant, the first Man, who took upon him the care of performing it, had an
Action against, and was sure to cast him, the Law ordering a reimbursement of
all the Plaintiff's expenses on that account, no debt having more privilege
than this, as being preferred even before Legacies, and the strictest Covenants,
yea before a Wife's Portion, which was esteemed the most Sacred Engagement that
belonged to any Society, and for which the Law had very carefully provided. And
this is the more observable, because a Slave who enjoyed no privilege, and was
by his unfortunate condition, not much more regarded than a Brute; being liable
to all manner of abuses without redress, subject to all sorts of affronts,
injuries and violence, and very often to loss of life it self, the Law taking
not the least notice of it, for his relief; had nevertheless, after his Death,
a Right to demand of his Master (by any that would do it for him) his Funeral
charges, and, in case of refusal, to distrain for them. True it is, that these
charges were very inconsiderable, and the place where this sort of People were
buried, most abject: Nepoti. Horat. l. ep.
But how small soever the one, and abject the other might be; yet was it a
Right, that could not be dispensed with.

The care Soldiers took of their own Burial.
AS for Soldiers, they in this case provided for themselves, after another
manner, not being willing, in a matter of so great importance, to trust their
Captains with the care of it. Each Legion had a Purse for their common Burials,
into which every one that was listed, was obliged to put some thing of his Pay:
and with this stock the Charges of their Interments were defrayed.

Remarkable instances.
VEGETIV'S, who tells us of that Pious Custom amongst a sort of Men, that are
thought to have neither Faith nor Law, Nulla fides pictasque viris qui castra
sequuntur. Lucan. l. ult.
adds another instance of that natural love of Burial, which is no less
admirable than the foregoing. He says, that after the bloody Defeat of Cannae,
most of the Roman Soldiers despairing of being interred, Live. l. 22.
because their Enemy was Conqueror and Master of the Field, were found to have
(as well as they could) dug holes for themselves, and laid down their Heads
foremost in them, that they might not be wholly deprived of Burial.

FOR this Reason it was, that they feared not Death in Landfights; as hoping
that the very same place wherein they fought, would afford them a Grave for
their Eternal rest. But they were mightily troubled and dismayed at the
thoughts of a Naval Combat, or when they were in danger of shipwreck; because
they saw themselves upon the point of being for ever deprived of it.

Hom. Il.
UPON which account also Achilles, who braved all manner of Dangers, could not
(as Homer says) keep himself from being daunted at that of shipwreck, when he
found himself ready to miscarry in the River Xanthus.

Sil. l. 4.
A LIKE fear of Scipio's, the greatest Captain the Romans ever had, Silius
mentions, who tells us, that he that had so many times, without the least
concern, or motion, seen Rivers of Blood running down, was most terribly
affrighted at the passage of the River Trebia, where he saw himself in danger
of being drowned.

Stat. l. 9.
THE same account Statius gives us of Hippomedon; who (as he says) could
without any trouble, have presented his Body to the dint of a thousand Swords,
and yet was not able to abide the thoughts of being cast away in the River
Theumesia.

Ovid. 1. Trist. 2. Synes. ep. 4.
IN a word, this was the Death which Ovid could not by any means be reconciled
with, and that upon this only score, that it deprives a Man of Burial.

THEREFORE they who were in danger of miscarrying at Sea, commonly tied a Piece
of Gold or Silver about their Necks, that therewith (if peradventure the Waves
should drive their Bodies to the shore) they might pay for their Funeral
Charges; though they knew that this caution and care was not necessary, since
by the Laws the Inhabitants of the Place, where they should be cast up, were
obliged to bury them. Which Laws we will now endeavor to describe, and set
down in some order, to the end we may therefrom derive a greater authority to
this Right of Burial, whereof we are treating.

The Third Ground of this Duty.
ALL the World knows, in how great esteem the Laws of the Twelve Tables have
ever been amongst the Romans; their equity being so universally acknowledged,
that the sole mention of them was enough to incline the most obstinate and
wilful minds imaginable, to reason.

Cic. l. 2. de L^g. and l. de Orat.
THESE were the Laws which Cicero (that famous Orator, and Oracle of the Roman
Senate) preferred before all the Writings of Philosophers, and declared them to
be more worth than whole Libraries, whether one considered their weight and
Authority, or the great advantages they procured to the Public. Now these so
good, wholesome and just Constitutions do speak of nothing more, than of the
Duty the Living are bound to pay to the Dead: and that with good reason; for
they being deprived of Life, and consequently unable to defend themselves, or
complain of those that abuse them, it is but just that the Laws should by all
manner of ways favor and protect them. And therefore they first of all define,
that an Heir, who shall not have well acquitted himself in all the Funeral
Honors, he ought to pay to his Benefactor after his Death, or omitted any
essential thing relating thereto, be put by, and deprived of the Inheritance or
Legacy which was left him. Secondly, that in case he has expressed the least
contempt in performing of the same, he shall be liable to capital Punishment.
And in the third and last place, that if he has been observed somewhat careless
and negligent in discharging the said Duty, he shall not enjoy the means
bequeathed to him, except he do every Year Sacrifice a Sow before he gather-in
his Harvest, to the end he may pacify and appease the Ghost of the Departed.

Plat. l. 1^. de Leg.
SOLON who was the first of Greece, that established. Laws, and had so well
regulated the Republic of Athens, that Cicero was of opinion, all other States
were to conform themselves to it, if they would be well governed; because he
had omitted nothing therein, which was requisite to good Order, Virtue, Peace
and Justice; did amongst those Laws he had made to this purpose, not forget to
insist upon each particular, and least Ceremony to be observed at Funerals;
which he afterward put into the hands of the Priests, that they might be the
Depositors and Judges of them for time to come.

Plut. in vit. Lycurg. and tract. de just La.
LYCVRGVS, who is also accounted one of the most ancient Lawgivers, and who by
his Justice made himself no less considered at Lacedaemon, than the former at
Athens, did not only confirm in favor of the Dead, all the Honors that were by
Solon appointed and ordained should be performed to them; but super-added this,
that thence-forward they should have their Sepulchers within the Walls of the
City; to the end, that being thus exposed to the sight of all People, they
might be the more respected, and imitated by them in the whole conduct of their
Lives.

Vlp. l. ult. de mort. inser.
THAT Learned Lawyer Vlpian and Labeo, who was before him, do both of them
assure us, that the Laws of all Nations do above all things recommend Funeral
Duties; being very severe to those that neglect the performance of the same.

Tit. 17. and 57.
BY the Salick Laws it was Enacted, that he who had been so inhumane and
barbarous, as to take a dead Body out of its Grave, to the intent of depriving
it of Burial, should be banished as a Monster from the Society of all Men; and
that none should give him any retreat, no not his own Wife; and this upon most
severe Penalties.

L. 5. c. Th. and Just. de sep. viol.
IN the Digest, as well as in the Codex of Theodosius and Justinian, we hear of
nothing but shame, Fines, Banishments, Amputations of Hands, Capital
Punishments, and other such like, decreed against them, who had done any injury
to the Dead, according to the quality of their Crime. We have also a Novel of
Valentinian, wholly in favor of Sepulchers. And that Apostate Prince Julian,
who might seem to have renounced all manner of Religion, by abandoning the
Christian, did nevertheless openly take the part of the Dead, and ordered those
to be most severely punished, who had disturbed, or offered any injury to them.

C. de Sep. Viol.
IN a word, so great respect has ever been given to Sepulchers, that the most
Christian Princes have extended it even to those of the Heathens, and strictly
forbidden the violating of them. For besides the Emperor Constans, who of all
Monarchs, was the greatest abhorrer of Paganism, Council. Tolet. 4. Canon. 45.
we might quote here the Canons of the fourth Council of Toledo, together with
those of that of Meaux, or Paris; Canon. 72.
all which declare the violating of Graves to be a Capital Crime, according to
both Divine and humane Laws.

IN ancient time it was not lawful to make water, or so much as spit, in Places
set apart for Burying the Dead, for which purpose they were used to have there
the representations of Griffins, Lions or Dogs, (they being the most watchful
of all Creatures) as so many Spies to have an eye that no undecent action might
be done there.

YEA, it was this great respect which the Ancients had for the Dead, that first
gave birth to their Idolatry, and made them change Sepulchers into Temples.
Here they reared their Altars, offered Sacrifices, and at last worshipped them
as Gods, who were buried as Men. Virgil tells us, that the Marble-Tomb, Aen. 4.
which Queen Dido had caused to be erected in her Palace, in honor of her
first Husband, was (even during her lifetime) looked upon as a Temple, so that
by the Divine Honors, which were there paid to his Ashes, she first gave an
instance of this Superstition. Upon this account it is, that all our Divines
have upbraided the Pagans with that gross blindness, into which they wilfully
plunged themselves, by placing them amongst the number of the Gods, whom they
had by experience, known to be but Men, having seen them, as well as others,
obnoxious to Death, which is the greatest defect of humane Nature, and
therefore most contrary to Divinity.

Prud. adv. Symach. l. 1.
AND methinks the Poet Prudentius treats them very favorably, when laughing
at the plurality and vanity of their Gods, he says, that there were as many
Temples at Rome, as Sepulchers built in honor of their Heroes. For it is
certain that this Superstition was universal amongst them; they being of
opinion, that Death indifferently consecrated all manner of Persons, and was
thought sufficient to entitle them to Divine Worship: And therefore on this
occasion the highest Personages forgot their State and Grandeur, and humbled
themselves to the meanest Service at the Funeral of those whom they had in
their life time looked upon with contempt; insomuch as even Princes honored
their Subjects, as soon as they were by Death hallowed and deified: and
Generals of Armies the meanest of their Soldiers.

TRAJAN himself, who has always past for one of the greatest and wisest
Emperors that Rome ever had, was not altogether free from this error. Dio. l.
68.
For we read in the Historian Dion, that he built Altars to the Soldiers who
had served him in that perilous and desperate War, which he waged against
Decebalus King of the Dacians, and were killed in the Field.

AND what surprises me more, is, that wise and learned Men have not been able
to keep themselves from being taken with this Superstition, and not only with
the multitude followed, but by their Writings authorized the same. Labeo tells
us, with his usual gravity, as if he were pronouncing the Decrees and Acts of
the Senate, That all Souls universally are deified, Apud Serve. in Aen. 3.
from the moment they are separated from their Bodies.

Apud Aug. 9. de Civit. 11.
AND the Platonists make no other difference between these so common
Divinities, than that the one do still continue to be wicked after their death,
as they were in their lifetime: and that the others on the contrary are always
good; asserting that those who have led an ungodly life are no sooner dead, but
they are turned to Hob-goblins, Specter and Ghosts, that haunt Houses and
Churchyards, as they who have lived well do become Tutelar and Family-Gods.

IN short, this Opinion was of old so universally received, that there was not
a Family but had their own Gods; for every one honored in particular all those
of his own Blood, that were dead.

Lact. l. 1. c. 15.
LACTANTIVS, who lived in those days, informs us, that they made Images of
them, which they carefully kept in their Houses; and the better to render them
venerable, they clothed them in the same Habits wherewith the other Gods, whom
they adored in their Temples, were adorned; dressing all the Statues of their
deceased Women, in the Habiliments of Goddesses, and those of Men, after the
manner of the Gods.

BUT lest we should think that Lactantius, being a Christian, does herein
impose upon us, to make us the more decry and abhor their Religion; we may with
little pains find the like instances in their own Authors. Stat. l. 5. Silv.
The Poet Statius, in the description he makes of the Funeral Honors, which
Abscancius paid to his Wife Priscilla, does not omit to mention, that he
extended them to an Apotheosis or Consecration, and denied her nothing of that
veneration which was given to the greatest Goddesses. Apul. Metaemor. l. 8.
Apulcius says no less of Charity her Mourning for the death of her Husband
Leopolemus; for having apparelled him like Bacchus, she made no difficulty to
pay him the same honors that went due to that God.

AND indeed from what they tell us themselves, I find that they expressed no
less reverence to them whom they had soon die, than to those they believed
Immortals, and were worshipped publicly. For besides Sacrifices, they
instituted Games and Solemn Festivals in honor of them; yea, (which is more,
and the greatest mark of Worship that can be expressed) they swore by their
Ashes.

Cic. l. 2. de Leg.
CICERO in his second Book of Laws, says, that these Games, Solemnities and
Sacrifices were authorized, by a practice of time out of mind; it having never
been questioned but that all Persons, as soon as they were departed this Life,
were admitted into the Rank and Number of the Gods. To which he adds, that
consonant to this pious Custom, he behaved himself at the Death of his Daughter.

AS for Oaths, which are Sacred Protestations and affirmations of any thing,
wherein the Immortal Gods are called to Witness, we find nothing more frequent
among Profane Authors, than their Swearing by the Ashes of their Parents, and
other near Relations. Ovid. Ep.
This we read in Ovid, that Briseis confirming something by Oath to Achilles,
takes the Souls of her three deceased Brothers, whom she considered as so many
Gods, to witness, of the truth of what she averred to him. Id. Ep. 8.
Hermione, in the same Poet swears to Orestes by the Bones of her Father.
Propert. l. 2 Eleg. 15.
Propertius does the like to Cynthia, by those of his Parents. Claudian assures
us, that there is nothing so decent and becoming a Man, Claud. l. 1.
nor so commendable, as to swear by the Ashes of his Parents. And Seneca the
Rhetorician introducing a young Man, whom his Uncle had disinherited, because
he took care to supply his Father's wants; Senec. Controv. 1.
makes him deliver himself in these words: How could I see him starve for
hunger, by whose Ashes I must swear one day?

FINIS.
Men's cujusque is est Quisque




