AN ESSAY To Revive the Ancient Education OF Gentlewomen, IN Religion, Manners,
Arts and Tongues. WITH An Answer to the Objections against this Way of
Education.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. to be sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Crown
at the lower end of Cheapside. 1673.

To all Ingenious and Virtuous Ladies, more especially to her Highness the Lady
MARY, Eldest Daughter to his Royal Highness the Duke of YORK.
CUstom, when it is inveterate, has a mighty influence: it has the force of
Nature it self. The Barbarous custom to breed Women low, is grown general
amongst us, and has prevailed so far, that it is verily believed (especially
amongst a sort of debauched Sots) that Women are not endued with such Reason,
as Men; nor capable of improvement by Education, as they are. It is looked upon
as a monstrous thing, to pretend the contrary. A Learned Woman is thought to be
a Comet, that bodes Mischief, when ever it appears. To offer to the World the
liberal Education of Women is to deface the Image of God in Man, it will make
Women so high, and men so low, like Fire in the Housetop, it will set the
whole world in a Flame.

These things and worse then these, are commonly talked of, and verily believed
by many, who think themselves wise Men: to contradict these is a bold attempt;
where the Attempter must expect to meet with much opposition. Therefore,
Ladies, I beg the candid Opinion of your Sex, whose Interest I assert. More
especially I implore the Favor of your Royal Highness, a Person most Eminent
amongst them, whose Patronage alone will be a sufficient Protection. What I
have written is not out of humor to show how much may be said of a trivial
thing to little purpose. I verily think, Women were formerly Educated in the
knowledge of Arts and Tongues, and by their Education, many did rise to a great
height in Learning. Were Women thus Educated now, I am confident the advantage
would be very great: The Women would have Honor and Pleasure, their Relations
Profit, and the whole Nation Advantage. I am very sensible it is an ill time to
set on foot this Design: wherein not only Learning but Virtue it self is
scorned and neglected, as pedantick things, fit only for the Vulgar. I know no
better way to reform these Exorbitancies, than to persuade Women to scorn those
Toys and Trifles, they now spend their time about, and to attempt higher
things, here offered: This will either reclaim the Men; or make them ashamed to
claim the Sovereignty over such as are more Wise and Virtuous than themselves.

Were a competent number of Schools erected to Educate Ladies ingenuously,
methinks I see how ashamed Men would be of their Ignorance, and how industrious
the next Generation would be to wipe off their Reproach.

I expect to meet with many Scoffs and Taunts from inconsiderate and
illiterate Men, that prize their own Lusts and Pleasure more than your Profit
and Content. I shall be the less concerned at these, so long as I am in your
favor; and this discourse may be a Weapon in your hands to defend your selves,
whilst you endeavor to polish your Souls, that you may glorify God, and answer
the end of your Creation, to be meet helps to your Husbands. Let not your
Ladyships be offended, that I do not (as some have wittily done) plead for
Female Preeminence. To ask too much is the way to be denied all. God has made
the Man the Head, if you be educated and instructed, as I propose, I am sure
you will acknowledge it, and be satisfied that you are helps, that your
Husbands do consult and advise with you. (which if you be wise they will be
glad of) and that your Husbands have the casting-Voice, in whose determinations
you will acquiesce. That this may be the effect of this Education in all Ladies
that shall attempt it, is the desire of

Your Servant.

To the Reader.
I Hope I shall not need to beg the patience of Ladies to peruse this Pamphlet:
I have bespoken, and do expect your Patronage; because it is your Cause I plead
against an ill custom, prejudicial to you, which Men will not willingly suffer
to be broken. I would desire Men not to prejudge and cast aside this Book upon
the sight of the Title. If I have solidly proved, what I do pretend to, and
fairly answered the Objections brought against my Assertions, and if I have
proposed something that may be profitable to Mankind, let it not be rejected.
If this way of Educating Ladies should (as its like, it never will) be
generally practiced, the greatest hurt, that I foresee, can ensue, is, to put
your Sons upon greater diligence to advance themselves in Arts and Languages;
that they may be Superior to Women in Parts as well as in Place. This is the
great thing I design. I am a Man my self, that would not suggest a thing
prejudicial to our Sex. To propose Women rivals with us to Learning, will make
us court Minerva more heartily, lest they should be more in Her Favor. I do
verily think this to be the best way to dispell the Clouds of Ignorance, and to
stop the Floods of Debauchery, that the next Generation may be more wise and
virtuous than any of their Predecessors. It is an easy matter to quibble and
droll upon a subject of this nature, to scoff at Women kept ignorant, on
purpose to be made slaves. This savours not at all of a Manly Spirit, to
trample upon those that are down. I forbid Scoffing and Scolding. Let any think
themselves agrieved, and come forth fairly into the Field against this feeble
Sex, with solid Arguments to refute what I have asserted, I think I may promise
to be their Champion.

These for my much Honored and worthy Friend, etc.

SIR,
I Have heard you discourse of the Education of Gentlewomen in Arts and
Tongues. I wonder any should think of so vain a thing.

Women do not much desire Knowledge; they are of low parts, soft fickle
natures, they have other things to do they will not mind if they be once
Bookish; The end of Learning is to fit one for public Employment, which Women
are not capable of. Women must not speak in the Church, its against custom.
Solomon's good House-wife is not commended for Arts and Tongues, but for
looking after her Servants; And that which is worst of all, they are of such
ill natures, they will abuse their Education, and be so intolerably Proud,
there will be no living with them: If all these things could be answered, they
would not have leisure.

We send our Sons to School seven years, and yet not above one in five get so
much of the Tongues only, so as to keep them, and nothing of Arts.

Girls cannot have more than half the time allotted them. If they were capable,
and had time, I cannot imagine what good it would do them. If it would do them
good, where should they be Instructed. Their converse with Boys would do them
more hurt than all their Learning would do them good.

I have no prejudice against the Sex, but would gladly have a fair answer to
these things, or else shall breed up my Daughters as our forefathers did.

Sir your Condescension herein will very much oblige,

Your affectionate Friend.
May 29. 1673.

SIR,
IT should be the earnest Endeavor of all men, to employ their Lives to those
noble, and excellent Ends, for which the Omnipotent and all-wise Creator made
them, which are, the Glory of God, the Eternal Happiness of their immortal
Souls, and to be useful in their Places. One generation passes away, and an
other comes: But the Earth, the Theater on which we act, abides for ever. All
the Works of the Children of Men do remain, not only in respect of the present
and future Emolument or Detriment, caused by them; But also in Reference to the
Influence they have as examples on succeeding Ages. The harvest of Bliss or
Woe, will be according to the Seed-time of this Life. This Life proceeds
ordinarily, as it begins, Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit Odorem
Testa diu --


So great is the Force of the first Tincture any thing takes, whether good, or
bad. As Plants in Gardens excel those, that grow wild; or as Brutes, by due
Management (Witness the Philosophers Dogs) are much altered: So Men, by liberal
Education, are much bettered, as to intellectuals and morals. All conclude
great Care ought to be taken of the Males: But your doubt in your Letter is
concerning the Females. I think the greater Care ought to be taken of Them:
Because Evil seems to be begun here, as in Eve, and to be propagated by her
Daughters. When the Sons of God took unto themselves the Daughters of Men,
Wickedness multiplied apace. It was the cursed Counsel of Balaam to debauch
Israel by Balack's Idolatrous Women. Wretched Jezebel excites Ahab to greater
Wickedness, than he could ever have thought of. God gave strict Command to the
Israelites, not to marry with heathenish Women, When Solomon himself (the
wisest of Men) did this, they soon drew his Heart from God. Bad Women, weak to
make Resistance, are strong to tempt to evil: Therefore without all Doubt great
Care ought to be taken, timely to season them with Piety and Virtue.

your great Question is, Whether to breed up Women in Arts and Tongues, is not
a mere new Device, never before practiced in the World. This you doubt the
more* Because Women are of low Parts, and not capable of Improvement by this
Education. If they could be improved, you doubt, whether it would benefit them?
If it would benefit them, you enquire where such Education may be had? or,
whether they must go to School with Boys? to be made twice more impudent than
learned. At last you muster up a Legion of Objections.

I shall speak distinctly to your Questions, and then answer your Objections.

Women have formerly been educated in Arts and Tongues.
Little is recorded concerning the manner, how Women were educated formerly:
You can expect my Proof to be only topical and by Circumstances.

It does appear out of Sacred Writ, that Women were employed in most of the
great Transactions that happened in the World, even in reference to Religion.
Miriam seems to be next to Moses and Aaron, she was a great Poet, and
Philosopher: For both Learning, and Religion were generally in former times
wrapped up in Verse.

The Women met David, singing triumphant Songs, composed (it is like by
themselves) a great Specimen of liberal Education.

Deborah, the Deliverer of Israel, was without all doubt a learned Woman, that
understood the Law. Huldah the Prophetess, dwelt in a College, (we may
suppose) where Women were trained up in good Literature. We may be sure she was
a very wise Woman: For King Josiah sends Hilkiah the Priest, and the Nobles of
his Court, in a Case of Difficulty and Danger, to consult with her. 2 Chro.
34.20.21 etc.

In the New Testament we find Anna a Prophetess.

Paul, Romans 16.1. Commends unto them Phebe, who was not only a Servant of
Christ: But a Servant of the Church at Cencrea. Ver. 12. He tells us Triphena,
Triphosa and Persis labored much in the Lord. Priscilla instructed Apollos.

Timothy's Grandmother called Lois, and his Mother Eunice were not only
Gracious Women, but learned Women; for from a Child they instructed him in the
holy Scriptures. 2 Timothy 1.5. compared with Chap. 3.15. The Children of the
Elect Lady, found walking in the Truth, were instructed by her. Philips four
Daughters were Prophetesses, Acts 21. Though Women may not speak in the Church;
yet those extraordinarily enabled, to whom Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 11.5. might: For
Paul directs them they should not pray nor prophecy with their Heads
uncovered, which supposes they might do the things. I shall not dispute these
Texts what this praying and prophesying was; it serves my Turn, that Women
extraordinarily enabled, were publicly employed.

We may infer from the Stories of the Muses, that this way of Education was
very ancient. All conclude the Heroes were men famous in their Generation,
therefore canonized after their Deaths. We may with like Reason conclude,
Minerva and the nine Muses were Women famous for Learning whilst they lived,
and therefore thus adored when dead.

There is no Question the Greeks and Romans, when most flourishing, did thus
educate their Daughters: in Regard so many amongst them were famous for
Learning. As Sempronia, Cornelia, Lelia, Mutia, Cleobulina, Cassandra,
Terentia, Hortensia, Sulpitia, Portia, Helvigia, Enonia, Paula, Albina, Pella,
Zenobia, Valeria, Proba, Eudocia, Claudia, and many others.

The Sybills could never have invented the Heroic, nor Sappho the Sapphick
Verses, had they been illiterate. Do you think Corinna could ever have thrice
out done Pindar, upon a solemn Contest so excellent in his Lyrick Verses, that
none else durst imitate him, had she not been instructed in Arts?

There was a Contest between twenty Grecian and twenty Roman Ladies, which were
most excellent in Learning. The Roman Dames were the best Orators: But the
Grecian Ladies the best Philosophers. This plainly shows they both were
instructed in all kind of good Literature.

Women Educated in Arts and Tongues, have been eminent in them.
I should be too tedious, if I should commemorate all upon Record, that have
been Smatterers in Learning. I shall only mention some few Ladies that have
been equal to most Men.

It is reported of Zenobia Queen of Palmeria, that she was not only excellent
her self in Arts and Arms: But Learning in her (like light in the Sun)
influenced her whole People, only famous in her Days.

Olympia Fulnia Maurata, Tutress to the Empress of Germany, understood French,
Latin, Dutch; she was so good a Grecian, that she read public Lectures in that
Language. She was also reputed to be well skilled in Divinity.

The Lady Jane Gray excelled Maurata in this, she understood the Hebrew also.
There is a large Discourse of her Learning (in which she took great delight)
and Piety, in the Book of Martyrs.

The present Duchess of New Castle, by her own Genius, rather than any timely
Instruction, over-tops many grave Gown-Men.

I am forbidden to mention the Countess Dowager of Huntington (instructed
sometimes by Mrs. Makin) how well she understands Latin, Greek, Hebrew, French
and Spanish; or what a proficient she is in Arts, subservient to Divinity, in
which (if I durst I would tell you) she excels.

The Princess Elizabeth, daughter to King Charles the first, to whom Mrs. Makin
was Tutress, at nine Years old could write, read, and in some measure
understand, Latin, Greek, Hebrew, French and Italian. Had she lived, what a
Miracle would She have been of her Sex!

The Princess Elizabeth, eldest Daughter to the Queen of Bohemia, yet living,
is versed in all sorts of choice Literature.

Mrs. Thorold, Daughter of the Lady Car in Lincolnshire, was excellent in
Philosophy, and all sorts of Learning.

I cannot without Injury forget the Lady Mildmay, and Dr. Loves Daughters;
Their Worth and Excellency in Learning is yet fresh in the Memory of many Men.

Cornelia read public Philosophy-Lectures at Rome, she brought up her Sons,
the Gracchi, so, that they were the only Men famous in their Days. She was
admired by Cicero for diverse of her Works.

The Papal Chair could not defend it self, but was invaded by a Woman, for her
Excellency in Learning above the men of her Times; As Volateran, Sigebertus,
Platina and others, that have writ the Lives of the Roman Bishops, do declare.
She is remembered likewise to this purpose by Boccasius in his Book de Claris
Mulieribus.

Rosuida, a Saxon by Nation, She lived under Lotharius the first; She was
Eloquent in the Greek and Roman Tongues, and practiced in all good Arts. She
composed many Works, not without great commendation from the Readers. One to
exhort to Chastity, Virtue, and Divine Worship. She published six Comedies;
besides a noble Poem in Hexameter verse, of the Heroic Acts done by the Otho
Cesars; with diverse others.

Elizabetha of Schonaugia zealously imitated the Study and Practice of this
Rosuida. She writ many things in the Latin Tongue; namely, a Book entitled, A
Path to direct us the way to God; as also a Volumn of Learned Epistles; with
many other Books.

I cannot omit Constantia the Wife of Alexander Sforza; She was so Learned,
that upon the sudden and without any premeditation She was able sufficiently
to discourse upon any Argument, either Theological, or Philosophical: Besides,
She was very frequent in the works of St. Hierome, Ambrose, Gregory, Cicero,
and Lactantius. She was much admired for her Extempory vain in Verse. Her
Daughter Baptista was equal to Her in Fame and Merit, and was reckoned among
the best Learned, and most Illustrious Women.

Christina late Queen of Sweden understood several Languages, and was well
versed in Politics, and acquainted with most Arts and Sciences.

I thought of Queen Elizabeth first, but purposely mention Her last, as the
Crown of all. How learned She was, the World can testify. It was usual for her
to discourse with Foreign Agents in their own Languages. Mr. Ascam, her Tutor,
used to say, She read more Greek in a day then many of the Doctors of her time
did Latin in a week. You see some Women have been good Proficients in most
kinds of Learning. I shall now show you how they have been excellent in some
particular parts of it, as the Tongues, Oratory, Philosophy, Divinity, and
lastly Poetry.

Women have been good Linguists.
It is objected against Women, as a reproach, that they have too much Tongue:
but it is no crime they have many Tongues; if it be, many Men would be glad to
be guilty of that fault. The Tongue is the only Weapon Women have to defend
themselves with, and they had need to use it dexterously. Many say one tongue is
enough for a Woman: it is but a quibble upon the word. Several Languages,
understood by a Woman, will do our Gentlemen little hurt, who have little more
than their Mother-Wit, and understand only their Mother Tongue: these most
usually make this Objection, to hide their own Ignorance. Tongues are learnt in
order to Things. As things were, and yet are in the World, its requisite we
learn Tongues to understand Arts: It Is therefore a Commendation to these Women
after mentioned, that they were Mistresses of Tongues.

There is an ancient Copy of the Septuagent, sent from the Patriarch of
Alexandria to King James, written by a Woman called Tecla, so accurate and
excellent, that the Authors of the Polyglot-Bible chose it before all other
Copies written or printed, to make use of in that Impression.

Anna Maria Schurman of Vtrecht, (called by Spanhemius, ultimum Naturae in hoc
sexu conatum, et decimam Musam, Natures Masterpiece amongst Women, excelling
the very Muses) has printed diverse Works in Latin, Greek, French and the
Persian Tongue; she understood the Arabic also* Besides, she was an excellent
Poet.

Amalasuntha Queen of the Ostrogothes, the Daughter of Theodericus, was a great
Mistress of the Latin and Greek Tongues, she spoke distinctly all the barbarous
Languages that were used in the Eastern Empires.

For Excellency in Tongues most of those Persons before mentioned are eminent
Instances, Maurata, the Lady Jane Gray, and the three Elizabeth's, etc.

Women have not been mere Talkers: (as some frivolous Men would make them) but
they have known how to use Languages, when they have had them. Many Women have
been excellent Orators.

Women have been good Orators.
Valerius Maximus tell us of Amesia a modest Roman Lady, when she was accused
of a great Crime, and ready to incur the Sentence of the Praetor, she in a great
Confluence stepped up amongst the People, and without any Advocate pleaded her
own Cause so effectually, that by the public Suffrage she was acquitted from
all Aspersion whatsoever, and from that Time she was called Androgine.

Hortensia was equal to her, the Daughter of Quintus Hortensius. When a
grievous Fine was imposed upon the Roman Matrons by the Tribunes, when all
Lawyers and Orators were afraid to take upon them the Patronage of their
Cause, this discreet Lady pleaded before the Triumvirate in the behalf of the
Women, so happily and boldly, that the greatest Part of the Mulct imposed upon
them, was remitted.

Some have commended Caia Affricana's Eloquence: I cannot approve of the Use
she put it to, but pass her over.

Tullia (by the Instruction of her Mother Terentia) was counted equal to her
Father Cicero in Eloquence.

Diverse of those Persons before mentioned were very eloquent, particularly
Maurata, Cornelia, and Queen Elizabeth. We may suppose Schurman, and the rest
that wrote so elegantly, could also speak eloquently upon a just occasion.

It is objected against poor Women, they may learn Tongues and speak freely,
being naturally disposed to be talkative: But for any solid Judgment or depth
of Reason, it is seldom found in their giddy Crowns. I proceed therefore to
show they have been good Logicians, Philosophers, Mathematicians, Divines, and
Poets.

Women have understood Logic.
Logic is the Key, those that have this in their Heads may unlock other
Sciences; some Women have had it at their Girdles, and been very dextrous in
Disputation.

Hipparchia with one Sophism put to Silence Theodorus. It was thus: That which
Theodorus doing, he is not said to do unjustly; if Hipparchia do, she is not
said to do unjustly. This he granted. She proceeds, But, Theodorus beating
himself, is not said to do unjustly; therefore if Hipparchia beat Theodorus,
she is not said to do unjustly. Theodorus makes no Reply, but, just like our
lazy Gentlemen, goes out of the Room and says, Let Women mind their Spinning.

Margarita Sorocchia, a Gentlewoman of Rome, is looked upon as so great a
Sopister, that she is ordinarily a Moderatix in the Academy at the Disputation
amongst learned Wits, in the most Polite Parts of Learning and Philosophy, yea
and Divinity too.

Those who read Schurman's Decertations, will conclude she understood the
Principles and Practice of Logic very well.

Caecilia did strange things by her great Skill in Logic, particularly by
solid Argument, she diswaded Tiburtius Valerianus his Brother, from heathenish
Idolatry to the Christian Faith.

Some think I have hardly spoke to the Purpose yet; Logic disposes to wrangle,
a thing Women are inclined to naturally: I proceed therefore to show that Women
have been great Proficients in the most solid Parts of Learning, which require
most serious Thoughts and greatest Judgment; they have been good Philosophers,
good Arithmeticians, good Divines, and good Poets.

Women have been profound Philosophers.
That they have been good Philosophers, appears from those numerous examples
before mentioned. I should but tautologize to repeat them again. Take only
their names; Rosuida, Elizabeth of Schonaugia, Constantia, her Daughter
Baptista, Anna Maria Schurman, Margarita Soracchia, etc. All those hereafter
mentioned as eminent in Divinity, must needs have some competent skill in
Philosophy; as Tibiola, Marcella, Eustochium, etc.

Aganolda was so desirous of knowledge, that she put her self into man's
Apparel, attained so great a perfection in Natural Philosophy, and in the
practice of Physic, that she was envied by all those of her faculty, and
slandered for incontinency; to vindicate her self, she discovered she was a
Woman.

Miriam was a great Philosopher, and so was the Queen of Sheba, or else she
would never have ventured to try the Wisdom of Solomon in dark Problems, and by
hard Questions.

Nicostrata (by some called Carmentis) helped to make up the Greek Alphabet,
and made some addition to the Roman Letters.

Aspasia, a Milesian Damsel, was so learned, that she instructed Pericles, and
of a great Soldier, made him an excellent Philosopher, and one of the best
Orators in Greece, and after was married to him.

Socrates acknowledges he imitated Aspasia in his Facultas Politica, and does
not blush to call Diotima his Tutress. These two Women were so learned, as to
teach this great Philosopher.

Arete attained to that perfection in Philosophy, that she instructed her son
Aristippus, who was therefore called (...), Mothertaught. After her Fathers
death, she erected a School of Philosophy, where she commonly read to a full
and frequent Auditory.

Leontinum, a Grecian Damsel, was so well seen in Philosophical Contemplation,
that she feared not to write a Book against the worthy Theophrastus.

Dama, the Daughter of Pythagoras, and her Mother, were excellent Philosophers.

Pythagoras professes he often advised with, and received help from
Themistoclea.

I should be too troublesome to you, if I should speak particularly of the
Learning of Adesia, the Wisdom of Hermodica, the Improvement of Themiste in
Pythagorean Philosophy, of the Works of Genebria, or how eloquent the two
Daughters of L. Crassus were.

I had almost sorgotten Christina Queen of Sweden in Philology and Philosophy,
superior to most of the great Scholars in Europe.

Portia, Cato's Daughter, was the best Philosopher in her Time.

Some Women have understood the Mathematics.
The Mathematics require as much seriousness as any Art or Science, yet some
Women have attained an extraordinary knowledge in these also.

Hyppatia of Alexandria, Daughter of Theon, writ of Astronomy; she was
Professor in the School in Alexandria, where she was frequented by many worthy
Scholars. Afterward by such as envied her Fame for Learning, she was pitifully
slain and massacred.

A Lady of late, I have forgot her name, is so well skilled in the
Mathematics, that she has printed diverse Tables.

If any think all this Learning is but merely humane, I acknowledge the great
end of Arts and Tongues is the better to enable us to know God in Jesus Christ,
and our own selves, that we may glorify and enjoy him for ever.

Si Christum diseis, nil est si caetera ouseis.
Si Christum neseis, nil est si caetera discis.
Many Women have improved their humane Knowledge, so as by Gods Blessing has
been a means of their obtaining Spiritual Knowledge.

Fabiola, a Roman Matron, had attained so great Perfection in the Knowledge of
the Scriptures, that she had a reverent Respect from the Learned in her Time.
St. Jerome vouchsafed to dedicate a Book to her entitled de Vesta Sacerdotali.

Marcella, a Roman, was so eminent in the Knowledge of Divinity, that St.
Jerome salutes her by Name in many of his Epistles. He writ diverse Books to
her. One de Mundi contemptu; another of the ten Names God is called by amongst
the Hebrews; a Third of Faith; a Fourth of Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost;
And diverse others.

Eustochium, the Daughter of Paula, a Roman Matron, was so excellent a Divine,
and so well practiced in the Scriptures, and in the Greek, Latin, and Hebrew
Dialects, that she was called the new Prodogy of the World.

We may reflect upon diverse of those before mentioned to supply the Defect of
Examples in this Place. Queen Elizabeth, and the Lady Jane Gray were eminent
for their Knowledge in Religion.

Rosuida, Elizabeth of Schonaugia, Constantia the Wife of Alexander Sforza, and
her Daughter Baptista, were excellent in Divinity as well as Philosophy.

The Works of Anna Maria Schurman, that are extant, declare how good a Divine
she was.

I shall conclude with Isola Navarula, who writ many eloquent Epistles. She was
a great proficient in Philosophy and Theology, as appears by that Book she
wrote by way of Dialogue, between Adam and Eve, which sinned first and most;
and by diverse other Books.

There is one thing yet remaining, in which Women have excelled, that is,
Poetry. Their excellency in this, tends as much to their vindication as any
thing yet spoken to. To be a Poetaster, is no great matter; but to be a
Poet-laureat, requires great natural endowments, such as man cannot lend, if
God does not give; Poeta nascitur, non fit. If a man's natural parts be low,
Industry, Education, Time, and Practice, may raise to some competent height in
Oratory; therefore we say, Orator fit: But all the Instruction and Education in
the World, all the pains, time, and patience imaginable, can never infuse that
sublime Fancy, that strong Memory, and excellent Judgment required in one that
shall wear the Bays. If Women have been good Poets, Men injure them
exceedingly, to account them giddy-headed Gossips, fit only to discourse of
their Hens, Ducks, and Geese, and not by any means to be suffered to meddle
with Arts and Tongues, lest by intolerable pride they should run mad.

If I do make this appear, that Women have been good Poets, it will confirm all
I have said before: for, besides natural Endowments, there is required a
general and universal improvement in all kinds of Learning. A good Poet, must
know things Divine, things Natural, things Moral, things Historical, and things
Artificial; together with the several terms belonging to all Faculties, to
which they must allude. Good Poets must be universal Scholars, able to use a
pleasing Phrase, and to express themselves with moving Eloquence.

Women have been good Poets.
Because so much depends upon this, I beg the Men's patience, if I be a little
tedious on this Point. I question not the Women will be contented to hear their
Sex vindicated.

I begin with Minerva, the Goddess of Wisdom; she was for no other reason
reckoned amongst the Goddesses, but for her excellency and cunning in Poetry
and other good Arts, of which she is said to be the first Inventress.

There were three Corinna's, famous for Poetry. One lived in the time of
Augustus, and was very dear to Ovid. A second was called Corinna Thespia, she
is celebrated in the Books of the Ancient Poets, especially Statius. The third,
and most eminent, was Corinna Thebana; she was Daughter of Archelodorus and
Procratia, and Scholar to Myrtis. In five set Contests she bore away the Palm
from Pindar, Prince of the Lyrick Poets. She published five Books of Excellent
Epigrams.

Erinna, Sir-named Teia, or (as some will have it) Telia, from the Island
Telos, not far distant from Gnidon; she flourished in the time of Dion of
Syracusa, and published an excellent Poem in the Dorick Tongue, besides diverse
Epigrams. Her Style was said to come near the Majesty of Homer's. She died when
she was but nineteen years of Age.

Sappho, the Daughter of Scamandaurus, lived in the time of Tarquinius Priscus;
she first devised the Sapphick Verse, and found out the use of the Harp with a
Quill. There was also another Sappho called Mitelena, who lived long after. She
published many rare and famous Poems amongst the Greeks; and therefore had the
honor to be called the tenth Muse.

Proba Valeria Falcona, a Roman Matron, lived in the time of Honorius and
Theodosius junior. She composed a Divine Poem of the Life, Works, and Miracles
of Christ. She also Paraphrased upon the Verses of Homer, and called the Work
Homeroucheutra. Her Husband being dead, she inscribed upon his Tomb an Epitaph,
Englished thus: To God, to Prince, Wife, Kindred, Friends, the Poor;
Religious, Loyal, True, Kind, Steadfast, Dear,
In Zeal, Faith, Love, Help, Amity, and Store;
He, that so lived, and so deceased, lies here.


I had almost forgot the Sybils: The Name signifies such as have thoughts of
God. As a Man that prophesies is called a Prophet, so a Woman predicting, was
called a Sybil. There were twelve of these, all of them Poets. Sybilla Lybica
invented the Heroic Verse. Sybilla Delphica was so famous a Poet, that Homer
did take many of her Verses to himself, and made them his own. All of them
delivered their Oracles in Verse: If their Verses were not so smooth as Homers
and Hesiods, an abatement must be made for the matter and manner of their
speaking, which was usually in an ecstasy. They all prophesied of Christ. I
shall insert only one or two of their Predictions, thus Englished. A King, a
Priest, a Prophet, all these three
Shall meet in one; Sacred Divinity
Shall be to Flesh espoused. O, who can scan
This Mystery, uniting God with Man!
When this rare Birth into the World shall come,
He the great God of Oracles strikes dumb.


Sybilla Delphica speaks to this purpose. An Angel shall descend, and say,
Thou blessed Mary hail;
Thou shall conceive, bring forth, yet be
A Virgin without fail.
Three Gifts the Chald'ans to thy Son
Shall tender with much piety,
Myrrh to a Man, Gold to a King,
And Incense to a Deity.


I shall mention only one more, which is that of Sybilla Europa. When the great
King of all the World shall have
No place on Earth by which he may be known;
When he that comes, all mortal men to save,
Shall find his own Life by the World overthrown.
When the most Just, injustice shall deprave,
And the great Judge be judged by his own.
Death when to Death, a Death by Death has given,
Then shall be op't the long-shut Gates of Heaven.


I do not produce these as Foundations of our Faith; We have a more sure word
of Prophecy which we ought to look unto, as a Light that shines in a dark
place. This is more sure than that which we see with our Eyes, hear with our
Ears, or handle with our Hands.

Cleobulina was Daughter of Cleobulus Lindus, one of the seven Wise Men of
Greece. She imitated, and some think did equalize her Father. She was eminent
for Enigma's and Riddles. Take this one rendered thus: One Father has twelve
Children great and small,
And they beget twice fifteen, Daughters all;
Half of them White, half Black, immortal made;
And yet we see how every hour they fade.


I cannot leave out Helpis, the Wife of the Famous Philosopher and Poet
Boethius Severinus; because many Hymns to the Apostles are yet extant, which
Gyraldus and the best Writers constantly affirm to be hers. She writ her
Epitaph with her own hand, translated thus; Helpis my Name, me Sicily first
bred;
A Husband's love drew me from hence to Rome,
Where I long lived in joy, but now lie dead,
My Soul submitting to the Almighties doom.
And I believe this flesh again shall rise,
And I behold my Savior with these eyes.


I may put Philenis and Astenissa together; they were both good Poets, and
imitated one another.

Hildegardis Moguntina was eminent for Learning and Piety as well as Poetry:
Her Works were approved in the Council held at Tryers, where Dr. Bernard was
present.

Aristophanes speaks much of Clitagora Lacedemonia, and Serabo in his Homerica
speaks more of Hestia Alexandria.

Antipater Thessalus, gives the first place amongst the nine Lyric Poets, to
Paxilla Syconia. She lived in the thirty second Olympiad.

I should be too tedious, if I should give you a particular account what Seneca
speaks of Michaele; what Aristophanes of Gharixena; what Celius speaks of
Musea; or, what Textor remembers of Meroe.

Cornificina, Luccia Mima, Cassandra, Magalostrate, were good Poets. Polla
Argentaria, Wife to the famous Poet Lucan, was reputed of that excellent
Learning, that she assisted her Husband in the three first Books, entitled
Pharsalia.

I can but name those Poets Anyle, Nosiis, Myro Byzantia, Damophila; because I
hasten to those nearer our own times: Only take notice, these numerous Examples
of Learned Women, do plainly prove, they were heretofore liberally educated.

Lorentia Stoza is now famous in Italy for diverse Hymns she composed in diverse
kinds of Verse, especially in excellent Sapphicks.

How excellent a Poet Mrs. Broadstreet is, (now in America) her Works do
testify.

We need no other Encomium of Mris. Philips, than what Mr. Cowley gives, he
plucks the Laurel from his own Brow, to crown hers, as best deserving it.
Besides, her Works in print speak for her.

Sir John Harington in his Allegory upon the 37 Books of Ariosta, commends unto
us the four Daughters of Sir Anthony Cook; also the Lady Russel, the Lady
Bacon, the Lady Killegrew, giving to each of them, for Poetry, a worthy
Character; whither I refer the Reader.

In the same place the Author commends to us, a great Italian Lady, Vittoria,
who writ largely and learnedly in the praise of her dead Husband. With whom I
may rank (if in the comparison I do not underprize) the beautiful and learned
Lady Mary, Countess of Pembrook, the worthy Sister to that incomparable Person
Sir Philip Sidney.

The Lady Jane Gray, and the Lady Arabella, had a great faculty in Poetry.

The two Orations delivered at the Universities by Queen Elizabeth's own Mouth,
gives ample testimony of her Oratory. Those ingenious Fancies, and pleasant
Poems, bearing her Name, shows she was a good Poet.

The Lord Burghlies three Daughters were eminent for Learning, and competent
Poets; as appears by these Verses made upon this occasion. Silesia was in
Cornwall, her Husband was designed to be sent Ambassador; Mildreda her Sister
was at Court, who had interest there to hinder this intended Embassy of her
Brother; Silesia writes to her Sister Mildreda: Si mihi, quem cupio Dominum,
Mildreda, remittas,
Tu bona, tu melior, tu mihi sola Soror.
Sin male cunctando retines, vel trans Mare mittas,
Tu mala, tu pejor, tu mihi nulla Soror.
At si Cornubiam, tibi pax sit, and omnia laeta,
Sin Mare, Silesiae nuntio bella. Vale.
Mildred, my Husband dear, if you now back do send,
Better than good you are, and Sister to the end.
But if you him stay there, or send him over the Sea,
Much worse than naught you are, no Sister you shall be.
If Cornwall he does see, I Will pray, and all good tell;
But if he cross the Sea, I am your foe. Farewell.
Silesia.

It may now be demanded, by those studious of Antiquity, why the Virtues, the
Disciplines, the Nine Muses, the Devisers, and Patrons of all good Arts, the
Three Graces; should rather be represented under the Feminine Sex, and their
Pictures be drawn to the Portraictures of Damsels, and not have Masculine
Denominations, and the Effigies of Men? Yea, why Christians themselves, in all
their Books and Writings which they commit to Posterity, still continue the
same practice? Why Wisdom is said to be the Daughter of the Highest, and not
the Son? Why Faith, Hope, and Charity, her Daughters, are represented as Women?
Why should the seven Liberal Arts be expressed in Women's Shapes? Doubtless this
is one reason; Women were the Inventors of many of these Arts, and the
promoters of them, and since have studied them, and attained to an excellency
in them: And being thus adorned and beautified with these Arts, as a testimony
of our gratitude for their Invention, and as a token of honor for their
Proficiency; we make Women the emblems of these things, having no sitter
Hieroglyphick to express them by. I shall add this one thing, worthy
observation, to the great honor and commendation of the Feminine Sex.

The parts of the World have their denomination from Women, Asia is so called
from the Nymph Asia, the Mother of Japethus and Prometheus. Europe, from Europa
the Daughter of Agenor. Lybia (which is Africa) from Libia the Daughter of
Epaphus. America (lately discovered) bears the same Female Figure.

It is usual for men to pride and boast themselves in the Wisdom, Valor, and
Riches of their Ancestors; what wise Men their Forefathers have been, what
great things they have done, and what large possessions they have had, when
they themselves are degenerated and become Ignorant, Cowardly, beggarly,
debauched Sots.

I hope Women will make another use of what I have said; instead of claiming
honor from what Women have formerly been, they will labor to imitate them in
learning those Arts their Sex has invented, in studying those Tongues they
have understood, and in practicing those Virtues shadowed under their Shapes;
the knowledge of Arts and Tongues, the exercise of Virtue and Piety, will
certainly (let men say what they will) make them honorable.

Care ought to be taken by us to Educate Women in Learning.
THat I may be more distinct in what I intend, I shall distinguish of Women,

Women are of two sorts, RICH, Of good natural Parts. POOR, Of low Parts.


I do not mean, that it is necessary to the esse, to the subsistence, or to the
Salvation of Women, to be thus educated. Those that are mean in the World, have
not an opportunity for this Education: Those that are of low Parts, though they
have opportunity, cannot reach this; Ex quovis ligno non sit Minerva: My
meaning is, Persons that God has blessed with the things of this World, that
have competent natural Parts, ought to be educated in Knowledge; That is, it is
much better they should spend the time of their Youth, to be competently
instructed in those things usually taught to Gentlewoman at Schools, and the
overplus of their time to be spent in gaining Arts, and Tongues, and useful
Knowledge, rather than to trifle away so many precious minutes merely to polish
their Hands and Feet, to curl their Locks, to dress and trim their Bodies; and
in the mean time to neglect their Souls, and not at all, or very little to
endeavor to know God, Jesus Christ, Themselves, and the things of Nature, Arts
and Tongues, subservient to these. I do not deny but Women ought to be brought
up to a comely and decent carriage, to their Needle, to Neatness, to understand
all those things that do particularly belong to their Sex. But when these
things are competently cared for, and where there are Endowments of Nature and
leisure, then higher things ought to be endeavored after. Merely to teach
Gentlewomen to Frisk and Dance, to paint their Faces, to curl their Hair, to
put on a Whisk, to wear gay Clothes, is not truly to adorn, but to adulterate
their Bodies; yea, (what is worse) to defile their Souls. This (like Circes
Cup) turns them to Beasts; whilst their Belly is their Godd, they become Swine;
whilst Lust, they become Goats; and whilst Pride is their God, they become very
Devils. Doubtless this under-breeding of Women began amongst Heathen and
Barbarous People; it continues with the Indians, where they make their Women
mere slaves, and wear them out in drudgery. It is practiced amongst degenerate
and Apostate Christians, upon the same score, and now is a part of their
Religion; it would therefore be a piece of Reformation to correct it; and it
would notably countermine them who fight against us, as Satan against Adam, by
seducing our Women, who then easily seduce their Husbands.

Had God intended Women only as a finer sort of Cattle, he would not have made
them reasonable. Bruits, a few degrees higher than Drils or Monkies, (which the
Indians use to do many Offices) might have better fitted some men's Lust, Pride,
and Pleasure; especially those that desire to keep them ignorant to be
tyrannized over.

God intended Woman as a help-meet to Man, in his constant conversation, and in
the concerns of his Family and Estate, when he should most need, in sickness,
weakness, absence, death, etc. Whilst we neglect to fit them for these things,
we renounce God's Blessing, he has appointed Women for, are ungrateful to him,
cruel to them, and injurious to our selves.

I remember a discourse in Erasmus, between an Abbot and a learned Woman. She
gives many good Reasons why Women should be learned, that they might know God,
their Savior, understand his Sacred Word, and admire him in his wonderful
Works; that they might also better administer their Household Affairs amongst a
multitude of Servants, who would have more reverence toward them, because they
were above them in understanding. Further, she found a great content in reading
good Authors at spare times. He gives her one Answer to all this, That Women
would never be kept in subjection if they were learned; as he found by
experience amongst his Monks, of all things in the World, he hated nothing so
much as a learned Monk, who would always be contradicting his Superior, from
the Decretals out of Peter and Paul. He cared not if all his Monks were turned
into Swine, so long as they would be obedient, and not disturb him in his
Pleasures. Doubtless if that generation of Sots (who deny more Polite Learning
to Women) would speak out, they would tell you, If Women should be permitted
Arts, they would be wiser than themselves (a thing not to be endured) then they
would never be such tame fools and very slaves as now they make them; therefore
it is a wicked mischievous thing to revive the Ancient Custom of Educating them.

Seeing Nature produces Women of such excellent Parts, that they do often
equalize, sometimes excel men, in what ever they attempt; what reason can be
given why they should not be improved?

Nothing is more excellent than Man; his excellency does not consist in his
smooth Skin, or erect Countenance, but in his Reasonable Soul; and the
excellency of Reason is, when it is improved by Art.

Learning perfects and adorns the Soul, which all Creatures aim at. Nay more, a
principal part of God's Image in Man's first Creation, consisted in Knowledge.
Sin has clouded this: why should we not by instruction endeavor to repair
that which shall be perfected in Heaven?

None deny the understanding of the highest things belong to Women; as, The
knowledge of God, Meditation of his Word, Contemplation of his Works; and they
have been all along eminently employed in the great Transactions of the Church:
In the Old Testament, Miriam, Debora, Jael, Judith, Esther. In the
New Testament, the Blessed Virgin, Anna, Phebe, Priscilla, Lois, Eunice, the
Elect Lady, etc. were all useful and serviceable to the Church. Who then will
forbid them the studying of Arts, Tongues, History, Philosophy, etc.
subservient to these? None can reverence the Majesty of God, nor admire his
wonderful Works, unless they in some measure know him and them.

This Nation was delivered from the Danes, by the Valor, Secrecy, and
Fidelity of the Women; and from worse, than Danish slavery by the means of a
Woman.

If any desire distinctly to know what they should be instructed in?

I Answer, I cannot tell where to begin to admit Women, nor from what part of
Learning to exclude them, in regard of their Capacities. The whole
Encyclopedeia of Learning may be useful some way or other to them. Respect
indeed is to be had to the Nature and Dignity of each Art and Science, as they
are more or less subservient to Religion, and may be useful to them in their
station. I would not deny them the knowledge of Grammar and Rhetoric, because
they dispose to speak handsomely. Logic must be allowed, because it is the Key
to all Sciences. Physic, especially Visibles, as Herbs, Plants, Shrubs, Drugs,
etc. must be studied, because this will exceedingly please themselves, and fit
them to be helpful to others. The Tongues ought to be studied, especially the
Greek and Hebrew, these will enable to the better understanding of the
Scriptures.

The Mathematics, more especially Geography, will be useful; this puts life
into History. Music, Painting, Poetry, etc. are a great ornament and pleasure.
Some things that are more practical, are not so material, because public
Employments in the Field and Courts, are usually denied to Women: Yet some have
not been inferior to many men even in these things also. Witness Semiramis
amongst the Babylonians; The Queen of Sheba in Arabia; Miriam and Debora among
the Israclites; Katherine de Medices in France; Queen Elisabeth in England.

Valerius Maximus tells us of diverse Women that have, with good success and
great applause, pleaded their own Causes, as Amesia Sentnia; and Hortensia the
Daughter of Q. Hortensius.

Amalesuentha, Queen of the Gothic Empire in Italy, contemporary with
Justinian, was exceedingly valued by him; as appears by his Epistles recorded
by Cassiadorus.

Zenobia made the Country famous by her Learning and Prudence.

In these late Times there are several instances of Women, when their Husbands
were serving their King and Country, defended their Houses, and did all
things, as Soldiers, with Prudence and Valor, like Men.

They appeared before Committees, and pleaded their own Causes with good
success.

This kind of Education will be very useful to Women.

1. The profit will be to themselves. In the general they will be able to
understand, read, write, and speak their Mother Tongue, which they cannot well
do without this. They will have something to exercise their thoughts about,
which are busy and active. Their quality ties them at home; if Learning be
their Companion, Delight and Pleasure will be their Attendants: for there is no
pleasure greater, nor more suitable to an ingenious mind, than what is founded
in Knowledge; it is the first Fruits of Heaven, and a glymps of that Glory we
afterward expect. There is in all an innate desire of knowing, and the
satisfying this is the greatest pleasure. Men are very cruel that give them
leave to look at a distance, only to know they do not know; to make any thus to
tantalize, is a great torment.

This will be a Hedge against Heresies. Men are furnished with Arts and Tongues
for this purpose, that they may stop the mouths of their Adversaries. And Women
ought to be Learned, that they may stop their ears against Seducers. It cannot
be imagined so many Persons of Quality would be so easily carried aside with
every wind of Doctrine, had they been furnished with these defensive Arms; I
mean, had they been instructed in the plain rules of artificial reasoning, so
as to distinguish a true and forcible Argument, from a vain and captious
Fallacy. Had they been furnished with Examples of the most frequent illusions
of erroneous Seducers. Heresiarks creep into Houses, and lead silly Women
captive, then they lead their Husbands, both their Children; as the Devil did
Eve, she her Husband, they their Posterity.

It is none of the least considerations, that a Woman thus educated, who
modestly uses her Learning, is, in despite of envy, honored by most,
especially wise and good men; such a one is admired and even adored by the
vulgar and illiterate.

More particularly, persons of higher quality, for want of this Education, have
nothing to employ themselves in, but are forced to Cards, Dice, Plays, and
frothy Romances, merely to drive away the time; whereas knowledge in Arts and
Tongues would pleasantly employ them, and upon occasion benefit others.

Seneca endeavoring to comfort his Mother Helvigia in her Affliction, when he
was under Banishment, suggests to her, that she had been liberally brought up,
and might now have an opportunity to be farther improved, and might comfort her
self in the study of Philosophy.

We cannot be so stupid as to imagine, that God gives Ladies great Estates,
merely that they may Eat, Drink, Sleep, and rise up to Play. Doubtless they
ought not to live thus. God, that will take an account for every idle thought,
will certainly reckon with those Persons that shall spend their whole lives in
idle play and chat. Poor Women will make but a lame excuse at the last day for
their vain lives; it will be something to say, that they were educated no
better. But what Answer Men will make, that do industriously deny them better
improvement, lest they should be wiser than themselves, I cannot imagine.

More particularly, Women are Unmarried. Married. Widows.


As for Unmarried Persons, who are able to subsist without a dependence, they
have a fairer opportunity than Men, if they continue long in that estate, to
improve the Principles they have sucked in, and to ripen the Seeds of Learning
which have been sown in their minds in their tender years. Besides, this will
be an honest and profitable diversion to possess their minds, to keep out worse
thoughts. Maids that cannot subsist without depending, as Servants, may choose
their places, to attend upon honorable Persons, or to be employed in
Nurseries; by their Conversation, to team Tongues to Children, whilst carried
in Arms; who perhaps, when they find their own feet, will not abide the tedium
of a School.

The famous Lord Mountagn was thus improved, to the amazement of all, which
made him ever after hate all Pedantick Education.

Julius Caesar also received such a tincture, whilst he was in the Nursery, that
he was the reviver of the purity of the Latin Tongue in his days.

Married Persons, by virtue of this Education, may be very useful to their
Husbands in their Trades, as the Women are in Holland; and to their Children,
by timely instructing them, before they are fit to be sent to School; as was
the case of Caesar and the Lord Mountagn.

I need not show how any Persons, thus brought up, if they happen to be Widows,
will be able to understand and manage their own Affairs.

2. Women thus educated, will be beneficial to their Relations. It is a great
blessing of God to a Family, to provide a good Wife for the Head, if it be
eminent; and a presage of ruin, when he sends a ranting Jezebel to a soft Ahab.

One Athaliah, married to Joram, plucks ruin upon the House of Jehosaphat. How
many Families have been ruined by this one thing, the bad education of Women?
Because the Men find no satisfactory converse or entertainment at home, out of
mere weariness they seek abroad; hence they neglect their Business, spend their
Estates, destroy their Bodies, and oftentimes damn their Souls.

The Italians slight their Wives, because all necessary knowledge, that may
make them serviceable (attainable by institution) is denied them: but they
court, adore, and glory in their Curtezans, though common Whores; because they
are polished with more generous breeding.

Many learned Men, having married Wives of excellent Parts, have themselves
instructed them in all kinds of Learning, the more to fit them for their
Converse, and to indear them and their society to them, and to make them
admired by others. The Woman is the glory of the Man; we joy in our Children
when eminent, and in our Wives when excellent, either in Body or Mind.

I have said before how they may improve their Children in Learning, especially
the Tongues; I mention it again, because it is a reason of so great weight,
that it is sufficient (if there was nothing else) to turn the Scale. Tullia had
never been so eloquent, had not she had so learned a Mother as Hortensia.

The Gracchi, Baptista, Damar, Aristippus, Eustochium (before mentioned) had
never been so famous in Arts and Tongues, had they not been timely taught by
their Mothers, Cornelia, Constantia, Arete, and Paula.

King Lemuel's Wisdom was extraordinary, yet he acknowledges the Seeds were
sown by the timely instruction of his Mother, Prove. 31. Therefore Solomon
charges Children to mind the Instruction of their Mothers; having found so much
good by it himself.

Besides, none have so great an advantage of making most deep impression on
their Children, as Mothers. What a prudent and virtuous Mother commends by
Precept and Example, sticks long; witness Lemuel and his Proverbs, many of
which he sucked in with his Mothers Milk.

Timothy was taught the Holy Scriptures from a Child, by his Grandmother Lois,
and by his Mother Eunice.

We may presume the Children of the Elect Lady, were found walking in the Truth
from their Mothers Instructions. For they seldom speak the Language of Canaan,
whose Mothers are of Ashdod.

3. Women thus instructed will be beneficial to the Nation. Look into all
History, those Nations ever were, now are, and always shall be, the worst of
Nations, where Women are most undervalued; as in Russia, Ethiopia, and all the
Barbarous Nations of the World. One great Reason why our Neighbors the Dutch
have thriven to admiration, is the great care they take in the Education of
their Women, from whence they are to be accounted more virtuous, and to be sure
more useful than any Women in the World. We cannot expect otherwise to prevail
against the Ignorance, Atheism, Propnaneness, Superstition, Idolatry, Lust,
that reigns in the Nation, than by a Prudent, Sober, Pious, Virtuous Education
of our Daughters. Their Learning would stir up our Sons, whom God and Nature
has made superior, to a just emulation.

Had we a sufficient number of Females thus instructed to furnish the Nurseries
of Noble Families, their Children might be improved in the knowledge of the
Learned Tongues before they were aware. I mention this a third time, because it
is of such moment and concern.

The memory of Queen Elisabeth is yet fresh. By her Learning she was fitted for
Government, and swayed the Scepter of this Nation with as great honor as any
man before her.

Our very reformation of Religion, seems to be begun and carried on by Women.

Mris. Ann Askue, a Person famous for Learning and Piety, so seasoned the
Queen, and Ladies at Court, by her Precepts and Examples, and after sealed her
Profession with her Blood, that the Seed of Reformation seemed to be sowed by
her hand.

Henry the Eighth made a beginning out of State Policy, his Feminine Relations
acted out of true Piety; this stuck in the Birth till his Daughter Queen
Elizabeth carried it to the height it is now at.

My design is not to say all that may be said in the praise of Women. How
modest and chaste many have been; how remarkable in their love to their
Husbands, how constant in Religion, how dutiful to their Parents, or how
beneficial to their Country.

The Scripture mentions the wise Woman at Abel, who ransomed the City from
Joab's Sword with Sheba's Head, when all the men were in a maze and knew not
what to do. Debora was more instrumental to deliver Israel than Barak. Nabal
and his House had been destroyed, had not Abigail wisely pacified David. The
whole People of the Jews had been cut off, had not Hester adventured her life
at the feet of Abasuerus.

My intention is not to equalize Women to Men, much less to make them superior.
They are the weaker Sex, yet capable of impressions of great things, something
like to the best of Men.

Hercules and Theseus were very valiant; Manalippe and Hyppolite were little
inferior to them. Zeuxes and Timanthes were brave Painters. So were Timarete,
Irene, Lala, Martia, and many others.

For Poetry, Sappho may be compared with Anacreon; Corinna with Pindar. Tullia
was eloquent like Cicero. Cato's Daughter little inferior to himself in the
Theory and Practice of Philosophy. Semiramis was like Alexander in
magnificence. The Tanaquils as politic as Servius Tullius. The Porcea's were
as magnanimous as Brutus.

The inference I make from hence is, that Women are not such silly giddy
creatures, as many proud ignorant men would make them; as if they were
incapable of all improvement by Learning, and unable to digest Arts, that
require any solidity of Judgment. Many men will tell you, they are so unstable
and unconstant, born down upon all occasions with such a torrent of Fear, Love,
Hatred, Lust, Pride, and all manner of exorbitant Passions, that they are
incapable to practice any Virtues, that require greatness of Spirit, or
firmness of Resolution. Let such but look into History, they will find Examples
enough of illustrious Women to confute them.

Before I mention the Objections, I shall state the Propositions I have
endeavored to prove; That which I intend is this, That Persons of competent
natural parts, indifferently inclined and disposed to Learning, whom God has
blessed with Estates, that they are not cumbred in the World, but have liberty
and opportunity in their Childhood; and afterward, being competently
instructed in all things now useful that concern them as Women, may and ought
to be improved in more Polite Learning, in Religion, Arts, and the knowledge of
things, in Tongues also as subservient to these, rather then to spend the
overplus time of their youth, in making Points for Bravery, in dressing and
trimming themselves like Bartholomew-Babies, in Painting and Dancing, in making
Flowers of Colored Straw, and building Houses of stained Paper, and such like
vanities.

Object. No Body means Gentlewomen should be thus educated in matters of mere
vanity; but in practicing their Needle, in knowing and doing those things that
concern good Housewifery, which is Women's particular qualification.

Answ. I know not what may be meant, but I see what is generally done. In most
Schools for educating this Sex, little more is proposed by the Undertakers, or
expected by the Parents. As far as I can observe, the less any thing of
solidity is taught, the more such places are frequented. I do acknowledge, in
the state of the Question, that Women should be accomplished in all those
things that concern them as Women. My meaning is, The overplus time may be
employed in polishing their minds with the knowledge of such things as may be
honorable, pleasant and profitable to them, and their Relations afterward.

Before I proceed further to Answer the remaining Objections, I desire this may
be taken notice of, That whatever is said against this manner of Educating
Women, may commonly be urged against the Education of Men.

Object. If we bring up our Daughters to Learning, no Persons will adventure to
Marry them.

Answ. 1. Many men, silly enough, (God knows) think themselves wise, and will
not dare to marry a wise Woman, lest they should be over-topt.

2. As some Husbands, debauched themselves, desire their Wives should be chaste,
and their Children virtuous: So some men, sensible of their own want, (caused
by their Parents neglect) will choose a learned Woman, in whom they may glory,
and by whose prudence their defect may be supplied.

3. Learned men, to be sure, will choose such the rather, because they are
suitable. Some Men marrying Wives of good natural parts, have improved
themselves in Arts and Tongues, the more to fit them for their converse.

4. Many Women formerly have been preferred for this very thing.

Athenais, Daughter to Leontius the Philosopher, left destitute by him, was
entertained by his Sister Placida for her Learning, and was after married to
the Emperor Theodosius, charmed by her worth, being fitted by her education for
that high place; she is recorded for an excellent Empress. Upon her being
baptized, she was called Eudocea.

Constantine married Helena the Daughter of Lois, more for her Learning, than
any other accomplishments.

We may probably imagine Hortensia, Terentia, Tullia, and diverse others, had
never been married to such brave men, had not their Education preferred them.

If this way of educating Gentlewomen should now be set on foot, there will not
be so great a number bred; but (as degenerate as times are) there would be
found learned men enough, to whom they may be preferred for their very Education.

Object. It is against custom to Educate Gentlewomen thus.

Answ. Bad customs ought to be broken, or else many good things would never
come into use. I have showed this is a Heathenish Custom, or a worse, continued
amongst us upon very bad grounds.

Object. Solomon 's good Housewife is commended for rising early, employing her
Servants, making Garments, by which her Husband was known in the Gate. It seems
she was of quality, she had so many Servants, and her Husband a Magistrate;
their Courts of Judicature were at the Gate: no mention is made of Arts or
Tongues.

Answ. It seems Persons of Quality were more industrious in those times than
they are now. I do not intend to hinder good House-wifery, neither have I
called any from their necessary Labor to their Book. My design is upon such
Persons whose leisure is a burden.

Further, if Solomon's good House-wife was accomplished with Arts and Tongues,
she would have more reverence from her Servants, and by her knowledge in
Economicks, know better how to manage so great a Family.

Solomon describes an industrious Woman. I am suggesting what persons ought to
do that are about these things. Those that deny this, deserve no Answer, but
are to be thought on with scorn, as that Duke that thought Women wise enough
that knew their Husbands Doublet and Breeches asunder.

If there be any persons so vain, and are yet pleased with this Apish kind of
Breeding now in use, that desire their Daughters should be outwardly dressed
like Puppets, rather than inwardly adorned with Knowledge, let them enjoy their
humor; but never wonder if such Marmosets married to Buffoons, bring forth and
breed up a generation of Baboons, that have little more wit than Apes and
Hobby-Horses. I cannot say enough against this Barbarous rudeness, to suffer
one part, I had almost said the better part, of our selves to degenerate (as
far as possible) into brutality.

Object. Women are of ill Natures, and will abuse their Education: They will be
proud, and not obey their Husbands; they will be pragmatick, and boast of their
Parts and Improvements. The ill Nature that is in them, will become more
wicked, the more wit you furnish them with.

Answ. This is the killing Objection, and every thick-skull'd Fellow that
babbles this out, thinks no Billingsgate Woman can Answer it. I shall take the
Objection in pieces.

1. They will abuse Learning.] So do men; he is egregiously simple, that argues
against the use of a necessary or very convenient thing from the abuse of it.
By this Argument no men should be liberally brought up; strong Drinks should
never be used any more in the World, and a hundred such like things.

2. They are of ill Natures.] This is an impudent calumny; as if the whole Sex
of Women, or the greatest part of them, had that malice infused into their very
Natures and Constitutions, that they are ordinarily made worse by that
Education that makes Men generally better. -- Ingenuas didicisse fideliter arts
Emollit mores, nec sinit esse feros.
The Heathen found, that Arts wrought upon Men, the rougher Sex. Surely it is
want of fidelity in the Instructor, if it have not the like effect upon softer
and finer Materials.

3. They will be proud, and not obey their Husbands.] To this I Answer; What is
said of Philosophy, is true of Knowledge; a little Philosophy carries a Man
from God, but a great deal brings him back again; a little knowledge, like
windy Bladders, puffs up, but a good measure of true knowledge, like Ballast in
a Ship, settles down, and makes a person move more even in his station; it is
not knowing too much, but too little that causes the irregularity. This same
Argument may be turned upon Men; whatever they answer for themselves, will
defend Woman.

Those that desire a farther Answer, let them peruse Erasmus his Dialogue, of
the Ignorant Abbot and the Learned Woman. An ignorant Magistrate, or Minister,
may as well plead against improvement of Knowledge in all below them, lest they
should be wiser than themselves, and so deride them. Do not deny Women their
due, which is to be as well instructed as they can; but let Men do their duty,
to be wiser than they are. If this does not please, let silly Men let wise
Women alone; the rule is, All should be (as near as they can) equally yoked.

Object. The end of Learning is public Business, which Women are not capable
of. They must not speak in the Church; and it is more proper for men to Act in
the Commonwealth than they.

Answ. They may not speak in the Church, but they may inquire of their Husbands
at home; it is private instruction I plead for, not public Employment. Yet
there is no such contradiction in the terms: Miriam and Deborah were
extraordinarily called forth by God, as well as Aaron and Barak. Sometimes
Women may have occasions for public Business, as Widows, and Wives when their
Husbands are absent; but especially persons born to Government. The Salique Law
has not prevailed all the World over, and good reason too; for Women upon
Thrones have been as glorious in their governing, as many Men, as I have showed
before. But lay all this aside; there are other ends of Learning, besides
pleading in the Hall, and appearing in the Pulpit. Private Persons (as I have
before showed) may many ways please themselves, and benefit others. This
Objection also will turn the Point upon all Men that are in a private capacity.

Object. They will not mind their Household Affairs.

Answ. Men are judged to be more capable of Country business by liberal
Education. Most ingenious Contrivances, even in Husbandry and Trades, have been
invented by Scholars. You may as well say, a Gentleman that has Country
Affairs to manage, ought not to be a Scholar, because he will be poring upon
his Book, when he should be looking after his Plowmen.

Object. They have other things to do.

Answ. Those which have, may mind those things for ought I have said: The
Question is of persons at leisure, Whether these had not better be employed in
some good Literature, than in pilling Straws, or doing nothing, which is the
certain Seed of doing mischief?

Object. Women do not desire Learning.

Answ. Neither do many Boys, (as Schools are now ordered) yet I suppose you do
not intend to lay Fallow all Children that will not bring forth Fruit of
themselves, to forbear to instruct those which at present do not thank you for
it.

But I have said, there is in all an innate desire of knowing, in Women as well
as Men: if the ways to the Temple of Pallas be so tedious and intricate, that
they confound or tire her Servants; or, if you dress up Learning in such an
ugly and monstrous shape, that you afright Children; I have nothing to say to
such, but that they should reform their Schools, or else all will think they
have no desire any, either Male or Female, should be instructed.

Object. Women are of low Parts.

Answ. So are many Men; we plead only for those which have competent Parts. To
be sure, some Women are as capable of Learning, and have attained to as great
height in it as most Men; witness those Examples before produced.

If this be true, their Parts generally are lower than Men's, there is the more
need they should by all convenient means be improved. Crutches are for infirm
persons.

Object. Women are of softer Natures, more delicate and tender Constitutions,
not so fixed and solid as Men.

Answ. If their Natures are soft, they are more capable of good Impressions; if
they are weak, more shame for us to neglect them, and defraud them of the
benefit of Education, by which they may be strengthened.

Object. It is against custom to educate Gentlewomen thus; those that do
attempt it, will make themselves ridiculous.

Answ. This Argument might have been used to the Irish; not to use Traces at
Plow and Cart, but to draw their Horses by their Tails, which was a general
custom amongst them. Bad Customs (when it is evident they are so) ought to be
broken, or else good Customs can never come into use. That this is a bad
Custom, is evident, continued upon a bad ground. Let Women be Fools, and then
you may easily make them Slaves.

Object. What need Women learn Tongues, there are Books enough in English for
them to peruse?

Answ. The great Thing I design is, the Knowledge of things; as Religion, the
Names and Natures of Herbs, Shrubs, Trees, Mineral-Juyces, Metals, and Precious
Stones; as also the Principles of Arts and Sciences before mentioned. The
learning of Tongues is only subservient to these. Was all Learning in English,
as it is now in French, I think those dead Languages would be of little use,
only in reference to the Scriptures. My opinion is, in the Educating of
Gentlewomen, greater care ought to be had to know things, than to get words. If
one must be neglected, it is better to neglect Tongues than Arts; though it is
best where both may be had.

Object. Solomon 's virtuous Woman, Prove. 31. is commended for good
Housewifery, not for Arts and Tongues; yet her Husband was a Person of Quality,
he sat amongst the Elders of the Land in the Gate.

Answ. It seems Persons of Quality were more industrious in those times than
now they are. Our Ladies would count it a great disparagement to them to do as
she did; to seek Wool and Flax, and to work willingly with their own hands,
verse. 13. to lay their hands to the Spindle, and to take hold on the Distaff,
verse. 19. to rise while it is Night, and to give Meat to her Household, and a
Portion to her Maids, verse. 15. It Is like the necessities of those times were
greater, and the way of living far different from that which is now in use. The
Duke of Florence is a great Merchant; Noblemen in England, and Gentlemen in
France, think it disparagement to them to be so.

Answ. 2. I plead that our Ladies should have but the same Abilities this
virtuous Woman had; not to labor as she did, but to understand as she did. I
am sure to do all those things well that she performed, so as to be reverenced
of her Servants, that her Children should rise up before her, and call her
Blessed, and that her Husband should praise her, requires knowledge in Arts and
Sciences, which were hardly got in those days without the knowledge of
Tongues; if they then were, or can be now, I am contented without them.

To buy Wool and Flax, to die Scarlet and Purple, requires skill in Natural
Philosophy. To consider a Field, the quantity and quality, requires knowledge
in Geometry. To plant a Vineyard, requires understanding in Husbandry: She
could not Merchandise, without knowledge in Arithmetic: She could not govern
so great a Family well, without knowledge in Politics and Oeconomicks: She
could not look well to the ways of her Household, except she understood Physic
and Surgery: She could not open her Mouth with Wisdom, and have in her
Tongue the Law of kindness, unless she understood Grammar, Rhetoric and
Logic. This seems to be the description of an honest, well-bred, ingenious,
industrious Dutch-woman. I desire our Women (whose condition calls them to
business) should have no other breeding, but what will enable to do those
things performed by this Woman.

As for those that are above these, I am sure the highest breeding imaginable
will be useful to them. I believe the men of our times would say, it is pity
any Woman should have so much Authority as this Woman had, she would be so
masterly there would be no living with her.

Object. Another Objection that seems unanswerable, is this; How shall time be
found to teach Children these things here proposed? Boys go to School
ordinarily from seven till sixteen or seventeen, and not above one in four
attain so much knowledge in the Tongues; as to be admitted into the University,
where no great accuracy is required; and they learn nothing else usually,
besides a little History: Gentlewomen will not ordinarily be sent out so soon,
nor is it convenient they should continue so long. Further, half their time, it
is supposed, must be spent in learning those things that concern them as Women.
Twice as many things are proposed to be taught Girls in half the time, as Boys
do learn, which is impossible.

Answ. This Objection makes the whole Contrivance seem idle, unless a
satisfactory Answer be given.

I say therefore, The learning of things will be no hinderance to the getting
Words. Words are the marks of things, and they are learnt better together than
asunder. As a man shall sooner remember Names, if he see the persons, so a Girl
shall much easier fasten in her memory the names of Herbs, Shrubs,
Mineral-Juyces, Metals, Precious Stones; as also the names of Birds, Beasts,
Fishes; the parts of Man's Body; if she see the things themselves in specie; or
the Pictures and Representations, where the things themselves cannot be had.
This is a great Truth, (if there be any such thing as a concatenation of
Notions, as doubtless there is) the thing being perceived, Words freely follow.
Besides, to learn words thus, will be very pleasant and delightful, even to
Children. As the eye is not satisfied with seeing, if it be an Object it can
reach and distinguish: So the mind of a Child is not satisfied with
understanding, if it be a thing he can apprehend. Let those that do believe
this, try a Child of four years old in plain Pictures of Men, Beasts, Birds, or
Fishes, they will see how inquisitive he will be; or, let them show Herbs,
Flowers, Stones, or any thing rare, and see whether it is any burden to the
Child's understanding or memory to learn the name when he sees the thing.

Let no Body be afrighted, because so many things are to be learnt, when the
learning of them will be so pleasant; how profitable I need not tell you.

If any doubt how this may be done, or what Authors we shall use, that words
and things may be learnt together;

I Answer, Comenius has prepared Nomenclatures for this purpose. His Orbis
Pictus, contains all the Primitive Latin words, and the representation of most
things capable of being set out by Pictures; it may be learnt by beginners in
three months, and is as a System of his Janua Linguarum.

This Janna Linguarum, a System of things, consists of a thousand Sentences;
ten of which may be learnt in one day, fifty in a week, the thousand in
twenty-six weeks; allowing one day in a week, and one week in a month for
Repetition, that we may keep what we get. Thus nine months is spent, I mean by
Gentlewoman, that spend but six hours in a day at their Books; the other three
months may be employed in gaining the French Tongue, which I thus demonstrate.

If the Latin Janua may be learnt in six months, where most of the words are
new, then the French may be learnt in three, by one that understands English
and Latin; because there is not above one word of ten in the French Tongue,
that may not fairly, without force, be reduced to the Latin or English.

These two new Languages being learnt, one will help to keep the other. This I
propose may be done to a Gentlewoman of nine or ten years old, that is of good
Capacity; lower Parts require longer time.

If we should dance that wild-Goose-chase usually led, it would require longer
time; ordinarily Boys learn a Leaf or two of the Pueriles, twenty Pages of
Corderius, a part of Esop's Fables, a piece of Tullie, a little of Ovid, a
remnant of Virgil, Terence, etc. and when all this is done, they have not much
above half so many words as this little Enchiridion, the Janua, supplies them
with.

It Is true, this course instructs us only in the propriety of the words;
therefore it is so much the better, it is the universal process of Nature to
rise by degrees, to proceed from Seeds to Leaves, from Leaves to Flowers; from
plain things to things ornamental. One would think those learned Men mad, that
go quite contrary to this Process; that propose to season with Rhetoric, and a
style, by reading crabbed Classick Authors, as Terence, etc. before Children
understand any thing of the plain signification of words.

But, methinks, I hear my Reader complain that I abuse him: I hear him confess
this is but reason; But he thinks I shun the difficulty, and say nothing to
Grammar, the groundwork of all; to begin at In Speech, to read the Accidence,
and to get it without Book, is ordinarily the work of one whole year.

To Construe the Grammar, and to get it without-Book, is at least the task of
two years more; and then, it may be, it is little understood, until a year or
two more is spent in making plain Latin. My Reader, it may be, thinks I have
forgot, or purposely omitted to allow time for these things, without which
nothing can be done.

I do confess, to proceed in Lilly's Method, (as is before mentioned) to commit
the very Accidence and Grammar to memory, requires three or four years,
sometimes more, (as many can witness by woeful experience) and when all is done,
besides declining Nouns, and forming Verbs, and getting a few words, there is
very little advantage to the Child. This being supposed, it is not likely
Children of ordinary Parts should in so short a time be improved in any
competent measure in the Latin Tongue.

The great reason of these Intricacies is, the whole Method swerves from the
Rules of true Didacticks.

1. This is an undeniable Principle; All Rules ought to be plain, that they may
be easily understood, especially such as are to be learnt by Children, to the
meanness of whose Capacities we ought to condescend.

The Rules in Lilly's Grammar are not so, because they are in Latin, a Tongue
the Learner does not understand; and which is worse, a great part of them is in
verse, hardly intelligible to a Child if they are translated into Grammatical
English.

2. Another undoubted Principle is; All Knowledge is increased by Syncrisis,
(comparing one thing with another) whoever would beget a new Idea in any ones
understanding, reduces it (if possible) to something he knows already, that is
like it. This is a Law of Nature, whoever proceeds according to it, moves
smoothly, as an oyled Clock when the Wheels are put into their right places.
Who-ever goes not according to this Rule, forces Water upwards, which returns
to its Channel, so soon as the vis impressa is spent; his motion is like to a
Leg or an Arm out of joint, very uneasy.

Much of the Method used in Lilly's Grammar, in the Etymologia, and the whole
Syntax, that concerns Government, varies from this grand Principle.

Those that would rationally teach Latin to a Child bred amongst us, ought to
accommodate his Instruction to the English Tongue, the Tongue she knows
already, and by Syncrisis, proceed a noto ad ignotum. This would be easy and
pleasant; but Lillies Grammar has no more respect to the English, than to the
Welsh or Irish. For instance; A Noun is the name of a thing which may be seen,
felt, heard, or understood. A Man does not understand this, when the Noun is a
second Notion, or not obvious to sense. Besides, it may as well be applied to
Welsh, Irish, Dutch, French, Italian, or Spanish, as to an English Noun.

If you demand, How can a better Rule be given, which may be more useful?

I Answer; A Noun may have usually before it in the English, a, an, or the, as
a Man, an Angel, the Book. This every Child understands at the first naming.

Lilly says, A Substantive stands by it self, and requires not another word to
show its signification. An Adjective cannot stand by it self, but requires
another word to show its signification. This is better than the former, yet
hard enough for a Child to understand. Take your indication from the English,
and see how plain it is. A Substantive varies in the number, as Book, Books. An
Adjective does not vary in the number, as good Book, good Books. Good is used
both in the singular and plural Number.

Pronouns, in our old Grammar, are said to be parts of Speech much like to
Nouns, used in Showing or Rehearsing. They are like to Nouns, that is, they are
the names of things that may be understood, and so like to Nouns in this, that
I cannot know them asunder. Then Lilly reckons them up in Latin, but dares not
name them in English, lest you should know them too quickly. How easily is this
dispatched, if we enumerate the Pronouns (let them be what they will) in two
Classes, thus; I, thou, he, we, ye, they, are Substantives; my, thy, his, our,
your, etc. are Adjectives.

It is better to tell a Child, Verbs have a sign of a Mood or Tense, than to
say, they signify doing, suffering, or being.

Participles are wildly described to be Parts of Speech, that take part of a
Noun, and part of a Verb, etc. No child is at all edified by the definition. I
confess this part of Speech is most difficult to be known in the English
Tongue; yet it may be done thus, All words ending in ing, d, t, or n, which
have no sign at all, and may be resolved into Verbs, are Participles, as
learning, which does learn; learned, which is learned.

If we now look back, that great stumbling block to distinguish the parts of
Speech, (which costs years, before a Child distinctly knows them, whilst he
looks upon them in their Latin dress) is got over in a few days, when we take
our direction from our own Tongue. I will repeat it again, that I may be
perfectly understood.

A Noun may have usually before it in the English Tongue, a, an, or the.
Substantives have a different termination in the Number; Adjectives have not.

Pronouns are all enumerated about thirty; some are Substantives, others are
Adjectives.

Verbs may have a sign of a Mood or Tense. All words ending in ing, d, t, or n,
which have no sign, and may be resolved into Verbs, are, Participles.

Prepositions are all enumerated, about thirty; whatever integral word is not
Noun, Pronoun, Verb, Participle, or Preposition, is either an Adverb, or a
Conjunction, it matters not much which a beginner calls them.

Interjections are all virtual Sentences; a few days will master this, if we
proceed gradually.

I do not know much more requisite to Gentlewomen, that intend not to be
critical, besides declining Nouns, and forming Verbs.

The special Rules for the genders of Nouns, are but five, and the exceptions
are not many.

There are but three general Rules for that part of Grammar called the As in
praesenti, the irregular Verbs, which most frequently occur in Authors, in
number about five hundred, are learned as a Vocabulary.

As to the Syntax; the two first Concords only are of use; and the Rules for
Government, (eight score in number in Lillies Grammar) are competently
accommodated to the signs of the Cases thus;

Substantives have their Cases by the Signs, and they are governed of the word
going before, on which they depend according to the signs of, to, for, with,
from, by, then, in, at, on, a, the.

Four exceptions subjoyned to this Rule, may make the Syntax complete enough
for a Woman, that intends only a superficial Knowledge in the Tongue; ten more
exceptions (that concern only particular words) will make them, as profound as
most men are by Lillies Rules.

To Answer the Objection fully; to know the parts of Speech by these Rules; to
decline a Noun, to form a Verb, to digest the five general Rules, and five
special Rules for the genders of Nouns, to commit to memory the three grand
Rules, containing the As in praesenti; to decline those five hundred irregular
Verbs, to understand the two Concords, and that one general Rule for
Government, with four Exceptions, will not require many months.

The Prefacer to Lillies Grammar (who I hope is very authentic) tells you,
more than this may be done very accurately by those blundering Rules of Lilly
in the space of three months, by Children of mean parts.

Those that do not understand these short hints, may peruse a Grammar and an
Apology; to which is added Rules for Pointing and Reading Grammatically;
Composed by M. Lewis, Sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns
in Cheapside, in which these things are more largely discussed. Or they may
speak with M. Lewis himself any Thursday in the Afternoon, between three and
six of the Clock, at the Bolt and Tun in Fleetstreet.

I will not trouble you with his Discourse, how this Method is founded upon the
general rule of Speaking, that goes through the World, and how the English
Tongue is one of the most regular Languages spoken upon the face of the Earth.
The Grammar of this being known, it may be a Standard to measure all other
Languages by.

If you peruse his Apology, you will see how the English is a foundation to
the Latin, the Latin to the Greek, you may there see how he demonstrates, to
learn to decline Greek Nouns, and form Greek Verbs, has not a fourth part of
the difficulty in it, as there is in the Latin.

Let not Persons rashly censure these Proposals, before they have examined the
Hypothesis, and heard what the Author can say in defense of it.

Let no Person be discouraged, because Grammar, Words, and Things, are proposed
to be learnt in so short a time; the plainness and shortness of the Grammar,
the seeing the Things, and having the Words in so short a compass, will make
the Work easy and very delightful.

If all I have said may conveniently be done, I expect many will deride this
Design. I am contented, let them abound in their own sense, and have Wives as
silly as themselves desire, over whom they may tyrannize.

I hope I shall by this Discourse persuade some Parents to be more careful for
the future of the Breeding of their Daughters. You cark and care to get great
Portions for them, which sometimes occasions their ruin. Here is a sure
Portion, an easy way to make them excellent. How many born to good Fortunes,
when their Wealth has been wasted, have supported themselves and Families too
by their Wisdom?

I hope some of these Considerations will at least move some of this abused Sex
to set a right value upon themselves, according to the dignity of their
Creation, that they might, with an honest pride and magnanimity, scorn to be
bowed down and made to stoop to such Follies and Vanities, Trifles and
Nothings, so far below them, and unproportionable to their noble Souls, nothing
inferior to those of Men, and equally precious to God in Christ, in whom there
is neither Male nor Female.

Let a generous resolution possess your minds, seeing Men in this Age have
invaded Women's Vices, in a noble revenge, reassume those Virtues, which Men
sometimes unjustly usurped to themselves, but ought to have left them in common
to both Sexes.

POSTSCRIPT.
IF any enquire where this Education may be performed; such may be informed,
That a School is lately erected for Gentlewomen at Tottenham-high-Cross, within
four miles of London, in the Road to Ware; where Mris. Makin is Governess, who
was sometimes Tutoress to the Princess Elisabeth, Daughter to King Charles the
First; Where, by the blessing of God, Gentlewomen may be instructed in the
Principles of Religion; and in all manner of Sober and Virtuous Education: More
particularly, in all things ordinarily taught in other Schools:

As, Works of all Sorts, Dancing, Music, Singing, Writing, Keeping Accounts,
Half the time to be spent in these Things.

The other half to be employed in gaining the Latin and French Tongues; and
those that please, may learn Greek and Hebrew, the Italian and Spanish: In all
which this Gentlewomen has a competent knowledge.

Gentlewomen of eight or nine years old, that can read well, may be instructed
in a year or two (according to their Parts) in the Latin and French Tougues; by
such plain and short Rules, accommodated to the Grammar of the English Tongue,
that they may easily keep what they have learned, and recover what they shall
lose; as those that learn Music by Notes.

Those that will bestow longer time, may learn the other Languages,
aforementioned, as they please.

Repositories also for Visibles shall be prepared; by which, from beholding the
things, Gentlewomen may learn the Names, Natures, Values, and Use of Herbs,
Shrubs, Trees, Mineral-Juices, Metals and Stones.

Those that please, may learn Limning, Preserving, Pastry and Cookery.

Those that will allow longer time, may attain some general Knowledge in
Astronomy, Geography; but especially in Arithmetic and History.

Those that think one Language enough for a Woman, may forbear the Languages,
and learn only Experimental Philosophy; and more, or fewer of the other things
aforementioned, as they incline.

The Rate certain shall be 20 l. per annum: But if a competent improvement be
made in the Tongues, and the other things aforementioned, as shall be agreed
upon, then something more will be expected. But the Parents shall judge what
shall be deserved by the Undertaker.

Those that think these Things Improbable or Impracticable, may have further
account every Tuesday at Mr. Masons Coffe-House in Cornhil, near the Royal
Exchange; and Thursdayes at the Bolt and Tun in Fleetstreet, between the hours
of three and six in the Afternoons, by some Person whom Mris. Makin shall
appoint.

FINIS.

