THE Axe at the Root OF PROFESSORS MISCARRIAGES. IN A Plain Detection of, and a
Wholesome Caveat against the Miscarriages opposite to Faith in God.

By Thomas Mall, Minister of the Gospel.

Mat. 3.10. Now also is the Axe laid unto the Root of the Trees; therefore,
every Tree which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the
fire.

John 5.14. Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee.

Isa. 7.9. If you will not believe, surely you shall not be established.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst upon London Bridge, 1668.

Sold for 6 d. by the Author's Appointm^^^

ERRATA.
Candid Reader
IN the two first sheets of this Treatise, the Author has not found any
faults, but in the Marginal Quotations; and he trusts thou will find none in
the rest, but what thine ingenuity will correct or pardon. In those sheets thou
may; p. 3. for sinatis r. sinaris. And f. Inarus r. Gnarus. p. 6. for swidas
r. suidas. And for justus r. gustus. Vale.

To the Cordial Mourners in England, especially in Exon, Crediton, Tiverton,
Taunton, Barnstable, Bitheferd, Torrington, Dartmouth, and Forey, for the
dreadful Tokens of God's displeasure against the Land of their Nativity, and
the sad Causes thereof; The Author wishes Grace and Peace.
Dear Hearts,
I Doubt not of your kind acceptance, and Christian improvement of this honest
Essay, to lay the Axe of God's Word at the Root of the Provocations of God's
Sons and Daughters. Are not you sensible of the woeful (though but partial)
departures of your God from your own Souls, and from the Land of your Nativity?
Are not you lamenting after the A^k? 1 Samuel 7.2. Zach. 11.10, 14. Hos. 13.1.
Are not you afraid that God is breaking England's staff of Bands, by breaking
its staff of Beauty? that even death will follow offending in Baal? Yea, do not
your hearts tremble at the very thoughts of what will farther ensue God's
taking away the Chariots and Horsemen of your Israel? 2 King. 2.12.
And would not you take the direct course to re-injoy the smiles of your
dearest Husband, and to prevent England's cutting down? Yea, Deuteronomy. 32.19.
are not you convinced that the Provocations of God's Sons and Daughters go
nearest to his heart? and that there is no hope even of their Salvation, so
long as vain thoughts of escaping utter ruin, Jer. 4.14.
without true repentance do lodge within them? And are not you therefore
resolved, Mat. 3.10.
that seeing God has laid the Axe to the root of the Trees, you will now in
good earnest lay the Axe to the root of your own Sins? that you will make it
your main business to promote in your own Souls, yea and in others too, not
only more humiliation for, but more reformation of what has been amiss, as
knowing, that humiliation without reformation, is like the Word of God in the
Letter, which kills, and not quickens; it accents sin, and not lesseneth it; it
continues judgment, and not removes it? For your help therefore herein, I have
endeavored to detect and caution you against the miscarriages opposite to
Faith in God; which, I dare say, Ephesians. 6.17. 2 Chr. 18.30.
are the Root of all your other Miscarriages: By the sword of the Spirit, and
that as welded by the skilful hands of several of England's Worthies, to whom
you are referred in the Margin; I have fought neither with small nor great, but
with your King-sins: It is said of Christ, In the day of thy wrath thou shall
smite through Kings. Psalm. 110.5.
And is not this the day of Christ's, yea, of your wrath against your sins? Is
not Christ, yea, are not you angry with them, and troubled for them? O then!
show that you have the Spirit of Christ in you; smite through Kings, I mean
only your Kingly-sins; and then I am sure none will be able to stand before
you: Scuh you will find your sins opposite to Faith to be; each of them has
many followers, and therefore may be called Gad, Behold a Troop comes. I have
indeed purposely waved speaking of the Miscarriages opposite to Faith, with
reference to its immediate object, Jesus Christ; not only because those are
more taken notice of by convinced Souls in these days, than these with
reference to its ultimate object, the Deity through Christ: But because those
are most excellently handled by the Reverend Author of the late choice
Gospel-Glass, Chapter 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, to which I shall once more refer you,
and shall detain you no longer from making use of this Axe. But whilst I am
whispering a word or two in the ears of such, as from the Miscarriages of some
(and not all) Professors, in which they are not countenanced, but for which
they are condemned by Religion and Profession, are so unreasouable as to fall
foul upon Religion and Profession O that such would seriously read judicious
Mr. A. Furgess's 71 Sermon. in his most excellent Commentary on Joh. 17. I shall
only transcribe for them one passage, fol. 377. Would it not have been (says
he) horrible impiety, to have broken out against all the Apostles, and Christ
himself; saying, Look what they are; It Is as the Pharisees said, a company of
Impostors and Deceivers, they are all for their own ends, they are all
covetous, and though they pretend Religon, yet they are Hypocrites; and though
they condemn the gross sins of the World, yet in secret they can be a bad as
any? would not such a tongue show that it was set on fire of Hell, that should
belch out such things?
. It is tru^ hereby offenses do come, and woe be to him by whom offenses come.
Whosoever shall offend, Mat. 18.7. Mat. 18.7. 1 Pet. 2.7. Joh. 16.1.
i. e. lay a stumbling block before one of Christ's little ones, it had been
better a millstone were hung about his neck, and he thrown into the Sea. Woe be
to such Professors, that by their being spots, open the mouth of Blasphemy. But
woe be also unto all those that take offense against Religion and Profession,
thereby. Woe unto the World because of offenses. Such will be found at last to
be Blasphemers against God, and runners in the broad way to Atheism and
Damnation. Christ is a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense, only to those
that perish; to them that believe, he is precious. This is hinted that none may
be offended, By your Faith's helper,

T. M.
Dec. 23. 1667.
Of Vain Curiosity.
Chap. I. The Miscarriages opposite to the saving Knowledge of God: the
apprehending Act of Faith.
1. VAin Curiosity. Beware not only of prying into the affairs of your
Neighbor, Against vain Curiosity.
which no way concern you; but of enquiring into Gods Secrets. God has made
known, enough for our Salvation; but some things he has concealed from us, and
they do not belong unto us. The secret things belong unto the Lord our God;
Deuteronomy. 29.29.
but those things which are revealed, belong unto us, and to our children for
ever. Have not you been gui^ty of not con^enting your selves with Gods
Revelations? Have not you desired and endeavored to be wise above what is
written? 1 Cor. 4.6.
O the many curious and unprofitable questions, that have been framed about the
Decrees of God, and the Works of Providence! We have not cried with the
Apostle, How unsearchable are his judgments, Romans 11.33. Genesis 3.5, 6.
and his ways past finding out! Have not some of you been for new lights? The
Serpent beguiled Eve hereby: the first sin came in by an attempt to get
forbidden knowledge. And what says the Apostle? I fear, lest by any means, as
the Serpent beguiled Eve, 2 Cor. 11.3.
through his subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity,
that is in Christ. Have not some had the same wild fancy, Gilespy's Miscellan.
Questions, p. 131.
that the Weigelians had, That there is a time to come (which they call,
Seculum Spiritus Sancii) in which God shall by his Spirit reveal much more
knowledge and light, than was revealed by Christ and his Apostles in the
Scriptures? Are not most of us still too inquisitive, When Christ will come in
his glory, when Babylon shall fall, when the Witnesses prophesying in sackcloth
and a^hes shall be at an end? Civil on Job. 28.21.
Christ's own Disciples were not content with what Christ cold them should be,
but enquire, When it should be? Christ does indeed give them many signs of the
destruction of Jerusalem, and of the end of the World; but tells them, Mat.
24.2, 3.36. Mar. 13.32.
Of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels of Heaven, no nor the
Son of Man (as Man) but my Father only. This Curiosity was also reproved by
Christ, immediately before his Ascension, with, Acts 1.7.
It is not for you to know the times or seasons which the Father has put into
his own power: And the Apostle Paul tells the Thessalonians, That such
knowledge was needless for them: But of the times and seasons, 1 These. ^.1.
Brethren, you have no need, that I write unto you. Even good men have
sometimes a stronger desire to know the times, than to redeem the time. Has
not the knowledge of many lain in canvasing foolish and unlearned questions,
which the Apostle bids Timothy to avoid, 2 Timothy 2.23.
because they ^end to strife? O! take heed of this sin for the future. It is a
great Vanity. Cavil on Job 11.12.
Man is vain (says one) when he would be wise beyond his line, or in things
above him, not in things about him, or sit for him. Those that pry into the
secrets of Princes, may fear what Actaem met with; and those that pry into the
secrets of divine mysteries, what Pentheus met with. Bacon: Sapientia v^terum,
Sect 10. Romans 12.3. Psa. 25.14. Cavil on Job, 28.21. Col. 3.18.
It is a sin that we are naturally prone too. Man naturally desires (as the
same Author well observes) forbidden wisdom, and his desire is seven times
stronger after it, as it is forbidden, than as it is wisdom. This is a sin
very provoking unto God: To pry into, dreana imperij, the mysteries of their
government is so unto Princes. No wonder that God has been a emswning fire to
us, seeing we have been so bold and daring Phaetons. Vain Curiosity is a
presumptuous transgression: take heed of continuing guilty thereof any longer:
for the future be wise unto sobriety. Though the secret of the Lord be with
those that fear him, yet they, that fear him, will not, dare not, meddle with,
nor search into his secrets. Take heed of breaking open of God, Cabinet,
entering into his Counsels, prying into his Ark once more: beware of suffering
your imagination to wax wanton, and run riot, yea mad about crotchets, and mere
niceties any more: take heed of intruding (as the Apostle speaks significantly
to this point) into things which you have not seen, yea, which cannot be seen,
being vainly puffed up by your fleshly mind. There is (says the same judicious
Expositor flesh in the understanding, as well as in the will and affections of
man; and in the flesh, there is pride, and it is pride, that makes men so busy
and bold; so boldly busy, as (un-ask'd, yea forbidden) to intrude into such
things. Psa. 131.1.
O! say now with David, Lord, mine Feart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty,
neither will I exercise my self in great matters, or in things too high for me.
Such are things not revealed: they are not only high things; but above the
lawfulness of man's search: Romans 12.16. Romans 11.33.
they are termed not incomprehensible; but rather (...), things not to be
enquired into. Who is able to open the Book? Rev. 5.3.
Who, but the Lion of the Tribe of Judah? The best of Gods Saints are so unfit
to expound the contents of the Book, wherein the mysteries of Providence lie
coucht, Genus quasi sacrileg^ ^emeritatis est, ut plus scire cupias, quam
smatis. Salts.
and insolded, that they may not so much as untye the clasps. A bold enquiry
here is not more irreverent, than full of danger. When men walk on sleep
places, they are subject to fall: so here, by meddling with high things, an
error, yea heresy, is quickly incurred.

2. Ignorance. I do not say, take heed of Nescience, Against Ignorance.
of not knowing those things, which you are not bound to know, or have not
means to know; in the former Section I have cautioned you against such science:
But beware of Ignorance, of not knowing what you ought to know, and what you
have means to know. Has not this been your sin? Has not Jesus Christ come in
flaming fire against this sin? O that it may be your sin no more! What! Is it
yet nothing to you, that your Souls should remain as Lanthorns without Candles
in them? Is it yet nothing to you, to want eyesight, to have blind Souls? Ephesians.
4.13. 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. Ga^dwins Evangelical Communicant. (...) q. (...), Inarus,
peritas. Leigh. crit. sacr.
to have the Gospel still hid from you, as so many lost Souls, blinded by the
god of this world? Have you no mind as yet to be freed from Satan's slavery?
Satan does indeed sometimes transform himself into an Angel of light; but he
always loves to dwell in a dark house, in an ignorant Soul: Though his Name be
(...), and he has much knowledge himself, yet he hates and hinders knowledge
in man: He knows, he has none more fast, than those that ye in the dark
Dungeon of Ignorance, bound in the chains of darkness. Is it nothing to you, to
continue still stark nargi^, without any goodness in your hearts? As the mind
is, so is the man. Without knowledge, the heart is not good. Prove. 19.2.
For any to say, Though I am ignorant, yet mine heart is good, is as if one
should say, Though I am blind, yet mine eyes are good. Those that had the
lepresse in the head, were to be judged unclean. Is it nothing to you, still to
remain useless unto others? Is it nothing to you, to be even in such times as
these, without an interest in God, strangers from the life of God through
ignorance, Ephesians. 4.18.
so as none of Gods ofters of himself do yet prevail with you? Is it nothing to
you, to continue prepared for ruin? Hos. 1.14.
The people that understand not, shall not only stumble, but fall, i. e. (...)
^ally perish. O ye ignorant Professions! Rev. 6.17.
the great day of Gods wrath is coming, and how will ye be able to stand? O
that you would yet know the things, that belong to your peace, Luc. 19.42.
before they be hid from your eyes!

3. Against Eryour.
Error. Take heed not only of not apprehending, but of mis apprehending God,
and the things of God. Has not this been your (...)? Have not your
apprehensions concerning God been very erroneous? Have not some Professors
thought, That there is no God, nor Devil, nor Heaven, nor Hell, but what is
within us; and that ^n and grace were equally of God, and agrecable to his
will? O! Be not always deceived concerning the Providence of God, his Worship,
his Minisiry, his House, his Discipline in his house, Brook's Satan's wiles.
Romans 1.28.
etc. Is it nothing to you, to be under the Gentiles heavy and dreadful Plague,
to be given up to a reprobate mind, a mind void of judgment, a mind
disallowed, rejected, and abhorred of God; a mind that all have cause to be
ashamed of? 1 cor. 3 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
Is it nothing to you, to suffer loss in Gods resiuing fire? Is it nothing to
you, still to entertain that w^orish woman, that has ca^ down many, wounded
many, yea slain many, many strong men, many great men, many learned men, yea
many Professing men? 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12.
Is it nothing to you, to be still in danger of Gods sending upon you strong
delusions, or (a^ the Greek has it, (...)) the efficacy of error, that you
should believe a lie, the lie of lies, viz., Popery, that you may be damned? Ah
Souls! Can you seriously consider these hints, and those you have in the
Gospel-glass, chap. 9. and not dread, and stand upon your guard, against every
Error in Religion? True hatred is to the whole kind. It is sad to frown on one
Error, and to smile on another. Gideon had seventy sons, and but one bastard,
Judge: 8.13.
and yet the bastard destroyed all the rest. One turn may bring a man quite out
of his way. Ah Lord! (said one) this mercy I humbly beg, that thou would rather
take me, and do any thing with me, than to give me up to those sad Errors, to
which thousands have married their Souls, and are in a way of perishing
eternally. Jam 1.16.
O! Do not err, my beloved Brethren. Take heed therefore of pride, of that
proud Curiosity I have already cautioned you against. The meek, or humble (as
the word signifies) will he guide in judgment, the meek will he teach his
way. Psa. 25.9.
The same Author tells of a man, who, seeing in a Vision many snares of the
Devil, spread upon the earth, sat down musing, and said within himself, Who
shall pass through these? Whereunto he heard a voice answering, Humility shall
pass through them. To persist wilfully in Error is Diabolical. It were best,
we never erred; next to that, that we amend our Errors. Take heed of being
cententious against the truth, Romans 2.^.
and dis^bedient to the truth, when made known unto you: yea take heed of a
voluntary sluggishness, and an assected laziness, as to searching out of Truth,
which cannot but expose a man to Error; for Truth does comm^^dy keep so much
State, 1 Timothy 6.10.
as not to reveal her self to any, but those who studiously seek her. Take heed
also of Covetousness. In a word, be careful to subdue all your inordinate
affections; for they are of great force to sway the Judgment.

4. Vnteachableness. Against Unteachableness.
Take heed of unwillingness to get clear and right apprehensions of God. Has
not this been your (...) Have not you been not only ignorant and erroneous, but
unwilling to be instructed? Have not you been not only destitute of, Ali^d est
ne(...).
but opposite to, the saving knowledge of God? Light has been offered; but
have not you shut your eyes against it? And if some light has broke in upon
you, Romans 1.19.
you have not liked to retain God in your knowledge. Have you not wilfully
rejected knowledge? and has not God therefore rejected you? Hos. 4.6. See B^^.
on the place:
Have not you ca^ off the knowledge of God, wit^ contempt, and despite, as the
word signifies? Have not you cast off the means of knowledge? And has not God
therefore took away the means of knowledge? Have not you thought, that you must
busy your heads about some other matters; and that you may do well enough
without this knowledge, if you do but know how to trade, and to manage your
worldly businesses? Have not you rejected the knowledge of that Truth
especially, that should have brought you to the true worship of God, as those
Priests did the knowledge, that they must worship God at Jerusalem, for fear of
losing their estates? Has not God therefore, in an extraordinary manner,
rejected you? So much is noted (thinks Tremellius) by the redundancy of a
letter in the word for Gods rejecting, not found elsewhere in all the
Scripture. Have not you even studied to be ignorant of God? Ba^^^^ough^ on H^s.
4 1.
Have not you therefore been for unteaching Priests, and humane inventions, in
the worship of God, which kept out of the Land of Israel the knowledge of God?
No wonder that God has a controversy with the Land, no wonder that God is
contending with English Professors in a way of judgment; no wonder if there be
no peace in England, to him that goes out, and comes in, 2 chronicles. 15, 3.5.
but great vexations upon all the Inhabitants, God vexing us with all
adoersity. So it was with Israel in the like case, Israel was without the true
God, i. e. the true worship of God, and without a teaching (...), and in those
times there was no peace, etc. No wonder ^^at God has made us to see, (...)
seeing we would not see: No wonder that God is departed from us, seeing we
have said, at least in our hearts, Job (...) see B^^^ on Job 22.^^.
Depart, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Your Ignorance has much
incented God against you; but your Vnteachableness much more. O! dequaint now
thy self with him. I beseech you now, now that the hand of God is out against
your selves, in some kind or other; now that the hand of God ^. much heavier
upon others; now dequaint your selves with him; now or never; now, or else he
will not be at peace with you, and good will not come unto you. Let it not
always be said. They know not, Psa. ^2.3.
neither will they understand, they walk on in darkness. O! unto reading and
hearing, add praying, that you may not only be Book-taught, but God-taught. You
need not ascend up into Heaven. to bring Christ down from above, nor to descend
into the deep, Romans 10.6.
to bring, up Christ from the dead, that you may be acquainted with him; John
17.3.
the Word is nigh you, which being read, heard, and prayed over, will give you
that knowledge of God and Christ, which is life eternal.

5. Against resting in a Form of Knowledge. Romans 2.20. Map^^^^, E^^er, H^sye,
^^cidas. Jam. 3: 17.
Re^ing in a Form of Knowledge. The word signifies the show, the appearance,
the Image of Knowledge. Has not this been your sin? Have not you affected the
reputation of knowledge, more than the reality of knowledge? Has not the Name
been better esteemed by you, than the Thing? Have not you satisfied your selves
with a dark and confused knowledge? Has not your light been darkness? The
wisdom from above is pure, and therefore clear and distinct. Have not you
satisfied your selves with a supless knowledge, 2 (...)
without the favor, that is in saving knowledge? Knowledge in Scripture does
connote affection; It is tea^me^ by the (...) men, ^ap^^^ (...), or (...)
and that, which carries not the heart and affections with it, deserves not
the name of Knowledge; and therefore those, that did not like and love God, are
said, not to know God. Have not you satisfied your selves without an
experimental knowledge of God, of the exercise of his Power, Wisdom, Goodness,
Mercy, etc. for your eternal welfare, in working effectually upon your hearts,
by his Word and Spirit? Have not you satisfied your selves with an unactive
knowledge? To have notions according to Knowledge, Jer: 10: 14:
and actions according to Ignorance, is to be brutish in knowledge. Have not
you set up your rest, in such acknowledge as is short of making men live
peaceably, humbly, obediently, and believingly, as saying knowledge does? This
Kind of knowledge, i.b.t a form of knowledge, without the truth, substance, and
reality of knowledge; as a form of godliness, 2 Timothy: 3: 5: Verban ti^^
connotant affectum and effectam. Job 28: 28: Psa: 111: 10:
is the appearance o^ godliness, without the payer of godliness. The knowledge
of God does note (...) barren nations concerning God, which do not render (...)
better in ou^ lives, or liker unto God. He knee no sin. in Paul, is in Peter,
He did no sin. To depart from evil, is understanding. They have a good
understanding, that do his Commandments. Josiah (...) street in performing his
known duty, And was not this, to know me, Jer: 22, 16:
says the Lord? ^^ch as do not dwake to righteousness, (the Greek is awake
righteously) i. e. that do not give their minds and endeavors to
righteousness, they have not the knowledge of God. 1 Cor: 15: 31:
Have not you ^^tisfied your selver, without knowing God in and through Christ?
Here let it be minded, T: G^win's Christier forth, p: 1 ^
that the Object of that Faith, that is required in the first Commandment, in
all its acts, both direct and reflect, inward and outward, is God in Christ, or
interest in God in and through Christ. The Deity, Father, Son, and Spirit, is
the ultimate Object; but Jesus Christ, God dwelling in flesh, Ephesians: 2: 18: 1
Pet: 1: 21:
is the more immediate Object thereof. Christ leads ^s by the hand, and we are
said by Christ to believe on God, that our Faith might be in God. But have you
ever had a real and intuitive sight of Jesus Christ in his glory, Sheph^a^d on
the pa^able of the V^^gins, p: 74, 75, 202, 203, 204:
not only from report, nor only from his works, nor only from the bare letter
of the Word, but from the Spirit? Have you ever beheld such a glory in Christ's
person, as has caused you to esteem him in all his glory, as your present,
greatest and enly good? 2 (...) 4: 6:
Has God ever given you the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ? If not, you must repent of your Knowledge under the
notion of Ignorance; and be sure, that for the future you be restless after a
clear, distinct, savory, experimental, active Knowledge of God in Christ.

6. Not growing in Knowledge. Against not growing in Knowledge (...) 3, 4, 5.
Is not saving knowledge a growing thing? Were not the risings and increasings
of the waters of the Sanctuary a type thereof? But ala^^ have not the best set
up their rest in low seize of saving knowledge? Have not some conceited
themselves taught by God immediately, by the Spirit, and needed not any of Gods
medi^^e teachings, by the ministry of man, or by the Scriptures? As for such,
whatever knowledge they pretend to, the truth is, they are altogether without
the saving knowledge of God. As he (says one) who thinks himself so good, that
he cannot be better, was never so good as he should be: So he that thinks he
knows so much, as he can learn no more, 1 Cor: 8: 2:
from the Scriptures and Mini^ry, know^ nothing as he ought. As for those, that
have the beginnings of life eternal, John 17: 3:
in the knowledge of God, and Jesus Christ, certainly it has been their great
fault, that they have not made conscience of growing in knowledge daily; both
of getting the knowledge of more duties, and of more sins; and more of the
goodness of those duties, and of the evil of those sins, which they knew
already, as they ought How seldom have Sermons been attended for this very
end? How seldom have Ministers been consulted with for this very end? Does not
your not growing in grace evidence, that you have not grown in knowledge? The
Ap^stle puts both together; 2 Pet: 3: 18:
Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; to
hint to us, that in proportion to our spiritual growth in knowledge, is our
growth in grace. Is not your neglect of growing in knowledge, evident in your
decays in knowledge; not seeing so much evil in sin, especially such and such
particular sins; nor so much good in duty, especially such and such particular
duties; nor so much beauty in truth, especially such and such particular
truths; no^ so much deformity in error, especially such and such particular
errors, as formerly. No wonder that God deals with us, as he has threatened to
deal with them, that know him not. No wonder if God seem to resolve, that this
generation of English Professors, shall not enter into the promised Canaan;
They were those that had not known Gods ways, to whom the Lord swore, that
they should not enter into his rest. To prevent this, let us all be sti^^'d up,
to conform more and more to Jesus Christ, who grew in wisdom, (...)
as well as in stature. Let us write after Paul's copy, Phil: 3: 12, 13, 14:
Not as though I had already attained, or were already perfect, but I follow
after, if that I may apprehend, that for which also I am apprehended of Christ
Jesus: Brethren, I count not my self to have apprehended; but this one thing I
do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth to those
things that are before, I press toward the mark, etc. Would you have God take
away all your talents? Take heed then of neglecting to increase them. Then
shall ye know, if ye follow on to know the Lord. The path of the just is as
the shining Light, Hos. 6.3. Prove. 4.18.
that shines more and more, till it be perfect Day. He (says one) that has
the least saving acquaintance with God, has enough to make him thankful; but
he that has the most, has not enough to make him idle.

7. Neglecting to make use of Knowledge. Against not making use of knowledge.
Has not this been your sin? Has not the habit of knowledge layn dead in your
Souls? Has it not been an useless and an unprofitable thing, both as to your
selves, and others? O that it may be your sin no more! Be not satisfied with
having Lights, or Lamps, Luc. 12.35.
but Let your Lights be burning, or shining. Make use of your knowledge, for
the heating of your affections, for the stirring up desires after God, love to
God, delight in God, hatred of sin, fear of offending God, etc. As the Spouse,
He is altogether lovely: Cant. 5.16.
This is my Beloved. Let the knowledge of wisdom be unto your Souls, as Honey,
that is good, and the Honeycomb, Prove. 24.13, 14
which is sweet unto the taste. Make use of your knowledge for the guiding of
your thoughts words and actions. Let wisdom guide you in every step you take.
Prove. 6.3^.
Ask of your knowledge continually, what says the Rule? what does the Word of
God require? Make use of your knowledge in bearing witness to truth, for which
you came into this World. John 18.36.
When you come to appear for an opposed truth, let not your knowledge be to
seek. Make use of your knowledge for the preserving of your Souls from
theoretical and practical miscariages. Seeing ye know, etc. beware lest ye
also be led away with the error of the wicked. If you will make use of your
knowledge, 2 Pet. 3.16: Prove. 2.11, 12, 16.
you have Gods promise for preservation from snares in judgment, and
defilements in practice. The Devil shall not undermine you by policy, no^
overcome you by power. Make use of your knowledge for the good of others. One
great end of knowledge is to communicate knowledge. And indeed (as one well
observes) to know for our own and others good is the only good knowledge. To
reject the directions of knowledge, as well as the means of knowledge is to
reject knowledge. Bur. on Hof. 4.6
And has not God therefore rejected you? Is not God reckoning with his wicked,
because slothful servants, for letting their Talents lie un-improved? Yea, is
not this a greater judgment than any outward judgments you are under? Is it not
an evidence of a Souls being under a spirit of slumber, to have no more use of
its knowledge, Isa. ^9.10.
then one asleep has? Not to use is all one as not to have knowledge. He that
has not, i.e. that does not make use of what he has, shall have what he has,
or seems to have, taken away from him.

Chap. II. The miscarriages opposite to Believing God? The Assenting Act of
Faith.
1. Against credulity. Prove. 14.15.
VAin Credulity. Has not this been your sin? Have not you been so simple as to
believe every word, pretending to come from God? Have not you been ready to be
^^ken to false Teachers? Mar. 4.24. mat. 7.15. Jer. 23.16. mar. 8.15.
Though God has said, Take heed what you hear: Beware of false Prophets:
Hearken not unto the words of the Prophets, that prophecy unto you, they make
you vain, they speak (...) Vision of their own heart: Take heed, beware of the
leaven of the (...) harisees, and of the leaven of Herod; yet how fool hardy
and venturous have you been? O the sad consequences of this fool-hardiness! Eve
lost all by hearing one Sermon from the mouth of the Serpent. Julian the
Emperor, sipt in his Apostasy by hearing Libanius, the Sophister. Let others,
yea your own harms, make you to beware. Faelix quem faciunt aliena pericula,
etc. Prove. 9.18. ^ These. 5.21.
O! come not any more near the do^r of their house; Know thou not that the
dead are there, and that their guests are in the depth of Hell? Say not, you
must try all things; Christians ought indeed to prove all things in the
Apostles sense; the Doctrines, that Christ's own Ministers teach them, they must
bring to the touchstone of the Word; But he that will adventure to taste of
every box and glass in an Apothecaries shop, may sooner meet with poison, than
with nutriment. Have not you been ready to receive and reject Doctrines, before
you have brought them to the touchstone and balance of the Sanctuary, to be
tried? Before you receive or reject a piece of gold, you will go to the
touchstone, to try whether it be good metal, or no, and to the balance to
try whether it be weight, or no; But have you not dealt otherwise with the
Doctrines you have heard? C^ril on Job 12: 11:
Has your ear tried the words, that have sounded therein? The Original word
for an ear (as an excellent Expositor observes) being of the dual Number,
signifies a pair of balances, to note, that we should not only hear, but
weigh. But have not you received Doctrines upon trust? Have not some given an
absolute credence to the Church, to a Synod, to a Council? Have not others to
this and the other singular person, if a learned Man, or a pious Man, if a
Pastor, or a Teacher, especially, if pretending the spirit of Revelation? But
what faith the Apostle? We beseech you, brethren, 2 Thessalonians. 2.2.
that ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by
word, nor by letter, as from us; not by spirit, those that pretend pr^phetical
revelations; nor word, those that plead traditions; nor letter, those that urge
forged records. It was the Bereans commendation, Acts 17.11.
that they would not trust Paul upon his word, but tried his Doctrine by the
Scriptures. Have not you also rejected Doctrines upon trust? It is as dangerous
(says one) to refuse, as to receive, what we have not examined. 2 Chro^. 12.8.
Shephard's wholesome caveat for a time of liberty. p. 3: Ash on 2 Chr^ 30.8. 1
Cor. 7, 23. mat. 23.10.
No wonder that we, that have been so ready to inslave our consciences to Men,
be given up to so soar a bondage. They shall be his servants, that they may
know my service, and the service of the Kingdoms of the Country; i.e. That
they may know the difference between them: the bondage of the one, and the
liberty of the other. O that this may be your sin no more! why should ye be any
longer willing to be the servants of Men, seeing one is your Master, which is
Christ?

2. Sinful Incredulity. Against Incredulity. (...) Credere, fidem habere,
testimonium accipere.
The assenting act of faith is a full persuasion of any truth upon a divine
testimony. The Hebrews, the Greeks, the Latins express it by such words, as
import believing, or giving credit to. Many think all Infidels are without the
pale among Turks, and Heathens; But alas! are not too many found in the bosoms
of Churches? The Israelites were Gods people, and yet destroyed in the
Wilderness, because they believed not. And may not we fear destruction for our
unbelief? Capel of temprations, page 153, 154.
Are not we still guilty of not believing that God is, what God is, and what
God says? One well observes, that all sin comes from Atheism; for who would
sin, did he then verily believe, that there were a God, that saw all, and would
punish all? And such a God, God must be, or no God: And all sin tends to
Atheism; for sin wipes out all the notions of a Deity, as much as it can: And
when we are in sin, we must be either willing to get out of it by Repemance, or
else we shall be willing to turn Atheists. Guilt always (says another) begets
fear; and fear, hatred; and hatred strikes at the being of the object hated:
Bates on Heb. 11.6. in M. E. at G. page 52. Gedolphins holy Arbor, page 17
as is evident in Malefactors, desiting there were no Law, nor Judge. Do not we
say in our hearts, there is no God? so the fool, the sinner does. It is
Atheism (says one) when Men do but in their hearts say that it is all vanity
which is spoken of God. Are not we still guilty of not believing what God is?
Do not we deny, if not expressly, yet consequentially Gods absolute dominion to
command us: the goodness as well as righteousness of the law of God, by which
we ought to be ruled: that he is the rewarder of them that diligently seek
him, and the avenger of his adversaries; that he sees our thoughts afar off,
and that our greatest secrets are naked and open to, anatomized, and diffected
before, his eyes: that he is good, yea the chief good? Are not we still guilty
of not believing what God says, which of us is yet fully persuaded that our
losses for Christ shall be made up with the hundred fold in this life; because
he has said, Verily, there is no Man that has left House, Luke 18.29, 30.
mat. 19, 29.
or Parents, or Brethren, or Wife, or Children, for the Kingdom of Gods sake,
who shall not receive manyfold in this present time: He shall (according to
Matthew) receive an hundred fold? Which of us yet believes that God will repay
what ever we lay out for his poor servants, because he has said, Prove. 19.17.
He that has pity on the poor, lends to the Lord, and that, which he has
given, will be pay him again? Which of us yet believes, that if we will be
Christ's witnesses, none of the World will cordially love us; Mat. 10.22.
because he has said, ye shall be hated of all Men for my names sake? Which
of us yet believes that all Hells and the Worlds hatred can do a Child of God
no hurt, because he has said, Blessed are ye, when Men shall revile you, Mat.
5.11.
and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my
Names sake? We are indeed apt to beguile our selves and others, in professing
that we receive Gods testimony in all that he speaks; but the Apostle tells us,
there is a denial of God in works, Tit. 1.16.
as well as in words: and certainly denial in works is the strongest denial,
and manifests that our affirming what God says in words is but mere
hypocrisy: that we do but flatter God with our mouth, Psalm. 73, 35 compared
with v. 40, 41.
and lie unto him with our tongues. Are not we still guilty of neglecting to
get our hearts more and more established in believing that God is, what God is,
and what God says? Is not this a lamentation, and should it not be for a
lamentation? should we not mainly repent of our unbelief, seeing it is not only
the provocation, but the cause of all our other provocations? Hebr. 3, 8.
No wonder that God has shamed the throne of our glory, seeing we have robbed
God of his glory by our unbelief? What is Gods declarative glory, but his
reputation in the World? Unbelief takes away Gods reputation, it makes him of
no credit in the World, it makes him a liar. 1 John 5: 10. Romans 3.3.
By unbelief we attempt to make the faith of God, i. e. his faithfulness, of
none effect. O! repent, repent that God, who is no debtor to you, who was never
worse then his word, has so little credit with you, who profess to be his
servants, his children, his spouses. No wonder that we are kept in the
Wilderness, yea in a manner brought back into Egypt: We may thank our unbelief
for shutting us out of Canaan. Heb: 3: 19:
They could not enter in because of unbelief. No wonder that Gods promises, the
only solid grounds o^ comfort in times of trial, do not, cannot, comfort us:
alas! Psalm: 27: 13:
they have no credit with us. We faint, because we believe not. O that this sin
may be your sin no more! Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you for
the future an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God, Hebr: 3:
12:
and thereby God be provoked to depart further and further from you, until he
has left you totally and finally.

3 Vnsetledness in Religion Has not this been your sin, yea, Against
unsetledness.
is it not still your sin? Who believes without wavering, without any fear lest
the contrary should prove true? Are not you troubled with a Vertigo in your
Heads, a giddiness in your understandings? Have not some thought scepticisme
very tolerable? 1 Cor: 16: 13: Col: 2: 6, 7, 8^ 2 These: 2: 2:
Has not the Apostle said, stand fast in the faith: Be established in the
faith, as you have been taught, etc. Beware lest any spoil you through
philosophy and vain deceit: be not soon shaken in mind? Brinsley's spiritual
Vertigo: p: 9, 10, 11, etc.
And yet have not many been for an Academical and Pyrrhonian demur and
dubitation concerning Scripture Revelations? Have not more been actually
carried about, as wheels, as chaff, as waves, as clouds, with every wind of
doctrine? Have not you turned round, as wheels, with the times and places,
where you lived? Have not you been up and down; now of this mind, then of that,
embracing and following those opinions, and ways, which the times have smiled
upon? Have not you been whirld about by the times, as chaff by the wind? Have
not you been wavering, Jam: 1: 6.
as a wave of the Sea, which is never standing still, if there be any wind
stirring? Have not some of you been carried quite round about the Card and
Compass, as the Clouds of the Air are from one quarter of the Heaven to
another? Hebr: 13.9.
Have not you been thus carried about with diverse and strange Doctrines, with
Doctrines differing from the truth, and strange to the Scriptures of the Old
and New Testament? Are not you yet unestablished, yea, are not you careless in
seeking after establishment? Are not you still even indifferent whether you pray
to God to establish you, as David did, yea, or no? Whether you enjoy the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper (that heart-establishing Ordinance) duly
administered, yea, or no? Whether you continue fellowship with established
Christians, yea, or no? Do not you still stagger at the promises of God, viz.
that God will be a Sun and a Shield, and no good thing will be withold from
them that walk uprightly: that Babylon is fallen, is fallen, i. e. shall as
certainly fall, and that utterly, as if she were so fallen already: that there
shall be a resurrection of the dry bones, etc Do not you still dispute the
promises in your thoughts? Do not you still doubt whether God will be as good as
his word, and that because of the difficulty, that lie in the way? All
staggering at the promises of God is from unbelief. Rom: 4: 20: Brinsley, etc.
p: 98:
He staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief. Is not this also a
matter of just and deep Lamentation to see so many Professors, some of which
were formerly looked upon as sober and stayed Christians, now reeling and
staggering (like drunken Men) to and fro, carried this way, and that way, as
the wind blows? should any of you, whilst your selves stand safe upon the
shore, see others though strangers, much more if friends, tossed upon the
waves, among rocks and quick sands, ready to perish every moment; might it not
be presumed, that it would affect, the flintie^ heart among you? and can you
see the souls of your brethren and sisters thus tossed to and fro without any
trouble to your own souls? But alas! who stands fast and safe upon the shore?
Are not all your hearts unsettled? And what! will ye not pity your own unstable
souls? Is it nothing to you, to be under Reubens reproach? Gen: 49. 4: Jam: 1:
8:
Unstable as water, thou shall not excel. A double minded Man is unstable in
all his ways. Are not you in danger of being utterly ruined in this hour of
temptation, that is come upon all the World, Col. 2.8. Ne sit, qui vos
depraedetur. Beza in loc. mar: 3: 5:
to try them that dwell upon the Earth? Are not you in danger of being spoiled,
of being made a prey? O! your unbelieving staggerings grieve the heart of your
Lord. The Holy Ghost, speaking of the unbelieving Jews, tells us, Jesus was
grieved for the hardness of their hearts: And shall they not grieve your
hearts? It is a wonder that God has spared you so long. O faithless and
perverse Generation! How long shall I be with you? How long shall I suffer you?
O! sin no more in this kind. O that henceforth ye be no more children tessed
to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14. Brinsley,
etc. 206, etc. Hebr. 13.9. 1 These. 1.5. (...) Col. 2.2.
by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to
deceive! O! Be not carried about with diverse and strange Doctrines for it is a
good thing, that the heart be established with grace. Be restless, till the
Word come unto you in much assurance: Be restless, till you have attained unto
all the riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgement
of the mystery of God, etc. Seek heart-establishment from God, for yourselves
and others, as Peter does, Now the God of all grace, etc. make you perfect, 1
Peter 5.10^ Psa. 51.12.
stablish, strengthen you: And David, Stablish me with thy free Spirit. Neglect
neither the Word, nor Sacrament, administered after the right order. O! Hebr.
10.25:
Forsake not the assembling of your selves together, as the manner of some is.
Trees stand s^^er in the Wood or Grove, where they have company, than in the
Field, where they stand alone.

4. Resting in a Dead Faith. Has not this been your sin? Against resting in a
Dead Faith. Manton on Jam. 2.17.
Have not you satisfied your selves with a Faith, that is but the carcass of
saving believing? The Apostle, in making mention of a dead faith, alludeth to a
corpse, or a dead plant, which have only an outward similitude and likeness to
those which are living. Saving belief is an assent wrought in the Soul, by the
sanctifying Spirit, and built upon a Divine Testimony. But is not our belief,
the effect of natural reason, White's Directions, p. 91, 92, etc. 1 John 5: 1:
further enlightened (at most) by the assistance of the Spirit? Do not we remain
unsanctified, notwithstanding our believing? Whosoever believes that Jesus is
the Christ, is born of God. Have we any further assurance of what we believe,
than that which Reason suggests? Were ever the things believed, evident to any
spiritual sense within us? Faith is the evidence of things not seen. Hebr: 11:
1:
Is not our belief grounded only upon an humane testimony? We call that a
Divine Testimony, White, etc: p. 95, 96, etc.
(says one of the Western Worthies) which is given by the Spirit of God, to
that Spirit which is within a regenerate person; For (says he) unto any
testimony two things are required; First, The manifesting and presenting that
which is to be credited or believed. Secondly, An ability in him, to whom it is
witnessed, to understand it; otherwise the proposing any thing by discourse to
a bea^, that wants reason to understand speech, or the relating of any thing to
a man, that has reason, in the Greek tongue, who understands no language but
English, is no testimony, no more than it is to a deaf man, that cannot hear:
Wherefore, to make a Divine testimony, there must be both Gods testifying unto
man, and also a mind in him able to understand that Revelation. First, The
Spirit of God must reveal and manifest unto a man that Truth, that is to be
believed, as the light discovers any visible object: Next, There must be in
that man, a light planted in his heart, ( which the Apostle calls, 1 Jo: 5: 20:
An understanding to know him, that is true) as the light or visnal-faculty is
planted in the eye, or else he cannot comprehend that light, that shines unto
him. -- The evidence then, which a true believer has of any truth of God,
which he embraces, is the manifesting of that truth unto the Spirit, not only
by a form of words, to the natural understanding, but beyond that, by a kind of
demonstration unto the spiritual mind; as the evidence of any object to the
eye, is by the shining of the light upon it, which makes it to appear to be
such as it is. This kind of testifying, or evidencing things, Rom: 8: 16:
in a spiritual way, the Apostle calls, The witnessing of Gods Spirit, with our
Spirit, mentioning expressly two Spirits, whereof, if either be wanting, there
can be no Divine testimony. But is not our belief grounded upon the testimony
of Reason, upon the consonancy of Scripture-revelations to right Reason? And is
not the testimony of reason an humane testimony? Yea, Do not we believe upon an
humane testimony, when we believe any thing written in the Scriptures, for the
testimony of the Scriptures, If that we believe the Scriptures themselves, upon
the general consent of the Church, or upon the probability and reasonableness
of the things therein delivered, or upon the observation of the truth of those
writings in most things, which all make up but an humane testimony? This the
same learned and judicious Divine proves thus, White, etc: p: 98, 99:
The assent unto one thing for another, is built upon that, to which we first
give our assent: as a stone in a wall, though it lies immediately upon that
stone, that is next under it, yet it is indeed supported by the foundation,
which bears up all the building. We say, we do believe; but is not our Assent
without suitable impressions upon our hearts, and without a suitable carriage in
our lives? Does the reality of Gods being believed, Baxter's Divine Lise, on
John 17: 3:
make us look upon our selves, and all things, as nothing without God, as
nothing in comparison of God; and to let the being and reality of our love,
desire, and endeavors, be let out upon the most real and transcendent Being?
Does the belief of Gods Unity, contract and unite our straggling affections, and
call them home from multifarious Vanity? Does the belief of Gods Immensity and
Incomprehensibility, fill our Souls with admiration? Does the belief of Gods
Eternity, draw our Souls from transitory to eternal things? Does the belief of
Gods Simplicity, make us in love with holy simplicity? Does the belief of Gods
Invisibility, make us mostly esteem and value things invisible? Does the belief
of Gods Immutability, beget in us unchangeable resolutions for God? Does the
belief of Gods Almightiness, sill us continually with holy fear, and promote
trusting in him? Does the belief of Gods Wisdom, make us delight in the
wisdom which is from above, and to choose God for our Teacher and Counselor?
Does the belief of Gods Goodness, fill our Souls with a superlative love unto
God, and industrious desires to be conform^d to his goodness in our measure?
Does the belief of Gods Holiness, cause us to have most high and honorable
esteems of holiness in the creature, and to fall in love with it, and wholly
conform our selves to Gods holiness in Christ? Does the belief of Gods Truth
and Faithfulness, make us resolved for duty, and an holy life, seeing the
commands of God are serious, and the promises and threats true? The true and
sound assent to any Divine Revelation, as an holy truth, includes a
correspondency in the believer, to the thing believed: Such an assent descends
from the understanding to the affections, and so to the conversation. True
Faith, and right Obedience, cannot be separated; for he that believes the truth
of Gods promises, filled with such things as he does most want, must needs
desire the good contained in them; and seeing God has declared the effect of
his promises, attainable only in ways of obedience, if he neglect that means,
it is manifest he does not desire the end. Certainly, if our assent does not,
cannot act, no more than a dead body can rise and walk, it is but a dead faith.
The Apostle does not say (as one well observes) Faith is dead without works,
Manton on Jam: 2: 20.
but Faith without works is dead. I here is a difference between these
predications, as there is between those, A man without motion is dead, and a
man is dead without motion. Works are not the cause, that give life to Faith;
but yet they are the effects, that argue life in Faith. Faith is not always
alike lively; but yet it is always living, and operation is the necessary
effect of life. O! What cause have we to repent of our dead Faith? And what!
Shall it always remain dead? Take heed, I beseech you, not only of setting no
your rest in a Knowledge, but in a Faith, falsely so called. Take heed of
pleasing your selves any longer with the name of Faith, and remaining destitute
of the virtue of Faith, for the crucifying your lusts and corruptions, and
conforming your hearts and lives to the Commandments of God. To assent to
truth, with the neglect of goodness, or with lazy desires after goodness, is
but a vain Faith That assent that does not now subdue sin, Genesis 23.4.
will not suppress fear, when you come to dye. What! will ye not yet bury your
dead out of your sight?

Chap. III. The Miscarriages, opposite to Consenting to have God to be your
God, the third Act of Faith.
1. Against resusing God.
REfusing God. Beware of still refusing to have the true God to be a God unto
you, and a God over you; to have him to be your Portion and Sovereign. To be
God, Genesis 17.1, 7. Romans 9.5.
implies to be enough unto all, to be an all-sufficient and self-sufficient
good: and to be over all, and above all, to be an all-commanding good. Ephesians.
4.6.
To refuse God, is to refuse to place our happiness in him, and to come under
his government. Has not this been your sin? God has offered himself to be
your chief good, and absolute Sovereign; but have not you refused such offers?
Yea, do not you still refuse them? There are many degrees of refusing (as one
well observes:) Although we may be free of some of them, Ob. Sedgwick's
Fountain opened, etc. chap. 6.
yet are not we comprised in some one or other of them? Are not some guilty of
refusing by way of presumptuous persecution? Are not others by way of malicious
opposition? Are not others by way of scornful derision? Are not others by way
of open (though not malicious) resistance? And if we be not guilty of any of
these refusings, yet are not we guilty of refusing by way of dissent, or
unperswasion? Are not we yet unperswaded to accept of God upon his own terms?
Certainly there is no medium 'twixt Faith and Infidelity: 'twixt receiving of
God, and refusing of God. He that is not with me (says Christ) is against me.
He, that does not accept of God, does refuse him. That Chapman, that will not
take your Wares at your price, in so doing, he does refuse them. That Woman,
that dissents, that will not consent, that such a man should be her Husband,
refuses to marry with him. Are not you still unperswaded to have God himself
for your Portion, Lam. 3.24. Portio cujusque dicitur in quo felicitatem suam
quisque collocat. Calv.
to place your happiness in him, and absolute Sovereign, to come under his
government? Is not this evident in the remaining deafness of the ears of your
Souls? Not to give ear to, or not to obey the Word of the Lord, is to reject
it; and to reject the Word of God, is to reject God himself. Psa. 81.11.
My people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me. Were you
ever yet effectually called? Did God ever yet speak in such a voice, as could
not but be heard, as could not be withstood? If yet your ears are deaf unto the
calls of God, if yet you are able to withstand the voice of God, certainly you
do still refuse him. Do not your hearts remain obdurate? Do the offers of God
make any impression on them? Is any savor of God to be found in them? Alas!
Gods offers do not move or stir them cordially to defire the enjoyment of him,
and subjection to him. Do not our worthless thoughts of God still continue? Do
not we still think, that God is not worth so much pains, so many prayers, so
much hearing, so much time, so many sighs and tears, etc. Alas! which of us
accounts Gods offers the best bargains? That which a man counts to be his best
bargain, O. Sedg. etc. p. 301, 302.
he will (says the same Author) (1.) Make all things to give way to that (2.)
Make that to fill up his desire. (3.) It will draw forth his choicest diligence
and pains. (4.) He will be at some loss to gain it. (5.) He is peremptory, and
unmoveably earnest for the enjoyment of it. (6.) The fruition of it presents
unto him the sweetest joy. Do we thus account closing with God best, Best of
all? Where then are our present cares to get God himself? Where are our strong
fears lest we miss of God? Where are our full desires, and peremptory and
steadfast resolutions to be the Lords, as well as to have God to be ours? (...)
will we part with for God? Whence comes in our sweetest joy? To them that
believe, i. e. receive Christ, or rather God in Christ, He is precious, Christ
is precious, and God in and through Christ is precious. But where is the
precious thought? Who are restless without God? To whom are Goods not good
without God, Peace not rest without God, Life not a being without God, all
nothing without God? Give me children, or else I dye, said Rachel. Do thou
say, Lord, give me thy self, or else I dye? O that this may be your sin no
more! Yet consider, and be wise: O! Do not still stand out against him: Though
you refuse his Ministers, yet do not any more refuse their Master: Though you
like not the messengers, yet do not any more dislike the offers. What shall I
say, to persuade you; or rather, whereby God himself may persuade you? If you
will continue still resolute, that God shall not be a God to, and over you:
verily, God will resolve, that you shall not be a people, but he will make an
utter end of you: Jer. 3.1, 5. Thou have played the ha^lot with many lovers;
yet return unto me, says the Lord. -- Will he reserve his anger for ever. Acts
3.19. Hebr. 10.26.
yet in the midst of judgment, he remembers so much mercy, as once more to
offer himself unto you, notwithstanding all your former refusals of him; and if
now you will but accept of him, all that is past shall be forgiven you, and God
will receive you into his grace and favor, and never any more upbraid you with
your often refusals of him: Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your
sins (your refusals of God in Christ, of such sins the Apostle speaks in that
place) may be blotted out: But if you will not, how can you read without
trembling, that Word of the Lord, If we sin wilfully, after w^ have received
the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a
certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, Against
closing with God hypocritically.
which shall devour the Adversaries?

2. Closing with God hypocritically. Beware lest your willingness to have God
for your God, still prove a consent not suited to the object of Faith, in its
absolute necessary respects and nature. It is essential to God, as the object
of man's Faith, (says a Worthy) to be his supreme Lord and Rector; Baxter's
Apology, p. 62, 63.
and his ultimate end, and chiefest good: and so must be apprehended and willed
by all, that indeed take him for their God: As also to be perfect in Being,
Wisdom, Goodness, and Power, and of perfect Veracity: yea, it is essential to
the object of our Faith, as such, to be considered comparatively: As that God
be taken, not only as our Good, but our chief good, to be prefer^'d before
every creature: that he be taken, not only as our Lord, but as Sovereign Lord,
to be obeyed before all other. -- Where these essentials are not in the
apprehension of the object, there is not truly Consent, or Faith. -- Consent
has relation to the Offer: and if it be not the offered thing, that is
consented to, but somewhat else, under that name, then it is not indeed
Consent; for there is no Relate without its Correlate. -- The Civil Law says,
Ignorantis non est consensus; A God that is inferior to Creatures in R^le, or
Goodness, and Desireableness, is not God indeed: And therefore, he that takes
God in this sense for his God, takes but the Name of God, an Idol of his own
brain, and not God himself. Has not this been your sin? Is it not still your
sin? Do not you seem to consent, when you do not indeed and in truth consent?
You pretend, you are heartily willing, that God should be your God, and that
you do consent to have him But?

First, Are not you still ignorant of the true God, Ignorantly.
whom you say you consent to take for your God? Ignorant Professors can only
seem to be Consenters: And are not you still ignorant Professors? See Chap. 1.

Secondly, Are not you for having of God, Without rejecting other Gods.
without rejecting of other gods? Indeed, had our hearts been always chaste and
faithful, we should not have needed to break, we should only have tied a knot;
Teates Scripture-Map of the wilderness of sin, and way to Canaan, p. 338.
but because of our former wanton dalliance with, and engagements unto other
lovers, we must solemnly renounce and disclaim them, or God will not be ours.
Hearken O Daughter, and consider, forget also thine own people, and thy fathers
house: so shall the King greatly desire thy beauty. But, Do not you still
refuse to renounce the World for your chief good? Do not you still say in your
hearts and desires, Who will show us, Psa: 45.10, 11, Other chief goods. Psa.
4.6.
who will give us to enjoy, any good, the good of the creature, an earthly
happiness? Do not you still say in your hearts, Take God for a portion, who
will, so we may have our portion in this life? Was not he guilty of blasphemy,
that said, He would not part with his part in Paris, for a part in Paradise?
And are not your hearts guilty of the same? Do not you still place your
happiness, either in riches, or honors, or pleasures? Haec tria pro trino
numine mundus habet.
Do not some cry out, Let us enjoy our pleasures, and we matter not God and
Heaven; yea, we matter not wealth or honor? Do not others cry out, Let us get
riches, and we matter not grace and glory; yea, we matter not honor or
pleasure? P^pulus mihi sibilat, and mihi plaud^.
Do not your earnest desires of having, carking cares, and anxious endeavors
for the procuring, inordinate delight in the enjoyment, distrustful fears of
losing, and repining sorrows for parting with, this Worlds good things, speak
out plainly, that you still place your happiness in the creature? Do not you
still refuse to renounce all other Lords? Other Lords.
Are not some still resolved to be ruled by the Devil, to be what he would have
them be, and to do what he would have them do? Ephesians. 2.3. (...)
Are none of you Children of disobedience? The original word imports, Children
unperswadable. Are not some still unperswadable by any Arguments to reject
Satan's injections and counsels? Are not others still resolved to be ruled by
the world, the things of the World, the men of the World? The World shall cut
out their work, and choose their Employments, yea their very Religion, and set
limits to it: Men's opinions, precepts, practices shall be their rule and
standard. Are not others still resolved to be ruled by themselves! to continue
their own Lords, consulting only with flesh and blood, doing only what is good
in their own eyes, Jer. 44.17, 18.
as that People, who cried out, We will certainly do whatsoever thing goes
forth of our own mouth; for then we had plenty of viciual and were well, and
saw no evil: but since we left off, we have wanted all things, and have been
consumed by the sword. But what says Christ? Mat. 6.24:
No man can serve two masters; for either he will hate the one, and love the
other: or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other: Ye cannot serve
God and mammon. Verily, you cannot be ruled by the flesh, or the World, or the
Devil, and by God too.

Thirdly, Without yielding up self unto God.
Are not you still for having God to be yours, without an hearty willingness to
be the Lords? Verily you will find it, that it is not enough to think or say,
I am none of Satan's, I am not for the World, I will not be for the Flesh: thou
must come to say heartily, Hos. 2.7.
I am Gods; I am, and through grace will continue Gods, and none but Gods. We
must not only leave our former lovers, Year, etc. p. 339.
but we must return to our first husband. What is this (says one) but the
marriage-match, and in the truest sense, the true lovers-knot? But alas! can
each of us say, I am thine, save me? Psalm. 119.94.
I am not mine own, not the Worlds, not Satan's; but thine, thine really, thine
totally, thine solely, thine everlastingly; save me. Are not you still
unwilling that all you are, Roberts of the Covenant. fol. 94, 95.
all that you have, all that you can do, and all that you can endure, should be
the Lords? Are not you still unwilling that your minds should be his to
apprehend and believe him? Your consciences his, to accuse, or excuse you
according to his pleasure? your memories his to retain him? your wills his to
yield and submit to him? your hearts and affections his to be employed about
him and his concernments? your eyes his to behold his works? your ears his to
hear his word? All your senses his, to be casements and inlets to his goodness?
your members his to be weapons o^ righteousness? your being his to be only for
him? Are not you still unwilling that all your credit, pleasures, riches, time,
parts, gifts, privileges, relations; etc. Should be Homagers unto God? Are not
you still unwilling that all you can do should be either for publishing, and
maintaining his truth, or promoting his worship, or protecting his Church, or
advancing his Kingdom, or fulfilling his will? Are not you still unwilling to
bear Christ's reproach, Heb. 13 13, 36, 37, 38
to undergo trials of cruel mockings, and scourgings, bonds, and imprisonments;
if need be to be stoned, sawn asunder, tempted, slain with the sword, to wander
about in sheep skins and goat skins, in Deserts and in Mountains, and in Dens,
and in Caves of the Earth being deaitute, afflicted, tormented for his sake? To
resist even unto blood, fighting against sin? Hebr: 12: 4^
Is not this still the language of your hearts, Let us break his bands asunder,
and ca^ away his cords from us? Psalm: 2.3.
Which of us does yet yield himself unto the Lord? The genuine constitution of
the Hebrew phrase is, Give ye the hand unto Jehovah. Ash on 2 Chronicles. 30.8. Job
11: 13: Isa: 1: 15: 1 Chro. 29.14. Ezekiel: 17: 18: Prove. 22: 26:
Are not you still unwilling to stretch out your hands to God, to be take your
selves to God in prayer? Are not you still unwilling to yield chediential
subjection to Gods government, as they submitted themselves (or gave the hand)
unto Solomon the King? Are not you still unwilling to enter into Covenant with
God to be his (which in Scripture is called giving the hand, and striking
hands) according to the Directions in the late famous Vindication of Piety.

Fourthly, Is not your willingness to have God forced, and not free? F^reedly
and not freely:
Properly indeed every consent is voluntary; but yet that may be called an
involuntary consent, when the will, might it use its own liberty with safety,
would not consent, though at present it does. Such a consent does a Mariner
give to cast his goods overboard in a Storm. God wooes and wins hearts; Teate,
etc: page 337.
he does not ravish them. Indeed at first they are not only coy, but crooked:
He comes to his own (in this sense, even his own intended, and elect Lady and
Spouse) but she receives him not. What gracious heart is there, but with
bitterness remembers how often it refused God, before he brought it to a yea,
and Amen? psalm: 110: 3:
God only of unwilling makes them willing in the day of his power. But alas!
are not you still forced to be willing to have him, rather then to be damned?
Did you ever look after God, but in a strait? Have not sin, and the World been
your only delight in good days? Ob: sedg: etc: f^nut: open: page: 303, 304:
and God your desire only in evil days? In your extremities God shall go for a
Number; but in your prosperity he shall stand only for a cipher. Verily
involuntary consents are false, are none, are indeed real refusings.

Fifthly, Is not your willingness to have God defective, and not full?
Defectively and not fully: Teate, etc: page 338:
Right consenting is not only a free, but a full act of the will. A divided
heart never yet consented indeed to have God for its God. Surely that Christ,
that God in Christ, that will not allow one man to serve two masters, will
never allow one woman to have two husbands, especially if himself must be one
of them: But alas! though you may not place your happiness altogether in the
creature, yet are not you still for placing some part of your happiness in some
created good? Though you be not altogether for being ruled only by Satan, or
the World, or the Flesh: yet are not you still unwilling not to be ruled in the
least by any of those Lords? Ob: Sedg: etc: page: 302, 303:
Are not you still unwilling to become fully the Lords? Is there not some one
thing in your selves, in the World, that you stick for? God can prevail with
you for all, but one thing, in that he must yield unto you. Is there not some
one thing in God that you stick at? you like Gods mercy, and his love, and his
graciousness, and his happiness: but is there not some one thing in God that
you like not? Do not you mislike either his holiness, or his justice, or his
anger, and wrath against sin? Are you sure that you like his Rule, and
Authority, his Spirit, his All? Alas! in this, or in that, you cannot like him,
you cannot come up to him: you are content to part with this, and to leave
that; to do this, and to suffer that; but you cannot yield up all unto God: you
will part with some sins, yea with all but one: you will forsake much of the
World, but not all. Is not your consent accompanied with some one exception or
other? you will have God, that with him you may enjoy such a lust, or so that
with him you may have such a kind of life: so that for him you may not hazard
your name, and credit, or your liberty, or livelihood, or your very life. If it
be thus, verily you do but pretend to consent: your seeming consent is a real
dissent. This one difference between God and your souls, will keep the breach
between you from being made up, and condemn you for Refusers of him. No
bargain, no match, can be made where there is one exception.

Sixthly, For the future, and not for the present:
Are not you only willing to have God for the future and not for the present?
Do not you delay to close with God, as your chiefest good, and supreamest Lord?
Do not you pause on Gods offers, and put him off for the present? Has not God
your present denial, but the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, your present
Embracements? You take the present time to please the Flesh, to enjoy the
World, to gratify the Devil; but you do not take the present time to enjoy God.
O Sinner! what is it that thy Heart does at present choose and cleave unto? Is
it not something sinful, or worldly? Do not some of you see a more present good
in your Lusts, than in God? Do not others see a more present good in the World,
than in God? Are not you still guilty of trifling delays? O. Sedg. etc. page
281.
Do not you say to God as Foelix to Paul, Go thy way for this time, when I have
a convenient season I will call for thee? Acts 24.25.
A consent for the future is no other than a present dissent. It is indeed a
most contemptible refusing of God, when we do not judge his offers even of
himself to be our chief good, and supreamest Lord, worthy of acceptance; of
all acceptance, of all acceptance for the present.

Seventhly, Is not your willingness to have God temporary, Temporarily and
weakly. Allens Vindication of Godliness. page 276, 277.
and weak, and not habitual, and prevailing? It is not (says one) what thou
art in a fit, or in a fright, or in a sudden passion, in sickness, or under the
apprehensions of death, that will give thee any certain Light, by which thou
may judge of thy state, but what thou art in the standing and abiding
disposition and bent of thy Soul. He, that has indeed consented to have God
for his God, abides willing, is never unwilling (when he is himself) to be rid
of Sin, the World, and the Devil, and to place his Happiness in the enjoyment
of God, and being under his government: To be sure, his willingness abides
greater than his unwillingness. But alas! Are not you only willing to have God
in Fits and Moods? Do not you remain habitually unwilling? Is not your
unwillingness greater than your willingness? Right willingness (says the same
Author) will discover it self to be prevailing by bringing forth both
Resolution and Resistance against Sin: Where a man is truly willing to be rid
of Sin, he will not only be patient, and give God leave to Crucify all his
beloved Lusts, and darling Corruptions, and give the Word leave to hew and
strike home at the root of them, without hiding them, or warding off the blow,
or wishing they may be spared to him; but stands steadfastly on Gods side, and
taking part with him against, resolves to use all his means for the conquering
and overcoming of them: And this resolution will bring forth resistance, a
restraining, curbing, and withstanding of Sin in all its Workings. But were you
ever thus resolved against the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, and for God? Do
you yet thus resist all Temptations to the contrary?

3. Renouncing God.
Renouncing of God. Has not this been your Sin? Even since you have consented
that God should be your God, have not you cast him off? Have you not returned
with the Dog to the Vomit, and with the Sow to wallow again in the Mire? Have
not you returned to your Former Lovers, and to be again in subjection to those
other Lords, that have had absolute dominion over you? Howard's Souls misery
and recovery, etc. page 134.
If you have not rejected God directly and intentionally, yet have not you
rejected him consequently and implicitly? Thus Saul, in sparing Agag, and the
fat Beasts of the Amalekites against Gods express commandment, 1 Samuel 15.23.
is said to have Rejected Gods Word, and therefore God himself. Because thou
have rejected the Word of the Lord he has also rejected thee from being King.
Have not you with deliberation, for the gaining of somewhat that pleased you,
done that which is indeed casting off of God? Which of you can say, Psalm.
44.18, 19, 20, 21.
Our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined from thy way,
though thou ha^ sore broken us in the place of Dragons, and covered us with the
shadow of Death? Oh! if we have forgotten the Name of the Lord, or stretched out
our hands to a ^ran^e God, shall not God search out this? Have not you listed
up your heel against God, after you have listed up your hand unto God? Has not
God threatened to renounce you, because you have renounced him? 2 Timothy 2.12.
to deny you, because you have denied him? O! be at length persuaded to
remember from whence you are fallen, Rev. 2.^.
and repent, Acts 11.23.
and do your fir^t-works; and for the future, with purpose of heart to cleave
unto the Lord: i. e. (as one well observes) as you have made a good choice,
Antiphar^nacum Saluber ^^mum. p. 6.
so still to s^ick to your choice. Never more refuse God, as the Stomach is
said to refuse such meat, a^, because of its contrariety to its appetite, it
vomits up again.

Now that you may not only heartily mourn for, but carefully take heed of, even
virtual, as well as formal refusals of Gods offers of himself unto you to be
your God, consider seriously what provocations all kinds of refusals of God are
unto his Majesty? Must it not necessarily incense him, that you should (as it
were) tell him you will have none of his Mercy, none of his Love, none of
Himself; you had rather enjoy the World, yea, your lusts, which dishonor and
grieve him so much? Jer. 44.4, 5.
Has not God said, Wherefore (speaking of this very sin) my fury has been
poured forth, and kindled in the Cities of Judah, and in the Streets of
Jerusalem, and they are wasted and desolate, as at this day? Yea, may you not
sear, that God will let you fall in this hour of temptation; yea, give you up
unto your own hearts lusts, to commit all manner of wickedness? Israel would
have none of me: so I gave them up unto their own hearts lust, Psa 81.11, 1^.
and they walked in their own counsels.

Chap IV. The Miscarriages opposite to Trusting in God, the relying Act of
Faith.
1. TEmpting of God. Tempting is the same with trying: Against Tempting God.
Amesi^ medull. l. 1. c. 12. Mal. 3.10.
to tempt God, is to make trial of some Divine perfection unlawfully. There is
indeed a lawful making an experiment of God; Try me now in this, says the Lord
of Hosts. This tempting or trying, is an Act of Faith, leading us to obey and
practice those things, which God has commanded, with expectation of that fruit
and blessing, that God has promised: But there is an unlawful making
experiments of God. And has not this been, yea is not this still your sin? Is
not your proving God, an evidence of your tempting God? Psa. ^5.9.
Your Fathers tempted me, and proved me. Do not you still make unlawful
experiments of Gods power, whether he can do such and such things? They tempted
God in their heart -- they said, Psa. 78.18, 19:
can God furnish a table in the wilderness? Do not you still circumscribe Gods
power, and set hounds to it at your pleasure; so that if God do not this or
that, which you have a mind to, he shall not be accounted Omnipotent? They --
tempted God, Psa. 78.41.
and limited the Holy One of Israel. Do not you still do such and such things,
in the most secret manner possible, to try whether God sees what is done in
secret, or no? They tempted the Lord, saying, Exodus 17.7.
Is the Lord among us, or not? Do not you still refuse to make use of the
ordinary means God has appointed, trying whether he will provide for you
extraordinarily? This Christ calls Tempting the Lord. Mat. 4.7.
Do not you still murmur and repine against God, and his Instruments, trying
whether he will be angry? Tempting Christ, and murmuring, are made Synonima's.
1 Cor. 10.9, 10.
If you do not still tempt God directly and intentionally, yet do not you still
tempt him consequently and implicitly? Do not you still do that, which of it
self; and in its own nature, tends to try, either Gods Power, or his
Omniscience and Omni-presence, or his Providence, or his Justice and Anger, of
what metal he is made? This notion of tempting God, may be farther cleared by
considering, White on Mat. 4.7.
what it is to tempt man: To tempt man, is to desire, and some way to
endeavor, to incline him to break that Law, that ought to rule him: In like
manner, To tempt God, is to desire, and some way to endeavor, to incline him
to break that Law, which he has proposed to himself to follow, in the ruling
of the World. Hence some distribute temptations into two sorts, some of
inducement, and some of trial; but the former sort may be referred to the
latter, because the will of God is tried in them. Thus God is tempted two ways
especially, either by expecting that God should do what he has not promised,
or by expecting that he should not do what he has threatened. And do not you
thus still tempt God? Do not you still expose your selves to danger, without
any urgent necessity, expecting protection from Heaven? Do not you still do
what Christ was tempted to by Satan? Do not you still refuse to use the
ordinary means appointed by God for your safety, and yet expect that God should
even work miracles for your preservation? It is true, when God takes away means
of safety from us, then to expect safety immediately from Heaven, is not to
tempt God, but to trust in God; for God has promised to come in at a dead
lift: When God affords no means of safety, he will provide for our safety
without means, if it be good for us to be safe. And Abraham called the name of
the place, Genesis 22.14.
Jehovah ^^ireh, as it is said to this day, in the Mount of the Lord it shall
be seen: The English of which Text (says one) is this, Ash's Support for the
sinking heart, in times of distress, page 3. John 4.8. Numb. 20.11.
Man's extremity is Gods opportunity. When Christ, and his company, were in the
desert, where no meat was to be had, he fed them miraculously; but in the City,
he sent his Disciples to buy meat. We may expect Water out of the Rock, where
there is nothing but Rocks and Stones; but where we may hope to find Water, we
must digg for it. 2 Kings 6, 1^, 32.
When Elisha was in a little Village, not able to defend him from the
Assyrians, he had chariots and horsemen of fire to defend him; but when he was
in Samaria, a strong walled City, though the King of Israel sent to fetch his
head, he said only to those that were with him, Shut the door. Do not some
still expect, that God should provide for their Bodies, though they neglect the
means that God has appointed for their nourishment, clothing, recovery from
sickness, etc? 2 These. 3.10.
Do not some look to eat, though they do not labor? But do not more expect
that God should provide for their Souls, though they neglect the means of grace
and salvation? Do not you still think, that your Souls shall do well enough,
though you take no pains about them? Do not you lay all upon God, and never
trouble your selves about them? Do not you still cry out, Let us dye the death
of the righteous? But are not you careless of living the life of the righteous?
Do not you still expect help from God in sinful ways? Do not you still expect
to meet with God in ways of worship of your own devising? Now therefore, why
tempt ye God, Acts 1^.10
to put a yoke upon the neck of the Disciples, which neither our Fathers, nor
we, were able to bear? In a word, (as to this Head) Do not you still do what
tends to incline God to make good his promises, though you do not perform their
conditions? Do not you also still expect, that God should not execute his
threats upon you, though there be that in you, against which, where e're it is,
the threatenings are denounced? Do not you still expect to escape punishments,
notwithstanding your very sins are threatened by God in his Word? Do not you
still run into temptation? And are not you careless to avoid occasions of sin,
and yet remain fearless of falling into sin, though God has threatened, Ezekiel.
14.3, 4, 5. 1 Cor. 10.9.
to give up such to their own hearts lusts? O that this may be your sin no
more! O! tempt not Christ any more, as you have tempted him. The naturalness of
this sin should make you take heed. This is an humor, that we are all given
unto by nature, to be mavelous desirous to try conclusions, that are rare and
unknown; to contemn things common, and to be fond after strange novelties. It
was told the Israelites as plain as could be, that they should not reserve of
the Mannah till morning; and they needed not to have reserved it, they had
fresh every day; and yet forsooth, they would needs keep it, if it were but for
an experiment sake, to try whether it would s^ink, or no: Exodus 16.20.
And though they were forbidden to gather any on the Sabbath day, and on the
Eeven before had enough for two days, and it was told them, they should find
none on the Sabbath day; yet they must needs try. This sin should not only be
the more lamented, but the more taken heed of, because it is such a provocation
unto God. It comes from much wickedness. Such an one, that will undertake a new
way to know the will of God, is not satisfied with Gods discovery of his will
in his Word: yea this sin proceeds from pride and arrogance, such a soul
refuses to subject its will to the will of God, and does seek to make Gods
will subject to its lusts. This sin lays you open to all manner of temptations,
to any wickedness whatsoever: neither are we overcome by any temptation of the
Devil, unless we do in a sort tempt God. ^nar^ 8: 11, 12: Psalm 95.11:
The Lord Jesus sighed for the Pharisee tempting of God, and why? Because God
swear in his wrath, that their Fathers who tempted him, should not enter into
his rest. It is verily height of madness to tempt God. To tempt God is to put
God to it, 1 Cor: 10: 22:
and do ye provoke the Lord to anger, are ye stronger than he? If you will
needs tempt, it were best for you to tempt your matches. There is no dealing
with Fire: it is very ^langerous to make experiments thereof: it will burn all,
that touches it, Heb: 12: 29:
and God is Fire, yea our God is a consuming Fire.

2 Not trusting in God. Against not trusting in God:
The Hebrews express this act of faith by a word, that signifies to lean on,
or to cast the weight of ones body, for support or stay. And it shall come to
pass in that day, ^a: 10: 20:
that the remnant of Israel, and such as are escaped of the house of Jacob,
shall no more stay upon him, that smote them; but shall stay upon the Lord, the
holy one of Israel in truth. But which of our souls do yet wholly rely upon God
for the making good of his promises, either for the bestowing, or continuing,
of what is good, or for the preventing, or removing, of what is evil? Is not
our not trusting in God still evidenced in our ignorance of God^ can God be
more trusted than he is known? They that know thy name, Psalm: 9: 10:
and they only, will put their trust in thee. Is it not also evidenced in our
want of interest in God, by reason of our not assenting, and consenting to him?
Who is this that comes up from the Wilderness, Cant: 8: 5:
leaning upon her beloved? who can suppose God to be thy leaning-stock, if he
be not thy beloved? May not God say with a bitter scorn, Teate, etc: page 333,
334:
who art thou, that learned upon another beloved? How dare thou lay thine
head in his bosom, unto whom thou never yet gave the heart in thy bosom?
It Is interest, and only interest in Christ, (in God in and through Christ) that
gives a right to this act of leaning upon him. If you still refuse to enter
into Covenant with God, he is so far from calling you to take hold, that he
will even knock off your fingers from holding upon his Covenant, with what have
thou to do, Psalm. 50.10.
to take my Covenant into thy mouth? I^ God be thine, if thou believe him,
and consents to have him to be thy God, lean and welcome, and the more thou
leanest, the dearer shall thou be unto him, Christ loved that Disciple best,
that leaned upon his bosom most. John 21.20. Isa. 49.5. Psalm. 18 ^.
If thou can say with Christ, my God th^^ ma^st add, he shall be my strength:
If thou can say with David, the Lord is my God, thou may add, my strength,
in whom I will trust. But if God be not thy beloved, thy leaning will be
counted wantonness impudence, and presumption. Is not our not trusting in God
also evidenced in our not keeping his way, the way of his Commandments, Psalm.
37.3.
and the way of his Providence, but tempting of him? But of these evidences
already in the former Chapters, and the first section of this. Once more, what
else do your carking cares and carnal sears argue, but your distrusts of God?
Trusting in God will not indeed suffer you to be slothfully careless what
becomes of you and yours, he that does not endeavor by honest, prudent,
diligent care to provide for his own is worse than an Infidel: 1 Timothy 5.8.
But yet trusting in God would not suffer you to be carkingly careful for any
thing. Be careful for nothing: Phil. 4.^.
it would free you from all those cares that distract the head, and divide the
heart from other, and better things: yea it would free you from all carnal
fears of evil, Ob. Sedg on Psalm. 23 3.
though you walk in the valley of the shadow of death, that is, though you meet
with dangers as terrible as death, though those dangers beset you as the
Mountains do the Valleys, though you be as near to death as the shadow is unto
the body, Psalm. 112.7, 8.
though there be but a step between you and death. But alas! do not your
carking cares and carnal fears either divert you from duty, Mal. 3 1^.
as if it were a vain thing to serve and wait upon the Lord, or else distract
you in duties, in reading, hearing, praying, meditating, etc. O that this may
be your sin no more! Verily if God shall never be trusted in by you, you shall
certainly, and for ought you know suddenly, be consumed by him. What said the
Bramble when chosen King? Come, and put your trust in my shadow, and if not,
let sire come out of the Bramble, and devour the Cedars of Lebanon. Judge. 9.15.
No wonder that Fire is proceeded from God to devour the tallest Cedars for
their not trusting in him. You should take the more heed of this sin, because
of your proneness to it, and because of its being the life and vigor of every
sin: all sin is departing from God; and we depart from God only, because we do
not trust in him.

3 Creature confidence: Against trusting in any Creature. Luk 18.9. p^al. 52.7.
Isa. 30.12.
trusting in somewhat that is not God. Is not this still your iniquity? Do not
you still trust in somewhat, either within or without your selves! Do not some
still trust in their sins? Lo this is the Man, that made not God his trust,
but strengthened himself in his wickedness, you trust in oppression and
perverseness, and stay thereon. Do not you still lay as fast hold of your sins,
as a lame Man of his Crutches? Jer. 8.5. Lie on psalm. 62.8. in M. E. at C. p.
433, 439. Prove. 3.5.
Do not you hold fast deceit, and refuse to return? Do not you think that if
your sins fall, you shall fall? Do not you think that you cannot live, if you
should leave your lying, dissembling, cheating, flattering, sinful compliances
with such, and such? Do not you still lean to your own understandings? If you
do, you cannot trust in the Lord with all your hearts: your own wisdom, Isa.
47 10. 1 Cor. 3 19. Romans 8.^.
your own politic contrivances for your safety, will pervert you: your wisdom
will appear foolishness with God, yea emnity against God. Do not you still
trust in your own hearts, in your own purposes, and resolutions, against your
sins, and for God, and in your promises of what you will do hereafter? He that
trusts in his own heart is a fool; prove. 18.26. Jer. 17.9.
but he, that walks wisely, shall be delivered. Ala^! the heart of man is
deceitful above all things. Do not you still trust in your own righteousness?
There is no more safety therein to secure you from the wrath of God in his
Judgments in this World, than there is to secure you from the wrath of God in
Hell. phil 3.8, 9.
This Paul knew, and therefore he suffered the loss of all things, and still
counted them dung, that he might be found in Christ (as his only City of
refuge) not having, his own righteousness. Do not you still trust in the
strength, vigor, and health of your bodies? Engl. Ann^t. on Is. 57.10.
May it not still be laid to thy charge, that thou do find the life of thy
hand, i. e. Thou still imaginest, that so long as thou art so strong and
healthy, thou shall not want sufficient means to support thee? Do not you still
trust in your Cities, Castles, strong holds? and yet does not God tell you, all
thy strong holds shall be like Fig Trees, Nahum 3: 12:
with the first ripe Figs: if they be shaken, they shall fall into the mouth of
the eater? Do not you still trust in your wealth? It is so hard to have riches,
and not trust in them, that what one Evangelist calls having of riches, another
calls trusting in them. The rich Man's wealth is his strong City, prove: 18: 11:
and as an high wall in his conceit, i. e. He conceives himself as safe in the
midst of his wealth, as if he were in a Tower as high as Heaven, he thinks
himself past the reach of danger; but he is deceived: Riches avail not in the
day of wrath. prove. 11: 4. Eccl 7.12. Zeph. 1.18. ^^^im. 6.17. Col. 3.5.
It is true, at sometimes and in some cases money is a defense or shadow; but
in the day of Gods wrath, money is but a shadow, and no defense. Trust not
therefore any more in uncertain riches. Be not once more guilty of this kind of
Idolatry. Do not some still tru^t in their worldly greatness? O! woe to him,
Hab. 2.9.
that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house, that he may se^ his Ne^ on
high, that he may be delivered from the po^^^ of evil. Do not others still
trust in their humane Allies and Assistances? That they have such Friends and
Con^ederate, ^o many stout and valiant Men, ready to form Armies, to stand by
them? If the shadow of such be your tru^t, the end of that trust will be your
confusion. An H^rse is a vain thing for safety. Is^. 30.2, 3. psalm 33.17. Nahum
3.13.
And the st^utest Soldiers are but like an Army of Women without God. Do not
others tru^t in Church privileges, crying out the Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are we? Such trust but in lying
words. No wonder that you have God for your foe, Jer. 7.4.
and that you are under his curse. What says the Prophet? yea what says the
Lord by the Prophet? Cursed be the Man, that tru^^eth in (...) an, and makes
flesh his Arm. Jer. 17.5.
No wonder that God is writing sentences of death upon all the means of your
salvation: God does sometimes severely chastise his own Children, even to
prevent their trusting in themselves. O! 2 Cor. 1.9.
how carefully should you take heed of this sin, seeing it is such a
provocation unto God, it being an undeifying of God, and a deifying of some
Creature: seeing also it is a (...) that may be often committed in a day, yea
in an hour: and seeing it is a sin that you are very proae unto? It is very
much in the nature of Man fallen (as one well ^^serve) to affect an
absoluteness and a selfsufficiency, Reynold on Hos: ^4: 3: s^l: 803, 804, 80^:
to seek the good he desires within himself, and to derive from himself, the
strength whereby he would repel any evil which he fears. He^eby ^a^an
prevailed to draw Man from God at first; (...) next unto God, every reasonable
created Fe^ing is (...) unto its self, we cannot conceive how it should turn
from God, (...) not in the next step turn unto it self, and by conseque^^^,
whatsoever it was in a regular dependence to have d^^ived from God, being ^dien
from him, it does by an irregul^^ depend (...) ^^^k from it self. It i^ natural
for a sinful Creature, wh^^ se^^^th only himself, and makes himself the last
end, to seek only unto himself, and make himself the first cause and mover
toward that end: Yea, so desperate is the aversion of sinful man from God,
that when he is convinced of his impotency, and driven off from
self-dependance; yet when he has no horses of his own to ride on, yet still he
will betake himself unto creatures like himself: Hos. 5.13.
If Ephraim see his sickness, and Judah his wound, Ephraim will to the
Assyrian, and King Jareb for help. Yea, when he has nothing in the world to
turn to, but he is necessitated to implore help from God, he will invent ways
of his own to do it. If Horses fail, and Ashur fail, and Israel must g^e to God
whether he will or no, it shall not be to God that made him, but to a God of
his own making. Once more, consider, you never repent for or from any sin,
unless you repent for and from this sin. True Repentance and Conversion takes
off the heart from all carnal Confidence; Hos. 14.3.
either in Domestical preparations of our own, We will not ride upon Horses; or
in Foreign aid from any Confederates, Ashur shall not save us: Or in any
superstitious and corrupt worshp, which sends us to God the wrong way, We will
not say any more to the work of our hands, ye are our gods.

4. Vain Confidence. Vain, not only in regard of the object, trusting in
somewhat beside God; Against Hyp^critical trusting in God.
but vain in respect of its form, seeing, though it has (in some sense) God
for its object, yet it wants the essential properties of right trusting in God:
I mean, Job 8.14.
the trust of the Hypocrite, which in Job is compared to the Spiders web. It Is
Mr. Caril's note upon the words, That an Hypocrite has a trust like himself:
He has grace proper to his state; false grace for his false heart. And has
not your trusting in God been such as belongs only to Hypocrites? Is yet your
trusting in God fixed and resolved? Is there yet any strength in it? Trust,
(says the same excellent Expositor) where it is true, has a double effect,
the want of which, discovers the falseness of it in the Hypocrite: It confirms
and strengthens the heart against all opposition: And it encourages the heart
against all dangers. Does not our trust fail in both these? Are not we still
for going on boldly, till we meet with opposition, and dangers threaten us?
Will our trust, though curiously wrought, bear any force of battery, or stress
of weather, any more than a Spiders web? Are not we still guilty of not
trusting in God at all times, and for all things? As true Obedience respects
all the Commandments, Caril on Job 13.15.
so true Trust respects all the Dispensations of God. A true believer (says
one) depends as much in proportion upon God for a piece of bread, as for
Heaven: He trusts God in the least, as well as in the greatest matters. But
though we pretend to trust in God for pardon and glory; yet do not we think it
needless to trust in him for food and raiment; either supposing that we can
help our selves, or suspecting that God will not stoop so low, as to help us?
When we have a great business to set about, we stir up our selves to trust in
God: and so we ought; but the spiritualness of trust is seen, in depending on
God, for managing the least business, performing the least duty, resisting the
least corruption, and bearing the least burden. As it is the same love of God,
that saves us eternally, and preserves us temporally: so it is the same power
of God, that does great and small things for us. Can we yet trust in God in all
weathers? Some only trust in God in fair weather, when they are full, they can
trust in God for bread; and when they are safe, they can trust in God for
protection: And others only trust in him in foul weather; their trusting in God
is not of choice, but forced, and of necessity; they never trust in him, but
when they have nothing else to help them. Are we yet able to say, Though he
slay me, yet I will trust in him: Or, though he make me alive, I will trust in
him? It is a glorious trial of trust (says the same Worthy) to say, Should God
make me not worth a groat, yet I will trust him; but it is a greater glory of
this trust, to say, Though God make me worth thousands, yet I will trust in
him: When we (to sense) have the least need of Gods help, then to trust in him,
and depend upon him, shows, that we are most sensible that we need his help;
for by this, we in one act, give testimony to the Allsufficiency of God, and to
the emptiness of the creature: by this we make God all, and the creature
nothing at all. Faith gives a more spiritual discovery of it self, when it
convinces us, that we are poor, in the midst of our abundance, without God;
than when it convinces us, that we have abundance in God, though we are poor.
Verily, to trust in God in all estates and turns, is proper to godliness. Our
trusting in creatures so much, does also evidence, that we do but seem to trust
in God, and that in deed and in truth, we do not trust in him at all: He that
trusts not in God alone, does not trust in him at all. Every thing we join with
God, dis-joyneth us from God: We can never take hold of God, unless we let go
our hold of other things. Which of us leans upon whole God only, and that with
the whole Soul? Well, seeing your trust h^r^ ^een the trust of the Hypocrite,
Job 8.14. Isa. 14.23.
it is no wonder that it has been as a Spiders web: No wonder that Gods besome
of purgation to true believers, has been his besome of destruction unto your
Trust and Confidence. When the house is swept, the cobwebs are swept aw^y: No
wonder that such sinners as you, Isa. 33 14.
in Zion be afraid: No wonder that fearfulness surprizeth the Hypocrite. O! as
ever you would stand before devouring Fire, take heed that your tru^t be not as
the Spiders web.

Chap. V. The Miscarriages opposite to Assurance the reflex Act of Faith.
1. REgardlesness of getting Assurance: Against want of Assurance.
which is called by some Divines, Sensus Fidei, the feeling, or perceiving of
Faith: by others, Flos Fidei, the very luster, and eminency of Faith. When God
requires all the Act, of Faith, he does not only require, that we know him, and
believe him, and consent to have him, and rely upon him; but he requires, that
we know that we do so. It is true, Assurance is not such a duty, as concerns
all men, at all times, and immediately; it concerns only some, and those in an
order, and mediately: Though therefore it is not the sin of Unbelievers, not to
know that God is their God, for that cannot be known by them; such are not
bound immediately to be persuaded of an interest in God, unless we will say,
that they are bound to be persuaded of a lie; God being the God of Believers
only; yet it is the (...) of Believers, ^ickman's discourse concerning the
spirits ^ealing up believers. page 76, 77.
to let their interest in God to hang hovering, and in dispute. It must be
confessed, that Gods not evidencing the direct Acts of Faith unto Believers, is
not their sin; for God may refuse to evidence them, out of Sovereignty, or for
the mere try^l and exercise of grace, and nor for the Believers sins; but yet,
for a Believer to be regardless of getting Assurance, is his sin; yea, if God
refuse, for any long time, to evidence the direct Acts of Faith, he may thank
some sin or other. He that bids us, Work out your salvation, and make your
calling and election sure, would not so let us be at uncertainties concerning
our selves, did not we slight some Ordinance, or omit some Duty, or give way
to some Lust. And is not this your sin still? Do not you still want that
feeling or perceiving of Faith, which is not merely humane, and subject to
falsehood and delusions, but from Gods Spirit, persuading the Soul, that it does
know, believe, consent to, and crust in God, and therefore infallible; for the
Spirit can no more inwardly p^rswade a soul of, then he can externally bear
witness to, any thing that is false? It is a good rule, laid down by a late
worthy in our Israel, Burges's Res^nings, etc. Part 1. fol. 20, 21.
(...) in all the Acts of Faith, whether they be direct, or reflect, the
firmness and certainty does more depend upon Gods spirit, confirming us, then
upon the clearness of the Arguments. But which of us can say, that we know
infallibly we are believers from Gods spirit persuading us of the truth of our
faith? It is true, no Man has such perfection of degrees of assurance in an
ordinary way, Do^little in Morning Exercise at Criple gate, ^^^m. 12. p. 3 ^,
307.
as that one degree more cannot be added to the former: and yet (as one well
reasons) there is not any repugnancy in asserting an infallible assurance,
and denying a perfect assurance; for I infallibly know that there is a God, and
that this God is good and just, and yet I have not a perfect knowledge of a
Deity, or of his goodness, and justice; for in this life we know but in part. Is
not your want of assurance that God is your God evidenced still in your Not
being ^et above the tormenting fear of death: not yet despising the perishing
vi^ities of this World: not yet slighting the censures of the ungodly: Hickman
in supra: p. 135, to page 155.
remaining still without an holy boldness in prayer: not yet taking comfort in
Word and Sacraments: not yet abounding in praise and thanks giving: not yet
kindly mourning for your sins, nor watching against them: and not yet
disregarding cavils against the Truth? Is not God contending with you upon thi^
account? God has often called upon you in the Ministry of the Word, to give
all diligence to make s^^e th^^ you are believers, and that God is your God
upon your says in him; but though God has spoken in your prosperity, you have
not heard: Jer. (...)
And is not he ^^ing his Rod to make way for his Word to enter into your
hearts? Is not he dep^iving you of all your outward delights, Causing all your
desirable things to perish at his rebuke, that they may not hinder you any
longer from making su^e, what cannot be taken away from you, that your hearts
may not be taken up any longer with other enjoyments, and thereupon want either
time or will to pursue the one thing necessary? Are not the Child's Babies taken
away to make it learn its Lesson? Has not God made a Thorn to grow up with
every Flower; the Star Wormwood to fall into every estate you are in, that you
may yet at length say, it is not good to be so busy to secure these
bitter-sweets, and careless of securing an interest in the unmixed chief good?
Is not God bringing you into life-threatning dangers, that you might not only
hear with the hearing of the ear, but see with your eyes the necessity of
having your interest in God cleared up unto your souls?

2 Carelessness of preserving assurance, Against carelessness to keep Assurance.
Non minor est virtus, quam quaerere, pa^ta ^ueri.
when gotten. It was your duty to be as careful to keep, as to gain,
assurance. When you had gained assurance, you should have remembered that you
took God to be your God, to rule you, and make you happy in the enjoyment of
himself, not to make you rich and great in this World, and that therefore Gods
people being in the hands of the Midiamites, will not evidence that the Lord is
not with them, Judge. 6.13. H^^^bman etc. p. 183. to 193. D^ut. 26 10, 11.
though Gideon say, If the Lord be with us, why then is all this befallen us?
You should have remembered that sincere, not perfect, faith in God, interests
souls in him, and that therefore frailties and infirmities do not dissolve the
union: you should have been very thankful for the first fruits of the Heavenly
Canaan: Psalm. 85. 8. Eccl. 5. 4, 5, 6.
you should have been very careful not to return unto folly: you should not
have deferd to pay your vows unto God: yea you should have brought forth such
fruit after assurance, as you either did not, or could not, before assurance.
But have not you been careless of discharging your duty herein? Have not you
forgotten the terms of the Covenant you have entered into with God? Have not
you been unthankful even for an Heaven upon Earth? Have not you been guilty of
wilful Relapses? Have not you refused or delayed to pay your vows? Have not you
done as little for God, as you might have done, had the light of his
countenance been never lifted up upon your souls? And is not God therefore
angry with you? Is not he greatly displeased with you? That is his meaning,
when he says, he has no pleasure in such fools. Mat. 13.12.
Has not he taken away what you had? Has not he deprived you not only of many
visible tokens of his presence, but of the spiritual light of his countenance,
that you may more value, and be more chary of, assurance, if ever you enjoy it
again? And what! shall God lose his end? O! Culverwell's White stone. page 152.
If ever God vouchsafe you any more of the hidden Manna, take heed of wasting
and crumbling it away: take heed of losing the white stone any more: O!
maintain the Oil of gladness in the Cruse: be not any more willing to part
with thy sweetness, thy fatness, and pleasantness: Be never more willing to be
left to the courtesy of a Wave: O! never more be weary of the Sunshine: take
heed of being once more cloyed with the clusters of Canaan, and of nauseating
the Honey comb.

3. Remisness in recovering Assurance, when lost. Has not this been your
miscarriage? Against Remisness in recovering Assurance.
and is not God therefore contending with you? Has not God deprived you of
sealing. Ordinances; because you had before driven him from his own Ordinances,
and were not restless for his return? Is it not the design of God in taking
away from you sealing. Ordinances to make you yet sensible of the loss of the
sealing-spirit, and that you may give him no rest till he has returned you
both, that the Winter may be past, and the time of singing may return? Is it
nothing to you to be under a spiritual Famine? Can you now live without the
hidden Manna? Are you still willing to continue under such a dismal Cloud, yea
to set in it?

O that none of the three foregoing miscarriages may be your sins any more!

First, Take heed therefore of thinking any more either that assurance is not
attainable at all, or that it is not tenable, when attained; or that it is not
recoverable, when lo^t. Reynold's Works fol. 100^.
Apprehensions of impossibility in either will kill all endeavors, yea desires
after it, because they will kill hope. Though the will sometimes, being
inordinate, may be tickled with a desire of impossibilities, under an implicit
condition, yet no hope, whether regular, or corrupt, can respect its object
under that apprehension. It works two passions most repugnant to this Hatred
and Despair; the one being a proud opposition, the other a dreadful flight
from that good, in which the Mind perceives an impossibility of attaining it.
Treasure up therefore the promises that God has made, that Believers shall
have, keep, Ezekiel. 34: 30. Hos. 2.19. 23.
recover assurance; not only that they shall know that God is their God, but
they shall walk in his Light, and if at any time through their own default they
lose the Light of his countenance, that upon their Repentance he will heal
their backslidings, and love them freely, m ni^est himself as graciously as
ever. Promises they are of things, as future. they are undertaking of good
things, which shall come to pa^^: Now every future thing is a possible thing.

Secondly, Take heed of slighting any more the want of Assurance. Uncertainly,
as to the truth o^ faith, and as to interest in God, i^ no light evil, it is
even an insupportable b^rden, especially to those that have experienced what an
Heaven upon Earth there is in Assurance. Though one may be a B^^i^^e^, and not
know that he is a Believer: and though Assurance (...) it is gained may be
lost; yet verily you (...) to (...) whether your Faith in God be true, and wh^
he^^e (...) you were Assured, if you can carry the want, or lo^s of Assurance,
as it i^ were no burden, and do not follow after the gaining or rec vering of
Assurance with un^t^e^able sighs and groa^s. ^sal: 3^^ 7: 42: 3, 4.
Thou hid thy faith (says David) and I was troubled. It wa^ indeed his daily
sorrow of heart, yea it was a^ death unto him. It is true, some ^un into the
other extreme: they are too much troubled for not gaining, or losing Assurance,
looking on their case as desperate, and themselves as guilty of the
unpardonable sin, in d^ivin^ God away from them; but do you take heed of both
extreme, not only lest you should be troubled too much, but lest you should be
troubled too little.

Thirdly, Take heed (not only lest your complaints, but) led your reque is for
the procuring, or preserving, or recovering of Assurance be heartless. Are you
in sears whether you be believers, whether God be your God, especially in such
days as these? you should be (as David was) all prayer: you should even envy
your selves the time you are forced to spend in eating and drinking, and
sleeping. Never expect to ge^ Assurance a^ first without such pantings, as the
chased Heart has after the waterbrooks, without earnest entreaties, and
longing, of Soul. Are you for the present under the light of God^ countenance?
Deprecate hea^^ily an Eclipse. Have you lost your assurance? Desire earnestly
from God new stamps and impressions: tell him, though you have ^ost the Print,
yet he has not lost the Seal: Psalm. 30.6, ^, 8. 77 1, 2. 88, 1, ^, ^.
give him no rest, till he give your soul' rest. Read but the Psalms of David,
^enned by him, when he w^ in de^^^tion, you will think that he breathed out his
Soul with hi^ Pet^^ms. How earnest also was Heman? yea Jesus Churst's Agony
made him more to express his earnestness, than at other times. Luke 22: 44.
Being in an Agony, he prayed more earnestly. This is one end of Gods present
dispensations toward you: Hos. 5: 15:
I will go (says God) and return to my place, till they acknowledge their
offense, and seek my face: in their afflictions they will seek me early: i.e.
betimes, Hickman, etc. page 205:
with all speed, with ca^e and vigor also, at such a rate as Men are wont to
do things in the morning. If your doubts do not prevail so far, as to make you
leave off hearty praying, your hearty prayers will prevail so far, as to make
you leave off doubting.

Fourthly, Take heed of contenting your selves (not only with heartless, but
with fruitless complaints. Some (says a famous Author) are of a whining
temper, Symmonds deserted Soul's case and cure. page 486.
apt to sill the ears of all their familiars with sad relations of their
mournful case; but there is little else to be found besides complaints: the
soul humbles not himself before God, nor contends in prayer, nor striveth by
the Ordinances and holy walking to find what it always was without, or has
lost. He compares them to the sick man, who lies grieving himself, but no way
seeking in earnest to help himself; and to Issachar, crouching under his
burden. To spend time (says another) in whining complaints, Hickman, etc.
page 200.
is more easy and more pleasing to those who have bruised themselves; but to
stir up strength, and be doing, is more safe and pleasing to God. I would not
(so he goes on) have deserted souls chidden for crying out and roaring: How can
they do other, whose wounds stink, and are corrupt, whose sores run all the
night long? But they must not spend all their time in roaring, but get the
broken bones set, and make use of them; so shall they recover strength and
rejoice.

Fifthly, Take heed of neglecting any longer any one means of Gods appointment,
either for the getting, or keeping, Hickman, etc. page 167. to page 173.
or recovering of Assurance. The neglect of any one (as one well observes) may
provoke God to reject your attendances on him in the other: it is also uncertain
in which God will manifest himself, and evidence to you the truth of your Faith
in him. Sometimes he does it in prayer: sometime in the reading or hearing of
the Word of God: sometimes in religious holy conference: sometimes in receiving
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: sometimes in singing of Psalms.

Sixthly, Take heed of remaining any longer lazy and slothful^n the use of the
means. O! 2 Pet. 1.10.
yet at length give diligence to make your calling sure; Culverwell's White
Stone, page 150, etc. 157, etc.
i. e. your effectual calling, that your faith in God is a full answer
thereunto. Assurance both requires and deserves all diligence. Such is the
darkness, deceitfulness, and inconstancy of the heart: such is the malice,
policy, and diligence of Satan to improve it: of so much consequence is this
business, and so dangerous is it to be deceived herein, that all diligence is
little enough. So satisfactory also is this assurance, that no labor will be
grudged by those that do believe it. Antipharmacum, etc. page 41.

See many more pathetical considerations to humble for laziness and to stir up
to diligence herein in Morn. Exer. at Criple-gate. page 141.315, 316.

Iisdem alitur quibus dignitur.


O! the rather now give all diligence to put your faith in God out of doubt,
because a Day of great trouble is approaching, yea already begun. What have you
beside, this to oppose to all your troubles here? When it comes to resisting to
blood, and giving up all, can you fadge with such work, while your spirits are
dubious and cloudy in this point? O my friends! Believe it, it is nothing but
this that can make a Saint triumph and glory in abasures and tribulations. And
little do you imagine how insupportable troubles are, when the spirit is low
and dubious in point of interest.

In particular, Take heed of being lazy, or any other ways miscarrying, in
self examination Assurance consists in a ressex Act, and by such workings it is
gotten, maintained, and recovered. The main reason why some never had
Assurance, why others do not keep assurance, and why others do not recover
assurance; is, because they are not often enough, nor diligent enough in
reflecting upon the deift, and course of their hearts and lives: they do not
often enough rightly and thoroughly compare themselves with the sure marks of
true faith in God, laid down in the Word of God. Many will take some little
pains to ^inde out the marks of true faith in God, and some little time they
will spend in comparing their hearts with those marks, but they will not
continue diligent in this great duty of self-examination, till the matter be
brought to some issue; they will not behold their faces in the Glass long
enough to beget in themselves a true notion or Idea of themselves, but go away,
and presently forget what manner of persons they were. But let it not be so
with you any more. Do you make it your business to go through with this work,
and therefore take heed of being mistaken as to what faith in God, and what
assurance of faith, is. Neither make more, Hickman, etc. page 120, 121, 122.
nor fewer essentials of faith in God; neither more, nor less, necessary to
interest in God, than God has made. Expect not ordinarily to have assurance of
faith wrought, preserved, or recovered by some vocal, or as it were vocal,
testimony of the spirit: or as soon as you be assured to be void of all fears,
and filled with all joy in believing. Set not about this work unseasonably, but
when you find your hearts in the most serious and quiet frame. He that will
see his Face in a Glass, must be fixed, and not in motion. Be still, Psalm. 4.4.
and so commune with your own hearts! When you are full of dark and black
temptations, you are in a mist, and not able to see things aright. The muddied
Water is not fit to give the true shape of the Face. Hearken not to what carnal
reason, and Satan say for, or against your interest in God. Before faith in
God, T. Goodwin's child of light, etc. page 26.27, 28.
ca^^al reason and Satan use their utmost strength to persuade Souls of the
goodness of their condition without Faith, thereby to prevent the entrance of
Faith, and their seeking after it at all, as not needful to interest them in
God: After says in God is wrought, Hickman, etc. page 127, 128, 129.
and erected upon the ruins of all Satan's strong holds, and the Souls carnal
reasonings, Satan and carnal reason, in revenge of such an overthrow, muster up
new Forces to persuade the Believer by all the Objections, they can raise, that
it does not believe aright, that its faith is not saving. Take heed therefore
of selflove, and sinful jealousy, and prejudice upon either account, when you
set about this work. As self-love and self-flattery bribreth and sets carnal
reason to plead for the interest of Unbelievers in God; so when once faith is
wrought, sinful jealousy does edge and sharpen the wit of carnal reason, to
argue and rangle against the work of Faith; and all such Objections as carnal
reason does find out against it, are pleasing to this corrupt principle; when
you try your selves, Burges's Refinings: part 1 page 57, 58.
you will but deceive your selves, if you do not cast out these two cursed
corrupt Principles out of your souls: if your hearts be prepossest with either,
your judgments will be blinded, and become partial in passing sentence upon
your estate. Take heed of trying your selves by false marks of faith in God, of
weighing with false weights. Hereby you may miscarry both on the right hand,
and on the left: on the right hand, if you try your selves by marks of perfect
faith in God: on the left hand, if you try your selves by such things as are
not indeed Scripture-marks of true faith in God; for as God is the Principium
essendi, the beginning or cause of the being of any grace; so Gods Word is the
Principium cognoscendi, the Principle by which we know what is true grace. I
cannot but mind you of three Rules of Direction, Ob. Sedgw. of Faith: chap. 13.
sect. 1.
which, a worthy now with God, has left you in this case. (1) There are some
things without which faith cannot be in the heart, and yet they do not
necessarily and infallibly conclude that a Man has faith. Conclude not for
your selves by finding the antecedents of Faith. (2) There are some things
which faith only does produce, yet because it d th not produce them always, a
Man must not therefore negatively conclude from the absence of them, the
absence of faith. (3) There are some things, which faith only does produce, not
as essential properties, but as magnificent Testimonies. Conclude not against
your selves for the want of such effects of faith. Be sure that you do not any
longer try your selves by uncertain qualifications, that belong not to every
Believer, at all times and none but believers; but try your selves by sine
infallible marks by the essential properties and effects of Faith in God. Set
not about this work without hearty cries to God for his spirit to irradiate the
grace you are searching after, and by witnessing with your spirit to put you
out of doubt. It is a vain thing for you to go about this work, much more to
think to go through with it by any strength of your own. And be sure that you
take heed of provoking God to withdraw from you in this work. Cant^ 4.4, 5, 6,
7.
Do not refuse the Light of Assurance when offered: Hereupon Christ withdrew
from the Spouse; but put your selves in a disposed an I prepared way to receive
the evidencing Light of the Spirit, who will not affine you whether you will,
or no. Do not make use of Signs in a prejudicial way to those direct and
immediate Acts of Faith, Burges, etc. page 56, 57.
whereby you close with God: While you are poring and digging into your own
heart to find faith there, forget not to exercise applicative Acts of Faith.
When ever you would go down into your own hearts, and take a view of your own
graces first close with God himself in Christ, and afterward begin afresh upon
the encouragement you have from the fight of grace within you, to act Faith
upon God with a redoubled strength. 2 Pet: 1: 9: Mat: 25: 29:
He that lacks these things, i. e. that does not use them, so not to use
Talents, is not to have them, is blind and soon forgets all the grace he
has. If God do not appear presently do not murmur and repine against him.
While Job thought that God wronged him, God ceased not to scare him with
dreams, and terrify him with visions; but when he justified God, God appeared
for him. But for a more full handling of the miscarriages about
self-examination, which you should mourn for, and take heed of, I shall refer
you to the twentieth chapter of the Gospel-glass.

4: Resting in an imaginary Assurance. Against an imaginary assurance
Presumption is mainly the work of a strong fancy. What the ^ich Believer has
by propriety and in possession, the same has the presumptuous Professor in a
dreaming fancy and imagination He pretends to be as knowing, as bell eving, as
confident, as the true Believer; he never doubted of his Interest in God, none
more ^ocond and merry then he is thereupon. Has not this been your sin? And is
not God therefore contending with you? Because we have built our house upon the
Sands, is not God razing all our sandy Foundations? Psalm. 66.10. Psalm. 25.8.
Because we have been careless of trying our selves, is not God trying us as
silver is tried? May not we even say, God and upright is the Lord, that will
teach sinners his way: that by the Thunderclaps of his Righteous Judgments is
resolved to awaken us out of those foolish dreams, in which if we should die,
we were undone for ever? O that we may be dreamers no longer! O, take heed of
presuming once more that God is your God, either because he made you: so he did
the Devils. Gods making you, puts you into the relation of creatures unto God,
and God of a Creator unto you, but not of a chief-good and supreme Lord. He is
your Creator, Psalm. 17.14.
whether you will, or no, but so he is not your God. Or because you prosper in
every thing, and are not in trouble and, distress as other men. The more you
have of a portion in this life, the more cause you have to sear that God is not
your portion. Or because Christ has died for you to purchase an interest in
God: So he has, if you will consent to have him for your chief good and
Sovereign Lord, other wise not O! how great will your confusion be, when your
Gold shall be found Dress, your Wine to be Water, your Graces to be
Corruptions; And you your selves appear no better then the mad Athenian, Burges
Resining, part. 1. Sermon. 6. Sermon. 30. and 118.
who thought all the Ships on the Sea were his. Take heed of such a confidence
of an interest in God, as has ignorance and self-love for its procreant
causes: as is grounded on a mere natural light, or some false reasonings: as is
wrought, without any serious and deep humiliation for being without God
preceding it, and easily without any opposition: as leaves the soul idle in the
Work of God, without love to, and encouragement in God: as is not attended with
an holy fear and humility: and as is not destroyed by sin, but crosses. Such a
confidence is a presumptuous confidence, and not assurance. Even hypocrites may
have some experimental knowledge, Sern ^^ 3.
and yet not assurance of Faith: they may know that they are enlightened, and
have other common gifts of the Holy Ghost: that sin is imbittered to their
souls: that they do assent to scripture Truths: that they have some desires
after God and Christ: that they do at sometimes and in some things trust in
God: and yet they want saving Faith, and therefore cannot know they have it. O!
take heed of thievishly fingering the Kings Coin without a Warrant: Christ told
the Jews, that they were of their father the Devil, John 8.54.
though of his Father they said, he is our God: they made their boasts and
brags, that God was their God; but God and Christ disowned them.

Chap. VI. The miscarriages opposite to confession, the external Act of Faith
in God. Against positive confession without a call.

1. RAsh adventuring upon positive confession without a Call from Heaven. Has
not this been the sin of some? and have not all Professors smarted for it? The
Acute Author of Christ Confessed (who (as the Publisher observes) has cut by a
thread in clearly and judiciously determing the present grand Cases of the
times) gives a threefold Answer to this Question, At what times are we
privileged from (and by consequence not called unto) positive confession of
Christ? Christ confessed p. 65, 66.
(1) When the engagements for self-safety are not preponderated by, or in an
equal poize with, those for our Saviors glory, (2.) When the interest both of
the confession, and Confessor will be visibly prejudiced. (3.) When the ends of
confessing Christ cannot manifestly be promoted by it, or attained by us; But
the glory of God will be visibly rather hindered: the Gospel harmed: and the
good of souls hazarded. O! see that for the future you do not unnecessarily
pull sufferings upon your selves for your confession of your Faith. Allegs
Vind. of Godl. p. 379.
There is (as an eminent Confessor well observes) a suffering for our fault:
there is a suffering for our Righteousness without our fault: and there is a
suffering for our Righteousness through our fault. Run not your selves upon
trouble when you need not, by unwary and imprudent managing and ordering your
selves in the duties that confession of Faith engages you to. Be clear
especially in those things, which may be costly: labor to see the Pillar of
Fire, and the Cl^ud going before you. Take heed of giving any just occasion to
others to persecute you, not only because the event of so great a temptation
is uncertain, but also l^st you be a cause that others by shedding your blood
become greater sinners then otherwise they would be.

2. Vnpreparedness openly to acknowledge says in God, Against unreadiness to
confess openly, when called thereto. 1 Pet. 3.14, 15.
when over he calls thereunto. What the Apostle says concerning Hope, is true
concerning Faith, Be ready always to give a reason both of the faith that is
before you, and of the faith that is within you: of the grace, as well as of
the object of faith: your own acquaintance with God, believing of God,
consenting to have him for your God, and relying upon him. Though you are not
bound (says the grand Casuist) to render an account always, C. C. p. 64.
yet you are bound always to be ready; at least with an habitual readiness:
though the outward action be not required at all times, yet the inward habitude
is But alas I have not you been strangers to an habitual inclination and
disposition to this duty? Have not you been without those principles of
self-denial and love to God, that Spirit of faith, patience, and pray^^, that
make souls ready for such work. O that this may be your sin no longer! Is not
this one reason of the present Dispensations of Providence toward you, to stir
you up by the Rod, that would not be stirred up by the Word to get to be ready,
not only to be bound, but to die for Christ at Jerusalem! The Apostle does not
say, I will be bound or I will die, Acts 21.13.
but I am ready is be b^urd and to die. All backwardness is s^ding back, when
our Savior says unto us, Take up thy Gross and follow me.

3. Refusing, Against delaying actually to confess, when called thereto.
Refusing, or delaying, actually to make an ^p^n acknowledgment of Faith in
God, when thereby God will be most magnif^^d, the Gospel best maintained, and
the good of souls best ministered to. Has not this been the sin of some of you?
Have not you actually declined that confession, which you have been called to
make? Have not you deferd your testimony to another time? and have not you
hereby driven God away from you? sure I am this cost many of the Martyrs,
especially in the Marian-Persecution, very dear. They did not make open
acknowledgment of their Faith in God, when God called them thereunto: and what
was the Issue? God in respect of comfort left them, and they were under worse
torments, then their Persecutors could have inflicted on them. When Jonah had a
Commission sealed him to go to Nineveh with a Message from God, he withdrew
himself, and went another way; but God in the midst of his security cast him
into the Whales belly; and when he was there, God withdrew from him, as if he
meant never to own him more; insomuch, that he says, I am cast out of thy
presence. Jona. 2.4.
O that herein you would sin no more! when ever God calls you thereto, do not
defer to exhibit an open oral confession of your Faith in God, no, See Christ
confessed, qu. 7 prop. 7. p. 69. etc.
not a moment longer, when God calls you thereto, do not defer to exhibit an
open real confession of your Faith in God in an active way, openly living up
unto your Faith in God; or in a passive way, either by staying to suffer, or by
suffering in flying, as the forementioned ends will best be promoted. O! do not
your Consciences tell you, that if you had been more public in your real
confessions in an active way, you had suffered less, not only from God, but
from men. Take heed of suffering any more upon this account.

4. Dissembling in confession. Against dissembling in confession C. G. p. 43.
There is a time (says our Casuist) for tho suspension of our confession; but
there is no time for simulation (properly so called) in our confession. We may,
yea must deal prudently, but not deceitfully Has not this been your sin? Has
not your conversation been in fleshly wisdom, and not in godly simplicity and
sincerity? Have not you at least, at sometimes gone about to cast a vail of
deceit before the eyes of men? Prove. 12.24. Isa. 33.1.
No wonder that such deceitful ones are under tribute: no wonder that such
treacherous dealings are dealt treacherously with. Dissemble I beseech you no
more, either in your oral or in your real confessions.

5. Denying Faith in God. Has not this been your sin? Against denying Faith in
God.
and has not God therefore denied you in this world? O! take heed of denying
your Faith in God once more, lest Jesus Christ deny you in Heaven. O! Do not
once more deny your Faith in God, either inwardly, or outwardly, either by
word, Mat. 10.33.
or work, whether explicitly, or implicitly. Even concealed and sm^th^red (much
more denied) truths will one time or other set the Conscience in a Flame. Jer.
20.9.
When Jeremiah said, I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his
name: What follows? Then his word was in my breast as a burning fire, V. Caril
on Job 6.10.
shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, Let him not spare (says
J^b) for I have not concealed the words of the Holy One: q.d. If I had hid his
word from men, God might justly hide his merci^s from me; or if I had concealed
his words from others, God might now justly reveal his wrath against me.

6. Making shipwreck of Faith. Has not this also been your sin? Against making
shipwreck of Faith. 1 Timothy 1.19. Rev. 2.5. Heb. 10.23. Veaning in the Farewell
Sermons.
Have not you renounced the confession which you once made? And has not God
departed from you, not only for your departures from your faith in him, but for
your departures from your profession thereof? O! remember from whence you are
fallen, and repent, and do your first works. What says the Apostle? Let us
hold fast the profession of our Faith without wavering, and what ever others
do, let us, among whom, upon whom, in whom such mighty things have been done by
God, hold fast our Faith: have we a mind to be without God again? had we rather
return to be Satan's, then continue to be the Lords? yea the profession of our
faith: faith without profession, will do no more for us, then profession
without faith: and that without wavering: this is both a man-like and a
Christian act.


