(...) Or the Virtues of, and way how to use the Mineral and Medicinall-Water
at PETERHEAD in SCOTLAND, within the Shire of ABERDENE: Whose Latitude is 57.
Degrees 43. minutes: Longitude 22. Degrees 40. minutes.
This being the Compend of a Piece, written Anno 1636. by A.M. then Student,
now M.D. and P. in A.R. Aberdon.
THis water by the trial of judicious Men, and manifold Experiments of
diseased People of all Ranks, Sexes, and Ages, is found to be nothing inferior
to the Spaw Mineral waters in Germany; and far to excel the wells of
Bourbon, of Pougues, of Forges in France: of Porrecta in Italy: of Tunbridge of
Knesburgh in ENGLAND: or any other as yet found out in Europe.

The Mineralls and Metal through which these waters pass, and whose Tu^ctu^e
they carry with them, are Vitriol: and Materia proxima omnium Metallorum, as
has been made often evident to the Eye, Taste, and Touch of the Learned.

For the Virtues of this Water; it purges and washes viscide and tartareous
Humors, extenuateth Pituite, it voideth the Liver Melt, Misera^^ks, and other
our Entrails of whatsoever obstructions are troublesome to them, it tempereth
the heat of the Kidneys, purging and expelling their Gravel, Sand, and Stones,
more forcible then any other Medicament. It hinders the concretion or
coagulation of Sand. resisting the generation of confirmed Stones, and if
confirmed, diminishes them. It purges the Bladder, and mundifieth the Stone
of viscide pitutle and Mucositie, wherewith it is often environed: preparing it
to be easily taken out by Lithotomie. It is most profitable for the Ulcers of
the Reins, and Carnosities in the Urinall passages. It certainly helps the
venerean and virulent Gonorhaea, and all other diseases of that sort applied
without: For their Ulcers Chancres, Poulains, Pustuls within by Injection and
Potion. It helps the concoction of the Stomach, and by Astrction so does
strengthen the same, that no^ec^n complain of harm. By its actual coldness,
it quenches Thrist appeaseth Dolours, throwing of the Belly, with Colic and
^^^ack Passions. It purifieth the Blood, kills and expels Worms, Chaseth
away Fevers of all sorts cleanses the Skin of Scabs by Lotion and Bathing. It
opens the Belly, if bound: and restrains the Fluxes thereof, working
proportionally according to the necessity of Nature, helping the defects
thereof.

These waters carry with them out of the Body diverse ways, all sorts of
excrementious Humors, Our Hydropeta piss much, the expulsive faculty being
helped through the diuretic quality of the Water, then gross Excrements (the
time of the drinking of the water,) are Black or Greenish; because the salt of
Minerals by its precipiating Virtue, Facit terrestreitatem descendere ad
fundum. Some Vomit, voyding their Stomach of superfluous Humors: Some Sweat,
sending forth their Obstructions by the Pores: and so these Clear Pure waters,
gracious both to Pallat and Eyes, provock many and diverse evacuations. which
scarce any Artificial Medicament could effectuat. They agree with both Sexes,
all Ages, restoring Health lost, preserving in Integrity the present.

Is there any Impurity or Corruption offending Nature: By what better and more
safe way can it be exstirpat, then by so excellent and Pure a thing is this? If
any Fever invade us, with what sharp Iulep. with what more convenient
efficacious Syrup of Limons shall you extinguish it, then with the Balsamic
aciditie of our Medicinal Water? Is there any pain to quench, let this be
your Anodyne, this your only and safe Landanum or Nepenthe, this your safest
Tryacle, your wholesome. Alexipharmacum and Antidote to abolish Poysonable,
Pestilent, and Malign Qualities? No Bezoar Natural, nor Artificial Animal,
Mineral or Metallic, no Alkermes comparable to this for corroborating the
Heart, that our Bodies may by its comforting help continue in living strength
and vigor. These and many more Virtues are proper to this Panacea and
universal Medicine, whose salt is Detersive, Purgative diuretic, an universal
voider and corrective of all Impurities and Corruptions, its Sulphur, a general
and spiritual Anodyne, its Mercury, an universal Consortative, which being
all conjoined in our water by the industrious working of Nature can furnish us
means not only for defense, but also for expulsion and suppression of Diseases;
as an excellent instrument appointed by GODS Providence for the help of
Mankind. It is found by Learned Physicians to be the only Sovereign specific
remedy, (to which difeated Persons should run as to their last refuge upon
Earth, when all other Artificial helps are ineffectual,) for the Diseases of
Liver, Splen, Kedneyes, and all other rebellious obstructions. Yea, its virtues
are not confined within the compass of the generality that does not reach to
the particular Diseases of the infirmer Sex; which as it is more lovely and
delicat then the other; so it is more opportune to its own defects: and is
obnoxious to some proper diseases as far different from these of men, as the
Sex is from the Sex. This Water helps as other common Diseases, so Barrenness
in both, but in the weaker Sex; the pale colors the immoderate evacuation or
retention in their desired Sickness: insurrection Precipitation, Suffocation
and other Diseases of the Mother.

Of the Time when, and Manner how these Waters are to be taken.
HE who is to drink of this Water either for curing Diseases; restoring Health
lost, or to preserve it being present, avoiding future inconveniences, shall
come to this Well any time of the Year when the Weather is Good, Air Dry, and
Clear: but especially in the Months of May, June, Iully, August, and
September; resting the first day after Arrival, the next day let him be Purged
with some fit and convenient Medicament, by the advice of some understanding
and approved Physician, the day following Purgation lethim come to the Well,
(neither fear any Hypercatharsis or Superpurgation) early in the Morning.
Fasting, yet, after the Sun rising: And drink first a Cup full about the
quantity of half a Mutchken, or half an English pynt, within half an hour
thereafter take an other Cup-full, of the same quantity, and so every half an
hour, for two hours two Cups: which will make a Scottish Chopin or an English
Quart. The second day, every half-houre of two hours two Cups, which will make
a Scottish Pynt. The third day take every half hour of the foresaid time three
Cups; which will make three Chopins: and so continue twenty, thirty, forty
days, or so long as the Disease requires, or Affairs can permit. Walk a
little betwixt the drinking of your Cups: taking above the waters a little
confected Anyse, Coriander, Cynamon, or some good Tablets proper for the
Disease, or Tobacco to help the Stomach to daunt and vanquish the actual
coldness of the water, ride or exercise your Bodies with any moderat
Recreation, whillest the most part of the water be voided, which will be so
soon as the Urine does begin to be colcured: Then dyne upon Meat of good
digestion and proper to the Nature of the Person and Disease. Afternoon, use
such recreation as occasion shall offer, and sup moderatly. If the Air be
troubled with Foggy Mists or Rainy, or if the Person be not able to travel
conveniently; the water may be taken lying in a Bed with good success.

A day after you leave of the drinking of water: Take some other good purgative
Medicine by the foresaid advyce. After you return home; live a long time
Temperatly; in a convenient Air, with wholesome Meat and Dring, moderat sleep
and exercise; avoiding repletion or immoderat evacuation of the Belly,
Intestines or Veins, natura vel art. Flec perturbation of the Mind: And in
so doing by the Grace of GOD, you shall continue Healthful even to your Lives
end.

AMEN.
^


