A CLOUD OF WITNESSES; OR, THE Sufferers Mirror, Made up of The
SWANLIKE-SONGS, and other CHOICE PASSAGES of several MARTYRS and CONFESSORS, to
the Sixteenth Century, in their Treatises, Speeches, Letters, Prayers, etc. in
their Prisons, or Exiles; at the Bar, or Stake, etc.

Collected out of The Ecclesiastical Histories of Eusebius, Fox, Fuller,
Petrie, Scotland,


And Mr. Samuel Ward's Life of Faith in Death, etc. and Alphabetically disposed.

By T. M. M. A.

Hebr. 12.1. Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a Cloud
of Witnesses, let us run with patience the race, that is set before us.

James 5.10. Take, my Brethren, the Prophets, who have spoken in the Name of
the Lord, for an example of suffering afflliction and patience.

London. Printed for the Author, and are to be fold by Robert Boulter in Saint
Paul's Churchyard. 1665.

Gentle Reader,
THou art desired to take notice, that through the transposing of some Leaves
of the Manuscript, the Author living far distant, there has been committed an
Error at the Press, in Mr. John Bradford's Letters, beginning at Page 44. Line
26. immediately before Mr. John Brown. Wherefore thou art entreated to turn to
Page 68. Line 6. and read to Page 71. Line 26. and so the Mistake will be
rectified.

Renowned Mr. Samuel Ward of Ipswich gives the following testimony to the
living speeches of dying Christians, which he collected.
AS for their last Speeches and Apothegms, pity it is no better mark has been
taken, and memory preserved of them. The choice and prime I have culled out of
ancient Stories and later Martyrologies, English, Dutch, and French. The profit
and pleasure has paid me for the labor of Collecting, and the like gain (I
hope) shall quit the cost of thy Reading. -- By these, which are but an handful
of Christ's Camp-Royal, it sufficiently appears, they had their Faith fresh and
lively in the face of their grand Enemy, Death; and by virtue of their Faith,
their Spirits, Wits and Tongues, untroubled, and undismayed.

The learned and ingenious Author of the Preface to Mr. Frith's Treatises of
preparation to the Cross (under the Title of Vox Pisces, or the Book-Fish)
gives the following Testimony to several of the remarkable passages in this
Collection.
PErhaps unto some Palats no Lequor seems desirable, but that which has a
delicious tang of the curiosity of these later Times, both for method and
style. For my part I say with the words in the Gospel, Luke 5.39. The old Wine
is better. And accordingly contemplating and comparing the devout Discourses
written in our Language upon the breaking forth of the Light of Reformation, I
am far more deeply taken with the solid simplicity and powerful Spirit, which
methinks I find in the Writings of those Confessors and Martyrs, who watered
the Garden of Reformation with their own blood in this Land, then with the more
elaborate and artificial composures, written more lately in the Times of our
Peace. Who in reading the Letters and Ghostly Meditations of blessed Bradford,
Tailor, Philpot, etc. yea even of other their Brethren less learned, that wrote
and spoke with that Hand, Heart, and Breath, which they were most ready to
yield up for the testimony of the Truth, does not therein perceive that lively
warmth of holy zeal, which is able to awake even a dull and sleepy soul? Among
which Martyrs, as this worthy Frith is one of the first for antiquity, so well
may he be in the foremost rank for comfortable exhortation and soundness of
Doctrine.

The Collectors Preface.
THe Speeches of dying men are remarkable; the Speeches of dying Christians are
much more remarkable; How remarkable then are the Speeches of dying Witnesses
for Christ? It is rationally expected that dying men, much more that dying
Christians, and most of all that dying Witnesses for Christ should speak best
at last. These are the last words of David, ^ Sam. 23.1
It is their last. And the Sun shines brightest at setting. They are
immediately to give in their last account. They are upon the borders of
Eternity. And the motions of Nature are more intense, as they draw nearer the
Center. To be sure, Saints are most heavenly, when nearest Heaven. Rivers, the
nearer the Sea, the sooner are met by the Tide. We have good Scripture-ground
to expect that dying Christians, especially dying Witnesses for Christ, should
have extraordinary assistances from on high for their last Discourses: That the
Wine of the Spirit should be strongest in them at their last. They have Gods
Word for it, Mat. 10.19.
That in that hour it shall be given them, what they shall speak: for it is not
they that speak but the Spirit of their Father.

One observes that when Stephen was to deliver his last speech, and to suffer,
he was filled with the Holy Ghost, so that all that sat in the Council,
looking steadfastly on Stephen, Acts 6.5.
saw his face, as if it had been the face of an Angel. His soul was so warmed
by the love of God, that he looked both his Adversaries and the tempestuous
approaching Storm out of countenance. When he was stoned he got a larger sight.
He saw the Heavens opened, and his Majestic Glorious Master, the light-giving
Diamond of Heaven, Act. 7.55
standing at his Fathers right hand. And this he got, no doubt, as for himself,
so to hearten all those that were to come after, he being the first Martyr
after Christ. Hence it has been often found, that their last Speeches have
been Oraculous and Prophetical. Zenophon personates Cyrus as inspired, whilst
he is breathing out his last requests. The nearer we return to the Original
Divinity (as Plotinus speaks) the more Divine we grow. One observes from a
Scripture instance, That what has been asserted by dying Witnesses, has most
speedily come to pass. Zachariah told the children of Israel, 2 Chr. 24.20, 24.
Because ye have for saken the Lord, he has also forsaken you. For this he was
immediately stoned, and the Lord sealed his Word very speedily afterward; For
the Assyrians coming with a small company against them, the Lord delivered a
very great multitude into their hands, and so without delay in their sight
sealed the words of his dying Witness Zachariah. And why his word sooner then
Isaiah's, Ieremiah's, Ezekiel's? etc. By them he pleaded much longer with his
Apostatizing Church. I know none but this: It was the Lords pleasure; and to
show his respect to dying Witnesses, that he would have what they say taken
special notice of. It may be, that he might show, that whatever fail, the words
of dying Witnesses shall not fall to the ground. It is true, we must not lay
such weight upon these sayings, as we must lay upon Scripture prophesies; 1
Pet. 1.9
for though such sayings may be true prophesies, yet we are not infallibly
assured that these are prophesies, till they be accomplished: yet their
sayings, while dying for and in the Lord, do give good encouragement to them
that remain alive, and so to be much esteemed by them; whether they respect the
honor of God, or the good of souls.

The last Speeches of Christ's dying Witnesses, have extorted even from Heathens
acknowledgments to the honor of God, Vere magnus est Deus Christianorum
Calocerius
that truly the Christians God is a great God: yea, by them sinners have been
converted. Justin Martyr and others by observing the end the Martyrs made, were
brought out of love with the ways of sin, and in love with the ways of
holiness.

These Speeches (here collected) are called Swanlike Songs for their
remarkableness, A Cloud of Witnesses, and The Sufferers Mirror for their
usefulness. The Israelites found not only comfort in the shadow of the Cloud
in the Wilderness, but a directive virtue therein, they were led by it. There
is a double power in such instances both to Comfort, and to Assimulate. Solamen
miseris, etc. 1 Cor. 10.13.
To see that others have suffered worse is no small comfort to Sufferers.
Jacob's Sheep conceived according to the color of the Rods, that lay in the
Troughs. Our conceptions will be like our visions: like the examples that are
set before our eyes. Here (as in a Glass) even the best may see their spots;
and all, especially Sufferers, may learn how to dress themselves for death. How
can the best of us read these passages, without shame for our low seize,
for our little proficiency in the School of Christ? How unlike are our faces to
the faces in this Mirror? How self-denying were they? How selfish are we? How
crucified to the world were they? How much glued thereunto are we? How easy
was it for them to choose the greatest Sufferings, rather then the least Sin?
How hard is it for us not to choose the greatest Sin, rather then the least
Suffering? How willing were they to part with all for Christ? How unwilling are
we to part with littles for Christ? What an honor did they esteem it to suffer
for Christ, to be chained, to be whipped, to be wrackt, to be halter'd, to be
staked for Christ? Have we such esteems of sufferings for Christ, and of such
sufferings? Are not we ashamed of our glory? How patient were they under the
greatest tortures? How impatient are we under very little troubles? How hot was
their love to Christ, his Truths, Ordinances, People? How cold is ours? How
zealous were they for the Honor of God? How lukewarm are we? How magnanimous
were they? How cowardly and dastardly are we? How humble were they? How proud
are we? How brokenhearted were they? How hard-hearted are we? What
sympathizing spirits had they? How little fellow-feeling is there now among
Christians? How active were they for the glory of God, and good of souls under
their sufferings? How slothful are we? And how little do we for either under
our sufferings? How strong was their Faith? How weak is ours? How fearless were
they of man, who can only kill the body? How fearful are we? How many of these
Worthies attained unto Assurance, and had their Evidences for Heaven clear? How
are the most of us in the dark, as to an interest in God, and a right and title
to Glory? How willing and desirous were they to die, even a violent death? How
loath are we to die, even a natural death? How did they without the least fear
play on the hole of this Asp, and with much courage put their hand into the Den
of this Cockatrice? But how does the fear of this King of Terrors make us
subject to bondage? Thus they are useful to shame us: They are also useful to
prepare us to die, especially a violent death. Such examples chalk the way more
plainly, Longum iter per praecepta, breve and efficax per exempla, Seneca.
then bare direction: These encourage more heartily: these persuade more
powerfully: these chide unbelief with more authority. I beseech you all, who
are the Lords people, (said one lately) not to scare at suffering for the
interests, of Christ; because of any thing you may see fall out in these days,
as to the sufferings of his Servants: but be encouraged to do and suffer; for I
assure you, in the Name of the Lord, he will bear all your charges. I do again
assure you, in his Name, he will furnish all your expenses, and bear all your
charges. Mr. Rough learned the way to Martyrdom by seeing and hearing Austo at
the Stake in Smithfield.

Coming from his burning, and being asked where he had been, he made answer,
There where I would not but have been for one of mine eyes: and would you know
where? Forsooth, I have been to learn the way. And soon after he followed him
in the same place and the same kind of death. Now if one president made him so
good a Scholar; what Dullards and Non-proficients are we, if such a Cloud of
Instances work not in us a cheerful ability to expect and encounter the same
adversary, so often foiled before our eyes? I shall detain thee no longer from
seeing these rare sights, but now invite thee in the words of Rev. 6.7. (...),
Come and see.
The good Lord add his blessing, that thine eye may affect thy heart, and that
these Remarkable passages may be thus useful to all our souls, and that the
Cloud of Witnesses may not be a standing Witness against any of us. Farewell.

To the Reader.
Reader,
THe life present is only preparative to that to come, as the hidden life in
the womb to the more perfect and noble life in the world, 1 Col. 12. Salvation
is not instantaneous. The Heirs of Glory make their gradual approaches to it,
and enter upon their Inheritance by degrees, Romans 13.11. And the nearer they
come to Heaven, the more heavenly their Spirits are. Could a man but hear the
last breathings and whispers of dying Saints, how would he melt and ravish?
Like the Sun they appear most great and glorious at setting. God often leads
them to the top of Pisg^h, whence they have a prospect of Canaan, a little
before they enter in to possess it.

But although God does frequently indulge those that die in the Faith of Christ
with rare and excellent visions of Christ, yet ordinarily those that die for
Christ as well as in Christ, have a Benjamin's portion in comparison of their
Brethren. There is a joy proper to Martyrs, which is bestowed upon them as an
honorarium, partly to reward their faithfulness in trials past; and partly to
encourage them to break through the difficulties which yet remain.

In these joys Heaven is let down to Earth, glory antedated, and a short
salvation here obtained, 1 Pet. 1.8. During the continuance of this glorious
frame, they are acted above the ordinary rate of man, which makes the world
stand at gaze, an^ all that behold them to admire at them. Their aspec^ is
rather angelical then humane, Acts 6.15. and they seem no longer fit to be
reckoned to the Tribe o^ mortals on Earth, but rather ranked with the glorious
Saints and Seraphims in Heaven; they no longer wrap themselves up in their
garment of flesh but the only strife among them seems to be wh^ shall first
cast it off, to put on the garments of glory prepared for them.

Reader, would thou see some of these Earthly Angels? men that are a little
too low for Heaven, and much too high for Earth. Would thou see poor frail
Creatures trampling the World under their feet, and with an holy scorn smiling
at the threat^ of Tyrants, who are the terrors of the mighty in the Land of the
Living? Would thou see shackled Prisoners behave themselves like Judges; and
Judges stand like Prisoners before them? Woulds^ thou see some of the rare
exploits of Faith, in it highest elevation immediately before it be swallowed
up in the beatifical vision? To conclude, Woulds^ thou see the heavenly
Jerusalem pourtraied o^ Earth, as the earthly Jerusalem once was upon (...)
Tile, Ezekiel. 4.1. And would thou hear the melodious voices of ascending
Saints, in a ravishing consort, ready to join with the heavenly Chorus, (...)
their ravishing Hallelujahs? Then draw near come and see. If thou be a man of
an heavenly Spirit, here is brave and suitable entertainment for the spirit.
And after thou have conversed a while wit these excellent Spirits, it may be
thou will judg^ as I do, That dead Saints are sweeter Companion (in some
respects) for thee to converse with, the^ those that are living. And when thou
shall see the magnificent acts of their Faith, their invincible patience, their
flaming love to Christ, their strange contempt of the World, their plainness
and simplicity in the profession of the Gospel, and their fervent love to each
other; thou will mourn also with me to consider the scandalous and shameful
relapse of Professors from these glorious heights, and to think how many
degrees these Graces are gone back in the souls of Professors, as the Sun upon
the Dial of Ahaz.

The Judicious Collector has gathered this Posie from the Martyrs Graves,
bound up in an excellent method, and presented it to thee. Here thou have the
Cream of the larger Martyrologies scum'd off, the very Spirits of them
extracted, which is more cheap and less tiresome. He intends if God permit a
Second Part speedily. And I assure thee he is a Person singularly qualified for
the Work, having both Materials and Judgment to dispose his Collections. Bless
God for such profitable Instruments, and improve their Labors. Such a Book
has been long desired, many have attempted it, but every one has not that
Furniture of Books and Parts for it. Solomon detecting some of those artifices
which the Buyer uses in Trading, Prove. 20.14. detects this as one, It is
naught, it is naught (says the Buyer) i. e. he disparageth the Commodity, to
beat down the price, but when he is gone he bo^steth. I am mistaken if thou
also do not boast of thy pennyworth in this Book when thou art gone and have
well perused it, that it may reach the end upon thy heart for which it is
designed, is the desire of thy Friend to serve thee,

I. F.

The Books Poetical Prologue
I Tell their death's, who dying, made Death yield,
By Scriptures sword, and Faith's unbattered shield
Their number's numberless who ran to die
Under their Savior's Standard valiantly.
More Saints ten Tyrant Emperors did slay,
Then for a year, Five thousand to each day.
Since Iesu^tes from the infernal Lake did rise,
More then Eight hundred thousand lost their lives
In Thirty years. Bloody Duke d' Alva willed
In Six years Eighteen thousand to be killed.
In Henry's and in Mary's Bloody Reign
Eight thousand have inhumanely been slain.
Twelve thousand and seven hundred more were Stockt,
Or Whipped, or Wrackt, or else Exiled, or Mocked.
I only promise many a Swan-like Song;
Read them, and beg of God with Heart and Tongue,
That as the Vine, that is cut, and pruned bears more
In one year, then it did in three before;
So may Christ's Vine: And may the Saints of God
(As Cammomile) grow better being trod.
And may Christ's Sufferer^ in like cases find
The Living God as near, as true, as kind,
As these have found; and learn Sin more ^o fear,
Then parting with what er'e they count most dear.
Swan-like SONGS.
A.
Adrian.
ADrian's wife seeing the Coffin hooped with Iron, Wards life of faith in
death, page 160.
wherein she was to be buried alive, spoke thus, Have you provided this
Pastycrust to bake my flesh in?

Agnes.
Agnes a Roman Martyr, Fox's Acts and Monumens, etc. Vol. 1. page 122.
contemning all threats of tortures, was assaulted as to her chastity. To the
lascivious Wretch she said, Thou shall willingly bathe thy sword in my blood,
if thou will, but thou shall not defile my body with filthy lust, do what thou
can. Hereupon his eyes were struck out by a flame of fire, like unto a flash
of lightning, and upon her prayer he was restored to sight again. When she saw
a sturdy cruel fellow (to behold) approaching with a naked sword in his hand; I
am now glad (said she) and rejoice more, that such an one as thou, a stout,
fierce, strong, and sturdy Soldier art come, then if one more feeble, weak,
and faint-hearted should come. This, even this is he, I now confess, that I do
love: I will make haste to meet him, and will no longer protract my longing
desire.

Albane.
Albane ( England's Proto-Martyr) delivered up Fox. Vol. ^. page 114.
himself to the Soldiers instead of Amphibolus, who had converted him to
Christianity, after he had fled to his house for refuge, and being bound, was
carried before the Judge, who at that time was sacrificing to his Idols. The
Judge perceiving the fraud, told Albane, Forasmuch as thou had rather convey
away the Rebel and Traitor to our gods, then deliver him up to the Soldiers,
that he might undergo due punishment for blaspheming our gods; look what
torments he should have suffered, if he had been taken, the same shall thou
suffer, if thou refuse to practice the Rites of our Religion. Albane,
notwithstanding his threats, told him plainly to his face, that he would not
obey his command. Then said the Judge, of what House and Stock art thou? Albane
answered, It matters not of what Stock I am; but if thou desire to know my
Religion, be it known unto thee, I am a Christian, etc. Then the Judge demanded
his name: my Parents (said he) named me Albane; and I honor and worship the
true and living God, that made all things of nothing. The Judge told him, If he
would save his life, he must come and sacrifice to their gods. Albane answered,
The sacrifice that you offer to the Devil profits you nothing, but rather
purchases for you eternal pains and Hell fire. The Judge commanded him to be
beheaded. The Executioner, observing his says and fervent prayers, fell down
at his feet, casting from him the sword, desired rather to be executed for, or
with him, then to do execution upon him; yet afterward another gave the fatal
blow.

Alcock.
Fox, Vol. 3. page 883.
Constable Rolf ( John Alcocks Master) having bailed his Servant, said unto
him, I am sorry for thee; for truly the Parson will seek thy destruction: Sir
(said Alcock) I am sorry I am a trouble to you; as for my self I am not sorry,
but I do commit my self into Gods hands, and I trust he will give me a mouth
and wisdom to answer according to right. Yet (said Rolph) take heed of him, he
is a blood-sucker, etc. I fear not (said A^cock) he shall do no more to me then
God will give him leave; and happy shall I be, if God will call me to die for
his Truths sake.

In his first Letter to Hadley he writes thus: O my Brethren of Hadley, why are
ye so soon turned from them, which called you into the Grace of Christ, to
another Doctrine? -- Though those should come unto you, that have been your
true Preachers, and preach another way of salvation, then by Jesus Christ's
death and passion, hold them accursed: yea, if it were an Angel came from
Heaven, and would tell you that the sacrifice of Christ's body upon the Cross
once for all, were not sufficient for all the sins of all those that shall be
saved, accursed be he. -- Why comes this plague upon us? Comes not this upon
thee, because thou have forsaken the Lord thy God? Thine own wickedness shall
reprove thee, and thy turning away shall condemn thee, that thou may know
how evil and hurtful a thing it is, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God.

Algerius.
Pomponius Algerius, Fox, Vol. 2. page 181.
whilst he was a Prisoner at Venice, before he was burnt at Rome, writ thus in
his comfortable Letter to the Christians, departed out of Babylon into Mount
Sion. To mitigate your sorrow, which you take for me, I cannot but impart unto
you some portion of my joys, which I feel, to the intent you may rejoice with
me. -- I shall utter that, which scarce any will believe: I have found a nest
of honey, an honeycomb in the entrails of a Lion. In the deep dark Dungeon I
have found a Paradise of pleasure. In the place of sorrow and death,
tranquillity of hope and life: where others do weep, I do rejoice; when others
do shake and tremble, there I have found plenty of strength and boldness: in
strait bands, and cold irons I have had rest: Behold he that was once far from
me, now is present with me; whom once I could scarce feel, I now see most
apparently; whom once I saw afar off, now I behold near at hand, whom once I
hungered for, the same now approaches and reaches his hand unto me; he does
comfort me, and heapeth me up with gladness; he drives away all bitterness; he
ministers strength and courage, etc. -- O how easy and sweet is the Lords
yoke! Learn, ye well-beloved, how amiable the Lord is, how meek, and merciful,
who visits his servants in temptations; neither disdaineth he to keep company
with us in such vile and stinking Caves. Will the blind and incredulous world
(think you) believe this? or rather will it not say thus? No, thou will never
be able to abide long the burning heat, the pinching hardness of that place,
etc. The rebukes and frowning faces of great men how will thou suffer? Do not
thou consider thy pleasant Country, the Riches of the World, thy Kinsfolk, the
delicate pleasures and Honors of this life? Do thou forget the solace of thy
Sciences, and fruit of all thy Labors? Will thou thus lose all thy labors
which thou have hitherto sustained? Finally, fear thou not death which
hangs over thee? O what a fool art thou, which for one words speaking may
salve all this and wilt not! But now to answer: Let this blind world hearken to
this again, What heat can there be more burning, then that fire which is
prepared for thee hereafter? What things more hard, and sharp, and crooked then
this present life which we lead? What thing more odious and hateful then this
world here present? And let these worldly men here answer me. What Country can
we have more sweet then the Heavenly Country above? What treasures more rich
or precious then everlasting life? and who be our Kinsmen but they which hear
the Word of God? Where be greater riches or dignities more honorable then in
Heaven. And as touching the Sciences, let this foolish world consider, Be not
they ordained to know God? whom unless we do know, all our labors, our
night-watchings, our studies, and all our enterprises here serve to no purpose,
all is but labor lost. Furthermore let the miserable worldly men answer me.
What remedy or safe refuge can there be unto him who lacks God, who is the life
and medicine of all men, and how can he be said to fly from death, when he
himself is already dead in sin? If Christ be the way, verity and life, how can
there be any life without Christ? The solely heat of the Prison to me is
coldness; the cold winter to me is a fresh spring in the Lord. He that fears
not to be burned in the fire, how will he fear the heat of weather? Or what
cares he for the pinching frost, which burns for the love of the Lord? The
place is sharp and tedious to them that be guilty, but to the innocent it is
mellifluous. Here droppeth the delectable dew, here flows the pleasant
Nectar, here runs the sweet milk, here is plenty of all good things. -- In
this world there is no mansion firm to me, and therefore I will travel up to
the New Jerusalem, which is in Heaven, and which offers it self to me without
paying any Fine or Income. -- I have traveled hitherto, labored, and sweat
early and late, watching day and night, and now my travels begin to come to
effect. -- What man can now cavil, that these our labors are lost, which have
followed and found out the Lord and Maker of the World, and which have changed
death with life? -- If to die in the Lord be not to die, but to live most
joyfully, where is this wretched worldly Rebel, which blames us of folly, for
giving away our lives unto death? O how delectable is this death to me! to
taste of the Lords C^p. -- I am accused of foolishness, for that I do not rid
my self out of these troubles, when with one word I may. But does not Christ
say, Fear not them which kill the body, but him which kills both body and
soul; and whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I also c^n^ess before
my Father which is in He^v^n; and he that denies me before men, him will I
also deny before my Heavenly Father. Seeing the words of the Lord be so plain,
how, or by what authority will this wise Counselor approve this his counsel
which he does give? God forbid that I should relinquish the commandments of
God, and follow the counsels of men; for it is written, Blessed is the man that
has not g^ne in the way of sinners, and has not stood in the counsel of the
ungodly, etc. Psalm. 1.1. God forbid I should deny Christ, where I ough to
confess him; I will not set more by my life, then by my soul; neither will I
exchange the life to come for this world here present. --

This Letter he underwrit thus; From the delectable Orchard of Leonine Prison,
12 Calend. August. An. 1555.

Allen.
Sir Edmond Tyrrel bidding Rose Allen to give her Father and Mother good
counsel, Fox Vol. 3. page 830.
that they might become good Catholics; Sir (said she) they have a better
Instructour then I, for the Holy Ghost does teach them, I hope, who I trust
will not suffer them to err. Thereupon the Knight said, It is time to look to
such Heretics. Sir (said she) with that which you call Herelie, do I worship
my Lord God. Then I perceive (said Tyrrel) you will burn with the rest for
company. No Sir (said she) not for company, but for my Christ's sake, if so I be
compelled, and I hope in his mercies if he call me to it, he will enable me to
bear it. To try her Tyrrel burnt the wrist of her hand with a candle, till the
very sinews cracked asunder, saying often to her, What, whore, wilt not thou
cry? To which she answered, That she had no cause she thanked God, but rather
to rejoice; You (said she) have more cause to weep then I, if you consider the
matter well. At last she said, Sir, have you done what you will do? He
answering, yea, and if thou th^nk it be not well, then mend it. She replied,
Mend it! Nay the Lord mend you, and give you repentance, if it be his will; and
now if you think it good to begin at the feet, and burn the head also. She
being asked by one, how she could abide the painful burning of her hand; She
said, at first it was some grief to her; but afterward the longer she burned,
the less she felt, even well near none at all.

Almondus.
My Body dies (said A^ondus a Via) my Spirit lives. Ward, etc. page 159.
Gods Kingdom abides ever, God has now given me the accomplishment of all my
de^^res.

Alost.
Fox Vol. 3. Cont. p. 34.
Francis d' Alost, a Cutler in Flanders, being conducted to Prison, said, Now
you have taken me, you think to deprive me of life, and thereby to bring great
damage to me; but you are deceived, for it is all one, as if you took counters
from me to fill my hand with a great sum of gold. As he went to suffer, he used
that speech of the Apostle St. Peter, I must now shortly put off this my
earthly tabernacle, 2 Pet. 1.10. which the love of Jesus my Lord constrains
me to do, 2 Cor. 5.14.

Am^chus.
Ward, page 141.
Turn (said he) the other side also, least raw flesh offend you.

Ambrose.
Ward, page 139, 140.
I have not so lived (said he) that I am ashamed to live longer, nor yet fear I
death, because I have a good Lord.

To Calignon ( Valentinians Eunuch) threatening death, he said, Well, do you
that which becomes an Eunuch, I will suffer that which becomes a Bishop.

Andrew.
Fox, Vol. 1. page 43.
When the Proconsul threatened Andrew the Apostle with the Cross, if he left not
off his preaching; I would never (said he) have preached the Doctrine of the
Cross, if I had feared the suffering of the Cross.

When he came to the Cross on which he was to be crucified, he said, O Cross
most welcome, and long looked for, with a willing mind joyfully I come to thee,
being the Scholar of him that did hang on thee; Ward, page 138.
welcome O Christ longed and looked for; I am the Scholar of him that was
crucified, long have I coveted to embrace thee, in whom I am what I am.

Anvil.
Frederick Anvil of Bearne, Ward, page 156.
to the Friars that willed him to call on the Virgin Mary, three times
repeated, Thine O Lord is the Kingdom, thine is the power and glory for ever
and ever; Let us fight, let us fight, Avaunt, Satan, avaunt.

Apprice.
Bonner asking John Apprice what he thought of the Sacrament of the Altar; Fox,
Vol. 3. page 700.
he answered, The Doctrine you teach is so agreeable to the world, and embraced
of the same, that it cannot be agreeable to the Word of God.

Ardley.
John Ardley being urged by Bonner to recant, Fox, Vol. 3. page 253.
cried out, If every hair of my head were a man, I would suffer death for my
Religion.

Being again solicited to recant; No, God forbid (said he) that I should do
so, for then I shall lose my soul.

Arethusius.
Marcus Arethusius having at the command of Constantinus pulled down a certain
Temple, Fox, Vol. ^. Page 128.
dedicated to Idols, and instead thereof built up a Church, where the
Christians might congregate; under Iulianus he was beaten, cast into a filthy
sinck, put into a basket anointed with honey and broth, hung abroad in the heat
of the Sun, as meat for Wasps to feed on, hereby it was hoped he would be
enforced either to build up again the Temple which he had destroyed, or else
give so much money as would pay for the building of the same. This good man
whilst he hung in the basket, did not only conceal his pains, but derided
those wicked instruments of his torments, calling them bafe, low, terrene
people, and himself exalted, and set on high, when they told him they would be
contented with a small sum of money from him: He said, It is as great a
wickedness to confer one halfpenny in case of impiety, as if a man should
bestow the whole.

Askew.
Mrs. Jane Askew being called by the Bishop of Winchester, a Parrot, told him,
that she was ready to suffer not only his rebukes, but all things that should
follow besides; yea, and all that gladly.

To her Confession in Newgate she thus subscribed; Written by me Jane Askew,
who neither wish death, nor fear its might, and as merry as one bound toward
Heaven.

In her Confession of her Faith she says, Though God has given me the bread
of adversity, and the waters of trouble, yet not so much as my sins have
deserved.

When Nicholas Sharton counseled her to recant, as he had done, she said, It
had been good for him never to have been born.

In an Answer to a Letter of Mr. Lacell's, she writ thus; O Friend, most dearly
beloved in God, I marvail not a little what should m^ve you to judge in me so
slender a faith as to fear death, which is the end of all misery. In the Lord I
desire you not to believe of me such weakness, for I doubt not but God will
perform his work in me, like as he has begun.

When Wrisley Lord Chancellor sent to her Letters at the Stake, offering her
the Kings pardon, if she would recant; she refusing once to look upon them,
gave this answer: That she came not thither to deny her Lord and Master.

Attalus.
Word, page: 340.
He answered to every question, I am a Christian. Being fired in an iron Chain;
Behold (said he) O you Romans, this is to eat man's flesh, which you falsely
object to us Christians.

Audebert.
Blessed be God (said Anne Audebert of Orleance) for this Wedding Girdle
(meaning the Chain) my first marriage was on this Lords Day, Ward, page 154.
and now my second to my Spouse and Lord Christ shall be on the same.

Augustine.
Boughs fall off trees (said he) and stones out of buildings, Ward, page 140.
and why should it seem strange that mortal men die?

Austine.
Austine a Barbar, Fox, Vol. 2. page 124.
born about Hennegow in Germany, as he was led to execution, being desired by a
Gentleman to have pity upon himself, and if he would not favor his life, yet
that he would favor his own soul: He answered, What care I have of my soul,
you may see by this; that I had rather give my body to be burned, then to do
that thing that were against my conscience.

B
Babilas.
Babilas Bishop of Antioch, St. Chrysoft. cont. Gentiles.
being cast by Decius into a filthy stinking Prison for the name of Christ,
with as many irons as he could bear, entreated his Friends (that visited him)
that after his death they would bury with him the signs and tokens of his
valor, meaning his bolts and fetters.

Now (said he) will God wipe away all tears, Ward, page 141,
and now I shall walk with God in the land of the living.

Bainham.
Mr. James Bainham, Fox, Vol. 2. page 300.
when he repented of his Recantation in Austin's Church in London, He declared
openly with weeping eyes, that he had denied God, and prayed all the people to
beware of his weakness, and not to do as he did; For (say he) If I should not
return again unto the truth, this Word of God (he having a New Testament in his
hand) would damn me both body and soul at the Day of Judgment. He persuaded
them to die by and die, rather then to do as he did; for he would not feel such
an hell again for all the worlds good.

When he was at the Stake in the midst of the flaming fire, which had half
consumed his Arms and Legs, he spoke these words; O ye Papists, Behold, ye look
for miracles, and here now you may see a miracle; for in this fire I feel no
more pain, then if I were in a Bed of Down, it is to me as a Bed of Roses.

Bar^evil.
Ward, page 162.
John Barbevil said to the Friars that called him ignorant Ass; Well, Admit I
were so, yet shall my blood witness against such Balaams as you be.

Bale.
Mr. John Bale in his excellent Paraphrase in Apocalypse. See the image of both
Churches printed 1550.


In his Preface -- He that will live godly in Christ Jesus, and be a patient
sufferer; he that will stand in Gods fear, and prepare himself to temptation;
he that will be strong when adversity shall come, and avoid all assaults of
Antichrist and the Devil, let him give himself wholly to the study of this
prophecy -- He that knows not this Book, knows not what the Church is,
Whereof he is a member. -- It contains the universal troubles, persecutions
and crosses, that the Church suffered in the Primitive Spring, what is
suffers now, and what it shall suffer in the later Times, by the subtilties
of Antichrist and his Followers, the cruel Members of Satan; and it manifests
what Promises, what Crowns, and what Glory the said Congregation shall have,
after this present Conflict with the Enemies, that the promised Rewards might
quicken the hearts of those that the Torments fears. -- Unto St. John were
these Mysteries revealed, when he was by the Emperor Domitianus exiled for his
Preaching, into the Isle of Patmos, at the cruel Complaints of the Idolatrous
Priests and Bishops, and by him writ and sent out of the same exile into the
Congregations. -- The Contents of this Book are from no place more freely and
clearly opened, nor told forth more boldly, then out of exile. -- Flattery
dwelling at home, and sucking there still his Mothers breasts, may never tell
out the truth, he sees so many dangers on every side, as displeasure of
Friends, decay of Name, loss of Goods, offense of Great men, and jeopardy of
Life, etc. The forsaken wretched sort has the Lord provided always to rebuke
the world of sin, hypocrisy, blindness; for naught is it therefore that he
has exiled a certain number of believing Brethren the Realms of England, of
the which afflicted Family my faith is that I am one. Whereupon I have
considered it is no less my bounden duty, under pain of damnation, to admonish
Christ's flock by this present Revelation of their perils past, and dangers to
come for contempt of the Gospel, which now reigns there above all in the
Clergy. -- Graciously has the Lord called them, especially now of late, but
his voice is nothing regarded. His Servants have they imprisoned, tormented,
and slain, having his Verity in much more contempt then before. We looked for a
time of peace, (says the Prophet Jeremiah) and we fare not the better at all;
we waited for a time of health, and we find here nothing else but trouble. And
no marvel, considering the Beasts head that was wounded, is now healed up again
so workmanly, as Rev. 13. mentions. The abominable hopocrisie, idolatry,
pride, and filthiness of those terrible termagaunts of Antichrists holy
household, those two-horned Whoremongers, those Conjurers of Egypt, and
lecherous Locusts, leaping out of the bottomless Pit, which daily deceive the
ignorant multitude with their Sorceries and Charms, must be showed to the World
to their utter shame and confusion. --. To tell them freely of their wicked
works by the Scriptures, I have exiled my self for ever from mine own native
Country, Kindred, Friends, Acquaintance, (which are the great delights of this
life) and am well contented for the sake of Christ, and for the comfort of my
Brethren there, to suffer poverty, penury, abjection, reproof, and all that
shall come beside. -- Here are we admonished beforehand of two most dangerous
evils; neither to agree with those Tyrants, that wage war with the Lamb in his
elect Members, nor yet to obey those deceitful Bishops, that in hypocrisy
usurp the Churches Titles. -- Of those has our heavenly Lord premonished us in
this heavenly work of his, and graciously called us away from their
abominations, lest we should be partakers of their sins, and so receive of
their plagues. If we unthankfully neglect it, the greater is our danger. --

Barlaam.
Fox, Vol. 1. page 118. Ward, page 141.
He holding his hand in the flame over the Altar, sung that of the Psalmist,
Thou teach my hands to war, and my fingers to fight.

Barnes.
I have been reported (said Dr. Barnes at the Stake) to be a Preacher of
Sedition, Fox, Vol. 2. page 527.
and disobedient to the Kings Majesty; but here I say to you, that you are all
bound by the command of God, to obey your Prince with all humility, and with
all your heart; and that not only for fear of the sword, but also for
conscience sake before God: Yea, I say further, If the King should command you
any thing against Gods Law, if it be in your power to resist him, yet may you
not do it.

Basil.
When Valens the Emperor sent his Officers to him, Buroughs in Mose Self-De^
al, page 1
seeking to turn him from the Faith: And first of all great preferments were
offered him; Basil rejected them with scorn: Offer these things (said he) to
Children. When he was afterward threatened grievously; Threaten (said he) your
Purple Gallants, that give themselves to their pleasures.

When the Emperors Messenger promised him great preferment, Clarks Lives, Part
1. page 101.
Alas, Sir, (said this Bishop of Caes^rca) these speeches are fit to catch
little Children, that look after such things; but we that are taught and
nourished by the holy Scriptures, are ready to suffer a thousand deaths, rather
then to suffer one syllable or tittle of the Scripture to be altered.

When the Emperor threatened to banish him, Leiglis Saints Encouragements in
evil times, page 9.
etc. if he obeyed not, he said, Those Bug-bears were to be propounded to
Children; but for his part, though they might take away his life, yet they
could not hinder him from professing the Truth.

When Modestus the Prefect asked him, Clark, etc. page 191.
Know you not who we are that command it? No body (said Basil) whilst you
command such things. Know ye not (said the Prefect) that we have Honors to
bestow upon you? They are but changeable (said Basil) like your selves.
Hereupon he threatened to confiscate his Goods, to torment him, to banish him,
or kill him; he answered, He need not fear confiscation, that had nothing to
lose nor banishment, to whom Heaven only is a Country; nor torments, when his
body would be dashed with one blow; nor death, which is the only way to set
him at liberty. The Prefect telling him he was Mad, he said, Opto me in
ae^^ernum sic delirare, I wish I may for ever be thus Mad. The Prefect another
time threatening him with death he said, Would it would fall out so well on my
side, that I might lay down this carcass of mine in the quarrel of Christ, and
in the defense o^ his Truth, who is my Head and Captain.

The Prefect desiring that he would not, by rashly answering, throw himself
away, offered him a day and night to consider further of it; but Basil said, I
have no need to take further counsel about this matter: Look what I am to day,
the same thou shall find me to morrow; but I pray God that thou change not thy
mind.

Benden.
Fox, Vol. 3. page 796.
Alice Benden, when she was in Prison at Canterbury, agreed with a fellow
Prisoner to live both of them with two pence half penny a day, to try thereby
how well they could sustain penury and hunger before they were put to it.

At her first coming into the Bishops Prison, she was much troubled, and
expostulated why her Lord did suffer her to be sequestered from her loving
Fellows in so extreme misery? But was comforted* by these words, Why ar^ thou
so heavy, O my soul? The right hand of the Lord can change all.

At the stake she took forth a shilling of Philip and Mary, which her father
had bowed^ and sent her when she was first in Prison, desiring her Brother
there present, to return the same to her Father again, that he might understand
she never lacked money whilst she lay in Prison.

Bennet.
Mr. Thomas ^ennet, Fox, Vol. 2.314.
a Schoolmaster in Exceter, being press't by a Doctor, a Gray Friar, to
recant for putting upon the doors of the Cathedral in Schedules, That the Pope
is Antichrist, and that we ought to worship God only, and not the Saints,
said, I take God to record, my life is not dear to me, I am weary of it, seeing
your detestable doings, to the utter destruction of Gods flock, so that I
desire death, that I may no longer be partaker of your detestable idolatries
and superstitions, or be subject unto Antichrist your Pope. -- Away from me I
pray you, vex my soul no longer, ye shall not prevail. -- If I should hear and
follow you this day, everlasting death should hang over me, a just reward for
them that prefer the life of this world before life eternal.

Berger.
Peter Berger, Fox, Vol. 2. page 140.
burnt at Lions 155^. beholding the multitude at the stake, said, Great is the
Harvest, Lord, send Laborers, I see the heavens open to receive me.

B^tken.
When she was brought to the Rack, Fox, Vol. 3. Suppl. p. 49.
she said, My Masters, wherefore will you put me to this torture, seeing I have
no way offended you? Is it for my Faith's sake? you need not torment me for
that, for as I was never ashamed to make confession thereof, no more will I be
now at this present before you, I will freely show you my mind therein. But for
all (...) when they proceeded on with what they inte^^^^, Alas my Masters, said
she, If it be so that I must suffer this pain, then give me leave first to call
upon God. Her request they granted: whilst she wa^ praying, one of the
Commissioners was so sur^^^^ with fear and terror, that by and by he swo^^^*
and could not be fetched again, and so she esca^^^ the torture.

Bilney.
Fox, Vol. 2. page 268.
Mr. Thomas Bilney in a Letter to Dr. Tonstal Bishop of London, he gives this
account of his conversion. -- The woman which was twelve years vexed with the
bloody Flux, had consumed all that she had upon Physicians, and yet was still
worse and worse, until such time as she came to Christ, and after she had once
touched the hem of his vesture, through faith she was healed. O mighty power of
the most High! which I also most miserable sinner have often tasted and felt.
Before I came to Christ I had likewise spent all I had upon ignorant
Physicians. -- They appointed me Fastings, Watchings, buying of Pardons, and
Masses, etc. But at last I heard speak of Jesus, even then, when the New
Testament was first set out by Erasmu^. At first I was allured to read, rather
for the Latin (having heard it was eloquently done) then for the Word of God.
At the first reading I hit upon this sentence of St. Paul, (O most sweet and
comfortable sentence to my soul) in 1 Timothy 1. It is a true saying, and worthy
of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of
whom I am chief. This sentence through Gods instruction and inward working, did
so exhilarate my heart, being before wounded with the guilt of my sins,
insomuch that my bruised bones leapt for joy. After this the Scripture began to
be more pleasant to me then the honey or the honeycomb. Therein I learned that
all my Travels, all my Fasting and Watching, all the redemption of Masses and
Pardons, without faith in Christ, were but a hasty and swift running out of the
right way, or else much like the vesture made of Fig Leaves, wherewithal Adam
and Eve went about in vain to cover their nakedness, and could never obtain
quietness and rest, till they believed in the promise of God, that Christ the
seed of the Woman should break the Serpents head. Neither could I be relieved
or eased of the sharp stingings of my sins, before I was taught of God, that
even as Moses exalted the serpent in the Desert, so shall the Son of man be
exalted, that all which believe on him, should not perish, but have everlasting
life. As soon as I began to taste and savor this heavenly Lesson, which none
can teach but God only, I desired the Lord to increase my faith. And at last I
desired nothing more, then that I being so comforted by him, might be
strengthened by his holy Spirit and grace from above, to teach the wicked his
ways, which are mercy and truth, that the wicked may be converted unto him by
me, who sometimes was also wicked. -- Accordingly I did teach, and set forth
Christ, being made for us by God his Father, our Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1. Who was made sin for us, i. e. a
Sacrifice for sin, that we through him should be made the righteousness of God,
2 Cor. 5. Who became accursed for us, to redeem us from the curse of the Law,
Gal. 2. -- I taught that all men should first acknowledge their sins, and
condemn them, afterward hunger and thirst for that righteousness, which is by
faith in Christ, etc. Romans 3. And forasmuch as this hunger and thirst was wont
to be quenched with the fullness of man's righteousness. -- Therefore oftentimes
have I spoken of those works, exhorting all men not so to cleave to them, as
they being satisfied therewith, should loath or wax weary of Christ. For those
things I have been cried out of, attached, and now cast into prison.

Page 271.
His abjuration cost him dear, it brought him even to despair, his Friends were
fain to be with him night and day.

Bishop Latimer says, That he thought all the Word of God was against him, and
sounded his condemnation: To bring any comfortable Scripture to him, was as
though a man should run him through with a sword.

Page 277.
The day before his Execution, some Friends finding him eating heartily, with
much cheerfulness, and a quiet mind, they said, They were glad to see him at
that time so heartily to refresh himself: O (said he) I imitate those, who
having a ruinous house to dwell in, yet bestow cost as long as they may to hold
it up.

Leigh 's Saints Encouragements in evil times. p. 27.
In Prison he diverse times proved the fire, by putting his finger near to the
candle; at the first touch of the candle his flesh resisting, and he
withdrawing his finger, did after chide his flesh in these words; Quid uniu^
m^mlri inustionem far n^n potes, and quo pacto cras totius corporis confl^
grationem tolerabis? What (said he) can thou not bear the burning of one
member, and how will thou endure to morrow the burning of thy whole body?

Fox, Vol. 2. page 277.
I feel, and have known it long by Philosophy, that fire is hot; yet I know some
(recorded in Gods Word) even in the flame felt no heat, and I believe that
though my body will be wasted by it, my soul shall be purged thereby.

At the same time he most comfortably treated among his Friends, of Isa. 43.1,
2, 3. But now, thus says the Lord, that created thee, O Jacob, and he that
formed thee, O Israel; Fear not, for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee
by thy Name. Thou art mine when thou passest through the waters, I will be with
thee, and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee; when thou walk
through the fire thou shall not be burnt, for I am the Lord thy God, the Holy
one of Israel, thy Savior. The comfort whereof never left some of his Friends
to their dying day.

The next morning the Officers fetching him to Execution, a certain Friend
entreated him to be constant, and to take his death patiently; Bilney answered,
I am sailing with the Mariner through a boisterous sea, but shortly shall be in
the Haven, etc. Help me with your Prayers.

Bland.
Mr. John Bland a Kentish Minister, Fox, Vol. 3. page 373.
in his Prayer at the stake. -- Lord Jesus, for thy love I do willingly leave
this life, and desire rather the bitter death of thy Cross, with the loss of
all earthly things, then to abide the blasphemy of thy Holy Name, or else to
obey man in the breaking of thy Command. -- This death is more dear unto me
then thousands of gold and silver. Such love, O Lord, have thou laid up in my
breast, that I hunger for thee, as the Deer wounded desires the soil.

Blehere.
Levine Blehere said to his Friends, Ward, page 160.
offering to rescue him by tumult; Hinder not the Magistrates work, nor my
happiness. Father, thou foresawest the sacrifice from eternity, now accept of
it I pray thee.

Bongeor.
Fox, Vol. 3. page 849.
Agnes Bongeor, having prepared her self to go with her Fellow-martyrs to the
stake, putting on a Smock made for that purpose, and sending away her sucking
infant to a Nurse, through a mistake of her Name in the Writ ( Bowyer being put
for Bongeor) was kept back. Hereupon she made piteous moan, wept bitterly, etc.
Because she went not with them to give her life in defense of her Christ; of
all things in the world, life was least looked for by her. In this perplexity a
Friend came to her, and put her in mind of Abraham's offering up Is^ac. I know
(quoth she) that Abraham's will before God was accepted for the deed, in that
he would have done it, if the Angel of the Lord had not stayed him; but I am
unhappy, the Lord thinks not me worthy of this dignity; and yet I would have
gone with my company with all my heart; and because I did it not, it is now my
chief and greatest grief. She was grieved because she had not offered her self
(though she had given away her child) which was more then Abraham was put to.)

Bossu.
Fox, Vol. 3. cons. p. 68.
Francis le Bossu, a French Martyr, to encourage his children to suffer
martyrdom with himself, he thus spoke unto them; Children, we are not now to
learn, that it has always been the portion of Believers to be hated, cruelly
used, and devoured by Unbelievers, as sheep of ravening wolves; if we suffer
with Christ, we shall also reign with him Let not these drawn swords terrify
us, they will be but as a Bridge, whereby we shall pass over out of a miserable
life into immortal blessedness. We have breathed, and lived long enough among
the wicked; let us now go, and live with our God. He and his two Sons were
killed, embracing each other, in the Massacre at Lions in France, 1572.

Bradford.
Mr. John Bradford, Fox, Vol. 3. p. 281, 282.
the night before he was carried to Newgate, he dreamt that Chains were brought
for him to the Counter, and that the day following he should be carried to
Newgate, and that the next day he should be burnt in Smithfield; which
accordingly came to pass.

Being asked what he should do, and whither he would go, if he should have his
liberty; he said, He cared not whether he went out, or no; but if he did, he
would marry and abide still in England secretly, teaching the people as the
time would suffer him.

When the Keepers Wife told him the sad News (as she called it) of the nearness
of his death, being to be burned the next day, he put off his Cap, and lifting
up his eyes to Heaven, said, I thank God for it, I have looked for the same a
long time, and therefore it comes not now to me suddenly, but as a thing
waited for every day and hour; the Lord make me worthy thereof.

Cresw^ll offering to labor for him, Page 292.
and desiring to know what suit he should make for him, What you will do (said
he) do it not at my request, for I desire nothing at your hands. If the Queen
will give me life, I will thank her; if she will banish me, I will thank her;
if she will burn me, I will thank her; if she will condemn me to perpetual
imprisonment, I will thank her.

The Chancellor pressing him to do as they had done, Page 283.
in hopes of the Queens mercy and pardon; My Lord (said he) I desire mercy with
Gods mercy, ( i. e. without doing or saying any thing against God and his
Truth, page 290.) but mercy with Gods wrath God keep me from. -- Gods mercy I
desire, and also would be glad of the Q^eens favor, to live as a Subject
without clog on Conscience: but otherwise the Lords mercy is better to me then
life. -- Life in his displeasure is worse then death, and death with his favor
is true life.

Page 286.
He having refused again and again to answer to the Chancellors Quaeries, said,
That no fear, but the fear of perjury made him unwilling to answer (he having
been six times sworn not to consent to the practicing of any Jurisdiction, or
any Authority on the Bishop of R^me's behalf, within the Realm of England) I am
not afraid of death, I thank God, I look and have looked for nothing else from
your hands a long time; but I am afraid when death comes, I should have ma^ter
to trouble my Conscience by the guilt of perjury. -- As for my death, as I know
there are twelve hours in the day, so with the Lord my time is appointed; and
when it shall be his good time, then I shall depart hence; but in the mean
season I am safe enough, though all the reople had sworn my death; into his
hands have I committed it, and do, his good will be done.

Page 297.
The Earl of Derby sending one of his Servants to him, willing him to tender
himself, He told the Messenger, that he thanked his Lordship for his good will
toward him, but in this case I cannot tender my self more then Gods honor.

The same Servant saying also, Ah Mr. Bradford, consider your Mother, Sister,
Friends, Kinsfolk, Country, what a great discomfort it will be to them to see
you die as an Heretic. Mr. Bradford replied, I have learned to forsake Father,
Mother, Brother, Sister, Friends, and all that ever I have, yea and my own
self, for else I cannot be Christ's Disciple.

Being asked by a good Gentlewomans Servant, Page 305.
that was sent to him, How he did? he answered, Well, I thank God: for as men
in Sailing, which be near to the Shore or Haven where they would be, would be
nearer, even so the nearer I am to God, the nearer I would be.

In a Letter to his Mother and Brethren. Page 308.
-- I am at this time in Prison sure enough from starting to confirm that I
have preached unto you: As I am ready (I thank God) with my life and blood to
seal the same, if God vouchsafe me worthy of that honor. -- If we suffer with
him, we shall also reign with him. Be not therefore faint-hearted, but rather
rejoice, at the least for my sake, who now am in the right and high way to
Heaven; for by many afflictions we must enter into the Kingdom of God. Now
will God made known his Children. When the wind does not blow, the Wheat cannot
be known from the Chafe; but when the blast comes, then flies away the
Chafe, but the Wheat remains, and is so far from being hurt, that by the
wind it is more cleansed from the Chafe. Gold when it is cast into the fire is
the more precious, so are Gods Children by afflictions. -- Indeed I thank God
more for this Prison, then for any Parlour, yea then for any pleasure that eyer
I had: for in it I find God my most sweet good God always. -- Of all deaths it
is most to be desired to die for Gods sake: such are sure to go to Heaven. --
Death, nor Life, nor Prison, nor Pleasure, I trust in God, shall be able to
separate me from my Lord God and his Gospel. -- Rejoice in my sufferings, for
it is for your sakes, to confirm the truth I have taught. -- Howsoever you do
be obedient to the Higher Powers, that is, in no point either in hand or tongue
Rebel; but rather if they command that which with good conscience you cannot
obey, lay your head on the Block, and suffer what they shall do, or say. By
patience possess your souls.

Page 310.
In his Letter to the City of London. -- I ask God heartily mercy, that I do no
more rejoice, then I do, having so great cause, as to be an instrument, wherein
it may please my dear Lord, and Savior to suffer. -- Although my sins be
manifold and grievous, yet the Bishops and Prelates do not persecute them in
me, but Christ himself, his Word, his Truth, and Religion. -- Let the anger and
plagues of God most justly fallen upon us, be applied to every one of our
deserts, that from the bottom of our hearts every one of us may say, It is I
Lord, that have sinned against thee: It is my hypocrisy, my vainglory, my
covetousness, uncleanness, carnality, security, idleness, unthankfulness,
self-love, etc. which have deserved the taking away of thy Word and true
Religion, of thy good Ministers by Exile, Imprisonment, Death, etc. -- Prepare
your selves to the Cross, be obedient to all that be in Authority in all
things, that be not against God, his Word; for then answer with the Apostle, It
is more meet to obey God, then man. Howbeit never for any thing resist, or rise
against the Magistrates. Avenge not your selves. Commit your Cause to the Lord.
If you feel in your selves an hope and trust in God, that he will never tempt
you above that he will make you able to bear, be assured the Lord will be true
to you, and you shall be able to bear all brunts: but if you want this Hope,
flee and get you hence, rather then by your tarrying Gods Name should be
dishonored.

In his Letter to Cambridge. Page 312.
-- Thou my Mother, the University, have not only had the truth of Gods Word
plainly manifested unto thee by Reading, Disputing, and Preaching publicly and
privately, but now to make thee altogether excuseless, and as it were almost to
sin against the Holy Ghost, if thou put to thy helping hand with the Romish
Rout to suppress the Verity, and set out the contrary, thou have my life and
blood, as a Seal to confirm thee, if thou will be confirmed, or else to
confound thee, if thou will take part with the Prelates and Clergy, which now
fill up the measure of their Fathers, which slew the Prophets and Apostles,
that all the righteous blood from Abel to Bradford may be required at their
hands. -- For the tender mercy of Christ in his bowels and blood I beseech you
to take Christ's eye salve to anoint your eyes, that you may see what you do,
and have done in admitting the Romish rotten Rags, which once you utterly
expelled. O be not the Dog returned to his vomit; be not the Sow that was
washed, returning to her wallowing in the mire. Beware least Satan enter in
with seven worse Spirits, etc. It had been better you had never known the
truth, then after knowledge to have run from it. Ah! woe to this world, and the
things therein, which has now so wrought with you. Oh that ever this Dirt of
the Devil should daub up the eye of the Realm! -- What is man whose breath is
in his nostrils, that thou should thus be afraid of him? -- Do not thou
know Rome to be Babylon? Do not thou know, that as the old Babylon had the
children of Judah in captivity, so has Rome the true Judah, i. e. the
Confessors of Christ? Do not thou know, that as destruction happened unto it,
so shall it do unto this? Do not thou know that God will deliver his people
now, when the time is come as he did then? Has not God commanded his people to
come out of her? and will thou give example to the whole Realm to run unto her?
Have thou forgotten the woe that Christ threatens to offence-givers? Wilt not
thou remember that it were better that a Millstone were hanged about thy neck,
and thou thrown into the Sea, then that thou should offend the little one?
Dear Mother, Receive some admonition of one of thy poor children, now going to
be burned for the testimony of Jesus; Come again to Gods truth, come out of
Babylon, confess Christ and his true Doctrine, repent that which is past, etc.
Remember the readings, etc. of Gods Prophet Bucer. Call to mind the threatenings
of God (now somewhat seen) by thy children, Leaver, and others. Let the exile
of Leaver, Pil^inton, Grindal, H^ddon, Horn, Scory, Ponet, etc. something awake
thee. Consider the martyrdom of thy Chickens, Rogers, Saunders, Tailor. And
now cast not away the poor admonition of me, going to be burned also, and to
receive the like Crown of Glory with my fellows. -- Even now the Axe is laid to
the Root.

Page 313.
In his Letter to Lancashire and Cheshire, etc. -- Indeed if I should simply
consider my life with that which it ought to have been, and as God in his Law
requires, then could I not but cry, as I do, Righteous art thou, O Lord, etc.
But when I consider the cause of my condemnation, I cannot but lament, that I
do no more rejoice; for it is Gods truth. So that the condemnation is not a
condemnation of Bradford simply, but rather a condemnation of Christ and his
Truth. Bradford is nothing else, but an instrument in whom Christ and his
Doctrine is condemned. And therefore, my dearly beloved, rejoice, rejoice, and
give thanks with me, and for me, that ever God did vouchsafe so great a benefit
to our Country, as to choose the most unworthy (I mean my self) to be one, in
whom it pleases him to suffer. -- Forget not how that the Lord has showed
himself true, and me his true Preacher, by bringing to pass these plagues,
which at my mouth you often heard before. -- My blood will cry for vengeance, as
against the Papists, Gods enemies, etc. so against you, if ye repent not, amend
not, and turn not unto the Lord.

In his Letter to the Town of Walden. Page 316.
-- What can you desire more, to assure your Consciences of the Verity taught
by your Preachers, then their own lives? Waver not therefore in Christ's
Religion truly taught you. Never shall the enemies be able to burn it, and
imprison it, and keep it in bonds, though they may imprison and burn us. -- I
humbly beseech you, and pray you in the bowels and blood of Jesus, now I am
going to death for the testimony of Jesus, love the Lords Truth, love (I say)
to love it, and to frame your lives thereafter. Alas! you know the cause of all
these plagues fallen upon us, and of the success, which Gods adversaries have
daily, is for our not loving Gods Word. You know how that we were but
Gospellers in lips, and not in life. -- Remember that before ye learned A.B.C.
your Lesson was Christ's Cross. Forget not that Christ will have no Disciples,
but such as will promise to deny themselves, and to take up their Cross (mark
that, take it up) and follow him, and not the multitude, custom, etc. -- Loath
would I be a witness against you at the last day, as of truth I must be, if ye
repent not, if ye love not Christ's Gospe^^

Page 317.
In his Letter to B.C. -- The world seems (...) have the upper hand, the Truth
seems to be oppressed, and they which take part therewith an unjustly
entreated. The cause of all this is God anger and mercy: His anger, because we
have grievously sinned against him, we have been un^thankful for his Word, etc.
we have been so carnal, covetous, licentious, etc. that of his Justice he could
no longer forbear, but make us feel his anger, etc. His mercy is seen in this,
that God do^^ vouchsafe to punish us in this present life. If he should not
have punished us, Do not you think we should have continued in the evils we
were in* Yes verily, we should have been worse. -- The way to Heaven is not the
wide way of the world, but it is a strait way, which few walk in; for few live
godly in Christ, few regard the Life to come, few remember the day of
Judgment, few remember how Christ will deny them before his Father, that do
deny him here, few consider that Christ-will be ashamed of them in the last
day, which are ashamed of his Truth and true Service, few cast up their
accounts, what will be laid to their charge in the day of vengeance, few regard
the condemnation of their own consciences, in doing that which they inwardly
disallow, few love God better then their goods. -- Of this I would that ye were
all certain, that all the hairs of your heads are numberless, so that not one
of them shall perish, neither shall man or Devil be able to attempt any thing,
much less do any thing to you before your heavenly Father, which loves you
most tenderly, shall give them leave; they shall go no farther then he will,
nor keep you any longer in trouble then he will. Therefore cast on him all your
care, for he is careful for you. Only study to please him, and to keep your
consciences clean, and your bodies pure from the idolatrous service, which now
every where is used, and God will marvellously and mercifully defend and
comfort you.

In his Letter to Erkinald Rawlins and his wife. Page 318.
-- First we have cause to rejoice for these days, because our Father
suffers us not to lie in Iezabel's bed, sleeping in our sins and security,
but as mindful of us, does correct us as his children. -- Secondly, because
they are days of trial, wherein not only ye your selves, but also the world
shall know, that ye be none of his, but the Lords Darlings, whom we obey his
servants we are. Now it is seen whether we obey the world or God. -- But the
trials of these days ye are occasioned more to repent, more to pray, more to
contemn this world, more to desire life everlasting, more to be holy, for holy
is the end; wherefore God does afflict us, and so to come to Gods company.

In his Letter to Mr. Laurence Saunders. Page 320.
-- A Friend having moved the Prisoners to subscribe to the Papists Articles,
with this condition, so far as they are not against Gods word. Dr. Tailor, and
Mr. Philpot think the salt sent by our Friend is unseasonable; for my own part,
I pray God in no case I may seek my self, and indeed (I thank God) I purpose it
not.

In another Letter. Page 321.
-- This will be offensive; therefore let us Vadere plane, and so sane. I mean
let us all confess we are no changlings, but re ipsa are the same we were in
Religion; and therefore cannot subscribe, except we will dissemble both with
God, with our selves, and with the world.

In his Letter to Dr. Cranmer, Dr. Ridley, and Dr. Latimer. -- Our dear brother
Rogers has broken the Ice valiantly; this day (I think) or to morrow at the
uttermost, hearty Hooper, sincere Saunders, and trusty Tailor end their course,
and receive their Crown. The next am I, who hourly look for the Porter to open
me the Gates after them to enter into the desired Rest. God forgive me mine
unthankfulness for this exceeding great mercy. For though I justly suffer (for
I have been a great Hypocrite, etc. the Lord pardon me, yea he has done it, he
has done it indeed) yet what evil has he done? Christ, whom the Prelates
persecute, his truth, which they hate in me, has done no evil, nor deserved
death. -- O what am I Lord, that thou should thus magnify me? Is this thy
wont, to send for such a wretched Hypocrite in a fiery chariot, as thou did
for Elias?

Page 322.
In his Letter to the Lord Russel. -- Faith is reckoned, and worthily among the
greatest gifts of God, by it, as we are justified, and made Gods children; so
are we Temples and Possessours of the Holy Spirit, yea of Christ also, Ephesians. 4.
And of the Father himself, John 14. By faith we drive the Devil away, 2 Pet. 5.
We overcome the world, 1 John 5. And are already Citizens of Heaven, etc. Yet
the Apostle does match even with faith, yea, as it were prefer suffering
Persecution for Christ's sake, Phil. 1. -- Though the wisdom of the world think
of the Cross according to sense, and therefore flies from it, as from a most
great ignominy and shame; yet Gods Scholars have learned to think otherwise of
the Cross, as the Frame-house wherein God frames his Children like to his Son
Christ, the Furnace that fineth Gods gold, the Highway to Heaven, the Suit and
Livery of Gods servants, the earnest and beginning of all consolation and glory.

In his Meditation on the Commandments. Page 93, 94.
-- As the first Command teaches me as well that thou art my God, as what God
thou art; therefore of equity I should have no other Gods but thee, that is, I
should only hang on thee, trust in thee, serve thee, call on thee, obey thee,
and be thankful to thee; so because thou did reveal thy self visibly, that
thou might visibly be worshipped. The second Commandment is concerning thy
Worship, that in no point I should follow in worshipping thee the device or
intent of any man, Saint, Angel, or Spirit, but should take all such as
idolatry, and image-service, be it never so glorious. And why? forsooth because
thou would I should worship thee as thou have appointed by thy Word; for if
service be acceptable it must be according to the Will of him, to whom it is
done, and not of him who does it, etc. So that the meaning of this Precept is,
that as in the first I should have none other Gods but thee, so I should have
no worship of thee, Page 198.
but such as thou appointest -- And therefore utterly abandon mine own will and
reason, all the reasons and good intents of man, and wholly give my self to
serve thee after thy will and word. -- Thou bidst me not to take thy Name in
vain, Page 98, 99.
as by temerarious, or vain swearing, etc. So by denying thy truth and word, or
concealing it, when occasion is offered to promote thy glory, and confirm thy
truth. By reason whereof I may well see, that thou would have me to use my
tongue in humble confessing thee, Page 113, 114.
and thy word, and truth after my Vocation, etc. -- Thy Ministers I pray not
for, This was his Meditation in Queen Marie 's time.
thy Church I am not careful for, no not now (good Lord) when wicked Doctrine
most prevails, Idolatry, Superstition, and Abomination abound, the
Sacraments, etc. blasphemously corrupted, etc. all which my wickedness brought
in, my profaning of the fourth Commandment, and my not praying. Thy Ministers
are in Prison, dispersed in other Countries, spoiled, burnt, murdered, many
fall (for fear of goods, life, name, etc.) from the truth they have received to
most manifest idolatry, false Preachers abound among the people, thy people
dearly bought, even with thy blood, are not fed with the bread of thy Word, but
with swillings and drink for swine. Antichrist wholly prevails, and yet for
all this also I am too careless, nothing lamenting my sins, which have been the
cause of all this. -- Help thy Church, cherish it, Page.115, 116.
and give it harbor here and elsewhere for Christ's sake. Purge the Ministry
from corruption, and false M^ni^ters. Send out Preachers to feed thy people.
Destroy Antichrist and all his Kingdom. Give to such as be fallen from thy
truth, repentance. Keep others from falling, and by their falling do thou the
more confirm us Confirm thy M^nisters and poor people in Prison and Exile.
Strengthen them in thy truth. Deliver them if it be thy good will. Give them
that with conscience they may so answer their Adversaries that thy servants may
rejoice, and thy Adversarie^ be confounded. Avenge thou thy own cause (^ thou
God of Hosts) Help all thy people, and m^^ especially, Page 146, 147.
because I have most need. -- Set my heart strait in case of Religion, to
acknowledg^ thee one God, to worship none other God, to re^verence thy Name,
and keep thy Sabbaths. Set m^ heart right in matters of humane conversation, t^
honor my Parents, to obey Rulers, and reverenc^ the Ministry of the Word, to
have hands clea^ from blood, true from theft, a body free from A^dultery, and a
tongue void of all offense, but purge the heart first O Lord, etc. --

In his Meditation concerning the sober usage of the body, Page 184, 185.
and the pleasures of this life. -- O that I could consider often and heartily
that this body God has made to be the tabernacle and mansion of our soul for
this life; but by reason of sin dwelling in it; is become now to the soul
nothing else but a prison, and that most strait, vile, stinking, filthy, etc.
Then should I not pamper up my body to obey it, but bridle it that it may obey
the soul; then should I fly the pain it puts my soul unto by reason of sin
and provocation to all evil, and continually desire the dissolution of it, with
Paul, and the deliverance from it, as much as ever did prisons his deliverance
out of prison, for alonely by it the Devil has a door to tempt and so to hurt
me. -- If it were dissolved, and I out of it, then could Satan no more hurt me,
then would thou speak unto me face to face, then the conflicting time were at
an end, then sorrow would cease, and joy would increase, and I should enter
into inestimable rest. --

In his Meditation for exercise of true mortification. Page 189, 190.
-- He that will be ready in weighty matters to deny his own will, and to be
obedient to the will of God, the same had need to accustom himself to deny his
desires in matters of less weight, and to exercise mortification of his will in
trifles. -- If we cannot watch with Christ one hour (as he says to Peter) we
undoubtedly can much less go to death with him. Wherefore, that in great
temptations we may be ready to say with Christ, Not my will but thine be done,
etc. Help me to accustom my self continually to mortify my concupiscence of
pleasant things, i. e. of wealth, riches, glory, liberty, favor of men, meats,
drink, apparel, ease, yea and life it self, etc. --

Page 192, 193.
In his Meditation of Gods Providence. -- This ought to be unto us most certain,
that nothing i^ done without thy Providence O lord, i. e. without thy
Knowledge, i. e. without thy Will, Wisdom, and Ordinance, for all these
Knowledge does comprehend in it, etc. --

This will we must believe most assurely to be^ all just and good, howsoever
otherwise it seem so unto us. -- But though all things be done by thy
Providence, yet Providence has many and divers^ means to work by, which means
being contemned, thy Providence is contemned also. Page 194.
-- Indeed when means cannot be had, then should we not tie thy Providence to
means, but make it free as thou art free; for it is not of any need, that thou
usest any instrument or mean to serve thy Providence. Thy Power and Wisdom is
infinite, and therefore should we hang on thy Providence even when all is clean
against us. -- Grant (Dear Father) that I may use this knowledge to my comfort
and commodity in thee; i. e. Grant that in what state soever I be, Page 195.
I may not doubt but the same does come to me by thy most just Ordinance; yea,
by thy merciful Ordinance; for as thou art just, and thou art merciful, yea,
thy mercy is above all thy works. -- Look for thy help in time convenient, not
only when I have means, by which thou may work, and art so accustomed to
do, but also when I have no means, but am destitute; yea, when all means be
directly and clean against me, grant (I say) yet that I may still hang on thee,
and on thy Providence, not doubting of a Fatherly end in thy good time. And
least I should contemn thy Providence, or presuming upon it by uncoupling those
things which thou have coupled together, preserve me from neglecting thy
ordinary and lawful means in all my needs; Page 196.
if so be I may have them, and with a good conscience use them, although I know
thy Providence be not tied to them farther then pleases thee. -- Howbeit so,
that I depend in no part on the means, or on my diligence, wisdom, and
industry, but on thy Providence, which more and more persuade me to be
altogether fatherly, and good, how far soever, otherwise it appear, yea is felt
of me. Page 197, 198.


In his Meditation of Gods presence. -- There is nothing that makes more to
true godliness of life, then the persuasion of thy presence. (Dear Father, and
that nothing is hid from thee, but all to thee is open and naked, even the very
thoughts which one day thou will reveal, either to our praise or punishment in
this life, as thou did David's faults, 2 King. 12. or in the life to come,
Mat. 25. Grant to me (Dear God) mercy for all my sins, especially my hid and
close sins, etc. and that henceforth I always think my self conversant before
thee, so that if I do well, I pass not the publishing of it, as Hypocrites do,
if I do or think any evil, I may know that the same shall not always be hid
from men. Grant me that I may always have in mind that day wherein all my
works shall be revealed, so in trouble and wrong I shall find comfort, and
otherwise be kept through thy grace from evil.

In his Meditation of God's power, beauty, and goodness. Page 199.
-- Because thou Lord would have us to love thee, not only do thou will,
entice, allure, and provoke us, but also do command us so to do, promising
thy self unto such as love thee, and threatening us with damnation if we do
otherwise, whereby we may see both our great corruption and naughtiness, and
also thine exceeding great mercy toward us. -- What a thing is it, that power,
riches, authority, beauty, goodness, liberality, truth, justice, which all thou
art, good Lord, cannot move us to love thee? whatsoever things we see fair,
good, wise, mighty, are but even sparkles of thy power, beauty, goodness,
wisdom, which thou art. --

Page 202, 203.
In his Meditation of death, etc -- O Dear Father. -- That our hearts were
persuaded that when we go out of the prison of the body, and so taken into thy
blessed company then. -- Whatsoever good we can wish we shall have, and
whatsoever we loath, shall be far from us, etc. Then should we live in longing
for that which we now most loath. -- If we remember the good things that after
this life shall ensue, Page 204.
without wavering in the certainty of faith, the passage of death shall be the
more desired. It is like a sailing over the sea to thy home and country: it is
like a medicine or purgation to the health of the soul and body: It is the best
Physician. It is like a woman in travail; for as the child (being delivered)
comes into a more large place then the womb, wherein it did lie before, so the
soul being delivered out of the body, comes into a much more large and ^air
place, even into Heaven. --

Page 224, 225.
In his Prayer for the remission of sins. -- O gracious God, who seek all
means possible how to bring thy children to the feeling, and sure sense of thy
mercy; and therefore when prosperity will not serve, then sendest thou
adversity, graciously correcting them here, whom thou will shall with thee
elsewhere live for ever. We poor Misers give humble praises and thanks to thee
(Dear Father) that thou have vouchsafed us worthy of thy correction at this
present, hereby to work that which we in prosperity and liberty did neglect.
For the which neglecting, and many other our grievous sins, whereof we now
accuse our selves before thee (most merciful Lord) thou might have most
justly given us over, and destroyed both souls and bodies. But such is thy
goodness toward us in Christ, that thou seem to forget all our offenses,
and -- wilt that we should suffer this Cross now laid upon us for thy Truth and
Gospels sake, and so to be thy witnesses with the Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs,
and Confessors, yea with thy dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ to whom thou do
now here begin to fashion us like, Page 226.
that in his glory we may be like him also. O good God, what are we on whom
thou should show this great mercy? O loving Lord, forgive us our
unthankfulness and sins. O faithful Father, give us thy holy Spirit now to cry
in our hearts, Abba, dear Father, to assure us of our eternal election in
Christ, to reveal more and more thy Truth unto us, to confirm, strengthen, and
stablish us so in the same, that we may live and die in it as Vessels of thy
mercy, to thy glory, and to the commodity of thy Church. Indue us with the
Spirit of thy wisdom, that with good conscience we may always so answer the
enemies in thy cause, as may turn to their conversion, or confusion, and our
unspeakable consolation in Jesus Christ, for whose sake we beseech thee
henceforth to keep us to give us patience, and to will none otherwise for
deliverance or mitigation of our misery, then may stand always with thy good
pleasure and merciful will toward us. Grant this, dear Father, not only to us
in this place, but also to all others elsewhere afflicted for thy Names sake,
through the death and merit of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

See the godly Meditations of Mr. John Bradford. p. 415.
In his godly Meditations. -- We are rather to be placed among the wicked, then
among thy children, for that we are so shameless for our sin, and careless for
thy wrath, which we may well say to be most grievous against us, and evidently
set forth in the taking away of our good King, and the true Religion, in the
exile of thy Servants, imprisonment of thy People, misery of thy Children, and
death of thy Saints: and by placing over us in authority thine enemies, by the
success thou gave them in all that they took in hand, by the returning again
into our Country of Antichrist the Pope. -- What shall we do? what shall we
say? who can give us penitent hearts? who can open our lips, that our mouths
might make acceptable confession unto thee? -- O what now may we do? Page 6.
Despair? no, for thou art God, and therefore good; thou art merciful, and
therefore thou forgivest sins, with thee is mercy and propitiation; and
therefore thou art worshipped. When Adam had sinned, thou gave him mercy
before he desired it, and will thou deny us mercy, which now desire the same?
Page 7.
Adam excused his fault, and accused thee, but we accuse our selves, and excuse
thee, and shall we be sent empty away? -- Abraham was pulled out of Idolatry,
when the world was drowned therein, and art thou his God only? Israel in
captivity in Egypt was graciously visited and delivered, and dear God, that
same good Lord, shall we always be forgotten? How often in the wilderness
did thou defer and spare thy plagues at the request of Moses, when the people
themselves made no Petition to thee; and seeing we do not only make our
Petitions to thee, but also have a Mediator for us, now far above Moses, even
Jesus Christ, shall we (I say) dear Lord, depart ashamed? Page 11.
-- Take into thy custody and governance for ever our souls and bodies, our
lives, and all that ever we have. Tempt us never further then thou will make us
able to bear, and -- always as thy children guide us, so that our life may
please thee, and our deaths praise thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord, for
whose sake we heartily pray thee to grant these things, etc. not only to us,
but, etc. especially for thy children, that be in thraldom under their
enemies, in exile, in prison, poverty, Page 12.
etc. Be merciful to all the whole Realm of England, grant us all true
repentance, and mitigation of our misery. And if it be thy good will, that thy
holy Word and Religion may continue amongst us. Pardon our Enemies,
Persecutors, and Slanderers, and if it be thy pleasure turn their hearts. Page
49.
-- Oh mighty King and most High, Almighty God, who mercifully governest all
things which thou have made, look down upon the faithful seed of Abraham, etc.
consecrated to thee by the anointing of thy holy Spirit, and appointed to thy
Kingdom by thy eternal purpose, free mercy, and grace, but yet as strangers
wandering in this vile vile of misery, brought forth daily by worldly Tyrants
like Sheep to the slaughter. -- Thou have destroyed Pharaoh with all his Horse
and Chariots, puffed up with pride against thy people, leading forth safely by
the hands of thy mercy thy beloved Israel through the high waves of the roaring
waters. Page 50.
Thou O God, the Lord of all Hosts and Armies did first drive away from the
Gates of thy people the blasphemous Senacherib, slaying of his Army 85000 by
the Angel in one night, and after by his own Sons before his Idols did kill
the same blasphemous Idolater, etc. Thou did transfor^ and change proud
Nebuchadnezzar, the enemy o^ thy people, into a bruit beast, to eat grass and
hay^ to the horrible terror of all worldly Tyrants, etc. Thou did preserve
those thy three Servants i^ Babylon, who with bold courage gave their bodies to
the fire, because they would not worship any dead Idol, and when they were cast
into the burning Furnace thou did give them cheerful hearts to rejoice and
sing Psalms, Page 51.
and saved^^ unhurt the very hairs of their heads, turn^ng the flame from them
to devour their enemies. Thou O Lord God by the might of thy right arm, which
governs all, broughtest Daniel thy Prophet safe into light and life forth of
the dark Den of the devouring Lions, Page 52.
etc. -- Now also, O heavenly Father, beholder of all things, to whom belongs
vengeance, thou see and con^iderest how thy holy Name by the wicked
Worldlings, and blasphemons Idolaters is dishonored, thy sacred Word forsaken,
refused, and despised, thy holy Spirit provoked, offended, thy chosen Temple
polluted and defiled. Tarry not too long therefore, but show thy power speedily
upon thy chosen Household, which is so grievously vexed, and so cruelly handled
by thy open enemies. Avenge thine own glor^, and shorten these evil days for
thine Elects sake. Let thy Kingdom come of all thy Servants desired, and
though we have all offended thy Majesty, Page 53.
-- Yet for thine own glory (O merciful Lord) suffer not the enemy of thy Son
Christ, the Romish Antichrist, thus wretchedly to delude and draw from thee our
poor brethren, for whom thy Son once died, that by his cruelty, after so clear
light, they they should be made Captives to dumb Idols and devilish inventions
of Popish Ceremonies thereunto pertaining. Suffer him not to seduce the simple
sort with this fond opinion, that his false gods, blind, mumbling, feigned
Religion, or his foolish Superstition does give him such conquest, such
victories, such triumph, and so high an hand over us. Page 54.
We know most certainly, O Lord, that it is not their arm and power, but our
sins and offenses, that has delivered us to their fury, and has caused thee
to turn away from us: But turn again, O Lord, let us fall into thine hands,
etc. least these vain Idolaters do rejoice at the miserable destruction of
those men whom they make Proselvtes, and from thy Doctrine Apostates. But O
Lord, thy will be fulfilled, this is thy righteous judgment to punish us with
the tyrannical yoke of blindness, because we have cast away from us the sweet
yoke of the wholesome Word of thy Son our Savior. Yet consider the horrible
blasphemies of thine and our enemies. Page 55.
-- They say in their hearts there is no God, which either can or will deliver
us: Wherefore, O heavenly Father, the Governor of all things, the Avenger of
the Causes of the poor, the fatherless, the widow, and the oppressed, look down
from Heaven with the face of thy fatherly mercies, and forgive us all former
offenses, and for thy Son Jesus Christ's sake have mercy upon us; who by the
force and cruelty of wicked and blasphemous Idolaters, (without causes
approved) are haled and pulled from our own houses, are slandered, slain, and
murdered as Rebels and Traitors, like persons pernicious, pestiferous,
seditious, pestilent, and full of mortal poison, to all men contagious; whereas
we do meddle no farther but against the hellish powers of darkness, etc. which
would deny the will of our Christ unto us, we do contend no farther but only
for our Christ Crucified, and the only salvation by (...) blessed Passion.
Page 56.
-- Therefore (O Lord) for (...) glorious Names sake, for Jesus Christ's sake,
etc. make the wicked Idolaters to wonder and stan^ amazed at thy Almighty
power. Use thy wonte^ strength to the confusion of thine enemies, and (...) the
help and deliverance of thy persecuted people* All thy Saints do beseech thee
therefore: The young Infants (which have some deal tasted of thy sweet Word) by
whose mouths thou have promised to make perfect thy praises, whose Angels do
always behold thy face, who besides the loss of us their Parents, are in danger
to be compelled and driven (without thy great mercies) to serve dumb and
insensible Idols, do cry and call unto thee: Their pitiful Mothers, with
lamentable tears lie prostrate before the Throne of thy Grace. Page 57.
Thou Father of the fatherless, Judge of the widows, and Avenger of all the
oppressed, Let it appear, O Lord Omnipotent, that thou do here Judge, Avenge,
and punish all wrongs offered to all thy little Ones that do believe in thee.
Do this, O Lord, For thy Names sake. Arise up, O Lord, and thine enemies shall
be scattered and confounded. So be it. O Lord most merciful, at thy time
appointed.

Brown.
Fox, Vol. 2. page 649.
John Brown told his wife (as he sat in the Stocks) that the Archbishop had
burnt his feet to the bones, so as he could not set them upon the ground, and
all to make them deny Christ, which (said he) I will never do; for if I should
deny him in this world, he would deny me hereafter.

Fox, Vol. 3. page 630.
Thomas Brown being brought forth to be condemned, Bonner said to him, Brown,
you have been before me many times, and I have took much pains to win thee from
thine errors, yet thou and such like have, and do report that I go about to
seek thy blood. Yea my Lord, (said Brown) indeed you be a Blood-sucker; and I
would I had as much blood as there is water in the Sea for you to suck.

Bruger.
A Friar offering John Bruger, Ward, page 155.
a foreign Martyr, a Wooden Cross at the Stake, No (said he) I have another
true Cross imposed on me, which now I will take up. I worship not the work of
man's hands, but the Son of God. I am content with him for my only Advocate.

Bruise.
I thank God (said Peter Bruise) my broken Leg suffered me not to fly this
Martyrdom. Page 159.


Buisson.
I shall now have (said John Buisson) a double Jail-delivery; Ward, page 160.
one out of my sinful flesh, another from the loathsome Dungeon I have long
lain in.

Burgins.
Lord (said Annas Burgins in the midst of his torments) forsake me not, Page
157.
least I forsake thee.

Burgon.
John Burgon to his Judges, Page 156.
asking him if he would appeal to the High-Court, answered, Is it not enough
that your hands are polluted with blood, but you will make more guilty of it?

Barnes.
When Dr. Barnes was brought before Cardinal Wolsey, See his Life and
Martyrdom before his Works, set forth by Mr. Fox.
He told him, he thought it necessary that his Golden Shoos, and Golden
Cushions, etc. should be sold and given to the poor, for that such things were
not comely for his Calling, neither was the Kings Majesty maintained by his
Pomp, but by God, who says, By me Kings reign.

When the Cardinal would have had him to re^fer himself to him, promising him
Favor, he an^swered, I will stick to the Holy Scripture, and t^ Gods Book,
according to the simple Talent tha^ God has lent me.

Being called before the Bishops and Abbot o^ Westminster, who demanded of him,
whether h^ would abjure or burn, he was in a great agony and then thought
rather to burn then to abjure* but persuaded by Gardener and Fox, because they
said he should do more good in time to come, He abjured, and carried his Faggot
to Paul's.

After they had long detained him in Prison notwithstanding, upon notice given
him of their intentions to burn him, notwithstanding his abjuration, he escaped
out of England into Germany, where he made his supplication to King Henry the
Eighth, against the Lordly Bishops and Prelates of England, for the
intolerable injuries, wrongs, and oppressions wherewith they had vexed not
only himself, but all true Preachers of Gods Word, and Professors of the same,
contrary to the Word of God, and their own Laws and Doctors. -- I do not
believe (says he) that ever God will suffer long so great Tyranny against his
Word, and so violent Oppressions of Christians, as they now use, and that in
the Name of Christ and his Holy Church. -- Now it is come to that, that whoever
he be, high or low, poor or rich, wise or foolish, that speaks against them
and their vicious living, he is either made a Traitor to your Grace, or an
Heretic against Holy Church, as though they were Kings or Gods. -- If there be
any men, that Preach, Dispute, or put forth in Writing not any thing touching
them, though it be never so blasphemous against God, the Blood of Christ, and
his Holy Word, they will not once be moved therewith, -- But if any man speak
against their Cloaked Hypocrisy, or against any thing belonging to them, by
which their abominations are disclosed, nothing can excuse, but he must either
to open shame, or cruel death, and that under the accusation of Treason. But
who is he that would be a Traitor, or maintain a Traitor against your Majesty?
Sure no man can do it without the great displeasure of the eternal God. The
Doctrine of the Gospel teaches all obedience to Rulers, and not Sedition; and
such as have preached the Word of God only, have never been the movers of
disobedience or rebellion against Princes, but they have been ready to suffer
with all patience whatsoever Tyranny any Power would minister unto them, giving
all people example to do the same; whereas the Papists exempt the Pope and
Priests from being bound to obey Magistrates. Yea, as to the people they teach,
that the words requiring Subjection are a Counsel, and not a Command; and that
the Popes Authority is sufficient to Dispense with all the Commandments of God.
-- Wherefore most gracious Prince, I lowly and merely desire your Majesty to
Judge between the Bishops and me, which of us is truest faithfullest to God and
to your Majesty.

The following Articles were some of Dr. Barnes his Position in his Sermon,
which the Bishops condemned for Heresy. (1) If thou believe that thou art more
bound to serve God to morrow, which is Christmas day, or on Easter day, or on
Whitsunday, for any holiness that is in one day more then another, thou art
superstitious. (2) Now dare no man preach the Truth and the very Gospel of God,
especially they that be feeble and fearful; but I trust, yea I pray to God,
that it may shortly come that false and manifest errors may be plainly showed,
etc. (3) We make now adays Martyrs, I tru^^ we shall have many more shortly;
for the Verity could never be preached plainly, but persecution followed. (6) I
will never believe, neither can I believe that one man may be by the Law of God
(...) Bishop of two or three Cities, yea of a whole Country; Tit. 1.
for it is contrary to Saint Paul, who says, I have left thee behind to set in
every City a Bishop. (7) It cannot be proved by Scripture that a man of the
Church should have so great temporal possessions. (8) Sure I am, that they
cannot by the Law of God have any Jurisdiction secular. (9) They say they be
the Successors of Christ and his Apostles, but I can see them follow none but
Judas; for they bear the purse and have all the money.

To burn me or to destroy me (says he in his Defense of the Two and twentieth
Article) cannot so greatly profit them; for when I am dead, the Sun, and the
Moon, and the Stars, and the Elements, yea and also Stones shall defend this
Cause against them, rather then the Verity should perish. -- As for me I do
promise them here by this present Writing, and by the fidelity I owe to my
Prince, that if they will be bound to our noble Prince, after the manner of his
Law, and after good conscience and right, that they shall do me no violence,
nor wrong, but discuss and dispute these Articles, and all other that I have
written after the holy Word of God, and by Christ's holy Scripture with me, then
will I (as soon as I may know it) present my self unto our most noble Prince to
prove these things by Gods Word against you all. --

He also writ unto King Henry the Eighth an excellent Treatise to prove from
the Scriptures of Truth, and out of the Writings of the Fathers, that faith
only justifies before God. Prefacing it thus, Now if your Grace do not take
upon you to hear the Disputation of this Article out of the ground of holy
Scripture, my Lords the Bishops will condemn it, before they read it, as their
manner is to do with all things, that please them not, and which they
understand not, and then cry they, Heresy, Heresy, an Heretic, an Heretic,
he ought not to be heard, etc.

He writ also several other Treatises, as what the Church is, what the Keys of
the Church be, and to whom they were given. Against free will, that it is
lawful for all men to read the holy Scriptures, that men's constitutions, which
are not grounded in Scripture, bind not the Conscience, etc. In which Treatise
he tells us, there be two manners of Powers; a Temporal, and a Spiritual Power.
The Temporal is committed to Magistrates; in this Power the King is chief and
full Ruler, etc. Unto this Power must we be obedient in all things that pertain
to the ministration of this present life, and of the Commonwealth, not only
for avoiding of punishment, but for conscience sake. So that if this Power
command any thing of Tyranny against right and law (always provided it repugne
not against the Gospel, nor destroy our Faith) our Charity must needs suffer
it. -- Nevertheless if he command thee any thing against right, or do thee any
wrong, if thou can by any reasonable and quiet means* without sedition,
insurrection, or breaking of the common Peace save thy self, or avoid his
Tyranny, thou may do it with good Conscience. -- But in no wise may thou
make any resistance with sword or with hand, but obey, except thou can avoid
as I have showed thee. -- But now it will be enquired, if it please the King to
condemn the New Testament in English, and to command that none of his Subjects
shall have it under displeasure, whether they be bound to obey this Command or
no? To this he answers (having showed why the King should not lay any such
Command on his Subjects) If the King forbid the New Testament, or any of
Christ's Sacraments, or the preaching of the Word of God, or any other thing
that is against Christ, under a temporal pain, or under the pain of death, men
should first make faithful prayers to God, and then intercede the King for a
release of the Command. If he will not do it, they shall keep their Testament,
with all other Ordinances of Christ, and let the King exercise his Tyranny (if
they cannot flee) and in no wise under pain of damnation shall they withstand
him with violence, but suffer patiently, and leave the Vengeance of it to their
heavenly Father, which has a scourge to tame those Bedlams with, when he sees
his time: Neither shall they deny Christ's Verity, nor forsake it before the
Prince, lest they run the danger of being denied by Christ before his Father.
-- This may be proved by the examples of the Apostles, when the High Priests of
the Temple commanded Peter and John that they should no more Preach and Teach
in the Name of Jesus: Acts 4. and 5.
They made them answer, It was more right to obey God then man. Also the
Pharisees came and commanded our Master Christ in Herod's Name to depart from
thence under pain of death: But he would not obey, but bid them go tell that
Wolf, Behold I cast out Devils, Luke 13.
etc. Nevertheless I must continue this day, to morrow, and the next day, etc.
So that he left not the Ministration of the Word for the Kings pleasure, nor
yet for fear of death. The three Children also would not obey the Kings command
against Gods Word. Dan. 3.
Daniel would not leave off Prayer, Dan. 6.
though commanded by the King. -- So that Christians are bound to obey in
suffering the Kings Tyranny, but not in consenting to his unlawful Command,
Always having before their eyes, the comfortable saying of our Master Christ,
Fear not them that can only kill the body; Mat. 10.
and that of Peter, Happy are ye if ye suffer for righteousness sake, etc. --
As for the Spiritual Power, it has no authority to make Statutes or Laws to
order the World by, but only faithfully and truly to preach the Word, not
adding thereto, nor taking therefrom. -- If these Ministers will of Tyranny,
above the Word of God, make any Law or Statute, it must be considered, whether
it be openly and directly against the Word of God, and to the destruction of
the Faith, etc. such Statutes men are not bound for to obey, neither of
Charity, (for here Faith is hurt, which gives no place to Charity) nor for
avoiding of slander, etc. The more that men be offended at the Word, and the
stiffer they be against it, the more openly and plainly, yea and that to their
faces, that make such Statutes, must we resist them with these words, We are
more bound to obey God then man. -- The other manner of Statutes be when
certain things, that be called indifferent, be commanded to be done of
necessity, etc. Here must they also be withstood, and in no wise obeyed; for in
this is our Faith hurt, and liberty of Christianity, etc. and therefore must
withstand them that will take this liberty from us, with this Text of
Scripture, 1 Cor. 7.
We are bought with the price of Christ's blood, we will not be the servants of
men. This Text is open against them, that will bind men^ Consciences in those
things that Christ has left them free in. Gal. 2.
Of this we have an evident example in Paul, who would not circumcise Titus,
when the false Brethren would have compelled him thereunto, as a thing of
necessity. -- It is plain, that by Christ we are made free, and nothing can
bind us to sin, but his Word. --

At the Stake Dr. Barnes began with this Protestation following: I am come
hither to be burned as an Heretic, and you shall hear my belief, whereby you
shall perceive what erroneous opinions I hold. -- I believe in the holy and
blessed Trinity, three Persons and one God, that cteated and made all the
World, and that this blessed Trinity sent down the Second Person Jesus Christ
into the womb of the most blessed and purest Virgin Mary, etc. I believe that
without the consent of man's will or power, he was conceived by the Holy Ghost,
and took flesh of her, and that he suffered hunger, thirst, cold, and other
passions of our body, (sin except) etc. And I do believe that he lived here
among us, and after he had preached and taught his Fathers Will, he suffered
the most bitter and cruel Death for me and all mankind. And I do believe that
this his Death and Passion was the sufficient Price and Ransom for the sin of
all the World; And I do believe that through his Death he overcame the Devil,
Sin, Death, and Hell, and that there is none other satisfaction unto the
Father, but this his Death and Passion only; and that no work of man did
deserve any thing of God, but only his Passion, as touching our justification;
for I acknowledge the best work that ever I did is impure and unperfect.
(Herewithal he cast abroad his Arms, and desired God to forgive him his
Trespasses) Wherefore I trust in no good work that ever I did, but only in the
Death of Christ, and I do not doubt but through him to inherit the Kingdom of
Heaven. -- The Sheriff hastening him to make an end, he turned to the people
and desired all men to forgive him, and if he had said any evil at any time
unadvisedly, whereby he had offended any man, or given any occasion of evil,
that they would forgive it him, and amend that evil they took of him, and to
bear witness, that he detested and abhorred all evil Opinions and Doctrines
against the Word of God, and that he died in the Faith of Jesus Christ, by whom
he doubted not to be saved.

Bressius.
If Gods Spirit say true, Ward, page 152.
I shall straight rest from my labors. My soul is even taking her wings to
fly to her resting place.

Brez.
A Lady visiting Mr. Guy de Brez, Fox, Vol. 3. C^^. p. 37.
a French Minister, Prisoner in the Castle of Tournay, told him, She wondered
how he could either eat, or drink, or sleep in quiet; for were I in your case
(said she) the very terror thereof would go ^igh to kill me. O Madam (said he)
the good Cause, for which I suffer, and that inward Peace of Conscience,
wherewith God has endued me, makes me eat and drink with greater content, then
mine enemies can, which seek my life. Yea so far off is it, that my bonds or
chains do any way terrify me, or break off my sleep, that on the contrary, I
glory and take delight therein, esteeming them at an higher rate, then Chains
and Rings of Gold, or any other Jewels of price whatsoever. Ye^ when I hear the
rattling of my Chains, methinks I hear some Instrument of Music sounding in
mine ears: not that such an effect comes merely from my Chains, but in regard I
am bound therewith for maintaining the truth of the Gospel.

In his Letter to his Wife. -- These thought came at first thronging into my
head. What mean we to go so many in company together as we did? Had it not been
for such and such, we had never been discovered, or taken. But meditating on
the Providence of God, my heart began to find wonderful rest, saying thus in my
self, O my God, the day and hour of my birth was before ordained of thee, and
ever since thou have preserved and kep^ me in great perils and dangers, and
hitherto delivered me out of all. And if now the hour be come, wherein I must
pass out of this life into thy Kingdom, thy will be done. I cannot escape out
o^ thine hands; yea though I could, yet, Lord, the^ know I would not, seeing
all my felicity depends upon conforming my will to thine. -- This World is not
the place of our Rest, No, Heaven is ou^ Home, this is but the place of our
Banishment* -- Take into your consideration the honor the Lord does you, in
giving you an Husband that is not only called to be a Minister of Christ's
Gospel, but also so highly advanced of God, as to be accounted worthy to
partake of the Crown of Martyrdom. It is an honor, which the Angels in Heaven
are not capable of. -- I am here taugh^ to practice, what I have preached to
others; yea let me not be ashamed to confess, that when I heretofore preached,
I spoke but as a Parrot, in regard of that which I have now better learned by
proo^ and experience. Ward, page 161.
(All my former discourses, were as a blind man's of Colors, in comparison of
my present feeling. Oh what a precious Comforter in a good Conscience!) I have
profited more in the School-house of this Prison, then ever I did in all my
life before. -- I would not change my condition with theirs that persecute me,
though I am lodged in the vilest Prison they have, dark and obscure, where I
have no air to breath at, but a little stinking Hole, where they lay all their
Rubbish, and where the Drunkards commonly vent their Urine, and though I be
laden with Irons both on my hands and feet, eating through the flesh even to
the bare bones, etc. and that I may make no escape guarded with forty men
before the Prison door. --

When the Provost brought him tidings that he was to be burnt at Six, Page 42.
or thereabouts that day, He gave him thanks for the good News, which he had
brought him. And going to the rest of the Prisoners he said, Brethren, I am
this day to die for the Doctrine of the Gospel, and now, blessed be God, I joy
and rejoice therein. I had not thought that ever God would have done me this
honor. I feel my self replenished with joy more and more, from minute to
minute. My God adds new courage to me, and my heart leapeth for joy within me.

Then exhorting them to be of good courage, he told them it was no hard matter
to die, adding by way of acclamation, O how happy are the dead that die in the
Lord, for they rest from their labors, and their works follow them!

Beware you do nothing (said he) against a good Conscience, etc. For if you do,
you shall certainly feel such an Hell in your Consciences, as will never cease
to vex and trouble you. O my Brethren, how good a thing is it to nourish a good
Conscience! One of the Prisoners asking him, Whether he had finished a certain
work, which he had begun, He answered, No, for now I must cease to labor,
because I am passing along to the heavenly rest.

The time of my departing is at hand, I go to reap that in Heaven, which I have
^own on Earth I have fought a good fight, I am at the point of finishing my
course, from henceforth the Crown of Glory is laid up for me, which the Lord,
the righteous Judge shall give unto me.

Methinks (said he with a joyful and smiling countenance) that my spirit has
obtained wings to sore aloft into Heaven, being invited to the marriage Supper
of the Lamb.

The Provost coming in with Bands, Mr. Guy bid him welcome, and gave him thanks
again for his good news. The Provost replying that it grieved him much that
things should be carried so, Mr. Guy joyfully answered, I accept of you as my
good Friend, I love you with all my heart.

C.
Caesar.
Ward, page 158.
O Lord (said Leonard Caesar) do thou suffer with me, Lord, support me, and save
me.

Caigneola.
Page 150, 151.
Michaela Caigneola, a noble Matron, seeing her Judges look out of the Windows,
said to her fellow Martyrs, These stay to suffer the torments of their
Consciences, and are reserved to judgment, but we are going to glory and
happiness.

When certain poor women wept and cried, O Madam, we shall never now have more
Alms; Yes hold (said she) yet once more, and plucked of her Slippers, and such
other of her Apparel, as she could with modesty spare from the fire.

Calberg.
Page 153.
I believe (said Thomas Calberg to the Friars, willing him to repent at the last
hour) that I am one of those workmen in Christ's vineyard, and shall presently
receive my penny.

Calocerius.
He seeing the great patience of Faustinus and Iolita, Fox, Vol. 1. page 53.
Citizens of Briria, in their very great torments, cried out, Vere magnus est
Deus Christianorum, Verily great is the God of Christians. Which words being
heard, caused him forthwith to be apprehended, and martyred with those two
famous Christians.

Cane.
When a fool's cap was put on Alexander Cane's head; Ward, page 159.
Can I have (said he) a greater honor done me, then to be served as my Lord
Christ before Herod? Lord, seeing my persecutours have no mercy, have thou
mercy on me, and receive my soul.

Canesire.
There is one Passage in your Letter (said Claude de la Canesire, The Mirror
of Martyrs, page 575.
in a Letter to his Wife from Lions) which does not a little comfort me,
namely, that albeit you are loath to leave me, yet you had rather have no
husband at all, then to have one that should betray the cause of Christ.

Cardmaker.
Mr. John Cardmaker, Fox. Vol. 3. page 250.
burnt in Smithfield, 1555. in a Letter to a Friend writes thus. You shall
right well perceive, that I am not gone back as some men do report me, but as
ready to give my life as any of my Brethren, that are gone before me. -- That
day, that I recant any point of Doctrine, I shall suffer twenty kinds of death,
the Lord being my assistance, as I doubt not, but he will. -- I have learned to
rejoice in poverty, as well as riches, for that I count now to be very riches.
-- I have conferred with some of my learned Adversaries, and I find they are
but Sophisters and shadows.

Careless.
Fox, Vol. 3. page 713.
John Careless of Coventry, Weaver, being wished by Dr. Martin to play the wise
man's part, to save that which God has bought. I thank you Sir (said he) and I
put you out of doubt, that I am most sure and certain of my salvation by Jesus
Christ, so that my soul is safe already, whatsoever pains my body suffers here
for a little time. Art thou so predestined to life (said the Doctor) that
thou can no^ perish in whatsoever opinion thou do die. That God has
predestined me to eternal life in Jesus Christ (said he) I am most certain,
and even so I am sure that his Holy Spirit (wherewith I am sealed) will so
preserve me from all Heresies, and evil opinions, that I shall die in none at
all.

When the Dr. told him that he was a goodly tall man, and might do the Queen
good service in Ireland; He said, wheresoever I am, I am ready to her Grace the
best service I can with body, goods, and life, and if she, or any under require
me to do any thing contrary to Christ's true Religion, I am ready also to do
service in Smithfield, as my Bedfellows and other Brethren have done, praised
be God for them.

Page 715.
In his Letter to Mr. Philpot. -- Ah my true loving Friends, how soon did you
lay aside all other business to make a sweet plaster for my wounded
conscience, yea, and that out of a painful pair of Stocks, which place must
needs be uneasy to write in! But God has brought you in a strait place, that
you might set my soul at liberty. -- Ah good Jeremy, has Phassur put thee into
the Stocks: why now thou have the right reward of a Prophet. -- Though you lie
in the dark, slurred with the Bishops black coal-dust, yet shall you shortly be
made as white as snow in Salmon, and as the wings of a Dove that is covered
with silver, and her feathers like gold. You know the Vessel before it be made
bright, is soiled with oil and other things, that it may scour the better. O
happy be you that you be now in the scouring house, for shortly you shall be
set on the celestial shelf, as bright as Angels. -- My old Friends of Coventry
have put the Counsel in remembrance of me not six days ago, saying, I am more
worthy to be burnt then any that has been burned yet. God's blessing on their
hearts for their good report. God make me worthy of that dignity, and hasten
the time, that I may set forth his glory. -- Blessed be the time that ever I
came into the Kings Bench to be joined in love and fellowship with such dear
children of the Lord.

In his Letter to his Wife. Page 716.
-- Are not two sparrows (says Christ) sold fer a farthing, and yet not one of
them shall perish without the will of your Heavenly Father, etc. As though he
should have said, if God has such respect and care for a poor sparrow, which
is not worth one farthing, it shall not be taken in the lime-twig, net, or
pitfall, until it be his good will and pleasure: you may be well assured, that
not one of you (whom he so dearly loves, that he has given his only dear Son
for you) shall perish or depart forth of this miserable life, without his good
will and pleasure. -- Let not the remembrance of children keep you from God.
The Lord himself will be a Father and a Mother better then ever yo^^ or I could
have been unto them. He himself will do all things necessary for them, yea as
much as rock the cradle, if need be.

Page 717.
In his Letter to Mr. Bradford. -- If we had been thanful to God for the good
Ministers of his Word, we had not so soon been deprived both of it and them. --
Take not away all thy true Preachers forth of this Realm (O Lord) but leave us
a seed, least England be made like unto Sodom and Gomorrah when thy true Lots
be gone. -- Hearken O Heavens, and then Earth give ear, and bear me witness at
the great Day, that I do here faithfully and truly the Lord's message to his
dear Servant, to his singularly beloved and elect child John Bradford. John
Bradford, thou man so specially beloved of God, I pronounce and testify unto
thee in the Name of the Lord Jehovah, that all thy sins whatsoever they be, be
they never so many, so grievous, or so great, be fully and freely pardoned,
released, and forgiven thee, by the mercy of God in Jesus Christ thine only
Lord and sweet Savior, in whom thou do undoubtedly believe. Christ has
cleansed thee with his blood, and clothed thee with his Righteousness, and
has made thee in the sight of God his Father without spot or wrinckle, so that
when the fire does his appointed office, thou shall be received (as a sweet
burnt-sacrifice) into Heaven, where thou shall joyfully rema^n in God's
presence for ever, as the true inheriter of his everlasting Kingdom, unto the
which thou wast undoubtedly predestinate, and orda^ned by the Lords infallible
purpose and decree before the foundation of the world was laid, and that this
is most true that I have said, I call the whole Trinity, the Almighty and
Eternal Majesty of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost to my record at
this present, whom I humbly beseech to confirm and stablish in thee the true
and lively feeling of the same. Amen. Selah.

In his Letter to his dear and faithful Brethren in Newgate, Page 719.
condemned to die. -- Cease not my dearly Beloved, so long as you be in this
life to praise the Lord with all your hearts, for that of his great mercy and
infinite goodness he has vouched you worthy of this great dignity, to suffer
for his sake, not only the loss of goods, wife, and children, long
imprisonment, cruel oppression, but death it self in the fire. This is the
greatest promotion that God can bring you, or any other into, in this vail of
misery; yea, so great an honor, as the highest Angel in Heaven is not
permitted to have, and yet has the Lord for his dear Son Christ's sake reputed
you worthy of the same, yea, and that before me and many others, who have both
long looked and longed for the same. -- Rejoice with double joy, and be glad,
my dear Brethren, for doubtless you have more cause then can be expressed. But
alas! I that for my sins am left behind, may lament with the holy Prophet, Woe
is me, that the days of my joyful r^st are prolonged. Ah cursed Satan! which
has caused me so sore to offend my most dear loving Father, whereby mine exile
and banishment is so long prolonged. Oh Christ, my dear Advocate, pacify thy
Father's wrath, which I have justly deserved, that he may take me home to him
in his sweet mercy.

In his Letter to Mr. Green, Page 720.
etc. -- If they be so blessed of God that die in the Lord, as the Holy Ghost
says they be, how much more blessed and happy then are you, that die not only
in the Lord, but for the Lord. -- O blessed Green, etc. fresh and green shall
thou be in the Lord's House, and thy fruits shall never wither nor decay. --

O happy Mr. Whittle, Peter's part thou have well played, therefore thy reward
and portion shall be like his. Now have thou good experience of man infirmity,
but much more proof and taste, yea sense and feeling of God's abundant
bottomless mercy^ Although Satan desired to sift thee, yet Christ thy good
Captain prayed that thy faith should not fail^ God's strength is made perfect
by thy weakness, etc. -- But alas! I lie like the lame man a^ the Pools side,
and every one goes into the place of health before me.

In his Letter to William Tyms. -- Satan has two great pieces of Ordinance to
shoot at you, with the which he cannot hurt you, because you have two bul-warks
to defend you. The first of these terrible Guns that he has shot at you is
fear and infidelity, for the uglesomness of death, and horror of your many and
great sins. But this pellet is easily put away with the sure shield of faith in
the most precious death and bloodshedding of our dear Lord and only Savior,
Jesus Christ, whom the Father has given to us wholly to be ours for evermore,
and with him has given us all things, as Paul says, so that though we be
never so great sinners, yet Christ is made unto us holiness, righteousness, and
justification; He has clothed us all his merits, etc. and taken to himself all
our sin, etc. so that if any should be now condemned for the same, it must
needs be Jesus Christ, who has taken them upon him. But indeed he has made
satisfaction for them to the uttermost, so that for his sake they shall never
be imputed to us, if they were a thousand times more then they be.

The other pestilent Piece he shoots off at you is, to provoke you to put
some part of your trust and confidence in yourself, and in your own holiness
and righteousness, that you may that way rob God of his glory, and Christ of
the honor and dignity of his death; but blessed be the Lord God, you have also
a full strong Bul-work to beat back this pestilent Pellet, even the pure Law of
God, which proves the best of us all damnable sinners in the light of God, and
that our best works are polluted, in such sort as the Prophet describes them,
with the which manner of speaking, our free will Pharisees are much offended,
for it felleth all man's righteousness to the ground.

In his Letter to Mr. Augustine Bernher. -- Pray for me that I may be strong
and hardy to lay a good load on that bloody beast of Babylon. O that I might so
strike him down, that he should never be able to rise again, but that stroke
belongs only to the Lord to strike at his coming, which I hope will be
shortly.

Carpenter.
All Bavaria (said George Carpenter) is not so dear to me as my wife and
children, Ward, page 156.
yet for Christ's sake I will forsake them cheerfully.

Carver.
Mr. Derick Carver, Fox, Vol. 3. page 385.
being asked by Bonner whether he would stand for his Confession, answered, He
would, for your Doctrine is poison and sorcery. If Christ were here, you would
put him to a worse death, then he was put to before.

At the stake he spoke thus; Dear Brethren and Sisters, I am come here to seal
with my blood Christ's Gospel, because that I know it to be true. -- As many of
you as do believe upon the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost unto everlasting
life, see you do the works pertaining to the same. As many of you as do believe
on the Pope of Rome, you do believe to your utter condemnation, and except the
great mercy of God prevent not, you shall burn in Hell perpetually.

In his Prayer. -- O Lord my God, thou has^ written, He that will not forsake
wife, children, house, and all that ever he has, and take up his cross, and
follow thee, is not worthy of thee. Lord, thou know that I have forsaken all
to come unto thee. Lord, have mercy upon me, for unto thee I commend my Spirit,
and my soul does rejoice in thee.

Chrysostom.
Clark 's first Volume of Lives, page 145.
Eud xia the Emperess having sent him a very threatening message, he gave this
answer; Go, tell her, Nil nisi peccatum timeo, I fear nothing but sin.

When she had procured his banishment, as he went forth of the City, he said,
None of these things trouble me; but I said within my self, if the Queen will,
let her banish me, the Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof, if she
will, let her cast me into the sea, I will remember Jonah; if she will, let her
cast me into a burning fiery. Furnace, or among wild beasts, the three children
and Daniel were so dealt with; if she will, let her stone me, or cut off my
head, I have St. Stephen, and the Baptist my blessed Companions, if she will,
let her take away all my substance, Naked came I out of my Mothers womb, and
naked shall I return thither again.

He used to say the Devil's first assault is violent, resist that, and his
second will be weaker, and that being resisted, he proves a Coward.

Clarebachius.
Ward, page 159.
I believe (said Adolphus Clarebachius) that there is not a merrier heart in the
world at this instant then mine is: Behold, you shall see me die by that faith
I have lived in.

Colham.
See Sir John Oldcastle under the Letter ( O)

Clark.
When Roger Clark was sentenced, Fox Vol page 569.
he said with much vehemence, Fight for your God, for he has not long to
continue.

At the Stake he cried out to the people, Behold the Lamb of God, which takes
away the sins of the world.

Coligni.
Jasper Coligni, Fox, Vol. 3. page 57. Clarks Martyrology etc. page 41. of his
life.
great Admiral of France, who was slain in the Massacre at Paris, August 24.
1572. being shot in the left Arm with two Bullets, and the forefinger of the
right hand broke off with a third; and being told by a Gentleman, that it was
to be feared the Bullets were poisoned, he said, All must be as it pleases God.

Seeing his Friends weep, which held his Arm whilst the Incisions were made, he
said, My Friends, why do you weep? I judge my self happy that bear these wounds
for the Cause of my God.

To Mr. Merlin, his Chaplain, he said, These wounds, my Friend, are Gods
blessings. The smart indeed is troublesome, but I acknowledge the will of my
Lord therein, and I bless his Majesty, who has been pleased thus to honor me,
and to lay any pain upon me for his holy Names sake: Let us beg of him, that he
will enable me to persevere to the end.

Speaking concerning those that wounded him, I know assuredly (said he) that it
is not in their power to hurt me, No, though they should kill me, for my death
is a most certain passage to eternal life. N

When the Bloodhounds brake open the house where he lay wounded, he spoke
thus, I perceive what is a doing, I was never afraid of death, and I am ready
to undergo it patiently, for which ^ have long since prepared my self.

I bless God that I shall die in the Lord. -- ^ now need no longer any help of
man, therefore my friends get ye hence. -- The presence of God to whose
goodness I commend my soul is abundantly sufficiently for me.

Co^v^r.
Ward, page 163.
Sheep we are for the slaughter (said France Co'ver to his two Sons, massacred
together with himself) this is no new thing, let us follow millions of Martyrs
through temporal death unto eternal life.

Coo.
Fox, Vol. 3. page 419.
Roger Coo being asked by the Bishop of Nor^ich^ whether he would not obey the
Kings Laws, answered, As far as they agree with the Word of God, I will obey
them. Whether they agree with the Word of God or no, we are bound to obey them
(said the Bishop) though the King were an Infidel; Coo replied, If Shadrach,
M^shach, and Abedn^go had so done, Neluchadn^zzar had never confessed the
Living God.

Constantine.
Ward, page: 154.
Being carried with other Martyrs in a Dung^ Cart to the place of Execution, he
spoke thus^ Well, yet are we a precious odor, and a swee^ savor to God in
Christ.

Cornford.
Fox Vol. 3. page 893.
John Cornford one of the last five that suffered Martyrdom in Queen Mary's
days (when the Sentence should have been passed, and they should have been
executed by the Papists) being move^ in Spirit with a vehement zeal for God, in
the nam^ of them all pronounced Sentence of Excommunication against the
Papists, in these words. -- In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of the
most mighty God, and by the power of the holy Spirit, and the authority of his
holy and Apostolic Church, We do hereby give into the hands of Satan to be
destroyed, the bodies of those Blasphemers and Heretics, that do maintain any
error against his most holy Word, or do condemn his most holy Truth for
Heresy, to the maintenance of any false Church or feigned Religion, so that by
this thy just judgment against thy Adversaries, thy true Religion may be known
to thy great glory, and our comfort, and to the edifying of all our Nation Lord
Jesus, So be it. -- It is observable, that within six days after this
Excommunication Queen Mary died, and the tyranny of all Eng^ish Papists with
her.

Con^ogue.
Brethren and Sisters (said Peter Conlogue of Breda at the Stake) be you
always obedient to the Word of God, Fox, Vol. 3. page 50.
and fear not those that can kill the body, for on the soul they can have no
power; as for me I am now going to meet my glorious Spouse the Lord Jesus
Christ.

Cranm^r.
When Dr. Th^mas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury was Excommunicated, Fox, Vol.
3. page 92.
he said, From this your Judgment and Sentence, I appeal to the just Judgment
of God Almighty, trusting to be present with him in Heaven, for whose presence
in the Altar I am thus condemned.

In his Letter to Mr. Wilkinson. Page 677.
-- The true Comforter in all distresses is only God through his Son Jesus
Christ. Whosoever has him has Comfort enough, although he were in a
Wilderness all alone. He that has twenty thousand in his company, if God be
absent, is in a miserable Wilderness. In him is all comfort, and without him is
none. Wherefore I beseech you seek your dwelling there, where you may truly and
rightly serve God, and dwell in him, and have him ever dwelling in you.

Page 323.
In his Letter to Mr. Warcup. -- Be not so dainty, as to look for that at God,
your dear Fathers hands, which the Fathers, Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles,
Evangelists, Saints, and his own Son Jesus Christ did not find, i. e. all fair
way and fair weather to Heaven. -- The Devil stands now at every Inne-door in
this City and Country of this World, crying unto us to tarry and Lodge in this
or that place till the storms be over-past, not that he would not have us to
wet our skin, but that the ^^me of our runn^ng our Race might over-pass us to
our utter destruction. -- Fear not the Flail, fear not the Fann^ng-wind, fear
not the Millstone, fear not the Oven; for all these make you more meet for the
Lords tooth.

Page 326.
In his Letter to Dr. Hill. -- Such as think it enough to keep the heart pure,
notwithstanding that the outward man carry favor, as they deny God to be
jealous, one that will have the whole man, having created, redeemed, and
sanctified both for himself, so they play the Dissemblers with the Church of
God, by their parting stakes between God and the World, offending the Godly,
whom either they provoke to fall with them, or make more careless and
conscienceless, if they have fallen, and occasioning the wicked and obstinate
to triumph against God, and the more vehemently to prosecute their malice
against such as will not defile themselves in body or soul with the Romish
Rags, now received among us. -- Call to mind that there are but two Masters,
two kind of people, two ways, and two Mansion places. The Masters be Christ
and Satan; the people the Servitors to either of these; the ways be strait and
wide; the Mansions be Heaven and Hell. This World is the place of trial of Gods
people and the Devils servants by whom they follow: The Cross it is that does
make the trial.

In his Letter to Royd^n and Esing. -- Whom would it grieve, Page 333.
which has a long journey to go through a piece of foul way, if he knew that
after that, the way should be most pleasant, yea the journey should be ended,
and he at his resting place most happy? Who will be afraid or loath to leave a
little pelf for a little time, if he knew he should afterward very speedily
receive most plentiful riches? Who will be unwilling for a while to forsake his
wife, children, friends, etc. when he knows he shall shortly after be
associated to them inseparably, even after his own hearts desire? Who will be
sorry to forsake his life, who is most certain of eternal life? Who loves the
shadow better then the body? Who can desire the dross of this world, but such
as be ignorant of the treasures of the everlasting joy in Heaven? Who is afraid
to die, but such as hope not to live eternally? -- What way is so sure a way to
Heaven, as to suffer in Christ's Cause? If there be any way on Horseback to
Heaven, surely this is the way, Acts 14. 2 Timothy ^. The Devil cannot love his
Enemies. Should we look for fire to quench our thirst? As soon shall Gods true
Servants find peace and ^avour in Antichrists Regiment.

In a Letter to Mrs. Anne Warcup. -- My Staff stands at the door. Page 345.
I look continually for the Sheriff to come for me; and I bless God I am ready
for him. Now go I to practice that which I have preached. Now am I climbing up
to the hill; it will cause me to puff and to blow before I come to the cliffe.
The hill is steep and high; my breath is short, and my strength is feeble. Pray
therefore to the Lord for me, that as I have now through his goodness even
almost come to the top, I may by his grace be strengthened not to rest till I
come where I should be. Oh loving Lord, put out thy hand, and draw me unto
thee; for no man comes but he whom the Father draws. See my dearly beloved,
Gods loving mercy: He knows my short breath and great weakness. As he sent
for Elias in a fiery Chariot, so sends he for me. By fire my dross must be
purified, that I may be fine gold in his sight.

In his Letter to Mr. Augustine Barnher. -- I have now taken a more certain
answer of death then ever I did. Ah my God, the hour is come, glorify thy most
unworthy child. I have glorified thee (says this my sweet Father) and I will
glorified thee. Amen.

Page 356.757, 361 362.
Some of the subscriptions of his Letters were observable. The most miserable
hard-hearted unthankful s^nner, John Bradford. A very painted hypocrite, John
Bradford. Miserrimus peccatur, John Bradford. The sinful John Bradford.

Page 307.
Pray, pray, pray, was the usual close of his Letters which he writ in Prison.
When he came into Smithfield, he fell flat on his face, and prayed; then taking
a Faggot in his hand he kissed it, and so likewise the Stake; and standing by
the Stake, lifting up his hands and eyes to Heaven, he said, O England,
England, repent of thy sins, repents of thy sins, beware of Idolatry, beware of
false Antichrist, take heed they do not deceive thee; and to his fellow Martyr
he said, Be of good comfort Brother, for we shall have a merry Supper with the
Lord this night; and then embracing the reeds, he said, Strait is the gate, and
narrow is the way that leads to life, and few there be that find it.

What can be so heavy a burden, as an unquiet Conscience, to be in such a
place, as a man cannot be suffered to serve God in Christ's Religion? If you be
loath to depart from your Kin and Friends, Remember that Christ calls them his
Mother, Sisters, and Brothers, that do his Fathers will. Where we find
therefore God truly honored according to his will, there we can lack neither
Friend nor Kin. If you be loath to depart for the slandering of Gods Word,
Remember that Christ when his hour was not yet come, departed out of his
Country into Samaria, to avoid the malice of the Scribes and Pharisees, and
commanded his Apostles, that if they were pursued in one place, they should fly
to another. Thus did Paul, and the other Apostles. Albeit when it came to such
a point, that they could no longer escape, then they evidenced that their
flying before came not of fear, but of godly wisdom to do more good; and that
they would not rashly, without urgent necessity offer themselves to death,
which had been a tempting of God.

After he had recanted, and was brought to Saint M^ry's Church in Oxford, where
Dr. Cole after he had preached bitterly against him, showing why he was to be
executed notwithstanding his Recantation, pressed him to evidence to the people
his conversion to Popery, Dr. Cranmer entreated the people to pray with him and
for him, that God would pardon his sins, especially his Recantation.

After he had prayed, Page 669.
he told them, It is a sad thing to see so many so much dote upon the love of
this false World, and be so careful of it, and so careless of Gods love, or the
World to come* therefore this shall be my first exhortation, tha^ you set not
your minds overmuch upon this glozing World, but upon God, and the World to
come, and to learn to know what this Lesson means, which St. John teaches,
That the Love of this World is hatred against God. -- Let rich men consider and
weigh three Scriptures, Luke 18. It is h^rd for a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of Heaven. 1 John 3. He that has the su^stance of this world, and
sees his Brother in necessity, and shuts up his mercy from him, how can he
say that he loves God? James 5.1, 2. Go to now ye rich men, weep and hard for
the miseries that are coming upon you, your riches are corrupted. -- Another
exhortation is, That next under God you obey your King and Queen willingly and
gladly, without murmuring or grudging. They are Gods M^nisters: Whosoever
resists them, resists the Ordinance of God. -- And now I come (said he) to
the great thing, that so much troubles my Conscience, more then any thing that
ever I did, or said, in my whole life, and that is the setting abroad a Writing
contrary to the Truth, which now here I renounce, and refuse as things written
with my hand, contrary to the Truth which I thought in my heart, and written
for fear of death and to save my life if it might be.

And forasmuch as my hand offended, writ^ng contrary to my heart, my hand shall
first be punished therefore, for may I come to the fire it shall be first
burned.

At the Stake, when the fire began to burn near him, he stretching out his arm
put his right hand into the flame, which he held so steadfast, that all men
might see his hand burned, before his body was touched.

His eyes lifted up to Heaven, he cried out even as long as he could speak, O
his unworthy hand!

His last words were the words of Stephen, Lord Jesus receive my spirit.

Cromwell.
Thomas Lord Cromwe^, Fox, Vol. 2. page 529.
Earl of Ess^x, the morning that he was executed, having cheerfully eaten his
breakfast, passing out of the Prison down the Hill in the Tower, met the Lord
Hungerford going to Execution for other matter; and perceiving him to be heavy
and doleful, he willed him to be of good comfort; for if you repent (said he)
of what you have done, there is mercy enough for you with the Lord, who for
Christ's sake will forgive you; and though the breakfast we are going to be
sharp, yet trusting in the mercy of the Lord, we shall have a joyful dinner.

In his Prayer on the Scaffold. Page 515.
-- O Lord Jesus, who art the only health of all men living, and the
everlasting life of them which die in thee -- Being sure that the thing cannot
perish, which is committed to thy mercy, willingly now I leave this frail and
wicked flesh, in sure hope that thou will in better wise restore it to me again
at the last day in the resurrection of the J^st. -- I see and acknowledge there
is in my self no hope of salvation, but all my confidence, hope, and trust is
in thy most merciful goodness. -- Thou, merciful Lord, wast born for my sake,
did suffer hunger and thirst for my sake, did teach, pray, and fast for my
sake, all thy holy actions and works thou wroughtest for my sake, thou
sufferedst most grievous pains and torments for my sake, and finally thou
gave thy most precious body and blood to be shed on the Cross for my sake;
Now, most merciful Savior, let all these things profit me, etc. -- Let thy
blood cleanse and wash away the spots and foulness of ^^ sins, let thy
righteousness hide and cover my un^righteousness. --

Cyprian.
Clark's first Volume of Lives, page 51. Leigh's Sain^s Encouragements in evil
times. page 10.
He went in the time of Persecution into volun^tary Banishment, lest (as he
said) he should (...) more hurt then good to the Congregation.

When he heard the sentence pronounced a^gainst him, he said, I thank God for
freeing m^ from the Prison of this Body.

He said Amen to his own sentence of Martyrdom. The Proconsul bidding him
consult about it, he answered, In so just a Cause there needs no deliberation.

D.
Daigerfield.
Fox, Vol. 3. page 759.
William Daigerfield and Joan his Wife (who then gave suck to her tenth child)
being imprisoned in several Prisons, Bishop Brooks sent for the man, and told
him, that his Wife had recanted, and so persuaded him to recant, and so sent
him to his Wife with a Form of Recantation with him, which when his Wife saw,
her heart clave in sunder, and she cried out, Alas! Husband, thus long we have
continued one, and has Satan so far perva^led with you, as to cause you to
break the Vow, which you made to God in Baptism? Hereupon he bewailed his
promise, and begged of God that he might not live so long as to call evil good,
and good evil, light darkness, or darkness light. And accordingly it came to
pass.

Damlip.
Fox, Vol. 2. page 564.
Mr. Adam Damlip, when he had been almost two years in the Marshalsey,
considering how he could not employ his talent there to God's Glory, as he
desired (though he had many Favors in Prison) resolved to write to the Bishop
of Winchester, earnestl^ to desire that he might come to his Trial; for (said
he) I know the worst, I can but lose my present life, which I had rather do,
then here to remain, and not to be suffered to use my talent to God's Glory.

When he understood by the Keeper, that his suffering was near, he was
notwithstanding very merry, and did eat his meat as well as ever he did in all
his life, insomuch that some at the Board said unto him, they wondered how he
could eat his meat so cheerfully, knowing he was so near his death; Ah Masters
(said he) Do you think that I have been so long God's Prisoner in the
Marshalsey, and have not yet learned to die? Yes, yes, and I doubt not but God
will strengthen me therein.

When he was told that his four Quarters should be hanged at four parts of
Calice, and his Head upon the Lanthern-gate, Then shall I not need (said he) to
provide for my Burial.

Delos.
Alas (said James Delos to the Monks that called him proud Heretic) here I get
nothing but shame, Ward, page 151.
I expect indeed preferment hereafter.

Denley.
Mr. John Denl^y being entreated by Bishop Bonner to recant, Fox, Vol. 3. page
388.
said, God save me from your Counsel.

In the Fire, with the burning flame about him, he sung a Psalm, and having his
face hurt with a Faggot hurled at him, he left singing for a while, and clapped
his hands in his bleeding face, and afterward put his hands abroad, and sung
again till he died.

Clarks first Volume of Lives, p. 12.
Dionysius.
Dionysius Areopagita (who seeing the gener^^^ Eclipse of the Sun at Christ's
death, said to one^ Either the God of Nature now suffers, or the frame of the
World shall be dissolved; and to another, God unknown in the flesh does suffer.

When he was apprehended by Sisinius the Prefect, and sharply reproved for
preaching against the worship of their Gods, and required to confess his
error, said, That they were no gods, whom they worshipped, but Idols, the
works of men's hands, and that it was through mere ignorance, folly, and
idolatry, that they adored them; adding, that there was but one true God, as he
had preached.

After he was grievously tormented, he was brought before Sisinius the second
time, who sentenced him to be beheaded forthwith. Dyonisius told him, he
worshipped such Gods as would perish like D^ng upon the Earth; but as for my
self (said he) come life, come death, I will worship none but the God of Heaven
and Earth.

He prayed thus at his death. O Lord God Almighty, thou onely-begotten Son, and
Holy Spirit; O Sacred Trinity, which art without beginning, and in whom is no
division, Receive the soul of thy Servant in peace, who is put to death for thy
Cause and Gospel.

He used to say, That he desired these two things of God (1) That he might know
the Truth himself, and (2) That he might preach it, as he ought, to others.

Driver.
Fox, Vol. 3. page 886.
Alice Driver in her first Examination, hav^ng got her Adversaries to
acknowledge, that a Sacrament is a sign, and that it was Christ's Body, his
Disciples did eat the night before he was crucified; Seeing it is (said she) a
sign, it cannot be the thing signified; and how could it be Christ's Body, that
was crucified, seeing his Disciples had eaten him up over night, except he had
two Bodies.

At the end of her second Examination, Page 887.
She said; Have you no more to say? God be honored. You be not able to resist
the Spirit of God in me a poor Woman. I was an honest poor man's Daughter,
never brought up in the University, as you have been, but I have driven the
Plough before my Father many a time (I thank God) yet notwithstanding in the
defense of God's Truth, and in the Cause of my Mr. Christ, by his Grace I will
set my foot against the foot of any of you all, in the maintenance and defense
of the same; and if I had a thousand lives, they should go for payment thereof.

When she was tied to the Stake, Fox, Vol. 3. page 888.
and the iron Chain put about her neck, O (said she) here is a goodly
Neckerchief, blessed be God for it.

Drowry.
Thomas Drowry (the blind Boy, Fox. Vol. 3. page 703.
to whom Bishop Hooper, as he was going to the Stake, after he had examined
him, said; Ah poor Boy, God has taken from thee thy outward sight, but he has
given thee another sight much more precious: He that endued thy soul with the
eye of Knowledge and Faith.) Shortly after Bishop Hooper's Martyrdom, was cast
into Prison. Afterward the Chancellor of Gloucester asking him, who taught him
that Heresy, that Christ's Body was not really present in the Sacrament of the
Altar, he said, You, Mr. Chancellor, when in yonder Pulpit you taught us that
the Sacrament was to be received spiritually by Faith, and not carnally and
really, as the Pap^^ teach. But (said the Chancellor) Do thou as I ha^^ done,
and thou shall live as I do, and escape bu^^ing. Though you (said Drowry) can
so easily d^^pense with your Conscience, and mock God a^^ the World, yet will
not I do so. Then said t^^ Chancellor, I will condemn thee; God's Will b^^
fulfilled (said Drowry.)

E.
Edward.
Fox, Vol. 2. page 653.
King Edward the Sixth (our English I^sias) being pressed by Archbishop Cranmer,
and Bishop Ruley to permit the Lady M^ry to have Mass in he^^ House; after he
had argued notably against i^^bid them be content, for he would spend his life
and all he had, rather then to agree to, and gra^^^ that he knew certainly to
be against the Truth and then fell a weeping, insomuch that the Bishop wept as
fast as he; and the Archbishop tol^ Mr. Cheek, his Scholar had more Divinity in
hi^^ little finger, then all they had in all their Bodies.

Elizabeth.
Fox, Vol. 3. page 945.
The Lady Elizabeth (afterward Queen of England) when she came out of the Barge
at Traytor^ Stairs, going into the Tower, said, Here landed as true a Subject,
being a Prisoner, as ever lande^ at these Stairs. And before thee, O God, I
speak it having no other Friends but thee alone.

Her Gentleman Usher weeping, she demande^ of him what he meant so
uncomfortably to use her, seeing she took him to be her Comfort, and not to
dismay her, especially for that she knew her Truth to be such, that no man
should have cause to weep for her.

When the Doors of the Prison were locked and bolted upon her, she called for
her Book, desiring God, not to suffer her to build her foundation upon the
Sands, but upon the Rock, w^ereby all blasts of blustering weather should have
no power against her.

When she was locked up close in Prison, at first she was much daunted, but
afterward she brake forth into this Speech; The skill of a Pilot is unknown,
but in a Tempest; the valor of a Captain is unseen, but in a Battle; and the
worth of a Christian does not appear, but in time of Trial and Temptation. Mr.
Burrough's Mos. Self-denial, page 31.

Upon Gardeners and other Counselors strict Examination of her, she said, My
Lords, you do sift me very narrowly, but well I am assured, you shall not do
more to me then God has appointed, and so God forgive you all.

Some telling her, that they were persuaded God would not suffer Sir Henry
B^n^field to make her away privately; Well, said she, God grant it be so; for
thou, O God, can mollify all such tyrannous hearts, and disappoint all such
cruel purposes; and I beseech thee to hear thy Creature, which am thy Servant,
and at thy Command, trusting by thy Grace ever so to remain.

As she passed over the Water to Richmond, going toward Windsor, in their
Journey to Woodstock, she espied certain of her old Servants standing on the
other side, very desirous to see her, and sent one of her men standing by unto
them; Go to them (said she) and say these words from me, Tanquam ovis, i. e.
just like a sheep to the slaughter.

At her departing from Woodstock she wrote these Verses with her Diamond in a
Gla^^ Window.

Much suspected by me,
Nothing proved can be,
Q^oth Elizabeth Prisoner. Clarks second Volume of Lives.
When a Popish Priest pressed her hard to declare her Opinion of Christ's
Presence in the Sacrament, she truly and warily answered him thus; It Was the
Word that spoke it,
He took the Bread and brake it,
And what the Word did m^ke it,
That I believe, and take it.


Esch.
Fox, Vol. 2. p. 101, 102.
John Esch and Henry Voes burnt at ^ruxels 152:^ being asked what they
believed, they said, The Books of the Old and New Testmant. And being asked
whether they believed the Decrees of the Councils, and the Fathers, they said,
Such a^ agreed to the Scriptures they believed; and being asked whether it were
any deadly sin to transgress the Decrees of the Bishop of Rom^, they said, That
it is to be attributed only to the Precep^ of God, to bind the Conscience of
man, or to lose it.

Being condemned, they gave thanks to God their Heavenly Father, which had
delivered them through his great Goodness from that false and abominable
Priesthood (they having been Augustine Friars) and made them Priests of his
Holy Order, receiving them unto him as a Sacrifice of ^^ sweet Odor.

The greatest Error that they were accused of, was that men ought to trust
only in God, forasmuch as men were liars, and deceitful in all their words and
deeds; and therefore there ought no trust or asfiance to be put in them.

The day of their Execution (said they) the day we have long desired.

One of them, feeing that the fire was kind led at his feet, said, Methinks you
do strew Roses under my feet.

Eulalia.
The Virgin Eulalia (of Emerita in Portugal) having secretly got out of her
Fathers house (where she was kept close for fear, Fox, Vol. 1. page 120.
least she should offer her self to Martyrdom) went courageously unto the
Tribunal, or Judgment Seat, and in the midst of them all, cried out, Would you
know what I am? Behold! I am one of the Christians, an enemy to your Divelish
Sacrifices, I spurn your Idols under my feet, I confess God omnipotent with my
heart and mouth. -- Go to thou Hangman, burn, cut, mangle thou these earthly
Members; it is an easy matter to break a brittle substance, but the inward
mind thou shall not hurt for any thing thou can do.

The Judge endeavoring to persuade her to recant, saying, Behold! what
pleasures thou may enjoy by the Honorable House thou came of; What! will thou kill thy self, so young a flower, (she being not much above twelve years
of age) and so near those Honorable Marriages and great Dowries thou may
enjoy? Eulalia did not answer him, but being in a great fury, spit in the
Tyrants face, threw down the Idols, and spurnt abroad with her feet ^he heap of
Incense prepared for the Censers. -- When one joint was pulled from another,
she said, Behold, O Lord, I will no^ forget thee; what a pleasure is it for
them, (...) Christ, that remember thy triumphant Victorie^ to attain unto these
high dignities.

F.
Fabrianus.
W^rd, page 160.
First better, (said Christopher Fabrianus) the sweet; First the Battle, the
Victory when I (...) dead. Every drop of my blood shall preach Christ and set
forth his Praise.

Faninus.
Ward, page 155.
Faninus an Italian kissed the Apparitor tha^ brought him word of his Execution.

To one reminding him of his Children, he said I have lest them to an able and
faithful Guardian.

To his Friends weeping, he said, That is we^^ done, that you weep for joy with
me.

To one objecting Christ's agony and sadness t^ his cheerfulness: Yea (said he)
Christ was sad, tha^ I might be merry. He had my sins, and I have (...) merits
and righteousness.

To the Friars offering him a wooden Crucif^^ he said, Christ needs not the
help of this Piece, (...) imprint him in my mind and heart, where he ha^^ his
Habitation.

Farellus.
Cl^^ks first V^lum^ of Lives, page 674.
Mr. William Farellus, being questioned by (...) Magistrates of Metis, by what
Authority, or (...) whose request he preached, answered, By (...) Command of
Christ, and at the request of h^^ Members.

Farrar.
Fox V^^. 3. page 216.
Mr. Richard Jones, coming to Dr. Robert Farra^ Bishop of St. David, a little
before his death, a^^ seeming to lament the painfulness of the death he was to
suffer, the Bishop said to him, That if he saw him once to stir in the pains of
his Burning, he should then give no credit to his Doctrine. Accordingly he
never moved, but even as he stood, holding up his stumps, so he continued
still, till Richard Gravel with a staff dashed him upon the head, and so
struck him down.

Filicu.
John Filicul and Julian L^ville (who suffered in France) being threatened if
they constantly persisted, The Mirror of Marty^s, page 595.
to be burnt alive, and to have their tongues cut out, or otherwise only to be
strangled, and to have the use of their tongues, contemned the offer, saying,
You would fain have us renounce our God for saving our selves from a little
pain, but it shall not be so; and looking one upon another, said, We are ready
not only to lose one or two of our Members, but the whole Body, and to be
burned and burned again in the defense of the Truth.

When the time of their execution came, Fox, Vol. 2* page 144.
the Officer put into their hands, being tied, a Wooden Cross, which they flung
away with their teeth, saying, That they were now to bear a more noble and
excellent Cross then that.

When their tongues were cut, God gave them utterance, insomuch that they were
heard to say, We bid Sin, the Flesh, the World farewell for ever, with whom we
shall never have to do hereafter.

At last when the Tormenter came to smear them with Brimstone and Gunpowder, Go
to (said Filiolus) salt on, salt on the rotten and stinking flesh.

Fillula.
By these Ladders (said John Fillula to his Fellows) we ascend the Heavens,
Ward, page 153.
now begin we to trample under feet, Sin, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil.

Filmer.
Fox. Vol. 2. page 555.
Henry Filmer said to Person and Testwood (his fellow Martyrs) Be merry my
Brethren, and lift up your hands to God, for after this sharp breakfast* I
trust we shall have a good dinner in the Kingdom of Christ our Lord and
Redeemer.

Flower.
Fox, Vol. 3. page 242.
William Flower (alias Branch) being told his death was near, said, I hunger
for the same, dear Friend, being fully ascertained that they can kill but the
body, which I am assured shall receive again life everlasting, and see death no
more.

Bishop Bonner persuaded him to recant, promising him thereupon great things,
he answered, That which I have said I will stand to, and therefore I require
that the Law may proceed upon me.

At another time, Do what you will, I am at (...) point; for the Heavens shall
as soon fall, as I will forsake mine opinion.

In his Prayer. -- Have mercy upon me for thy dear Son our Savior Jesus
Christ's sake, in whom I confess only to be all salvation and justification and
that there is none other mean, nor way, no^ holiness, in which, or by which any
man can be saved in this World.

Burning in the fire, he cried out three times^punc; O the Son of God have
mercy upon me, O the Son of God receive my soul.

Folks.
Fox. Vol. 3. page 832.
Elizabeth Folks being examined, whether she believed the presence of Christ's
Body to be in the Sacrament substantially and really? answered, That she
believed that that was a substantial and real l^e.

When Sentence of Condemnation was rea^ against her, she kneeled down, lifting
up her eye and hands to Heaven, she praised God that ever she was born to see
that most blessed and happy day, that the Lord would count her worthy to suffer
for the testimony of Christ; and Lord, if it be thy will, forgive them that
have done this against me, for they know not what they do.

At the Stake she being hindered from giving her Petticoat to her Mother (who
kissed her, and exhorted her to be strong in the Lord) threw it away from her,
saying, Farewell all the World, farewell Faith and Hope; and so taking the Stake
in her hand, said, Welcome Love, etc.

When she and the other five that suffered with her, were nailed to the Stakes,
and the fire about them, they clapped their hands together for joy in the fire.

Fox.
The day after Queen Mary's death Mr. John Fox preaching at Basil to the
English Exiles, She his Life before his second Vol. of Acts and Monun.
did with confidence tell them, That now was the time come for their return
into England, and that he brought that News by command from God.

The Lady Anne Hennage being given up for dead, He told her, she had done well
in fitting her self for death, but that she should not die of that Sickness;
and being blamed by her Son in Law for disquieting her mind with hopes of life,
He answered, that he had said no more then was commanded him; for it seemed
good to God that she should recover, and so she did.

Mrs. Honywood having been sick of a Consumption almost twenty years, was
scarce able to speak when Mr. Fox came to her, only faintly she breathed forth
a desire to end her days. Mr. Fox, after he had prayed with her, told her,
That she should not only grow well of that Consumption, but also live to an
exceeding great age. As well might you have said (quoth Mrs. Honywood) that if
I should throw this Glass against the Wall, I might believe it would not break
to pieces; and holding a Glass in her hand, out of which she had newly drunk,
she threw it forth, but the Glass falling first on a Chest, and then on the
ground, neither brake nor cracked. Accordingly this eminent Christian
Gentlewoman being then Sixty years of age, recovered and lived till she was
above Ninety, and could reckon above three hundred and sixty of her Children
and Childrens Children.

He also foresaw his own death, and therefore sent away his sons that they
might not be present.

Frith.
Fox, Vol. 2: page 304.
Mr. John Frith with some others, (chosen into Christ's Church Oxford, whose
Foundation was laid by Cardinal Wolsey) conferring together upon the abuse of
Religion, then crept into the Church, were therefore accu^ed of Heresy unto
the Cardinal, and cast into Prison, within a deep Cave under the ground of the
same College, where their salt Fish was laid. Through the filthy stinch
thereof they were all infected, and some took their death, but Mr. Frith was
wonderfully preserved; and was translated from that University (after many
miseries undergone both beyond Sea and in his own Land) to another School,
namely, to a more settled Discipline of affliction, the Tower of London; where,
as he remained a Patient in regard of the Persecution, which he suffered, so
did he also the office of a Physician, in prescribing to others Preparatives
and Remedies in the like case. To which end A.D. 1532. he employed his pen in
writing those Treatises, which now go under the name of Vox Pisces, or the
Book-Fish.

Concerning which (the Author of the Preface thereunto) observes, See the
preface to Vo^ Pisces, or the Book-Fish.
that in some sort they ran the Fortune of the Author, being held in captivity
in the Sea, and kept in Iohah's Prison, the belly of a Fish, being in danger
there to be consumed, as the Author was like to have perished in the Dungeon at
Oxford by the noisome stinch of Fish.

The Wine therein offered (says the same Author) is the purest juice of a
Grape of the Vine (Christ Jesus) trod in the Wine Press of Persecution about
an hundred years since: It was found in the Maw of a Codfish in Cambridge
Market, 1626. and Printed 1627.
Which being put in a Paper Vessel, and formerly miscarrying by wrack in the
transporting, is now beyond expectation in a strange Living Vessel brought back
again to Land, no doubt to the end, that it might after long lying hid in
store, be anew broached and dispersed abroad for the refreshing of many thirsty
souls; to whom it is like to taste not the worse, but the better for the long
lying in so salt a Cellar, as is the bottom of the Sea, wherein, by all
probability, it has been buried for many years.

Mr. Frith did not light his Candle at the Lamp of Mr. Calvin, which then was
not extant; nor of great Luther, who was then but in the beginning of his
growth. And yet (says the same Author) How judiciously is there shown the use
of the Cross among Christians to consist in the due preparation for it, and
constant patience under it? How foundly are we taught that our Election and
Justification are of Gods mere mercy, and not for any thing foreseen in us? --
That remission of sins is through Christ only. -- That no man can merit for
others. -- That true Believers do sin, yet fall not away utterly from Christ.
-- As the Work commends the Author, so the Author much more the Work. When he
wrote of the Cross, he fought valiantly under the Cross; he turned his words of
patience into the perfect work of patience. He had the like happ^ness to that
of St. Paul, to bring forth children unto Christ in his bands. Whilst he was
kept close Prisoner in the Tower, by his Letters and Treatises he gained many
souls to Christ, and among others (which is most observable) he converted one
R^s^^l to the Truth, who had formerly dipped his Pen in Gall, and wrote most
bitterly against the Truth of the Gospel, and against the Writings of this
Prisoner of Christ, then ^ bands for the Gospel. Like a Swan he sang most
sweetly before his death, and foretold both particularly his own Martyrdom,
and the propagation of the Gospel through all England within twenty years after
his death; which accordingly came to pass in the Reign of King Edward. He was
as it were a Pr^mrose in the new Spring of the Gospel: And though he wrote in
the twilight between the night of Popery, and the day of Reformation, yet God
so enlightened him, that his Tre^^ise of the Sacraments, was the Candle at which
that great Torch Archbishop Cranmer was lighted, as Mr. Fox reports.

A prep. to the Cross. page 7, 8.
That is the true Cross (says Mr. Frith in his Treatise called, A preparation
to the Cross) which God does lay upon us -- For the Word of God to suffer all
scorns, mocks, lies, and persecutions, and not to fear the most cruel, yea even
the most shameful death. Page 13.
-- That we may be prepared to bear the true Cross, we must consider that no
calamity falls on us by fortune or chance, but by the counsel and appointment
of God, Page 16. See also chapter 13. of the Prep. l. 1.
as witnesses the holy Scripture. -- It is undoubtedly no sma^ comfort to be
assured, that the Cross is of God, and that we are chastened of God, and not of
the Devil, or of any wicked man, who utterly can have no power upon us, not so
much as to move one hair of our head, A Prepar. page 27, 28
beside the will of *the Lord. -- But it is not enough to consider that we are
afflicted through the counsel and will of God, but must moreover mark the cause
and intent of his godly will; for reason judges that we are punished, to the
end to be hurt or destroyed, etc. but we must forsake Reason, and cleave to the
Word of God, which teaches that we suffer affliction to our health and
salvation; for afflictions are not signs of wrath and displeasure, but of grace
and favor. -- This is no small comfort to them that bear the Cross, Page 33.
that they are not punished of the Lord to their hurt or destruction, but to
their health and salvation; and that their afflictions, poverty, etc. are not
signs of Gods wrath, but instruments by which God is glorified. -- When God
does afflict his people for their sins, Page 40.
he does not therefore afflict them, that by their afflictions they should
satisfy for their sins: for the passion and suffering of Jesus Christ is the
ransom and expiation of our sins; but that by affliction he may bring sinners
to repentance. Page 41, 42, 43.
-- When a Christian sees himself forsaken of all men, he must pray, and not
cease to pray, but pray in faith mistrusting nothing. Psalm. 49.
-- God calls Invocation or crying on him in trouble, a Sacrifice, the true
and most acceptable honor. -- So likewise he calls the Hope, whereby we
tarry his help in affliction, Sacrifice. Psalm. 4.
Sacrifice you the sacrifice of Justice, and hope ye in the Lord, q. d. that
Hope is a Sacrifice, whereby we yield justice to God, that (seeing he has so
promised) he will pluck us out and deliver us, Page 59, 60, etc.
for so much as he is righteous and true. -- Of patience to Godward, springs
forth patience toward men; for when the heart is at peace with God, it tarrieth
help of him, and utterly sets aside lust to revenge. Page 66, 67, etc.
-- Our reason is therefore troubled and vexed in persecution, because it
thinks that we are afflicted because God either hates us, or does not regard
us, neither will help us. These false opinions God plucketh from us, and
teaches us, that we are afflicted, not because he hates us, but because he
will either amend us, or when we be amended, continue us so. -- And that in our
affliction he will help us, and keep us, and also comfort us with the Holy
Ghost, and set our Conscience at peace, and make us be glad in God, Page 69,
etc.
etc. -- Christian patience has certain conditions, whereby it is known to be
true patience. (1) It grudgeth not, neither excuses it self, as though it
should suffer unworthily for his sins, wherefore he sits down and holds
his peace, as I^remiah says. -- (2) Is casts all carefulness on God, and
commits it self wholly to God, that Gods will be done and not his. (3) It
humbles himself, and casts off the pleasures of the World. (4) He is merry
and ready to suffer yet more heavy and g^ievous evils. A Pr^p. to the Cross,
page 70.
-- We must look for help in all afflictions; for God promises his help,
saying, I am with you, F^ar ye not, I will strengthen you. Page 72.
-- But the manner, time, and kind of help is unknown unto us, that Faith and
Hope may have place, which sticks to these things which are not seen nor
heard. Page 76.
-- God delivers when most need is, that his glory may shine the brighter. --
He will therefore help, Page 89.
when we be in a manner compelled to despair in all humane help, and when all
carnal counsel deceives us; for God only will be glorified. Page 91.
-- He does prolong help for our utility and profit, that he might exercise and
prove Faith by temptation, so that he only might possess the title and name of
Helper. Page 92, 93.
-- He that believes makes not haste. He which yet seems afar off, shall
appear at the end, and shall not lie: although he tarry, yet look for him, for
he is coming, and at the last he shall come and shall not be slow. -- It is
also a great comfort to them that be in affliction, to remember that they have
Christ, and his Prophets, See cha. 12. of the prep. to the Cross, l. 1. and c.
12. l. 2. See page 105
and Apostles, and all good and holy men for their examples, -- Furthermore, it
is a great comfort to the godly, that the wicked (whom God does use as a rod to
scourge the godly) go not clear away without punishment, whom he makes either
shamefully ashamed, or through their own counsel he does take them, and
brings them into the same destruction, which they themselves have studied and
found out for others. -- The cause is, Page 109.110.
For he that hurts one faithful, wrongeth not only him, but God, who does
revenge the injury and wrong done to the faithful, as injury done to himself.
-- He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye. -- Saul, Saul, why
persecuteth thou me. Page 136, etc.
-- If thou be tempted concerning the Gospel, or suffering persecution for
the Gospel, think of these Scriptures, He that receeveth not my Cross, and
follows not me, is not worthy of me. If any man will come after me, let him
forsake himself, and take his Cross and follow me. For he that will save his
soul shall lose it. Contrariwise he that loses his soul for my sake, shall
find it. He that will confess me before men, I will confess him before my
Father. -- The Apostles rejoiced that they were counted worthy. -- The Servant
is not above his Lord: all they that will live godly in Christ Jesus must
suffer persecution. -- If thou must die, and leave Wife and Children and thy
dear Friends, say, The Lord shall be their Defender; for G^^ both will, and is
able to cherish mine, to nouri^^ and defend them; for he is the Father of the
fa^therless, and the Widows Husband. I forget things behind my back, See also
chap. 16. l. 2.
and endeavor my self to th^^ things that are before my face. They that ha^^
Wives, let them be as though they had none, an^ they that weep as though they
wept not. -- If Satan say thou must forsake the world, what then Answer thou
contrariwise: I shall attain Heaven For blessed are the dead that die in the
Lord. All the world lies in wickedness. All that are born ^^ God overcome the
world, and this the victor^ which overcomes the world, our faith. All the
world shall perish with its lusts and desires. Lo^^ not the world, nor the
things of the world. We are strangers in this world, and citizens of Heaven* --
Ye sons of men, why love ye vanities, and seek lies? how long love you infancy
or childhood? --

See p. 176, etc. of the Preparation, etc.
-- The godly have most comfort; though i^ this life they be as sheep ordained
to be slain, and seem forsaken of God, etc. yet they do not despair* no not in
death, but are sure they shall pass through death to life eternal, etc. Also
they have this comfort, that their death is good and precious; the^ also know,
that through Christ's death, death is overcome and abolished. Page 180.
-- Christ by his death has changed their death into a sleep. -- Such as be at
the point of death, Page 184.
ought to take comfort and be strong, in that they know that they carry with
them both Letter and Token, which is Baptism, whereby their death is
incorporate with the death of Christ, and that it is not their death, so much
as the death of Christ. Wherefore let them surely trust, that they shall
overcome, as that death of Christ has overcome. Page 191.
Unto the godly it is a great comfort, that they know that death is not in the
power of Tyrants, nor put into the hand of any Creature, least they should be
much troubled, etc. they shall only die when it pleases the Lord. -- We
cannot live any longer then the Lord has appointed, Page 193.
and we shall not die, though we be in the greatest peril, and extreme jeopardy
before our hour. Page 202.
-- Then wherefore should they fear death? they cannot live longer then God
has appointed, nor die any sooner. See page 205, etc.
-- It is the comfort of the godly in all adversity, that through the Grace of
God, they shall be revived, and raised up, as well the body as the soul; the
souls to Justice, the bodies to Glory. This hope the wicked have not, Page 223,
224.
etc. -- It is a great comfort that affliction shall not endure continually,
and the afflictions of this time are not worthy of the Glory which shall be
showed upon us. -- Our trouble, which is but temporal and light, works an
exceeding and eternal weight of Glory unto us, who look not on the things that
are seen, but on them which are not seen. --

If a man praise a very fool (says Mr. Frith in his Preface to his Mirror)
and think his wit good and profound, he is indeed more fool then the other.
Thus seeing man praises and commends riches, honor, etc. and such other vain
and transitory things, which are but as a dream, and vanish like a flower of
the field; when a man should have most need of them, he himself is more vain
then those things which are but vanity.

If God has opened the eyes of thy mind (says the Mirror it self) and have
given thee Spirit and Wisdom through the knowledge of his Word, See the glass
to know thy self, p. 13, 14, etc.
boast not thy self of it, but rather fear and tremble, for a chargeable Office
is committed unto thee which (if thou fulfill it) is like to cost thee thy (...)
at one time or other, with much trouble and pers^^cution: but if thou fulfill
it not, then shall t^^ Office be thy Damnation. For St. Paul says, W^^^ to me
if I ^^each not. And by the Propher Ezek^^ God says, If I say unto the wicked
that he shall die t^ death, and thou show him not of it, the wicked shall (...)
in his iniquity, but I shall require his blood at thy ha^^^ But peradventure
our Divines would expou^^ these Texts only of them that are sent and ha^^ cure
of souls. Whereunto I answer, That eve^ man that has the light of Gods Word
revealed unto him, is sent wheresoever he sees necessity, an^ has the cure of
his Neighbors soul, e. g. If Go^ has given me my sight, and I perceive a
blin^ man going in the way, which is ready for lack (...) sight to fall into a
pit, wherein he would likely perish, I am bound by Gods Command to guide hi^
till he be past that jeopardy, or else if he peris^^ therein, his blood shall
be required at my hand^ Thus if I perceive my Neighbor like to perish (...)
lack of Christ's Doctrine, then am I bound to instruct him with the knowledge
God has given me* or else his blood shall be required at my hand* Peradventure
they will say, that there is already one appointed to watch the Pit, etc. and
therefore I am discharged and need take no thought. Where unto I answer, I
would be glad that so it were, notwithstanding if I perceive that the Watchmen
b^ asleep, or run to the Alehouse, etc. and through his negligence epsy my
Neighbor in danger o^ the Pit, then am I nevertheless bound to lead him from
it. I think that God has sent me at that time to save that soul from
perishing, and the Law o^ God and Nature that binds me thereunto, which
charge me to love my Neighbor as my self, to do unto him as I would be done
unto. Hag. 1.
-- If God has given thee riches, etc. thou art yet the very owner of them,
but God is the Owner, who says by the Prophet, Gold is mine, and silver is
mine, and he has for a season made thee a Steward of them, so see whether thou
with be faithful in the distribution of them, according to his Commands. -- Our
spiritual Possessionaries are double Thieves and Murderers, as concerning the
body, besides their murdering of the soul, for lack of Gods Word, which they
will neither preach, or suffer any other to do it purely, but persecute them,
and put them unto most cruel death: First, they are Thieves and Murderers,
because they distribute not what they have from charitable Forefathers, to the
intent it should have been ministered unto the Poor, but upon Horses, Coaches,
etc. gorgeous apparel, and delicate fare, etc. Thus they defraud the Poor of
their bread, and so are Thieves; and (because this bread is their life) they
are Murderers also. -- Besides they are Thieves and Murderers for withdrawing
their perfect Members from labor, whereby they might minister unto their
Neighbors necessities (I speak of as many as are not occupied about preaching
Gods Word.)

Besides these and many other Treatises, he wrote also several choice Letters,
whilst he was Prisoner in the Tower.

In his Letter to the faithful Followers of Christ's Gospel, he thus expresses
himself. See his Works, page 81, 82.
-- It cannot be expressed, Dearly Beloved in the Lord) what joy and comfort it
is to my heart to perceive how the Word of God has wrought, and continually
works among you; so that I find no small number walking in the ways of the
Lord, according as he gave us Commandment, willing that we should love each
other, as he loved us. Now have I experience of the faith which is in you, and
can testify, that it is without simulation, that ye love not in word and
tongue only, but in deed and truth. What can be more trial of a faithful
heart, then to adventure not only to aid and succor by the means of other
(which without danger may not be admitted unto us) but also personally to visit
the Poor oppressed, and see that nothing be lacking unto them, but that they
have both ghostly comfort and bodily sustenance, notwithstanding the strait
inhibition and terrible menacing of these worldly Rulers, even ready to abide
the extremest jeopardies that Tyrants can imagine. This is an evidence that
you have prepared your selves to the Cross of Christ, according to the Counsel
of the Wise man, which says, My Son, when thou shall enter into the way of the
Lord, prepare thy self unto tribulation. This is an evidence that you have cast
up your accounts, and have wherewith to finish the Tower, which ye have begun
to build: and I doubt not but he that has begun this work in you, shall for
his Glory accomplish the same, even unto the coming of the Lord, which shall
give unto every man according to his deeds. And albeit God of his secret
Judgments for a time keep the rod from some of them that ensue his steps, yet
let them surely reckon upon it; for there is no doubt, but all which will live
devoutly in Christ must suffer persecution; for whom the Lord loves he
corrects, and chasteneth every child that he receives. -- If ye be not under
correction, of which we are all partakers, then are ye bastards, and not
children. Nevertheless we may not suppose that our most loving Father should do
that, because he rejoices in our blood or punishment, but he does it for our
singular profit, that we may be partakers of Holiness, and that the remnants of
sin, which (through the frailty of our Members) rebel against the Spirit and
Will, causing our works to go unperfectly forward, and may some deal be
suppressed, least they should subdue us and reign over us. -- Of these things
God had given me the speculation before, and now it has pleased him to put in
ure and practice upon me. I ever thought, yea and do think, that to walk after
Gods Word, would cost me my life at one time or another; and although the Kings
Grace should take me into his Favor, and not suffer the bloody Edomites to
have their pleasures upon me, yet will I not think that I am escaped, but that
God has only deferred it for a season, to the intent that I should work
somewhat that he has appointed me to do, and so to use me to his Glory. And I
beseech all the faithful followers of the Lord to arm themselves with the same
supposition, marking themselves with the sign of the Cross, not from the Cross
as the superstitious multitude do, but rather to the Cross, in token that they
be ever ready willingly to receive the Cross, when it shall please God to lay
it upon them. The day that it comes not, count it clear won, giving thanks to
the Lord who has kept it from you, and then when it comes, it shall nothing
dismay you; for it is no new thing, but that which you have continually looked
for. And doubt not but that God, who is faithful, will not suffer you to be
tempted above what you are able to bear, but shall ever send some occasion by
the which ye shall stand steadfast, for either he shall blind the eyes of your
enemies, and diminish their Tyrannous Power, or else when he has suffered them
to do their best, and that the Dragon has cast a whole flood of waters after
you, he shall cause even the Earth to open her mouth, and swallow them up. So
faithful is he an^ careful to ease us, when the vexation shall be too heavy for
us, he shall send a Joseph before you, against ye shall come into Egypt; yea he
shall so provide for you, that ye shall have an hundred Fathers for one an
hundred Mothers for one, an hundred House for one, and that in this life, as I
have proved b^ experience, and after this life everlasting joy wit^ Christ our
Savior. Notwithstanding since thi^ steadfastness comes not of our selves (as
St. Austi^ says) there was never man so weak or frail, no no^ the greatest
offender that ever lived, but that every man of his own nature should be as
frail, and commit as great enormities, except he were kept from it by the
Spirit and Power of God. I beseech you Brethren, in the Lord Jesus Christ, to
pray with me, that we may be Vessels to his land and praise* what time soever
it pleases him to call upon (...) The Father of Glory give us the Spirit of
wisdom, understanding, and knowledge, and lighten the eyes of our mind, that
we may know his waye^ praising the Lord eternally. -- Amen.

John Frith the Prisoner of Jesus Christ, at all times abiding his pleasure.


Fox, Vol. 2. page 306.
In his Letter to his Friends concerning his troubles. -- I doubt not, dear
Brethren, but th^^ it does some deal vex you, to see the one part (...) have
all the words, and freely to speak what they list, and the other to be put to
silence, and not to be heard indifferently; but refer your matter unto God, who
shortly shall judge after another fashion. --

The Archbishop of Canterbury having sent one of his Gentlemen, Fox, Vol. 3.
page 990, 991.
and one of his Porters to fetch Mr. John Frith out of the Tower to be
examined; The Gentleman pitying him, endeavored to persuade him to relent to
Authority, and to give place for a time, and not to cast himself away, and
suffer all his singular gifts to perish with him with little profit to the
world, etc. Mr. Frith gave him thanks for his good will, but told him farther,
thus, My Cause and Conscience is such, that in no wise I either may or can for
any worldly respect without danger of damnation start aside, etc. If I be
demanded what I think of the Supper of the Lord, otherwise called the Sacrament
of the Altar, I must needs say my Knowledge and my Conscience, though I should
presently lose twenty lives, if I had so many. -- And if I may be indifferently
heard, I am sure mine Adversary, cannot condemn me or mine Assertion, etc. Yea
marry, quoth the Gentleman, you say well, if you might be indifferently heard;
but I much doubt thereof, for that our Master Christ was not indifferently
heard, neither should be (as I think) if he were now present again in the
world, etc. Well, well, (quoth Frith unto the Gentleman) I know very well that
the Doctrine of the Sacrament, which I hold and have opened, contrary to the
Opinion of this Realm, is vety hard meat to be digested, both of the Clergy and
Laity: but this I will say to you, That if you live but twenty years more, you
shall see this whole Realm of mine Opinion, etc. and if it come not to pass,
then account me the vainest man that ever you heard speak with a tongue. -- All
things well and rightly pondered, my death in this Cause (which is Gods and not
mine) shall be better unto me and all mine, then life in continua^ bondage and
misery. The Gentleman was (...) wrought upon, that he contrived a way for Mr.
Frith's escape, and prevailed with the Porter (...) agree with him in the
suffering thereof, and then told him, that the business which he had
undertaken, viz. to lead him as a sheep to the slaughter, (...) grieved him,
that he was overwhelmed with care and sorrows; whereupon he was resolved, wh^^
danger soever he incurred, to find out a way to deliver him out of the Lions
mouth, and so acquainted him with the way that he and the Porter ha^^ agreed
upon. Mr. Frith having diligently hearkened to his Speech, said with a smiling
countenance* And is this the effect of your secret consultation all this while,
surely you are like to lose your labor, for if you should both leave me here,
and g^ to Croydon, declaring to the Bishops that you ha^^ lost Frith, I would
surely follow after as fast as (...) could, and bring them news that I had
found an^ brought Frith back again. Do you think that I am afraid to declare
mine Opinion before the Bishop in so manifest a Truth? You are a fond man (sai^
the Gentleman) thus to talk. Do you think th^^ your reasoning with the Bishops
will do any good* I much marvel that you were so willing to fly the Realm
before you were taken, and now so unwilling to save your self when you may.
Marry (sai^ Frith) there is a great difference between escapin^ then and now,
then I was at liberty, and not attached; but now being taken by the Higher
Po^^ers, and that by Almighty Gods permission an^ providence, I am fallen into
the Bishops hand^ only for Religions sake, and for such Doctrine, (...) I am
bound in conscience under pain of damnation to maintain. If I should now start
aside, and run away, I should run from my God, and from the testimony of his
Word, whereby I should deserve a thousand hells.

At the time of his burning Dr. Cook admonished all the people, Fox, Vol. 2.
page 310.
that they should no more pray for him, then they would do for a Dog. Whereupon
Mr. Frith smiling, desired the Lord to forgive him.

Fulgentius.
An Arian Bishop offering to punish the Priest that had most mercilesly beaten
him, Clark's first Volume of Lives, p. 167, etc.
if he desired it, he said, It is not lawful for a Christian to meditate
revenge, our Lord Christ well knows how to repay the injuries offered to, and
inflicted on his Servants. If my case be avenged, then lose I the reward of my
patience. It may also scandalize many little ones, if I a Catholic should
require judgment at an Arians hands.

In the midst of his greatest sufferings he used to say; Plura pro Christo
toleranda, We must suffer more then this for Christ.

G.
Gardener.
William Gardener, Fox, Vol. 2. page 746.
an English Merchant in Portugal, was so much troubled in spirit at the sight
of the Idolatry, committed by the Priests in the Mass, at the solemnization of
the Marriage between the King of P^rtugal's Son, and the King of Spain's
Daughter, that he could not be quiet, till he had (though in the presence of
the King, and of the Nobles, and whole City) the next Sabbath with one hand
snatched away the Cake from the Priest, and trod it under his feet, and with
the other overthrew the Chalice. The King asking him how he durst be so bold?
He answered, Most noble. Kin^ -- The thing which you have seen, was not done
nor thought of me for any contumely, or reproac^ to your presence, but only
for this purpose (a^^ before God I do clearly confess) to seek the salvation of
this people.

Being asked who set him on? He answered* He was not moved by any man, but by
his o^^ Conscience, there being no man under Heaven for whose sake he would put
himself into so manifest a danger, but he owed his service first to God and
secondarily to their salvation; wherefore if he had done any thing displeasing
to them, the ought to impute it to themselves, who so irreverently used the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper unto so great Idolatry, not without great
ignomi^^^^ the Church, violation of the Sacrament, and the peril of their own
soals, except they repented.

For this he was cruelty tormented, and burned and in the fire he ^un^; Psalm.
43. Judge me, O God, and defend my (...) against the unmerciful ^^ple.

Gauderin.
Fox, Vol. 3. cont. 49.
Christopher Gauderin, having been a Spend-thrift, was converted by Lewis
St^llius, telling him, That he ought rather to distribute of his gettings to
the poor, then to spend them so wastfully; for if he continued so, God would
surely call him to an account for it, insomuch that he was chosen a Deacon in
the Church; in the execution of which Office, he was taken and imprisoned, and
being asked how he came to turn Heretic, seeing he learned not that of his
Master the Abbot, he answered, I am no Heretic, but a right believing
Christian, which he taught me not indeed, but rather, other vile qualities,
which I am ashamed now to rehearse.

Some objecting to him his youth, being about the age of thirty, He told them,
That man's life consisted but of two days, viz. the day of his birth, and the
day of his death. And for my part (said he) I am now willing by death to pass
into eternal life.

The morning that he was to be executed, He said to his Fellow Prisoners
(having put on a clean shirt, and washed himself) Brethren, I am now going to
be married, I hope before noon to drink of the wine of the Kingdom of Heaven.

A Friar coming to them (as he said) to convert them; Christopher said unto
him, Away from us, thou seducer of Souls, for we have nothing to do with thee.

One of his Fellow Sufferers (as the Hangman was gagging him) said, What, shall
we not have liberty in this our last hour to praise our God with our voice and
tongue. Brother (said Gauderin) let not this discourage us, for the greater
wrong our enemies think to do unto us, the more assistance we shall find from
God: And so he never ceased to comfort them, till he was gagged also, and burnt
June 2, 1568.

Gerard.
About the year 1160. in the reign of Henry the Second, Clarks Martyrology page
41.
came about thirty Waldens^s into England, Gerardus being their Minister, to
labor to win Disciples to Christ. They were converted before a Council of
Bishops at Oxford, and Gerard speaking for them all, said, We are Christians,
holding and reverencing the Doctrine of the Apostles. -- Being urged with
arguments against their Doctrine, they answered, They believed as they were
taught by Gods Word, but would not dispute their faith. -- Being admonished to
repent, and threatened if they did not, they despised their Counsel, scorned
their threats, saying, Blessed are they that suffer persecution for
righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

They were excommunicated, burnt in the foreheads for Heretics, Mr. Gerard
both in the forehead and cheek; their clothes were cut off to their Girdles,
and so whipped through Oxford, they singing all the while, Blessed are ye when
men hate you, and despitefully use you, etc.

Ghest.
Fox, Vol. 1. page 1012.
Laurence Ghest had his wife and seven children brought to him (the Bishop
hoping to overcome him by his nat^ral affection to them) and his wife beginning
to exhort him to favor himself, He desired her not to be a block in his way,
for that he was in good course, running toward the mark of his salvation.

Gibson.
Fox, Vol. 3. page 858.
Some of the Articles exhibited against Mr. Richard Gibson. -- (3) That he has
commended, allowed, defended, and liked both Cranmer, L^tim^r, Ridley, and all
other Heretics here in this Realm of England, according to the Ecclesiastical
Laws condemned for Heretics, and also liked their Opinions. (4) That he has
comforted, aided; assisted, and maintained both by words and otherwise,
Heretics and erroneous Persons, or at the least suspected and infamed of
Heresies, etc. (5) That he has affirmed that the Religion now used in this
Realm, is in no wise agreeable to Gods Word and Commandment, etc.

The Bishop asking him, if he knew any cause why the Sentence should not be
read against him, he said, Page 859.
the Bishop had nothing wherefore justly to condemn him. Sentence being read,
He again admonished Gibson to remember himself, and so save his soul. Mr.
Gibson answered, That he would not hear the Bishops babbling, boldly protesting
that he was contrary to them all in his mind, though he aforet me kept it
secret, for fear of the Law. And speaking to the Bishop, he said, Blessed am I,
that am cursed at your hands, We have nothing now, but thus will I; for as the
Bishop says, so it must be. And no heresy is it to turn the truth of Gods
Word into lies, and that do you.

Mr. Gibson also propounded Nine Articles to Bonner, by him to be answered by
yea or nay, or else by saying he could not tell (1) Whether the Scriptures of
God, written by Moses and other holy Prophets of God through faith, that is in
Christ Jesus, be available Doctrine, to make all men in all things unto
salvation learned, without the help of any other Doctrine, or no? (3) Whether
the holy Word of God, as it is written, does sufficiently teach all men, of
what dignity, estate, or calling by Office whatsoever be or they be, their
full, true, and lawful duty in their Office? and whether every man -- be found
upon the pain of eternal damnation, in all things to do, as he is thereby
taught and commanded, and in no wise to leave undone any thing that is to be
done, being taught and commanded by the same? (4) Whether any man (the Lord
Jesus Christ, God and man only except) by the holy Ordinance of God, ever was,
is, or shall be Lord over Faith? (5) By what lawful Authority or Power any man
of what Dignity, Estate, or Calling soever he or they be, may be so bold as to
alter or change the holy Ordinances of God, or any of them, or any part of
them? (6) By what evident tokens Antichrist in his Ministers may be known,
seeing it is written, That Satan can change himself into the similitude of an
Angel of Light, and his Ministers fashion themselves, as though they were
Ministers of righteousness? (7) What the Beast is, which makes war with the
Saints of God? and what the gorgeous and glittering Whore is, which sits
upon the Beast? --

Gilby.
See Mr. Gilby 's Admonition to England and Scotland to call them to
repentance, Printed at Geneva, 1558. page 59.
Mr. Anthony Gilby, an exiled Minister of Christ in Queen Mary's days, in his
Admonition speaks thus. -- Whereas many have written* many profitable
Admonitions to you twain (O England and Scotland, both making one Island most
happy, if you could know your own hapiness) -- and others with Pen and Tongue,
with Word, with Writing, with jeopardy and loss of Lands, Goods, and Lives,
have admonished you both twain of that cankered poison of Papistry, that ye
foster and pamper to your own perdition and utter destruction of your selves
and yours, souls and bodies, for now and ever. I thought it my duty (seeing
your destruction to man's judgment to draw so near) hom much or how little
soever they have prevailed, Page 60.
yet once again to admonish you both to give testimony to that truth, which my
Brethren have written, and especially to stir your hearts to repentance, or at
the least to offer my self a witness against you, for the justice of God, and
his righteous judgments, which doubtless (if your hearts be hardened) against
you both are at hand to be uttered. Thus by our writing, whom it pleases God
to stir up of your Nations all men that now l^ve, and that shall come after us,
shall have cause also to praise the mercy of God, that so often admonishes
before he strikes, and to consider his just punishment, when he shall pour
forth his vengeance. Give ear therefore betimes, O Britain (for of that name
both rejoices) whilst the Lord calls, exhorts, and admonishes: that is
the acceptable time, when he will be found. If ye refuse the time offered, ye
cannot have it afterward, though with tears (as did Esau) ye do seem to seek
it. Yet once again in Gods behalf I do offer you the very means, which if God
of his mercies grant you grace to follow, I doubt nothing, but that of all your
enemies speedily ye shall be delivered. Ye rejoice at his Word, I am sure, if
ye have any hope of the performance. Then hearken to the matter which I write
unto you, not forth of men's Dreams and Fables, nor forth of profane Histories,
painted with man's wisdom, vain eloquence, or subtle reasons, but forth of the
infallible Word of God. -- Is not this Gods curse and threatening (amongst many
others) pronounced against the sinful Land and disobedient people? Deuteronomy. 28.
That strangers shall devour the fruit of thy Land, and be above thee, etc. and
thy strong walls wherein thou trusted, shall be destroyed, etc. And does not
Isaiah reckon this also as the extremity of all plagues, for the wickedness of
the people to have women raised up to rule over them? Isa. 3.
But what says the same Prophet in the beginning of his prophecy, for a
remedy against these and all other evils, Page 61.
Your hands are full of blood (says he) O ye Princes of Sodom and people of
Gomorrah; but wash you, make you clean, take away your wicked thoughts forth of
my sight, ^ease to do evil, learn to do well, etc. Then will I turn my hand to
thee, and purge out all thy dross, and take away thy tynne, and I will restore
thy Judges as aforetime, and Counselors as of old. And Moses said before in
the place alleged, That if thou will hear the voice of the Lord (...) God,
Deuteronomy. 28.
and do his Commandments, thou shall be blessed (...) the Town, and blessed in
the Field. The Lord shall ca^^^ thine enemies, that rise up against thee, to
fall before thee, etc. Lo the way in few words, O Britany, (...) win Gods
favor, and therefore to overcome thin^ enemies. But to print this more deeply
upon your hearts, O ye Princes and people of that Island whom God has begun to
punish, seek (I want you) no snifting holes to excuse your faults* no political
practices to resist Gods vengeance* -- Submit your selves to him, Page 62.
who holds you^ breath in your nostrils, who with one blast of hi^ mouth can
destroy all his enemies. Embrace hi^ Son Christ, and repent betimes for your
obstinacy against him and his Word, and for your cruelt^ against his Servants.
Repent, repent. For repentance is the only way of your redress and
deliverance. -- Consider how the Lord has entreated Israel and Judah, his own
people, how often they trespassed, and how he gave them over into the hands of
their enemies: But whenever they repented and turned again to God
unfeignedly, he sent them Judges and Deliverers, Kings and Saviors. -- Noah
pronounces, that within a hundred and twenty years all flesh should be
destroyed. We have many Noah's, that so cry in our times* yet no man repents.
All the time that Noah was preparing for the Ark to avoid Gods vengeance, the
multitude derided this holy Prophet, as the multitude of you two Realms does at
this day deride all them that by obedience to Gods Word seek the means
appointed to avoid Gods judgments. Then the people would not repent, Page 63.
but as if they should live for ever they married, they banqueted, they
builded, they planted, deriding Gods messenger. Do not you the like? I appeal
to your own consciences. The Lord calls to fasting (says the Prophet Isaiah)
to mortify themselves, and kill their lusts, but they kill Sheep and Bullocks.
Jeremy cries for tears and lamentation; They laugh and mock-Malachi cries to
the people of his time, Turn unto me, and I will turn unto you, says the Lord
of Hosts, and they proudly answer, Wherein shall we turn? Are you not such? Do
you not ask, Wherein shall we turn, when ye will not know your sins? Ye will
not confess and acknowledge your faults, though ye go a whoring in every
Street, Town, and Village with your Idols: though the blood of the oppressed
cry every where against you for vengeance. So that seeing no taken of
repentance, I cannot cry unto you with John Baptist, O ye generation of vipers,
who has taught you to fly from the wrath to come? Page 64.
-- But I will wound you no more with the words of the Prophets, or of this
holy Saint of God John Baptist, but with our Savior Christ's two most sweet
parables of the two Sons and of the Tilmen, to whom he set his vineyard, I will
labor to set before your eyes your rebellion, hypocrisy, and cruelty, if so I
can bring any of you to repentance. -- He has called you by his Word many a
time to work in his vineyard. I ask, what you have answered. Some of you have
said plainly, like rebellious children, That ye would not do it, that ye would
not work in your Fathers vineyard. Shall I apply this part to Scotland?
Scotland was indeed called most plainly and evidently through the mercies of
God both by their own faithful Countrymen, Page 65.
and also by earnest travel of our English Nation to come into the Lords
vineyard in the time of King Edward the Sixth, but refused. That time (as ye
know) the vineyard in England by the children of God was not altogether
neglected, and then most earnestly were ye^^ (O Brethren of Scotland) required
to join han^^ with us in the Lords work, but Satan alas would not suffer it.
His old fo^tred malice, and Antichris^^ his Son, could not abide, that Christ
should grow^^ to strong by joining that Isle together in perfect Religion, etc.
lest this one Island should become a safe Sanctuary (as it began to be) to all
the persecuted in all places. -- God has also by the blood of his Saints, shed
amongst you, by favor and friendship, by war and the sword, yea by famine and
pestilence, and also by all other means called you to labor in his vineyard;
but to this days alas! we hear not of your humble obedience, But still ye say
with stubborn faces, We will not labor, we will not be bound to such
thraldom, etc. Ye think perchance I am too sharp, and that I accuse you more
then you deserve; for amongst you many do know the will of your Father, and
many make profession of his Gospel, but consider, Brethren, that it is not
enough to know the Commandment, and to profess the same in mouth, but it is
necessary, that ye refuse your selves, your own pleasures, appetites, and your
own wisdom, if ye shall be judged faithful laborers in the Lord vineyard,
and that ye bear the burdens, together with your Brethren, and suffer heat and
sweat, before ye taste the fruits with them. God will no^^ be content, that ye
look over the Hedge, and behold the labors of your Brethren, but he requires
that ye put your hands also to the labors, that ye travel continually to pluck
up all unprofitable weeds, though in so doing the Thorns prick you to the bone;
that ye assist your Brethren in their labors, though it be with the jeopardy
of your lives, the loss of your substance, and displeasure of the whole earth.
Page 68.
-- I must needs leave thee, O Scotland, after I have advertized thee of this,
that thou follow not the example of England, but let thy reformation be full
and plain, according to Gods holy Will and Word, without addition. Let all the
plants, which thy Heavenly Father has not planted, be rooted out at once. Let
not avarice blind thee, nor worldly wisdom discourage thy heart; let none bear
the name of a Teacher, that is known to be a Fosterer of Superstition, or any
kind of wickedness. -- Thus must thou, O Scotland, repent thy former
inobedience, if that thou will be approved of the Lord. And now do I return to
thee, O England, I do liken thee to the second Son in the Parable, which
answered his Father with flattering words, saying, I go Father, but yet he went
not at al^. For since the time I had any remembrance, our Heavenly Father, of
his great mercies, has not ceased to call thee into his Vineyard, and to these
late days thou have always said, That thou would enter and be obedient. In
the time of King Henry the Eighth, when by Tyndal, Frith, Biln^y, and other his
saithful Servants, God called England to dress his Vineyard, many promised full
fair, but what fruit followed, nothing but bitter grapes, yea, briars and
brambles, the wormwood of avarice, the gall of cruelty, the poison of filthy
fornication, flowing from head to foot, the contempt of God, and open defense
of the Cake-idol, by open Proclamation to be read in the Churches, instead of
Gods Scriptures. Page 70.
-- It grieveth me to write these evils of my Country, save only that I must
needs declare what fruit were found in the Vineyard, after you promised to work
therein, to move you to Repentance, and to justify Gods Judgments, how
grievonsly soever he shall plague you hereaft^^ Wherefore I desire you to call
to remembranc^ your best state under King Edward, when all me^^ with general
consent promised to work in th^^ Vineyard, and ye shall have cause I doubt not
to ^a^ment your wickedness, that so contemned the voic^^ of God for your own
lusts, for your cruelty, for your covetousness, that the Name of God was by
your vanities evil spoken of in other Nations* -- God grant you all repentant
hearts, for no order or state did any part of his duty in those days. B^^ to
speak of the best, whereof you use to boast, your Religion was but an English
Mattins, patched forth of the Popes portess. Many things were in your great
Book superstitious and foolish, all were driven to a present service, like the
Papists, that they should think their duties discharged, if the number were
said of Psalms and Chapters. Finally, there could no Discipline be brought into
the Church nor correction of manners. Page 71.
-- To what contempt was Gods Word, and the admonition of his Prophets come in
all estates before God did strike, some men are not ignorant. The Preachers
themselves for the most part could find no fault in Religion, but that the
Church was poor, and lacked living. -- Sure many things should have been
reformed, before that the Kitchen had been better provided for our Prelates in
England. It was most evident that many of you under the cloak of Religion,
served your own bellies; some where so busy to heap benefice upon benefice,
some to labor in Parliament for purchasing of Lands, that the time was small,
which could be found for the Reformation of abuses, and every little that was
spent upon the feeding of your flocks. -- In a word, the Go^^spel was so
lightly esteemed; that the most part of men thought rather that God should bow
and stoop to their appetites, then that they should be subject to his holy
Commandments. -- Even the Nobility and Council would suffer no rebukes of Gods
Messengers, though their offenses were never so manifest; let those that
preached in the Court, the Lent before King Edward deceased, speak their
conscience, and accuse me if I lie; yea, let a writing of Northumberland's to
Mr. Harlow be brought to light, and it shall testify, that he was not ashamed
to say, That the liberty of the Preachers tongues would cause the Council and
Nobility to rise up against them, for they could not suffer so to be entreated.
These were the fruits in the time of Harvest, a little before the Winter came,
and of the time of Mary what should I write? -- It has cast off the Truth
known, and confessed, and follows lies and errors, Page 72.
which once it detested. It builds the building which once it destroyed; it
raises up the idols, which once were there confounded. -- They persecute, they
banish, they burn Christ the Son of God in his members. Page 73.
-- But to be short, this only remains for both these Nations, that they
repent, and return into the Vineyard, with the first Son, and bring forth the
fruits of Repentance. The fruits of Repentance I call not only to know your
sins, and to lament them, but to amend your lives, and to make strait the Lords
paths by resisting Satan and Sin, and obeying God in doing the works of
righteousness, and executing Gods Precepts and Judgments, so long amongst you
contemned, Mat. 3.
for even now is the Axe put to the root of the tree, etc. The Lord has now
his Fan in his hand, and will purge his floor, etc. Repent therefore whilst you
have time, before you be ^anned, Page 74.
hewn down, and fired. -- Here have we to lament the miserable state of
mankind, which i^ so seduced by the subtle Serpent, that he cannon know his
misery, when he is admonished, nor perceive his perdition, when it draws so
near. When the Servants of God set forth his Truth, they are charged to trouble
Realms and Countries, as wa^ Elias, when they warn men to join hands with
wicked Kings and Princes, they are counted Traitors, as was Isaiah and
Jeremiah, such is man's malice. --

Wherefore I do admonish and exhort you both in the Name of the living God,
that howsoever yo^ have hitherto showed your selves the Servants o^ men, to
bear and flatter with the world, that no^ ye learn in Gods cause to despise the
faces of men to bend your selves against this wicked world, neither regarding
the Visors of Honors, vain Titles nor dignities, any farther then they seek
Gods only Glory, for his Glory will he not suffer to be contemned for any
cause; no, he will pour contemp^ on those Princes that strive against his
Truth, b^^ those that glorify him, Page 75.
will he glorify. -- Behold, your only remedy remaining, is to repen^ your
time of ignorance, of stubbornness, of cruelty of idolatry, wherein ye have so
long continued Mourn for your ignorance, and now with all diligence seek for
knowledge of the World of God and openly profess the Gospel, which is the power
of God, whereof ye ought not to be ashamed. Cease at the last from your old
stubbornness, and labor in the Vineyard with all meekness. Cease from your
cruelty against Christ's Members, and learn t^ suffer for Christ's sake, if ye
will be true Christians. Banish all Idolatry and Popish Superstition from
amongst you, else can ye have no part i^ Christ's Kingdom, no more then Christ
can be partaker with Antichrist. Pray to the Lord of Hosts and Armies to give
you the courage, strength, and means. The Lords Arm is not shortened now, no
more then of old. Be strong therefore in the Lord, for the defense of the
Truth, though all the World rise against it. Now when the battle is fierce
against the living God for dead idols, against the Gospel of Christ for the
inventions of Antichrist, against Christ members for Popish ceremonies; can any
of you that will be accounted Gods Children, still halt of both hands? Page 76.
-- If you will maintain Gods truth in the Earth, he will receive you as his
Children into the Heavens, if you confess his Christ before this wicked
Generation, Christ shall confess you before his Father in the Heavens, in the
presence of his Angels: But if you persist stubbornly to banish Gods Word, and
his Son Christ in his Members forth of your Earthly Kingdoms, how can ye look
for any part in his Heavenly Kingdom? Page 77.
-- Lo here is the choice of life and death, of misery and wealth offered to
you by Gods mercies, and the means how you may win Gods favor opened, whereby
only ye may prevail against your enemies. God grant you hearts to answer as
the people did to Joshua, Josh. 24.
offering the like choice. God forbid (say they) that we should forsake God, we
will serve the Lord our God, and obey his voice, for he is our God. And we your
ban^shed Brethren, by the Power of God, to provoke you forwards, will thus
pronounce with Joshua, That we and our F^milies will serve the Lord God, though
all Nations run to Idols, though all people do persecute us. We know that Satan
has but a short time to rage, and that Christ our Captain right speedily will
crown his Soldiers, to whom as he is the eternal God with his Father be all
honor and glory for ever and ever. So be it.

See it at the end of the Dialogue.
A short Prayer which Mr. Gilby made for t^^ faithful in those days. O Lord
God, and most merciful Father, we beseech thee for the honor of the Holy Name
to defend us from that Antichrist (...) Rome, and from all his detestable
enormities, manners, laws, garments, and ceremonies. Destroy tho^ the counsel
of all the Papists and Atheists, enemi^^ of thy Gospel, and of this Realm of
England. D^^^close their mischiefs and subtle practices. C^^ found their
devices. Let them be taken in the^ own wiliness. And strengthen all those that
mai^tain the Cause and Quarrel of thy Gospel, with i^vincible force and power
of the Holy Spirit, so the they fail not to proceed and go forward to that tr^^
Godliness, commanded in thy Holy Word, with (...) simplicity and sincerity, to
thy Honor and Glor^ the comfort of thine Elect, and the confusion (...) thine
enemies, through Jesus Christ our Lord an^ Savior. Amen, Amen. And say from
the hear^^ Amen.

Glee.
Fox, Vol 3. cont. p. 24.
When the Friars told Madam La Glee, that (...) was in a damnable estate: It
seems so indeed (sai^^sne) being now in your hands; but I have a (...) that
will never leave me, nor forsake me, for (...) that. Thou have (said they)
renounced the Faith It is true (said she) I have renounced your faith which I
am able to show is rejected, and accurse^ of God, and therefore deserves not so
much as (...) be called Faith.

Page 25.
When news was brought her, that she was co^^demned to be hanged, she fell down
upon he^ knees, and blessed God, for that it pleased him (...) snew her so much
mercy as to deliver her by such kind of death, out of the troubles of this
wretche^ world, and to honor her so far, as to call her (...) die for his
Truth, and to wear his Livery (meaning the Haltar, which the Hangman had put
about her neck) Then sitting down at Table to break her fast with the three
other condemned Servants of Christ, giving thanks to God, she exhorted them to
be of good courage, and to trust unto the end in his free and only mercy. She
then called for a clean linen Wastcoat, making her self ready, as if she had
been going to a Wedding. Ward, page 151.
Mr. W^rd tells us, that she put on her Bracelets; for I go (said she) unto my
Husband.

Being commanded (as she was led to execution) to take a Torch into her hand,
and to acknowledge she had offended God and the King: Away, away, (said she)
with it. I have neither offended God, nor the King, according to your meaning,
nor in respect of the cause, for which I suffer. I am I confess a sinful woman,
but I need no such light, for helping me to ask forgiveness of God for my sins
past, or present. Life such things your selves, who sit and walk in the
darkness of ignorance and error.

Then one of her Kinsfolks met her in the way, and presented to her view her
little children, praying her to have compassion on them. I must needs tell you
(said she) that I love my children dearly; but yet neither for the love I bear
to them, or any thing else in this world, will I renounce the Truth, or my God,
who is and will be a Father unto them, to provide better for them, then I
should have done, and therefore to his providence and protection I commend and
leave them.

When she saw the three men about to die silent, and not to call on God, she
ex^orted then thereto, and gave them an example.

Glover.
Fox. Vol. 3. page 412.
Mr. Robert Glover in his Letter to his Wife ha^ many memorable passages, the
chief I shall collec^ -- I thank you heartily (most loving Wife) (...) your
Letters sent to me in my imprisonment. read them with tears more then once or
twic^ with tears (I say) for joy and gladness, that Go^ has wrought in you so
merciful a work; (1) (...) unfeigned repentance. (2) An humble and heart
reconciliaton. (3) A willing submission and ob^^dience to the will of God in
all things. -- The^^ your Letters, and the hearing of your godly pr^^ceedings
have much relieved and comforte^ me, etc. and shall be a goodly Testimony for
you at the great Day, against many worldly and dain^^ Dames, which set more by
their own pleasure an^ praise in this world, then by Gods Glory, little
re^garding (as it appears) the everlasting health (...) their own souls or
others. -- So long as God shall lend you continuance in this miserable world
above all things give your self continually to Prayer, lifting up pure hands
without anger, wrath, o^ doubting, forgiving as Christ forgives. And that w^^
may be the better willing to forgive, it is good often to call to remembrance
the multitude and greatness of our sins, which Christ daily and hour^^
pardons and forgiveth us. -- And because God^ Word teaches us, not only the
true manner ^^ praying, but also what we ought to do or not to (...) in the
whole course of our life, what pleases (...) displeases God, John 12.
and that as Christ says, The Wo^^ of God, that he has spoken, shall judge
us. Let you^ Prayer be to this end especially, that God of hi^ great mercy
would open and reveal more and more daily to your heart the true sense,
knowledge, an^ understanding of his most holy Word, and gi^^ you grace in your
living, to express the fruit thereof. And forasmuch as Gods Word is, as the
Holy Ghost calls it, 1 Cor. 1.
The Word of affliction, i. e. it is seldom without hatred, persecution,
peril, danger of loss of goods and life, etc. Call upon God continually for his
assistance, casting your accounts what is like to cost you, endeavoring your
self, through the help of the Holy Ghost by continuance of prayer, to lay your
foundation so sure, that no storm or tempest shall be able to overthrow it;
Luke 17.
remembering always (as Christ says) Lots wife, i. e. to beware of looking
back to that thing that displeases God: and nothing more displeases God then
Idolatry, that is, false worshipping of God, otherwise then his Word commands.
-- They object they be the Church, etc. My answer was, The Church of God
knows and acknowledges no other head, but Jesus Christ the Son of God, whom
ye have refused, and chosen the man of sin, the Son o^ perdition, Page 423.
enemy to Christ, the Devils Deputy and Lieutenant, the Pope. Christ's Church
hears, teaches, and is ruled by his Word, as he says, John 10.
My Sheep hear my voice. If you abide in me, and my Word a^ide in you, you be
my Disciples. Their Church repelleth Gods Word, and forces all men to follow
their traditions. Christ's Church dares not add nor diminish, alter or change
his blessed Testament; Acts 7.
but they be not afraid to take away all that Christ instituted, and go a
whoring (as the Scripture says) with their own inventions, etc. The Church of
Christ is, has been, and shall be in all ages under the Cross, persecuted,
molested, and afflicted, the world ever hating them because they are not of the
world; but these persecute, m^rther, slay, and kill such as profess the true
doctrine of Christ, be they in learning, living, conversation, and other
virtues never so excellent. Christ and his Church referred the trial of their
doctrine to the Word of God, and gave the people leave to judge thereof by the
same Word; John 5.
search the Scriptures. But this Church takes away the Wor^^ from the people,
and suffers neither learned nor unlearned, to examine or prove their doctrine
by the Word of God. The true Church of Go^ labors by all means to resist and
withstand the lusts, desires, and motions of the world, the flesh, and the
Devil: these for the most part give themselves to all voluptuousness, etc. -- I
likened them (...) Nimrod, whom the Scripture calls a mighty Hunter, telling
them, That that which they could no^ have by the Word, they would have by the
Sword and be the Church whether men will or no. -- Be^ware of such as shall
advertise you something (...) bear with the world, as they do, for a season.
Ther^ is no dallying with Gods matters. It is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of God. Remember the Prophet Elias, 1 Chr. 18. Luke 9.
Why halt ye on both sides? Remember what Christ says, He that puts his
ha^^ to the Plough, and looks back, is not worthy of me. And seeing God has
hitherto allowed you as a good Soldier in the fore-ward, play not the Coward*
neither draw back to the rere-ward. Saint John numbreth among them, that shall
dwell in the he^y Lake, such as be fearful in Gods Cause. Set before your eyes
always the examples of such, as have behaved themselves boldly in Gods Cause,
as Stephen, Peter, Paul, Daniel, the three Children, the Widows Sons, and in
your days Anne Askew, La^rence Sanders, John Bradford, etc. Be afraid in
n^thing (says Saint Paul) of the adversaries of Christ^ Doctrine, Phil. 1.
the which is to them a sign of perdition, b^^ to you of everlasting salvation.
Christ commands the same, saying, Fear them not. Let us not follow the
example of him, who asked time first to take leave of his Friends. If we do so,
we shall find few of them, that will encourage us to go forward in our
business, please it God never so much. We read not that James and John, Andrew
and Simon, when they were called, put off the time, till they had known their
Fathers and Friends pleasure, but the Scripture says, Mat. 13.
They forsook all, and by and by followed Christ. Christ likened the Kingdom
of God to a precious Pearl, the which whosoever finds, sells all that he
has to buy it. Yea, whosoever has but a little taste or glimmering how
piecious a treasure the Kingdom of Heaven is, will gladly forego both life and
goods for the obtaining of it. But the most part now adays be like to Aesops
Cock, which when he had found a precious stone, wished rather to have found a
barley corn: so ignorant be they how precious a jewel the Word of God is, that
they choose rather the things of this world, which being compared to it, be
less in value then a barley corn. If I would have given place to worldly
reasons, these might have moved me; the foregoing of you and my children; the
consideration of the state of my children, being yet young, apt and inclinable
to virtue and learning, and so having the more need of my assistance; I was
never called to be a Preacher or Minister; and (because of my sickness) fear of
death in Prison before I should come to my answer, and so my death to be
unprofitable. But these and such like, I thank my heavenly Father (which of his
infinite mercy inspired me with his Holy Ghost, for his Sons sake, my only
Savior and Redeemer) prevailed not in me. But when I had by the wonderful
permission of God fallen into their hands, at the first sight of the Sheriff,
nature a little abashed; yet ere ever I came to the Prison, by the working of
God and through his goodness, fear departed. -- Little justice was showed by
Mr. Sheriff; but the less justice a man finds at their hands, the more
consolation in conscience shall he find from God; for whosoever is o^ the
world, the world will love him. After I came to Prison, and had reposed my self
there a while, I wept for joy and gladness my belly full, mu^i^g much of the
great mercies of God, and (as it were) saying to my self after this sort, O
Lord, who am I, on whom thou should bestow this thy great mercy, to be
numbered among the Saints that suffer for the Gospels sake? And so beholding and
considering on the one side my imperfection, unableness, sinful misery and
unworthiness, and on the other side the greatness of Gods mercy, to be called
to so high promotion, I was as it were amazed and overcome for a while with joy
and glad^ess, concluding thus; O Lord, thou show power in weakness, wisdom
in foolishness, mercy in sinfulness. Who shall let thee to choose where and
whom thou will? As I have ever zealously loved the confession of thy Word, Page
424.
so ever thought I my self unworthy to be partaker of affliction for the same.
Some traveling with me to dismissed upon bonds, to them my answer was (to my
remembrance) after this sort; Forasmuch as the Masters have imprisoned me,
having nothing to burden me withal, if I should enter into bonds, I should in
so doing accuse my self: and seeing they have no matter to lay to my charge,
they may as well let me pass without bonds, as with bonds. Secondly, if I shall
enter into bonds, covenant and promise to appear, I shall do nothing but
excuse, color, and cloak their wickedness, and endanger my self nevertheless,
being bound by my promise to appear. -- Afterward debating the matter with my
self, these considerations came into my head. I have from time to time with
good conscience (God I take to record) moved all such as I had conference with
to be no dalliers in Gods matters, but to show themselves after so great a
light and knowledge, hearty, earnest, constant, and stable in so manifest a
truth, and not to give place one jot contrary to the same. Now thought I, if I
shall withdraw my self, and make any shifts to pull my own neck out of the
Collar, I shall give great offense to my weak Brethren in Christ, and advantage
to the enemies to slander Gods Word. It will be said, he has been a great
emboldner of others to be earnest and fervent, to fear no worldly perils and
dangers, but he himself will give no such example. Wherefore I thought it my
bounden duty both to God and man, being (as it were) by the great goodness of
God called and appointed hereunto, to set aside all fear, perils and dangers,
all worldly respects and considerations, and like as I had before, according to
the measure of my small gift, within the compass of my vocation and calling,
from the bottom of my heart unfeignedly moved, exhorted, and persuaded all
that pro^ess Gods Word, manfully to persist in the defense of the same, not
with sword and violence, but with suffering and loss of life, rather then to
de^ile themselves again with the whorish abominaon of the Romish Antichrist. So
the hour being come with my fact and example to ratify, confirm, and protest
the same to the hearts of all true Believers, and to this end (by the mighty
assistance of Gods holy Spirit) I resolved my self with much peace of
conscience, willingly to sustain whatsoever the Romish Antichrist should do
against me. -- When Mr. Warren the Chancellor willed (...) chief Jailer to
carry me to the Bishop, I laid (...) his charge the cruel seeking of my death;
a^^ when he would have excused himself, I told h^^ he could not wipe his hands
so: He was as g^^^^ of my blood before God, as though he had mu^thered me with
his own hands. He departed from me, saying I needed not to fear if I would be
(...) his belief. God open his eyes, and give him gra^^ to believe this, which
he and all of his inclination shall find (I fear) too true for their parts,
that (...) they which cruelly, maliciously, and spitefully pe^secute, molest,
and afflict the Members of Christ for their Conscience sake, and for the true
test^^mony of Christ's Word, and cause them to be mo^^ unjustly slain and
murdered, without speedy re^pentance shall dwell with the Devil and his Ange^
in the fiery lake everlastingly, where they sha^^ wish and desire, cry and
call, but in vain (as the^^ right companion Epulo) to be refreshed of them whom
in this world they contemned, despised, disdained, as slaves, misers, and
wretches. -- The Bishop laid to my charge my not coming to Church Here I might
have dallied with him, and put him to his proofs. -- Notwithstanding I answered
him through Gods merciful help, that I neither ha^ nor would come at their
Church, as long as their Mass was used there, to save (if I had them) (...)
hundred lives. -- The Bishop asking me wh^ should judge the Word? I told him,
Christ wa^ content that the people should judge his Doctrine by searching the
Scriptures, and so was Paul. Methinks ye should claim no farther privilege no^
pre-eminence then they had. -- The Bishop telling me, He was my Bishop, and
therefore I mu^^ believe him: If you say black is white (said I) must I also
say as you say, and believe the same, because you say it is so? Page 425.
-- If you will be believed because you be a Bishop, Why find you fault with
the people, that believed Mr. Latimer, Mr. Ridley, Mr. Hooper, etc. that were
Bishops? Because they were Heretics (said the Bishop) And may not you err
(quoth I) as well as they? I looked for learning at my Lords hand to persuade
me, and he oppressed me only with his Authority. He said I dissented from the
Church, and asked me where my Church was before Kings Edward's time; I desired
him to show me, where their Church was in Elias time, and what outward show it
had in Christ's time? -- The tidings that I should be carried to Lichfield did
at first somewhat discourage me, fearing least I should by reason of my great
sickness through extreme handling (which I looked for) have died in the Prison,
before I should come to my answer: But I rebuked immediately with Gods Word
this infidelity in my self, etc. after this manner, What make I of God? Is not
his power as great in Lichfield as Coventry? Does not his providence extend as
well to Lichfield as Coventry? Was he not with Habakkuk, Daniel, Meshach, and
Jeremy in their most dangerous imprisonments? He knows what things we have need
of them. He has numbered all the hairs of our head. The Sparrow falls not to
the ground without our heavenly Fathers will, much more will he care for us, if
we be not faithless, whom he has made worthy to be witnesses of his truth. So
long as we put our trust in him, we shall never be destitute of his help,
neither in prison, nor in sickness, nor in health, nor in death, nor before
Kings, nor before Bishops. Not the Devil himself, much less one of his
Ministers shall be able to prevail against us. With such like meditations I
waxed cheerful of good consolation and comfort. So that hearing one say, They
could not provide Horses enough for us, I said, Let them carry us in a
Dung-Cart for lack of Horses, if they list, I am well content for my part. -- I
told Iephcot the Chancellors Servant, That they should have judgment without
mercy, that showed no mercy, and this mercy I found at his hand at Lichfield.
He put me into a Prison that same night, where I continued till I was
condemned, in a place next to the Dungeon, etc. very cold, with small light,
and there he allowed me a bundle of Straw instead of a Bed, without Chair,
Form, or any other thing to ease my self withal. God of his mercy gave me
great patience through prayer that night, so that if it had been his pleasure,
I could have have been contented to have ended my life. -- In the time of my
imprisonment I gave my self continually to prayer and meditation of the
merciful promises of God, made unto all, without exception of persons, that
call upon the Name of his dear Son Jesus Christ. I ^ound in my self daily
amendment of health of body, increase of peace in conscience, and many
consolations from God by the help of his holy Spirit, and sometime (as it were)
a taste and glimmering of the life to come, All for his only Son Jesus Christ's
sake. To him be all the praise for ever and ever. The enemy ceased not many
times sundry ways to assault me: Oftentimes objecting to my conscience my own
unworthiness of the greatness of the benefit to be accounted amongst those that
suffer for Christ, for his Gospels sake. Against him I replied* with the Word
of God on this sort. What were all those whom God had chosen from the beginning
to be his Witnesses, and to carry his Name before the world? Acts 24. Romans 11.
Romans 4. John 1.
Were they not men, as well subject to sin and imperfections, as other men be?
-- Who gave first unto him? What have thou that thou have not received? All
have received of his fullness. They were no bringers of any goodness to God, but
altogether receivers. They chose not God first, but God chose them. They loved
not God first, but he loved them first: Yea he both loved and chose them when
they were his enemies, full of sin and corruption, as well as void of all
goodness. -- He is and will be the same God, as rich in mercy, as mighty, as
able, as ready, as willing to forgive sins without respect of persons to the
worlds end of all them that call upon him. God is near, he is at hand, he is
with all, with all (I say) and refuses none, excepteth none, that faith^ully
in true repentance call upon him, in what hour, what place, or what time soever
it be. It is no arrogance nor presumption in any man to burden God (as it were)
with his promise, and of duty to claim and challenge his aid, help, and
assistance in all our perils, dangers, and distress, calling upon him not in
the confidence of our own godliness, but in the trust of his own promises made
in Christ. -- His Word cannot lie, Psalm. 50.
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will hear thee, and thou shall
praise me. I answered the enemy also on this manner; I am a sinner, and
therefore unworthy to be a witness of this truth. What then? Must I deny his
Word, because I am not worthy to pro^ess it? What bring I to pass in so doing,
but add sin to sin? What is greater sin then to deny the truth of Christ's
Gospel? He that is ashamed of me or of my words (says Christ) of him also will
I be ashamed before my Father, and all his Angels. I might also by the same
reason forbear to do any of Gods Commandments. When I am provoked to pray, the
enemy may say to me, I am not worthy to pray, therefore I shall not pray, etc.
--

When the Bishop came to Lichfield -- he persuaded me to be a Member of his
Church, which had continued so many years. As for our Church (as he called it)
it was not known, he said, but lately in King Edward's time. I profess my self
to be a Member of that Church (said I) that is builded upon the foundation of
the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ being the head cornerstone. And this
Church has been from the beginning (said I) though it bear no glorious show
before the world, being ever for the most part under the Cross and affliction,
contemned, despised, and persecuted. The Bishop contended on the other side
that they were the Church. So cried all the Clergy against the Prophets of
Jerusalem (said I) saying, The Church, the Church, etc. So much out of Mr.
Glover's choice Letter.

Page 427.
After he was condemned, his heart was lumpish and desolate of all spiritual
consolation; whereupon fearing least the Lord had utterly withdrawn, he made
his moan to Mr. Austine Bernher, his familiar friend, telling him how he had
prayed night and day to God, and yet had no sense of comfort from him. The
Minister desired him to wait patiently the Lords leisure; and howsoever his
present feeling was, yet seeing his cause was just, he exhorted him constantly
to stick to the same, and to play the man, not doubting but the Lord in his
good time would visit him, and satisfy his desire with plenty of consolation,
whereof (said Mr. Bernher) he was right certain and sure, and therefore desired
him, whenever any such feeling of Gods heavenly mercies should begin to touch
his heart, that then he should show some signification thereof. The next day,
as he was going to the place of his Martyrdom, and was come within light of
the Stake, although all the night before, praying for strength and courage, he
could feel none; suddenly he was so mightily replenished with Gods holy
comfort, and heavenly joys, that he cried out, clapping his hands to Austine,
and saying in these words, Austine, He is come, he is come, etc. and that with
such joy and alacrity, as one seeming rather to be risen from some deadly
danger to liberty of life, then as one passing out of the world by any pains of
death.

Godfrey.
When one called Godfrey de H^mmele Heretic, Ward, page 157.
he said, No Heretic, but an unprofitable Servant, yet willing to die for his
Lord, and reckoning this death no death, but a life.

Goodman.
Mr. Christopher Goodman, See his Sermon on Act. 4.19. Enlarged and Printed at
Geneva. 1558.
an exiled Minister of Christ in Queen Mary's days, declaring the cause of all
the then misery in England, and the only way to remedy the same, writes as
follows from Geneva.

-- If all in whom the People should look for comfort, Page 216, etc.
be altogether declined from God (as indeed they appear to be at this present
time in England, without all fear of his Majesty, or pity upon their Brethren)
-- Then assure your selves (dear Brethren and Servants of God) there can be no
better counsel, nor more comfortable or present remedy (which you shall prove
true, if God grant you his Spirit and Grace to follow it) then in continual and
daily invocation of his Name, to rest wholly and only upon him, make him your
shield, buckler, and refuge, who has so promised to be to all them that are
oppressed and depend upon him; to do nothing commanded against God and your
conscience, preferring at all times the will of God to the will of men, saying
and answering to all manner of persons, This God has commanded, this we must
do: That God has forbidden, that we will not do. If you will rob us and spoil
us for doing the Lords will, to the Lord must you make answer, and not to us;
for his goods they are, and not ours. If ye will imprison us, behold you are
oppressors; if ye will hang us, or burn us, behold ye are murderers of them
which fear the Lord. -- And for our part, if you take from us this vile and
corruptible life, we are sure the Lord will grant it us again with joy, and
immortality, both of soul and body. If God give you grace to make this or the
like answer, and strength to contemn their Tyranny, you may be sure to find
unspeakable comfort and quietness of conscience in the midst of your danger,
and greatest rage of Satan. And thus boldly confessing Christ your Savior
before men (as by the examples of thousands of your Brethren before your faces
God does mercifully encourage you) you may with all hope and patience wait for
the joyful confession of Christ again, Page 218.
before his Father and Angels in Heaven, that you are his obedient and dearly
beloved Servants; being also assured of this, that if it be the will of God to
have you any longer to remain in this miserable world, that then his Providence
is so careful over you, and present with you, that no man or power can take
away your life from you, nor touch your body any farther then your Lord and God
will permit them, which neither shall be augmented for your plain confession,
nor yet diminished for keeping of silence; for nothing comes to the Servants
of God by hap or chance, whose hairs of their heads are numbered. Whereof if ye
be so assured, as ye ought, there can be nothing that should make you to shrink
from the Lord. If they do cast you into Prison with Joseph, the Lord will
deliver you: If they cast you to wild beasts and Lions, as they did D^niel, you
shall be preserved: Page 219.
If into the Sea with Jonas, you shall not be drowned; or into the dirty
dungeon with Jeremy, you shall be delivered; or into the fiery Furnace with
Shadrach, Meshach, and A^ednego, yet shall not be consumed. Contrariwise, if it
be his good pleasure, that you shall glorify his holy Name by your death, what
great thing have you lost? changing death for life, misery for felicity,
continual vexation and trouble for perpetual rest and quietness, choosing rather
to die with shame of the world, being the Servants of God, then to live among
men in honor, being the servants of Satan, and condemned of God. Otherwise, if
you give place to the wickedness of men to escape their malice and bodily
dangers, you show your selves therein to fear man, more then the mighty and
dreadful God: him that has but power of your body, and that at Gods
appointment then God, himself, who has power, after he has destroyed the
body, to cast both soul and body into hellfire, there to remain everlastingly
in torments unspeakable. And moreover, Page 220.
that which you look to obtain by these sinful shifts, you shall be sure to
lose with grief and trouble of conscience; for this saying of your Master being
true and certain, that They which seek to save their life (meaning by any
worldly reason or policy) shall lose it. Mat. 16.
What shall be their gains at length, when by dissimulation and yielding to
Popish Blasphemy, they dishonor the Majesty of God to enjoy this short,
miserable, and mortal life, to be cast from the favor of God, and company of
his heavenly Angels, to enjoy for a short time their goods and possessions
among their fleshly and carnal Friends, whenas their conscience within shall be
deeply wounded with hell-like torments? when Gods curse and indignation hangs
continually over the heads of such, ready to be poured down upon them; when
they shall find no comfort, but utter despair with Judas, who for this worldly
riches (as he did) have sold their Master, Page 221.
seeking either to hang themselves with Judas, to murder themselves with
Francis Spira, to drown themselves with Justice Hales, or else to fall into a
raging madness with Justice Morgan? What comfort had Judas then by his money
received for betraying his Master? was he not shortly after compelled to cast
it from him, with this pitiful voice, Mat. 27.
I have sinned in betraying innocent blood? -- Then, Page 222.
dear Brethren in Christ, what other reward can any of you look for, committing
the like offenses? -- There is no trust but in God, no comfort but in Christ,
no assurance but in his promise, by whose obedience only you shall avoid all
danger. Mat. 10.
And whatsoever you lose in this world, and suffer for his Name, it shall be
here recompensed with double, according to his promise, and in the world to
come with life everlasting, which is to find your life, when you are willing to
lay it down at his Commandment. I am not ignorant how unnatural a thing it is,
and contrary to the flesh, willingly to sustain such cruel death, as the
Adversaries have appointed to all the Children of God, who mind constantly to
stand by their prosession, yet to the Spirit notwithstanding is easy and
joyful; for though the flesh be frail, the Spirit is prompt and ready. Page 223.
Whereof (praised be the Name of God) you have had notable experience in many
of your Brethren, very Martyrs for Christ, who with joy patiently, and
triumphing have suffered and drunk with thirst of that bitter Cup, which nature
so much abhors, wonderfully strengthened no doubt by the secret inspiration
of Gods holy Spirit; so that there ought to be none among you so feeble, weak,
or timorous, whom the wonderful examples of Gods present power and singular
favor in those persons, should not encourage, bolden, and fortify to show the
like constancy in the same Cause and Profession. Nevertheless great cause we
have thankfully to consider the unspeakable mercy of God in Christ, who has
farther respect to our infirmity, that when we have not that boldness of Spirit
to stand to the death, as we see others, he has provided a present remedy,
that being persecuted in one place, we have liberty to flee into another. When
we cannot be in our own Country with a safe conscience (except we would make
open profession of our Religion, Page 224.
which is every man's duty, and so be brought to offer up our lives in sacrifice
to God in testimony that we are his) he has mollified and prepared the hearts
of Strangers to receive us with all pity and gladness, where you may be also
not only delivered from the fear of death, and the Papist^cal Tyranny,
practiced without all measure in that Country, but with great freedom of
conscience hear the Word of God continually preached, and the Sacraments of our
Savior Christ purely and duly, ministered without all dregs of Popery or
Superstition of man's invention, to the intent that you being with others
refreshed for a space, and more strongly fortified, may be also with others
more ready and willing to lay down your lives at Gods appointment; for that is
the chiefest grace of God, and greatest perfection, to sight even unto blood
under Christ's Banner, and with him to give our lives. Page 225.
But if you will thus flee (Beloved in the Lord) you must not choose unto your
selves places, according as you fancy, as many of us, who have left our
Country have done, dwelling in Popish places among the enemies of God in the
midst of impiety; some in France, as in Paris, Orleance, Roan; some in Italy,
as in Rome, Venice, Padua, which persons in fleeing from their Queen, run to
the Pope, fearing the danger of their bodies, seek where they may poison their
souls, thinking by this means to be less suspected of Iezebel, show themselves
afraid and ashamed of the Gospel, which in times past they have stoutly
professed. And lest they should be thought favorers of Christ, have purposely
ridden by the Churches and Congregations of his Servants, their Brethren,
neither minded to comfort others there, nor to be comforted themselves; wherein
they have showed the coldness of their zeal toward Religion, and given no
small occasion of slander to the Word of God, which they seemed to prosess.
Page 226.
-- This manner of fleeing then in ungodly, etc. Neither is it enough to keep
you out of the Dominions of Antichrist, and to place your selves in corners,
you may be quiet and at ease, and not burdened with the charges of the poor,
thinking it sufficient if you have a little exercise in your houses in reading
a Chapter or two of the Scriptures, and then will be counted zealous persons,
and great Gospellers; No Brethren, and S^sters, this is not the way to show
your selves manful soldiers of Christ, except you resort where his Banner is
displayed, Page 227.
and his Standard set up, where the Assembly of your Brethren is, and his Word
openl^ preached, and Sacraments faithfully ministered; for otherwise what may a
man judge, but that such either disdain the company of their poor Brethren,
whom they ought by all means to help and comfort, according to that power that
God has given them for that end only, and not for their own ease; or else
that they have not that zeal to the House of God, the Assembly of his Servants,
and to the spiritual gifts and graces (which God has promised to pour upon the
diligent hearers of his Word) as was in David, who desired, being a King, Psalm.
84.
Rather to be a doorkeeper in the House of God, then to dwell in the tents of
the ungodly, lamenting nothing so much the injuries done to him by his Son
Absalom (which were not small) as that he was deprived of the comfortable
exercises in the Tabernacle of the Lord, which then was in Sion. Neither does
there appear in such persons that greedy desire (whereof Isaiah makes mention)
which ought to be in the Professors of the Gospel, Page 228. Isa. 2.
who never would cease or rest, till they should climb up to the Lords hill,
meaning the Church of Christ, saying one to another, Let us ascend to the hill
of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways,
and we shall walk in his footsteps; for the Law shall come forth of Sion, and
the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem. Which zeal the Prophet does not mention in
vain, but to show what a thirst and earnest desire should be in true
Christians, and how the same appears in seeking and resorting to those
places, where it is set forth in greatest abundance and perfection, as was
after Christ's Ascension in Jerusalem. And as that zeal showed them to be of
Christ, by the like must we be judged Christians also, that if we flee for
Christ, the places whereunto we flee, may bear witness for what cause we are
fled. Page 229.
Neither is it a sufficient excuse which many allege, that they believe to be
saved by Christ, that they have sufficient knowledge of their duty, and the
rest they can supply by their own diligence. I dare say their faith is not so
much, but they had need to desire with the Apostles, Lord, increase our faith.
And if they will so confess, why do they forsake the chiefest means that God
has ordained, which is the open Congregations of his people, where his Word,
the fountain of Faith, is most purely preached, and where the godly Examples of
others may be a sharper spur to prick them forward; and as for the knowledge
and diligence of such, there may be no buckler to defend their doings; for if
they have those gifts whereof they boast, where may they better bestow them
then in the Church of God? except they will say they are born to themselves,
and have the gifts of God, which he would have common to others, applied to
their own private fancy, which is to lap them up in a clout, and not to put
them forth to the vantage of the owner, as did the unprofitable Servant, Page
230.
and as do all they to whom God has given either learning, counsel, or worldly
substance, who either for the strength of Cities, pleasantness of the air,
tra^fick, or merchandise, or for any other worldly respect or policy do absent
themselves from the Congregation and company of their poor Brethren, where
Christ has advanced his Standard, and blown his Trumpet. If God then give you
not strength at the first to stand in his Profession to the death, nor that you
cannot be quiet in conscience, abiding in your Country, you see how his mercy
has given you liberty to kill, and what places he has appointed you to flee
unto, that is, where you may do good to your selves and others, where ye may be
free from Superstition and Idolatry, where your faith may be increased and not
diminished, and your selves strengthened, and confirmed, and more strongly
armed. But if you in tarrying will neither stand manfully to Christ your
Master, but betray him, doing as the Papists do; nor yet with thanks use this
remedy, that God has granted to our infirmity, to resort to his Churches,
godlily instituted, what answer shall ye be able to make to his Majesty, when
he shall call for an account of your doings? How shall you avoid his wrathful
indignation, now ready to be poured upon his enemies? -- For in taking part
with their impiety, you must be partakers of their Cup likewise. Neither is
this any new or hard Doctrine, that may exceed your capacity, but may rather be
termed your A. B. C. and first Principles, wherein none ought to be ignorant.
That if we will be Christ's Scholars, we must learn to bear his Cross, and to
follow him, not to cast it off our shoulders with the enemies, and run from
him. -- Be no more deceived in so plain a matter. Page 233.
If the Lord be God, follow him, if B^al be God, go after him. -- Let not the
example of any lead you into error, for men are but mortal. Trust in the Lord,
for he is a sure rock. -- Trust not your own shifts, for they will deceive you.
Mark the end of others, and in time be warned. These Lessons are hard to the
flesh, but ea^^e to the spirit. The way of the Lord is a strait path, but most
faithful, sure and comfortable. -- From Geneva this first of Ian. An. 1558.

Goose.
John Goose (burnt in England An. 1473.) being pressed by the She^^ff of L^ndon
to recant, Clarks Marty^ology page 57.
and so deliver himself from death, answered, That for his Religion he was at a
pass, and neither could nor would recant the same.

Fox, Vol. 1. page 939.
When the Sheriff gave him some meat, of which he did eat heartily, he said to
the standers by, I eat now a good and competent Dinner, for I shall pass a
sharp shower, before I go to Supper.

Gordius.
Fox. Vol. 1. page 117.
When a solemn Feast was celebrated in Caesarea, in honor to Mars, Gordius a
Citizen thereof, who had been a Centurion, and had chosen exile for sometime in
the heat of Persecution, left the Desert wherein he lived in exile, and got him
up into the chief place of the Theater, and with a loud voice cried out,
Behold, I am found of them that sought me not, and to those that asked not for
me, have I openly appeared.

The Sheriff asking him, who he was, from whence he came, and for what he came
thither; I am come (said he) to publish, that I set nothing by your desires
against the Christian Religion, but that I profess Jesus Christ to be my hope
and safety.

The Sheriff threatening him with all kind of torments; It would be to me a
damage (said he) if I should not endure diverse torments for Christ's Cause.

When he was tormented, he lifted up his eyes to Heaven, saying, The Lord is my
helper, I will not fear the thing that man can do unto me; I will learn no
evil, for thou Lord art with me.

He blamed the Tormentors if they favored him at all.

The Sheriff promising great things, if he would deny Christ; It lies not in
you (said he) to place any in Authority, which be worthy to have a place in
Heaven.

When he was led out of the City to be burnt, many with tears begged him to save
himself, but he said, Weep not, I beseech you, for me, but rather for those
that bring us to the fire, and thereby purchase Hell fire to themselves. Truly
I am ready for the Name of Christ to suffer a thousand deaths, if need were.

Some persuading him to deny Christ with his tongue, and to keep his Conscience
to himself: My tongue (said he) which by the goodness of God I have, cannot be
brought to deny the Author and giver of it; for with the heart we believe unto
righteousness, and with the mouth we confess unto salvation.

Gorgius.
When the Tyrant offered Gorgius promotion: Ward, page 141.
Have ye any thing (said he) equal to, or more worthy then the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Gonzalve.
Mr. John Gonzalve a famous Preacher in Sevil, Fox, Vol. 3. cont. page 12.
was often observed in all his Sermons to aim at this mark, To deliver men's
minds from that blind conceit of meriting by works, that so way might be made
for justification only by says in Christ Jesus, and deeply to ingraft in them
the knowledge of the sole merit of his plenary satisfaction.

When he was led to the place of his Martyrdom, he never showed the least sign
of his being dismayed, Page 13.
but contrariwise with great constancy and courage of heart standing above all
the people, to whom he had formerly preached and delivered the pattern of sound
doctrine, he began with a loud voice to recite the Psalm, which begins thus, O
Lord, Psa. 28.1.
my Rock, be not thou silent to me, etc. He changed not his countenance upon
the Scaffold, though they had gagged him there, because he comforted and freely
exhorted one of his Sisters to be constant.

When the time was come that those which should be burned were brought to the
place of Execution, they were every one commanded to recite the Articles of
their belief; which they willingly did: but when they came to the Article, I
believe the holy Catholic Church, they were bid to add the word Roman, but
they were silent. Then did the Monks and Friars importune Gonzalve's Sisters,
etc. to repeat the word Roman, who answered, They would if they might hear
Gonzalve pronounce it. He being ungagged, the first word he spoke was, That
they should be of good courage, and not to add one word more then what they
had recited.

Grange.
Fox, Vol. 3. Com. page 39
The Bishop of Arres telling Mr. Peregrine de la Grange, that he was sorry to
see him in that condition in Prison. Sir (said he) as for the base estate in
which you now see me, God has so comforted me therein with his grace, that I
do without any great difficulty patiently suffer what he has pleased to lay
upon me; yea I praise and bless his Name, that he has balanced the weight of
my afflictions, according to the strength which he has given me, so as I sink
not under the burden; for as my sufferings in Christ abound, he causes his
consolations by Christ to abound in me also. 2 Cor. 1.3


It is usual (said the Bishop) with such as you are to glory in this kind of
speech; for as soon as any afflictions do befall you, you by and by style them
the sufferings of Christ; and if any of you be put to death, then it is for
Gods truth: but when things are laid to the touchstone, the matter is nothing
so, nor so. Sir (said Mr. Grange) if your meaning be of such as have died for
the Doctrine, for which I am bound with this Chain, and thus fettered with
Irons, I doubt not but they have given such a reason of their Faith, that
whosoever shall read their Answers, and weigh the same without partiality, must
needs judge as we do. And for my own part, I am ready to make it good, 1 Timothy
6.3. Deuteronomy. 12.32.
That the Doctrine I now hold and teach, is according to godliness, taken out
of the pure Fountains of the holy Scriptures, without adding thereto,
diminishing or varying any way therefrom. We read (said the Bishop) that in all
times men have been wont to shelter themselves under the title of Gods Word,
even the old Heretics, etc. I am not ignorant hereof (said Mr. Grange) in
regard that Satan knows how to transform himself into an Angel of light,
thereby to establish his delusions, causing darkness to be taken for light: But
the Holy Ghost, who is the Spirit of truth, has in such wise discovered his
juglings, that none are deluded thereby, but those who at noon day close their
eyes that they may not behold the light. Do you think (said the Bishop) that
the Holy Ghost has given you such an illumination, that the truth should only
be revealed to you, and to none other. God forbid Sir (said Mr. Grange) I
should have any such thought. I am not of the mind of those Dreamers, who brag
of their having particular Revelations of the Holy Spirit, but I speak of an
ordinary and general Revelation, such as is taught us out of the Bible, etc.

I am neither Calvinist nor Papist. I am a Christian; and what I hold
concerning Religion is taken out of Christ's Doctrine, who is the only Doctor
of his Church. What Calvin has taught conformable to the Word of God, I am of
the same mind with him. And whereas you call your Religion the Old Religion,
and ours the New, it troubles me not at all; since the Father of Lies has long
since forged the same, to disgrace the Truth, etc. --

See page 39, 40, 41, 42.
In his dispute with the Bishop concerning the Real Presence, etc. We may see
what holy boldness mixed with meekness the Lord had endued this holy Servant of
his with.

When the Provost gave him and Monsieur de Br^z (of whom before) notice, that
they should die that day, they magnified God for his goodness, and gave the
Provost thanks for the good news, which he had brought them. Monsieur la Grange
going to the rest of the Prisoners, Page 43.
said, I am this day to die for the Truth, and then the heavenly inheritance is
prepared for me. My name is written in the Book of Life, Phil. 4.^. Romans 11.29.
never to be blotted out, because the gifts and calling of God are without
repentance. --

He called for a Brush to brush his Hat and Cloak, causing his Shoos to be
blacked; for now (said he) I am bidden to the marriage of the Lamb, where I am
to feast with him for ever and ever.

Being asked, Whether he meant to suffer with those Shackles on his heels? I
would I might (said he) yea and that they would bury them with me to, that they
might manifest the inhumanity of my adversaries. He told his friends, he felt
such joy of the Holy Ghost in his heart, that he could not with tongue express;
adding, that God showed him a thousand times more favor by taking him after
this manner out of this transitory life, then if he had let him die in his bed
by sickness; for now I shall die (said he) enjoying the benefit of all the
powers of my soul, praying the Lord to have mercy on me.

Monsieur la Grange and de Brez were sentenced to be hanged for administering
the Lords Supper against an express charge by the King given them to the
contrary.

When la Grange was upon the Ladder, he protested with a loud voice, that he
died only for preaching to the people the pure truth of God, taking Heaven and
Earth to witness the same with him.

Gratwick.
Mr. Stephen Gratwick, Fox, Vol. 3. page 790.
seeing the Bishops that sat upon to laugh, said unto them, Why do ye laugh?
Are ye confederate together for my blood, and therein triumph? You have more
cause to look weightily upon the matter; for I stand here before you upon life
and death. But you declare your selves what you are. You are lapped in Lambs
apparel, but you are bent to have my blood. --

Seeing you will have my blood, Page 792.
let me say a little more for my self: On Sunday last you preached this Truth,
If any man think himself Religious, and bridleth not his tongue, the same man's
Religion is vain: And yet in the mean time you seduced your tongue to slander
us poor Prisoners there present in Iron hands, burdening us with the names of
Arrians, Herodians, Anabaptists, Sacramentarians, Pelagians: And when we stood
up to purge our selves thereof, you said, You would cut out our tongues, and
cause us to be pulled out of the Church by violence. But there you gave your
self a shrewd blow, etc. --

Being asked by the Bishop of Winchester if he would recant, he said, My faith
is grounded more steadfastly then to change in a moment. It is no process of
time can alter me, unless my faith were as the waves of the Sea.

When he was condemned, he desired God with a loud voice, That he would not lay
his blood to their charge if it were his good will.

Green.
Fox. Vol. 3. page 622.
Mr. Bartlet Green wrote in Mr. Bar^r^m Calthrops Book a little before his
death, thus. -- Two things have very much troubled me whilst I was in the
Temple, Pride and Gluttony, which under the color of Glory and good
Fellowship, drew me almost from God. --

For So Much as vainglory is so subtle an adversary, that almost it wounds
deadly, ere ever a man can perceive himself to be smitten, therefore we ought
so much the rather by continual prayer to labor for humbleness of mind.
Gluttony beg^nneth under a charitable pretense of love and society, and has in
it most uncharitableness. -- Let us therefore watch and be sober; for our
adversary the Devil walks about like a roaring Lion, seek^ng whom he may
devour. Vale (mi Bartrame) and mei memineris, ut semper simillimi efficiamur.
Vale, etc. Farewell (my Bartram) and remember me, that we may be always like,
Farewell at Newgate I^n. 20. A. 1556.

Page 623.
In his Letter to Mr. Philpot. -- Being accused that I spoke against the Real
Presence, and the Sacrifice of the Mass, and that I affirmed that their Church
was the Church of Antichrist: I confessed it, and that I would continue
therein, though not maintain it by learning, my conscience being satisfied in
the truth, which is sufficient to my salvation. -- I told Mr. Welsh, Forasmuch
as it pleases you to use me so familiarly (for he behaved himself toward me,
as though I had been his equal) I shall open my mind freely to you. I consider
my youth, lack of wit and learning, which would God it were but a little under
the opinion that some men have of me: But God is not bound to time, wit, or
knowledge, but rather chooses the weak things of the world to confound the
mighty, Romans 9.
neither can men appoint bounds to Gods mercy; For I will show mercy on whom I
will show mercy. There is no respect of persons with God, whether he be old or
young, rich or poor, wise or foolish, Fisher or Basket-maker. God gives
knowledge of his truth, James 1.
through his free grace, to whom he list. -- Now I am brought hither before a
great many Bishops and learned men to be made a fool and a laughing stock, but
I weigh it not a rush; for God knows that my whole study is to please him:
Besides that, I care not for man's pleasure or displeasure.

As he was going to Newgate (after he was condemned) there met with him two
Gentlemen, Page 627.
that seeing him burst out into tears, to whom Mr. Green said, Ah my friends,
is this your comfort you are come to give me? Must I who needed to have comfort
ministered to me, become now a comforter of you? --

When he was going to, and was at the Stake, he repeated this Distich, Christ
Deus, sine te spes est mihi nulla salutis,
Te duce vera sequir, te duce falsa nego


In English thus.

O Christ my God, sure hope of health,
Besides thee I have none,
The truth I love and falsehood hate,
By thee my guide alone.
These Verses he wrote in a Book of Mr. Hussey's of the Temple.

Behold thy self by me,
Such one was I as thou,
And thou in time shall ^e,
Even dust as I am now!
Bartlet Green. Page 628.
In his Letter to his Friends of the Temple. -- Very Friends are they, which are
knit together by the knot of Charity. Charity does not decay, but increase in
them that die faithfully. -- If thy Friend be out of sight, is thy friendship
ended? -- If he be carried into Heaven, is Charity hindered thereby? The Fathers
of the Primitive Church gave thanks for their Friends that died in the Faith,
to prove that Charity died not with Death. -- What says Saint Paul, We are
members of his body, of his flesh, and of his blood; we are members one of
another. Is the hand or Arm, Foot or Leg a member, when it is dissevered from
the body? What is it that couples us, but love? When all things shall fail,
love fails never. Hope has his end, when we get that we hoped for. Faith is
finished in Heaven. Love endures for ever: Spiritual love, I mean; for carnal
love, when that which we love is lost, does perish with the flesh. Neither was
that ever but fleshly love, which by distance of place or severing of bodies,
is parted as^nder. -- If we keep Christ's commandment in loving each other, as
he loved us, then should our love be everlasting. This friendship Paul felt,
when it moved him to say, That neither length nor ^readth, neither height nor
depth, should sever him from the love of Christ. Now you may say, Why writes
thou this? Truly to the end, that if our friendship be stable, you may
accomplish this the last request of your Friend, etc. -- Mr. Fleetwood, I
beseech you remember Witt^ance and Cook, two singular men among common
Prisoners. Mr. Fernham, Mr. Fell, and Mr. Hussy (as I hope) will dispatch
Palmer and Richardson, with his companions. I pray you Mr. Palmer think on I.
Grove, an honest poor man, Tra^ford and Rice Apprice his Accomplices. My Cousin
Thomas Witton (a Scrivener in Lombard-str^et) has promised to further their
delivery, at the least he can instruct you which way to work. I doubt not but
that Mr. Bowyer will labor for Goodwife Cooper (for she is worthy to be
helped) and B^rard the Frenchman. There be also diverse others well-disposed
men, whose deliverance if you will not labor for, yet I humbly beseech you to
seek their relief. -- For these and all other poor Prisoners I make this my
humble suit and prayer to you all my especial good Friends, beseeching you by
all the bonds of amity, in the bowels of mercy, to tender the cases of
miserable Captives. Help to cloth Christ, visit the Afflicted, comfort the
Sorrowful, and relieve the Needy. The very God of peace guide your hearts to
have mercy on the poor, and love faithfully together. Amen.

This present Monday when I look to die, and to live for ever.

Yours for ever, Bartlet Green.


In his Letter to Mrs. Elizabeth Clark. -- I shall not cease with continual
Prayer to labor for you, desiring Almighty God to increase that which he has
long since begun in you, of sober life, and earnest zeal toward his Region, 1 Timothy 5.
She that is a true Widow and friendless, puts her trust in God, continuing
day and night in supplication and prayer; but she that lives in pleasure is
dead, even yet alive. And verily she is a true widow, that has married Christ,
forsaking the vanities of the world, and the lusts of the flesh; 1 Cor. 7.
For as the married woman cares how to love and serve and please her Husband,
so ought the Widow to give all her soul and heart, thoughts and words, studies
and labors, faithfully to love God, virtuously to bring up her children and
household, and diligently to provide for the poor and oppressed. -- Not to live
in pleasure, but to watch unto prayer, steadfastly laying up all her trust in
God. Luke 2.
Of Anna it is written, That she never went out of the Temple, but served God
with fasting and prayer night and day, -- to ^ring up her children and household
godly in the nurture and information of the Lord. Ephesians. 6.
-- There are most manifest examples against Parents for the offenses of
Children. Contrariwise how greatly might Hanna rejoice over Samu^l her Son,
whom she had brought up in the House of the Lord? Page 629.
-- But above all Widows, thrice blessed was the happy Mother of the seven
Sons, that so had instructed them in the fear of the Lord, that by no torments
they would s^rink from the love of his Truth? -- To be liberal to Strangers, 1 Timothy 5.
to wash the Saints feet, and minister to them in their adversity. Saint Paul
(as though they only had been therefore meet) appointed only Widows to
minister to the Saints, and to gather for the poor. -- Alas! That Christ so
hungreth, and no man will feed him; is so sore oppressed with thirst, and no man
will give him drink; destitute of all lodging, and not relieved; sick, and not
visitted; imprisoned, and not seen. In times past men could bestow large sums
of money on Copes, Vestments, and Ornaments of the Church: why rather follow we
not St. Ambrose his example, who sold the same for the relief of the poor; or
Chrysostom's command, who willed first to deck and garnish the living Temple of
God? But alas! such is the wickedness of these our last days, that nothing
moves us, neither the pure Doctrine, the godliness of life, nor good examples
of the Ancient Fathers. If in any thing they erred, that will their charitable
children embrace, publish and maintain with sword, faggot and fire: but all in
vain they strive against the stream; for though in despite of the Truth, by
force of the ears of crafty persuasion, they may bring themselves into the
haven of Hell; yet can they not make all men believe that the banks move while
the ship saileth, nor ever shall be able to turn the direct course of the
stream of Gods Truth. --

In another Letter. -- Better is the day of death (says Solom^n) then the day
of birth. -- Happy are the dead that die in the Lord. Man of woman is born in
travel to live in misery; man through Christ does die in joy to live in
felicity: he is born to die, and dies to live. Strait as he comes into the
world with cries he utters his miserable estate; strait as he departs with
Songs he praises God for ever. Scarce yet in his cradle, three deadly enemies
assault him, after death no Adversary may annoy him; whilst he is here he
displeases God, when he is dead, he fulfilleth his will. -- Here he dies
every hour, there he lives continually; here is sin, there is righteousness;
here is time, there is eternity; here is hearted, there is love; here is pain,
there is pleasure* here is misery, there is felicity. -- Seek therefore the
things that are above, etc.

Gray.
Fox, Vol. 3. page 13, 14, etc.
The Lady Jane Gray, Daughter to the Duke of Suffolk, whose Mother was Daughter
to Mary, King Henry the Second's Sister, having personated a Queen for ten
days, and upon Queen M^ries Proclamation being imprisoned, the Queen sent Mr.
Fecknam to her, two days before her death to commune with her, and reduce her
from the Doctrine of Christ to Queen Mary's Religion. Page 31.
The effect which communication here follows. Madam (said Fecknam) I lament
your heavy Case, etc. You are welcome unto me Sir (said the Lady Jane) if you
come to give me Christian Exhortation. And as for my heavy Case (I thank God) I
do so little lament it, that rather I account the same for a more manifest
Declaration of Gods favor toward me, then ever he showed me at any time
before; and therefore there is no cause, why either you or other which bear me
good will, should lament or be grieved with this my Case, being a thing so
profitable for my souls health. I am here come (said he) from the Queen and
Council to instruct you in the true Doctrine of the right Faith, etc. I
heartily thank the Queen (said she) who is not unmindful of her humble Subject,
and I hope no less that you will do your duty therein, both truly and
faithfully. What is then (said he) requried of a Christian? To believe (said
she) in God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, three Persons and one God. What
(said he) is there nothing else required or looked for in a Christian, but to
believe in him? Page 32.
Yes (said she) We must love him with all our heart, with all our soul, and
with all our mind, and our Neighbor as our self. Why then (said he) faith
justifies not, and saves not. Yes verily (said she) Faith (as Paul says)
only justifies. Why (said he) St. Paul says, If I have all faith without
love, it is nothing. True (said she) for how can I love him, whom I trust not?
or how can I trust him, whom I love not? Faith and love go both together, and
yet love is comprehended in faith. How must we love our Neighbor? (said he) To
love our Neighbor (said she) is to feed the hungry, to cloth the naked, and
give drink to the thirsty, and to do to him as we would do to our selves. Why
then (said he) it is necessary unto salvation to do good works also, and it is
not sufficient only to believe. It is meet (said she) that a Christian in
token that he follows his Master Christ to do good works, yet may we not say,
that they profit to our salvation; for when we have done all, we be
unprofitable servants, and faith only in Christ's blood saves us. How many
Sacraments are there? (said he) Two (said she) The one the Sacrament of
Baptism, by which I am washed with water, and regenerated by the Spirit, and
that washing is a token to me that I am a child of God: the other the Sacrament
of the Lords S^pper, which offered to me is a sure seal and testimony that I am
by the blood of Christ, which he shed for me on the Cross, made partaker of the
everlasting Kingdom. There are seven (said he) By what Scripture (said she)
find you that. Well (said he) we will talk of that hereafter. What do you
receive in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper? Do you not receive the very body
and blood of Christ? No surely (said she) I believe that the Supper I neither
receive flesh nor blood, but Bread and Wine, which Bread, when it is broken,
and Wine, when it is drunken, puts me in remembrance, how that for my sins,
the Body of Christ was broken, and his Blood shed on the Cross, and with that
Bread and Wine I receive the Benefits that come by the breaking of his Body,
and shedding of his Blood for our sins on the Cross. Why (said he) does not
Christ speak these words, Take, eat, this is my Body? Require you any plainer
words? Does he not say it is his Body? I grant he says so (said she) and so he
says, I am the Vine, I am the Door, and yet is not the Vine, or the Door. Does
nor St. Paul say, Romans 4.
He calls things that are not, as though they were.

-- When Fecknam took his leave, he said, That he was sorry for her; for I am
sure (said he) that we two shall never meet. True it is (said she) that we
shall never meet, except God turn your heart; for I am assured, unless you
repent and turn to God, you are in an evil case, and I pray God in the Bowels
of mercy, to send you his Holy Spirit. --

In her Letter to her Father. -- Father, although it has pleased God to hasten
my death by you, by whom my life should rather have been lengthened; yet can I
so patiently take it, as I yield to God more hearty thanks for shortening my
woeful days, then if all the world had been given unto my Possessions with life
lengthened at my own will. Page 33.
-- Although my death at hand to you seem right woeful, to me there is nothing
that can be more welcome, then from this vale of misery to aspire to that
heavenly Throne of all joy and pleasure, with Christ our Savior; in whose
steadfast faith (if it be lawful for the Daughter so to write to the Father) the
Lord that hitherto has strengthened you, so continue you, that at last we may
meet in Heaven, with the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.

In her Letter to Mr. Harding (formerly her Fathers Chaplain, and a zealous
Preacher of the Gospel, but then tnrn'd Papist) she writes thus. -- As often as I
call to mind the dreadful and fearful saying of God, Luke 9.
That he which lays hold on the Plough, and looks back, is not meet for the
Kingdom of Heaven; and on the other side, the comfortable words of our Savior
Christ to those, That forsaking themselves do follow him. I cannot but marvel
at thee, and lament thy Case, who seemed sometime to be the lively Member of
Christ, but now the deformed Imp of the Devil; sometime the beautiful Temple of
God, but now the filthy and stinking Kennel of Satan; sometime the unspotted
Spouse of Christ, but now the shameless Paramour of Antichrist; sometime my
faithful Brother, but now a Stranger and an Apostate; sometime a stout
Christian Soldier, but now a cowardly Runaway: yea, when I consider these
things, I cannot but cry out upon thee, thou seed of Satan, and not of Judah,
whom the Devil has deceived, the world has beguiled, and the desire of life
subverted, and made thee of a Christian an Infidel. Wherefore have thou taken
the Testament of the Lord in thy mouth? Wherefore have thou instructed others
to be strong in Christ, when thou thy self do now so shamefully shrink, and
so horribly abuse the Testament and the Law of the Lord? When thou thy self
preachest not to steal, yet most abominably stealest, not from men, but from
God, and committing most heinous sacrilege, robbest Christ thy Lord of his
right members, thy body and soul, and choosest rather to live miserably with
shame to the world, then to die, and gloriously with honor reign with Christ,
in whom, even in death is life? Why do thou now show thy self most weak, when
indeed thou ought to be most strong? The str^^gth of a fort is unknown
before the assault, but thou yieldest thy hold, before any battery be made. Oh
wretched and unhappy man, what art thou but dust and ashes? and will thou
resist thy Maker, that fashioned and framed thee? Will thou now forsake him
that called thee from the custome-gathering of the Romish Antichristians, to be
an Ambassador and Messenger of his Word? He that first framed thee, and since
thy first Creation and Birth preserved thee, nourished and kept thee, yea and
inspired thee with the Spirit of Knowledge (I cannot say of grace) shall he not
now possess thee? Dare thou deliver up thy self to another, being not thine
own, but his? How can thou, having knowledge, or how dare thou neglect the
law of the Lord, and follow the vain traditions of men; and whereas thou have
been a public Professor of his Name, become now a Defacer of his glory? Will thou refuse the true God, and worship the invention of man, the golden Calf,
the whore of B^bylon, the Romish Religion, the abominable Idol, the most wicked
Mass? Will thou torment again, rent and tear the most prec^ous Body of our
Savior Christ with thy bodily and fleshly teeth? Will thou take upon thee to
offer up any Sacrifice unto God for our sins, considering that Christ ^ff^red
up himself (as P^u^ says) u^^n the Cross a live^y Sacrifice once for all. Can
neither the punishment of the Israelites, (which for their Idolatry they often
received) nor the terrible threatenings of the Prophets, nor the curse of Gods
own mouth, fear thee to honor any other god then him? Do thou so regard him
that spared not his dear and onely-Son for thee, so diminishing, yea utterly
extinguishing his glory, that thou will attribute the praise and honor due
unto him to the Idols, which have mouths, and speak not, eyes and see not, ears
and hear not, whi^^ ^^all perish with them that made thee. Page ^4.
-- Confounded be all they that worship them. -- Christ o^^ereth up himself
once for all, and will thou offer him up again daily at thy pleasure? But thou will say, thou do it for a good intent. Oh sink of sin! Oh child of
perdition! Do thou dream therein of a good intent, where thy conscience bears
thee witness of Gods threatened wrath against thee? How did Saul, how for that
he disobeyed the Word of the Lord for a good intent, was thrown from his
worldly and temporal Kingdom? -- Will thou for a good intent dishonor God,
offend thy Brother, and danger thy soul, wherefore Christ has shed his most
precious blood? Will thou for a good intent pluck Christ out of Heaven, and
make his death void, and deface the triumph of his Cross by offering him up
daily? Will thou either for fear of death, or hope of life, deny and refuse thy
God, who enriched thy poverty, healed thy infirmity, and yielded to thee his
Victory, if thou could have kept it? Do thou not consider, that the thread
of thy life hangs upon him that made thee, who can (as he please) either
twine it harder to last the longer, or untwine it again to break the sooner?
Do thou not then remember the saying of David, Psa. 104.
When thou t^kest away thy Spirit (O Lord) from men, they die, and are tur^^d
again to their dust; but when thou let^est thy breath (...) forth, they shall
be made, and thou shall renew the face of the earth. Remember the saying of
Christ in his Gospel; Mat. 10.
Whosoever seeks to save his life shall lose it, but whosoever will lose his
life for my sake shall find it. Again, Wh^soever loves Father or Mother above
me, is not meet for me. He that will follow me, let him forsake himself, and
take up his Cross, and follow me. What Cross? the Cross of infamy and shame, of
misery and po^^^^^ of affliction and persecution for his Names (...) Let the
often falling of these Heavenly Showers (...) thy stony heart. Let the two-edged
sword of Gods holy Word sheer asunder the sinews of worldly respects, even to
the marrow of thy carnal heart, that thou may once again forsake thy self,
and embrace Christ, and like as good subjects will not refuse to hazard all in
the defense of their earthly and temporal Governor, so fly not like a
white-liver'd Milk-sop from the standing wherein thy chief Captain Christ has
has set thee in array of this life. Psalm. 16.
Fight manfully, come life, come death, the Quarrel is Gods, and undoubtedly
the Victory is ours. But thou will say, I will not break unity; what? not the
unity of Satan and his members? not the unity of darkness? not the agreement of
Antichrist and his adherents? -- Tully says of Amity, Amicitia non est nisi
inter bonos. But mark my Friends; yea Friend, if thou be not Gods enemy,
there is no unity, but where Christ knitteth the knot among such as he is. --
The agreement of all men is not an unity, but a conspiracy. Thou have heard
some threatenings against those that love themselves above Christ, and against
those that deny him for love of life; says he not, He that denies me before
men, Mat. 10.
I will deny him before my Father in Heaven. And to the same effect writes
Paul, It is impossible that they which were once enlightened, and have tasted
of the Heavenly Gift, and were partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted of
the good Word of God, if they fall away, etc. should be ren^wed again by
repentance. Heb. 10.
And again, If we shall willingly sin after we have received the knowledge of
his Truth, there is no oblation left for sin, but the terrible expectation of
judgment and fire, which shall devour the adversaries. Thus Paul writes, and
this thou read, (...) do thou not quake and tremble? Well, if these
te^rible and thundering threatenings cannot stir thee to cleave unto Christ, and
forsake the world; yet let the sweet consolation and promises of the
Scriptures, let the example of Christ and his Apostles, holy Martyrs and
Confessors encourage thee to take faster hold of Christ. Mat. 5.
Hearken what he says, Blessed are you when men revi^e you, and persecute you
for my sake: Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in Heaven; For so
persecuted they the Prophets, that were before you. Hear what Isaiah says,
Isa. 51.
Fear not the curse of men, be not afraid of their blasphemies; for worms and
moths shall eat them up like cloth and wool, but my righteousness shall
endure for ever, and my saving health from generation to generation. What art
thou then (says he) that fear a mortal man, the child of man, which fades
away like the flower, and forgets the Lord that made thee, that spread out
the Heavens, and laid the foundation of the earth? I am the Lord thy God, that
makes the sea to rage, and be still, whose Name is the Lord of Hosts: I shall
put my Word in thy mouth, and defend thee with the turning of the hand. Christ
also says unto his Disciples, Luke 12. Mat. 13.
They shall accuse you, and bring you before Princes and Rulers for my Names
sake; and some of you they shall persecute and kill; but fear you not, and care
you not what you shall say; for it is ^e Spirit of your Father that speaks
within you, even the hairs of your head are all numbered. Page 35.
Lay up treasures for your selves, where no thief comes, nor moth corrupts.
Fear not them that kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; Mat. 10.
John 15.
but fear him that has power to destroy both soul and body. If ye were not of
the world, the world would love his own; but because ye are not of the world,
but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you. Let
these and such like consolations taken out of Scriptures, strengthen you to
Godward. Let not the examples of holy men and women go out of your mind, as
Daniel and the rest of the Prophets, of the three children, etc. -- Return,
return again into Christ's war, and as becomes faithful warrior, Ephesians. 6.
put on that armor that St. Pau^ teaches to be most necessary for a Christian
man* And above all things take unto you the shield o^ Faith, and be you
provoked by Christ's own example, to withstand the Devil, to forsake the world,
and to become a true and ^aithful member of his mystical Body, who spared not
his own Body for our sins. Throw down your self with the fear of his threatened
vengeance for this so great and heinous ^ffence of Apos^acy, and comfort your
self on the other hand with the mercy, blood, and promise of him, who is ready
to turn unto you, whenever you turn unto him. Disdain not to come again with
the lost Son, seeing you have so wandered with him. Be not ashamed to turn again
with him from the swill of Strangers to the delicate of your most benign and
lov^ng Father, acknowledging that you have sinned both against Heaven and
against Earth: Against Heaven, by staining the glorious Name of God, and
causing his most sincere and pure Word to be evil spoken of through you:
Against Earth, by offending so many of your weak Brethren, to whom you have
been a stumbling block through your sudden sliding. Be not ashamed -- to weep
bitterly with Peter -- to wash away the filth and mire of your offensive fall
-- to say with the Publican, Luke 18.
Lord, be merciful to me a sinner. Remember the horrible History of Julian of
old, and the lamentable case of Spira of late, whose case (methinks) should be
so green in your remembrance, that being a thing of our time, you should fear
the like inconvenience, seeing you are fallen into the like offense. Last of
all, (...) the lively remembrance of the last Day be always before your eyes,
remembering the terror that at that time shall befall the Runagates and
Fugitives from Christ, who setting more by the world then by Heaven, more by
their life then by him that gave them life, did shrink, yea fall away from him
that forsook not them; and contrariwise, the inestimable joys prepared for
them, that fearing (...) peril, nor dreading death, have manfully fought and
victoriously triumphed over all power of darkness, over hell, death, and
damnation, through their most renowned Captain Christ, who now stretches out
his arms to receive you, ready to fall upon your neck, and kiss you, and to
feast you with the dainties and delicates of his own precious blood; which
undoubtedly, if it might stand with his determinate purpose, he would not let
to shed again, rather then you shall be lost. --

The night before she suffered, she sent unto her Sister, the Lady K^therine
the New Testament in Greek, at the end whereof she wrote thus.

I have sent you (good Sister) a Book, which although it be not outwardly
trimmed with Gold, yet inwardly it is more worth then precious stones. It is
the Book of the Law of the Lord. It is his Testament and last Will which he
bequeathed unto us wretches, which shall lead you to the path of eternal joy;
and if you with a good mind read it, and with an earnest mind do purpose to
follow it, it shall bring you to an immortal and everlasting life. It shall
teach you to live, and learn you to die. It shall win you more then you should
have gained by the possession of your woeful Fathers lands; for, as if God had
prospered him, you should have inherited his lands: so if you ply diligently
this Book, seeking to direct your life after it, you shall be an inheriter of
such riches, as neither the covetous shall withdraw from you, nor the thief
steal, nor the moth corrupt. Desire with David to understand the Law of the
Lord God. Live still to die, that you by death may purchase eternal life. Trust
not that the tenderness of your age shall lengthen your life: the young die (if
God call) as soon as the old. Labor always to learn to die, defy the world,
deny the Devil, and despise the flesh, and delight your self only in the Lord.
Be penitent for your sins, but yet despair not; be strong in faith, and yet
presume not. Desire with St. Paul to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, with
whom, even in death, there is life. Be like the good Servant, and even at
midnight be waking, least when death comes, and steals upon you, as a thief
in the night, you be with the evil Servant found sleeping, and least for lack
of oil ye be found like the foolish women, and like him that had not on the
Wedding Garment, and then ye be cast out from the Marriage. Rejoice in Christ,
as I do. Follow the steps of your Master Christ, and take up your Cross. Lay
your sins on his back, and always embrace him. And as concerning my death,
rejoice as I do, that I shall be delivered of this corruption, and put on
incorruption; for I am assured, that I shall for loosing of a mortal life, win
an immortal life, the which I pray God grant you, and send you of his grace to
live in his fear, and to die in the true Christian Faith, from the which (in
Gods Name) I exhort you that you never swarve, neither for hope of life, nor
fear of death; for if you will deny his truth for to lengthen your life, God
will deny you, and yet shorten your days. And if you will cleave unto him, he
will prolong your days to your comfort and his glory; to the which glory God
bring me now, and you hereafter, when it shall please him to call you. Fare you
well (good Sister) and put your only trust in God, who only must help you.

In her Speech upon the Scaffold. -- Good people, I am come hither to die, and
by a Law I am condemned to the same. The Fact against the Queens Highness was
unlawful, and the consenting thereunto by me; but touching the procurement and
desire thereof, I do wash my hands thereof in innocence before God and you, and
therewith she wrung her hands. I pray you bear me witness, that I die a true
Christian, and that I look to be saved by no other mean, but only by the mercy
of God in the blood of his only Son Jesus Christ. I confess, when I did know
the Word of God, I neglected the same, loved my self and the world, and
therefore this plague is worthily happened to me for my sins; and yet I thank
God of his goodness, that he has thus given me a time and respite to repent;
and now, good people, while I am alive, I pray you assist me with your Prayers.
--

In her Prayer. -- Thou, O Lord, art the only Defender and Deliverer of those
that put their trust in thee; and therefore I being defiled with sin, etc.
overwhelmed with miseries, vexed with temptations, and grievously tormented.
With the long imprisonment of this vile mass of clay, my sinful body, does come
unto thee (O merciful Savior) craving thy mercy and help, who have said, Thou will not suffer us to be tempted above our power. -- O merciful God, consider
my misery best known unto thee, and be thou unto me a strong Tower of defense.
Suffer me not to be tempted above my power, but either be thou a Deliverer to
me out of this great misery, or else give me grace patiently to bear thy heavy
hand and sharp correction. It was thy right hand that delivered the people of
Israel out of the hands of Pharaoh, who for the space of four hundred years did
oppress them, and keep them in bondage. O deliver me sorrowful wretch! (for
whom thy Son Christ shed his precious blood on the Cross) out of this miserable
captivity and bondage. How long will thou be absent? for ever? O Lord, have
thou forgotten to be gracious, and shut up thy loving kindness in displeasure?
Will thou be no more entreated? Is thy mercy clean gone for ever, and thy
promise come utterly to an end for evermore? Why do thou make so long
tarrying? Shall I despair of thy mercy O God? far be that from me. I am thy
workmanship, created in Christ Jesus; give me therefore grace to tarry thy
leisure. --

When the Handkerchief was tied about her eyes, she kneeling down, and feeling
for the Block said, What shall I do? where is it? and being directed by one of
the Standers by, she laid her head down upon the Block, and stretching forth
her Body, said, Lord, into thy hands I commend my Spirit.

Clark's second Vol. of Lives, p. 60, etc.
In her troubles she writ the following Verse with a pin.

Non aliena putes homini, quae obtingere possunt;
Sors hodierna mihi, tunc erit illa tibi.
In English thus, Think nothing strange which man cannot decline,
My Lot's to day, to merren may le thine.
Deo juvante, nil nocet livor malus:
Et non juvante, nil juvat labor gravis.
Post tenebras spero lucem.


In English thus, If God protect me, malice cannot end me,
If not, all I can do will not defend me.
After dark night
I hope for light.


H.
Haggar.
He was persecuted for saying, Fox, Vol. 2. page 44.
( A. 1520.) that There should be a battle of Priests, and all the Priests
should be slain: and that the Priests should a while rule, but they should all
be destroyed for making of false gods. -- That the men of the Church should be
put down, and the false gods that they m^ke: and after that, they should know
more, and then should be a merry world.

Hale.
When Thomas Hale was taken by an Alderman of Bristow and another, Fox, Vol. 3.
page 892.
he said unto them, You have sought my blood these two years, and now much good
do it you.

He was burned A. 1557. for saying, The Sacrament of the Altar is an Idol.

Hall.
Nicholas Hall in his Answer to the first Article against him, Fox, Vol. 3.
page 381.
granted himself a Christian man, and acknowledged the determinations of the
holy Church, i. e. of the Congregation, or Body of Christ: but denied to call
the Catholic and Apostolic Church his Mother, because he found not this Word,
Mother, in the Scripture.

To the second he said, That whereas before he held the Sacrament to be but
only a token or remembrance of Christ's death, now he said, that There is
neither token nor remembrance, becasue it is now misused, and clean turned from
Christ's institution, etc.

Hallewin. Harman.
Fox, Vol. 3. cont. p. 7.
When Cornelius Hallewin of Antwerp had received a sharp Letter, sent him from
the Minister of the Flemish Church, upon the occasion of a recantation spread
and falsely fathered upon Cornelius: the blood gushed out of his nose, he spread
abroad his arms, and made pitiful outcries. What to deny the Truth (said he)
God forbid! O that the faithful should conceive so hardly of me! Good God, thou
know I am innocent, nor have I this way offended.

When he was condemned to die, the Margrave offered him, that he should die a
more easy kind of death, if he would give ear to the Priests, which he had
brought to him to Prison: No Sir (said he) God forbid I should do such a thing.
Do ye with my body what ye will.

As they bound him and Harman of Amsterdam Harman willed the Margrave to take
heed what he did; for (said he) this will not go for payment in Gods sight in
bereaving us thus of our Lives. I wish you therefore to repent before it be too
late. You cannot long continue this tyrannous course; for the Lord will shortly
avenge it.

A Cross being offered them, and a promise that they should be beheaded, and
not burnt, if they would take it into their hands, they said, They would not
give the least sign, that might be, of betraying the Truth, and that it was all
one to them what death they were put to, so they died in and for the Lord. The
punishment (they said) could last but for a while, but the glory to come was
eternal.

At the Stake Cornelius fell on his knees, praying God to forgive his enemies,
who had sinned through ignorance.

When the Margrave of Antwerp offered Halle^i^ and Harmar mitigation of
torments upon abjuation: Ward, page 157.
We are resolved (said they) these momentary afflictions are not worthy that
exceeding weight of glory, that shall be revealed.

Hallingdale.
Articles against John Hallingdale. Fox, Vol. 3. page 856.
-- (3) That during the reign of King Edward, he did depart from his former
Faith and Religion, and so does continue, and determines so to do, (as he
says) to his life's end. (4) That he has diverse times said, That the Faith,
Religion, and Ecclesiastical Service, received, observed, and used now in this
Realm is not good, but against Gods command, etc. And that he will not in any
wise conform himself to the same, ^ut speak, and think against it during his
natural life. (5) That he absenteth himself continually from his Parish Church,
etc. (6) That he will not have his Child by his will (as he says) confirmed by
the Bishop. Unto all which Articles he made this answer, that he confessed all,
and every part to be true.

He told B^nner, Rev l. 18.
that the blood of the Prophets, and of the Saints, and of all that were slain
upon the Earth, was found in the Babylonical Church, which is the Church where
the Pope is head. -- Because I will not come to your Babylonical Church,
therefore you go about to condemn me.

Being demanded whether he would recant, he answered, That he would continue,
and persist in his Opinions to the death.

When the Sentence was read, He openly thanked God, that he never came into the
Church, since the abomination came into it.

Fox, Vol. 3. page 708.
When William Hallywell and the twelve more (that were burnt in one Fire at
Stratford the how near London) were condemned, and carried down thither to be
burnt, they were divided into two parts, in two several Chambers: Thereupon the
Sheriff came to the one part, and told them, That the other had recanted, and
their lives therefore should be saved, willing and exhorting them to do the
like, and not to cast away themselves: unto whom they answered, That their
Faith was not built on man, but on Christ crucified: Then the Sheriff went to
the other part, and said the like to them; but they answered as their Brethren
had done before, That their Faith was not built on man, but on Christ and his
Word.

Hamelin.
Fox, Vol. 3. cont. page 5.
Mr. Philibert Hamelin of Tournay, refusing offers of escape out of Prison,
said, I esteem it altogetder unleseeming for a man, that is called to preach
Gods Word unto others, to run away, and to break Prison, for fear of danger,
but rather to maintain the Truth taught even in the midst of the flaming fire.

After Sentence of death was past upon him, he eat his meat as joyfully, as
though he had been in no danger, speaking to them of the happiness of eternal
life, evidencing that A good conscience is a continual feast.

Fox, Vol. 2. page 151.
When he was apprehended, there was apprehended with him, his Host, whom he
thought he had converted, but afterward he renounced Christ and his Word:
Whereupon he said unto him, O unha^py, and more then miserable! Is it possible
for you to be so foolish, as for the s^ving of a few days, which you have ^o
^^ve by the course of nature, so to start away, and deny the Truth? Know you
therefore, that although you have by your folishness avoided the corporal fire,
yet your life shall be never the longer; for you shall die before me, and God
shall not give you the grace, that it shall be for his Cause, and you shall be
an example to all Apostates.

Immediately after, as he was going out of the Prison he was slain by two
Gentlemen, that had a quarrel with him: whereof when Mr. Hamelin heard, he
professed he knew of no such thing before, but spoke as pleased God to guide
his tongue. And thereupon discoursed excellently of the providence of God, to
the conversion of some present.

When he was in Prison a Priest came in one Sabbath with all his furniture to
say Mass: but Mr. Hamelin, when he saw him, pulled off his garments, etc.
saying, Is it not enough for you to blaspheme God in Churches, but you must
also pollute the Prison with your idolatry?

Hamilton.
Mr. Patrick Hamilton, The Eccles. Hist. of Scorl. p. 4.
Brothers Son to James Hamilton, Earl of Arran, and Sisters Son to John Stuart,
Duke of A^thai, hating the world, and the vanity thereof, left Scotland, and
traveled into Germany, where he became intimate with Martin Luther, Philip
Melancthon, Francis Lambert, and became an eminent Professor, the zeal of Gods
glory did eat him up, so that he could not choose, but he must return into his
own Country to make known the Gospel.

Articles objected against him. Fox, Vol. 2. page 227.
-- That the Pope is Antichrist. -- That the Popes Laws be of no strength. --
That he doubted, Whether all Children, departing immediately after their
Baptism, are saved or condemned.

At the place of Execution he gave his Servant Scot. Hist. page 4.
(who had been his Chamberlain a long time) his Gown, Coat, etc. saying, These
will not profit in the fire, they will profit thee. After this, of me thou
can receive no commodity, except the example of my death, Page 6.
which I pray thee bear in mind; for albeit it be bitter to the flesh, and
fearful before men, yet it is the entrance unto eternal life, which none shall
possess that denies Christ Jesus before this wicked Generation.

The fire being kindled, he cried with a loud voice, Lord Jesus, receive my
spirt. How long shall darkness overwhelm this Realm? And how long will thou
suffer this tyranny of men?

A Black Friar, called Campbel, who had pretended some love to the Gospel,
cried out to him, Convert Heretic, call upon our Lady, say, Salve Regina, etc.
His answer was, Depart and trouble me not, thou Messenger of Satan. -- Wicked
man, thou know the contrary, and the contrary to me thou have confessed. I
appeal thee before the tribunal seat of Christ Jesus.

Vol. 2. page 228.
Mr. Fox says, That he cited him to appear before the High God, as general
Judge of all men, to answer to the innocence of his death, etc. between that
and a certain day of the next Month, which he there named: and that the Friar
died before the said day came, without remorse of conscience, that he had
persecuted the innocent.

He was burnt Febr. ult. A. 1527.

Page 229.
In his Treatise styled Patricks places, by Mr. John Frith, who translated it
out of Latin into English. -- He that loves God loves his Neighbor. If a man
say, 1 John 4. Romans 13. Galat. 5. John 16. Page 230. Romans 9.
I love God, and yet hates his Brother, is a Liar, etc. He that loves his
Neighbor as himself, keeps all the Commandments of God. -- He that has
faith loves God. My Father loves you, because you love me, and believe that I
am come of God. -- It is not in our power to keep any one of the Commandments
of God. -- But you will say, Wherefore does God bid us do that which is
impossible for us? I answer, To make thee know that thou art but evil, and that
there is no remedy to save thee in thine own hand, and that thou may seek
remedy at some other, etc. -- The remedy is showed in the Gospel. -- To believe
God is to believe his Word, and to account what he says true. -- Faith is the
gift of God. -- Faith is not in our power. Page 231.
-- He that lacks Faith cannot please God. -- All that is done in Faith
pleases God. Page 232.
-- He that believes the Gospel shall be saved. -- No manner of works make us
righteous. Page 233.
-- He that thinks to be saved by his works, calls himself Christ. -- Thou
must do good works, but beware that thou do them not to deserve any good
through them. --

Mrs. Katherine Hamilton (Sister to Mr. Patrick) was also accused; See the
Preface before the Eccles. Hist. of Scotland.
and being questioned about works, she answered, That none was saved by his
works. One thereupon speaking to her of the works of Congru^ and Condigno, she
answered, Work here, work there, what kind of working is all this? No works can
save me, but Christ's.

Hamell.
When Godfrey Hamell was condemned for an Heretic: Fox, Vol. 2. page 127.
Nay (said he) not an Heretic, but an unprofitable Servant of Jesus Christ.

When the Hangman went about to strangle him, to diminish his punishment, he
refused it, saying, That he would abide the Sentence, that the Judges had given.

Hankes.
Mr. Thomas Hankes being asked by Bonner why he suffered his Child to be
unchristened so long? Fox, Vol. 3 page 256.
answered, Because we be bound to do nothing contrary to the Word of God. Being
told, that Baptism is commanded by the Word of God: His institution therein
(said he) I do not deny; but all things invented and devised by man, etc. But
will you (said Bonner) deny that which all the World and your Father have been
contented withal? What my Father (said Hankes) and all the W^rld has done I
have nothing to do with, but what God has commanded me to do, to that stand I.
Page 257.
Bonner telling him that Baget was converted to think well of their Baptism: I
build my faith (said he) neither upon this man, nor upon you; but upon Christ,
who is the founder and author of all men's faith.

Bonner threatening to take another course with him: Whatsoever ye do (said he)
I am ready to suffer it; for I am in your hands to abide it.

Bonner telling him he would not have any Heresy talked in his House: Why
(said he) is the Truth become Heresy? God has commanded that we should have
none other talk in our House, in our Beds, at our Meat, and by the way, but all
Truth.

Darbishire ( Bonners Kinsman) telling him, he was too curious; for he would
have nothing but his pretty Gods Book: he answered, And is it not sufficient
for my salvation? Yes (said D.) for our salvation; but not for our instruction.
God send me the salvation (said H.) and you the instruction.

Bonner threatening him again: You are (said he) in the hands of God, and so am
I. -- That which I have said, I will stand to it God willing, there is no way
to remove it.

Bonner telling him that a Faggot would make him know and believe the Sacrament
of the Altar: No, no (said he) a point for your Faggot. What God thinks meet
to be done, that shall ye do, and more ye shall not do.

Bonner telling him, That he was willing to teach him, but he was so stubborn,
that he would not learn: Except ye learn me (said he) by the Word of God, I
will never credit you, nor believe you.

Harpsfield telling him, If his Child died unchristened, he was damb'd and his
Child both: Judge you no farther (said he) then ye may by the Scritures. -- How
can your Child being an Infant (said Harpsfield) believe? Page 259.
The deliverance of it (said Hankes) from sin stands in the faith of his
Parents: Saint Paul saying, 1 Cor. 7.
-- Else were your Children unclean. To trust to any (said Bonner) we bid you
not; but to pray to them, we bid you: They that list (said Hankes) receive your
Doctrine. You teach me, that I should not believe, nor trust in any, but to
call on them; and Saint Paul says, How shall I call on him, on whom I believe
not?

Bonner calling him fool: he said, A Bishop must be blameless, or faultless,
sober, discreet, no chider, nor given to anger.

Mr. Hankes telling Bonner, That Christ says, These tokens shall follow them
that believe in me: Page 260. Mark 16
They shall speak with new tongues, c^st out Devils; and if any drink deadly
poison, it shall not hurt them. Bonner asked him, With what new tongues do ye
speak? Forsooth (said Hankes) where before I came to the knowledge of Gods
Word, I was a foul Blasphemer and filthy talker. Since I came to the knowledge
thereof, I have praised God with the some tongue, and is not this a new tongue?
How do you (said Bonner) cast out Devils? Christ (said Hankes) did c^st them
out by his Word; and he has left the same Word, that whosoever does credit,
and believe it, shall c^st out Devils. Did you (said Bonner) ever drink deadly
poison? Yea forsooth thee I have (said Hankes) for I have drunk of the
p^stilent Traditions and Ceremonies of the Bishop of Rome.

Bonner threatening that he should be burnt for an Heretic: Where prove ye
(said Hankes) that Christ, or his Apostles did kill any man for his faith? Did
not Paul (said B.) excommunicate? Yes, my Lord (said H.) but there is a great
difference between excommunication, and burning. -- If you will have us grant
you to be of God, then show mercy; for that God requires.

An old Bishop persuading him to learn of his Elders to bear somewhat: I will
bear with nothing (said he) that is contrary to the Word of God.

Page 261.
Fecknam charging him for building his Faith on Latimer, ^ranmer, Ridley, etc.
I build my Faith (said he) upon no man, and that ye well know; for if those
men, and as many more, as they be, should recant, and deny that they have said,
or done, yet will I stand to it, and by this shall ye know that I build my
Faith upon no man.

Chadsey asking him, What he said of the Bishop of Rome? From him (said he) and
all his detestable enormities, good Lord deliver us.

Bonner saying, You speak of Idols, and you know not what they mean: God has
taught us what they be; (said Hankes) for whatsoever is made, graven, or
devised by man's hand, contrary to Gods Word, the same is an Idol..

Page 262.
Chadsey telling him, It was pity he should live: In this case (said he) I
desire not to live, but rather to die. -- I wou^d my part might be to morrow.

Bonner threatening to send him to Newgate: My Lord (said he) you can do me no
better p^easure.

Page 263.
Bonner telling the Keeper, His Prisoner would not go to the Sermon: Yes, my
Lord (said he) I pray you let me go, and that that is good I will receive, and
the rest I will leave behind me.

Bonner asking after his imprisonment, Whether he was the same man he was
before? he answered, I am no Changeling, nor none will be.

Miles Huggard asking him, Where he proved that Infants were to be baptized? Go
teach all Nations (said he) baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Sir, here is none excepted.

Bonner threatening him again: Page 264.
Ye shall do no more (said he) then God shall give you leave. -- As for your
cursings, railings, and blasphemings, I care not for them; for I know the moths
and worms shall eat you, as they eat cloth or wool. --

His examination he writ himself, and subscribed it, T.H. Who desires all
faithful men, and Brethren, to pray unto God to strengthen me in his Truth unto
the end. Pray, pray, pray, gentle Brethren, pray.

Bonner advising him at his public examination to speak advisedly; Page 265*
for he stood upon life and death: Well (said he) I will willingly receive what
shall be put unto me. -- My Lord, as you be my friend in causing these my
sayings to be written; so do you cause them to be read, and yet I will never go
from them.

Being exhorted to return again to the bosom of the Mother Church: No, my
Lord, (said he) that will I not; for if I had an hundred bodies, I would suffer
them all to be t^rn in pieces, rather then I will abjure, or reca^t.

Some of his Friends being not a little confirmen by his example, and
discourses, yet being somewhat afraid of so sharp a punishment, desired him a
little before his death, that in the midst of the flame he would show some
token, if he could, whereby they might be more certain, whether the pain of
burning were so great, Page 266.
that a man might not therein keep his mind quiet and patient* Whereupon it was
agreed between them, that if the rage of the pain were tolerable, then he
should lift up his hands above his head toward Heaven, before he gave up the
ghost. Accordingly, when he had continued long in the fire, his speech taken
away, his skin drawn together, his fingers consumed, so that all concluded he
was dead; contrary to all expectation, he reached up his hands, burning on a
light fire, over his head, to the living, God and with great rejoicing (as it
seemed) clapped them three times together.

He was burned to ashes, June 10. 1555.

In his Letter to the Congregation. --

The holy Spirit conduct and lead you all in all your doings, that you may
always direct your deeds according to his holy Word, that when he shall appear
to reward every man according to his works, ye may as obedient children, be
found watching, ready to enter into his everlasting Kingdom, with your Lamps
burning, and not be ashamed of this life, which God has lent you, etc. All
flesh (says the Prophet) is gr^ss, and all his glory as the flower of the
field, which for a season shows her beauty, and as soon as the Lord blowe^h
upon it, it withers away, and departs. Here we are as Pilgrims and
Strangers, following the footsteps of Moses, among many unspeakable dangers,
etc. -- in danger of that dreadful Dragon, and his sinful seed, to be tempted,
devoured, and tormented, who cease not behind every Bush to lay a ba^t, etc.
casting abroad his Apples in all places, times, and seasons, to see if Adam
will be allured and enticed to leave the living God, and his most holy
commandment, etc. promising the world at will, to all that will fall down, and
for a mess of pottage sell, and set at naught the everlasting Kingdom of
Heaven. -- Therefore I am bold in bonds (as entirely desiring your everlasting
felicity) to warn you, and most heartily desire you to watch and pray. -- On
the high mountains does not grow most plenty of grass, neither are the highest
trees farthest from danger, but seldom sure, and always shaken of every wind
that blows. Such a deceitful thing (says our Savior) is honor and riches,
that without grace, it choketh up the good seed sown, etc. It makes a man
think himself somewhat, that is nothing at all; for though for our honor we
esteem our selves, and stand in our own light, yet when we shall stand before
the living God, there shall be no respect of persons; Prove. 1.
for riches helps not in the day of vengeance, nor can we make the Lord
partial for money.

-- Though the world rage, and blaspheme the Elect of God, ye know that it did
so unto Christ, his Apostles, and to all that were in the Primitive Church, and
shall be unto the worlds end. -- I beseech you in the bowels of Christ my Lord
Jesus, stick fast unto the Truth: let it never depart out of your hearts and
conversations, etc.

Yours in him that lives for ever.


In his Letter to his Wife, Page 267.
after his Condemnation. --

I exhort you to love God with all your heart, and soul, and mind, etc. To lay
sure hold on all his promises, that in all your troubles you may run strait to
the great mercy of God, etc. And be sure that neither Devil, Flesh, nor Hell
shall be able to hurt you. But if you will not keep his holy Precepts, and call
for Gods help to walk in the same, but will leave them, and do as the wicked
world does, then be sure to have your part with the wicked world in the burning
lake. Beware of Idolatry, which most of all stinks in Gods Nostrils, and has
been of all good men detested from the beginning of the world, for the which
what Kingdoms, etc. God has punished with most terrible plagues, etc. to the
utter subversion of them, is manifestly to be seen through the whole Bible;
yea, for this he draadfully plagued his own people, etc. But how he has
preserved those that abhorred superstition and idolatry, etc. is also to be
seen from the beginning, out of what great danger he has delivered them; yea,
when all hope of deliverance was past, as touching their expectation, etc. I
exhort you also in the bowels of Christ, that you will exercise, and be
steadfast in Prayer, the only mean to obtain of God whatsoever we desire, so it
be asked in Faith. O what notable things do we read in Scripture, that have been
obtained through fervent Prayer! -- Whatsoever you desire of God in Prayer, ask
it for Jesus Christ's sake, for whom and in whom God has promised to give us
all things necessary. Though what we ask come not by and by, continue still
knocking, and he will at length open his treasures of mercy, etc. -- Yet once
again I warn you, that ye continue fervent in Prayer, etc.


Page 268.
In his Letter to Mr. Throgmorton. --

Whereas the love of God has moved you to require my Son to be brought up
before your eyes, and the self same love has also moved me to leave him in
your hands as a Father in my absence, I shall require you in Gods behalf,
according to your promise, that ye will see him brought up in the fear of the
Lord, and instructed in the knowledge of his holy Word, that he may learn to
leave the evil, and know the good, etc. And this I require you to fulfill, or
cause to be fulfilled, as ye before the Living God will make answer for the
same. --

Yours, and all men's in Christ Jesus.


Hector.
Bartholomew Hector, Fox, Vol. 2. page 155.
being condemned, was threatened, that if he spoke any thing to the People, his
Tongue should be cut off; yet he did not forbear.

He prayed for the Judges, That God would forgive them, and open their eyes.

He refused a Pardon, offered him at the Stake.

At his Death many wept, saying, Why does this man die, who speaks of nothing
but of God?

When he was called before Authority to be examined, Fox, Vol. 3. cont. page 5.
he would answer them to nothing before he had made his Prayer to God:
Whereupon falling down upan his knees, he said, Lord, open my mouth, and direct
my Speech to utter that only, that may tend to thy honor and glory, and the
edification of thy Church.

When he was bound to the Stake, Gunpowder and Brimstone was brought to be
placed about him; he lifting up his eyes to Heaven, said, Lord, how sweet and
welcome is this to me?

Hernaudes.
Mr. Julian Hernaudes, Fox, Vol. 3. cont. p. 14.
(a Spanish Martyr) came from the Wrack, and the Tortures of the Inquisition
inflicted on him, for bringing with him, and causing to be brought into Spain,
many Books of the Holy Scriptures in Spanish) as from a Conquest, saying to his
Fellow Prisoners as he past by them, These Hypocrites are gone away confounded,
no less then wolves, that have been long hunted.

When he was brought forth to his Execution, he said to the rest, Courage, my
valiant and constant Brethren, now is the hour come, in which as the true
Champions of Jesus Christ, we must witness his Truth before men, and for a
short trial for his sake we shall triumph with him for ever and ever.

Herwyn.
Fox, Vol. 3. cont. p. 17.
When John Herwyn of Flanders, was led to Prison, the Bailiffe meeting certain
Drunkards in the Street, and saying, They say we have many Gospellers in
Houscot, but it little appears by these disorders: he replied, Mr. Bailiffe, is
drunkenness a sin? What of that (said the Bailiffe) Why then (said Herwyn)
commit you not these fellows to Prison, seeing it is your office to punish
vice, and to protect such as fear God?

After he was in Prison, because he was not called forth before the
Magistrates, as soon as he desired and expected, he grew heavy and sad, asking,
Why they so delayed the matter? for his heart was fired with an holy zeal to
confess Christ before his Judges.

When he was brought forth, he admonished his Judges to examine the Doctrine of
the Roman Church by the true Touchstone, which is the holy Scripture, that so
they might discern how opposite and contrary the one is to the other. Consider
also (said he) what the words of St. Peter import, where the affirms, That we
ought to obey God rather then man, etc.

When he craved for Justice, either one way or another, they urged him to
desist from his Opinion; but he answered, That his faith was not built on an
Opinion, Psalm. 14.
but (said he) the Lord has taught me to eschew evil, and do good.

See thou not (said they) how these opinions have troubled the world? and how
many of the learneder sort do contradict them? So far is it off (said he) that
the Doctrine of the Gospel should be the cause of troubles, debates and
strifes, which reign in the world. These troubles indeed arise from the rage of
men. And as for your learned men, it is impossible for humane wisdom to
comprehend the Doctrine of God; for which cause Christ says, Father I thank
thee, that thou have hid these secrets from the wise men of the world, and have
revealed them unto Babes.

When those two Malefactors that were coupled with him brake Prison and fled,
he might have escaped, but fearing his flight might be imputed to the godly
Christians in the City, he would not fly.

When he was advertised of his Sentence, He thanked God for advancing him to so
high an honor as to be counted worthy to suffer for his Name.

As he passed forth from the Court, viewing the people, who waited to see him,
he said, See here how this wicked world rewards the poor Servants of Christ.
Whilst I gave my self to drunkenness, etc. I was never in danger of these bands
(lifting up his hands which were bound) I was then counted a good fellow, and
at that time, who but I? But no sooner began I by conversion to ask after a
godly life, but the world made war upon me, and became my enemy, persecuting
and imprisoning me, and now lest of all sending me to the place where I must
pay my last debt. Mat. 10.24. John 15.20.
But the Servant is no better then his Lord; for seeing they persecuted him, no
question they will persecute us.

At the Stake he said, Brethren, I fight under the Standard, and in the quarrel
of my great Lord and Captain Christ. -- I am now going to be crucified; follow
you me, when God of his goodness shall call yo^ to it.

He was burnt Nov. 4. An. 1560.

Hierome.
I find two of this Name.

Fox, Vol. 2. page 5^4.
1. Mr. William Hierome, Vicar of Stepney near London.

Being accused for preaching against Magistrates, he affirmed (as before he had
preached) That (...) Magistrate of himself could make any Law or Laws (...)
bind the infe^i ur people, unless it were by the power and authority of his or
their Princes to him or them given, but only the Prince. Adding, If the Prince
make Laws consenting to Gods Laws, we are bound to obey them; and if he make
Laws repugnant to the Laws of God, etc. yet we are bound not violently to
resist, or grudge against him.

At the Stake he gave the following Exhortation to the people; Page 527.
I say unto you, good Brethren, that God has b^ught us all with no small
price, neither with gold, nor silver, nor other such things of small value, but
with his most precious blood. Be not unthankful therefore, but do what you can
to keep his Commandments, Page 528.
i. e: love your Brethren. -- If God has sent thee plenty, help thy neighbor
that has need, give him good counsel, if he lack. -- Bear your Cross with
Christ. -- Let all Christians put no trust nor confidence in their works, but
in the blood of Christ, to whom I commit my soul, beseeching you all to pray to
God for me, and for my Brethren here present with us, etc.

2. Mr. Hierome of Prage.
Fox Vol. 1. page 832.
When he was brought Prisoner to Constance, several of the Bishops said unto
him; Hierome, why did thou fly, and did not appear when thou wast cited? He
answered, Because I could not have any safe conduct, etc. and I would not my
self be the occasion of my perils and danger; but if I had known of this
citation, although I had been in Bohemia, I would have returned again.

When certain cried out, Page 833.
Let him be burned, let him be burned; He answered, If my death does delight
and please you, in the Name of God let it le so.

When he was welcomed to Prison by a Friend of Mr. Hus, saying to him, Be
constant, and fear not death for the Truths sake, of the which, when you ^ere
at liberty, you did preach so much goodness; He answered, Truly Brother, I do
not fear death; and for^smuch as we know that we have spoken. much thereof in
times past, let us now see what may be known or done in ^ffect.

Vitus asking him how he did, He answered, Truly Brother I do very well.

After a long sore imprisonment he was forced to recant and consent unto the
death of Mr. John Hus, that he was justly condemned, and put to death; but his
hopes of freedom thereupon were disappointed, Page 834.
for they caused him to be carried back unto the same Prison, but not so
straightly chained and bound as before.

After his Recantation and Consent to the death of Mr. Hus, he refused to
answer to any Questions propounded to him in private, except he might be
brought before the Council; They supposing he would confirm his former
Recantation, sent for him May 25. An. 1416.

When he was brought before them, Page 835.
he began with Prayer to God, beseeching him to give him Spirit, ability and
utterance, which might most tend to the profit and salvation of his own soul.

Then he spoke unto them thus; I know that there have been many excellent men
which have suffered much otherwise, then they have deserved, being oppressed
with false witnesses, and condemned with wrong judgment, as Socrates, Plato,
Anaxagoras, Zeno, Boethius, Moses, Joseph, Isaiah, Daniel, and almost all the
Prophets, etc. John Baptist, Christ, Stephen, and all the Apostles who were
condemned to death not as good men, but as seditious stirrers up of the people,
and contemners of the gods and evil doers. -- This was the old manner of
ancient and learned men, and most holy Elders, that in matters of Faith they
did differ many times in Arguments, not to destroy the Faith, but to find out
the Verity: So did Augustine and Hierome dissent. -- As for Mr. Hus, he was a
good, just, and holy man (to his knowledge) and much unworthy that death which
he did suffer. Page 836.
-- At last he added, That all the sin^ that ever he had committed did not so
much gnaw and trouble his conscience, as did that only sin, which he had
committed, in that most pestiferous fact, whenas in his Recantation he had
unjustly spoken against that good and holyman and his Doctrine, and especially
in consenting to his wicked condemnation. Concluding that he did utterly revoke
that wicked Recantation, which he made in that cursed place, and that he did it
through weakness of heart and fear of death, and that whatsoever he had spoken
against that blessed man, he had altogether lied upon him, and that it did
repent him with his whole heart that ever he did it. --

Being again brought forth to have judgment given him, and pressed to recant
what he had before spoken in open audience in commendation of Mr. Wickliffe and
Mr. Hus, He said unto them, I take God to my witness, and I protest here before
you all, that I do believe and hold the Articles of the Faith, as the holy
Catholic Church does hold and believe the fame; but for this cause shall I now
ce^oondemned, for that I will not consent with you to the condemnation of those
most holy and blessed men aforesaid, whom you have most wickedly condemned, for
their detesting and abhorring your wicked and abominable life.

After the Bishop of Londy had ended his Sermon, which was but an exhortation
to condemn Mr. Hierome, he said unto them, You shall condemn me wickedly and
unjustly; but I after my death will leave a remorse in your conscience, and a
nail in your heart, and here I cite you to answer unto me before the most high
and just Judge within an hundred years.

This Prophecy was printed in the Coin called moneta Hussi, Page 830.
of the which Coin I my self (says Mr. Fox) have one of the Plates, having the
following superscription printed about it, Centum revolutis annis D^o
respondebitis and mihi.

An hundred years come and gone,
With God and me you shall reckon.
After Sentence was pronounced against him, Page 837.
a long Mitre of paper, painted about with red Devils, was brought to him,
whereupon he said, Our Lord Jesus Christ, whenas he should suffer death for me,
most wretched sinner, did wear a Crown of Thorns upon his Head, and I for his
sake, instead of that Crown will willingly wear this M^tre or Cap.

When the fire was kindled, Page 838.
he said, Into thy hands O Lord I commend my Spirit. -- O Lord God, Father
Almighty, have mercy upon me, and pardon mine offenses, Clarks Mart. of Eccl.
Hist. page 223.
for thou know how sincerely I have loved thy Truth.

When the Executioner began to kindle the fire behind him, he bade him kindle
it before his face; for (said he) If I had been afraid of it, I had not come to
this place, having had so many opportunities offered to me to escape it.

At the giving up of the ghost he said, Hanc animam in flammis offero Christ
tibi.
This soul of mine in flames of fire,
O Christ I offer thee. --


Fox. Vol. 1. page 830.
In his Letter to Mr. John Hus. --

My Master, in those things which you have both written hitherto, and also
preached after the Law of God, against the pride, avarice, and other inordinate
vices of the Priests, go forward, be constant, and strong, and if I shall know
that you be oppressed in the cause, and if need shall so require, of mine own
accord I will follow after to help you as much as I can.


Petrie's Church Hist. Cent. 15. p. 539.
In the Letter of Poggius ( Secretary to the Council of Constance) to Leonard
Aretin concerning Hierome's death. --

I profess I never said any man, who in talking, especially for life and death,
has come nearer the eloquence of the Ancients, whom we do so much admire. It
was a wonder to see with what words, with what Eloquence, Arguments,
Countenance, and with what confidence he answered his Adversaries, and
maintained his own Cause: that it is to be lamented that so fine a wit had
strayed into the study of Heresy, if it be true that was objected against him.
-- When it was refused that he should first plead his own Cause, and then
answer to the railings of Adversaries, he said, How great is this iniquity,
that when I have been three hundred and forty days in most hard prisons, in
filthiness, in dung, in fetters, and want of all things, ye have heard my
Adversaries at all times, and ye will not hear me one hour? -- Ye are men, and
not gods; ye may slip, and err, and be deceived, and seduced, etc. When it was
demanded what he could object to the Articles against him? It is almost
incredible to consider how cunningly he answered, and with what Arguments he
defended himself. He never spoke one word unworthy of a good man; that if he
thought in his heart, as he spoke with his tongue, no cause of death could have
been against him, no not of the meanest offense. -- In the end Poggius says, O
man, worthy of everlasting remembrance among men!


This Epistle is in Fascicu^. r^^. expetend. fol. 152.

Holland.
A Friend of Mr Roger Holland's thanking the Bishop for his good will to his
Kinsman, Fox, Vol. 3. page 875.
and beseeching God that he might have grace to follow his Council; Sir (said
Mr. Holland) You crave of God you know not what, I beseech God to open your
eyes to see the light of his Word. Roger (said his Kinsman) hold your peace,
lest you fare the worse at my Lords hands. No (said he) I shall fare as it
pleases God, for man can do no more then God does permit him.

The Register asking him, Whether he would submit himself to the Bishop, before
he was entered into the Book of contempt. I never meant (said he) but to submit
my self to the Magistrate, as I learn of St. Paul, Romans 13. yet I mean not to
be a Papist; they will not submit themselves to any other Prince or Magistrate,
then those that must first be sworn to maintain them and their doings. B^nner
telling him, Roger, I perceive thou will be ruled by no good counsel, etc. He
answered, I may say to you my Lord, as Paul said to Felix, and to the Jews,
Acts 22. 1 Cor. 15. It is not unknown to my Master, whose Apprentice I was,
that I was of this your blind Religion, etc. having that liberty under your
auricular Confession, that I made no conscience of sin, but trusted in the
Priests absolution, etc. So that Lechery, Swearing, and all othervices I
accounted no offense of danger, so long as I could for money have them
absolved. Page 876.
-- And thus I continued, till of late God has opened the Light of his Word,
and called me by his grace to repentance of my former idolatry and wicked life.
-- The antiquity of our Church is not from Pope Nicholas or Pope Ione, but our
Church is from the beginning, even from the time that God said to Adam, That
the seed of the woman should break the Serpents head, etc. All that believed
this promise were of the Church, though the number were oftentimes but few and
small, as in Elias days, when he thought there was none but he that had not
bowed the knee to Baal, etc. Moreover of our Church have been the Apostles and
Evangelists, the Martyrs and Confessors that have in all Ages been persecuted
for the testimony of the Word of God. --

Page 877.
After Sentence was read against him, he said, Even now I told you that your
authority was of God and by his sufferance, and now I tell you, God has heard
the prayer of his Servants, which has been poured forth with tears for his
afflicted Saints, which daily you persecute. This I dare be bold in God to
speak (which by his Spirit I am moved to say) that God will shorten your hand
of cruelty, that for a time you shall not molest his Church. And this shall you
in short time perceive, my dear Brethren, to be the most true; for after this
day, in this place, shall there not be any by him put to the trial of Fire and
Faggot. Which accordingly came to pass. He was the last burnt in Smithfield.

Then he began to exhort his Friends to repentance, Page 878.
and to think well of them that suffered for the testimony of the Gospel.

The day that Mr. Holland and the rest suffered, a Proclamation was made, that
none should be so bold as to speak to them, or receive any thing of them upon
pain of imprisonment. Notwithstanding the people cried out, desiring God to
strengthen them; and they prayed for the people and the restoring of his Word.

At length Mr. Holland embracing the Stake and the Reeds, said, Lord I most
humbly thank thy Majesty, that thou have called me from the stake of death unto
the light of thy heavenly Word, and now unto the fellowship of thy Saints, that
I may sing and say, Holy, holy, holy Lord God of Hosts. Lord into thy hands I
commit my spirit. Lord, bless these thy people, and save them from idolatry.

Hooper.
Mr. John Hooper in his exile writ a Declaration of Christ and his Office, and
a Declaration of the holy Commandmants of Almighty God, etc.

In his Epistle (before his Declaration of Christ and his Office) to the Duke
of Somerset. See his Declaration of Christ and his Office, Printed at Zurick An
1547.
-- Because the right of every just and lawful Heir is half lost and more, when
his Title and Claim is unknown, I have written this little Book, containing
what Christ is, and what his Office is, that every godly man may put to his
helping hand to restore him again to his Kingdom, -- who has sustained open
and manifest wrong this many years, as it appears by his evidence and
writing, the Gospel sealed with his precious blood. --

In his Declaration -- chapter 3. -- Jesus Christ in all things executed the true
Office of a Bishop, to whom it appertained to teach the people, which was the
chiefest part of the Bishops Office, and most diligently and straightly commanded
by God. As all the Books of Moses and the Prophets teach, and Christ commanded
Peter, John 20. and Paul all the Bishops and Priests of his time, Acts 20. --
Christ left nothing untaught, but as a good Doctor manifested unto his Audience
all things necessary for the health of man, John 4. -- He gave also his
Apostles and Disciples after his resurrection commandment to preach, and
likewise what they should preach, Go into all the world and preach the Gospel
to every creature, teaching them to observe what I have commanded, Matt. 28. --
As they did most sincerely and plainly without all glosses or additions of
their own inventions, and were as testimonies of the Truth, and not the Authors
thereof. -- Always in their Doctrine they taught the thing that Christ first
taught and Gods holy Spirit inspired them, Gal. 1. 2 Cor. 3. Holy Apostles
never took upon them to be Christ's Vicar in the Earth, nor to be his
Lieutenant; But said, Let a men so account of us, as of the Ministers of
Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4.1. And in the same
Epistle the Apostle Paul hiddeth the Corinthians to follow him in nothing, but
where he followed Christ, chap. 11. They ministered not in the Church, as though
Christ was absent, although his most glorious Body was departed into the
Heavens above, but as present, that always governs his Church with his
Spirit of Truth, as he promised, Matthew. ult. Behold I will be with you to the
end of the world. In the absence of his Body he has commended the protection
and governance of his Church to the Holy Ghost, one and the same God with the
Father and himself. -- It was no little pain that Christ suffered in washing
away the sins of this Church: therefore he will not commit the defense thereof
to man. It is no less glory to defend and keep the thing won by force, then it
is by force to obtain the victory. -- Therefore he keeps the defense and
governance of the Church only and solely himself, in whom the Devil has not a
jot of right. Though the Apostles were instructed in all truth, etc. they were
but Ministers, Servants, Testimonies, and Preachers of this verity, and not
Christ's Vicars on Earth, etc. but only appointed to approve the thing to be
good, that God's Law commanded, and that to be ill, which the Word of God
condemned. Seeing that Christ does govern his Church always by his holy
Spirit, and binds all the Ministers thereof unto the sole Word of God: what
abomination is this, that one Bishop of Rome, etc. should claim to be Christ's
Vicar on Earth, and take upon him to make any Laws in the Church of God to bind
the conscience beside the Word of God, and by their Superstition and Idolatry
put the Word of God out of his place? -- All, that are not blinded with the
smoke of Rome, know the Bishop of Rome to be the Beast John describes in the
Apocalypse, as well as the Logician knows that risibilitate distinguitur homo
a caeteris animantibus. Christ's supremacy and continual presence in the Church
admits no Lieutenant, nor general Vicar: Likewise it admits not the Decrees
and Laws of men brought into the Church, contrary unto the Word and Scripture
of God, which is only sufficient to teach all verity and truth, for the
salvation of man. -- chapter 4. -- This Law teaches man sufficiently as well what
he is bound to do unto God, as unto the Princes of the world, Romans 13. 1 Pet.
2. Nothing necessary for man but in this Law it is prescribed. Of what degree,
vocation, or calling soever he be, his duty is showed unto him in the
Scripture. And in this it differs from man's laws, because it is absolutely
perfect, and never to be changed, nothing to be added to it, nor taken from it.
And the Church of Christ the more it was, and is burdened with man's laws, the
farther it is from the true and sincere verity of Gods Word. -- Though Basil,
Ambrose, Epiphanius, Augustine, Bernard, and others erred not in any principal
Article of the Faith, yet they did not inordinately, and more then enough extol
the Doctrine and Tradition of men, and after the death of the Apostles, every
Doctors time was subject to such Ceremonies and manners, that were neither
profitable nor necessary. --

-- Unto the writings of Scripture only, and not unto the writings of men, God
has bound and obligated his Church. In this passage. I admonish the Christian
Reader that I speak not of the Laws of Magistrates or Princes, that daily order
new Laws for the preservation of their Commonwealths, as they see the necessity
of their Realms or Cities require; but of such Laws, as men have ordained for
the Church of Christ, which should be now and for ever governed by the Word of
God. -- This Law must prevail. We must obey God rather then man. The example
hereof we have in Daniel of the Three Children, who chose rather to burn in the
fiery Furnace, then to worship the Image that Nebuchadnezzar had made. So did
the Apostles, Acts 5. -- Cursed be those that make such Laws; and cursed be
those that with sophistry defend them. -- chapter 5. -- The Authority of Gods word
requires me to pronounce this true Judgment in the case of Images that be not
worshipped in the Church, that their presence in the Church is against Gods
Word, as well as to say, Sancta Maria ora pro nobis.

-- The Old Testament says, Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 6. Thou shall make no Image. The
New says, that Christ came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it, Matthew.
5. Christ therefore has left the commandments of the old Law unto the Church,
in which he says, Thou shall not make any Image. -- Of late years Images were
in the Temple, and honored with pater noster, heart and mind, leg and knee:
Now they be applied to another use to teach the people, to be Laymens Books,
as Damascene, etc. says. O blasphemous and devilish Doctrine! -- The most
perfect Churches of the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles used no such mean:
and we ought to follow them and the Word of God, writ by the Prophets and
Apostles. -- The words of Gregory ad Seren. Episcop. M^ssil. part. 10. Ep. 4.
should move no man, though he say, Quod legentibus Scriptura, hoc ideotis
pictura praestat cernentibus. This is but Gregory's opinion. Epiphanius was not
of his mind, He willed the occasion of ill to be taken out of the Church, as
Paul commands, 1 These. 5. This Doctor was (as all men know) of singular
learning and virtue. Again against the Authority of Gregory the Great I set the
Authority of Athanasius the Great, who denies in express words the Images to
be the Books of the Lay people. Lactantius Firmianus cries so out against
Images, that he says there can be no true Religion where they be. Tertullian
judges the same. -- Loved we God we would be content with the Scripture. --
Shall not the Patriarks, Prophets, Christ and his Apostles suffice the Church
of God? What although many learned men have approved Images, should their
wisdom maintain any contrary to the Word of God? -- Such as defend them have
nothing but sophistical arguments to blind the people with. The Scripture nor
Apostles Church used none. Had all Asia, Africa, and Europe, and Gabriel the
Archangel descended from Heaven approved the use of Images, forasmuch as the
Apostles never taught nor wrote any such thing, their Authority should have no
place; the Word of God solely and only is to be preferred, which forbids
Images. -- chapter 10. -- The Office of Christ to sanctify us (according to John
17.1 sanctify my self, that they may be sanctified) does abrogate all other
things that man's constitutions attribute any holiness unto, as bewitched water,
etc. for only Christ sanctifies, and all holiness we must attribute unto him.
-- Sacraments must be used holily, yet not have this Office of Christ added to
them. -- chapter 11. -- In the later days when Christ, as King, was to be born,
the Angel declared the Power and Puissance of his Kingdom. He shall reign over
the house of Jacob, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end, Luke 1. Although
the Commonwealth of the Church has no certain place appointed, where it shall
remain, as it was appointed in the old Law, yet certain we be that this
Kingdom of Christ remains upon the Earth, and shall do till the Earth be
burned, Matthew. 16.28. 1 Cor. 15. Howbeit as Christ wan and obtained this
Kingdom in the later days without shield or spear, so does he preserve it
with his holy Spirit, and not with carnal weapons. My Kingdom is not of this
world, John 18. Meaning he would not reign in this world, as a Prince of this
world in pomp and pride, but defend his people with his holy Spirit, that the
Devil and the World should not break their patience, though many afflictions
and sorrows should fight against them for the Truth's sake. Christ does not
deny to be King of the world, but he meant not to reign worldlily, to the
hinderance and defacing of the Emperors Dignity and Title; as the Jews falsely
accused him, as Cyrillus l. 12. c. 10. in Iohannem says. -- This Kingdom
shall be ever persecuted till the worlds end. Isaiah the Prophet described the
Church of this present life, saying, He will give you the bread of adversity,
and the water of affliction, but he will not remove thy teachers, chap. 30.20.
Thus the Church shall always remain but in affliction. I know such as favor
not the Truth, will interpret my words, that I condemn all Princes and Kings,
as enemies of the Gospel, because they peaceably enjoy their Kingdoms, whereas
I wish them always so to do to the glory of God: but of the one thing I will
assure every Prince of world; The more sincere he is in the Cause of God, the
more shall be his Cross. -- God indeed preserves above humane reason his
Ministers, as he did Jacob from the hands of Esau, David from Saul, Daniel from
the Lions, and Paul in the Ship, when there was no humane hope of salvation. --
Likewise he governs his Church with his only Laws. -- The only Law
whereunto this Congregation is bound is the Gospel, as Christ says; John 4.
The Holy Ghost shall teach you all things, and bring to your remembrance all
things which I have said unto you. Here Christ binds the Apostles and all the
Church unto the things that he had taught them. -- Such as teach the people to
know the Commonwealth of the true Church by these signs, the traditions of men,
and the succession of Bishops, teach wrong. Those two false opinions have given
unto the succession of Bishops power to interpret the Scripture, and power to
make such Laws in the Church, as it pleased them. -- God has given the Civil
Magistrates power and authority to make such Laws for the Commonwealth as shall
be agreeable with reason, and not against Gods Law, and likewise power to
interpret the same Laws: but this is not to be admitted in the Church, unto
whom God has given the Gospel, and interpreted the same by his only Son,
taught the meaning and contents thereof himself. -- The adversaries of the
Truth defend many an error under the name of the holy Church: when the Church
therefore is named, diligently consider when the Articles they would defend,
were accepted of the Church, by whom, and who was the Author of them. Leave not
till the matter be brought unto the first original and most perfect Church of
the Apostles. If thou find by their writings, that their Church used the thing
that the Preacher would prove, then accept it, or else not. Be not amazed,
though they speak of never so many years, nor name never so many Doctors. -- If
either the Authority of Bishops, or the greater part should have power to
interpret the Scripture, the sentence of the Pharisees should have been
preferred before the sentence of Zachary, Simion, Elizabeth, or the blessed
Virgin. Consider the true Church is many time but a small Congregation, as
Isaiah says, Unless God had left us a remnant, we had been as Sodom. Therefore
the interpretation of the Scripture is not obligated to ordinary power, nor the
most part. -- Beware of deceit, when thou hear the name of the Church. The
verity is then assaulted. They call the Church of the Devil, the holy Church
many time. -- Remember, Christian Reader, that the gift of interpreting the
Scripture is the light of the Holy Ghost given unto the humble and penitent
person, that seeks only to honor God, and not unto those persons that claim
it by title or place, because he is a Bishop, or followed by succession Peter
or Paul. -- Remember therefore to examine all Doctrine by the Word of God; for
such as preach it aright, have their infirmities and ignorance, they may depart
from the Truth, or else build some superstition and false Doctrine upon the
Gospel of Christ. Superstition is to be avoided, false Doctrine to be abhorred,
whosoever be the Author thereof, Prince, Magistrate, or Bishop. As the Apostles
made answer, Acts 5. We ought to obey God rather then man. -- chapter 13. -- The
Law is necessary for a justified man to teach him with what works he should
exercise his faith, will, and obedience unto God. We may not choose works of our
own wisdom to serve him withal. He would have us to be governed by his Word,
as David says, Thy Word is a light unto my feet: And Christ, In vain do they
worship me by the commands of men. --

In the second Declaration. See his Declaration of the ten holy Commandments of
Almighty God, Printed A. 1548. page 8, 9.
-- Moses commands, Deuteronomy. 4 that no man should decline from this Law, neither
to the right, nor left hand, i. e. That no man should add to, or take any
thing from it, but simply to observe it, as it is given or written to us. From
this right line and true rule of Gods Word man erreth diverse ways: Sometimes
by ignorance, because he knows not, or will not know, that only the express
Word of God suffices. He holds with the most part, and condemns the
better, as it is to be seen at this present day. This reason takes place, it
is allowed of the most part, and established by so many holy and learned
Bishops, therefore it is true, etc. Another way that leads from the Word of
God, is many times the power and authority of this world, as we see by the
Bishop of Rome, and all his adherents, who give more credit to one Charter and
Gift of Constantine, then to the whole Bible. Another erreth by mistaking of
the time, making his superstition far elder then it is, etc. One says thus, My
Father believed, and should I believe the contrary? -- Whereas no Law at all
should be spoken of conscience, Page 11.
but the only Word of God, which never altered, nor can be altered, Matt. 5.
Luke 10. Psalm. 18.119. If Heavens and Earth made by word cannot be altered, how
much more the Word it self! Unto which Law, the conscience of man in matters of
faith is bound only. Page 13.
-- Such as can interpret nothing, will say, I have an ill opinion of God in
Heaven, and of the superior Powers on Earth, because I damn the Disciples of
the false Doctors with the Doctors, and take from all Powers on Earth authority
to prescribe unto their Subjects any Law touching Religion of the soul. As
concerning those that be seduced by false Teachers, St. Luke c. 6. and Ezekiel
3. and 13. judge as I do. -- Both he that leads to damnation, and he that is
led, Page 14.
falls into the pit. -- Notwithstanding I believe, that in the midst of
darkness, when all the world (as far as man might judge) had sworn unto the
Bishop of Rome, Christ had his Elect, that never consented to his false Laws,
as it was in the time of Elias, 1 Kings 19. where God says, He had preserved
seven thousand that had not bowed the knee to Baal. Page 15.
-- As many as die before us, seduced by false Teachers without repentance, the
Scripture condemns: As many as believed them not, but trusted to the
Scripture (or else deceived, yet repented before they died) live eternally in
joy and solace and are saved, as John says Rev. 13. in the blood of the Lamb.
-- As touching the superior Powers of the Earth, it is not unknown to all men
that have read and marked the Scripture, that it pertains nothing to their
Office to make any Law to govern the Consciences of their Subjects in Religion,
but to reign over them in this case, as the Word of God commands. Howbeit in
their Realms they may make what Laws they will, Page 16.
and as many as they will; command them to be kept as long as it pleases them,
and change them at their pleasure, as they shall see occasion for the wealth
and commodity of their Realms: -- Unto the which superior Powers we owe all
obedience, both of body and goods, and likewise our daily prayer for them to
Almighty God, etc. And as many diverse Commonwealths as there be, so many diverse
Laws there may be. Howbeit all Christian Kings and Kingdoms with other
Magistrates, should reign by one Law, and govern the Churches of their Realms
solely by the Word of God, which is never to be changed. Page 17.
-- Thus Christ commanded his Apostles to teach, and their Audience to hear the
things he commanded, Matthew. 28. Mark 16. -- Moses prescribes unto his Audience
seven Rules, Page 26.
wherewith he prepares them to the receiving of the ten Commandments. (1) A
right persuasion of Gods Word, that God will undoubtedly give the good promised
to the good, and inflict the evil threatened against the evil. Page 29.
-- (2) To have a right opinion of the Magistrates and superior Powers of the
Earth, to give them no more, nor any less honor and reverence then the Word of
God commands. -- For lack of this preparative the world has erred from the
Truth this many years. Men do not look what Gods Word says, but extol the
authority of man's Laws, preferring the decree of a general or provincial
Council before the Word of God. Page 30.
-- (3) Another preparative is obedience both to God and man. It were as good
nere read the Law, in case we mind not to be obedient. -- (4) To observe jus
gentium. Page 31.
-- (5) To esteem the Doctrine of the Commandments, Page 32.
as it is worthy. Page 34.
-- (6) A true and right understanding of the Law, not to constrain the letter
against the mind of the Text, but behold always the consent of the Scripture.
Page 36.
-- (7) To add nothing to this Law, neither to take any thing from it. -- If
thou judge that Gods Law contains one part of such Doctrine as is necessary
for man's salvation, and the Bishops Laws another part, thou contemnest and
dishonourest the whole Law, and the Giver thereof, and offendest against that
command, Deuteronomy. 4.12. and Prove. 30. Page 64.
-- Every thing that we do for the honor of God, not commanded by his Word, is
as strange, and not accepted by God; as all good intentions, feigned works by
man, and all things commanded by general Councils, not expressed in the Word of
God, by the Patriarks, Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles, which be and ever
were before God the holy and Catholic Church. Whosoever add any thing to
their Laws are the Church of Antichrist, Deuteronomy. 4.12. Revel. 22. Nadab and Abihu
offered strange fire, i. e. such as he commanded not. Page 68.
-- Read the Commentaries of Thom. Val^^s and Nicol. iu Aug. de Civit. Dei, l.
4. and they will tell thee what superstition is, if thou believe not the
Scripture. Superstition (say they) is a superfluous Religion, what ways soever
it be superfluous whether it be of the superfluity of the things honored, or
of the things used for Religion, or of the manner in Religion. This doubtless
is understood by the name of Superstition, from whence soever the name has its
rise; whatsoever thou do to please God Almighty, if it be not commanded in
his Word, Page 70.
it is superfluous superstition. -- The purpose, end and will of the second
Commandment is, That Gods pleasure is unto us, that we do not profane or
dishonor the true Religion or honor of God with superstitious Rites or
Ceremonies not commanded by him. Page 77.
-- I am a jealous God, q. d. when we two were married together for the love
that I bore unto thee, I gave thee certain Rules and Precepts how in all things
thou may keep my love and good will toward thee, and thou promisedst me
obedience to my Commandments, Ex^d. 19. So honor me therefore, and love me as
it stands written in the Writings and Indentures written between us both, I
cannot suffer to be otherwise honored, then I have taught in my Tables and
Testament. --

Against obeying of Gods Laws, Page 209.
the first Sophism or carnal Objection is, when men say it is no place nor time
to learn or obey Gods Laws, we be not in the Temple, etc. but in the broad
world, and must do as other men do, and rather serve the place we be in, and
u^ulare cum lupis, bark with the wolf, then speak of the Scripture: Deuteronomy. 29,
30.
besides, it is too dangerous a season, let it pass till the world be no more
quiet, etc. -- This Objection Moses breaks, and proves that the Law should
be always received, and in every place. -- Those that observed it in the
wilderness God fed by miracle from Heaven, and preserved all their apparel,
Page 210.
that it consumed not, nor perished in the wearing for the space of forty
years. -- A second Objection is, when men put from themselves the obedience of
the Law unto others, saying, Let the Priests, etc. learn and keep the Law, what
should a Prince, Magistrate, or Gentleman be so bound? Youth cannot be tied to
so strait Canons, it must not be so bridled, etc. This wicked acceptance of
persons Moses destroys, yea all (says he) stand this day before the Lord
your God, Page 211.
your Princes, your Tribes, your Elders, your Officers, and all men of Israel,
your children, your wives, and thy Guest, etc. No manner of prison is excluded
from the League. Page 212.
-- A third is presumption, when men know what is to be done, yet against their
knowledge presuming of Gods mercy, Page 213.
do the thing that is evil, saying, If I walk in the imagination of my heart,
and take my pleasure, there is no danger, etc. But (says Moses) the Lord will
not favor such an one, but then be angry, and kindle his ire against him, so
that every curse written in this Book, shall rest on him, etc. A fourth is
Animosity, Page 218.
thus reasoning with ones self, who knows what his last hour shall be? -- But
(says Moses) Secret things belong to God, but the things that God has
revealed to us and our children for ever, Page 222.
that we do all the precepts of this Law. -- A fifth is Desperation, when men
think it is in vain for them to observe Gods Laws, there is no hope of their
salvation, etc. It is impossible for him to return to God, and do all that God
requires, etc. Moses gives a remedy against this dangerous disease, Page 224.
shows the way to God, declares, That God is full of mercy, Page 229.
and ready to forgive, etc. -- A sixth is the pretense of Ignorance, saying,
The Scripture, the Laws of God have so many mysteries, too hard for our
capacities, etc. Besides the Doctors brawl and chide between themselves, and
how should the Unlearned understand it aright? Who can tell (says another)
whether this be the true Law or not? If it were the true Law of God, then it
should contain all verities, and have no deed of man's Laws. Now the greatest
part of Christians in name say, That this Law is not sufficient, except it be
holp and aided by the Law of the Bishops. -- Moses answers and says, Page
230:
This Law is sufficient, simple and plain, easy to be understood, a perfect
Doctrine, and required of all men; the Commandment that I prescribe unto thee
to day is not far above thee, nor put far from thee, etc. By which words it
appears, that God has made his will and pleasure simple and plainly open to
his people, etc. Yea the Law of God to do well by is written naturally in the
heart of every man, Page 231.
etc. though there were no Law written, etc. man's conscience would tell him
when he does well and when ill. Page 234.
-- Farewell in our only and sole joy and consolation, Christ Jesus.

This holy Exile parting with Mr. Bullinger and his Friends at Zurick, Fox,
Vol. 3. page 145.
declared that the principal cause of his return to his own Country was the
matter of Religion, etc. Be sure (said he) neither the nature of the Country,
nor pleasure of commodities, nor newness of friends shall ever induce me to the
oblivion of such friends and Benefactors, and therefore you shall be sure from
time to time to hear from me how it goes with me, but the last news of all I
shall not be able to write; for there said he, (taking Mr. Bullinger by the
hand) where I shall take most pains, there shall you hear of me to be burned to
ashes, and that shall be the last news, which I shall not be able to write. --

When he was made Bishop of Worcester and Gloucester, the Arms allotted him
(probably by his own appointment) were, Page 146.
a Lamb in a fiery Bush, and the Sunbeams from Heaven descending down upon the
Lamb, rightly denoting as it seemed, the manner of his suffering, which
afterward followed.

After his return, in his Sermons he corrected sin, and sharply inveighed
against the iniquity of the world, and corrupt abuses of the Church. --

When he was elected Bishop of Worcester and Gloucester, he made humble
supplication to the King, either to discharge him of the Bishopric, or to
dispense with him as to the wearing of such Garments and Apparel as the Popish
Bishops were wont to do. His Petition the King granted, as appears by his
Letter to the Archbishop of Canterbury, telling him, That the Rites and
Ceremonies he would be dispensed in were offensive to his conscience. The Oath
also, Page 147.
used then commonly in the Consecration of Bishops was against his conscience,
as appears by the Earl of Warwick's Letter to the Archbishop, writ by the Kings
desire.

Page 149.
In the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign, when notice was given him that he
should be sent for to London, and how dangerous it was for him to appear, he
gave this Answer: Once I did flee, but now because I am called to this Place
and Vocation, I am thoroughly persuaded to tarry, and to live and die with my
sheep.

Page 150.
When he was imprisoned in the Fleet, he writes thus: I am so hardly used, that
I see no remedy (saving Gods help) but I shall be cast away in Prison before I
come to Judgment. But I commit my just cause to God, whose will be done,
whether it be by life or death.

Winchester exhorting him to the unity of the Catholic Church, and to
acknowledge the Popes Holiness to be Head of the same Church, promising him the
Queens mercy; he answered, That forasmuch as the Pope taught Doctrine
altogether contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, he was not worthy to be
accounted a Member of Christ's Church, much less to be Head thereof; wherefore
he would in no wise condescend to any such usurped Jurisdiction, neither
esteemed he the Church, whereof they called him Head, to be the Catholic
Church of Christ, Page 151.
for the Church of Christ only hears the voice of her Spouse Christ, and
flies the strangers. Howbeit (said he) if in any point to me unknown, I have
offended the Queens Majesty, I shall humbly submit my self to her mercy, if
mercy may be had with safety of conscience, and without the displeasure of God.

Come Brother (said he to Mr. Rogers, who was sent with him to the Counter in
Southwark) must we two take this matter first in hand, and begin to fire these
Fagots? Yea Sir (said Mr. Rogers) by Gods grace. Doubt not (said Mr. Hooper)
but God will give strength.

The Sheriff telling Mr. Hooper he wondered that he was so hasty and quick with
the Lord Chancellor, he answered Mr. Sheriff, I was nothing at all impatient,
although I was earnest in my Masters Cause, and it stands me so in hand; for
it goes upon life and death, not the life and death of this world only, but
also of the world to come.

In his Letter for the stopping of certain false rumors spread abroad
concerning his Recantation, by the Bishops and their Servants. -- The grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ be with all them that unfeignedly look for the coming of
our Savior Christ. Amen. Dear Brethren and Sisters in the Lord, and my
Fellow Prisoners for the Cause of Gods Gospel, I do much rejoice and give
thanks unto God for your constancy and perseverance in affliction, unto whom I
wish continuance to the end. And as I do rejoice in your faith and constancy in
afflictions that be in Prison, even so I do mourn and lament to hear of our
dear Brethren, that yet have not felt such dangers for Gods Truth, Page 152.
as we have, and do feel, and be daily like to suffer more, yea the very
extreme and vile death of the fire; yet such is the report abroad (as I am
credibly informed) that I John Hooper, a condemned man for the Cause of Christ,
should now after sentence of death (being in Newgate Prisoner, and looking
daily for Execution) recant and abju^e that which heretofore I have preached;
and this talk arises of this, That the Bishop of London and his Chaplains
resort unto me. Doubtless if our Brethren were as Godly as I could wish them,
they would think that in case I did refuse to talk with them, they might have
just occasion to say that I were unlearned, and durst not speak with learned
men; or else proud, and disdained to speak with them. -- But I fear not their
Arguments, neither is death terrible to me. -- I am more confirmed in the
truth, which I have preached heretofore, by their coming. Therefore ye that may
send to the weak Brethren, pray them that they trouble me not with such reports
of Recantations as they do, for I have hitherto left all things of the world,
and suffered great pains and imprisonment, and I thank God I am as ready to
suffer death as a mortal man may be. It were better for them to pray for us,
then to credit or report such rumors that be untrue. We have enemies enough of
such as know not God truly: but yet the false report of weak Brethren is a
double cross. I wish your eternal salvation in Jesus Christ, and also require
your continual Prayers, that he which has begun in us may continue it to the
end. I have taught the truth with my tongue, and with pen heretofore, and
hereafter shortly will confirm the same by Gods grace with my blood.

Newgate Feb. 2. 1554. Your Brother in Christ J. H.


When the Keeper told him he should be sent to Gloucester to be burned, he
rejoiced very much, lifting up his eyes and hands to Heaven, he praised God
that he saw it good to send him among the people over whom he was Pastor, Page
153.
there to confirm with his death the truth which he had before taught them, not
doubting but the Lord would give him strength to perform the same to his glory.

Sir Anthony Kingston (formerly his Friend, then a Commissioner to see
Execution done upon him) coming to him a little before his death, bid him
consider that life was sweet, and death was bitter, etc. It is true (said Mr.
Hooper) I am come hither to end this life, and to suffer death here, because I
will not gainsay the former truth which I have heretofore taught among you. --
True it is that daath is bitter, and life is sweet; but alas! consider that the
death to come is more bitter, and the life to come is more sweet; therefore for
the desire and love I have to the one, and the terror and fear of the other, I
do not so much regard this death, nor esteem this life, but have settled my
self through the strength of Gods holy Spirit, patiently to pass through the
torments and extremities of the fire now prepared for me, rather then to deny
the truth of his Word, desiring you and others in the mean time to commend me
to Gods mercy in your Prayers.

I thank God (said the Knight) that ever I knew you; for God did appoint you to
call me, being a lost child, and by your good instructions, where before I was
both an Adulterer and Fornicator, God has brought me to the forsaking and
detesting of the same. If you had the grace so to do (said the Bishop) I do
highly praise God for it, and if you have not, I pray God you may have, and
that you may continually live in his fear.

The Knight and the Bishop parting with tears, the Bishop told the Knight, that
all the troubles he had sustained in Prison, had not caused him to utter so
much sorrow.

A Papist telling him he was sorry to see him in that case. Be sorry for thy
self man (said he) and lament thine own wickedness; for I am well, I thank God,
and death to me for Christ's sake is welcome.

Page 154.
When he was committed to the Sheriff of Gl^cester, the Mayor and Aldermen at
first saluted him, and took him by the hand. Mr. Mayor (said Mr. Hooper) I give
most hearty thanks to you and to the rest of your Brethren, that you have
vouchsafed to take me a Prisoner and condemned man by the hand, whereby to my
rejoicing it is somewhat apparent that your old love and friendship toward me
is not altogether extinguished, and I trust also that all the things I have
taught you in times past are not utterly forgotten, etc. For the which most
true and sincere Doctrine, because I will not now account it falsehood and
Heresy, as many other men do, I am sent hither by the Queens command to die,
and am come where I taught it to confirm it with my blood. And now Mr.
Sheriffs, -- My request to you is, That there may be a quick Fire, shortly to
make an end, and in the mean time I will be as obedient unto you, as your
selves would wish. If you think I do amiss in any thing, hold up your finger
and I have done: for I am not come hither as one enforced or compelled to die;
for it is well known I might have had my life with worldly gain; but as one
willing to offer and give my life for the truth, rather then to consent to the
wicked Papistical Religion of the Bishop of Rome, etc. --

When the Sheriffs fetched him from his Chamber to the place of Execution with
Bills, Weapons, etc. Mr. Sheriffs (said he) I am no Traitor, neither needed you
to have made such a business to bring me to the place where I must suffer; for
if ye had willed me, I would have gone alone to the Stake, and have troubled
none of you all.

When he saw the multitude of People that were assembled, he said unto them
that were about him, Alas! why be these People assembled and come together?
peradventure they think to hear something of me now, as they have in times
past; but alas! speech is prohibited me.

Notwithstanding the cause of my death is well known unto them: when I was
appointed here to be their Pastor, I preached unto them true and sincere
Doctrine, and that out of the Word of God; because I will not account the same
to be Heresy and untruth, this kind of death is prepared for me.

When he was come to the place where he was to suffer, after he had begun to
pray, a Box was brought and laid before him upon a stool, with his Pardon (or
at leastwise it was feigned so to be) from the Queen, if he would turn; at the
sight thereof he cried, If you love my soul away with it, if you love my soul
away with it.

In his Prayer he was overheard to say; Lord, I am Hell, but thou art Heaven; I
am swill, and a sink of sin, but thou art a gracious God and merciful Redeemer.
Page 155.
-- Thou art ascended into Heaven, receive me Hell to be partaker of thy joys,
where thou sit in equal glory with thy Father; for well know thou
wherefore I am come hither to suffer, and why the wicked do persecute this thy
poor Servant, not for my sins and transgressions against thee, but because I
will not allow their wicked doings to the contaminating of thy blood, and to
the denial of the knowledge of thy Truth, wherewith it did please thee by thy
holy Spirit to instruct me, the which with as much diligence as a poor wretch
might (being thereto called) I have set forth to thy glory. And well see
thou, my Lord and God; what terrible pains and cruel torments be prepared for
thy Creature; such, Lord, as without thy strength none is able to bear, or
patiently to pass. But all things that are impossible with man are possible
with thee. Therefore strengthen me of thy goodness, that in the fire I break
not the Rules of patience, or else assuage the terror of the pains as shall
seem most to thy glory.

When he was at the Stake, three irons made to bind him to the Stake, were
brought; one for his Neck, another for his Middle, and the third for his Legs.
He refusing them, said, Ye have no need thus to trouble your selves, for I
doubt not but God will give strength sufficient to abide the extremity of the
fire without bands: notwithstanding, suspecting the frailty and weakness of the
flesh, but having assured confidence in Gods strength, I am content ye do as ye
shall think good.

When he was first scorched with the fire, Page 156.
he prayed, saying mildly, and not very loud (but as one without pains) O Jesus
the Son of David have mercy upon me, and receive my soul.

When the second fire was spent, and only burnt his lower parts, he said, for
Gods love (good people) let me have more fire. In the third fire he prayed with
somewhat a loud voice, Lord Jesus have mercy on me, Lord Jesus have mercy on
me, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit.

The Reasons of Mr. Hooper's refusing the Episcopal Habits, etc. I find thus.
C. Why do not you my Lord use these innocent and harmless weeds? See Cabal. p.
13, 14.


H. I put my self upon the trial of the Searcher of Hearts, that no obstinacy,
but mere Conscience makes me refuse these Ornaments.

C. These Ornaments are indifferent of themselves, and of ancient use in the
Church.

H. They are useless being ridiculous and superstitious.

C. Nay, my Lord, being enjoined by lawful Authority, they become necessary,
not to salvation, but to Church-unity.

H. Being left indifferent by God, it is presumption in man to make them
necessary.

C. By a moderate use of these Ceremonies we may gain Papists into the Church.

H. While you hope to gain Papists into the Church, you lose many Protestants
out of it.

C. You discredit other Bishops, who have used this Habit.

H. I had rather discredit them then destroy mine own conscience.

C. How think you, being a private person, to be indulged with, to the
disturbance of the public Uniformity of the Church?

H. If it please your Grace but to read these Letters, I hope you will be
satisfied (and then he produced the Letters from the Earl of Warwick, an^ King
Edward.)

C. These are to desire, that in such reasonable things, wherein my Lord Elect
of Gloucester craveth to be born withal at your hands, you would vouchsafe your
Graces favor; the principal cause is, that you would not charge him with any
thing burdenous to his Conscience.

I. Warwick.


WE do understand you stay from Consecrating our well beloved Mr. J. Hooper,
because h^ would have you omit and let p^ss c^rtain Rites and Ceremonies
^ffensive to his Conscience, whereby you thi^^ you shall fall in praemunire of
Laws; We have though^ good by advice of Our Council to discharge you (...)
manner of Dangers, Penalties, and Forfeitur^ (...) should run into, by omitting
any of the some, and (...) Our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and
Dis^charge.

Edward Rex.


Fox, Vol. 3. page 116.
In his Letter writ in Answer to one sent hi^ concerning certain taken in Bow
Churchyard whilst they were praying. -- I do rejoice in th^^ men can be so
well occupied in this perilous time and flee for remedy to God by Prayer, as
well for their own lacks and necessities, as also charitably to pray for them
that persecute them. So does the Word of God command all men to pray charitably
for them that hate them, and not to revile any Magistrate with words, or to
mean him evil by force and violence. They also may rejoice that in well doing
they were taken to Prison. -- Thus fare you well, and pray God to send his true
Word into this Realm again amongst us, which the ungodly Bishops have now
banished.

In his Letter to those Christians so taken Prisoners. -- The grace, Page 117.
favor, consolation, and ^^d of the Holy Ghost be with you now and ever. So be
it. Dearly Beloved in the Lord, ever since I ^eard of your imprisonment I have
been marvellously moved with great affections and passions, as well of mirth
and gladness, as of heaviness and sorrow. Of gladness in this, that I perceived
how ye be bent and given to prayer and invocation of Gods help in these dark
and wicked proceedings of men against Gods glory. I have been sorry to perceive
the malice and wickedness of men to be so (...) devilish, and tyrannical to
persecute the (...) of God for serving of God, etc. These (...) doings do
declate, that the Papists Church is (...) bloody and tyrannical, then ever was
the (...) of the Ethnicks and Gentiles. -- Trajan the Emperor commanded, That
no man should be persecuted for serving of God: but the Pope and his Church
have cast you into Prison, being taken doing the Work of God, and one of the
excellentest Works, that is required of Christians, viz. whilst ye were in
Prayer. -- O glad may ye be that ever ye were born to be apprehended, whilst
ye were so virtuously occupied. Blessed be they that suffer for righeeousness
sake. If God had suffered them that took your bodies, then to have taken your
life also, now had you been following the Lamb in pertual joys, away from the
company and assembly of wicked men. But the Lord would not have you suddenly so
to depart, but reserveth you gloriously to speak and maintain his Truth to the
world. Be ye not careful what ye shall say; for God will go out and in with
you, and will be present in your hearts and in your mouths to speak his
wisdom, though it seems foolishness to the world. He that has begun this good
work in you, continue in the same unto the end. Pray unto him, Mat. 10.
that ye may fear him only, that has power to kill both body and soul, and to
cast them into hell fire. Luke 12.
Be of good comfort, all the hairs of your head are numbered, and there is not
one of them can perish, except your heavenly Father suffer it to perish. Now
you be in the field, and placed in the forefront of Christ's battle. Doubtless
it is a singular favor of God, and a special love of him toward you, to give
him this pre-eminence, as a sign that he trusts you before others of his
people. Wherefore (dear Brethren and Sisters) continually fight this Fight of
the (...) Your Cause is most just and godly, ye stan^ (...) the true Christ
(who is after the flesh in He^^^^) and for his true Religion and Honor,
(...)amply, fully, sufficiently, and abundantly contained in the holy
Testament, sealed with Christ's own blood. How much be ye bound to God, who put^
you in trust with so holy and just a Cause? Remember what lookers on you have
to see and behold you in your fight, God and all his holy Angels, who be ready
always to take you up into Heaven, if ye be slain in his Fight. Also you have
standing a^ your backs all the multitude of the Faithful, who shall take
courage, strength, and desire to follow such noble and valiant Christians, as
you be. Be not afraid of your Adversaries; 1 John 4.
for he that is in you, is stronger then he that is in them. Shrink not
although it be pain to you: your pains be not now so great, as hereafter your
joys shall be. Read the comfortable Chapters to the Romans, 8.10, 15. Hebrews
11.12. And upon your knees thank God that ever ye were accounted worthy to
suffer any thing for his Names sake. Read the second Chapter of Luke, and there
you shall see how the Shepherds, that watched their Sheep all night, as soon as
they heard that Christ was born at Bethlehem, by and by went to see him. They
did not reason nor debate with themselves, who should keep the Wolf from the
Sheep in the mean time, but did as they were commanded, and committed their
Sheep unto him, whose pleasure they obeyed. So let us do now we be called,
commit all other things to him that calls us. He will take heed that all
things shall be well. He will help the Husband: he will comfort the Wife: he
will guide the Servants: he will keep the House: he will preserve the Goods;
yea rather then it should be undone, he will wash the Dishes, and rock the
Cradle. Cast therefore all your care upon God; for he cares for you. Besides
this, you may perceive by your imprisonment, that your Adversaries weapons
against you be nothing but flesh, and blood, and tyranny, for if they were
able, they would maintain their Religion by Gods Word; but for lack of that,
they would violently compel, such as they cannot by holy Scripture persuade;
because the holy Word of God, and all Christ's doings be contrary unto them. I
pray you pray for me, and I will pray for you.

Fleet, Ian. 14. 1555.

Page 156.
In a Letter to certain of his Friends. -- Now is the time of trial, to see
whether we fear more, God or man. It was an easy thing to hold with Christ,
whilst the Prince and world held with him; but now the world hates him, it is
the true trial who be his. Wherefore in the Name, and in the Virtue, Strength,
and Power of his holy Spirit, prepare your selves in any case to adversity and
constancy. Let us not run away, when it is most time to fight. Remember none
shall be crowned, but such as fight manfully; and he that endures to the end
shall be saved. Ye must now turn all your cogitations from the peril you see,
and mark the felicity that follows the peril, either victory in this world of
your enemies, or else a surrender of this life to inherit the everlasting
Kingdom* Beware of beholding too much the felicity, or misery of this world;
for the consideration and too earnest love or fear of either of them draws
from God. Wherefore think with your selves, as touching the felicity of the
world, it is good; but yet none otherwise then it stands with the favor of
God. It is to be kept; but yet so far forth, as by keeping of it we lose not
God. It is good abiding and tarrying still among our friends here; but yet so,
that we tarry not therewithal in Gods displeasure, and hereafter dwell with the
Devils in fire everlasting. There is nothing under God, but may be kept, so
that God, being above all things we have be not lost. Of adversity judge the
same. Imprisonment is painful, but yet liberty upon evil conditions is more
painful. The Prisons stink; but yet not so much as sweet Houses, where the fear
and true honor of God is lacking. I must be alone and solitary: It is better
to be so, and have God with me, then to be in company with the wicked. Loss of
Goods is great; but loss of Gods grace and favor is greater. I am a poor
simple creature, and cannot tell how to answer before such a great sort of
noble, learned, and wise men: It is better to make answer before the pomp and
pride of wicked men, then to stand naked in the light of all Heaven and Earth
before the just God at the later day. I shall die then by the hands of the
cruel man: He is blessed, that loses his life full of miseries, and finds
the life of eternal joys. It is pain and grief to depart from Goods and
Friends; but yet not so much as to depart from grace and Heaven it self. Page
157.
Wherefore there is neither felicity, nor adversity of this world, that can
appear to be great, if it be weighed with the joys or pains in the world to
come. I can do no more, but pray for you; do the same for me, for Gods sake.
For my part (I thank the heavenly Father) I have made mine accounts, and
appointed my self unto the will of the heavenly Father: as he will, so I will
by his grace. -- I am a precious jewel now, and daintily kept, never so
daintily; for neither mine own man, nor any of the Servants of the House may
come to me, but my Keeper alone.

Ian. 21. 1555.

In another Letter. -- The grace, mercy, Page 158.
and peace of God the Father, through our Lord Jesus Christ, be with you my
dear Brethren, and with all those that unfeignedly love and embrace his holy
Gospel. Amen. We must give God thanks for the Truth he has opened, etc. and
pray unto him, that we deny it not, nor dishonor it with idolatry; but that we
may have strength and patience, rather to die ten times, then to deny him once.
Blessed shall we be, if ever God make us worthy of that honor to shed our
blood for his Names sake: and blessed then shall we think those Parents, which
brought us into this world, that we should be carried from this mortality into
immortality. If we follow the command of Paul, that says, Col. 3.
If ye be risen with Christ, s^ek those things which are above, where Christ
sits at the right hand of God; we shall neither depart from the vain
transi^ory goods of this world, nor from this wretched and mortal life, with so
great pains, as others do. -- There is no better way to be used in this
troublesome time for your consolation, then many times to have Assemblies
together of such men and women, as be of your Religion in Christ, and there to
take and renew among your selves the truth of your Religion, to see what ye be
by the Word of God, and to remember what ye were before ye came to the
knowledge thereof; to weigh and confer the dreams and false lies of the
Preachers, that now preach, with the Word of God, that retains all truth: and
by such talk, and familiar resorting together, ye shall the better find out all
their lies, that now go about to deceive you, and also both know and love the
Truth that God has opened to us. It is much requisite that the Members of
Christ comfort one another, make prayers together, confer one with another; so
shall ye be stronger, and Gods Spirit shall not be absent from you, but in the
midst of you, to teach you, to comfort you, to make you wise in all godly
things, patient in adversity, and strong in persecution. Ye see how the
Congregation of the wicked, by helping one another, make their wicked Religion
and themselves strong against Gods Truth and his people. -- Ye may perceive b^^
the life of our forefathers, that Christ's words, In the world ye shall have
trouble: H^ that will live godly in Christ must suffer persecution, be true;
for none of all his before our time escaped trouble: then shall ye perceive
that it is but a folly for one that professes Christ truly, to look for the
love of the world. Ye be no better then your forefathers. Be glad that ye may
be counted worthy Soldiers for this War: and pray to God when ye come
together, that he will use and order you and your doings. (1) That ye glorify
God. (2) That ye edify the Church and Congregation. (3) That ye profit your
own souls. In all your doings beware ye be not deceived; for although this time
be not yet so bloody and tyrannous, as the time of our forefathers, that could
not bear the Name of Christ, without danger of life and goods; yet is our time
more perilous for soul and body. Therefore of us Christ said, Luke 18.
Think ye when the Son of man comes, he shall find faith upon the earth? He
speaks not of being christened and in name a Christian, but of saving Faith:
and doubtless the scarcity of Faith is now more (and will, I fear, increase)
then it was in the time of the greatest Tyrants, that ever were. In Rev. 6. ye
may perceive that at the opening of the fourth Seal came out a pale Horse, and
he that sat upon him was called Death, and Hell followed him. This Horse is
the time, when Hypocrites and Dissemblers entered into the Church, under
pretense of the true Religion, etc. that have killed more souls with heresy
and superstition, then all the Tyrants that ever killed bodies by fire, sword,
or banishment, etc. and all souls, that trust to these Hypocrites, live to the
Devil in everlasting pain, as is declared by Hells following the pale Horse.
These pale Hypocrites have stirred up Earthquakes, i. e. the Princes of the
world against Christ's Church. They have darkened the Sun, and made the Moon
bloody, and have caused the Stars to fall from Heaven, i. e. they have darkened
with mists, and daily darken the Sun of Gods Word, imprisoned, and chained, and
butchered Gods true Preachers, Page 159.
which fetch only light at the Sun of Gods Word, that their light cannot shine
unto the world, as they would: Whereupon it comes to pass, that many Christians
fall from Gods true Word to hypocrisy, most devilish superstition and
idolatry. --

In his Letter to Bishop Farrar, Doctor Tailor, Mr. Bradford, and Mr. Philpot,
Prisoners in the Kings Bench in Southwark. -- I am advertised, that we shall be
carried shortly to Cambride, there to dispute for the Faith and for the
Religion of Christ (which is most true) that we have and do profess. I am (as I
doubt not ye be) in Christ ready) not only to go to Cam^ridge, but also to
suffer, by Gods help, death it self in the maintenance thereof. -- I write this
to comfort you in the Lord, that the time draws near, and is at hand, that we
shall testify before Gods enemies Gods Truth. --

May 6. 1554. Yours, and with you unto death in Christ, J. H.


Page 160.
In his Letter to his Wife. -- As the Devil has entered into their hearts, that
they themselves cannot, or will not come to Christ to be instructed by his holy
Word; so can they not abide any others to become Christians, and lead their
lives after the Word of God, but hate, persecute, rob, imprison, and kill them,
whether male or female; though they have never offended Gods or Man's Law, yea
though they daily pray for them, and wish them Gods grace; having no respect to
nature. The Brother persecuteth the Brother, the Father the Son, and most dear
Friends are become most mortal Enemies. And no marvel; for they have chosen
sundry Masters, the one the Devil, the other God. The one agree with the other,
as God and the Devil agree between themselves. Genesis 21. Gal. 4.
-- As he that was born after the flesh persecuted in times p^st him that was
born after the Spirit, even so it is now. Therefore forasmuch as we live in
this life amongst so many great perils and dangers, the only remedy is what
Christ has appointed, Luke 21.
Ye shall possess your selves in patience. -- When troubles come we must be
patient, and in no case violently, nor seditiously to resist our persecutors;
because God has such care of us, that he will keep in the midst of all
troubles the very hairs of our heads, etc. And seeing he has such care of the
hairs of our heads, how much more does he care for our life it self? Their
cruelty has no farther power then God permits, and that which comes unto
us by the will of our heavenly Father, can be no harm, loss, destruction to us,
but rather gain, wealth, and felicity. That the spirit of man may feel these
consolations, the giver of them, the heavenly Father, must be prayed unto for
the merits of Christ's Passion; for it is not the nature of man that can be
contented, until it be regenerated and possessed with Gods Spirit, to bear
patiently the troubles of mind or body. When the mind of man sees troubles on
every side, threatening poverty, yea death, except the man weigh these brittle
and uncertain treasures, that be taken from him, with the riches of the life to
come, and this life of the body with the life in Christ's blood, and so for the
love and certainty of the heavenly joys contemn all things present, doubtless
he shall never be able to bear the loss of goods and life. -- The Christian
man's faith must be always upon the resurrection of Christ, when he is in
trouble, and in that glorious resurrection he shall see continual joy, yea
victory and triumph over all persecution, trouble, sin, death, hell, the Devil,
and all other persecutors; the tears and weepings of the faithful dried up,
their wounds healed, their bodies made immortal in joy, their souls for ever
praising the Lord, in conjuction and society everlasting with the blessed
company of Gods Elect in perpetual joy. If ye le risen with Christ, Col. 3.
seek the things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God
the Father. When he bids us seek the things that are above, he requires
that our minds never cease from prayer and study in Gods Word, until we see,
know, and understand the vanities of this world, the shortness and misery of
this life, and the treasures of the world to come, the immortality thereof, the
joys of that life, and so never cease seeking, until such time as we know
certainly and be persuaded what a blessed man he is, that seeks the one and
finds it, and cares not for the other though he lose it; and in seeking,
Page 161.
to have right judgment between the life present and the life to come, we
shall find how little the pains, imprisonment, slanders, lies, and death it
self is in the world, in respect of pains everlasting, the Prison infernal, and
Dungeon of Hell, the Sentence of Gods Judgment, and everlasting Death. When a
man has by seeking the Word of God found out what the things above be, then
must he set his affections upon them. And this Command is more hard then the
other; for for man's knowledge many times sees the best: men know that there is
a life to come, better then this present, etc. Yet they set not their affection
upon it, they do more affect and love indeed a trifle of nothing in this world,
that pleases their affection, then the treasure of all treasures in Heaven. We
must set our affections on things above, i. e. when any thing worse then
Heaven, offers it self to be ours, if we will give our good wills to it, and
love it in our hearts, then ought we to see by the judgment of Gods Word,
whether we may have it without Gods displeasure; if we cannot, if the riches of
this world may not be gotten nor kept by Gods Law, neither our lives continued
without the denial of his honor, we must set our affections upon the riches
and life that is above, and not upon things that be upon the earth. This second
Command requires, that as our mind judges Heavenly things to be better then
Earthly, and the life to come better then the present life; so we should choose
them before other, and prefer them, etc. These things be easy to be spoken of,
but not so easy to be used and practiced. -- Read Psa. 88. wherein is
contained the prayer of a man, that being vexed with Adversaries and
persecutions, saw nothing but death and hell, apprehending not only man, but
God angry with him; yet he by Prayer humbly resorted unto God, and put the hope
of his salvation in him, whom he felt his enemy. -- In this Command (possess
your lives by your patience) God requires every one to be patient, he says
not, It is sufficient that other holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
Evangelists, and Martyrs continued their lives in patient suffering the
troubles of this world; but Christ says it to every one of his people. By your
patience continue you your life, not that man has patience in himself, but
that he must have it for himself of God, the only Giver of it, if he purpose
to be a godly man. Besides, as our Profession and Religion requires patience
outwardly, without resistance and force, so requires it patience of the mind,
and not to be angry with God, although he use us, that be his own creatures, as
him lists. We may not murmr against God, Page 162.
but say always his Judgments be right and just, and rejoice that it pleases
him to use us, as he used heretofore such as he most loved in this world. Have
a singular care to this command, be glad and rejoice, etc. he shows great
cause why, because your reward is great in Heaven. Christ also takes from us
all shame and rebuke, Mat. 5.
as though it were not an honor to suffer for him, because the wicked world
does curse and abhor such poor troubled Christians. He places all his
honorably, saying, Even so persecuted they the Prophets that were before you.
-- We may learn by things that nourish and maintain us, both meat and drink,
what loathsomness, and (in a manner) abhorring they come to before they work
their perfection in us, etc. that whosoever saw the same would loath and abhor
his own nourishment, before it come to its perfection. Is it then any marvel if
such Christians, as God delights in, be so mangled and defaced in this world,
which is the Kitchen and Mill, to boil and grind the flesh of Gods people in,
till they atchieve their perfection in the world to come? -- Raw flesh is not
meat wholesome for man, and unmortified men and women be not creatures meet for
God. Christ's people must be broken and all to torn in the Mill of this world,
and so shall they be most fine meat to their Heavenly Father. -- We must
therefore patiently suffer, and willingly attend upon Gods doings, although
they seem clean contrary, after our judgment, to our wealth and salvation, as
Abraham did, when he was bid to offer his Son Isaac, in whom God promised the
Blessing and multiplying of his seed. Joseph at the last came to that which God
promised him, although in the mean time, after the Judgment of the world, he
was never like to be, as God said he should be Lord over his Brethren. When
Christ would make the blind man to see, he put clay upon his eyes, which after
the judgment of man was a means rather to make his double blind, then to give
him his sight, but he obeyed and knew that God could work his desire, what
means soever he used contrary to man's reasons. -- To judge things
indifferently, the trouble be not yet generally, as they were in our good
Fathers time, soon after the death and resurrection of our Savior Christ. --
Was there ever such trouble as Christ threatened upon Jerusalem? Mat. 24.
Toward the end of the world we have nothing so much extremity as they had
then, but even as we be able to bear. --

In another Letter. -- I require you not to forget your duty toward God in
these perilous days, in the which the Lord will try us. I trust you do
increase by the reading of the Scriptures, the knowledge you have of God, and
that you diligently apply your self to follow the same; for the knowledge
helps not, except the life be according thereto.

-- I commend you to God, and the guiding of his ghost Spirit, to stablish and
confirm you in all well doing, and keep you blameless to the day of the Lord,
watch and pray, for this day is at hand.

In his Letter to his charitable Friends in London. -- For your liberality I
most heartily thank you, and praise God highly in you for you, etc. praying him
to preserve you from all famine, scarcity, and lack of the truth of his Word,
which is the lively food of your souls, as you preserve my body from hunger,
and other necessities that would happen unto me, were it not cared for by the
charity of godly people. Such as have spoiled me of all that I had, have
imprisoned me, and appointed not one halfpenny to feed or relieve me withal;
but I do forgive them, and pray for them daily in my poor Prayer to God, and
from my heart I wish their salvation, and quietly and patiently bear their
injuries, wishing no farther extremity to be used toward us: yet if the
contrary seem best to our heavenly Father, I have made my reckoning, and fully
resolved to suffer the uttermost that they are able to do against me; yea death
it self by the aid of Christ Jesus, who died the most vile death of the Cross
for us, wretched and miserable sinners. But of this I am assured, that the
wicked world with all his force and power shall not touch one of the hairs of
our heads without leave and license of our heavenly Father, whose will be done
in all things. If he will life, life be it; if he will death, death be it;
only we pray that our wills may be subject to his will. -- If we be contented
to obey Gods will, and for his Commands sake to surrender our goods and our
lives to be at his pleasure, it makes no matter whether we keep goods and
life, or lose them. Nothing can hurt us that is taken from us for Gods Cause,
nor can any thing at length do us good that is preserved contrary to Gods
command. Let us wholly suffer God to use us and ours after his holy wisdom,
and beware we neither use nor govern our selves contrary to his will by our own
wisdom; for if we do, our wisdom will at length prove foolishness. It is kept
to no good purpose, that we keep contrary to his Commandments. It can by no
means be taken from us, that he would should tarry with us. He is no good
Christian that rules himself and his, as worldly means serve; for he that so
does, shall have as many changes as chances in the world. To day with the world
he shall like and praise the truth of God, to morrow, as the world will, so
will he like and praise the falsehood of man; to day with Christ, to morrow with
Antichrist. -- Glorify your heavenly Father both with your inward and outward
man. If ye think ye can inwardly in the heart serve him, and yet outwardly
serve with the world in external service the thing that is not of God, ye
deceive your selves; for both the body and soul must concur together in the
honor of God; 1 Cor. 6.
for if an honest wife be bound to give both heart and body to faith and
service in marriage, and if an honest wives faith in the heart cannot stand
with a whorish or defiled body, much less can the true faith of a Christian in
the service of Christianity stand with the bodily service of external idolatry;
for the mystery of Marriage is not so honorable between man and wife, as it is
between Christ and every Christian. Therefore (dear Brethren) pray to the
heavenly Father, that as he spared not the soul nor the body of his dearly
beloved Son, but applied both of them with extreme pain, to work our salvation
both of soul and body: so he will give us all grace to apply our souls and
bodies to be Servants to him. -- Let us not deride our selves, and say our
souls serve him, whatsoever our bodies do to the contrary for civil order and
policy. But alas! I know by my self what troubles you, Page 164.
viz. the great danger of the world, that will revenge (ye think) your service
to God with sword and fire, with loss of goods and lands: but (dear Brethren)
weigh on the other side, that your enemies and Gods enemies shall not do as
much as they would, but as much as God shall suffer them, who can trap them in
their own counsels, and destroy them in the midst of their furies. Remember ye
be the Workmen of the Lord, and called into his Vineyard, there to labor till
Evening-Tide, that you may receive your penny, which is more worth then all the
Kingdoms of the Earth; but he that called us into his Vineyard, has not told
us how sore and how fervently the Sun shall trouble us in our labor, but has
bid us labor, and commit the bitterness thereof to him, who can and will so
moderate all afflictions, that no man shall have more laid upon him, then in
Christ he shall be able to bear, unto whose merciful tuition and defense I
commend both your souls and bodies.

Yours with my poor Prayer. J. H.


In a Letter to a Merchant of London. -- I thank God and you for the great help
and consolation I have received in time of adversity by your charity, but most
rejoice that you be not altered from truth, although falsehood cruelly seeks
to disdain her. Judge not my Brother truth by outward appearance, for truth now
worse appears, and is more vilely rejected then falsehood. Leave the outward
show, and see by the Word of God what is truth, and accept truth, and dislike
her not, though man call her falsehood. As it is now, so it has been
heretofore: truth has been rejected, and falsehood received. Such as have
professed truth, have smarted, and the friends of falsehood laughed them to
scorn. The one having the commendation of truth by man, but the condemnation of
falsehood by God, flourishing for a time with endless destruction; the other
afflicted a little season, but ending with immortal joys. Wherefore, dear
Brother, ask and demand of your Book, the Testament of Jesus Christ, in these
woeful and wretched days, what you should think, and what you should stay your
selves upon for a certain truth, and whatsoever you hear taught, try it by your
Book, whether it be true or false. The days be dangerous and full of peril,
not only for the world, and worldly things, but for Heaven and heavenly
things. It is a trouble to lose the treasure of this life, but yet a very pain
if it be kept with the offense of God. Cry, call, pray, and in Christ daily
require help, succor, mercy, wisdom, grace, and defense, that the wickedness
of this world prevail not against us. --

In his Letter to Mrs. Wilkinson. -- I am very glad to hear of your health, and
do thank you for your loving tokens; but I am a great deal more glad to hear
how Christianly you avoid idolatry, and prepare your self to suffer the
extremity of the world, rather then to endanger your self to God. You do as you
ought to do in this behalf, and in suffering of transitory pains, you shall
avoid permanent torments in the world to come. Use your life and keep it with
as much quietness as you can, so that you offend not God. The ease that comes
with his displeasure turns at length to unspeakable pains; and the gains of
the world, with the loss of his favors is beggary and wretchedness. --

In his Letter to Mr. Hall and his Wife. -- The days be dangerous and full of
peril; but let us comfort our selves in calling to remembrance the days of our
Forefathers, upon whom the Lord sent such troubles, that many hundreds, yea
thousands died for the testimony of Jesus Christ, both men and women, suffering
with patience and constancy as much cruelty as Tyrants could devise, and so
departed out of this miserable world to the bliss everlasting, where now they
remain for ever, looking always for the end of this sinful world, when they
shall receive their bodies again in immortality, and see the number of the
Elect associated with them in full and consummate joys; and as virtuous men
suffering Martyrdom now rest in joys everlasting, their pains ending their
sorrows, and beginning their ease: so did their constancy and stedfastness
animate and confirm all good people in the truth, and gave them encouragement
to suffer the like, rather then to fall with the world to consent unto
wickedness and idolatry. Wherefore, my dear Friends, seeing God has
illuminated you in the same true faith, wherein the Apostles, and Evangelists,
and all Martyrs suffered most cruel death, thank him for his grace in
knowledge, and pray to him for strength and perseverance, that ye be not
ashamed nor afraid to confess it. Ye be in the truth, and the gates of Hell
shall never prevail against it, nor Antichrist with all his Imps prove it
false; they may persecute and kill, but never overcome. Be of good comfort, and
fear God more then man. This life is short and miserable; happy be they that
can spend it to the glory of God.

In his Letter to Mrs. Warcop. Page 165.
-- I did rejoice to understand, that you be fully resolved by Gods grace to
suffer extremity, rather then to go from the truth which you have professed. --
As you be traveling this perilous journey, take this Lesson with you,
practiced by the Wise men, Matthew. 2. Such as traveled to find Christ, followed
only the Star, and as long as they saw it, they were assured they were in the
right way, and had great mirth in their journey; but when they entered into
Jerusalem, whereas the Star led them not thither, but to Bethlem, and there
asked the Citizens the thing that the Star showed before, they were not only
ignorant of Bethlem, but lost the sight of the Star, etc. -- The Word is the
only Star that shows us where Christ is, and which way we may come unto him;
But as Jerusalem stood in the way, and was an impediment to the Wise men, so
does the Synagogue of Antichrist, that bears the Name of Jerusalem, i. e. the
Vision of Peace, and among the people now is called the Catholic Church,
stands in the way that Pilgrims must go by through this world to Bethlem, i.
e. the house of bread or plentifulness, and is an impediment to all Christian
Travelers; yea, and except the more grace of God be, will keep the Pilgrims
still in her, that they shall not come where Christ is at all; and to stay them
indeed, they take away the Star of Light, which is Gods Word, that it cannot be
seen. -- Ye may see what great dangers happened unto these Wise men, whilst they
were learning of Liars; where Christ was. (1) They were out of their way. And
(2) They lost their Guide and Conductor. -- If we come into the Church of men,
and ask for Christ, we go out of the way, and lose also our Conductor and
Guide, that only leads us straight thither. -- Sister, take heed, you shall
in your journey toward Heaven meet with many a monstrous beast: have salve
therefore of Gods Word; therefore ready you shall meet husbands, children,
lovers and friends, that shall, if God be not with them, be very le^s and
impediments to your purpose. You shall meet with slander and contempt of the
world, and be accounted ungracious and ungodly, you shall hear and meet with
cruel tyranny to do you all extremities; you shall now and then see the
troubles of your own conscience, and feel your own weakness; you shall hear
that you be cursed by the sentence of the Catholic Church, with such like
terrors, that pray to God, and follow the Star of his Word, and you shall
arrive at the Port of Eternal Salvation, by the merits only of Jesus Christ.
--

Hudson.
Fox, Vol. 3. page 869.
When Thomas Hudson of Ailesham in Norfolk saw the Constables come to his house
to apprehend him, he said; Now mine hour is welcome, friends, welcome, you be
they that shall lead me to life in Christ. I thank God therefore, and the Lord
enable me thereto for his mercies sake; for his desire was, and he ever prayed
(if it were the Lords will) that he might suffer for the Gospel of Christ.

When Berry threatened him, saying, I will write to the Bishop my good Lord,
etc. O Sir (said he) there is no Lord but God, though there be many lords and
many gods.

Will thou recant (said Berry the Priest) or no? The Lord forbid (said Hudson)
I had rather die many deaths then to do so.

Page 870.
When he came first to the Stake, he was very sad, not for his death, but for
lack of feeling his Christ; and therefore came from his Fellow Sufferers under
the Chain, and fell down upon his knees, and prayed; and at last he rose with
great joy, as a man new changed, even from death to life, and* said, Now I
thank God I am strong, and pass not what man can do unto me.

Hullier.
Mr. John Hullier, Fox, Vol 3. page 696.
Conduct in Kings College at Cambridge, suffered martyrdom at Cambridge,
April 2. A. 1556.

In his Letter to the Christian Congegation. -- It stands now most in hand (O
dear Christians) all them that look to be accounted of Christ's flock at the
great and terrible day, when a separation shall be made, etc. faithfully in
this time of great afflictions, to hear our Master Christ's voice, the only
true Shepherd of our souls, who says, Whosoev^r shall endure to the end shall
be saved. Mat. 24.
-- In this time we must needs either show that we be his faithful Soldiers,
Ephesians. 6.
and continue in his battle to the end, putting on the armor of God, the
buckler of Faith, the breast plate of Love, the helmet of Hope and Salvation,
and the Sword of his holy Word, with all instance of supplication and prayer,
or else, if we do not work and labor with these, we are Apostates and false
Soldiers, shrinking most unthankfully from our Gracious and Sovereign Lord and
Captain Christ, and leaning to Belia^; Luke 14.
for he says plainly, Whosoever bears not my Cross, and follows me, cannot
be my Disciple, and, Mat. 6.
No man can serve two Masters; for either he must hate the one and love the
other, or else he shall lean to the one and despise the other. Elias also said
unto the people, 1 Kin. 18.
Why halt ye between two opinions? If the Lord be God, follow him; or if Baal
be he, follow him. -- If Christ be that only good and true Shepherd, that gave
his life for us, then let us, that bear his mark, and have our consciences
sprinkled with his blood, follow altogether for our salvation his heavenly
voice and calling, according to our profession and first promise. If we shall
not, certainly (say what we can) though we bear the Name of Christ, we are none
of his Sheep indeed; for he says manifestly, John 10.
My sheep hear my voice and follow me: A stranger they will not follow, but
will flee from him; for they know not the voice of a stranger. -- The craft and
wiliness of our subtle enemy is manifold and diverse, and full of close
windings: -- At this present day if he cannot induce one thoroughly, as others
do, to savor his devilish Religion, and of good will and free heart to help
to uphold the same, yet he will inveigle him to resort to his wicked and
whorish Schoolhouse, and to keep company with his Congregation there, and to
hold his peace and say nothing, whatsoever he think, etc. by that subtle means
flattering him, that he shall both save his life and also his goods, and live
in quiet. But if we look well on Christ's holy Will and Testament, we shall
perceive that he came not to make any such peace upon Earth, nor that he gave
any such peace to his Disciples, I leave peace with you (says he) my peace I
give you, John 14.15, 16.
not as the world gives it, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled
and fearful. These things have I spoken unto you, that in me ye should have
peace, in the world ye shall have affliction; Luke 14.
but be of good cheer, I have overcome the world. The Servant is not greater
then his Lord and Master; if they have persecuted me, they shall also persecute
you. If any man come to me and hates not his father and mother, etc. yea and
moreover his own life, it is not possible for him to be my Disciple. Blessed be
ye, that now weep; for ye shall laugh: and woe be unto you that now laugh, for
ye shall mourn and weep. Page 697.
He that will find his life, shall lose it. Therefore the God of that true
peace and comfort, preserve us that we never obey such a false Flatterer, who
at length will pay us home once for all, bringing for temporal peace and
quietness, everlasting trouble, etc. for these vain and transitory goods,
extreme loss of the eternal treasure and inheritance; for this mortal life,
deprivation of the most joyful life immortal, and endless death most miserable,
etc. -- I judge it better to go to School with our Master Christ, and to be
under his Ferula and Rod (although it seems sharp and grievous for a time) that
at length we may be inheriters with him of everlasting joy, rather then to keep
company with the Devils Scholars, the adulterous generation, in his School,
that is all full of pleasure for a while, and at the end to be paid with the
wages of continual burning in the most horrible Lake, which burns evermore
with fire and brimstone, etc. -- What does he else, I pray you, that resorteth
to the Ministration and Service, that is most repugnant to Christ's holy
Testament, there keeping still silence, and nothing reproving the same, but in
the face of the world by his very deed it self, declare himself to be of a
false, fearful, dissembling, feigned, and unfaithful heart, discouraging, as
much as lies in him, all the residues of Christ's Host, and giving a manifest
offense unto the weak, and also confirming, encouraging, and rejoicing the
hearts of the adversaries in all their evil doing? by which he shows himself,
neither to love God, whom he sees to be dishonored and blasphemed of an
Antichristian Minister, nor yet his Neighbor, before whom he should rebuke the
evil, according to the command, Thou shall not hate thy Neighbor, Lev. 18. 2 Timothy 1.
but reprove him, etc. -- But God has not given us the spirit of fear, but of
power and love. Be not ashamed to testify our Lord, but suffer adversity with
the Gospel, M^^. 10. 1 Pet. 3.
through the power of God, etc. Fear not them that kill the body, etc. Fear
not, though they seem terrible unto you, neither be troubled, but sanctify the
Lord God in your hearts. Only let your conversation be as becomes the Gospel,
Phil. 1.
etc. in nothing fearing your adversaries, which is to them a token of
damnation, and to you of salvation, and that of God; for unto you it is given
not only to believe in Christ, but to suffer for his sake. -- In the
Revelation it is written, Rev. 21.
That the fearful shall have their part with the Unbelieving and Abominable, in
the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. Matt.
7.
-- Wide is the gate and broad is the way which leads to destruction, and
many there be that go in thereat; but strait is the gate, and narrow is the way
that leads unto life, and few there be that find it. -- Thus I wholly commit
you to him, Page 698.
and to the Word of his grace, which is able to build further, beseeching you
most heartily to pray for me, that I may be strong in the Lord and in the power
of his might, and stand perfect in all things, being always prepared and
ready, looking for the mercy of our Lord unto eternal rest, and I will pray for
you, as I am most bound. So I trust he will graciously hear us for his promise
sake in Christ.

Your Christian Brother, a Prisoner of the Lord, John Hullier.


In another Letter to the Congregation of Christ's faithful followers. -- Most
dear Christians, having now the sweet comfort of Gods saving health, and being
confirmed with his free Spirit, (be he only praised therefore) I am
constrained in my conscience to admonish you, as ye tender the salvation of
your souls, by all manner of means to separate your selves from the
Antichristian Company, considering what is said in the Revelation, If any man
worship the Beast and his Image, Revel. 14.
and receive his mark in the forehead, or in his hand, the same shall drink of
the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured into the cup of his wrath, etc.
-- The Beast is none other, but the carnal and fleshly Kingdom of Antichrist.
-- What do they else but worship this Beast and his Image, 2 Pet. 2.
who after they had escaped from the filthiness of the world, through the
knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, are yet again tangled therein,
and overcome, using dissimulation for fear of their displeasure, doing one
thing outwardly, and thinking inwardly another: So having them in reverence
under a cloak and color, to whom they ought not so much as to say, Ioh. Ep. 2.
God speed; and adjoining themselves to the Malignant Congregation, which they
ought to abhor as a Den of Thieves and Murderers, and a Brothel-house of most
blasphemous Fornicators. -- But this feignedness and dissimulation, Christ and
his Gospel will no ways allow. Luke 9.
-- Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and
sinful generation, of him also shall the S^n of man be ashamed, when he shall
come in the glory of his Father, Mal. 1. Heb. 6. Luke 6.
etc. Cursed be the dissemblers, etc. Ye were once enlightened, and tasted of
the heavenly gift. -- And no man that puts his hand to the Plough and
looks back, is apt for the Kingdom of God. -- They went out from us, 1 John
2.
but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, no doubt they would have
continued with us. -- Wherefore, good Christians, for Gods dear love, deceive
not your selves through your own wisdom, 1 Cor. 3.
and through the wisdom of the world, which is foolishness before God; but
certify and stay your own consciences with the faithful Word of God, Psa. 145.
Hebr. 3.
etc. Though Gods mercy is over all his works, yet it does not extend but only
to them that hold fast the confidence and rejoicing of hope unto the end, not
being weary of well doing, but rather every day waxing stronger and stronger in
the inward man. In the Revelation, where it is entreated of the Beast and his
Image, Revel. 13.
it is said, Here is the sufferance of Saints, and here are they that keep the
Commandments and Faith of Jesus Christ; intimating, that God does use those
wicked men as instruments for a time, to try the patience and faith of his
peculiar people, etc. -- Peradventure you will say, What shall we do? shall we
cast our selves headlong to death? I say not so; but this I say, That we are
all bound (if ever we look to receive salvation at Gods hands) in this case to
be wholly obedient to his determinate counsel, etc. and then to cast all our
care on him, who works all in all for the best unto them that love him. Now
thus be commands, Come away from her my people, Revel. 18.
that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.
-- Come out from among them, Page 699.
and join not your selves to their unlawful Assemblies; yea, do not once show
your selves with the least part of your body to favor their wicked doings. --
Now choose you which way you will take, either the narrow, etc. or the broad
way, etc. I for my part have now written this short Admonition to you of good
will, (as God is my witness) to exhort you to that way, which at length you
shall prove and find to be best; and I do not only write this, but I will
(with the assistance of Gods grace) seal it with my blood. --

Hunter.
Atwell a Sumner, Fox, Vol. 3. page 190.
telling William Hunter it was never a merry world since the Bible came abroad
in English: Say not so for Gods sake (said Hunter) for it is Gods Book, out of
which every one that has grace may learn to know what things both please God,
and also what displeases him. Could not we tell (said Atwell) before this time
how God was served? No (said Hunter) nothing so well as we may now, if that we
might have his blessed Word amongst us still, as we have had. You must turn or
burn, (said Atwell) God give me grace (said Hunter) that I may believe his Word
and confess his Name, whatsoever come thereof.

Whereas you doubt of my belief (said Hunter to Wood the Vicar of Southwell) I
would it were tried, Page 19.
Whether that you or I would stand faster in our Faith. Yea thou Heretic (said
Wood) would thou have it so tried? That which you call heresy (said Hunter)
I serve my Lord God withal; I would that you and I were fast tied to a Stake,
to prove, whether that you or I would stand strongest to our Faith. It shall
not be so tried (said Wood) No (said Hunter) I think so; for if I might, I
think I know who would soonest recant; for I durst set my foot against yours
eyes to the death.

Bonner telling him, Page 192.
That he was content he should keep his conscience to himself, so that he would
go to Church, and receive, etc. No (said he) I will not do so for all the good
in the world. Then (said Bonner) I will make you sure enough, I warrant you.
Well (said Hunter) you can do no more then God will permit you. Well (said B.)
will you recant indeed by no means? No (said H.) never while I live, God
willing.

Bonner asking him how old he was, he said, He was Nineteen years old. Well
(said B.) you will be burned ere you be Twenty, if you will not recant. H.
answered, God strengthen me in his Truth.

Page 193.
Bonner, even after Sentence was past, offering him, if he would then recant,
to make him a Freeman of the City, and to give him Forty pound in money to set
up with, or to make him Steward of his House, etc. Hunter said unto him, My
Lord, if you cannot persuade my Conscience by Scriptures, I cannot find in my
heart to turn from God for the love of the world; for I count all things
worldly but loss and dung in respect of the love of Christ. If thou die in
this mind (said B.) thou art condemned for ever. God judges righteously (said
H.) and justifies them, whom man condemns unjustly.

When he was brought to Burntwood to be burned, his Father and Mother came to
him, and desired heartily of God that he might continue to the end in that good
way, which he had begun, and his Mother said unto him, That she was glad that
ever she was so happy to bear such a Child, which could find in his heart to
lose his life for Christ's Names sake. Then said he to his Mother, For my little
pain which I shall suffer, which is but short, Christ has promised me a Crown
of Joy. May you not be glad of that, Mother? With that his Mother kneeled down
on her knees, saying, I pray God strengthen thee, my Son to the end: Yea I
think thee as well bestowed, as any Child that ever I bare.

His Father said, I was afraid of nothing but that my Son should have been
killed in the Prison for hunger and cold, the Bishop was so hard to him.

The night before his Execution, he had a dream, that he was where the Stake
was pitched where he should be burned, and that it was at the Towns end, where
the Butts stood, (which was so indeed) and that he met his Father going to the
Stake, and that there was a Priest at the Stake, which went about to have him
recant, and that he said to him, Away false Prophet, and that he exhorted the
people to beware of him, and such as he was: which things came to pass
accordingly.

Whilst he was led to the Stake, the Sheriffs Son came to William and embraced
him, saying, William be not afraid of these men, who are here present with
Bills and Weapons, ready prepared to bring you to the place where you shall be
burned. William answered, I thank God I am not afraid; for I have cast my
account, what it will cost me already. Then the Sheriffs Son could speak no
more to him for weeping.

When he met his Father (according to his dream) his Father said unto him, God
be with thee Son William. William answered, God be with you good Father, and be
of good comfort; for I hope we shall meet again when we shall be merry.

At the Stake the Sheriff told him, That there was a Letter from the Queen; if
he would recant, he should live, if not, he must be burned. No (said William) I
will not recant, God willing.

Mr. Brown telling him (upon his desire to the people to pray for him as long
as he was alive) I will pray no more for thee, then I will pray for a Dog. Mr.
Brown (said William) now you have that you sought for, and I pray God it be not
laid to your charge in the last day; howbeit I forgive you. I ask no
forgiveness of thee (said Mr. Brown) Well (said William) if God forgive you
not, I shall require my blood at your hands. Then said William Hunter, Son of
God shine upon me. Immediately the Sun in the Firmament shined out of a dark
cloud, so full in his face, that he was constrained to look another way.

When the Priest came (according to his dream) he said, Away thou false
Prophet. Beware of them good people, and come away from their abominations,
lest that you be partakers of their plagues. Then (said the Priest) look how
thou burnest here, so shall thou burn in Hell. William answered, Thou lie,
thou false Prophet, away thou false Prophet, away.

When the fire was kindled, his Brother said to him, William, think on the holy
Passion of Christ, and be not afraid of Death. William answered, I am not
afraid. Then lift he up his hands to Heaven, and said, Lord, Lord, Lord,
receive my spirit.

Higbed.
Fox, Vol. 3. page 196.
Mr. Higbed of Essex being pressed by Bonner to recant, answered, I will not
abjure; for I have been of this mind these sixteen years, and do what ye can,
ye shall do no more then God will permit you to do, and with what measure ye
measure unto us, look for the same again at Gods hands.

Page 198.
When his Articles and Answers were read, he said, -- Ye go about to trap us
with your subtilties and snares; and though my Father and Mother and other my
Kinsfolk did believe as you say, yet they were deceived in so believing: and
whereas you say Doctor Cranmer and others, etc. be Heretics, I do wish that I
were such an Heretic, as they were and be.

Then Bonner asked him again, Whether he would turn from his error and come to
the unity of their Church? No (said he) I would ye would recant; for I am in
the truth, and you in error.

Hus.
Mr. John Hus preaching at the honorable and very solemn Funeral of three in
Prague, Fox Vol. 1. page 778.
who had been put to death in Prison, for calling the Pope Antichrist, and
speaking against Indulgences, at whose Funeral was sung on this wise, These be
the Saints which for the Testament of God gave their bodies, etc. much
commended them for their constancy, and blessed God the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who had hid the way of his Verity so from the prudent of the world, and
had revealed it to the simple, who chose rather to please God, then man. This
occasioned his expulsion out of Prague, being before excommunicated by the Pope.

The Emperor having given safe conduct to Mr. John Hus to come to the general
Council at Constance, Page 786.
he promised to come, professing he was ready always to satisfy all men,
which shall require him to give a reason of his faith and hope, etc. and giving
notice to all, that could object any error or heresy to him to appear, and not
spare him. --

The Twenty sixth day after he came to Constance, Page 789* 790.
two Bishops, etc. were sent to him to bring him before the Pope and his
Cardinals: To whom he answered, I am not come to defend my Cause particularly
before the Pope and his Cardinals, but to appear before the whole Council, and
there answer for my defense openly, etc. unto all such things as shall be
demanded, or required of me. Notwithstanding forasmuch as you do require me so
to do, I will not refuse to go with you; and if it happen that they evil
entreat me, yet nevertheless I trust in my Lord Jesus, that he will so comfort
and strengthen me, that I shall desire much rather to die for his glory sake,
then to deny the Verity, which I have learned by his holy Scriptures.

When he came to the Cardinals, they told him they had heard that he had taught
great and manifest errors through the Realm of Bohemia, etc. You shall
understand (answered Mr. Hus) that I am thus minded and affectioned, that I
should rather choose to die, then I should be found culpable of one only error,
much less of many and great errors: For this cause I am willingly come to the
general Council, to receive correction, if any man can prove any errors in me.

Page 791.
Some of the Articles presented to the Council against him. -- (4) He says that
all Priests be of like power. (8) He holds this opinion, That a man being
once ordained a Priest or a Deacon, cannot be forbidden or kept back from the
office of preaching.

Page 799.
When several false witnesses rose up against him, he said, Albeit they were as
many more in number as they are, I do much more esteem, yea and without
comparison regard the witness of my Lord God before the witness of all mine
adversaries.

Page 800.
He being asked whether it was lawful for him to appeal unto Christ, answered,
Verily I do affirm before you all, that there is no more just, nor effectual
plea, then that which is made unto Christ; forasmuch as the Law does determine,
that to appeal is no other thing then in a cause of grief or wrong done by an
inferior Judge to implore and require aid and remedy at an higher Judges
hands. Who is then an higher Judge then Christ? Who can know, or judge the
matter more justly, or with more equity? In him is found no deceit, nor can he
be deceived. Who can better help the miserable and oppressed then he?

It being in his Accusation, that he counseled the people to resist with the
sword all such as did gainsay his Doctrine, etc. he answered, That he at all
times when he preached, did diligently admonish and warn the people, that they
should arm themselves to defend the truth of the Gospel, according to the
saying of tbe Apostle, With the helmet and sword of salvation; and that he
never spoke of any material sword, but of that which is the Word of God.

Some more Articles against him, taken out of his Treatise of the Church. Page
802.
(1) There is but one holy universal, or Catholic Church, which is the
universal Company of all the Predestinate. (6) A reprobate man is never a
member of the holy Church. Page 804.
-- (18) An Heretic ought not to be committed to the secular powers to be put
to death, for it is sufficient that he suffer the Ecclesiastical censure.

In his appeal. Page 805.
-- Forasmuch as the most mighty Lord, One in Essence, Three in Person, is both
the chief and first, and also the last and uttermost refuge of all those which
are oppressed: -- and forasmuch as the Lord Jesus Christ, very God and Man,
being compassed in with the Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, wicked Judges and
Witnesses, etc. has left behind him this godly example for them that shall
come after him, to the intent they should commit all their causes into the hand
of God. -- O Lord behold my affliction, etc. thou art my Protector and
Defender. O Lord, thou have given me understanding, and I have acknowledged
thee. -- For mine own part I have been as a meek Lamb, which is led unto
sacrifice, and have not resisted against them. -- Deliver me from mine enemies,
for thou art my God. -- I appeal to the Sovereign and most just Judge, who is
not defiled with cruelty, nor can be corrupted with gifts and rewards, neither
yet be deceived by false witness. -- I John Hus do present and offer this my
appeal to my Lord Jesus Christ, Page 806.
my just Judge, who knows, and defends, and justly judges every man's just
and true cause.

The day before his condemnation, when four Bishops were sent by the Emperor
to him, to know whether he would stand to the judgment of the Council, Page
816.
Mr. John de Clum spoke thus unto him: Mr. I. Hus, -- I require you, if you
know your self guilty of any of those errors which are objected against you,
that you will not be ashamed to alter your mind to the will of the Council; if
contraiwise, I will be no Author to you that you should do any thing contrary
to your conscience, but rather to suffer any kind of punishment, then to deny
that which you have known to be the truth. Mr. Hus with tears answered, Verily
as before I have oftentimes done, I do take the most High God for my witness,
that I am ready with my whole heart and mind, if the Council can instruct me
any better by the Scripture to change my purpose. One of the Bishops telling
him he should not be so arrogant as to prefer his own opinion before the
judgment of the whole Council; Page 817.
he said, If he which is the meanest or least in all this Council can convict
me of error, I will with an humble heart and mind do whatsoever the Council
shall require of me.

Page 819.
When they condemned his appeal as heretical, he said, O Lord Jesus Christ,
whose Word is openly condemned here in this Council, unto thee again do I
appeal, which when thou wast evil entreated of thine enemies, did appeal unto
God thy Father, committing thy Cause unto a most just Judge, that by thy
example we also, being oppressed with manifest wrongs and injuries, should flee
unto thee.

Whilst they were reading his Sentence -- He interrupted them often; Page 820.
and specially when he was charged with obstinacy, he said with a loud voice, I
was never obstinate, but as always heretofore, even so now again I desire to
be taught by the holy Scriptures; and I do profess my self to be so desirous of
the truth, that if I might by one only word subvert the errors of all
Heretics, I would not refuse to enter into what peril soever it were to speak
it.

When the Sentence was ended, kneeling down upon his knees, he said; Lord Jesus
Christ, forgive mine enemies, by whom thou know that I am falsely accused,
etc. forgive them for thy great mercies sake.

When he was degraded, he spoke to the people thus; These Lords and Bishops do
exhort and counsel me, that I should here confess before you all, that I have
erred; the which thing to do, if it might be done with the infamy and reproach
of man only, they might peradventure easily persuade me thereunto, but now
truly I am in the sight of the Lord my God, without whose great ignominy and
grudge of mine own conscience, I can by no means do that which they require of
me. -- With what countenance should I behold the Heavens? With what face should
I look upon them whom I have taught, whereof there is a great number, if
through me it should come to pass that those things, which they have hitherto
known to be most certain and sure, should now be made uncertain? Should I by
this my example astonish or trouble so many souls, so many consciences, endued
with the most firm and certain knowledge of the Scriptures and Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and his most pure Doctrine, armed against all the assaults
of Satan? I will never do it, neither commit any such kind of offense, that I
should seem more to esteem this vile carcass appo^nted unto death, then their
health and salvation.

When one of the Bishops took from him the Chalice, saying, O cursed Judas,
etc. We take away from thee this Chalice of thy salvation. But I trust (said
he) unto God the Father Omnipotent, and my Lord Jesus Christ, for whose sake I
do suffer these things, that he will not take away the Chalice of his
Redemption, but have a steadfast and firm hope that this day I shall drink
thereof in his Kingdom.

The other Bishops took away the Vestments put upon him, and each of them
giving him their curse. Whereunto he sa^d, That he did willingly embrace and
hear those blasphemies for the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

When the Bishops caused to be made a Crown of Paper, in which were printed
three ugly Devils, and this title set over their heads, H^resiarcha, A
Ringleader of an Heresy, and he saw it, he said, My Lord Jesus Christ for my
sake did wear a Crown of Thorns, why should not I then for his sake wear this
light Crown, be it never so ignominious: Truly I will do it, and that willingly.

When it was set upon his head, the Bishops said, Now we commit thy soul unto
the Devil. But I (said Mr. Hus, lifting up his eyes toward Heaven) do commit my
Spirit into thy hands, O Lord Jesus Christ, unto thee I commend my Spirit which
thou have redeemed.

Page 821.
When the people heard his prayers at the Stake, they said, What he has done
before we know not, but now we see and hear that he does speak and pray very
devoutly and godlily.

After he had prayed some while, being raised by his Tormentors, with a loud
voice he said, Lord Jesus assist and help me, that with a constant and patient
mind I may bear and suffer this cruel and ignominious death, whereunto I am
condemned for the preaching of thy most holy Gospel and Word.

When he beheld the Chain with which his Neck was to be tied to the Stake, he
smiling, said, That he would willingly receive the same Chain for Jesus Christ's
sake, who (he knew) was bound with a far worse Chain.

The Duke of Bavaria, Page 822.
before the fire was kindled, coming to him, and exhorting him to be mindful of
his safeguard, and renounce his errors, he answered; What error should I
renounce, whenas I know my self guilty of none? for as for those things that
are falsely alleged against me, I know that I never did so much as once think
them, much less preach them; for this was the principal end and purpose of my
Doctrine, that I might teach all men repentance and remission of sins,
according to the verity of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, Clarks first Volume of
Lives, page 217.
and the Exposition of the holy Doctors; wherefore with a cheerful mind and
courage I am here ready to suffer death. Leigh's Saints Encouragements in evil
times-out of Luther 's Pref^ce before Daniel.


He told them at his death, That out of the ashes of the Goose (so Hus in the
Bohemian Language signifies) an hundred years after God would raise up a Swan
(so Luther in that Language signifies) in Germany, whose singing should
affright all those Vultures, and who should escape their burning.

This Prophecy was exactly fulfilled in Lut^er, who rose up just an hundred
years after 1415 (the year when Mr. Hus was burnt) and though he so enraged the
Pope and his powerful party; he died in his bed.

Page 823.
In his Letter to the people of Prague. -- Be circumspect and watchful, that ye
be not circumvented by the crafty trains of the Devil; and the more circumspect
ye ought to be, for that Antichrist labors the more to trouble you. The last
judgment is near at hand, death shall swallow up many, but to the elect
children of God, the Kingdom of God draws near, because for them he gave his
own body. Fear not death, love together one another, persevere in understanding
the good will of God without ceasing. Let the terrible and horrible Day of
Judgment be always before your eyes, that you sin not, and also the joy of
eternal life, whereunto you must endeavor. Let the passions of our Savior be
never out of your minds, that you may bear with him and for him gladly
whatsoever shall be laid upon you; for if you shall consider well in your minds
his Cross, nothing shall be grievous unto you, and patiently you shall give
place to tribulations, cursings, rebukes, stripes and imprisonment, and shall
not doubt to give your lives for his holy truth, if need require. Know ye, Well
Beloved, that Antichrist being stirred up against you, devises diverse
persecutions. -- But I am in good hope, Page 824.
that through the mercy of our God, and by your Prayers, I shall persist
strongly in the immutable verity of God unto the last breath. -- I commend you
to the merciful Lord Jesus Christ, our true God, and the Son of the immaculate
Virgin Mary, who has redeemed us by his most bitter death, without all our
merits from eternal pains, from the thraldom of the Devil and from sin.

From Constance, A. 1415.

In his Letter to his Benefactors. -- I exhort you by the bowels of Jesus
Christ, that now ye setting aside the vanities of this present world, will give
your service to the eternal King Christ the Lord. Trust not in Princes, nor in
the Sons of men, in whom there is no health; for the Sons of men are
dissemblers and deceitful. To day they are, to morrow they perish; but God
remains for ever. He has his Servants not for any need he has of them, but
for their own profit, unto whom he performs that which he promises, and
fulfilleth that which he purposes to give. He casts off no faithful Servant
from him; for he says, Where I am, there also shall my Servant be; yea, the
Lord makes every Servant of his to be the Lord of all his possession, giving
himself unto him, and with himself all things. -- O happy is that Servant, whom
when the Lord shall come, he shall find watching. Happy is the Servant which
shall receive that King of Glory with joy. Wherefore well beloved Lords and
Benefactors, serve you that King in fear. --

In his Letter to the Lord John de Clum. -- The iniquity of the great Strumpet,
i. e. of the malignant Congregation (whereof mention is made in the Apucalyps)
is detected, and shall be more detected; with the which Strumpet the Kings of
the Earth do commit fornication, fornicating spiritually from Christ; and as is
there said, sliding back from the truth, and consenting to the lies of
Antichrist, through his seduction, and through fear, or through hope of
confederacy, forgetting of worldly honor. -- I rejoiced to perceive your mind
now to give over the vanity and painful service of this present world, and to
serve the Lord Jesus Christ quietly at home, whom to serve is to reign, as
Gregory says, whom he that serves faithfully has Jesus Christ himself in the
Kingdom of Heaven to minister unto him, as himself says, Blessed is that
Servant, whom when the Lord shall come he shall find waking, and so doing.
Verily I say unto you, that he rising shall gird himself, and shall minister
unto him. This do not the Kings of the world to their Servants. --

In another Letter. -- As touching death, God does know why he does defer it
both to me and to my well beloved Brother Mr. Jerome, who I trust will do
holily and without blame, and do know also that now he suffers more valiantly
then I my self a wretched sinner. God has given us a long time that we may
call to mind our sins the better, and repent for the same more fervently. He
has granted us time, that our long and great temptation should put away our
grievous sins, and bring the more consolation. He has given us time, wherein
we should remember the horrible rebukes of our merciful King and Lord Jesus,
and should ponder his cruel death, and so more patiently may learn to bear our
afflictions. And moreover, that we might keep in remembrance how the joys of
the life to come are not given after the joys of this world immediately, but
through many tribulations the Saints have entered into the Kingdom of Heaven;
for some of them have been cut and chopped all to pieces, some their eyes bored
through, some sod, some roasted, some flain alive, some burned quick, stoned,
crucified, grinded between milstones, drawn and haled hither and thither unto
Execution, drowned in waters, strangled, and hanged, torn in pieces, vexed with
rebukes before death, pined in prisons, and afflicted in bonds: and who is able
to recite all the torments and sufferings of the holy Saints, which they
suffered under the Old and New Testament, for the verity of God? -- And it will
be a marvel if any man now shall escape unpunished, who dare boldly resist the
wickedness and perversity, especially of those Priests which can abide no
correction. --

In another Letter. Page 825.
-- I desire, that if Audience be given me, that the King will be there present
himself, etc. And that you Right Noble and Gracious Lord John, with the Lord
Henry, and the Lord Wencelaus, etc. if you may, will be present, and hear what
the Lord Jesus Christ, my Procurator, and Advocate, and most gracious Judge
will put into my mouth to speak, that whether I live or die, you may be true
and upright witnesses with me, lest lying lips should say hereafter, that I
swerved from the truth which I have preached. --

In another Letter. -- My faithful and beloved in Christ, be not afraid with
their Sentence in condemning my Books, they shall be scattered hither and
thither abroad, like light Butterflies, and their Statutes shall endure as
Spider-webs. They were about to shake my constancy from the verity of Christ,
but they could not overcome the virtue of God in me. They would not reason with
the Scriptures against me, etc. And when I said I was desirous to be
instructed, if I did in any thing err, the chief Cardinal answered, Because
thou would be informed, there is no remedy but that thou must first revoke
thy Doctrine, according to the determination of fifty Batchelors appointed. O
high instruction!

-- These things I thought good to write unto you, that you may know how they
have overcome with no grounded Scripture, nor with reason, but only did essay
with terrors and deceits to persuade me to revoke and to abjure. But our
merciful God, whose Law I have magnified, was and is with me, and I trust so
will continue, and will keep me in his grace unto death. --

In another Letter. -- Beloved, I thought it needful to warn, that you should
not be discouraged, because the Adversaries have decreed that my Books shall be
burnt. Remember how the Israelites burned the Preachings of the Prophet Jeremy,
and yet they could not avoid the things that were prophesied of in them; Page
826.
for after they were burnt, the Lord commanded to write the same Prophecy
again, and that larger; which was done. -- It is also written in the Books of
the Maccabees, that the wicked did burn the Law of God, and killed them that
had the same. Again, under the New Testament they burned the Saints with the
Books of the Law of God. -- Remember the sayings of our merciful Savior, by
which he forewarneth us; There shall ^e (says he) before the Day of Judgment
great tribulation, Mat. 24.
such as was not from the beginning, until this day, nor shall be afterward.
So that even the Elect of God should be deceived, if it were possible: but for
their sakes those days shall be shortened.

-- The Council of Constance shall not extend to Bohemia; for I think that many
of them which are of the Council shall die before they shall get from you my
Books. They shall depart from the Council, and be scattered abroad throughout
all parts of the world, like Storks, and then they shall know when Winter
comes what they did in Summer. I trust in God that he will send after me those
that shall be more valiant; and there are alive at this day that shall make
more manifest the malice of Antichrist, and shall give their lives to the death
for the truth of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall give both to you and me the
joys of life everlasting. -- This Epistle was written upon St. John Baptist's
day in Prison and in cold Irons, I having this Meditation with my self, that
John was beheaded in his Prison and bonds for the Word of God.

In another Letter. -- I desire you, if any man at any time have noted any
levity, either in my talk, or in my conditions, that he do not follow the same,
but pray to God for me, to pardon me that sin of lightness. Page 827.
-- I look next day for the Sentence of death, having a full trust that he will
not leave me to deny his truth, etc. How mercifully the Lord God has dealt
with me in mavelous temptations ye shall know, whenas hereafter by the help
of Christ we shall all meet together in the joy of the world to come. -- I
beseech you pray to God for our enemies. --

In another Letter to a Minister. -- My dear Brother, be diligent in preaching
the Gospel, neglect not your Vocation, labor like a blessed Soldier of
Christ. First live godlily and holily. Secondly, teach faithfully and truly.
Thirdly, be an example to others in well doing, that you be not reprehended in
your sayings. -- Preach continually, but be short and fruitful. -- Never
affirm or maintain those things that be uncertain or doubtful. -- Exhort men to
the confession of their Faith. -- Against fleshly lust preach continually all
that ever you can, for that is the raging beast which devoureth men, for whom
the flesh of Christ did suffer.

Page 828.
In another Letter. -- O holy God, how largely does Antichrist extend his power
and cruelty? But I trust that his power shall be shortened, and his iniquity
shall be detected more and more amongst the faithful people. -- Let Antichrist
rage so much as he will, yet he shall not prevail against Christ. -- I am
greatly comforted in those words of our Savior, Happy be you, when men shall
hate you, and shall separate you, and shall re^uke you, and shall c^st out your
name as execrable, for the Son of man. Rejoice and be glad; Luke 6.
for great is your reward in Heaven. O worthy, yea a most worthy consolation,
which not to understand, but to practiae in time of tribulation, Iam. 1.
is an hard Lesson! -- Certainly it is a great matter for a man to rejoice in
trouble, and to take it for joy to be in diverse temptations. A light matter it
is to speak it, and to expound it; but a great matter to fulfill it. For why?
our most patient and most valiant Champion himself, etc. was troubled in
spirit, and said, My soul is heavy unto death, etc. and yet he notwithstanding,
being so troubled, said to his Disciples, Let not your hearts be troubled. -- O
most merciful Christ, draw us weak creatures after thee; for except thou
should draw us, we are not able to follow thee. -- Without thee we can do
nothing, much less enter into the cruel death for thy sake. Give us that prompt
and ready spirit, a bold heart, an upright faith, a firm hope, and perfect
charity, that we may give our lives patiently and joyfully for thy Names sake.

Page 829.
In another Letter. -- I love the counsel of the Lord above gold and precious
stones. Wherefore I trust in the mercy of Jesus Christ, that he will give me
his Spirit to stand in his Truth. Pray to the Lord, for the spirit is ready,
but the flesh is weak. -- Know this for certain, that I have had great
conflicts by dreams, in such sort as I had much ado to refrain from crying out.
I dreamed of the Popes escape before he went; and after the Lord John had told
me thereof, immediataly in the night it was told me, that the Pope should
return to you again. I dreamed also of the apprehending Mr. Hierom, although
not in full manner as it was done. All the imprisonments, whither and how I am
carried, were opened to me before, although not fully after the same form and
circumstance. Many Serpents oftentimes appeared to me, having heads also in
their tail; but none of them could bite me. These things I write, not esteeming
my self a Prophet, or that I extol my self, but only to signify to you what
temptations I had in body and also in mind, and what great fear I had, lest I
should transgress the Commandments of the Lord Jesus Christ. --

In a Letter to the Lord John de Clum. -- I pray you expound to me the dream of
this night. I saw how that in my Church of Bethlem they came to raze all the
Images of Christ, and did put them out. The next day after I arose and saw many
Painters which made more fairer Images, and many more then I had done before,
which thing I was very glad and joyful to behold. And the Painters with much
people about them, said, Let the Bishops and Priests come now, and put out
these Pictures. Which being done, much people seemed to me in Bethlem to
rejoice, and I with them: and I awaking therewith, felt my self to laugh, etc.
--

This Vision the Lord John and Mr. Hus himself in his Book of Epistles ( Ep.
45.) seems to expound, and applies the Images of Christ to the preaching of
Christ and of his life. The which preaching and doctrine of Christ, though the
Pope and Cardinals should extinguish in him, yet did he foresee and declare,
that the time should come, wherein the same doctrine should be revived again by
others so plenteously, that the Pope with all his power should not be able to
prevail against it.

Page 830.
In the Forty eighth Epistle, seeming to speak with the same Spirit of
Prophecy, he has these words; But I trust those things, which I have spoken
within the House, hereafter shall be preached upon the top of the House.

In a certain Treatise also by him written, De Sacerdotum and Monachorum
carnalium abominatione, speaking Prophetically of the reformation of the
Church, he has these words; Moreover hereupon note and mark by the way, that
the Church of God cannot be reduced to its former dignity, or be reformed
before all things first be made new. The truth whereof is plain by the Temple
of Solomon. -- As my mind now gives me, I believe that there shall arise a new
people, formed after the new man, which is created after God: of the which
people new Clerks and Priests shall come and be taken, which all shall hate
covetousness, and the glory of this life, hastening to an heavenly conversation.

All these things shall come to pass, and be brought by little and little in
order of times, dispensed of God for the same purpose: and this God does and
will do for his own goodness and mercy, and for the riches of his great
longanimity and patience, giving time and space of repentance to them, that
have long lain in their sins, to amend, and fly from the face of the Lords
fury, whilst in the mean time the carnal people, and carnal Priests
successively shall fall away and be consumed as with the moth, etc.

In another Letter. -- You know how I have detested the avarice and inordinate
life of the Clergy; wherefore, through the grace of God; I suffer now
persecution, which shortly shall be consummate in me, neither do I fear to have
my heart poured out for the Name of Christ Jesus. -- If you shall be called to
any Cure in the Country, let the honor of God and the salvation of souls move
you thereunto, and not the having of the living or Commodities thereof. -- See
that you be a Builder of your Spiritual House, being gentle to the poor, and
humble of mind, and waste not your goods in great fare. I fear if you do not
amend your life, ceasing from your costly and superfluous apparel, lest you
shall be grievously chastised, as I also wretched man shall be punished, which
have used the like, being seduced by custom and evil men, and worldly glory,
whereby I have been wounded against God with the spirit of pride. And because
you have notably known both my preaching and outward conversation, even from my
youth, I have no need to write many things to you, but to desire you for the
mercy of Jesus Christ, that you do not follow me in any such levity and
lightness, which you have seen in me. You know how before my Priesthood (which
grieveth me now) I have delighted oftentimes to play at Chess, and have
neglected my time, and have unhappily provoked both my self and others to anger
by that Play. Wherefore (besides other my innumerable faults) for this I desire
you to invocate the mercy of the Lord, that he will pardon me: --

This Letter to this Minister was not to be opened by him before he was sure of
Mr. Hus his death.

In a Treatise De Sacerdotum, Fox, Vol. 3. page 381.
etc. before mentioned, he has these words, In writing these things, (and what
else I have written before) nothing else has moved me hereunto, but only the
love of our Lord Jesus crucified, whose prints and stripes (according to the
measure of my weakness and vileness) I covet to bear in my self, beseeching him
to give me grace, that I never seek to glory in my self, or in any thing else,
but only in his Cross, and in the inestimable ignominy of his Passion. I do
not therefore doubt but these things will like all such as unfeignedly love the
Lord Christ crucified, and will not mislike not a little all such as be of
Antichrist, durst not have so written unless the Lord Jesus Christ crucified by
his inward motion had so commanded me. --

Hyperius.
Ward 's Living Speeches, etc. page 155.
O what a difference is there (said Martin Hyperius) betwixt this and eternal
fire? Who would shun this to leap into that?

FINIS.
A CLOUD OF VVITNESSES; OR, THE Sufferers Mirror, Made up of The
SWANLIKE-SONGS, and other CHOICE PASSAGES of several MARTYRS and CONFESSORS to
the end of the Sixteenth Century, in their Treatises, Speeches, Letters,
Prayers, etc. in their Prisons, or Exiles; at the Bar, or Stake, etc.

Collected out of The Ecclesiastical Histories of Eusebius, Fox, Fuller, Clark,
Petrie, Scotland,


And Mr. Samuel Ward's Life of Faith in Death, etc. and Alphabetically disposed.

By T. M. M.A.

The second Part.

Deuteronomy. 32.7. Remember the days of old, consider the years of many generations:
ask thy Father, and he will show thee, thy Elders, and they will tell thee.

Psalm. 44.22. For thy sake we are killed all the day long: we are counted as
Sheep to the slaughter.

Phil. 1.28. In nothing be terrified by your adversaries, etc.

Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Robert Boulter. 1665.

A brief account of what may be expected in this Collection by a friend to the
Author.
READER,
IT is a comfort Thetis gives her brave Son in Homer, that though he should be
short lived, yet he should continue himself in the admiration of posterity.
Though these blessed Martyrs, and Saints departed sought not glory to
themselves, yet they all obtained a good report, and their memory is blessed,
whilst the memory of the wicked rots, or which is far worse) stinks. I grant
many of them went in a siery Chariot to Heaven; yet those Mantles that fell
from them may, through the concurs of God, so spirit others, that they may do
worthily in Ephrat^, though they never arrive to the glory of the first
Worthies. I d^ubt not but many of them might, by their staying l^nger in their
houses of Booths, have been very beneficial to the World; yet Sampson's violent
death was not without profit to the Church of God in pulling down the House of
the Philistines: And therefore I cannot but commend the Essay, and elaborate
Collections of this Author, in reviving the Memories of these Ancient
Christians.

It was well observed by Sir Francis Bacon, That old Wood is best to burn, and
old Friends best to trust, and old Books best to read. Hence Scholars set a
great price upon an ancient Manuscript. Here are old things, men of ancient
days, and old Books in a new Edition, for thy benefit.

Here you will not find the fault, that Historians are commonly guilty of, who,
like flattering Limners, draw too favorably, or shadow over a wrinckle, and
slily forge in some secret grace: Here is an honest Pen modestly, but yet
faithfully giving thee an account of Believers, who through much faith,
patience, and tribulation entered into the King^ome of Heaven.

Here are worthy Patterns for you to follow; glorious Copies for you, who are
but Beginners in the World, to write after. They all call upon you so to follow
them, as they followed Christ. Here is a Cloud of Witnesses, which if you have
(with Jesus) in your eye, you will be the better prepared to lay aside every
weight, and to run with patience the race that is set before you.

Man is led by nothing better then by example; and examples of great Ones are
most effectual: Such are these. I know abundantly how this lazy formal Age is
ready to look on Scripture-Worthies, as men unimitable; as Giants, to whose
stature they despair ever to arrive: But h^re you may be tolled on in your
active and passive obedience, as lazy Travelers will h^ld out with good
Company, which beat the Path before them: Here is no excuse left of frailty,
which we are ready to make against obedience; for th^se presidents in all Ages
abudantly testify, that we frail men, by the power of the same grace of God,
may reach to the same perfections. We are too apt in these days to think our
selves good enough, if we find any worse then our selves; but we should not
content our selves to run with the Footmen, but to excel the best.

I have of late thought it a very high way to growth and perfection, to collect
some of the choicest frames of the best Christians, and always set them before
us: Blessed be the Lord, this is done to thy hand; and may thou reap the
advantage of this labor.

Here thou may read thy defects in these holy men's excesses, and amend thy
self without any diminution to their glory. Here thou may receive light from
that which dazleth thee, and luster from that which (at present) ecclipseth
thee. When thou considerest what a dastardly, cowardly Spirit is within thee,
what an Enemy of the Cross of Christ thou art, here is that which will promote
thy shame, that these (under the dawnings of Gospel-glory and grace) should be
as bold as Lions, whil^t thou art as timorous as an Hare. How do we shrink and
tremble, whilst these were as Rocks in the midst of the Floods, standing
unmovable when the Winds blew, and the Seas made a noise.

I heartily wish that the dew of Heaven may fall upon these holy Relics, that
such a Spirit may attend the Reader as did these, when called before Kings and
Rulers for the Name of Christ.

I heartily wish that these experiments of Gods presence with his suffering and
witnessing Saints, may help thee to trust in God. I kn^w you ought to trust God
upon his single Bond, without a Pawn or Pledge of his Power and Faithfulness;
but certainly Faith is wonderfully helped by former experiences in all Ages:
and therefore let this Epitome of the Bo^k of Martyrs (as to the Martyrs
sayings) strengthen thy confidence, and make thee r^ly on God, as a constant
tried Friend. Th^se are all great instanc^s, that God is seen in the Mount;
that he has good will to the flaming Bush; that he is willing to accompany the
Church in the fiery Furnace. Say after the perusal of this Manual, I dare trust
in God in the greatest difficulties; I will take no th^ught what to answer to
the Sons of men, but will believe it shall be given in that hour; I will cast
all my care on him; I will assure my self, that as my tribulations do, so my
consolations shall, abound; he has been others help, therefore under the
shadow of his wings will I rejoice; They that know thy Name, Ps. 9.10.
will put their trust in thee; for thou Lord have not forsaken them that seek
thee; Psalm. 22.4, 5.
Our Fathers trusted in thee: they trusted, and thou did deliver them: they
cried unto thee, and were delivered: they trusted in thee, and were not
confounded. Here you have Gods former dealings with, and appearings for his
suffering Saints to publish to thee and me, what his future behavior will be.
What David said of the tried sword, we may of God much rather, Psalm. 77.5, 10.
There is none like it. I have considered the days of old, the years of
ancient times. I will remember the years of the right hand of the most High.

Moreover in these Gleanings thou will see the excellency of Christ, and the
high advantages of Faith, in that the Lord Christ is worthy, for whose sake all
is to be parted from. Here is the Lord Jesus rated and valued above all the
comforts, contentments, and happiness of both the worlds: not that these were
of a Stoical Apathy, or prodigal of their blood and lives; only Christ was the
first Figure, and all the world but empty Ciphers without him. The estimate
which their souls set on Christ, did infinitely exceed the rate, which they s^^
on any thing else: all was but dross and dung, this is the voice of all these
Saints ^^arted, Christ is not valued at all, if he be not valued above all.

What shall I say more?

Here you may see somewhat to shore up the dejected Christians, who may be too
much discouraged at the low condition of Gods Church: upon reading here sad
Melancthon may be contente^ to let God continue the reins of Government in his
own hands; and we may, when even sinking, lea^^ of Austin; Let the world (said
he) sink or swim, be ruined or prosper, I will bless the Lord that made the
world.

Here you may (in short) see the Cavils against the Cross, blown off to your
hand: the objections against the Truth abundantly silenced. Here you will meet
with seasonable Cautions against unscriptural Compliances. Here cases of the
present Age are briefly debated and cleared: and here you may have a Directory
how to keep your Consciences inoffensive toward God, toward the Saints, and
toward them that are without.

But (Reader) I will not detain thee from enjoying the labors of my Friend.
The Lord bless them to thee and me. See that thou refuse not him that speaks
from Heaven, nor these, whose blood (like their Masters) cries against their
enemies for vengeance; but calls aloud to you to stand fast in the Faith once
delivered, and to consider the end of their Warfare: which that thou may, is
heartily desired by

A Cordial Friend to all the Friends of Christ, S.L.

Swan-like SONG'S. The Second Part.
I.
Ieuville.
NIcholas Ieuville, Fox, Vol. 3. cont. p. 6.
being condemned to be burned alive, and his tongue to be cut out, the
Tormentor putting the Halter about his Neck, said, Praised be God, for I am now
counted worthy to be one of the Heavenly Order.

Ignatius.
When Trajan the Emperor returned from the Parthian War, Clark 's first Volume
of Lives, page 1, 2.
and came to Antioch, having commanded gratulatory Sacrifices to be offered in
every City, he required Ignatius, who was Pastor of the Church at Antioch, to
be present at those Sacrifices: but he before Trajan's face did justly and
sharply reprove their Idolatry, for which cause he was delivered by ten
Soldiers to be carried to Rome.

As he passed through Asia, so guarded, he confirmed the Congregations, through
every City where he came, preaching the Word of God to them, and giving them
wholesome Exhortations. When he came to Smyrna, he wrote an Epistle to the
Church at Ephesus, and another to the Church of Magnesia on the River Meander,
and another to the Church at Trallis.

V. Mella Patrum collect. per F. Rous. page 13, 14.
In his Epistle to the Ephesians. -- You have heard of my being carried bound
from Syria for the common Name and Hope. I hope through your prayers I shall so
fight against the Beasts at Rome, that through Martyrdom, I shall become his
Disciple, who offered himself a sacrifice for us unto God. -- I do not command
you, as if I were any thing; for though I am in bonds for the Name of Christ, I
am not as yet perfect in Christ Jesus. Now I begin to be a Disciple. --
Onesimus himself does exceedingly commend your decent and meet order, and that
you all live according to the Truth, and that there is no place for Herest
among you, and that you hear none farther then he preaches Christ Jesus in
truth. Page 15.
-- Oppose their anger with mildness, and their proud brags with humility, and
their cursings with praying, and their errors with stedfastness in the Faith.
-- Let us be found in Christ Jesus unto everlaststing life. Without him nothing
becomes you: in whom I carry about these bonds (spiritual pearls) in which I
may stand advanced by the help of your prayer: of which I always desire to be
partaker, that I may be numbered among the Ephesian Christians, who have always
in the strength of Christ consented with the Apostles. See that you often meet
together to give God thanks and to praise him; for when you have often met
together in the same place, the power of Satan is weakened, and his mischief
vanishes away by the concord of your faith. The Tree is manifested by its
fruit, -- the work of profession does not now appear, unless by the power of
Faith we be found to persevere to the end. It is herrer to be a Mute, and a
Christian, then to be Talkative, and no Christian. It is good to teach; but let
him that teaches, do what he teaches.

In his Letter to the M^gnesians. Page 16.
-- It becomes us not only to be called, but to be Christians. -- As there be
two sorts of moneys; one Gods, the other the Worlds; so each sort has its
peculiar stamp. Unbelievers have the stamp of the World; Believers in love have
the stamp of God the Father through Jesus Christ: through whom, unless our Will
be inclined to die after the example of his Passion, his Life is not in us. --
There is one Christ, then whom, nothing is more excellent. Let all therefore
agree as in one Temple. -- Although I am in bonds, I am not to be compared with
one of you yet at liberty. I know you are free from pride, and when I praise
you I know you even blush. --

In his Exhortation prefixed to his Epistle to the Church at Trallis, Clark,
page 2.
he persuades them not to refuse Martyrdom, lest thereby they should lose the
hope that was laid up for them.

In the Epistle it self. Rous, page 16.
-- I savor many things in God; but I keep my self within bounds, lest I
perish by vain glory. Now I am mostly to fear; neither am I to mind those that
would puff me up. They that praise me, scourage me. I do indeed love to
suffer; but that I am worthy, I know not. -- I beseech you (not I, Page 17.
but the love of Christ Jesus) to make use only of Christian Food, and to
abstain from Heresy, a strange Herb. Temporaries embrace Christ, -- but they
are not of the Fathers planting: If they were, there would appear the Branches
of the Cross, and their fruit would be incorruptible. --

In his Epistle to the Romans. -- I, Christ Jesus his bondman, hope I may
salute you, if it be his will, that I may be judged worthy to reach the goal. I
have begun well, if, (or O that I may) have grace to take my lot without let. I
fear least your love hurt me. I would not that you should please men, but God,
even as you do. -- Do you labor that I may be sacrificed unto God, seeing the
Altar is prepared, that you in love making a Quire, may sing to the Father in
Christ Jesus, that a Bishop of Syria has been honored thus to set in the
West, being called from the East. It is good to fall from the World to God,
that I may rise in him. -- Beg only this for me, that I may be supplied with
inward and outward strength, that I may not only say, but will, and not only
be called, but be found a Christian. If I be found so, I shall be called so,
even then when I shall not appear to be a Believer to the World. Page 18.
Nothing visible is perpetual. The things that are seen are temporary: those,
which are not seen, are eternal. Christianity is a work, not a work of
persuasion, but of greatness, when it is hated by the World. I write to the
Churches, and require of all, that I may voluntarily die for God, if that you
forbid it not. I beseech you, bestow not upon me unseasonable love. Suffer me
to be the food for the wild Beasts, by whom I shall enjoy God. I am Gods Corn,
when the wild Beasts have ground me to powder with their teeth, I shall be his
White-bread. Yea rather cunningly entice the wild Beasts to be my Sepulcher,
and to leave nothing of my body behind them, lest when I am dead I be found
troublesome to any. Then shall I be a true Disciple of Christ indeed, when the
World shall not see even my body. Pray unto God for me, that by these
instruments I may become a sacrifice unto God. From Syria even till I came to
Rome I fought with Beasts, as well by Sea as by Land, night and day being bound
among the cruel Leopards (I mean my Military Guard) who, the more benefits they
received at my hands, became so much the worse unto me; but I being exercised
and now well acquainted with their injuries, am taught every day more and more
to bear the Cross: yet hereby am I not justified. Would to God I might once
enjoy the Beasts prepared for me, which I wish also to fall upon me with all
their violence, whom also I will cunningly entice, without delay to devour me,
and not to abstain from me, as they have from others, whom for fear they have
left untouched, and if they be unwilling to it, I will even compel them to
fall upon me. Pardon me. I know what is for my advantage. Quid mihi neile ^ix*
ego novi.
Mr. Clark renders it, I know well how much this will avail me. Now do I begin
to be a Disciple, seeing I neither regard things visible, nor invisible, so I
may gain Christ. Let Fire, the Cross, Skirmishings with wild Beasts, Cuttings,
Butcherings or Rentings in pieces, Breakings of my Bones asunder, Manglings of
my Members, Bruisings of my whole Body, and the Torments of the Devil (all the
Torments that man and the Devil can invent) fall upon me, Et Diaboli ^ormenta.
so that I may enjoy Jesus, The Ends and Kingdoms of this World will not help
me. It is better for me to die for Christ Jesus, then to reign over the Ends of
the Earth. What will it profit a man to gain the whole World, and lose his own
soul? I seek him, who died for us, and rose again. Pardon me, my Brethren, be
not an hindrance to me, that I may not live; be not unwilling that I should
die. Seeing I desire to be Gods, do not gratify the World. Suffer me to enjoy
pure light: when I shall be there, I shall be a man of God. Permit me to
emulate the sufferings of Christ, my God. Whosoever enjoyes him, understands
what I desire, and will bear with me, when he knows what constrains me. The
Prince of this World would hold me and corrupt my soul and will for God. Page
19.
Let none of you help him, but rather help me, that is, God. Do not name Christ
Jesus, and love or covet the World. Let not envy dwell in you. -- Living, but
in love with dying, I write unto you. My love is crucified; and there is not in
me a fire of love toward any thing of an earthly matter; but living water, and
he, that speaks within me, says unto me, Come unto the Father. I rejoice not
in corruptible nourishment, nor in the pleasures of this life. I would have the
bread of God, heavenly bread, the bread of Life, which is the flesh of Christ,
the Son of God, who in these last times is made of the seed of David and
Abraham, and for drink I would have his blood, who is love incorruptible, and
life eternal. Be mindful in your prayers of the Church in Syria, which instead
of me has the Lord for their Pastor. Jesus Christ alone will take care for it,
and your love to him. But I am ashamed to be called one of that number. Neither
am I worthy, seeing I am the last of them, and an abortive: but through the
mercy of God I have obtained, that I may be some one, if I can enjoy God.

In his Letter to the Philadelphians. -- Ye children of the Light, fly the
dividing of Truth and wicked Doctrines. Follow, as sheep, your Pastor. -- In
your concord there is no place for the Wolves to get in. If any one preach
Judaism unto you, do not hear him. It is better to hear Christianity from one
that is circumcised, then Judaism from one that is uncircumcised. If both do
not preach Christ Jesus, they are to me Funeral Pillars and Monuments of the
dead, Page 20.
upon whom Names only are inscribed. -- Where division and anger is, God
dwells not. --

In his Letter to the Smyrnaeans. -- Jesus Christ is truly dead, and truly
risen. He has not suffered only according to appearance, as some Infidels
teach. -- If these things be done by Christ only in opinion, I am bound only
in opinion. But why should I deliver up my self unto Death, to the Fire, to the
Sword, to Beasts, but that he that is near the Sword is near unto God, he that
is present with the Beasts is present with God? I hear all only in the Name of
Christ, that I may suffer with him, he strengthening me, who is made perfect
man. -- What does it profit me, if any one praise me; and blaspheme my Lord,
not confessing him to be clothed with flesh? Page 21.
-- Your prayer has reached to the Church of Antioch, which is in Syria,
whence I salute you all, being bound in Gods honorable bonds, though unworthy,
being the last of all there, yet made worthy by the will of God, not according
to my Conscience, but of the mere grace of God, etc. --

In one of his Epistles he says, Clark, page 3.
Truly I did see him ( Christ) in flesh after his resurrection, and do believe
that it is he, etc.

He used to say, That there is nothing better then the peace of a good
Conscience.

That good and wicked men are like true and counterfeit money; the one seems to
be good and is not, the other both seems and is good.

That the Lions teeth are but like a Mill, which though it bruiseth, yet
wastes not the good Wheat, only prepares and sits it to be made pure Bread.
Let me (said he) be broken by them, so I may be made pure Manchet for Heaven.

Other graces are but parts of a Christians armor, as the shield of Faith,
etc. but Patience is the Panoply, or whole armor of the man of God.

Joan.
Fox, Vol. 3. page 52.
The Lady Joan, Queen of Navar, who was poisoned at Paris a few days before the
bloody Massacre on Aug. 24. 1572. in her sickness she said, I take all this as
sent from the hand of God my most merciful Father; nor have I during this
extremity, feared to die, much less murmured against God for inflicting the
same upon me, knowing that whatsoever he does, he does the same so, as all in
the end shall turn to my everlasting good. -- I depend wholly upon Gods
providence, knowing that all things are wisely disposed of by him. -- As for
this life, I am in a good measure weaned from the love of it, in regard of the
afflictions that have followed me from my youth hitherto; but especially
because I cannot live without daily offending my good God, Page 53.
with whom I desire to be with all my heart. -- In regard of mine own
particular, my life is not dear unto me, seeing so long as I live in this frail
flesh, I am still prone and apt to sin against God: only my care is somewhat
for my children, which God has given me, because they shall be now deprived of
me in their young years; yet I doubt not, but although it should please God to
take me from them, that himself will be a Father to them, and a Protector over
them, as he has been to me in my greatest afflictions; and therefore I commit
them wholly to his government and Fatherly care. Page 54.
-- She often uttered these words, O my God, in thy good time deliver me from
this body of death, and from the miseries of this life, that I may no more
offend thee, and that I may attain to that felicity, which thou in thy Word
have promised me. Page 55.
-- To a Minister a little before her death she said, I neither expect
Salvation, Righteousness, nor Life from any else, then from my only Savior
Jesus Christ, being assured that his only merit abundantly suffices for the
full satisfaction of all my sins, albeit they are innumerable.

Ioris.
John Ioris of Assahen, Fox, Vol. 3. cont. p. 37.
in a Letter of his to his Parents and Friends, a little before his Martyrdom
writ thus. -- Most dear Father and Mother, Sister and Brother, I write here
unto you comfortable news, viz. That in all my life, I never saw any day so
pleasing to me, as this is, in which the Lord has counted me worthy to be one
of his Champions, and to suffer for his holy Name: for which I give him most
humble and hearty thanks. -- Rejoice with me, I pray you, that God has now
called me to so glorious and welcome Marriage Day. O how precious in the sight
of the Lord our God is the death of his Martyrs! Dear Friends, two Priests and
some of the Magistrates have sought to terrify me with many threats, thinking
to turn me aside from my holy Profession; but the Lord of his great mercy has
given me grace to withstand them all. I plainly told them, I was not ashamed of
the Gospel of Christ, but would be willing and ready to die in the defense
thereof, following my Lord and Master Jesus Christ, through all afflictions, to
be made Partaker with him at last of his eternal joys in his celestial
Tabernacle. Wherefore if God shall call any of you forth to suffer ought for
his Names sake, bear the same (I beseech you) with meekness and patience, not
declining from the truth for fear or favor, to the right hand or to the left,
But fear him rather, who is able to cast soul and body into hell. The time
which God has lent us to converse in this world, is but short; and therefore
let us begin to abandon the love of this world, with all things therein,
betimes, that so we may be ready to follow the call of God. Dear Father and
Mother, I do take my last farewell of you, until we meet together again in the
Kingdom of Heaven, where we shall partake of that joy that shall last for
ever, all sorrows, tears, and griefs being wiped away. Be ye not therefore
grieved, I pray you, but be patient; for the affliction which is befallen me,
is most acceptable to me, for which also I bless and praise the Lord.

Iueson.
Fox, Vol. 3. page 386.
Thomas Iueson, being pressed to recant, said, I would not recant for all the
goods in London: I do appeal to Gods mercy, and will be none of your Church,
nor submit my self to the same. And that I have said, I will say it again. And
if there came an Angel from Heaven, to teach me any other Doctrine then that
which I am in now, I would not believe him.

Iuleddo, or Iulitta.
Fox, Vol. 3. page 305.
A Servant to a good Gentlewoman telling Mr. Bradford, that her Mistress had
been sorer afflicted with her own Father and Mother, then ever he was with his
imprisonment. Mr. Bradford bid her tell her Mistress, That he had read that day
a godly History, written by Basilius Magnus of Iuleddo, a virtuous Widow, She
had great Lands, and many children, and nigh her dwelt a Cormorant, which for
her godliness hated her, and out of very malice took away her lands, so that
she was fain to go to Law. The Judge demanded of him, why he wrongfully
withheld these Lands from this Woman. He answered, he might, because she was
disobedient to the Kings proceedings; for she will in no wise worship his gods,
nor offer sacrifice unto them. Woman (said the Judge thereupon) if this be
true, thou art like not only to lose thy Land, but thy Life. Whereupon she
said, And is there no remedy, but either to worship your false gods, or else to
lose my Lands and life? then farewell Suit, farewell Lands, farewell Children,
farewell Friends, yea and farewell Life too, and in respect of the true honor
of the everliving God, farewell all. At the place of her Execution, she
exhorted all women to be strong and constant; for (said she) ye were redeemed
with as dear a price as men; Page 306.
for although ye were made of the rib of the man, yet be you all of his flesh:
so that also in the case and trial of your faith toward God, ye ought to be as
strong.

Mr. Ward calls her Iulitta, Ward, page 141.
and records her Speech thus: We women received not only flesh from men, but
are bone of their bone, and therefore ought to be as strong in Christ's Cause.

Mr. Fox out of Basil tells the Story thus, Vol. 1. page 123.
That when the Judge passed Sentence against Iulitta, she said, Farewell
riches, and welcome poverty; farewell life, and welcome death. All that I have
if it were a thousand times more, would I rather lose, then speak one wicked
and blasphemous word against God my Creator. I yield thee most hearty thanks,
O my God, for this grace, that I can contemn and despise this frail and
transitory world, esteeming Christian Profession above all treasures.

Afterward, when any Question was demanded, her Answer was, I am the Servant
of Jesus Christ. At the Stake she said to the women beholding her, Stick not, O
Sisters, to labor and travel after true pie^y and godliness. Cease to accuse
the frailty of feminine Nature. What? are not we created of the same matter
that men are? yea after Gods Image and Similitude, are we made as lively as
they. Not flesh only did God use in the Creation of the woman, in sign and
token of her infirmity and weakness, but bone of bones is she, in token that
she must be strong in the true and living God, all falsehoods forsaken, constant
in faith, all infidelity renounced, patient in adversity, all worldly ease
refused. Wax weary (my dear Sisters) of your lives, led in darkness, and be in
love with my Christ, my God, my Redeemer, my Comforter, which is the true light
of the world. Persuade your selves, or rather the Spirit of the living God
persuade you, that there is a world to come, wherein the Worshippers of Idols
and Devils shall be tormented perpetually, and the Servants of the High God be
crowned eternally.

Iusberg.
The Mirror of the Martyrs. page 113.
Brethren (said Iustus Iusberg) you see that my end approaches, which howsoever
I fear, as a man burdened with the body of sin; yet am I resolved as a
Christian, joyfully to endure it, being assured that all my sins are fastened
to the Cross of Christ.

Iuventius.
Burro^gh's on Moses Self denial, page 132.
Chrysostom in an Oration on Iuventius and Maximus, two Martyrs, brings in
this objection of the Persecutours against them; Do not you see others of your
rank do thus? and them answering thus; for this very reason we will manfully
stand and offer our selves as a sacrifice for the breach that they have made.

K.
Kennedy.
Alexander Kennedy, The Ecclesiastical History of Scotland, page 24.
who passed not eighteen years of age, when he was presented before his bloody
Butcherers, at first was faint, and gladly would have recanted; but while the
place of repentance was denied him, the Spirit of God wrought in him, and with
a cheerful countenance, and a joyful voice, upon his knees he said, O eternal
God, how wonderful is that love and mercy that thou bear unto mankind, and
unto me the most Caitiffe and miserable wretch above all others; for even now,
when I would have denied thee, and thy Son, our Lord Jesus Christ my only
Savior, and so have cast my self into everlasting dammation, Thou by thy own
hand have pulled me from the very bottom of hell, and made me to feel that
heavenly comfort, which takes from me that ungodly fear wherewith before I was
oppressed. Now I defy death, do what you please, I praise my God, I am ready.

Kerby.
Mr. Wingfield telling him, Fox, Vol. 2. page 568.
the fire is hot, the terror is great, the pain extreme, life sweet; Better it
were betime to stick to mercy, while there is hope of life, then rashly to
begin, and then to s^rink; He said, Ah Mr. Wingfield, be at my burning, and you
shall say there stands a Christian Soldier in the fire; for I know that
fire, water, sword, and all other things are in the hands of God, and he will
suffer no more to be laid upon us then he will enable us to bear.

When Sentence was past against him, Page 569.
he with most humble reverence holding up his hands, and bowing himself
devoutly, said, Praised be Almighty God.

Kilian.
Ward, page 162.
To such as asked Kilian, a Dutch Schoolmaster, if he loved not his Wife and
Children? He answered, Yes, if all the world were gold, and were mine to
dispose of, I would give it all to live with them, though it were but in
Prison; yet is my soul and my Lord Christ dearer to me then all things
whatsoever.

Knight.
Fox, Vol. 3, page 200.
When Stephen Knight was at the Stake, he prayed, -- O Lord Jesus Christ, for
whose love I leave willingly this life, and desire rather the bitter death of
thy Cross, with the loss of all earthly things, then to abide the blasphemy of
thy most holy Name, or to obey men in breaking thy holy Commandment. Thou
see, O Lord, that where I might live in worldly wealth to worship a false
god, and honor thine enemy, I choose rather the torment of the body, and the
loss of this life, and have counted all things but vile, dust, and dung, that I
might win thee, which death is dearer unto me, then thousands of gold and
silver. Such love, O Lord, have thou laid up in my breast, that I hunger for
thee, as the Deer that is wounded desires the soil. Send thy holy Comforter, O
Lord, to aid, comfort, and strengthen this weak piece of earth, which is empty
of all strength of it self. Thou remembrest, O Lord, that I am but dust, and
able to do nothing that is good. Therefore, O Lord, as of thine accustomed
goodness and love, thou have bidden me to this banquet, and accounted me worthy
to drink of thine own Cup amongst thine Elect; even so give me strength, O
Lord, against this thine Element, which as to my sight it is most irksome and
terrible, so to my mind it may at thy Commandment (as an obedient Servant) be
sweet and pleasant, that through the strength of thy holy Spirit, I may pass
through the rage of this fire into thy bosom, according to thy promise, and
for this mortal receive an immortal, and for this corruption put on
incorruption. Accept this burnt-sacrifice and offering, O Lord, not for the
sacrifice, but for thy Dear Sons sake, my Savior, for whose Testimony ^ offer
this free-will-offering with all my heart and with all my soul. O Heavenly
Father, forgive me my sins, as I forgive all the world. O sweet Son of God, my
Savior, spread thy wings over me. O blessed and holy Ghost, through whose
merciful inspiration, I am come hither, conduct me into everlasting life. Lord,
into thy hands I commend my Spirit. Amen.

Keyser.
Leonard Keyser, Fox, Vol. 2. page 114.
as he was led to the place where he was to be burnt, said, O Lord Jesus,
remain with me, sustain and help me, and give me force and power.

When the wood was ready to be set on fire, he cried with a loud voice, O
Jesus, I am thine, have mercy upon me, and save me.

Knox.
Mr. John Knox, The Eccl^siastical History of Scotland in Folio, page 74.
wearied with removing from place to place, by reason of the Persecution that
came upon him by the Bishop of St. Andrews, was determined to have left
Scotland, and to have visited the Schools of Germany (he had then no pleasure
in England, by reason that, although the Popes Name was suppressed, yet his
Laws and Corruptons remained in full vigor) but was prevailed with by some
Gentlemen, for their Childrens sake, whose Education he had undertaken, to go
to St. Andrews, that he might have the benefit of the Castle, which was
fortified against the Papists, since the death of the Cardinal in it. Thither
he came An. 1547. where he was called to the Ministry after this manner. Mr.
Rough having showed in a Sermon what power the Congregation, Page 75.
how small soever, passing the number of two or three, had to elect any man in
the time of need, as that was, in whom they espied the gifts of God, and how
dangerous it was to refuse to hear the voice of such as desire to be
instructed, he directed his words to Mr. Knox, saying, Brother, you shall not
be offended, although that I speak unto you that which I have in charge even
from all those here present, which is this. In the Name of God, and of his Son
Jesus Christ, and in the name of these that presently call you by my mouth, I
charge you that you refuse not this holy Vocation, but as ye tender the glory
of God, the increase of Christ's Kingdom, the edification of your Brethren, and
the comfort of me, whom ye understand well enough to be oppressed by the
multitude of labors, that you take upon you the public office and charge of
preaching, even as you look to avoid Gods heavy displeasure, and desire that he
shall multiply his graces upon you. And in the end he said to those that were
present, was not this your charge to me? and do ye not approve this Vocation?
They answered it is, and we approve it.

Besides this Vocation, that which necessitated Mr. Knox to enter in the
public place, was his beating by his Pen Dean Annan (a rotten Papist) that had
long troubled Mr. Rough in his Preaching, from all defenses, that he was
compelled to fly to his last refuge, the Authority of the Church, which (said
the Dean) damned all Lutherans and Heretics, and therefore he would not
dispute. Whereupon Mr. Knox in the open audience of the Parish Church of St.
Andrews told the Dean thus; As for your Roman Church, as it is now corrupted,
and the Authority thereof, wherein stands the hope of your victory, I no more
doubt but that it is the Synagogue of Satan, and the head thereof, called the
Pope, to be that man of sin, of whom the Apostle speaks, then I doubt that
Jesus Christ suffered by the procurement of the visible Church of Jerusalem;
yea, I offer my self by word or writing, to prove the Roman Church this day
farther to degenerate from the purity, which was in the days of the Apostles,
Page 76.
then was the Church of the Jews, from the Ordinance given by Moses, when they
consented to the innocent death of Jesus Christ. The people hearing the offer,
cried with one consent, We cannot all read your writings, but we can all hear
your preachings; therefore we require you in the Name of God, that ye let us
hear the Probation of what you have affirmed; for if it be true, we have been
miserably deceived.

The next Lords Day he preached on Dan. 7. And another King shall rise after
them, and he shall be unlike unto the first, and he shall subdue three Kings,
and shall speak words against the most High, and shall consume the Saints of
the most High, etc. In the beginning of his Sermon, he showed the great love of
God toward his Church, whom he pleased to forewarn of dangers to come, so many
years before they came to pass. -- After he made a short Discourse of the four
Empires, the Babylonian, Persian, Grecian, and Roman; in the destruction of the
fourth rose up that last beast, which he affirmed to be the Roman Church; for
to none other power, that ever has been yet, do all the Notes that God showed
to the Prophets belong, except to it alone, and to it they do properly
appertain, as such as are not more then blind may clearly see. -- Then he
showed that the Spirit in the New Testament gives to this King other new names;
as the man of sin, the Antichrist, the whore of Babylon, which he proved to
belong to the Papists, and their head the Pope. --

Page 78.
Hereupon he was (with Mr. Rough) convented before the Sub Prior of St. Andrews,
etc. and several Articles were read against them.

The strangeness (said the Sub Prior) of these Articles, which are gathered
forth of your Doctrine, have moved us to call for you to hear your Answers. Mr.
Knox said, I for my part praise my God, that I see such an Auditory; but
because it is long since, that I have heard, that ye are one that is not
ignorant of the Truth, I may crave of you in the Name of God, yea and I appeal
your conscience before that supreme Judge, that if ye think any Article there
expressed, contrary to the Truth of God, that ye oppose your self plainly unto
it, and suffer not the people to be therewith deceived; but if in your
conscience you know the Doctrine to be true, then will I crave your Patr^cinie
thereto, that by your Authority the people may be moved the ^ather to believe
the Truth. The Sub Prior answered, I come not here as a Judge, but only
familiarly to talk, and therefore I will neither allow nor condemn, but if ye
list, I will reason. Why may not the Church for good causes devise Ceremonies
to decore the Sacraments, and other Gods Service?

K. Because the Church ought to do nothing but in faith, and ought not to go
before, but is bound to follow the voice of the true Pastor.

S. It is in faith that the Ceremonies are commanded, Page 79.
and they have proper significations to help our faith, they have a godly
signification; and therefore proceed from faith, and are done in Faith.

K. It is not enough that man invent a Ceremony, and then give it a
signification according to his pleasure; for so might the Ceremonies of the
Gentiles, and of Mahomet be maintained: but if any thing proceed from faith, it
must have the Word of God for its assurance; for faith comes by hearing, and
hearing by the Word of God. Now if ye will prove that your Ceremonies proceed
from faith, and do please God, you must prove that God has commanded them,
else they are sin; for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

S. Will ye bind us so strait, that we may do nothing without the express Word
of God? What if I ask drink, think ye that I sin? and yet I have not Gods Word
for me.

K. I would ye should not jest in so grave a matter, neither would I that you
should begin to hide the truth with Sophistry. -- As to your drinking, I say,
that if ye either eat or drink without assurance of Gods Word, in so doing you
displease God by sinning against him; for the creatures are sanctified by the
Word and Prayer. The Word is this, all things are clean to the clean. -- But
the Question is not of meat or drink, wherein the Kingdom of God consists
not, but of Gods true Worshipping, without which we can have no society with
God; and here it is doubted, if we may take the same liberty in using of
Christ's Sacraments, that we may do in eating and drinking. -- Moses says, All
that the Lord thy God commands thee to do, that do thou to the Lord thy God,
add nothing to it, diminish nothing from it. By these Rules I think the Church
of Christ will measure Gods Religion, and not by that which seems good in their
own eyes.

Page 80.
S. Pardon me, I spoke it, because I was dry, Friar follow the Argument.

F. I will prove that those Ceremonies ye damn are ordained by God; for the
Ceremonies of the Church are the gold, silver, and precious stones, which do
abide the fire, and consume not away, etc.

K. I praise God, through Christ, I find his Word true; Christ bids us not fear
when we shall be called before men to give Confession of his truth; For it
shall be given in that hour, what we shall speak. If I had sought the whole
Scriptures, I could not have produced a place more potent to confound you. -- I
would learn of you what fire it is that your Ceremonies do abide? and in the
mean give you this Argument from the same Text against you. That which can
abide the fire, can abide the Word; but your Ceremonies cannot abide the Word,
therefore they cannot abide the fire, then are they not gold, Page 81.
silver, and precious stones.

F. I deny your M^nor, viz. That our Ceremonies may not abide the trial of Gods
Word.

K. I prove, That abides not the trial of Gods Word, which Gods Word condemns;
but Gods Word condemns your Ceremonies, therefore they do not abide the trial
thereof, but as a Thie^ abides the trial of the Inquest, and thereby is
condemned to be hanged, etc. The Minor is evident* for the plain and strait
Commandment is, D^u^. 4.
Not th^^ thing that appears good in thine eyes shall thou do to the Lord thy
God, but what the Lord thy God has commanded thee, that do thou, add nothing
to it, diminish nothing from it. Now unless ye be able to prove that God has
commanded your Ceremonies, this Command will damn both you and them.

The Friar would not answer directly, but ever fled to the Authority of the
Church. Whereto Mr. Knox answered oftener then once, That the Spouse of Christ
had neither Power nor Authority against the Word of God. Then said the Friar,
you will leave us no Church. Indeed (said Mr. Knox) in David I read, Ps. 26.5.
that there is a Church of Malignants, that Church ye may have without the
Word, etc. but as for me I will be of none other Church, except of that which
has Jesus Christ to be Pastor, which hears his voice, and will not hear a
stranger.

Upon the appearance of one and twenty French Galleys in the sight of the
Castle, Page 83.
the Castle was demanded to be delivered, and the Governor refusing, it was
besieged by Sea and Land, the Plague being within. Mr. Knox ever told them
within, That their corrupt life, having fallen into all kind of licentiousness,
puffed up with pride of their success, and relying on England for help in case of
need, could not escape the punishment of God. When they triumphed of their
Victory, he lamented, and said, Page 84.
They saw not what he saw. When they bragged of the force and thickness of
their Walls, he said, They should be but Egge-shells. When they vaunted,
England will rescue us, he said, Ye shall not see them, but ye shall be
delivered into your enemies hands, and shall be carried into a strange Country.

The last of July the Castle was delivered upon Articles, That the lives of all
in the Castle should be saved, and safely transported into France, etc. In
France the principal, that looked for freedom, were put into several Prisons,
and the rest were left in the Galleys, and miserably used, among which Mr. Knox
was all the Winter.

Page 92.
When Mr. James Balfour (afterward Sir James Balfour, and an Apostate) would
ask Mr. Knox, if he thought that ever they should be delivered; his Answer ever
was, That God would deliver them from that bondage to his glory, even in this
life.

When the Galleys returned to Scotland, within sight of St. Andrews, Mr. James
willed Mr. Knox (who was then extremely sick, that few hoped his life) to look
to the Land, and asked if he knew it? He answered, Yes, I know it well, for I
see the Steeple of that place, where God in public opened my mouth to his
glory, and I am fully persuaded, how weak soever I now appear, that I shall not
depart this life, till that my tongue shall glorify his holy Name in the same
place. This he spoke many years before he sat foot on Scottish ground.

In answer to a Letter from those that were imprisoned in Mount Michel, Mr.
Knox writes; That if without the blood of any shed or spilt by them for their
deliverance, they might set themselves at liberty, they might safely do it. But
to shed any man's blood for their freedom, thereto would he never consent.
Adding farther, that he was assured that God would deliver them and the rest of
that company, even in the eyes of the world, but not by such means they looked
for, that the praise of their deliverance should redound to his glory only. He
willed therefore every one to take the occasion that God offered to them,
provided that they did nothing against Gods command for deliverance. -- Adding,
Page 93.
that in one instant God delivered the whole company into the hands of
unfaithful men, but so would he not relieve them; but some would he deliver by
one means, and at one time, and others must abide for a season upon his good
pleasure.

When Mr. Knox was delivered, he came into England, and was Preacher to
Barwick, then to Newcastle, then to London, etc. But before he was delivered,
whilst in the Galleys, he wrote a Treatise containing the Sum of his
Doctrine, and the Confession of his Faith, and sent it to his Familiars in
Scotland, with his Exhortation, that they should continue in the truth, which
they had professed, notwithstanding any worldly adversity that might ensue
thereof.

Whilst he was in England, See his Life set before the Ecclesiastical History
of Scotland, page 2.
he was in so great favor and esteem with King Edward the Sixth, that he was
offered a Bishopric; but he not only refused and rejected it, but with a
grave and severe Speech declared, That the proud title of Lordship, and that
great state was not to be suffered to be in the Church of God, as having Quid
commune cum Antichristo, i. e. somewhat common with Antichrist.

King Edward being dead, the Persecution of Queen Mary made him leave England,
with many other godly Ministers; and first he went to Frankford, where for a
time he preached the Gospel to the English Congregation there. See this
Admonition at the end of the Ecclesiastical History of Scotland, page 43.


There he wrote his Admonition to England, An. 1554.

In his Admonition to the true Professors of the Gospel of Christ in England.
-- Looking for a suitable Scripture to handle for your consolation in these
most dark and dolorous times, as I was turning my Book, I chanced to see a Note
in the Margin written thus in Latin, Vid eat Anglia, Let England beware, the
Note written was this, Seldom it is that God works any notable work to the
comfort of his Church, but that trouble, fear, and labor comes upon such as
God has used for his Servants, Page 44.
and Workmen; and also tribulation most commonly follows that Church, where
Christ Jesus is most truly preached. This Note was made upon Matthew. 14. which
place declares that after Christ had used the Apostles, as Ministers and
Servants to feed so many thousand, etc. he sent them to Sea, etc. and there
they met with a Storm, that was like to overthrow their poor Boat and them. --
Remembering that I had handled the same Scripture in your presence, I thought
nothing more expedient, then shortly to call to mind such things, as then, I
trust, were touched. -- Why Christ sent away from him the people, the
Evangelist John declares, saying, When Jesus knew that they were come to take
him, John 6.
that they might make him King, he passed secretly (or all alone) to the
mountain. -- The people sought by Christ a carnal and worldly Liberty,
regarding nothing his heavenly Doctrine, etc. viz. that such as would follow
him, must suffer for his Names sake persecution, must be hated of all men, must
deny themselves, must be sent forth, Page 45.
as Sheep among Wolves: No part of this Doctrine pleased them; but their whole
mind was upon their bellies, for sufficing whereof, they devised that they
would appoint Christ their worldly King; for he had power to multiply bread at
his pleasure. Which vain opinion perceived by Christ, he withdrew himself from
their company, to avoid all such suspicion, and to let them understand, that no
such Honors did agree with his Vocation, who came to serve, and not to be
served. -- Why the Disciples should suffer that great danger, Saint Mark
plainly shows, Mark 6.
saying, That their hearts were blinded, and therefore did neither remember,
nor consider the miracle of the loaves, i. e. Albeit they touched the bread,
etc. and gathered up twelve baskets full, etc. yet did not they rightly
consider the infinite power of Christ Jesus by this wonderful miracle; and
therefore of necessity it was, that in their own bodies they should suffer
trouble for their better instruction. When I deeply consider how the flock of
Christ was fed under King Edward the Sixth, and now behold the dispersion, etc.
methinks I see the same causes to have moved God, not only to withdraw his
presence frem the multitude, but also to have sent his well beloved Servants to
the travels of the Seas, etc. What were the affections of the greatest
multitude that followed the Gospel is easily judged by their lives. Who lived
(in that rest) as that he had refused himself? -- as that he had been crucified
with Christ? -- as that he had certainly looked for trouble to come upon him?
yea who lived not in delicacy and joy, and seeking the world and pleasures
thereof, caring for the flesh and carnal appetites, as though death and sin had
clean been devoured? and what was this else then to make of Christ an earthly
King? The Word, that we professed, daily cried in our ears, that our Kingdom,
our Joy, our Rest and Felicity, neither was, is, nor should be upon the Earth,
etc. but in Heaven, into which we must enter by many tribulations. But, alas!
we sleeped in such security, that the sound of the Trumpet could of many never
be perfectly understood, but always we persuaded our selves of a certain
tranquillity, Page 46.
as though the troubles, whereof mention is made within the Scriptures of God,
appertained not at all to this Age, etc. and therefore was our heavenly Father
compelled to withdraw from us the presence of his Verity, to the end we may
more earnestly thirst for the same, and with more obedience embrace and receive
it, etc. -- I mean not that such as have left Christ in body and heart shall
embrace the Verity, but such as by the infirmity of the flesh, and weakness of
faith dare not openly and boldly confess that, which their hearts know to be
most true, and lament for the imperfection bypast and present; from such shall
not the amiable presence of Christ for ever be withdrawn; but yet again shall
the eyes of their sore troubled hearts behold the Light of Christ's Gospel,
wherein they most delight. We the Ministers, who were Distributers of this
Bread (the true Word of God) lacked not our offenses, which also moved God to
send us to the Sea. And because no man's offenses are so manifest unto me as
mine own, I will only censure my self. -- ( O that all such Ministers, as are
put from their Charges, would seriously and sadly peruse and lay to heart his
humble confession.) The portion of heavenly Bread which I received from Christ
by his benediction multiplied in breaking, etc. but alas! Page 47.
how little did I consider the dignity of that Office, and the power of God,
that then multiplied the Bread, the people received of my hands? God I take to
record in my Conscience, that I delivered the same Bread, that I received of
Christ's hands; and that I mixed no poison with the same, i. e. I teached
Christ's Gospel without any mixture of men's dreams, devices, or fantasies, but
alas I did it not with such fervency, with such indifferency and diligence, as
now I know it was my duty. Some complained in those days that the Preachers
were indiscreet persons, yea Railers, etc. -- but alas this day my Conscience
accuses me, that I spoke not so plainly, as my duty was to have done; for I
ought to have said to the wicked man expressly by his name, Thou shall die the
death. I find Jeremiah the Prophet to have done so to Pashur the high Priest,
and to Zedekiah the King. -- The blind love I did bear to this my wicked
Carcass, was the chief cause I was not fervent and faithful enough in that
behalf; for I had no will to provoke the hatred of all men against me. -- As I
was not so fervent in rebuking manifest iniquity, as I should, so was I not so
indifferent a feeder as is required of Christ's Steward; for the love of friends
and carnal affection of some men, with whom I was most familiar, allured me to
make more residence in one place then in another, having more respect to the
pleasure of a few, Page 48.
then the necessity of many. -- Moreover remaining in one place, I was not so
diligent as mine office required; but sometime by counsel of carnal friends I
spared the body, some time I spent in worldly business of particular friends,
and sometime in taking recreation* etc. And albeit men may judge these to be
light and small offenses, yet I acknowledge that unless pardon should be
granted unto me in Christ's blood, that every one of these three offenses
deserved damnation. -- And beside these, I am assaulted, yea, infected and
corrupted with seeking the favor, estimation, and praise of men. -- O Lord be
merciful to my great offense, and deal not with me according to my great
iniquity; but according to the multitude of thy mercies remove from me the
burden of my sin; for of purpose and mind to have avoided the vain displeasure
of man, I spared little to offend thy Majesty. Think not that I thus accuse my
self without cause, to appear more holy, or to accuse my Brethren; No, God is
Judge to my Conscience, that I do it from an unfeigned and sore troubled heart.
-- This great tempest comes from the great mercy of our heavenly Father, to
provoke us to unfeigned repentance; for neither Preacher, nor Professor did
rightly consider the time of our merciful visitation, but we spent our time, as
though Gods Word had rather been preached to satisfy our fantasies, then to
reform our evil manners. Which thing if we earnestly repent, then shall Jesus
Christ appear unto our comfort, be the storm never so great. Haste, O Lord, for
thy Names sake.

Observe next the vehemence of the fear, which the Disciples endured in that
great danger, of longer continuance then any before; They were in the midst of
the raging Sea, Page 49.
and it was night, and Christ their Comforter absent from them, and comes not
to them neither in the first, second, nor third Watch. What fear think you were
they in? Such as be in like danger in England do by this storm better
understand, then my Pen can express. -- What we read here to have chanced to
Christ's Disciples, and their poor Boat, the same thing has chanced, does, and
will chance to the true Church, traveling (like a Ship) in the Sea of this
troublesome World, to the Haven of eternal felicity. -- The wind, Page 50.
that always has blown against the Church of God, is the malice of the Devil:
As the wind is invisible, and yet the poor Disciples feel that it troubles and
lets their Ship; so the pestilent envy of the Devil works in Reprobates so
subtily, that it cannot be espied by Gods Elect, nor by his Messengers, till
first they feel the blasts thereof to blow their Ship backward. As the vehement
wind causes the waves of the Sea to rage, and yet the dead water neither
knows what it does, nor can cease from being troubled, and troubling Christ's
Disciples in their poor Ship; so by the envy and malice of the Devil are wicked
and cruel, both Subjects and Princes (whose hearts are like the raging Sea)
compelled to persecute the true Church of Christ, and yet so blinded, that they
see not their manifest iniquity, nor can they cease to run to their own
destruction. -- The whole malice of the Devil has always this end, Page 52.
to vex and overthrow Christ's afflicted Church. -- Albeit the Tyrants of the
Earth have learned by long experience, Page 54.
that they are never able to prevail against Gods Truth, yet because they are
bound Slaves to their Master the Devil, they cannot cease to persecute the
Members of Christ, when the Devil blows his wind in the darkness of the
night, i. e. when the Light of Christ's Gospel is taken away, and the Devil
reigns by Idolatry, Superstition, and Tyranny. -- It is fearful to be heard
that the Devil has such power over any man, but yet the Word of God has so
instructed us, and therefore we must believe it. He is called the Prince and
god of this world, because he reigns and is honored by Tyranny and Idolatry
in it. He is called the Prince of darkness, Page 55.
that has power in the air. It is said, he works in the children of
unbelief, etc. -- And therefore wonder not that now the Devil rages in his
obedient Servants; for this is their hour and power granted to them, they
cannot cease, nor assuage their furious fumes; for the Devil, their Sire,
stirs, moves, and carries them at his will. -- I do not attribute to him
or them power at their pleasure, but only as God shall suffer. When therefore
I hear what the ravenous Lions do, I pray, O Lord, those cruel Tyrants are
loosed by thy hand, to punish our former ingratitude, whom, we trust, thou will
not suffer to prevail for ever, but when thou have corrected us a little, and
have declared to the world the tyranny that lurked in their boldened breasts,
then will thou break their jaw-bones, and wilt shut them up in their Caves
again, that the generation and posterity following may praise thy holy Name,
before thy Congregation. Amen. -- I know that God shall yet show mercy to his
afflicted Church in England, and repress the pride of these present Tyrants, as
he has done those that were before us. Therefore, beloved Brethren in our
Savior Jesus Christ, hold up to God your hands, that are fainted through fear,
and hear the voice of your God, who swears by himself, that he will not
suffer his Church to be oppressed for ever, and that he will not despise our
sobs to the end, if we will row and strive against this vehement wind: I mean,
if that ye will not turn back headlong to Idolatry, then shall this storm be
assuaged in despite of the Devil. Page 56.
-- Be not moved from the sure Foundation of your Faith; for albeit that Christ
Jesus be absent from you (as he was from his Disciples in that great storm) by
his bodily presence, yet he is present by his mighty power and grace. He
stands upon the mountain in security and rest, i. e. his flesh and whole
humanity is now in Heaven, and can suffer no such trouble, as once he did; yet
he is full of pity and compassion, and does consider all our travel, anguish,
and labors; wherefore it is not to be doubted, but that he will suddenly
appear to our great comfort. The tyranny of this world cannot keep back his
coming, more then the blustering wind and raging Seas let Christ to come to his
Disciples, looking for present death. -- We gave you warning of these days
long ago: for the reverence of Christ's blood let these words be noted; The same
Truth, that spoke before of these dolorous days, fore-spake also the
everlasting joy prepared for such as should continue to the end. The trouble is
come: O dear Brethren look for the comfort, and (after the example of the
Apostle) abide in resisting this vehement storm a little space. The third watch
is not yet ended. Remember that Christ came not to his Disciples till the
fourth watch. Page 57.
-- Observe next that the Disciples at the presence of Christ were more afraid
then they were before: That Christ uses no other instrument but his Word to
pacify their hearts: That Peter in a fervency first left the Ship, and yet
after feared: That Christ permitted neither Peter, nor the rest of his
Disciples to perish in that fear, but gloriously delivered all, and pacified
the tempest. -- There were three causes why the Disciples knew not Christ, but
judged him to be a Spirit: The darkness of the night, that let their eyes to
see him: The unaccustomed Vision that appeared; and it was above nature that a
massy, weighty, and heavy body of a man (such as they understood their Master
Christ to have) should be born up of, and walk upon the water of the raging Sea
and not sink: And finally, the horror of the tempest, and great danger they
were in persuaded them to look for none other, but certainly to be drowned. --
What here happened to Christ himself, daily happens to the verity of his blessed
Word, etc. The truth and sincere preaching of his glorious Gospel, sent by God
for man's deliverance from sin, etc. is judged to be Heresy and deceiveable
Doctrine, sent by the Devil to man's destruction. -- The chief note is this,
Page 58.
The more nigh deliverance, and salvation approaches, the more strong and
vehement is the temptation of the Church of God: and the more nigh that Gods
vengeance approaches to the wicked, the more proud, cruel, and arrogant are
they. Whereby it commonly comes to pass, that the Messengers of Life are judged
to be the Authors of all mischief. Thus the Israelites cursed Moses, Exodus 5.6,
etc.
alleging that he and Aaron was the whole cause of their last extreme trouble.
Page 59.
-- This I write to admonish you, that although you see tribulation so abound,
that no hope be left, that yet you decline not from God. And that albeit
sometimes ye be moved to hate the Messengers of Life, that therefore ye shall
not judge that God will never show mercy after. No, dear Brethren, as he has
dealt with others before you, so will he deal with you. -- One cause why God
permits such blood-thirsty Tyrants to molest his Church, is this, Such is
his justice, that he will not pour forth his extreme vengeance upon the wicked,
until such time as their iniquity be so manifest, that their very flatterers
cannot excuse it. Exodus 10.
Pharaoh was not destroyed, till his own household Servants and Subjects
abhorred and condemned his stubborn disobedience. -- If Gardener, Tunstal, and
Bonner had suffered death when first they deserved it, Papists would have
alleged (as they did) that they were reformable, neither thirsted they for the
blood of any man. And of Lady Mary, who has not heard, that she was sober,
merciful, and one that loved the Commonwealth of England? Had she and her
pestilent Council been dead before these days, their iniquity and cruelty had
not so manifestly appeared to the world. Page 62.
-- Thus (dear Brethren) must the Sons of the Devil declare their own impiety
and ungodliness, that when Gods vengeance (which shall not sleep) shall be
poured forth upon them, all tongues shall confess and say, That God is
righteous in all his judgments. -- The means Christ used to remove the
Disciples fear is only his Word, he said, Be of good comfort, it is I, be not
afraid. The natural man (that cannot understand the power of God) would have
desired some other present comfort in so great a danger, as either to have had
the Heavens to have opened, and to have showed them such a light in that
darkness, that Christ might have been fully known by his own face, or else,
that the winds and raging waves of the Sea suddenly should have ceased, or some
other miracle, that had been subject to all their senses, whereby they might
have perfectly known that they were delivered from all danger. And truly equal
it had been to Christ Jesus to have done any of these (or any work greater) as
to have said, It is I, be not afraid: but he would hereby teach us the dignity
and effectual power of his holy Word.

-- This I write (Beloved in the Lord) that ye knowing the Word of God, Page 63.
not only to be that whereby were created Heaven and Earth, but also to be the
Power of God to Salvation to all that believe, etc. may now in this hour of
darkness and most raging tempest, thirst and pray, that ye may hear yet once
again this amiable voice of your Savior Christ, Page 64.
Be of good comfort, it is I, be not afraid. -- Exercise your selves secretly
in revolving that which sometimes you have heard openly proclaimed in your
ears, and be every man now a faithful Preacher to his Brother; Luke 24.
If your communication be of Christ, assuredly he will come before ye be aware.
-- What comfort was in the hearts of the Disciples, when they heard these
words, It is I, your Master, your Master, most familiar, whose voice you know,
whose work you have seen, who commanded you to enter into this journey, it is
I, be not afraid, cannot be expressed, but by those that have experienced the
comforts of the Spirit after great conflicts, Page 65.
etc. -- It is certain Christ's voice had wrought in Peter's heart, not only a
forgetting and contempt of the great tempest, but such boldness and love, that
he could fear no danger following, but assuredly did believe that nothing could
resist his Masters Command, and therefore he says, Command me to come, q. d. I
desire no more then the assurance of thy command. If thou will command, I am
determined to obey. The waters cannot prevail against me if thou speak the
word: so that whatsoever is possible unto thee, by thy Will and Word may be
possible unto me. --

Page 68.
-- Such as bear reverence to Gods most holy Word, are drawn by the power and
virtue of the same, to believe, and follow, and obey that, which God
commands, be it never so hard, and contrary to their affections; and
therefore are they wonderfully preserved, when Gods vengeances are poured forth
upon the disobedient.

Page 70.
-- In Peter's being afraid, seeing a mighty wind, and when he began to sink,
crying, Lord, save me: Three things are principally to be noted; From whence
comes the fear of Gods Elect: Why they faint in adversity: What rests with
them in the time of their fear and down-sinking. -- The cause of our fear, who
would through the storms of the Sea go to Christ, is, that we more consider the
dangers and lets that are in our journey, then we do the Almighty Power of him
that has commanded us to come to himself. -- This I note for this purpose,
that albeit this late most raging storm has taken from you the presence of
Christ for a time, so that you have doubted whether it was Christ which you saw
before or not; and albeit that the vehemence of this contrary wind, that would
drive you from Christ, has so employed your ears, that almost you have
forgotten what he was who commanded you to come to himself, when that he cried,
Mat. 11. Rev. 18.
Come unto me, etc. Pass from Babylon, O my People, etc. Yet despair not, such
offenses have chanced to Gods Elect before you. Page 71.
If obstinately ye shall not continue, yet shall you find mercy and grace. --
So long as Peter neither feared danger, nor mistrusted Christ's Word, so long
the waves did serve his feet, as if they had been dry, solid, and sure ground,
etc. to instruct us, That lively faith makes man bold, and is able to carry in
through such perils, as be incapable to nature. But when faith begins to faint,
then begins man to sink down in every danger. Page 73.
-- Indeed with Gods Elect in their greatest fear and danger, there rests
some small spark of faith, which by one means or other declares it self;
albeit the af^l^cted person in fear or danger does not presently perceive the
same. -- Lord, save me, declares that Peter knew the power of Christ able to
deliver him, and that he had some hope through Christ's goodness to obtain
deliverance. --

It is also to be noted, that in his great jeopardy Peter murmureth not against
Christ, neither blame him, albeit at his Command he had left his Boat, he says
not, Why let thou me sink, seeing I have obeyed thy Command? Moreover, he
asked help of Christ alone. -- Immediately stretched forth his hand, etc. Note,
That God is always nigh to those that call on him faithfully, etc. What was
visibly done to Peter, is done to Christ's members invisibly in all ages.

Page 74.
-- Open your ears (Dear Brethren) and let your hearts understand that our God
is unchangeable, his gracious hand is not shortened this day. -- If we know the
danger we are in, and unfeignedly call for deliverance, the Lords hand is
nigher then the sword of our enemies. Christ's rebuke of Peter teaches us, That
God does not flatter, nor conceal the faults of his Elect, but makes them
manifest, that the offenders may repent, and that others may avoid the like
offenses. -- In passing to Christ through the storms of this world, it is not
only required that our faith be fervent in the beginning, but constant to the
end, and not faint. -- We have less excuse for doubting then Peter, for he
might have alleged, that he was not advertised that any great storm should
have risen between him and Christ, which we cannot justly allege; for since
Christ has appeared to us, he has continually blown in our ears, Page 75.
that persecution should follow the Word that we professed. Alas then, why
doubt we through this storm to go to Christ? Support, O Lord, and let us sink
no farther. -- O blessed and happy are those that patiently abide the
deliverance of the Lord. The raging Sea shall not levour them, albeit they have
fainted, etc. The Majesty of Christ's presence shall put to silence this
boisterous wind, the malice of the Devil, which so blows in the hearts of
Princes, Prelates, and earthly men, etc. --

-- Peradventure some there are of Gods Elect beholdin^ such as have sometimes
boldly professed Christ's verity, now to be returned to their accustomed
abominations, and themselves to be so overcome of fear, that against their
knowledge and conscience they stoop to an Idol,
and with their presence maintain the same fear, whether it be possible the
Members of Christ's Body can be permitted so horribly to fall to the denial of
their Head. The dolor and fear of such I grant to be most just; for O how
fearful is it for the love of this transitory life in the presence of man to
deny Christ, and his known and undoubted Verity? Yet such as be not obstinate
contemners of God I should counsel, that they would rather appeal to Mercy,
Page 76.
then to pass against themselves the fearful Sentence of Condemnation, and to
consider that God includes all under unbelief, that he may have Mercy on all.
-- And that all Christ's Apostles fled from him, and denied him in their hearts,
and yet were not rejected for ever. -- Some may demand, How shall it be known
in whom faith is not utterly quenched, and in whom it is, seeing all flee from
Christ, and bow down to Idolatry? Hard it is, and in a manner impossible, that
one man should be able to judge of another, that could not Elijah do of the
Israelites in his days, but yet a man may of himself.
-- And will thou have a trial, whether the root of faith remains with thee
or not? Feel thou thy soul fainting in faith, as Peter felt his body sink
down in the waters? Art thou as sore afraid, that thy soul shall drown in hell,
if thou consentest or obeyest idolatry, as Peter was, that his body should
drown in the waters? Page 77.
Desire thou as earnestly the deliverance of thy soul, as Peter did the
deliverance of his body? Believe thou that Christ is able to deliver thy
soul, and that he will do the same according to his promise? Do thou call
upon him without hypocrisy, now in the day of thy trouble? Do thou thirst
for his presence, and for the liberty of his Word again? Mournest thou for the
great abominations that now overslow the Realm of England? If these promises
remain in thy heart, then art not thou altogether destitute of faith, neither
shall thou descend to perdition for ever, but the Lord shall mercifully stretch
forth his mighty hand, and deliver thee. How? it neither appertains to thee to
demand, nor to me to define.

-- I think not that suddenly and by one means shall all the faithful in
England be delivered from Idolatry: No, it may be that God so strengthens the
hearts of some of those that have fainted before, that they will resist
Idolatry to the death, and that were a glorious and triumphant deliverance: of
others God may so touch the hearts, that they will choose to go as Pilgrims,
from Realm to Realm, suffering hunger, cold, heat, thirst, weariness and
poverty, then they will abide (having all abundance) in subjection of Idolatry:
To some God may offer such occasions, that in despite of Idolaters they may
remain in their own Land, and yet neither Bow the knee to Baal, nor lack the
lively food of Gods most holy Word. -- Seeing we are so like the Disciples, let
us make such a complaint (as the following one) unto God. Page 78.
G God, the heathen are entered into thine inheritance, they have defiled thy
holy Temple, and have profaned thy blessed Ordinances, etc.
Thy Prophets are persecuted, and none are permitted to speak thy Word freely,
the poor Sheep of thy Pasture are commanded to drink the venomous waters of
men's traditions, etc. Such is the tyranny of these most cruel Beasts, that they
say plainly, they shall root us out at once, so that no remembrance shall
remain of us on earth. O Lord* thou know we are but flesh, etc. We confess
we are punished most justly, thy blessed Gospel was in our ears, like a Lovers
Song, it pleased us for a time; but alas! our lives did nothing agree with holy
Statutes. -- But be thou mindful, O Lord, that thy enemies blaspheme thy holy
Name, etc. Thy Gospel is called Heresy, and we are accused as Traitors, for
professing the same, etc. Albeit our sins accuse and condemn us, yet do thou
according to thy great Name. -- Correct us, but not in thy hot displeasure,
spare thy people, and permit not thine inheritance to be in rebuke for ever,
etc. Gather us yet once again to the wholesome treasures of thy most Holy Word,
that openly we may confess thy blessed Name within the Realm of England. --
Amen.

-- Abide patiently the Lords deliverance, Page 79.
avoiding and flying such offenses as may separate and divide you from the
blessed Fellowship of the Lord Jesus at his second coming. Watch and pray,
resist the Devil, and row against this vehement Tempest, Isa. 26.
and the Lord shall come shortly to your comfort, and you shall say, Behold,
this is our God, we have waited for him, and he has saved us. --

Mr. Knox remained at Frankford till some more given to unprofitable
Ceremonies, See the History of T^oubles at Frankford, page 37.38. And the
Ecclesiastical History of Scotland, page 93, 94.
then to the sincerity of Religion, essaied by a most cruel, barbarous, and
bloody practice to dispatch him out of the way. They accused him to the
Magistrates of high Treason against the Emper^ur, and his Son Philip, and Mary
Queen of England, for that in his Admonition to England, he called the Emperor
no less an Enemy to Christ then N^ro, and Queen Mary more cruel then I^zabel.
The Magistrates, perceiving their malice, and abhorring their bloody attempt,
gave advertisement secretly to him to depart their City, because they could not
save him, if he were required by the Emper^ur, or by the Queen of England in
the Emperors Name.

The night before his departure he made a most comfortable Sermon of the Death
and Resurrection of Christ, and of the unspeakable joys that were prepared for
Gods Elect, which in this life suffer persecution for the Testimony of his
blessed Name.

From Frankford he went to Geneva, and thence to Diep, and thence to Scotland.

The Ecclesiastical History of Scotland page 98, 99.
At his coming to Edinburg, the Lord made him instrumental for the comforting
the troubled conscience of Mrs. Elizabeth Adamson, who under extreme torments
of body said, A thousand years of this torment, and ten times more joined unto
it, is not to be compared to a quarter of an hour that I suffered in my Spirit.
I thank my God, through Jesus Christ, that has delivered me from that fearful
pain, and welcome be this, even so long as it pleases the Majesty of Heaven to
exercise me therewith.

At his coming into Scotland he began as well in private conference as
preaching to show how dangerous a thing it was to communicate in any son with
Idolatry. Whereupon the Question was debated, Whether in any wise it was lawful
for: Christian to go to Mass, or to communicate with the abused Sacraments in
the Papistical manner? I was urged, that Paul at the command of James, and of
the Elders of Jerusalem passed to the Temple and feigned himself to pay his Vow
with others* Page 100.
But this and other things were so fully answered b^ Mr. Knox, that Mr.
Maitland confessed, I see ver^ perfectly that our shifts will serve nothing
before God seeing that they stand us in so small stead before men. His Answer
to the fact of Paul, etc. was, (1) The fact was most unlike going to Mass; for
to pay Vows was sometimes Gods command, as was never Idolatry; and their Mass
from the Original was and remained odious Idolatry. (2) I greatly doubt (said
he) whether either James's command, or Paul's obedience, proceeded of the holy
Ghost, seeing he fell into the most desperate danger that ever he sustained
before for obeying worldly-wise counsel.

Mr. Knox was so successful in a short time through the blessing of God, Page
101.
that the Earl of Glencarn, the Earl of Marschel, and Henry Drummond, were so
contented with his Exhortation, that they willed him to write unto the Queen
Regent somewhat that might move her to hear the Word of God. He obeyed their
desire, and wrote that which was afterward published, and is called, The
Letter to the Queen Dowager, which was delivered to her own hands, by the Earl
of Glencarn. The Queen having read it, delivered it to the Bishop of Gl^scow,
saying in mockage, Please you my Lord to read a Pasquil, which words coming to
the ears of Mr. Knox, occasioned him to make the Additions to his Letter.

-- In his Letter. See this Letter with the Additions at the end of the
Ecclesiastical History of Scotland, page 81. Mat. 5. John 14.16. Isa. 9.
-- The Christians Victory stands not in resisting, but suffering: as our
Sovereign Master pronounces to his Disciples, That in patience they should
possess their souls: and Isaiah painteth forth all other Battles to be with
violence, tumult, and bloodshedding, but the Victory of Gods people to be in
quietness, silence, and hope; meaning that all others that obtain victory, do
enforce themselves to resist their Adversaries to shed blood, and to murder:
but so do not Gods Elect, for they suffer all things at the command of him who
has appointed them to suffer, being most assuredly persuaded that then only
they triumph, when all men judge them oppressed; for in the Cross of Christ
always is included a secret and hid victory, Page 82.
never well known till the Sufferers appear altogether to be (as it were)
exterminate; for then only did the blood of Abel cry to God, when proud Cain
judged all memory of his Brother to have been extinguished. -- Sometimes God
touches the hearts of those, who in man's judgment have power to destroy his
people, with pity to save them, etc. for two causes specially, (1) To comfort
his weak Warriers in their manifold temptations. And (2) To give a testimony of
his favor to such great ones. -- Pity and mercy showed to Christ's afflicted
flock, as they never lacked reward temporal; so if they be continued, and be
not changed into cruelty, are assured signs and seals of everlasting mercy to
be received from God. -- From those words of Christ, Page 83.
Fu^fill the measure of your Fathers, Mat. 23.
that all the blood which has been shed since the blood of Abel the just, till
the blood of Zechariah, etc. It is evident, that the murderers of our time are
guilty of all the blood that has been shed from the beginning; and it is but
equal and just it should be so; for whosoever sheddeth the blood of any one of
Christ's members, for professing his Truth, consents to all the murder that
has been made from the beginning for that cause. As there is one Communion of
all Gods Elect, of which every member is participant of the righteousness of
Christ; so is there a communion among the reprobates, by which every one of the
Serpents seed are guilty of all the iniquity which the whole body commits,
because they are altogether against Christ Jesus, and his eternal Verity; every
one serving Satan, the Prince of this world, in their rank, age, degree, and
estate. The Kings and Princes, that by power oppress the people of God, and
will not suffer that they truly worship God, as he has commanded, but will
retain them in Egypt, are brethren and companions to Pharaoh: The Prelates and
Priests, with their Fathers the old Pharisees, have taken away the key of
Knowledge, and have shut up the Kingdom of Heaven before men, so that neither
they themselves will enter, nor suffer others to enter in. Page 86.
-- As Satan by craft has corrupted the most holy Ordinances of Gods Precepts
of the first Table, in the place of the spiritual honoring of God, introducing
men's dreams, inventions, and fancies; so has he, abusing the weakness of man,
corrupted the Precepts of the second Table, touching the honor that is due to
Parents, under whom are comprehended Princes and Teachers; for now the Devil
has so blinded the senses of many, that they cannot, or at least will not
learn what appertains to God, and what to Caesar; but because the Spirit of
God has said, Honor the King; therefore whatsoever they command, be it right
or wrong, must be obeyed. It is blasphemy to affirm, That God has commanded
any creature to be obeyed against himself, that for the command of any Prince,
be he never so potent, men shall commit Idolatry, embrace a Religion which God
has not approved by his Word, or confirm by their silence wicked and
blasphemous Laws made against the Honor of his Majesty; and men that do so are
Traitors to their Princes, whom by flattery they confirm in their rebelling
against God. Page 88.
-- God cannot lie, he cannot deny himself, he has witnessed from the
beginning, Deuteronomy. 4. and 12.
that no Religion pleases him, except that which he by his own Word has
commanded and established: The Verity it self pronounces this Sentence, Mat.
15.
In vain do ye worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Precepts of men, and also
all plantation, which my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted out.
Before the coming of his well-beloved Son in the flesh, he secretly punished
all such as durst enterprise to alter or change his Ceremonies or Statutes, as
in S^ul, Uzziah, Nadab, A^ihu is to be read, and will be now, after that he
has opened his counsel to the world by his only Son, whom he commands to be
heard; and after that by holy Spirit, speaking in his Apostles, he has
established the Religion, in which he would have his true worshippers to abide
unto the end, will he now (I say) admit men's inventions in the matter of
Religion, which he reputed for damnable Idolatry? If men or Angels would
affirm, that he will, or may do it, his own Verity shall convince them of a
lie; Deuteronomy. 4. and 12.
for this Sentence he pronounces, Not that which seems good in thy eyes,
shall thou do to the Lord thy God, but that, which the Lord thy God has
commanded thee, that do thou; add nothing unto it, diminish nothing from it,
which, sealing up his New Testament, Rev. 2.
he repeateth in these words, That which ye have, ho^d till I come, etc. --

The Ecclesiastical History of Scotland, page 101.
Whilst Mr. Knox was thus occupied in Scotland, Letters came to him from the
English Church, assembled at Geneva (which was separated from the superstitious
and contentious company that was at Frankford) commanding him in Gods Name, as
he that was their chosen Pastor, to repair unto them for their comfort. Great
desires there were to stay him in Scotland, but he would not be persuaded,
saying, Page 102.
Once I must see that little Flock, which the wickedness of men has compelled
me to leave; adding, That if God blessed those small beginnings, and if that
they continued in godliness, whenever they pleased to command him, they
should find him obedient.

Immediately after his leaving Scotland, the Bishops summoned him, and for
nonappearance, burnt him in Effigy at the Cross in Edinburg, An. 1555. from
the which unjust Sentence, Mr. Knox made his Appellation, and directed it to
the Nobility and Commons of Scotland, Printed at Geneva, An. 1558.

In his Appellation. See his Appellation at the end of the Ecclesiastical
History of Scotland, page 1.
-- To the Nobility and States of Scotland. -- It is not only the love of this
temporal life (Right Honorable) nor the fear of corporal death that moves me
to expose unto you the injuries done against me, and to crave of you redress;
but it proceeds partly from the reverence every man owes to Gods eternal
Truth, and partly from a love which I bear to your Salvation. It has pleased
the Lord of his infinite mercy, not only to illuminate the eyes of my mind,
Page 2.
etc. but to make and appoint me a Witness, Minister, and Preacher of his
Doctrine, the sum whereof I communicated to my Brethren in Scotland, because I
knew my self to be a Steward, and must give an account, etc. I did therefore
(as Gods Minister) whilst with them (God is record and witness) truly and
sincerely, according to my gift divide the word of Salvation, etc. -- I
affirmed (so taught by my Master Christ Jesus) That whosoever denies him, yea
^r is ashamed of him before this wicked generation, him shall Christ deny, and
of him be ashamed, etc. And therefore I feared not to affirm, that of necessity
it is, that such as hope for life everlasting, avoid all Superstition, vain
Religion, and Idolatry; Vain I call, whatsoever is done in Gods Service or
Honor, without the express command of his Word. -- Nevertheless me as an
Heretic, and this Doctrine as Heretical, have your false Bishops and ungodly
Clergy condemned, pronouncing against me a Sentence of death, in testification
whereof they have formed a Picture, from which false and cruel Sentence, etc. I
make it known to your Honors, that I appeal to a lawful and general Council,
etc. most humbly requiring of your Honors to receive me calling unto you, as
to the Powers of God, Page 3.
ordained into your Protection against the rage of Tyrants, not to maintain me
in any iniquity, error, or false opinion, but to let me have such equity, as
God by his Word, ancient Laws and determinations of godly Councils, grant to
men accused or infamed. Page 4.
-- It is lawful to Gods Prophets and Preachers of Christ to appeal from the
sentence and judgment of the visible Church, to the knowledge of the Civil
Magistrate, who by Gods Law is bound to hear their causes, and to defend them
from Tyranny, Ier. 26.
as appears in Ieremiah's case, Page 5.
etc. He was condemned by the Priests and Prophets in Jerusalem, etc. who then
only in earth were known to be the Visible Church, from which Sentence he
appealed, i. e. sought help of the Princes. I am in your hands, etc. q. d. the
Princes of Judah and Rulers of the people, to whom it belongs indifferently to
judge between party and party, to justify the Just man, and to condemn the
Malefactor. You have heard a Sentence of death pronounced against me by the
Priests, Page 6.
etc. I stand in your presence, whom God has made Princes, your Power is above
their Tyranny, before you do I expose my cause, I cannot resist to suffer what
you think just; but least my lenity and patience should make you negligent in
the defense of me in my just cause, etc. I dare not conceal. That if you murder
me (which thing ye do, if ye defend me not) ye make your selves and this whole
City guilty of my blood: whereupon they freed him from the Sentence. Ier. 38.
-- The same this Prophet did before Zedekiah. Page 7.
-- This will more plainly appear in the fact of Saint Paul. Acts 22.23, 24,
and 25.
-- He appealed from all judgment of the Priests at Jerusalem to the Emperor.
-- It seems that his Cause was greatly to be suspected, partly for that he
refused the judgment of those, that had most knowledge (as all men supposed)
of Gods Will and Religion; and partly because he appealed to the Emperor, who
then was at Rome, far absent from Jerusalem, a man ignorant of God, and enemy
to all virtue: But the Apostle considering the nature of his enemies, and what
things they had intended against him, did not fear to appeal from them, Page 8.
etc. grounding himself upon his innocence, he neither regarded the displeasure
of Festus, nor the brunt of the ignorant multitude, but appealed to Caesar,
etc. -- What I think of mine own person God will reveal, when the secrets of
all hearts shall be disclosed, etc. But touching the Doctrine and Cause, for
which that adulterous and wicked generation of Antichrists Servants (who will
be called Bishops among you) have condemned me: I fear not, neither do I shame
to confess and avow before man and Angel to be the eternal truth of the eternal
God; and in that case I doubt not to compare my self with any member, in whom
the Truth has been impugned, since the beginning. -- Seeing that my battle is
against the proud and cruel hypocrites of this Age, Page 9.
as that battle of those most excellent instruments was against the false
Prophets and Malignant Church of their ages. No man ought to think it strange
that I compare my self with them, with whom I sustain a common cause. -- But
lest that some doubt remain, that I require more of you then you of conscience
are bound to grant, Page 10.
-- I purpose briefly, but yet freely to speak what God by his Word does assure
me to be true. (1) That in conscience you are bound to punish Malefactors, and
to defend Innocents imploring your help. (2) That God requires of you to
provide that your Subjects be rightly instructed in his true Religion, and that
the same be by you reformed, whenever abuses do creep in by the malice of
Satan, and negligence of men. (3) That you are bound to remove from Honor, and
to punish with Death (if the Crime so require) such as deceive the people, See
page 11. to page 20.
or defraud them of that food of their souls; I mean, Gods lively Word. --
After that M^ses had declared what was true Religion, Page 20, 21.
viz. To honor God as he commanded, adding nothing to his Word, neither
diminishing any thing from it; Deuteronomy. 12.
and after also he had vehemently exhorted them to observe the same Law, he
denounces the punishment against the transgressors, If thy Brother, Deuteronomy. 23.
and 27.
Son, Daughter, Wife, or Neighbor, whom thou love as thine own life,
solicit thee secret, saying, Let us go serve other gods, etc. let not thine
eye spare him, etc. Observe here, (1) That such as sollicitate only to
idolatry, ought to be punished to death, without favor or respect of person,
etc. (2) That the punishment of such crimes, Page 22.
as are Idolatry, Blasphemy, and others that touch the Majesty of God, does not
appertain to Kings only, but also to the whole body of the people, and every
member thereof, according to his vocation, etc. God even straightly commands,
that a City declining to idolatry should fall by the edge of the Sword, Deuteronomy. 7.
and that the whole spoil of the same should be burned, no portion of it
reserved, that the Lord may turn from the fury of his wrath, Page 23.
etc. hinting, that by the defection and idolatry of a few, Gods wrath is
kindled against the whole, which is never quenched, till such punishment be
taken upon the Offenders, that whosoever served them in their idolatry be
brought to destruction; because that it is execrable and accursed before God.
-- If any think that this is contrary to the practice of the Ap^stles, Page 24.
who finding the Gentiles in idolatry, did call them to repentance, requiring
no such punishment: I answer, That the Gentiles before the preaching of Christ,
were never avowed by God to be his people, nor received into his household,
neither were his Laws given unto them to be kept in Religion, nor Policy; and
therefore no corporal punishment was inflicted on them, etc. But after they
repented of their idolatries and embraced, and made one people with the
believing Jews, they were subject to the same Law, as the Jews were, and were
liable to the same punis^ment if they returned to idolatry again. Page 25.
-- In universal defections, and a general revolt, such as was in Israel after
Jeroboam, there is a diverse consideration; for then, because the whole people
were conspired against God, none could be found to execute the punishment God
had appointed, till God raised up Iehu, whom he appointed for that purpose.
Page 32.
-- I know that your Bishops, etc. will cry, A damned Heretic ought not to be
heard. But remember, my Lords, what I protested in the beginning, upon which
ground I continually stand, I am no Heretic, no deceivable Teacher, but the
Servant of Christ Jesus, a Preacher of his infallible Verity, innocent in all
they can lay to my charge, etc. and therefore am unjustly condemned, from which
cruel Sentence I have appealed, and do appeal (as before) in the mean time most
humbly requiring your Honors to take me into your protection, to be Auditors
of my just defenses, granting unto me the same liberty, which Ahab, a wicked
King, and Israel, at that time a blinded people, granted to Elijah in the like
case, 1 Kings 18.
viz. that your Bishops, and the whole rabble of your Clergy may be called
before you, and before the people whom they have deceived; that I be not
condemned by multitude, custom, authority, or law devised by man, but that God
himself may be judge betwixt me and my adversaries. Let God, I say, speak by
his Law, Prophets, Christ Jesus, Apostles, and so let him pronounce what
Religion he approves, and then be my enemies never so many, and appear they
never so strong and learned, no more do I fear victory, then did Elijah, being
but one man, against the multitude of Baal's Priests. And if they think to have
advantage by their Councils and Doctors, this I farther offer, to admit the one
and the other as witnesses in all matters debatable, three things (which justly
cannot be denied) being granted, (1) That the most ancient Councils, ^ighest to
the Primitive Church, in which the learned and godly Fathers examined all
matters by Gods Word, may be holden of most authority. (2) That no
determination of Councils, or man, be admitted against the plain verity of Gods
Word, nor against the determination of those four chief Councils, etc. (3) That
to no Doctor be given greater authority, then Augustine required to be given to
his Writings, viz. If he plainly prove not his affirmation by Gods infallible
Word, that then his Sentence be rejected and imputed to the error of a man. --

Page 34.
-- To the Commonalty of Scotland. -- I am most assuredly persuaded, that
whatsoever is used in the Papistical Church, is altogether repugnant to Christ's
blessed Ordinance, and is nothing but mortal venom, of which whosoever
drinks, therewith he drinks death and damnation, except by true conversion
unto God he be purged from the same. -- It will be said, That it is
unreasonable, that ye should call your Religion in doubt, which has been
approved and established by so long continuance, and by the consent of so many
men before you. But I shortly answer, That neither is the long continuance of
time, neither the multitude of men a sufficient approbation, Page 35.
which God will allow for our Religion: For as some of the Ancients witness,
neither can long process of time justify an error, nor can the multitude of
such as follow it, change the nature of the same; but if it was an error in
the beginning, so it is in the end; and the longer that it be followed, and the
more that do receive it, it is the more pestilent, and the more to be avoided.
If Antiquity or Multitude of men could justify any Religion, then was the
idolatry of the Gentiles, and now is the abomination of the Turks good
Religion; for antiquity approved the one, and a multitude have received and do
defend the other. But otherwise to answer; Godl^ men may wonder from what
Fountain such a Sentence does flow, that no man ought to try his Faith and
Religion by Gods Word, but he may safely believe and follow every thing, which
Antiquity and Multitude have approved. The Spirit of God does otherwise teach
us, John 5. and 7. Acts 17. 1 John 4. John 3.
Search the Scriptures, etc. The Bareans are commended for trying the Apostles
Doctrine by Gods plain Scriptures. Believe not every Spirit, but try the
Spirits, etc. Whosoever does evil hates the light; neither will he come to the
light, lest that his works be manifested and rebuked. -- Truth being of the
nature of fine purified Gold, does not fear the trial of the Furnace; but the
stubble and chafe of men's inventions (such is their Religion) may not abide
the flame of the fire. Page 36.
-- Seeing Religion is to man, as the stomach to the body, which, if it be
corrupted, does infect all the members, it is necessary that the same be
examined, and if it be found replenished with pestilent humors (I mean with
the fancies of men) then of necessity it is that those be purged, else shall
your bodies and souls perish for ever. A corrupt Religion defiles the whole
life of man, appear it never so holy. Neither would I that ye should esteem the
reformation and care of Religion less to appertain to you, because you are no
Kings, Rulers, Judges, Nobles, nor in Authority. -- To believe and receive the
Gospel the Commonalty are no less bound, then be their Rulers and Princes. --
As your bodies cannot escape corporal death, if with your Princes ye eat re
drink deadly poison (although it be by ignorance or negligence) so shall ye not
escape the everlasting, if with them ye pro^ess a corrupt Religion. -- As the
just lives by his own faith, so does the unfaithful perish by his own
infidelity -- If ye look for the life everlasting, you must try if ye stand in
the faith; and if ye would be assured of a true and lively faith, you must
needs have Christ truly preached unto you. (...) 37.
-- When the Tabernacle was built and set in order, God provided how it and the
things pertaining to the same should be sustained, so that they should not fall
in decay: and this provision (albeit Heaven and Earth obey his Empire) would he
not take from the secret and hid treasures, which lie dispersed in the veins of
the Earth, neither yet would he take it only from the rich and potent of the
people, Exodus 30.
but the rich should give no more for that use, then the poor, nor the poor
less then the rich. Page 3^.
-- If this equality was commanded by God for the maintenance of that
transitory Tabernacle, which was but a shadow of a better to come; is not the
same required of us, who have the Verity, which is Christ Jesus? He being clad
in our nature is Immanuel, i. e. God with us. And for the more assurance of his
promise of being with us, etc. he has erected among us the signs of his own
presence with us, the true preaching of his Word, and right administration of
the Sacraments, his spiritual Tabernacle, to the maintenance whereof is no less
bound the Subject then the Prince, the poor then the rich. -- As the one is
obliged to believe in heart, and with mouth to confess the Lord Jesus, so also
is the other. Page 39.
-- The poorest that in the days of this cruel persecution believes in
Christ, and boldly does confess him before this wicked generation, is no less
acceptable before God, then is the King, that by his Sword and Power rooteth
out Idolatry, and so advances Christ's Glory. --

From Geneva, July 4. 1558.

Afterward Mr. Knox called back again into Scotland by some Lords, The Eccles.
Hist. of Scotland, page 107, 108, 109.
etc. but a stop being for a while put upon his return, he writ from Diep,
October. 27. 1557. having left Geneva.

In his Letter. -- If any persuade you for fear of dangers that may follow, to
faint in your former purpose, let him be judged of you both foolish and your
mortal enemy: foolish, because he understood nothing of Gods approved wisdom;
and enemy unto you, because he labored to separate you from Gods favor,
provoking his vengeance and grievous plagues against you; because he would that
you should prefer your worldly rest to Gods praise and glory, and the
friendship of the wicked to the salvation of your Brethren. I am not ignorant
that fearful troubles shall ensue your enterprise: But O joyful and comfortable
are the troubles and adversities, which man sustaineth for accomplishment of
Gods Will revealed by his Word! How terrible soever they appear to the
judgment of the natural man, yet are they never able to devour, nor utterly to
consume the Sufferers; for the invisible and invincible power of God sustaineth
and preserves, according to his promise, all such, as with simplicity do obey
him. --

Page 149.
When the Bishop of Saint Andrews threatened Mr. Knox, that if he preached there
(as he intended) he should be assaulted with a dozen of Culverings. Being
demanded his judgment, whether his preaching should not be delayed, answered,
God is my witness, that I never preached Christ Jesus in contempt of any man,
neither mind I at any time to present my self to that place, having either
respect to my own private commodity, or to the worldly hurt of any creature:
But to delay to preach to morrow (unless the body be violently withholden) I
cannot in conscience; for in this Town and Church God began first to call me to
the dignity of a Preacher, from the which I was reft by the tyranny of France,
and procurement of the Bishops, Page 147.
what torment I sustained in the Galleys, etc. is now no time to recite. This
only I cannot conceal, which more then one have heard me say, when absent from
Scotland, That my assured hope was in open audience to preach at Saint Andrews,
before I departed this life. And therefore, my Lords, seeing that God, above
the expectation of many, has brought my body to the same place, where first I
was called to the office of a Preacher, and from the which I was most unjustly
removed, I beseech your Honors not to stop me from presenting my self unto my
Brethren: And as for the fear of danger, that may come to me, let no man be
sollicitous; for my life is in the custody of him, whose glory I seek; and
therefore I cannot so fear their boast or tyranny, that I will cease from doing
my duty, when of mercy he offers the occasion. I desire not the hand of any
man to defend me, only I crave audience, etc. Whereupon the Lords were fully
content he should preach; and so he did, upon the ejection of the buyers and
sellers forth of the Temple, applying the corruption that was then, to the
corruption that is in Papistry, and Christ's fact to the duty of those to whom
God gives power and zeal to remove all Monuments of idolatry. Page 206.207.
-- When the Lords and those that favored Reformation were driven from
Edinburg to Sterling (which was the time of their greatest trouble) Mr. Knox
preached on Psalm. 80.5.6, 7, 8.

In the Sermon. -- God in wisdom sometimes suffers his chosen Flock to
mockage, and dangers, yea apparent destruction; that they may feel the
vehemence of Gods indignation; that they may know how little strength is in
themselves; that they may leave a testimony to the generations following, Page
208.
as well of the malice of the Devil against Gods people, as of the mavelous
Work of God in preserving his little Flock by far other means, then man can
espy. -- It is a great and sore temtation, when God turns away his face from
our Prayers, etc. This temptation no flesh can overcome or abide, unless the
mighty Spirit of God interpose; as appears in Saul, when God would not hear
him. The difference between the Elect and Reprobate in this temptation is this;
The Elect, sustained by the secret power of Gods Spirit, still call upon God,
albeit he appear to contemn their Prayers, as Jacob did, etc. But the
Reprobate, being denied their requests, do cease to pray, and contemn God, and
it may be seek to the Devil for what they cannot obtain by God. -- Such is our
tender delicacy and self-love of our own flesh, that those things, which we
lightly pass over in others, we can greatly complain of, if they touch our
selves. Page 209.
-- When the sins of men are rebuked in general, seldom is it that man
descends within himself, accusing and condemning in himself that, which most
displeases God; but rather he doubts that to be a cause, which before God is
no cause indeed; as the Israelites supposed the cause of their overthrow was,
because they had lifted the Sword against their Brethren of Benjamin, and yet
the express command that was given them, did deliver them from all crime in
that cause. -- The true cause was their going to execute judgment against the
wicked without repentance for their own former offenses and defection from God;
and their trusting in their own strength, they were a great multitude, and the
other far inferior to them. Page 210.
-- When we were a few, etc. we called upon God, and took him for our
Protector, Defense, and Refuge; among us we had no bragging of multitude, nor
of our strength, nor of our policy; we did only sob to God to have respect to
the equity of our Cause, and to the cruel pursuit of the tyrannical Enemy. But
since that our Number has been multiplied, and great Ones joined with us,
nothing has been heard, but, This Lord will bring these many hundred Spears;
this man has the credit to persuade the Country; If this Ear be ours, no man
in such bounds will trouble us. Thus we made flesh our Arm. -- It rests that
we turn to the Eternal our God (who beats down to the death, that he may
raise up again, to leave the remembrance of his wondrous deliverance, to the
praise of his own Name) which if we do unfeignedly, I no more doubt, but that
this our dolor, confusion, and fear, shall be turned into joy, honor, and
boldness, then that God gave victory to the Israelites over the Benjamites,
after that twice with ignominy they were repulsed. Yea, whatsoever shall become
of us and our mortal carkases, I doubt not but that this Cause (in despite of
Satan) shall prevail; for it is the eternal Truth of the eternal God.

It may be that God shall plague some; Page 211.
for that they delight not in the Truth, albeit for worldly respects they seem
to favor it: yea God may take some of his dearest Children away, before that
their eyes see greater troubles; but neither shall the one, nor the other so
hinder this Action, but in the end it shall triumph.

After the taking of Kinghorn, Page 215.
at which time the Queen Regent blasphemously said, Where now is John Knox his
God? My God is now stronger then he even in Fife. Mr. Knox preached a
comfortable Sermon, John 6.
on the danger wherein the Disciples of Christ, when they were in the midst of
the Sea, and Jesus upon the Mountain, exhorting them not to faint, but to row
against the contrary blasts, till that Jesus Christ should come; for (said he)
I am assuredly persuaded, that God will deliver us from this extreme trouble,
as that this is the Gospel of Jesus Christ, which I preach unto you this day.
The fourth watch is not yet come, abide a little, the Boat shall be saved, and
Peter, which has left the Boat, shall not drown.

Page 218.
In his Letter to Sir William Cicil, Secretary of State in England. -- As from
God you have received Life, Wisdom, and Honors, etc. so ought you wholly to
apply the same to the advancement of his glory, Page 219.
etc. which alas! in times past you have not done: For to the suppressing of
Christ's true Evangel, to the erecting of Idolatry, and to the shedding of the
blood of Gods most dear Children, have you by silence consented and subscribed
this your most horrible defection from the known Truth and once professed, etc.
He has not dealt with you, as with others, etc. but you guilty in the same
offenses has he fostered (as it were) in his own bosom, during the time of
that most miserable thraldom under Queen Mary; and now has set you at such
liberty, as the fury of Gods enemies cannot hurt you, except that willingly
against his Honor, you take pleasure to conspire with them. -- God requires of
you earnest repentance for your former defection, and an heart mindful of his
merciful providence, and a will ready to advance his glory, that evidently it
may appear, that in vain you have not received these graces of God. To
performance whereof, of necessity it is, that carnal wisdom and worldly policy
(to both which you are too much inclined) give place to Gods naked Truth. Very
love compells me to say, That except the Spirit of God purge your heart from
that Venom, which your eyes have seen destructive to others, that you shall
not long escape the reward of Dissemblers. -- Now you are in that estate and
credit, in the which you shall either comfort the sorrowful and aff^icted for
righteousness sake, or else you shall molest and oppugn the Spirit of God
speaking in his Messengers. The Comforters of the afflicted for godliness have
promise of comfort in their greatest necessities; but the Troublers of Gods
Servants (how contemned soever they appear before the world) are threatened to
have their Names in execration to the Posterities following. -- Except that in
the Cause of Christ's Evangel you be found simple, sincere, fervent, and
unfeigned, you shall taste of the same cup, which Politic Heads have drunk in
before. -- I hear that some of that poor Flock, Page 220.
of late assembled in Geneva, are so extremely handled, that those who most
rudely have shed the blood of Gods most dear Children, find this day among you
greater favors, then they do. Alas! This appears much to repugne to
Christian Charity: for whatsoever has been mine offense, this I fear not to
affirm in their Cause; That if any that have suffered Exile in those most
dolorous days of Persecution, deserve praise and commendation for peace,
concord, sober and quiet living, it is they. --

From Diep, April 10. 1559.

In his Letter to Queen Elizabeth. Page 226.
-- Consider deeply how for fear of your life you did decline from God, and bow
to Idolatry, going to Mass under your Sister Mary her persecution of Gods
Saints. Let it not appear a small offense in your eyes, that you have declined
from Christ Jesus in the day of your Battle: neither would I that you should
esteem that mercy to be vulgar and common, which you have received, viz. that
God has covered your Offense, has preserved your Person, when you were most
unthankful, and has Exalted you, etc. -- Commonly it is seen, that such as
refuse the counsel of the Faithful (appear it never so sharp) are compelled to
follow the deceit of Flatterers to their own perdition. --

Edinburg, July 28. A. 1559.

Page 310.
When Mass was permitted to the Queen for a time, Mr. Knox the next Sabbath
after the first Mass, showed what terrible plagues God had taken upon Realms
and Nations for Idolatry, and added, That one Mass was more fearful to him,
then if Ten thousand armed Enemies were Landed in any part of the Realm, of
purpose to suppress the whole Religion; for (said he) in our God there is
strength to resist and confound multitudes, if we unfeignedly depend upon him,
whereof heretofore we have had experience; but when we join hands with
Idolatry, it is no doubt but both Gods amiable presence and comfortable defense
will leave us, and what shall then become of us? Alas! I fear that experience
will teach us to the grief of many.

When God began to make his words good, He did in the audience of many, Dec.
1565. ask God mercy that he was not more vehement and upright in suppressing
that Idol at the beginning; For (said he) albeit I spoke that, which offended
some (which this day they see and feel to be true) yet did I not that, which
might have been done; for God had not only given me knowledge and a tongue to
make known the impiety of that Idol, but he had given me credit with many, who
would have put in execution Gods Judgments, if I would only have consented
thereto: but so careful was I of that common tranquillity, and so loath was I to
offend some, that in secret conference with zealous men I traveled rather to
mitigate, yea to slacken that fervency God had kindled in them, then to animate
or encourage them to put their hands to the Lords Work: wherein I acknowledge
my self to have done most wickedly, and from the bottom of my heart do ask of
my God pardon, that I did not what in me lay to have suppressed that Idol in
the beginning.

When the Queen accused him for stirring up her Subjects against her Mother and
her Self, and that he was the cause of much sedition and great slaughter in
England, and that all he did was by Necromancy: Madam (said Mr. Knox) may it
please your Majesty patiently to hear my simple answers: Page 311.
and first, If to teach the Word of God in sincerity, if to rebuke Idolatry,
and to will a people to worship God according to his Word, be to raise Subjects
against their Princes, then cannot I be excused; but if the true knowledge of
God and his right worshipping be the chief cause, which must move men to obey
their just Princess from their heart (as it is most certain they are) wherein
can I be reprehended? I think, and am surely persuaded that your Majesty has
had, and now has as unfeigned obedience of such as profess Christ Jesus within
this Realm, as ever your Father or Progenitors had of those that were called
Bishops. Page 312.
-- And now shortly to answer the other two Accusations, I heartily praise my
God, through Jesus Christ, that Satan, that enemy of mankind, and the wicked of
the world, have no other crimes to lay to my charge, then such as the world it
self knows to be most false and vain. If indeed in any of the places, where I
was in England, during the time of my being there, there was either Battle,
Sedition, or Mutiny, I shall confess my self a shedder of blood; but God so
blessed my weak labors in Barwick (wherein then commonly used to be slaughter,
by reason of quarrels that used to arise among Soldiers) that there was great
quietness all the time that I remained there. And whereas they slander me of
Magic, Necromancy, etc. all the Congregations that ever heard me, know what I
spoke against such acts, and those that use such impiety: but seeing my Master
was accused thus, even that he was possessed with Beelzebub, I must patiently
bear their false accusations.

But yet (said the Queen) you have taught the people to receive another
Religion, then their Princes can allow; and how can that Doctrine be of God,
seeing God commands Subjects to be obedient to their Princes? Madam (said he)
as right Religion took neither original, nor antiquity from worldly Princes,
but from the eternal God alone; so are not Subjects bound to frame their
Religion according to the appetite of their Princes. Page 313.
-- Daniel and his fellows were Subjects to Nebuchadnezzar and unto Darius, and
yet they would not be of their Religion. The three Children said, We make it
known to thee, O King, that we will not worship thy gods. And Daniel prayed
publicly to his God against the express command of the King. --

Page 314.
You are not the Church (said the Queen) that I will nourish: I will defend the
Church of Rome; for I think it is the true Church of God. Your will Madam (said
he) is no reason, neither does your thought make that Roman Harlot to be the
immaculate Spouse of Jesus Christ. And wonder not ( Madam) that I call Rome an
Harlot; for that Church is altogether polluted with all kind of spiritual
fornication, etc. Yea I offer my self further to prove, that the Church of the
Jews, who crucified Christ Jesus, when they manifestly denied the Son of God,
was not so far degenerated from the Ordinances and Statutes, which God gave by
Moses and Aaron to his people, as the Church of Rome is declined from the
purity of Religion, which the Apostles taught and planted. --

You interpret the Scriptures (said she) in one manner, and they in another;
whom shall I believe? who shall be Judge? Believe (said he) God that speaks
plainly in his Word; and further then the Word teaches you, ye shall believe
neither the one, nor the other. The Word of God is plain in it self; and if
there appear any obscurity in one place, the Holy Ghost, who is never
contrarious to himself, explains the same more clearly in other places.

When he was accused as one that had irreverently spoken of the Queen, Page 334.
and that traveled to bring her into hatred and contempt of the people, and
that he had exceeded the bounds of his Text. Madam (said he) if your ears had
heard the whole matter that I treated of, if there be in you any spark of the
Spirit of God, yea of honesty and wisdom, you would not justly be offended
with any thing I spoke. -- My Text was this, And now O Kings understand, be
learned ye Judges of the earth. After ( Madam) I had declared the dignity of
Kings and Rulers, the obedience due to them, I demanded this Question, But oh
alas! what account shall the most part of Princes make before the supreme
Judge, whose Throne and Authority so shamefully they abuse? The complaint of
Solomon is this day most true, That Violence and Oppression do occupy the
Throne of God on earth; for whilst that Murderers, Blood-thirsty men,
Oppressors, etc. dare present themselves before Kings and Princes, and the poor
Saints of God are banished and exiled, what shall we say, but that the Devil
has taken possession in the Throne of God, which ought to be ^earful to all
wicked doers, and a refuge to the innocent and oppressed: And how can it be
otherwise? For Princes will not understand, Page 335.
etc. Gods Law they despise, his Statutes and holy Ordinances they will not
understand; for in fidling and singing they are more exercised, then in reading
or hearing Gods most blessed Word. etc. And of dancing ( Madam) I said, That
albeit in Scripture I find no praise of it, and in profane Writers it is termed
the gesture rather of those that are mad, then of sober men. Yet do I not
utterly condemn it, provided that two vices be avoided. (1) That the principal
Vocation of those that use that exercise, be not neglected, for the pleasure of
dancing. (2) That they dance not, as the Philistines their Fathers, for the
pleasure that they take in the displeasure of Gods people; for if they do so,
they shall receive the reward of dancers, and that will be to drink in Hell,
unless they speedily repent. So shall God turn their mirth into sudden sorrow;
for God will not always afflict his people, nor wink at the tyranny of Tyrants.

Many that stood by witnessed, That Mr. Kn^x had recited the very words that
publicly he spoke. The Queen looked about upon some of the Reporters, and
said, Your words are sharp enough, as you have spoken them, but yet they were
told me in another manner. -- If you hear any thing of my self, that misliketh
you, come to my self and tell me, and I shall hear you. Madam (said he) I am
called to a public Function within the Church of God, and appointed by God to
rebuke the sins of all. I am not appointed to come to every man in particular
to show him his offense; for that labor were infinite. If your Majesty
pleases to frequent the public Sermons, then I doubt not but you shall fully
understand, both what I like and mislike, as well in your Majesty as in all
others. Or if your Majesty will assign me a certain day and hour when it shall
please you to hear the Form and Substance of Doctrine, which is proposed in
public to the Churches of this Realm, I will most gladly wait upon your
Majesty's pleasure, time, and place; but to come and wait upon your Chamber
door, or elsewhere, and then to have no farther liberty, but to whisper my mind
in your Majesty's ear, Page 336.
or to tell you what others think or speak of you, neither will my conscience,
nor the Vocation whereto God has called me, suffer it.

Mr. Knox departed with a reasonable merry countenance, whereat some Papists
offended, said, He is not afraid; which heard by him, he answered, Why should
the pleasant face of a Lady afray me? I have looked in the faces of many angry
men, and yet have not been afraid above measure.

When the Courtiers picked quarrels against the Preachers for reprehending
avarice, Page 348.
oppression, excess, riotous cheer, banqueting, immoderate dancing, and
whoredom, that thereof ensues, which then began to abound at Court, alleging,
That all their preaching was turned into railing. Mr. Knox told them; It comes
to our ears, that we are called Railers, whereof albeit we wonder, yet we are
not ashamed, seeing that the most worthy Servants of God, that before us have
traveled in this Vocation, have so been styled; but unto you do I say, that
the same God, who from the beginning has punished the contempt of his Word,
and has poured forth his vengeance on such proud mockers, shall not spare you;
yea, he shall not spare you before the eyes of this wicked generation, for the
pleasure whereof ye despise all wholesome admonition. Have you not seen greater
then any of you sitting where ye sit (Earl Huntly) pick his nails, and pull
down his Bonnet over his eyes, when Idolatry, Witchcraft, Murder, Oppression,
etc. were rebuked? was not this his common talk? When these Knaves have railed
their fill, then will they hold their peace. Have ye not heard it affirmed to
his own face, that God should revenge that his blasphemy, even in the eyes of
such as were witness to his iniquity? By your hands has God executed the
judgment threatened. But what amendment can be espied in you? Idolatry was
never in greater quiet, virtue and virtuous men never in more contempt, vice
was never more bold, nor punishment less feared. And yet who guides the Queen
and Court? Page 349.
who but Protestants? O horrible slanderers of God, and of his holy Evangel!
Better it were unto you plainly to renounce Christ Jesus, then thus to expose
his blessed Evangel to mockage. If God punishes not you that this same age
shall see your punishment, the Spirit of righteous judgment guides me not.

Page 352.
When the Queen sent for Mr. Knox, and would have him to persuade the people,
especially the Gentlemen of the W^st, not to put hand to punish any for using
themselves in their Religion as pleased them: He willed her Majesty to punish
Male-factours according to the Laws, and he durst promise quietness upon the
part of them that professed the Lord Jesus within Scotland; but if her Majesty
thought to delude the Laws, he said, He feared some would let the P^^ists
understand, that without punishment they should not be suffered so manifestly
to offend Gods Majesty. Page 354.
-- I shall cause (said the Queen) to summon all offenders, and ye shall know
that I shall minister justice. I am assured then (said he) that ye shall please
God, and enjoy rest and tranquillity within your Realm, which to your Majesty
is more profitable, then all the Popes power can be.

In his Letter to the Earl of Murray. Page 357.
-- Seeing I perceive my self frustrate of my expectation, which was, that you
should ever have preferred God to your own affection, and the advancement of
his truth to your own commodity, I commit you to your wit, and to the
conducting of those which can better please you. --

In a Sermon concerning the Queens Marriage, Page 359.
he said, Whenever the Nobility of Scotland, who profess the Lord Jesus,
consent that an Infidel (and all Papists be Infidels) shall be Head to our
Sovereign, ye do, so far as in you lies, banish Christ Jesus from this Realm;
yea, bring Gods vengeance on the Country, a plague upon your selves, and
perchance you shall do small comfort to your Sovereign.

When he was upon that account brought before the Queen; Page 360.
Madam (said he) when it shall please God to deliver you from that bondage of
darkness and error, wherein ye have been nourished for lack of true Doctrine,
your Majesty will find the liberty of my tongue nothing offensive. Out of the
Pulpit I think few have occasion to be offended at me; but there I am not
Master of my self, but must obey him, who commands me to speak plain, and to
flatter no flesh upon the face of the earth. But what have you to do (said she)
with my Marriage? I am sent (said he) to preach the Evangel of Jesus Christ to
such as please to hear. It has two parts, Repentance and Faith. Now, Madam, in
preaching of Repentance, of necessity it is that the sins of men be noted, that
they may know wherein they offend: but so it is, that the most part of your
Nobility are so addicted to your affections, that neither Gods Word, nor yet
their Commonwealth are rightly regarded; and therefore it becomes me to speak
that they may know their duty. (And so he repeated to her self what he had said
in public) Whereupon the Queen wept; but when she had given place to her
inordinate passions, Mr. Knox said, Madam, in Gods presence I speak, I never
delighted in the weeping of any of Gods Creatures, etc. much less can I rejoice
in your Majesty's weeping; but seeing I have given you no just occasion to be
offended, but have spoken the truth, as my Vocation craves of me, I must
sustain your Majesty's tears, rather then I dare hurt my conscience, or betray
the Commonwealth by silence.

Page 362.
About that time he p^ayed thus. -- Deliver us O Lord from the bondage of
Idolatry. Preserve and keep us from the tyranny of Strangers. Continue us in
peace and concord among our selves, if thy good pleasure be, O Lord, for a
season.

Being asked, Why he prayed for quietness for a season, and not absolutely? His
answer was, That he durst not pray, but in faith, and faith in Gods Word
assured him, That constant quietness would not continue in that Realm, wherein
Idolatry had been suppressed, and then was permitted to be erected again.

Page 366.
The Master of Maxwell telling him, That he would not find that men will bear
with him in times to come, as they had done in times past; If (said he) God
stand my Friend, as I am assured he of his mercy will, so long as I depend upon
his promise, and prefer his glory to my life and worldly profit, I little
regard how men behave themselves toward me, etc. --

The Earl of Murray, Page 367.
and the Secretary sent for Mr. Knox, and lamented that he had so highly
offended the Queen by writing Letters, desiring the Brethren from all parts to
convene at Edinburg, that there was no hope for him, unless he would confess
his offense, and put himself in her Majesty's will. I praise God through Jesus
Christ (said he) I have learned not to fear the things that the Godless
multitude fear. I have the testimony of a good conscience, that I have given no
offense to the Queen; for I have done nothing but my duty, and so my hope is,
that my God will give me patience to bear what will ensue.

When he was called before the Queen and her Council, Page 368.
the Secretary Lethington told him, the Queen was informed, That he traveled
to raise a tumult of her Subjects against her, and for certification thereof,
produced one of his Letters, which he owned. Then said the Secretary, Mr. Knox,
Are not you sorry from your heart, that such a Letter has passed your Pen,
etc. Before I repent (said he) I must be taught my offense. Offense (said
Lethington) If there were no more but the Vocation of the Queens Leiges, Page
369.
the offense cannot be denied. Remember your self, my Lord, (said Knox) there
is a difference betwixt a lawful and an unlawful Vocation. If I have been
guilty in this, I have often offended since I came last into Scotland; for what
Vocation of Brethren has ever been since, to which my Pen has not served? and
before this no man laid it to my charge as a crime. Then was then (said
Lethington) and now is now, we have no need of such Vocation, as sometimes we
have had. The time that has been (said Knox) is now before my eyes; for I see
the poor flock in no less danger, then it has been at any time before; except
that the Devil has gotten a Vizard upon his face, before he came in with his
own face, discovered by open tyranny, seeking the destruction of all that
refused Idolatry, and then I think you will confess, the Brethren lawfully
assembled themselves for defense of their lives; and now the Devil comes under
the Cloak of Justice, to do that which God would not suffer him to do by
strength, by crafty deceit, making the Prince party, etc. After a long
conference between the Queen and Mr. Knox, the Secretary told him, He might
return to his house for that night. I thank God and the Queens Majesty (said
he) and Madam, I pray God to purge your heart from Papistry, and to preserve
you from the counsel of ^latterers; for how pleasant soever they appear to your
ear and corrupt affections for the time, experience has taught us, in what
perplexity they have brought famous Princes. After he was gone, the Nobility in
the presence of the Queen absolved Mr. Knox.

Page 380.
In his Prayer for the Queen. -- O Lord, if thy good pleasure be, purge the
heart of the Queen: Majesty from the venom of Idolatry, and deliver her from
the thraldom and bondage of Satan, into the which she has been brought up,
and yet remains, for the lack of true Doctrine; and let her see by the
illumination of thy Spirit, that there is no means to please thee, but by Jesus
Christ thy only Son, and that Jesus Christ cannot be found but in thy holy
Word; nor yet received, but as it prescribes, which is, to renounce our own
wisdom, and preconceived opinion, and worship thee as it commands; that in so
doing she may avoid the eternal damnation which is ordained for all obstinate
impeniten^s; and that this poor Realm may also escape that plague and vengeance
which inevitably follows Idolatry, maintained against the manifest Word, and
the light thereof.

Secretary Lethington was offended at two things therein. (1) Because he prayed
for the Queen conditionally, If it be thy good pleasure, etc. Where have ye an
example of such a Prayer? Mr. Knox answered, Wheresoever the examples are, I am
sure of the Rule, which is this; If we shall ask any thing according to his
Will, he shall grant us. -- I have learned to pray in faith; now faith (you
know) depends upon the Word of God; and so it is, that the Word of God teaches
me, that Prayer profits the Sons and Daughters of Gods Election. -- Besides,
Page 381.
did not the Apostles pray as they commanded others to pray? Now Peter
commanded Simon Magus to pray conditionally, If it be p^ssible, etc. (2) Where
find ye that the Scriptures call any the Bondslaves of Satan (said the
Secretary) or that the Prophets of God spoke of Kings and Princes so
irreverently? The Scripture says (said Mr. Knox) that by nature we are all the
children of wrath, Page 382.
and our Master Christ affirms, That such as do sin, are servants to sin, etc.
Behold, I send thee (says Christ to Paul) to the Gentiles, to turn them from
the power of Satan unto God. -- Kings and Queens are not excepted, but all
unfaithful are pronounced to stand in one rank, and to be in bondage to one
Tyrant the Devil. -- Elisha was a Subject in the Kingdom of Israel, and yet
how little reverence did he give to the King? he feared not to say to King
Iehoram, What have I to do with thee? Page 383.
etc. As the Lord of Hosts lives, in whose sight I stand, if it were not that
I regard the presence of Jehoshaphat, the King of Judah, I would not have
looked toward thee, etc. --

Page 390.
Lethington telling him, That we are not bound to follow extraordinary
examples, unless we have the like command, etc. I grant (said Mr. Knox) if the
example repugne the Law; as if a covetous man should borrow silver, raiment,
etc. from his neighbor, and withhold the same, alleging the example of the
Israelites in Egypt, etc. But where the example agrees with the Law, etc. it
stands to us in place of a Commandment; for as God in his Nature is constant
and immutable, so cannot he condemn in the ages subsequent, that which he has
approved in his Servants before us. --

Page 391.
Lethington telling him, That prosperity does not always prove, that God
approves the facts of men. Yes (said he) when the facts of men agree with the
Law of God, and are rewarded according to his own promise expressed in his Law,
the prosperity that succeeds them is a most infallible assurance, that God has
approved them. --

Page 416.
Upon the nineteenth of August An. 1565. a little while after the Queen was
married to the Lord Darley, who to please the Protestants, came to Church, Mr
Knox preached upon Isa. 26.13, 14, 15, 16, etc. wherein he said, That God sets
in Government (for the offenses and ingratitude of the people) Boys and Women,
and that God justly punished Ahab and his posterity, because lie would not take
order with that harlot Iezabel; for which Sermon he was called in question, and
in answering said more then he had preached; for he added, That as the King had
(to please the Queen) gone to Mass, and dishonored the Lord God, so should God
in his Justice make her an instrument of his ruin; and so it fell out in a
very short time. But the Queen being incensed at these words, to please her he
was forbid to preach for a time. See his Life before the Ecclesiastical History
of Scotland, page 3. See the Sermon it self at the end of the said History, p.
88.
This Sermon he took care to have it printed, to make known to the world what
ground there was to deal so with him, as he tells us.

In his Epistle to the Reader. -- I dare not deny (least that in so doing I
should be injurious to the Giver) but that God has revealed to me secrets,
unknown to the world, and also that he has made my tongue a Trumpet, to
forewarn Realms and Nations, yea, certain great revelations of mutations and
changes, when no such things were feared, nor yet was appearing: A portion
whereof cannot the world deny (be it never so blind) to be fulfilled; and the
rest alas! I fear, shall follow with greater have, and in more full perfection
then my sorrowful heart desires. Page 89.
Notwithstanding these revelations and assurances, I did ever abstain to commit
any thing to writing, contented only to have obeyed the charge of him, who
commanded me to cry.

If any then will ask to what purpose this only Sermon is set forth, and
greater matters omitted, I answer, To let such, as Satan has not altogether
blinded, see, upon how small occasions great offense is now conceived. For this
Sermon (from my Bed) I was called before the Council, and after long reasoning,
I was by some forbidden to preach in Edinburg, so long as the King and Queen
were in Town. --

The Sermon he writ for the Press the last day of August 1565. Page 122
when the Castle of Edinburg was shooting against the Exiled for Christ's sake;
and therefore he concluded thus; Lord into thy hands I commend my Spirit, for
the terrible roaring of Guns, and the noise of Armor do so pierce my heart,
that my soul thirsts to depart. Be merciful to thy flock, O Lord, and at thy
good pleasure put an end to my misery.

See his Life before the Ecclesiastical History of Scotland, page 3.
The next Sabbath, after the Earl of Murray was slain, a Note was sent to Mr.
Knox, among the Papers, wherein were written the names of those that desired
the Prayers of the Church, with these words, Take up the man, whom ye accounted
another god. At the end of his Sermon he bemoaned the loss that the Church and
State of Scotland received by the death of that man, and said, That as God in
his mercy gives good and wise Rulers, so he takes them away in his wrath; and
then added, There is one in this Company, that makes the subject of his mirth
this horrible murder, whereat all good men have cause to be sorry: I tell him,
he shall die where there shall be none to lament him.

The young Gentleman that writ the Note, hearing this Comination, went home and
said to his Sister, that John Knox was raving to speak of he knew not whom. His
Sister replied with tears in her eyes, telling him, That none of John Knox's
threatenings fell to the ground without effect: and so it fell out in this
particular; for this Mr. Thomas Metellan shortly after went beyond Sea to
travel, and died in Italy, having no known man to assist him, much less to
lament him.

Page 4.
He told his People, it was his desire to finish and close his preaching with
preaching upon the History of Christ's Passion.

In his last Sermon to his People at Edinburg, (which was preached at the
Election of Mr. James Lawson to succeed him, to whom he had writ thus; Accelera
mi frater, alioqui sero venies; Make haste, Brother, otherwise you will come
too late; meaning, That if he made any stay, he should find him dead and gone.
He called God to witness, that he had walked in a good conscience among them,
not seeking to please men, nor serving his own or other men's affections, but in
all sincerity and truth preached the Gospel of Christ most gravely and pithily,
exhorting them to stand fast in the faith which they had received.

In his sickness he said unto the Earl of Morton, Page 5.
who came to visit him; My Lord, God has given you wisdom, honor, high
birth, riches, many good and great friends, and is now to prefer you to the
Government of the Realm. In his Name I charge you, that you will use these
Blessings better in time to come, then you have done in times past: In all your
actions seek first the glory of God, the furtherance of his Gospel, the
maintenance of his Church and Ministry; next be careful of the King, and the
welfare of the Realm. If you shall do this, God will be with you, and honor
you: if otherwise you do it not, he will deprive you of all these benefits, and
your end shall be shame and ignominy.

These Speeches the Earl about nine years after, at the time of his Execution,
called to mind, saying, That he had found them true, and Mr. Knox therein a
true Prophet.

A day or two before his death, he sent for Mr. Lindsay, Mr. Lawson, and the
Elders and Deacons of the Church, and said unto them, The time is approaching,
for which I have long thirsted, wherein I shall be released from all my cares,
and be with my Savior Christ for ever; and now God is my Witness, whom I have
served with my Spirit in the Gospel of his Son, that I have taught nothing but
the true and sincere Word of God, the true and solid Doctrine of the Gospel;
and that the end I proposed in all my Doctrine was, to instruct the ignorant,
to confirm the weak, to comfort the consciences of those who were humbled under
the sense of their sins, and born down with the threatenings of Gods judgments.
Such as were proud and rebellious; I am not ignorant, have blamed, and do yet
blame my too great rigor and severity; but God knows, that in my heart I
never hated the persons of those, against whom I thundered Gods judgments, I
did only hate their sins, and labored according to my power to gain them to
Christ. That I did forbear none of whatsoever condition, I did it out of the
fear of my God, who has placed me in the Ministry, and I know will bring me to
an account. Now Brethren, for your selves, I have no more to say, but to warn
you to take heed to the Flock, Page 6.
over which God has placed you overseers, which he has redeemed with the
blood of his only begotten Son. And now Mr. Lawson, Fight a good fight, do the
work of the Lord with courage, and with a willing mind, and God from above
bless you, and the Church whereof you have charge: against it (so long as it
continues in the Doctrine of the Truth) the gates of Hell shall not prevail.

This spoken, and the Elders and Deacons dismissed, he called* the two
Preachers to him, and said, There is one thing that grieveth me exceedingly;
You have sometimes seen the courage and constancy of the Lord of Grange, in
the Cause of God, and that most unhappy man has cast himself away. I pray you
two to take the pains to go to him, and say from me, That unless he forsake
that wicked course, wherein he is entered, neither shall the rock, in which he
confideth, defend him; nor the carnal wisdom of that man, whom he counts
half a god (this was young Lethington) yield him help, but shamefully he shall
be pulled out of that nest, and his carcass hang before the Sun (and so it fell
out; for the next year, the Castle which he did keep against the Kings
Authority, was taken, and he hanged before the Sun) the Soul of that man is
dear unto me; and if it be possible, I would fain have him saved. They went,
but could not prevail; yet at his death, he did express serious repentance for
his sins.

The next day he was much in Prayer, crying, Come Lord Jesus, Sweet Jesus, into
thy hands I commend my Spirit.

Being asked by those about him, if his pains were great, he answered, That he
did not esteem that a pain, which should be unto him the end of all troubles,
and beginning of eternal joys.

Oftentimes, after some deep Meditations, he burst forth in these words, O
serve the Lord in fear and death shall not be troublesome unto you: Page 7.
blessed is the death of those that have part in the death of Christ.

In the Evening, having slept some hours together, but with great unquietness;
for he was heard to send forth many sighs and groans. Being asked, after he
awaked, How he did find himself, and what it was that made him to mourn so
heartily in his sleep? He answered, In my life time I have often been assaulted
with Satan, and many times he has cast in my teeth my sins, to bring me to
despair; yet God gave me strength to overcome all his temptations: and now that
subtle Serpent, who never cease to tempt, has taken another course, and
seeks to persuade me, that all my labors in the Ministry, and the fidelity
that I have shown in that Service, has merited Heaven and immortality: but
blessed be God, that brought to my mind these Scriptures, What have thou, that
thou have not received? and not I, but the grace of God in me. With which he is
gone away ashamed, and shall no more return. And now I am sure my Battle is at
an end; and that without pain of body, or trouble of spirit, I shall shortly
change this mortal and miserable life, with that happy and immortal, which
never shall have end.

After one had prayed for him, he was asked whether he heard the Prayer? he
answered, Would to God that ye had heard it with such an ear and heart as I
have done: adding, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. With which words, without any
motion of hands or feet, as one falling asleep, rather then dying, he ended his
life.

When he was buried, the Earl of Morton being near the Grave, said by way of
Epitaph, Here lies the body of him, who in his life time never feared the face
of man.

L.
Lalaeus.
Ward, page 161, 162.
Simon Lalaeus to Silvester his Executioner said, Never saw I a man in all my
life, whose coming was more welcome to me then thine.

Fox, Vol. 2. page 142.
Silvester, seeing the great faith and constancy of this blessed Martyr, was
converted, and with all his Family removed to the Church at Geneva.

Lambert.
Fox, Vol. 2. page 396.
The first Article against him was, Whether he was suspect or infamed of
heresy? Unto your first Demand (said he) I answer, Page 398.
That I am not certain what all persons at all seasons have deemed or suspected
of me; peradventure some better, some worse. The opinion of the people was
never one, but thought diversely of all the famous Prophets, and of the
Apostles, yea and of Christ himself: some saying that he was a very good man;
others said nay, and called him a Seducer, etc. Seeing therefore that all men
did not say well by Christ, the Author of Verity and Truth, yea Truth it self,
etc. what should I need to regard, if at some time some person for a little
cause should suspect of me amiss, and evil report of me? etc. Woe be unto you,
when all men speak well of you; for so did their Fathers to the false Prophets.
--

In his Answer to their second Demand. -- Our Prelates have sent out
commandments, that if any person shall adventure to keep any of Luther's Books,
they shall be excommunicated, etc. But this is no novelty; for so did their
forefathers the Prelates in Christ's time, etc. When Christ went about
preaching, the Scribes and Pharisees, who were Prelates then, gave a general
command, That whosoever confessed him to be Christ, should be put out of the
Synagogue, etc. The Apostles were in like manner served. In the Old Testament
they procured of one, that was a temporal Ruler at that season, to have the
Prophecy of Jeremy (for he of all other is most vehement against the
dissimulation of Priests) to be burned. Page 399.
-- If they had the Spirit of Christ, which they claim and pretend to, they
would follow the counsel of the Apostles, 1 These. 5.
To prove all things, and to retain that only which is good, refraining from
all that has semblance of evil; and to try the spirits of them that should
speak, 1 John 4.
whether they were of God, or no. -- The Priests (says Chrysostom on Matthew)
that were Pharisees in Christ's time, made a^^ Ordinance, That whosoever should
acknowledge I^s^^ to be Christ, should be excommunicate. If the Ph^risees or
Priests, that now do occupy their rooms, should make a like Ordinance, because
they would not have Christ's Doctrine professed for hindering their lucre, should
we leave off to seek after the knowledge of Christ's Doctrine? No verily. --
When it was objected against Hierom, that he retained by him the Works of
Eusebius and Origin, he brings to prove, That it was lawful for him that
passage of the Apostle, Prove all things, etc. -- These things prove, that I
and others may safely (no good Law inhibiting, but Constitutions Pharisaical)
read the Works of Luther, etc.

Page 401.
In his Answer to their fifth Demand. -- It is evident from Christ's words, When
you have done all things commanded, say yet you be unprofitable Servants, etc.
That he would not have us esteem our merits, when we have done what is
commanded by God, but reckon our selves to be servants unprofitable to God,
forasmuch as he has no need of our well doing for his own advancement, etc.
and if we ought not to attend our merits in doing the Commandment of God, much
less in observing our own Inventions, or Traditions of men, unto which there is
no benefit in all Scripture, which Paul calls the Word of Truth and Faith,
promised.

Page 402.
In his Answer to the sixth Demand. -- That they will not suffer Marriage to be
solemnized at all times of the year; I think it stands not with Christ's Rule,
but rather is against the same. -- It ought also freely to be administered, and
without money. -- In the Primitive Church (as ancient Doctors deem, and the
Scripture in mine opinion records the same) there were no more Officers in
the Churches of God then Bishops and Deacons. Hierome in his Com. on the
Epistles of Paul says, That those whom we call Priests were none other then
Bishops, and the Bishops none other then Priests, etc. Neither were they
chosen, as they be now adays, etc. But they were chosen not only of the
Bishop, but with the consent of the people, among whom they should have their
Living, as shows Cyprian, and the people ought to have power (as he says) to
choose Priests, etc. But alas! such Elections are now banished, and new Fashions
brought in.

In his Answer to the thirteenth Demand. Page 404, 405.
-- I say that there is a Purgatory in this world, the Fire of Tribulation,
through which all Christians shall pass, 2 Timothy 2.
as testifies Paul, whose testimony is full, notable, and true, albeit that few
do know it, and fewer will believe it, That all that will live godly in Christ
Jesus shall suffer persecution. In this Purgatory do I now reckon my self to
stand; God send me well to persevere unto his honor. 1 Pet. 3.
Of this speaks St. Peter, -- For a season ye are sundry ways afflicted and
tormented, that the trial of your Faith, etc. though it be tried with fire,
might be found unto laud, glory, and honor, at the appearing of Jesus Christ,
etc. other Purgatory know I none. --

In his Answer to the seventeenth Demand. Page 409.
-- For So Much as no positive law of man, made without foundation of Scripture,
may bind any person, so that in breaking of such he shall therefore sin deadly,
and of this sort made by man is the Fast of Lent, and other days ordained in
your laws without authority of Scripture, etc. --

In his Answer to the one and twentieth Demand. Page 410.
-- Men may be wrongfully suspected of heresy, as the Bishops and Priests,
with their Orator Tertullus suspected Paul, Acts 24.
etc. And their Predecessors spoke of the Prophets, yea, and of Christ himself,
calling him a Seducer and Preacher of heresy. Men being thus suspected, ought
in no wise therefore to cease preaching, as is evident in the instance of Peter
and John, Acts 4.5, 6.
etc. which is written without doubt for our instruction, so that thereby you
may see when men be wrongfully suspected or in^amed of heresy, Page 411.
and so prohibited by Bishops to preach the Word of God, that they ought for no
man's commandment to leave or stop, etc. --

In his Answer to the two and twentieth Demand. -- Priests have two names in
Scripture, Pres^yteri and Sacerdo^es. They are most usually called Presbyteri,
who are set to be Prelates in the Church, to guide the same by his blessed
Word. And Priests thus called Presbyteri in the Primitive Church (what time
were but few Traditions and Ordinances to let us from the strait institution
made by Christ and his Apostles) were the very same and none other but Bishops.
Titus 1.
-- As many as are in this wise Priests, ought to preach freely the Word of God
in all places and times convenient, etc. Others be called Priests by this word
Sacerdotes, Page 512. ^ev. 1. 1 Pet. 2.
and thus be all Christians, etc. These ought not all to preach openl^ in
general Assemblies, etc. yet privately are they bound for instruction of their
Servants, Children, Kinsfolk, etc. to speak that should be for the destruction
of vice, ^phes. 6.
and upholding and increase of virtue, etc. -- Notwithstanding this I say, both
by supportation of Gods Law, and also of Laws written in the D^crees, that in
time of great necessity Lay people may preach, etc. --

P^g. 413.
In his Answer to the four and twentieth Demand. -- Excommunication binds
before God, if it be lawfully denounced, if the persons be guilty, and if it be
done with the consent of others gathered with the Bishop in Christ's Name for
the behoof of Christ's Church; for so used St. Paul in excommunicating the
incestuous Corinthian, 1 Cor. 5. Mat. 18.
and Christ requires, etc. So that excommunication ought to be done (as
methinketh) by the Congregation assembled together with their Pastor, whose
advice they ought principally to esteem and follow, if it be virtuous and godly.

In his Answer to the thirtieth Demand. Page 417.
-- Where you speak of Prelates Deputies, I think such be little behoveful to
Christ's flock. It were right and necessary, that as the Prelates themselves
will have the Revenues, etc. they should themselves labor and teach diligently
the Word of God, and not shift the labor from one to another, till (pity it
is) all be left undone. Such does Saint John call thieves and murderers, etc.
-- God would have every man get his living by the sweat of his own face, i. e.
by his labor, according to his estate and calling. --

In his Answer to the five and thirtieth Demand. Page 418.
-- That one singular person may judge more rightly, then a great multitude
assembled in a Council, appears by Gods Law, and by the Law of man. John 11.
Acts 5.
Caiaphas is one instance; A whole Council did submit to his Sentence. Gamaliel
is another. Agreeable to this we find in the Decrees, Did. 31. the whole
Council of Nice commending the Sentence of Paphnutius, and upon this, that
Paphnutius did resist and prevail against the whole Council; the Gloss notes,
that one singular person may gainsay an universal generality, having a
reasonable cause on his side. Panormitane also gives his suffrage. I would
(says he) rather believe one Lay person, bringing in for him authority of
Scripture, then universal Council, that ordains a thing without Scripture.

Page 422.
In his Answer to the five and fortieth Demand. -- Concerning opinions or
conclusions I can tell you of none other then I have showed: The sum whereof I
think concluded in these two Scripture Propositions, Acts 4.
(1) Christ is the Head cornerstone of our faith, whereupon it should be
grounded, neither is there salvation in any other, etc. (2) Men do worship God
in vain, Isa. 29.
teaching doctrines and precept or laws humane. Thus I certify you of all the
opinions and conclusions which I intend or have intended to sustain, and not to
decline from, neither for fear, nor yet for love of man or men. --

These Answers of Mr. Lambert the five and forty Articles against him were
directed and delivered to Dr. Warham Arch Bishop of Canterbury, about the year
1532.

From the danger he was in at that time he was delivered by the death of Dr.
Warham; Fuller's Eccles H^st. Cent. 16. l. 5. pog. 229.
but falling into fresh Troubles through the indiscretion of Dr. Tailor and Dr.
Barnes, to make the quicker work (following the precedent of St. Paul,
appealing to Caesar) he appeals to the King: who having lately taken upon him
the Title of the Supreme Head of the Church of England, would show that Head
had a Tongue could speak in matters of Divinity. In Whitehall the place and day
is appointed, where an Act-Royal was kept, the King himself being Opponent, and
Lambert the Answerer.

Fox, Vol. 2. page 424.
When the King commanded him to declare his mind, etc. He gave God thanks, which
had so inclined the heart of the King, that he himself would not disdain to
hear, and understand the controversies of Religion; for that it happens
oftentimes, through the cruelty of the Bishops, that many good and innocent men
in many places are privily murdered and put to death without the Kings
knowledge. But now forasmuch as that High and Eternal King of Kings, in whose
hands are the hearts of all Princes, has stirred up the Kings mind, that he
himself will be present to understand the Causes of his Subjects. I do not
doubt, but that God will bring some great thing to pass through him, to the
setting forth of the glory of his Name.

When the King was worsted and wearied, Arch Bishop Cranmer supplied his place,
arguing though civilly, shrewdly against the truth; and (says Dr. Fuller) his
own private judgment: See his Eccles. Hist Cent. 16. l. 5. page 229.
which was worse (says the same Author) then keeping the clothes of those who
killed Stephen, seeing this Arch Bishop did actually cast stones at this Martyr
in the Arguments he urged against him. See his Worthies of England page 319.
Yet after his whole body was reduced to ashes, his heart was found entire and
untouched; an argument of his cordial integrity to the Truth, though fear too
much prevailed, and too often on him.

After the Dispute was ended, Fox, Vol. 2. page 426.
the King said unto him, What say thou now? Art thou yet satisfied? Will thou live or die? what say thou? Thou have yet free choice. Mr. L^mbert
answered, I commend my soul unto the hands of God, but my body I wholly yield
and submit to your clemency.

The King notwithstanding commanded the Lord Cromwell to re^d the Sentence of
Condemnation against him. And it is very observable, that through the
pestiferous and crafty counsel of Gardener, Satan (who oftentimes raises up
one Brother to destroy another) brought about the death of this Martyr by such,
viz. Tailor, Barnes, Cranmer, and Cromwell, who afterward suffered the like
for the Gospels sake.

Page 427.
After his legs were consumed and burned to the stumps, he lifting up such hands
as he had, and his fingers ends flaming with fire, cried unto the people in
these words, None but Christ, none but Christ.

See None but Christ.
Mr. Clement Cotton in his Epistle to the Reader, before his None but Christ
notes, that these words were uttered by Mr. Lambert, as the triumphant voice of
Faith, after that he had through the power of Christ put to flight the fear of
Hell, Sin, and Death, etc. as by doubling of them may appear: and that by way
of imitation (not tying any to syllables) they well beseem the thoughts and
speeches also of every Christian, upon sure and safe grounds, as in their
daily, so even in their last conflicts to be taken up and used.

Latimer.
Fox, Vol. 3. page 457.
After Mr. Hugh Latimer was converted, and was become famous for preaching the
Word, Dr. Redman wrote to him to dissuade him: to which Letter he returned the
following Answer; Reverend Mr. Redman, It is enough for me, that Christ's Seep
hear no man's voice but Christ's; and as for you you have no voice of Christ
against me, whereas for my part I have an heart ready to hearken to any voice
of Christ, that you can bring me. Thus fare you well, and trouble me no more
from talking with the Lord my God.

Page 458.
When he was cited to appear before Dr. Warham, Arch Bishop of Canterbury, etc.
and kept in London from his charge at West Kingston in Wiltshire, he wrote to
the Arch Bishop, expostulating the case with him thus. -- If Peter thought it
just, that by reason of his Office he should not cease to teach and admonish
the people, whilst he should be in this Tabernacle, and that he should be so
much the more instant therein, the nearer he drew to death. It cannot but seem
unjust that those, that will not preach themselves, should hinder those that
are willing, unless they be throughout conformable to their wills. --
Whatsoever I may suffer for the Truth cannot trouble me; for God lives, and he
has taken the care of me. -- O that we were as diligent in, and as much
devoted to what God requires, as our own inventions. -- Hitherto I stand
immovable for Gods commands, and so seek not my own gain or glory, but
Christ's, and so shall stand whilst I breath. Page 459.
-- Who does not see a manifest abuse of many things? and seeing, grieve not
because thereof? and grieving, does not labor the removal thereof? and when
shall it be removed, whilst the use is preached up, and the abuse concealed?
the truth is the abuse cannot but so long reign. -- Go forth and teach all
things (says Christ) What all things? All things (says he) which I commanded
you; he does not say all things, that shall seem unto your selves fit to be
preached. Go to therefore I beseech you by the immortal God, let us all and
every one intend with all our soul to preach what God requires, lest we become
Adulterators and Hucksters of preaching, rather then true Preachers; especially
seeing men are most dull toward the things of God, and most ready for their
own things, needing no spurs at all, being deceived by an unjust estimation of
things, and an innate superstition, received from forefathers, which can
scarce be healed by any preaching, though frequent, earnest, and sincere.

Hence I dare not subscribe to the rude Propositions; because I dare not be a
means of the continuing of popular superstition, lest I be the Author of my own
damnation thereby. -- It is not I assure you any pride that hinders me from
that Subscription, which your Lordship has so often to my very great grief
required of me. It cannot but be wicked not to obey the Fathers of the Church;
but yet they must see what and wherein they command, seeing it is said in a
certain place, We ought to obey God rather then man. --

The rude Propositions (as he calls them) to which he was required to
subscribe, may be seen in Mr. Fox in the same Page.

Page 462.
In a Sermon of his at Stamford, October. 9. 1550. he has the following words
concerning the crafty and deceitful handling of those Bishops in his
Examinations, and what subtle devices they used to entrap him. I was once
(says he) in Examination before five or six Bishops, where I had much
turmoiling. Every Week thrice I came to Examination, and many snares and traps
were laid to get something. Now God knows I was ignorant of the Law, but that
God gave me answer and wisdom what I should speak. It was God indeed; for else
I had never escaped them. At last the Chamber wherein I was wont to be examined
was somewhat altered; whereas there was wont to be a fire in the Chimney, now
there was none but Arras was hanged over the Chimney. A subtle Question being
propounded to me; I pray you Mr. Latimer (said one) speak out, I am very thick
of hearing, and here be many that sit afar off. I marvelled at this, that I was
bid speak out, and began to suspect somewhat, and gave an ear to the Chimney,
and there I heard a Pen moving, they having appo^nted one there to write all my
Answers. God was my good Lord, and gave me answer, I could never else have
escaped it.

After he was made Bishop of W^rcester, he was accused before the King, the
Story whereof he gives us in a Sermon he preached afterward, before King
Edward. In the Kings days that is dead (says he) many of us were called
together before him to say our minds in certain matters. In the end one
kneeling down, accuses me for preaching seditious Doctrine. A heavy
salutation. The King turned to me and said; What say you to that Sir? Then I
kneeled down, and turned me first to my Accuser, and said, Sir, What form of
preaching would you appoint me in preaching before a King? Would you have me
preach nothing as concerning a King in the King's Sermon? Page 461.
-- Then turning to the King, I said, I never thought my self worthy, nor did I
ever sue to be a Preacher before your Grace, but I was called to it, etc. And
if your Grace allow me for a Preacher, I would desire your Grace to give me
leave to discharge my Conscience, and to frame my Doctrine according to my
Audience. --

And I thank Almighty God (which has always been my remedy) that my sayings
were well accepted of the King, etc. It is even as the Scripture says, The
Lord directs the Kings heart. Certain of my Friends came to me with tears in
their eyes, and told me they looked I should have been in the Tower the same
night.

Upon the coming in of the six Articles, he did of his own free accord resign
his Bishopric, and so was silent till King Edward's days.

At what time he first put off his Rocket in his Chamber among his Friends,
Suddenly he gave a skip in the floor for joy, feeling his shoulders so light,
and being discharged (as he said) of such an heavy burden.

In King Edward's days he was a diligent Preacher, Page 462.
and an hard Student at his study about two of the Clock in the Morning, Winter
and Summer, though his body had been sore bruised by the fall of a Tree, and he
above sixty seven years of age) and by the same Spirit he did so evidently
foreshew and prophecy of all those plagues, which a^terward ensued, that if
England ever had a Prophet, he was one.

As touching himself, he ever affirmed, That the preaching of the Gospel would
cost him his li^e, to the which he no less cheerfully prepared himself, then
certainly was persuaded that Winch^ster was kept in the Tower for that purpose,
as the event did too truly prove the same.

Fuller 's Ecclesiastiastical History, Cent. 16. l. 7. page 405.
It may be queried, Seeing that Latimer was outed of his Bishopric in the days
of King Henry the Eighth, on the account of the sixth Article, why was he not
restored to the same under King Edward the Sixth, especial seeing Heath his
Successor was legally deprived, and the place actually void; whereas on the
contrary, Hugh Latimer continued Hugh Latimer, without any addition of
preferment? A late Ecclesiastical Historian answers, It was not for want of any
favor from the King, etc. nor because his downright Sermons disobliged the
Courtiers, who generally delight in soft Preaching, as in soft Clothing; nor
out of sullenness, because he would not be bedded again with that wife, which
(though unwillingly) had in his absence embraced another, etc. But we impute it
either to his conscience (oft-times sharpest in the bluntest men) because he
would not be built on the ruins of another, especially knowing Heath one of a
meek and moderate nature; or to his age, who Barzillai like was superannuated
for earthly honor, etc. Or because he found himself not fit for Government,
better for Preaching, then Ordering Ecclesi^stical Affairs: Or lastly, because
he prophetically foresaw, that the ingratitude of the English Nation would
shorten their happiness, and King Edward's life; and he was loath to come into a
place, only to go out thereof. Sure I am it was a loud lie, which Parsons
tells, That Latimer was kept bare. He kept himself bare, living not in the want
but neglect, yea contempt of all worldly wealth; though he was the Corban or
Treasury, into which restored-ill-gotten-goods were cast to be bestowed on the
poor, according to his discretion.

At the coming of Queen Mary (by the means no doubt of Winchester) a Pursevant
was sent down to cite him to appear at London, Fox, Vol. 3. page 462.
of which John Carles gave him notice six hours before; yet he would not
escape, but prepared himself for his journey before the said Messenger came to
his house, at which the Pursevant wondered: thereupon he said unto him; My
Friend, you be a welcome Messenger to me. And be it known unto you, and to all
the world, that I go as willingly to London at this present, being called by my
Prince to render an account of my Doctrine, as ever I was at any place in the
world. I doubt not, but that God, as he has made me worthy to preach his Word
before two excellent Princes, so will he enable me to witness the same unto the
third, either to her comfort or discomfort eternally, etc.

As he came up to London through Smithfield, without the Pursevant (for he
having delivered his Letters, departed, affirming, that he had command not to
tarry for him; whereby it is evident they would have had him fled out of the
Realm) he said merrily, That Smithfield had long groaned for him.

In the Tower being kept without fire in the frosty weather, he bade the
Lieutenant's man tell his Master, That if he did not look better to him,
perhaps he would deceive him. The Lieutenant charging him with these words; His
Answer was, I did indeed say so; for you look, I think, that I should burn; but
except you let me have some fire, I am like to deceive your expectation, for I
am like here to starve for cold.

From the Tower he was transported to Oxford with Archbishop Cranmer, and
Bishop Ridley to dispute with the learned Men of both Universities about the
Presence, Substance, and Sacrifice of the Sacrament.

Page 49.
When he was brought before the Commissioners, and appointed to dispute, he
alleged age, sickness, disuse and lack of Books, saying, That he was almost as
meet to dispute, as to be a Captain of Calice; but he would (he said) declare
his mind either by writing or word, and would stand to all that they could lay
upon his back, complaining, That he was permitted to have neither Pen nor Ink,
nor any Book, but only the New Testament, then in his hand, which (he said) he
had read over seven times deliberately, and yet could not find the Mass in it,
neither the Marrow-bones, nor the sinews of the same.

Page 80, 81.
When he was brought to dispute, in the Close of his Protestation, which he
delivered to Dr. Weston in writing, saying, Let me here protest my Faith, for I
am not able to dispute, and afterward do your pleasure with me. He has these
words; O Sir, you may chance to live till you come to this age and weakness,
that I am of. I have spoken in my time before two Kings, more then once, two,
or three hours together, without interruption, but now I could not be suffered
to declare my mind before you, no not by the space of a Quarter of an hour,
without snatchings, revilings, checks, rebukes, and taunts. -- I pray God give
you grace ever well to use your gifts, and ever to remember, That he that
dwells on High, looks on the low things on the earth, and that there is no
counsel against the Lord; and also that this World has been, and yet is a
tottering World: and that though we must obey Princes, yet in the Lord; for who
so does obey them against the Lord, they be most pernicious to them, and the
greatest adversaries that they have; for they so procure Gods vengeance on
them, if God be only the Ruler of things. -- I would as fain obey my
Sovereign, as any in this Realm; but in these things I can never do it with an
upright conscience. God be merciful to us. Amen.

Then (said West^n) you refuse to dispute, will you here then subscribe. No,
good Master (said Mr. Latimer) I pray be good to an old man, you may, if it
please God, be once as old as I am; you may come to this age, and to this
debility.

Dr. Cartwright telling him, Page 84.
That he was of his opinion, but he was sorry for it, and desired he might
repent also. Will you give me leave (said Mr. Latimer) to tell what has caused
Mr. Doctor here to recant? It is Poena Legis, the Pain of the Law has brought
you back, and converted you, and many more, the which lets many to confess
God. And this is a great Argument. There are few here that can dissolve it.

Smith telling him, Page 85.
He was not of Chrysostom's and St. Austine's Faith: I am (said he) of their
Faith, when they say well, and bring Scripture for them; and farther, Austine
requires not to be believed.

Weston telling him, He could not have found his Doctrine forty years agone:
The more cause (said he) have we to thank God, that has now sent the light
into the World.

Weston pressing him to recant: You shall have no hope (said he) in me to turn.
I pray for the Queen daily even from the bottom of my heart, that she may turn
from this Religion.

Page 92.
When he was excommunicated by Weston, he said, I thank God most heartily, that
he has prolonged my life to this end, that I may in this case glorify God by
that kind of death.

When he was brought forth from the Bailiffs to see a Mass, with a general
Procession, and understood so much, he run as fast as his old bones would carry
him to a Shop, and would not look toward it.

Page 463.
After the Sentence was past upon him, he was committed again to Prison in
Oxford, where in Prayer he oftentimes continued so long kneeling, that he was
not able to rise without help; and among other things these were three
principal matters he prayed for. (1) That as God had appointed him to be a
Preacher of his Word, so he would give him grace to stand to his Doctrine to
death, that he might give his hearts blood for the same. (2) That God of his
mercy would restore his Gospel to England once again; and these words Once
again, once again he did so inculcate and beat into the ears of the Lord God,
as though he had seen God before him, and spoke to him face to face. (3) That
God would preserve the Lady Elizabeth, and make her a comfort to this
comfortless Realm of England. Neither were these things desired of him in vain,
but the Lord most graciously granted every one of these requests. (1) The Lord
assisted him to be constant to the last.

At the Stake he lifted up his eyes toward Heaven, with an amiable and
comfortable countenance, saying, God is faithful, which does not suffer us to
be tempted above our strength. Afterward he shed his blood in the Ca^se of
Christ. The blood ran out of his heart in great abundance, his body being
opened by the force of the fire. (2) The Gospel was restored again unto
England. (3) When the enemies tr^umphed, Gods Word was banished, no place left
for Gods Servants to cover their heads, God hav^ng wonderfully preserved the
Lady Elizabeth, set her on the Throne, and thereby the captivity of sorrowful
Christians was released.

In his Letter to Mr. Morice. -- I thank you that now of late you would
vouchsase to write unto me, so poor a wretch, to my great comfort among all
these my troubles. Page 465.
-- Seeing there is no pain that can break my charity and patience, cause me to
dishonor God, to displease God, to be displeased with God, nor to joy in God,
bring me from surety of Salvation, separate me from Christ, or Christ from me,
I care the less for it. --

In his Letter in answer to Dr. Sherwood. Page 468.
-- God gives us both what he knows best for us; to me patience becoming a
Christian in the midst of my sufferings, and to you as sound a judgment, as
you have now a fervent zeal. -- I said that all Popes, Bishops, Vicars,
Rectors, not entering by the door, but ascending some other way, are Thieves and
Robbers, etc. Hence you gather, that I said, all Popes, Bishops, Vicars,
Rectors, simply are so. O my Brother, is this a good collection? -- Is there
not a vast difference between these two assertions, All not entering in by the
door are Thieves, And all simply are Thieves. Whence I pray you could it seem
to you to say, Simply all are Thieves, when I said only, All not entering in by
the door are Thieves? Unless perhaps all appear to you to ascend some other
way, and not to enter by the door? If you think so, if you be wise, do not say
that you do so think, you know how dangerous it will be for you to say so. --
You say that Christ did only in secret, and not in public, task the
Pharisees; but I am but a man, not a searcher of hearts, etc.

But did not Christ by name accuse them, even before the multitude, saying, Woe
unto you, Scriles and Pharisees, Hypocrites? It is true, I am but a man, that
see not the spot lying hid in another heart, but only the life exposed to the
view of all, and so knowing them by their fruits, whom Christ would have so
known. I do condemn that course of life, whoever take it up, which I find often
condemned in the holy Scriptures, and in the holy Interpreters thereof. Am not
I then undeservedly found fault with by you? -- What I spoke rightly concerning
the Church, you wickedly calumniate as if I had made all equal with Peter as to
the use of the Keys, when there was not a word mentioned concerning the power
of the Keys, etc. -- But I only admonished my hearers, that the Church of
Christ was built upon a Rock, and not upon the Sands; least they trust in a
dead faith, and not show forth their faith by their works. --

Page 470.
In his Letter to Sir Edward Bainton. -- To recompense your goodness toward me,
I shall not cease to pray my Lord God, who is able, and also does indeed reward
all them that favor the favorers of his Truth for his sake; for the truth is
a common thing, pertaining to every man, for the which every man shall answer
another day: and I desire favor neither of your Worship, nor of any man else,
but in truth, and for the truth, I take God to witness, Page 47.
which knows all. -- I marvel not a little how the Bishop of London having so
broad, wide, and large Diocese, committed unto his Cure, and so peopled as it
is, can have leisure for preaching and teaching the Word, in season, out of
season, privately, publicly, to his own flock, convincing, exhorting,
admonishing, etc. to trouble me, or to trouble himself with me, etc. -- I do
not think Judges now adays so deeply confirmed in grace, or so impeccable, but
that it may behove and become Preachers to admonish them to do well, to examine
whether the accusers do not pervert the words of the accused; and this I did
upon occasion of the Apostles saying, Ye are not under the Law, but under
Grace. What a saying is this (said I) if it be not rightly understood. The
words sound as if he would encourage Christians to break Law, seeing they be
not under the Law: and what if Paul's adversaries would have so taken them, and
accused him of the same to my Lord of London. If he would have heard Paul
declare his own mind, he would have escaped; but if he would have rigorously
followed, utcunque allegata and probata, and have given sentence after the
relation of the Accusers, good St. Paul must have born a faggot at Paul's Cross,
the Bishop of London being his Judge.

-- But my Lord will say, Peradventure that men will not take the Preachers
words otherwise then they mean therein. Romans 3.
-- As though St. Paul's words were not otherwise taken. Page 472.
Because he said, That our unrighteousness commends the righteousness of God,
he was reported to mean, That we should do evil that good may come thereof,
though he meant nothing so, etc. Now my Lord will not think (I dare say) that
St. Paul was too blame, that he spoke no more warily, or more plainly to avoid
the offense of the people, but rather the people for that they took no better
heed to his meaning; yea, he will pity the people who had been so long nuzled
in the Doctrine of the Pharisees, and wallowed so long in darkness of man's
Traditions and Superstitions, that they were unapt to receive the bright Light
of the Truth, and wholesome Doctrine of God, uttered by St. Paul; nor do I
think that my Lord will require more circumspection in me, then was in St.
Paul, when he did not escape slanderous reports of them, that be of corrupt
judgments, who reported him to say whatsoever he appeared to them to say, or
whatsoever seemed to them to follow of his saying: So they report us to say
(says Paul) so they speak evil of us, whose damnation is just. And I think the
damnation of all such, that evil report Preachers now adays is just also: yea,
Christ himself was mis-reported and falsely accused, both as to his words, and
also as concerning the meaning of his words. He said, Destroy you, they made
it, I can destroy; He said, This Temple, they added, Made with hands, to bring
it to a contrary sense. -- He did mean of the Temple of his Body, and they did
wrest it to Solomon's Temple. -- There be three sorts of persons, which can
make no credible information. (1) Adversaries. (2) Ignorant ones, and without
judgment. (3) Whisperers, which will spew out in hudder mudder more then they
dare avow openly. The first will not, the second cannot, the third dare not:
Therefore the relation of such is not credible, and cannot occasion any
indifferent Judge to make process against any man. -- It is a great
commendation to be evil spoken of them, that be naught themselves, and to be
commended of such is many times no little reproach. God send us all grace to
wish well one to another, and to speak well one of another. Meseems it were
more comely for my Lord (if it were comely for me to say so) to be a Preacher
himself, having so great a Cure, as he has, then to be a Disquieter of
Preachers, and to preach nothing at all himself.

-- I am sure St. Paul, the true Minister of God, and faithful Dispenser of
Gods Mysteries, and right Exemplar of all true and very Bishops, says, Though
some preach Christ of envy, Phil. 1.
thinking to obscure me, and bring my authority into contempt, some of good
will thinking to comfort me, notwithstanding so that Christ be preached, I joy
and will joy: So much he regarded more the Glory of Christ, and Promotion of
Christ's Doctrine to the edification of Souls, then the Maintenance of his own
Authority, Reputation and D^gnity, considering that what Authority he had, it
was to Edification, and not to Destruction. Now I think it were no reproach to
my Lord, but rather very commendable, to joy with Paul, and be glad that Christ
be preached qis vis modo, yea, though it were for envy, in disdain, despite,
and contempt of his Lordship.

-- The University of Cambridge has Authority to admit twelve early, of which
I am one, and the Kings Highness did decree, That all admitted of Universities
should preach throughout his Realm, as long as they preached well. -- To
inhibit a Preacher admitted of the King, is to disobey the King. -- We low
Subjects are bound to obey Powers, and their Ordinances, and are not the
highest Subjects also, who ought to give us an ensample of such obedience? As
for my preaching it self, I trust in God my Lord of London cannot justly blame
and reprove it, if it be taken as I spoke it, or else it is not my preaching,
but his that falsely reports it; Page 473.
as Martial says to one that depraved his Book: Quem recitas meus est, O
Fidentine, libellus;
Sed male dum recitas, incipit esse tuus.


In English thus; Mine is the Book thou read Fidentine;
But thou not reading right do make it thine.


Now I hear that my Lord of London is informed, and has informed the King,
that I go about to defend Bilney and his cause against his Ordinaries and
Judges, whereas I had nothing to do with Bilney, except his Judges did him
wrong; for I did nothing else but admonish all Judges indifferently to do
right. -- It might have become a Preacher to say as I said, though Bilney had
never been born. I have known Bilney a great while, I think much better then
ever did my Lord of London, and to tell you the truth, I have known hitherto
few such, so prompt and ready to do every man good after his power, both
friends and foes, etc. In sum, a very simple good Soul, nothing meet for this
wretched world, whose blind fashion and miserable state (yet far from Christ's
Doctrine) he could as evil bear, and would sorrow, lament, and bewail it, as
much as any man that ever I knew. -- I cannot but wonder, if a man living so
mercifully, so charitably, so patiently, so continently, so studiously and
virtuously, and killing his old Adam, i. e. mortifying his evil effections, and
blind motions of his heart so diligently, should die an evil death. Let him
that stands beware that he fall not. -- I am ignorant in things, that I trust
hereafter to know, as I do now know things, in which I have been ignorant
heretofore. -- It were too long to tell you, what blindness I have been in, and
how long it was ere I could forsake such folly, it was so incorporate in me;
but by continual prayer, continual study of Scripture, and often communicating
with men of more right judgment, God has delivered me, etc. yea men think
that my Lord himself has in times past thought, Page 474.
that by Gods Law a man might marry his Brothers Wife, who now both dares think
and speak the contrary: and yet this his boldness might have chanced in Pope
Julius his days, to stand him either in a Fire or a Faggot. Which thing
pondered of my Lord, might somewhat stir him up to charitable equity toward
such who labor to do good, as their power serves, with knowledge, and do hurt
to no man with their ignorance; for there is no greater distance then between
Gods Law, and not Gods Law, nor is it so, or so, because any man thinks it
so, or so; but because it is so, or so indeed, therefore we must think it so,
or so, when God shall give us knowledge thereof; for if it be indeed either so,
or not so, it is so, or not so, though all the world have thought so these
thousand years, etc. -- The matter is weighty (as you say) and ought to be
substantially looked upon, even as weighty as my life is worth; but how to look
substantially upon it, otherwise know not I, then to pray my Lord God night and
day, that as he has emboldned me to preach his Truth, so he will strengthen me
to suffer for it, to the edification of them, who have by his working taken
fruit thereby, and so I desire you and all others that favor me for his sake
likewise to pray; for it is not I (without his mighty helping hand) that can
abide that brunt; but I have trust that God will help me in time of need, which
if I had not, the Ocean I think should have divided my Lord of London and me by
this day; for it is a rare thing for a Preacher to have favor at his hand, who
is no Preacher himself, and yet ought to be. I pray God both he and I may
discharge our selves, he in his great Cure, and I in my little One to Gods
pleasure and safety of our souls. Amen.

Page 475.
In his Reply to Sir Edward Baynton's Answer. -- Truly I were not well advised
if I would not either be glad of your instruction, or yet refuse my own
reformation; but yet it is good for a man to look before he leap. -- First, you
mislike that I say I am sure I preach the Truth, saying in reproof of the same,
God knows certain Truth. Indeed none knows certain Truth but God, and those
which be taught of God, as faith Paul; for God reveals it to them: and says
Christ, They shall be all taught of God. -- As to my arrogance, either I am
certain or uncertain that it is Truth that I preach. If it be Truth, why may I
not say so, to encourage my Hearers to receive the same more fervently, and
pursue it more studiously? If I be uncertain, why dare I be so bold to preach
it? If your Friends in whom you trust so greatly be Preachers, after Sermon I
pray you ask them whether they be sure that they taught you the Truth or no. If
they say they be sure, you know what follows: if they say they be not sure,
when shall you be sure that have such doubtful Teachers? -- Our knowledge here
(you say) is but dark as through a Glass. What then? Therefore it is not
certain and sure. I deny your Argument by your leave: yea, if it be by Faith it
is most sure, for the certainty of Faith is the surest certainty, as Duns and
other School-Doctors say. There is a great difference between certain knowledge
and clear knowledge; for that may be of things a^sent, that appear not, this
requires the presence of the object or thing known. -- It is true there are
too many that have a zeal for God, but not according to knowledge: there are
also who have knowledge without zeal, holding the truth in unrighteousness: and
there are, that have lost the spiritual knowledge of Gods Word, which they had
before, because they have not ensued it, nor promoted the same, but rather with
their mother wits have impugned the wisdom of the father, and hindered the
knowledge thereof, which therefore has been taken away from them. To him has
not, that also which he has, i. e. seems to have, shall be taken away. To
abuse that, which a man has, or not to use it well, is as not to have it. --
It behooves every Preacher to have so deep and profound knowledge, that he may
call this or that Truth, which this or that he takes in hand to preach for
Truth; and yet he may be ignorant in many things, both this or that, as Apollo
was, but such things, whether this, or that, he will not attempt to preach for
the Truth. Page 476.
-- There be many things in Scripture in which I cannot discern certainly verum
and falsum, no not with all the exercise I have in Scripture, nor yet with the
help of all Interpreters I have, to content my self and others in all
scrupulosity, that may arise; but in such I am wont to wade no farther in the
stream, then that I may either go over, or else return back again, having ever
respect, nor to the ostentation of my little wit, but to the edification of
them that hear me, as far forth as I can, neither passing mine own, nor yet
their capacity. -- It is but foolish humility willingly to continue always an
infant still in Christ; -- for though Paul would not have us to think
arrogantly of our selves, and above that, which it becomes us to think of our
selves, yet he bids us so to think of our selves, as God has distributed to
every one the measure of faith. He that may not with meekness think in himself
what God has done in him, and of himself as God has done for him, how shall
he, or when shall he give due thanks to God for his gifts? -- Every opinion or
manner of teaching, which causes dissension in a Christian Congregation is not
of God, by the Doctrine of St. John; but not every thing, whereupon follows
dissension, causes dissension. -- An occasion is sometime taken, and not
given. The Galatians, having for Preachers and Teachers the false Apostles, by
whose teaching they were degenerate from the sweet liberty of the Gospel into
the sour bonds of Ceremonies, thought themselves peradventure a Christian
Congregation, when Paul writ his Epistle unto them, so that the false Apostles
might have objected to Paul, that his Apostleship was not of God; forasmuch as
there was dissension in a Christian Congregation by occasion thereof, while
some would renew their opinions by occasion of the Epistle, others would opine
as they were wont to do, and follow their great Lords and Masters, the false
Apostles, who were not Heathen, but high Prelates of the Professors of Christ.
-- I would also learn of your Friends, whether St. Hieromes Writings were of
God, which caused dissension in a Christian Congregation? What were they that
called him falsarium and corrupter of Scripture, and for envy would have bitten
him with their teeth? Unchristen or Christen? What had Unchristen to do with
Christian Doctrine? They were worshipful Fathers of a Christian Congregation,
men of much more hotter stomachs then right judgment, of a greater authority
then good charity. Page 477.
But Hierom would not cease to do good (as he says himself) for the evil
speaking of them that were naught, giving in that an ensample to us of the
same. And I pray you what mean your Friends by a Christian Congregation? all
those (trow ye) that have been Christened? But many of those be in worse
condition, and shall have greater damnation, then many Unchristned; for it is
not enough to a Christian Congregation that is of God, to have been Christened,
but it is to be considered what we promise when we be Christened, to renounce
Satan, his works, his pomps; which thing if we busy not our selves to do, let
us not crack, that we profess Christ's Name in a Christian Congregation in one
Baptism: Matt. 17.
And whereas they add, In one Lord, I read, Not every one that says Lord,
Lord, etc. And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not that I bid you? And
whereas they add, In one Faith, St. James says, Show me thy Faith by thy
Works. And the Scripture says, He that believes God, attends to his
commands. And the Devils believe to their little comfort. I pray God save you
and your Friends from that Believing Congregation. Hieron. Tom. 5. in Ieremiam,
c. 26.
-- St. Hier^m exhorts true Preachers to suffer death for the same, when evil
Priests and false Teachers and the people, that be by them deceived, are angry
with them for preaching the truth, though they be Christened as well as others.
I fear St. Hierom might appear to some Christian Congregation (as they will be
called) to write seditiously, to divide the unity of a great honest number
confessing Christ in one Baptism, one Lord, one Faith. -- Hierom calls the
Priests Masters, and very proverly: Servants teach not their own Doctrine, but
the Doctrine of their Master Christ to his glory: Masters teach not Christ's
Doctrine, but their own to their own glory. -- Your Friends have learned of St.
John, That every one that confesses Jesus Christ in flesh is of God, and I
have learned of St. Paul, That there have been, not among Heathens, but among
the Christened, who confess Christ with their mouth, and deny him with their
acts. -- I leave it to your Friends to show, Utrum qui factis negant Christum
and vita sint ex Deo necne per solam oris confessionem; for they knew well
enough from the same St. John, He that is of God sins not, and hears the
Word of God. Many shall hear, I never knew you, who shall not only be
Christened, but also Prophecy, and do many mighty works in the Name of Christ.
-- False Prophets are called naughty Servants; Servants, because they confess
Christ in the flesh; and naughty, because they deny him in their deeds, not
giving meat in due season, and exercising Mastership over the Flock. Page 478.
-- In the people there is required a judgment to discern when Gods Ordinances
are ministered, and when men's own, lest we take Chalk for Cheese, which all edge
our teeth, and hinder digestion; for it is commonly said, The blind eats many
a fly, as they did, which were persuaded of the High Priests to ask Barabbas
and crucify Christ: and ye know that to follow the blind guides is to come
into the pit with the same. -- Better it were to have a deformity in preaching,
so that some would preach the truth of God, and that which is to be preached
without cauponation and adulteration of the Word, then to have such an
uniformity, that the silly people should thereby be occasioned to continue
still in their lamentable ignorance, corrupt judgment, superstition and
idolatry, etc. -- I see well, whosoever will be happy, and busy with vae
votis, shall shortly after come coram no^is. -- I shall have need of great
patience to bear the false reports of the malignant Church. Page 479.
-- I wonder how men can go quietly to bed, who have great Cures and many, and
yet peradventure are in none of them all. -- I must suffer of necessity, and so
enter: so perilous a thing it is to live godly in Christ Jesus even in a
Christian Congregation. God make us all Christians after the right fashion.
Amen.

In his Letter to King Henry the Eighth. -- Saint Austin says, That he, who
for fear of any Power hid^th the Truth, provokes the wrath of God to come upon
him; for he fears men more then God. Saint Chrysostom says, That he is not
only a Traitor to the Truth, who openly for Truth teaches a Lie, but he also,
who does not freely pronounce and show the Truth that he knows. -- These
passages made me sore afraid, and troubled in conscience, and at last drew me
to this strait, that either I must show forth such things as I have read and
learned in the Scripture, or else be of that sort, that provoke the wrath of
God upon them and be Traitors to the Truth: the which thing rather then it
should happen, I had rather suffer extreme punishment. For what other thing is
it to be a Traitor to the Truth, then to be a Traitor and a Judas unto Christ,
who is the very Truth, and cause of all Truth? who says, That whosoever deny
him here before men, he will deny him before his Father in Heaven: the which
denying ought more to be feared and dreaded, then the loss of all temporal
goods, honor, promotion, fame, prison, slander, hurts, banishments, and all
manner of torments and cruelties, yea and death it self, be it never so
shameful and painful. But alas! how little do men fear the terrible judgment
of Almighty God? and especially they, who boast themselves to be Guides unto
others, and challenge to themselves the knowledge of holy Scriptures, yet will
neither show the Truth themselves (as they be bound) nor suffer them that
would. So that what Christ said to the Pharisees may be said to them, Woe be to
you, Matt. 23.
etc. who shut up the Kingdom of Heaven before men, Page 480.
and neither will you enter in your selves, nor suffer them that would, to
enter in. -- Now they have made it Treason to have the Scripture in English.
Here I beseech your Grace to hear patiently a word or two. Though as concerning
your Regal Power you are to me and all your Subjects in Gods stead, etc. yet as
concerning that you be a mortal man, in danger of sin, having in you the
corrupt nature of Adam, in the which all be conceived and born, and so have no
less need of the merits of Christ's Passion for your salvation, then I or other
of your Subjects have, etc. I was bold to write this rude, homely, and simple
Letter to your Grace. -- First I exhort you to make the life and process of
Christ and his Ap^stles in preaching, and the words of Christ to his Disciples,
when he sent them forth to preach his Gospel. Christ was born and lived very
poor, though he might by his Divine Power have had all the Treasures of this
World when and where he would. But this he did to show us that his Followers
should not regard and set by the Riches and Treasures of this World, if they
happen to them, they should not set their hearts upon them. Matt. 5.
It is not against the poverty in spirit, which Christ praises, to be rich, to
be in dignity and honor, so that the heart be not set upon them. They be
enemies to this poverty in spirit, though they have never so little, that have
greedy desires to the Goods of this World, only because they would live after
their own pleasure and lusts. -- I will not that your Grace should take away
the Goods due to the Church, but take away all evil persons from the Goods, and
set better in their stead. I name nor appoint no person or persons, but remit
your Grace to the Rule of our Savior Christ, Matt. 7.
By their fruits ye shall know them. -- The words that Christ spoke to his
Disciples, when he sent them to preach his Gospel, Matt. 15.
are, that here they shall be hated and despised of all men worldly, and
brought before Kings and Rulers, and that all evil should be said of them for
their preaching sake; but he exhorts them to take patiently such persecution
by his own example, saying, It becomes not the Servant to ^e above the Master,
etc. Read also the fourteeth Chapter, and there your Grace shall see that he
promised to the true Preachers no worldly promotion or dignity, but
persecution, and that they should be betrayed even by their own Brethren and
Children. In John also he says, John 16.
In the world you shall have oppression, and the w^rld shall hate you, but in
me you shall have peace: And elsewhere, Matt. 10.
Lo I send you as Sheep among Wolves. The true Preachers go like Sheep,
harmless, and be persecuted, Page 481.
and yet they revenge not their wrong, but remit all to God: So far is it off
that they will persecute any other but with the Word of God only, which is
their weapon. This is the most evident token, that Christ would that his Gospel
and the Preachers of it should be known by, that it should be despised among
worldly wise men, and be reputed foolishness by them, and deceivable Doctrine,
and the true Preachers should be persecu^ed and driven from Town to Town, and
at last lose both Goods and Life; and yet they that persecuted them should
think they did well and a great pleasure to God. -- Where the Word of God is
truly preached, there is persecution as well of the Hearers, as of the
Teachers. He that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution. It
is not only given you to believe in the Lord, but to suffer perse^ution for
his sake. Where is quietness and rest in worldly pleasure, there is not the
Truth; for the world loves all that are of the world, and hates all things
that are contrary to it. St. Paul calls the Gospel, The Word of the Cross. --
May it please your Grace to return to the golden Rule of your Savior, By their
fruits you shall know them. Where you see persecution, there is the Gospel, and
there is the Truth, and they that do persecute be without the Truth. They whose
works be naught, John 3.
dare not come to the Light, but go about to hinder it, letting as much as they
may, that the holy Scriptures should not be read in our Mother Tongue, saying,
That it would cause Heresy and Insurrections, and so persuade, or fain would
persuade your Grace to keep it back. But here mark their shameless boldness,
which be not ashamed to gather Grapes of Thorns, etc. and to call Light
Darkness, etc. and to say, That that, which teaches all Obedience, should
cause Dissension and Strife. -- Therefore good King, seeing the right David,
our Savior Christ has sent his Servants, his true Preachers and his Word to
comfort our weak and sick souls, let not worldly wise men make your Grace
believe that they will cause Insurrections and Heresies, and such Mischiefs as
they imagine of their own mad brains, lest that he be avenged upon you and upon
your Realm, as was David upon the Ammonites, and as he has ever been avenged
upon them, which have obstinately withstood and gainsaid his Word. But
peradventure they will say experience shows, How that such men as call
themselves Followers of the Gospel, regard not your Graces Command, neither set
by your Proclamation, as appears by those that were punished in London for
keeping such Books, as your Grace had prohibited by Proclamation; and so like
as they regarded not this, so they will not regard other your Laws, Statutes,
and Ordinances. But this is but a crafty persuasion. -- The very cause of your
last Proclamation, and the chief Counselors (as men say,
and of likelihood it should be) were they, whose evil living and cloked
hypocrisy those Books uttered and disclosed. -- And so it might be that these
men did not take this Proclamation as yours, but as theirs set forth in your
Name, as they have done many times more, Page 482.
etc. -- There is no man, I hear say, that can lay any word or deed to their
charge, that should sound to the breaking of your Graces Laws, this only
excepted, If it be yours, and not theirs. -- There be some that for fear of
losing of their wordly honor, will not leave off their opinion, which rashly,
and that to please men withal, by whom they had great promotion, they took
upon to desend by writing, etc. Let these men remember St. Paul and David. Take
heed of their worldly wisdom, which is foolishness before God, that you may do
what God commands, and not what seems good in your own sight without the
Word, that your Grace may be found acceptable in his sight, and one of the
Members of his Church, and according to the Office he has called your Grace
unto, you may be found a faithful Minister of his Gifts, and not a Defender of
his Faith; for he will not have it defended by man, or by man's power, but by
his Word only, by the which he has evermore defended it, and that by a way
far above man's power or reason, etc. Wherefore Gracious King, remember your
self, have pity upon your soul, and think that the day is even at hand, when
you shall give an account of your Office, and of the Blood that has been shed
with your Sword. In the which day, that your Grace may stand steadfastly and not
be ashamed, but be clear and ready in your reckoning, and to have (as they say)
your quietus est sealed with the blood of our Savior Christ, which only
serves at that day, is my daily Prayer.

December. 1. A. 1530.


Observe in this Letter (says Mr. Fox) the duty of a right Pastor to Truth;
that Kings are many times abused by Flatterers and wicked Counselors, the
subtle practices of Prelates in abusing the Name and Authority of Kings to set
forth their own malignant proceedings, and the great boldness and divine
stoutness of this Servant of Christ, who as yet being no Bishop, so plainly and
freely, without fear of death, adventuring his Life to discharge his
Conscience, durst so boldly, to so mighty a Prince, in such a dangerous case,
against the Kings Law and Proclamation, Page 483.
set out in such a terrible time, take upon him to write, and to admonish that,
which no Councellor durst once speak to him, in defense of Christ's Gospel: and
yet though his wholesome counsel did not prevail, God so wrought with his
Servant in doing his duty, that no danger, no nor displeasure rose to him
thereby. It was not long after that the King made him Bishop of Worcester.

Page 486.
Touching the memorable acts and doings of this worthy man, I cannot neglect the
taking notice of one (for therein he spoke notably, though he said not a word)
viz. his bold enterprise in sending to King Henry a Present. It was a custom
that every year upon Ian. 1. every Bishop should send the King a
New-years-gift. Mr. Latimer, being then Bishop of Worcester, presented a New
Testament for his New-years-gift, with a Napkin having this Posy about it.
Fornicat^res and Adulteros judicabit Dominus, i. e. Whoremongers and Adulterers
God will jundge.

In his Letter to Mrs. Wi^kinson out of Bocardo in Oxford. -- If the gift of a
pot of cold water shall not be in oblivion with God, how can God forget your
manifold and bountiful gifts, when he shall say to you, I was in Prison and you
visited me. God grant us all to do and suffer, while we be here, as may be to
his will and pleasure, Amen.

Yours in Bocardo, H. L.


In his Letter to Dr. Ridley, Fox, Vol. 3. page 433.
-- You say except the Lord assist me with his gracious aid, in the time of his
Service, I shall (I know) play but the part of a white-livered Knight. John 15.
Truth it is, for, Without me (says Christ) ye can do nothing, much less
suffer death of our Adversaries, through the Bloody Law prepared against us:
But it follows, If you abide in me, and my Word abide in you, ask what you
will, and it shall be done for you. What can be more comfortable? Page 434.
-- Better a few things well pondered, then to trouble the memory with too
much. You shall prevail more with praying, then with studying, though mixture
be best; for so one shall alleviate the tediousness of the other. I intend not
to contend much with them in words, after a reasonable account of my Faith
given; for it shall be but in vain. They will say, as their Fatherr said, when
they have no more to say, We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to die. Be ye
steadfast and unmovable, Stand fast. If ye abide, if ye abide, etc. But we
shall be called obstinate, sturdy, ignorant, heady, and what not? So that a man
has need of much patience, that has to do with such men. -- Diotrephes now of
late did ever harp upon Unity,
Unity. Yea Sir (said I) but in Verity, not in Popery. Better is a diversity,
then an unity in Popery. -- The Marrow-bones of the Mass are altogether
detestable, and therefore by no means to be born withal: so that of necessity
the mending of it is to abolish it for ever. Page 435.
-- What fellowship has Christ with Antichrist? -- Come forth from among them
and separate your selves from them, says the Lord. It is one thing to be the
Church indeed, and another thing to counterfeit the Church. Page 439.
-- I thank you, that you have vouchsafed to minister so plentiful Armor unto
me, being otherwise altogether unarmed, saving that he cannot be left destitute
of help, who rightly trusts in the help of God. I only learn to die in
reading of the New Testament, and am still praying to my God to help me in time
of need. Page 441.
-- My Prayer shall you not lack, trusting that you do the like for me; for
indeed there is the help, etc. -- There is no remedy (now they have the Master
bowl in their hand and rule the roast) but patience. Better it is to suffer
what cruelty they will put upon us, then to incur Gods high indignation.
Wherefore be of good cheer in the Lord, duly considering what he requires of
you, and what he does promise you. Our common enemy shall do no more then God
will permit him. God is faithful who will not suffer us to be tempted above our
strength, etc. Be at a point what you will stand to: stick unto that, and let
them both say and do what they list. They can but kill the body, which is of it
self mortal: neither shall they do that when they list, but when God will
suffer them, when the hour appointed is come. -- Let them not deceive you with
their sophistical sophisms and fallacies: you know that false things may have
more appearance of truth, then things that be most true. Remember Paul's
watchword, Col. 2.
Let no man deceive you with likeliness of speech. -- Fear of death does most
persuade a great number: be well ware of that argument. -- The flesh is weak,
but the willingness of the spirit shall refresh the weakness of the flesh. The
number of the Cryers under the Altar must needs be fulfilled. If we be
segregated thereunto, Happy are we. That is the greatest promotion, that God
gives in this world to be such Philippians, to whom it is given, not only to
believe, but to suffer, etc. But who is able to do these things? Surely all our
ability, all our sufficiency is of God. He requires and promises. Let us
declare our obedience to his will, when it shall be requisite, in the time of
trouble, yea, in the midst of the fire. When that Number is fulfilled, which I
ween shall be shortly, then have at the Papists, when they shall say, Peace,
all things are safe, etc. Christ shall come gloriously, to the terror of all
Papists; but to the great consolation of all that will here suffer for him.
Comfort your selves one another with these words. -- Pray for me, pray for me,
I say; pray for me, I say; for I am sometime so fearful, that I would creep
into a Mouse-hole: sometime again God does visit me with his comfort. So he
comes and goes, to teach me to feel and know mine infirmity, to the intent to
give thanks to him that is worthy, lest I should rob him of his due, as many
do, yea almost all the world. Farewell. Fare you well once again, and be thou
steadfast and unmovable in the Lord. Paul loved Timothy mavelous well,
notwithstaing he says unto him, 2 Timothy 1.
Be thou partaker of the affliction of the Gospel, and again, Harden thy self
to suffer afflictions. Be faithful unto death, Rev. 2.
and I will give thee a Crown of Life, says the Lord.

Mr. Fox records one Letter more of this holy man's, which he wrote when he was
Bishop of Worcester to a Justice of Peace, who could not at first bear his
being told by this Servant of God his fault in oppressing and wronging a poor
man, but sent him word in great displeasure, that he would not take it at his
hands, etc. but afterward proved a good man: in which Letter his close is very
observable. Consider with your self (says Mr. Latimer) what it is to oppress
and defraud your Brother, Page 485.
and what follows thereof. It is truly said, The sin is not forgiven, except
the thing be restored again, that is taken away. No restitution, no salvation:
which is as well to be understood of things gotten by fraud, Page 486.
guile, and deceit, as of things gotten by open theft and rollery. I will do
the best I can, and wrestle with the Devil omnibus v^ri^us, to deliver you and
your Brother out of his possession. I will leave no one stone unmoved to have
you both saved. There is neither Arch Bishop, nor Bishop, nor any learned man
in either University, or elsewhere, that I am acquainted with, that shall not
write to you, and by their learning confute you. There is no godly man of Law
in this Realm, that I am acquainted with, but they shall write to you, and
confute you by Law. There is neither Lord nor Lady, nor any Noble person in
this Realm, that I am acquainted with, but they shall write unto you, and
godlily threaten you with their Authority. I will do all this, yea, I will
kneel upon both my knees before the Kings Majesty and all his honorable
Council, with most humble Petition for your Reformation, rather then the Devil
shall possess you still to your final damnation: so that I do not despair, but
verily trust one way or other to pluck both you and your crabbed Brother (as
crabbed as you say he is) out of the Devils claws, maugre the Devils heart. --

In the month of October, An. 1555. Mr. Latimer and Dr. Ridley were brought
forth together to their final Examination and Execution.

At his last appearence, Page 499.
being pressed to recant, he said, -- I must use here the counsel of Cyprian, who
when he was ascited before certain Bishops, that gave him leave to take
deliberation and counsel, to try and examine his opinion, he answered them
thus. In sticking to, and persevering in the truth, no counsel nor deliberation
must be taken; and being asked, which was most like to be the Church of Christ,
whether the persecuted, or the persecutor? Christ (said he) has foreshewed,
That he that does follow him must take up his Cross. How think you then my
Lords, Is it like that the Sea of Rome, which has been a continual persecutor,
is rather the Church, or that small flock, which has always been persecuted
even to death.

Mr. Latimer being told, That his and St. Cyprian's case was not one: Yes
verily (said he) my cause is as good as St. Cyprian's; for his was persecution
for the Word of God, and so is mine.

As he was going to Execution, Page 502.
Dr. Ridley spying him behind him, said; O be ye there? Yes (said Mr. Latimer)
have after as fast as I can follow.

When he could not be suffered to answer Dr. Smith's Sermon at their Execution,
Page 503.
on that in the Corinthians: If I give my body to be burned, and have not
charity, etc. he said; Well, there is nothing hid, but it shall be opened.

When a Faggot was brought kindled with fire, and laid at Dr. Ridley's feet, Mr.
Latimer said, Be of good comfort Mr. Ridley, and play the man; We shall this
day light such a Candle by Gods Grace, in England, as I trust will never be put
out.

He received the flame, as it were embracing it, and crying out vehemently, O
Father of Heaven receive my soul.

Laverock.
Fox, Vol. 3. page 701.
Hugh Laverock, an old lame man, after he was chained to the Stake, cast away
his Crutch; and comforting John Apprice a blind man, his Fellow-Martyr, said
unto him, Be of good comfort, my Brother, for my Lord of London is our good
Physician, he will heal us both shortly; thee of thy blindess, and me of my
lameness.

Lavoy.
Fox, Vol. 2. p. 129, 130.
Mr. Aymond de Lavoy, a French Minister, having intelligence that some were sent
to apprehend him; and being willed by his Friends to fly, and shift for
himself, he said, That he had rather never to have been born, then so to do. It
is the office of a good Shepherd, not to fly in time of peril, but rather to
abide the danger, lest the Flock be scattered; or else, least in so doing, he
should leave some scruple in their minds, Thus to think, That he had fed them
with dreams and fables, contrary to the Word of God. Wherefore beseeching them
to move him no more therein, he told them; That he feared not to yield up both
body and soul in the quarrel of that Truth which he had taught, saying with St.
Paul, I am ready not only to be bound for the testimony of Christ in the City
of Bourdeaux, but to die also.

When his Hearers flew upon the Sumner to deliver their Preacher out of his
hands, he desired them not to stop his Martyrdom, seeing it was the Will of
God that he should suffer for him, he would not (said he) resist.

Whilst he was in Prison, he bewailed exceedingly his former life, though there
was no man that could charge him outwardly with any crime.

One of the Presidents coming to him, and shaking him by his beard, bid him
tell what fellows he had of his Religion. None (said he) but such as know and
do the Will of God my Father, whether they be Nobles, Merchants, Husbandmen, or
of whatsoever degree they be.

In his torments in Prison he comforted himself thus; This body once must die,
but the Spirit shall live. The Kingdom of God abides for ever.

In the time of his tormenting, being but of a weak body, he swounded:
afterward coming to himself again, he said; O Lord, Lord, why have thou
forsaken me? The President answering, Nay wicked Lutheran, thou have forsaken
God; Alas! (said he) why do ye thus torment me? O Lord, I beseech thee, forgive
them, they know not what they do.

All their tortures could not force him to confess one man's name; but he said
unto them, I thought to have found more mercy with men; Wherefore I pray God I
may find mercy with him.

To the Friars that came to confess him after his condemnation, he said;
Depart, I will confess my sins to the Lord. Do ye not see how I am troubled
enough with men? will ye yet trouble me more? others have had my body, will ye
also take from me my soul? away from me.

At last he took a certain Carmelite, bidding the rest to depart, whom after
much talk he did convert to the Truth.

Such trust have I (said he to the Judge) in my God, that the same day when I
shall die, I shall enter into Paradise.

Page 131.
The Church (said he) is a Greek word, signifying as much as Congregation or
Assembly. And so I say, Whenever the Faithful do congregate together to the
honor of God, and amplifying of Christian Religion, the Holy Ghost is verily
with them. By this it should follow (said the Judge) that there be many
Churches. It is no absurd thing (said he) to say there be many Churches or
Congregations among the Christians; Gal. 1.
and so speaks St. Paul, To all the Churches which are in Galatia.

When the Judges left him, looking on him as a damned Creature, he said with
St. Paul, Who shall separate me from the love of God, shall the sword, hunger,
or nakedness; No, nothing shall pluck me from him.

As he was carried to the place of Execution, he sang Psalm. 114. and preaching
still as he went, one of the Soldiers bidding the Carter therefore to drive
apace, John 8.
he said unto him, He that is of God hears the Word of God.

Many being offended, that passing by an image of the Virgin Mary, he would not
pray unto her; lifted up his voice to God, praying, That he would not suffer
him at any time to invocate any other but him alone.

At his Execution he said, O Lord, Make haste to help me, tarry not, do not
despise the work of thy hands: and you my Brethren, that be Students, I exhort
you to learn the Gospel; for the Word of God abides for ever. Labor to know
the Will of God, and fear not them that kill the body, but have no power upon
your souls. My flesh repugneth marvellously against the Spirit, but shortly I
shall cast it away. I beseech you pray for me. O Lord my God, into thy hands I
commend my soul.

Laurence.
I find three of this name recorded in the Book of Martyrs.

First, Fox. Vol. 1. page 92.
Laurence the Deacon, when Xistus his Pastor was martyred under the Emperor
Valerianus, was grieved that the Son should be secluded from the Father, that
he should not suffer with him. Seeing him led alone as a Sheep to the
slaughter, he cried out to him: O Dear Father, whither go thou without the
company of thy dear Son? whither hastenest thou, O Reverend Pastor, without
thy Deacon? never wast thou wont to offer sacrifice without thy Minister? What
crime is there in me, that offends thy fatherhood? Deniest thou unto him the
fellowship of thy blood, to whom thou have committed the distribution of the
Lords blood? --

He having after three days respit promised the merciless Tyrant to declare
where the Churches treasure lay, Page 93.
caused a good company of poor Christians to be congregated, and when the day
of his answer was come, and he was strictly charged to staud to his promise; he
stretching out his arms over the poor, said; These are the precious treasure of
the Church, these are the treasure indeed, in whom the faith of Christ
reigns, in whom Jesus Christ has his mansion-place: What more precious
jewels can Christ have, then those in whom he has promised to dwell. It is
written, I was hungry, and ye gave me to eat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me to
drink; I was harbourless, and ye lodged me. Look what ye have done to the least
of these, the same have ye done to me. --

No tongue is able to expre^s the Tyrant's fury and madness hereupon. Kindle
the fire of wood (says he) make no spare. Has this Villain deluded the
Emperor? Away with him; away with him, whip him, buffet him, brain him,
Jesteth the Traitor with the Emperor? roast him, boil him, toss him, turn him
on pain of our high Displeasure, do every one his office O ye Tormentors.

When he was on the fiery Gridiron, which was as a soft Bed of Down to him, he
spoke thus unto the Tyrant; This side is now roasted enough,
Turn up O Tyrant great,
Essay whether roasted or raw
Thou think the better meat.


Fox, Vol. 3. page 200.
Secondly, John Laurence, who was burnt at Colchester, March 29. An. 1555.

He being not able to go, being lamed with Irons in Prison, was born to the
fire in a Chair, and whilst he sat in the fire, the young children came about
the fire, and cried as well as they could, Lord strengthen thy Servant, and
keep thy promise; Lord strengthen thy Servant, and keep thy promise.

Thirdly, Henry Laurence, who was burnt at Canterbury, about the later end of
August, the same year.

Fox, Vol. 3. page 393.
He being required to put his hand to his Answers, wrote, Ye are all of
Antichrist, and him ye fol; probably he would have written, And him ye follow,
had not he been hindered.

Lawson.
Fox, Vol. 3. page 916.
Elizabeth Lawson, continuing almost three years in Prison, in which time her
own Son, and many others were burnt, said often; Good Lord, what is the cause
that I may not yet come to thee with thy children? Well, good Lord, thy blessed
Will be done, and not mine.

This good old Woman, about the age of sixty, before she went to Prison, had
the Falling Sickness; but she told a friend of hers, That after she was
apprehended, she never had it more.

Leaf.
Bonner pressing John Leaf, Fox, Vol. 3. page 306.
an Apprentice of London, to recant, he said, No; but I will die in that
Doctrine that Mr. Rogers, Hooper, Cardmaker, etc. died for. -- My Lord, you
call mine Opinion Heresy, it is the true Light of the Word of God, and I
profess I will never forsake my well-grounded Opinion, whilst I have breath in
my body.

When two Bills were sent to him in the Counter in Breadstreet, the one
containing a Recantation, the other his Confessions, to see which of them he
would sign; when that which contained his Confessions was read (for he could
neither read nor write) in stead of a Pen he took a Pin, and so pricking his
hand, sprinkled the blood upon the said Bill, willing the Reader thereof to
show the Bishop, that he had sealed the same Bill with his blood already.

Jews.
Mrs. Joyce Jews was converted by Mr. John Glover, Fox, Vol. 3. page 838.
who after she was in some trouble, willed her in any case not to meddle with
that matter in respect of vainglory, or to get her self a Name, showing to her
the great danger she was like to cast her self into, if she should meddle in
Gods matter otherwise then Christ does teach.

When the Bishop reasoned with her, she told him; I find not these things in
Gods Word, which you urge and magnify as things most needful for men's
Salvation. If these things were in the same Word of God commanded, I would with
all my heart receive, esteem, and believe them. The Bishop answering, If thou will believe no more then is in the Scriptures, concerning matters of Religion,
thou art in a damnable case; she was amazed, and being moved by the Spirit of
God, told him, That his words were ungodly and wicked.

Page 839.
When news was brought of the coming down of the Writ, de comburendo, etc. she
sent for several Christians to consult with them how she might behave her self,
that her death might be more glorious to the Name of God, comfortable to his
people, and most discomfortable to the enemies of God. As for death (said she)
I do not greatly pass, when I behold the amiable Countenance of Christ, my Dear
Savior, the ugly face of death does not greatly trouble me.

Two Priests sending her word, that they were come to hear her Confession; she
sent them word again, That she had made her Confession to Christ her Savior,
at whose hands she was sure to have forgiveness of her sins. As concerning the
Cause, for the which she should die, she had no cause to confess that, but
rather to give unto God most humble praise, that he did make her worthy to
suffer death for his Word.

And as concerning that Absolution, That they were able to give unto her, by
Authority from the Pope, she did defy the same, even from the bottom of her
heart.

About three of the Clock in the morning, before her Execution, Satan
questioned with her, How she could tell that she was chosen to eternal life,
and that Christ died for her! I grant that he died, but that he died for thee,
How can thou tell? But Satan was soon put to flight, and she comforted in
Christ, by arguing her Election, and Christ dying for her in particular from
her Vocation, and the holy Spirit working in her heart love and desire toward
God to please him, and to be justified by him through Christ, etc.

When the Sheriff about eight of the Clock that morning came into her Chamber,
and told her bluntly, That she had but one hour to live, she was somewhat
abashed; but being told by a friend, that she had great cause to praise God,
that he will so speedily take her out of this world, etc. She said, Mr.
Sheriff, your message is welcome to me, and I thank my God, that he will make
me worthy to adventure my life in his quarrel.

In her Prayer, as she was going to the Stake, she desired God most instantly
to abolish the idolatrous Mass, and to deliver this Realm from Popery. To which
most of the People said Amen, yea the Sheriff himself.

Lucius.
He said to Urbicius a corrupt Judge, Ward, page 139.
threatening death; I thank you with all my heart, that free me and release me
from wicked Governors, and send me to my good and loving Father.

Luther.
How devoted Dr. Martin Luther was to the Pope, See his Epistle to the Reader,
before the first Tome of his Works, printed at Jena, An. 1612.
when he first appeared, and what brought him upon the Stage, he himself tells
us.

-- Above all things, I desire the pious Reader, and that for the sake of our
Lord himself, Christ Jesus, not only to read these things with judgment, but
with much pity, knowing I was a Monk, and a most mad Papist, when I undertook
this Cause, so drunk with, yea drowned in Popish Doctrines, that I was most
ready to kill, and to co-work with the Murderers of all those who withdrew
their obedience from the Pope in the least. So great a Saul was I, as there be
yet many more. I was not so cold in defending the Papacy, as was Eccius
himself, and such as he, etc. So that thon wilt find in my first writings very
many and great things humbly conceded to the Pope, which now I account highest
blasphemy, and do abominate. -- At first I was alone, and most unfit and unable
to handle so great matters; I call God to witness, that his Providence, not my
own will and purpose, engaged me so far. When in the year 1517. Indulgences
were sold most shamefully, I was then a Preacher, and a young Doctor of
Divinity (as I was called) and began to dissuade the people from harkening to
the Sellers of Indulgences, and therein I thought surely I had the Pope for my
Patron, and upon that confidence was very valiant, seeing he does in the
Decrees condemn the immodesty of the Gatherers of money, so he calls the
Preachers of Indulgences. Thereupon I writ two Letters, one to the Arch Bishop
of Moguntz, who had one half of the money for the Indulgences (I knew not then
that the other half did belong to the Pope) the other to the Bishop of
Branderburg; beseeching them to restrain the impudence and blasphemy of the
Gatherers of the money. But the poor Monk was contemned. Being contemned I
published a short Disputation, and a Sermon, concerning Indulgences, and
afterward my Resolutions, and that for the Popes honor, not that Indulgences
might be condemned, but that good works of charity might be preferred before
them. This was accounted troubling of Heaven, and setting the world on fire.

I am accused unto the Pope, and am cited to appear at Rome, and against single
me rise up the whole Papacy. These things were done in the year 1518. whilst
Maximilian the Emperor held a Council at Ausburg, in which Cardinal Cajetane
was the Popes Legate. Him Prince Frederick, Duke of Saxony prevailed with, that
I should not be compelled to go to Rome, but have my business heard and
composed by himself.

Being called before him, poor I came on foot to Ausburg, upon the cost of and
with Letters of Credence from Prince Frederick to the Senate, and some other
good men, who dissuaded me (after I was come) from going to the Cardinal till I
had Caesar's safe conduct. When the Cardinals Orator was told by me so much, he
was angry. What (said he) do you think that Prince Frederick will take up Arms
for you? I answered, That I would by no means. Where then (said he) will you
abide? I answered Under Heaven. But (said he) if you had the Pope and Cardinals
in your power, what would you do? I would (said I) give them all reverence and
honor.

-- At my meeting with the Cardinal I made the following Protestation. See the
first Tome of his Works, fol. 164.
I Martin Luther an Augustine Friar protest, that I do reverence and follow the
Church of Rome in all my sayings and doings, present, past, and to come; and if
any thing has been or shall be said by me to the contrary, or otherwise, I
count it, and will that it be counted and taken as though it never had been
spoken. Having before this writ to Pope Leo the Tenth thus, Fol. 66.
-- I offer my self prostrate under the feet of your Holiness, with all that I
am and have, Save me, kill me, call me, recall me, reprove me, condemn me, even
as you please.

I will acknowledge your voice, the Voice of Christ residing and speaking in
you. --

-- Here see men in my case, how hard it is to rise out of errors generally
received, and by long custom becomes as it were natural. How true the Proverb
is, It is hard to leave customs, and custom is another nature: and how truly
Austine says; Custom if it be not resisted will become necessity. I who had
then seven years read and taught the Scriptures most diligently, privately and
publicly, and had some taste of the knowledge of Christ, viz. That we were
justified and saved not by works, but by faith in Christ, and now defended
publicly (he means in his Dispute with Eccius at Lipsia in the year 1519.)
that the Pope is not by Divine Right Head of the Church; yet I did not see what
naturally follows thence, viz. That the Pope is therefore of necessity from
the Devil, for what is not of God is necessarily of the Devil. I was (I say) so
corrupted by example and the title of holy Church and Custom, that I granted
to the Pope an humane right, which yet if it be not underpropt with Divine
Authority, is a lie and divelish; for we must obey Parents and Magistrates, not
because they command, but because it is the Will of God. Hence I can better
bear those that do even pertinaciously cleave unto Popery, especially if they
have not read the Scriptures, seeing I that so many years most diligently read
them, did notwithstanding stick thereunto so firmly. -- In the year 1519. the
Pope sent Prince Frederick a golden Rose by Charles Miltitius, who persuaded me
earnestly to be reconciled to the Pope, and to study the things of peace. I
promised that I would most willingly do whatsoever truth and my conscience
would allow, and assured him that I was most desirous of and studious for
peace; and seeing I was drawn and necessitated to do what I did, what I did was
not my fault. -- Charles is accounted unwise, and the course he took imprudent;
but in my judgment, if the Bishop of Moguntz and the Pope, before he had
condemned me unheard, had taken the same course, the business had never come to
this. -- These things I relate good Reader, That if thou will read my little
Works, thou may remember I am one of them, who (as Austine reports of
himself) profit by Writing and Teaching; not one of those, who from nothing on
a sudden become Chieftains. Farewell in the Lord, and pray for the increase of
the Word against Satan, who is always mighty and malicious, but now most
furious and raging, knowing his time is but short, and that the Kingdom of his
Pope is shaken. The Lord God confirm what he has wrought in us, and perfect
the Work he has begun in us, to his own glory. Amen.

March 3. An. 1545.

Mr. Clark tells us, Clark 's first Volume of Lives, page 230.
That when they threatened to burn his Books, he writ thus to Spalatinus.

-- As for my self, I contemn Rome's favor and fury. Let them censure and burn
all my Books, I will do the like by theirs, and will put an end to all my
humble observance of them, which does but incense them more and more.

In his Epistle to Melancthon from Auslurg, See his Works, Tom: 1. fol. 163.
when he appeared before Cajetan. -- Here is nothing new or wonderful, but
that the City is filled my Name, and every one desires to see such a Boutefeau.
Play the man as you do in rightly teaching the youth. I am willing for them and
you to he sacrificed, if it please the Lord. I had rather die, and (which is
most grievous to me) for ever want your most sweet company, then recant, and be
an occasion to the most foolish and bitter enemies of all learning of
destroying good learning. Italy is fallen into Egyptian darkness, so ignorant
are all of Christ and the things of Christ, and yet we have these for our
Masters and Teachers of faith and manners: So filled up is the anger of God
against us. -- Farewell my Philip, and by holy Prayer avert the Lords anger. --

When Cajetan wrote to Prince Frederick, either to send Luther to Rome, or to
banish him out of his Dominions, See his Works, Tom. 1. fol. 176.
he wrote unto the Prince as follows. -- I refuse not banishment, as seeing
snares laid for me every where by my Adversaries, neither can I easily live any
where in safety. But what should I a miserable and humble Monk hope for? yea
what danger should I not fear? when they threaten your Excellency, so great a
Prince, so great an Elector, so devout a favourer of the Christian Religion, I
know not what misery, if you do not either send me to Rome, or banish me.
Wherefore least any evil should happen unto you for my sake (which I am most
unwilling of, behold I leave your Country, being resolved to go where my
merciful God pleases, and to commit the event to his Will. --

-- I still rejoice in the love of God, and give him thanks that Christ the Son
of God has counted me worthy to suffer in so holy a Cause. --

November. 19. 1518.

In his Letter to Pope Leo the Tenth, April 6. 1520. Oper. Tom. 1. fol. 385.
-- I have indeed sharply inveighed against all wicked Doctrines, and been
biting to my Adversaries for their impiety, of which I am so far from
repenting, that I am resolved in contempt of man's judgment to persevere in
that heat of zeal, after the example of Christ, who in his zeal calls his
Adversaries a Brood of Vipers, blind, hypocrites, the children of Satan: and of
Paul, who calls the Sorcerer the child of the Devil, full of all subtilty and
wickedness; and others, dogs, etc. If his Hearers were tender and soft, they
would account him biting and immodest. Who more biting then the Prophets? the
wicked mad company of flatterers have made the ears of this age so delicate,
that as soon as we perceive our own ways not approved, we cry out we are
bitten; and when we cannot repel the Truth on any other account, we avoid it
under the pretense of railing, impudence, etc. But what is Salt good for, if it
be not sharp? what a Sword if it will not cut? Cursed is the man that does the
work of the Lord negligently. -- I contend with none but only about the word
of Truth. In all other things I will yield to any, but cannot and will not
desert and deny the Word. Neither you, nor any body else can deny, but the
Court of Rome is more corrupt then any Babylon or S^dom. -- I have therefore
detested and could not endure that the people of Christ should be deluded under
your Name and the Church of Rome, and so have resisted and shall resist them
while I breath. -- The Roman Court is desperate, the anger of God is come upon
it to the full, it hates Councils, fears to be reformed, etc. and makes good
her mothers character, We would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed, let
us forsake her.

-- Hence I have been troubled good Le^, that you were made Pope in these
days, who wast worthy of better. She does not deserve you, and such as you but
Satan himself, who does indeed reign in that Babylon more then you your self. O
would to God, that laying aside that which your deadliest enemies boastingly
call your glory, you would be content with being a private Priest, and live
upon your own inheritance. -- What do you my Leo at Rome, but let the most
wicked and accursed wretches use your Name and Authority to destroy men's
estates and souls, to increase wickedness, to oppress faith and truth with the
whole Church of God. O most unhappy Leo, you sit in a most dangerous seat. I
tell you the truth, because I wish you well. If Bernhard did sympathize with
his Eugenius ruling Rome in a more hopeful condition, though then very
corrupt, what may not we complain, to whom in the space of three hundred years
there is such an accession of corruption and perdition? It incomparably exceeds
the wickedness of the Turks.

-- Behold my Father Leo, upon what account I have so inveighed against that
pestilent See. I am so far from speaking against your Person, that I hope I
should do you the greatest courtesy, Fol. 386.
if I should stoutly and fiercely destroy that your Prison, yea your Hell. --
But this I never intended, but was forced to do so by my Adversaries. -- When I
was before Cardinal Cajetan, he might have made peace with a word, for I
promised silence, and to put an end to my Gause, if he would command my
Adversaries to do the same: but he justified my Adversaries, and required me to
recant, which he had not in his instructions. Not Luther but Cajetan is to be
blamed; for what followed afterward, seeing he would not suffer me to be
silent, when I most earnestly desired it. -- Upon the occasion of Eccius
challenging me to dispute with him, many Romish corruptions were brought to
light. -- Now the name of the Court of Rome does stink in the world, and the
Papal Authority languisheth, their famous ignorance is misliked, of which there
would have been no mention, if Eccius had not interrupted the Treaty between me
and Charles Miltitius. -- Being yet persuaded to hearken to peace, etc, I come,
holy Father, and humbly beg, that you would (if it may be) put to your helping
hand, by bridling those Parasites, the great Enemies of Peace, whilst they
pretend to be for peace. None may presume, that I will recant. I cannot bear
the imposition of any Laws for the interpreting of the Word of God, which ought
not to be bound, etc. These two things excepted, there is nothing that I
cannot, yea will not do or suffer for peace. I hate contentions. I will provoke
none; no more will I be provoked. If I be provoked, I will not be without a
tongue for my Master Christ. -- Take heed, my Father, of harkening to those
Sirens, who make you more then a mere man, even an half God, so that you may
command any thing. -- These are your Enemies, and seek your soul to destroy. --
How unlike is Christ unto his Successors, who yet would be his Vicars? and I
fear many are so too properly. A Vicar is of one absent. If the Pope be
President, Christ being absent, what is he other then Christ's Vicar? But what
then is that Church, but a multitude without Christ? and what is such a Vicar,
but Antichrist and an Idol? How much better do the Apostles, who call
themselves the Servants of Christ present, not the Vicars of Christ absent? --

In his Appeal, See his Works, Vol. 2. fol. 258.
Nov. 17. 1520. -- Seeing Leo the Tent does persevere hardened in his tyranny,
and has by his Bull condemned unheard, and unconvicted, and moreover as an
Infidel and an Apostate does fly and find fault with Councils, and most
wickedly prefer his Tyranny before their Power, and most impudently does
require me to deny the Faith of Christ, etc. and to omit nothing that may show
him to be Antichrist, does subject the Scripture to himself, and with
incredible blasphemy trample thereupon, I Martin Luther do make it known to
all, that I stick to my former Appeal from him to the next Council, etc. --

See his Works, Tom. 2. fol. 259.
In a Letter of his to Herman Tulichins before his Treatise de Captivitate
Babylonica Ecclesiae. -- Whether I will or no, I am made more learned daily, so
many and so great Masters contending with me. I have writ more then two years
ago concerning Indulgences, but so, that I am now wonderfully sorry for the
publishing of that Book; for I was then very superstitiously devoted to the
Roman Tyranny, and therefore would not have Indulgences, which I saw so
generally approved, altogether rejected. -- Now O that I could persuade all
Booksellers and others that read my Books, to burn those concerning
Indulgences, and instead thereof receive this position, Indulgences are the
wickednesses of the Flatterers of Rome. -- Whereas then I denied the Popes
primacy to be of Divine Right, I yielded it to be of Humane Right, -- but now I
know and am certain, that the Papacy is the Kingdom of Babylon and the power
of Nimrod, that mighty Hunter, and therefore instead of what I have written of
that subject take this position, Papacy is the mighty hunting of the Roman
Bishop. --

Fol. 316, 317.
-- When the Cardinals burnt Luther's Books, he burnt the Popes Decrees, and
his Bull lately sent out against him, and gives us the following account why he
did so.

I Martin Luther, called Dr. of Divinity, do notify to all that by my will,
counsel, and help, the Books of the Pope of Rome were burnt, etc. and that (1)
Because we have ancient examples for the burning of wicked and corrupt Books,
Acts 19. (2) I am a Baptized Christian, and a Doctor of holy Scripture, and a
daily Preacher, and therefore it belongs to me, my Condition, my Oath, my
Office to abolish, at least to hinder perverse, false, seducing, and wicked
Doctrines. And yet (3) I had not gone about this work, unless I had upon
experience found the Pope and Pontificians Corrupters and Seducers, not only
to err and seduce, but after many admonitions by me given so hardened and
bewitched, that they will not only not suffer themselves to be taught, but
condemn and burn the Evangelical Doctrine to confirm their Antichristian and
Diabolical abominations. -- (5) Because by their burning of my Books Truth is
endangered, etc. I have also, being moved, as I hope, by the holy Ghost, for
the confirming and preserving the Christian Verity and the common people, have
caused their Books to be burnt, having looked for their hopeless amendment. Let
none therefore be moved by the sublime Titles of the Books, the Canon Law, The
Decreetals, etc. but first see what is taught therein, and then judge whether
they be burnt justly or unjustly. --

When Luther threw the Popes Bull into the fire, Fol. 320.
December. 10. 1520. Because (said he) thou have troubled the holy One of the
Lord, eternal fire shall trouble thee.

The same day in his Prelection on the Psalter he admonished his Hearers to
take heed of Popish Institutions. That this burning was but a small business:
it should be that the Pope, that is, the Papal See should be burned. Unless
(said he with a grave countenance) ye do with all your hearts depart from the
Popish Kingdom, your souls cannot be saved; so diverse is the Kingdom of the
Pope from the Kingdom of Christ and the life of a Christian, that it would be
safer to live in a Wilderness, and see no man, then to live in that
Antichristian Kingdom. Let every one therefore, that has any care of his own
soul, take heed lest he deny Christ by assenting to Popery. Whoever will now be
a Minister, he must perish either in this World, or that which is to come. If
he dare not contradict the working of error, in the World to come; if he does
contradict, in this World his life will be hazarded. For my part, I had rather
run any danger here, then expose my Conscience to give such an account for
Silence as God will require.
Therefore having heartily dissented from the Roman madness, I do now abominate
that Babylonian Plague. And these things I will declare to my Brethren, as long
as I live. If I cannot withstand so great a destruction of Souls, yet many of
our own may be kept from running headlong to Hell. Let others do what they
please. It is high time to repent.

Fol. 321.
In his Letter to Prince Frederick Duke of Saxony before his Postills. -- The
Apostle requires that a Bishop should not only be mighty in Doctrine, but able
to convince gainsayers. Not that I account my self a Bishop, seeing the Riches
and Mitre, by which a Bishop is now known, are wanting, but because whosoever
fulfills the Office of preaching, discharges the Office of Bishop, who ought
to be a two-handed Ehud, and kill Eglon: and I do set my self to the work of
peace, being through the grace of God a bold Contemner of my Adversaries,
though in the midst of Swords, Bulls, Trumpets, and Papistical Alarms, that
cannot terrify me. And indeed what cannot I do in him, who comforts me? --

Fol. 379.
In his Letter to Iustus Jonas. -- I fear lest whilst we fight valiantly for
grace and good works, we do in the mean time deprive our selves of grace and
good works. Truly having beheld these terrible days of anger, I desire nothing
more, then that my head were a fountain of water, that I may weep for that late
devastation of souls, which the Kingdom of Sin, and Perdition wrought. The
Roman Monster sits in the midst of the Church, and boasts of his Deity, the
Pontificials flatter him, the Sophisters obey him, and the Hypocrites will do
any thing for him. In the mean time Hell enlarges her bosom, and opens her
mouth beyond measure, and Satan sports in the ruining of Souls. -- Pray to God
for me, that I may be delivered from wicked and unbelieving men in this
Babylon, and that my mouth may be opened to the praise of the glory of the
grace of the Gospel of his Son. -- Be of good courage, and fear not this
Baal-phogor, seeing he is scarce Baal-zebub, a Fly, if yet we believe, seeing
Jesus Christ is God blessed for ever. --

From the place of my Exile, June 8. 1521.

When he had safe conduct from the Emperor Charles the Fifth to come to and
return from Worms, Fol. 412
dated March 6. 1521. he took his Journey thither; and though his Friends
informed him in a Town near Worms, that his Books were before his coming
condemned in public Proclamations, and therefore that it was dangerous for him
to go, notwithstanding the Emparours promise, yet having heard all they could
say, he told them, As for me, since I am sent for, I am resolved and certainly
determined to enter the City in the name of our Lord Christ Jesus, yea although
I knew that there were so many Devils to resist me, as there are Tiles to cover
all the Houses in the whole World, etc.

At his first appearance before the Emperor, two things were demanded of him,
Whether those Books there present were his, and whether he would recant their
Contents or edhere thereunto? He granted the former; but as to the later,
Forasmuch (said he) as the question concerns Faith, and the salvation of
Souls, and because it concerns the Word of God, then which nothing is of
greater account, as well in Heaven, as on Earth, and which all ought duly to
rererence, it will be rash and dangerous to pronounce any thing, before I be
well advised, seeing through unadvisedness I may speak less then the business
requires and more then truth, both which call to mind that of Christ, Whosoever
shall deny me before men, him will I deny before my Father in Heaven. I
therefore humbly beseech the Imperial Majesty to grant me time to deliberate,
so that I may satisfy the Question without any prejudice to the Word of God,
and peril of my own soul. Whereupon a days time was granted him.

It is observable, that as he was going to appear, and whilst he was in that
Assembly of Princes, Luther was exhorted by some present to be courageous and
to play the man, and not to fear that only can kill the body, etc. and also,
when thou art before Kings, think not what thou shall speak; for it shall be
given to you in that hour.

Fol. 413.
When he appeared the next time, he answered thus, Most Serene Emperor, and
your most Illustrious Princes, and most merciful Lords, I appear before you
here at the hour prescribed unto me yesterday, in obedience to your Command,
humbly beseeching for Gods mercy, that your renowned Majesty, and your most
Illustrious Honors would be pleased benignly to hear this Cause, which is (I
hope) the Cause of Righteousness and Truth. -- As for my self I can affirm
nothing but this, That I have taught and writ hitherto in singleness of heart,
what I thought tended only to Gods glory, and the sincere instruction of
Christ's faithful Ones. -- As for the second Question, I beseech your most
Excellent Majesty, and your Honors to observe, that all my Books are not of
one sort. There be some in which I have so Sincerely and Evangelically handled
the Religion that consists in Faith and Observance, that my very Enemies are
forced to be harmless, profitable, and worthy to be read of Christians. -- If I
should revoke these, what shall I do? Even I alone of all men, repugning the
unanimous confession of all, shall condemn that Truth, which both Friends and
Foes confess. Another sort of my Books inveigheth against the Papacy, and the
Doctrine of the Papists, as those, who by their Doctrines and most wicked
Examples have corrupted the whole state of Christianity in soul and body; for
none can deny, nor hide it, seeing the experience and sad complaints of all are
witnesses, that the Consciences of the Faithful are most miserably ensnared,
vexed, and tortured by the Popes Laws, and the Doctrines of men, and that the
substance, especially of this famous Germany has been, and is yet most
tyrannically and by unworthy means devoured: When as they themselves by their
Laws provide (as in Did. 9. and 25. q. 1. and 2.) that the Popes Laws and
Doctrines, that are contrary to the Scripture and the Sentiments of the
Fathers, should be reprobated for erroneous. If therefore I should revoke
these, I shall strengthen Tyranny, and open not only Windows, but Doors and
wide Gates to so great wickedness, which is like to extend farther and with
greater licentiousnesses, then ever it durst heretofore; and by the testimony
of this my retractation, their most licentious Kingdom of Wickedness, and lest
subject to punishment, most intolerable to the miserable common people, will
yet be more confirmed and established, especially if this be bruited, that I
have done this by the Authority of your most Excellent Majesty, and the whole
R^man Empire. Good Lord! What a Cloak shall I be to their Wickedness and
Tyranny? The third sort is of such, as I have writ against some particular
persons, such who have labored all that ever they could to maintain the Romish
Tyranny, and to demolish the Religion which I have taught. I confess I have
been more bitter against these, then became my Religion and Profession. Neither
do I make my self a Saint, nor do I dispute concerning my Life, but concerning
the Doctrine of Christ. It is notwithstanding unsafe for me to revoke these;
for this Recantation will occasion Tyranny and Wickedness to reign again more
ragingly over Gods people, then ever Yet, seeing I am a man, and not God, I can
no otherwise defend my Books, then Jesus Christ himself, my Lord, defended his
Doctrine, who being examined about his Doctrine before Annas, and cufft by a
Servant, said, If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil. If the Lord
himself, who knew he could not err, did not refuse to have testimony given
against his Doctrine, even by a most vile Servant; how much more then should I,
that am but vile corruption, and can of my self do nothing but err, desire and
expect the testimony of any against my Doctrine? Therefore I beseech, for Gods
mercy, your most Excellent Majesty, and your most Illustrious Honors, or any
other of high or low degree, to give in his testimony, to convict my Errors,
to confute me by the Scriptures of the Prophets or Evangelists and Apostles,
and I will be most ready, when taught, to recant any Error, yea will be the
first that shall cast mine own Books into the fire. I suppose hereby it is
manifest, that I have well weighed the perils and dangers, as also the
divisions and dissentions, which have risen through the World by occasion of my
Doctrine, of which I was yesterday gravely and sharply admonished: As for me,
the face of things is very pleasant, when I see discords and dissentions
stirred up upon the account of the Word; for such is the course, the lot, and
event of the Gospel; for Christ says, I came not to send Peace, but a Sword; I
came to set a man at variance with his Father. -- The Emperors Prolocutor
telling him, Fol. 414.
That he had not answered to the purpose, neither ought he to call in question,
what has been in time past defined and condemned in Councils, and therefore a
plain and direct answer, whether he would recant or no, was demanded of him?
Seeing therefore (said Luther) your most Excellent Majesty, etc. require a
plain answer, I will give one, and that without horns or teeth; Unless I shall
be convinced by Scripture testimonies, or evident reason; (for I believe
neither Pope, nor Councils only, seeing it is evident, that they have often
erred, and contradicted themselves) I am so evercome by the Scritures which I
have alleged, and my Conscience is so captived to the Words of the Lord, that
I may not, neither will I recant at all; and that because it is neither safe
nor honest to act against Conscience. Here I stand. I have nothing else to say.
God be merciful to me.

The Princes consulted together upon this Answer given by Luther; and when they
had examined it, the Prolocutor endeavored to refell it, telling him, That it
nothing avails to renew disputation concerning things condemned by the Church
and Councils, through so many Ages, unless it should be necessary to give a
reason to every one of every thing that is concluded; but if this should be
permitted to every one that gain ayeth the determination of the Church and
Councils, to be convinced by the Scriptures, we shall have nothing certain and
established in Christianity: And therefore the Emperor required of him a plain
and direct Answer, either negative or affirmative, to this Question; Art thou
resolved to defend all thy Works as Orthodox^ Or will thou recant any thing in
them? Then Dr. Martin besought the Emperor, that he might not be compelled to
recant against his Conscience, captived to and hindered by the holy Scriptures,
without manifest Arguments to the contrary. The Answer (said he) that is
required, is a plain and direct Answer. I have no other, then what I have
already given. Unless my Adversaries can deliver my Conscience from captivity
to those (they call) Errors by sufficient Arguments, I cannot get out of the
Net, in which I am entangled. All things, which Councils have determined, are
not therefore true; yea Councils have erred, and determined often things
contrary to themselves: and therefore the Prolocutors Argument falls. I can
show that Councils have erred, and therefore I may not revoke what is plainly
and diligently expressed in Scripture.

Hereupon the Emperor resolved to pursue Martin Luther and his Adherents by
Excommunication, and other means, that may be devised to extinguish his
Doctrine, yet would not violate his Faith, but intended to give order for his
safe return thither whence he was called, and certified the Princes Electors,
Dukes, and the other Estates assembled so much in a Letter to them.

Before Luther had any Answer from the Emperor, Fol. 415.
several of all ranks visited him, and conferred with him; among the rest the
ArchBishop of Triers sent for him, and Dr. Vaeus in the presence of many Nobles
protested that Luther was not called to dispute, but only the Princes had
procured license from the Emperor benignly and brotherly to exhort him, etc.
To whom he gave this Answer; Most gracious and illustious Princes and Lords, I
give you most humble thanks for your clemency and singular good will, from
whence proceeds this admonition. I do indeed acknowledge my self altogether
unworthy to be admonished by so Mighty Princes. I have not reprehended all
Councils, but only that of Constence, and that because that Council has
condemned the Word of God, as appears in that this Article of John Hus, That
the Church of Christ is the Company of the Elect, is condemned by it. -- I am
ready to lose blood and life for you, so I be not compelled to revoke the
manifest Word of God; in defense whereof, we ought rather to obey God, then
man. Here I cannot avoid scandal. There be two manners of offenses, at Manners
and at Faith. -- Now it is not in my power to make Christ not to be a Rock of
Offense. -- I am ready to obey Magistrates, how wickedly soever they live, so
that I be not enforced to deny the Word of God.

Hereupon Dr. Vaeus admonished Luther to submit his Writings to the Emperors
and the Princes judgment. He answered humbly and modestly, That he was so far
from fearing their Examination, that he was content to suffer his Writings to
be discussed most accurately of the meanest, so that it were done by the
Authority of the Word of God and of the holy Scripture. The Word of God (said
he) makes so clearly for me, that I may not yield, unless I be untaught, and
taught better by the Word of the Lord. St. Austin writes thus; I give this
honor only unto the Canonical Books to believe them to be altogether true; as
for other holy and learned Doctors I only so far believe them, as they write
the truth. St. Paul bids us, Prove all things and hold fast that which is good.
1 These. 5. Gal. 1.
He says also, Though an Angel from Heaven should preach any other Doctrine,
etc. Wherefore I humbly beseech you not to urge my Conscience, bound in
Scripture bonds, to deny the so clear Word of God. In all other cases I will be
most obedient to you.

The Marquess of Branderburg asking him, Whether he was not resolved not to
yield, unless he were convinced by the holy Scripture: Yes (said he) most noble
Lord, or else by clear and evident reasons.

Fol. 416.
Afterward Pentinger and Dr. Vaeus endeavored to persuade Luther to let the
Emperor and Empire to pass judgment upon his Writings simply and absolutely:
He answered, That he was ready to do and suffer any thing, so that they would
build on the Authority of the holy Scripture: Otherwise he could not consent;
for God by the Prophet says, Trust ye not in Princes, nor in the children,
etc. Cursed is he that trusts in man. When notwithstanding this answer they
urged him more vehemently, he told them, Nothing is less to be permitted to
man's judgment, then the Word of God. Then they prayed him to submit his
Writings to the judgment of the next Council. He agreed thereunto, provided,
That they pass judgment concerning them out of the Scriptures, and prove the
contrary by testimonies thence.

Afterward the Arch Bishop of Triers treated privately with him to persuade
him; Luther told him, It was not s^fe for him to submit so momentous a business
to them, who after they had called him under safe conduct, attempting him with
new commands, had condemned his Opinion, and approved the Popes Bull.
Afterward the Arch Bishop desired Luther to show what remedies there were in
this case; He answered, None better then Gamalie^'s, who said, Act^ ^
If this c^unsel or work proceed of men, it shall come to n^ught; but if it be
of God, ye cannot destroy it. Caesar and the States may write to the Pope, that
they are certain, If this his purpose (...) of God, it will of i^s own acc^rd
come to n^ught within three, yea within two years. The Arch Bishop asking him,
What if the same A^^icles, which the ^ouncil of Constance condemned, be
collected out of your Writings to be submitted to a Cou^cil: I may not (said
he) and I will not hold my peace concerning such; because I am certain the Word
of God is condemned by their Decrees, therefore I will rather lose life and
head, then abandon the manifest Word of the Lord.

When Luther was commanded by the Emperor to return within one and twenty
days under safe conduct: He said, It is as pleases the Lord. Blessed be the
Name of the Lord. I humbly give most hearty thanks to the Emperor, and all the
Princes, etc. for so benign and favorable audience, and for safe conduct to
come and return. I desire nothing of you, but a reformation by the holy
Scripture; and that I do most earnestly desire. Otherwise I am ready to suffer
all things, life and death, shame and reproach, for the Emperor and Empire,
reserving nothing for my self, but only the free Word of God to be confessed
and testified by me.

See his Works, Tom 2. fol. 477.
In his Letter to his Father. -- Know, dear Father, that your Son is come to
this, to be most certainly persuaded, that nothing is before, nothing more
holy, more religious then Gods command. But you will say, Did thou ever doubt
hereof? Truly I did not only doubt hereof, but I was altogether ignorant that
it was so; and if you will suffer me, I am ready to demonstrate that this
ignorance was common to you with me. -- If you had known that Gods Command is
to be preferred before all things, Fol. 478.
you would by your Paternal Authority have taken away my Monks Cole; and if I
had known it, I should not have entered into the Monastery without your leave,
and against your consent. -- But God has caused all to work for good. -- He
would have me to experience the wisdom of the Universities, and the holiness
of the Monasteries; that is, that they should be known to me by many sins and
impieties, lest occasion should be given to wicked men to triumph over their
future Adversary, that I condemned what I knew not. I therefore lived a Monk,
though without crime, not without fault. -- Will you now come and free me, my
Father? The Lord has come before you and freed me. -- My Conscience is freed,
which is the richest liberty. I am now a Monk and no Monk, a new Creature, not
of the Pope, but of Christ. The Pope does indeed create Puppets, that is, Idols
like himself, in which Number I was once a poor seduced One, but now freed by
grace. -- Your authority over me does indeed remain entire. But he that has
freed me, has greater authority over me. --

November. 21. 1521.

In his Epistle to Prince Frederick. Fol. 515.
-- The perils and dangers which seem to hang over your Person, Dominions, and
Subjects, and especially my self, condemned by Edicts and Bulls, by the Popes
and Emperors Authority upon my return are not unobserved; Certainly no less
then a violent death is to be expected by me every hour. But what shall I do?
God calls and urges me to return. -- To this I am not induced by pride and
contempt of the Emperor, or of your Excellency, or of any Magistrate; for
although sometimes we must not do what is commanded by man, as when any thing
is commanded contrary or repugnant to the Word of God, yet the Power and
Authority is never to be contemned, but always to be highly honored. -- But I
am assured, that the beginning of my Preaching at Wittenberg came not from my
self, but from God. Neither can any kind of persecution and death teach me
otherwise; yea I think I prophecy rightly, That no terrors nor cruelty shall
be able to put out this Light. --

Besides, Fol. 516.
whilst I was absent from Wittenberg, Satan has entered in among my flock, etc.
and I have resolved rather to regard the great necessity of that Church, then
the offending or pleasing your Excellency; yea, then the hatred and fury of the
whole world. Certainly this is my flock, committed to me by the Lord; These are
my children in Christ. Shall I doubt whether I should come to or stay from
them, for whom I ought to lose my life, and choose death, which I shall (God
helping me) willingly and cheerfully. -- I do also very much fear least some
great and horrible insurrection be in Germany, to punish Germany 's? contempt
of, and ingratitude for the Blessings of God. We see with how great liking,
applause, and concurrency the Gospel is received by very many; but many receive
this Blessing carnally, they plainly see the truth, but do not walk in the
truth as they ought. -- The Ecclesiastical Tyranny is weakened and broken, and
that was all I aimed at in my Writings. Now I see God will proceed farther, and
will sometime do the same that he did to Jerusalem, when he overturned
altogether both the Ecclesiastical and Political Government for persecuting the
Gospel, and other outrages. I have lately begun to learn, that not only the
Ecclesiastical, Spiritual, but the Political and Civil Authority ought to yield
unto the Gospel, etc. Seeing therefore that God requires by Ezekiel, that we be
as a Wall unto the people, I have thought it necessary to do all we can and
ought by mutual counsels, studies, instructions, admonitions, exhortations, for
the averting, or at least for the deferring ^f the anger and judgment of God.

-- This I dare affirm, and wish that your Excellency were assured thereof,
that it is far otherwise concluded in Heaven, then in the Convention at
Norinberg; and in short time we shall see, that they, who n^w dream that they
have quite dev^ured and e^ten up the Gospel, have not so much as far fashi^n
sake said Grace (as the English expressi^n is) for these untouched dain^ies.

Mr. Cla^k says he concludes, That he returned to Wittenberg under stronger
Protection then the Elector could give him; for (says he) God alone can order
and prom^te the Truth without any man's helping hand; therefore in this Cause,
he that most strongly trusts to Gods assistance, he most surely defends himself
and others. See his Relation of Luther 's Life, p. 237.
-- The Gospel begins to be ^ppressed, and therefore herein I ought not to
regard any mortal. I beseech theref^re your, Excel^ency to take in good part my
coming home without your command, yea privity. You are the Lord of my body, and
little fortunes, but Christ of the souls, to wh^m he has sent me, etc. -- I
hope, being confident that my Lord Christ is stronger then our enemies, that he
will defend me from their rage; if he will not, his good will be done: this I
can confidently promise, that no peril shall come to your Excellency for my
sake. --

An. 1522.

In his Letter to Sebastian Schlick, a Bohemian Nobleman. Fol. 517.
-- The loathsome death of the Papacy is at hand, and its unavoidable ruin
approaches; and (as Daniel says) She comes to an end, and none shall help
her. -- In a short time I shall by my writings (Christ favoring of me) free
the Bohemians from their reproach, and cause that the name of Popery shall be
odious and abominable throughout the world, and that to be a Papist, and to be
anathematized shall be all one. --

July 15. 1522.

In his Answer to King Henry the Eighth's Book against him. Fol. 518.
-- Let not King Henry impute my sharpness against him to me, but to himself.
-- If seeing that mere corruption and a wretched worm dare knowingly belie the
Majesty of my Heavenly King, it cannot but be lawful for me for my Kings sake,
to bespatter the King of England with his own dirt, and to trample under foot
his Crown, filled with blasphemy against Christ. Fol. 520.
-- The Lord cleared up his Will by degrees unto me, till by the hand of the
mighty Jacob, it came to this, that by evident and pure Scriptures I was
convinced, that the Pope, Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, Monks, Masses, and that
whole Kingdom with their Doctrines and Ministries, are mere lies, idols, and
the very abomination standing in the holy place, yea and the Scarlet Whore
sitting upon the Beast, drunk with the blood of Christ's Witnesses, and making
the Kings of the Earth drunk with the cup of her fornications and abominations.
-- This Truth being discerned, I was forced to retract some of my Writings, and
still do so, being sorry at the very heart I ever writ one syllable in favor
of the Pope and his Kingdom. -- Yea, I spoke too modestly in my Treatise
concerning the Babylonish Captivity of the Church in calling Papacy the Popes
mighty hunting; for that from the example of Nimrod may be said of all profane
civil Powers, to whom notwithstanding God would have us to be subject to honor
them, and pray for them. I now say most truly, That Papacy is the most
pestilent abomination of Prince Satan. --

Fol. 531.
-- Against the sayings of Fathers, Men, Angels, Devils, I set not ancient
Custom, not multitude, but the Word of one Eternal God. Here I stand, sit,
abide, glory, triumph over the Papists, Thomists, Henry 's, Sophisters, and all
the gates of Hell. The Word of God is above all. God is on my side, what should
I care if a thousand Austines, a thousand Cyprians, a thousand Churches of
Henry be against me. God cannot err nor deceive, but Austine and Cyprian, as
all the Elect may err, Clarks first Volume of Lives, page 240.
yea have erred. -- Let the Henry's, the Bishops, the Turk, and the Devil
himself do what they can, we are the children of the Kingdom, worshipping and
waiting for that Savior, whom they and such as they spit upon and crucify. --
If any be offended at my sharpness against the King, Fol. 534.
let him take this Answer. -- It is no great matter if I contemn and bite an
earthly King, whenas he feared not at all in his Writings to blaspheme the King
of Heaven. Clarks first Volume of Lives, page 241. Fox, Vol. 2. page 80.
--

In the year 152^. a Diet was held at Norinberg in the absence of the Emperor,
wherein the Edict of Worms was made null: of this the Popes Legate complained
to the Princes, saying, That Luther was not punished according to the Emperors
Edict. The Princes Answer was, That the Court of Rome neglected Reformation:
that Germany was so far enlightened with the Sermons and Writings of Luther,
that if they should go about to put the Edict in execution, great tumults would
arise, and the people would be ready to think, that they went about to oppress
the Truth, and to put out the light of the Gospel, that so they might the
better defend those manifest vices which could be no longer concealed.

In the year 1525. Clark, ^ page 239.
Luther married Katherine a Boren, who had formerly been a Nun; The change of
his Condition troubled him, because of the unseasonableness of the time, it
being then, when Germany weltred in the blood of the Clowns, and Saxony mourned
for the death of their Prince, insomuch that Melancthon was fain to labor to
comfort him all he could.

In his Letter to Melancthon, who was much troubled at the rage of the Papists,
and Caesar's threats to subvert the Gospel. -- In private conflicts I am weak
and you are strong, but in public conflicts you are found weak, and I
stronger, because I am assured that our Cause is just and true. If we fall,
Christ the Lord and Ruler of the world falls with us; and suppose he fall, I
had rather fall with Christ then stand with Caesar. I extremely dislike your
excessive cares, with which (you say) you are almost consumed. That these reign
in your heart, it is not from the greatness of the danger, but the greatness of
your incredulity. Page 240.
If the Cause be bad, let us revoke it and fall back; if it be good, why do we
make God a liar? -- Be of good comfort, I have overcome the world. If Christ be
the Conqueror of the world, why should we fear as if it would overcome us? A
man would fetch such Sentences as these upon his knees from Rome or Jerusalem.
Be not afraid, ^e courageous and cheerful, solicitous for nothing, the Lord is
at hand to help us.

When the Diet was met at Ausburg in the year 1530. the Elector of Saxony sent
to Luther to know, Whether the Cause of Religion should be referred to the
judgment of the Emperor? He answered, This honor is to be given to the Word
of God only to be Judge of sacred Controversies.

Page 244, 245.
In his Preface before the Smalca^dian Articles. -- In many Bishoprics diverse
Parishes are destitute of spiritual food, etc. I fear for this Christ will call
a Council of Angels to destroy Germany, as he destr^yed Sodom and Gomorrah. --
Our sins weigh us down, and suffer not God to be gracious to us; because
instead of repenting, we defend our abominations. O Lord Jesus Christ, do thou
summon and hold a Council, and redeem thy Servants by the glorious coming. The
Popes and Popelings are past cure; therefore help us poor and distressed men,
who groan unto thee, and seek thee with our hearts, etc.

Page 246.
When the Papists charged him for an Aposta^e; he yielded himself to be one, but
a blessed and holy one, who had not kept his promise made to the Devil; I am
(said he) no otherwise a Revolter then a Magician, renouncing his Covenant made
with the Devil, and betaking himself to Christ.

When he fell sick of the Stone, he made his Will, in which he bequeathed his
Detestation of Popery to his Friends, and to the Pastors of the Church, having
made before this Verse; Pestis eram vivus, moriens ^ro mortua Papa:


In English thus; I living stopped Romes breath,
And dead will be Romes death.


In this last Prayer Feb. 18. 1546. Page 249.
-- I pray God to preserve the Doctrine of his Gospel among us; for the P^pe
and the Council of Tren^ have grievous things in hand. -- O heavenly Father, my
gracious God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, thou God of all consolation,
I give thee hearty thanks that thou have revealed to met thy Son Jesus Christ,
Thee O Christ have I taught, thee have I trusted, thee have I loved, into thy
hands I commend my Spirit, Ward, page 152.
whom I believe, whom I profess, whom I glorify, whom the Pope and the reut of
the wicked persecute and dishonor. I beseech thee Lord Jesus Christ receive my
soul. O my heavenly Father, though I be taken out of this life, and must lay
down this frail body, yet I certainly know that I shall live with thee
eternally, and that I cannot be taken out of thy hands. -- Lord into thy hands
I commend my Spirit, Thou O God of Truth have redeemed me.

In this last Will. -- O Lord God, I thank thee that thou would have me live
a poor and indigent person upon earth. Page 250.
I have neither house, nor lands, nor possessions, nor money to leave. Thou
Lord have given me Wife and children. Them Lord I give back unto thee. Nourish,
instruct, and keep them (O thou the Father of Orphans, and Judge of the Widow)
as thou have done to me, so do to them.

When he saw his Daughter Magdalen ready to die, he read to her Isa. 26.19. Thy
dead men shall live together, with my dead body shall they arise, etc. Adding,
My Daughter, Enter thou into thy Chamber in peace, I shall ere long ^e with
thee; for God will not permit me to see the punishment which hangs over the
head of Germany.

Page 251.
When the Elector gave him a new Gown, he said, I am made too much of; for if
here we receive a full recompense for our labors, we shall hope for none in
another life. I say flatly, That God shall not put me off with these low things.

In the Cause of God (said he) I am content to undergo the hatred and violence
of all the world.

Page 252.
When his head was out of order (as it used to be toward his later end) he
would usually say, Strike Lord, strike mercifully, I am prepared; because by
thy Word I am forgiven mine iniquities, and have fed upon thy body and blood.

He used to say that three things would destroy Christian Religion;
Forgetfulness of the Blessings received by the Gospel: security, which reigns
every where: and worldly wisdom, which will seek to bring all things into
Order, and to support the public Peace by wicked counsels

Page 256.
Erasmus said of him, God has given to this later age a sharp Physician, and
that because of the greatness of its diseases.

Acts and Mon. Vol. 2. page 88.
Mr. Fox says of him, That Luther a poor Friar should be able to stand against
the Pope, was a great miracle: that he should prevail against the Pope was a
greater: and after all, to die in peace, having so many enemies, was the
greatest of all.

See M. Clark in the life of Myconius, page 313.
When Myconius fell into a Consumption 1541. and wrote to Luther, That he was
sick unto life, and not unto death. Luther wrote back, I pray Christ our Lord,
our salvation and health, etc. that I may not live to see thee, and some others
of our Colleagues to die and go to Heaven, and leave me here among the Devils
alone. I pray God I may first lay down this dry, exhausted, and unprofitable
Tabernacle. Farewell, and God forbid that I should hear of thy death, while I
live. The Lord prolong thy life for me. This I desire; this I will, and let my
will be done, ( Amen) for this will has the glory of God, not my pleasure, nor
advantage for its end. By and by hopeless Myconius recovered and lived six
years longer even till after Luther's death.

Hence Iustus Jonas speaking of him, says, That man could have of God what he
pleased.

He would by no means endure that any should be called after his Name; Page 254.
for (said he) the Doctrine which I teach is none of mine; neither did Idie for
any man; neither would Paul, 1 Cor. 3.4. etc. endure such terms: Besides we are
all Christians, and profess the Doctrine of Christ: And lastly, because the
Papists use to do so, calling themselves Pontificians, whom we naught not to
imitate.

M.
Mallot.
Often have we hazarded our lives (said John Mallot a Soldier) for the
Emperor Charles the Fifth, Ward, page 153.
and shall we now shrink to die for the King of Kings? Let us follow our
Captain.

Man.
Thomas Man having broken Prison after his recantation, Fox, Vol. 2. page 29.
said, If I be taken again of the pild knave Priests, I wist well I shall go
the holy Angel, and then be an Angel in Heaven. Accordingly the Sheriff of
London, when he had brought him into Smithfield to be burnt, put him into Gods
Angel. He thanked God that he had been instrumental to convert seven hundred
persons.

Marbeck.
Fuller 's Englands Wo^^^es in B^^kshire. page 91.
John Marbeck was a skillful Organist in the Quire of Windsor, a man of
admirable industry and ingenuity. His English Concordance (the first that ever
was in English) Bishop Gardener himself could not but commend as a piece of
singular industry. King Henry the Eighth hearing thereof, said, That he was
better employed, then those Priests that accused him.

Fox, Vol. 2. page 547.
Being pressed to discover Heretics, and being told he could not do God and the
King greater service: If I knew (said he) who were Heretics indeed, it were
somewhat; But if I should accuse him to be an Heretic that is none, What a
worm would that be in my conscience, so long as I live. Yea it were a great
deal better for me to be out of this life, then to live in such torment.

He being called a Dolt who would not discover them, who should be sent for,
and would utter then all they can of him. Whatsoever (said he) they shall say
of me, let them do it in the Name of God, I will say no more of them, nor of
any man else, then I know.

Page 548.
Being further pressed to write down what he knew of such, he thus prayed unto
God; O most merciful Father of Heaven, thou that know the secret doings of
all men, have mercy upon thy poor Prisoner that is destitute of all help and
comfort. Assist me, O Lord, with thy special grace, that to save this frail and
vile body, which shall turn to corruption in its time, I have no power to say
or to write any thing, that may be to the casting away of my Christian Brother;
but rather, O Lord, let this vile flesh suffer at thy will and pleasure. Grant
this, O most merciful Father, for thy dear Son Jesus Christ's sake.

Then he rose up, and began to search his Conscience, what he might write, and
at last writ thus: Whereas your Lordship will have me to write of such things,
as I know not of my Fellows at home, May it please your Lordship to understand,
that I cannot call to remembrance any manner of thing, whereby I may justly
accuse any one of them, unless the reading of the New Testament, which is
common to all men, be an offense. More then this I know not.

The Bishop of Winchester asking him, What helpers he had in setting forth his
Concordance? None, my Lord (said he.) None? ( said the ^ishop) how can that be?
It is not possible that thou should do it without help. Truly my Lord (said
he) I did it without the help of any man, save God alone. Nay (said the Bishop)
I do not discommend thy diligence; but what should thou meddle with the
thing, which pertains not to thee? And then speaking to one of his Chapl^ins,
said, This Fellow has taken upon him to set out the Concordance in English;
which Book, when it was set out in Latin, was not done without the help and
diligence of a dozen learned men at least, and yet he will bear me in hand,
that he has done it alone.

The Bishop of Salisbury asking him, Page 550.
How he could invent such a Book, or know what a Concordance meant without an
Instructor? I will tell your Lordship (said he) what Instructor I had to begin
it. When Thomas Matthews Bible came first out in Print, being not able to buy
one, I borrowed one, and intended to have writ it out, and was gone as far as
I^shua, which when Mr. Turner understood, he told me it would be a more
profitable work to set out a Concordance in English. A Concordance (said I)
what is that? He told me it was a Book to find out any word in the whole Bible
by the letter, and that there was such an one in Latin already, and that it
required not so much learning as diligence. This is all the instruction that
ever I had before or after of any man. Being asked, How he could with this
instruction bring it to this order and form, as it is? He answered, I borrowed
(...) Latin Concordance, and began to practice my wit* and at last with great
labor and diligence brought it into this order. -- But I marvel greatly, why I
should be so much examined about this Book. Have I committed any offense in
doing it or no? If I have, I am loath any other should be molested or punished
for my fault. Therefore to clear all men in this matter, this is my request,
That ye will try me in the rest of the Book that is undone. You see I have
only done with letter L. Now take what word you will of M. and so in every
letter following, and give me the words in a piece of Paper, and let me be any
where alone with Pen, Ink, and Paper, the Latin Concordance, and the English
Bible, and if I bring you not those words written in the same order and form,
as the rest be, then it was not I did it, but some other. This is honestly
spoken (said the Bishop of Ely) and then shall thou bring many out of
suspicion. Accordingly he writ in a days time in the same order and form, as
he had done the rest, all the words they gave him, which contained three sheets
of Paper and more.

Page 5^^.
Being threatened if he did not discover what he knew, his fingers should be made
to tell: If you do tear (said he) the whole body in pieces, I trust in God you
shall never make me accuse any man wrongfully.

If thou art stubborn (said Dr. Oking) thou will die for it. Die for it? (said
Marbeck) wherefore should I die? You told me the last day before the Bishops,
that as soon as I had made an end of that piece of the Concordance they took
me, I should be delivered, and shall I now die? This is a sudden mutation. You
seemed then to be my Friend, but I know the cause, you have read the Ballad I
made of Moses Chair, and that has set you against me; but whenever ye shall
put me to death, I doubt not but I shall die Gods true man, and the Kings.

This worthy Confessor was of so sweet and amiable nature, Fuller, etc. page 91.
That all good men did love, and few bad men did hate him: yet was he condemned
in the year 1544. to be burnt at Windsor, which his Pardon prevented, of which
diverse causes were assigned, (1) That Bishop Gardner bare him a special
affection for his skill in the Mystery of Music. (2) That such, who condemned
him, procured his Pardon out of remorse of conscience, because of the slender
evidence against him. (3) That it was done out of design to reserve him for a
discovery of the rest of his Party, and if so their plot failed them; for being
as true as Steel ( whereof his Fetters were made, which he wore in Prison for a
good time, he could not be frighted, or flattered to make any detection.

Marcus. v. Arethusius. Part. 1.
Marcus of Arethuse being hung up in a Basket, Ward, page 142.
anointed with honey, and so exposed to the stinging of Wasps and Bees, said to
his Persecutors, that stood and beheld him, How am I advanced, despising you
that are below on Earth.

Marlorate.
Mr. Augustine Marlorate, Fox, Vol. 3* cont. page 25.
Minister of Roan, when in the Civil Wars of France that City was taken by
storm, was taken also, and brought before Mon^orency, the Constable of France,
who said unto him, Thou art he, who have seduced the people. If I have seduced
them (said he) it is God that has done it rather then I; for I have preached
nothing to them, but his divine Truth. You are a seditious person (said the
Constable) and the cause of the ruin of this City. As for that imputation
(said he) I refer my self to all that have heard me preach, be they Papists, or
Protestants, whether I ever meddled with matters of the Politic State, or no.
-- The Constable told him (swearing a great Oath) we shall see within a few
days, whether thy God can deliver thee out of my hands, or no.

Clark 's first Vol. of Lives, page 577.
It is observable how speedily Gods Judgments found out his Persecutors. The
Captain that apprehended him was slain within three weeks, by one of the basest
Sou^diers in all his Company. The Constables Son was shortly after slain in the
Battle of Dreux. Two of his Judges also died very strangely soon after, viz.
The President of the Parliament by a Flux of Blood, which could be by no means
stanched: The other being a Councellor, voiding his Urine by his Fundament,
with such an intolerable stink, that none could come near him. Villeben that
switched him with a Wand as he was carried on the Hurdle to Execution^, a while
after escaped death by the loss of his hand, wherewith he had so basely smitten
this Servant of the Lord.

Marsake.
Fox, Vol. 2. page 141.
Sir L^wis Marsake was so glad of the Sentence of Condemnation, that he went out
praising God and singing of Psalms.

To a Soldier that would have hindered him from stepping aside to call upon
God; What (said he) will you not let us pray in that little time which we have?

When Halters were put about the necks of his two Fellow Sufferers, he seeing
himself to be spared because of his Order and Degree, called to the Lieutenant
for one of those precious Chains about his neck in honor of his Lord.

Why I pray you (said he) do you deny me the badge of so excellent an Order?
The Mirror of Martyrs, page 315.
Is not my Cause the same with theirs?

Marsh.
Mr. George Marsh, Fox, Vol. 3. page 224.
Minister in Lancashire, writes thus concerning his Troubles. -- My Friends and
Relations advised me to flee. -- If I were taken, (said they) and would not
recant (as they thought I would not, and God strengthening and assisting me
never shall) it would not only put them to great sorrow, and losses, and
shame, but also my self, after troubles and painful imprisonment, unto shameful
death. -- To their counsel my weak flesh would gladly have consented, but my
spirit did not fully agree, thinking and saying thus unto my self, That if I so
fled away, it would be thought and reported, that I did not only flee my
Country* and nearest and dearest Friends, but from Christ holy Word, of late
years within my heart, or at least with my life professed, and with my mou^h
taught. I knew not what to do, but ceased not by earnest prayer to ask and seek
counsel of God, a^^ of other my Friends, whose godly judgment and knowledge I
much trusted to. Still I was undetermined what to do, but told a Friend, that
had prayed with me for direction, I doubted not but God (according as our
prayer and trust was) would give me such wisdom and counsel, as should be most
to his honor and glory, the profit of my Neighbors and Brethren, and mine own
eternal salvation by Christ in Heaven. -- At length one came to me with Letters
from a faithful Friend (which I never read, nor looked on) who said thus, My
Friends advice was, that I should in no wise flee, but abide and boldly confess
the Faith of Jesus Christ. At which words I was so confirmed and established in
my Conscience, that from thenceforth I consulted no more, whether it were
better to flee, or to tarry; but was at a point with my self, that I would not
flee, but go to Mr. Barton, who did seek me, and patiently bear what cross it
should please God to lay upon me. Whereupow my mind and conscience, being much
troubled before, was now merry and in quiet state. -- Thereupon I went to Mr.
Barton. He showed me a Letter from the Earl of Derby, wherein he was commanded
to send me to Lathum. Thither I went. The Earl asked me whether I was one that
sowed dissension among the people? I denied it, and desired to know mine
Accusers; but that could not be granted. He asked me, whether I was a Priest? I
said, Page 225.
No, but a Minister, etc. I was asked, whether I had ministered with a good
Conscience? I answered, I had ministered one year with a good Conscience, I
thanked God, and if the Laws of the Realm would have suffered me, I would have
ministered still; and if the Laws at any time hereafter would suffer me to
minister after that sort, I would minister again. -- The Vicar of Prescot
having communed with me a good while concerning the Sacrament of the Altar,
told my Lord and his Council, that the answer which I had made before, and then
made, was sufficient for a Beginner, and one that did not profess a perfect
Knowledge in that matter: and thereupon I had more favor. Hereupon I was much
more troubled in my spirit then before, because I had not with more boldness
confessed Christ, but in such sort, as mine Adversaries thereby thought they
should prevail against me. Hitherto I went about as much as lay in me, to rid
my self out of their hands, if by any means, without open denying of Christ and
his Word, that could be done. This considered I cried more earnestly to God to
strengthen me with his holy Spirit, with boldness to confess him, and to
deliver me from their enticing words, and that I might not be spoiled through
their Philosophy, and deceitful vanity after the traditions of men, and
ordinances of the world, and not after Christ. Page 226.
-- The Vicar of Prescot and Parson of Grapnal much exhorted me to leave mine
Opinions, saying, I was much deceived, understanding the Scriptures amiss, and
much counseled me to follow the Catholic Church of Christ, and to do as
others did. I answered, My faith in Christ conceived by his holy Word I neither
might nor would deny, alter, or change for any living creature whatso^v^r ^e
were. -- Afterward Mr. Sherburn and Mr. M^^r persuaded me to leave mine
Opinions because of the adv^rsity of the Maintainers of them, and the
prosperity of the Favorers of the Religion now used. I answered, That I
believed and leaned only to the Scriptures, not judging things by prosperity
or adversity. They advised me not to let shame hinder me from renouncing mine
Opinions. I answered, That what I did, I did not for the avoiding of any
worldly shame, saying, My soul and life were dearer to me, then the avoiding of
any worldly shame: neither yet did I it for any vain praise of the world, but
in the reverent fear of the Lord. -- Mr. Sherburn told me that it was great
pity I should cast my self away, etc. I answered, That my Life, Mother,
Children, Brethren, Sisters, and Friends, with other Delights of this life,
were as dear and sweet to me, as unto any other man, and that I should be as
loath to lose them, as another would, if I might hold them with a good
conscience, and without the ignominy of Christ. But seeing I could not do that,
my trust was that God would strengthen me with his holy Spirit to lose them all
for his sake; for I take my self (said I) for a Sheep appointed to be slain,
patiently to suffer what cross soever it shall please my merciful Father to lay
upon me. Page 227.
-- After this Mr. Moor told me, I was unlearned, and erred from the Catholic
Faith, stubborn, and stood altogether in mine own conceit. I answered, For my
learning, I acknowledge my self to know nothing, but Jesus Christ, even him
that was crucified, and that my Faith was grounded on Gods holy Word only, and
such as (I doubted not) pleased God, and as I would stand in to the last, God
assisting me, and that I did not say, or do any thing of stubbornness,
self-wilfulness, vainglory, or any other worldly purpose, but with good
conscience, and in the fear of God. Desiring him to speak to my Lord and his
Council, that I might find some mercy at their hands; but he giving me but
short answer, then I said, I commit my Cause to God, who has numbered the hairs
of my head, and appointed the days of my life, saying, I am sure God, who is a
Righteous Judge, would make inquisition for my blood, according as he has
promised. -- I desire the Reader of this Relation to pray for me, and all them
that be in bonds, that God would assist us with his holy Spirit, that we may
with boldness confess his holy Name, Page 228.
and that Christ may be magnified in our bodies, that we may stand full and
perfect in all the will of God. -- Whilst I was at Lancaster, some of good will
toward me, but without knowledge, that came to talk with me, gave me the same
counsel, that Peter gave Christ, as he went up to Jerusalem; Master, favor thy
self, etc. But I answered with Christ's sharp answer to Peter again, Get thee
behind me Satan, and perceiving that they were an hinderance to me, and that
they savoured not the things which are of God, but the things that are of men;
I made them plain answer, that I neither could nor would follow their counsel,
but that by Gods grace I would both live and die with a pure Conscience, and
according as hitherto I had believed and professed; for we ought in no wise
(said he) to flatter and bear with them, though they love us never so well,
which go about to pluck us away from the obedience which we owe unto God, and
to his Word, but after Christ's example, sharply to rebuke them for their
counsel. -- God so strengthened me with his Spirit of boldness, according to my
humble request and prayer before (everlasting thanks be given to him therefore)
that I was nothing afraid to speak to any that came to me, no not even to
Judges, before whom I was thrice arraigned at the Bar, among the Thieves, with
irons on my feet, and put up my hand as others did; but yet with boldness I
spoke unto them, so long as they would suffer me. -- They threatened and rebuked
me, for my preaching to the people out of Prison, and for my praying and
reading so loud, that the people in the streets might hear. -- When the Bishop
of Chester came to Lancaster, he was informed of me, and desired to send for
me, and examine me; but he said he would have nothing to do with Heretics so
hastily. So hasty in judging and calling me Heretics are our Bishops in their
Lordly Dignities, before they hear, etc. contrary to the Word of God, which
says, Condemn no man before thou have tried out the truth of the matter, and
when thou have made inquisition, then reform righteously. Give no Sentence
before thou have heard the Cause, but first let men tell out their tale; and he
that gives Sentence in a matter before he hear it, is a fool, and worthy to be
confounded. -- It is no new thing for the Bish^ps to persecute the Truth and
the Prophets of the Lord for their constancy in preaching of the true Faith;
Page 229.
Faith; for so did their Pharisaical Forefathers. Pashur was the Head Bishop
of the Temple, the Ringleader of false Prophets, the chief Heretick-taker,
that is as much as to say, the Outthruster of true Godliness. He imprisoned the
Prophet Jeremy, etc. The ungracious Bishop I^son was such another, Machab. 2.4.
-- Such were also the execrable and blind Bishops Annas and Caiaphas, who never
spoke the Truth of God themselves, unless it were against their wills,
unwittingly to their own destruction. -- At Chester several times came to me,
and with all probability of words and Philosophy, or worldly wisdom, and
deceitful vanity, after the traditions of men, and the beggarly Ordinances and
Laws of the world, but not after Christ, went about to persuade me to submit my
self to the Church of Rome, and to acknowledge the Pope to be Head thereof, and
to interpret the Scriptures no otherwise then that Church did. I answered, That
I do acknowledge and believe one Holy Catholic Church, without which there is
no Salvation; and that this Church is but one, because it ever has, does, and
shall confess one Only God, and him only worship; and one Only Messiah, and
him only trust for Salvation: which Church is ruled and led by one Spirit, one
Word, and one Faith, etc. and is built only upon the foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the Head-corner-stone, and
not upon the Romish Laws, the Bishop of Rome being the supreme Head, etc. and
that this Church is a little poor silly flock, dispersed and scattered abroad,
as sheep without a shepherd, in the midst of wolves; or as a company of Orphans
and fatherless children, led and ruled by the only Laws, Counsels, and Word of
Christ, who is the supreme Head thereof, assisting, succouring, and defending
her from all assaults, errors, troubles, and persecutions, wherewith she is
ever compassed about.

-- I was thrust at with all violence of craft and subtilty, but yet the Lord
upheld me. Everlasting thanks be to that merciful and faithful Lord, who
suffers us not to be tempted above our might, but in the midst of our
troubles strengthens us with his holy Spirit of comfort and patience, gives
us a mouth and wisdom how and what to speak, where against all his Adversaries
are not able to resist. --

At another appearance before the Bishop, Page 230.
etc. the Chancellor charged him, That he had preached most heretically and
blasphemously in many Parishes within the Bishops Diocese against the Popes
Authority, the Catholic Church of Rome, etc. He answered, That he neither
heretically nor blasphemously preached or spoke against any of the said
Articles, but simply and truly as occasion served, and (as it were thereunto
forced in Conscience) maintained the Truth touching those Articles, as (said
he) all you now present did acknowledge the same in King Edward's days.

After the Bishop of Chester had read half-ways the Sentence of Condemnation,
Page 231.
he asked him whether he would not have the Queens mercy in time? He answered,
He did gladly desire the same, and did love her Grace as faithfully as any of
them, but yet he durst not deny his Savior Christ, and so lose his mercy
everlasting, and win everlasting death.

Being again called upon by the people to recant and save his life, he said, I
would as fain live as any of you, if in so doing I should not deny my Master
Christ, and again he should deny me before his Father in Heaven.

When the Bishop had read out the Sentence, he said, Now I will no more pray
for thee then I will pray for a Dog. Mr. Marsh answered, That notwithstanding
he would pray for his Lordship.

When he was in the Dungeon, and none suffered to come near him, some of the
Citizens would at a hole upon the wall of the City, that went into the Dungeon,
ask him how he did? He would answer them most cheerfully, that he did well, and
thanked God most highly, that he would vouchsafe of his mercy to appoint him to
be a witness of his Truth, and to suffer for the same, wherein he did most
rejoice, beseeching him that he would give him grace not to faint under the
Cross, but patiently bear the same to his glory, and comfort of his Church.

When he came to the place of Execution, one showing him a Writing under the
great Seal, and telling him, It was a Pardon for him if he would recant; he
said, That he would gladly receive the same; but forasmuch as it tended to
pluck him from God, he would not receive it upon that condition.

After that he began to speak to the people, showing the cause of his death,
and would have exhorted them to stick unto Christ. Whereupon one of the
Sheriffs said, We must have no Sermoning now.

When the Beholders supposed no less but that he had been dead, having been so
long in the fire, he spread abroad his Arms, saying, Father of Heaven have
mercy upon me.

Upon this many of the people said, Page 232.
That he was a Martyr, and died mavelous patiently and godly, which thing
caused Dr. Cotes the Bishop shortly after to preach in the Cathedral, that he
was an Heretic, burnt like an Heretic, and was a firebrand in hell. But
shortly after the judgment of God took hold of the Bishop; it was a report in
all men's mouths that he died burnt by an harlot.

In his Letter to the Reader, touching his Examinations. -- Though Satan be
suffered to sift us, as wheat, for a time, yet fails not our faith, through
Christ's aid, but that we are at all times able and ready to confirm the Faith
of our weak Brethren, and always ready to give an answer to every man that
asks us a reason of the hope that is in us, and that with meekness and
reverence, having a good conscience; and whenas they backbite us as evil doers,
they may be ashamed, forasmuch as they have falsely accused our good
conversation in Christ. I thought my self well settled with my loving Wife and
Children, and also well quieted in the peaceable possession of that pleasant
Euphrates; but the Lord, who works all for the best to them that love him,
would not there leave me, but took my dear and beloved Wife from me, whose
death was a painful cross to my flesh. I thought also my self well placed under
most loving and gentle Mr. Laurence Saunders in the Cure of Langton. But the
Lord of his great mercy would not suffer me long there to continue, (although
for the small time I was in his Vineyard I was not an idle workman) but he has
provided me to taste of a far other Cup; for by violence has he yet once again
driven me out of that glorious Babylon, that I should not taste too much of her
wanton pleasures, but with his most dearly beloved Disciples to have my inward
rejoicing in the Cross of his Son Jesus Christ, the glory of whose Church I see
it well,
stands not in the harmonious sound of Bells and Organs, nor yet in the
glistering of Mitres and Copes, nor in the shining of gilt Images and Lights,
but in continual Labors and Afflictions for his Names sake.

God at this present here in England has his Fan in his hand, and after his
great Harvest, whereinto these years past he has sent his Laborers, is now
sifting the Corn from the Chafe, and purging his Floor, and ready to gather
the Wheat into his Garner, and burn up the Chafe with unquenchable fire. Take
heed and beware of the leaven of the Scribes and Pharisees. -- Try all things,
and choose that which is good. Believe not every Spirit, but prove the Spirits,
whether they be of God or not. -- The true Touchstone is the Word of God. --

In his Letter to the faithful Professors of Langton. -- Grace be unto you, and
peace be multiplied in the Knowledge of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. I thought
it my duty to write unto you, my Beloved in the Lord, to stir up your minds,
and to call to your remembrance the words that have been spoken to you before,
and to exhort you (as that good man, Acts 11.
and full of the Holy Ghost, Barnabas did the Antiochians) that with purpose of
heart ye continually cleave unto the Lord, and that ye stand fast, and be not
moved away from the Hope of the Gospel; whereof God be thanked, ye have had
plenteous preaching by Mr. Sanders, and other Ministers of Christ, who now when
persecution does arise, because of the Word, do not fall away, and forsake the
Truth, being ashamed of the Gospel, whereof they have been Preachers, but are
willing and ready for your sakes, to forsake not only the chief and principal
delights of this life, viz. their native Country, Friends, Livings, etc. but
also to fulfill their Ministry to the utmost, viz. with their painful
imprisonments, and blood-sheddings, if need shall require, to confirm and seal
Christ's Gospel, whereof they have been Ministers. Acts ^^.
They are ready, not only to be cast into prison, but also to be killed for
the Name of the Lord Jesus. Whether those, being that good salt of the earth,
i. e. true Ministers of Gods Word, by whose Doctrine, being received by Faith,
men are made savoury unto God, and which themselves lose not their saltness;
now when they be proved with the boisterous storms of persecution, or others,
being that unsavory salt, which has lost it saltness, i. e. those ungodly
Ministers, who do fall from the Word of God to the dreams and traditions of
Antichrist; whether of these (I say) be more to be credited and believed, let
all men judge. Iam. 2.
Wherefore my dearly Beloved, Receive the Word of God with meekness, that is
grafted in you, which is able to save your souls, and see that ye be not
forgetful hearers, deceiving your selves with Sophistry, but doers of the
Word; Mat. 7.
whom Christ does liken to a Wise man, which builds his house upon a rock,
etc. That when Satan with all his Legions of Devils, with all their subtle
suggestions, and the world with all the mighty Princes thereof, with their
crafty counsels, do furiously rage against us, we faint not, but abide constant
in the Truth, being grounded upon a most sure Rock, which is Christ, and the
Doctrine of the Gospel, Mat. 16.
against which the gates of Hell, i. e. the power of Satan cannot prevail. And
be ye followers of Christ and his Apostles, and receive the Word in much
affliction, as the godly Thessalonians did. 1 These. 2.
They only are the true followers of Christ and his Apostles, that receive the
Word: And they only receive the Word, who both believe it, and also frame
their lives after it, and be ready to suffer all manner of adversity for the
Name of the Lord, 2 Timothy 3.
as Christ and all the Apostles did, and as all that will live godly in Christ
Jesus must do; Acts 14.
for there is none other way into the Kingdom of Heaven, but through much
tribulation. And if we suffer any thing for the Kingdom of Heavens sake, Mat.
5.
and for Righteousness sake, Mat. 7.
we have the Prophets, Christ, Mark 8.
the Apostles, and Martyrs for an example to comfort us; for they did all enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven at the strait gate and narrow way, which few do
find: and unless we will be content to deny our selves, and take up the Cross
of Christ, and his Saints, it is an evident argument that we shall never reign
with him. But if we can find in our hearts patiently to suffer persecutions and
tribulations, it is a sure token of the righteous Judgment of God, that we are
accounted worthy of the Kingdom of Heaven, for which we also suffer. It is
verily (says the Apostle) a righteous thing with God to recompense
tribulations to them that trouble us, 2 These. 1.
and rest to us that be troubled. -- These things we ought to have before our
eyes always, that in the time of persecution (whereof all that will be the
children of God shall be partakers, and some of us are already) we may stand
steadfast in the Lord, and endure even to the end, that we may be saved; for
unless we, like good Warriers of Jesus Christ, will endeavor our selves to
please him, who has chosen us to be soldiers, and fight the good Fight of
Faith to the end, we shall not obtain that crown of Righteousness, 1 Timothy 2.
which the Lord, that is a right our Judge, shall give all them that love his
Coming. Let us therefore ground our selves on the sure Rock Christ; for other
foundation can no man lay, 1 Cor. 3.
beside^ that which is laid already, which is Jesus Christ. If any bu^ld on
this foundation gold, silver, etc. By fire the Apostle does mean persecution,
the portion of those that do preach and profess the Word of Christ, which is
called the Word of the Cross. By gold, etc. he understands them, that in the
midst of persecution abide steadfast in the Word. By hay and stubble, such as in
time of persecution do fall away from the Truth. When Christ does purge his
floor with the wind of adversity, these are scattered as light chafe, which
shall be burnt with unquenchable fire. If they which do believe, do in time of
persecution stand steadfastly in the Truth, the Builder (I mean the Preacher of
the Word) shall receive a reward, and the Work shall be preserved and saved;
but if so be that they go back and swerve when persecution arises, the Builder
suffers loss, i. e. shall lose his labor and cost; but let he shall be
saved, if he being tried in the fire of persecution, does abide fast in the
Faith. Wherefore my Beloved, 1 Pet. 2.
give diligent heed, that ye, as li^ing stones be ^uilt upon the sure Rock,
Page 234.
etc. -- Let ^s be sure, that unless we keep Christ and his holy Word dwelling
by Faith in the House and Temple of our hearts, the same thing that Christ
threatens to the Jews, Mat. 14.
shall happen unto us, viz. The unclean spirit of ignorance, superstition,
idolatry, and unbelief, the Mother and Head of all Vices, which by the grace of
God was cast out of us, bringing with him seven other spirits worse then
himself, shall to our utter ruin return again to us, and so shall we be in
worse case then ever we were before; for if ^e, after we have escaped from the
filthiness of the world, through the Knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, be yet entangled therein and overcome, then is the lat^r end worse then
the beginning, and it had been letter for us not to have known the way of
righteousness, (...) after we have known it to turn from the holy Commandment
given unto us; for it is then happened unto us, according to the true Proverb,
The Dog is turned to his vomit, and the Son that was washed to wallowing in the
mire. Hebr. 6.
-- It is not possible (says the Apostle) that they, which were once
enlightened, etc. if they fall away, should be renewed again by repentance, etc.
St. Paul's meaning in this place is, That they that believe unfeignedly Gods
Word, do abide steadfast in the known Truth. If any therefore fall away from
Christ and his Word, it is a plain token, that they were but dissembling
Hypocrites, for all their fair faces outwardly, and never believed truly etc. 1
John 2.
They went out from us, Hebr. 10.
because they were not of us, etc. If we sin willingly after we have received
the knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a
certain fearful looking for of judgment, etc. Wherefore let us, on whom the
ends of the world are come, take diligent heed unto our selves, that now in
these last and perilous times (in which the Devil is come down and has great
wrath, because he knows his time is but short, and whereof the Prophets,
Christ, and the Apostles have given us such warning) we withhold not the Truth
in unrighteousness, believing, doing or speaking any thing against our
knowledge and conscience, John 8.
or without faith, etc. If ye believe me ye shall die in your sins. -- Dear
Friends, we trust to see better of you, and things which accompany salvation,
and that ye being the good ground, watered with the moistness of Gods Word
plentifully preached among you, will with a good heart hear the Word of God and
keep it, bringing forth fruit with patience; and that you will be none of those
forgetful and hypocritical hearers, who, although they hear the Word, suffer
the Devil to catch away what was sown in their hearts, either having no root in
themselves endure but a season, and as soon as persecution arises because of
the Word, by and by they are offended, or with the cares of this world, and
deceitfulness of riches choke the Word, and so are unfruitful. Read the Parable
of the Sower, and note especially, That the most part of the hearers of Gods
Word are but Hypocrites, hearing the Word without any fruit or profit, yea to
their greater condemnation; for only the fourth part of the seed does bring
forth fruit. Therefore let not us that be Ministers, or Professors and
Followers of Gods Word be discouraged, though that very few do give credit and
follow the Doctrine of the Gospel, and be saved. -- We trust that ye will not,
Page 235.
like the Gadarenes, for fear to lose your worldly substance or other delights
of this life, banish away Christ and his Gospel from among you. -- If ye do,
your own blood will be upon your own heads. And as ye have had more plentiful
preaching of the Gospel, then others, so ye shall be sure to be sorer plagued,
and the Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to another Nation,
that will bring forth the fruits thereof. Wherefore my dearly beloved in
Christ, take good heed unto your selves, and ponder well in your minds, how
fearful and horrible a thing it is to fall into the hands of the Living God,
and see that ye receive not the Word in vain, but declare your faith by your
good works: among which the chiefest are to be obedient to the Magistrates
(since they are the Ordinance of God, whether they be good or evil) unless they
command idolatry and ungodliness, i. e. things contrary to true Religion; for
then we ought to say with Peter, Acts 5.
We ought more to they God then man. But in any wise we must beware of Tumult,
Insurrection, Rebellion, or Resistance. The weapon of a Christian in this
matter ought to be the Sword of the Spirit, which is Gods Word, and Prayer,
coupled with humility and due submission, and with readiness of heart, rather
to die then to do any ungodliness. -- (2) We must obey our Parents, and be
careful for our Houses, that they be fed not only with bodily food, but much
rather with spiritual food, the Word of God. (3) Whatsoever ye would that men
should do unto you, Matthew. 7.
do ye likewise unto them; for this is the Law and the Prophets. (4) Pray for
all Estates. (5) After these works, we must learn to know the Cross: and (6)
What affection and mind we must bear toward our enemies, whatsoever they be to
suffer all evils patiently, to pray for them that persecute us. And thus doing
we shall obtain a certainty of our vocation, that we be the elect Children of
God. And thus I commend you, Brethren, unto God and to the Word of his grace,
which is able to ^uild farther etc, beseeching you to help Mr. Saunders and me
your late Pastors, and all them that be in bonds, for the Gospels sake, with
your Prayers to God for us, that we may be delivered from unreasonable men,
etc. and that this our imprisonment may be to the glory and profit of our
Christian Brethren in this world, and that Christ may be magnified in our
bodies, whether it be by death or life. Amen. The grace of our Lord be with you
all. -- The unprofitable Servant of Jesus Christ, and now also his Prisoner. G.
M. June 28. 1555.

Postscript. Save your selves from this untoward generation. Pray, pray, pray.
Never more need.

In his Letter to his Friends at Manchester. -- These are earnestly to exhort
you and beseech you in Christ, as ye have received the Lord Jesus, even so to
walk, rooted in him, and not to be afraid of any terror of your adversaries,
be they never so many and mighty, and you on the other side never so few and
weak; for the battle is the Lords. -- As I was with Moses, so will I be with
thee, says God, and will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. Be strong and
bold, neither fear nor dread; for the Lord thy God is with thee, whithersoever
thou go. Now if God be ^n our side, who can be against us? In this our
spiritual warfare is no man overcome, unless he traitorously leave and forsake
his Captain, or cowardly cast away his Weapons, or willingly yield himself unto
his Enemies, or fearfully turn his back and fly. Be strong therefore in the
Lord and in the power of his might, and put on all the armor of God, that ye
may be able to stand stedf^st against all the assaults of Satan. -- If we
submit our selves to God, and his holy Word, no man shall be able to hurt us;
God will deliver us from all troubles, yea from death also, till such time as
we covet and desire to die, as he did Paul, Acts 18. Phil. 1.
etc. Let us therefore run with patience unto the battle that is set before us,
and look unto Jesus the Captain and Finisher of our Faith, and after his
example, for the rewards sake, that is set out unto us, patiently to bear the
Cross, and despise the shame. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus must
suffer persecution. Christ was no sooner Baptized, and declared to the world to
be the Son of God, but Satan was by and by ready to tempt him: which thing we
must look for also; yea the more we shall increase our faith and virtuous
living, the more strongly will Satan assault us, whom we must learn after the
example of Christ, to fight against and overcome with the Holy and Sacred
Scriptures, etc. and let the fasting of Christ, when he was tempted in the
Wilderness, be an example unto us of our sober living, not for the space of
forty days (as the Papists do fondly fancy of their own brains) but us long
as we are in the Wilderness of this wretched life, assaulted of Satan, who like
a roaring Lion, etc. It is the nature and property of the Devil always to hurt
and do mischief, if God do not forbid. Indeed if God will not permit him, he
cannot so much as enter into a filthy Hog, etc. Let us, knowing Satan's deceits
and rankor, walk the more warily, and take unto us the shield of faith, etc.
Let us fast and pray continually, etc. To fasting and prayer must be joined
mercy to the poor and needy, etc. Let us go boldly to the seat of grace, where
we shall be sure to find grace and mercy to help in time of need. -- Wherefore,
my dear Brethren, be ye fervent in the Law of God, and jeopard ye your lives,
if need shall require, for the testament of the Fathers, and so shall ye
receive great honor, and an everlasting name. Remember Abraham, was not he
found faithful in temptation, and it was reckoned unto him for righteousness?
Joseph in time of his trouble kept the Commandment, and was made a Lord of
Egypt. Phineas was so fervent for the honor of God, that he obtained the
Covenant of an everlasting Priesthood. Joshua for the fulfilling of the Word of
God was made the Captain of Israel. Caleb bare record before the Congregation,
and received an Inheritance. David also in his merciful kindness obtained the
Throne of an everlasting Kingdom. Elias being zealous and fervent in the Law,
was taken up into Heaven. The three Children remained steadfast in the Faith,
and were delivered out of the fire, and Daniel from the mouth of the Lions.
Thus whoever put their trust in the Lord were not overcome. Fear not ye then
the words of ungodly men; for their glory is but dung and worms; to day they
are set up, and to morrow they are gone; they are turned into earth, and their
memorial comes to naught. Wherefore let us take good hearts unto us, and quit
our selves like men in the Law, etc. Let us not faint, because of affliction,
wherewith God tries all them that are sealed to everlasting life, etc. Seeing
we are in the narrow and strait way, that leads unto the m^st joyful and
pleasant City of everlasting life, let us not stagger, or turn back, being
afraid of the perilous way, but follow our Captain Christ therein, and be
afraid, no not of death it self. Consider also the course of this world, how
many for their Master's sake, or a little promotions sake will adventure their
lives, as commonly in Wars, and yet is their reward but light and transitory,
and ours is unspeakably great and everlasting. They suffer pains to be made
Lords on Earth for a short season; how much more ought we to endure, it may be
much less pains, to be made Kings in Heaven for evermore? -- Seeing, Brethren,
it has pleased God to set me, and that worthy Minister of Christ, John
Bradford, your Countreyman, in the forefront of this Battle, where (for the
time) is most danger, I beseech you all in the bowels of Christ to help us, and
all our fellow Soldiers standing in like perilous place, with your Prayers to
God for us, that we may quit our selves like men in the Lord, and give some
exmple of boldness and constancy, mingled with patience in the fear of God,
that ye and others of our Brethren, through our example, may be encouraged and
strengthened to follow us, that ye also may leave example to your weak Brethren
in the world to follow you. Amen. -- Brethren, the time is short, 1. C^r. 7.
it remains that ye use this world, as though ye used it not; for the fashion
of this world passes away. 1 John 2. Coll. 3.
See that ye love not the world, nor the things that be in the world; but set
your affections on heavenly things, etc. Be meek and long-suffering; serve and
edify one another with the gift that God has given you: beware of strange
Doctrine, etc. --

August 30, 1555.

Page 238.
In his Letter to Ienkin Crampton, etc. -- These be earnestly to exhort you, yea
and to beseech you in the tender mercy of Christ, that with purpose of heart ye
cleave unto the Lord, and that ye worship him in spirit, in the Gospel of his
Son; for God will not be worshipped after the commandments and traditions of
men, nor yet by any other means appointed, prescribed and taught us, but by his
holy Word: and though all men almost defile themselves with the wicked
traditions of men, and ordinances after the world, and not after Christ, yet do
ye after the ensample of Daniel, and his three Companions, etc. Be at a point
with your selves, that ye will not be defiled with the unclean meats of the
Heathen, I mean, the filthiness of Idolatry, and the very Heathenish Ceremonies
of the Papists, but as the true Worshippers, serve ye God in spirit and verity,
according to the sacred Scriptures. Above all things I wish you continually and
reverently to search and read the Scriptures, and with the wholesome
admonitions of the same to teach, exhort, comfort, and edify one another, now
in this time of the great famishment of souls, for want of the food of Gods
Word. And doubt not but that the merciful Lord (who has promised to be with
us, even to the worlds end, and when two or three are gathered together in his
Name he will be in the midst of them) will assist you and teach you the right
meaning of the sacred Scriptures, will keep you from all errors, and lead you
into all truth, as he has promised. And though you think your selves unable to
teach, yet at the command of Christ, now in time of famine, seeing the hungry
people in the wilderness far from any Towns, if they be sent away fasting, are
sure to faint and perish by the way, employ those five loaves and two fishes
that ye have, upon that hungry multitude, although you think it nothing among
so many. And he that increased the five loaves and two fishes to feed five
thousand men, etc. shall also augment his gifts in you, not only to the
edifying of others, but to an exceeding great increase of your own knowledge in
God and his holy Word: And fear not your Adversaries; for either according to
his accustomed manner, God shall blind their eyes, that they shall not spy
you, or get you favor in their sight, or else graciously deliver you out of
their hands by one means or other. Comfort your selves in all your adversities,
and stay your selves in him, who has promised not to leave you, as fatherless
and motherless children, without any comfort, but that he will come unto you,
like a most gentle and merciful Lord. --

In another Letter. -- The same grace and peace do I wish unto you, which St.
Paul wishes to them, to whom he writ, etc. Grace is taken for the free mercy
and favor of God, whereby he saves us freely without any of our deservings or
works of the Law. Peace is taken for the tranquillity of conscience, being
persuaded that through the only merits of Christ's death and bloodshedding,
there is an atonement and peace made between God and us, so that God will no
more impute our sins unto us, Page 239.
nor condemn us. -- Be not ashamed of the testimony of our Lord Jesus, nor of
us his Prisoners, but suffer ye adversity with the Gospel; for which word we
suffer, as evil doers, unto bonds; but the Word of God is not bound with us.
Therefore we suffer all things for the Elects sake, that they also may obtain
the Salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.

Wherefore stand ye fast in the Faith, and be not moved from the hope of the
Gospel: so shall ye make us with joy to suffer for your sakes, and as the
Apostle says, To fulfill that which is behind of the Passions of Christ in our
flesh, for his Bodies sake, which is the Congregation. St. Paul does not here
mean, that there wants any thing in the Passion of Christ, which may be
supplied by man; but the words are to be understood of the Elect, in whom
Christ is and shall be persecuted to the worlds end. The Passion of Christ
then, i. e. of this Church, his mystical Body, shall not be perfect till all,
whom God has appointed, have suffered for his sake. -- On our parts nothing
can be greater consolation and inward joy to us in our Adversity, then to hear
of your Faith and Love, and that ye have a good remembrance of us always,
praying for us as we do for you. Now are we alive, if ye stand steadfast in the
Lord. Good Shepherds do always count the welfare and prosperous estate of
Christ's Flock to be their own. While it goes well with the Congregation, it
goes well with them also, in whatever affliction they be: but when they see
the Church in peril, then be they weary of their own lives, and can have no
rest nor joy. Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I do not
burn? But this affection is not in them that seek their own lucre and glory. --
God is wont for the most part to warn his Elect what trouble shall happen to
them for his sake, not to frighten them thereby, but rather to prepare their
minds against the boisterous storms of Persecution. --

In his Letter to Robert Langley. -- I thank you for visitting me a Prisoner
for Christ, and unacquainted with to your cost, and for your promise, that if I
did want any thing necessary to this life, you with some others would help me,
and rejoice greatly in the Lord, who stirs up the hearts of others to be
careful for me in this my great necessity. I thank God as yet I do want
nothing, and intend to be as little chargeable to others as I can; yet if I
want, Page 240.
I will be bold with you and others to send for your help, desiring you in the
mean while to pray for me and all others in the bonds of Christ, that God would
perform the thing which he has begun in us, that we may confess Jesus Christ
with boldness, and fight the good Fight of Faith,

In another Letter. -- These be to certify you, that I greatly rejoice in the
Lord, for that my sweet Savior Christ does stir up the minds, not only of my
familiar friends in times past, but of sundry heretofore to me unknown to help
me, sending me not only necessaries for this life, but comfortable Letters,
encouraging me and exhorting me to continue grounded and stablished in the
Faith, etc. I call daily upon God, in whom is all my trust, and without whom I
can do nothing, that he would perfect what he has begun, being assured he will
so do; forasmuch as he has given me, not only to believe, ^ut to suffer for
his sake. The Lord strengthen me with his Holy Spirit, that I may be one of the
number of those Blessed, which enduring to the end shall be saved. -- My trust
in the Lord is, that this my business shall happen to the furtherance of the
Gospel. -- God will to your consolation gloriously deliver by one means or
other his Oppressed. Only tarry ye the Lords leisure, and wait still for the
Lord. He tarrieth not, that will come; look for him therefore, and faint not,
and he will never fail you.

Marshall.
Ward, page 152.
I was from eternity (said Christopher Marshall of Antwerp) a sheep destined to
the slaughter, and now I go the Shambles. Gold must be tried in the fire.

Massey.
Fuller 's Englands Worthies in Huntshire. page 5.
I must needs here mention an Infant without a Christian Name, and not capable
of speaking, because its death still speaks aloud. This Infant was the child of
Perotine Massey, the Wife of a Minister of Gods Word, for fear fled out of the
Island of Guernsey. She with her Mother and Sister were burnt for absence from
Church. The Babe properly was never born, but by the force of the flame burst
out of his Mothers Belly alive; and yet by the command of the Bailiffe (supreme
Officer in the then absence of the Governor) cast again into the fire, and
therein consumed to ashes. It seems this bloody Bailiffe was minded like the
cruel Tyrant, commanding, Canis pessimi ne catulum esse relinquendum, though
this indeed was no dog, but a Lamb, and that of the first minute, and therefore
too young by the Levitical Law to be sacrificed. Here was a spectacle without
precedent, a cruelty built three generations high, that Grandmother, Mother,
and Grandchild, should all suffer in the same flame.

Maximinus.
Ward, page 140.
We are ready (said Maximinus and Iubentius) to lay off the last garment, the
flesh.

Melancthon.
Clarks first Volume of Lives, page 562.
I tremble to think (said Philip Melancthon) with what blind devotion I went to
Images, whilst I was a Papist.

When Luther began to oppose the Pope, he was sent for by Prince Frederick Duke
of Saxony to Wittenberg to teach the Greek Tongue, and yet then he was but two
and twenty years old An. 1518.

When he was first converted, Page 571.
he thought it impossible for his Hearers to withstand the evidence of the
Truth, in the Ministry of the Gospel; but after he had been a Preacher a while,
he complained, That old Adam was too hard for young Melancthon.

In the year 1519. he went with Luther to Lipswich, Page 563, 564.
where he disputed with Eccius.

In this Disputation Eccius brought a very subtle Argument, which he being not
able suddenly to answer, said, I will answer you to morrow. Eccius replying,
That is little for your credit, if you cannot answer it presently. Sir (said
he) I seek dot mine own glory in this business, but the Truth. To morrow God
willing you shall hear further.

In the year 1521. when the Divines of Paris had condemned Luther's Doctrine
and Books, See Luthers Works, Tom. 2. fol. 427.
he wrote an Apology for him against their furious Decree.

In his Epistle to the Reader. -- See Christian Reader, what Monsters in
Divinity Europe has bred. The last year the Sophisters of Colen and Lorain
condemned the Gospel by some naked Propositions, confirmed neither by Scripture
nor reason. M^dder then they are they, whoever they be, who have at Paris
condemned Luther. Page 428.
-- There is no cause to wonder that they are no more favorable to Luther.
Alas! they were not more favorable to their own great Gerson, when the Schools
at Paris were more wholesome. -- It concerns us to consider, what is decreed,
not who have decreed it. The Apostle will not have us give place, no not to
Angels, corrupting the Gospel. -- Farewell to the Name of our Masters, farewell
to the Name of Parisians, unless in their own Schools. In the Christian
Commonwealth nothing prevails but the Voice of Christ, which whosoever hears
not is not Christ's. -- They say that Luther ought rather to be overcome by
fire, then by reason. -- They accuse Luther of Heresy, not because he dissents
from Universities, Fathers, Councils; not because he dissents from the
Scripture, and the Opinions of Universities, Fathers, Councils, they call the
first Principles of Faith. -- But it will be said Luther does dissent from the
Scripture, because he dissents from the Expositions of Scripture, which from
Fathers, Councils, and Schools, have hitherto been received. This is (as I
perceive) the Hinge of the Controversy. Here I ask this Question of our
Masters, Whether the Scriptures be so delivered, that their meaning cannot
certainly be collected without the Exposition of Councils, Fathers, and
Schools? If you deny that the meaning of the Scripture cannot certainly be
concluded without their glosses, I cannot see why the Scriptures were
delivered, or why the Apostles invite us to the study of the Scriptures? -- If
you grant it, certainly the Scripture ought to be preferred, not only before
the Schools and Fathers, but before Councils determining otherwise. May not
then Luther oppose unto Councils, Fathers, Schools, the certain sense and
meaning of Scripture? But we will not yield so much, that Luther opposes the
Fathers and Councils. --

(...) page 564 565*
When the Wars for Religion brake out in Germany, he foresaw in a Dream the
Captivity of the E^ect^r of Saxony, and the Lantgrave of Hess fifteen days
before they were taken.

When the Plague broke out in Wittinberg, and the University was removed, he
said, He feared not that Plague, but a far worse Plague, which threatened the
ruin of the Commonwealth.

In the year 1534. in his Letter to Camerarius he gives this reason why he
refused King Henry's offers if he would come into England. -- Perhaps (says
he) many things are reported amongst you concerning England, that it lies open
now for the Religion of the purer Doctrine; but I have intelligence from a good
hand, that the King has no great care of the Affairs of the Church, only this
Good comes of his rejecting the Popes Authority, that for the present no
cruelty is used toward those that are desirous of better Doctrine.

When he went to Hagenaw to meet the Protestant Divines there, foreseeing, that
he should fall into a mortal disease, he made his Will, and left it with
Cruciger, saying, Viximus in Synodis, and jam moriemur in illis.


In English thus; Employed in Synods, living, often was I,
Now in a Synod I am like to die.


He was often threatened with Banishment out of Germany, Page 569.
of which he writes thus; I have through Gods mercy been here these forty
years, and yet I could never say, or be sure, that I should remain here one
week to an end.

Seven days before he died, Page 566.
many persons worthy of credit, betwixt nine and ten of the Clock at night saw
in the Clouds over the Tower of Wittenqerg five rods bound together, after
which two vanishing, the other three appeared severed in diverse places, the
branches of the rods turning toward the North, the handles toward the South.
When this Prodigy was told Melancthon, he said, Herein Gods Fatherly
Punishments are not swords, but rods, which Parents use to correct their
children withal: and I fear a dearth.

Page 567.
When the Pastors of the Church visitted him in his sickness, he said unto them,
By the goodness of God I have no domestical grief to disquiet me, etc. but
public matters affect me, especially the troubles of the Church in this evil
and sophistical age. But through Gods goodness our Doctrine is sufficiently
explained and confirmed.

Page 568.
When he heard by Letters of the persecution of some godly men in France, he
said, That his bodily disease was not comparable to the grief of his mind for
his godly Friends, and for the miseries of the Church. -- Yet my hopes are very
great, for the Doctrine of our Church is explained. If God be for us, Page 570.
who can be against us? I desire (said he) to depart for two causes. (1) That I
may have the much desired sight of Jesus Christ, and the Church Triumphant. (2)
That I may be delivered from the cruel and implacable discords of Divines.

Meyere.
For Martyr. V^l. 3. com. p. 50.
Mr. Giles Meyere of Flanders, after he was converted, he sought all means how
to employ his Talent. He was not only careful to preach to his Charge, but he
went from h^use to house, comforting and exhorting every one, as occasion
served, out of the Word of God, laboring above all with them to beware of the
abominable superstitions of the Papacy.

When he was imprisoned 1567. in a deep dark hole, he bore his affliction
patiently, but so praised God for esteeming him worthy to suffer for his sake,
and so comforted them that came to visit him, that they could not leave him
without tears.

In the midst of the Fagots (though he was gagged) he was heard distinctly and
plainly to say, Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit.

Mill.
Mr. Walter Mill being brought before the Bishops of Scotland to answer to
Articles against him, Fox. Vol. 2. page 625.
and placed in a Pulpit before them, he prayed so long, that one of the Bishops
Priests called out to him saying, Sir Walter Mill arise, and answer to the
Articles, for you hold my Lord here overlong. When he had ended his Prayer, he
answered, We ought to obey God rather then men. I serve one more mighty, even
the Omnipotent Lord. And whereas you call me Sir Walter, call me Walter, and
not Sir Walter, I have been overlong one of the Popes Knights.

Being threatened with the Sentence of Death, if he would not recant, he said, I
know I must die once; and therefore as Christ said to Judas, What thou do do
it quickly: so say I to you. Ye shall know that I will not (...) the Truth; for
I am corn, I am no chafe; I (...) not (...) blown away with the wind, nor
burst with the slail, I will abide both.

Being bid to pass to the Stake, Page 626.
he said, Nay, but if thou will put me up with thy hand, thou shall see me pass
up gladly; for by the Law of God I am forbidden to lay han^ upon my self. Being
put, he ascended gladly, saying, I will go up unto the altar of God.

After he had prayed, he spoke thus to the people; Dear Friends, the cause why
I suffer this day is not for any crime laid to my C^arge (albeit I be a
miserable sinner before God) but only for the defense of the Faith of Jesus
Christ, set forth in the Old and New Testament to us; for which (as the
faithful Martyrs have offered themselves gladly before, being assured (after
the death of their bodies) of eternal felicity. So this day I praise God that
he has called me of his mercy among the rest of his Servants to seal up his
Truth with my life, which as I have received it of him, so willingly I offer it
to his glory. Therefore as you will escape the eternal death, be no more
seduced with the lies of Priests, Bishops, etc. and the rest of the Sect of
Antichrist, but depend only on Jesus Christ, and his mercy, that ye may be
delivered from condemnation.

Being in the fire, he said, Lord have mercy upon me, pray people while there
is time. He was burnt An. 1558. and by his death gave the very dead blow to
Popery; See the Ecclesiastical History of Scotland, Praef. page penult.
for by his death the people of all Ranks and Conditions were so moved, that
they made open Profession of the Truth, without any more dallying, and upon
this occasion a Covenant was presently entered in to defend one another against
the Tyranny of the Bishops. So that he was the last that died for Religion at
that time in that Kingdom.

His Epitaph.
Non nostra impietas, aut actae crimina vitae
Armarunt hosts in mea fata truces:
Sola fides Christi sacris signata libellis,
Quae vitae causa est, est mihi causa necis.
In English thus; Not any sin committed here by me
Against me armed my bloody enemy:
The Scripture Faith, of life the only cause,
Did cause my death, and that against all Laws.


Monerius.
Claudius Monorius, being cavilled at by the Friars for eating a Breakfast
before his Execution, said, This I do that the flesh may answer the readiness
of the Spirit.

Moral.
Let us not, See the Mirror of Martyrs, page 563.
my Brethren, ( said John Moral, an outlandish Martyr) fear the Prisons;
seeing they are Christ's Schools and Colleges, wherein Gods children learn
their Fathers Lessons: There we find him true in his Promises: There he
manifests himself incomparably to his Children.

Our Prisons are Schools of Defense, where we learn how to ward off all the
blows, that the world, flesh, or Devil would foyl us with; all which we learn
of our Captain Christ. Here we are quit of the vain allurements of the world:
Here we are freed of the fear of meeting idols in the streets: Here we may
without check call upon God,
and sing Psalms unto him. Therefore let us not refuse to hear Sermons for fear
of going to Prison.

N.
Newman.
John Newman in his written Answer to Suffragen Thornton. ^
-- It may please you to understand that good Ministers all the time of King
Edward's reign taught us diligently, persuading us by the Allegations of Gods
Word, that there was no Transubstantiation, nor corporal Presence in the
Sacrament: their Doctrine was not believed of us suddenly, but by their
continual preaching, and also by our continual Prayer unto God, that we might
never be deceived, but if it were true, that he would incline our hearts unto
it; and if it were not true, that we might never believe it. We weighed, That
they labourel with Gods Word, etc. -- Wherefore until such time as our
consciences are otherwise taught and instructed by Gods Word, we cannot with
safeguard of our consciences take it, as many suppose at this time. And we
trust in God, that the Queens Highness, and her most Honorable Council, will
not in a matter of Faith use compulsion or violence; because Faith is the gift
of God, and comes not of man, or of man's Laws, nor at such time as men require
it, but at such time as God gives it.

Page 392.
Being asked whether he would stand to what he had said; I must need stand to it
(said he) till I be persuaded by a further truth. It being replied; Nay, you
will not be persuaded, but stand to your own Opinion: Nay (said he) I stand not
to mine own Opinion, God I take to witness, but only to the Scriptures of G^d;
and I take God to witness, that I do nothing of presumption, but that that I do
is only my Conscience; and if there be a further truth then I see, except it
appear a truth to me, I cannot receive it as a truth. And seeing Faith is the
gift of God, and comes not of man; for it is not you that can give me Faith,
nor no man else; therefore I trust ye will bear the more with me, seeing it
must be wrought by God; and when it shall please God to open a further truth to
me, I shall receive it with all my heart.

Hab. 2. Heb. 10.
In his Confession of his Faith. -- The Lord is the Protector of my life. The
just shall live by Faith; and if he withdraw himself, my soul shall have no
pleasure in him. Page 393.
-- Thus have I declared my Faith briefly, which were no Faith, if I were in
doubt of it. This Faith I desire God to increase in me. Praise God for his
gifts.

Nicaise.
Fox, Vol. 3. cont. page 33.
Nicaise a Say-maker in Tournay for refusing to live according to the Customs
of the Romish Church, and to observe the traditions invented by her, etc. being
condemned, and having heard the sentence, as he rose up, he said, Now praised
be God.

As he was led to execution, seeing a great multitude of people, he lifted up
his voice, and said, O ye men of Tournay, open your eyes, awake ye that sleep,
and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give ye light.

As he joyfully ascended up the Scaffold, he said, Lord, they have hated me
without a cause.

As he was fastening to the Stake, he said, Eternal Father, have pity and
compassion upon me, according as thou have promised to all, that ask the same
of thee in thy sons Name.

Noyes.
When John Noyes was asked by his Brother in Law if he did fear death, Fox,
Vol. 3. page 851.
when the Bishop gave judgment against him, he answered, He thanked God he
feared death no more at that time then himself, or any other did being at
liberty.

Being bound to the Stake, he said, Fear not them that can kill the body, but
fear him that can kill both body and soul, and cast it into everlasting fire.

When he saw his Sister weeping and making moan for him, he bade her, Weep not
for him, but weep for her sins.

When a Faggot was set against him he took it, and kissed it, and said, Blessed
be the time that ever I was born to come to this.

He said also, Good people bear witness that I do believe to be saved by the
merits and passion of Jesus Christ, and not by my own deeds.

When the fire was kindled and burned about him, he said, Lord have mercy upon
me, Christ have mercy upon me, Son of David have mercy upon me.

In his Letter to his Wife out of Prison. -- You desired me to send you some
tokens to remember me. I therefore send you these Scriptures even for a
remembrance. St. Peter says, Dearly beloved, be not troubled with this heat,
that is now come among you to try you, as though some strange thing had happened
unto you, but rejoice in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings,
that when his glory appears, ye may be merry and glad. If ye be railed on for
the Name of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of glory and the Spirit of God
restest on you. -- See that none of you suffer as a Murderer, etc. but if any
suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but glorify God in this behalf;
for the time is come that judgment must begin at the House of God: If it first
begin at us, what shall the end of them be, that believe not the Gospel of God?
Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit their souls
to him in well doing. St. Paul says, 2 Timothy 3.
All that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution. St. John
says, See that ye love not the world, nor the things of the world: If any man
love the world, the love of the Father is not in him; for all that is in the
world, as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life is
not of the Father, but is of the world, which vanishes away and the lust
thereof, but he that fulfilleth the will of God abides for ever. 2 Cor. 1.
-- St. Paul says, What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness?
what company has light with darkness? or what part has the Believer with the
Infidel? etc. Wherefore come out from among them, and separate your selves now
(says the Lord) and touch no unclean thing, so will I receive you, and I will
be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord
Almighty. -- So farewell Wife and Children, and leave worldly care, and see
that ye be diligent to pray. Take no thought (says Christ) saying what ye
shall eat, Matthew. 6.
or what ye shall drink, or wherewith shall we be clothed? (after all these
things do the Geneiles seek) for your heavenly Father knows that you have
need of all these things; but seek ye first the Kingdom of God and the
righteousness there^f, and all these things shall be ministered to you. --

O.
O^colampadius.
He fell sick in the year 1531. and of his age 49. about the same time that
Zuinglius was unhappily slain. See his Life in Melch. ^dam. page 55.56.
His grief for his death much increased his sickness. He foretold his own
death: was very desirous to enjoy the heavenly Light.

Sending for the Ministers of the Gospel to him, he spoke to them thus; O my
Brethren, you see what is done: The Lord is come, he is, he is now calling me
away. -- What shall I say unto you, the Servants of the Lord, whom the love of
God your Master, the same study and doctrine have most intimately united, now
that I am to take my leave of you? Salvation, hopes of Heaven, Truth, Light for
our feet is procured by Christ for us: It becomes us to cast away all sadness,
all fear of life and death, etc. My Brethren, this only remains, That we who
have for some time walked in the ways of Christ, continue constant and
faithful followers of him therein, persevering in purity of doctrine and
holiness of life. Other things Jesus Christ the Lord, who is able and willing
to look after his own concernments, will take care of. He will defend his own
Church. Go to then, O my Brethren, so let your light shine forth, that God the
Father may be glorified in us, and the Name of Christ be made illustrious and
conspicuous by the light of your life. Continue to love one another
unfeignedly. Lead your whole life as in the sight, as under the eye of God. In
vain do we press to holiness, if our words be without deeds: there is need of
the Light of life, and the heavenly Spirit, if we will confound Satan, and
convert this world unto Christ the Lord. O my Brethren, What a cloud is there
arising? what a storm a coming? what a defection is at hand? But it becomes you
to stand fast. The Lord, who is careful of his own affairs, will be present
with you. -- For my self, I pass not the horrible aspersion of corrupting the
Truth, that is c^st upon me. I am just now going before the Tribunal of Christ,
and that (through grace) with a clear conscience. There it will appear, that I
have not seduced the Church. --

The night before he died, when a very dear Friend returned to him,
Oecolampadius asked him, What news he had brought? His Friend answering, None.
I will tell you some then (said Oeculampadius) I shall presently be with my
Lord Christ.

Ward, page 152.
A while after being asked, Whether the light offended him? He putting his hand
to his heart, said, Here is abundance of light. Here is light enough.

Ogner, or Ogvier.
Ward, page 153* 154.
Robert Ognier's Son said to his Father and Mother at the Stake with him,
Behold millions of Angels about us, and the Heavens opened to receive us.

To a Friar that railed; Thy cursings are blessings.

To a Nobleman that offered him life and promotion; Do you think me such a
fool, that I should change eternal things for temporary?

And to the people; We suffer as Christians, not as Thieves or Murderers.

Fox, Vol. 3. con^. page 2.
When the Prov^st of Lile had seized on Robert Ogvier, his Wife, and his two
Sons, Baudicon, and Martin, as they were conveyed along through the streets of
the City, Baudicon with a loud voice said, O Lord, assist us by thy grace, not
only to be Prisoners for thy Name, but to confess thy holy Truth in all purity
before men, so far as to seal the same with our bloods for the edification of
thy poor Church.

When they were brought before the Magistrates, they said unto Robert Ogvier,
etc. It is told us that you never come to Mass, yea and also dissuade others
from coming thereto, and that you maintain Conventicles in your Houses. He
answered, Whereas you lay to my charge that I go not to Mass, I refuse so to do
indeed, because the death and precious blood of the Son of God, and his
sacrifice is utterly abolished there, and trodden under foot; for Christ by one
sacrifice has perfected for ever them that are sanctified. Hebr. 10.14. Matt.
^5.9.
-- The Mass is the mere invention of men, and you know what Christ says, In
vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of men. -- As
for the second Accusation, I cannot nor will deny, but there have met together
in my House honest people fearing God, for the advancement of Gods glory, and
the good of many, and not to wrong any. I knew indeed the Emperor had forbid
it: but what then? I knew also that Christ in his Gospel has commanded it;
Matt. ^8.20.
Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there (says he) am I in
the midst of them. Thus you see I could not well obey the Emperor, but I must
disobey Christ. In this case then I choose rather to obey my God, then man.

When one of the Magistrates demanded what they did, when they met together?
Baudicon the eldest Son of Robert Ogvier answered, If it please you my Masters
to give me leave, I will open the business at large to you. Leave being
granted, he lifting up his eyes to Heaven, began thus; When we meet together in
the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to hear the Word of God, we first of all
prostrate upon our knees before God, and in the humility of our spirits, do
make a confession of our sins before his Divine Majesty: Then we pray, that the
Word of God may be rightly divided, and purely preached: we also pray for our
Sovereign Lord the Emperor, and for all his honorable Counselors, that the
Commonwealth may be peaceably governed to the glory of God; yea we forget not
you, whom we acknowledge our Superiors, entreating our good God for you, and
for this whole City, that you may maintain it in tranquillity. Thus I have
summarily related what we do. Think you now, whether we have offended highly in
this matter of our assembling.

When Robert and Baudicon were condemned, they praised God for the Sentence;
and when they were returned to Prison, after Sentence was past, they rejoiced
that the Lord did them that honor to enroll them in the number of his Martyrs.

Robert being told by a seducing Friar, That i^ he would give ear to him, he
would warrant him he should do well: Poor man (said he) how dare thou
attribute that unto thy self, which belongs to the eternal God, and so rob him
of his honor; For it seems by thy speech, Page 3.
that if I will hearken to thee, thou will become my Savior. No, no, I have
one only Savior Jesus Christ, who by and by will deliver me from this present
evil world. I have one Doctor, Matt. 17.5.
whom the heavenly Father has commanded me to hear; and I purpose to hearken
to none other.

Another Friar exhorting him to have pity of his soul which Christ had
redeemed: Thou willest me (said the good old man) to pity mine own soul. Do
not thou see what pity I have on it, when for the Name of Christ I willingly
abandon this body of mine ^n the fire, hoping to day to be with him in
Paradise. I have put all my confidence in God, and my hope wholly is fixed on
the merits of Christ's Death and Passion: he will direct me the right way unto
his Kingdom. I believe whatsoever the holy Prophets and Apostles have written,
and in that Faith will I live and die.

Baudicon said, Let my Father alone and trouble him not thus, he is an old man,
and has an infirm body, hinder him not I pray you from receiving the Crown of
Martyrdom.

One telling Baudicon, That he would sell all he was worth to buy Fagots to
burn him, and that he found too much favor; He answered, The Lord show you
more mercy.

Some of the Friars having fastened a Crucifix betwixt the old man's hands, when
Baudicon espied it, he said, Alas! Father, what do you now? will you play the
Idolater even at the last hour? and then pulling the Idol out of his hands,
threw it away, saying, What cause has the people to be offended with us, for
not receiving of a Jesus Christ of wood? We bear upon our hearts the Cross of
Christ, the Son of the everliving God, feeling his Word written therein in
letters of Gold.

Baudicon beginning to sing on the Scaffold the Sixteenth Psalm, a Friar cried
out, Do ye hear my Masters, what wicked errors these Heretics sing to beguile
the people withal: whereupon Baudicon replied, Thou simple Idiot, call thou
the Psalms of David the Prophet, Errors? But no marvel; for thus you are wont
to blaspheme against the Spirit of God.

Then turning his eye to his Father, who was about to be chained to the Stake,
he said, Be of good courage, Father, the worst will be past by and by.

The old man complaining of the blow, which the Executioner gave him on the
foot, as he was fastening to the Post, a Friar said, Ah these Heretics they
would be counted Martyrs forsooth, but if they be but touched a little, they
cry out as if they were killed: Whereupon Baudicon said, Think you then that we
fear the Torment^rs? No such matter; for had we feared the same, we had never
exposed our bodies to this so shameful and painful a kind of death.

Then he often reiterated those short breathings, O God, Father everlasting,
accept the sacrifice of our bodies, for thy wellbeloved Son Jesus Christ his
sake. With his eyes fixed on Heaven, he said to his Father, Behold for I see
Heavens open, and millions of Angels ready pressed to receive us, rejoicing to
see us thus witnessing the Truth in the view of the world. Father, let us be
glad and rejoice; for the joys of Heaven are set open to us.

When the fire was kindled he often repeated this in his Fathers ear, Faint
not, Father, nor be afraid; yet a very little while, and we shall enter into
the Heavenly Mansions.

The last words they were heard to pronounce, were, Jesus Christ, thou Son of
God, into thy hands we commend our spirits.

Page 4.
Jane the Wife of Robert, whilst in Prison, (separated from her Son Martin) was
drawn away by a Monk and prevailed with to let go her first faith; and having
promised to draw her Son Martin from his errors, he was suffered to come to
her: which when he understood, O Mother (said he) what have you done? Have you
denied him, who has redeemed you? Alas! What evil has he done you, that you
should requite him with this so great an injury and dishonor? Now I am plunged
into that woe, which I have most feared. Ah good God! that I should live to see
this. This pierces me to the very heart. His Mother hearing this, and seeing
his tears, she with tears cried out, O Father of mercies, be merciful to me
miserable sinner, and cover my transgression under the righteousness of thy
blessed Son. Lord, enable me with strength from above to stand to my first
Confession, and make me to abide steadfast therein, even to my last breath.

When they that had seduced her came to her again, with detestation she said,
Avoid Satan, get thee behind me: from henceforth thou have neither part nor
portion in me. I will by the help of God stand to my first Confession; and if I
may not sign it with ink, I will seal it with my blood.

When Jane and Martin heard the Sentence past, returning to Prison they said,
Now blessed be our God, who causes us thus to triumph over our Enemies. This
is the wished hour. Our gladsome day is come.

Let us not then (said Martin) forget to be thankful for the honor he does us
in conforming us to the image of his Son. Let us remember those that have
traced this death before us; for this is the high way to the Kingdom of
Heaven. Let us then, good Mother, go on boldly out of the Camp with the Son of
God, bearing his reproach with all his holy Martyrs; for so we shall find
passage into the glorious Kingdom of the everliving God.

Some of the Company not brooking these words, said, We see now thou Heretic,
that thou art wholly possessed body and soul with a Devil, as was thy Father and
Brother, who are both in Hell. Martin replied, Sirs, as for your railings and
cursings our God will this day turn them into blessings in the sight of all his
holy Angels.

A certain Temporizer endeavoring to stagger Martin by the consideration of
the multitude that believed not as he did; his Mother said, Sir, Christ Jesus
our Lord says, Matt. 7.12.
That it is the wide gate and broad way that leads to destruction, and
therefore many go in thereat: but the gate is narrow that leads to life, and
few there be that find it. Do ye then doubt whether we be in the strait way, or
no, when ye behold our sufferings? Would you have a better sign then this to
know whether we are in the right way? Compare our Doctrine with that of your
Priests and Monks. We for our part are determined to have but one Christ, and
him crucified: We only embrace the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament.
Are we deceived in believing that which the holy Prophets and Apostles have
taught?

Martin being asked, Whether he thought himself wiser then so many learned
Doctors? answered, I pray you Sir does not Christ our Lord tell us, That his
Father has hid the secrets of his Kingdom from the wise and prudent, Matt.
11.^^ Job 5.13.
and revealed them to Babes? And does not the Lord oftentimes catch the wise in
their own craftiness?

Then came into the Prison to Martin two men of great Authority, and persuading
him to recant, promised him great matters, etc. Martin gave them this answer,
Sirs, you present before me many temporal commodities: but alas! do you think
me so simple, as to forsake an eternal Kingdom, for enjoying a short
transitory life? No Sirs, it is too late to speak to me now of worldly
commodities: Speak of those spiritual ones, which God has prepared for me to
day in his Kingdom. I purpose not to hearken after any other. Only let me
crave one hours respite to my self, to give my self to Prayer.

Afterward Martin declared the effect of this combat to certain Brethren in
Prison, saying, Let us lift up our heads, Brethren, the brunt is over; this I
hope is their last assault. Forget not I pray you the holy Doctrine of the
Gospel, nor those good Lessons, which you have learned from our Brother Guy
(probably he meant Mr. Guy de Brez, of whom before in letter B.) Manifest it
now to all, that you have received them not only into your ears, but also into
your hearts. Follow me. We lead you the way. Fear not, God will never leave
you, nor forsake you.

Jane having ascended the Scaffold, cried out to Martin, Come up, come up my
Son.

As Martin was speaking to the people, she said, Speak out, Martin, that it may
appear to all, that we die not Heretics.

She being bound to the Stake, said, We are Christians, and that which we now
suffer, is not for murder, or theft, but because we will believe no more then
the Word of God teaches us.

Both rejoiced, that they were counted worthy to suffer for the same.

When the fire was kindled, with lifting up their hands to Heaven in an holy
accord, they said, Lord Jesus into thy hands we commend our spirits.

Oldcastle.
Sir John Oldcastle, Fox, Vol. 1. page 727.
Lord Cobham, was of great birth, and in great favor with King Henry the
Fifth, so as Arch Bishop Arundel durst not meddle with him, till he knew the
Kings mind. The King when he heard the Priests Accusations, promised to deal
with him himself, which accordingly he did in private, admonishing him to
submit himself to his Mother, the holy Church, and as an obedient Child to
acknowledge himself cupable. The Christian Knight thus answered the King. Most
worthy Prince. I am always prompt and ready to obey, forasmuch as I know you a
Christian King, and the appointed Minister of God, bearing the sword to the
punishment of evil doers, and for safeguard of them that be virtuous. Unto you
(next my Eternal God) owe I my whole obedience, and submit thereunto (as I have
done ever) all that I have, either of Fortuns or Nature, ready at all times to
fulfill whatsoever ye shall in the Lord command me. But as touching the Pope
and his Spirituality, I owe them neither suit nor service; forasmuch as I know
him by the Scripture to be the great Antichrist, the son of perdition, the open
Adversary of God, and the abomination standing in the holy Place.

When he was by a wi^e cited to appear before the Arch Bishop, etc. he told the
Messenger (though he affirmed to him that it was the Kings pleasure that he
should obey that citation of the Sumner) that he would in no case consent to
those most devilish practices of the Priests.

Upon his nonappearance, the Arch Bishop judged him contumacious, and
afterward excommunicated him, Page 728.
etc. This constant Servant of the Lord perceiving himself compassed on every
side with deadly dangers, he wrote a Christian Confession of his Faith, and
signed and sealed it with his own hand, which was a brief Exposition of the
Common Sum of the Churches Faith, called the Apostles Creed. In the close
thereof. -- I believe the Universal Law of God to be most true and perfect, and
they which do not follow it in their faith and works (at one time or another)
can never be saved: whereas he that seeks it in faith, accepts it, learneth
it, delights therein, and performs it in love, shall taste for it the
felicity of everlasting innocence. This is my faith also, that God will ask no
more of a Christian Believer in this life, but only to obey the Precepts of
that most blessed Law. If any Prelates of the Church require more, or any other
kind of obedience, he contemns Christ, exalting himself above God, and so
becomes an open Antichrist.

All the Premises I believe particularly, and generally all that God has left
in his holy Scripture, that I should believe.

This Confession he delivered to the King, desiring him that it might be
examined by the most godly, wife, and learned men of his Realm, and if it be
found in all points agreeable to the Verity, that he might be holden for a true
Christian; if it be proved otherwise, let it be condemned, provided that he be
taught a better Belief by the Word of God. But the King would not receive it,
but commanded it to be delivered to his Judges.

Being threatened by Arch Bishop Arundel, Page 729.
that he should be proclaimed an Heretic: He said, Do as ye shall think best,
for I am at a point, I shall stand to my Bill to the death.

The Arch Bishop telling him, Page 730.
That all Christians should follow the Determinations of holy Church: he said,
That he would gladly believe and observe whatsoever the holy Church of Christ's
institution had determined, or whatsoever God had willed him either to believe
or do; but that the Pope of Rome with his Cardinals, Arch Bishops, Bishops,
etc. had lawful power to determine such matters as stood not thoroughly with
his Word, he would not affirm.

When the Arch Bishop sent him their Determination concerning the Sacrament of
the Altar, etc. he saw that God had given them over for their unbeliefs sake,
into most deep errors and blindness of mind, and that their uttermost malice
was purposed against him, however he should answer, and therefore he put his
life into the hands of God, desiring his only Spirit to assist him in his next
Answer.

At his second Appearance the Arch Bishop offering to absolve him from the
Curse that was against him; He with a cheerful countenance said, God has said
by his holy Prophet, Maledicam benedictionibus vestris, i. e. I shall curse
where you do bless: and further said, I will not desire your Absolution; for I
never trespassed against you. And with that he kneeled down on the pavement,
holding up his hands toward Heaven, Page 731.
and said, I shrieve me here unto thee, my Eternal Living God, that in my frail
youth I offended thee, O Lord, most grievously in pride, wrath, and gluttony,
in covetousness and in lechery. Many men have I hurt in mine anger, etc. Good
Lord I ask thee mercy.

And therewith weepingly stood up again, and said with a mighty voice; Lo, good
people, lo, for the breaking of Gods Law, and his great Commandments, they
never yet cursed me; but for their own Laws and Traditions most cruelly do they
handle both me and other men; and therefore both they and their Laws by the
promise of God shall utterly be destroyed.

Being asked if he believed not in the determinations of the Church? No
forsooth (said Ire) for it is no God.

Page 732.
Being taxed to be one of Wickliff's Scholars: As for the virtuous man Wickliffe
(said he) I speak it before God and man, that before I knew that despised
Doctrine of his, I never abstained from sin; but since I learned therein to
fear my Lord God, it has otherwise I trust been with me. So much grace I could
never find in all your glorious instructions.

He said further, Your Fathers the old Pharisees ascribed Christ's miracles to
Beelzebub, and his Doctrine to the Devil, and you as their natural children have
still the self same judgment concerning his faithful Followers. They that
rebuke your vicious living must needs be Heretics, and that must your Doctors
prove, when you have no Scripture to do it. -- Since the venom of Judas was
shed into the Church, ye never followed Christ, nor stood in the perfection of
Gods Law.

Being asked what he meant by that venom? He answered, Your Possessions and
Lordships; for then cried an Angel in the air (as your own Churches mention)
Woe, woe, woe, this Day is venom shed into the Church of God. -- Rome is the very
nest of Antichrist, and out of that nest come all his Disciples, of whom
Prelates, Priests and Monks are the Body, these pild Friars are the Tail, which
cover his most filthy part. -- This is not only my saying, but the Prophet
Isaiah, who says, He that preaches lies is the tail behind. -- Then said he
unto them all, Mat. 23.
Christ says in his Gospel, Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for
ye close up the Kingdom of Heaven before men, neither enter ye in your selves,
nor suffer any other that would enter into it, but ye stop up the ways
thereunto by your own Traditions. --

The Arch Bishop telling him, That none should preach in his Diocese, yea in
his Jurisdiction, that make division or dissension among the poor Commons: Page
733.
He answered, Both Christ and his Apostles were accused of sedition-making; yet
were they most peaceable men. But Daniel and Christ prophesied, That such a
troublesome time should come, as has not been yet since the worlds beginning:
and this prophecy is partly fulfilled in your days, etc. Christ says also,
If these days of yours were not shortened, scarcely should any flesh be saved;
therefore look for it justly, for God! will shorten your days.

Being asked what he said of the Pope? He said, As I said before, so say I
again, That he and you together make up whole Antichrist. --

Page 735.
After the Arch Bishop had read the Bill of his Condemnation, the Lord Cobham
said with a cheerful countenance; Though you judge my Body, which is a
wretched thing, yet am I certain and sure, ye can do no harm to my soul, no
more then could Satan to the soul of Job. He that created that will of his
infinite mercy and promise save it; I have therein no manner of doubt.

And therewith he turned himself to the people, and said with a loud voice,
Good people, for Gods love be well ware of these men, for they will else
beguile you, and lead you blindfold into Hell with themselves; for Christ
says plainly unto you, If one blind man lead another, they are like both to
fall into a ditch.

After this he fell down upon his knees, and before them all prayed thus for
his enemies, Lord God Eternal, I beseech thee of thy great mercy sake forgive
my pursuers, if it be thy blessed Will.

Page 775.
Here it is observable, That Arch Bishop Arundel that passed Sentence of Death
against Lord Cobham, did feel the stroke of Death, and had the Sentence of God
executed upon him, before the Death of this famous Martyr. The Arch Bishop died
Feb. 20. 1414. and this condemned Lord survived his Condemner three or four
years.

Oom.
Wonter Oom writes thus from his Prison at Antwerp. Fox, Vol. 3. cont. p. 28.
-- Wellbeloved Brother and Sister, whom I love dearly for the Truths sake, and
for your faith in Christ Jesus. These are to certify you that I enjoy the
comfort of a good conscience, etc. Whosoever will forsake this present evil
world, and become followers of their Captain Christ, must make account to meet
with many persecutions; for Christ has told us aforehand, Mat. 10.12. John
16.3. 2 Timothy 3.12. Phil. 1.24. Mat. 5.11, 12. 1 Pet. 2.21. Heb. 12.2. 2 Cor.
8.9. Romans 5.2. Heb. 12.
that we should be hated, persecuted, and banished out of the world for his
Names sake; and this they will do, because they have neither known the Father
n^r me. But be not afraid, for I have overcome the world. St. Paul also
witnesses the same thing, saying, All that will live godly in Christ Jesus,
must suffer persecution, and to you ie it given to suffer, etc. And does not
our Lord Jesus say, Blessed are you when men persecute you, and speak all
manner of evil falsely, etc. Now whereto serves all this, but to bring us into
a conformity with our Lord and Master Jesus Christ? for Christ has suffered
for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps. He endured the
Cross, and despised the shame, etc. and became poor to make us rich. By him
also are we brought by faith into that state of grace wherein we stand,
rejoicing in the hope of the glory of God, knowing that tribulation works
patience, etc. Wherefore be not afraid of the fiery trial that is now sent
among us to prove us; for what father, loving his child, does not correct it?
Even so does the Lord correct those whom he loves; for if we should be without
correction, whereof all true Christians are partakers, then were we bastards
and not sons. Prove. 3.11, 12.
And therefore Solomon says, Despise not the chastning of the Lord, etc. Fear
not then to follow the footsteps of Christ; for he is the Head, and we are the
Members. Acts 14.22.
We must after his example through many tribulations enter into Heaven. Let us
say with St. Paul, Phil. 1.21. Romans 7.24.
Christ is unto me in life and death advantage; and, O wretched creatures that
we are, who shall deliver us from this body of death. -- It is a good thing to
hope, and quietly to wait for the salvation of the Lord: Page 29.
and to bear the yoke in ones youth, etc. -- The salvation of the righteous is
of the Lord; Lam. 3.26. Psalm. 37.39. 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8.
He is their strength in the time of trouble. Wherefore giving all diligence,
let us add to faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge
temperance, and to temperance patience, and to patience godliness, etc.

Out of my Role, Dec. 11. 1562.
Origin.
Fox, Vol. 1. page 70.

See his life in Clarks Marrow of Eccles. Hist. page 32.


When he was but seventeen years old, his Father being carried to Prison, he had
such a fervent mind to suffer Martyrdom with him, that he would have thrust
himself into the Persecutors hands, had it not been for his Mother, who in the
night time privily stole away his clothes, and his very shirt also: whereupon
more for shame to be seen naked, then for fear to die, he was constrained to
remain at home; yet when he could do no more, he wrote to his Father in Prison
thus; See O Father, that you do not change your resolution for my sake.

Whites little Bo^k for Children, p. 47.
His fame was so great, that the Emperor Severus sent for him to come to Rome,
and commanded the Provost of Egypt to furnish him with all things necessary for
his journey. Page 48.
The Provost was very careful to provide a Ship, and diverse Garments, etc. But
Origin would receive no part thereof, no not so much as hose or shoes, but went
in a single Garment of Cloth, and bare foot went to Rome: and when at his
arrival there were brought to him a Mule and a Chariot, to use which he liked
best, he answered, That he was much less then his Master Christ, who rode but
one day in all his life, and that was on a silly she Ass; and therefore he
would not ride, except he were sick or decrepid, as his legs might not serve
him to go.

When he was brought into the presence of the Emperor, Page 49.
and his Mother, they saluted him, and rejoiced much to see him.

Being demanded what he professed? he answered, Verity. The Emperor asking him
what he meant thereby? It is the Word (said he) of the Living God, Page 50.
which is infallible. The Emperor asked which is the Living God, and why he so
called him? Origin answered, That he did put that distinction for a difference
from them whom men (being long drowned in error) did call their gods, whom
they confess to have been mortal ones, and to have died; but the God whom he
preached was ever living, and never died, and is the Life of all things that
be, Page 51.
like as he was the Creator of them. -- The Emperor telling him, that he much
marvelled why men of such great and wonderful knowledge should honor for God
a Man, that was crucified, being but of a poor estate and condition: O noble
Emperor ( said Origin) consider what honor the wise Athenians at this present
do to the name and image of Codrus, their last King; for that when they had war
with their enemies, who had answer made by the Oracle of Apollo, That if they
slew not the King of Athens, they should have the Victory; Page 52.
Codrus hearing thereof, preferring the safeguard of his people before his own
life, took to him garments of a Slave, and bearing upon his shoulder a burden
of sticks, he went to his enemies Camp, and there quarrelling of purpose with
some of them, and in the press hurting one with his knife, he was by him that
was hurt struck through the body, and slain; which being known to the enemies,
they being confused, raised their Camp, and departed; and for this cause the
Athenians have ever since had the name of Codrus in reverence worthily, and not
without cause. Now then consider most Excellent Prince, Page 53.
how much more worthily, with what greater reason and bounden duty ought we and
all men to honor Christ, being the Son of God, and God, who not only to
preserve mankind from danger of the Devil, his ancient enemy, but also to
deliver man out of his dark and stinking dungeon of error, being sent by God
the Father from the highest Heavens, willingly took on him the servile garment
of a mortal body; and hiding his Majesty, lived under the visage of poverty.
And finally, not of his enemies immediately, but much more against reason, of
his own chosen people the Jews, unto whom he had extended benefits innumerable,
and after his temporal Nativity, were his natural people and subjects, he
quarrelling with them, by declaring to them their abuses, and pricking them
with condign rebukes, at the last he was not slain with so easy a death as
Codrus was, Page 54.
but in most cruel fashion was scourged, until no place in his body was without
wounds, and then had long and sharp thorns set and pressed upon his head, and
after long torments and despights, he was constrained to bear an heavy Cross,
whereon afterward both his hands and feet were nailed with long great nails of
iron, and the Cross with his naked and bloody body, being lift up on high, was
let fall with violence into a Mortais, that his joints were loosened; and
notwithstanding all this torment and ingratitude, Page 55.
he never grudged, but lifting up his eyes to heaven, he prayed with a loud
voice, saying, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. This was
the Charity most incomparable of the Son of God employed for the redemption of
mankind, who by the transgression of Adam, the first man that was created, was
taken prisoner by the Devil, i. e. kept in the bondage of sin and error, from
actual visage of Gods Majesty, until he were on this wise redeemed, as it was
ordained at the beginning. -- But what makes you bold to affirm (said the
Emperor) that Jesus, Page 56.
which in this wise was crucified, was the Son of God? Sir (said Origin)
sufficient testimony, which of all creatures reasonable ought to be believed,
and for most certain proof to be allowed. What testimony is that said the
Emperor? Truly (said Origin) it is in diverse things, First, the promise of
God, by whom this world was made; also by his holy Scriptures, speaking by the
mouths of his Prophets, as well Hebrews as Greeks, and others whom ye call
Vates and Sybillas; also by the Nativity of Jesus of a pure Virgin, without
carnal company of a man, the most clean and pure form of his living without
sin, his Doctrine divine and celestial, his miracles most wonderful and
innumerable, all grounded on charity only, without ostentation, his undoubted
and perfect Resurrection the third day after he was put to death, his glorious
Ascension up into Heaven in the presence and sight of five hundred persons,
which were virtuous and of credence; also the gift of the Holy Ghost in
speaking all manner of Languages, and interpreting the Scriptures, not only by
himself, but afterward by his Apostles and Disciples, and given to others by
imposition of their hands. Page 58.
And all these ordinarily followed, according to the said Promises and
Prophesies.

In the reign of Decius for the Doctrine of Christ he underwent bands and
torments in his body, Clark, page 36.
racking with bars of irons, Dungeons, besides terrible threats of death and
burning, etc. At length hearing that some Christians were carried to an
Idol-Temple to force them to sacrifice, he out of his zeal ran thither to
encourage and dissuade them from it? When his Adversaries saw him, they let go
the other, and laid hold upon him, putting him to his choice, whether he would
offer Incense to the Idol, or have his body defiled with a foul and ugly
Blackmoor. He chose to offer Incense. Then did they presently put Incense into
his trembling hands, and whilst he demurred upon it, they took his hands, and
caused him to throw it into the fire, and thereupon presently cried out, Origin
has sacrificed, Origin has sacrificed. After this fact he was excommunicated
by the Church; and being filled with shame and sorrow he left Alexandria, and
came to Jerusalem, where he was even constrained by importunity to preach to
them. He took his Bible, opened it, and the first place he cast his eye upon
was this Scripture, Unto the wicked says God, Psalm. 50.16.
Why do thou preach my Laws, and take my Covenant into thy m^uth When he had
read these words, he sat down, and burst out into abundance of tears, the
whole Congregation weeping with him also, so that he was not able to say any
more unto them. After this he wandered up and down in great grief and torment of
Conscience, and wrote the following Lamentation:

In the bitterness and grief of mind I go about to speak unto them, who shall
hereafter read this confused writing. Page 37.
But how can I speak, when my tongue is tied up, and my lips dare not once move
or wag? My tongue does not his office, my throat is dried up, and all my senses
and instruments are polluted with iniquity. -- O ye Saints and blessed of God,
with waterish eyes, and wet cheeks soaked in dolor and pain, I beseech you to
fall down before the Seat of Almighty God, for me miserable sinner, who by
reason of my sins dare not crave ought at the hands of God. Woe is me, because
of the sorrow of my heart. -- Woe is me my Mother, that ever thou broughtest me
forth: -- A righteous man to be conversant in unrighteousness: an heir of the
Kingdom of God to be now an inheritor of the Kingdom of Satan: a Minister to
be found wallowing in impiety: a man beautified with honor and dignity, to be
in the end blemished with shame and ignominy: -- a lofty Turret, yet suddenly
thrown to the ground: a fruitful Tree, yet quickly withered: a burning light,
yet forthwith darkened: a running fountain, yet by and by dried up. Woe is me
that ever I was decked with gifts and graces, and now seen pitifully deprived
of all. But who will minister moisture to my head? and who will give streams of
tears unto my eyes, that I may bewail my self in this my sorrowful plight?
Alas! O my Ministry, how shall I lament thee? O all ye my Friends, tender my
Case, and pity my Person, that am so dangerously wounded. Pity me, O ye my
Friends, for that I have now trodden under foot the Seal and Cognizance of my
Profession, and joined in league with the Devil. Pity me, O ye my Friends, for
that I am rejected, and cast away from before the face of God. Page 38.
-- There is no sorrow comparable to my sorrow; there is no affliction that
exceeds my affliction, no bitterness that passes my bitterness, no lamentation
more lamentable then mine; neither is there any sin greater then mine, and
there is no salve for me. Where is that good Shepherd of souls? where is he,
that went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, which salved and cured him that was
wounded by Thieves? Seek me out, O Lord, that am fallen from the higher
Jerusalem; which have broken the vow I made in Baptism, etc. Alas! that ever I
was Doctor, and now occupy not the room of a Disciple. Thou know, O Lord,
that I sell against my will: whereas I went about to enlighten others, I
darkened my self: when I endeavored to bring others from death to life, I
brought my self from life to death: when I minded to present others before God,
I presented my self before the Devil: when I desired to be found a Friend and
Favourer of Godliness, I was found a Foe and a Furtherer of Iniquity: when I
set my self against the Assemblies of the wicked, and reproved their doings,
there found I shame, and the most pestilent wound of the Devil. Some promised
me to be baptized; but after that I passed from them, the Devil the same night
transformed himself into an Angel of Light, and said unto me, When thou art up
in the morning, go on, and persuade them and bring them to God: but the Devil
going before me prepared the way, etc. and I (O unhappy creature) skipping out
of my Bed at the dawning of the day, could not finish my wonted Devotion,
neither accomplish my usual Prayers, desiring that all men might be saved; and
come to the knowledge of the Truth) whilst in the mean time I wrapped my self
in the snares of the Devil. I gat me to those wicked men, I required of them to
perform the covenant made the night before, I silly soul knowing not their
subtilty, and we came to the Baptism. O blinded heart, how did thou not
remember? O foolish mind, how did thou not bethink thy self? O witless brain,
how did thou not understand? Page 39.
But it was the Devil that lulle^ thee asleep, and in the end slew thy unhappy
and wretched soul? -- O thou Devil, what have thou done unto me? how have thou
wounded me? I bewailed sometimes the fall of Sampson, but now have I fallen
worse my self: I bewailed formerly the fall of Solomon, but now have I fallen
worse my self. -- Sampson had his hair cut off, but the Crown of Glory is
fallen off my head: Sampson lost the carnal eyes of his body, but my
spirititual eyes are put out: it was the wiliness of a woman that brought
confusion upon him, but it was my tongue brought me into this sinful
condition. -- Alas! my Church lives, yet I am a Widdower: my Sons be alive,
yet I am barren: every creature rejoices, and I alone am desolate and
sorrowful, etc. Bewail me, O ye blessed people of God, who am banished from
God. -- Bewail me, who am shut out of the Wedding-chamber of Christ. -- Bewail
me, who am abhorred of the Angels, and severed from the Saints. Page 40.
-- Who knows whether the Lord will have mercy on me, and whether he will
pity my fall? whether he will be moved with my desolation? whether he will have
respect to my humiliation, and incline his tender compassions toward me? I
will prostrate my self before the threshold and porch of his Church, that I may
entreat all people both small and great, saying unto them, trample and tread me
under foot, who am the unsavory salt; tread upon me, who have no taste, nor
favor of God; tread upon me, who am fit for nothing. Now let the Elders mourn,
for that the Staff, whereon they leaned, is fallen. Now let the young men
mourn, for that their Schoolmaster is fallen. Now let the Virgins mourn, for
that the Advancer of Virginity is defiled. Now let the Ministers mourn, for
that their Patron and Defender is shamefully fallen. Woe is me, that I fell so
lewdly: woe is me, that I fell most dangerously, and cannot rise again. Assist
me, O holy Spirit, and give me grace to repent. Let the fountains of tears be
opened, and gush out into streams, to see if peradventure I may have grace
thoroughly to repent, and to wipe out of the Book of my Conscience the
Accusations Printed therein against me. But thou, O Lord, think not upon my
polluted lips, neither weigh thou the tongue, that has uttered lewd things;
but accept of my repentance, etc. and have mercy upon me, and raise me up out
of the mire of corruption; for the puddle thereof has even choked me up. Woe
is me, that was sometimes a Pearl glistering in the golden Garland of Glory,
but now am thrown into the dust, and trodden in the mire of contempt. Woe is me,
that the Salt of God now lies on the Dunghill, etc. Now I will address my self
and turn my talk unto God; Why have thou lift me up, and cast me down? -- I had
not committed this impiety, unless thou had withdrawn thine hand from me. --
But why, O Lord, have thou shut my mouth by thy holy Prophet David? Have I been
the first that sinned? Page 41.
or am I the first that fell? Why have thou forsaken me, being desolate, and
banished me from among thy Saints, and astonished me, when I shonld preach thy
Laws? -- David himself, who has shut up my mouth, sinned too bad in thy sight;
yet upon his repentance, thou receivedst him to mercy. Peter, that was a
Pillar, after his fall, wiped it away with salt tears, not continuing long in
the puddle of his infidelity. -- Now I humbly beseech thee, O Lord, call me
back; for that I tread a most perilous and destructive way. Grant me that good
Guide and Instructor, the Holy Ghost, that I become not an habitation of
Devils: but that I may tread under foot the Devil, that trod upon me, and
overcoming his sleights, may be again restored to the joys of thy salvation.
-- Now all ye, which behold my wound, tremble for fear, and take heed that ye
slumber not, nor fall into the like crime: but rather let us assemble together,
and rend our hearts, etc. I mourn and am sorry at the heartroot, O ye my
Friends, that ever I so fell, etc. Let the Angels lament over me, because of
this my dangerous fall. Let the Assemblies of Saints lament over me, for that I
am severed from their blessed societies. Let the holy Church lament over me,
for that I am woefully declined. Let all the people lament over me, for that I
have my deaths wound. -- Bewail me, that am in like case with the reprobate
Jews; for this, which was said unto them by the Prophet, Why do thou preach
my Laws, etc. now sounds alike in mine ears. What shall I do, that am thus
beset with manifest mischiefs? Alas! O death, why do thou linger? Herein thou
do spite, and bear me malice. O Satan, what mischief have thou wrought unto
me? How have thou pierced my breast with thy poisonous dart? Think thou,
that my ruin will avail any thing at all? Think thou to procure to thy self
any ease or rest, whilst that I am grievously tormented, who is able to
signify unto thee, whether my sins be wiped and done away? whether I shall not
again be coupled with, and made a Companion to the Saints? O Lord, I fall down
before thy Mercy-seat, have mercy upon me, who mourn thus out of measure,
because I have greatly offended. -- Rid my soul, O Lord, from the roaring Lion.
The Assembly of the Saints does make intercession for me, who am an
unprofitable Servant. Show mercy, O Lord, to thy wandering Sheep, who is subject
to the rending teeth of the ravenous Wolf: save me, O Lord, out of his mouth,
etc. Let my sackcloth be rent asunder, and gird me with joy and gladness. Let
me be received again into the joy of my God. Let me be thought worthy of his
Kingdom, through the earnest Petitions of the Church, which sorroweth over me,
and humbles her self to Jesus Christ in my behalf: to whom with the Father,
and the Holy Ghost be all glory and honor for ever and ever. Amen.

Ormes.
Fox, Vol. 3. page 852.
Cicely Ormes of Norwich was taken, for that she said to two Martyrs at the
Stake, That she would pledge them of the same Cup.

The Chancellor of Norwich offered her, That if she would go to the Church,
and keep her tongue, she should be at liberty, and believe as she would: She
told him, She would not consent to his wicked desire therein, do with her what
he would; for if she should (she said) God would surely plague her. Then the
Chancellor told her, He had showed more favor to her, then ever he did to
any, and that he was loath to condemn her, etc. But she answered him, Page 853.
That if he did, he should not be so desirous of her sinful flesh, as she would
(by Gods grace) be content to give it in so good a quarrel.

Before she was taken this time, she had recanted, but never was quiet in
Conscience, till she had forsaken all Popery. Between the time she had
recanted, and now was taken, she had provided a Letter for the Chancellor, to
let him know that she repented her recantation from the bottom of her heart,
and would never do the like again while she lived: but before the Letter was
delivered, she was taken.

When she came to the Stake, she kneeled down and prayed, and then said, Good
people, I believe in God the Gather, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, three
Persons and one God. This do I not, nor will I recant; but I recant utterly
from the bottom of my heart the doings of the Pope of Rome, and all his Popish
Priests and Shavelings. I utterly refuse, and never will have to do with them
again by Gods grace. And good people, I would ye should not think of me, that I
believe to be saved, in that I offer my self here unto the death for the Lords
Cause, but I believe to be saved by Christ's Death and Passion: and this my
death is, and shall be a witness of my faith unto you all here present. Good
people, as many of you as believe as I believe, pray for me.

Laying her hand on the Stake, she said, Welcome the Cross of Christ.

She was burnt at the same Stake, that that Simon Miller and Elizabeth Cooper
was burned at, to whom she had said, That she would pledge them, etc.

After she had wiped her hand, blacked with the Stake, she touched the Stake
again with her hand, and kissed it, and said, Welcome the sweet Cross of Christ.

After the Tormentors had kindled the sire about her, she said, My soul does
magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior.

Oswald.
John Oswald denied to answer any thing, Fox, Vol. 3. page 706.
until his Accusers should be brought face to face before him: Nevertheless
(said he) the Fire and Fagots cannot make me afraid; but as the good Preachers,
which were in King Edward's days, have suffered and gone before, so am I ready
to suffer and come after, and would be glad thereof.

P.
Palmer.
Mr. Julius Palmer was wont to say, Fox, Vol. 3. page 734.
None were to be accounted valiant, but such as could despise injuries.

Page 735.
When he was a Papist he told Mr. Bullingham, then a Papist also, As touching
our Religion, even our Consciences bear witness, that we taste not such an
inward sweetness in the profession thereof, as we understand the Gospellers to
taste in their Religion; yea, to say the truth, we maintain we wot not what,
rather of will, then of knowledge. But what then? rather then I will yield to
them I will beg my bread.

His Conversion was occasioned by the constancy of the Martyrs at their death,
he having often said in King Edward's days, That none of them all would stand to
death for their Religion. When he returned from the burning of Bishop Ridley
and Bishop Latimer, he cried out, Oh raging Cruelty, Oh Tyranny tragical, and
more then barbarous! From that time he studiously sought to understand the
Truth for which they suffered.

Page 736.
When he resolved upon leaving his Fellowship in Magdalens College in Oxford,
he was demanded of a special Friend, Whither he would go or how he would live?
He made this answer, Domini est terra, and plenitudo ejus; The earth is the
Lords, and the fullness thereof. Let the Lord work, I will commit my self to
God, and the wide world.

After his leaving his Fellowship being at Oxford, he was persuaded to hear
Friar John, that succeeded Peter Martyr, in the Divinity Lecture; and hearing
him blaspheme the Truth, departed; and being found in his Chamber weeping, and
asked why he slipped away so on a sudden? O said he, if I had not openly departed,
I should have openly stopped my ears; for the Friars blasphemous talk in
depraving the Verity, made my heart worse to smart, then if mine ears had been
cut off from my head.

Afterward Supping in the company of the said Friar, and other great Papists,
and having refused to kiss his hand, or to pledge him, and being asked why he
was so unwise and uncivil in his carriage? He answered, Oleum eorum non
demulcet, sed frangit caput meum, The oil of these men does not supple, but
breaks my head.

Another time a little before his death reasoning stiffly for the Truth, Mr.
Barwick then Fellow of Trinity College told him, Well, Palmer, now thou art
stout and hardy in thy Opinion; but if thou were once brought to the Stake, I
believe thou would tell me another tale. I advise thee beware of the fire, it
is a shrewd matter to burn. Truly, said Palmer, I have been in danger of
burning once or twice, and hitherto (I thank God) I have escaped. But I judge
verily it will be my end at last, welcome be it by the grace of God. Indeed it
is an hard matter for them to burn, that have the mind and soul linked to the
body, as a Thiefs foot is tied in a pair of Fetters; but if a man be once able,
through the help of Gods Spirit, to separate and divide the soul from the body,
for him it is no more mastery to burn, then for me to eat this piece of bread.

After he had not only resigned up his Fellowship, Page 737.
but left his School at Reading for Conscience sake, he went to his Mother at
Esham, hoping to get from her some Legacies left him by his Father. Her first
words to him were, Thou shall have Christ's curse and mine whithersoever thou
go. Oh Mother (said he) your own curse you may give me, which God knows I
never deserved, but Gods curse you cannot give me, for he has already blessed
me. -- Whereas you have cursed me, I again pray God to bless you, and prosper
you all your life long.

Page 739.
At his Trial at Newberry Dr. Ieffery told him he would make him recant, and
wring peccavi out of his lying lips, ere he had done with him. But I know (said
Palmer) that although of my self I be able to do nothing, yet if you and all
mine enemies, both bodily and ghostly, should do your worst, you shall not be
able to bring that to pass, neither shall ye prevail against Gods mighty
Spirit, by whom we understand the truth, and speak it so boldly. Ah (said
Ieffery) are you full of the Spirit? are you inspired with the Holy Ghost? Sir
(said Palmer) no man can believe but by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost:
therefore if I were not a Spirtual man, and inspired with Gods holy Spirit, I
were not a true Christian. He that has not the Spirit of Christ is none of
his. I perceive (said Ieffery) you lack no words. Christ has promised (said
Palmer) not only to give us store, necessary, but with them such force of
matter, as the Gates of Hell shall not be able to confound, or prevail against
it. Christ (replied Ieffery) made such a promise to his Apostles; I trow you
will not compare with them. Palmer answered, with the holy Apostles I may not
compare, yet this promise I am certain pertains to all such as are appointed
to defend Gods Truth against his enemies, in the time of their persecution for
the same. Then (said Ieffery) it pertains not to thee. Yes (said Palmer) I am
right well assured that through his grace it appertains at this present to
me, as it shall appear if I may dispute with you before this Audience. Thou art
but a beardless Boy (replied Ieffery) and dare thou presume to offer
disputation, or to encounter with a Doctor. Remember Doctor (said Palmer) the
wind blo^e^h where is lists, etc. Out of the mouth of Infants, etc. Thou have
hid these things from the wise, etc. God is not tied to (...), wit, learning,
place, nor person; and though your wit and learning be greater then mine, yet
your belief in the Truth, Page 740.
and zeal to defend the time is no greater then mine. -- The Catholic Church I
believe, yet not for her own sake, but bebecause she is holy, that is to say, a
Church that grounds her belief upon the Word of her Spouse Christ.

After Dinner Sir Richard Alridges sent for Mr. Palmer to his Lodging, and by
offers tempted him to recant; Mr. Palmer told him, that as he had in two places
already recounced his livelihood for Christ's sake, so he would with Gods grace
be ready to surrender and yield up his life also for the same, when God should
send time. When the Knight perceived he would by no means relent, Well Palmer
said he, then I perceive one of us twain must be damned, for we be of two
Faiths, and certain I am there is but one Faith that leads to Life and
Salvation. O Sir (said Palmer I hope we both shall be saved. How may that be
said the Knight? Right well Sir (said Palmer) for as it has pleased our
merciful Savior, Page 741.
according to the Gospels parable to call me at the third hour of the day, even
in my flowers, at the age of four and twenty years, even so I trust he will
call you at the eleventh hour of this your old age, and give you everlasting
life for your portion.

Mr. Winchcome persuading him to take pity on the pleasant flowers of lusty
youth before it be too late. Sir (said Palmer, I long for those springing
flowers that shall never fade away.

Brethren (said Palmer) to his fellow Prisoners an hour before his Execution)
be of good cheer in the Lord and faint not. Remember the words of our Savior
Christ, Matthew. 5.10, 11, 12. We shall not end our lives in the fire, but change
them for a better life: yea for Coals we shall receive Pearls. For Gods holy
Spirit certifieth our spirit, that he has even now prepared for us a sweet
Supper in Heaven for his sake which suffered first for us.

As he arose from Prayer at the Stake, two Popish Friars came behind him, and
exhorted him yet to recant and save his soul. Mr. Palmer answered, Away, away,
tempt me no longer; away I say from me all ye that work iniquity, for the Lord
has heard the voice of my tears.

When he was bound to the Post, he said, Good people pray for us, that we may
persevere to the end, and for Christ's sake beware of Popish Teachers, for they
deceive you.

When the fire was kindled and took hold of his body, and the bodies of John
Gwin and Thomas A^kine, they lifted up their hands to Heaven, and quietly and
cheerfully, as though they had felt no smart, cried, Lord Jesus strengthen us,
Lord Jesus assist us, Lord Jesus receive our souls.

After their three heads by force of the raging and devouring flames of the
fire were fallen together in a cluster, so that they were all judged already to
have given up the ghost, suddenly Mr. Palmer as a man awaked out of sleep, Page
742.
moved his tongue and jaws, Iullus and Palma^ slorebit.
and was heard to pronounce this word, Jesus.

Epitaphium in Palmerum.
Palmerus flammas Christi pro dogmate p^ssus,
Impositum pondus, ceu bona Palma, t^lit.
Non retrocessit, sed contra erdentior ivit,
Illaesam retinens fortis in igne fidem.
Propterea in Coelum nunc Palmifer iste receptus
Iustiti^ Palmam not pereuntis habot.
Paulinus.
When he had his City, Shaw 's Tombstone, page 33.
Gold, Silver, and all taken away, he said, Lord, let not the loss of these
things trouble me; for thou art all, and more then all these to me.

Pareus.
David Pareus, See his Life in Clark 's first Volume of Lives, page 917.
having foreseen the great miseries, that would come upon the Palatinate, when
the Spaniards came in with their Army, by Prodigies and Dreams, he was
persuaded to retire himself. At his departure he cried out, O Heidelberg,
Heidelberg! But it is better to fall into the hands of God, then of men, whose
tender mercies are cruelty.

Paschalis.
It is a small matter (said Lewis Paschalis) to die once for Christ: Ward, page
160.
if it might be, I could wish I might die a thousand deaths for him.

Patingham.
Patrick Patingham being much pressed by Bonner to recant, Fox, Vol. 3. page 350.
He protested that the Church, which the Bishop believed, was no Catholic
Church, but was the Church of Satan, and therefore he would never turn to it,
etc.

Peloquine.
The Inquisitors telling Dyonisius Peloquine his life was in his own hands;
Ward, page 161.
Then (said he) it were in an ill keeping. Christ's School has taught me to
save it by losing it, and not by the gain of a few days or years, to lose
eternity.

Person.
Mr. Anthony Person being come to the place of Execution, Fox. Vol. 2. page 554.
with a cheerful countenance embraced the Post in his arms, and kissing it,
said, Now welcome mine own sweet Wife; for this day shall thou and I be married
together in the love and peace of God.

Page 555.
Pulling the straw unto him, he laid a good deal thereof upon the top of his
head, saying, This is Gods Hat, now am I dressed like a true Soldier of
Christ, by whose merits only I trust this day to enter into his joy.

Peter.
Fox, Vol. 1. page 45.
The Apostle Peter was crucified, his head being down, and his feet upward, he
himself so requiring; because he was (he said) unworthy to be crucified after
the same manner and form, as the Lord was, etc.

Seeing his Wife going to her Martyrdom, (belike as he was yet hanging upon
the Cross) he was greatly joyous and glad thereof, and cried out unto her with
a loud voice, Remember the Lord Jesus. None but Christ, Ward, page 138.
Nothing but Christ.

Phileas.
Fox, Vol. 1. page 103.
Phileas, Bishop of the Thumitans, whilst he was in bonds, before he received
the Sentence of Death, wrote to the Congregation, over which he was Bishop,
exhorting them to persist in the Truth of Christ professed, notwithstanding the
Torments inflicted upon the Martyrs in his days, which he thus describes; Some
beat them with Cudgels, some with Rods, some with Whips, some with Thongs, and
some with Cords. -- Some of them, having their hands bound behind their backs,
were lifted up upon Timber-logs, and with certain Instruments their members and
joints were stretched forth, whereupon their whole bodies hanging were subject
to the will of the Tormentors, who were commanded to afflict them with all
manner of torments, not on their sides only, but bellies, thighs, and legs.
They scratched them with the talens and claws of wild Beasts. Some were seen to
hang by one hand upon the Engine, whereby they might feel the more grievous
pulling out of the rest of their joints and members. -- Some were stretched out
(after they were beaten) upon a new kind of Rack. Others were cast down upon
the Pavement, where they were oppressed so thick, and so grievously with
torments, that it is not almost to be thought what afflictions they suffered.
Some died of their torments, not a little shaming and confounding their enemies
by their singular patience. -- Others were condemned, and willingly and
cheerfully were martyred.

Philpot.
Mr. John Philpot, Fox, Vol. 3. page 537.
Son of Sir Peter Philpot of Huntshire, being threatened to be removed from the
Kings Bench to Lullards Tower, said, You have power to transfer my Body from
place to place at your pleasure, but you have no power over my soul. -- God
has appointed a day shortly to come, in the which he will judge us with
righteousness, howsoever you judge of us now.

When Story threatened him with a worse Prison, he said, God forgive you, and
give you more merciful hearts, and show you more mercy in the time of need. Do
quickly that you have in hand.

Bonner telling him, Page 543.
He marvelled they were so merry in Prison, singing and rejoicing in their
naughtiness; Methinks (said he) you do not well herein, you should rather
lament and be sorry. My Lord (said Mr. Phi^pot) the mirth that we make is but
in singing certain Psalms, as we are commanded by St. Paul, willing us to be
merry in the Lord, singing together in Hymns and Psalms. -- We are my Lord in a
dark comfortless place, and therefore it behooves us to be merry, least as
Solomon says, Sorrowfulness eat up our heart; St. Paul says, If any man be of
upright mind, let him sing; and we therefore to testify we are of an upright
mind to God (though we be in misery) do sing.

After this conference with Bonner, I was (says Mr. Philpot) carried to my
Lords Cole-house again, where I with my six Fellows do rouz together in the
straw as cheerfully (we thank God) as others do in their Beds of Down.

When he was brought before Bonner (and the Bishop of Bath, etc.) a second
time, before he answered any questions, he fell down upon his knees before
them, and prayed thus; Almighty God, thou art the Giver of all wisdom and
understanding, I beseech thee of thine infinite goodness and mercy in Jesus
Christ to give me (most vile sinner in thy sight) the Spirit of wisdom to
speak and answer in thy Cause, that it may be to the contentation of the
Hearers, before whom I stand, and also to my better understanding, if I be
deceived in any thing.

Bonner telling the Bishop of Wercester, that he did not well to exhort him to
make any Prayer; for in this point (said he) they are much like to certain
arrant Heretics, of whom Pliny makes mention, that did daily sing Antelucanos
Hymnos, praise unto God before the dawning of the day: Mr. Philpot replied, My
Lord, God make me and all you here present such Heretics as those were that
sang those Morning Hymns, for they were right Christians, with whom the Tyrants
of the world were offended for their well doing.

Page 544.
Afterward he made this Protestation; I protest here before God, and his
Eternal Son Jesus Christ my Savior, and the Holy Ghost, and his Angels, and
you here present, that be Judges of that I speak, that I do not stand in any
Opinion of wilfulness, or singularity, but only upon my conscience certainly
informed by Gods Word, from the which I dare not go for fear of damnation.

The Bishop of Worcester telling him he was of ^^ch arrogance, Page 545.
singularity, and vainglory, that he would not see what was clearly proved. Ha
my Lords (said Mr. Philpot) is it now time, think you, for me to follow
singularity or vainglory, since it is now upon danger of my life and death,
not only presently, but also before God to come? I know if I die in the true
Faith, I shall die everlastingly, or if I do not, as you would have me, you
will kill me and many thousands more; yet had I rather perish at your hands,
then to perish eternally. And at this time I have lost all my commodities of
this world, and now lie in a Cole-house, where a man would not lay a Dog, with
the which I am well contented.

The Bishop of Gloucester asking him, Page 546.
What do you think your self better learned then so many notable learned men as
be here? Mr. Philpot answered, Elias alone had the Truth, when there were four
hundred Priests against him. The Bishop telling him Elias was deceived, for he
thought there had been none good but himself, and there were seven thousand
besides him. Mr. Philpot answered, Yea, but he was not deceived in Doctrine as
the other four hundred were.

He told the Bishop of London at his third appear^nce before him, Page 547.
My Lord, in that you say you will ^it on me in judgment to morrow, I am glad
thereof, I look for none other but death at your hands, and I am as ready to
yield my life in Christ's Cause, as you be to require it.

Dr. Story telling him, Page 551.
What? you purpose to be a stinking Martyr, and to sit in judgment with Christ
at the last Day, to judge the twelve Triles of Israel? Yea Sir (said Mr.
Philpot) I doubt not thereof, having the promise of Christ, If I die for
righteousness sake, which you have begun to persecute in me.

Page 558.
The Chancellor of Lichfield advising him not to cast himself away wilfully; He
answered, My conscience bears me record, that I seek to please God, and that
the love and fear of God causes me to do as I do; and I were of all other
creatures most miserable, if for mine own will only I do lose all the
commodities I might have in this life, and afterward be cast to damnation; but
I am sure it is not my will, whereon I stand, but Gods Will, which will not
suffer me to be cast away I am sure.

Page 560.
Mr. Philpot being sent for by Bonn^r that he might go with him to Mass, the
Keepers as they were going along asked him, Will you go to Mass; Mr. Philpot
answered, My stomach this morning is too raw to digest such raw meats of flesh,
blood, and bone.

When he was put into the stocks, he said, God be praised that he has thought
me worthy to suffer any thing for his Names sake. Better it is to sit in the
stocks of this world, then to sit in the stocks of a damable conscience.

Page 562.
As he was conveyed out of the Cole-house into a close Tower, joining to Paul's
Church, through many straits, There (said he) I called to remembrance, that
strait is the way to Heaven.

Page 565.
Harpsfield accusing him for being like himself in Oxford, when in Disputation
he would not give over; He said, Mr. Harpsfield, you know in the Schools of
Oxford, when we were young men, we did strive much upon vainglory and
contention, more then for the Truth; and if I was then in the time of my
ignorance earnest in my own cause, I ought now to be earnest in my Master
Christ's Cause, and his Truth.

I know now that nothing done upon vainglory and singularity can please God,
have it never so goodly a show.

Morgan telling him he should be burned for his Heresy, Page 572.
and afterward go to Hell fire; He said, I tell thee thou Hypocrite, that I
pass not this for thy Fire and Fagots, neither do I (I thank God my Lord) stand
in fear of the same: my faith in Christ shall overcome them; but the Hell fire
which thou threatnest me is thy portion, and is prepared for thee, unless thou
speedily repent, and for such Hypocrites as thou art.

When Bonner would not grant him candle light, Page 573.
he said, Seeing I shall not have my request, the Lord shall be my light,

I would my Burning Day were to morrow, for this delay is every day to die, and
yet not to be dead. Dr. Chedsey telling him, he was not like to die yet; He
answered, I am the more sorry thereof, but the Will of the Lord be done of me
to his glory. Amen.

Bonner telling him, That he made other Prisoners rejoice and sing with him, he
said, Yea my Lord, we shall sing, when you and such as you are shall cry Vae,
vae, woe, woe, except you repent.

The Bishop of Worcester bidding him to follow his Fathers before him, Page 574.
he said, It is forbidden us of God by the Prophet Ezekiel to follow our
Fathers, or to walk in their commandments. The Bishop replying, It is written
also in another Place, Ask of your Fathers: Mr. Philpot rejoined, We ought
indeed to ask our Fathers that have more experience and knowledge then we of
Gods Will, but no more to allow them then we perceive they agree with the
Scriptures. Pray for grace, said the Bishop. Prayer (said Philpot) is the
comfortablest exercise I feel in my trouble, and my conscience is quiet, and I
have peace of mind, which cannot be the fruits of Heresy.

Page 578.
My Lords (said Philpot to the Bishops) you must bear with me since I speak in
Christ's Cause; and because his glory is defaced, and his people cruelly and
wrongfully slain by you, because they will not consent to the dishonor of God;
if I told you not your fault, it would be required at my hands at the Day of
Judgment. Therefore know ye Hypocrites indeed, That it is the Spirit of God
that tells you your sin, not I, I pass not, I thank God, of all your cruelty,
God forgive it you, and give you grace to repent.

When he was condemned for an Heretic, He said, I thank God I am an Heretic
out of your cursed Church, but I am no Heretic before God.

The Chief Keeper greeting him thus, Ah! have not thou done well to bring thy
self hither? he said, Well, I must be content, for it is Gods appointment.

The Keeper promising him all favor, if he would recant; Nay (said Mr.
Philpot) I will never recant, whilst I have my life, that which I have spoken;
for it is most certain truth, and in witness hereof I will seal it with my
blood.

A Messenger coming to him from the Sheriff, bade him make ready, for the next
day he should be burned at a Stake with fire. Page 593.
Mr. Philpot returned this Answer, I am ready, God grant me strength and a
joyful Resurrection. And so he went into his Chamber, and poured out his
Spirit unto the Lord God, giving him most hearty thanks that he of his mercy
had made him worthy to suffer for his Truth.

His Servant taking his leave of him said, Ah Master farewell; Mr. Bradford
said unto him, Serve God and he will help thee.

Entering into Smithfield, the way was foul, and two Officers took him up to
bear him to the Stake; whereupon he said merrily, What? will ye make me a Pope?
I am content to go to my journeys end on foot.

Coming into Smithfield, he kneeled down, saying, I will pay my vows in thee O
Smithfield.

Kissing the Stake, he said, Shall I disdain to suffer at this Stake, seeing my
Redeemer did not refuse to suffer a most vile death upon the Cross for me?

In his Letter to the Christian Congregation. Page 594.
-- It is a lamentable thing to behold at this present in England the faithless
departing both of men and women from the true knowledge and use of Christ's
sincere Religion, which so plentifully they have been taught and do know, their
own conscience bearing witness to the verity thereof. If that earth be cursed
of God, which eftsoons receiving moisture and pleasant dews from Heaven, does
not bring forth fruit accordingly; how much more grievous judgment shall such
persons receive which prove Apostates? -- It is not only given us to believe,
but also to confess and declare what we believe in our outward Conversation.
The belief of the heart justifies, and to acknowledge with the mouth makes a
man safe, Romans 10, It is all one before God, not to believe at all, and not to
show forth the lively works of our belief. -- Whosoever in time of trial is
ashamed of me (says Christ) and of my words, of him the Son of man will be
ashamed before his Father. --

Page 595.
The Prophet Aggeus 2. tells us, The Lord shakes the earth, that those might
abide for ever which be not overcome. -- Let no man deceive you with vain
words, saying, That you may keep your faith to your selves, and dissemble with
Antichrist, etc. This is the wisdom of the flesh, but the wisdom of the flesh
is death and enmity of God, as our Savior for example aptly did declare in
Peter, who exhorts Christ not to go to Jerusalem, but counseled him to look
better to himself. -- We cannot serve two Masters, we may not halt on both
sides, and think to please God. -- Our bodies are the temple of the Holy Ghost,
and whosoever does profane the temple of God, him will God destroy. 2 Cor. 3.
-- God judges all strange religion, which is not according to his Institution,
for whoredom and adultery. -- We must glorify God as well in body as in soul:
moreorer, we can do no greater injury to the true Church of Christ, then to
seem to have forsaken her by cleaving to her Adversaries. Woe be to him by whom
any such offense comes, it were better for him to have a millstone tied about
his neck, etc. Such be Judasses, Page 596.
Traitors to the Truth, etc. -- St. John in the Apocalypse tells us plainly,
That none of those who are written in the Book of Life do receive the mark of
the beast, i. e, papistical Synagogue, either in their foreheads or hands, i.
e. apparently or obediently. See the commands for separation, Phil. 2. 2 Cor.
6. Rev. 18. 2 These. 3. -- Many will say for their vain excuse, God is
merciful, etc. Truth it is, The mercy of God is above all his works, but
cursed is he that sins upon hope of forgiveness. -- Others say, But we ought
to obey the Magistrates, although they be wicked; true, but God must have his
due, as well as Caesar his. -- If they command any thing contrary to Gods Word,
we ought not to obey their commandments, although we should suffer death
therefore, Acts 4. Dan. ^. --

Some run to this, If I be elected to Salvation, I shall be saved, whatsoever I
do: such verily may reckon themselves to be none of Gods elect Children, that
will do evil that good may-ensue, Romans 3. God having chosen us that we should
be holy, etc. Ephesians. 1. -- The Lord open our eyes that we may see how dangerous
it is to decline from the knowledge of Truth contrary to their conscience. --

In his Letter to John Carles. Page 597.
-- I am in this world in Hell, but shall be shortly lifted up to Heaven, where
I shall look continually for your coming; and though I tell you that I am in
Hell in the judgment of the world, yet assuredly I feel in the same the
consolation of Heaven, I praise God, and this loathsome and horrible Prison is
as pleasant to me, as the walk in the Garden of the Kings Bench. -- If God does
mitigate the ugliness of mine imprisonment, what will he do in the rage of the
fire, whereunto I am appointed? And this has happened unto me, that I might be
hereafter an ensample of comfort, if the like happen unto you, or any other of
my dear Brethren with you, etc. -- Be joyful under the Cross, and praise the
Lord continually; for this is the whole burnt-sacrifice which the Lord
delights in.

In another Letter to Careless. Page 598.
-- Behold the goodness of God toward me, I am careless, being fast closed in
a pair of Stocks, which pinch me for very straitness, and will you be careful?
Be as your name pretends, Cast all your care on God, set the Lord before your
eyes always, for he is on your right side, that you should not be moved. --
Praise God and be joyful, that it has pleased him to make u^ worthy to suffer
somewhat for his Names sake. The Devil must rage for ten days. --

Written in a Cole-house of darkness, out of a pair of painful Stocks, by
thine own in Christ,

John Philpot.


In his Letter to certain godly women, forsaking their own Country for the
Gospel. -- I read in the Evangelists of certain godly women that ministered unto
Christ, following him in the days of his Passion, and never forsook him, but
brought oil to anoint him being dead, until he had showed himself unto them
after his Resurrection, and bid them tell his dispersed Disciples, that he was
risen, and they should see him in Galile: To whom I may justly compare you (my
loving Sisters in Christ) who of late have seen him suffer in his members, and
have ministered to their necessity, anointing them with the comfortable oil of
your assistance, Page 599.
even unto death; and now seeing ye have seen Christ live in the ashes of them,
he willed you to go away, and to declare to our dispersed Brethren and Sisters
that he is risen, and lives in his elect Members in England, and by death does
overcome infidelity, and that they shall see him in Galile, which is by
forsaking this world, etc. -- Let your faith shine in a strange Country, as it
has done in your own, that your Father which is in Heaven may be glorified by
you to the end. -- Commend me to the whole Congregation of Christ, willing them
not to leave their Country without witness of the Gospel, after that we all be
slain, which already be stalled up and appointed to the slaughter; and in the
mean season to pray earnestly for our constancy, that Christ may be glorified
in us and in them both by life and death. --

In his Letter to his Sister. -- Fear not whatsoever is threatened of the wicked
world, prepare your back, and see it be ready to carry Christ's Cross; and if
you see any untowardness in you (as the flesh is continually repugnant to the
Will of God) ask with faithful Prayer, that the good Spirit of God may lead
your sinful flesh whither it would not. -- My dissolution I look for daily,
Page 600.
but the Lord knows how unworthy I am of so high an honor, as to die for the
Testimony of his Truth: Pray that God would vouchsafe to make me worthy, as he
has for long imprisonment, for the which his Name be praised for ever. --

In his Letter to certain godly Brethren. -- It is an easy thing to begin to
do well, but to continue out in well doing is the only property of the
Children of God, and such as assuredly shall be saved; Blessed are they that
persevere to the end. -- God in Rev. 3. does signify to the Church, That there
shall come a time of temptation upon the whole world, to try the dwellers on
earth, from the danger of which temptation all such shall be delivered as
observe his Word, which Word there is called the Word of patience, to give us
to understand, that we must be ready to suffer all kind of injuries and
slanders for the profession thereof. -- Oh how glorious be the Crosses ^f
Christ, which bring the Bearers of them unto so blessed ^n end? Shall we not be
glad to be partakers of such shame as may bring us to so high a dignity? Page
601.
-- It is commanded us by the Gospel, not to fear them that can kill the body,
but to fear God who can cast both soul and body into Hell fire: so much are we
bound to observe this Commandment, as any other which God has given us. -- Now
it will appear what we love best, for to that we love we will stick. -- What
loses he, which in this life receives an hundred for one, with assurance of
eternal life? O happy exchange! Even now he is of the City and Household of the
Saints with God, he possesses the peace of God, which passes understanding,
and is made a fellow of the innumerable company of Heaven, and a perpetual
friend of all those that have died in the Lord, from the beginning of the
world. Is not this more then an hundred fold? -- Stand and be no cowards in the
Cause of your Salvation; for his Spirit that is in us, is stronger then he,
which in the world does now rage against us. -- I beseech you with St. Paul to
give your bodies pure and holy sacrifices unto God. -- God tempts us now as
he did our Father Abraham, commanding him to sacrifice his Isaac, which
signifies mirth, joy, etc. He by obedience preserved his Isaac alive. God
commands us to sacrifice our Isaac, our joy, which if we be ready to do as
A^raham was, our joy shall not perish, but live and be increased, the Ram shall
be sacrificed in the stead thereof, only the concupiscence of the flesh
entangled with the cares of this stinging world shall be mortified. Page 602.
-- To, withstand the present temptations set before your eyes, how our Savior
Christ overcame them in the desert, and follow his example, if the Devil tempt
you, to take a worldly wise way, that you may have your fair Houses, Lands, and
Goods to live on still; say, Man lives not only by bread, etc. If the Devil
tempt you to forsake the Faith, and to be conformable to the learned men of the
world, say, It is written a man shall not tempt his Lord God. If the Devil
offer you large promises of honor, dignity, etc. so that ye will worship
Idols; say, Go behind me Satan, it is written, a man must worship his Lord God,
and serve him only. If your Mother, Brother, Sister, Wife, Child, Kinsman or
Friend do seek of you to do otherwise then the Word of God has taught you, say
with Christ, That they are your Mothers, Brothers, Sisters, Wives, Children and
Kinsmen which do the will of God the Father. --

In his Letter to Mr. Harrington. -- Glorious is the course of the Martyrs of
Christ at this day; never had the Elect of God a better time for their glory
then this is. --

-- A man that is bid to a glorious Feast, wishes his Friend to go with him,
and to be partaker thereof. God does call me, most unworthy, among others, to
drink of the Bride-Cup of his Son, etc. -- I wish you be as I am, except these
horrible bands, but yet most comfortable to the Spirit. Praised be the Lord for
the affliction which we suffer, and he gives us strength to continue to the
end. -- Though my Lords Cole-house be but very black* yet it is more to be
desired of the Faithful, then the Queens Palace. --

In his Letter to the Lady V^ne. -- The Spirit confirm, strengthen, and
stablish you in the true Knowledge of the Gospel, that your faithf^ll heart may
attain and taste with all the Saints, what is the height, the depth, the
length, and the breadth of the sweet Cross of Christ. Page 603.
Amen. -- Ah! great be the plagues that hang over England, yea, though the
Gospel should be restored again. Happy shall that person be whom the Lord shall
take out of this world not to see them. Ah the great perjury which ^en have run
into so wilfully by rece^ving Antichrist again and his wicked Laws! Oh that the
Lord would turn his just judgments upon the Authors of the truce-breaking
between God and us, etc. -- The world wondreth how we can be merry in such
extreme misery; but our God is omnipotent, which turns misery into felicity:
Believe me ( Dear Sister) there is no such joy in the world, as the people of
Christ have under the Cross, I speak by experience; therefore believe me, and
fear nothing that the world can do unto you; for when they imprison our bodies,
they set our souls at liberty with God; when they cast us down, they lift us
up; yea, when they kill us, then do they bring us to everlasting life. What
greater glory can there be, then to be at conformity with Christ, which
afflictions do work in us! God open our eyes to see more and more the glory of
God in the Cross of Jesus Christ, and make us worthy partakers of the same. Let
us rejoice in nothing with St. Paul, But in the Cross of Jesus Christ, by whom
the world is crucified unto us, and we unto the world. -- Death why should I
fear thee? since thou can not hurt me, but rid me from misery to eternal
glory. J. P. Dead to the world, and living to Christ. --

Page 604.
In another Letter to the same Lady. I have felt under the Cross (thanks be
given to God therefore) more true joy and consolation then ever I did by any
benefit that God has given me in my life before. For the more the world does
hate us, the ^igher God is unto us, and there is no perfect joy but in God.

Page 605.
In a fourth Letter to the same Lady. -- Satan has brought me out of the Kings
Bench into the Bishop of London's Cole-house, a dark and an ugly Prison as any
is about London (but my dark body of sin has wel^ deserved the same, and the
Lord has now brought me into outward darkness, that I might the more be
enlightened by him, who is most present with his Children in the midst of
darkness) where I cannot be suffered to have any candlelight, neither ink nor
Paper, but by stealth. -- Pray ( Dear Lady) that my Faith faint not, which at
present (I thank God) is more lively with me, then it has been in times past.
I taste and feel the faithfulness of God in his promise, who has promised to be
with his in their trouble, and to deliver them. I thank the Lord I am not
alone, but have six other faithful Companions, who in our darkness do
cheerfully sing Hymns and Praises unto God for his great goodness. We are so
joyful, that I wish you part of my joy.

Let not my strait imprisonment any thing molest you; for it has added and
daily does unto my joy, but rather be glad and thankful unto God with me. --
Cheerful and holy Spirits under the Cross be acceptable Sacrifices in the
sight of God. --

In another Letter to the same Lady. Page 606.
-- This is the day that the Lord has made, let us be glad and rejoice in the
same; this is the way though it be narrow, which is full of the peace of God,
and leads to eternal bliss. O how my heart leapeth for joy, that I am so near
the apprehension thereof! God forgive me mine unthankfulness and unworthiness
of so great glory. -- I have so much joy of the reward that is prepared for me
most wretched sinner, that though I be in place of darkness and mourning, yet I
cannot lament, but both night and day am so joyful, as though I were under no
cross at all, yea in all the days of my life I was never so merry, the Name of
the Lord be praised therefore for ever and ever, and he pardon mine
unthankfulness. -- Pray instantly that this joy be never taken from us, for it
passes all the delights of this world, it surmounteth all understanding. -- I
trust my Marriage-garment is ready. --

In his Letter to a Friend in Prison that writ to him concerning
Infant Baptism. -- The same night I received your Letter, as I was musing on
it I sell asleep, and in the midst of my sweet rest I saw a great beautiful
City all of the color of Azure, and White, and apiece, in a mavelous
beautiful composition in the midst of the Sky. The sight hereof so inwardly
comforted me, that I am not able to express the consolation I had; yea, the
remembrance thereof causes as yet my heart to leap for joy; and as Charity is
no Churl, but would others to be partakers of his delight, so methought I
called to others, and when we together had beheld the same, by and by to my
great grief it vanished. This Dream I take to be of the working of Gods Spirit.
Page 607.
I interpret the City the Church, and the appearance of it in the Sky, the
heavenly state thereof, and that according to the Primitive Church, which is
now in Heaven, men ought to measure and judge of the Church of Christ, and on
earth the mavelous Quadrature of the same, the universal agreement in the
same, that all here in the Church Militant ought to consent to the Primitive
Church throughout the four parts of the world, the wonderful joy I conceived,
the unspeakable joy which they have that be at Unity with Christ's Primitive
Church, and my calling others to the fruition of this Vision, my moving you and
others to behold the Primitive Church in all your Opinions concerning Faith,
and to conform your self in all points to the same, which is the Pillar of
Truth. Page 610.
-- Let the bitter Passion of Christ, which he suffered for your sake; and the
horrible torments which the godly Martyrs of Christ have endured before us, and
also the inestimable reward of your life to come, which is hidden yet a little
while from you with Christ, strengthen, comfort, and encourage you to the end
of that glorious race which you are in. Amen.

Pikes.
William Pikes some while before he was last taken, Fox, Vol. 3. page 879.
he was in his Garden reading the Bible; and about twelve a clock of the day,
his face being toward the South, there fell down four drops of fresh blood
upon his Book, he not knowing from whence it came. Calling his Wife to him, he
said, What means this? will the Lord have four Sacrifices? I see well enough
the Lord will have blood. His will be done and give me grace to abide the
trial. Wife, let us pray, the day draws nigh. Afterward he daily looked to
be apprehended, till the time came indeed.

Being at the point of death in Newgate, so that no man looked he should live
six hours, he declared to them that stood by, that he had been twice in
persecution before, and that now he desired the Lord, if it were his will, that
he might glorify his Name at the Stake.

Place.
Monsieur Pierre de la Place President of the Court of Requests in France, Fox,
Vol. 3. cont. page 62.
when out of that entire love which his Wife bore him, fell down at the feet of
one of those bloody Instruments of that barbarous M^ssacre, 1572. to entreat
some favor for her Husband. He rebuked her, and told her, That it is not the
arm of flesh we must stoop unto, but unto God only.

Perceiving in his Sons Hat a White Cross, which through infirmity he had
placed there, thinking thereby to save himself, he sharply chid him, and
commanded him to pluck that mark of sedition thence, telling him, We must now
submit to bear the true Cross of Christ.

Pothnius.
Ward, page 139.
Pothnius, Bishop of Lions, to the President asking him in the midst of his
torments, What that Christ was, answered, If thou were worthy, thou should
know.

Polycarp.
Fox, Vol. 1. page 55.
This famous Bishop of Smyrna, St. John's Disciple, having been in Prayer three
days before his apprehension, in a Vision by night he saw the Bed set on fire
under his head, and suddenly to be consumed. When he awoke he gave this
exposition of the Vision to them that were present, That in the fire he should
lose his life for Christ's Cause.

When the Pursuers were brought to the Inn where he was, he might have
escaped, but would not, saying, The will of God be done.

As he was going to the place of Judgment, there came a voice from Heaven
(heard by several of his Church) saying, Be of good cheer Polycarpus, and play
the man.

When the Proconsul bid him say, Destroy these naughty men, he looked up to
Heaven, saying, Thou, thou it is, that wilt destroy these wicked naughty men.

The Proconsul bidding him defy Christ and he should be discharged, he
answered, Fourscore and six years have I been his Servant, yet in all his time
has he not so much as once hurt me; How then may I speak evil of my King and
Sovereign Lord, which has thus preserved me?

The Proconsul still urging him to swear by Caesar's prosperity, he replied, If
thou requirest this, pretending that thou know not what I am, Know then that
I am a Christian; Page 56.
and if thou desire to know the Doctrine of Christianity, appoint a day, and
thou shall hear. -- I have thought it my duty thus to say unto you, for so much
as we are commanded to give unto the Governors and Powers ordained of God, the
hounour meet and due to them, and not hurtful unto us. --

The Proconsul telling him he had wild Beasts to whom he would throw him,
unless he took a better way: Polycarp said, Let them come, we have determined
with our selves, that we will not by repentance turn us from the better way to
the worse, but convenient it is, that a man turn from things that be evil unto
that which is good and just.

I will tame thee with fire (replied the Proconsu^) if thou set not by the wild
Beasts, nor yet repent. Then said Polycarp, you threaten me with fire, which
shall burn for the space of an hour, and shall be within a little while after
put out and extinguished; but thou know not the fire of the judgment to
come, and of everlasting punishment which is reserved for the wicked and
ungodly. But why make you all these delays? Give me what death soever you list.

When they would have tied him to the Stake with iron hoops, he said, Let me
alone as I am; For he that has given me strength to come to the fire, shall
also give power that without this provision I shall abide, and not stir in the
midst of the fire.

When his hands were bound behind him, he prayed thus, O Father of thy
welbeloved and blessed Son Jesus Christ, by whom we have attained the knowledge
of thee, the God of Angels and Powers, and of every creature, and of all just
men, which live before thee. I give thee thanks that thou have vouchsafed to
grant me this day that I may have my part among the Number of the Martyrs, to
drink of the Cup of Christ, unto the resurrection of eternal Life both of body
and soul, through the operation of thy holy Spirit, among whom I shall this day
be received into thy sight for an acceptable sacrifice; and as thou have
prepared and revealed the same before this time, so thou have accomplished the
same, O thou most true God, which can not lie. Wherefore for all these things
I praise thee, I bless thee, I glorify thee by our everlasting Bishop Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory evermore. Amen.

As soon as the fire was kindled, some of his Church then present saw this
marvellour thing; The fire being like unto a Vault or Roof of an House, and
after the manner of a Shipmans Sail filled with wind, compassed about the
Martyr, as with a certain Wall, and he in the middle of the same, not as Flesh
that burned, but as Gold and Silver when it is tried in the fire: They smelt
also a savor so sweet, as if Myrrh, or some other precious Balm had given a
scent.

When they saw that his body could not be consumed by fire, one thrust him
through with a Sword; which being done, so great a quantity of blood ran out of
his body, that the fire was quenched therewith.

S^e Mr. Cl^rks first (...) of (...), p 5. etc.
Polycarp going with St. John to a Bath at Ephesus, and espying Cerinthus the
Heretic in it, said, Eugiamus ocius, etc. Let us depart speedily, for fear
least the Bath wherein the Lords adversary is do fall upon us.

He so detested H^reticks, then when Marcion (of his former acquaintance) met
him at Rome, and wondering that he took no notice of him, said unto him, Do
thou not know me Polyc^rp? Yea (said he) I know thee well, Thou art the eldest
Son to the Devil.

His manner was to stop his ears, if at any time he heard the wicked speeches
of Heretieks, and to ^^un those very places, where such speeches had been
uttered.

He suffered Martyrdom in the seventh year of ^^rus, Anno Christi 170. and of
his age 86.

Praetorius.
Arias Praetorius the day before his death, Melchior. Adam. in vita ejus, page
466.
dreamed he saw a Coffin carried, and asking whose it was, he heard this
answer, That Christ was to be laid in his Sepulcher, and that he should
speedily follow him. When he awaked, he concluded his own death was not far off.

Whereupon he cried out, He that follows Christ, walks well, not in darkness.

Jesus, be thou merciful to me a miserable sinner, and draw me after thy self.

Pressed.
Prest's Wife being asked by the Bishop of Exeter, Fox, Vol. 3. page 889.
Whether she had not an Husband? She answered, That she had an Husband and
Children, and had them not: So long as she was at liberty, she refused neither
Husband nor Children; but now standing here as I do (said she) in the Cause of
Christ and his Truth, where I must forsake Christ or my Husband, I am contented
to stick only to Christ my heavenly Spouse, and renounce the other. Here she
making mention of the words of Christ, He that leaves not Father or Mother,
Sister or Brother, or Husband, etc.

The Bishop told her, That Christ spoke that of the holy Martyrs, which died
because they would not sacrifice to the false gods: so (said she) I will rather
die then I will do any worship to that foul Idol, which with your Mass you make
a god.

The Bishop telling her, That if she had been an honest woman, she would not
have left her Husband and Children, and run about the Country like a Fugitive:
She told him, Sir, I labored for my living, and as my Master Christ
counsels me, When I was persecuted in one City, I fled into another. When I
would have my Husband and Children to leave Idolatry, and to worship God in
Heaven, he with his Children rebuked men, and troubled me. I fled not for
whoredom nor for theft, but because I would not be partaker with him and his
of that foul Idol the Mass.

Page 890.
During a Months liberty which was granted her by the Bishop, she went into the
Cathedral at Exeter, and seeing a Dutchman making new Noses to certain fine
Images which were disfigured in King Edwards time; What a mad man art thou
(said she) to make them new Noses, which within a few days shall all lose
their heads? The Dutchman accused her, and laid it hard to her charge; and she
said unto him, Thou art accursed, and so are thy Images. He called her Whore.
Nay (said she) thy Images are Whores, and thou art a Whore-hunter; for does not
God say, You go a whoring after strange gods, figures of your own making.

Page 891.
When judgment was given against her, she lifted up her voice, and said, I
thank thee, my Lord, my God, this day have I found that I long sought.

This favor they pretended after her Judgment, That her life should be
spared, if she would recant: Nay that will I not (said she) God forbid, that I
should lose the life eternal for this carnal and short life. I will never turn
from my heavenly Husband to my earthly Husband; from the fellowship of Angels
to mortal Children: and if my Husband and Children be faithful, then am I
theirs. God is my Father, God is my Mother, God is my Sister, my Brother, my
Kinsman, God is my friend most faithful.

After her Condemnation she refused to receive my money from well affected
people, saying, I am going to a City, where money bears no mastery. Whilst I
am here, God has promised to feed me.

When she was brought to the Stake, without the ^alls of Exeter, in a place
called So then hay, in the ^roneth of November 1558. the Priests again
as^^ulted her; but she prayed them to have no more ^alk with her, and cried
still, God be merciful to (...) a sinner, God be merciful to me a sinner.

This Agnes Priest, The History of the Worthies of England, p. 249, 250.
or Pressed, was the sole Devonshire Martyr (says Dr. Fuller) under the reign of
Queen Mary: Wherefore as those Parents, which have but one Child, may afford it
the better attendance, as more at leisure: So seeing by Gods goodness we have
but this single Native of this Country, yea of this Diocese, we will enlarge,
etc. (1) Her Christian Name, which Mr. Fox could not learn, ^e have recovered
from another excellent Author, Mr. Vowell in Hollingshead, page 1309. (2) I am
informed by the Inhabitants thereabout, that she lived at Northcot in the
Parish of Boynton, in the County of Cornwall, etc. (3) She was a simple woman
to behold, thick, but liltle and short in sta^^re, about Four and fifty years
of age. (4) She was endited on Monday the fourth week in Lent, An. Phil. and
Mar. 2. and 3. before W. Stanford, Justice of the Assize: So that we may
observe more legal formality was used about the condemnation of this poor
woman, then any Martyr of far greater degree. (5) Her own Husband and Children
were her greatest Persecutors, from whom she fled; because they would force her
to be present at Mass. (6) She was condemned by Bishop Troublefield Bishop of
Exeter, etc. yea she was the only person in whose persecution Bishop
Troublefield did appear; and it is justly conceived, that Blackstone his
Chancellor was more active then the Bishop in procuring her death.

Potten.
Fox, Vol. 3. page 678.
Agnes Potten of Ipswich, in a night a little before her death, being asleep in
her bed, saw a bright burning fire, right up as a Pole, and on the side thereof
she thought there stood a number of Queen Mary's Friends looking on, then
(being asleep) she seemed to muse with her self, whether her fire should burn
so bright or no. And indeed her suffering was not far unlike her dream.

At the Stake she and Joan Trunchfield, who sufferred with her, required the
people to credit, and to lay hold on the Word of God, and not upon man's devices
and inventions; and to despise the Ordinances and Institutions of the Romish
Antichrist, with all his superstitious and rotten Religion.

Pusices.
Ward, page 142.
Shut thine eyes but a while (said Pusices to an old man trembling at
Martyrdom) and thou shall see Gods Light.

R.
Rabeck.
Fox. Vol. 3. cont. page 5.
John Rabeck, a French Martyr, being urged to pronounce Jesus Maria, conjoined
in one Prayer, boldly answered, That if his Tongue should but offer to utter
those words at their bidding, he himself would bite it asunder with his Teeth.
Vide vitam ejus a Theophilo B^^^sio descriptam in P.R Comment. de Relig. Christ.


Ramus.
The great crime that the Sorbonists objected against Peter Ramus, and for
which he suffered much, was, That by opposing Aristotle he enervated Divinity.
Whence we may see what a Divinity they were for, who made Aristotle the great
Master thereof, who laughs at the Creation of the World, Divine Providence, and
the Immortality of the Soul: and slighting Life eternal, placed the happiness
of man in this mortal Life only, and left nothing for man after death, then to
have it said, He was happy: in a word, who defined humane felicity from man's
ability, and not from divine grace.

In his adverse condition he would comfort himself with the following Verses:
1. Commit vitam, rem, decus,
Dei unius arbitrio,
Animi tibi ex sententia
Confecta reddet omnia.
Illustris aurorae ut jubar,
Tua faciet ul sit aquitas,
Ut luce virtus sit tua^
Meridiana clarior.


In English thus; Commit to God, life, wealth, and name,
And what thou will shall have the same.
Thy righteousness shall shine more clear,
Then the light of the morning (...)
2. -- Deus ^abit his quoque finem^
Durate, ut vos^^t rebus servate secundis.
-- These shall not want an end.
Bear up, and wait till G^d does better send.


That which he first disliked in Popery, was their execrable idolatry in
corrupting the second Commandment, and the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

When in the Possiac Synod he heard the Cardina^ of Lorain acknowledge, That
the first of the fifteet^ Centuries since Christ was a truly golden Age but the
rest were so much the worse, by how much they farther departed from the first,
Peter Ramus concluded, That the Age of Christ and his Apostles was to be
restored, and chosen.

When the Civil Wars brake forth in France for Religion, he went into Germany,
and at Heidelberg, having made to Tremellius and the Church a Confession of his
Faith, he received the Sacrament of the Lords Supper in that Church.

After his conversion he daily did read the Old and New Testament, and out of
each Chapter collected an Index, containing Rules and Examples relating to both
the parts of Christian Doctrine, viz. Faith, and the Actions of Faith, and so
made his Commentaries; and certainly he had made much greater progress in
Divinity, had he not been so soon (not much above two years) after his
conversion taken away by a violent death.

When in that horrid Massacre at Paris, begun Aug. 24. 1572. he was mortally
wounded, Aug. 26. in the seven and fiftieth year of his age, he was heard to
commend his soul to God in these words: O Jehovah, against thee only have I
sinned, and done evil before thee. Thy judgments are truth and righteousness.
Have mercy upon, and pardon my Murderers; for they know not what they do.

Read.
See the Ecclesiastical History of Scotland, page 2.
Some of the Articles that were exhibited against Adam Read, and other Scotch
Confessors, were these following: (1) That Images are not to be had in the
Kirk, nor to be worshipped. (4) That it is not lawful to fight for the Faith,
nor to defend the Faith by the Sword, if we be not driven to it by necessity,
which is above all Law. (12) That the Pope is not the Successor of Peter, but
where he said, Go behind me Satan. (17) That the Pope exalts himself against
God, and above God. (19) That the blessings of the Bishops (of dumb Dogs they
should have been styled) are of no value. (20) That the excommunication of the
Kirk is not to be feared, Page 3.
if there be no true cause for it. (29) That we are no more bound to pray in
the Kirk, then in other places. (32) That the Pope is the head of the Kirk of
Antichrist. (34) That they which are called Princes and Prelates in the Church,
are Thieves and Robbers. By these Articles exhibited in the year 1494 (which
God of his merfull providence caused the enemies of his Truth to keep in their
Registers) may appear how God retained some spark of light in Scotland in the
time of greatest darkness.

When Arch Bishop Blacater asked Adam Read, Whether he believed that God was in
Heaven, he answered, Not as I do the Sacraments seven. Whereupon Blacater
insultingly said unto the King, Sir, Lo, he denies that God is in Heaven:
Whereat the King wondering, said, Adam Read what say you? He answered, May it
please your Majesty to hear the end between the Churl and me: and therewith
turned to the Bishop, Page 4.
and said, I neither think nor believe, as thou think, that God is in
Heaven, though I am most assured, that he is not only in Heaven, but also in
the Earth; but thou and thy Faction declare by your works, that either you
think there is no God at all, or else that he is so set up in Heaven, that he
regards not what is done on Earth; for if thou firmly believedst that God were
in Heaven, thou should not make thy self Check-mate to the King, and
altogether forget that charge that Jesus Christ the Son of God gave to his
Apostles, to preach the Gospel, and not to play the proud Prelates, as all the
rabble of you do this day. And now Sir (said he to the King) judge you whether
the Bishop or I believe best, that God is in Heaven.

Then the King said to him, Adam Read, Will thou burn thy Bill? He answered,
Sir, the Bishop and you will.

Ridley.
Fox, Vol. 2. page 788.
Dr. Nicholas Ridley, then Bishop of London, went about September. 8.^ 1552. to
see the Lady Mary, and offered to preach before her: but she told him, The door
of the Parish Church adjoining shall be open to you, if you come, and you may
preach if you list; but neither I, nor any of mine shall hear you. Madam (said
he) I trust you will not refuse Gods Word. I cannot tell (said she) what you
call Gods Word, that is not Gods Word now, that was Gods Word in my Fathers
days. Gods Word (said he) is all one in all times, but has been better
understood, and practiced in some Ages, then in other. --

After this Conference, Sir Thomas Wharton, one of the Lady Mary's Officers,
brought the Bishop to the place where they dined: but the Bishop after he had
drunk, pausing a little while, and looking very sadly, brake out into these
words, Surely I have done amiss. Why so, said the Knight? For I have drunk
(said he) in that place, where Gods Word offered, has been refused: whereas if
I had remembered my duty, I ought to have departed immediately, and to have
shaken off the dust of my feet for a testimony against this House.

These words were spoken by the Bishop with such vehemence, that some of the
Hearers afterward confessed, That their hairstood upright upon their heads.
This done the Bishop departed.

In the time of Queen Jane, Fox, Vol. 3 page 16
in his Sermon at Paul's Cross, he prophesied at it were, That if ever the Lady
Mary were Queen, she would bring in Foreign Power to reign over them, besides
the subverting the Christian Religion then established.

Shortly after this Sermon Queen Mary was proclaimed, and Dr. Ridley speedily
repaired to Fremingham in Suffolk, to Queen Mary, but had but cold welcome
there: he was spoiled of his Dignity, and sent back upon a lame halting Horse
to the Tower.

In the Tower he was sometimes invited to the Lieutenants Table, Page 42.
where he had conference with Secretary Brown, etc.

In that Conference. -- It is not in Scripture (said Dr. Ridley) as in the
witness of men, where a ^umber is credited more then one. A multitude of
affirmations in Scripture, and one affirmation is all one as to the truth if
the matter. That which any one of the Evange^ists sp^ke, inspired by the Holy
Ghost, is as true ^s that which is spoken by them all. What John says of
Christ, I am the door of the She^p, is as true as what Matthew, Mark, Luke,
etc. say, This is my body; ^^t the Scripture words are only true in the sense
in which they were spoken. -- As for Unity, I embrace it, ^it be with Verity,
and joined to our Head Christ. -- ^^r Antiquity, I am persuaded that to be true
which ^reneus says, That which is first, is true. Our Religion was first truly
taught by Christ himself and his Apostles, Page 43.
etc. -- You know I were a very fool, if I ^iu'd in this matter dissent from
you, if that in my ^onscience the Truth did not enforce me s^ to do. Ye per^ive
I trow, it is out of my way, if I esteemed worldly ^^in.

Afterward he was sent out of the Tower with Cranmer and Latimer to dispute at
Oxford.

Page 49.
When he was the first time brought before the Commissioners, they asked him,
Whether he would dispute or no? He answered, That as long as God gave him life,
he should not only have his heart, but also his mouth and Pen to defend his
Truth.

Page 82.
In his Protestation before his Disputation. -- Whilst I weighed with my self
how great a charge of the Lords Flock was of late committed to me, for which I
am certain I must render an account to my Lord God, etc. and that moreover by
the command of the Apostle Peter, I ought to be ready always to give a reason
of the hope that is in me with meekness and reverence unto every one, that
shall demand the same. Besides this considering my duty to the Church of
Christ, and to your Worships, being Commissioners by public Authority, I
determined to obey your command in openly declaring to you my mind touching the
Propositions which you gave me. And albeit (plainly to confess unto you the
truth in these things, which ye now demand of me) I have thought otherwise in
times past, then now I do; yet (God I call to record unto my soul, I lie not) I
have not altered my judgment, as now it is, either by constraint of any man,
or Laws, or for the dread of any dangers of this world, or for any hope of
commodity, but only for love of the Truth revealed to me by the grace of God
(as I am undoubtedly persuaded) in his holy Word, and in the reading of the
Ancient Fathers.

Page 83.
Dr. Weston telling him, What he said contained only evasions and starting
holes. I cannot (said Dr. Ridley) start far from you, I am captive and bound.

Bertram (said he) was the first that pulled me ^y the ear, and that first
^rought me from the common error of the Popish Church, and caused me to search
more diligently and exactly both the Scriptures and the Writings of the old
Ecclesiastical Fathers in this matter.

When he was condemned by them for an Heretic, Page 91.
he said, Although I be not of your Company, yet doubt I not ^ut my Name is
writ in another place, whether this sentence will send us sooner, then we
should come by the course of Nature.

In his Letter to Dr. Crannier. Page 93.
--

I wish you might have seen these mine Answers before I had delivered them,
that you might have corrected them: but I trust in the substance of the matter,
we do agree fully, both led by one Spirit of Truth, and both walking after one
Rule of Gods Word. -- I trust the day of our delivery out of all miseries, and
of our entrance into perpetual rest, and unto perpetual joy and felicity
draws nigh. The Lord strengthen us with his mighty Spirit of Grace. -- Pray
for me I pray you, and so shall I for you. The Lord have mercy of his Church,
and lighten the eyes of the Magistrates, that Gods extreme plagues light not on
this Realm of England.

Turn or burn.

In his Letter to Mr. Latimer in Prison. Page 433.
--

I pray you good Father, let me have one draught more of your Cup, wherein you
mingle to me profitable with pleasant to comfort my stomach; for surely except
the Lord assist me with his gracious aid in the time of his Service, I know I
shall but play the part of a white-liver'd Knight. But truly my trust is in
him, that in mine infirmity he should try himself strong, and that he can make
the Coward in his Cause to fight like a man.

Sir, Now I daily look when Diotrephes with his Warriors shall assault me:
wherefore I pray you good Father, for that you are an old Soldier, and an
expert Warrior, and (God knows) I am but a young Soldier, and as yet of
small experience in these fights, help me I pray you to buckle mine harness.
And now I would have you to think, that those darts are cast at my head, by
some one of Diotrephes, or Antonius his Soldiers, (By Antonius he meant some
Popish Persecutour, as Winchester, alluding thereby to the Story of Victor l.
3. De Persecu^. Aphri.)


Object. 1. All men marvel greatly why you do not go to Mass, which is a thing
(as you know) now much esteemed of all men, yea, of the Queen her self.

Answ. Because no man that lays hand on the plough, and looks back, is fit
for the Kingdom of God; Luke 9.
and also for the same cause why St. Paul wou^d not suffer Timothy to be
circumcised, which is, that the Truth of the Gospel might remain with us
incorrupt, Gal. 2.
Gal. 2. And again, If I build again the things which I destroyed, I m^ke my
self a Trespasser. This is also another cause, lest I should seem by outward
fact to allow the thing, which I am persuaded is contrary to sound Doctrine,
and so should be a stumbling block to the weak. But woe be to him by whom
offense comes, Mat. 18. It were better for him that a Millstone were hanged
about his neck, and he cast into the midst of the sea.

Page 434.
Object. 2. Have not you used in times past to say Mass your self, and
therefore why will you not now vouchsafe once either to hear it, or see it.

Answ. I confess unto you my fault and ignorance; but know you, that for these
matters I have done penance long ago, both at Paul 's Cross, and at Cambridge,
and I trust God has forgiven me mine offense, for I did it ignorantly.

Object. 3. But you know how great a crime it is to separate your self from the
Communion or Fellowship of the Church, and to make a scisme or division.

Answ. I know that the Unity of the Church is to be ^^tained by all means, and
the same to be necessary to salvation; but I do not take the Mass, as it is at
this lay, for the Communion of the Church, but a Popish de^ice, etc.

Object. 4. Admit there be a fault in the Mass, do not you know both by Cyprian
and Augustine that Communion of Sacraments does not defile a man, but consent
of deeds; if you do not consent to the ^^ult in the Mass, why do you trouble
your self in ^ain?

Answ. Forasmuch as things done in the Mass tend ^^enly to the overthrow of
Christ's Institution, I judge that by no means, either in word or deed, I ought
to con^ent unto it. What is objected out of the Fathers is meant ^f them who
suppose they are defiled, if any secret vice be ^^ther in the Ministers, or in
them that communicate with them, and not of them which do abhor superstition,
^^d wicked traditions of men, and will not suffer the same (...) be thrust upon
themselves, or upon the Church in stead ^f Gods Word, and the truth of the
Gospel.

Object. 5. The Mass is the Sacrament of Uni^^, etc.

Answ. Page 435.
It Is true, the Bread which we break accord^^^ to the Institution of the Lord,
is the Sacrament of (...) Unity of Christ's mystical Body; for we being many
(...) one Bread, and one Body, forasmuch as we are parta^^rs all of one Bread.
But in the Mass the Lords Institution is not observed, for we are not all
partakers of one ^^ead, but one devoureth all, etc. So that as it is used it
may seem a Sacrament of singularity, etc. --

Page 438, 439.
Object. 12. Is not abstaining from the Church by reason of the Mass contrary
to the examples of the Prophets and Apostles of Christ? --

Answ. It can no where be showed, that the Prophets, or Christ, or his Apostles
did in the Temple communicate with the people in any kind of worshipping
forbidden by the Law of God. -- How else I pray you can you understand that St.
Paul alleges, when he says, 2 Cor. 6. What concord has Christ with Belial?
or what part has the Believer with the Infidel? or how agrees the Temple of
God with Images? For ye are the Temple of the Living God, as God himself has
said, I will dwell among them, and will be their God, and they shall be my
people; wherefore come out from among them, and separate your selves from them
(says the Lord) and touch no unclean thing, so will I receive you, and will be
a Father unto you, and you shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord God
Almighty.

Object. 14. For so much as you are so stiffly, I will not say obstinately,
bent, and so wedded to your Opinion, that no gentle exhortations and wholesome
counsels, no other kind of means can call you home to a better mind; there
remains that which in like cases was wont to be the only remedy against
stiff-necked and stubborn persons, that is, you must be hampered by the Laws,
and compelled either to obey, whether you will or no, or else suffer that which
a Rebel to the Laws ought to suffer? -- Do you not know, that refusing to obey
the Laws of the Realm, is the readiest way to stir up Sedition and Civil War?
It is better that you should bear your own sin, then that through the example
of your breach of the common Laws, the common quie^ should be disturbed. How
can you say you will be the Queens true Subject, whenas you do openly profess
you will not keep her Laws.

Answ. -- I grant it to be reasonable, that he that ^y words and gentleness
cannot be made to yield to that which is right and good, he that will not be
subject to Gods Word, should be punished by the Laws.

-- These things ought to take place against him who refuses to do that is
right and just, according to true godliness, not against him which cannot bear
superstitions quietly, but does hate and detost from his heart such kind of
proceedings, and that for the glory of the Name of God. -- Whosoever love their
Country in Truth, i. e. in God, they will always judge (if at any time the
Laws of God and man are contrary) that a man ought rather to obey God then man;
Page 440.
and they that think otherwise, and pretend a love to their Country, forasmuch
as they make their Country to fight as it were against God, in whom consists
the only stay of that Country, such are to be judged most deadly enemies and
Traitors to their Country. -- Satan indeed has ever this dart in readiness to
hurl against his Adversaries, to accuse them of sedition, that he may bring
them if he can in danger of the higher Powers. Thus Ahab said unto Elias, Art
thou he that troubles Israel? The false prophets complained of Jeremy to their
Princes, that his words were seditious, and not to be suffered. The Scribes and
Pharisees accused Christ as a seditious person, and one that spoke against
Caesar. Did not they at the last cry, If you let this man go, you are not
Caesar's friend? Thus the Orator Tertullus accused Paul before Felix the
Deputy, We have found this man (says he) a pestilent fellow, and a stirrer up
of sedition unto all the Jews in the whole world. But were these indeed
seditious persons? God forbid; but they were of men falsely accused, and
wherefore I pray you? but because the reproved before the people their guiles,
superstitions and deceits. -- A man indeed ought to obey his Prince, but in the
Lord, and never against the Lord; for he that knowingly obeys his Prince
against God, does not a duty to the Prince, but is a deceiver of the Prince,
and a helper to him to work his own destruction. He is also unjust which gives
not to the Prince that is the Princes, and to God that is Gods. -- Hitherto you
see (good Father) how I have in words only made a flourish before the fight
which I shortly look for, and how I have begun to prepare certain kind of
weapons to fight against the adversary of Christ. -- And here methinks I see
you suddenly lifting up your head to Heaven after your manner, and then looking
upon me with your Prophetical Countenance, and speaking thus unto me, Trust not
my Son (I beseech you vouchsafe me the honor of this Name, for in so doing I
shall think my self both honored and loved of you) Trust not to these
word-weapons; for the Kingdom of God is not in words but in power. Remember
always the words of the Lord, Do not imagine aforehand what and how you will
speak; for it shall be given you even in that same hour what ye shall speak,
Mat. 10. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father that
speaks in you, Mar. 11. I pray you therefore (Father) pray for me, that I may
cast my whole care on him, and trust on him in all perils; for I know and am
surely persuaded, that whatsoever I can think aforehand is nothing, except he
assist me with his Spirit when the time is. Page 441.
-- Pray that I may out of a true Faith say with David, I will not trust in my
bow, and it is not my sword that shall save me, Psalm. 44. For he has no
pleasure in the strength of an horse, etc. But the Lord delights in them that
fear him, and put their trust in his mercy. I beseech you Pray, pray, pray,
that I may enter this fight only in the Name of God. --

In his Letter to Mr. Bradford and his Fellow Prisoners. --

How joyful it was to us to hear the report of Dr. Tailor, and of his godly
Confession, etc. I assure you it is hard for me to express. Blessed be God
which was and is the Giver of that and of all godly strength and stomach in the
time of adversity. Page 442.
-- It is not the slanderers evil tongue but a man's evil deed that can with God
defile a man; and therefore with Gods grace ye shall never have cause to doubt
but that we will continue, etc. Sir, Blessed be God, with all our evil reports,
grudges and restraints we are merry in God, and all our cure and care is and
shall be (by Gods grace) to please and serve him of whom we look and hope after
these temporal and momentary miseries to have eternal joy and perpetual
felicity with Abraham, etc. through Jesus Christ our Lord.


In his Letter to his Cousin. --

I can do no less then lament their case, who for fear of trouble or loss of
goods will do in the sight of the world those things they know and are assured
are contrary to the Will of God, being assdred their end will be so pitiful
(without speedy repentance) that I tremble to think of it. -- Alas! such as
should in this dangerous time have given you and me comfortable instructions
have persuaded us to follow (I lament to rehearse it) superstitious Idolatry:
yea, and the worst of all is, they seek to prove it by Scriptures. The Lord for
his mercy turn their hearts. Amen.


In another Letter to Mr. Bradford. Page 444.
--

Oh dear Brother, seeing the time is now come, wherein it pleases the Heavenly
Father for Christ our Savior his sake to call upon you, and to bid you come,
happy are you that ever you were born thus to be found awake at the Lords
Calling. -- If it be not the place that sanctisieth the man, but the holy man
does by Christ sanctify the place, then happy and holy shall be that place
where in thou shall suffer, and which shall be sprinkled over with thy ashes in
Christ's Cause. All thy Country may rejoice of thee, that it ever brought forth
such an one which would render his life again in his Cause of whom he had
received it. --

We do look now every day when we shall be called on, blessed be God. I ween I
am the weakest many ways of our company, and yet I thank our Lord God and
Heavenly Father by Christ, that since I heard of our dear. Brother Rogers his
departing, and stout confession of Christ and his Truth even unto death, my
heart (blessed be God) rejoiced of it, that since that time I never felt any
lumpish heaviness in my heart, as I grant I have felt sometimes before. Oh good
Brother, blessed be God in thee, and blessed be the time that ever I knew thee.


In his Letter to the Brethren imprisoned. --

What worthy thanks can we render unto the Lord for you my Brethren, namely,
for the great consolation which through you we have received in the Lord, who
notwithstanding the rage of Satan, that goes about by all manner of subtle
means to beguile the world, and also busily labors to restore and set up his
Kingdom again that of late began to decay and to fall to ruin, ye remain
still unmovable as men grounded upon a strong rock. And now albeit that Satan
by his Soldiers and wicked Ministers daily (as we hear) draws numbers unto
him; so that it is said of him, That he plucketh even the Stars out of Heaven
whiles he drives into some men the fear of death, and loss of all their Goods,
and offers unto others the pleasant baits of the world, etc. to the intent
they should fall down and worship not the Lord but the Dragon, the old Serpent,
which is the Devil, that great beast and his image, and should be enticed to
commit fornication with the Strumpet of Babylon, etc. Yet blessed be God the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has given unto you a manly courage, and
has so strengthened you in the inward man by the Power of his Spirit, that you
can contemn as well all the terrors as also the vain allurements of the world,
esteeming them as mere trifles and things of naught. -- In the Faith of Christ
stand ye fast my Brethren, and suffer not your selves to be brought under the
yoke of bondage and superstition any more, and be of good comfort, and remember
that our grand Captain has overcome the world. Page 445.
-- We never had a better or more just cause either to contemn our life or shed
our blood, we cannot take in hand the defense of a more certain, clear and
manifest Truth. -- Shall we or can we receive and acknowledge any other Christ
instead of him, who is alone the everlasting Son of the everlasting Father,
etc. Let such wickedness my Brethren, let such horrible wickedness be far from
us. -- What can your Adversaries else do unto you by persecuting you, and
working all cruelty and villainy against you, but make your Crowns more
glorious, yea beautify and multiply the same, etc.


In another Letter to the Brethren. --

Now even now (out of doubt Brethren) the pit is opened against us, and the
locusts begin to swarm, and Abaddon now reigns; ye therefore (my Brethren)
which pertain unto Christ, and have the Seal of God marked in your foreheads,
i. e. are sealed with the Earnest of the Spirit to be a peculiar people of God,
quit your selves like men, and be strong; for he that is in us is stronger then
he which is in the world, and ye know all that is born of God overcomes the
world, and this is our victory that overcomes the world, even our Faith. Let
the world fret, let it rage never so much, be it never so cruel and bloody, yet
be sure that no man can take us out of the Fathers hands; for he is greater
then all, etc. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? etc. Who
shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation? etc.


In his Letter to Mr. West his quondam Chaplain.

-- I wish you grace in God, and love of the Truth, without which truly
established in men's hearts by the mighty hand of the Almighty God* it is no
more possible to stand by the Truth in Christ in time of trouble, then it is
for the wax to abide the heat of the fire. -- I am persuaded Christ's words to
be true, Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before
my Father which is in Heaven; and I believe that no earthly Creature shall be
saved, whom the Redeemer and Savior of the world shall before his Father deny.
-- If you had wished that neither fear of death, nor hope of worldly prosperity
should let me to maintain Gods Word and his Truth, which is his glory and true
honor, it would have like me well. You desire me for Gods sake to remember my
self: Indeed it is now time so to do, for so far as I can perceive, it stands
me upon no less danger then of the loss both of body and soul, and I trow then
it is time for a man to awake, if any thing will awake him. He that will not
fear him that threatens to cast both body and soul into everlasting fire, whom
will he fear? With this fear O Lord fasten thou together our frail flesh that
we never swerve from thy laws. You say you have made much suit for me; God
grant that you have not in suing for my worldly deliverance impaired and
hindered the furtherance of Gods Word and his Truth. Page 447.
-- To write unto these whom you name, I cannot see what it will avail me; but
this I would have you know, That I esteem nothing available for me, which also
will not further the glory of God.

-- Sir, How nigh the day of my dissolution and departure out of this world is
at hand I cannot tell, the Lords Will be fulfilled how soon soever it shall
come. --

My conscience moves me to require both you and my Friend Dr. Harvey to
remember your promises made to me in times past of the pure setting forth and
preaching of Gods Word and his Truth. These promises although you shall not
need to fear to be charged with them of me hereafter before the world, yet look
for none other but to be charged with them at Gods hand. My conscience and the
love I bear you bids me now say unto you both in Gods Name, fear God and
love not the world; for God is able to cast both soul and body into hell fire.
--

-- What is it else to confess or deny Christ in this world, but to maintain
the Truth taught in Gods Word, or for any worldly respect to shrink from the
same. He that will wittingly forsake either for fear or gain of the world any
one open Truth of Gods Word, if he be constrained he will assuredly forsake God
and all his Truth, rather then he will endanger himself to lose, or to leave
that he loves indeed, better then he does God and the Truth of his Word. I
like very well your plain speaking, telling me I must either agree or die. Sir,
I know I must die, whether I agree or no. But what folly were it then to make
such an agreement by the which I could never escape the death which is common
to all, and also incur the guilt of death and eternal damnation? Lord grant
that I may utterly abhor and detest this damnable agreement so long as I live.
--

If you do not confess and maintain to your power and knowledge that which is
grounded upon Gods Word, but will either for fear or gain of the world shrink
and play the Apostate, indeed you shall die the death.


Page 448.
In his Letter to Mr. Grindall, then in Exile at Frankford, afterward Arch
Bishop of Canterbury. --

Rejoice in the Lord, and as you love me and the other my Reverend Fathers and
Concaptives (which undoubtedly are gloria Christi) lament not our state, but I
beseech you to give to our Heavenly Father for his endless mercies and
unspeakable benefits even in the midst of all our troubles given to us, most
hearty thanks: for know ye, that as the weight of his Cross has increased upon
us, so he has not, nor does he cease to multiply his mercies to strengthen us,
and I trust, yea by his grace I doubt nothing, but he will so do for Christ our
Masters sake even to the end. -- West your old Companion, and sometime my
Chaplain alas has relented, but the Lord has shortened his days; soon after
he had said Mass against his conscience, he pined away, and died for sorrow.
Page 449.
-- My daily Prayer is (as God does know) and by Gods grace shall be so long as
I live in this world for you my Dear Brethren that are fled out of your own
Country, because you will rather forsake all worldly things then the Truth of
Gods Word, that God our eternal Father, for our Savior Christ's sake will daily
increase in you the gracious gift of his Heavenly Spirit to the true setting
forth of his Glory and Gospel, and make you to agree brotherly in the Truth of
the same, that there arise no root of bitterness among you that may infect that
good seed which God has sown in your hearts already, and that your life may be
pure and honest, according to the Rule of Gods Word, that others may be in love
with your Doctrine and with you, and glorify our Father which is in Heaven. --
Now we expect nothing but the triumphant Crowns in the Lord of our Confession
from our old enemy. I commend my self humbly and heartily to your Prayers, Dr.
Grindal, and to the rest of the Brethren with you, dearly beloved by me in the
Lord, viz. Cheek, Cox, Turner, Lever, Sampson, Chambers, etc. and others who
love the Lord in Truth. I commend also to you my Reverend Fathers and
Fellow Prisoners in the Lord, Thomas Cranmer, now most worthy the Name of a
true and great Shepherd, yea Arch Bishop, and Hugh Latimer, that old Soldier
of Christ's, and the true Apostle of our English Nation. --


In his Letter to Augustine Bornher. -- Brother Augustine, I bless God with all
my heart in his manifold merciful gifts, given unto our dear Brethren in
Christ, specially to our Brother Rogers, etc. and also to Hooper, Saunders, and
Tailor, whom it has pleased the Lord to set in the forefront of the Battle
against his Adversaries, and has endued them all (so far as I can hear) to
stand in the Confession of his Truth, and to be content in his Cause, and for
his Gospels sake to lose their lives. And evermore and without end blessed be
our Heavenly Father, for our dear and entirely beloved Brother Bradford, whom
now I perceive the Lord calls for; for I ween he will no longer suffer him to
abide among the adulterous and wicked generation of this world. I doubt not but
he has helped those which are gone before in their journey, that is, has
animated and encouraged them to keep the high way, and so to run, that at
length they might obtain the Prize. The Lord be his comfort, whereof I do not
doubt; I thank God heartily that ever I was acquainted with him, and that ever
I had such an one in my house. The other two he means are the Protamartyr
Rogers, and the Exile Grindal. Page 487.
I trust to God it shall please him of his goodness to strengthen me to make up
the Trinity out of Paul's Church to suffer for Christ, etc.

Upon the thirtieth of September, 1555. Dr. Ridley (with Father Latimer) was
brought before the Queens Commissioners to undergo his last Examination. Whilst
the Commission was reading he stood bare, till he heard the Cardinal named and
the Popes Holiness, then he put on his Cap; and being admonished by the Bishoy
of Lincoln, the Popes Delegate to pull it off, he answered, I do not put it on
in contempt of your Lordship, nor of the Cardinal, in that he came of Royal
Blood, etc. but that by this my behavior I may make it appear, that I
acknowledge in no point the usurped Supremacy of Rome; and therefore I contemn
and despite all Authority coming from the Pope. -- As for taking off my Cap, do
as it shall please your Lordships, and I shall be content.

Page 488.
When Lincoln in a long Rhetorical Speech persuaded him to recant, etc. he said;
My Lord, in your Exhortation I have marked especially three points, which you
used to persuade me to leave my Doctrine and Religion, which I perfectly know
and am thoroughly persuaded to be grounded not upon man's imaginations and
decrees, but upon the infallible Truth of Christ's Gospel, and to look back and
return to the Romish See contrary to my Oath, contrary to the Prerogative and
Crown of this Realm, and especially (which moves me most) contrary to the
expressed Word of God. (1) That the Sea of Rome taking his ^eginning from
Peter, upon whom (you say) Christ has builded his Church, has in all ages
lineally from Bishop to Bishop been brought to this time. (2) That the holy
Fathers in their Writings from time to time have confessed the same. (3) That I
was once of the same Opinion. For the first. -- Christ in saying, Upon this
stone, does not mean Peter himself, etc. but his Confession, that he was the
Son of God, upon this Rock-stone I will build my Church; for this is the
foundation and beginning of all Christianity, with word, heart and mind to
confess that Christ is the Son of God. -- Christ's Church is built not on the
frailty of man, but upon the stable and infallible Word of God, Page 489.
that Christ is the Son of God. -- Whilst the Sea of Rome continued in the
Promotion and setting forth of Gods glory, and due preaching of the Gospel, the
Fathers commended and honored Rome, and so do I; but after the Bishops of that
See, seeking their own pride and not Gods honor, set themselves above Kings,
challenging to them the Title of Gods Vicars, etc. I cannot but with S. Gregory
a Bishop of Rome confess, that the Bishop of that place is the very true
Antichrist, whereof St. John speaks by the name of the Whore of Babylon. --
For the third, I cannot but confess I was once of the same Religion you are of,
yet so was St. Paul a Persecutour of Christ.

Lincoln farther urging him to recant, Page 490.
etc. he said, am fully persuaded that Christ's Church is found^d in every place
where his Gospel is truly received and effectually followed. Page 491.
-- Your gentleness is the same that Christ had of the High Priests. Your
Lordship says, You have no power to condemn me, neither at any time to put a
man to death: so the High Priests said, That it was not lawful for them to put
any man to death, but committed Christ to Pilate; neither would suffer him to
absolve Christ, although he sought to do it. What? (said Dr. Weston) do you
make the King Pilate? No Dr. (said Ridley) I do but compare your deeds with
Caiaphas his deeds and the High Priests, who would condemn no man to death, as
you will not, and yet would not suffer Pilate to deliver Christ.

Page 492.
Being required to answer to his Articles presently, though he had time given
him till the morrow; First (said he) I require the Notaries to take and write
my Protestation, that in no point I acknowledge your Authority, or admit you to
be my Judges, as you are authorized from the Pope, etc.

Page 498.
At last the Bishop of Lincoln with his Cap in his hand desired him to turn. But
Dr. Ridley made an absolute Answer, That he was fully persuaded the Religion he
defended to be grounded on Gods Word, and therefore without great offense
toward God, great peril and damage of his soul, he could not forsake his
Master and Lord God.

For my part (said Weston) I take God to witness I am sorry for you. I believe
it well my Lord (said Ridley) forasmuch as one day it will be burthenous to
your soul.

Page 500.
After Sentence was read against him, the Bishop of Gloucester came to his
Prison, and would have persuaded him yet to recant, upon promise of the Queens
mercy; but he answered him, My Lord, you know my mind fully herein, and for the
Doctrine which I have taught, my conscience assures me it was sound, and
according to Gods Word (to his glory be it spoken) the which Doctrine the Lord
God being my helper, I will maintain so long as my tongue shall wag, and breath
is within my body, and in confirmation thereof seal the same with my blood. --
Do with me as it shall please God to suffer you, I am well content to abide the
same with all my heart. -- The Servant is not above his Master; if they dealt
so cruelly with our Savior Christ, as the Scripture makes mention, and he
suffered the same patiently, how much more does it become us his Servants. --
The Bishop bidding him to hold his peace, he answered, That so long as his
tongue and breath would suffer him, he would speak against their abominable
doings whatsoever happened unto him for so doing.

When in the degrading of him they read, We do take from you the Office of
preaching the Gospel, etc. Dr. Ridley gave a great sigh, and looking up toward
Heaven, said, O Lord God, forgive them this their wickedness.

After his Degradation Brooks the Bishop of Gloucester refusing to talk with
him, Page 501.
he said, Seeing that you will not suffer me to talk, neither will vouchsafe to
hear me, what remedy but patience? I refer my cause to my heavenly Father, who
will reform things that be amiss, when it shall please him.

In his Supplication to the Queen. -- It may please your Majesty, for Christ
our Saviors sake, in a matter of Conscience (and now not for my self but for
other poor men) to vouchsafe to hear and understand this humble Supplication.
It is so (Honorable Princess) that whilst I was Bishop of London, diverse
Tenants took Leases of me and the Cha^ter for valuable considerations, but now
Bishop Bonner will not allow those Leases, which must redound to many poor men's
utter ruin. Wherefore this is mine humble Supplication, That either their
Leases may stand, or their moneys be restored to them, and their former Leases;
now the Fines paid to me may easily be repaid, if you will be pleased to
command some portion of those Goods I left in my house to be sold for that end.
I suppose half of the value of my Plate will go nigh to restore all such Fines
received.

Page 502.
When Bishop Brooks delivered Dr. Ridley to the Bailiffs, charging them not to
suffer any to speak with him, and to bring him to the place of Execution when
they were commanded, he said, God I thank thee, and to thy praise be it spoken,
there is none of you all able to lay to my charge any open or notorious crime;
for if you could it should surely be laid in my lap. I see very well you play
the part of a proud Pharisee (said Brooks) exalting and praising your self. No,
no, no (said Ridley) to Gods glory only is it spoken. I confess my self to be
a miserable wretched sinner, and have great need of Gods help and mercy, and do
daily call and cry for the same.

The night before he suffered his Beard was washed and his legs, and as he sat
at Supper with Mr. Mr. Irish and Mrs. Irish, he invited them to his Marriage;
To morrow (said he) I must be married, and was as merry as ever in all his
life. Wishing his Sister, he asked his Brother sitting at the Table, Whether
she could find in her heart to be there o^ no; yea I dare say (said his
Brother) with all her heart. I am glad to hear so much of her (said Dr. Ridley)
At this talk Mrs. Irish wept; whereupon Dr. Ridley said, O Mrs. Irish, you love
me not now I see-well enough, for in that you weep it does appear you will not
be at my Marriage, neither are content therewith: indeed you be not so much my
friend as I thought you had been; but quiet your self, though my Breakfast
shall be somewhat sharp and painful, yet I am sure my Supper shall be more
pleasant and sweet.

When he arose from the Table, his Brother offered him to watch all night with
him; but he said, No, no, no, that you shall not, for I mind (God willing) to
go to Bed, and sleep as quietly to night ^s ever I did in my life.

When he espied Mr. Latimer at the Stake, he ran to him, embraced and kissed
him, and said, Be of good heart Brother, for God will either assuage the fury
of the flame, or else strengthen us to abide it.

After Dr. Smith had preached on 1 Cor. 13. Page 503.
If I give my Body to be burned, etc. Dr. Ridley kneeled down on his Knees
toward the Lord Williams, etc. and said, I beseech you my Lord, even for
Christ's like, that I may speak but two or three words. Whereupon the Bailiffs,
and Dr. Marshal Vice Chancellor of Oxford ran hastily to him, and with their
hands stopped his mouth, and said, Mr. Ridley, if you will recant, you shall
not only have liberty to speak, but your life. Not otherwise (said Ridley) No
(said Marshal) Well (said Dr. Ridley) so long is the breath is in my Body I
will never deny my Lord Christ and his known Truth. Gods Will be done in me. --
I commit our Cause to Almighty God, who shall indifferently judge all.

Being in his shirt, he said, O heavenly Father, I give unto thee most hearty
thanks, for that thou ^ast called me to be a Professor of thee even unto
death. I beseech thee, Lord God, take mercy upon this Realm of England, and
deliver the same from all her enemies.

To the Smith he said, Good Fellow knock in the Chain hard; for the flesh will
have his course.

When his Brother brought him Gunpowder, he said, I will take it to be sent of
God; therefore I will receive it as sent of him.

To my Lord Williams he said, My Lord, I must be a Suitor to you for diverse
poor men, and my Sister, etc. There is nothing in all this world troubles my
conscience (I praise God) this only excepted.

When he saw the fire flaming toward him, he said, Into thy hands O Lord I
commend my Spirit. Lord receive my soul, Lord have mercy upon me.

Page 505.
In his Letter to all his true Friends. -- I warn you all that ye be not amazed
or astonished at the kind of my departure and dissolution; for I assure you, I
think it the most honor that ever I was called to in all my life, and
therefore I thank my Lord God heartily for it, etc. For know ye, that I doubt
no more, but that the causes wherefore I am put to death, are Gods causes, and
the causes of the Truth, then I doubt that the Gospel which John wrote is the
Gospel of Christ, or that Paul's Epistles are the very Word of God. And to have
an heart willing to abide and stand in Gods Cause, and in Christ's Quarrel even
unto death. I assure thee (O man) it is an inestimable gift of God, given only
to the true Elect, and dearly beloved Children of God, and Inheritors of the
Kingdom of Heaven: for the holy Apostle, and also Martyr in Christ's Cause St.
Peter, 1 Pet. 4. says, If ye suffer rebuke in the Name of Christ, i. e. in
Christ's Cause, and for his Truths sake, then are ye happy and blessed, for the
glory of the Spirit of God rests upon you; and if for rebukes suffered in the
Name of Christ, a man is pronounced blessed and happy, how much more blessed
and happy is he that has the grace to suffer death also? Wherefore all ye that
be my true Lovers and Friends rejoice and rejoice with me again, and render
with me hearty thanks to God our heavenly Father, that for his Sons sake my
Savior and Redeemer Christ, he has vouchsafed to call me, being so vile and
sinful a wretch in my self, unto the high dignity of his true Prophets, of his
faithful Apostles, and of his holy Elect and chosen Martyrs to die in defense
and maintenance of his eternal and everlasting Truth. Page 507.
-- If ye love me indeed, you have cause to rejoice, for that it has pleased
God to call me to a greater honor and dignity then ever I did enjoy before,
either in Rochester or London, or should have had in Durham, whereunto I was
last of all elected; yea I count it greater honor before God indeed to die in
his Cause, then is any earthly or temporal promotion or honor that can be
given to a man in this world. And who is he that knows the Cause to be Gods,
to be Christ's Quarrel, and of his Gospel, to be the Commonweal of all the Elect
and chosen Children of God, of all the Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven?
Who is he (I say) that knows this assuredly by Gods own Word, and the
Testimony of his Conscience (as I through the infinite goodness of God, not of
my self, but by his grace acknowledge my self to do) and does in deed and in
truth love and fear God, love and believe his Master Christ, and his blessed
Gospel, and the Brotherhood, the chosen Children of God, and also lusts and
longs for eternal life? who is he (I say again) that would not, that cannot
find in his heart in this Cause to be content to die? Page 508.
-- Farewell Pembrohe Hall in C. of late mine own College, my Cure and my
Charge what cafe thou art in now God knows, I know not well. -- Woe is me for
thee mine own dear College, if ever thou suffer thy self by any means to be
brought from setting forth Gods true Word. In thy Orchard I learned without
Book all Paul's Epistles, yea and I ween all the Canonical Epistles, save only
the Apocalypse. Of which study, although in time a great part did depart from
me, yet the sweet smell thereof I trust I shall carry with me into Heaven. The
Lord grant that this zeal and love to that part of Gods Word, which is a Key to
all the Scripture, may ever abide in that College so long as the world shall
endure. -- O thou now wicked and bloody See of London, etc. hearken thou
whorish Bawd of Babylon, thou wicked limb of Antichrist, thou bloody Wolf, why
slayest thou and make havoc of the Prophets of God? why murthereft thou so
cruelly Christ's poor silly Sheep, which will not hear thy voice, because thou
art a stranger, and will follow none other but their own Pastor Christ his
voice? Think thou to escape, or that the Lord will not require the blood of
his Saints at thy hands? Page 509.
-- Instead of my farewell to thee now, I say fie upon thee, fie upon thee,
silthy Drab, and all thy false Prophets. -- To you my Lords of the Temporality
will I speak, etc. Know ye that I had before mine eyes only the fear of God
and Christian charity toward you that moved me to write, for of you hereafter I
look not in this world either for pleasure or displeasure; if my talk shall do
you never so much pleasure or profit, you cannot promote me, nor if I displease
you can you harm me, for I shall be out of your reach. Page 510.
-- I say unto you as St. Paul says unto the Galatians, I wonder my Lords what
has bewitched you, that ye so suddenly are fallen from Christ unto Antichrist,
from Christ's Gospel unto man's Traditions, from the Lord that bought you unto
the Bishop of Rome. I warn you of your peril; be not deceived, except you will
be found willingly consenters to your own death. -- Understand my Lords, it was
neither for the privilege of the Place or Person thereof, that the Sea and
Bishop of Rome were called Apostolic, but for the true trade of Christ's
Religion which was taught and maintained in that See at the first of those
godly men; and therefore as truly and justly as that See then for that true
trade of Religion and consanguinity of Doctrine with the Religion and Doctrine
of Christ's Apostle was called Apostolic, so as truly and as justly for the
contrariety of Religion, and diversity of Doctrine from Christ and his Apostles
that See and the Bishop thereof at this day both ought to be called and are
indeed Antichristian. The Sea is the Seat of Satan, and the Bishop of the same
that maintains the Abominations thereof is Antichrist himself indeed. Page
511.
-- As for your displeasure by that time this shall come to your knowledge, I
trust by Gods grace to be in the hands and protection of the Almighty, my
heavenly Father, the living Lord, the greatest of all, and then I shall not
need (I trow) to fear what any Lord, no nor what King or Prince can do unto me.
-- Much cause have you to hear me patiently, seeing I am appointed to die, and
look daily when I shall be called to come before the eternal Judge, and
therefore you cannot think, but that I only study to serve my Lord God, and to
say that thing which I am persuaded assuredly by Gods Word shall and does
please him, and profit all to whom God shall give grace to hear and believe
what I do say. -- If the Popes supremacy be necessary to salvation to be owned,
How chanced it that ye were all (my Lords) so light as for your Princes
pleasures, H. 8. and E. 6. which were but mortal men, to forsake the Unity of
your Catholic Faith, i. e. to forsake Christ and his Gospel? How chanced it
also that ye and the whole Parliament did not only abolish and expel the
Bishop of Rome, but also did abjure him in your own persons, and did decree in
your Acts great Oaths to be taken for that purpose? On the other side, if the
Law and Decree which makes the supremacy of the Sea and Bishop of Rome over
the universal Church of Christ be a thing of necessity required unto salvation
by an Antichristian Law (as it is indeed) then (my Lords) never think other,
but the day shall come when ye shall be charged with this your undoing that
which once ye had well done, and with this your perjury and breach of your
Oath, which Oath was done in judgment, justice, and truth, agreeable to Gods
Law.

The Whore of Babylon may for a time dally with you, and make you so drunken
with the wine of her filthy stews and whoredoms (as with her dispensations and
promises of pardon a poena and culpa) that you may think your selves safe; but
be ye assured, when the Living Lord shall try the matter by fire, and judge it
according to his Word, unless ye repent, without all doubt ye shall never
escape the hands of the Living God for the guilt of your perjury and breach of
your Oath; then shall ye drink of the Cup of the Lords indignation and
everlasting wrath, which is prepared for the Beast, his false Prophets, and all
their partakers. For he that is partner with them in their whoredoms and
abominations, must also be partner with them in their plagues, and be thrown
with them into the Lake burning with brimstone and unquenchable fire. --

In his Letter to the Prisoners, etc. and Exiles. -- For the fervent love that
the Apostles had unto their Master Christ, Page 512.
and for the great commodities and increase of all godliness, which they felt
by their faith to ensue of afflictions in Christ's Cause. And thirdly, For the
heaps of heavenly joys which the same do get unto the godly, which shall
endure in Heaven for evermore, for these causes they rejoiced that they were
accounted worthy to suffer contumelies and rebukes for Christ's Name. And Paul
was so much in love in that which the carnal man loatheth so much, i. e. with
Christ's Cross, that he judged himself to know nothing else but Christ
crucified, he gloried in nothing else but Christ's Cross. Page 513.
-- Why should we Christians fear death? Can death deprive us of Christ, who is
all our comfort, our joy, and our life? Nay forsooth; But on the contrary Death
shall deliver us from this mortal body, which loadeth and bears down the
Spirit, that it cannot so well perceive heavenly things, in the which so long
as we dwell, we are absent from the Lord. -- And who that has a right
knowledge of Christ our Savior, that he is the eternal Son of God, life,
light, the wisdom of the Father, all goodness, all righteousness, and
whatsoever heart can desire, yea infinite plenty of all these, above that that
man's heart can conceive or imagine (for in him dwells the fullness of the
Godhead bodily) and also that he is given us of the Father, and made of God to
be our wisdom, our righteousness, our holiness, and our redemption; who (I
say) is that believes this indeed that would not gladly be with his Master
Christ? -- To die in the defense of Christ's Gospel is our bounden duty to
Christ, and also to our neighbor; to Christ, for he died for us, and rose that
he might be Lord of all; and seeing he died for us, we also says St. John, 1
Ioh. 3. should jeopard, yea give our life for the Brethren. -- Farewell (dear
Brethren) farewell, Page 514.
and let us comfort our hearts in all troubles and in death with the Word of
God, for Heaven and Earth shall perish, but the Word of the Lord endures for
ever.

In his Lamentation for the change of Religion in England. -- Of late in every
Congregation throughout all England was made Prayer and Petition unto God to be
delivered from the Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all his detestable
enormities, from all false doctrine and heresy, and now alas! Satan has
persuaded England by his fal^hood and craft to revoke her old godly prayer,
etc. -- This is one maxim and principle in Christ's Law, Page 518.
He that denies Christ before men, him shall Christ deny before his Father and
all his holy Angels in Heaven. -- Now then seeing the doctrine of Antichrist is
returned again into this Realm, and the higher Powers alas! are so deceived and
bewitched, that they are persuaded it to be Truth, and Christ's true Doctrine to
be error and heresy, and the old Laws of Anticrist are allowed to return with
the power of their Father again. What can be hereafter looked for of Christians
abiding in this Realm, but extreme violence of death, or else to deny their
Master? -- Therefore prepare and arm thy self to die, for both by Antichrists
accustomable Laws, and Scripture Prophesies, there is no likelihood of any
other thing, except thou will deny thy Master Christ, which is the loss at the
last of body and soul unto everlasting death. -- My counsel to such as are yet
at liberty, is to fly from the plague and get them hence. I consider not only
the subtilties of Satan, and how he is like to deceive (it it were possible)
even the chosen of God, and also the great frailty, which is oftentimes more in
a man, then he does know in himself, and which in the time of temptation will
utter it self; but also the examples of Christ, Paul, Elias, etc. and Christ
says, When they persecute you in one City fly unto another. -- Truly before
God I think that the abomination that Daniel prophesied of so long before, is
now set up in the holy Place; the Doctrine of Antichrist, his Laws, Rites, and
Religion contrary to Christ, and to the true serving and worshipping of God I
understand to be that abominition; therefore now is the time in England for
those words of Christ, Then (says Christ) they that be in Jewry let them fly
into the Mountains, then (says he) mark this then; for truly I am persuaded,
and I trust by the Spirit of God that this then is commanded. By those in Iewry
I understand such who truly confess one Living God, and the whole truth of his
Word after the Doctrine of Christ's Gospel; these are bid in the time of
Antichrists reign to fly into the Mountains, i. e. places of safeguard. The woe
that follows signifies, Page 519.
that such are then in extreme danger who are let by any means whatsoever,
so that they be no ways able to fly from the plague; and Christ's bidding to
pray that our flight be not in Winter, nor on the Sabbath day, bids us to pray
that we may fly in time, and far enough from the danger of the plague. -- Rev.
18. The Angel cries mightily with a loud voice, Fli^ my people out of Babylon,
lest you be infected with her faults, and so be made partakers of her plagues;
for her offenses and sins are grown so great, that they come to Heaven:
Certainly the time does approach, and the Lords day is at hand. Paul also that
blessed Apostle forbids us, 2 Cor. 6. to join our selves with the unfaithful,
etc. This counsel to depart the Realm some good persons may think good; others
may think it may indeed by Gods Word be lawfully done, but not to be counseled
to be done; for they will peradventure say, We should counsel a man always to
do that which is best of all, and of most perfection; but boldly in Christ's
Cause to spend a man's life is best of all, and of most perfection, and to flee
may smell of cowardliness: whereas in many things that which is best for one,
at sometimes is not best for all at all times; and it is not meet for a child
to covet to run before he can go. -- But every true Christian, either Brother
or Sister, after they be be called and brought into the wrestling-place to
strive in Christ's Cause for the best game, i. e. to confess the Truth of the
Gospel in hope of everlasting life, should not shrink, nor relent one inch, nor
give back, whatsoever shall befall, but to stand to their tackle, and stick by
it even unto death, as they will Christ shall stick by them at the later day.
-- Some may think they may stay and escape the danger notwithstanding, by
keeping their Faith and Religion close to themselves, inwardly worshipping God
in spirit and truth, Page 520.
and outwardly not transgressing common order. Whereas Gods Word requires not
only the belief of the heart, but the confession of the mouth, forbids not
only the thing that is evil, but to abstain from all appearance of evil, and
both consenters and doers are accounted guilty by Gods Word, and we may not do
evil that good may come thereof. Thy heart thou say God shall have, and yet
will suffer thy body to do the thing that God abhors: Take heed, O man, what
thou say, thou can not deceive the heart-searcher. To give God thy heart
is to give him thy whole heart, to love him, to dread him, and to trust in him
above all other things, and he loves God that keeps his commands; and to dread
God above all other is rather willingly to incur the danger and peril of all
fearful things, then wittingly to do what God forbids, and to trust in him
above all things is assuredly to trust to his promise of his reward and of his
tuition, and of his goodness and mercy, and to prefer that above all things in
the world, seem they never so strong, so wise, or so good. Now how can thou
say truly, that God has thus thy heart, when thy deeds do declare far another
thing? Thy body, O man, is Gods, and all the parts thereof, even as thy soul
is; he made them both, and Christ with his blood redeemed them both, and is Lord
of both; for he has bought them both dearly, and dare thou suffer any part
of either of them to do service to Satan? Surely in so doing thou committest
sacrilege, and do rob God. -- What is it to bear the mark of the Beast in
the forehead, and in the hand, that St. John speaks of? I suppose he bears
the mark of the Beast in his forehead, which is not ashamed of the Beasts
ways, but will profess them openly; and he bears his mark in the hand that
does the works, though he may be ashamed to own them. Page 521.
-- It may be objected, O Sir it is no small matter you speak of, to depart
from a man's own Native Country into a strange Realm. Some have Lands and
Possessions, which they cannot carry with them: Some have Father, Mother, Wife,
Children, and Kinsfolk, from whom to depart is as hard a thing, and almost all
one as to suffer death, etc.

I grant here thou may heap a number of worldly in commodities, which are
very like to ensue the departure out of a man's own Country: but what of all
these and a thousand more of the like sort? I will set against them all one
saying of Christ, which to the true Christian is able to countervail all these,
yea to weigh them down, viz. If any man do come to me, and do not hate Father
and Mother (he means, and will not in his Cause forsake his Father and Mother)
etc. he cannot be my Disciple. -- It may further be objected; Alas! Sir, I am
an impotent man, an aged man, a sick man, a lame man, or I have so many small
Infants and a Wife which live by my labor, if I leave them they will starve,
and I am not able to carry them with me, such is my state, what shall I do? O
lamentable state! O sorrowful heart that can neither depart, nor without
extreme peril is able to tarry still! Of the state of such as are not able to
fly the infection of the pestiferous plague of Antichrists abominations Christ
lamenting, not cursing, says, Woe be to the great bellied and traveling women,
etc. For these my heart mourns the more, the less I am able to give any
comfortable counsel, but this, That always as they look for everlasting life,
they abide still in the confession of his Truth, whatsoever shall befall, and
for the rest to put their trust wholly in God, who is able to save them against
all appearance. And commonly in extremities, when all worldly comfort fails,
and the danger is at highest, then unto his he is wont after his accustomed
mercy, to be most ready to put his helping hand; instance in Daniel, the three
Children, Paul plucked out of the mouth of the Lion, in the Mount God raised up
most of the Judges for the delivering of his people. Page 522.
-- As to such instances it may be objected these were special miracles of God
which now are ceased; and to require them at Gods hands were it not to tempt
God? I grant such were great wonderful works of God, etc. but Gods hand is as
strong as ever it was, and he is as good and as gracious as ever he was, but in
such as are put to death for his sake he does more, when in anguish of the
torments he stands by them, and strengthens them in their says to suffer in
confession of the Truth the bitter pangs of death, etc. -- To die in Christ's
Cause is an high honor, Page 523.
to the which no man should aspire, but to whom God vouchsafes that
privilege; for no man is allowed to presume to take to himself any office of
honor, but he which is thereunto called of God. Rev. 12.
John says well, speaking of them which have obtained the Victory by the blood
of the Lamb, and by the Word of his Testimony, that they loved not their lives
even unto death. And our Savior Christ says, Mat. 16.
He that shall lose his life for my Cause shall find it. This manner of speech
pertains not to one kind of Christians (as the worldly do wickedly dream) but
to all, that truly pertain to Christ; for when Christ had called unto him the
multitude together with his Disciples, he said unto them (Mark, he said not
this unto his Disciples or Apostles only, but unto all) Whosoever will follow
me, let him forsake or deny himself, etc. for whosoever will to save his life,
forsake me and my Truth, shall lose it, and whosoever shall lose, Mark S.
etc. Whosoever shall ^e ashamed of me and my words, i. e. to confess me and my
Gospel before this adulterous generation, of him shall the Son of man be
ashamed, etc. Know thou, O man of God, that all things are ordained for the
furtherance of thee toward thy salvation. All things (says Paul) work with
the good to goodness, etc. It is not as the wicked think, That poverty,
adversity, sickness, tribulation, yea painful death of the godly be tokens
that God does not love them, but even the clean contrary. -- Now (thou, O man
of God) for the Lords sake, let us not for the love of this life, tarry here
too long, and be occasion of delay of that glorious consummation of all Christ's
Sufferers, in hope and expectation whereof the former Martyrs have departed in
the Lord, and the which also the living endued with Gods Spirit, ought so
earnestly to desire, Rev. 22.
etc. crying out, Come Lord Jesus, come. Then shall our weak body be
transfigured and made like to Christ's glorious body, and then shall we see, and
have the unspeakable joy and fruition of the glorious Majesty of our Lord, even
as he is. Who, or what then shall let us to jeopard? yea to spend this life,
which we have here, in Christ's Cause? in our Lord God his Cause? O therefore
thou man of God, that art laden, and so let, like unto a great bellied
woman, that thou can not fly the plague, yet if thou lust after such things,
as I have spoken of, stand fast whatsoever shall befall thee in thy Masters
Cause, and take this thy letting to fly for a call from God to fight in thy
Master Christ's Cause. Of this be thou certain, they can do nothing unto thee,
which thy Father is not aware of, or has not foreseen before: they can do no
more then it shall please him to suffer them to do for the furtherance of his
glory, edifying of his Church, and thine own salvation. -- O be not afraid, and
remember the end. What I have spoken for the comfort of the big-bellied woman,
I mean to be spoken likewise to the Captive and Prisoner in Gods Cause; for
such I count to be as it were already summoned and pressed to fight under the
Banner of the Cross of Christ, and as it were Soldiers allowed and taken up
for the Lords Wars, to do their Lord and Master good and honorable service,
and to stick to him even unto death, etc. To conclude, I say unto all that love
Christ Jesus our Redeemer and Savior, that love to follow the ways of the
holy Ghost, who is our Comforter and Sanctifier, that love Christ's Spouse and
Body, etc. yea, that love life and their souls health. Hearken my dear Brethren
and Sisters, Page 524.
etc. to the Word of our Savior Jesus Christ, Mat. 10.
spoken to his Apostles, and meant to all his in St. Matthew's Gospel, Fear not
them which kill the body, for they cannot kill the soul; but fear him, etc. --
The Lord grant us of his heavenly grace and strength, that here we may so
confess him in this world amongst this adulterous generation, that he may
confess us again at the last day before his Father, etc. --

In his Reasons why Images should not be placed and erected in Churches. Page
992.
-- First the words of the Command, Exodus 20. repeated more plainly, Deuteronomy. 27.
where observe those words, Thou shall not make to thy self, mean, to any use of
Religion: and those, And sets it in a secret place, imply, that no man durst
then commit Idolatry openly. -- The reason why God gave this general
Prohibition is, Page 993.
lest thou being deceived, should bow down to them, and worship them. This
general Law is generally to be observed, though some be not hurt by them. Moses
was not deceived or seduced by Iethro's Daughter, nor Boaz by Ruth, a woman of
Moab; yet the general Law was to be observed, Thou shall not join thy children
in marriage with strangers, Deuteronomy. 7.
least she seduce thy Son, etc. -- If by virtue of the second Commandment
Images were not lawful in the Temple of the Jews, then by the second Command
they are unlawful in the Churches of Christians; but, etc. in the Tabernacle
and Temple of God no Images were appointed openly to beset, nor by practice
afterward used or permitted, so long as Religion was purely observed;
therefore, etc. For the second Command is moral and not ceremonial, etc. The
Jews by no means would consent to Herod, Pilate, or Pe^ronius, that Images
should be placed in the Temple at Jerusalem, but rather offered themselves unto
death, then to consent unto it. Besides that Josephus commends them for
observing the meaning of the Law: sure they would not have endangered
themselves so far, if they had thought Images had been indifferent in the
Temple of God. -- Ath^nasius tells us, The invention of Images came of no good,
but of evil, and whatsoever has an evil beginning, can never in any thing be
judged good, seeing it is wholly naught. -- T^rtullian expounding those words,
Little Children, beware of Images, says, That the meaning is, as if he had
said, Little Children, keep your selves from the shape it self or form of them.
Images in the Church either serve to edify, or to destroy. If they edify, then
there is one kind of edification, which the Scriptures neither teach nor
command, 1 Cor. 14.
but always disallow: if they destroy, they are not to be in the Church. The
Command of God is, Thou shall not lay a stumbling block before the blind, and
cursed is he that makes the blind wander in his way. Images are snares and
traps for the feet of the ignorant. Page 994.
-- Images do not stir up the mind to Devotion, but distract the mind from
Prayer, hearing of Gods Word, etc. Hence in the Council Chamger of the
Lacedaemonians no picture was suffered, least in Consultation of the weighty
matters of the Commonwealth, their minds by the sight of the outward Image
might be withdrawn or wander from the matter. -- To allow a most certain peril
for an uncertain profit, and the greatest danger for the smallest benefit, in
matters of Faith and Religion, is a tempting of God, and a grievous offense. --
In the Primitive Church there were no Images in places of Assembly for
Religion; this the Heathens objected to the Christians for a crime, as Origin
and Arnobius testify, etc. -- Lactantius says, It is not to be doubted that
there is no Religion, wheresoever is any Image. -- Not only by Varro's
judgment, but also by St. Augustine's approbation of Varro, the most pure and
chaste observation of Religion, and nearest the Truth, Page 995.
is to be without Images. -- By the judgment of this ancient Father (
Epiphanius) to permit Images in Churches is against the Authority of Scripture,
meaning, against the second Commandment, etc. Besides Epiphanius does reject
not only graven and molten, but painted Images. Again, he spared not the Image
of Christ: yea, he did not only remove it, but with a vehemence of zeal cut in
pieces: and he is careful that no such kind of painted Images be permitted in
the Church. -- It is manifest to them that read Histories, that not only
Emperors, but also diverse and sundry Councils in the East Church have
condemned and abolished Images both by Decrees and Examples. -- But this
notwithstanding experience has declared, Page 996.
That neither Councils, nor Writings, Preachings, Decrees, making of Laws,
prescribing of Punishments, have helped against Images, to which Idolatry has
been committed, nor against Idolatry, whilst Images stood. --

In his Letter to his Dear Brother, and Reverend Fellow-Elder in Christ John
Hooper. Page 147.
-- My dearly beloved Brother, etc. whom I reverence in the Lord, etc.
Forasmuch as I understand by your works, that we thoroughly agree and wholly
consent together in those things which are the grounds and substantial points
of our Religion, against which the world so furiously rages in our days,
howsoever in time past by certain by-matters and circumstances of Religion,
your wisdom and my simplicity (I grant) has a little jarred, each of us
following the abundance of his own sense and judgment. Now (I say) be you
assured, that even with my whole heart, God is my witness, in the bowels of
Christ, I love you in the Truth, and for the Truths sake, which abides in us;
and, as I am persuaded, shall by the grace of God abide in us for evermore.

Because the world, as I perceive, Brother, busily conspireth against Christ
our Savior, with all possible force and power, let us join hands together in
Christ; Page 148.
and if we cannot overthrow, yet to our power, and as much as in us lies, let
us shake those high Altitudes, not with carnal but with spiritual weapons. Let
us also prepare our selves for death, by which after our short afflictions
here, by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, we shall triumph together with him
in eternal glory. I pray you Brother salute in my Name your Reverend
Fellow-Prisoner and Venerable Father Dr. Cranmer, by whom, since the first day
that I heard of his most godly and fatherly constancy, in confessing the Truth
of the Gospel, I have conceived great consolation and joy in the Lord. -- It
will also be to me great joy to hear of your constancy and fortitude in the
Lords Quarrel.

I am earnestly moved to counsel you, not to hasten the publishing of your
Works, especially under your own Name, least your mouth should be stopped
hereafter, and all things taken away from the rest of the Prisoners, whereby
otherwise if it so please God, may be able to do good to many. Farewell in the
Lord, my most Dear Brother. -- Once again and for ever in Christ, my most Dear
Brother farewell.

Rieux.
Dionysius de Rieux was one of them who was first burned at Melda, Fox, Vol. 2.
page 128.
or Meaux in France, An. 1528. for saying, That the Mass is a plain denial of
the Death and Passion of Christ. He was always wont to have in his mouth the
Words of Christ, He that denies me before men, him also will I deny before my
Father.

Rogers.
Mr. John Rogers preaching at Paul's Cross even after Queen Mary was come to
the Tower of London, Fox, Vol. 3. page 119.
confirmed the Truth of that Doctrine which he and others had there taught in
King Edward's days, exhorting the people constantly to remain in the same, and
to beware of all pestilent Popery, Idolatry and Superstition. For that Sermon
he was called in Question.

In his Examination and Answer Ian. 22. 1555. -- I never granted King Henry the
Eighth to have any Supremacy in spiritual things, Page 120.
as are the forgiveness of sins, giving of the holy Ghost, authority to be a
Judge above the Word of God.

-- The Chancellor asserting, That the Parliament that abolished the Popes
Supremacy was with most great cruelty constrained thereunto. He answered, With
cruelty? Why then I perceive that you take a wrong way with cruelty to persuade
men's consciences; for it should appear by your doings now, that the cruelty
then used has not persuaded your consciences. How would you then have your
consciences persuaded with cruelty? -- Sir Richard Southwell telling him, Page
122.
That he would not burn in this year, when it comes to the Purpose: he
answered, Sir, I cannot tell, but I trust to my Lord God, yes; lifting up his
eyes to Heaven. -- I desire the hearty and unfeigned help of the Prayers of all
Christ's true Members, the true Imps of the true unfeigned Catholic Church,
that the Lord God of all consolation will now be my comfort, aid, strength,
buckler and shield, as also of all my Brethren that are in the same case and
distress, that I and they all may despise all manner of threats and cruelty,
and even the bitter burning fire, and the dreadful dart of death, and stick
like true Soldiers to our dear and loving Captain Christ, our only Savior
and Redeemer, and the only true Head of the Church, that does all in us all,
which is the property of an Head, and that we do not traitorously run out of
his Tents, or rather out of the plain field from him, in the greatest jeopardy
of the battle, but that we may persevere in the fight (if he will not otherwise
deliver us) till we be most cruelly slain of his enemies: For this I most
heartily, and at this present with tears most instantly and earnestly desire
and bes^ech you all to pray.

In his second Examination and Answer Ian. 28, 29. 1555. -- Should (said the
Chancellor) when the Parliament has concluded a thing, any private person have
authority to discuss, whether they had done right or wrong? No, that may not
be. I answered shortly, That all the Laws of men might not, neither could rule
the Word of God, but that they all must be discussed and judged thereby, and
obey thereto: and neither my conscience, nor any Christians could be satisfied
with such Laws, as disagreed from that Word.

-- Mr. Hooper and Mr. Cardmaker were examined before me. Page 123.
The Lord grant us grace to stand together, fighting lawfully in his Cause,
till we be smitten down together, if the Lords Will be so to permit it; for
there shall not an hair of our heads perish against his Will, but with his
Will; whereunto the same Lord grant us to be obedient unto the end and in the
end. Amen. Sweet, mighty and merciful Lord Jesus, the Son of David, and of
God. Amen, Amen, let every true Christian say and pray.

-- I told the Chancellor, That I would not be out of the Catholic Church, but
into his Church by Gods grace, Page 124.
I would never come. Well (said he) then is our Church false and Antichristian?
Yes said I. -- When I desired leave to confirm my Doctrine by writing, you
would not grant it, because I was a private person, and the Parliament was
above the Authority of all private Persons; and therefore the sentence thereof
might not be found fault with, etc. And yet my Lord (said I) I can show that
one man has come into a general Council, and after the whole had agreed upon
an Article, has by the Word of God declared so pithily that the Council had
erred in declaring the said Article, that he caused the whole Council to alter
their Act. -- Panormitanus also (said I) says, That unto a simple Layman that
brings the Word of God with him, there ought to be given more credit, then to
a whole Council assembled together.

-- The Chancellor facing me, and hoping to dash me out of Couutenance, I told
him, in that Cause, being Gods Cause, he should not make me afraid to speak. --

I was never the worse but the better to be earnest in a just and true cause,
and in my Master Christ's matters. Page 125.
-- When Winchester had read the Condemnation, he declared that I was in the
great curse, etc. Well my Lord (said I) here I stand before God and you, and
all this honorable Audience, and take him to witness, that I never wittingly
nor willingly taught any false Doctrine; and therefore have I a good conscience
before God and all good men. Page 126.
I am sure you and I shall come before a God that is righteous, before whom I
shall be as good a man as you: and I nothing doubt but that I shall be found
there a true Member of the true Catholic Church of Christ, and everlastingly
saved: and as for your false Church, ye need not to excommunicate me forth of
it, I have not been in it these twenty years, the Lord be thanked therefore.
But now ye have done what ye can, my Lord, I pray you yet grant me one thing,
that my poor wife being a stranger, and having ten children by me, may come and
speak with me as long as I live. She shall not come at thee said he. Then I
have tried out all your charity said I. -- Two things more I purposed to have
touched, if I could have been permitted: The one, how it was lawful for a
private man to reason and write against a wicked Act of Parliament, or ungodly
Council, etc. The other was to prove, that Prosperity was not always a token
of Gods love. Page 127. Acts 5.
For the first -- I shall add one example more. The high Priests, the Elders,
Scribes and Pharisees decreed in their Council, and gave ^he same command to
the Apostles, that they should ^ot preach in the Name of Christ, as ye have
also forbidden us. Notwithstanding when they were charged therewithal, they
answered, We ought more to obey God then man. Even so we may answer you, God is
more to be obeyed then man; and your wicked Laws cannot so tongue-tie us, but
we will speak the Truth. The Apostles were beaten for their boldness, and they
rejoiced that they suffered for Christ's Cause. Ye have also provided rods for
^s, and bloody whips; yet when ye have done that which Gods Hand and Counsel
has determined, that ye shall do, be it life or death, I trust that ^od will
so assist us by his holy Spirit and Grace, that we shall patiently suffer it,
and praise God for it. And whatsoever become of me and others, which now suffer
for speaking and professing the Truth, yet be ye sure that Gods Word will
prevail and have the upper hand, when your bloody Laws and wicked Decrees, for
want of sure foundation, shall fall in the dust. -- For the second point. -- It
may please your Lordship to understand, That we poor Preachers whom you so evil
entreat, did most boldly and plainly rebuke the evil government of those under
King Edward in many things, especially their covetousness, and neglect and
small regard to live after the Gospel, as also their negligence to occasion
others to live thereafter. I might instance in what I once did at Paul's Cross,
for which I was fain to answer before all the Council, and many of my Brethren
did the like; so that we for the not rebuking of their faults, shall not answer
before God, nor be blameworthy before men. -- I am an English man born, and
God knows do naturally wish well to my Country. Page 128.
I have often proved that the things which I have much feared should come to
pass, have indeed followed. I fear you have and will with your Governing bring
England out of Gods Blessing into a warm Sun. I pray God I may fail of my
guessing in this behalf: but truly that ( Englands welfare) will not be with
expelling the true Word of God out of the Realm, and the shedding innocent
blood. -- Gods works are wonderful and incomprehensible by man's Wisdom, etc.
He has put his Beloved and Dear Heart into his enemies hands. Ier. 12.
-- This to worldly wise men is a madness above all madness, and yet God does
this, -- Can the world show the cause? -- This I am right sure of, that it was
not because they were in Heresies, and subject to false gods services, and
idolatry, and their enemies men of God, and beloved of God. -- The Herod's and
Pharaohs plainly determined, that if the men which they killed and handled evil
had been Gods people, God would never have suffered them to come into their
hands, but rather have done the contrary, and have let John Baptist kill Herod,
and the Israelites Pharaoh and Nebuchadnezzar. Even the like is now to be seen
in us, and in our most cruel adversaries. They are not therefore the Catholic
Church, because our merciful God has at this present given our lives into
their hands: neither are we therefore Heretics, because we suffer punishment
at their hands. John 1. Acts 16. Acts 17. Acts 21. Acts 22. Page 129.
-- The holy men of God recorded in Scripture, were in their days accounted to
be Heretics, Seditious, and D^sturbers of the whole world. -- But here they
will cry out, Lo these men will be still like ^^hn Baptists, the Apostles and
Prophets, etc. I an^^er, We make not our selves like to them in doing ^iracles,
etc. but only in this, in Doctrine, and in ^ffering persecution and infamy for
the same. We ^^ve preached their very Doctrine, and none other ^^ing, and for
this Cause we suffer the like reproach, ^ame, and rebuke of the world, and the
like per^ecution, losing of our goods and lives, forsaking (as ^^r Master
Christ commands) Father, Mother, ^^ster, Brethren, Wives, Children, and all
^^at there is, being assured of a joyful Resur^^ction, and to be crowned in
glory with them, according to the infallible Promises made unto us in Christ,
our only and sufficient Mediator, etc. -- But let us consider, that if it be
Gods good will and pleasure to give his own beloved heart, i. e. his beloved
Church and the Members thereof, into the hands of their Enemies, ^o chasten,
try, and prove them, and to bring them ^o the true unfeigned acknowledging of
their own ^atural stubbornness, disobedience toward God and his Commands, as
touching the love of God and their Brethren, and their natural inclination ^and
readiness to love Creatures, to seek their own ^usts, and pleasures, etc. to
promote repentance in them, and crying to God for forgiveness, and for he said
of the Spirit daily to mortify those evil de^ires and lusts, etc. with many
other causes. What does he hereafter with those Enemies, into whose ^ands he
has given his tenderly beloved Darlings? He destroys and damneth the
impenitent Enemies, as is evident in Herod, Pharaoh, etc. -- And think ye that
bloody butcherly Bishop of W. and his most bloody Brethren shall escape? or
that England shall not for their offenses, and especially for the maintenance
of their Idolatry, and wilful following of them, not abide a great brunt? Ye
undoubtedly. If God look not mercifully on England, the seeds of utter
destruction are sown in i^ already, Page 130.
etc. -- Spite of Nebuchadnezzar's beard and maugre his heart, the captive,
inthralled, and miserable Jews must come home again, and have their City and
Temple builded up again by Zerubbabel, etc. and Babylon's Kingdom must go to
ruin, and be taken of Strangers, the Persians and Medes. So shall the
dispersed English Flock be brought again into their former estate, or to a
better, etc. and our bloody Babylonical Bishops, etc. brought to utter shame
and ruin; for God cannot, and undoubtedly will not for ever suffer their
abominable lying false doctrine, their hypocrisy, blood-thirst, whoredom,
idleness, their pestilent life, pampered in all kind of pleasure, their
Thrasonical boasting pride, their malicious, envious, and poisoned stomachs,
which they bear toward his poor and miserable Christians. If judgment begin
at the House of God, etc.

The morning that he should be burnt, he was found fast asleep, so that he
could scarce with much jogging be awakened. At last being raised and waked and
bid to make haste; Then (said he) if it be so, I need not to tie my Points. So
little daunted was this Proto Martyr, of all the blessed Company that suffered
in Queen Mary's days, at the tidings of death and of such a death.

After he was degraded by Bonner but one Petition, viz. That he might talk a
few words with his Wife before his burning, but that would not be granted.
Probably he desired to speak to her, that he might reveal where he had hid the
Book he had writ of his Examinations and Answers: But man's malice could not
hinder Gods Providence from bringing that Book to his Wifes hands after his
death out of the blind corner in the Prison, where he had hid, and where it
could not be found by his enemies, though they made diligent search for his
Papers.

When he was in Prison he told the Printer of Mr. Fox's Acts and Mon. who was
then a Prisoner also for Religion, Page 131.
thus, Thou shall live to see the alteration if this Religion, and the Gospel
to be freely preached again, and therefore have me commended to my Brethren, as
well in Exile, as others, and bid them be circumspect in displacing the
Papists, and putting good Ministers into Churches, or else their end will be
worse then ours.

Whilst he was a Prisoner in Newgate he had devised, that he with his Fellows
should have but one meal a day, they paying for two, the other meal should be
given to those that lacked on the other side of the Prison: but their Keeper
would not suffer it.

The Lords Day before he suffered he drank to Mr. Hooper, being then underneath
him, and said, That there never was a little Fellow, that would better stick to
a man, then he would stick to him: Supposing they should both be burnt
together. But it happened otherwise.

As he was to be brought out of Newgate to Smithfield, Mr. Woodro^fe, one of
the Sheriffs, came to him, and asked him if he would recant? That which I have
preached (said Mr. Rogers) I will seal with my blood. Then (said the Sheriff)
thou art an Heretic. That shall be known (said he) at the day of Judgment.
Well (said W.) I will never pray for thee. But (said he) I will pray for you.

A little before his burning at the Stake, his Pardon was brought to him, if he
would recant: but he utterly refused it.

His Wife and Children being eleven in number, ten that could go, and one
sucking on the Breast, met him by the way as he was going toward Smithfield:
but this sight, grievous indeed to flesh and blood, could nothing move him.

As he was burning, he washed his hands (as it were) in the flame.

Romanus.
Fox, Vol. 1. page 115.
When Galerius with Asclepiades invaded the City of Antioch, by force of Arms
to drive the Christians to renounce their pure Religion, Romanus ran to the
Christians, at that time congregated together, and declared that the Wolves
were at hand, that would devour the Christian Flock; but fear not (said he)
neither let this imminent peril disturb you my Brethren. Hereupon old Men and
Matrons, Fathers and Mothers, young Men and Maidens were most ready to shed
their blood in the defense of their Christian Profession. Page 116.
-- Romanus so encouraged them, that they did not stick to offer their naked
throats, wishing gloriously to die for the Name of their Christ.

Whereupon Romanus was brought before the Emperor, who said, What? art thou
the Author of this sedition? art thou the cause why so many shall lose their
lives? By the gods I swear thou shall smart for it; and first in thy flesh
shall thou suffer the pains, whereunto thou have encouraged the hearts of thy
fellows. Romanus answered, Thy sentence, O Emperor, I joyfully embrace. I
refuse not to be sacrificed for my Brethren, and that by as cruel means, as
thou can invent: And whereas thy Soldiers were repelled from the Christian
Congregation, that so happened, because it lay not in Idolaters and worshippers
of Devils to enter into the holy House of God, and to pollute the Place of true
Prayer.

When the Tormenters would not truss him up and draw out his Bowels, because he
was of noble Parentage; the Captain commanded him to be scourged with Whips
with knaps of Lead at the ends. Instead of tears, sighs, and groans, Romanus
sung Psalms all the time of his whipping, requiring them not to favor him for
his noble Birth. Not the blood of my Progenitors (said he) but Christian
Profession makes me Noble.

When the Captain commanded his Sides to be lanced with Knives, until the Bones
appeared white again: Sorry am I, O Captain (said he) not that my flesh shall
be thus cut and mangled; but for thy cause am I sorrowful, who, being
corrupted with damnable errors, seducest others.

He preached the second time the living God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, his
welbeloved Son, and eternal life through faith in his blood; together with the
abomination of idolatry, etc. Whereupon his face was buffeted, his eyelids
torn with their nails, his cheeks scotched with knives, the skin of his beard
was plucked by little and little from the flesh, etc. Thereupon the meek Martyr
said, I thank thee, O Captain, that thou have opened unto me many mouths,
whereby I may preach my Lord and Savior Christ: Look how many wounds I have,
so many mouths I have lauding and praising God.

When the Captain blasphemingly said, Thy crucified Christ is but a yesterdays
God; the gods of the Gentiles are of most Antiquity. Romanus desired the
Captain to hear what a Child of seven years of age would say. His request being
granted, Tell me my Babe (said Romanus) whether thou think it reason that we
worship one Christ, and in Christ one Father, or else that we worship infinite
gods? To whom the Babe answered, That certainly whatsoever it be that men
affirm to be God must needs be One; which with One is one and the same: and in
as much as this One is Christ, of necessity Christ must be the true God; for
that there be many gods we Children cannot believe.

The Captain hereat amazed, said, Thou young Villain and Traitor, where and of
whom learned thou this Lesson? Of my Mother (said the Child) with whose milk
I sucked in this Lesson, that I must believe in Christ.

The Captain thereupon commanded the Child to be hoised up and scourged. The
joyful Mother only saw that sight with dry eyes: yea, the rebuked her sweet
Babe for craving a draught of cold water. She charged him to thirst after the
Cup, that the Infants of Bethlem once drank of, forgetting their Mothers Milk
and Paps. She willed him to remember little Isaac, who beholding the Sword
wherewith, and the Altar whereon he should be sacrificed, willingly proffered
his tender neck to the dint of his Fathers Sword.

Then the butcherly Tormentor plucked the skin from the Crown of his head, hair
and all. The Mother cried, Suffer my Child, anon thou shall pass to him, that
will adorn thy naked head with a Crown of eternal Glory. The Child received the
stripes with a smiling countenance.

As they laid hands on Romanus, to carry him to the place of Execution, he
looked back, and said, I appeal from this thy tyranny, O Judge unjust, unto the
righteous Throne of Christ, that upright Judge; not because I fear thy cruel
torments and merciless handlings, but that thy judgments may be known to be
cruel and bloody.

When the Tormentor required the Child of the Mother, Page 117.
who had taken it up in her arms, she kissing it, delivered the Babe, and said,
Farewell my sweet Child; and as the Hangman was cutting off its head, she sang,
All laud and praise, with heart and voice,
O Lord, we yield to thee:
To whom the death of all thy Saints
We know most dear to be.


When Romanus was cast into the fire, he said he should not burn. Accordingly a
great storm arose (as it is reported) and quenched the fire.

Then his Tongue was cut out. Nevertheless he spoke, saying, He that speaks
Christ, shall never want a Tongue. Think not that the Voice, that utters
Christ, has need of the Tongue to be the Minister.

Eusebius says, Eusebius. E^c^. H^st. G^. and Lat. page 320.
That by his constancy in enduring his Tongue to be pulled out of his Mouth, he
really declared to all, that a divine Virtue is never wanting to any, who
suffer for godliness sake, which does both mitigate their griefs, and
corroborateth their hearts.

This valiant Soldier of Christ was not at all, terrified thereat, but of his
own accord put out his Tongue, and willingly yielded the same to the Tormentors
hands.

Then he was clapped in Prison again, and there a long while cruelly tormented,
and at last in the year 306. strangled, and thereby according to his own desire
was crowned with Martyrdom.

Roper.
Fox, Vol. 3. page 537.
George Roper, a young man, at his coming to the Stake, putting off his Gown,
fetched a great leap.

So soon as the flame was about him, he put out both his arms from his body
like a roode, and so stood steadfast, not plucking his arms in at all, till the
fire had consumed them, and burnt them off.

Rough.
Fox, Vol. 3. page 860.
Mr. John Rough, a famous Scotch Minister in England in King Edward's days, at
the beginning of Queen Mary's reign fled into Frizeland with his Wife, where he
labored for his living in knitting of Caps, Hose, etc. till lacking of Yarn,
etc. he came over into England to provide for the maintenance of his
Occupation; and at London hearing of the secret Society and holy Congregation
of Gods Children there assembled, he joined himself unto them; and afterward
being elected their Minister, continued for some time in fellowship with them,
teaching and confirming them in the Truth and Gospel of Christ. But not long
after he was by a false Brothers treachery taken, and clapped in Newgate.

Page 862.
When he was before Bonner, he told him, That he utterly detested the Service
then used, and that if he should live as long as did Me huselah, yet he would
never come to hear the abominable Mass, and other Service, being as it was
then. --

Dr. Watson then Bishop of Lincoln, being at his Examination, urged that he had
done more hurt in the North Parts in King Edward's days, then an hundred
besides, etc. Why Sir (said Mr. Rough) Is this the reward I have for saving
your life in those days?

He said, he had lived thirty years, and yet had never bowed his knee to Ball.

Before Bonner he affirmed, That he had been twice at Rome, and there had seen
plainly with his eyes, that the Pope was the very Antichrist; for he saw more
reverence given to him, then to that which they accounted their God.

Mr. Rough having been at the burning of Austoo in Smithfield, and returning
homeward again, met with one that as'd him, where he had been? I have been
(said he) where I would not for one of mine eyes but I had been. Where have you
been? replied his Friend. Forsooth (said he) to learn the way. And so he told
him, he had been at the burning of Austoo, where shortly after he was burned
himself.

In his Letter to some Friends. -- The comfort of the Holy Ghost make you able
to give consolation to others, in these dangerous days, when Satan is let
loose, but to the trial only of the chosen, when it pleases our God to sift
his Wheat from the Chafe. -- I speak to Gods glory; my care in my great
temptations was to have the senses of my soul open, to perceive the Voice of
God, saying, Whosoever denies me before men, him will I deny before my Father
and his Angels: And to save the life corporal, is to lose the life eternal: and
he that will not suffer with Christ, shall not reign with him. Therefore, most
tender Ones, I have by Gods Spirit given over the flesh, with the fight of my
soul, and the Spirit has the victory. The flesh shall now ere it be long,
leave off to sin: the Spirit shall reign eternally. I have chosen Death to
confirm the Truth by me taught. What can I do more? Page 863.
Consider with your selves, that I have done it for the confirmation of Gods
Truth. Pray that I may continue to the end. The greatest part of the assault is
past, I praise my God. I have in all my assaults felt the present aid of my
God, I give him most hearty thanks therefore. Look not back, nor be ye ashamed
of Christ's Gospel, nor of the bonds I have suffered for the same. -- It is no
time for the loss of one man in the Battle for the Camp to turn Back. Up with
men's hearts; blow down the dawbed Walls of Heresy. Let one take the Banner,
and the other the Trumdet; I mean, not to make corporal resistance, but pray,
and ye shall have Elias defense, and Elizeus company to fight for you. The
Cause is the Lords. -- My heart with pangs of death is assaulted: but I am at
home yet with my God alive. Pray for me, etc. --

From Newgate Prison in haste, the day of my Condemnation. I. R.


In his Letter to the Congregation two days before he suffered. -- Whosoever
will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution; for it is given unto
them not only to believe, but to suffer: and the Servant or Scholar cannot be
greater then his Lord or Master; but by the same way the Head is entered, the
Members must follow. -- My dear soul is departing this Life to my great
advantage; I make change of morality for immortality, of corruption to put on
incorruption, to make my body like to the Corn cast into the ground, which
except it die first it can bring forth no good fruit. -- Happy are they that
die in the Lord, which is to die in the Faith of Christ, professing and
confessing the same before many Witnesses. -- What a Journey (by Gods power) I
have made these eight days, is above flesh and blood to bear: but (as Paul
says) I may do all things through him, who works in me, Jesus Christ. My
course (Brethren) I have run, I have fought a good fight, the Crown of
Righteousness is laid up for me, my day to receive it is not long to. Pray
(Brethren) for the enemy does yet assault. -- Be not ashamed of the Gospel of
the Cross, by me preached, nor of my suffering; for with my blood I affirm the
same. I go before. I suffer first the baiting of the Butchers Dogs; yet I have
not done what I should have done. -- What was undone, impute that to frailty
and ignorance, and with your love cover that which was and is naked in me. God
knows ye are all tender to me. My heart bursteth for the love of you. Ye are
not without the great Pastor of your souls, who so loves you, that if men
were not to be found (as God be praised there is no want of them) he would
cause stones to minister unto you. Cast your care on that Rock, the wind of
temptation shall not prevail. Past and pray; for the days are evil. Look up
with your eyes of hope; for your redemption is not far off, (but my wickedness
has deserved that I shall not see it) and also that which is behind of the
blood of our Brethren, which shall also be laid under the Altar, Page 864.
shall cry for your relief. --

The Friday at night before Mr. Rough was taken, being in his Bed he dreamed,
That he saw two of the Guard leading Cuthbert Sympson (Deacon of the said
Congregation) and that he had the Book about him, wherein were written the
Names of all them, that were of the Congregation. Afterward he awaked, and
having told the dream unto his Wife, after some time spent in reading, he fell
asleep again, and dreamed the same dream again: and awaking, told his Wife his
dream, and said, O Brother Cuthbert is gone. And whilst he was making ready for
to go and see how it was with him, Mr. Sympson came into Mr. Rough's House, and
brought the Book with him. Mr. Rough having told him his dream, persuaded him
to carry the Book no more about with him: which he was loath to promise; because
(said he) dreams are but fancies, and not to be credited. Then Mr. Rough
straightly charged him in the Name of the Lord to do it. Whereupon Mr. Sympson
left the Book with Mrs. Rough. And so the Congregation was preserved.

Page 865.
The next night Mr. Rough dreamed, That he himself was forcibly carried to the
Bishop, and that the Bishop plucked off his beard, and cast it into the fire,
saying these words, Now I may say, I have had a piece of an Heretic burned in
my House. And so accordingly it came to pass.

Rose.
Fox, Vol. 3. page 933.
Mr. Thomas Rose born at Exmouth in Devon, when he was first taken, was sorely
stocked in Prison. The Stocks were very high and great; so that day and night
he did lie with his back on the ground, upon a little straw, with his heels so
high, that by means the blood was fallen from his feet, his feet were without
sense for a long time. -- His Mother might not be suffered to see him. --
Afterward Cranmer set him at liberty. --

When he was brought before Gardener, Page 934.
being taken at Bow in London with five and thirty more, Winchester told him,
That he would know who were his Maintainers, or else he would make him a foot
longer. My Lord (said he) you shall do as much as pleases God, and no more,
yet the Law is in your hand; but I have God for my Maintainer, and none other.

At his second Examination the Chancellor asked him, Page 935.
What he said to the real presence in the Sacrament? I wist right well (said
he) you are made an instrument to seek innocent blood: Well, you may have it,
if God permit, it is present, and at hand; for I came not hither to lie, but to
die (if God see it good) in defense of that which I have said: Wherefore you
may begin when you think good, etc. --

At his third Examination the Bishop saying, Ah Sirrah, you will admit nothing
but Scripture, I see well: No truly my Lord (said he) I admit nothing but
Scripture for the Regiment of the Soul; for Faith comes by hearing, and
hearing by the Word of God; and where the Word of God is not, there ought no
belief to be given; for whatsoever is not of Faith is sin. --

Roth.
Richard Roth in his Letter to certain Brethren and Sisters condemned at
Colchester, Fox, Vol. 3. page 848.
and ready to be burned for the testimony of the Truth. -- O dear Brethren and
Sisters, how much have you to rejoice in God, that he has given you such faith
to overcome this blood-thirsty Tyrant thus far? And no doubt but he that has
begun that good work in you, will fulfill it to the end. O dear Hearts in
Christ, what a Crown of Glory shall ye receive with Christ in the Kingdom of
God? Oh that it had been the good will of God, that I had been ready to have
gone with you. I lie in my Lords Little-ease in the day, and in the night in
the Cole-house alone, and we look every day when we shall be condemned; but I
lie still at the Pools brink, and every man goes in before me; but we abide
patiently the Lords leisure, with many Bands, in Fetters and Stocks, by the
which we have received great joy in the Lord. And now fare you well dear
Brethren and Sisters in this World, but I trust to see you in the Heavens face
to face. -- How blessed are you in the Lord, that God has found you worthy to
suffer for his sake. -- O be joyful even unto death. Fear it not, says
Christ, for I have overcome death. -- Be strong, let your hearts be of good
comfort, and wait you still for the Lord. He is at hand. The Angel of the Lord
pitcheth his Tent round about them that fear him, and delivers them which way
he sees best; for our lives are in the Lords hands, and they can do nothing
unto us, before God suffer them: Therefore give all thanks to God. O dear
Hearts, you shall be clothed with long white Garments upon the Mount Sion, with
the multitude of Saints, and with Jesus Christ our Savior, who will never
forsake us. O blessed Virgins, you have played the wise Virgins part, in that
you have taken Oil in your Vessels, that ye may go in with the Bridegroom, when
he comes, etc. but as for the foolish, they shall be shut out; because they
made not themselves ready to suffer with Christ, neither go out to take up his
Cross. O dear Hearts, How precious shall your death be in the sight of the
Lord? for dear is the death of his Saints. O fare you well, and pray. The grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen, Amen. Pray, pray, pray.

By me R. R. written with mine own blood.


The Bishop asking him what he thought of his Fellow-Prisoner Ralf Allerton; He
answered, That he thought him to be one of the elect Children of God; and if he
were put to death for his Faith and Religion, he thought he should die a true
Martyr.

The Bishop asking him how he did like the Order and Rites of the Church, then
used here in England; He said, That he ever had, and then did abhor the same
with all his heart.

Being persuaded to recant, and ask mercy of the Bishop: No (said he) I will
not ask mercy of him, that cannot give it.

Rought.
A Suffolk man (so called) and his Wife and several others, Fox, Vol. 3. page
704.
being rebuked for going so openly, and talking so freely: Their answer was,
They acknowledged and believed, and therefore they must speak: and that the
tribulation was by Gods good will and providence, and that his Judgments were
right to pur^^^ them with others for their sins: and that of very faithfulness
and mercy God had caused them to be troubled bled: and that one hair of their
heads should not perish before the time; but all things should work unto the
best to them that love God: and that Christ Jesus was their life and only
righteousness: and that only by faith in him, and for his seek all good things
were freely given them, also forgiveness of sins, and life everlasting.

Rupea.
The Mirror of Martyrs, page 310.
You may (said Castalia Rupea) throw my body from this steep Hill, yet will my
soul mount upward again. Your blasphemies more offend my soul, then your
torments do my body.

Russel.
The Ecclesiastical History of Scotland, page 24.
Jeremy Russel being apprehended in the Diocese of Glasgow in Scotland, A.
1539. and railed upon, answered, This is your hour and power of darkness. Now
sit ye as Judges, and we stand wrongfully accused, and more wrongfully to be
condemned; but the day shall come, when our innocence shall appear, and that ye
shall see your own blindness, to your everlasting confusion. Go forward, and
fulfill the measure of your iniquity.

He comforted his Fellow-Prisoner Alexander Kennedy (of whom see the second
Part under K.) saying, Brother fear not, more mighty is he that is in us, then
he that is in the world: the pain that we shall suffer is short, and shall be
light; but our joy and consolation shall never have end: and therefore let us
contend to enter in unto our Master and Savior by the same strait way, which
he has taken before us: Death cannot destroy us; for it is destroyed already
by him, for whose sake we suffer.

Rycetto.
Mr. Anthony Rycetto of Vincence being condemned to be drowned, Foo, Vol. 3.
cont. page 44.
his Son, about twelve years of age, comieg to visit him, besought him with
tears to yield, and to save his life, that he might not be left fatherless. A
true Christian (said his Father) is bound to forego Goods, Children, yea, and
life it self, for the maintenance of Gods honor and glory.

A Captain telling him, That Francis Sega was resolved to recant: What tell you
me (said he) of Sega? I will perform my vows unto the Lord my God.

A Priest presenting him with a wooden Crucifix, exhorting him to return, and
to die in the favor of God, reconciling himself to the Church of Rome, the
holy Spouse of Christ: But he rejected the Crucifix, and besought the Priest to
come out of the snare of the Devil, to cleave to Jesus Christ, and to live, not
according to the flesh, but after the Spirit. If you do otherwise (said he)
assure your selves your unbelief will bring y^u into that Lake of fire, that
shall never be quenched; for though y^u confess with your mouth that you know
Jesus Christ, yet you not only deny him by your works, but you persecute him
in his Members, being bewitched by the Pope, the open enemy of the Son of God.

As he was carrying to be drowned, because it was very cold, he called for his
Cloak, which they had taken from him. Whereupon the Wherry-man said unto him,
Fear thou a little cold? What will thou do, when thou art cast into the Sea?
Why art not thou careful to save thy self from drowing? Do not thou see that
the poor Flea skips hither and thither, to save her life? His answer was, And I
am now flying to escape eternal death.

Being arrived at the place where he was to suffer, the Captain put a Chain of
Iron about his middle, with a very heavy Stone fastened thereto: Then Rycetto
lifting his eyes to Heaven, said, Father forgive them; for they know not what
they do. And being laid on the Planck, he said, Lord Jesus, into thy hands I
commend my spirit.

FINIS.

