The Mystery of Ambras Merlins, Standardbearer Wolf. and last Boar of Cornwall.
With sundry other Misterious Prophecys, both Ancient and Modern, plainly
unfolded in the following treatise, on the signification and portent of that
prodigious Comet, seen by most part of the World Anno 1680 with the Blazing
Star Anno 1682, and the conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter in October
following, and since, all which do purport many sad calamites to befall most
parts of the Europian continent in general before the year 1699. some sooner
then others, but ^n Ore perticulerly the ruin of the house of Austria, Vienna,
and the Empire of Germany, with Rome, Italy and the Pope and Papicy, the King
and Kingdom of France, with several other Countries in Europe, and the danger of
an invation in England by the Turks, and then the convertion of the said Nation
to the Christian faith, before this present expedition of the Turks into
Hungary and Germany be over, which will be followed. (1) with the calling of
the Jews, (2) the reducing of all ways of Religious Worship in to the by which
an universal peace will ensue to all the Earth.


Written by a Lover of his Country's Peace, Anno Domini, 1683.
THe Situation, Dimention, Complexion and natural Comixture of the said Comet,
Blazing Star and Conjuction, having been treated on at large by others before,
shall save my Time and Pains in that kind now -- and being (after the first
Appearance of the said Star) enquired of by some of my Neighbors concerning
its Signification, I then told them, That it signified much to Scotland and
Ireland, and but little to us here in England -- but when by my noctural
observation of it afterward I saw the great ascents it made toward the
North Pole, in so much that it was more Southward thereof by its last
appearance, then it was Northward of it at the first -- for which cause, I then
told my said Neighbors, that I feared it might signify more to us with many
Countries East South and West of us, then it would either Scotland or Ireland,
but that it would begin to Opperate in Scotland first, and with our selves hear
soon after.

And if I be not too much mistaken in its signification, together with that of
the Comet and conjunctions, viz. Religion and dominion, Rule and Government
both in Church and State, with many other things besides, but especially in
matters of Religion, and Religious things, which may conduce to make most parts
of Europe deeply sensible of many sad calamitys ready to befall them; which
being granted -- then I think that Scotland is made very sensible thereof
already and our selves too much; and not all neither: and who knows but that it
may be so in Ireland by this time also, as many places else may do soon after
us, for the Comet and Star, being wholly Saturnin, and the Conjunctions being so
in a great part also, What may be expected less then that the Effects should be
according to the cause? And the rather considering how unluckily Tory Mars was
posited so near the conjunction in October last; that look what malevolent
Saturn should Enviously and Subtly suggest, and benevolent Jupiter might
peradventer unwillingly consent unto, Mars stood by furiously, resolved to put
it on Soldier like, vi et armis -- And then Saturn parting so slowly from
Jupiter does presage the longer continuance of our miserys when they come.

Which kind of Calamity (be they what they will) are like to be brought upon us
Protestants by a Saturnine Sect, or sort of People, and their Adherents, as all
such may be truly called who wed their Interest, and do their Work, whose
Religion may be little better than that of the Papists or Turks, as shall be
seen anon; all which occurs into my mind a Prediction of Nostredamus, quoted by
Mr. Gadbury in his Almanac; Ann. 1679.

When Venus shall a Prince and Empire raise,
And ove's constrained to give dull Saturn Praise;
Then shall the Laws and Powers, Jove did erect,
Strike Sale, and bow to a Saturnine Sect.
It may concern us too much, though Gadhury did cantingly say Not.

Then in the next place, take one of Mr. Lillys in his English Merlin, page 25.
viz. I judge that privately by Lies, Treacheries, feigned and dissembled
Treaties, and Ambassadors, and by the policies of a Jesuitical faction all
over Europe, the true Protestant Religion will be infinitely distressed, and
the Heavenly intentions impedited, and all those Countries professing
Protestantism exceedingly molested, by so great a compact of Villains and false
hearted Traitors; lurking in the ^^foms and closets of Princes, that many shall
think that Popery shall return to its old Seat in every Country. By which it
may appear, where and by whom the Pro^estant Religion is like to be put in
danger, more then by the Dissenters. In favor of which said Saturnin People,
some men give themselves to do like a sort of People living in King David's
time, of whom he says, Psalm. 37.14. The Wicked bend their Bow, and make their
Arrow ready on the string to shoot in Secret and to hurt those of an Upright
Conversation, and verse 32. the Wicked watches the Righteous, and seeks to
slay Him; it was of such men that David spoke in verse. 12. saying, save me from
the Bloody Man, for the Sins of their Mouths and the words of their Lips, even
for their Perjury and Lies, let them be taken in their own Pride.

Of this sort of Men it was Mr. Lilly did so aptly predict in his Almanac for
1681. saying, There are a dissatisfyed People amongst us, that too frequently
endeavor to Poison the minds of the People, to promote their own designs, and
are animated therein by Persons of no mean Quality -- which seems to be truly
predicted, witness that unparalelled and monstrous presentment, made to the
Justices at the Bridge-house in January last at Sessions there; putting the
Protestant-Dissenters equally Criminal with Papists; but those men taking
little notice of the late Lord Chancellors well worded speech to the Parliament
Anno. 1678/9, that it would be necessary to distinguish between
Popish-Recusants that would destroy the Church, and other Recusants that only
wander from the Church -- we leave them to learn to distinguish better if the
Papists come to sit at helm to stear the Ship.

Its no small wonder to me that such men should be so Brutish, as not to take
any more notice of the many warnings God gives us now and of late years; or can
they think that God did light that prodigious Comet in the heavens in 1680. and
the Star since only for the world to gaze on and wonder at? -- or may we not
all rather fear that he sees some crying sins reigning amongst us mortals that
he would have us turn from, or otherwise he will Punish us for, and therefore
mercifully warns us before hand of? Amongst which crying sins the present
Persecution may be one; which some may not think to be a sin, because its
authorized by a Law -- but it may not be a jot the less a sin for that, in
which like case, King David put a Query saying, has the throne of Iniquity
fellowship with thee that forgeth wrong for a Law?

And so for Subbornation, Perjury, Atheism, and others as bad, but for the said
Persecution it is such as has not been presidented by any since the publishing
the Gospel of Peace; unless by the Roman Heathen Emperors, against the
Apostles and Primitive Christians in those times; and the Papists against the
Protestants in all times since.

And what presidents these are for Protestants to follow against each other,
let the reformed churches abroad judge, which again occurs into my mind another
prediction of Mr. Lilly in his Almanac 1681. saying, those pretending to
Religion, whether Papists or Seditious, will show but little pity or
compassion on those, whose unhappiness it may be to fall under their Subjection.

Having thus sparingly hinted at a few of those crying sins reigning amongst
us, let us look back to see the effects that may follow, and first with respect
to our selves in this Nation, who according to the judgments of the Ancients,
the experience of later Ages, and the present apprehensions of some Sages yet
living amongst us, as well as of some lately dead, on such configurations as we
now treat on, may expect great changes and alterations in Government, with
other calamitys besides, (1) but God grant we meet with no change of
Governors, lest it prove for the worse, nor yet by any undue means. (2) nor
secondly, any pestilentical Plague, as in sixty five. (3) nor such a dreadful
burning of houses as in sixty six, though we have had many burnt since. -- (4)
fourthly, nor a scarcity of grain and other fruits of the Earth, to pine the
Poor with hunger as in some time past, so long threatened, and may now be
feared. (5) nor an innovation of Popery into the Church, whereby the
established Religion in the Nation (of which we so much boast) may be thrust
aside if not subverted, when the Ministers and Teachers thereof may be removed
into corners, and be glad of Private houses to preach in then for fear of the
Papists, as the Non-conformists are for fear of some of them now. (6) nor any
breakings out amongst our selves to the cutting each others throats, as the
fruits of our present divisions; so little taken notice of unless by such as
rejoice thereat, having been the chief fomenters thereof. (7) lastly, nor an
invation of an Enemy from a very far off, so little thought on and less feared.


Some of which said disastreous calamitys may be brought upon us, and most
Protestant Countries in Europe, first, by that Saturnin People and their
Adherents, as was said before, but God grant it be not attempted by Bloody
Butcherings, as was once designed and still feared, and then look what the said
people come short of bringing on us Protestants, may in the next place be
brought on them and us too by the Turks, which is to be understood, an Enemy
from a very far off as a little before.

Which said Nation have or late penetrated themselves far into Hungary, and
will be hardly courted or compelled out again on any easy, or honorable terms
for the Empire, but if they bring another Army in this Summer as it is said they
are preparing for; then they will hardly ever return to go out again until
they have overrun Hungary and Germany as far as to the Gates, yea within the
walls of Vienna, and thence to Lubick, and other Hance Towns on the Western Sea
with their Ships round into the said Sea; as was once predicted by Nostredamus,
saying.

Through French-mens Discords and Neglect,
A Way is made for Mahomet 's Sect:
Siena 's Land and Sea shall bleed;
The Phocan Port full of Ships decreed.
Then the Contest will not be so great between the Ministers of the Church of
England and the Nonconfermist Dissenters; nor yet between the Protestants in
general and the Papists, as between the Mahometans and the Christians; when the
venerable Muffty and Musslman will dare to vie it with the haughty Cardinal and
reverend Bishop.

For which many an unfortunate European Prince may thank, first, the present
Emperor, who by his heavy Pressures laid on the Protestants in Hungary, forcing
them into Arms for their Just Rights, which gave the Turks an opportune
Occasion for the present Invasion. Secondly, The French King for more than once
enviting them to it. And Thirdly, The Pope, who advised the Emperor to reduce
the Hungarians by Arms, rather than by an Amicable Compliance. And now to
illustrate the probability of these things, with more of this kind, coming to
pass within a few years, take as follows.

1. First, An ancient German Prophecy in the old Saxon, presaging, first, the
present French King's late Conquest; secondly, the Turks present Incursion into
Germany: saying, In the south shall live a Wolf, who shall gnash down Towns
into his thirsty Throat; but in his bloody Banquet shall Dye -- Then out of the
East shall come a Dismal Black Dog, who like a Thief by Night shall enter into
Germany, but in the Enterprise shall lose one of his Limbs, and so depart with
such a yelping sound as shall make all Asia and Africa quake thereat; then he
shall forsake his old Master, and choose him a new one. Of which more in the
close of the Treatise.

2. A Second is a Turks Prophecy to his own Slave, who was a Lubicker Seaman,
taken by a Turk's Man of War, Anno 1658. or thereabouts: The Turk was a Doctor
of Physic and Chyrurgeon, who took his said new Slave one morning into his
study in 1660. and there said to him, -- that soon after the year 1680. of
Christion account, the Turks Nation should raise an innumerable Army to go
against Christendom, who when come to the borders thereof, would divide into
three parts, one to go on the right hand toward Muscovy and Poland, another on
the left toward the Alps and Switzerland, and the third right foreward toward
Germany, which should go on conquering as far as near Lubick, where they
should be defeated, and I (said he to his slave) shall be slain in the fight,
and thou shall live to see it, therefore when the fight is over, come thou into
the field to look for me, whom thou shall find dead among the slain, and
clothed with a violate color gown as now I am, when thou have me lay me in my
Mothers Bosom, which is all the service I shall require of thee -- so he
dismissed him and sent him to Lubick.

3. A Third thing is a mentioning of diverse Prophetical but unusual Visions,
Apparitions, and Revelations made known to Christopher Kotterus, Christiana
Ponatovia, and Nicholas Dabi^ius, all persons of known Integrity and well
approved of by all the Ministers that were banished out of Bohemia by
Fardinando 2 Emperor of Germany; when he expelled Frederick King thereof, for
turning Protestant anno 1620. all which said Visions and Revelations were since
printed in the Bohemian tongue, (all threatening the Emperor, Empire, house of
Austria, the Pope and Church of Rome, with ruin to all intents and purposes,)
and is of late made English in a small Volume, and of as small a price, sold at
Mr. Paulets shop at the sign or the Bible in Chancery Lane.

Unto which book refer the reader -- and then the several intelligences we have
had of late years, relating what prodigious multitudes of Mice, swarms of
Caterpillars, had invaded some parts of Germany, and the great flocks of flying
Fowls, that like great clouds met and fought in the air, falling dead to the
ground, all which must needs presage some strange things to befall those parts,
such as the present incursion of the Turks may be, who when they have pierced
through those parts, will then proceed and enter into France, whose mighty
Monarch with his Po^ish Peers and Pesants, will be as fully rewarded for the
cruel Massacres committed on the Hugonets there, about a hundred years since,
and the cruelty used against the said people there of late, and now -- as the
Emperor and house of Austria will have been a little before, for all their
cruelty toward the foresaid King of Bohemia, his progeny and Protestants, anno
1620. and since, and as the Pope and Iesuitical Crew will be in some time
after, for all the Blood spilt by their means since the Reformation, in most
places of Europe.

And whereas we in England have of late been, and now are again, engaged in (as
is by many said) a causless Persecution of our Neighbors and Fellow Subjects
at home, God grant we be not as deeply engaged to sustain the like Punishment
with other Nations abroad for the like Offenses.

4. In the next place take a few lines of Merlin's Mysterious Prophecy on the
fate of England's Monarchy, for which he has been so Renowned amongst the
Learned in all Ages since, viz.

The Standardbearer Wolf shall raise Troops, and environ Cornwall with his
Tail; but a Soldier in a Cart shall withstand him, who shall change the People
into a Boar, and the Boar shall wasle the Provinces, but he shall be drowned in
the deep of Severn.

From which I judge, that when the Turks have finished their Conquest in
France, they may design an Expedition for England; which said expedition may be
undertaken by some Christian Prince, or Turkish Bashaw, who on the Ship himself
comes in, shall carry a Flagg figured with a White Wolf, (as in this Page) and
is therefore by Merlin called the Standardbearer Wolf, and designing to land on
Severn side of Cornwall or Devonshire, will bring his Ships and Troops that
follow him (who are therefore called his Tail) round the Point of Lands End
into the Severn Sea, which will be his environing Cornwall flag with white wolf
and fleur de lis with his said Tail: but then a Soldier in a Cart, id est, an
English Admiral or General in a Ship (who shall change the People into a Boar,
id est, shall command the People on the Sea coasts to move themselves and all
Provisions into the Inland Country, and leave those Countries void and waste,
as if Boars or other Swine had made waste of all before) shall withstand the
said Standardbearer Wolf, id est, fight, defeat and sink him in the deep of the
Severn Sea, and so verify Merlin's said Lines. Unto which said Standardbearer
Wolf, with his fatal Success, Mr. Lill^ does allude in his Ephemeris, anno
1654. where he had portraitur'd the Emblim of a Wolf, as in the Margin, to whom
he writ, saying, Full Fifty Years, or near 'twill be,
Ere England's Kingdom thou shall see;
In it no Honor can thou have,
Nor so much Earth as makes a Grave.
Forbear, forbear; it is thy sad Fate
To feed the Fish, et cetera.


Finis coronat opus et mergit lupus.
LONDON, Printed for Benj. Billingsley, at the Printing-Press under the Piazza
of the Royal Exchange, 1683.


