MVRRELS TWO BOOKS OF COOKERIE AND CARVING.

The fifth time printed, with new Additions.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for John Marriot, and are to be sold at his shop in
St Dunstans Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1641.

Is morsige Iteden kuys worden / so ^chueren^e de pan van achteren.





LA CUISINIERE
Tous les ans nouvelle Cuisine
Car tous les ans changenl les gouts;
Ettous les Jours nouveaux ragouts*
Soyes done Chimiste Justine.




A NEW BOOK OF COOKERIE.

Wherein is set forth a most perfect direction to furnish an extraordinary, or
ordinary-feast, either in Summer or Winter.

Also a Bill of Fare for Fish-dayes, Fasting-daies, Ember-weekes, or Lent.

And likewise the most commendable fashion of Dressing, or Sowcing, either
Flesh, Fish, or Foul: for making of Gellies, and other Made-dishes for
service, to beautify either Noblemans or Gentleman's Table.

Together with the best and newest Art of Carving and Sewing.

All set forth according to the now new English and French fashion:

By JOHN MVRRELL.

TO THE VIRTUOUS and well accomplished Gentlewoman Mris Martha Hayes (Daughter
to the honorable Sr Thomas Hayes Knight, late Lord Mayor of the City of
London:) health and happiness.
OF this Name and Nature (worthy Gentlewoman,) many small Books and Pamphlets
have heretofore been published the most of which nevertheless have instructed
rather how to mar then make good Meat: but this (in credit of my knowledge,
and strict observation in Travel) is experimentally such as it pretends to be
in the Title Page thereof. Whereof I can say bu^ this, and this it will perform
for the sayer, That it gives each Meat his right for the manner o^ dressing;
Each dish his due, for the order of serving: and both good proof of my desire
to please and profit in the publishing. So, referring it to you^ worthy
perusal, and my self to your favorable opinion, I eve^ remain.

London, July, 20 1630 Yours, no less humbl^ then truly devote^

The first Book of Cookery.
BY reason of the general ignorance of most men in this practice of Catering.
I have set down here a perfect direction how to set forth an extraordinary
Diet for the Summer season, when these things mentioned may easily be had. It
serves also for a Direction for a Bill of fare: and also for a perfect
direction for the serving of dinner orderly, twenty Dishes to your first Mess,
and as many to the second Course to the same Mess, and ten to the third
Course: so that in all you have fifty dishes to your Mess. For the boords end
you may leave out some of the costliest dishes: if you have ten or twelve for
the boords end it is sufficient. If you cannot come by all these things named,
then you may place some other thing at your discretion in the place, so that it
be not gross meat, for gross meat disgraceth the Feast.

Also, another Direction for another service for the Winter season, of twenty
Dishes to the first Mess, and as many to the second Course to the same mess:
so that in all there be forty Dishes to the mess although it be contrary to the
other service of the Summer season. And you may take of these meats half so
many to the boords end, and it will be sufficient both for the first and the
second: but if your persons be of equal dignity, then serve your first Mess,
and the boords end, all as one alike equally.

A third Direction for a common ordinary Service of ten or twelve dishes to a
mess, to your first Mess, and as many to the second Course to the same Mess,
so that in all there will be twenty dishes to your Mess: but to your boords
end six or eight, according as your board will hold. If any of these meats
named be wanting, then you may place some other that you have ready at hand.

These Directions serve both for a Bill of fare, and to serve out your meat in
good order: it is also a direction to young practitioners which understand not
these businesses.

A Bill of service for an extraordinary Feast for Summer season, 50. dishes to
a Mess.
1 A Grand Sallet. 2 A boyld Capon. 3 A boyld Pike. 4 A dish of boyld
Pea-chickens, or Partriges, or young Turkey chicks. 5 A boyld Breame. 6 A dish
of young Wild-ducks. 7 A dish of boyld Quails. 8 A Florentine of Pufpaste. 9 A
forced boild meat. 10 A hansh of Venison roasted. 18 A Lombar Pie. 12 A Swan.
13 A Fawn or Kid, with a Pudding in his belly, or for want of a Fawn you may
take a Pigge and fley it. 14 A Pasty of Venison. 15 A Bustard. 26 A Chicken
Pie. 17 A Pheasant or Powtes. 18 A Potato Pie. 19 A Couple of Caponets. 20 A
set Custard.
The second Course.
1 A Quarter of a Kid. 2 A boyld Carpe. 3 A Heron or Bitter. 4 A Congers head
broyled, or Trouts. 5 A Hartichoake pie. 6 A dish of Ruffs or Godwits. 7 A cold
baked meat. 8 A sowst pigge. 9 A Gull. 10 A cold baked meat. 11 A sowst pike,
Breame, or Carp. 12 A dish of partriges. 13 An Orengado pie. 14 A dish of
Quails. 15 A cold baked meat. 16 A fresh Salmon, perch or Mullet. 17 A
Quodling Tart, Cherry, or Goosebery Tart. 18 A dried Neates-tongue. 19 A Iole
of Sturgeon. 20 A sucket Tart of pufpaste.
The third Course for the same Mess.
1 A Dish of Pewets. 2 A Dish of Pearches. 3 A dish of green Pease, if they be
dainty. 4 Dish of Dotrels. 5 A dish of Hartichoakes. 6 A dish of buttered
Crabs. 7 A dish of Prawnes. 8 A dish of Lobstars. 9 A dish of Anchoues. 10 A
dish of pickled Oysters.
Another direction for a Bill of fare for Winter season, and also serves to
set forth your meat in order.
1 A Shield or Collar of Brawne. 2 A Sallet. 3 A boiled Capon. 4 A boyld
Gurnet. 5 A boyld Mallard. 6 A forced boyld meat. 7 A roasted Neats tongue with
a pudding in it. 8 A made dish of puspaste. 9 A Shoulder of Mutton with Olives,
and Capers. 10 A Chine of Beef. 11 A dish of Chewets of Veale. 12 A Swan or
Goose. 13 An Oliue-Pie. 14 A Pigge. 15 A Loyne of Veale or a Leg of Mutton.
16 A Lark or a Sparrow-pye. 17 A Turkey. 18 A Pastie of Venison. 19 A Capon.
20 A Custard.
The second course for the same mess.
1 A Young Lamb or Kid. 2 A couple of Rabbets. 3 A Kickshaw fryde or baked. 4 A
roasted Mallard. 5 A brace of Partriges. 6 A Chicken-Pye. 7 A brace of
Woodcocks. 8 A couple of Teales. 9 A cold baked meat. 10 A dish of Plouers. 11
A dish of Snites. 12 A cold baked meat. 13 A dish of Larkes. 14 A Quince, or
Warden-Pye. 15 A bride Neates-tongue. 16 An Oyster-Pye, 17 A dish of Puffes. 18
A Iole of Sturgion. 19 A laid Tart of Pufpaste and sucket. 20 A dish of pickled
Oysters.
The first Course for a small common Service of Meat, to direct them which are
unperfect, to bring them to further knowledge of greater Service.
1 A Boyld Capon or Chicken. 2 A Leg of Lamb farc'd of the French fashion,
or neates tongue. 3 A boyld Mallard or Rabbet. 4 A dish of boild Olives of
Veale, or Collops and Eggs. 5 A piece of roast Beef. 6 A dish of Chewets of
Veal, or Mutton-pyes, if it be Winter, but if it be summer an Oliue-pye. 7 A
leg of Mutton roasted whole, or a Loyne of Veale, or both. 8 A pigge. 9 A
Swan, Goose, or Turkey. 10 A pasty of Venison, or forequarter of Mutton, or a
fat rumpe of Beef. 11 A Capon, pheasant, or Hearne. 15 A Custard.
A second Course to the same diet.
1 A Quarter of Lamb. 2 A couple of Rabbets. 3 A Maliard, Teale, or Widgin. 4
A brace of partriges or Woodcocks, 5 A Chicken or pigeon-pie. 6 A dish of
plouers or Snites. 7 A couple of Chickens. 8 A Warden or Quince-pie, 9 A sowst
pig or Capon. 10 A Cherrie or a Gooseberrie Tart, or a Quarter-Tart of pippins.
11 A dish of some kind of sowst-fish. 12 Lobstars or pickled Oysters.
A Table of Direction for a Bill of fare for fish-daies, and Fasting days,
Ember-weekes, or Lent.
The first Course for the same diet.
1 A Dish of Butter. 2 Rice milk. 3 Buttered Eggs. 4 Stewed Oysters. 5 A
boiled Rochet or Gurnet. 6 A boyld Sallet of Herbs, or of Carrets. 7 A boyld
pike. 8 Buttered Loaves. 9 Cheuets of Ling or Stockfish. 10 Another Sallet. 11
Stewed Trouts or Smelts. 12 A dish of butterd stockfish. 13 Salt Eele, or
white-herring. 14 A Iole of Ling. 15 A Skirret-pye. 16 Buttered Flounders or
plaice. 17 An Eele or Carpe-pye. 18 Haddocke, Fresh-Cod, or Whiting. 19 Salt
Salmon. 20 A Custard.
The second course for this diet.
1 A Boyld Carpe. 2 Spitcheockes of Eeles. 3 Fride Stockfish. 4 Boyld Eeles. 5
Bakte Puffes. 6 A roasted Eele. 7 Buttered Parsnips. 8 Fride Oysters. 9 Blancht
Manchet in a Fryingpan. 10 A fride Rochet. 11 An Oyster-pye. 12 Fride Smelts.
13 A Pippin-pye. 14 Fride Flounders. 15 Butterd Crabs. 16 Fride Skirrets. 17 A
Tart of Spinach or of Carrets. 18 Conger. 19 Lobstar or Prawnes. 20 Pickled
Oysters.
If your Mess be half so much for the boords end, it will be enough both for
the first and second course.

To boil a Capon Larded with Lemmons, on the French fashion.
SCald your Capon, and take a little dusty Oatmeale to make it boil white.
Then take two or three ladlefuls of Mutton broth, a faggot of sweet Herbs, two
or three Dates, cut in long pieces, a few parboyld Currants, a little whole
Pepper, a Piece of whole Mace, and one Nutmeg. Thicken it with Almonds. Season
it with Verjuyce, Sugar, and a little sweet Butter. Then take up your Capon,
and larde it very thick with a preserved Lemmon. Then lay your Capon in a deep
Meat-dish for boiled meats, and power the broth upon it. Garnish your dish
with Suckets and preserved Barberries.

To sowce a Pigge.
SCald a large Pigge, cut off his head and slit him in the midst, and take
out his bones, and wash him in two or three warm waters. Then collar him up
like brawne, and sow the collars in a fair cloth. Then boil the^ very tender
in the fair water, then take them up and throw them in fair water and salt
until they be cold, for that will make the skin white. Then take a pottle of
the same water that the Pigge was boiled in, and a Pottle of White Wind, a race
of Ginger sliced, a couple of Nutmegs quartered, a spoonful of whole Pepper,
five or six Bay-leaues: seethe all this together* when it is cold, put your
Pigge into the sowce-drinke, so you may keep it half a year, but spend the
head.

To sowce Oysters.
TAke out the meat of the greatest Oysters: save the liquor that comes from
them; and strain it into an earthen Pipkin: put into it half a pint of
White Wind, and half a pint of White Wind Vinegar: put in some whole Pepper,
and sliced Ginger. Boil all these together with two or three Cloaues, when it
has boiled a little, put in your Oysters, and let them boil two or three
walmes, but not too much. Then take them up, and let the sirrup stand until it
be called: then put in your Oysters, and so you may keep them all the year.

To sowce Pike, Carpe, or ^^me.
DRaw your Fish, but scale it not: save the Liver and the refuse of it, slit
the said refuse, and wash it. Then take a pottle of fair water, and a quart of
White Wind, and a faggot of sweet herbs: so soon as you see your Wine boil,
throwin your Fish with the scales on, and when you see your Fish boil, pour
in a little Vinegar, and it will make your Fish crisp. Then take up your Fish,
and put it in a Tray. Then put into the liquor some whole pepper, a little
whole Ginger, and when it is boiled together well with a little Salt, and cold,
put in your Fish into an earthen pan: when you serve it in, serve Gelly in
Sawcers, with a little fine Ginger about the Sawcers sides, and Fennel on your
Fish.

To boil Flounders or Gudgeons on the French fashion.
Boil a pint of White Wind, and a pint of fair Water, a few sweet Herbs,
tops of (...), sweet Marjoram, winter Sauo^^ ^^ps of Rosemary, a piece of whole
Mace, a little Parsley picked small: when all is boiled well together, put in
your Fish, and scum it well. Then put in a little crust of Manchet, a quarter
of a pound of sweet Butter. Season it with Pepper, and Verjuyce, and so serve
it in.

To boil a Gurnet on the French fashion.
DRaw your Gurnet, and wash it clean, boil it in water and salt, with a faggot
of sweet Herbs: then take it up, and power upon it Verjuyce, Nutmeg, Butter,
and Pepper: thicken it with the yolks of two new laid Eggs. All this being
powered upon your Fish, garnish your dish with preserved Barberries, or a sliced
Orange.

To boil a Leg of Mutton on the French fashion.
CVt out all the meat at the Butt end, leaving the bone still in. Mince it
small with Beef Suit, and Marrow. Then take sweet Cream, yolks of Eggs, a few
Raisins of the Sun, two or three Dates minced, a little grated Bread. Season
it with Pepper, Salt, and Nutmegge: then work it stiff, like a Pudding, and
cram it in again. Then stue it in a Pot with a Marrow bone, and a knuckle of
Veale: serve the Leg by it self, and your knuckle in stued broth, and your
Marrow-bones upon Bruys, with Carrets, and Pepper.

To hash a Leg of Mutton on the French fashion.
PArboile your Leg, and take it up and pare off some thin slices and prick
your Leg through, and let out the grauie on the slices: then bruise sweet
Herbs with the back of a Ladle, and put in a piece of sweet Butter: Season it
with Verjuyce and Pepper: and when your Mutton is boiled, pour it on it, and
serve it so to the Table.

To roast a leg of Mutton, on the French fashion.
PAre all the skin as thin as you can Lard it with sweet Lard, and stick
about it a dozen Cloves: when it is half roasted, cut off three or four thin
pieces and mince it small with a few sweet hearb^ and a little beaten Ginger:
put in a ladlefull of Claret Wine, a piece of sweet Butter, two or three
spoonfuls of verjuyce, little Pepper, a few parboyld Capers when all this is
boiled together, chop the yolk of an hard Egg into it. The^ dridg^ your Leg,
and serve it upon sauce.

To roast a Neates tongue, on the French fashion.
CHop sweet herbs fine, with a piec^ of a raw Apple, season it with Pepper,
Ginger, and the yolk of a new la^^ Egg chopped small to mingle amongst it^ then
stuff it well with that farcing, an^ so roast it. The sauce for it is Verjuyce
Butter, and the juice of a Lemmon, and little Nutmegge. Let the tongue lie
(...) the sauce when it goes to the Table Garnish your Dish as you think
fittest, or as you are furnished.

To boil Pigeons with Rice on the French fashion.
FIt them to boil, and put into their bellies sweet Herbs, viz. Parsley, tops
of young Time: and then put the^ into a Pipkin, with as much Mutton broth as
will cover them, a piece of whole Mace, a little whole Pepper: boil all these
together until your Pigeons be tender. Then take them off the fire, and scum
of the fat clean from the broth, with a spoone, for otherwise it will make it
to taste rank. Put in a piece of sweet Butter: season it with Verjuyce,
Nutmeg, and a little Sugar, thicken it with Ryce boiled in sweet Cream.
Garnish your Dish with preserved Barberies ^t Skirret roots, being boiled with
Verjuyce and Butter.

To boil a Rabbet with Herbs on the French fashion.
FIt your Rabbet for the boiling, and seethe it with a little Mutton broth,
White Wind and a piece of whole Mace: then take Lettuce, Spinach, Parsley,
Winter Sauory, sweet Marjoram: all these being picked, and washed clean, bruise
them with the back of a Ladle (for the bruising of the herbs will make the
broth look very pleasantly green.) Thicken it with a crust of manchet, being
steeped in some of the broth, and a little sweet. Butter therein. Season it
with Verjuyce, and Pepper, and serve it to the Table upon Sippets. Garnish your
dish with Barberries.

To boil Chickens in white broth.
TRusse your Chickens fit to boil, as was before showed in the Rabbets, cut
two or three Dates in small pieces: take a piece of whole Mace: thicken your
broth with Almonds: Season it with Verjuyce, and a little Pepper. Garnish your
dish sides with sweet Sucket and sugar, after you have seasoned your broth. In
like sort you may boil a Capon, but then you must put Marrow into your White
broth. If you dislike Mutton-broth, then boil it by it self in fair water
till it turn as white as a Curd. But the French men follow the other way, and
it is the better.

To boil a Teale or Wigeon on the French fashion.
PArboyle either of these Fowls, and throw them in a Pale of fair water (for
that takes away the rancknesse of the flesh.) Then roast them half, and take
them off the fire, and put sweet Herbs in the bellies of them: lace them down
the breast, and stick them with two or three whole Cloves in the breast with
your knif in every one of them so many. Then put them in a Pipkin, with two or
three ladlefuls of strong Mutton broth, a piece of whole Mace, two or three
little Onyons minst small. Thicken it with a toast of household bread: put in a
piece of sweet butter as big as a Walnut: Season it with Pepper and Verjuyce.

To smoore an old Coney Ducke, or Mallard on the French fashion.
PArboyle any of these and half roast it, lanch them down the breast with
your knife, and stick them with two or three Cloves. Then put them into a
pipkin with half a pound of sweet Butter, a little White Wind, Verjuyce, a
piece of whole Mace, a little beaten Ginger, and Pepper. Then mince two Onyons
very small, with a piece of an Apple, so let them boil leisurely, close
covered, the space of two hours, turning them now and then. Serve them in upon
Sippets.

Another way to boil Chickens, or Pigeons with Gooseberryes or Grapes.
Boil them with Mutton-Broth, and White Wind, a piece of whole Mace, put into
the bellies of the^ sweet Herbs: when they be tender, thicken it with a piece
of Manchet and two hard eg yolks strained with some of the same broth. The^ put
some of the same broth into a boyld-meat dish, with Verjuyce, Butter, and
Sugar, and so boil your Grapes or Gooseberries in the dish close covered, till
they be tender, and pour it on the breast of your dish.

To boil a Chine of Mutton or Veale, in sharp broth, on the French fashion.
Cover your meat with fair water and a little White Wind, a piece of whole
Mace, a Nutmeg quartered, a handful of Herbs clean picked, and bruised with
the back of a Ladle, young Lettice, Spinach, Parsley, tops of young Time: when
all is boiled well together, thicken it with a crust of Manchet, and the yolke
of a hard Eg, steeped in some of the same broth, and draw it through a
strainer, and thicken your broth with it. Season it with a little Verjuyce and
Pepper.

To boil Larks or Sparrowes.
TRusse them fit to boil, and put them into a Pipkin, with a Ladlefull of
Mutton-broth, a piece of whole Mace, a quarter of a Nutmegge, a faggot of sweet
Herbs, and a little young Parsley picked clean and short: put your Parsley
loose into your broth: season it with Verjuyce, Pepper and Sugar. Thicken it
with the yolks of two new laid Eggs hard, and a piece of Manchet, strained
with some of the same broth, till they be tender. Garnish your dish as you will.

Baked-meates.
A made dish of Coney Livers.
PArboyle three or four of them, and then chop them fine with sweet Herbs,
the yolks of two hard Eggs, Season it with Cinnamon, Dinger, and Nutmeg, and
Pepper: put in a few parboyld Currants, and a little melted butter, and so make
it up into little pastyes, frye them in a Fryingpan, shave on Sugar, and serve
them to the board.

A made dish of Sweetbread.
Boil, or roast your Sweetbread, and put into it a few parboyld Currants, a
minst Date, the yolks of two new laid Eggs, a piece of Manchet grated fine,
Season it with a little pepper, Salt, Nutmeg, and Sugar, wring in the juice of
an Drange or Lemmon, and put it between two sheets of Puf-paste, or any other
good paste: and either bake it, or fry it, whether you please.

A made dish of Sheep tongues.
Boil them tender, and slice them in thin slices: then season them with
Cinnamon, Ginger, and a little Pepper, and put them into a Coffin of fine Paste,
with sweet Butter, and a few sweet Herbs chopped fine. Bake them in an Duen.
Then take a little Nutmeg, Vinegar, Butter, Sugar, the yolke of a new laid
Egg, one spoonful of Sack, and the juice of a Lemmon: boil all these
together on a chafingdish of Coals, and put it into your Pie: shog it well
together, and serve it to the Table.

A Florentine of a Cony, the wing of a Capon, or the Kidney of Veale.
MInce any of these with sweet herbs, parboyld Currants, a Date or two minst
small, a piece of a preserved Drange or Lemmon, minst as small as your Date.
Season it with Ginger, Cinnamon, Nutmeg, and Sugar: then take the yolks of two
new laid Eggs, a spoonful of sweet Cream, a piece of a short Cake grated and
marrow cut in short pieces. Bake this in a dish between two leaves of
puf-paste, put a little Rose Water to it before you close your paste. When it
is baked, shave on Sugar.

A Fridayes Pie, without either Flesh or Fish.
WAsh green Beets clean, pick out the middle string, and chop them small with
two or three well relisht ripe Apples. Season it with Pepper, Salt, and Ginger:
then take a good handful of Raisins of the Sun, and put them all in a Coffin
of fine Paste, with a piece of sweet Butter, and so bake it: but before you
serve it in, cut it up, and wring in the juice of an Drange and Sugar.

A Chewet of Stockfish.
Boil watered Stockfish, and make it fit to be eaten: when it is cold take the
whitest of the fish and mince it small: put in parboyld Currants, Ralsins of the
Sun, Season it with Nutmeg, Pepper, Salt, and a piece of sweet Butter. Bake
it, but before you serve it in, cut it up, and wring in the juice of an Drange.

A Quarter-Tart of Pippins.
QUarter them and lay them between two sheets of Paste: put in a piece of whole
Cinnamon, two or three bruised Cloves, a little sliced Ginger, Drengado, or only
the yellow outside of the Drange, a bit of sweet Butter about the bigness of a
Egg, good store of Sugar: sprinkle on a little Rose water. Then close your
Tart, and bake it: Ice it before it go to the board, serve it hot. This Tart
you may make of any puf-paste, or short paste that will not hold the raising.
If you bake in any of these kinds of pastes, then you must first boil your
Pippins in Claretwine and Sugar, or else your Apples will be hard when your
Crust will be burnt and dried away. Besides, the wine gives them a pleasant
Color, and a good taste also. Though you boil your Pippins tender, take heed
you break not the quarters, but bake them whole.

A Gooseberry Tart.
PIck the stalks of your Gooseberries, and the pips in the tops: put them in
good Paste, with a little green Ginger fliced in slices: cast on good store of
Sugar and Rosewater, and so close them.

A Cherry Pie.
BRuise a pound of Cherries, and stamp them, and boil the sirrup with Sugar.
Then take the stones out of two pound: bake them in a set Coffin: Ice them, and
serve them hot in to the board.

To make an Oyster Pie.
Save the liquor of your largest Oysters, season them with Pepper and Ginger,
and put them into a Coffin: put in a minst Dnyon, a few Currants, and a good
piece of Butter. Then pour in your sirrup and close it. When it is baked, cut
up the Pie, and put in aspoonefull of Vinegar and melted Butter: shake it well
together, and set it again into the Duen a little while: then take it out, and
serve it in.

A made dish of Musckels and Cockles.
PArboyle them and take out the meat, and wash them very clean in the water
they were boiled in, and a little whitewine: mince them small with two or three
yolks of new-laid Eggs. Season it with Pepper, Salt, and a little Nutmeg:
then wring in the juice of an Drange, and put them between two sheets of
Paste, Cake it, Ice it, and use it: you may also fry them.

To bake Neates tongues to be eaten hot.
Boil it tender, and pill off the skin, take the flesh out at the Butt-end:
mince it small with Oxe-suet, and Marrow. Season it with Pepper, Salt,
Nutmegge, parboyld Currants, and a minced Date cut in pieces. Take the yolks of
two new-laid Eggs, and a spoonefull of sweet Cream, work all together with a
silver spoone in a Dish, with a little powder of a dried Drange-pill: sprinckle
a little Verjuyce over it, and cast on some Sugar. Then thrust it in again as
hard as you can exam it. Bake it on a dish in the Duen: baste it with sweet
Butter, that it may not bake dry on the outside: when it is to be eaten, sauce
it with Vinegar and Butter, Nutmeg, Sugar and the juice of an Drange.

A delicate Chewet.
PArboyle a piece of a Leg of Veale, and being cold, mince it with Beef suet,
and Marrow, and an Apple, or acouple of Wardens: when you have minst it fine,
put a few parboyled Currants, six Dates minst, a piece of preserved Drange-pill
minst, Marrow cut in little square pieces: Season all this with Pepper, Salt,
Nutmeg, and a little Sugar: then put it into your Coffins, and so bake it.
Before you, close your Pie, sprinckle on a little Rosewater, and when they are
baked shave on a little Sugar, and so serve it to the table.

To make an Umble Pie, or for want of Umbles to do it with a Lambs head and
Purtnance.
Boil your meat reasonable tender, take the flesh from the bone, and mince it
small with Beefe-suet and Marrow with the Liver, Lights, and Heart, a few sweet
Herbs and Currants. Season it with Pepper, Salt, and Nutmeg:bake it in a
Coffin raised like an Vmble pie, and it will eat so like unto Vmbles, as that
you shall hardly by taste discern it from right Umbles.

To bake a Calves Chaldron.
PArboyle it, and cool it, and pick out the Kernels, and cut it in small
pieces: then season it with Pepper, Salt, and Nutmeg: put in a few sweet Herbs
chopped, a piece of sweet butter, sprinckle it with uerjuyce, and so close it.
When you serve it in, put to it a little of a cawdle, made with Nutmeg,
Vinegar, Butter, Sugar, and the yolks of two new laid Eggs, a spoonefull of
Sack, and the juice of an Orange.

To bake a Carpe.
SCald, wash and draw a sayre large Carpe: season it with Pepper, Salt, and
Nutmeg, and put it in a Coffin with good store of sweet Butter: cast on great
Raisins of the Sun, the juice of two Oranges, put your Butter uppermost, to
keep the rest moist: sprinckle on a little Vinegar before you close it, and so
bake it.

To bake a Tench with a Pudding in her belly.
LEt your fish blood in the Tail, then scald it, and scour it: wash it
clean, and dry it with a does. Then take grated Bread, sweet Cream, the
yolks of two or three new-laid Eggs, a few parboyld Currants, a few sweet
Herbs chopped fine. Season it with Nutmeg and Pepper, and make it into a stiff
pudding, and put it into your Tenches belly. Season your fish on the outside
with a little Pepper, Salt, and Nutmegge, and put him in a deep Coffin with a
piece of sweet Butter, and so close your Pie, and bake it. Then take it out of
the Oven, and open it, and cast in a piece of preserved Orange minst. Then take
Vinegar, Nutmeg, Butter, Sugar, and the yolke of a new-laid Egg, and boil it
on a Chafingdish of Coals, always stirring it to keep it from curding. Then
pour it into your Pie, shogge it well together, and serve it in.

To bake Eeles.
CUt your Eeles about the length of your finger: season them with Pepper, Salt,
and Ginger, and so put them into a Coffin, with a good piece of sweet Butter.
Put into your Pie great Raisins of the Sun, and an Onyon minst small, and so
close it and bake it.

To bake Chickens with Grapes.
TRusse and scald your Chickens, season them well with pepper, salt, and
Nutmeg: and put them into your Pie, with a good piece of Butter; bake it and
cut it up, and put upon the breast of your Chickens, Grapes, boild in Uerjuyce,
Butter, Nutmeg, and Sugar, with the juice of an Orange.

To bake a Steake pie with a French pudding in the pie.
SEason your Steakes with Pepper, Salt, and Nutmeg: and let it stand in a tray
an hour: Then take a piece of the leanest of a Leg of Mutton, and mince it
small with Oxe-suet, and a few sweet Herbs, tops of young Time, a branch of
Pennyroyal, two or three leaves of red Sage, grated Bread, yolks of Eggs, sweet
Cream, Raisins of the Sun, work all together like a Pudding with your hand
stiff, and roll it round like bals, and put them in your Steakes in a deep
Coffin, with a good piece of sweet butter, sprinckle a little Uerjuyce on it,
and bake it: then cut it up, and roll Sage: leaves in Butter, and frye them,
and stick them upright in your walls, and serve your Pie without a cover, with
the juice of an Orange or Lemmon.

To make a good Quince Pie.
PAre them, and coare them (the best of the Quinces is next unto the skin,
therefore pare it as thin as is possible) stuff them with Sugar, then with
as much other Sugar as they weigh, put them with pieces of sliced ginger in a
Coffin, sprinckle on a little Rose Water before you close your Pie. Bake it,
and let it stand long a soaking in the oven, Ice it, and serve it in.

To make a Pippin Pie.
TAke their weight in Sugar, and stick a whole Cloue in every piece of the^ and
put in pieces of whole Cinnamon, then put in all your Sugar, with a slice or two
of whole Ginger: sprinckle Rose Water on them before you close your Pie: bake
them and serve them in.

To bake a Pigge.
SCald it, and slit it in the midst, flay it, and take out the bones. Season
it with Pepper, Salt, Cloves, Mace, and Nutmeg: chop sweet herbs fine with the
hard yolks of two or three new laid Eggs, and parboyld Currants. Then lay one
half of your Pigge into your pie, and herbs on it: then put on the other
half with more herbs aloft upon it, and a good piece of sweet Butter aloft
upon all. It is a good dish both hot and cold.

To bake Fallow Deer in the best manner.
BAke it first in his own blood, only wipe it clean, but wash it not, bone it
and skin it, and season it with Pepper and Salt. Then bake it in fine Paste
afterward, either puft-paste or short-paste.

To bake a Red Dear.
PArboyle it, and dress it, and let it lie all night in Red Wine, and Vinegar:
then Larde it thick, and season it with Pepper, salt, Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg,
and Ginger. Bake it in a deep Coffin of Rye paste, with store of Butter: let it
soake well. Leave a vent-hole in your Pie, and when you draw it out of the
Quen, put in melted Butter, Vinegar, Nutmeg, Ginger, and a little Sugar: shake
it very well together, and put it into the Quen again, and let it stand three
or four hours at the least, to soake thoroughly: when your Quen is cold: take
it out, and stop the hole with Butter.

To bake a wild Boar.
TAke the buttocke of a Brawne, and the fillets: parboyle it, and mince it
small, and stamp it in a Mortar till it come like paste all in a lump. Then
lard it, and use it like the Red Dear. The fillets also of beef for a need
will serve very well.

To bake a Swan.
SCald it, and take out the bones: then parboyle it and season it well with
Pepper, Salt, and Ginger. Then Lard it, and put it in a deep Coffin of
Rye-paste, with store of Butter. Let it soake well: when you take it out of the
Quen, put in more Butter moulten at the vent-hole.

To bake a Turkey or a Capon.
BOne the Turkey, but not the Capon: parboyle them, and stick cloves in their
breasts: Lard them and season them well with Pepper and Salt, and put them in a
deep Coffin with the breast downward, and store of Butter: and when it is
baked, pour in more Butter, and when it is cold, stop the vent hole with more
butter.

To bake a Hare on the French fashion.
PArboyle two Hares, and take the flesh from the bone, and mince it small, and
beat it in a Mortar into a lumpy substance: then sowce it in Wine and Vinegar,
as you would do red Dear, and season it also. Lap all this pulp about the
Chine of one Hare, so it will seem but one: Lard it well, and put it into a
Coffin, with store of butter, and so bake it. Then take it out of the Oven, and
put into it a little melted Butter, Nutmeg, Ginger and Sugar, and set it into
the Oven again to soake: when it is cold stop the hole with Butter.

To bake a wild Goose or Mallard.
PArboyle them, and break the breastbone of a large Goose, or take it quite
out, and all the other bones also, but not out of a Mallard. Season them and
lard them and put them into deep Coffins, with store of Butter; when you draw
them out of the Oven, put in more, and do as before is showed.

To bake a Curlew or Hearneshaw.
TRusse them, and parboyle them, but upon one side. Season them with Pepper,
Salt, and Ginger. Put them in deep Coffins, with store of Butter, and let the
heads hang out for a show.

To bake Woodcocks, or Black-birds.
TRusse, parboyle, and season them with Pepper and Salt: your Woodcocke may be
larded: do as in other.

To bake Larkes or Sparrowes.
Serve them as before was showed in the Woodcocks and Blacke-birds.

Fritters on the Court-fashion.
TAke the Curds of a Sack posset, the yolks of six new-laid Eggs, and the
whites of two of them, fine flower, and make thick batter: cut a Pome water in
small pieces: season it with Nutmeg and a little Pepper, put in a little strong
Ale, and warm milk: mingle all together, and put them into Lard, neither too
hot nor too cold. If your batter swim, it is in good temper.

To make Pancakes so crispe, that you may set them upright.
MAke a dozen or a score of them in a little drying pan, no bigger then a
Sawce^, and then boil them in Lard, and they will look as yellow as gold,
beside the taste will be very good.

A Sallet of Rose-buds and Cloue Gillyflowers.
PIck Rose-buds, and put them into an earthen Pipkin, with White Wind vinegar
and Sugar: so may you use Cowslips, Violets, or Rose-mary-flowers.

To keep green Cucumbers all the year.
CVt the Cucumbers in pieces, boil them in spring water, Sugar, and Dill, a
walme or two. Take them up and let your pickle stand until it be cold.

To keep Broom Capers.
Boil the greatest and hardest buds of the Broom in Wine Vinegar and
Bay Salt, scum it clean: when it is cold, you may put in raw ones also, each
by themselves: put in a peele of Lead on the raw ones, for all that swim will
be black, and the other that are pressed down, as green as any Leek. The
boyld ones will change color.

Purslaine stalks.
GAther them at the full growth, but not too old: parboyle them, and keep them
in White Wind Vinegar and Sugar.

To make Caper-rowlers of Radish cods.
TAke them when they be hard, and not over much open: boil them tender in fair
water, boil White Wind Vinegar and bay salt together, and keep them in it.

Diverse Sallets boiled.
PArboile Spinach, and chop it fine, with the edges of two hard Trenchers upon
a board, or the backs of two Choppinkniues: then set them on a Chafindish of
Coals with Butter and Vinegar. Season it with Cinnamon, Ginger, Sugar, and a
few parboyld Currants. Then cut hard Eggs into quarters to garnish it withal,
and serve it upon Sippets. So may you serve Burrage. Buglosse, Endiff, Suckory,
Coleflowers, Sorrel, Marigold-leaues, Watercresses, Leekes boiled, Onyons,
Sporragus, Rocket, Alexanders, Parboyle them and season them all alike: whether
it be with Oil and Vinegar, or Butter and Vinegar, Cinnamon, Ginger, Sugar, and
Butter: Eggs are necessary, or at least very good for all boyld Sallets.

Buds of Hoppes.
SEethe them with a little of the tender stalks in fair water, and put them in
a dish over coals with Butter, and so serve them to the Table.

A Sallet of Mallows.
STrip off the leaves from the tender stalks saving the tops: let them lie in
water, and seethe them tender, and put them in a dish over coals, with Butter
and Vinegar: let them stand a while: then put in grated bread and Sugar
between every lay.

A Sallet of Burdock roots.
CVt off the outward rind, and lay them in water a good hour at the least:
when you have done, sees them until they be tender: then set them on coals
with Butter and Vinegar; and so let them stand a pretty while: then put in
grated Bread and Sugar betwixt every lay, and serve them in.

To make blancht Manchet in a Fryingpan.
TAke half a dosen of Eggs, half a pint of sweet Cream, a penny Manchet
grated, a Nutmegge grated, two spoonefuls of Rose Water, two ounces of Sugar,
work all stiff like a Pudding: then frye it like a Tansey in a very little
Fryingpan that it may be thick: frye it brown and turn it out upon a plate.
Cut it in quarters, and serve it like a Pudding: scrape on Sugar.

Puddings.
A fierced Pudding.
MInce a Leg of Mutton with sweet Herbs: searce grated Bread thorough a
Collinder, mince Dates, Currants, Raisins of the Sun being stoned, a little
Orengado cut finely, or a preserved Lemmon, a little Coriander-seedes, Nutmeg,
Ginger, and pepper: mingle all together with milk and Eggs, raw, wrought
together like Paste: wrap the meat in a cawle of Mutton or of Veale, and so you
may either boil or bake them. If you bake them, beat the yolk of an Egg with
Rose Water, sugar, and Cinnamon. And when it is almost baked, draw it out, and
stick it with Cinnamon and Rosemary.

A pudding of Veale.
MInce raw Veal very fine, cut some Lard, like Diamonds: mince sweet Marjozam,
Pennyroyal, Camomill, winter. Sauory, Nutmeg, Pepper, Ginger, and Salt made
hot, the gut of a fat Mutton Hog: cut it about an inch long: work it together
with store of Cinnamon and Sugar and Barberies, sliced Figs, blancht Almonds,
half a pound of Beef suet, most finely minst: put this into your short skins:
set them a boiling in a Pipkin of Claret Wine, with large Mace, a sliced
Lemmon, and Barberies in knots, or Grapes: this is a delicate Pudding.

A Fregesey of Eggs.
BEat a dozen of Eggs with Cream, Sugar, Nutmeg, Mace, Rose Water, and a Pome
water cut ouerth wart in slices: put them into the Drying Pan with sweet
Butter, and the apples first: when they be almost enough, take* them up, and
cleanse your Pan: put in sweet Butter, and make it hot: put in half the Eggs:
and Cream at one time: stir it with a sawcer, or such a thing. Take it out, and
put it in a dish, put in the rest of the Eggs and Cream like the former, and
then put in your apples round about the batter. Then cast on the other side on
the top of it, and keep it from burning with sweet Butter. When it is fried on
both sides enough, wring on the juice of an Orange and serve it in.

A Cambridg Pudding.
SEarce grated bread through a cullinder, mince it with Flower, minst Dates,
Currants, Nutmeg, Cinnamon and Pepper, minst Suet, new milk warm, fine Sugar and
Eggs: take away some of their whites, work all together. Take half the Pudding
on the one side, and the other on the other side, and make it round like a
loaf. Then take Butter, and put it in the midst of the Pudding, and the other
half aloft. Let your liquor boil, and throw your pudding in, being tied in a
fair cloth: when it is boiled enough, cut it in the midst, and so serve it in.

A Swan or Goose Pudding.
Stir the blood of a Swan, or Goose, steep fine Oatmeale in Milk, Nutmeg,
Pepper, sweet Herbs, minst Suet: mingle all together with rose water, Le^mon
pills minst fine, Coriander seeds, a little quantity thereof. And this is a rule
both for grated bread pudding or any other Pudding that is made in a Swanne or
Goose neck.

A Liveridge or Hogs Pudding.
Boil a Hogs Liver well, let it be thoroughly cold, then grate it like Bread:
grate Bread, take new Milk, the fat of a Hog minst fine, put it to the
bread, and the Liver, the more the better, diuideit into two parts. Take store
of dry herbs, that are very well dried, mince them fine, put the herbs into
one part, with Nutmeg, Mace, Pepper, Annis-seeds, Rose Water, Cream, and Eggs,
wash the skins, and then fill them up, and let them boil enough. To the other
sort put Barberies, sliced Dates, Currants, new Milk and Eggs, work them as
the other.

A Chiveridge pudding.
LAy the fattest-guts of your Hog in fair water and Salt, to scowre them.
Take the longest and the fattest gut, begin at the midst of the Gut, and
stuff it with Nutmeg, Sugar, Ginger, Pepper, and sliced Dates, boil it and
serve it to the Table.

A Ryce pudding.
Steep it in fair water all night: then boil it in new milk, and draine out
the Milk through a Cullinder: mince Beefe-suet handsomely, but not too small,
and put it in the Rice, and parboild Currants, yolks of new laid Eggs, Nutmeg,
Cinnamon, Sugar and Barberies: mingle all together: wash your scoured guts, and
stuff them with the aforesaid pulp: parboyle them, and let them cool.

A Florentine of Veale.
MInce cold Veale fine, take grated Bread, Currants, Dates, Sugar, Nutmeg,
Pepper, two or three Eggs, and Rose Water: mingle all well together, and put it
on a Chafingdish of coals, stir them till they be warm, and then put some
between two sheets of puft-paste, and bake it, put the rest upon slices of a
white loaf and frye it in a frying-panne, washed before with the yolk of an
Egg: serve it with Cinnamon and Ginger, at the second course.

A marrow toast.
MInce cold parboyld Veale, and suet very fine, and sweet herbs, each by
themselves, and then mingle them together with Sugar, Nutmeg, Cinnamon,
Rose Water, grated Bread, the yolks of two or three new-laid Eggs: open the
minst meat, and cover it with the Marrow. Then put your toast into the Pipkin
with the uppermost of some strong broth: let it boil with large Mace, a Faggot
of sweet herbs, scum them passing clean, and let them boil almost dry. Then
take Potato-rootes boiled, or Chestnuts, Skirrootes, or Almonds boiled in
Whitewine, and for want of Wine you may take Verjuyce and Sugar.

Another in a Drying Pan.
TAke the marrow whole out of the bone as near as you can: ten Oysters is a fit
proportion for that marrow, being parboyled and bearded, and cut in small
pieces. Put in a little young Time, Pennyroyall, and parsley minst fine: work all
together like batter. Then roll your Marrow within that, and season it with
Pepper, Salt, and Nutmeg. Then make it in little Pastyes with fine Paste: some
like Peascods: fry them, shave on Sugar, and serve them in.

A Pudding stewed between two Dishes.
TAke the yolks of three Eggs, and the white of one, half a dozen spoonfuls
of sweet Cream, a Nutmeg grated, a few Cloaues and Mace, a quarter of a pound
of Beef suet minst small, a quarter of a pound of Currants, temper it like a
Pudding with grated Bread, and a spoonful of Rose Water. Then take a Kell of
Veale, cut it in square pieces like Trenchers, lay three spoonfuls of the
batter upon one side, then roll it up in the cawle: pin on one side over the
other with two small pricks, and tie each end with a thread. You may put two,
or three, or four of them in a dish, then take half a pint of strong Mutton
broth, and half a dozen spoonfuls of Vinegar, three or four blades of large
Mace, and an ounce of Sugar. Make this broth to boil upon a chafindish of
Coals, and then put in your Pudding: when it boiles, cover it with an other
dish, and let it stue a quarter of an hour longer. Turn them for burning,
then take up your Pudding, and lay it upon Sippets, and pour the broth upon
the top. Garnish your dish with the coar of a Lemmon, and Barberies: serve them
hot, either at dinner or Supper.

To make French puffes with green Herbs.
TAke Spinach, Parsley, Endife, a sprig or two of Sauory: mince them very fine:
season them with Nutmeg, Ginger, and Sugar. Wet them with Eggs, according to
the quantity of the Herbs, more or less. Then take the Coare of a Lemmon,
cut it in round slices very thin: put to every slice of your Lemmon one
spoonful of this stuff. Then frye it with sweet Lard in a Drying Pan, as you
fry Eggs, and serve them with sippits or without, sprinckle them either with
White Wind or Sack, or any other Wine, saving Rhenish wine Serve them either at
Dinner or Supper.

Dropped Raisins.
TAke the fairest Reasins of the Sun, slit them on one side: lay them open, as
round and as broad as you can. Then take the aforesaid Herbs minst and
seasoned, and lay betwixt two Raisins as many as you can close betwixt them.
Take half a spoonful of the aforesaid stuff that you fried your Lemmons
with: fry them brown.

A Fond pudding.
TAke either Mutton, Veale, or Lamb, roast or raw, but raw is better. Mince it
fine with Beef Suet: take Spinach, Parsley, Marigold, Endiffe, a sprig of Time,
and a sprigge of Sauory: chop them fine, and season them with Nutmeg, Sugar,
minst Dates: take Currants and grated Bread, the yolks of three or four new
laid Eggs, a spoonefull or two of Rose water, as much vejuyce: work the^ up
like Birds. Beasts, Fishes, Pears, or what you will. Fry them, or bake them,
and serve them upon sippits, with verjuyce or White Wind, Butter, and Sugar:
serve them either at Dinner or Supper.

To make puffes on the English fashion.
TAke new milk Curds, press out the Whay clean, take the yolks of three Eggs,
and the white of one, fine Wheat Flour, and mingle amongst your Curds: Season
it with Nutmegge, Sugar, and Rosewater, mingle all together. Butter a fair
white Papet, lay a spoonefull at once upon it: set them into a warm Oven, not
over hot, when you see them rise as high as a halfe-penny loaf, then take
Rose Water and Butter, and indale them over: scrape on Sugar, and set them in
the Oven again until they be dried at the tops like Ice. Then take them out,
and serve them upon a plate, either at Dinner or Supper.

To make a Pudding in a Frying-panne.
TAke four Eggs, two spoonfulls of Rose Water, Nutmeg grated, Sugar, grated
Bread, the quantity of a penney Loaf, a pound of Beefe-suet minst fine: work
them as stiff as a Pudding with your hand, and put it in a Drying Pan with
sweet Butter, fry it brown, cut it in quarters, and serve it hot, either at
Dinner or Supper. If it be on a fasting-day leave out the Suet and Currants, and
put in two or three Pomewaters, minst small, or any other soft Apple that has a
good relish.

To make Apple-puffes.
TAke a Pomewater, or any other Apple that is not hard, or harsh in taste:
mince it small with a dozen or twenty Raisins of the Sun: wet the Apples in
two Eggs, beat them all together with the back of a knife or a spoone. Season
them with Nutmegge, Rose Water, Sugar, and Ginger: drop them into a Drying Pan
with a spoone, fry them like Eggs, wring on the juice of an Orange or Lemmon,
and serve them in.

To make Kick-shawes.
TAke the Kidney of a Veal, or Lamb, or if you have neither of both, the^ take
the ear of Mutton, take the fat and all, boil it, and mince it fine: season
it with Nutmeg, Pepper, and Salt. Then take two or three Eggs, a spoonful of
Rose Water, two or three spoonfuls of Sack, as much grated Bread as will work
them like lithe-paste. Then flower your moulds, and fill them with that paste:
then roll a thin sheet of paste, wet it and cover it over: fry them, and
turn them into small dishes, and keep them warm in the Oven, serve them at
dinner, or supper. If you will bake them, then you may turn the^ into the dish
raw, out of your moulds, and Ice them with Rose Water and Sugar, and set them
in the Oven, when your pyes are half baked.

To make some Kick-shawes in paste, to fry or bake, in what form you please.
MAke some short Puft-paste, roll it thin, if you have any moulds you may
work it upon your moulds, with the pulp of Pippins, seasoned with Cinnamon,
Ginger, Sugar, and Rose Water, close them up, and bake them, or fry them: or
you may fill them with Gooseberries, seasoned with Sugar, Cinnamon, Ginger, and
Nutmeg: roll them up in yolks of Eggs, and it will keep your Marrow, being
boiled, from melting away, or you may fill them with Curds, boiled up with
whites of Eggs and Cream, and it will be a tender Curd: but you must season
the Curde with parboyld Currants, three or four sliced Dates put into it, or
six bits of Marrow, as big as half a Walnut: put in some small pieces of
Almond-paste, Sugar, Rose Water, and Nutmeg. And this will serve for any of
these Rick-shawes, either to bake, or for a Florentine in Puft-paste: any of
these you may fry or bake, for Dinner or Supper.

To make an Italian pudding.
TAke a penny whiteloafe, pare off the crust, and cut it in square pieces like
unto great Dyce, mince a pound of Beefsuet small: take half a pound of Raisins
of the Sun, stone them, and mingle them together, and season them with Sugar,
Rose Water and Nutmeg, wet these things in four Eggs, and stir them very
tenderly for breaking the Bread: then put it in a dish, and prick in three or
four pieces of marrow, and some sliced Dates: put it into an Oven hot enough
for a Chewet: if your Oven be too hot, it will burn: if too cold, it will be
heavy. When it is baked, scrape on Sugar and serve it hot at Dinner, but not at
Supper.

To boil a Rack of Veale on the French fashion.
CVt it into Steakes, cut a Carret or Turnip in pieces like Diamonds, and put
them into a Pipkin with a pint of White Wind, Parsley bound in a Faggot, a
little Rosemary, and large Mace, and a stick of Cinnamon: pare a Lemmon, or
Orange, and take a little gross pepper, half a pound of Butter: boil all
together until they be enough: when you have done, put in a littie Sugar and
Verjuyce, garnish your dish as you list.

To fearce a Leg of Lamb on the French fashion.
TAke the flesh out of the inside, and leave the skin whole, mince it fine
with suet: take grated Bread, minst Orange pil, sliced nutmeg, Coriander-seeds,
Barberies picked, a little Pepper: work all together with yolks of Eggs, like a
Pudding, and put it in again. If you want a cawle of Mutton to close it with,
then take the yolk of an Egg, and smear it all over, and it will hold it fast.
Then put it in a dish raw, and set it upright, and put a little Butter into the
dish, and set the dish into the Oven: put to the aforesaid things, Sugar,
Currants, and sliced Dates, Salt and Verjuyce. When it goes to the table, strew
it with yolks and parsley, either of them minst by it self.

To hash Dear; Sheep, or Calves tongues, on the French fashion.
Boil, Blanch, and Larde them, stick them with Cloves and Rosemary and put
them on a Spit, until they be half roasted. Then put them into a Pipkin with
Claret Wine, Cinnamon, Ginger, sugar, sliced Le^mon, a few Carrawayseeds, and
large Mace. Boil all together and serve them in with fried toasts.

English Cookery.
To boil a Capon.
TAke strong broth of marrow bones, or any other strong broth, put the Marrow
into a pipkin with salt: boil your Capon in the Pipkin, and scum it clean,
before you be ready to take it off put in your Salt. Take a pinfe of White Wind
in a pipkin, for one Capon; if you have more, you must have more wine: half a
pound of Sugar, a quarter of a pound of Dates sliced, Potatoes boiled and
blancht, large Mace, Nutmeg sliced: if you want Potatoes, take Endiffe, and for
want of both boil Skirrets, and blanch them: boil all together, with a
quarter of a pint of Verjuyce, and the yolks of Eggs, strain it and stir it
about, and put it to the Capon with strong broth.

To garnish your Dishes.
GArnish your Dishes round about with fine Sugar: take Orengado dipped among
Biskets: take Carawayes. Take a Pomegranat and garnish the side of your dish
with it: take Currants and Prunes, and wrap them in fine Sugar, having been
first boiled tender in fair water: Take a Lemmon and slice it, and put it on
your dish, and large Mace steeped or boiled, or preserved Barberries. Any of
these are fit to garnish your Dish: take your Capon out of the broth, and put
it into a dish with sippets, and of these garnishes round about it.

To boil a Capon another way.
Boil a Knuckle of Veale until it make strong broth: then take your Capon,
and boil it in fair water and Salt, and when it is almost boyld, take it and
put it in a Pipkin, and strain your broth in to the Capon: Then wash and scrape
Parsley, and Fennel roots clean, pith them, and slice them along: boil them
in a skillet of water, and when they are half boiled take them from the fire,
and put them in a strainer and then in a clean Pipkin. Then take a little
Rosewater, and a quarter of a pound of fine Sugar, until it be as clear as
glass: then take a little large Mace, a faggot of sweet Herbs, a minst
Lemmon, the pill taken off. Boil a few Raisins of the Sun with it, but first
take out your Capon and strain the broth: put the Capon into a Dish very
finely garnisht: then put the broth to the Capon: then take Parsley roots, and
lay them on the top of the Capon with your minst and sliced Lemmon, your
Raisins of the Sun, and your large Mace. Garnish your dish, as before is
showed.

To boil a Capon in Rice.
Boil a Capon in Salt and water, and if you like it, you may put into a sa^^
cloth, a handful of Oatmeale: then take a quarter of a pound of Rice, and
steep it in fair water, and so half boil it then strain the Rice through a
Cullinder then boil the Rice in a Pipkin, with (...) quart of Milk: put in
half an ounce o^ large Mace, half a pound of Sugar: boil it well but not
ouer-thick, put in a little Rose Water: blanch half a pound of Almonds, and
beat them in a mortar with a little Cream and Rose Water: beat them fine,
and strain them into a Pipkin by it self. Then take up your Capon, and set
your Almonds a little against the fire; garnish your dishes as you think fit
and say in your Capon, and put your Rice handsomely upon the Capon, and then
the broth upon the Rice.

To boil a Capon with Oysters and picked Lemmons.
Boil the Capon half enough, with fair water and Salt: then strain some of
the broth into a quart of Renish-wine: then put in a few sweet herbs, minst
with a pickled Le^mon or Orange, put all into the Pipkin, and let them boil
together. Then take the Oysters, pick and beard them, and parboyle them: then
put them out of the broth into a Cullinder, and then put them into a Pipkin.
Then take a few Raisins of the Sun: if you love the juice of an Onyon, first
boil some Onyons by themselves, and strain them, and then put them into the
Pipkin, and serve in with what garnish you please.

To boil a Capon with Pippins.
PArboyle it as before, then put two Marrow-bones into a Pipkin, or rather put
the marrow of two or three bones into a Pipkin, with a quart of White Wind, a
little sliced Nutmeg, half a score of Dates. When you have so done, put in a
quarter of a pound of Sugar, then pare your Pippins, and cut them into
quarters, and put them into a Pipkin, and cover them with a little Rose Water
and Sugar, and boil them. Then take (if you have it) sippets of Biscuit, and
for want thereof take other Bread: then boil seven or eight Eggs hard, take
out the yolks and put them in a strainer. Then take a little Verjuyce, and
strong broth where the Capon is boiling, strain it, and put it in a Pipkin, and
stir all together with the Pippins and Muscadine: let the Mascadine be put
on when the Pippins are cold.

To boil Chickens in Whitebroth.
TRusse and parboyl them very white: then put them with sweet Herbs into a
Pipkin with Mace, pieces of Cinnamon, chop a little Parsley but course, and
strain the yolks of four or fine Eggs, with a little verjuyce, which must
be put in when they are ready to be taken from the fire. Garnish your dish.

To boil Chickens in soope.
Boil them until they be enough, boil Hartichokes very well, and blauch
them. Then put your Chickens into a Pipkin with strong broth. Cut your
Hartichokes, and put them into a pipkin with a few sliced Dates: wash a few
Raisins of the Sun, and a few Currants clean, put the^ into a pipkin: then take
Cola-Flora, and wash it clean, and parboyle it very well. When you take them
from the fire, blaunch them very clean, and put them into a pipkin: then take
some of your Hartichokes left, and a little white Bread, laid in steep with a
little broth and Verjuyce, half a dozen yolks of hard Eggs, and a little
strong broth and Verjuyce, a quarter of a pound of Sugar, put it into the
Pipkin, and stir all together, with a good quantity of Butter: then mince the
flowers of Marigolds, and boil them with the rest: stum the broth clean and
then it will look very clear: with this boiling you may boil Capon, Pigeon,
Rabbet, Lark, etc.

To boil the common way.
TRusse and parboyle them, and put the^ into a Pipkin with strong broth: then
take Parsley, Endiffe, Spinach, a Faggot of sweet Herbs. Bruise your parsley
and Endiffe, and put them into a Pipkin and two or three ribs of Mutton, and if
you have any Potatoes, or Skirrets, put the^ in with Marigold Flowers, and let
them boil well together: then slice one Carret* and cast it in, and serve it
with a few large Mace, and a little Verjuyce. Take the yolks of half a dozen
Eggs, mince them by themselves fine, and the parboyld Parsley by it self; then
mingle the^ with a few Barberries: cast all these things on the top of the
Chickens, after you have put them in the Dish: so also may you do with a
Knuckle of Veale.

To boil Chickens with Lettice the best way.
CUt every Chicken in four quarters after the parboyling of them, and put them
into a Pipkin with two or three Sweet-breads of Veale: or if you cannot so
readily come by so many, then take the Vdder of a Veale, and parboyl it very
well: Cut it in pieces, and put it into the Pipkin, with a sliced Lemmon. Then
take Lettice, cut them and wash them clean; and bruise them with the back of a
Ladle, and put them into the pipkin: then take a good deal of sweet Butter,
about the quantity of half a pound half a pint of Sack, a quarter of a pint
of white wind, Mace, a sliced Date, a Nuimeg: you may put in three or four
Dates sliced, if you have so many. Let all these boil together over the fire
with Marigold-flowers and sweet Herbs.

To boil a Rabbet.
PArboyle your Rabbet well, and cut it in pieces: then take strong broth, and a
Faggot of Herbs, a little Parsley, sweet Marjoram, three or four yolks of
Eggs, strained with a little white Bread, and put all in a Pipkin with Mace,
Cloves, and a little Verjuyce to make them have a taste.

To boil a Rabbet with Grapes or Gooseberries.
TRusse your Rabbet whole, and boil it with strong broth, until it be ready:
Then take a pint of White Wind, a good handful of Spinach chopped in pieces,
the yolks of Eggs cut in quarters, and a little large Mace. Let all boil
together with a Faggot of sweet Herbs, and a good piece of Butter.

To boil a Rabbet with Claret Wine.
Use it as before is showed, slice Onyons, and a Carret, root, a few Currants,
and a Faggot of Herbs, minst Parsley, Barberries picked, large Mace, Nutmeg,
and Ginger: throw them all into the Pipkin. Boil it with half a pound of Butter.

To boil a wild Duck.
TRusse and parboyle it, and then half roast it: then carue it, and save the
grauy: take store of Onyons. Parsley, sliced Ginger and Pepper: put the grauy
into the Pipkin with washed Currants, large Mace, Barberries, a quart of
Claret Wine: let all boil well together, scumme it clean, put in Butter and
Sugar.

To boil a tame-Duck, or Widgin.
PArboyle your Fowl well, take strong Mutton broth, a handful of Parsley, chop
them fine with an Onyon, and Barberries, picked Endiffe washed: throw all into
the Pipkin with a Turnip cut in pieces, and parboyld, until the rankness be
gone: then put in a little White Wind, or Verjuyce, half a pound of Butter:
boil all together, and stir it, and serve it with the Turnip, large Mace,
Pepper and a little Sugar.

To boil Pigeons.
PArboyle your Pigeons with Parsley in their bellies, and Butter: put them in a
Pipkin with strong broth, about a quart thereof, a ribbe of Mutton, large Mace,
a little gross Pepper, beaten Cinnamon, a little Ginger and Sugar, a few
Raisins of the Sun, a few Currants, Barberries in bunches, half a pint of
white wind, boil all together with a little Bread steeped in broth, to color
it: strain it with some of the broth, and put it into the pipkin: let them
boil till they be enough, and so serve them in. This broth may serve to boil
Woodcockes, or Partridges in, with this difference, take some of the broth out
of the Pigeon, and put in a minst Onyon. Let all boil until it be enough.

To boil Pigeons with Capers or Sampyre.
PVt them into a Pipkin, with a pint or more of white wind, a little strong
broth, a ribbe or two of Veale, wash off the saltness of your Capers or
Sampyre; blaunch half a pound of Almonds, put them in cold water, cut them
longwise and put them into the Pipkin with Raisins of the Sun. Take large
Mace, a little sliced Ginger, a sliced Nutmeg; let them all boil together with
a Faggot of Herbs, Throw into them three or four yolks of Eggs whole, and a
piece of Butter, then put in the Sampyre or Capers. This boiling will serve
well for Rabbets.

To boil Saweeges.
PVt them into a quart of Claret wine, large Mace, Barberries, Cinnamon, a
handful of sweet herbs. Garnish this Dish with Cinnamon, Ginger, and fine
Sugar.

To boil Goose-Giblets, or Swannes giblets.
Pick and parboyle them clean, and put to them some strong broth, with
Onyons, Currants, and Parsley, and let all boil together with large Mace, and
Pepper; boil them well with a Faggot of sweet Herbs, and then put in
Verjuyce and Butter.

Giblets with Herbs and Roots.
Pick and parboyl them, and put them in a quart of Claret Wine into a Pipkin,
half an ounce of Sugar, a good quantity of Barberries, Spinach, and a Faggot of
sweet Herbs, boyld Turnips, and Carrets sliced, and put them into the Pipkin,
and boil them well together: then take strong broth, Verjuyce, and the yolks
of two or three newlayd Eggs: strain them, and put them into the Pipkin.

To smoore a Rack or Ribs of Mutton.
CVt your Mutton in pieces, and split it with the back of a Cliuer, and so put
it into a dish, and a piece of sweet Butter, and put it into the bottom of
your dish: then take a Faggot of sweet Herbs, and gross Pepper: stue them in a
covered dish with a little Salt: turn them now and then, and when they are
enough, put them in a clean Dish with sippets. The dish is best garnished with
Barberries, and Pepper.

For the fillets of a Veale, smoored in a Frying-panne.
CVt them as for Olives; hacke them with the back of a knife; then cut Lard
fine, and lard them, then put them in a Drying Pan with strong Beer, or Ale,
and fry them somewhat brown; then put them into a pint of Claret Wine, and
boil them with a little Cinnamon, Sugar and Ginger.

A Dish of Steakes of Mutton, smoored in a Frying-panne.
TAke your Leg of Mutton cut into Steakes, and put it into a Drying Pan, with
a pint of White Wind, smoore them somewhat brown: then put them into a
Pipkin; Cut a Lemmon in slices, and throw it in; then take a good quantity of
Butter and hold it over the fire; when it is ready to fry put in a handful of
Parsley, and when it is fried, put it into the Pipkin and boil all together.
This Dish would be garnished with Cinnamon, Sugar, and sliced Lemmons.

To smoore a Chicken.
CVt it in small pieces, and fry it with sweet Butter; take Sack, or
White Wind, Parsley, an Onyon chopped small, a piece of whole Mace, and a little
gross Pepper; put in a little Sugar, Veriuyce, and Butter. Then take a good
handful of Clary, and pick off the stalks, then make fine batter with the
yolks of two or three new-laid Eggs, and fine flower, two or three spoonfuls
of sweet Cream and a little Nutmegge, and so fry it in a Drying Pan with sweet
Butter; serve your Chickens with the fried Clary on them. Garnish your dish
with Barberies.

To fry Mussels, Perywinckles, or Oysters, to serve with a Duck, or single by
themselves.
Boil these shell Fishes; then flower and fry them; then put them into a
Pipkin, with a pint of Claret Wine, Cinnamon, Sugar, and Pepper. Take your
Ducke boiled or roasted, and put them into two several Pipkins, if one be
boiled, and the other roasted, and a little Sugar, large Mace and fried toasts,
stuck round about it with Butter.

To marble Smelts, Soales, Flounders, Plaice, etc.
FRy Sallet Oil in a Drying Pan, or Chafer, wipe your Fish, and when the Oil
is hot, put in so much Fish as the Oil will cover, and when it wastes you must
supply it. Then fry Bay-leaues, where the Fish has been fried in whole pieces;
put Claret Wine into an earthen Pan, put the fried leaves into the bottom of
the Pan, and let some of them lie aloft; slice an ounce of Nutmeg, or rather
two, as much Ginger, and large Mace, a few cloves and Wine-Vinegar; put your
marble Fish into the liquor, so as the Bay, leaves and spices cover it, as well
as it that lies under. And upon occasion serve it with the Bay-leaues, and the
spices of the liquor.

To congar Eeles in Colar like Brawne.
CVt them open with the skin on, and take the bone clean out, large Mace,
gross Pepper, some fine sweet Herbs, chop under your Knise. Then strew the
Herbs and the Spices all along the inside of your Eele, and roll it like a
collar of Brawne: so may you do with Tenches, boiled in fair water, White
Wine, and a quantity of Salt, so put in some sliced Ginger, Nutmeg, and Pepper
in grain. When it is well boiled put it into an earthen Pan, covered with
the own liquor, and a little White Wind Vinegar.

To sowce a Pigge in collars.
CHine your Pigge in two parts: take out all the bones, lay it in a Keeler of
water all night. The next day scrape off all the filth from the back, and wipe
it very dry: then cast Pepper on it, a little large Mace, and Ginger, with a
Bay-leaf or two, even as you would do a collar of Brawne, and let your pan
boil before you put it in: keep it with scumming until it be half boiled,
then take out a Ladlefull or two, and put it in a Pan by it self, put into this
boiling some Rhenish or Claret Wine, sliced Nutmegge-grosse Pepper, sliced
Ginger. Let it stand until it be almost cold, and then dish it with Bay-leaues.

To sowce a Breast of Veal.
BOne your breast, and lay it in fair water, until the blood be gone. Then
take it, and dry it, and take all kind of sweet herbs, Nutmeg beaten,
Cinnamon beaten, Ginger beaten, but not too fine, Callender, pared Lemmon-pill
cut in fine pieces: mingle all together, spread your Veale, and cast it on the
inside, and then roll it like a collar of Brawne, bind it close. Let your
liquor boil, and put inyour Veale. So you may use racks unbound, and Breasts
unbound. Let it be scumm'd very clean: then put in a Faggot of sweet hear bes,
and keep it covered, for that will make it white: when it is almost boiled,
throw in sliced Nutmeg, large Mace, a little Ginger, a Lemmon or two sliced.

To have a shoulder of Mutton or a Leg of Lamb.
TAke your meat off the Spit, and hash it into a Pewter Dish: put insome
Rhenish-Wine, Raisins of the Sun, sliced Lemmon, raw Oysters: put them all
together into a pipkin, and stir them* If you want Oysters, and Raisins, the^
take two Oysters whole, put them into the meat. If you want Wine, take strong
broth, Verjuyce, and Sugar. Throw a few Barberries into the Dish, and ser^^ it
on toasts or sippets.

A Leg of Lamb fearst with Herbs.
Serve it as before showed, with sweet Herbs, and grated Bread, Biskit
seeds, a few Coriander-seedes, Lemmonpills minst fine, Nutmegge sliced, sliced
Dates, a little gross pepper, Capers washed clean: put all together with six or
seven yolks of new-laid Eggs, hard roasted, and whole, and put them in your
stuff and work them with Sugar, Rosewater and Verjuyce, and the Marrow of a
bon^ or two, Salt, and pepper, put all together into the Skin: Carrawayes and
Oreng^ do are fittest garnish for your Dish.

To smoore Calves feet.
Boil and blanch them, and lay them in fair water, and Salt, and when they
are cold, cut them in the midst, and take out the blackness, and put them in
a Dish with sweet Butter, Mince parsley, Onyons, and tops of time, Currants,
large Mace, pepper, with a little Wine. Vinegar. Let all stue together until
they be ready: put in a few Barberries, chopped parsley fine, two or three yolks
hard, and minst by themselves, Rose Water, and sugar, and when you serve it,
strew it with parsloy and hard Eggs.

Another way.
BLaunch them as before, put them in a Dish with fair water and Butter, chop
Lettice, and Spinach, with the back of your Knife: and put them in a Dish: let
them boil with large Mace, sliced Lemmon, a few Grapes, or a stewed Cucumber
sliced. Let all boil well together with pepper: strain into a Dish the yolks
of Eggs, Verjuyce, and Sugar: strain them together when they go to the Table,
This boiling will serve for Neates-feet, Sheep. Trotters, or Hogs feet: serve
them hot at Supper.

To have Neates tongues.
Boil them, and blaunch them, and slice them in pieces, put them into a Pipkin
with Raisins of the Sun, large Mace, Dates sliced, a few blauncht Almonds,
and Claret Wine, boil all together with half a pound of sweet Butter,
Verjuyce and Sugar. Strain a Ladlefull of Liquor, with the yolks of about
half a dozen Eggs.

The same with Chestnuts.
Serve your fongue, as before: put it in a Pipkin with blauncht Chest-nute*
strong broth, a Faggot of Herbs, large Mace, washed Endiffe, a little Pepper, a
few Cloves, and whole Cinnamon. Boil all to gether with Butter, season them
with Salt only, garnish your Dish as youll st.

Certain Gellies.
Crystal Gelly.
TAke a Knuckle of Veale, and a pair or two of Caluesfeete, take out the fat
between the Clease, wash them in two or three warm waters, and let them be al
night in an earthen pot or pan, in fair water. The next day boil them very
tender in fair Spring Water, from a gallon to three pintes: then let the
liquor stand until it be cold in a earthen Basin, pare away the top and
bottom, and put to it a little Rose Water, season it with double refined
sugar, then put to it half a dozen spoonfuls of Oil of Cinnamon, and as many of
Oil of Ginger, and half so much Oil of Nutmeg, a grain of Musk tied in a
little Lawn: when all this is boiled together, put it into a Silver or earthen
Dish, and so let it stand until it be thoroughly cold, and then either serve it
in slices, or otherwise if you please.

To make Gelly of Pippins, of the color of Amber.
TAke eight fair pippins, take out the coares, boil them in a quart of
Spring Water, from a quart unto a pint: put in a quarter of a pint of
Rose Water, a pound of fine Sugar, and boil it uncovered, until it come to
the color of Amber: you may know when it is enough by letting a drop fall on a
piece of Glass, and if it stand it is enough: then let it run into an
earthen or silver Basin upon a Chafindish of Coals, and while it is warm,
fill your Boxes or Printing-moulds with a spoone, and let it stand, and when it
is cold you may turn it out of your mould, and it will be printed on the upper
side.

To make Gelly of Pippins, as orient red as Rubie.
TAke eight fair pippins, take out the coares, boil them in a quart of
spring water, and a pound of fine Sugar, boil it still covered close until it
be red, and in all other the operations you must do as in the Amber
coloured-Gellies, remembering always that your Box or moulds be laid in water
before you use them three or four hours, and the Gellie will not cleave unto
them.

To make white Leach of Almonds.
TAke half a pound of Jordan Almonds, lay them in cold water, the next day
blanch them, and beat them in a stone Mortar, put in some Damaske-rose-water
into the beating of them: and when they be beaten very fine, draw them through
a strainer, with a quart of sweet-milke, from the Cow: set it upon a
Chafing Dish of Coals, with a piece of Isinglas, a piece of whole Mace, one
Nutmeg quartered, a grain of Musk fyed in a fair cloute and hung upon a
thread in it: And when you see it grow something thick, take it off the fire,
and take out your whole spices, and let it run through a strainer, into a broad
deep Dish. And when it is cold, you may slice it, and so serve it in. If you
please you may cast some of it into colors, as Yellow, Green, Red: your
yellow must be Safron, or the blossoms of white Roses: the Green, must be the
juice of Green Wheat: and your Red you must make with Turnsoll: thus you may
have Leach of four several colors.

FINIS.
THE SECOND BOOK OF Cookerie.

Wherein is set forth the newest and most commendable Fashion of Dressing,
Boiling, Sowcing, or Roasting, all manner either Flesh, Fish, or any kind of
Foul.

Together with an exact order of making Kickshawes, or made-dishes of any
fashion, fit to beautify either Noblemans or Gentleman's table.

All set forth according to the now new English and French fashion.

BY JOHN MVRRELL

The sixth Impression.

LONDON, Printed for John Marriot, and are to be sold at his shop in Saint
Dunstans Churchyard. 1641.

To the Right worshipful the Lady Brown, Wife to the right Worshipful Sr
John Brown, Knight, health and happiness.
My most Honorable Lady:
THE last Book of this kind which I published (the last year) having under
your name found so good welcome at their hands into which it chanced, (since it
mended their fare with their own food) has now (for their further welfare in
the like manner) called out this Second part, as a second service to satisfy
their more dainty desire: In which services, such Novelties as Time, Art, and
Diligence (the Perfecters of each Faculty) do daily devise, may be seen and
practiced, to give all contentment to the curioust palate. And this I take to
be no sinful curiosity, but it is rather a sin to mar good meat with ill
handling; and so the old proverb verified; God sends Meat, but the Devil
Cooks: what it is, (Good Madam) is altogether, with the Author, yours, though
he show it others; that so the world may be thankful to you for good meat
well dressed though at their own cost: And let me lose my credit with you and the
world too, if it deceive their expectation, so as they cook it by this book.
To the trial whereof I refer them: recommending it and my self, to your
Ladyships wonted favor, resting in all humble service

Your Ladyships JOHN MVRRELL.

THE SECOND Book of Cookery.
To boil a Capon larded with Lemmons on the French fashion.
TAke a fat young Capon, and three or four pieces of a neck or chine of
Mutton, and put them together in a pot or Pipkin until your Capon be tender:
boil them with as much fair water as will cover them, then take a pint of
the broth out from them, and put it in another Pipkin: put in six blades of
whole Mace, as many Dates broken in quarters, and eight lumpes of Marrow: then
take two Hartichoake bottomes, cut them in square pieces or quarters: if you
have no Hartichoakes, then take potatoes, and as much sugar as will sweeten it,
boil them on the fire, until the Marrow be boiled, then take the yolks of
five or sire Eggs, half a pint of Sack or Muscadine, wring in the juice of
two or three Lemmons, a little Sugar, a little Ambergris, a little
Rosewater, and Salt, strain them through a Canuis strainer, and put them into a
pipkin to your Marrow, brew the^ together with your Ladle, that they curdle
not. Garnish the Dish with wet Suckets and preserved Barberries, your Sippets
must be dyetbread: then take up your Capon, and take a preserved Lemmon cut in
long slices, draw those slices through the breast of the Capon thick, lay the
Capon into your garnisht Dish, and pour your broth hot on the top of the Capon:
Lay on it Sucket and preserved Barberries, scrape on fine Sugar, then serve it
hot to the Table.

To boil Chickens.
Boil your Chickens in a Skillet or green pipkin, with as much fair water as
will cover them, put to two or three whole Maces, and put into them a good
piece of Butter, and a little salt, according to the quantity of your broth,
one handful of picked Parsley, two or three sprigs of Time and Winter: Sauory
stripped, bruise them together, and put them into your pipkin to the Chickens,
and when the Chickens be almost boiled put in a handful of Gooseberries or
clusters, of Grapes green, or Lemmon payred and cut in pieces, or Barberies
off the free or out of the pickle: take any of these fruits, garnish your dish
fitting for your Chickens, serve them in upon hot sippets, lay the Livers and
the Gizzards with the fruit on the Chickens, scrape on fine sugar, and serve it
hot to the Table.

Another way to boil Chickens, or a Capon in white-broth.
TAke and boil in a pot or pipkin two or three small Chickens, take two or
three blades of whole Mace, as many quartered Dates, three or four lumps of
Marrow, a little Salt, a little Sugar, the yolks of two or three Eggs, a
quarter of a pint of Sack, strain your Eggs, and Sack through a Canuis
strainer, and put them into the Chickens, brew it with your Ladle for curdling:
slice a Lemmon rind, but first taste it, that it be not bitter, if it be, pare
it, and garnish your Dish with Lemmons and hard Eggs quartered then pour the
broth upon sippets, and lay in the Chickens, scrape on Sugar, and serve it hot.

Another way to boil Chickens, for one that is sick, and to provoke sleep.
PUt two or three small Chickens into a green Pipkin, with as much fair water
as will cover them, scumme them and put into them the top or bottom of an
vnchipt Manchet, two or three blades of Mace, one handful of Raisins of the
Sun, the stones picked out, as much sweet Butter as a walnut, parboyl three or
four hard Lettices in Lettice water in a Skillet, cut them in quarters, put
them to your Chickens, wring in the juice of a Lemmon, let him drink the
broth, and eat the Lettice with the Chickens: If the Patient be bound in the
body, put not in the Butter until the Chickens be boiled.

Another way to boil them on Sorrellsops, for him that has a weak stomach.
Boil them in as much fair water as will cover them, with picked Parsley and
sweet Butter stopped in their Bellies: put into the broth, Parsley,
Winter-sanorie and Time picked and stripped, a blade or two of Mace; one handful
of green Sorrel, stamped in a wooden Dish, or stone mortar: put half your
broth into the Sorrel from the Chickens, wring in the juice through a Canuas
strainer into a pewter Dish, put in as much Butter as a walnut, a little Sugar,
then set it on a chafingdish of coals, then take a deep Dish, slice in some
Manchet, cover the bottom of the dish with them, pour the other half of the
broth from your Chickens upon the Sippets, and lay the Chickens on them, then
take your Sorrel sauce, and pour it on the Chickens, scrape on Sugar, and
serve it hot to the Table.

To boil Partridges.
PUt two or three Partridges into a pipkin with as much water as will cover
them, then take three or four blades of Mace, one Nutmeg quartered, five or
six whole Cloves, a piece of sweet Butter, two or three Manchet toasts tosted
brown soak them in a little Sack or Muscadine, strain it through a Canuas
strainer with a little of the broth, then put them into the Pipkin, to the
Partridges, boyls your Partridges very softly, often turning them until your
broth be half boiled away, then put in a little Salt and a little sweet
Butter: when your broth is boiled, garnish your dish with a sliced Lemmon, the
yolk of an hard Egg minst small, then lay on small heaps between the slices
of the Lemmon, then lay your Partridges in your garnisht dish upon sippets, and
pour your broth hot upon them, lay upon the breast of your Partridge round
slices of a Lemmon pared, mince small, and strew on the yolke of a hard Egg:
prick all over the breast of your partriges five or six wing-feathers, scrape
on Sugar, and serve it hot. In like manner you may boil young Phesants, or
young Turkies, or Peachickens, or Woodcocks, or Quails, or Larkes, or
Sparrowes.

To boil a Leg of Mutton on the French fashion.
TAke a fair Leg of Mutton, and a piece of suet of the kidney cut in long
slices as big as ones finger, then thrust your knife into the flesh of your
Leg down as deep as your finger is long, and thrust into every hole a slice
of the aforesaid Kidney Suet, but take heed that one piece touch not another:
boil your Leg well, but not too much, then put half a pint of the broth
into a Skillet or pipkin and put to it three or four blades of whole Mace,
half a handful of Currants and Salt, boil them until the broth be half
boiled away: then take it off the fire, and straight before the broth has done
boiling, put in a piece of sweet Butter, a good handful of French Capers, and
a Lemmon cut in square pieces like Dice, with the rind on, and a little Sack,
and the yolks of two hard Eggs minst. Lay your Leg of Mutton with the
fairest side upward upon sippets within your garnished dish: having all these
things in readiness to put into your aforesaid broth when it comes boiling off
the fire, then pour it on your Leg of Mutton hot, so scrape on Sugar, and
serve it hot to the Table.

To farce a Leg of Mutton.
CVt out all the flesh at the Butte end, from a fair Leg of Mutton, but take
heed you cut not the uttermost skin, mince the flesh small that you have cut out
even as it were for pies, the^ mince among your meat four pound of dubbing
suet, so you may make of it five or six small pies, and yet there may be left
enough to fill your Leg again, but before you put it into your Pyes, season
it with a little white Salt, and a little Sugar, Cloves, Mace, and Nutmegges:
three or four spoonefuls of Rose Water, half an handful of Carraway-seed,
covered with Sugar, two pound of Currants, one of Raisins of the Sun without
their stones, six Dates minst, stir all these betwixt your hands and fill
your Pies, bake them in a moderate Quen, for they will endure no great heat,
and will be baked in an hour; then take the rest of the meat that is left, and
work it with an Egg, and put it into your Leg of Mutton, where your meat
came out. This lets you understand, you must leave out of your Pies as much as
will fill your Leg of Mutton, then prick up your Leg with a prick at the
end where you put your meat in: then set it in an Quen in an earthen pan or
Dish, or if you please you may put it on the spit and roast it: if you do so,
then set a dish under it and save the grauy, and if you take the thickest of
the grauy that is in the bottom of the Dish, put a little White Wind, and
Vinegar, a few Barberries, and the yolke of an hard Egg minst: if you have no
Barberries, then take Capers; lay your Leg on sippets, and garnish your Dish
with sliced Lemmons and Barberries, or Capers, pour your sauce hot on, and
scrape on Sugar, etc.

To farce a Leg of Lamb.
CVt out all the meat, as before in the Mutton, and mince it with half a
pound of beef Suet very small, then the two handfulls of Parsley picked
clean, half a handful of Winter-Sauory and Time picked very clean, and mince
them very small: then season your aforesaid Lamb with half the herbs, and a
little Cloves and Mace, a little Sugar and white Salt, a little Salt will be
enough: then put in a handful of Currants, and work it up with an Egg: then
put half your meat into your Leg of Lamb, and prick up the end with a prick,
and work the rest of your meat into little round cakes, as broad as a
shilling: put your Leg of Lamb into the pot, with as much Mutton broth as will
cover it, if you have it not, then take fair water, and put in a little Cloves
and Mace, and the other half of the Herbs, and the meat that you did make in
little cakes, and let it boil with often turning it round, until it be boiled
unto a pint: then put in three or four spoonefuls of Vinegar, and then take
up your Leg of Lamb, and put it into a boyld meat Dish upon sippets: and
pour your broth and your round pieces of the meat on the top of the Lamb: then
scrape on fine Sugar, and serve it hot to the table.

To stew Trouts.
PVt three or four Trouts in a pewter dish, and a quarter of a pint of
White Wind, or of Sack, with a piece of sweet Butter, as big as an Egg, a
little whole Mace, a handful of Parsley, a little Sauory and Time, mince all
together, and put them into the Trouts: if you have no Wine, take fair water,
and one spoonful of Vinegar, and a little Sugar, and let these stew a quarter
of an hour, then mince the yolk of an hard Eg, and strew your Trouts with it,
pour the broth and Herbs all over them, scrape on fine Sugar, and serve it
hot to the Table.

To make a farst Pudding.
MInce Mutton, Veale, or Lamb, with beef Suet, a handful of Parsley, a
little Winter-Sauory and Time: season your meat with a little Cloves and Mace,
Salt and Sugar, work it up like birds or little bals, or like Lemmons, put
them in a pewter dish, put to them a little-Mutton or fresh Beef broth, as
much as will cover them, put into the broth a little Mace, Winter-Sauory,
Parsley and Time, shred small together: it must be put in when the broth is
half stewed, and so it will make it green. Garnish your dish with a sliced
Lemmon or Barberries: Lay Sippets about your Dish, and lay your Birds or Bals
on the sippets, then put a spoonefull of Sugar, and two of Vinegar: pour your
broth on them, scrape on fine Sugar, and serve it in to the Table hot.

To boil a Pike.
TVrne a Pike round with his tail to his mouth, cover it with fair water in a
pan or in a kettle, and with it also cast in a good handful of white Salt, a
handful of Rosemary, Time, sweet Marjoram and Winter-Sauory: when your water
boyles put in your Pike, and make it boil until it swim, and then it is
boiled enough: then take a little White Wind and Verjuyce, about the quantity
of half a pint, a few Prunes, a little large Mace Sugar, Currants, sweet
Butter, as much as an Egg: Let all these boil together until your Currants be
soft: then take up your Pike and lay it upon sippets and if you will you may
take off the scales, but the best is to let them alone: Lay all over your Pike
parboyld Parsley, and pickled Barberries, then take the yolks of two new-layd
Eggs, strain them with a little White Wind or Verjuyce, and put them into
your broth upon the Pike, scrape on fine Sugar, and serve it hot to the Table.

To farce a Leg of Mutton on the French fashion.
CVt out all the meat of a fair Leg of Mutton, at the butte end, mince it
with half a pound of Beefe-suet, take a handful of Parsley, six sprigges of
Winter-Sauory, and as many of Time, mince all together very small, and put it
into your meat: then season your meat with Cloves, Mace, Salt, Sugar, and a
handful of Currants: work up your meat and Herbs with a couple of Eggs,
and put it into the skin of the Leg of Mutton where you cut it out: prick
it up close with a long prick, then take the rest of your meat, and work one
half of it into little cakes, as broad as a shilling, let the other half be
in little crumbs like minst meat: then cover your Leg of Mutton in fair
water, in a Pot or Pipkin, and put your round pieces of meat, and all your
loose meat in, then take six blades of whole Mace, six Dates quartered, a
handful of French Capers, half a handful of Currants, and two spoonfulls of
sugar, a little beaten Cloaues and Mace, boil all these together softly, over
a moderate fire, oftentimes turning your Mutton that it burn neither to the
pots-side nor bottom, and when it is boiled to the quantity of a pint and a
half, then garnish your Dish with Capers and a sliced Lemmon, then mince the
yolk of an Egg as small as Dice, you must take the Lemmon rind and all, but
if it be bitter, it will mar the taste of the meat, therefore pare off the
yellow outside: then lay your Leg of Mutton in Sippets on your Garnisht Dish,
and put into your broth a little Sack or Muscadine, or White Wind: if you have
none of all these, then take a little Vinegar and Sugar, the quantity of the
fourth part of a pint, pour your broth on the top of your Leg of Mutton,
then cast on it your aforesaid minst Lemmon and yolks of Eggs, having them
ready against your Mutton be boiled, then scrape on Sugar, and serve it in hot:
you may lay about it and upon it garnishing of puft-paste, if you have it not
ready, then a Lemmon will serve as well.

To boil a Carpe or a Breame.
Cover your Carpe or Breame with fair water, in a Skillet or pan upon the
fire, put in a handful of white-Salt, a handful of Rosemary, Time and sweet
Marjoram, put in a pint of White Wind Vinegar, or a quart of White Wind or
Claret, and make it boil: then take a fair Carpe or Breame quick, take out
the guts, and wash your filth clean, tie it up close in a cloth, that the
scales fall not off with boiling: then put it into the boiling liquor, let it
boil until it swim, then take a pint of Claret Wine, and four races of
the whitest Ginger sliced, six blades of whole Mace, a good piece of sweet
Butter, and a handful of Sugar, let it boil until it taste of the spices:
then take up your Carpe, or your Bream, and lay it upon sippets in a Dish broad
enough for your fish, and put into your Wine and spices another piece of sweet
Butter, when it has done boiling, (for then it will not be so oily,) then
power it on the top of your fish, then strew on good store of beaten Ginger
upon the Fish, being so boiled as is before showed: scrape on fine Sugar, and
serve it hot: but in any wise take heed you break not the scales of your Fish.

To boil a wild-Ducke, Widgin, or a Teale, on the French fashion.
Dress your Foul, trusse up the Legs upon the back, put it upon a Spit,
with a quick fire, half roast it, and set a dish under it to save the grauy,
baste it once with sweet Butter, but no oftener: when you think it half
roasted, take it up and lay it in the Dish wherein you saved the grauy, launch
it down the breast with your knife, and cut up the wings broad like a Shoulder
of Mutton: then take a handful of Parsley, five or six sprigges of sauory,
and as much Time, and a handful of Raisins of the Sun without their kernels
or stones, mince all together small, then put your Ducke or other foul before
named into a Pipkin, with as much as half a pint of strong Mutton broth, or
fresh Beef broth: put in a quarter of a pint of Sack or White Wind, then put
in half your Herbs, and Raisins and grauy of your Ducke into the Pipkin unto
your Ducke, put in six blades of whole Mace, a little Sugar, a grain or two of
Salt, let your Ducke boil, often turning it, until it be half boiled away: in
the mean while, take the other half of the Herbs, and Raisins, mingle them
with the white of an Egg, and fry them with a little suet in a pan, in round
Cakes like Figs, frye them thoroughly and they will be green, but burn them
not. Then dish up your Duck upon Sippets, and power your broth upon the top,
and lay on your round Sippets upon the breast of your Duck, scrape on Sugar,
and serve it hot to the Table.

Another way to boil small Carpes or Breames.
SCrape your Fish, and put it in a skillet or Pipkin, and half a Pint of
fair water and as much White Wind, take the milches and refuse of your Fish,
wash the^ clean, and put them again into your fish: then put in five or six
blades of whole Mace, a handful of Parsley clean picked, a little Sauory, and as
much Time stripped, a good piece of sweet Butter, a little Sugar: put all these
into your fish, and let it boil until it be half boiled away, then put in a
handful of Gooseberries or Grapes in clusters, or if you have neither of both,
the^ take Barberries, or a sliced Lemmon, and strain the yolks of three Eggs
with a little Vinegar or White Wind, put it into your broth to thicken it: then
Dish up your fish with any garnishing that you have, and lay in your fish, and
power the broth upon it, scrape on Sugar, and serve it hot to the Table.

Another way to boil a Leg of Mutton or Lamb.
CVt a piece of Kidney suet in square pieces of the bigness and length of your
finger, and then thrust your knife into six or seven places of the meat, and
put your pieces into the holes: boil your Mutton or Lamb, often turning it,
but take heed you ouerboyle it not: then boil a good handful of Parsley
tender, mince it small with your Knife, then warm a quarter of a pint of
White Wind Vinegar with a Chafindish of Coals, with a piece of sweet Butter as
big as an Egg, and put in a few clusters of Barberries, boiled or pickled:
then Dish up your meat upon sippets, pour this sauce upon it, and serve it hot.

To boil Eeles.
FLey and wash your Eeles, and cut them in pieces about a handful long, cover
them in a pot or Pipkin with water, put to them a little Pepper, and Mace
beaten, and six Onyons in thin slices, a little grated bread, three or four
spoonefuls of Ale-yeast, a good piece of sweet Butter, a handful of Parsley,
a little-Winter-Sauory, and as much Time, shred them small, and put them in,
and boil them moderately half an hour: as soon as they begin to boil,
put in a handful of Currants well washed and picked, and when it is boiled, put in
a little Vinegar or Verjuyce, and another piece of sweet Butter, and a little
Salt; then lay them upon sippets, and serve them hot to the Table.

To boil a Rabbet.
FLey and wash your Rabbet, slit the hinder legs on both sides of the backbone,
turn them forward and trusse it, prick them close to the body of the Rabbet,
and set the head right up, with a prick right down in the neck, then put it
into a pot or Skillet, that you may turn it in and cover it with fair water,
and make it to boil: then season it with a little whole Mace, sweet Butter and
Salt, and a few Currants, a handful of Parsley, a little Winter Sauory and
Time, bruised with the back of a Ladle: then scrape a raw Carret, then take the
yolks of two hard Eggs, a toast of manchet, strain it with a little Verjuyce
through a strainer, and put all these into it, both to season it and to thicken
it then let it boil leisurely with often turning it, until your broth be
half boiled away: then put in a little sweet Butter, a little Sugar, and a
little more Verjuyce, and then dish it upon sippets, and power your broth upon
it, scrape on Sugar and serve it hot to the Table.

To boil Lamprels.
WAsh your Lamprels, but take not out the Guts, cut them in pieces about an
inch long, and put into the pot or posnet twice so much water as will cover
them, season it with Pepper and Salt, thicken it with a few Onyons, and a
little grated bread, and a little Ale-yest, then shred a handful of Parsley, a
little winter-Sauory and Time small, let all boil until the broth be half
boiled away: then put in a good piece of sweet butter, and let them boil a
little more, then serve it either in dishes or in porengers.

To boil a Neck, or a Loine, or a Chine of Mutton, or to boil a Neck, or
Leg, a Fillet, or a Knuckle of Veale, or to boil a Leg, or Loine of Lamb.
CVt any of these meats in so big pieces as that two or three of them may
serve in a Dish, and put them into a Pot, with so much water as will cover
them: If you have one neck of Mutton or Veal, then you may take two handfuls
of Parsley, and ten sprigs of Winter-Sauory, and as much of Time: then put into
these Herbs twelve reasonable great Onyo^s, but if they be small, then take
the more, grate in half a penny loaf, put into these an ounce of Cloaues and
Mace, two or three corns of Pepper, all your spices being beaten small, put in
the quantity of one ounce of Sugar, and six spoonefulls of Ale-yest, and a
little Salt: put all these into your meat when it begins to boil: then let it
boil moderately until it be half boiled away, often stirring it that it
burn not, then put in five or six speenefulls of Vinegar: then you may Dish
it in as many Dishes as you see fitting, according to the occasions: serve it
in to the board hot.

To stew Smelts or Flounders.
PVt your Smelts or Flounders in a deep dish, put to them a quarter of a pint
of Vinegar or white wind, as much Butter as two Eggs, put in a little great
Pepper, ^ handful of Parsley, six sprigs of Winter-Sauory and as much of
Time, shred them, and mince them small in the yolks of two hard Eggs: put in
all these when you put in your fish, and let them stew, now and then turning
them and your fish, and when you see them stewed, dish them upon sippets, and
lay on them bunches of pickled barberries, scrape on Sugar, and serve them hot
to the table.

To boil Pigeons on the French fashion.
TRusse your Pigeons ready to be boiled, cover them with water, take two or
three blades of whole Mace, a handful of French Capers, a few Raisins of the
Sun, shred small three or four Dates, broken into quarters, a good piece of
sweet Butter, and a little Sugar, let them boil half away, then put in the
yolk of a hard Eg minst, a little sweet Butter, three or four spoonfuls of
Vinegar, as your taste shall direct you, more or less: garnish your dish with
some of your aforesaid Eggs, and take out some of your Capers out of your
broth, lay them upon sippets, scrape on Sugar, and serve them hot to the Table.

Another way to boil a Pike.
TAke out the riuet out of your Pike, and wash it, and cut it in pieces all of
a length, three pieces are enough, then take the middle piece and slit it down
the back into two pieces, then cover it in the pan or kettle with fair water,
and boil it with a handful of white Salt and sweet Herbs, but put not in your
fish until the water boil, and then let it swim before you take it up, for it
is not enough til the^: then take it up, and lay it upon sippets with the head
and tail, and cut ends both together in the middle of the Dish, then lay your
middle pieces on each side one, with the scales upward: if it be a small Pike
you may take off the scales: but if it be a great one, then let them alone, for
they keep your fish very white: boil a good handful of Parsley tender, and
mince it fine, and put it into a Pipkin with a quarter of a pint of Vinegar,
and as much sweet Butter as an Egg, eight or nine clusters of Parboyld
Barberies, a little Sugar to take away the sharpness of your vinegar, pour it
upon your dish of fish hot, but let it not boil: scrape on Sugar, etc. You may
garnish this dish with boyld Parsley, Barberies, and mince also the yolke of an
Egg and strew on it.

To boil Olives of Veale.
CVt a fillet of Veale in thin slices, as broad as your hand, and then beat
them with the back of your chopping Knife, then take two handfuls of Parsley,
and half a handful of Rosemary and Time, pick them and shred them small, put
to them a handful of Currants, the yolks of two or three hard Eggs minst, a
little Sugar: work all these with a raw Egg: season your pieces of Veale with
Mace, Pepper, Ginger, and Salt: then put your farcing herbs upon your thin
pieces of Veale, and roll them up as big as an Egg, and prick them with a
small prick, and keep them close, then cover them in a Pipkin with fair
water, with a handful of French Capers, and a handful of Currants: and the
other half of your herbs: understand that you must put but half your herbs to
your Olives: then put in a little Pepper, Mace beaten, a little Sugar: boil all
these together, with often turning them that they burn not, and put in a good
piece of sweet Butter, Vinegar, and Sugar: dish it upon sippets and serve it to
the Table.

To boil a Mullet, or a Pike with Oysters.
TAke a fair Mullet or Pike, trusse it round, and set it on a kettle of water,
and throw into it a handful of Salt, and a handful of sweet Herbs, and make
your water boil: then tie your Mullet or Pike in a fair cloth, and put it
into your boiling liquour, and put it in a pint of White Wind Vinegar, and let
your fish boil leisurely until it swim: take the riuet and a pint of great
oysters, and as much Vinegar as their grauy, three or four blades of Mace, a
little gross Pepper: boil all these in a Pipkin by themselves, until your
Oysters be boiled, then strain the yolks of two or three Eggs with half a
pint of Sack, or White Wind, put in a little Sugar, and another piece of
Butter, then put in your Wine and Eggs: then dish up your fish upon sippets
and power your broth upon it: scrape on fine Sugar, and serve it hot, etc. With
this broth you may stew a Capon, but the^ you must take roasted Ches-nuts,
being roasted very tender, but not burnt, and steep them in Sack or
Claret Wine, (...) and put them into your Oysters: then dish up your Capon upon
sippets, and your broth upon it: scrape on Sugar, and serve it in hot to the
Table.

To boil a tame Ducke.
Cover your Ducke with fair water in a Pipkin, put in five or six blades of
Mace, a handful of Raisins of the Sun, five or six sliced Onyons, a good piece
of sweet Butter: when your Ducke is half boiled, put in three or four pieces of
Marrow, let them boil until your broth be half boiled away, then put in a
little Vinegar: garnish your Dish with parboyld Onyons, and Raisins of the
Sun. Lay your Duck upon sippets in your garnisht Dish, and pour your broth
and Onyons upon the top of your Duck: scrape on Sugar and serve it hot to the
Table.

To boil a rashar of Mutton, or of cold Lamb.
SLice cold Mutton or Lamb into thin slices, and put it into a pewter or
earthen Dish, and put to it half a pint of Claret Wine, a blade or two of
Mace, a Nutmeg sliced in round slices, and a little Sugar, a little Butter:
stew your Mutton until it be through hot, and lay your rasher upon sippets.

To boil a Knuckle of Veale, or a neck of Mutton.
CVt your Knuckle or neck into pieces, boil it in a gallon of fair water, put
in seven or eight blades of Mace, as many pieces of whole Cinnamon and Nutmegs,
ten whole Cloves, a pound of Raisins of the Sun, the stones picked out, a
pound of Currants, half a pound of French Barley clean washed, put in all this
after that your meat begins to sees, and is scummed. If you boil a knuckle
of veale then you were best, if you have it, to boil a Marrow* bone with it:
but if you boil a neck of Mutton you need not: boil all this until it come
to a pottle, then put in Salt by discretion, as your taste ^ all direct you,
put in half a pint of Claret Wine, and if it be not sweet enough, you may put
in Sugar* sippet it, and serve it, etc.

To stew the ribs of a neck of Veale in steakes.
PVt five or six ribs of a neck of Veale into a pewter Dish, prick into every
rib two or three Cloves, put to it half a pint of Mutton or Beef broth,
four or five blades of whole Mace, half a handful of Currants, three or four
Dates broke in quarters, a little Saffron tide up in a cloth, a piece of sweet
Butter as big as an Egg: stew these half away, close covered, turning them
often: then put in a little Verjuyce, and lay your steaks upon sippets, power
your broth on them, scrape on Sugar, and serve them hot to the table.

Bakte Meats, and Kickshawes.
To make a grand Sallet.
TAke buds of al kind of good Herbs and a handful of French Capers, seven or
eight Dates cut in long slices, a handful of Raisins of the Sun, the stones
being picked out, a handful of Almonds blancht, a handful of Currants, five or
six figs sliced, a preserved Orange cut in slices: mingle al these together
with a handful of Sugar, then take a fair Dish fit for a shoulder of Mutton,
set a standard of paste in the midst of it, put your aforesaid Sallet about
this standard, set upon your Sallet four half Lemmons, with the flat ends
downward, right over against one another, half way betwixt your standard, and
the dishes side, prick in every one of these Lemmons a branch of Rosemary and
hang upon the Rosemary preserved Cherries, or Cherries fresh from the free: set
four half Eggs, being roasted hard, between your Lemmons, the flat ends
downward, prick upon your Eggs sliced Dates and Almonds: then you may lay
another garnish between the brim of the Dish and the Sallet, of quarters of
hard Eggs and round slices of Lemmons: then you may garnish up the brim of the
Dish with a preserved Orange, in long slices, and betwixt every slice of
orange, a little heap of French Capers. If you have not a standard to serve in:
then take half a Lemmon, and a fair branch of Rosemary.

To sowce a Pigge.
CVt off the head of a fair large Pig, and roll him up in small collars like
Brawne: boil it in a kettle of fair water, twice so much as will cover him,
put in a handful of sweet herbs, and a handful of white Salt, seven or
eight blades of whole Mace, two or three Nutmegs cut in quarters, three or
four races of Ginger sliced, half a pint of white wind Vinegar or more: let
these boil until your Pigge be very tender, as you may easily know by your
own discretion: then take your Pig up with a scummer, and lay it upon a plate
until it be cold, then boil your broth again until it come to a Gelly, strain
it through a Gelly bag into a dish, then take your collars of Pig and pare off
the top and the bottom, but ridge them as you do Brawne, and cut off the
skin round about: set three of them in a dish fitting for them, but let not
the one piece touch the other, then put your Gelly warm upon them, even until
they be covered, and so let them stand until they be cold, this dish may well
return to the Table three or four times: the garnishing may be thereunto what
you think fit or what you have ready.

To make Puspaste.
TAke a quart of flower, a pound and a half of sweet Butter, work half a
pound of the Butter into the flower dry, betwixt your hands: then break into
the flower four Eggs, and as much fair water as will wet it, to make it
reasonable light paste, then work it into a piece of a foot long, strew a
little flower on the table, that it hang not to, then take it by the end, and
beat it well about the board until it stretch long, and then double it, and
taking both ends in your hand, beat it again, and do so five or six times,
then work it up and roll it abroad, and then take the other pound of Butter,
and cut it in thin slices, and spread it all over the one half of your Paste,
with your thumb, then turn the other half over your buttered side, and turn
in the sides round about underneath, then crush it down with a Rolling-pin,
and so work it five or six times with your Butter, then you may roll it
broad, and cut it in four quarters, and if it be not thin enough roll it
thinner in round pieces about the thicknes of your little finger: then take a
Dish as broad as your piece of Paste, and strew on a little flower on the dish,
then lay on one piece of paste, and you may put into it pieces of Marrow and
Hartichoak bottomes or Potato, or Eringus roots: but you must roll your lumpes
of Marrow in the yolks of raw Eggs, and season them with Cinnamon, Sugar,
Ginger, and a very little Salt: lay this upon your Paste, then lay your other
sheet upon that dish, and close it round about the brim of your dish with your
thumb: then cut off your round with a Knife close by the brim of the dish,
then you may cut it cross the brim of the dish like virginal keys, and turn
them cross over one another: then bake them in an Oven, as hot as for small
Pyes. In this manner you may make Florentines of Rice, with yolks of Eggs,
boiled with Cream: Boil the yolks of six Eggs with half a pint of Cream,
keep it with very much stirring, that it burn not, and it will turn thick,
like Curds, but it will be yeilow: then you may season it with Sugar, Cinnamon,
and a little Nutmeg, three or four sliced Dates, put into it three or four
pieces of Almond paste, five or six lumps of Marrow, stir them up together,
and put them into the Florentine, then bake it in an Oven, as hot as for Pies.
If you have Rice, boil it tender in Milk, and a blade or two of Mace, boil
it until the Milk be boiled away, then season it with a little Nutmeg,
Cinnamon, and Sugar, two or three raw Eggs, a little Salt, a little Rose Water,
a handful of Currants, three or four sliced Dates: you may put this in your
dish, betwixt two sheets of puffed past, and bake it as before. If you have none
of these, then you may take quarters of Pippins, or Pears, the coares taken
out, and boiled tender in Claret: Wine, then put them into the Paste, or for
want of these, you may take Gooseberries, Cherries, or Damsons, or Apricockes,
without the stones, or Prunes: when you see your past rise up white in the
Oven, and begin to turn yellow, then take it forth and wash it wish Rose,
water and Butter, scrape on fine sugar, and set it into the Oven again, about a
quarter of an hour: then draw it forth, and serve it in.

To roast a Leg of Mutton, or a Cowes Udder.
THrust your Knife into the Leg of Mutton, at the butte end, the length of
your finger, then take a piece of Kidney suet, and cut it in long slices and
thrust into every hole of the Leg one of those pieces: prick on the outside
whole Cloaues: then roast your Leg tender, take a hard Lettice, a handful of
Parsley, and boil them tender, then beat them with the back of your
Chopping-knife a cross, until they be as soft as the pulp of an apple: then
take a piece of sweet Butter as big as an Egg, and a quarter of a pint of
Vinegar, and a spoonefull of powder-Sugar: heat this upon the fire, and serve
it in unto the Table hot, with your meat. Though this be excellent sauce, yet
if you like it not, then you may make a Gallantine thus. Take a little
Claret Wine, and a piece of sweet Butter, grated bread, a little beaten
Cinnamon, and Ginger, a little Sugar, two or three cloves, a branch of Rosemary:
set all these on the fire until they boil, and then put it in to the Leg,
or Vdder, and serve it hot to the Table.

To make an Olive Pie to be eaten hot.
CVt the flesh of a Leg of Veal into slices, as broad as your hand, and beat
it a cross with the back of a chopping-Knife: then take two handfuls of
Parsley, seven or eight sprigs of Winter-Sauory, as many of Time: strip these
small, and let there be no stalks in them, then shred them and put unto them
the yolks of three or four hard Eggs minst small: season your meat with
Ginger, Nutmeg, Salt, and Sugar: put to your Herbs a little Sugar, and a
handful of Currants: lay your herbs upon your slices of Veale beaten and
seasoned: then roll every piece into an Olive of the bigness of an Eg, and
lay them into a Coffin fit for your meat, and strew on them the rest of your
herbs, and a few Currants, three or four sliced Dates, three or four blades
of whole Mace, a little Sugar, put in half a pound of sweet Butter, cut in
slices, close up the Pie, and bake it in an Oven, as hot as for Manchet: half
an hour before you serve it to the board, put in a little white wind or
Vinegar, wash over your Pie with a little Rose Water and Butter, and strew upon
it hard Sugar and flower beaten together: if any place grow presently dry, wet
it again with Rose Water and Butter, and set it into the Oven again, and
within a quarter of an hour it will be crisp like ice: then draw it forth, and
serve it hot to the Table.

To roast a shoulder of Mutton to serve for either Dinner or Supper.
ROast it with a quick fire that the fat may drop away, and when you think it
half roasted, set a Dish under it, and flash it with a Knife a cross, as you
do Porke, but you must cut it down to the bone on both the sides, let all the
grauy run into the dish, baste it no more after you have cut it, put unto the
grauy half a pint of White Wind Vinegar, a bandfull of French Capers, a dozen
Raisins of the sun, the stones being picked out, five or six Dates broken in
quarters, five or six Olives sliced, five or six blades of Mace, a handful of
powder Sugar, stew all these until they be half stewed away: then dish your
Shoulder, and power this sauce on the top of the meat, throw on Salt, and
serve it hot to the Table.

To bake a Chicken Pie to be eaten hot.
TRusse four or five Chickens fit to be bakte, season them with Nutmegge,
Pepper, Salt, and Sugar, put them into a fit Coffin: then season seven or eight
lumpes of Marrow, with Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Salt and Sugar, roll it in yolks of
hard Eggs, it will keep them from dissoluing: lay your marrow upon the
Chickens, and the yolks of three or four hard Eggs broken in quarters, five
or six blades of whole Mace, as many quartered Dates, a little Sugar, half a
pound of sweet Butter: close up your Pie, and set it in an Oven as hot as for
Manchet, and in one hour it will be bakte, draw it forth, and wash it with
Rosewater and Butter, and strew on flower, and Sugar, beaten together, and set
it again into the Oven a quarter of an hour, it will be like ice: then draw it
forth, and put in a little Sack, or Muscadine, and so serve it hot to the
Table.

To roast a Neates tongue to be eaten hot.
Boil a fair Neates tongue tender, blanch it and lard it on one side, prick
in some Cloves: then cut out the meat at the great end; and mince it with a
little dubbing suet, as much as an Egg, then season it with a little Nutmeg,
and Mace, and Sugar, three or four Dates minst, a handful of Currants, half a
preserved Orange minst small, about half a grain of Musk: work up your meat
with the yolks of two raw Eggs, and stuff it hard into the Tongue; then
pin over the end a piece of a Caul of Veale, or a skinny piece of Beef
suet, then put it on a small spit, through both ends, set a Dish under the meat
to save the grauy, baste it with sweet Butter, and put to the grauy a little
Sack, or Muscadine and the yolk of an hard Egg minst, and the coare of a
Lemmon minst: when your Neates Tongue is roasted take it up, and put it in a
dish fitting for it, and put a little Sugar into the sauce, and power it all
over the Tongue, and serve it hot to the Table.

To bake a Neates Tongue to be eaten hot.
Boil a fair Neates Tongue tender: season it as you read before in the roasted
tongue: then lay in the tongue into a Coffin, made of the same fashion. Lay on
it five or six blades of whole Mace, three or four quartered Dates, a little
Orange cut into slices, the coare of a Lemmon sliced, half a pound of sweet
Butter, a little Sugar, close up your Pie, and put it into an Oven, as hot as
for Manchet: if you see it color too fast, then take down the Oven lid: but if
too slow, then lay a few coals in the Ouens mouth, in an hour and half it
will be bakte: then take a little Sack or Muscadine, and the juice of a
Lemmon, half a grain of Musk, a little Sugar, the yolks of two or three raw
Eggs, a little sweet Butter: set this on a chafindish of coals, and stir
it, that the Eggs curdle not, until the Butter be melted, then draw it out,
and cut it up, and put in your caudle, scrape on Sugar, and serve it hot to the
Table.

To roast a Pigge with a Pudding in his belly.
FLey a fat Pigge, and trusse his head backward, looking over his back, lay
him in a very fair Dish, for soyling: then temper as much stuff for a
Pudding, as you think will fill his belly, you must temper your pudding with
grated bread, half a pound of dubbing suet minst, a handful of Currants, four
or five Dates minst, Cloaues, Mace, Nutmegs, and Ginger, beaten, of each alike,
and a little Sugar, and a very little Salt, you must wet your pudding with two
Eggs, and a little Rosewater and sweet Cream, as much as will wet your
pudding so stiff, as that if you lay it upon a Trencher, it will not run
abroad: then put it into the belly of the Pigge, and prick up the belly close,
spit it, and roast it: and when it is almost roasted, wring upon it the juice
of a Lemmon: and when you are ready to take it up, take the yolks of four or
five new-laid Eggs, a handful of feathers, wash the Pigge with the yolks of
Eggs, and while you are a washing the Pigge, let some other body bread it
after you, before the Eggs be hard: mingle amongst your bread a little Ginger,
Pepper, and Nutmeg: let your sauce be Vinegar, Butter, and Sugar, and the yolke
of a hard Egg minst: so serve it in upon your sauce hot to the Table.

To bake a Pigge to be eaten hot.
FLey a small fat Pigge, cut it in quarters or in smaller pieces, season it
with Pepper, Ginger, and Salt: lay it into a fit Coffin, strip and mince small a
handful of Parsley, six sprigs of Winter-Sauorie, strew it on the Meat in the
Pie, and strew upon that the yolks of three or four hard Eggs minst, and lay
upon them five or six blades of Mace, a handful of clusters of Barberries, a
handful of Currants well washed and picked, a little Sugar, half a pound of
sweet Butter, or more: close your Pie, and set it in an Oven, as hot as for
Manchet: and in two hours it will be Bakte: then draw it forth and put in half
a pint of Vinegar, and Sugar, being warmed upon the fire, pour it all over
the meat, and put on the Pie-lid again: scrape on Sugar, and serve it hot to
the Table.

Another way to roast a Leg of Mutton.
LArde a fair large Leg of Mutton, a finger deep with the kidney suet, cut
long wise like ones finger: prick in some Cloves, and roast it with a quick
fire: when you think it half roasted, cut off some of the vnderside of the
flesh end, into thin slices: then take half a pint of great Oysters, and
the grauy of them, three or four blades of whole Mace, a piece of sweet
Butter, as big as an Egg, a quarter of a pint of Vinegar, a spoonful of
Sugar: put all these into your slices of Mutton, which you cut off the Leg,
and stew them together in a Pipkin until the liquor be half consumed: then dish
up your Mutton being very well roasted, and pour the sauce upon the top of it:
strew Salt about it, and serve it hot to the Table.

To bake a steake Pie of the ribs of Mutton, to be eaten hot.
CVt a neck of Mutton betwixt every ribbe, beat every ribbe with a Cleuer
flatlings, it will make the Mutton to eat short: then season it with Pepper
and Salt, and put it in a Coffin, lay on three or four blades of whole Mace,
half a pound of sweet Butter, close up your Pie, and set it into an Oven, as
hot as for Manchet, in two hours it will be bakte: but in the mean time boil
a good handful of good Parsley very tender, beat it as soft as the pulp of an
Apple, put in a quarter of a pint of Vinegar, and as much White Wind or Sack,
but White Wind is the better, a little sweet Butter, two spoonefuls of Sugar,
put your Parsley into this liquour, heat it but warm: then you may cut up your
Pie, and pour this sauce all over the steakes: shake it well upon your peele,
to make the sauce and the grauy mingle together: then lay on your lidde again,
scrape on fine Sugar, and serve it hot to the Table.

To roast a Neck of Mutton.
CVt away the scragge end of a large neck of Mutton, and put a couple of pricks
through the best end, roast it with a quick fire, but scorch it not, baste it
with sweet Butter, then wring in the juice of half a Lemmon: when it is half
roasted, save the grauy in a dish, being put under the meat for the same
purpose, and then baste it again with sweet Butter, and wring in the juice of
the other half of the Lemmon: bread it with a little Manchet mingled with
beaten Nutmeg and Cloaues, put it into a warm Dish, and put in the grauy that
dropped from it: this is a sauce both wholesome, and toothsome.

To make a Hartichoake-Pie to be eaten hot.
TAke the bottomes of four well boiled Hartichoakes, season them with Nutmeg,
Pepper, Salt, and Sugar, then lay them in a Coffin, in each corner one: then
lay the Marrow of four or five Marrow-bones (as whole as you can get them) in
warm water to take away the redness, dry them, and season them with Cinnamon,
Ginger, Sugar, and Salt, roll them up in the yolks of raw Eggs, and lay them
upon your Hartichoakes, and here and there the yolk of an hard Egg, some
whole, some in halues, as your eye shall advise you, strew on them the rest of
the seasoning: lay upon them five or fix Dates broken in quarters, five or
six blades of whole Mace and a little Sugar, put almost a pound of sweet
Butter on the top of all: close your Pie, and set it into an Oven as hot as for
Manchet, in an hour or little more it will be bakte: if your Oven be over hot,
it will dissolve your Marrow, or dry it up: draw it forth when it has stood an
hour, put in a little Sack or Muscadine, wet it with Rosewater and Butter,
strew on it a little flower and Sugar beaten together, and set it into the Oven
again, in a qua^ter of an hour it will be hard, and cris^^ like ye: draw it
forth and serve it hot to the Table.

To roast a Shoulder, or Hanch of Venison, or a Chine of Mutton.
TAke any of these meats, lard them with French larde, and prick them thick
with Rose-mary, roast them with a quick fire, but burn them not, baste them
with sweet Butter: take half a pint of Claret Wine, a little beaten Cinnamon
and Ginger, two spoone fulls of Sugar, five or six whole Cloves, a branch of
Rosemary, a little sweet Butter, a handful of grated bread: let all these
boil together, until it be as thick as Water-grewell, then put in a little
Rose Water and Musk, it will make your Gallentine taste very pleasantly, put
it in a fitting dish: draw off your meat, and lay it into the dish, strew it
with Salt.

To make Chewets of Veale.
PArboyle two pound of the lean flesh of a Leg of Veale, so, as that it may
be eaten: pare off the outside and mince the meat so small as grated bread,
then mince six pound of Beef suet, as small as the meat, but you must first
pick out the kernels, and the skins, mingle them so together, as that you can
see no meat in the suet: then mince a quarter of a pound of Dates small, take
a quarter of a pound of Biskets and Carrawaies, two pound of Currants clean
washed and picked, and dride in a fair cloth: season your meat with a little
Cloaues and Mace, Nutmegge, and twice so much Cinnamon as any of the other, all
by discretion, the fourth part of a pint of damask Rosewater, almost half a
pound of Sugar, then stir up your meat, that it be seasoned in all places
alike, the least taste of Salt that may be is enough: then raise such Pies as
you may put nine or ten of them in a dish, fashion them somewhat long, and
raise them higher then an ordinary Pie, fill them as full as you can without
disfashioning of them, with thrusting out the sides, close them with very
thin liddes, bake them in an Oven as hot as for other Pies, in half an hour
they will be bakte: draw them out, and scrape on Sugar, and serve them hot to
the Table.

To roast a Capon with Oysters, and Chestnuts.
Boil and pill nine or ten Chestnuts, put them hot into Claret Wine,
parboyle as many great Oysters, spit a Capon to be roasted, put the Chestnuts
and the Oysters into the belly of the Capon, and stop them in with sweet
Butter, roast it with as hot a fire as you can, but burn it not: baste it with
sweet Butter, so soon as it drops, save the grauie: parboyle twenty
Chestnuts, and twice so many great Oysters, take half a pint of Claret Wine,
and a piece of sweet Butter, and a little gross Pepper, stew the Oysters and
parboyld Chestnuts in the Wine, with Butter, until it be half consumed: then
put the grauie of the Capon into your sauce, and the sauce into a fair Dish:
bread up your Capon, and lay it on the sauce, sprinckle Salt, and serve it in
hot to the Table.

To bake a Quince or a Warden Pie, so as the fruit may be red, and the crust
pale and tender.
PAre fair pear Quinces or Wardens, and set them into an earthen pan, with
the crowns upward, put to them a little Claret Wine, and a grain of Musk or
more, according to the quantity of the fruit, put in a little Sugar, cover them
close with a sheet of Paste, set them into a Bakers Oven with wheaten bread,
but not household bread, for then they will be burnt and dry: when they have
stood three or four hours in the Oven, they will be very red and tender, then
you may keep them a week or more for use: when you have occasion to make your
Pie, take Butter, and the yolks of Eggs, and make short Paste, and raise a
Coffin fit for your stuff, one by another, put in whole Cloves, and a little
whole Cinnamon, pour in some sirrup from their former baking, or if you want
it, then put in Claret Wine, and more Sugar, set them in an oven as hot as for
Pies, and in one hour they will be bakte, and your fruit orient red. Remember
before your first baking, that you coare your Quinces.

To roast a Shoulder or a Fillet of Veale with farcing herbs.
VVAsh your meat, and parboyle it a little, striptwo handful of Parsley,
Winter Sauory a handful, and some Time: mince these herbs small, put to them
the yolks of three or four hard Eggs minst, Nutmeg, and Pepper, Currants a
good handful, work all these with the yolke of a raw Egg: make holes as deep
as your finger all over your meat, fill them with the Herbs: roast it with a
quick fire, let the grauy of the Herbs drop on the Herbs left, baste
your meat with sweet Butter: when it is almost roasted, put the herbs and
grauy to a quarter of a pint of White Wind Vinegar, and a good spoonefull of
Sugar, let them boil until you take up the meat, and when it is in a ^it
dish, power the fawce all over the meat, and strew it with Salt, and serve it
hot to the Table.

To fry Calves feet, or Trotters.
SHred a handful of young Parsley very small, and beat it between three or
four raw Eggs, season it with a little Nutmeg and Sugar, a corn of Pepper,
and a little Salt: boil your feet tender, and slit them in halues, roll three
of these halues into the aforesaid Parsley and Eggs: heat your frying pan
with sweet Butter, or suet, slide your feet and Eggs with the flat side
downward, when the Butter is hot: if you have any Currants, put a handful into
your Eggs and Parsley, they will ask no more frying then an Egg: when the
under side is yellow, turn them every one by it self, as you do Eggs, Dish
them upon sippets, with that side outward that you fryd first, boil young
Parsley tender, and beat it until it be like the pulp of a roasted Apple, put
to it a quarter of a pint of Vinegar, two spoonefuls of Sugar, a piece of
sweet Butter, heat them well, and power them on the feet, scrape on Sugar, and
serve it hot to the Table.

Buttred Loaves.
SEason a pottle of flower with Cloves, Mace, and a little Pepper, mingle it
with Milk warm from the Cow, take half a pound of sweet Butter melted,
half a pint of Ale-yest, two or three raw Eggs, temper your flower with
these things, to the temper of Manchet paste, then make them up in little
Manchets about the bigness of an Egg, flat them, cut them and prick them,
set them on a paper, and bake them like Manchet, let the Ouen-lidde be down:
but if something be in the Oven that requires longer or more heats, then cover
them with a paper, in an hour they will be thoroughly soakt: then melt a pound
of sweet Butter, with some Rose Water in it, draw forth your loaves, and pare
away the crusts, slit them through betwixt the top and the bottom, in two
places, and they will be like three round toasts: put them into the melted
Butter, and turn them over and over in the Butter, then take a warm Dish, and
put in the bottom pieces of the loaves, strew on Sugar of a good thickness,
then set on the middle pieces, and serve them likewise: lastly put on the tops,
and scrape on Sugar on them also: so you may set on three, four, five, six,
or more in a dish. If you be not ready to send them in, then set them in the
Ouens mouth, with a paper over them, to keep them from drying.

To fry sheep tongues, Deeres tongues, or Calves tongues.
Break three or four Eggs with Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Sugar, and Salt, put to them
a handful of Currants: pill the Tongues, and slice them in thin slices, put
them into your Eggs: and when your Frying pan is hot with Butter, or sweet
lard, cut the coare of a Lemmon in square pieces, like dice, and put it in to
your Eggs and tongues, but not before you be ready to put the meat into the
pan, for then it will make them curdle: then frye them in spoonefulls like
Eggs on both sides, the least burning takes away all the good taste of all the
other things: fry them, and dish them upon sippets, or upon thin Manchet
toasts fride with sweet Butter. Let your sauce be Sack, or White Wind, sweet
Butter, and Sugar, heat it hot, and pour it on the top of your Tongues:
scrape on Sugar, and serve it hot to the Table.

Boiled Sallets.
SCrape boyld Carrets, being ready to eat, and they will be like the pulp of a
roasted Apple, season them with a little Cinnamon, Ginger, and Sugar, put in a
handful of Currants, a little Vinegar, a piece of sweet Butter, put them into a
Dish, but first put in another piece of butter, that they burn not to the
bottom: then stew your roots in the Dish a quarter of an hour: if they
begin to be dry, put in more Butter: if they be too sweet, put in a little
more Vinegar. The same way you may make a Sallet of Beetes, Spinnage, or
Lettice boiled: beat any of these tender, like the pulp of a roasted Apple, and
use them as before showed.

A bakte Pudding after the Italian fashion.
PAre off the crusts from a penny white loaf, cut it in square pieces like
dice, put to it half a pound of dubbing suet minst small, half a pound of
Raisins of the Sun, the stones taken out, two Ounces of Sugar, five or six
sliced Dates, a grain of Musk, five or six lumpes of Marrow: season these
with Cloaues, Mace, Nutmeg, and Salt, but a very little Salt is sufficient,
beat a couple of Eggs, with four or five spoonefuls of Cream, power it upon
your seasoned bread, and stir it very gently for breaking, so as the pieces
may be but wet, but not so wet that you can see any moisture in them: lay a
Pome water in the bottom of the Dish, or some other soft Apple pared, and
sliced thin, put your Pudding also upon the Apple, and so set the Dish into
an Oven, as hot as for Manchet, or small Pies, when you see it rise yellow,
take down your Oven lidde to cool your Oven, it will be bakte in half an
hour: if the Oven be too hot, it will be burnt, if it be too cold, it will be
too heavy: when it is bakte draw it forth, and scrape on Sugar, and serve it
hot to the Table.

To make Puffes.
SEt the best new Milk together, as a Cheese is made with Runnet, and when it
is run, take the Curds, and strain the Whey clean from them, then season
your Curds with a little Ginger, Cinnamon, Sugar, and Nutmegge, put in a little
Rosewater, Musk and one Egg, but the yolks of two: temper it with as much
fine flower as will make it leeth paste, as leeth as you can work it, then
butter a white Paper, make them into flat balls, about the bigness of a great
table man, and set them into an Oven as hot as for Manchet, upon the buttered
paper, or rather the Oven must be as hot as for small Pies: a quarter of an
hour after, you may take them out, and dipp them in Butter melted with
Rose Water, scrape on fine Sugar, and set them into the Oven again: beware of
burning them: when you see time, draw them again and put as many of them in a
Dish as you think fit: they will shine, and be crispe.

Blancht Manchet, to be made in a Drying Pan.
Break eight or nine Eggs, take away the whites of four of them, beat them,
with half a pint of sweet Cream: put to them half a penny Manchet grated,
and put to it two ounces of Sugar beaten, Nutmeg and Mace, a little Rose Water:
fry these with sweet Butter, even as you would fry a Tansey: but let it be a
small drying pan, that it may be the thicker, beware you burn it not: and when
it is fride, wash it over with a little Sack, and the juice of a Lemmon: scrape
on Sugar, and serve it in hot upon a plate, even as a Tansey.

To make Peascods, or Dolphins of Marrow, or of a roasted kidney of Veale.
SEason parboyld Marrow with Sugar, Cinnamon, and Ginger, roll it up in the
yolke of a raw Egg: then take a piece of short paste rolled very thin, then
flower your Dolphin or Peascod mold, and lay your piece of paste upon it, then
fill the mould upon the paste with your Marrow, or roast kidney minst, and
seasoned with the aforesaid seasoning, and fair parboyld Currants, being
wrought with the yolke of a raw Egg: when you have filled your moulds with
either of these meats upon the paste, round about close by the meat, then lay
another sheet of paste on the meat, and close it down with your finger to the
wet paste, then pinch off the paste close by the mould with your Thumb, and
then turn out your Dolphins or Peascods upon a paper, then frye them with a
good deal of sweet Suet, but let your Suet be hot before you put them in, or
else it will make your Paste, heavy: when you have fryde them on the one side,
turn the other, but fry that side last that you serve upward unto the Table:
then take them out of that hot Larde, and dish them upon a warm Dish and
plate, scrape on Sugar, and set it against the fire, or in a warm Oven, that
you may serve them hot, for if you let them lie still in the Drying Pan, they
will drink up the suet, and be both heavy, and of an ill taste: take heed also
in any wise that you turn them off, for they will endure no hot fire.

To make a Livery Pudding.
Boil a Hogs liver very dry, when it is cold grate it, and take as much
grated Manchet as Liver, sift them through a course Sieve or Collinder, and
season it with Cloaues, Mace, Cinnamon, and as much Nutmeg as of all the other,
half a pound of Sugar, a pound and half of Currants, half a pirite of
Rose Water, two pound of Beef Suet minst small, eight Eggs, put away the
whites of four: temper your Bread and Liver with these Eggs, Rose Water, and
as much sweet Cream as will make it something stiff: then cut the small guts
of a Hog about a foot long, fill them about three quarters full of the
aforesaid stuff, tie both ends together and boil them in a kettle of fair
water, with a pewter Dish, under them, with the bottom upward, and it will
keep your Puddings from breaking: when the water seetheth put in your
Puddings, let them boil softly a quarter of an hour, and take them up: an so
you may keep them in a dry trug a week or more: when you spend them, you must
broyle them.

To make Rice Puddings.
Boil half a pound of Rice with three pintes of Milk, a little beaten Mace,
boil it until your Rice be dry, but never stir it, but if you chance to
stir it, then you must stir it continually or else it will burn: power
your Rice into a Collinder, or else into a strainer, that the moisture may
run clean from it: then put to it six Eggs, and put away the whites of
three, half a pound of Sugar, a quarter of a pint of Rose Water, a pound of
Currants, a pound of Beef suet shred small, season it with Nutmeg, Cinnamon, and
a little Salt, stir all this together with a spoon thin, dry the smallest
guts of a Hog in a fair cloth being watered and scoured fit for the Puddings,
and fill them three quarters full, and tie both ends together, let them boil
softly a quarter of an hour or scarce so much, and let the water boil before
you put them in, and do as in the other Pudding last spoken of.

The end of the Books of Cookery.
A NEW BOOK OF CARVING AND SEVVING.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for John Marriot, and are to be sold at his shop in
St Dunstans Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1641.

Terms of a Carver.
BReak that Dear, leach that Brawne, rear that Goose, lift that Swan, sauce
that Capon, spoil that Hen, frush that Chicken, unbrace that Mallard: unlace
that Cony, dismember that Herne, display that Crane, disfigure that Peacock,
vnjoynt that Bitturne, vntatch that Curlew, allay that Fesant, wing that
Partrich, wing that Quail, mince that Plouer, thie that Pigeon, border that
Pastie, thie that Woodcock, thie all manner of small Birds.

Timber the Fire, tire that Egg, chine that Salmon, string that Lampry, splat
that Pike, sauce that Plaice, sauce that Tench, splay that Breme, side that
Haddock, tuske that Barbell, culpon that Troute, finne that Cheuine, transen
that Eele, tranch that Stugio, vndertranch that Porpas, tame that Crab, barbe
that Lobster.

The office of the Butler and Pantler, Yeoman of the Cellar and Ewry.
THou shall be Butler and Pantler all the first year, and ye must have three
pantry Knives, one Knife to square Trencher-loaues, another to be a Chipper,
the third shall be sharp for to make smoothe Trenchers: then chip your
Sovereigns bread hot, and all other bread let it be a day old, household bread
three days old, Trencher-bread four days old, then look your Salt be white
and dry, the powder made of Iuory two inches broad, and three inches long: and
look that your Saltceller lidde touch not the Salt: then look your table
clothes, towells and napkins be fair foulded in a chest or hanged upon a
perch, thou look your Table-kniues be fair polished, and your spoones
clean, then look you have two Tarriors, a more and a less, and wine cannels
of box, made according, and a sharp gimlet and faucets: And when ye set a Pipe
on broach, do thus, set it four fingers broad above the nether chine upward
a staunt, and then shall the lees never arise. Also look ye have in all seasons
Butter, Cheese, Apples, Pears, Nuts, Plums, Grapes, Dates, Figs and Raisins,
Compost, green Ginger, Chard, and Quince. Serve fasting, Butter, Plums,
Damsons, Cherries, and Grapes: After meat Pears, Nuts, Strawberries,
Huttleberries and hard Cheese: Also Blandrels, or Pippins with Carrawaies in
Confects: after Supper roasted Apples and Pears, with blancht powder, and hard
Cheese: beware of Cow-creame and of Strawberries, Huttleberries, Iuncat for
Cheese will make your Sovereign sick, but let him eat hard Cheese.

Hard Cheese has these operations: it will keep the stomach open. Butter is
wholesome first and last, for it will do away all poisons: Milk, Cream, and
Iuncate they will close the Maw, and so does a posset, beware of green
Sallets, and raw fruits, for they will make your Sovereign sick, therefore
set not much by such meats as will set your teeth on edge, therefore eat an
Almond and hard Cheese. Also of diverse drinks if their fumositiues have
displeased your Sovereign, let him eat a raw Apple, and the fumositiues will
cease.

Measure is a merry mean, and if it be well used, Abstinence is to be praised
when God therewith is pleased.

Also take good heed of your wines every night with a candle, both red Wine,
and sweet Wine, and look they reboyle nor leake not, and wash the pipe heads
every night with cold water, and look ye have a clenching iron, ads, and
linen clothes if need be, and if they reboyle, ye shall know by the hissing,
therefore keep an emptied Pipe with thelees of colored Rose, and draw the
reboyled Wine to the lees, and it shall help it, and if the sweet Wine pale,
draw it into a Romney Vessel for leesing.

Also look your compost be fair and clean, and your Ale five days old ere
men drink it, then keep your house of office clean, and be courteous to answer
to each person, and look ye give no person no paid drink, for it will breed
the scab.

And when ye lay the cloth, wipe the board clean with a cloth, then lay a
cloth (a couch it is called) take your fellow the one end, and hold you the
other end, then draw the cloth straight, the bought on the utter edge, take the
utter parts and hand it eauen, then take the third cloth and lay the bought on
the inner edge, and lay estate with the upper part half a foot broad, then
cover the Cuphoord and thine Ewry, with the Towel of Diaper, then take thy
Towell about thy neck, and lay the one side of the Towell upon thy left arm,
and thereon lay your Sovereigns Napkin, and lay on thine arm seven Loaves of
Bread, with three or four Trencher Loaves, with the end of the Towel in the
left hand, as the manner is, then take thy Salt-celler in thy left hand, and
take the end of the Towell in your right hand to bear in Spoones and Knives,
then set your Salt on the right side where your Sovereign shall sit, and on
the left side your Salt, set your Trenchers, then lay your Knives, and set your
Bread one Loaf by another, and your Spoones, and your Napkin fair foulded
beside your Bread, then cover your bread and trenchers, spoones and Knives, and
at every end of the Table, set a Saltseller, with two trencher Loaves, and if
ye will wray your Sovereigns Bread stately, ye must square and proportion
your Bread, and see that no Loaf be more then another, and then shall ye
make your wrapper mannerly: then take a Towell of reins, of two yards and a
half, and take the Towell by the ends double, and lay it on the Table, then
take the end of the bought, a handful in your hand, wrap it hard, then lay the
end so wrapped between two Towels, upon that end so wrapped. This being done,
lay your bread bottom to bottom, six or seven loaves, then see you set your
Bread mannerly in good form, and when your Sovereigns Table is thus arrayed,
cover all other boords with Salt, Trenchers and Cups: also see thine Ewry be
arrayed with Basins and Ewers, and water hot and cold, and see ye have Napkins,
Cups, Spoones, and see your Pots for Wine and Ale be made clean, and to the
surnape make the courtesy with a cloth under a fair double napry: then take
the Towels end next you, and the utter end of the Cloth on the vttter side of
the Table, and hold these three ends at once, and fould them at once, that a
pleat pass not a foot broad, then lay it even where it should lie: and after
meat wash with that, that is at the right end of the Table, ye must guide it
out, and the Marshall must convey it and look to each cloth, the right side
be outward, and draw it straight: then must ye raise the upper part of the
Towell, and lay it without any groaning, and at every end of the Towell ye
must convey half a yard that the Sewer may take estate reverently, and let it
be, and when your Sovereign has washed, draw the surnape eauen, then bear
the surnape to the midst of the board, and take it up before your Sovereign,
and bear it into the Ewry again, and when your Sovereign is set, look your
Towell be about your neck, then make your Sovereign courtesy, then uncover
your Bread and lay it by the Salt, and lay your Napkin, Knife, and spoone before
him, then kneel on your knee till the purpaine pass eight Loaves, and look
ye set at the ends of the Table four Loaves at a Mess, and see that every
person have a Napkin and a Spoone, and wait well to the Sewer how many Dishes
be covered, and so many cups cover ye, then serve ye forth the Table
mannerly, that every man may speak of your courtesy.

Of the Sewing of Flesh.
THe Sewer must Sew, and from the board convey all manner of pottages, meats
and sawces, and every day commune with the Cook, and understand and wit how
many Dishes shall be, and speak with the Pantlers and Officers of the Spicerie
for fruits that shall be eaten fasting. Then go to the board of Sewing, and
see ye have Officers ready to convey, and servants for to bear your Dishes.
Also if the Marshall, Squires, and Sergeants of Arms be there, then serve
forth your Sovereign without blame.

Service.
FIrst set ye forth Mustard and Brawn, Pottage, Beef, Mutton, stewed Pheasant,
Swan, Capon, Pig, Venison, Hake, Custard, Leach, and Lombard, Fruter, vaunt,
with a subtilty two pottages blanch manger and gelly. For standard Venison,
roast Kid, Fawn, and Come, Bustard, Storke, Crane, Peacock with his tail,
Hernesew, Bitturne, Woodcock, Partrich, Plouer, Rabbets, great Birds, Larks,
Doucets, Pampuffe, white Leach, Amber, Gelly, Cream of Almonds, Curlew, Brew,
Snite, Quail, Sparrow, Martinet, Perch in Gelly, pety Peruis, Quince bakte,
Leach Dewgard, Fruter, Fage, Blandrels or Pippins with Caraway in Confects,
Wafers and Ipocras, they be agreeable. Now this feast done, void ye that Table.

Of the Carving of flesh.
THe Caruer must know the Caruing, and the fair handling of a Knife, and how
he shall fetch all manner of Foul: your Knife must be fair, and your hands
must be clean, and pass not two fingers and a Thumb upon your Knife. In the
midst of your hand set the haft sure, vnlassing the mincing with two Fingers
and Thumb, Caruing of Bread, laying and voyding of Crumbs with two Fingers and
a Thumb: look ye have the care, set never on Fish, Flesh, Beast nor Foul,
more then two fingers and a Thumb, then take your loaf in your left hand, and
hold your knife surely, enbrew not the Table cloth, but wipe upon your Napkin,
then take your Trencher-loaf in your left hand and with the edge of your
Table-knife take up the Trenchers as nigh the point as you may, then lay four
Trenchers to your Sovereign one by an other, and lay thereon other four
Trenchers, or else twain, then take a Loaf in your left hand and pare the
loaf round about, then cut the over crust to your Sovereign, and cut the
nether crust and void the paring, and touch the Loaf no more after it is so
served, then cleanse the table that the Sewer may serve your Sovereign.

Ye must also know the fumosities of Fish, Flesh, and Fowls, and all manner
of Sawces according to their appetites, these be the fumosities: Salt, sour,
restie, fat, fried, sinews, skins, honey, croupes, young feathers, heads,
pigeons bones, and all manner of legs of beasts and fowls to the other side,
for these be fumosities, lay them never to your Sovereign.

Service.
TAke your Knife in your hand and cut Brawne in the Dish as it lies, and lay
on your Sovereigns Trencher, and see there be Mustard.

Venison with furmity is good for your Sovereign, touch not the Venison with
your hand, but with your Knife, cut it out into the furmity, do in the same
wise with Peason and Bacon, Beef, Hen and Mutton: pare the Beef, cut the
Mutton and lay to your Sovereign: beware of fumosities, salt, sinew, fat,
resty, and raw. In Sirrup, Phesant, Partrich, Stockedoue, Chickens, in the left
hand take them by the Pinion, and with the forepart of your Knife lift up your
wings, then mince it into the sirrup, beware of skin, raw and sinew: Goose,
Teale, Mallard and Swan, raise the Legs, then the wings, lay the body in the
midst or in any other Platter, the wings in the midst, and the Legs after,
lay the Brawne between the legs and the wings in the platter: Capon or Hen of
Greece, lift the Legs, then the wings, and cast on wine or ale, then mince
the wing and give your Sovereign: Fesant, Partridge, Plouer, or Lapwing, raise
the wings and after the legs, Wood-cocke, Bitturn, Egrit, Snite, Curlew and
Hernesew, unlace them, break off the Pinions, and break the neck, then raise
the legs, and let the feet be on still, then the wings. A Crane, raise the
wings first, and beware of the trump in his breast, Peacock Storke, Bustard, and
Shouillard, unlace them as a Crane, and let the feet be on still, Quail,
Sparrow, Lark, Martinet, Pigeon, Swallow and Thrush, the legs first, then the
wings: Fawn, Kid, and Lamb, lay the Kidney to your Sovereign, then lift up
the Shoulder, and give to your Sovereign, a ribbe. Venison roast, cut it in
the Dish, and lay it to your Sovereign: a Conny, lay him on the back, cut
away the vents between the hinder legs, break the carnell bone, then raise
the sides, then lay the Conny on the womb, on each side the chine, the two
sides departed from the Chine, then lay the bulk, Chine, and sides in the
Dish: also ye must mince four Lesses to one morsel of meat, that your
Sovereign may take it in the sauce. All bakte meats that be hot-open them
above the Coffin, and all that be cold open them in the midway. Custard, cheek
them inch square, that your Sovereign may eat Doucets, pare away the sides
and the bottom, beware of fumositiues, Fruter, vaunt, Fruters they say be
good, better is Fruter Pouch, Apple Fruters be good hot, and all cold touch
not. Tansey, is good hot. Worts of grewell, of Beef, or of Mutton is good,
Gilly, Mortrus, Cream of Almonds, Blanch-Manger, Iussell and Charlet, Cabbage
and vmbles of a Dear be good, and all other pottage beware of.

Sawces for all manner of Fowls.
MVstard is good with Brawn, Beef, chine of Bacon and Mutton: Verjuyce good to
boil Chickens, and Capon: Swan with Chaldrons: ribs of beef, with garlic:
Mustard, Pepper, Verjuyce, Ginger, sauce of Lamb, Pig and Fawn: Mustard and
Sugar, to Fesant, Partrich and Conny: sauce Gamlin, to Hernesew, Egript,
Plouer, and Crane, Brew and Curlew, Salt, Sugar, and water of Camet, Bustard
Shouillard, and Bitturne sauce, Gamlin, Woodcocke, Lapwing, Lark, Quail,
Martinet, Venison, and Snite, with whitesalt: Sparrowes and Throstles, with
salt and Cinnamon: thus with all meats, sauce shall have the operation.

Of the Feasts and service from Easter unto Whitsontide.
ON Easter day, and so forth to Penticost after, the serving of the Table,
there shall be set Bread, Trenchers and spoones after the estimation of them
that shall sit there, and thus you shall serve your Sovereign: lay Trenchers,
and if he be of a lower degree or estate, lay five Trenchers, and if he be of a
lower degree, four Trenchers, and of a lower degree, three Trenchers, then cut
bread for your Sovereign, after ye know his conditions, whether it be cut in
the midst or pared, or else to be cut in small pieces, also you must
understand how the meat shall be served before your Sovereign, and namely on
Easter day, after the governance and service of that Country where ye were
borne. First on that day ye shall serve a Calfe sodden, and sodden Eggs with
green sauce, and set them before the most principal estate, and that Lord
because of his high estate shall part them all about him, then serve pottage,
as Worts, Roots, or Brewis, with Beef, Mutton, or Veale, and Capons, to be
colored with Saffron, and baked meats, and the second course. Iussell with
Mamony, and roasted Endoured, and Pigeons, with Bakte meats, as, Tarts,
Chewets, and Flaunes, and other, after the disposition of the Cooks, and at
Supper time diverse sawces of Mutton or Veale in broth, after the ordinance of
the Steward, and then Chickens with Bacon, Veale, roast Pigeons, or tamed, and
Kid roast with the head, and the purtenance of Lamb, and Pigs feet with
Vinegar and Parsley thereon, and Tansey fried, and other bakte meats: ye
shall understand this manner of Service, dureth to Penticost, save fish days.

Also take heed how ye shall array these things before your Sovereign. First
ye shall see there be Green sauce of sorrel or of Vines, that is, hold a
sauce for the first course and ye shall begin to raise the Capon.

A general Table of direction for the order of Carving up of Foul, to direct
them which know not, and are willing to learn.
Lift that Swan.
THe manner of cutting vpos a Swan, must be to slit her right down in the
middle of the breast, and so clean through the back, from the neck to the rumpe,
so part her in two halfes, but you must do it cleanly and handsomely, that you
break not, nor tear the meat, then lay two halfes in a fair Charger, with the
slit sides downward, throw salt about it, and set it again on the Table. Let
your sauce be chaldron for a Swan, and serve it in sawcers.

Rear the Goose.
YOu must break a Goose up contrary to this fashion. Take a Goose being
roasted, and take off both the Legs fair like a shoulder of Lamb, take them
quite from the body, then cut off the belly piece round, close to the lower end
of the breast: then lace her down with your knife clean through the breast, on
each side your Thumbs breadth from the bone in the middle of the breast. Then
take off the Pinion of each side, and the flesh which you first laced with your
knife, raise it up clean from the bone, and take it clean from the carcass
with the Pinion. Then cut up the bone which lies before in the breast, which
you commonly call the Merry thought, the skin and the flesh being upon it. Then
cut from the breast bone another slice of flesh clean through, and take it
clean from the bone: then turn your carcass, and cut it asunder, the back
bone above the loyne bones, then take the Rumpe end of the Backbone, and lay
it in a fair Dish, with the skinnie side upward, lay at the fore-end of it the
Merry-throught, with the skinne-side upward, and before that the apron of the
Goose: then lay your Pinions on each side contrary, set your legs on each
side contrary behind them, that the bone end of the legs may stand up cross
in the middle of the Dish, and the wing Pinions may come on the outside of
them. Put under the Wing Pinions on each side the long slices of flesh which
you cut from the breast bone, and let the ends meet under the legge-bones, and
let the other ends lie cut in the Dish betwixt the Leg, and the Pinion: then
pour in your sauce into the Dish under your meat, then throw on Salt, and set
it on the Table.

To cut up a Turkey or Bustard.
YOu must raise up the Leg very fair, and open the joint with the point of of
your Knife, but take not off the Leg: Then lace down the breast with your
Knife on both sides, and open the breast Pinion with the Knife, but take not
the Pinion off, then raise up the Merry-throught betwixt the breast bone and
the top of the Merry-thought, then lace down the flesh on both sides of the
breast bone, then raise up the flesh called the brawne, and turn it outward
upon both sides, but break it not, nor cut it not off, then cut off the wing
Pinion, at the joint next to the body, and stick on each side the Pinion, in
the place where ye turned out the brawne, but cut off the sharp end of the
Pinion and take the middle piece, and that will fit just in the place.

You may cut up a Capon or Pheasant the same way: but of your Capon cut not off
the Pinion, but in the place where you put the Pinion of the Turkey, you must
put the Gizard of your Capon, on each side half.

Dismember that Herne.
YOu must take off both the legs, lace it down to the breast with your knife
on both sides, and raise up the flesh, and take it clean off with the Pinion.
Then you must stick the head in the breast, and set the Pinion on the contrary
side of the carcass: and the leg on the other side of the carcass, so that
the bone ends may meet cross over the carcass, and the other wing cross
over upon the top of the carcass.

Unbrace the Mallard.
RAise up the Pinion and the Leg, but take them not off, and raise the
Merrie-thought from the breast, and lace it down on each side of the breast
with your knife, bending to and fro like waves.

Unlace that Conny.
Turn the back downward, and cut the belly flaps clean off from the Kidney,
but take heed you cut not the Kidney, nor the flesh. Then put in the point of
your Knife between the Kidneys: and loosen the flesh from the bone on each
side of the bone, then turn up the back of the Rabbet, and cut it cross
between the wings, then lace it down close by the bone, with your Knife on
both sides, then open the flesh of the Rabbet, from the bone with the point of
your Knife against the Kidnie: and pull the Leg open softly with your hand,
but pluck it not off then thrust in your Knife betwixt the ribs and the
Kidney, and ^lit it out, then lay the legs close together.

Of the Carving of all manner of Fowls.
Sauce that Capon.
TAke up a Capon, and lift up the right leg and right wing, and so array
forth, and lay him in the platter as he should fly, and serve your Sovereign,
and know well that Capons, or Chickens be arraied after one sauce, the Chickens
shall be sawced with green sauce or Verjuyce.

Allay that Fesant.
Take a Fesant, raise his legs and his wings, as it were a Hen, and no sauce
but only Salt.

Wing that Partridge.
Take a partrich, and raise his legs and his wings as a Hen, if ye mince
him, sauce him with Wine, Powder of Ginger, and salt, then set him upon a
Cha^^ndish of coals to warm, and serve it.

Wing that Quail.
Take a Quail and raise his legs and his wings as a Hen, and no sauce but
Salt.

Display that Crane.
Take a Crane and unfold his legs, and cut of his wings by the joints, then
take up his wings and his legs, and sauce them with powder of Ginger,
Mustard, Vinegar and Salt.

Dismember that Heron.
Take a Heron and raise his legs and his wings as a crane, and sauce him with
Vinegar, Mustard, Powder of Ginger and Salt.

Vnjoynt that Bitturne.
Take a Bitturne and raise his legs and his wings as a Heron, and no sauce
but Salt.

Break that Egript.
Take an Egript and raise his legs and his wings as a Heron, and no sauce but
Salt.

Vntach that Curlew.
Take a Curlew and raise his legs and his wings as a Hen, and no sauce but
Salt.

Vntach that Brew.
Take a Brew and raisehis legs and his wings in the same manner, and no sauce
but only Salt, and serve it to your Sovereign.

Unlace that Conny.
Take a Conny and lay him on the back, and cut away the vents, then raise the
wings and the sides, and lay bulk, chine, and sides together: Sauce, Vinegar
and Powder of Ginger.

Break that Sarcell.
Take a Sarcell or Teale, and raise his wings and his legs, and no sauce but
only Salt.

Mince that Plover.
Take a Plouer and raise his legs and wings as a Hen, and no sauce but only
Salt.

A Snite.
Take a Snite and raise his wings, his legs and his shoulders, as a Plouer, and
no sauce but Salt.

Thie that Woodcock.
Take a Woodcock and raise his legs as a Hen, this done dight him the brain.

From the Feast of Whitsontide unto Midsummer.
IN the second Course for the meats beforesayd ye shall take for your sawees,
Ale, Wine, Vinegar, and powders after meat, but Ginger and canell from
Penticost to the Feast of S. John Baptist.

The first course shall be Beef and Mutton with sodden Capons, or roasted, and
if Capon be sodden, array him in the manner aforesaid, and when he is roasted,
thou must cast on Salt, with Wine or with Ale, then take the Capon by the
legs, and cast on the sauce, and break him out, and lay him in a Dish as he
should fly, first ye shall cut the right leg and the right shoulder, and
between the four members lay the brawne of the Capon with the croupe in the
end between the legs, as it were possible for to be joined together, and other
bakte meats after. And in the second course, pottage shall be Iussell Charlet
or Mertrus, with young Geese, Veale, Porke, Piaeons, or Chickens roasted with
Pampuffe, Fritters, and other bakte meats after the ordinance of the Took.
Also the Goose ought to be cut member to member, beginning at the right leg,
and so forth under the right wing, and not upon the joint above, and it ought
to be eaten with green Garlike, or with Sorrel, or tender Vines or Verjuyce
in Summer season after the pleasure of your Sovereign: also ye shall
understand that all manner of Fowls that have whole feet, should be raised
under the wing and not above.

From the Feast of Saint John the Baptist unto Michaelmas.
IN the first course: Pottage, Worts, Gruell and Furmenty, with Venison, and
Mortrus, and pestles of Porke, with green sauce, roasted Capon, swan with
Chawdron. In the second course, pottage after the ordinance of the Cooks, with
roasted Mutton, Veal, Pork, Chickens or endoured Pigeons, Hernesewes, Fritters
or bakte meats, and take heed of the Fesant, he shall be arrayed in the manner
of a Capon, but it shall be done dry without any moisture, and he shall be
eaten with salt, and powder of Ginger, and the Hernesew shall be arrayed in the
same manner without any moisture, and he should be eaten with Salt, and
Powder, also ye shall understand that all manner of Fowls having open claws,
as a Capon, shall be tired and arrayed, as a Capon and such other.

From the Feast of Saint Michaell unto the Feast of Christmas.
IN the first course pottage, Beef, Matton, Bacon, pestles of Porke, or with
Goose, Capon, Mallard, Swan or Fesant, as it is before said, with Tarts or
Bakte-meates, or Chines of Porke. In the second course, Pottage, Mortrus or
Conies or Sew: then roast flesh, Mutton, Porke, Veale, Pullets, Chickens,
Pigeons, Teales, Wigions, Mallards, Partrich, Woodcocke, Plouer, Bitturne,
Curlew, Hernesew, Venison roast, great Birds, Suite, Feldfares, Thrushes,
Fritters, Chewits, Beef with sauce, Geloper, roast, with sauce pogill, and
other baked meats as is aforesaid, and if ye carue before your Lordor your
Lady any sodden flesh, carue away the skin above, then Carue reasonably of
the flesh for your Lord and Lady, and specially for Ladies, for they will soon
be angry, for their thoughts be soon changed, and some Lords will be soon
pleased, and some not* as they be of complexion. The Goose and swan may be cut
as ye do other Fowls that have whole feet, or else as your Lord or your
Lady will have it.

Also a swan with a Chadron, Capon, or Fesant, ought to be arrayed, as it is
aforesaid, but the skin must be had away, and when they have been carved
before your Lord or your Lady, for generally the skin of all manner whole
footed Fowls, that have their living on the water, their skins be wholesome
and clean, for by cleanness of water and fish is their living, and if they
eat any stinking thing, it is made so clean with the water that all the
corruption is clean gone away from it.

And the skin of a Capon, Hen, or Chicken be not so clean, for they eat
soul things in the streets, and therefore the skins be not so wholesome, for
it is not their kind to enter into the River to make their meat boyd of the
filth. Mallard, Goose, or Swan, they eat upon the land foul meat, but auon
after the kind they go to the river, and there they cleanse them of their
foul stink. A Fesant as it is aforesaid, but the skin is not wholesome, then
take the heads of all field birds, and wood birds, as Fesant, Peacock,
Partrich, Woodcock, Curlew, for they eat in their degree foul things, as
worms, toades, and other such.

The second Part of the Sewing of Fish.
The first course.
TO go to the Sewing of fish muscalade, Menewes in Sew, of Porpos or of
Salmon, bakte Herring with Sugar, Green fish Pike, Lamprey, Salens, Porpos,
roasted, bakte Gurnard, and Lamprey bakte.

The second course.
Gelly white and red, Dates, in Confect, Conger, Salmon, Dorey, Brit, Turbut,
Halibut for standard, Base, Trout, Mullet, Cheuin, Sole, Eeles and Lamprey
roast, Tench in Gelly.

The third course.
Fresh Sturgion, Breame, Perch in Gelly, a Ioule of Salmon, Sturgion, Welkes,
Apples, and Pears, roasted with Sugar Candy. Figs of Malike and Raisins, Dates
capt with minced Ginger, Waters and Ipocras they be agreeable, this Feast being
done, void ye the Table.

Of the Carving of Fish.
THe Caruer of Fish, must see to peason and furmenty, the tail and the liver,
ye must look if there be a salt Porpos or Sole, Turrentine, and do after the
form of Venison, baked Herring, and lay it whole upon your Sovereigns
Trencher, white Herring in a Dish, open it by the back, pick out the bones
and the row, and see there be Mustard. Of salt-fish, greene-fish, salt salmon,
and Conger, pare away the skin: Salt-fish, Stockfish, Marling, Mackrell, and
Hake with Butter, take away the bones and the skins: a Pike, lay the womb
upon his Trencher, with Pike sauce enough, a salt Lamprey, gobon it in seven or
eight pieces, and lay it to your Sovereign: a playce, put out the Water, then
cross him with your knife, cast on Salt, Wine, or Ale. Gurnard, Rochet, Breme,
Cheuin, Base, Melet, Roch, Perch, Sole, Mackrell, Whiting, Hadocke, and
Codling, raise them by the back, and pick out the bones and cleanse the refet
in the belly: Carry, Bream Sole and Trout, back and belly together: Salmon,
Conger, Sturgion, Turbuthirbol, Thornback. Houndfish, and Halibut, cut them in
the Dishes, the Porpos about, Tench, in his sauce, cut two Eeles and Lampreys
roast, pull off the skin, pick out the bones, put thereto Vinegar and powder: a
Crab, break him asunder in a dish, and make the shell clean, and put in the
stuff again, temper it with Vinegar and powder them, cover it with bread, and
fend it into the kitchen to heat, then set it to your Sovereign, and lay them
in a Dish: a Creuis, dight him thus, part him asunder, and slit the belly, and
take out the fish, pare away the red skin and mince it thin, put Vinegar in the
Dish, and set it on the Table without heating: a Ioule of sturgion, cut it in
thin morsels, and lay it round about the Dish.

Fresh Lamprey bakte, open the pastie, then take white bread, and cut it
thin, and lay it in a Dish, and with a spoone take out Galentine, and lay it
upon the bread with Red Wine and powder of Cinnamon, then cut a Gobon of the
Lamprey, and mince the Gobon thin, and lay it in the Galentine, then set it
upon the fire to heat. Fresh herring with salt and wine, Shrimps well picked,
Flounder, Gudgines, Menewes, and Mussels, Eeles, and Lampreyes: Spr^^ts is good
in sew, Musculade in woorts, Oysters in sew, Oysters in grauy, Menewes in
porpas, Salmon in foele Belly white and red, Cream of Almonds, Dates in
Confects, Pears and Quinces in sirrup, with parsley roots. Mortus of
Houndfish raise standing.

Of the sawces of all Fish.
MUstard is good for salt Herring, salt fish, salt Conger, salmon, sparling,
salt Eele, and Ling: Vinegar is good with salt porpos, Turrentine, Salt
Sturgion, Salt Thrilpole, and salt whale, Lamprey with Galentine, Verjuyce: to
roach, Dace Breme, Molet, Dace, Flounders, Salt Crab and Cheuine with Powder of
Cinnamon: to Thornbacke, Herring, Houndfish, Haddock, Whiting, and Cod, Vinegar,
Powder of Cinnamon and Ginger, green sauce is good with Green-fish and Halibut,
Cottell and fresh Turbut: put not your green sauce away, for it is good with
Mustard.

The Chamberlaines Office.
THe Chamberlain must be diligent and cleanely in his office, with his head
combed, and see to his Soueraign, that he be not negligent of himself, and see
that he have a clean shirt, breech, peticote and doublet, then brush his hosen
within and without, and see his shoone and his slippers be clean, and at morn
when your Sovereign will arise, warm his shirt by the fire, and see ye have a
foot sheet made in this manner. First set a chair by the fire with a cushion,
another under his feet, then spread a shirt under a chair and see there be ready
a Kerchife, and a Comb, then warm his petticoat, his Doublet and his
stomacher, and then put on his doublet and his stomacher, and then put on his
hosen and shoone, or flippers, then strike up his hosen mannerly, and tie them
up, then button his Doublet hole by hole, and lay a cloth upon his neck and
head, then look ye have a Basin and Ewer with warm water, and a towel to wash
his hands, then kneel upon your knee, ask your Sovereign what robe he will
wear, and bring him such as he commands, and put it upon him, and take your
leave mannerly, and go to the Church or Chapel to your Sovereigns closet,
and see there be Carpets, and Cushions, and lay down his Books of Prayers,
then draw the Curtains, and take your leave goodly, and go to your
Sovereigns Chamber, and cast all the clothes off the bed, and beat the
Feather-bed, and the Bolster, but look ye waste no Feathers, then the
blankets, and see the sheets be fair and sweet, or else look ye have clean
sheets, then lay the head sheets and the pillowes, then take up the Towell
and the Basin, and lay Carpets about the bed or in Windows and Cuphoord laid
with cushions: also look there be a good fire burning bright, and see it the
house of easement be sweet and clean, and therpriuy board covered with green
cloth and a Cushion, then see there be blanket down, or Cotton for your
Soucraigne, and look ye have a Basin and Ewer with water, and Towell for your
Sovereign, then take off his gown, and bring him a manttle to keep him from
cold, then bring him to the fire and take off his shoon and his Hosen, then
take a fair Kerchiefe of reins and comb his head, and put on his Rerchiefe
and his Bonet: then spread down his bed, lay the head sheet and the Pillowes,
and when your Sovereign is in bed, draw the Curtains, and see there be mortar
or ware of perchours ready, then drive out dog or Cat, and look there be
Basins and Vrinall set near your Sovereign, then take your leave manerly, that
your Sovereign may take his rest merrily.

Of the knowledge which is required of the Marshall and the Usher.
THe Marshall and the Usher must know all the Estates of the Land, and the high
Estates of a King with the blood Royal.

The Estate of a King. The Estate of a Kings son, a Prince. The Estate of a
Duke. The Estate of a Marquess. The Estate of an Earl. The Estate of a
Bishop. The Estate of a Vicount. The Estate of a Baron. The Estate of the three
chief Judges and the Mayor of London. The Estate of a Knight Bachelor. The
Estate of a Knight, Deane, Archdeacon. The Estate of the Master of the Rolls.
The Estate of other Justices, and Barons of Checker. The Estate of the Mayor of
Calice. The Estate of a Doctor of Dininity. The Estate of the Doctor of both
the Laws. The Estate of him that has been Mayor of London, and Sergeant of
the Law. The Estate of a Master of the Chancery, and other Worshipful
Preachers and Clerks that be graduable, and all other orders of chaste persons
and Priests, worshipful Merchants, and Gentlemen, all these may sit at the
Squires Table.
A Duke may not keep the hall but each Estate by themselves in Chamber or in
Panilion, that neither see other: Marquis, Earls, Bishops and Vicounts, all
these may sit at a mess: a Baron and the Major of London, and three chief
Judges, and the Speaker of the Parliaments, all these may sit two or three at a
mess: and all other states may sit three or four at a mess: also the
Marshall must understand and know the blood Royal, for some Lord is of the
blood Royal, and of small liuelihood, and some Knight is wedded unto a Lady of
Royal blood, she shall keep the Estate of her Lords blood, and therefore the
Reyall blood shall have the Reverence, as I have showed you before: also a
Marshall must take heed of the birth, and next of the line of the blood Royal:
Also he must take heed of the Kings Officers, of the Chancellor, Steward,
Chamberlain, Treasurer, and Comptroller.

Also, the Marshall must take heed unto strangers, and put them to worship and
reverence, for if they have good cheer it is your Sovereigns honor. Also a
Marshall must take heed, if the King send your Sovereign any message, and if
he send a Knight, receive him as a Baron, and if he send a Yeoman receive him
as a Squire, and if he send a Groom, receive him as a Yeoman. Also it is no
rebuke to a Knight, to set a groom of the Kings at his Table.

A true and approved Receipt, for the right making of the best Ipocras.
TAke of Grains half a dragm, take of Cinnamon 4. ounces, of Ginger, two
ounces, of Nutmegges half an ounce, of Cloves and Mace of either a quarter of
an ounce, bruise these well in a Mortar, and infuse them in a gallon of white
wine 4. or 5. days, the vessel being close stopped, then put to it a pound of
sugar, and a half, when the sugar is dissolved, put to it balf a pint of
Rose Water, and as much milk; let it stand a night, and then let it run through
in Ipocras Bag, then may you put it into a fine new Rundlet if you purpose is
peep it, or if you spend it presently, you may put it into certain pots for
the preent.

An excellent and much approved receipt, for a long Consumption.
TAke 8.10. or 11. white Snayles, and break away their shells from them, then
put them into a bowl of water for twelve hours, to cleanse themselves from
their slime, then take them from that water, and put them into an other bowl
of running water for twelve hours more, then take them out, and put them into
half a pint of White Wine, and keep them in it twelve hours, then take a
quart of Red Cowes Milk; and put the Snayles out of the Wine into the Milk,
and boil the quart of Milk with the Snayles put into it, until it be boyld
to a pint, then put into it one ounce of Canded Sugar, and so give the sick
party the same to drink every morning, and at four of the clock in the
afternoon, but you must not let the sick party eat or drink any thing else
for the space of two hour s after they have taken this Receipt, and without all
doubt, this being duly made and taken accordingly, will with Gods help^
recover the party being very weak and far spent in this long lingering
sickness, and of my knowledge has been often approved, and is found an
excellent Receipt to cure the same disease.

A Table of the first book.
A Bill of service for an extraordinary Feast for Summer season: fifty dishes
to a Mess.
THe first course. Fol. 3. The second course for the same Mess. Fol. 4 The
third course for the same Mess. Fol. 5 Another direction for a bill of fare
for winter season, which also serves to set forth your meat in order. Fol. 5
The second course for the same Mess. Fol. 6 The first course for a small
common Service of Meat, to direct them which are unperfect, to bring them to
further knowledge of greater Service. Fol. 7 A second course to the same Mess
Fol. 8 A Table of direction for a bill of Fare for Fish days, and Fasting
days, Emberweeks, or Lent. The first course for the same diet. Fol 19 The
second course for the same diet. Fol 10
Boylde-Meates.
TO boil a Capon Larded with Lemmons, on the French fashion. Fol 11 To sowce a
Pigge. Fol 11 To sowce Oysters. Fol 12 To sowce a Pike, Carpe or Breame. Fol 13
To boil Flounders, or Gudgeons on the French fashion. Fol 14 To boil a Gurnet
on the French fashion. Fol 14 To boil a leg of Mutton on the French fashion.
Fol 15 To hash a leg of Mutton on the French fashion. Fol 15 To roast a Leg
of Mutton on the French fashion. Fol 16 To roast a Neates-tongue on the French
fashion. Fol 16 To boil Pigeons with Rice, on the French fashion. Fol 17 To
boil a Rabbet with Herbs on the French fashion. Fol 17 To boil Chickens in
whitebroth. Fol 18 To boil a Teale, or widgeon, on the French fashion. Fol 29
To smoore an old Coney, Duck, or Mallard on the French fashion. Fol 19 Another
way to boil Chickens. or Pigeons with Goose-berries or Grapes. Fol 20 To boil
a chine of Mutton or Veale, in sharp broth on the French fashion. Fol 21 To
boil Larkes or Sparrowes. Fol 21
Baked-Meates.
A Made dish of Coney Livers. Fol 22 A made dish of sweet breads. Fol 22 A made
dish of Sheeps tongues. Fol 23 A Florentine of a Coney, the wing of a Capon, or
a Kidney of Veale. Fol 23 A Chewet of Stockfish Fol 24 A Frydayes Pie, without
either flesh or fish. A quarter tart of pippins. Fol 25 A Gooseberry tart Fol
26 A Cherrytart. Fol 26 To make an Oyster-pye. Fol 26 A made dish of Muscels
and Cockles. Fol 27 To bake a Neates-tongue to be eaten hot. Fol 27 A delicate
Chewet. Fol 28 To make an Vmble pie, or for want of Vmbles, to do it with a
Lambs head and Purtenance. Fol 28 To bake a Calves Chaldron. Fol 29 To bake a
Carpe. Fol 29 To bake a Tench with a pudding in her belly. Fol 30 To bake
Eeles. Fol 31 To bake Chickens with Grapes. Fol 31 To bake a steake pie with a
french pudding in the pie. Fol 31 To make a good quince pie. Fol 32 To make a
pippin pie. Fol 33 To bake a Pigge. Fol 33 To bake Fallow Dear in the best
manner. Fol 33 To bake red Dear. Fol 34 To bake a wild boar. Fol 34 To bake
a Swanne. Fol 35 To bake a Turkey or Capon. Fol 35 To bake a Hare on the French
fashion. Fol 35 To bake a wild Goose or Mallard. Fol 36 To bake a Curlew or
Herneshaw. Fol 36 To bake Woodcooks or Blackbirds. Fol 37 To bake Larks or
Sparrowes. Fol 37 Fritters on the Court fashion. Fol 37 To make Pancakes so
crispe that you may set them upright. Fol ^8 A Sallet of Rose buds and Clove
Gilly flowers. Fol 38 To keep green Cucumbers all the year. Fol 38 To keep
broom Capers. Fol 38 Purslaine stalks. Fol 39 To make Caper-rowles of Raddish
Cods. Fol 39 Diverse Sallets boiled, Fol 39 Buds of Hops. Fol 40 A Sallet of
Mallows. Fol 40 A Sallet of Burdoek-roots. Fol 40 To make blancht Manchet in a
Prying pan. Fol. 41
Puddings.
A Farced Pudding. Fol. 42 A ^udding of Veale. Fol. 43 A Fregesey of Eggs.
Fol. 44 A Cambridge Pudding. Fol. 44 A Swan or Goose pudding. Fol. 45 A
Leveridge, or Hogs pudding, Fol. 45 A Chiveridge pudding. Fol. 46 A Rice
pudding. Fol. 46 A Florentine of Veale. Fol. 46 A Marrow toast. Fol. 47 Another
in a Fryingpan Fol. 48 A pudding stewed between two dishes. Fol. 48 To make
French puffes with green Herbs. Fol. 49 Dropped Raisins Fol. 50 A fond Pudding.
Fol. 50 To make uffes on the English fashion. Fol. 51 To make a pudding in a
fryingpan. Fol. 52 To make Apple puffes. Fol. 52 To make Kickshawes. Fol. 53 To
make some Kickshawes in paste to fry or bake in what form you please. Fol. 54
To make an Italian pudding. Fol. 55 To boil a Rack of Veal on the French
fashion. Fol. 56 To farce a Leg of Lamb on the French fashion. Fol. 56 To hash
Dear, Sheep, or Calves tongues on the French fashion. Fol. 57
English Cookery.
TO boil a Capon. Fol. 58 To garnish your Dishes. Fol. 59 To boil a Capon
another way. Fol. 59 To boil a Capon in Rice. Fol. 60 To boil a Capon with
Oysters, and pickled Lemmon. Fol. 61 To boil a Capon with Pippins. Fol. 62 To
boil Chickens in Whitebroth. Fol. 63 To boil Chickens in Soope. Fol. 63 To
boil the common way. Fol. 64 To boil Chickens with Lettice, the best way.
Fol. 65 To boil a Rabbet. Fol. 66 To boil a Rabbet with Grapes and
Gooseberries. Fol. 66 To boil a Rabbet with Claret wine. Fol. 66 To boil a
wild Duck. Fol. 67 To boil a tame Duck, or Widgin. Fol. 67 To boil Pigeons.
Fol. 68 To boil Pigeons with Capers or Sampyre. Fol. 68 To boil Sawceges.
Fol. 69 To boil Goose Giblets, Swannes Giblets. Fol. 69 Giblets with Herbs
and Roots. Fol. 70 To smoore a Rack, or ribs of Mutton. Fol. 70 For the
fillets of a Veale, smoored in a fryingpanne. Fol. 71 A Dish of steakes of
Mutton, smoored in a fryingpan. Fol. 71 To smoore a Chicken. Fol. 72 To fry
Muscles, Pery-Winckles, or Oysters to serve with a Duck, or single by themselves
Fol. 72. To marble Smelts, Soales, Flounders, plaice, etc. Fol. 73 To Conger
Eeles in Collars, like Brawne. Fol. 73 To sowce a Pigge in collars. Fol. 74 To
sowce a breast of Veale. Fol. 75 To hash a shoulder of Mutton, or a leg of
Lamb. Fol. 75 A leg of Lamb farst with Herbs. Fol. 76 To smoore Calves feet.
Fol. 77 Another way. Fol. 77 To hash Neates-tongues. Fol. 78 The same with
Chest-nuts. Fol. 78
Certain Gellies.
Crystal Gelly. Fol. 79 To make Gelly of Pippins of the color of Amber. Fol.
80 To make a Gelly of pippins, as orient red as Rubie. Fol. 81 To make white
leach of Almonds. As also afterward to make it either yellow, green, or red.
Fol. 81
A Table of the second book.
TO boil a Capon larded with Lemmons, on the French fashion. Fol. 87 To boil
Chickens. Fol. 88 An other way to boil Chickens, or a Capon in White broth.
Fol. 89 Another way to boil Chickens for one that is sick, and to provoke
sleep. Fol. 90 Another way to boil them on Sorrelsops, for him that has a
weak stomach. Fol. 91 To boil a partridge. Fol. 91 To boil a Leg of Mutton
on the French fashion Fol. 93 To farce a leg of Mutton. Fol. 94 To farce a
leg of Lamb. Fol. 95 To stew Trouts. Fol. 96 To make a farst pudding. Fol.
97 To boil a Pike. Fol. 98 To farce a Leg of Mutton on the French fashion.
Fol. 99 To boil a Carpe or Breame. Fol. 101 To boil a Wild Duck, Widgin, or a
Teale on the French fashion. Fol. 102 Another way to boil smaller Carpes or
Breames. Fol. 103 Another way to boil a Leg of Mutton or Lamb. Fol. 104 To
boil Ecles. Fol. 105 To boil a Rabbet. Fol. 105 To boil Lamprels. Fol. 106
To boil a Neck, or a Loyne, or a Chine of Mutton, or to boil a Neck, or
Leg, a Fillet or a Knuckle of Veale, or to boil a Leg or Loyn of Lamb. Fol.
107 To stew Smelts or Flounders. Fol. 108 To boil Pigeons on the French
fashion. Fol. 109 Another way to boil a Pike. Fol. 109 To boil Olives of
Veale. Fol. 111 To boil a Mullet, or a Pike with Oysters. Fol. 112 To boil a
tame Duck. Fol. 123 To make a rasher of Mutton, or of cold Lamb Fol. 113 To
boil a Knuckle of Veale, or a neck of Mutton. Fol. 114 To stew the ribs of
a neck of Veal in steakes. Fol. 115
Bakte Meats, and Kick-shawes.
TO make a grand Sallet. Fol. 116 To so we a Pigge. Fol. 117 To make
puf-paste. Fol. 118 To roast a Leg of Mutton, or a Cowes Vdder. Fol. 121 To
make an Olive Pie to be eaten hot. Fol. 122 To roast a shoulder of Mutton to
serve for either dinner or supper. Fol. 124 To bake a Chicken-pie to be eaten
hot. Fol. 124 To roast a Neates tongue to be eaten hot. Fol. 125 To bake a
Neates tongue to be eaten hot. Fol. 126 To bake a pigge with a pudding in his
belly. Fol. 127 To bake a Pigge to be eaten hot. Fol. 128 Another way to roast
a Leg of Mutton. Fol. 129 To bake a steake pie of the ribs of Mutton, to be
eaten hot. Fol. 130 To roast a Neck of Mutton. Fol. 131 To make a Hartichoak
pie to be eaten hot. Fol. 132 To roast a Shoulder, or Hanch of Venison, or a
Chine of Mutton. Fol. 133 To make Chewets of Veale. Fol. 134 To roast a Capon
with Oysters and Chestnuts Fol. 135 To bake a Quince, or a Warden Pie, so as
the fruit may be red, and the crust pale and tender. Fol. 136 To roast a
shoulder or a fillet of Veale with farcing herbs. Fol. 137 To fry Calves
feet, or Trotters. Fol. 138 Buttered Loaves. Fol. 138 To fry Sheep tongues,
Deeres tongues, or Calves tongues. Fol. 140 Boyld Sallets Fol. 141 A bakte
pudding after the Italian fashion. Fol. 142 To make puffes. Fol. 143 Blanch
manchet to be made in a Frying pan. Fol. 144 To make Peascods, or Dolphins of
Marrow, or of a roasted Kidney of Veale. Fol. 144 To make a Livery pudding.
Fol. 146 To make Rice puddings. Fol. 147
A Table to the Book of Carving, and Sewing.
Terms for Carving. Fol. 151 The Office of the Butler and Pantler, Yeoman of
the Celler and Ewery. Fol. 152 The Sewing of Flesh. Fol. 158 The Service of
Flesh. Fol. 158 The Carving of Flesh. Fol. 159 Sawces for all manner of Fowls.
Fol. 163 The carving of all manner of Foul. Fol. 166 Service for the four
quarters of the year. Fol. 174
Sewing of Fish, first, second, and third Course. 178
CArving of Fish. Fol. 179 Sawces of all Fish. Fol. 181 Chamberlaines office.
Fol. 182 The knowledge which ought to be in a Marshall, and Viher. Fol. 184 An
excellent Receipt for to make the best Ipocras. Fol. 187 An approved Receipt for
a Consumption though the party be far spent. Fol. 188
FINIS,
Officit hic menti Dans pinguia fercula ve^tri.



cuts and prices of meat THE FAMILY GUIDE. showing from an exact calculation,
The Medium Price of Meat, and the relative value of each Joint. 1794
Hind Quarter
1. Sir-Loin 5 d 2. Rump 5 d 3. Aitch-Bone 4. d 4. Buttock 4 d 5. Mouse D.o 3.
d 6. Veiny-Piece 4. d 7. Thick-Flank 4. d 8. Thin D.o 4. d 9. Leg 1 d
Fore Quarter
10. Fore Rib, 5 Ribs 5 d 11. Middle D.o 4 d.o 3 d 12. Chuck -- 3 d.o 3 d 13.
Sholr or Leg Mutt.* piece 3 d 14. Brisket 4. d 15. Clod 3. d 16. Neck or
Sticking Piece 2. d 17. Shin 1 d 18. Cheek


LONDON




