Thesaurus and Armamentarium Medico-Chymicum OR A Treasury of Physic. WITH THE
Most secret Way of Preparing REMEDIES Against all DISEASES. Obtained by Labor,
confirmed by Practice, and published out of good will to Mankind. BEING A Work
of great Use for the Public. WRITTEN Originally in Latin by that Eminent
Physician Hadrianus a Mynsicht, Com. Palate. Med. Phys.

And faithfully rendered into English by John Partridge Physician to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by I. M. for Awnsham Churchill at the Black Swan near Amen
Corner. 1682.

To the Honorable Lady Madam Frances Jenynes of St. Albans in the County of
Hartford, Health and Happiness.
Honored Madam,
THose many Favors that I have received by your generous Approbation of my
unmeriting Endeavors were too considerable to be passed by without my
remembrance, or immerged in the Gulf of Oblivion without my acknowledgment with
thanks for the same; yet upon a review of what is done, methinks it appears so
slender a piece of service, that I do indeed question your Acceptance. Yet I
have ventured to present to your Ladiship's Patronage these few sheets as a
digression from my other Studies, and the Earnest of what I acknowledge my self
in Arrears for your former Favors. Be pleased therefore, I beseech you, to
accept my service, and pardon my presumption. The thing it self is really
Foreign, only dressed in an English Garb, but I fear not so fashionable as this
captious Age may expect. However we are all bound by Nature to be Civil to
Strangers: And seeing this is so, I presume to put it under your Protection,
your Name being sufficient, but especially your verbal Commendation to give it
a better Reception and Esteem among all Persons of Honor and Eminence, than he
that is

YOUR LADYSHIPS Humblest Servant, I. Partridge.

TO THE READER.
Friendly Reader,
I Here present thee with a Treatise in our own Language, that is, plain
English, which I assure you is one of the best Pieces of its kind, and will, I
question not, be serviceable to all those who understand not the Latin, and
yet are willing to be acquainted with the Mystery of Physic; and therefore to
omit all other Prolegomena's, I come to speak something to the Book in general
and particular.

The Book is generally Chemical, and turned into as good English as the matter
(without too much swelling the Book with impertinent words) would bear; and
therefore for thy convenience and satisfaction I have added an Explanatory
Table, to give the meaning of those words, which perhaps may not seem plain to
every Reader, as Dysentery, Haemorrhage, Narcotick, Sudorisick, etc. But yet
there are three or four words, which I do confess remain doubtful to me what
English to give them; and therefore I have put them in the English, as I found
them in the Latin, that those who pretend to be Learned, may give their own
sense of them. And the first is Sem. Cinae, mentioned in the Powder called
Species Diamercurii, and in the Water called Aqua contra Vermes. The second is
Antiphyllorum, mentioned in the Powder called Species Diajovis, and in the
Marmelada Hysterica. The third is Boletus Cervinus, mentioned in the Species
Diaveneris, Confectio Satyrii, Confectio Pacifica, and diverse other Medicines:
so that did I not think it a piece of modesty or honesty to translate them into
such words as my Judgment thought most congruous, there being no Authority for
it but Opinion, and in so doing I should have abused both Reader and Author;
and therefore I fairly expose them to every Reader that either is, or thinks
himself able to give the true meaning of them.

Fourthly, In that Medicine called Morsuli Martiales, the Author has
prescribed half an ounce of Oil of Cinnamon, which I judge should be but half a
dram; for half an ounce of that Oil will cost of it self about forty shillings
or three pound, and so make the Medicine too chargeable for common use: Hence I
conclude it a mistake of the Printer, putting half an ounce for half a dram;
yet I have in the English followed the Latin Prescript.

Fifthly, The Species Confectio Anacardinae being the first Ingredient
mentioned in the Composition of the Water called Aqua Xyloaloe, is a
Composition of it self, and may be found in the Dispensatory of Valerius
Cordus, page 83.

Sixthly, In several places of this Book the Author commands things to be duly
gathered, as Peony in the Aqua Epileptica, in the Spiritus Vini Cephalicus, in
the Elixir Poeoniae, and other places; there is no more designed by that, but
to gather them Astrologically, in the hour of that Planet governing the same,
the Planet at the same time being strong, also Angular, and every way fortified
if possible.

Thou have three several Tables; The first, of the Sections, in which thou
may see the general Heads and Matter of the whole Book: The second, of all
the distinct Medicines Alphabetically set down under the Letter beginning the
first word of the Medicine, as Oleum Balsami under O, and Sal Apoplecticum
under S, and so of the rest. The third Table shows the Diseases that the
Medicines in this Book cure, and for the Printers ease and the Readers
convenience, they are brought under as few Heads as may be: For instance sake
thus, Burning Fever, Intermitting Fever and Hungarian Fever, and others of
that denomination, are all brought under the word Fever. Likewise Wind in the
Stomach, weakness of the Stomach, Diseases of the Stomach, etc. are all brought
under the word Stomach, and so are Diseases of the Matrix brought under the
word Womb, and so of the rest, which thou will no sooner see but understand
them.

Lastly, I recommend it to thy Perusal, not desiring thy Commendation of it
beyond its Merit, nor expecting thee so disingenuous, as to condemn it without
a cause; but wishing thy impartial Opinion, as if the Author hereof were thy
real friend. But what need I say more to this purpose; for Books have their
Horoscopes as well as Men, and therefore by consequence, Fate too. Habent sua
Fata Libelli.
Fate is not bound to Man, to Prince or State;
But Books have also their peculiar Fate.
And this Fate of Books is wrapped up in the Opinion and Judgment of every
Reader; for according as he understands, so he reports, and according to his
Credit, so he is believed in the World; and therefore hard is the Fate of
Authors, if thus to be dealt with. But I leave it with thee, hoping that my
pains may be thy profit and advantage, which if it be, and that thou art
satisfied with my well wishes and endeavors, it is all that is either desired
or expected

By thy Friend J. Partridge.

A Physical Dictionary Explaining the Terms of Physic used in this Book
derived from the Latin and Greek.
A.
APozem is a Decoction of diverse herbs and other ingredients, to which
sometimes Syrups are added. Acrimony, sharpness. Anodyne, Medicines asswaging
pain. Acute, sharp. Asthma, shortness of breath.
B.
BOlus, a Bole, a Medicine to be taken from a knife's point.
C.
CAtarrh, a defluxion of humors from the Brain upon the Iaws, Lungs, etc.
Constipate, to stop. Cephalic, belonging to the Head. Concoction, digestion or
boiling. Cataplasm, a Pultis. Corrode, to eat or fret. Chronical, to last long.
Cardialgia, Heart-burning.
D.
Diuretic, to provoke Urine. Decoction, the liquor wherein things are boiled.
Defluxion, the same as destillation. Delirium, doting, raving, to talk idly.
Diarrhoea, a common looseness without blood, etc. Diaphragma, the Midriff.
Dyspnoea, shortness of breath. Dysentery, a bloody Flux. Diaphoretick, that
causes sweating, etc.
E.
EPispastick, a Plaster to draw Blisters. Errhines, Medicines to be snuffed up
the Nose to purge the Brain. Empyema, a corrupt matter between the Breast and
the Lungs. Erysipelas, swellings on the skin caused by Choler. Elephantiasis, a
leprous disease over the whole body or some part of it. Epithems, are Medicines
applied in bags to the Liver, Spleen, Stomach, etc. Eschar is the Core that
falls off after a Caustic has been applied.
F.
FRacture, a breaking, as of a bone, or skull. Fomentation, a Liquor made to
bathe a part with Clothes or Sponges dipped in the same. Filter, to strain.
Fermentation, the working of humors, as drink in a Vessel. Flatulent, windy.
G.
GArgarisms, Medicines to gargle and wash the throat with. Glandules, Kernels
about the throat and other parts. Gangrene, is the putrefaction of a part
tending to death.
H.
HHpochonders, the parts beneath the ribs, whence the disease takes its name.
Hemiplegia, the Palsy of one side only. Haemorrhoids, Veins in the Fundament,
to which Leeches are applied. Haemorrhagia, blood breaking forth in any part of
the body. Hysterical Fits, Wombsickness.
I.
INfuse, to steep. Intestines, the Guts. Injection, a Medicine cast into the
body with a Syringe
L.
LAxative, loosening of the Belly. Lohoch or Lambitive, is a Medicine to lick
up with a Liquorish-stick, or the like.
M.
MEninges, are thin Coats that cover the Brain. Mesaraick Veins, are little
Veins near the Stomach. Matrix, the Womb. Mesentery, the skin which knits the
Guts together.
N.
NArcotick, Medicines that induce sleep, and stupifie, are so called. Noxious,
hurtful.
O.
OPhistotones, a kind of Convulsion. Oedema, a swelling caused by phlegm.
Opiate, all Medicines are so called that procure sleep. Orifice, is the mouth
or entrance into a larger part, as the Womb, Stomach, etc. and that hole that
is made in the opening of a Vein. Ophthalmy, an inflammation of the Eyes
causing redness. Oxycrate, Vinegar and water mixed together.
P.
PAralysis, the Palsy. Peripneumonia, an inflammation of the Lungs.
Pericranium, the skin about the Skull. Frenzy, Madness. Plethorick, full of
blood. Peritonaeum, the inner Coat of the Belly. Paroxysm, a Fit of any
disease, suppose a Fever. Putrid, rotten. Pubes, the hairy part above the
Privities. Perinaeum, the space between the Privity and the Fundament.
Q.
QUittor, Matter in an Ulcer or Wound.
R.
REspiration, breathing. Refrigerate, to cool. Relax, to loosen.
S.
SUdorifick, causing sweat. Subeth, a dead sleep. Sphincter, the Muscle of the
Arse. Spasmus, the Convulsion. Scorbute, the Scurvy. Sal prunellae, is
Saltpeter purified with Brimstone. Sphacelus, deadness of any part. Scirrhus,
a hard swelling without pain. Suffocating, choking. Seton, is a skain of Silk
drawn through the flesh. Sutures, the places where the Skull joins.
T.
TOrpor, Numbness. Transpiration, the passage of the vapors and sweat through
the Pores. Tincture, the Essence of any thing drawn in Spirit of Wine.
V.
VErtigo, a swimming of the Head. Vertebrae, the bones of the Back. Ureters,
certain Pipes going from the Kidneys to the Bladder. Venery, Lechery.
The Names, Characters, and quantity of Physical Weights.
A Grain is thus charactered gr. A Scruple is twenty Grains. A Dram is three
Scruples. An Ounce is eight Drams. A Pound is twelve Ounces lb. This stands for
half a Pound lbss. A Pugil (or a small handful) is thus written P. An Handful
is thus written M. q. s. stands for quantum sufficit, that is, as much as
suffices. q. v. stands for quantum voles, that is, as much as you please. s.
a. stands for secundum artem, that is, according to Art; and it is sometimes
written among Physicians L. a. that is, Lege artis, which is to the same sense.
In the Praise of his very worthy Friend Mr. John Partridge upon his
Translation of Adrian Mynsicht, etc.
HAil gentle Muses of Parnassus's hill,
Inspire my Genius by your glorious skill,
To speak the praises of this worthy Piece
Transcendently excelling Jason's golden Fleece.
He! for his lucre and his envy too
The Trojan's Treasure got, but this not so:
This the Commune Bonum may be said,
The best Translation that our Wits have made.
Each joynt's unstirr'd, each knot so well untied,
That nothing can be exquisite beside.
Long has bright Adrian eclipsed been;
But now there is no defect that can be seen:
Long has his Treasure been obscure and hid;
But now all difficulties are forbid.
The Sacred Key we wanted of this Store;
But now the passage's free, what need we more?
Diseases now may fly from Britain's Isle,
And Health without control may reign and smile.
This Antidote, like Mists before the Sun,
Distempers dissipates, and makes them run.
Here Is a whole Army of such Sacred Charms,
As conquers perfectly all Mortal's harms.
Ampusa trembles, and each Mortal's foe
Impressions cannot make or breed us woe.
As long as Mynsicht thus is made our own,
What greater kindness to the Nation's shown?
Peruse, kind Reader, and admire my Friend,
Let all the Universe his Praise extend,
Extol his Name, and lift it up so high,
That it may meet and kiss Eternity:
For this I Am sure there can be none more fit
Or trusty to translate this, speaks it
William Hide.

To my good Friend Mr. John Partridge upon his Translation.
Famed Lilly did the Astrologick Art
To English Men in English first impart;
This Work of his thou did abbreviate,
Refining it at neat methodick rate.
Great Mynsicht, in Poeonian Art renowned,
A Treasury for the Latin World did found,
Wherein are laid of Jewels a great store,
Which were to Phoebus's Sons unknown before:
This on us English thou do now bestow,
Such as none else, save Mother Tongue, do know.
As Mynsicht's Glory does through Latium flourish,
So England shall thy Praises ever nourish.
Johannes Gibbon Fecialis Anglicus, Titulo Mantelii Caerulei.

OF Chemical Medicines.
SECTION I. Of select and other precious Chemical Medicines.
Unicornu Minerale, or the Mineral Unicorn.
THIS glorious and mysterious Medicine, by reason of the unworthy and
ungrateful Sons of the World, was hidden and obscured, lest this Spagyrick Gemm
should seem to be cast among Swine; nevertheless, out of affection to Christian
love, and the impulse of the Deity, I was willing to make it public; and among
other Mysteries, which I have gained from the Light of Nature, and the inquiry
of Grace; or have found by the scrutiny of my own Experience; or has been
revealed to me by the good will of excellent Spagyrick Artists, and the prudent
Searchers into the things of Nature, I freely communicate to the Sons of
Learning and Experience; yet I do appoint it as a thing beyond all doubt, that
this healthy and celestial comfort may be received with a pleasant countenance,
and with the delight of a thankful mind dedicated to God in praise and
thanksgiving.

The Preparation.

TAke native Vitriol green, and known to the Philosophers only, or for want of
that, the Crystals of Vitriol of Venus well cleansed, sublimely mundified, and
free from all its terrestrial quality; put it into a strong and well luted
Retort, increase the fire by degrees, till it produces a reddish Oil, which
carefully preserve: the use of it shall be showed hereafter. Then take the
Caput mortuum which is left in the bottom of the Vessel, and pour upon it an
appropriate Menstruum, and set it in a cold place, and it will shoot into
Crystals of the nature and savor of Vitriol. Calcine the Caput mortuum the
second time, and proceed as before is directed, and it will again produce new
Crystals almost of the same kind, but less profitable to this Mystery. Repeat
this labor so often and so long, till no more smell remains in the Vitriol;
and then lastly calcine the Caput mortuum thoroughly, but Philosophically, and
extract from it its Salt, which will be excellent and pleasant to the taste,
which also preserve in hope of the following doctrine, and in the mean time be
mindful of what has been spoken:

You may by due rectifying of the terrene part, find a true occult Medicinal
Stone.

Then take the forementioned Oil, and pour into it Water, in that dissolve
filings of Steel, and prepare Vitriol of it, which dissolve in distilled
Rainwater, that the Crystal may the better appear, which labor you shall so
often repeat, till you have the pure from the impure, and that the Crystals
appear clear and pellucid, without dimness and obscurity. From these Crystals
of Mars in the former manner distill a red Oil, and let it be well rectified,
lest any of the phlegm should remain in it: Then you shall have the blood of the
red Lion, that is, a Mineral, the Sulphur of Mars and Venus together, of
excellent virtue, and this taken from Vulcan, according to that saying:
Mulciberis capti Marsque Venusque dolis.


This being done, extract from the Caput mortuum a Salt void of all smell of
Mars, prepare it after the same manner as is already showed in the Extraction
of Salt of Vitriol of Venus. Both these Salts mix together in equal weight, put
it into some open Glass-vessel, and set it in a Cellar or other cold place,
where it may resolve it self into a Mercurial water: Then take the solution,
and from that again draw fresh Crystals; and then you will have a duplicate
Mercury, the Salt of Sapience and Nature, the Salt of the Philosophers, under
which is hidden the Basis of the World. And this duplicate Mercury being
wrapped in a hood of obscurity, was never manifested so plainly by any of the
Philosophers as by my self, although in certain obscure words it was delivered
by them; which was not easy to be understood, till by the search of more
laborious men, the thing was further sought into: and this Mercury is called by
the Philosophers Rebis, which is as it were the terrestrial Treasure discovered
by the mercy of God, an Experiment of the best and greatest knowledge which you
must reserve for the following use.

Take the Mercury now mentioned, and that red Sulphur, those two join
Philosophically by the rule of Reason and Understanding, and let the Spagyrick
Vessel, in which they are mixed, be three parts empty, and the fourth part only
filled with the Medicine; this seal Hermetically, and manage it with a
Philosophical fire by degrees in a continual heat, till the whole mass be
coagulated and brought into the form of a stone: Which being done, you may, if
you please, reduce into its forms principally, and in a short time render it
more noble and illustrious; and so you have made the great Mystery. If you are
curious, you may observe before the Coagulation a wonderful appearance of many
things, and many colors also: all which consider well, honor God, and
accommodate your Neighbor.

Virtue, Use, and Dose.

IT is an universal Medicine, and such a Treasure that is able to cure all
Diseases, by what name soever they are called, in all and every Creature. One,
two, or more grains of this Arcanum taken, according to the age and
constitution of the Patient, does presently penetrate the whole body like
smoke, it removes all the vicious and malignant attendants of Nature, and puts
all into a better conformity, it does renew the whole Creature, and as it were
regenerates all de novo: it keeps the whole structure in order, beyond the
power and disturbance of small accidental Diseases, even to old age, or to the
end of life, which is determined by the Almighty, etc. For Contra vim mortis
non est medicamen in hortis.
When death's empowered by the God above,
No medicine can our miseries remove.


Also this illustrious Medicine, when duly fermented with the pure Gold of
Philosophers, cleanses Metals from their original impurity, and renders them
good by the virtue of the pure fixed Gold. For which immense and ineffable
benefit, and every other gift and wisdom, let it be to the praise and glory of
the great Creator, who is God blessed for ever.

Unicornu Solare, or the Solar Unicorn.
LIke as the Unicorn in the animal Kingdom, is esteemed of great price by all
men, but especially great ones, and is esteemed of such a price, that it far
exceeds all Gemms, precious Stones, Gold and Silver both in price and
excellence, and has a place among the richest of Treasures: So also the Solar
Unicorn in the Mineral Kingdom is to be esteemed of great price for its great
fixitude, and more than solid perfection; for it is the highest, most precious,
and next to universal, to which it is joined as a Partner both in virtue and
operation, and so secret a Mystery, that it is not improper to call it a most
powerful and inaccessible Remedy.

Preparation.

ALthough it is easy to the knowing and skilful, yet it will be difficult to
the ignorant and unskilful, they being wrapped in ignorance like a garment. Take
the original Mineral of Gold, broken into piece like Hazel-nuts, the quantity
of a pound or less, put it into a Cornuta, or other Spagyrick Vessel, and with
a gentle clear fire distill it, the work being made secure and all well luted,
and let the matter in the bottom not melt, but sweat only without burning, that
it may send forth a sweet and celestial Water, which is of great price. And
indeed by the benefit of this Spagyrick Art, a pound of the Mineral will scarce
cast forth by sweat the quantity of a spoonful of water; therefore you may
reiterate this labor with new Mineral until you think you have water
sufficient for your purpose. Then rectify this water eight or nine times, that
the pure may be separated from the impure; which being done, let it be reserved
for use as the true Arcanum and Hermetical Treasure: and he that knows how to
transmute this water into a viscous and vivid liquor, has really that most
secret and rare Key which is known but to a few, by which that golden Castle
that is fenced with a threefold Wall, is most easily recluded, and by the
thread of wisdom he legitimately enters to those Treasures hidden in Gold: But
this work is the following labor, etc. Now take the best Arabic Gold, with
Antimony according to Art purified to the height, and wrought into thin plates
by the Goldsmith or otherwise, and then without any other additament it may be
brought into a most fine Powder; or if you know how without Corrosives to
prepare a fine Calx of the Sun Spagyrically, you may do it with more profit,
etc. Then put of this most secret Powder what quantity you will into a
Philosophical Glass, and pour upon it a little of the Solar Menstruum, that it
may exceed the Powder half the thickness of your little finger, seal the Glass
Hermetically, and set it to digest in such a heat as the Embryo is nourished by
in the Mothers womb, till the water is consumed, or drunk up by the Powder of
Gold; then open your Glass, and pour upon it so much of your Solar Menstruum,
as you did the first time: Let it dry again the same way as before, and repeat
this work so often, till the Gold is changed into a reddish Powder, and then
the Solar Unicorn is prepared; which is approved in many and most desperate
Diseases a most profitable and sweet Remedy: It is truly that golden Fleece,
which after a manifold and so often repeated Philosophical Concoction, does
overcome and conquer the heat of fire, neither can it be overcome by it. Hence
you may recall the quality of this sort of Mystery to the Touchstone of a more
ripe counsel.

Virtue, Use, and Dose.

BY this Arcanum the wiser Physicians not only conserved (by the will of God)
the health and strength of the body, and prolonged life for many years, but
also they cured the Epilepsie, the Apoplexy, the Elephantiasis, Morphew,
Melancholy, Madness, Quartan Agues, Sciatica, Gout, pains in the Joints,
Dropsy, yellow Jaundice, Pox, Asthma, Phthisis, Pleurisy, Itch and Scurff,
Cancers, Noli me tangere, and the like dangerous humane Diseases of this kind
by other Remedies incurable; and this done by the strength of the fire
contained in it, which does not only consume the lethal humors, but also does
repair and renovate the very marrow in the Bones, and raise and succor the
whole humane body, though half dead. And one thing is worthy to be noted of
this Medicine, that it contains in it self a most powerful and diaphoretick
force: Therefore whosoever is willing to use this Remedy, especially if he
labors under any of the forementioned Diseases, let him repair to his Bed for
one or two hours, and prepare for a Sweat, and it will cast it out sweetly and
plentifully without any pain, and leave nothing impure or superfluous in the
Body. To young men who desire a long life, it is given once a month, and the
day he takes it, let him forbear both meat and drink till the evening, by which
means the virtue of the Medicine will grow into a radical equality with the
humors, and the strength of the Body will increase more and more, the natural
beauty will increase, and outdo the art of paint, etc. giving a comeliness
pleasing and conspicuous to every beholder. But to those who labor under the
beforementioned Diseases, it ought to be given ten days successively in
Vehicles proper and appropriate to the Disease, and so (God willing) they will
be restored to their pristine health, as much as Art and Medicine can perform.
To old people it is given twice a month, and by the Providence of God it
preserves their Intellectuals firm and entire, and in their greatest age it
renders their bodies vigorous and fresh even to their graves. To young Women
and Virgins this Arcanum is given four times a week at the New Moon, it keeps
Nature in its due current, and every part of the body in order. Also if you
should give it to a Woman who is long in Labor, and though the Birth were
hindered by the bigness of the Child, yet immediately after the wished for
Infant will be brought forth almost without any pain. If it be given to Women
whose Courses have left them, it keeps them fresh, lusty, and fair, and
sometimes it causes their Terms to come again, so that they are made capable of
Childbearing. It also cures the Pestilence, and if any Carbuncle should
appear, it dispels the matter of it, and by a friendly Sweat drives forth the
cause of it: For which great and glorious Mystery we ascribe honor to Jehovah
and the individual Trinity for ever and ever.

Aurum Potabile, or Potable Gold.
TAke the best Hungarian Gold thoroughly prepared with Antimony and a strong
fire, which done, let it be wrought into thin plates, then dissolve it with
good and well rectified Oil of Salt, known to none but to the absolute Chemist,
and after solution draw off the humidity with an Alembick, and in the bottom
you shall find the yellow Calx of the Sun. Take this and put it into a glass
Vessel, and pour upon it so much of the Oil of Cinnamon as will make a Mixture
like a Pultis, and you will see the matter in the middle begin to boil and wax
black; then have ready at hand good Spirit of Wine very well rectified and
impregnated with the Tartar of the Philosophers, pour a little of that into the
forementioned liquid Mass, that it may rise a fingers breadth above the matter,
and the Spirit will presently extract the soul of the Sun, clear and in color
like Gold; this being done, pour off the tinged Spirit, and pour on fresh, and
this labor repeat so often, until the Spirit receives no more Tincture.
Dissolve the remaining Calx of the Sun again anew, with fresh Oil of Salt, and
proceed as at the first, by repeating and continuing this work till the whole
body is dissolved, and a potable Liquor made of the Gold: after all, let this
Aromatic Liquor of the Sun be circulated, that it may be freed from all the
acrimony of the Oil of Salt, which still remains in it, or in the Spirit of
Wine: and this is the first solution made without Corrosives, which no man will
ever be able to reduce again into natural Gold.

Virtue, Use, and Dose.

AMong the best of Medicines this is the chief, it takes away most Diseases and
Distempers of the Body, intrinsecally drawing away the original, and constantly
works the Cure with great admiration; it renovates and conserves the whole
body; it refreshes all the vital Spirits; consumes all malignant humors; it
quiets the mind, makes them cheerful and merry, and affords good blood; it is a
specifical Cordial and the most noble Chemical Treasure, for which we are bound
to give our greatest thanks to the Omnipotent God, etc. Dose from three drops
to five and seven taken in some convenient Vehicle in a morning fasting.

Argentum Potabile, or Potable Silver.
TAke of the finest Silver what quantity you will, and dissolve it in Aqua
fortis, then set it in a cool place, and it will shoot forth into Crystals,
pour off the phlegm, and take the Crystals, put them into a Glass, or a well
glazed earthen Dish, and set it in a Cellar or other such like place to
dissolve, and it will be like water, evaporate the humidity, and you will have
in the bottom a Powder, which mix with Sal Armoniack, and sublime them
according to Art, and the Sal Armoniack will quickly rise and carry with it the
true Soul of the Moon; put the sublimed matter into a Glass or well glazed
Basin, and with distilled Rainwater let it be well edulcorated, and the
corrosive and superfluous sharpness of the Aqua fortis and the Sal Armoniack
may be separated. Afterward dry the Powder, and put it into a Glass, and pour
upon it the well rectified Spirit of the Microcosm, then set it in a warm place
for 24 hours, and this Spirit will soon draw out the Soul of the Moon, fair,
clear, but bluish, and in color like a Saphir; pour off the tinged Liquor, and
put on fresh, until all the sulphurous part be extracted: this done, let it
evaporate of it self, or else draw it off by an Alembick in Sand, and again
pour on Philosophical Spirit of Wine, and that will fundamentally extract the
Soul of the Moon, and also constantly retain it. But if you are willing to have
it in the form of a Powder, then draw off the Menstruum first by an Alembick,
and the Soul of the Moon will remain in the bottom, which reserve for your use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose.

THis Potable Silver, or true Soul of the Moon cures the Epilepsie and all
Lunatic Diseases, as well in general as in special; it takes away the cares of
the mind, and gives quiet sleep; it consumes Catarrhs, and is a good remedy for
the noise in the Ears; it also helps Deafness; it comforts the Brain; it helps
Forgetfulness, and strengthens a weak Memory; it expels the Vertigo, Grief, and
all those humors which are the ground of Melancholy-distempers; it is a
Specific for the Head, which in all ages and both Sexes cures the most
dangerous distempers thereunto belonging. Lastly, it is a precious and noble
Treasure, curing many diseases and imbecillities. The Dose from three drops to
half a scruple, in any Vehicle proper to the distemper.

Arcanum Duplicatum, or a double Secret.
THis Arcanum is also called the Salt of Wisdom, also a Salt of two things,
because it does consist but of two things in its preparation, to wit, Vitriol
and Nitre, and it is by the Chemists prepared in the following method. Extract
from the Caput mortuum of Aqua fortis (distilled from equal parts of Vitriol
and Nitre) a most white Salt with warm water. Take this Salt and grind it upon
a Marble, and put it into a Cucurbit luted all over; let your fire be increased
by degrees, and continued for twelve hours, till it be calcined, remembering to
stir it often, toward the end let the bottom of the Cucurbit grow red-hot,
afterward let all cool again: the Vessel being broken, take out your Salt, and
work again as at the first, grinding it into sine Powder, etc. and let this
labor be repeated the second and third time, and then it is truly prepared.

But some of the more curious Spagyrists add to seven or ten parts of this
Salt, one part of the Calx of the Sun or Moon well prepared; and being well
mixed together, they grind them into a fine Powder upon a Marble, and after by
the benefit of fire, as Artists well know how, they six and unite them: and
being so prepared, they preserve it as a part of their Treasure.

Virtue, Use, and Dose.

IT is given in all Melancholy-distempers, in Madness, disturbance of Mind, the
Pestilence, Epidemical Diseases, etc. This Medicine is a great Secret, and
works variously, by Transpiration, by Stool, and sometimes also it causes
sleep. The Dose is from a scruple to half a dram in any Vehicle appropriate to
the disease.

Ros Mineralis, or the Mineral Dew.
TAke the whole Spagyrical Lion, not embowelled, but first Philosophically
roasted in the Sun; put him into the Balneum of Wisdom; let it be ingeniously
done, that it may sweat out the Mineral dew, which is sweet and lovely. Then
rectify this by it self often, until it be spiritual and celestial, and then
you have the golden Fleece of Jupiter, the true Spring of Venus, the Sweat or
Labor of Pallas, the Tears of Diana, and the Metamorphosis of Actaeon, that
is, its power over many and various Diseases. For which glorious and Divine
gift, praise be to the immortal God for ever and ever.

Virtue, Use, and Dose.

IT is a general Medicine appropriate to extract the Essences and Tinctures of
all Vegetables: For as the Heavens work powerfully upon these sublunary bodies,
by giving life to all things; so also this heavenly Liquor preserves the body
in health, prolongs life, preserves youth, keeps off old age, resists
putrefaction, and expels all kind of diseases. The Dose from two drams to half
an ounce, or an ounce either by it self, or in some specific Vehicle.

Bezoardicum Joviale, or the Jovial Bezoar.
THis Secret the true and skilful Chemists do with me prepare after this
manner. Take Regulus of Antimony three ounces, the best English Tin purified
two ounces. Let them be melted together, and afterward brought into a most
fine Powder, then add of sublimate Mercury ten ounces. All which being well
mixed and put into a Retort, let them be distilled, and there will appear a
white matter, which Artists call Butter of Antimony. Put this into a Cucurbit,
and draw off all this humidity, and then add to it so much Spirit of Sal Nitre
as the Powder, being taken out, shall require in weight, and in Sand distill it
dry; then take it out again, and reduce it into fine Powder, and pour upon it
the Liquor before drawn off with an addition of two ounces of fresh Spirit of
Sal Nitre, and as before draw it off; take out the white Powder again, and
powder it finely, and put it in again with the last Liquor drawn off, and add
to it again two ounces more of fresh Spirit of Sal Nitre, and draw it off again
the third time. Lastly, take it out again, and reduce it into powder, and lay
it upon a smooth board before a hot fire for two or three hours, that it may
dry, and afterward keep it for your use. In this method I did first prepare it
in the Year 1610. and found it strong and powerful in operation.

Virtue, Use, and Dose.

IT is a wonderful Diaphoretick, and a most powerful Secret in all Distempers
of the Womb, and in many other Diseases belonging to Women: It Is very good in
the Plague, Fevers, Seurvy, and all Epidemical Diseases; it is a present Remedy
against Poison of any kind that is drunk; also in all Falls where Bezoardick
and Sudorifick Medicines are useful. The Dose from three grains to five and six
in Treacle-water, or in our water of Hartshorn, or in any other convenient
Liquor.

Crocus Metallorum absinthiated.
TAkeof the best bright crude Antimony, Salt of Wormwood of each four ounces.
Mix them, and in a Crucible let them be calcined according to art, and you will
find the Antimony calcined, of a reddish color, and fixed, being utterly
bereaved of all its Arsenical Sulphur; this wash so often, till no more
acrimony of the Salt of Wormwood be perceived by the taste: this Powder so
edulcorated and dried, keep for your use, as the true and most genuine Crocus
Metallorum.

Virtue, Use, and Dose.

THis is an excellent profitable Remedy, accommodated to most Diseases; pain in
the Head, Epilepsie of what kind soever, in all distempers of the Stomach,
Fevers, Plague, Hypocondriack Melancholy, Asthma's, Pleurisies as well
spurious as exquisite, Gouts, etc. in all which it has most excellent effects.
In the Dropsy it purges without any offense or nauseating, and that sometimes
by Vomit, sometimes by Stool: In other Diseases it works by Vomit and Stool
together. It opens the obstructions of the Liver, cures the yellow Jaundice,
rectifies the Spleen, and is an excellent Medicine for the Scurvy. The Dose
from three grains to four, five, or six in Conserves or other appropriate
Vehicles; or what is better, let so many grains be infused in two ounces of
Rhenish wine, and two drams of Cinamon-water all night; in the morning strain
it, throw away the powder, and drink the clear Wine warm. If you infuse it in
Spanish Wine, it seldom vomits, but works only by stool; therefore for
Vomiting, white or Rhenish is best.

Tartarus Emeticus, or a Vomiting Tartar.
TAke acid Tartar finely powdered, Crocus Metallorum absinthiated, of each two
ounces: mix them well, and put them into a Viol, and pour upon it two pound of
our Aqua Benedicta Serpilli, place it in warm Sand for three or four days, and
keep it close covered or stopped; shake it often, that the acidity of the Tartar
may be perfectly dissolved: afterward while it is warm filter it through
Hippocrates sleeve according to art, that the Crocus Metallorum being well
separated from the solution, may remain in it; but the solution it self may
pass through it clear and void of Feces. This done, set it in a cool place to
crystallize, then take these Crystals impregnate with Tartar, which being dried
and powdered, keep them for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a most excellent Vomit in all chronical and
stubborn Diseases, especially in those men who are of weak Constitutions,
seeing it is far more gentle and safe than Crocus Metallorum and other Mineral
Vomits. It is good against all Melancholy, Madness, a distempered Mind,
Deliriums, continual pains of the Head, which arise from other parts of the
body by consent, the Vertigo, Epilepsie, Apoplexy, Fascination, difficulty of
Hearing, ringing of the Ears. Also against nauseating and windiness of the
Stomach and Sides, yellow Jaundice, Dropsy, Tertian, Quartan, and other
chronical, continual, putrid and acute Fevers, Love-potions, poisonous
Draughts, choleric Pleurisies, and all Diseases in general that Choler has a
share in. It is also good against that poisonous Dysentery that happens
commonly in the Plague. Also against the Hangarian disease it is an excellent,
divine, and safe remedy. If any have unadvisedly or unawares taken poisonous
Meats or Drinks, or swallowed Flies, Spiders, and such like; also little
Fish-bones, and other such like things sticking in the Throat, or from other
things which are brought into the Stomach, by Enchantments, as hairs, nails,
pins, yarn, or other prodigious things of that kind that are dangerous to life,
are all removed by the wonderful effects of this Vomit. The Dose is from four
to five and six grains, especially in robust bodies, in any appropriate
Vehicle, taken two or three hours before or after meals, or at any time in
necessity. But this is to be observed, That neither this nor any other Vomits
may be given to every one without danger; but they are to be given to those
only, who are apt to vomit, that have a strong stomach, a wide throat, and are
accustomed to vomit, and in whom the peccant humors are naturally carried
upwards. But choleric men, and those who abhor vomiting, or have weak brains,
or any weakness or imperfection in the Head, which does properly reside there,
and is not caused by consent from other parts of the body: All those who have
Phthisicks, Asthma's, Coughs, Colicks, spit blood, are subject to be feverish,
those who have internal Imposthumes, or inveterate and confirmed obstructions
of the Mesentery, Liver, and Spleen, or have schirrous Tumors in those parts,
or have any of their principal members hurt: Also all those who have their
spirits exhausted by burning and pestilential Fevers, all those who are
troubled with a nauseating at the stomach, that they are not able to contain
either meat or drink, (which is not from any inherent matter in the Ventricle,
that Nature endeavors to cast off by Vomit, but it rises accidentally from
the effects of the parts adjacent) all these are to abstain from Vomits.
Lastly, as well Women with Child as other Women and Virgins, who are troubled
with the obstruction of their Terms, not rising from the impurity of the
Bowels, but from the obstruction of the Veins only which pass into the Womb,
these likewise are to forbear Vomits. It is to be noted also, when any one
begins to vomit, it is usual to give them Broth made of Pulse or flesh without
fat, or a draught of warm drink; and if it be needful to reiterate the same,
that so the Vomit may work the easier, and the motion of the Medicine may be
hastened.

Tartarus Nitratus, or Tartar Nitrified.
Take Salt of Tartar, Nitre prepared, of each equal parts. Dissolve them in
Rose Water warm, then filter it, and boil it gently over the fire, till there
appear a crust on the top, then put it in a cool place, and it will
crystallize, which Crystals keep for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It Is a most excellent Medicine; for it has a singular
faculty in cutting and cleansing thick and tartarous humors, and in opening
obstructions. Also in putrid Fevers, and has been experimented both in the
Hungarian and malignant, and it resists putrefaction. In the inflammation of
the Throat, called the Prunella, it is a present remedy: it brings forth the
stone in the Kidneys, cleanses the Bladder of all impurities, and provokes
Urine. The Dose is from one scruple to half a dram in some appropriate Liquor
or other Medicine.

Oxysaccharum Emeticum, or a Vomit of Vinegar and Sugar.
Take Crocus Metallorum absinthiated half an ounce, Cassia lignea two drams,
Lignum Aloes, Roots of Angelica, of each one dram; red Roses half a dram. Let
them be infused in fifteen ounces of Vinegar of Clovegilly-flowers: let them
stand in infusion for 24 hours in a gentle heat, and afterward filter them,
and add of white Sugar Candy as much as will make it like a Syrup, and then
keep it for your use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is excellent in pains of the Head, in Melancholy,
Epilepsie of what sort soever, Quinsie, Plague, Pleurisy, Cough, Asthma, in
all affections of the Stomach, in the Dysentery, Pox, Coagulation of blood,
etc. it is good for those who have taken poisonous draughts; it preserves from
the Gout. The Dose is from half an ounce to six drams in specific Liquors, or
given by it self.

Catharticum Argenteum, or the Silver Cathartick.
TAke of pure Silver an ounce, Aqua fortis distilled from the Salt of Nitre and
Vitriol, and in a Retort in Sand over a gentle fire first rectified, six
ounces. Dissolve the Moon in this water, and to the solution add of fresh Aqua
fortis four ounces, of purified Nitre half an ounce, mix them well, and distill
it in an Alembick in Balneo Mariae, or in Sand three times, still pouring on
again the distilled Liquor on the Faeces according to art; then put the
Cucurbit into Sand, that is, higher than it is luted, that so all the Aqua
fortis may be drawn off till it be thoroughly dry. Then break the Glass, and
take out the coagulated Medicine in the bottom, which is black without-side,
but white within: break this into small pieces, and then dissolve it in about
four ounces of Aqua fortis before drawn off, till the Powder grow black, and
then you have the true Philosophical Moon; take this clear Liquor, and put it
into a cold place, and it will shoot into Crystals. Take these Crystals and dry
them by the fire, not in the Sun, if you do, they will grow black and
unprofitable: and when they are sufficiently dried, keep them for your use
without edulcoration.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It Is a most powerful Cathartick, with which the most
skilful Chemists purge in the Cachexy and Dropsy, etc. it also purges all
serous and watery Humors, and cures external Tumors of the Body in the strongest
Constitutions; it expels the watrish humors in the sides, which cause various
Symptoms and Diseases, and it relieves any parts of the body overprest with
humors. The Dose is from four to five grains in a morning in a good draught of
warm Wine: It is most proper to use it in the decrease of the Moon about her
last Quarter, unless urgent occasion require otherwise.

Turpethum Minerale verum, or the true Turbith Mineral.
THE true and genuine Turbith Mineral is not (by the best Chemists) prepared
from crude Mercury with Aqua fortis, but from sublimate, in the following
manner: Take of the best sublimate Mercury what quantity you please, dissolve
it in Aqua coelestis warm, filter the solution often, which being done, put the
filtred Liquor into a Glass, and pour upon it by drops so much Oil of the Salt
of Tartar as is requisite, till you see a red Powder in the bottom of the
Glass, then pour off the Liquor, and keep the red Powder, edulcorate that with
common water, till it has lost all its sharpness and saltness, then pour upon
it Aqua Mellis six or seven times well rectified, and let this be repeated as
many times, at last take the Powder (being dry) and pour upon it Alkohol of
Wine that it may be well moistened, set the humidity on fire, and keep it
stirring with an Iron Spatula, till all the Wine be consumed, and so you have
Turbith Mineral truly prepared, whose excellent virtue is known almost to all,
neither shall I enlarge further upon it. The Dose is from four or five grains
to six and seven in some convenient Vehicle.

Mercurius Dulcis, or Sweet Mercury.
MErcurius dulcis by the best of Spagyrists is thus prepared: Take of Mercury
sublimate six ounces, of crude Mercury four ounces. Mix them well, that the
crude Mercury may be no more seen, sublime it the common way; and this
sublimation repeat five or six times, till the Mercury becomes insipid or
sweet. The red Powder in the bottom, and the white which is sublimated into the
neck of the Glass is to be thrown away, and that in the middle only reserved:
and so you have Mercurius dulcis truly prepared, break the Glass and take it
out, pulverize it, and keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It does wonders in the Dropsy, Plague, Pleurisy,
Gout, yellow Jaundice, etc. for by purifying the blood, and rectifying the
marrow in the bones, it radically drives out all noxious humors from the body:
it is also an excellent Cathartick, and by right deserves to be called a
Panacea. In all desperate diseases caused by a putrefaction of humors it is of
singular use; for it draws forth all poisonous and vicious humors, and does not
move Vomiting, but only by stool it gently purges, and performs all its
operations without trouble. It kills Worms, heals all Venereal Ulcers, yea the
Pox it self, and it powerfully dries and radically takes away the defluxions of
the Brain. The Dose from one scruple to half a dram, and in strong bodies two
scruples.

Mercurius Vitae Corrected.
LET Mercurius vitae vitrified by the benefit of common Borax be finely
powdered, pour upon it distilled Vinegar first strongly impregnated with Spirit
of Salt of Nitre, and again well dried in Sand, so shall you have (after due
edulcoration) a Powder, which is safer to be taken, and whose desired
operations are performed with less trouble, than by that of other preparations.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is good in Quartan and other intermitting Fevers,
in most diseases of the Head; in the Plague, Dropsy, Leprosy, Pox, malignant
Ulcers, and the like grievous affects, it works wonders. Dose in weak bodies
from two grains to three, in strong bodies from four to five either by it self,
or in Conserve of Roses or Violets, or so many grains may be infused in Wine or
other convenient Liquor all night, in the morning let it be strained through a
Cloth and drunk.

The Aperitive Magistery of Mars.
TAke of the Juice of Sorrel depurated three pound, pour it upon eight ounces
of the best Tamarinds; rub them well together either with your hands, or with a
wooden Pestle in an earthen Basin (not a Pewter one) that it may be all like
Pulp, or thick Pottage: then take out all the husks and little stringy fibers,
boil it a little, and clarify it with the whites of two Eggs; then strain it
through a woollen Cloth, and being clear, put it into a glass Cucurbit, to
which add filings of Steel well cleansed from all its filth four ounces. Let
them digest together in Sand warm for three days and three nights, putting a
blind head upon the Cucurbit, and stir it often with a wooden Spatula. After
digestion filter it into a Glass or earthen Basin, and in Sand let it evaporate
to the consistence of a liquid Extract, and you shall have this Aperitive
Magistery of Mars. What remains of the Steel let it be dried and brought into a
most fine Powder, and reserved for use; and so you have Steel prepared with
Vinegar of Tamarinds for Chalybeate Wine, whose description and use seek in its
proper Section.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It has a singular property in opening, dissolving, and
drying; which admirable Title is not given to it only for opening the
oppilations of the Liver, Spleen, and Meseraicks, but also for dissolving and
consuming hard scirrhous Tumors, and for drying and corroborating the parts
grieved and debilitated by a redundance of humors. Besides it has an excellent
faculty of attenuating, loosning and preparing black Choler; and therefore it
has been experimented in the Cure of Melancholy, black and yellow Jaundice,
Quartan Agues, and all other affects arising from superfluity, obturation,
putrefaction, and the like. It also by a specific quality opens the Veins of
the Matrix being obstructed, and hence it moves and provokes the Terms, etc. It
has been also experimented in the Green Sickness, ill habit of Body, and the
beginning of a Dropsy. It also corroborates the Genital parts of man or woman,
debilitated and relaxed by a superfluity of moisture. Lastly, it is also very
profitable in an inveterate Gonorrhoea, and the white stinking flux of the
Womb. Moreover, if this liquid Magistery be mixed with a just quantity of
Rhenish Wine, it colors it black; but if it be filtred again through a Paper,
it becomes clear and dilucid as before, and does no ways abate of its strength,
it still retaining its strong taste, and is of equal virtue and force;
therefore in all affects where the Spaw-waters, or any other Medicinal Waters
that are impregnated with the Minerals of Mars, which are so highly commended
by our practical Physicians, are useful, this will supply the place, and may be
given as effectually to the Patient to drink. For where the body is
conveniently cleansed, and some Veins opened, if there be occasion, and
afterward for certain days drink this Martial Wine, and observe a good diet,
there and then it works upon the same affects, which those Medicinal Waters are
given for or can perform. The Dose of this Aperitive Magistery is from half a
dram to a dram, more or less, in some appropriate Vehicle, or in Electuaries,
Conserves, Boles, Rotula's, and in other Species of Medicines it may be mixed
according to the judgment of the Physician. But the Dose of the Martial Wine is
from two ounces to three, either by it self, or mixed with other Liquors.

The Magistery of Jupiter.
TAke the Ashes of fine Tin prepared in an open fire, and with strong distilled
Vinegar extract a Salt according to Art; afterward take Spirit of Vitriol well
rectified, and drop it in upon this Extraction, being first filtred, and
immediately it will become white like Milk, and a white Powder will precipitate
to the bottom, which Powder take and edulcorate by washing it often with
distilled Rainwater, till it has lost all its acrimony, then dry the Powder,
and keep for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is of excellent virtue in the infirmities of the
Womb and other Hysterical affects: It repels those Vapors which arise from the
Womb to the upper parts, and does prevent those grievous Symptoms that are
hence used to rise. The Dose is from four grains to six in proper Vehicles.

The Magistery of Saturn.
TAke of the clear and crystalline Salt of Saturn what quantity you will,
dissolve it in Rose Water, afterward pour upon it Spirit of Vitriol (there are
some who use Oil of Tartar, but Spirit of Vitriol is best) slowly, and yet with
a quick fall, till it be of the color of thick Milk; then filter it through a
brown Paper, and a white Magistery will remain there, then with Cordial water
edulcorate it according to the Spagyrick Art, and having dried it, keep it for
your use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Magistery of Saturn is freed from all its nauseous
and noxious sweetness, and we happily use it in Phthisicks, Hecticks, burning
Fevers, and in other internal Inflammations. Also in Quartan Agues, in
affections of the Spleen, in the Colic and Venereal Lusts it is a great
Secret, it being contrary to these things. The Dose is from four to six grains
in some specific and congruous Vehicle. It is also of excellent use in the
rottenness and foulness of the Mouth, in malignant Ulcers, in Cancers, in all
Saturnine Diseases, the Wolf (an Ulcer so called) Fistula's, all burning Sores,
Burns, red Pustles of the Face, the redness of the Eyes, etc. and may be
variously mixed either in Plasters or Liniments, or dissolved in other things
for external use.

Anima Vitrioli, or the Soul of Vitriol.
TAke several great and large earthen Vessels, by how much the larger they are,
by so much the better; fill those Vessels full with Rainwater, and into every
Vessel put two, three, or more handfuls of common Vitriol, yet measure the
Vitriol, and either increase it or diminish it according to the bigness of the
Vessels, and let this Vitriol dissolve in the water, let the Vessels stand
where they may not be moved, and sometimes exposed to the Sun or the Air, yet
so, that it may not rain into them, nor any filth be cast therein: Then you
shall see the Soul of Vitriol swim on the top of the water in color like the
Rainbow or a Peacocks tail; this being thin, you shall take it off with a
Spoon diverse times in the day: This being done, stir the water about, and by
and by when it is settled again, there will appear fresh Soul, which take also,
and so by little and little you shall gather as much as you shall think
sufficient. Note, When there will no more colors rise in the water, the Soul
is all extracted, and the water is to be replenished with fresh Vitriol. The
Soul being all abstracted, it will at first appear like mud, which lay upon a
Tile or other earthen Vessel, and put it into a strong fire till it be red-hot,
and then it will be of the color of blood, and endure the flame; which being
done, though it should lie in the fire many days, it will not waste a grain.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Soul of Vitriol (Philosophically extracted, and
Spagyrically prepared) is given in many Diseases, especially all fluxes of the
Head and Belly, the flux of Blood and Terms, etc. in the Epilepsie, Dropsy,
Gonorrhoea, prickings of the Sides, Gout, Fevers, Frenzy, etc. in all which
it is of admirable use. The Dose from five grains to six or eight in
appropriate Vehicles and Medicines respecting the Disease.

The Arcanum of Vitriol.
Distill from native Vitriol calcined a very red Oil, take the Caput mortuum,
and from thence extract the extreme Salt free from all the taste of Vitriol:
then mix three parts of this extracted Salt with two parts of the distilled
Oil, put upon a fire till it be dry. Repeat this labor so often, till the Salt
is double the weight it was at first, then put this Salt into a glass Cucurbit,
and pour upon it so much Oil of Vitriol, seal it Hermetically, and set it to
putrify, and afterward into warm Sand, which within a few days you shall find
coagulated; and so it is prepared.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Arcanum is not only a stomachical Specific, but
also a most powerful Remedy against all kind of Diseases, which I happily use
in general to conserve the Body in health. The Dose from three and five grains
to six or eight in some appropriate Vehicle.

Nitre Vitriolated.
TAke of Nitre prepared one part, Spirit of Vitriol rectified two parts. Mix
them, and distill it in a Retort by degrees, first with a gentle, then with a
more strong fire, till the Retort wax very hot, and when the Spirit will no
more ascend, let it cool by degrees, and in the bottom of the Retort will
remain a white Powder almost void of its sharp, corrosive, and nitrous quality:
Upon this Powder pour so much fresh Spirit of Vitriol as is sufficient for its
dissolution, then filter it through a brown Paper, and let it half evaporate
away, and put it then into a cool place to crystallize. Take these Crystals and
dry them, and keep them for use, and so you have the true Nitrum vitriolatum,
which by certain Chemists is called the Coagulated Spirit of Vitriol.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It has the same virtue and operation that the Spirit
of Vitriol has, only it refrigerates more, and has a greater diuretic force;
in coloring any thing it is also the same, only it exceeds the Spirit. The
operation of it chiefly consists in cutting humors, in dissipating, mundifying,
drying, contracting, and resisting putrefaction, and by its tartness it
restrains thirst. Hence it is a most excellent Medicine in all Fevers, whether
malignant, pestilential, putrid, Hungarian, or Epidemical, which from a
sulphurous, astral, and poisonous influence are caused and kindled in men's
bodies, containing in it a Bezoardick property, by which it often moves Sweat
and Urine, and consumes all internal, fervid, noxious Vapors; it also purges
and comfort the Stomach by a natural heat, and helps it in Concoction; it
stirs up the Appetite, takes away putrefaction, and the cause of a stinking
Breath; it also kills the Worms, which are the effects of Putrefaction and
Crudity. It is also a most profitable Remedy for all Hepatick diseases, and for
those who have their Faces painted with red Pustles, or are subject to a
Diarrhoea. It is an useful Medicine in the Quincy, pestilential Pleurisy,
Tumors of the Spleen, putrid Gonorrhoea, the Whites in Women, the Scurvy, and
the like. The Dose is from four or six grains to eight or ten in Conserves,
Electuaries, Syrups, Juleps, or other convenient Liquors. In cold distempers it
is given mixed with Wine; but in Fevers in Barley-water. In Diarrhoea's and
imperfections of the Liver, as also in a Gonorrhoea and Fluxes in Women it is
given mixed with Conserve of red Roses, that it may become tart, and red like
blood. But all they who are subject to Contraction and Convulsion of the
Nerves, and those who have dry Brains, or lean, spare Bodies; also those whose
Stomachs are small and weak, and have the mouth of their Ventricle small and
tender; also Women and Virgins, who are troubled with the obstruction of the
Terms, must abstain from the use of this Medicine.

Flowers of Nitre.
DIssolve Nitre prepared in Rose Water, then put the solution into a new Pot
not glazed, and set it in a cold place for some days, till the flowers of the
Nitre pass through the Pot, and stick to the outside of it; then with a Hares
foot let them be diligently wiped off, and keep them for your use without any
other preparation.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is of excellent use in the Hungarian, and other
malignant burning Fevers. It repels and takes off all Inflammations; also the
roughness of the Jaws, and the heat of the parts adjoining, especially when
they begin to wax black. It is an admirable Remedy to alter and remove the
intemperate heat of the Heart, Ventricle, Lungs, Liver, Spleen, Kidneys and
Bladder. It brings away the Stone, and expels Urine too long retained. The Dose
is from half a dram to a dram in some appropriate Medicine.

Spirit of Salt Coagulated.
TAke crystalline Salt of Wormwood, or the common Salt well rectified, add to
this so much Spirit of Salt as will Spagyrically coagulate and unite these
together; yet let it be so done, that the Spirit of Salt may abound both in
favor and strength. This so coagulated and justly consistent, keep for your
use in a glass Vessel: for this is much more profitable than the Spirit of Salt
it self, both to take, keep and carry about, as need shall require.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This is a most excellent Medicine, having a Balsamic
property, by which it renews the whole man, and purifies the Blood; it comforts
the Head, Heart, and Stomach; opens obstructions of the Liver and Spleen; it
takes away, discusses, mundifies, and resists putrefaction: It is also a most
powerful Diuretic, and therefore a Specific in Dropsies, powerfully expelling
by Urine all the watery and flatulent humors, and all the tartarous and snivelly
matter, by which the Stone in the Reins and Bladder is generated. It is a
present Remedy in the Iliack and Colic passions, in the yellow Jaundice, in
long burning Fevers, Dysenteries, Palsies, Apoplexies, Gout, Leprosy, Worms,
Rupture, the English Sweat, the Plague, Poisons, etc. The Dose from six or
seven to ten or fifteen grains in specific and appropriate Vehicles. In the
Dropsy it is given (other Remedies being given before) in Wormwood-water mixed
with Spirit of the flowers of Elder, of each equal parts, and this continued
daily, till the Dropsy or Tympany is cured, which will be in few days.

Spirit of Vitriol Coagulated.
IN the same manner is Spirit of Vitriol coagulated with Salt of Sorrel, and is
without doubt of great force in Physic, as is witnessed by Experience the
Mistress of all things.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a great Secret in corroborating a weak stomach,
whose digestion it also helps; it is useful in Fevers of the Stomach, in
Inflammations and Thirst. We also use it in all diseases of the Head,
suffocation of the Womb, Stone, Jaundice, Plague, Epidemical diseases, etc. for
it does powerfully resist the Enemy of Nature, and preserves from putrefaction.
The Dose (the body being first cleansed) is so much as will make any thing
sharp or tart, yet so, that it may not offend the Teeth; it is given in Mutton,
or other warm Broth, or in any other proper Vehicle: yet choleric men must
abstain from the use of it. Some do coagulate the Spirit of Vitriol with the
Salt of Wormwood, which way of preparing of it is equal in force of operation
to the other.

The Gemm of Life.
TAke of Sal Gemm first prepared, then certain times Chymically dissolved in
Rhenish Wine, then filtred and coagulated three pound. Put this into a Cucurbit
well luted, and put upon it a double Alembick (as Artists well know) with a
Receiver large enough, and by degrees sublime it with a strong fire, till all
the white and corrosive Spirits go forth, and the Receiver be filled with
clouds, then let all be cleared again, and take away the Salt which is risen
into the Alembick, and with Spirit of Wine extract it: the Spirit being
impregnate with the Salt take it by inclination, and keep it by it self. The
Salt left in the bottom dissolve again in the Rhenish Wine before abstracted,
then filter it, and with an Alembick draw off all the humidity: the Salt being
dried, sublime it the second time, and being sublimed again with Spirit of
Wine, as before, extract it, and this labor repeat four times or more, till
there can be no more extracted. Lastly, all the Spirit of Wine impregnate with
the Salt and kept apart, now mix them together, and in a gentle heat in Balneo
bring it to the dryness of Salt, and so you have a Salt spiritual, lovely, fair
and crystalline, of great force and operation. At last put this Salt into a
silver Vessel gilt with gold, melt it, and when it is melted, put to it (under
an earthen covering) so many leaves of Gold by degrees, as may make it of a
most red color, and after a quarter of an hour take it away, let it cool, and
reduce it into a most fine Powder, and keep it for your use as an incomparable
Treasure.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a Medicine that deserves great praise and esteem;
and that I may say all in a few words, it is the only Treasure of humane life
against all diseases, even the most desperate: its force and power in altering,
penetrating, comforting, expelling, and resisting putrefaction, is greater than
can be found in any other. Besides, it opens all obstructions, dissipates
poisons, it renders the substance of the blood and all the Spirits more pure
and lightsom, and prolongs life, unless opposed by Fatal necessity, God so
ordering it. The Dose is from four grains to half a scruple in some appropriate
Medicine, which must be considered according to the quality of the disease.

Alum Tinged.
Take crude Alum an ounce, Magistery of Dragons blood half an ounce. Dissolve
them in Carduus-water, and coagulate it according to art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Alum thus impregnate with Dragons blood, is of
excellent use in Fevers and Quartan Agues, and a great Secret in Dysente^ies,
and all other Fluxes of the Belly. The Dose is from half a scruple to a whole
scruple in some appropriate Vehicle; but in Fevers or Agues it is given some
hours before the Fit in Tabaco-water, to move Sweat if possible.

Bezoar Potabile.
TO accomplish and perfect this Arcanum, prepare with singular care and study
the following dissolving Menstruum: Take Nitre cleansed, Spirit of Vitriol
rectified, of each equal parts, distill it in Sand in a Retort, observing
degrees in your fire. And this first time, when the fire has been at the
height, and is again abated, pour out the Liquor and weigh it, and add to it
the same quantity in weight of Spirit of Wine Alkoholisated, and pour it on
your Nitre again, and draw it off as at first, keeping a gentle fire in the
beginning of your work, lest the Spirit of Wine should fly too soon; then
gradually increase your fire to the fourth degree, until you can perceive no
more to rise. This labor is performed in about three hours, ere you get your
fire to the fourth degree; lastly you will see your Retort red-hot: from which,
when it is cold, you may take your Receiver, and your Menstruum is prepared
ready for use, and in the bottom of your Retort you shall find a very little
white matter almost void of taste. Then take of the Oriental Bezoar-stone
finely powdered an ounce, put it into a small glass Cucurbit, and pour upon it
of this Menstruum (last mentioned) as much as will stand above the Medicine
three fingers, and set it in Balneo with a moderate heat, and in the space of
two or three hours the Menstruum will turn the Bezoar-stone into a red color.
Pour off this solution, and what still remains undissolved, pour upon it again
the forementioned Menstruum after the same manner as before, and again put
that into a Bath, and repeat this work till it is all dissolved; and when it is
so, put all the tinged Menstruum into a Cucurbit, and with an Alembick draw it
off gently: which being done, pour Spirit of Wine upon the mass left in the
bottom, and again draw that off as before, and so do the second and third time
(remembering to add new Spirit of Wine each time) until you can perceive no more
acrimony of the Menstruum left; then again pour upon it water of Hartshorn, or
other Cordial water, and again set it in Balneo, till all the Extract is
dissolved in this Liquor: afterward filter it through a Paper, and evaporate
it, that about four ounces may remain, which keep as the most excellent
Treasure among all earthly things for your use. How this water of Hartshorn is
truly and peculiarly prepared, shall be showed in the Section of Waters.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This most noble and more than Royal Medicine is a
singular Antidote against Poison of every kind, but chiefly against noxious
vapors of a poisonous quality, and pestilential infections reigning in the
habit of the body, and afflicting the vital Faculty, which it expels by Sweat
and insensible Transpiration, and roborates the Heart, and all other of the
principal internal parts. This I have found by Experience, that it operates
with great virtue and force against all sudden and dangerous affects produced
from pestilential Poison, in Fevers, the small Pox, Epidemical Pleurisies, the
Hungarian disease, and all other diseases which arise from the same causes:
neither is it used with less success against the Erysipelas and other poisonous
Symptoms where Diaphoretick Bezoars are required; it is an enemy to all
putrefaction and malignity, and it mundifies the blood. The Dose is from a
scruple to a dram in proper Vehicles. It is also given to the sick in some
Potion to be drunk, and not to put him into a violent heat, (therefore it may
be taken early in the morning, or if need require, at any other time of the
day, being guided by your reason) lest it should weaken and abate the strength
of the Patient by giving too much vent for the Spirits; and yet it is necessary
that the Patient be warm, and do gently sweat, as much as may be without the
debilitation and decrease of strength. Moreover this Medicine may be given two
or three times or more, according to the condition of the Patient, etc. in all
Complexions and Constitutions of bodies, to Women with Child, to Children and
Infants, without any hurt or danger, especially if the state of the disease be
such, that they dare not give those hot Theriacal and Alexiterical Antidotes.
But if the condition of the sick seems so to require, that a Vein should be
opened, or the body cleansed by some Vomit or Purge, these things ought first
to be done, and after, if need be, some Sudorifick given. Also if the
constitution of the Patient be such, that he cannot sweat easily, as indeed
many such are sometimes found, when such a Patient shall be committed to your
care that cannot sweat, though covered never so warm, and other means used to
force it; give a Dose of this Arcanum, and it will work either by Vomit, or
Stool, or by Urine, or some other insensible Perspiration, like a pestilential
Vulnerary that drives the peccant matter from the Center to the Emunctories and
out of the body, and no other ways does it invade the malignity; therefore we
may also expect the same effect from this Antidote which in other cases and
bodies is produced from Sweat-driving Medicines. Also in the giving of it great
care is to be taken, lest any thing of Vinegar, or other sharp Liquor be mixed
with it, nay any acetous Syrups are also forbidden, as Syrup of Citrons,
Goose-berries, Barberries, etc. But this Extract of Bezoar may be precipitated
another way, which will fall to the bottom of the Vessel like Powder, and not
easily dissolve. But if any should read this, especially one ignorant of the
Secrets of Nature, and will not believe, or does not know the efficacy and
power of this Divine Medicine, let him prove it in this manner: let him give
poison to a Pigeon, Hen, Dog, Cat, or any other Animal, and when it is ready to
dye, then let him give it of this Medicine in some appropriate Vehicle, and he
may see what is to be done by the works of his Creator. Moreover I have often
proved it, and by the Grace of God I have given it with wonderful success among
the infected, in acute Diseases, the Plague, Petechia, poisonous Draughts, etc.
Lastly, it is to be observed, that this Potable Bezoar is not to be kept in
Venice or Bohemian Glasses, but in thick German Glasses, for the more sure
keeping of its spiritual virtue, for which give praise and honor to God.

Magistery of the Bezoar-stone.
OF the Oriental Bezoar-stone there is also a most excellent and precious dry
Magistery prepared, of a subtle and penetrating virtue, thus: Dissolve the
Bezoar according to art in the Menstruum, whose preparation was mentioned
before; when it is dissolved, filter it through a Paper, and have ready at hand
either distilled Vinegar, or Juice of Citrons clarified, pour this by drops
upon the solution, yet pour it on quick, holding your hand a good distance
above it, and presently soft and subtle particles will precipitate to the
bottom, almost without any acrimony; then draw off the Menstruum, and
edulcorate it with Cordial waters; which being done, dry it, and keep for use,
as the true and sincere Magistery of Bezoar.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This noble Magistery thus prepared, is profitable in
all malignant affects and Symptoms, and is given against all poisonous humors
or vapors that infect the Heart, especially where the quality and putrefaction
is judged to be hot; and therefore in all other cases where Bezoar is useful,
it may be safely given, and in the first place to those who are of a tender
Nature, and nauseate Physic; also to Women with Child and to Infants, because
it has almost neither smell nor taste. The Dose of it to Infants is from two
or three grains to four; but to those of riper years, according as the age and
necessity may require, from ten or twelve to fifteen grains, in distilled
Waters, or other convenient Medicine, according as the skilful Physician shall
think most fit.

Magistery of Coral with Roses.
Take of distilled Vinegar four pound, and red Roses dried. Put the Roses into
the Vinegar, and let them stand in infusion till it is of a red Tincture, which
filter; and in this Liquor dissolve according to art red Coral, and into this
solution drop Spirit of Vitriol, and there will suddenly a red Powder
precipitate it self to the bottom; this Powder dry in the shade, and not in the
Sun, or by the fire, without any edulcoration, (lest the sharpness of the
Vitriol should be lost, and the Tincture of Roses washed away) and keep it for
use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Magistery is given in those cases, and to those
persons where the use of the other Corals is thought too dear. It comforts the
Heart and vital Spirits, and preserves the body from all poison: It purifies
the blood, and resists putrefaction, and all other diseases arising from blood
corrupted. It gently refrigerates, drys and contracts: by which means it
roborates all the internal members debilitated by an intemperate heat, and
preserves the body in a good state of health. It is by Experiment found most
profitable in a weak Stomach, Vomiting, Bleeding at the Nose, Flux of the
Liver, Suffocation of the Matrix, superfluous Terms, the Whites, Abortion,
Gonorrhoea, Stone in the Reins, Dysentery, and all other Fluxes of the Belly.
The Dose is from four grains to six in any Vehicle appropriate to the Disease.

Annotation. In like manner you may prepare Magistery of Corals from Flowers of
Piony, good in the Epilepsie and other dangerous affects, and is a very
commendable Medicine: and the same is to be understood in preparing it from
certain other Flowers.

Scammony Rosated.
Take Spirit of Vitriol first rectified with Spirit of Wine three ounces, red
Roses dried a dram and a half. Infuse the Roses in the Spirit till it become
red, then filter it, and you have the Spirit of Vitriol rosated. Afterward
dissolve crude Scammony in the Spirit, that it may be like Broth or thick
Pottage, then dry it again, and this labor repeat the second and third time;
then add a little Spirit of Roses, (the Pestle being first smeared with Oil of
sweet Almonds) and work it strongly into a mass, from which afterward with some
drops of Oil of Roses and Cinnamon make Troches of a fragrant and sweet odor,
which may be kept many years.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It purges diverse humors, but especially yellow Choler
without any trouble, and cleanses the Vessels and blood; hence it is given
with good success in many diseases that require evacuation; and this it
performs gently without any Gripes of the Belly. The Dose is from thirteen or
sixteen grains to twenty, either in Pills, or in Powder given in any proper
Vehicle.

Annotation. In the whole Spagyrick Republic I have not found a more noble
Corrective for Scammony, as I can witness by my own Experience; for this does
exceed all other Preparations, yea the very Rosin of Scammony it self. For it
dissipates its tough, viscous, and poisonous malignity, and does correct it,
and does certainly purge; which does not always follow from the taking of the
Rosin only.

Magistery of Scammony.
THE true and Spagyrick Preparation and Correction of Scammony which is used as
a Secret by Physicians, is this: Take a sufficient quantity of select Scammony,
which dissolve in Philosophical Spirit of Wine; after due filtration draw it
off again in an Alembick at least to half, then pour upon it Rose Water as much
as shall seem necessary for precipitation, and the pure Rosin of Scammony will
be precipitated, void of all its poisonous quality, and freed from its nauseous
smell and taste, which (when the humidity is separated from it) reserve for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It purges the body of both sorts of Choler, and diverse
other diseases, without any offense to the body: neither can there be a more
mild, sweet, and noble Cathartick found in the whole bosom of Nature. The Dose
is from half a scruple to a whole scruple in Conserves or other appropriate
Vehicles.

Magistery of Gum Guttemaw or Gambogia.
BY the forementioned Method may a Magistery or Flowers be prepared of this
Peruvian Gum, which is an incomparable Cathartick to purge serous and thick
humors; let it be prepared carefully and reserved for use. The Dose is from
ten, twelve or fifteen grains to a scruple, especially in robust bodies.

Gum of Peru Rosated.
Take Gum of Peru or Guttemaw well pulverized an ounce, Chicory-water half an
ounce, Spirit of Vitriol rectified a dram. These being well mixed, put it into
a Glass or a well glazed Vessel, and in a warm place (but if it be too hot, it
will grow black and be spoiled) let it evaporate and grow dry, till it looks of
an earthy color. Afterward pulverize this, and add to it powder of red Roses
an ounce, of red Sanders two drams, and pour upon it a sufficient quantity of
Spirit of Wine, and let it circulate for twenty four hours, and when it is
grown cold again filter it through a Paper, and by degrees let it evaporate
till it is dry: and so you have a red Extract, of valid and excellent efficacy,
and in aspect fair and lovely, though the Gum by it self or the Magistery of it
is of an unpleasant yellow color, and does easily nauseate. Hitherto it is
revealed and communicated to none, but to the ingenious and worthy, for which
end it was found.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It purges serous humors without danger and difficulty
from all parts of the body; for which reason it is used with excellent success
in all ill habits of body, Dropsy, Gouts of all sorts, and such kind of
diseases: also in the Scurvy and Greensickness it is found excellent by
Experience. The Dose is from fifteen grains to twenty one, especially in robust
strong bodies.

Amber Muskified.
Take of the best pure Amber an ounce, of the most odorate Musk a dram,
Elaeosaccharum of Citrons half a dram. Mix them, and bring the mass into a most
subtle Powder, which moisten with Spirit of Roses hot, and let it dry again:
and this labor repeat certain times, and afterward let it be again finely
powdered, and keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It heats and drys: It comforts the Brain, it roborates
and succors it in all its affects; it helps the continual pain of the Head; it
cleanses the Eyes of white specks, and consumes the moist defluxions thereof.
It wonderfully gives help to old people, and to those who are naturally cold;
it hastens drunkenness, being infused in Wine. The Dose is from four to six and
eight grains at the most in Sack, or other proper Vehicle.

Regal Diacinamon.
Take of the best Cinnamon four ounces, three Nutmegs, of our Syrup of Cinnamon
as much as will suffice. Make it into an Electuary, to which add Confectio
Alkermes an ounce, Oil of Cinnamon half an ounce, Amber Muskified, Troches of
Pearls, of each a dram; Leaves of Hungarian Gold thirty one. Mix them, and so
make a Royal magnificent Medicine, which reserve for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is of a hot quality: It comforts the Brain and Heart
above measure; it discusseth the vicious humors of the Stomach, and helps
Concoction; it helps the Syncope and Palpitation of the Heart; it resists the
inflation and swelling of the Stomach, and dissipates wind. It allays the
Colick-pains proceeding from a cold Cause, and it sweetens the Breath. It
resists all putrefaction. It is very agreeable to old people who are cold and
debilitated, and in whom the native Balsam, and natural heat are lessened and
impaired. It does wonderfully recover strength, increase Seed, and promotes the
strength of Procreation; it excites to Venery, and much sweetens the pleasure
thereof, and safely increases the motion thereunto. The Dose in the morning
fasting, and in the evening at going to bed, is the quantity of a Hazel-nut
more or less, according to the Complexion and Sex of the Patient.

Pearls Trochiscated.
TAke white Salt of the Oriental Pearls, and free from all its acetosity, what
quantity you please, dissolve it in water made of May-dew gathered from the
standing Wheat, or in some Cordial liquor: to this solution add by drops of
Spirit of Vitriol rectified as much as shall seem requisite for precipitation,
and a white Powder will precipitate to the bottom, which (the phlegm being
removed) edulcorate and dry it according to art, and you have the true
Magistery of Pearls. Then take of this Magistery an ounce, the true Oil of
Roses, and Oil of Cinnamon, of each a scruple. Mix them, and with Tragacanth
dissolved in equal parts of Rose Water and Cinamon-water, let little Troches be
made according to art, which lay by for use, and reserve it like a Treasure.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a most excellent Comfortative in all affects of
the Heart, as Pain, Sorrow, Trembling, Pulsation, Palpitation, defects of the
Mind, etc. Also in pains of the Head, Vertigo, Epilepsie, Apoplexy, Palsy,
Contractures, resolution of the Nerves, Convulsion, Frenzy, Melancholy,
Madness, Gout, and Gouty pains in the Joints, Consumption, Blasting, the
numbness and decay by Age, Stone, Dropsy, Scurvy, French Pox, and Fevers,
etc. It purifies the Blood; it comforts all the Senses, Brain, Memory, and
Heart, and preserves the whole body sound. It fortifies Nature within, also the
Child in the Womb; it roborates the Spirits, repairs the strength, and
increases the humane Seed: it amends Milk in Women, takes away the spots of
the Eyes, and consumes Catarrhs, etc. And these Troches of Pearls thus made by
our ordination have been highly approved by many Great and Noble men, and by
them esteemed as a great Secret, and equal in effect to the Aurum Potabile. The
Dose, according to the nature of the infirm, and the Judgment of the Physician,
is from six grains to eight in appropriate Vehicles.

Elaeosaccharum of Citrons.
Take of Rose Water sixteen pound, the exterior bark of Citrons one pound.
Distill it, and separate the Oil from the water, rectify it, and reserve it for
use. Then take of white Sugar Candy three ounces, Oil of Citrons rectified half
an ounce. Mix them and you have a most odorate Eleosaccharum of Citrons. Yet
there is another more secret way of preparing an Eleosaccharum of Citrons and
Oranges, and that is thus: from the exterior coat of them, being yet recent,
the oily Juice is pressed, and mixed with a sufficient quantity of white Sugar
Candy, and well incorporate, and so you have an Eleosaccharum far more sweet
and excellent both in smell and taste, which is also easier to be prepared.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It helps the imbecility of the Heart and Ventricle, it
promotes Concoction, and discusseth Flatulencies; it is good against Poisons,
and causes a sweet breath. It being also mixed with Wine, does wonderfully
advance it by its most sweet odor and taste. The Dose is from half a scruple
to a scruple in any convenient Vehicle.

Annotation. This way of Preparation may be observed almost in all Spices,
Gums, Barks, Herbs, Flowers and Seeds, etc. to wit, in Clove-gilli-flowers,
Cinnamon, Cassia lignea, Nutmegs, Mace, Pepper, white Amber, Mastich, Marjoram,
Sage, Rue, Lavender, flowers of Chamomil and Roses, Aniseeds, Fenil-seed,
Angelica, Caraway, Cummin-seed, Dill, etc. From these and such like may
Eleosaccharum be prepared, most friendly to humane Nature.

Magistery of Parsley.
Take Ashes of Hearts-ease, or Salt of Tartar half a pound, and with a
sufficient quantity of Rainwater make a strong Lixivium clear, etc. Then take
Parsley not dried in the Sun, and cut small, what quantity you please. Put it
into a Glass, and pour upon it your Lixivium already made; let them stand in
digestion in a warm place to extract the Tincture: To this being impregnate,
and the Lixivium yet hot, pour upon it warm, crude Alum half a pound dissolved
in Rainwater, mix them well together, and the true Tincture of the Parsley
will precipitate with the ebullition, and be a little green, which diligently
edulcorate and keep for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It heats and cuts the Humors, it strongly provokes the
Terms and Urine, it discusseth Wind, and expels the Stone. The Dose is from six
grains to ten or twenty in some appropriate Vehicle.

Annotation. In like manner Magisteries or Tinctures of green dried Herbs, as
of Rue, Watercresses, Water-Mints, Rosemary, Sage, etc. are extracted, and kept
for the use of them in Physic.

SECT. II. Of Liquid Tinctures.
Tincture of Coral.
TAKE true Spirit of Honey, Philosophically distilled (but not that corrosive
and poisonous vulgar sort) pour it upon the pure red fragments of Coral (first
Spagyrically and without fire calcined) to draw the Tincture, until the body
remains white, and as it were dead. All the Extractions being mixed, after due
ablution and Coagulation draw it off gently in Balneo Mariae, and the remaining
Essence of the dissolved matter (not of the dissolving Menstruum) again draw
off with rectified Spirit of Wine, until you do receive a most red Tincture
like blood, which you shall make into the form of an Oil, at least of an
Alcoole by evaporating the mediety thereof, and keep it for your use, as the
true and genuine Preparation of Corals; but by no means make your Tincture with
Aqua Mellis, as many have hitherto done by hiding of this Secret.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. Hitherto the Hermetical Artists have kept this noble
and precious Essence to themselves; for they used it with happy and great
success in Fantastical imaginations, Epilepsie, and Melancholy, because it
mundifies and renews the blood throughout the whole body. It also resists all
defects rising in the blood by putrefaction and corruption, and it radically
throws off all internal diseases. It also comfort the seven principal
Members, but especially the Heart and vital Spirits, which it defends against
poison and all other evil and dangerous accidents. Also it wonderfully opens
all obstructions of the principal Members, as the Lungs, Liver, Spleen, and
Kidneys, and it allays Inflammations. It eats up the heat of Fevers, and
consumes their matter, etc. It is a divine Medicine in the most vehement
suffocation of the Matrix, superfluity of the Terms, in the Dropsy, Scurvy,
Palsy, Pox, Leprosy, Dysentery, Gonorrhoea, Convulsions, and Blood congealed
or stagnant. The Dose is from six drops to half a scruple, or a whole scruple,
in Vehicles convenient and proper to the disease.

Tincture of Mars.
Take of Sal Armoniack two parts, of filing of Steel one part. Mix them, and in
a Retort distill them by degrees, first with a gentle, after with a more strong
fire, and the Essence of Mars will remain in the bottom; take this and
edulcorate it well, that it may be free from all the sharpness of the Sal
Armoniack: then put this matter thus edulcorated into a little Cucurbit, and
with Spirit of Wine extract a Tincture, and when it will tinge no more, take
away the tinctured Spirit, and draw it off to the half in an Alembick, that
which remains with the Essence extracted, filter through a Paper, and reserve
that for use as the true Tincture of Mars.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Tincture of Mars is by Experiment found to be of
singular use in all obstructions of the Liver and Spleen. Also in
Hypochondriack Melancholy, Quartan Agues, ill habit of Body, Dropsy,
Green Sickness, Scurvy, the Terms too much either in flux or retention. The
Dose is from six drops to half a scruple, in Wine, Syrups, Decoctions, or other
convenient Liquors, that the strength of it may so much the better penetrate,
which is effectual even to the remote and extreme parts of the body; but in the
use of this, the body ought to be often and gently purged of the peccant
humors, and a good Diet to be observed.

Tincture of Antimony.
TAke Vitriol calcined to a redness what quantity you please, pour upon it
distilled Vinegar. Let them stand in a warm place for two or three days, take
the Tincture by inclination, filter it, and the Menstruum is prepared. Then
take a sufficient quantity of crude Antimony well pulverized, and pour upon it
of your Menstruum beforementioned, what quantity you please, and let them
digest according to art, until the Menstruum appear yellow, which pour off, and
pour on fresh, till all the Tincture is extracted. This being done, and all the
several Tinctures mixed, let them be distilled to the thickness of Honey, then
at last draw it off again with Spirit of Wine to the half, and you shall then
receive a reddish Tincture, which keep for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It does wonders in the Epilepsie, Melancholy, Madness,
Love, potions and poisonous Draughts. The Dose is six grains in some convenient
Vehicle.

Tincture of Sulphur.
EXtract flowers of Sulphur with Spirit of Turpentine in the usual manner;
which being done, let the Spirit evaporate by degrees till the rest is dry;
then take out the dr^ed matter, and pulverize it, and with Spirit of Wine
rectified extract a Tincture from it; and when it will give no more Tincture,
add all the tinged Spirit together, and put to it the same quantity of our
Pectoral water, and set them for some days in a warm place, that they may
digest: afterward draw off the Spirit of Wine in B. M. with a gentle fire, and
so the Tincture of Sulphur will remain in the Pectoral water. This take off by
inclination to the quantity of half, evaporate the rest till it be like Oil,
what remains filter through a Paper, and keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Tincture does not only free the Breast from all
thick humors that obstruct the Organs of Respiration, and cause the Cough, and
shortness of breathing; but it cleanses the Thorax, Lungs and neighboring
parts of all putrid and imposthumous Tumors, and hastens their Cure, and gives
freedom and ease in breathing. It succors, drys, and roborates a cold Brain in
such as are falling into a Consumption. It also allays the pains of the Colic,
and resists Putrefaction. It is likewise given with great success in the Plague
proceeding from a moist Cause, but especially to the Common people, who by
feeding upon gross and bad food, fill their blood with moist crude humors, and
therefore more proper for this kind of infection, than to the others. The
ordinary Dose is from five, six or seven to ten drops in a proper Vehicle.

Tincture of Tartar.
TAke Salt of Tartar well depurated by frequent solution and coagulation what
quantity you will, pour upon it the best Spirit of Wine Alkoholisated to the
eminence of three or four fingers; set it in digestion for certain days, and
every day as often as it is convenient shake it; but take heed lest the Spirit
of Wine should break the Glass: let it stand so till it is tinged of a most red
color. This Spirit being tinctured pour it off, and pour on more that is
fresh; and this work repeat so often, till it can receive no more Tincture from
the Tartar. Lastly, the Spirit of Wine thus tinctured mix together, filter it
through a Paper, and keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It cleanses the Reins and Bladder, it breaks the
Stone, and brings it away like Bran; it works by Urine, and preserves Health.
It is excellent to remove Obstructions and Putrefactions, and for penetrating
and roborating it does almost exceed all other Medicines and Arcana's. It
preserves from the Palsy and Gout, if it be taken constantly morning and
evening, either by it self or in specific Liquors. Moreover in rectifying the
blood it is of admirable use, and cannot be sufficiently praised for its
effects as well in that as in the Headache, Dropsy, Erysipelas, Jaundice both
black and yellow, Colic, Leprosy, Pox, Scabs, Itch, Tetters, Pimples, the
Terms retained, Pleurisy, prickings in the Sides, Fevers, Contractures, Gout,
and in other tartarous and venenate Diseases. The Dose is half a spoonful at
the most by it self, or in some appropriate Liquor, but the Dose is to be
increased or diminished according to the Age, Sex, Complexion, etc. of the
Patient.

Tincture of Lacca.
Take Gumm Lacca finely powdered half an ounce, burnt Alum two drams. Mix them,
and pour upon them water made of Lapis Medicamentosus with water of Sage and
Roses three pound. Let them stand in digestion till it be perfectly tinctured:
which being done, filter it, and keep the red Tincture for use.

Virtue and Use. It is experimented in the Scurvy, and cures the laxity and
rottenness of the Gums, and takes away the stink thence arising, it repairs the
decayed flesh about the Teeth: the way of using this Tincture, is to wash and
rub those parts often.

Tinctura Proprietatis.
Take Spirit of Wine prepared with Aniseeds sixteen ounces, Elixir Proprietatis
an ounce, Confectio Alkermes half an ounce, Clove-gilli-flowers a dram. Let
them stand in digestion till the Spirit be perfectly tinged, then filter the
tinctured Spirit, sweeten it with white Sugar Candy, and keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is an excellent Medicine in Melancholy, Hemicrania,
Vertigo, Palsy, Catarrh, Asthma, Cough, weakness of the Stomach, passion of
the Heart, Quartan Ague, and Stone. Moreover it comforts the Heart, keeps back
baldness, and makes the Patient merry and joyful, etc: The Dose is from one
dram to two in some convenient Vehicle.

Tincture of Iuniper-berries.
Take of fresh Iuniper-berries grossly powdered a pound, Aniseed bruised four
ounces, Angelica-roots an ounce, Nephritick wood half an ounce, of the best
Mace two drams. Mix them, and infuse them in four quarts of Spanish Wine: let
them infuse fourteen days, and every day let them be stirred or shaken,
afterward distill them in B. M. and with this Liquor distilled, extract the
Tincture of Juniper Berries according to art; which afterward filter and a
little edulcorate, and preserve for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It heats, opens, attenuates and discusseth, and is good
for the Stomach. It is effectually taken in all distempers of the Breast,
Cough, Wind, Gripings, and the biting of Serpents; and is very profitable in
the Plague: it expels the Stone, provokes Urine, and helps the Convulsion and
Suffocation of the Matrix. The Dose is from one spoonful to three in the
morning fasting.

Tincture of wild Poppy.
Take the Conserve of the flowers of wild Poppy an ounce, flowers of wild
Poppies moistened with Spirit of Vitriol a dram. Mix them, and with water
distilled from the juice of the beforementioned flowers thirty ounces, draw a
most red Tincture; which filter, and then add of the Syrup of the juice of wild
Poppies a little vitriolated eight ounces. Mix them, and keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is very profitable in hot, thin, and sharp
Defluxions that trouble the rough Artery and Jaws, and it procures sleep; it
helps the Cough, Catarrh, and Phthisick: it is an admirable remedy in
Pleurisies and prickings in the Sides, it mitigates Pain, removes
Inflammations, and causes Sweat gently; moreover it is very profitable in
Fluxes of the Belly and Dysenteries stirred up by the efflux of Choler and
sharp Humors. The Dose is from one ounce to two by it self, or in any
convenient Liquor.

Tincture of Cassia Lignea.
Take Cinamon-water made with Spanish Wine one pound, good Cassia Lignea six
drams. Let them stand so long in digestion, till it be perfectly tinctured,
which filter and keep for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is fit for all cold Distempers; it strengthens the
Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Lungs, Heart, Brain and Nerves, and also sharpens the
sight. It is good against Poisons and poisonous bitings or stingings, etc. It
sweetens the Breath, provokes Urine and the Terms; it helps Vomiting, and
loathing at the Stomach; it gives ease in all diseases where we are willing to
heat, open, attenuate, digest, and strengthen; yet they who are of a hot
Constitution, or are troubled with inflammations, must for bear the use of this
Medicine.

Tincture of St. Iohns-wort.
Take Juice of the Herbs and flowers of St. Iohnswort strained and depurated
two pound, of Pimpernel with purple flowers strained and depurated one pound,
blood of an Ass taken from the veins behind his ears half a pound, flowers of
Bugloss, red Roses and Rosemary, of each six drams; Confectio Alkermes, and
Cassia lignea, of each half an ounce; of Saffron one dram. Let them infuse all
night, and then distill them in B. M. cohobate the Liquor, and repeat the work
the second time.

Take of this water two pound, Essence of the flowers of St. Iohns-wort made
with Spirit of Wine half an ounce. Let them stand all night in a warm place, in
the morning filter it so often till you have a most red Tincture, which
edulcorate with white Sugar Candy, and keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Water is a great Secret in Melancholy, Madness,
Witchcraft, Enchantments, yea in the Imagination impaired or abolished, and as
much as lies in art, it amendeth the weakness, dullness, and stupidity of the
Mind, and the slowness of the Understanding, it happily takes away all the
affects of the Imagination. It also provokes Urine and the Terms; it helps
Tertians and Quartans, and is useful for all diseases of the Reins and Bladder.
The Dose is from three spoonfuls to four twice in the day, in the morning
before Sunrising, and at night going to bed.

Tinctura Vitae.
Take simple Spirit of Wine six pound, of the best Rosewater four pound, Orange
peels, Citron peels, red Roses dried, water-Mints, Balm, white Sanders,
Cinnamon, of each eight ounces; wood of Aloes, Mace, of each two drams; seeds of
Angelica, Coriander, Anise and Fenil, of each a dram and a half; Spicknard,
Galangal the less, Oriental Saffron, Cardamoms the less, Cloves, of each half a
dram; Ambergriese and Alexandrian Musk, of each half a scruple. Let them stand
in digestion for eight days, and then distill them in an Alembick.

Then take of this Spirit drawn off seven pound, Cassia lignea two ounces,
Confectio Alkermes half an ounce, Oriental Saffron a scruple. Let them digest
until the liquor is perfectly tinctured, afterward let the tinged Spirit be
edulcorated with a sufficient quantity of white Sugar Candy dissolved in its
proper liquor, and reserved for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. By the pleasantness of its smell it refreshes the
Heart and Spirits, it exhilarates, and prolongs life, and comforts the Stomach
and Brain, it increases the heat of the Ventricle, confirms its strength,
dissipates wind, and encourages digestion, it helps the Gripings of the Guts,
and keeps them sound; yea it is very profitable in the cold distempers of the
Thorax, Liver, and Spleen. The Dose is from one spoonful to two.

Tincture of Guajacum.
Take raspings of Guajacum four ounces, of the best Mastich an ounce, resinous
wood of Aloes a dram, Clovegilliflowers half a dram. These being mixed, pour
upon them a sufficient quantity of Spirit of Wine to extract the Tincture,
which afterward filter and reserve for use.

Virtue and Use. Let the Mouth and aching Teeth be washed often with this
Tincture; for the pain often proceeds from the defluxions of the Head, it drys
Catarrhs, takes away the stink and rottenness of the mouth, and renders the
breath sweet: at the same time let there be warm Plasters applied to the
Temples made of Mastich or Gum Elemi, and after spitting let the mouth be
diligently washed with a Decoction of Aniseeds.

Tincture of Sassafras.
Take Fountain Water well boiled, and while it is yet hot eight pound,
Sassafras cut into small thin chips two ounces. Let them stand in infusion all
night in a new well glazed Pot close covered until it cools of it self; in the
morning filter it, and the straining being clear, let it be a little aromatized
with a Tincture of Cassia lignea, and keep it for your daily use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a Nectar in Catarrhs and Arthritick pains;
because of its vast dryness and moderate heat it is an excellent remedy in
Defluxions of every kind, which it does radically consume, and also expels the
Stone. It discusseth Wind, prepares the Womb for Conception, provokes the
Terms, helps Digestion, corrects Vomiting, and moves the Belly downwards; but
to those who are weak and extenuated it is useless. The Dose is not strictly
observed, but the Patient may drink his fill of it, and continue it for some
weeks.

A Tincture for the Toothach.
Take Guajacum two ounces, Sassafras and Sarsa parilla, of each an ounce; roots
of wild Pellitory, crude Alum, Nitre prepared, of each half an ounce; seeds of
Staveacre and Henbane, of each two drams; Opium Spagyrically prepared, Cloves,
of each a dram and a half; wild Time, Origanum and Saffron, of each a dram. Mix
them and make a Powder, which put into a Glass, and pour upon it simple Spirit
of Wine, and Wine-Vinegar a pound and a half, and of these make a Tincture.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. A little of this Tincture held warm in the Mouth on the
place where the Teeth ache (after a while spit it out and take in fresh, if need
be) does powerfully allay and take away all pains of the Teeth by hindering the
sharp flux of Humors; nay it wonderfully takes away those humors that are
already fallen on the part; and although at first it seems to increase the
pain, yet it is suddenly mitigated and does vanish.

Tinctura Uterina.
Take the berries of Elder and dwarff Elder, of each four ounces; roots of
Bryony an ounce, of the herb Marjoram a dram. Mix them, and pour thereon a
sufficient quantity of Aqua Hyster. Lit. A. add also a few drops of Spirit of
Vitriol, and make a digestion in B. M. for certain days, till you shall receive
a most red Tincture, which keep for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It has a manifest Hysterical and Cephalic force
against all suffocations and torsions of the Womb, and other dangerous affects;
yea it takes away all dolors and compressions of the Diaphragma. The Dose is
from half a spoonful to a whole spoonful by it self, or in some Hysterical
liquor.

A Diaphoretick Tincture.
Take Spirit of Wine left in making our Solar Bezoar, and flowers of Elder
rectified, of each four ounces; Tartar often rectified three ounces, of the
best Vitriol an ounce, Confectio Alkermes six drams. Digest them for certain
days, shaking them often, till the liquor be perfectly tinged.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a singular Medicine in the Plague, putrid Humors,
diseases of the Head, Palsy, rectifying the Blood, trembling of the Heart, ill
habit of Body, Dropsy, Jaundice, Asthma, Pleurisy, Quinsie, prickings of the
Sides, Pox, Leprosy, Worms, Contractures, Courses retained, Fevers, etc. for
it comforts the principal Members, consumes superfluities, corrects and expels
noxious humors, and by its Diaphoretick force penetrates the Nerves, Muscles,
and Marrow, and reduces all into its natural and pristine state. The Dose is
from half a spoonful to a whole one, in water of Carduus, Elder, or Hearts-ease.

Tinctura Stiptica, or the Stiptick Tincture.
Take the yolks of twenty one Eggs boiled hard, Conserve of the roots of great
Comfry, flowers of wild Poppy, of each four ounces; of the thorny pricks of
Fishes, of Nutmegs, Gum Arabic, of each two ounces; the heads of Poppy with
the seeds, flower of red Archangel, juice of Acacia (or instead of it juice of
Sloes) of each an ounce. Mix them, and let them infuse 24 hours in six pints of
red Stiptick Wine, then add of our Aqua Hypnotica ten ounces, and distill all in
Balneo.

Then take of this distilled liquor four pints, Dragons blood moistened with
spirit of Vitriol as much as does suffice to give it a red tincture, then
filter it, and the red Tincture edulcorate with Syrup of the Juice of wild
Poppy-flowers, and reserve it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is very profitable, and of great power and force in
all Fluxes of the Belly, as Dysenteries, Diarrhoea's, Lienteries, Tenesmus,
etc. The Dose is four ounces.

SECT. III. Of Extracts.
Bezoarticum Solare, or the Solar Bezoar.
TAke Venice Treacle, Mithridate, of each eight ounces; shavings of Guajacum
and Sassafras, of each six ounces; Bay Berries, roots of Elicampane, Angelica,
of each four ounces; Swallow-wort, Zedoary, Tormentile, of each two ounces;
Dragon-wort, Masterwort, Valerian, Scorzonera, white Dictamnus, Butter-bur, of
each an ounce; elect Mastich, red Myrrh, wood of Aloes, Calamus aromaticus,
Cardamoms the less, white Ginger, Cubebs, Oriental Saffron, Mace, of each six
drams.

These being pulverized and mixed, draw the Tincture Spagyrically with the best
Spirit of Wine, and then separate the Spirit from the Essence by a gentle heat
in Balneo, until it remains at the bottom thick like Honey; which being done,
add of Confectio Alkermes an ounce, Jovial Bezoar, Diaphoretick Mineral,
Oriental Bezoar, of each half an ounce; Elks hoofs and Hartshorn Hermetically
calcined, native Cinnabar prepared, sealed Earth, flowers of Nitre, of each
three drams; the Mineral, Solar, and Animal Unicorn, of each a dram and a half;
Salt of Oriental Pearls, and of red Corals, flowers of Benjamin, milk of
Sulphur, of each a dram; salt of Betony, of Scabious, of Scordium, of each
three scruples; the five precious Stones prepared, the bone of a Stags heart,
Vipers, of each half a dram; Ambergriese and Musk of each a scruple. These
being all diligently mixed and incorporated, at last add by drops true Oil of
Roses, of the Oils of the seeds of Angelica, of Oranges, white Amber, Cloves,
Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Camphire, Garden Rue, Citrons rectified, of each a dram. Mix
them all together, and bring them into the due and just form of an Extract, to
which you may add for the greater force of the Medicine, the Salt made of the
calcined Feces, and extracted according to art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a great Secret, nay it is the best Medicine in
many and almost all Diseases, against all metallic, animal, and vegetable
Poisons, as Mercury, Arsenick, Wolf-bane, the brain of a Cat, poisonous
Medicines, Love-potions, the poison of Spiders, Vipers, Serpents, Scorpions,
Toads, etc. which does powerfully expel it from the Heart and the other
principal Members by Sweat, and penetrates and conserves the whole body. It is
also useful after due Purging in all putrefactions and superfluous humors of
the body from whencesoever they arise, in ill habits of Body, Dropsy, etc. In
Erysipelas's (in which case open a Vein first in strong bodies) in the English
Sweat, punctures of the Sides, small Pox, Asthma, Melancholy, Pox, obstructions
of the Liver and Spleen, Leprosy, Contractures, all long and confirmed
Diseases, etc. Also all Gouts in the Joints, Knee, Foot, Hip, in all Fevers,
Terms retained, Jaundice, yea in the Colic and Iliack Passion, etc. It is a
singular and incomparable remedy in the Plague, the Hungarian disease, and in
all Epidemical diseases it is a great Secret, and by the report of the Patient,
it works to a miracle; and that I may speak all in a word, it is an universal
Evacuative of all Poisons in the body. In Apostems, Carbuncles, the true
Pleurisy, first give one Dose, and exactly five hours after give another, let
this be gentle, that he may have a third, and of the happy success let no man
doubt. But if the Patient should cast up the Medicine by Vomit, repeat it again
presently, yea though he should retain it, for it is not sufficient to give one
Dose only; but give it so, that it may cast the pestilential Poison out of the
body with power and safety, repeat this Alexipharmack Sudorifick five or six
times in two days: Which seeing it is often neglected, how many may be saved
which dye, and this noble Medicine is defamed! When the Patient is in his
Sweat, let him refresh himself with Conserve of Roses vitriolated, Conserve of
Sorrel, Rob of Goose-berries, Juice and Syrup of Citrons, of Pomegranates, with
Cordial and simple Waters, etc. and let the Patient abstain from sleep till he
has sweat twice. When his Sweat is over, let his body be dried with clean
Linen moderately warm, but take great care lest the expulsed Poison be driven
in again by too cold Air; let the Sheets and Blankets of the Bed be changed:
And if the sick were tired with sweating, let him use comforting and refreshing
Meats, as new-laid Eggs, Broth, Ptisans, and such like, which are pleasant, and
nourish much in a small quantity. The Dose is from half a scruple to a scruple:
But if he be seized with the Plague, or his case be desperate, let him take at
first half a dram or two scruples in our water of Hartshorn, Treacle, or
Carduus benedictus, or let him take it in any other appropriate Vehicle, and
sweat; for it does most powerfully drive all Poison out of the body by its
Diaphoretick force; for you will see the whole body flow with sweat. For which
Divine blessing let the Name of the Lord be blessed.

Aurea Hadrianea, or the Golden Hadrianean.
Take of the following Extracts made with distilled Vinegar, Venice Treacle,
Mithridate, Confectio Alkermes, of each an ounce; roots of Anthora, Angelica,
Elicampane, of each half an ounce; Scordium, Oriental Saffron, Lupines, of each
three drams; Hartshorn and Elks hoof Hermetically calcined, Bole prepared with
juice of Citrons, sealed Earth, Bezoar, Diaphoretick Mineral, Jovial Bezoar, of
each two drams; Hyacinth prepared, Emerauld prepared, salt of Pontick Wormwood,
Carduus, the lesser Centaury, of each a dram and a half; Magistery of Pearls,
of red Corals, and of Crabs eyes, of each a dram; bone of a Stags heart, bones
of Vipers, Unicorns horn, Extract of Lignum Aloes, of each half a dram; then
add by drops Oil of white Amber rectified, of Camphire, Zedoary, Roses, Cloves,
Cinnamon, Citrons rectified, Angelica, Rue, of each half a scruple. First mix
the Extracts carefully, that they may all well incorporate one with another,
which being well mixed, add the other Oils and Powders, which by little and
little sprinkle on the mass; which being warm, bring it into the form of an
Extract.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Antidote from its value and excellence is called
Golden, and in virtue and operation it comes near our Solar Bezoar, only it is
easier prepared. In the first place it is a most excellent remedy against the
Plague, Epidemical diseases, and all kinds of Poison. For whosoever in time of
the Plague shall use this Medicine, keep it in their bodies, and sweat with it,
do by the Providence of God escape, without having the distemper. But let one
that is insected use it from half a dram to a dram in his greatest necessity,
expecting the operation of it in his bed; and while he sweats let him forbear
sleep, which many Physicians do not permit under the space of 24 hours,
especially when the Bubo and Carbuncle appear; yet seeing it does restore
strength, and that heat in sleep is carried rather to the exteriors than to the
interiors, it ought not to be forbidden beyond the time of Sweating: neither
let the sick use any rigorous means to procure Sweat; for I observe, that
either with or without it, by the use of this Alexitery, Evacuation is made by
insensible Transpiration, and the pestiferous matter is retunded, which ought
to be observed in giving all Diaphoreticks. Moreover it helps Epilepsies,
Apoplexies, Hemicrania's, Cephalalgia's, Vertigoes, Convulsions, Palsy and
Melancholy. It is a present help in the Asthma, pains of the Heart, Spleen and
Liver, Dropsies, spitting of Blood, the bloody Flux, Colic, Sciatica, Gout;
and all kinds of Fevers either Quotidian, Tertian, or Quartan. The Dose is
from half a scruple to a scruple and half a dram in some specific and
appropriate Vehicle.

Extractum Panchymagogon.
Take leaves of Sena eight ounces, Pulp of Coloquintida, roots of white
Turbith, black Hellebore, of each four ounces; Mechoacan, Hermodactyls,
Elateris, resinous Ialap, of each three ounces; Aloe rosata, elect Rhubarb,
dwarff Elder-berries, of each two ounces. Of these Hermetically make an Extract
of a just consistence, to which add of Scammony rosated, acid Tartar, of each
an ounce; these Oils, of Cloves, Cinnamon, Mastich, Fenil, Chamomil, Oranges,
Mace, of each a scruple. Mix all into a mass for Pills, which keep for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is an universal Cathartick profitable for all ages;
because as well in general as particular it purges all superabounding humors
in what parts of the body soever they lurk, and that pleasantly without any
nauseating. The Dose is from one scruple to two, or a dram, especially in
strong bodies.

Extractum Polychrestum, or an Extract good for many things.
Take Aloe rosata, leaves of Sena, of each four ounces; Hermodactyls, white and
gummy Turbith, Ialap, of each three ounces; black Hellebore, Mechoacan, Troches
Alhandal, Gum of Peru, red Myrrh, the best Mastich, Ammoniacum, Sagapen,
Opopanax, Sarcocol, of each an ounce and a half; Troches of Agarick, dwarff
Elder-berries dried, the best Rhubarb, of each an ounce; Myrobalans Indian and
yellow, Polypody of the Oak, Dodder, Cummin seeds, flowers of Arabic,
Stoechas, of each half an ounce; true Castor, Indian Spike, Cloves, of each two
drams. These being mixed, draw a Tincture according to art in the best Spirit
of Wine, of which make an Extract of a just consistence for our Pills, called
Pilulae Polychrestae.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is called Polychrestum, because it is profitable in
many distempers of the body, and purges all humors. The Dose is from half a
dram to a dram by it self, or mixed with other Pills: it is quickened with our
Scammony rosated.

Extractum Specificum Hydropicum, or a Specific Extract against the Dropsy.
Take juice of the roots of Flower-de-luce made thick, Elatery, of each eight
ounces. Mix them, and in Spirit of Wine, in which Species Diarrhodon Abbatis
has been infused, draw a Tincture according to art, which preserve till
hereafter; then take Pulp of Coloquintida, roots of white and gummy Turbith,
black Hellebore, of each four ounces; the best Rhubarb, gummy Ialap, Mechoacan,
of each two ounces; the inner bark of the roots of Elder, Walnut-tree,
Alder-tree, of each an ounce; Hedge-Hysop, Fumitory, grains of Pepper of the
Mount, dwarff Elder-berries, of each six drams. Mix these likewise, and with
Spirit of Wine rectified, in which Species Diacubeba has been infused, extract
a Tincture, with which mix the former, and draw off the humidity in Balneo,
leaving the Extract at the bottom, of the consistence of a Pultis; to which add
Magistery of Gutta Gamba, Scammony rosated, of each an ounce; Tartar
vitriolated, Hyacinth prepared, of each half an ounce; Crocus Metallorum
absinthiated, Mercurius vitae, of each two drams; Spirit of Vitriol rectified a
dram. Let all these be carefully pulverized by themselves, and faithfully mixed
with the Medicine, and about the end add of the Oils of Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace,
Chamomil, Oranges and Mint, of each half a dram; and of all make a Mass of a
consistence like an Extract.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is specific in Dropsies; for it principally purges
those serous Excrements, and carries off all superfluous humidities, and
discusseth the matter of Tumors. It also prevents and cures all diseases
arising from a salt and burnt humor; as Elephantiasis, Mange, Leprosy, Cancer,
Tetters, running Sores, Ulcers malignant and fistulous. It is given in the
morning with care, because it is a strong Cathartick, and powerfully purges
Phlegm and all watery humors from the whole body.

Extractum Diasenae, or an Extract of Sena.
Take of elect Sena four ounces, Ialap, Polypody, of each two ounces; Agarick,
black Hellebore prepared, elect Rhubarb, of each an ounce; Fenil seeds half an
ounce, Cinnamon, Squinanth, of each two drams; Ginger, Zedoary, of each a dram.
After they are bruised, infuse them in a sufficient quantity of warm water,
then shift the water and pour on new, until all the virtue be draw forth; which
being done, evaporate the humidity till it comes to the thickness of Honey, and
then add Oil of Aniseeds and Cloves, of each a scruple: which being well
incorporated, the work is ended.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a most profitable Purge in all Constitutions,
especially Melancholy, etc. Dose from one dram to four scruples.

Extractum Specificum Emeticum, or a Specific Vomiting Extract.
Take Diar^ hod^n Abbatis half an ounce, fresh roots of Asarabacca, Bryony,
Sowbread, of each an ounce; the inner bark of the roots of Alder, the best
Rhubarb, juice of Liquorish, elect Mastich, of each half an ounce. From these
with Spirit of Wine draw a Tincture by digestion, stirring it often in the day,
which being done, reserve it. Then take Roots of the lesser Spurge prepared,
white Hellebore prepared, of each eight ounces. These being cut and moderately
bruised, pour upon them the Tincture you before prepared, and let them stand in
a gentle heat in Balneo for fourteen days; then take the Spirit by inclination,
and pour on fresh; do this so long till all the virtue is extracted. Lastly,
the Spirit truly tinged being mixed together, draw off the humidity according
to art, until the Extract does appear in the bottom like Honey; to which add
Salt of Vitriol half an ounce, Gutta Gamba, Tartar vitriolated, of each two
drams; Oil of Cloves, of Cinnamon, Nutmegs, of each a scruple. Mix them all
carefully, and make an Extract according to art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This is a specific Vomit, and works variously by Vomit
and Stool, and is of great force and virtue in all Fevers, pains of the Head
and Joints, Gout, Jaundice, Dropsy, and in obstructions of the Liver and
Spleen; yea in the Appetite depraved, and the Stomach debilitated, for it
leaves nothing of a depraved nature in it, but radically casts forth all the
impure and peccant humors, nor does it do any injury. The Dose is to be
regulated according to the Age, Sex, and Complexion, etc. from a scruple to
half a dram in some convenient liquor, or in the form of a Pill, etc. having
eaten something convenient before; for then it works with the most ease and the
least trouble.

Extractum Specificum Colicum, or a Specific Extract for the Colic.
Take of the yellow rind of Oranges six ounces, specie^ of Diacymini,
Iuniper-berries, of each three ounces; roots of Elicampane, Pimpernel, Cloves,
Zedoary, of each an ounce and a half; seeds of Chervil, Bay Berries dried,
Mother of Time, Marjoram, juice of Liquorish, of each an ounce; Cardamoms the
less, Oriental Saffron, of each six drams. Mix them, and with Spirit of Wine
draw a Tincture, which afterward in Balneo abstract to the thickness of Honey,
and add of Nitre vitriolated thra drams, Hartshorn Hermetically calcined,
Swines and Hares Cockal-bones calcined, of each two drams; white Amber
prepared, Magistery of Corals, the Carp-stone, of each a dram and a half;
Diaphoretick Mineral, Jovial Bezoar, the Bezoar stone, Lac Sulphuris, of each a
dram; Spirit of Salt rectified half a dram. Mix them all together, and make of
it a Mass like an Extract, to which add of our Carminative Oil two drams, the
Oils of Angelica, Cloves, white Amber, Mastich, Mace, Cinnamon, Citrons, of each
a scruple. All being well incorporated, make an Extract and reserve it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This is a Specific in the Colic, and is properly
applied to the Colic and Iliack Passion rising from a cold, moist and flatuous
Cause, and (the Excrements of the Guts being evacuated) it is a Secret in
allaying the vehement and mos^ grievous pains of the Intestines; for it
dissolves and attenuates the thick and viscous humors, and dissipates wind. It
helps the distension and windiness of the Hypochonders and Stomach, and
wonderfully relieves the coldness of the Stomach, and the weakness of the
Bowels. It is also profitable for old Folks, and those who have the Quartan
Age, etc. It repairs Concoction, and effectually expels the Tartar that is
dissolved and loosned in the Guts. The Dose is from a scruple to half a dram,
in our Water against the Colic, or in any other appropriate.

Extractum Specificum Uterinum, or a Specific Extract for the Womb.
Take Elder-berries dried, dwarff Elder-berries, of each four ounces; roots of
Piony duly gathered, red Mugwort, white Dictamnus, Briony, of each two ounces;
Misleto of the Oak, Climmin seeds, Pennyroyal, Balm new dried, Cassia lignea,
of each an ounce; Oriental Saffron, true Castor, of each half an ounce. Mix
them, and draw a Tincture with Spirit of Wine; which being done, separate the
Spirit, and the Extract will remain in the bottom: to which add the blood of a
Hog dried in an Oven, and prepared with the Hysterical water half an ounce,
Jovial Bezoar two drams, Magistery of English Tin, of Mother of Pearls, and
Coral, of each a dram and a half; Oil of Cloves, of Angelica, white Amber,
Oranges, of each a dram. Let them be all well mixed, and made into the form of
an Extract, which keep for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. We have not a greater Secret for the Womb than this is;
for in the suffocations of the Matrix, where all things are irritated, and as
it were desperate, it is a most salubrious Medicine; for it takes away the
cause of these most cruel effects, and all, or at leastwise the most
deplorable fits and strangulations of the Womb, caused by a retention of the
Seed, and it resists many other things of the same nature; it also perfectly
quiets the motion of the Matrix. The Dose is from a scruple to half a dram
three or four mornings together, in our Hysterical water, or any other
appropriate, as those of Mugwort, Balm, Motherwort, Pennyroyal, etc.

Laudanum Opiatum.
Take of Thebane Opium Spagyrically prepared two ounces, juice of wild
Poppy-flowers made thick an ounce, roots of Hounds-tongue, transmarine Mummy,
Styrax calamitis, juice of Liquorish, Oriental Saffron, of each half an ounce.
With Spirit of Wine draw the Tincture of each of them apart, except the Opium,
which is to be drawn in distilled Vinegar, or Juice of Citrons, then abstract
the Spirit of all the Extractions in gentle heat of Balneo, to the thickness of
Honey, and add to it the Extract of Bezoar stone, Anodyne Sulphur of Vitriol,
of each two drams; Salt of Oriental Pearls, red Coral, of each a dram; Elks
hoofs Hermetically calcined, bone of a Stags heart, white Amber prepared, of
each half a dram; Ambergriese a scruple, Musk half a scruple. These being all
well incorporate and mixed, add of our Aurum potabile a dram and a half, Oils of
Chamomil, Dill, Wormwood, Oil of Oranges, Cloves, Nutmegs, of Citrons
rectified, of Aniseeds and Caraway seeds, of each half a scruple. Let all be
well mixed, and brought into a Mass or Extract.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is an admirable Medicine in stopping all fluxes of
Humors and Catarrhs, and all excretions of Blood and Terms, in unreasonable
watchings and want of rest, in Fevers of all kinds, and in sudden weakness: In
Frenzy, Madness, Melancholy, Vomiting, Epilepsie, Heart-passions, Hiccupping,
Colic, weakness of the Stomach, Pleurisy, pains of the Joints, Gouts of all
kinds, Sciatica, Stone, Nephritick pains, etc. For in allaying all vehement and
sharp pains it is really a Divine help, and as it were our last refuge, there
being not a Medicine to be found in the Spagyrick Republic more excellent,
speedy, safe, and secret than this is, witness the very Mother and Nurse of
Physic, Experience; therefore use this Divine Medicine only to the Glory of
the most high God, and the Health of your sick Neighbor, and with me give
thanks for the same. The Dose is from two or three to four, five or six grains,
which is given at bed time, the body being empty; for when the Patient takes
it, he should omit his Supper that evening, lest his food should obstruct the
Medicine. And because the use of Laudanum Opiatum is grown so famous and
frequent, I will here subjoyn the various use thereof.

In Affects of the Head.
A Draught. Take Laudanum Opiatum three, four, five or six grains,
Marjoram-water half an ounce, Syrup of Betony two drams, Confection of
Smaragdus a scruple, oil of Oriental Pearls three drops, oil of Fenil one drop,
spirit of Vitriol as much as does suffice to make it grateful. Mix them, and
make a Draught for one Dose.

Another. Take Laudanum Opiatum what quantity you please, Syrup of the juice of
black Cherries, water of Vervain, Nutmegs, of each two drams; Confection of
Hyacinth a scruple, salt of red Corals three grains, oil of white Amber a drop.
Mix them, and make a draught for one Dose.

Pills. Take Laudanum Opiatum what quantity is convenient, Magistery of Pearls,
Smaragd or Emerauld prepared, of each three grains. Mix them, and with Oil of
Fenil make little Pills, which gild for one Dose.

Another. Take Laudanum Opiatum a convenient quantity, Magistery of red Corals,
Hyacinth prepared, of each three grains. Mix them, and with Oil of white Amber
or Marjoram make little Pills, which gild for one Dose.

A Bole or Bolus.

Take Laudanum Opiatum a sufficient quantity, conserve of Marjoram a dram,
confection of Smaragdus a scruple, species of Diambrae half a scruple,
Elaeosaccharum of Cinamom a sufficient quantity to make it into a Bole for one
Dose.

Another. Take Laudanum Opiatum a sufficient quantity, conserve of Rosemary
flowers a dram, confect. of Hyacinth a scruple, species of Diamoscu dulce half
a scruple, oil of Mace one drop, Manus Christi Perlats a sufficient quantity to
make it into a Bole for a Dose.

In Affects of the Heart.
A Draught. Take Laudanum Opiatum a sufficient quantity, Syrup of Lemmons two
drams, water of Borage, Cinnamon, Roses, and Water-Lily, of each a dram;
Confectio Alkermes, Tincture of Corals, of each half a scruple; Salt of
Oriental Pearls three grains. Mix them, and make a draught for one Dose.

Another. Take Laudanum Opiatum a sufficient quantity, Syrup of the juice of
Citrons and of Black-berries, of each two drams; water of Balm and Bugloss, of
each a dram and a half; of our Confectio pretiosa a scruple, Tincture of Coral
half a scruple. Mix them, and make a draught for one Dose.

Pills. Take Laudanum Opiatum a sufficient quantity, our Magistery of Pearls
and the bone of a Stags heart, of each three grains. Mix them, and with Oil of
Mace make little Pills, and gild them for one Dose.

Others. Take Laudanum Opiatum a sufficient quantity, of the five precious
Stones prepared, Oriental Bezoar, of each a grain. With Oil of Cinnamon make
Pills and gild them, for one Dose.

A Bole.

Take Laudanum Opiatum a sufficient quantity, confection of Borage vitriolated
a dram, confection of Alkermes a scruple, species of Diamargariton frigidum
half a scruple, of Manus Christi Perlat. enough to make it into a Bole for one
Dose.

Another. Take Laudanum Opiatum a sufficient quantity, conserve of
Clovegilliflowers vitriolated one dram, our confection of Citrons a scruple,
species Diarrhodon Abbatis half a scruple, Elaeosaccharum of Cinnamon enough to
make it into a Bole for one Dose.

In the Epilepsie and Vertigo, etc.
A Draught. Take Laudanum Opiatum a sufficient quantity, Syrup of Piony
flowers, waters of the Lily of the Valley, of our Epileptick, of each two
drams; of our Cephalic Confect a scruple, oils of Cubebs and Elks hoofs, of
each a drop; Spirit of Vitriol a sufficient quantity to make it grateful. Mix
them, and make a draught for one Dose.

Another. Take Laudanum Opiatum a sufficient quantity, Syrup of Betony, water
of Lavender and Teil-tree, of each two drams; confection of Smaragdus a
scruple, essence of Camphire three grains, oil of white Amber and Hartshorn,
of each a drop; of our Elixir of Piony so much as will make it grateful. Mix
them, and make a draught for one Dose.

Pills.

Take Laudanum Opiatum a sufficient quantity, of the Animal Unicorn, Magistery
of Corals, of each three grains. With Oil of Man's Scull make Pills and gild
them, for one Dose.

Others. Take Laudanum Opiatum a sufficient quantity, Magistery of man's Scull,
Sulphur of the Moon, of each three grains. With Oil of Elks hoofs make Pills
which gild, for one Dose.

A Bole.

Take Laudanum Opiatum a sufficient quantity, confection of Piony flowers
vitriolated a dram, confection of Smaragdus a scruple, of our species Dialunae
half a scruple, oil of Rosemary a drop. Mix them, and with Troches of Diambra
q. s. make a Bole for one Dose.

Another. Take Laudanum Opiatum a sufficient quantity, conserve of Rosemary
flowers a dram of our Cephalic confect a scruple, of our species Diacranei
half a scruple, oil of Lavender a drop. Mix them, and with Troches of Diamoscu
dulce make a Bole for one Dose.

In Vomiting, Hiccup, and a weak Stomach, etc.
Take Laudanum Opiatum a sufficient quantity, syrup of Mint, our Stomach-water,
of each three drams; Extract of Calamus Aromaticus, our Sal stomachicum, of
each four grains; oil of Nutmegs and Mace, of each a drop; our Elixir of
Vitriol q. s. to ma^e it grateful. Mix them, and make a draught for one Dose.

Another. Take Laudanum Opiate a sufficient quantity, syrup of Quinces, water
of Calamus aromaticus, of each three drams; Extract of Galangal the less, Nitre
vitriolated, of each four grains; oil of Cloves, of Water-mints, of each a
drop; of our Elixir of Sulphur q. s. to make it grateful. Mix them, and make a
draught for one Dose.

Pills.

Take Laudanum Opiate a sufficient quantity, Diagalangal ten grains. With Oil
of Sage make small Pills for one Dose, which gild.

Others. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. species of Aromaticus Caryophyllat. ten
grains. With Oil of Wormwood make Pills for one Dose, which gild.

A Bole.

Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. preserved Ginger a dram, preserved Acoras half a
dram, oil of Mastich and Zedoary, of each a drop. Mix them, and with Troches of
Diagalangal make a Bole for one Dose.

Another. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. conserve of Water-mint a dram, Diacydon.
aromat. half a dram, oil of Cinnamon and Calamus aromaticus, of each a drop. Mix
them, and with Troches of Aromaticus Caryophyllatus make a Bole for one Dose.

In Melancholy, Madness, and Frenzy, etc.
A Draught. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Basilicon Iulip, Bugloss water, of each
three drams; spirit of sealed Earth, essence of St. Iohns-wort, of each a
scruple; Elixir Proprietatis q. s. to render it grateful. Of these make a
draught for one Dose.

Another. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Balm water half an ounce, syrup of Bugloss
two drams, our confection of Citrons half a dram, essence of Saffron, tincture
of Smaragdus ten grains. Mix them, and make a draught for one Dose.

Pills.

Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Sulphur of the Moon, Magistery of Oriental Pearls,
of each three grains. With Oil of Cinnamon make Pills for one Dose, which gild.

Others. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. powder of burnt Crab-fish, magistery of red
Coral, of each three grains. With distilled Oil of Roses make little Pills for
one Dose, and gild them.

A Bole.

Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Confection of Hyacinth a dram, Essence of St.
Iohns-wort a scruple, species of Diamargariton frigidum, Elaeosaccharum of
Citrons, of each half a scruple. Mix them, and with Manus Christi Perlat. q. s.
make a Bole for one dose.

Another. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. confection of Smaragds a dram, essence of
St. Iohns-wort a scruple, tincture of Corals, Elaeosaccharum of Cinnamon, of
each half a scruple. Mix them, and with Troches of Diarrhodon Abbatis make a
Bole for one dose.

In Fevers of all kinds.
A Draught. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Carduus water an ounce, syrup of the
lesser Centaury two drams, of our febrile Salt ten grains, Extract of Zedoary
half a scruple. Mix them, and make a draught for one dose.

Another. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. of our Aqua febrifuga an ounce, syrup of
Wormwood two drams, of our febrile Elixir a scruple, Extract of Cloves half a
scruple. Mix them, and make a draught for one dose.

Pills.

Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. of our febrile Salt half a scruple. With Oil of
Wormwood make small Pills for one dose, and gild them.

Others. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. of Nitre vitriolated half a scruple. Mix
them, and with Oil of Camphire make little Pills for one dose, and gild them.

A Bole.

Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. of our febrile Treacle a dram, preserved Ginger
half a dram, species of our Febrifuge a scruple, Elaeosaccharum of Myrrh half a
scruple. Mix them, and with white Sugar Candy make a Bole for one dose.

Another. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. of our febrile Treacle a dram, preserved
Calamus aromaticus half a dram, of our febrile Salt a scruple, Elaeosaccharum
of Rue half a scruple. Mix them, and with Diarrhodon Abbatis make a Bole for
one dose.

In Pectoral Diseases, Cough, Asthma, and Phthisick, etc.
A draught. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. syrup of Liquorish and Horehound, of
each a dram and a half; water of Lohoch sanum, Hysop, and Fenil, of each a
dram; Elaeosaccharum of Aniseeds ten grains. Of these make a draught for one
dose.

Another. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. water of Horehound, Coltsfoot, and Betony,
of each a dram and a half, syrup of Hysop and Iujubes, of each a dram; Rob of
Nuts, Elaeosaccharum of Fenil ten grains. Mix them, and make a draught for one
dose.

Pills.

Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. compound flowers of Sulphur, Benjamin, of each four
grains. Mix them, and with Oil of Sage make Pills for one dose.

Others. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Lac Sulphuris, white Tragacanth, of each
four grains. Mix them, and with Oil of Chamomil make small Pills for one dose,
which gild with Leaf-gold.

A Bole.

Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. of o r Pectoral Confection a dram, Lohoch sanum and
exper. half a dram, juice of Liquorish, Elaeosaccharum of Fenil, of each half a
scruple; Extract of Oriental Saffron three grains. Mix them, and with Troches
of simple Diaireos make a Bole for one dose.

Another. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Conserve of Violets a dram, conserve de
Pino half a dram, of our species of Diasulphuris a scruple, Extract of
Elicampane, Elaeosaccharum of Aniseeds, of each ten grains. Mix them, and with
simple Manus Christi q. s. make a Bole for one dose.

For the stopping of Defluxions of Humors and thin Catarrhs, falling from the
Head upon the Windpipe, which causes broken rest and a continual Cough.
A Draught. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. water of the bark of green Walnuts and
Scabiose, of each two drams; Syrup of wild Poppies a dram and a half, Rob of
Nuts a dram, Elaeosaccharum of Nutmegs ten grains. Of these make a draught for
one dose.

Another. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. of our Aqua Serpilli benedict. half an
ounce, syrup of Iujubes two drams, of our Diacodium with Saffron a dram,
Elaeosaccharum o Cubebs ten grains. Of these make a draught for one dose.

Another in a very hot Cause.
Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. of Pomgranate-wine half an ounce, water of Roses
two drams, syrup of Poppies simple, Diamorum, of each a dram and a half; Nitre
vitriolated two grains. Mix them, and make a draught for one dose.

Pills.

Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Magistery of Sandaraca, Emerauld prepared, of each
four grains. Mix them, and with Oil of Mastich make Pills for one dose, and
gild them.

Others. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Magistery of Mastich, white Amber prepared,
of each four grains. Mix them, and with Oil of Frankincense make it up into
Pills for one dose, and gild them.

A Bole.

Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Conserve of the flowers of wild Poppies half a
dram, Rob de Cornis half a dram, of the species of Diamargariton frigidum a
scruple. Mix them, and with Sugar Penids make a Bole for one dose.

In all Fluxes of the Bowels.
A Draught. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Tormentil water half an ounce, of our
Stiptick Syrup two drams, essence of the flowers of red Nettles (or Archangel)
half a scruple, Extract of the roots of Bistort, Elaeosaccharum of Nutmegs, of
each ten grains. Of these make a draught for one dose.

Another. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Plantanewater half an ounce, syrup of
Quinces two drams, essence of Balaustins a scruple, Extract of Tormentil,
Elaeosaccharum of Cloves, of each ten grains. Mix them, and make a draught for
one dose.

Pills.

Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Magistery of Coral rosated, Crocus Martis, of each
four grains. Mix them, and with Oil of Mastich make little Pills for one dose.

Others. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Magistery of Gum Arabic, Hartshorn burnt
and prepared, of each four grains. Mix them, and with Oil of Sage make it into
small Pills, and gild them.

A Bole.

Take Laudanum Opiate. q. s. Confection of dried Roses a dram, of our Narcotick
Confect a scruple, our species of Diamartis and Elaeosaccharum of Oranges, of
each ten grains. Mix them, and with Troches of Diarrhodon Abbatis q. s. make a
Bole for one dose.

Another. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Conserve of Comfry flowers a dram, of our
Stiptick Confect half a dram, species of our Diaplantaginis, Elaeosaccharum of
Citrons, of each ten grains. Mix them, and with Troches of Diamargariton
frigidum make a Bole for one dose.

In Excretion of Blood, and overmuch Evacuation of the Terms.
A Draught. Take shavings of Brasil a handful, of Gum Arabic three drams. Boil
these in a sufficient quantity of white Wine in Balneo. Then take of this
liquor being strained and clear, and of Laudanum q. s. syrup of Quinces,
Diacodium with Saffron, of each two drams; Magistery of Coral rosated, essence
of Crocus Martis, of each ten grains; Elaeosaccharum of Cloves four grains, Rob
of Barberries q. s. to give it a grateful relish. Mix them, and make a draught
for one dose.

Another. Take Tormentil, Dragonwort, Chicory, of each a dram; shavings of
Hartshorn, seeds of Roses, Plantane, and Sorrel, of each half a dram;
Shepherds purse, Pimpernel, and Liverwort, of each a scruple; flowers of
Millefoil, red Roses, and Rosemary, of each ten grains; Sebestens two. Boil
these in a sufficient quantity of red Stiptick Wine in Balneo. Then take of the
clear straining an ounce and a half, Laudanum q. s. syrup of wild Poppies,
syrup of Comfry, of each two drams; essence of Dragons blood a scruple,
Elaeosaccharum of Nutmegs ten grains, Rob of Gooseberries q. s. to make it
grateful. Mix them, and make a draught for one dose.

Another most excellent in the overflowing of the Terms.
Take Laudanum five grains, water of Shepherds purse an ounce and an half, Rob
of Elder three drams, Sal Prunellae two scruples, Extract of Tormentil ten
grains, Camphire four grains. Mix them, and make a draught for one dose.

Pills.

Take Laudanum q. s. red Bole prepared, Magistery of Corals Rosated, of each
four grains. Mix them, and with Oil of Rosemary make Pills, and gild them.

Others. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. moss of the Sloe-tree, Magistery of the
mother of Pearls, of each four grains. Mix them, and with Oil of Sage make
little Pills and gild them for one dose.

A Bole.

Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. the preserved rind of Quinces a dram, Troches of
Spodium half a scruple, powder of Cuttle-fish bones, Elaeosaccharum of Zedoary,
of each ten grains. Mix them, and with Troches of Diamargariton frigidum make a
Bole for one dose.

Another. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. roots of Comfry preserved a dram, Troches
of sealed Earth a scruple, white Amber prepared, Elaeosaccharum of Nutmegs, of
each ten grains. Mix them, and make them into a Bole for one dose.

In the Colic and Iliack Passion, etc.
A Draught. Take Conserve of red Roses an ounce, roots of Zedoary a dram. Boil
them in three ounces of Chamomil water. To an ounce and a half of this water
strained, add Laudanum six grains, syrup of Oranges two drams, of our Colic
Extract a scruple, of our Carminative Elaeosaccharum ten grains. Mix them, and
make a draught for one dose.

Another. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. of our Aqua benedicta Serpilli half an
ounce, syrup of Mint two drams, of our Colic Extract a scruple, Elaeosaccharum
of Oranges ten grains. Mix them, and make a draught for one dose.

Another. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. of our Aqua Carminativa half an ounce,
syrup of Citron rinds two drams, Extract of Zedoary, Elaeosaccharum of
Angelica, of each ten grains, spirit of Salt of Nitre q. s. to make it
grateful. Of these being mixed make a draught for one dose.

Pills.

Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Magistery of the Carpstone, bones of the Hares foot
calcined, of each four grains. Mix them, and with Oil of white Amber make small
Pills for one dose which gild

Others. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Oriental Bezoar stone, the Cockal-bone of a
Hogs foot calcined, of each four grains. Mix them, and with Oil of Cummin seed
make little Pills for one dose, which gild.

A Bole.

Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Confection of Mint a dram, of our Extractum Colicum
half a scruple, Elaeosaccharum of Cinnamon ten grains. Mix them, and with Rowls
of Dianisi make a Bole for one dose.

Another. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Conserve of the flowers of wild Poppy a
dram, Elaeosaccharum of Chamomil a scruple, of Nitre vitriolated four grains.
Mix them, and with Rotula's of Diacymini make a Bole for one dose.

In the Pleurisy.
A Draught. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. water of wild Poppy flowers half an
ounce, syrup of Maidenhair two drams, Extract of Liquorish a scruple,
Elaeosaccharum of Aniseeds ten grains. Mix them, and make a draught for one
dose.

Another. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. water of Carduus Mariae half an ounce,
syrup of Iujubes two drams, essence of the flowers of wild Poppy,
Elaeosaccharum of Fenil, of each ten grains. Mix them, and make a draught for
one dose.

Pills.

Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. of the jaw bone of a Pike, the tooth of a wild
Boar, of each four grains. Mix them, and with Oil of Benjamin make little
Pills, which gild for one dose.

Others. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. compound flowers of Sulphur, Extract of the
juice of Liquorish, of each four grains. Mix them, and with Oil of Hysop make
little Pills for one dose, which you may gild.

A Bolus.

Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Conserve of the flowers of wild Poppies a dram,
Lohoch sanum and expert. half a dram, of our Species Pleuritica a scruple,
Elaeosaccharum of Cummin seeds ten grains. Mix them, and with Diatragacanthum
frigidum make a Bole for one time.

Another. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Conserve of Violets a dram, of our
Diacodium crocatum half a dram, our secret Pulvis Pleuriticus a scruple,
Elaeosaccharum of Chamomil ten grains. Mix them, and with Rotula's of Diaireos
simple make a Bole for one dose.

In the Stone and Gout.
A Draught. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. of our Aqua Nephritica half an ounce,
syrup of Marshmallows two drams, salt of the Perch-stone ten grains, oil of
Oriental Pearls sour drops. Mix them, and make a draught for one dose.

Another. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. water of Germander half an ounce, syrup of
Mallows two drams, salt of Crabs eyes ten grains, oil of red Coral four drops.
Mix them, and make a draught for one dose.

Pills.

Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Magistery of the Jewish Stone, of Venetian Borax,
of each four grains. Mix them, and with Spirit of Turpentine make little Pills
for one dose, which you may gild.

Another. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Magistery of the Spunge-stone, Nitre
prepared, of each four grains. Mix them, and with Oil of Parsley make little
Pills for one dose, which gild.

A Bole. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Conserve of Violets, preserved roots of
Pimpernel half a dram, of our species Dianitri a scruple, Elaeosaccharum of
Parsley ten grains. Mix them, and with Sugar of Violets make a Bole for one
dose.

Another. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Confection of Mallow flowers a dram,
preserved roots of Eryngo half a dram, of our Species Nephriticus a scruple,
Elaeosaccharum of Citrons ten grains. Mix them, and with Syrup of Roses make a
Bole for one dose.

In immoderate Watching and unquiet Rest.
A Draught. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Poppywater half an ounce, Syrup of
Poppies two drams, Elaeosaccharum of Aniseeds ten grains, Spirit of Vitriol
three drops. Mix them, and make a draught for one dose to be taken in the
Evening.

Another. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. of our Aqua Hypnotica half an ounce, syrup
of flowers of wild Poppies two drams, Elaeosaccharum of Fenil ten grains, oil
of Oriental Pearls three drops. Mix them, and make a draught for one dose.

Pills.

Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Magistery of Pearls, of Ambergriese, of each four
grains. With Oil of Styrax make Pills for one dose, and gild them.

Others. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Magistery of red Coral, Lignum Aloes, of
each three grains. With Oil of Benjamim make small Pills for one dose, and gild
them.

A Bole.

Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Conserve of red Roses vitriolated a dram, Lohoch de
Papavere half a dram, species of Diamoschu dulce ten grains, Extract of Saffron
three grains. Mix them, and with Rotula's of Diarrhodon Abbatis make a Bole for
one dose.

Another. Take Laudanum Opiate q. s. Conserve of Violets vitriolated a dram,
Diacodium crociated half a dram, species of Diambra ten grains, Extract of
Elicampane flowers three grains. Mix them, and with Rotula's of Diamargariton
frigidum make a Bole for one dose.

Laudanum Minerale, or the Mineral Laudanum
Take of the Anodyne Sulphur of Vitriol corrected and fixed two drams, Magistery
of Pearls, Extract of Lignum Aloes, of each a dram and a half; of Saffron a
scruple, Bezoar stone, the Animal Unicorn, of each fifteen grains; oils of
Cloves and Cinnamon, of each half a scruple. Mix them, and with Syrup of the
Juice of wild Poppy flowers make a soft Mass according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a most excellent Anodyne, and most profitable to
procure sleep, also to stop Catarrhs, Defluxions (from the Brain upon the Nose
or Eyes) Coughs, and other such kind of affects; it helps the Distillations
that fall upon the Thorax, Lungs, etc. The Dose is from six grains to eight or
ten in any Conserve or convenient Liquor, or in the form of a Pill.

SECT. IV. Of the Preparing certain things, etc.
The Calcination and Preparation of Hartshorn, Elks hoofs, Man's Skull, etc.
Spagyrically or without Fire.
THis Calcination is effectually performed in a Bladder by continual boiling or
digesting in fair water, by which vapor the Horn hanging in the neck of the
Bladder, in which place it may be best wrought and penetrated, by a pleasant
and wonderful manner is calcined to a perfect whiteness, without those violent
flames which otherwise consume its virtues (as is used to be done in the vulgar
Calcination) but let the fourth part of the Bladder be empty: And if in boiling
the water should consume, pour on more scalding hot, and this do until this
fumigatory Calcination (for whatsoever is calcined by this method, is not
undeservedly said to be calcined by Suffumigation) be absolutely finished.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. Hartshorn thus prepared, is equal to the Unicorns horn
in its Diaphoretick force; for it is profitable in all affects of the Heart,
and wonderfully excellent in all kind of Poison. Moreover it is very effectual
in the yellow Jaundice, Dysenteries, pains of the Guts, voiding of blood either
upwards or downwards, pains in the Bladder, Fluxes of blood in Women, etc. The
Elks hoof also of the same Preparation is of great efficacy, being a noble
Cordial in malignant Fevers, and a Secret in many other diseases, likewise
man's Skull wonderfully cures the Epilepsie, Apoplexy, Vertigo, etc. The Dose is
from ten to twenty or thirty grains in some appropriate Vehicle.

The true Spagyrical Preparation of Thebane Opium.
Put Thebane Opium cut into small pieces upon an Iron plate, and set it upon
hot coals, constantly stirring it, till all the poisonous and corrosive quality
is separated by Evaporation. Yet take this caution, let not him that tends it
receive the Fumes, for it is hurtful. When this is evaporated, the Opium left
upon the Plate will have a fragrant smell like Violets, which is a true sign
that all its malignity is separated; then dissolve this Opium thus prepared
either in Wine-vinegar distilled, or in Juice of Citrons: which being done,
again draw off the Menstruum, and keep it for use.

The Preparation of Nitre.
Take of Nitre purified with Flos Sulphuris half a pound, dissolve it in Spirit
of Wine and Vitriol, of each a like quantity; then draw off the Spirit, until
the mass remains crusty; what is left in the bottom, put into a cool place, and
the Nitre will shoot into Crystals, from which take the humidity, and dry the
Crystal, and reserve them for use.

The Preparation of Millepedes commonly called Wood-lice.
Take Millepedes what quantity you please, wash them in Spanish Wine, and in a
Glass close stopped, and covered with Paste all over, dry them in an Oven;
again wash them in Spanish Wine, and dry them as before, and repeat this the
third time; fourthly infuse them in our Aqua Nephritica vitriolated for two or
three days, afterward dry them, and pulverize them, and keep them for use.

The Preparation of white Hellebore.
Take white Hellebore finely pulverized, pour upon it often Vinegar, left after
the dissolution of red Coral being abstracted and vitriolated (but first infuse
in it the Cordial flowers and grains of Chermes) dry it again, and so you shall
have white Hellebore well and Spagyrically prepared, which may safely be given
inwardly in many diseases in a certain dose and mixture without any danger.

The Preparation of Fish-shells.
Take oblong shells which are found near Fishponds and Lakes, pour upon them
distilled Vinegar, and let them lie therein a whole night, to extract the filth
from them, which you shall carefully scrape off, and afterward pulverize them,
and with Carduus water prepare it upon a Marble; for the volatile Powder of
them made by Calcination is of no worth nor use in Physic.

The Calcination and Preparation of River flints.
Take River-flints white and shining, and heat them red-hot in a strong fire,
then quench them in water in which Sal Armoniack has been dissolved, and
repeat this work often, till at last the Flints appear white like Snow, and may
be easily brought to a Powder. This Powder edulcorate with Rose water, and keep
it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Powder is not only a powerful Dentifricium,
cleansing the Teeth on a sudden from all their corrosive Tartar and other
filth, and makes them white, but also Iron and Steel, and hence it takes away
all rust from Arms and Weapons presently, and makes them fair and clean,
especially if the rust be first rubbed with Oleum Templini, and then afterward
scoured with this Powder. By this way Arms that are kept in store may be
preserved pure and clean for many years from the filth and damage of rust. And
indeed it is of great use not only for the Armory of Princes, but of Cities and
Persons of Honor; and though it is but an ordinary thing, it ought not to be
contemned.

The Preparation of the Pumice-stone.
Quench a red-hot Pumice-stone in Cows milk thrice, and the fourth time leave
it in the Milk until all grow cold, then pulverize it, and it is prepared for
our Farina Virginea.

The Preparation of the sweet Earth of Vitriol.
Take of green Vitriol calcined to a perfect redness what quantity you please,
pulverize it, and edulcorate it by often washing it in distilled Rainwater,
till the red Earth is freed from all its saltness and acrimony; then dry this
sweet (or rather insipid) Earth, and reserve it for use.

The Preparation and Calcination of Alum.
Take of common Salt two parts, of the best Alum one part. Mix them, and in a
convenient Vessel reverberate them according to art for twelve hours, then take
away the reverberated matter, and wash it so often with warm water, till it is
perfectly edulcorated, and the Powder is quite freed from all its saltness,
then pour upon it our Juniper Spirit of Wine, that it may swim three or four
fingers above it, and keep it for use.

To the candid Reader.
THou have here, courteous Reader, these Arcana's being Chemical and other
Preparations, partly private, elaborated with my own care and Experience, and
partly from others (yet by a due method) produced in this place, which for the
dispensing our following Compositions, are wholly necessary for thee; with
which few in this place, I do satisfy my self. I do neither hope for, nor
expect any other thing than thanks for things found, and pardon for those
omitted; therefore do thou accept of these things (such as they are) as well
with a benevolent as a ready hand, and give, when need requires, thy assistance
to those that want it, improve all prudently, and by these things preserve thy
Neighbors health.

SECT. V. Of Species and Powders.
Species Diasolis, or the Compound Species of the Sun.
TAke Hartshorn and Elks hoof Spagyrically calcined, sealed Earth, of each a
dram and an half; Oriental Bezoar a dram, Diaphoretick Mineral, Jovial Bezoar,
of each two scruples; Magistery of Pearls and-red Corals, white Amber prepared,
of each half a dram; the Solar and Animal Unicorn, bone of a Stags heart, of
each a scruple; true Gallia moschata eleven grains, Oils of Cinnamon and
Citrons, of each half a scruple. Mix them, and make of all a most subtle Powder.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is an Arcanum in all Epidemical and Pestilential
diseases, Erysipelas's, poisonous draughts, and in the Asthma, or most
dangerous straitness of the Breast; for it defends the Heart from danger of
poison, and expels by Sweat all noxious humors from it, and does wonderfully
relieve it in all its distempers. The Dose is from half a scruple to a scruple
in Carduus water, Elder flowers, or Treacle, or any other appropriate Vehicle.

Pulvis Bezoarticus Imperialis, or the Imperial Bezoartick Powder.
Take of Elks hoofs and Hearts horn Spagyrically calcined, of each three drams;
the red Oriental Bole prepared, Jovial Bezoar, of each two drams; Oriental
Bezoar stone, sealed Earth, of each a dram and a half; flower of Sulphur
compound, the Animal Unicorn, Magistery of Oriental Pearls, red Coral, of each
half a dram; native Cinnabar prepared, bone of a Stags heart, white Amber
prepared, of each a scruple. Mix them, and make of all a most subtle Powder.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a most excellent Diaphoretick in all peracute
diseases, in burning, malignant and Epidemical Fevers; for it wonderfully
drives out by Sweat all poisonous and vicious humors from the Heart and other
principal Members. The Dose is from half a scruple to a scruple in appropriate
sudorifick Waters, or in Water or Decoction of the shaving of Hartshorn.

Species Dialunae, or compound Species of the Moon.
Take roots and seeds of Peony gathered in a due time, Elks hoofs Spagyrically
calcined, Magistery of Man's Skull, of each half an ounce; of the true Soul of
the Moon in powder, Lunar Bezoar, of each four drams; native Cinnabar prepared,
Misleto of the Oak, Squills prepared, of each two drams; the Secundine of a
Woman dried, but it must be of her first child, and that a son also, Peacocks
dung prepared, of each a dram and a half; Salt of Oriental Pearls and red
Corals, of each a dram; true Castor, long Pepper, Cubebs, of each a scruple;
the best Musk and Ambergriese, of each half a scruple. Mix them, and make of
all a most subtle Powder, to which add Oil of Hartshorn rectified, Oil of white
Amber, Nutmegs and Rue, of each half a scruple. Mix them again, and keep them
for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It does wonders in Lunatisms, Epilepsies, or Comitials,
Vertigo's, Lethargies, Subeth, and in all cold congealed evils of the Brain; it
does also relieve those who are troubled with frightful dreams, and uncertain
fears. The Dose in curing is from a scruple to half a dram given in the Fit in
our Epileptick, or Apoplectick, or any other convenient water. But in
preservation it is given in all Quarters of the Moon, and in all moist and
unconstant seasons of Air, from half a scruple to a scruple in the
forementioned Waters.

Pulvis Epilepticus mirabilis, or the wonderful Epileptick Powder.
Take of the Skull of a man strangled, and calcined without fire an ounce,
Misleto of the Oak, counterfeit Cinnabar, Elks boofs, of each half an ounce.
Mix them, and make a Powder, of which give a scruple to Children immediately
after the Fit, but to full grown persons a scruple: let this be repeated, and
it cures them.

Pulvis Ophthalmicus, or a Powder for the Eyes.
Take of white Sugar Candy and Tuty prepared, of each two drams; Pearls
prepared and Sarcocol, of each half a dram; Beans prepared a seruple. Mix them,
and make a most fine Powder for the Eyes.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Powder is a great Secret to me in many affects of
the Eyes: and first it heals dullness and spots in the Eyes, it wipes away the
little clouds and specks therein, and is a present remedy for watery Eyes. It
sharpens the Sight, and makes it clear, and then conserves the Eyes sound and
well. It being used in time, a small part of this Powder is sprinkled into the
Eyes morning and evening, or it may also be mixed with other Eye-medicines.

Species Diamartis, or the Compound Species of Mars.
Take Tormentil, Nutmegs, Galls, of each half an ounce; Crocus Haematitis,
Crocus Martis made by calcination, of each three drams; Zedoary, Calamus
aromaticus, white Amber prepared, roots of Cinquefoil and Cloves, of each two
drams; ashes of Sponge, Oriental red Bole prepared, sealed Earth, Acacia, of
each a dram and a half; seeds of Plantane, those things corruptly called Rose
seeds, of each four scruples; Hearts horn and Man's bones Hermetically calcined,
of each a dram; burnt Alum, Soul of Vitriol, of each half a dram. Mix them, and
make of all a fine Powder.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It helps the tenderness of the Stomach, also
Dysenteries, pains in the Guts, and spitting of blood and matter, the
Gonorrhoea, Haemorrhoids: It helps those that cannot hold their water, or have
a bloody Urine; it stops Women's menstrual Purgations: And lastly, it stops all
Haemorragies of blood from what part soever it proceeds. The Dose from a
scruple and half a dram to one dram in some convenient Liquor.

Species Diamercurii, or the Compound Powder of Mercury.
Take seeds of Cina thirteen drams, Mercurius dulcis five drams, the best
Rhubarb, Gummi Turbith, Corallina, of each two drams; shavings of Hearts horn,
red Myrrh, of each a dram; tops of the lesser Centaury, Tansie, Camphire, of
each a scruple; Oil of Hazel-wood distilled per descensum, Spirit of Vitriol,
of each half a scruple. Mix them, and make of all a fine Powder.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is given for the Worms, the Moon decreasing, from a
scruple to a dram, according to the age and strength of the Patient, it is
given in Milk, and is an excellent Medicine against all kind of Worms; for
having killed them, it brings them away by stool. It is given also in water of
Wormwood, Centaury the less, Tansie, and Nettles, or Archangel. Also in Oxymel
of Squills, Honey clarified, Syrup of Citrons, Sorrel, Hydromel, or any other
way which Children best like.

Species Diajovis, or the Compound Powder of Jupiter.
Take Faecula Bryoniae half an ounce, Salt of English Tin, Mother of Pearl, red
Coral, of each three drams; roots of white Dictamnus and Peony, of each two
drams; white Amber prepared, Oriental Saffron, Misleto of the Oak,
Antophyllorum, of each a dram; true Castor a scruple. Mix them, and make of all
a fine Powder.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a blessed Medicine in the most vehement and
desperate suffocation and strangulation of the Womb, and as it were sent from
Heaven of God to Women: For which Divine help let the Name of the Lord be
blessed. The Dose is from a scruple to half a dram three or four mornings
together, or in time of necessity, in our Hysterical water, or any other
appropriate Liquor.

Species Diaveneris, or a Compound Powder of Venus.
Take Sulphur of Vitriol of Venus sublimate, and Spagyrically prepared half an
ounce, Venetian Borax two drams, seeds of Ashen-keys, of Rocket, of each two
drams; of Parsneps, Nettles and Leeks, of each a dram and a half; roots of
Pellitory of Spain, Boletus cervinus, of each four scruples, Galangal the less,
white Ginger, Cinnamon, of each a dram; Sea-Skinck prepared, Magistery of
Pearls, Oriental Saffron, of each half a dram; Cantharides with the wings cut
off, Ambergriese, each a scruple; Musk, Oil of Mace, of each ten grains. Mix
them, and make of all a fine Powder, with which mix an ounce of white Sugar
Candy, and keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is by Experience the most effectual, and indeed the
last and most powerful remedy of all, against the defect in the act of Venus:
And he that is willing to please his Consort, and would to the utmost prove his
virile force, let him take after Supper (if he desires the effect presently) at
his going to bed; or if he would continue that work, every morning from one
scruple to two, or a dram in warm Milk, Sack, etc. It may also be prepared
without Cantharides.

Species Diasaturni, or the Compound Powder of Saturn.
Take Magistery of Saturn an ounce, juice of Liquorish depurated, Lac Sulphuris
compound, roots of elect China, of each three drams; Salt of Oriental Pearls,
salt of red Coral, salt of Wheat bread, of each two drams; red Bole prepared,
Benjamin sublimate, Olibanum, of each a dram; Oriental Saffron, Cassia lignea,
of each half a dram. Mix them, and make of all a fine Powder, to which add of
white Sugar Candy three ounces, and being well mixed with the Powder, keep it
for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. I know not with what words to extol this incomparable
Medicine! For a Consumption that cannot otherwise be cured by humane skill, is
oftentimes by this Medicine. The Dose morning and evening is from half a dram
to a dram, in our Specific water against Consumptions, or in any other
appropriate Vehicle.

Species Diasulphuris, or a Compound Powder of Sulphur.
Take Lac and compound flowers of Sulphur, of each an ounce and a half; juice
of Liquorish cleansed, Cardamoms the less, sealed Earth, of each six drams;
seeds of Roman Nettles, seeds of Quinces, Cinnamon, Ginger, Nutmegs, Saffron,
long Pepper, Mace, of each three drams; Tragacanth, roots of Flower-de-luce,
flowers of wild Poppy, Mastich, cream of Tartar, of each a dram and a half. Mix
them, and of all make a Powder, to which add Oils of Hysop, Fenil, Sage,
Aniseeds, and Chamomil, of each a scruple; and keep it for use.

Virtue, Use and Dose. It helps continual Coughs, difficulty of Breathing,
chronical Asthma's. It does cut and attenuate diverse thick and gross humors in
the Breast; it preserves and cures without any other Medicine, the Consumption,
Wasting, Pleurisy, and all Putrefactions and Imposthumes, and is wonderfully
effectual in all affects of the Throat, and does quickly restore the loss of
the Voice. It also drys up the Rheum from the Head, and the evil humors in the
Body, from which are used to proceed Gouts, pains in the Joints, and such like
dolors. It is a good Medicine in the Epilepsie, Apoplexy, Leprosy, Pox,
Convulsion of the Nerves, Colic and Dropsy, etc. The Dose is from a scruple
to a dram morning and evening in some convenient Vehicle; but in the Dropsy it
is given with the like quantity of Magistery of Crocus Martis, the body being
first cleansed, and it never fails. In the affects of the Throat we use it in
the form of a Tragaea, by adding white Sugar Candy, or mixed with Pectoral
Syrups in the form of an Electuary or Lambitive.

Pulvis Refectivus, or a Refective Powder.
Take white Sugar Candy concrete in Syrup of Violets an ounce, Lac Sulphuris
half an ounce, compound flowers of Sulphur, Confectio Alkermes, of each two
drams; Magistery of Pearls, red Coral, and Saturn, of each a dram. Mix them,
and make of all a fine Powder.

Virtue, Use and Dose. It repairs strength, comforts the Heart, and Nature it
self; it nourishes and fattens; it drys up the Rheum in the Head, roborates the
Brain, allays the Cough, cures the Asthma, Consumption and wasting. The Dose is
a scruple in water of Calves Lungs, or Aqua Caponis, or any other Specific, or
so much of the Powder is mixed with any thing as will tinge the Vehiculum
white: and of this mixed Liquor the Dose is morning and evening one or two
spoonfuls.

Pulvis excellens contra Tussim Infantum, or an excellent Powder against the
Cough in Children.
Take of Sugar Penids three ounces, species of Diatragacanth frigid, Diaireos
simple, of each half an ounce; roots of Peony two drams, juice of Liquorish a
dram, Lac Sulphuris, Saffron, of each two scruples; Man's skull calcined without
fire, seeds of white Poppy, of each a scruple. Mix them, and make of all a most
fine Powder.

Species Diavitrioli, or a Compound Powder of Vitriol.
Take Galangal the less an ounce, Magistery of Vitriol, roots of water Acorus,
of each half an ounce; long Pepper, Cummin seeds, Zedoary, of each two drams;
Cinnamon, Calamus aromaticus, Mace, of each a dram and a half; Cardamoms the
less, white Ginger, Cloves, Saffron, Indian Spicknard, wood of Aloes, of each
half a dram; Musk and Ambergriese, of each half a scruple. Make them into a
fine Powder for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a profitable Medicine against frigid humors of
the Ventricle, and putrefaction in the parts thereof, and it digests phlegm. It
helps digestion and concoction, nauseating and vomiting, and preserves the
natural heat, and warms the members of nutrition. It dissipates flatulent
humors, it restrains four belchings, and is useful in all diseases of the
Liver. It is profitable for those who are upon recovery after a long disease;
it helps the stink of the Nose and Mouth, which arises from the consent of the
Stomach. The dose is from half a scruple to half a dram, or by adding Sugar may
be made a Tragea. Note, That this and all other Compositions which have a great
quantity of Musk, may be also prepared without it.

Species Diacinnabaris, or a Compound Powder of Cinnabar.
Take native Cinnabar prepared half an ounce, Lapis stellaris prepared, Elks
hoofs Spagyrically calcined, of each three drams; the raspings of the forepart
of a Man's skull, Misleto of the Oak, of each two drams; roots and seeds of
Peony, of each a dram and a half; species Diamoschu dulce and Diambrae, of each
a dram; Magistery of Pearl and red Coral, of each half a dram; Oriental
Saffron, Oil of white Amber, of each a scruple; Leaves of Gold thirteen. Make
all into a fine Powder, and keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It has a wonderful force and power in the Epilepsie,
and in all other kinds of dangerous diseases belonging to the Head, and is both
a sure and certain Experiment, by which (God assisting) we have perfectly
restored to health an incredible number, who were incurable by other means, and
some of them laboring under that sorrowful disease nine, ten, twelve, and some
eighteen years and more, and yet have been happily restored by this Medicine.
The dose is from a scruple to two, according to the age and strength of the
Patient, in appropriate and specific Vehicles, to be repeated every morning
till the Patient enjoys perfect health.

Species Dianitri, or a Compound Powder of Nitre.
Take Crystals of Nitre prepared with spirit of Wine and Vitriol an ounce,
salts of Perch stones, Crabs eyes, white Amber, of each two drams; roots of
Dropwort and Liquorish, of each a dram and a half; seeds of the lesser Nettle,
Burdock, Saxifrage, Gromel, Broom, of each a dram; berries of Bays huskt,
Juniper, of each four scruples; Cinnamon, white Ginger, Saffron, long Pepper and
Mace, of each two scruples; a burnt Hare, Goats blood prepared, powder of
Ceterach, red Sanders, of each half a dram; Millepedes prepared a scruple,
white Sugar four ounces. Mix them, and make of all a fine Powder.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is an excellent powerful Medicine in breaking and
expelling the Stone in the Reins and Bladder. The dose is from a scruple to
half a dram, early in the morning in a specific Vehicle.

Species Diatartari, or a Powder compounded with Tartar.
Take Tartar vitriolated, Magistery of Scammony, of each two ounces; white and
gummy Turbith, Hermodactyls, of each half an ounce; Oil of Cloves and Cinnamon,
of each ten grains. Mix them, and make a Powder, which reserve for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It gently resolves Tartar coagulated in any part of the
body, and being resolved, it safely and easily brings it away by stool, with
all other Podagrical defluxions. It purges yellow Choler plentifully, and watery
humors lying between the Skin. It also cleanses the Skin of foulness, Scabs,
Leprosy, and such kind of filth. Moreover it cures the Scurvy, and mitigates
the pains in the Joints. The dose from half a dram to a dram, especially in
strong bodies.

Species Diacrystalli, or a Powder compounded with Crystals.
Take the flesh of a young red Cows udder boiled in Wine, and dried in a
Furnace an ounce, long Pepper five drams, Crystals prepared half an ounce,
Pearls prepared ^wo drams, seeds of Borage, Fenil, Lettice and Nigella, of each
a dram; roots of Goats-beard, Cardnus, and wild Rape, of each half a dram;
white Sugar three ounces. Mix them, and make all into a fine Powder.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a specific Medicine for Mothers and Nurses that
give suck; for it does so increase milk in them, that it does turn almost all
their food they take, into milk: And it has also a secret quality to increase
milk of it self. The dose is from half a dram to a dram morning, noon and night
in Broth, Carduus-water, or any other convenient Vehicle.

Species Diasuccini, or a Powder compounded with Amber.
Take white Amber prepared half an ounce, Magistery of red Coral rosated,
Nutmegs torrified, red Orienta^ Bole, Smaragdus prepared, of each two drams;
Crocus Martis made by reverberation, Dragons blood, of each a dram and a half;
Styrax Calamitis, burnt Hartshorn prepared, Laudanum Opiate, of each a dram;
Rose seeds, seeds of Plantane, flowers of wild Poppy, of each half a dram;
Cloves, Saffron, Cinnamon and Mace, of each a scruple. Mix them, and make of all
a fine Powder.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Powder restrains and obtunds the viscous and
tartarous Salts which erode the Bowels, and does disquiet the ordure of the
Guts. Hence it is the only healing Medicine in al^ Dysenteries and Fluxes of
blood by stool. The dose is from a scruple to a dram in appropriate Vehicles.

Species Diacretae, or a compound Powder of Chalk.
Take Chalk prepared with Rose Water three drams Nutmegs a dram and a half,
roots of Liquorish and se^^ of Quinces, of each a dram; Oriental Bole prepares
red Coral prepared, of each half a dram; the Carp f^^^^ prepared with Plantane
water, Mace a little torrifies best Mastich, Oriental Saffron, of each a
scruple; w^^^ Sugar three ounces. Mix them, and make a fine Powder.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This is a Catholic Medicine in the Orexis or burning
of the Stomach; for these Species have such a power, that they hinder the
ebullition and tartarous sublimation of yellow Choler into the Orifice of the
Stomach, and do powerfully resolve and precipitate it. The dose is from half a
dram to a dram in the Fit: For Medicines in this case are to be given
whenever the stomach is distempered, and to continue taking, till it is
restored to health again.

Species Diaboracis, or a compound Powder of Borax.
Take Venetian Borax half an ounce, Cassia lignea, Oriental Saffron, of each a
dram; shavings of the Savintree, white Amber prepared, of each half a dram;
bone of a Stags heart, Misleto of the Oak, flowers of white Violets, of each a
scruple. Mix them, and make them into a fine Powder.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is successfully given to Women who are inclined to
be barren, and to those who bear them with difficulty: It is most excellent to
facilitate the Birth, to cast out the dead Child, or Afterbirth retained. The
dose is from a scruple to a dram in water of Cinnamon, white Violets, Mugwort,
or in good white Wine.

Species Diaterebinthinae, or a Powder compounded with Turpentine.
Take Turpentine twice washed in Citron water two ounces, Magistery of Scammony
an ounce, white and gummy Turbith six drams, Tartar vitriolated, white
Hermodactyls, of each three drams; species of Lithortrib two drams, Saffron and
Mace, of each a scruple Sugar of Violets four ounces. Mix them, and make of all
a Powder, to which add Oils of Aniseeds, Oranges, Cloves, Cinnamon and Fenil, of
each ten grains. Mix them well, and keep them for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is an excellent Cathartick, and wonderfully
experimented in the Gout, Colic, Gonorrhoea, Dysury, Strangury, Stone in the
Reins and Bladder, and in other distempers of the Urinal passages. The dose is
from half a dram to a dram and a half in Broth of a Capon, Beef, Cicers, or in
Ale, Beer, or white Wine: But it is given to Women in water of Balm or
Juniper Berries.

Species Diamumiae, or a compound Powder of Mumy.
Take Foreign Mumy, Magistery of Perch stones, of each two drams; Goats blood
prepared, Cloves, Sperma Ceti, of each a dram and an half; roots of Madder,
Swallow-wort and Tormentil, of each a dram; white Amber prepared, salt of red
Coral, Oriental red Bole, of each half a dram. Mix them, and make all into a
fine Powder.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Powder is excellent in all distempers that happen
by Falls; for it dissolves blood coagulated. It is effectually used in
Fractures, Contusions and Ruptures falling down, and glutinates all internal
Wounds, and prevents Impostumes that usually happen after Falls from on high.
The dose is from a scruple to a dram in Chervil water, Wine, or wine-Vinegar.

Pulvis Stipticus ejusdem fere efficaciae, or a Stiptick Powder almost of the
same force.
Take Swallow-wort roots an ounce, elect Rhubarb and Foreign Mumy, of each half
an ounce; red Lacca, Sperma Ceti, of each two drams; Bole Armoniack prepared,
sealed Earth, of each a dram. Mix them, and make a Powder for the same use.

Another. Pulvis Stipticus valde efficax, or a Stiptick Powder of great force.
Take Sperma Ceti an ounce, sealed Earth half an ounce, Bole Armoniack, Dragons
blood, Boodstone, of each two drams; Crabs eyes prepared a dram, roots of
sweet Angelica, Pontick Rhubarb, elect Rhubarb, of each half a dram. Mix them,
and make a Powder. The dose of which is half a dram in warm Wine, expecting
sweat after it, by which way it operates and passes to the Wounds.

Species Diaolibani, or a compound Powder of Olibanum.
Take the roots of Peony duly gathered, and Flower-deluce, of each three drams;
the best Olibanum a dram and a half, Elks claws calcined without fire,
Magistery of Man's skull, Oriental Saffron, Misleto of the Oak, of each a dram;
Sugar penids two ounces. Mix them, and make a fine Powder.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is given in the Epilepsie, Apoplexy, suffocative
Catarrhs, Cough, Cardiack Passions, and in every sudden disease, and any
dangerous accidents in Children and Infants; for it comforts the Heart and
Brain, and throws off the peccant matter from those parts. The dose is from
half a scruple to a scruple by it self, or in Mothers milk, or any other
convenient liquor.

Species Diatabaci, or a compound Powder of Tabaco.
Take Indian Tabaco prepared with Oil of Aniseeds half an ounce, roots of white
Hellebore, of Lily of the valley, Pellitory of Spain, of each half a dram;
seeds of male Peony, flowers of Lavender, Rosemary, Marjoram and Origanum, of
each a scruple; long Pepper, Peruvian Gum, Agarick Troches, Gallia Moschata, of
each ren grains. Mix them, etc.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. A little of this Powder snuffed up the Nostrils, does
immediately cause Sneezing, by which means it purges the Brain kindly: It is
very effectual in all dolors of the Head, Catarrhs, Vertigo, Epilepsie, in all
Imposthumes and other obstructions of the Nostrils; for the Excrements as well
thick as putrid it plentifully casts off, and also strengthens the Brain. The
dose is the quantity of a Pease in the morning fasting, which is to be snuffed
up the Nose.

Species Diamarjoranae, or a compound Powder of Marjoram.
Take flowers of the Lily of the valley half an ounce, Marjoram first moistened
with its own Oil two drams, wood of Aloes a dram, Cubebs a scruple, Ambergriese
ten grains. Mix them, and make a fine Powder.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. We happily use this Powder in all diseases and affects
where Sneezing is needful; for it purges the Head exceedingly from all thick
and flegmy humors, and wonderfully comforts the Brain, and the Organs of Sense
also. The dose is the quantity of a Pease snuffed up the Nose in a morning.

Species Diabalaustinae, or a Powder compounded with Balaustines.
Take Balaustines six drams, roots of Avens and round Galingale, elect Mastich,
sealed Earth, Cloves, Sandarack, Citron peels, Rosemary, of each half an ounce;
Coral prepared, white Amber, flowers of Pcony, and red Roses, Olibanum, of each
three drams; Nutmegs, seeds of wild Rue, Coriander seeds prepared, yellow
Sanders, Sassafras, Cubebs, of each two drams. Mix them, and make a Powder to
be applied to the Coronal suture.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is applied in Consumptions, Hecticks, dry Fevers,
pains in the Head, to stop Loosnesses, to dry Catarrhs, and comfort the Brain,
let it be sprinkled upon the Coronal suture at night going to bed. But in cold
and moist distempers of the Brain, let the Head be first bathed with Spirit of
Wine, and after sprinkle the Powder, and you shall see a wonderful effect; for
it hinders the defluxion of the Rheum to the Nose, Eyes, and other parts.

Species Diabuglossae, or a compound Powder of Bugloss.
Take the bark of the roots of Bugloss an ounce, Elaeosaccharum of Citrons half
an ounce, red Roses dried, yellow Sanders, wood of Aloes, of each three drams;
Magistery of Pearls and red Coral, of each a dram; bone of a Stags heart,
Oriental Saffron prepared, of each half a dram; Gallia Moschata, our Aurum
Potabile, Indian Spicknard, of each a scruple; Oil of Roses and Cinnamon, of
each ten grains; Manus Christi simple three ounces. Mix them, and make a fine
Powder.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This is a most excellent Medicine, where any one is
come as it were to desperation by overmuch sorrow. The efficacy of this
Medicine is such against the affects of Melancholy and Cardiack Passions, etc.
that it quickly restores them to health, and is a most friendly Medicine to the
Heart. It comforts all members, whose natural and animal sense is impaired; it
helps the trembling of the Heart and Syncope; it repels evil cogitations,
relieves the solitary, begets good manners, abolisheth false imaginations, and
brings joy. The dose is from a scruple to a dram.

Species Diaplantaginis, or a compound Powder of Plantane.
Take juice of Liquorish extracted, sealed Earth, of each an ounce; roots of
Plantane, Dragonwort and Tormentil, of each six drams; Magistery of Crocus
Martis made by reverberation, Hartshorn burnt and prepared, rind of
Pomegranate, of each half an ounce; Boodstone, Nutmegs, Orange peel, Cloves,
of each three drams; leaves of Sage, Misleto of the Oak, Balaustines, of each
two drams; our Magistery of Coral prepared with Barberries, feeds of Plantane,
a Hearts pizzle, of each a dram and an half; the inside skins of Hens gizards
prepared, Dragons blood, Hypocistis, of each a dram. Mix them, and make them
into a fine Powder.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Powder helps those that loath their meat, that
piss or spit blood; yea young Women, whose Urinary passage is injured after a
hard labor. In Dysenteries, pains in the Guts, and superfluous Menstrua's; it
yields great relief to all Ulcerations in the Guts, Reins, Bladder and Urinary
passage, and soon removes all the Symptoms. The dose is from half a dram to a
dram in the morning fasting, and before dinner and supper, in two or three
ounces of Plantane water.

Pulvis Polychrestus Imperialis, or an Imperial Powder good for many things.
Take white Sugar Candy six ounces, Crocus Martis prepared with Vinegar of
Tamarinds an ounce and an half, seeds of Fenil, shavings of Ivory, the
Ankle-bone of a Hare, Pikes eyes, Cardamoms the less, white Ginger, Nutmegs,
roots of Liquorish, of each an ounce; Cinnamon, Cubebs, Cassia lignea,
Spicknard, roots and seeds of Peony, Misleto of the Oak, acid Tartar, of each
an ounce and a half; Magistery of the Carp-stone, of Crabs eyes, of the
Pearch-stone, Oriental Saffron, seeds of Parsley and Smallage, true Castor,
Cloves, red Myrrh, wood of Aloes, Hysop, Oil of Aniseeds, each two drams;
Magistery of Pearls and red Coral, the best Mace, of each a dram; leaves of
Hungarian Gold forty three. Mix them, and make them all into a fine Powder.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It expels wind, flatulencies, and all peccant humors
from the Stomach and Intestines, and also comforts those parts; it preserves
from putrefaction, and roborates the Brain; it increases Memory, and is
excellent in the Epilepsie, in the trembling and debility of the Heart,
difficulty and straitness of the Breast, Cough, Asthma, etc. It sweetens grief,
exhilarates sorrow, removes timidity, and opens all obstructions of the Liver
and Spleen. It cures the Tympany coming of a cold cause, and many other long
and confirmed diseases. It stops the running of the Piles, purifies the blood,
procures a fresh color; it warms a frigid Matrix, and amends a corrupt
intemperature of the Womb; it purges the Reins and Bladder of stones, sand,
etc. It opens the Urinary passage, and gives ease in the Strangury. The dose
every morning is the quantity of a Chestnut, either by it self, or in some
Liquor respecting the disease.

Pulvis Dysentericus, or a Dysenterick Powder.
Take Hearts horn Spagyrically calcined an ounce and a half, seeds of Bloodwort
and Plantane, of each an ounce; Chalk prepared, Nutmegs, Misleto of the Oak,
Nitre prepared, of each half an ounce. Mix them, and make a fine Powder, which
is effectually given in all Fluxes of the Belly. The dose is one dram in some
specific Vehicle.

Species Dialauri, or a compound Powder of Bay Berries.
Take Bay Berries dried in an Oven in paste, and pulverize an ounce, flowers of
Centaury the less three drams, Madder, red Myrrh, Oriental Saffron, of each a
dram; round Birthwort, Cardamoms the less, Galangal the less, of each two
scruples; salt of Cinnamon and Savin, of each half a dram. Mix them into a fine
Powder.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They powerfully open obstructions of the Womb, and as
wonderfully stir suppressed Terms, and bring them down in a large quantity too.
The dose is from half a dram to a dram in decoction of Savin with Saffron, or
in Beer, Ale, or Wine twice a day, in the morning fasting, or at night going to
bed, and to continue it till the Courses are produced.

Species Diajalapiae, or a compound Powder of Ialap.
Take the best and resinous roots of Ialap two ounces, acid Tartar eleven
scruples, Oil of Cinnamon a scruple. Mix them, and make a Powder according to
Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It purges by stool without any trouble, and mundifies
the blood. It draws away Phlegm, Choler, and ^ll other impurities from the whole
body, and removes obstructions: For that reason it is given in pains of the
Joints and Hypochonders. Dose from half a dram to a dram, especially in strong
bodies.

Species Diaesulae, or a compound Powder of Spurge.
Take the lesser Spurge prepared, Rotula's of Diarrhodon Abbatis, of each an
ounce and a half; white Hellebore prepared, salt of white Vitriol, of each
three drams; juice of Liquorish extracted, red Sanders, of each a dram;
Cinnamon, Flower -- de-luce, white Ginger, of each two scruples; Magistery of
Pearls and red Coral, of each a scruple, Elaeosaccharum of Cloves, Nutmegs,
Mastich, of each half a scruple. Mix them, and make a Powder according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is successfully given in all Quotidian Fevers, also
in all Tertian and burning Fevers, and all other infirmities of the Stomach,
in salt Defluxions, Worms, pains of the Back, Plague, Epidemical diseases, in
poisonous draughts, and carries off the slimy matter from the Joints that
causes the Gout, it works both upwards and downwards, but without any trouble
or molestation. The dose is from half a dram to a dram.

Species Stomachicae, or a Powder compounded for the Stomach.
Take acid Tartar three ounces, Galangal the less, white Ginger, long Pepper,
of each a dram and a half; Cardamoms the less, Nutmegs, Cloves, Zedoary, of
each a dram; roots of Liquorish, leaves of Sage, seeds of Rue and Caraways,
Olibanum, of each half a dram; Oil of Cinnamon a scruple, Oil of Water-mint, of
Oranges and Aniseeds, of each ten grains; white Sugar Candy eight ounces. Mix
them, and make a Powder.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It stirs up lost Appetite, takes away pains, Vomiting
and Hiccup; it helps the Asthma, prevents surfeiting, and other disorders by
excess; it expels flatuosity, and roborates the Stomach: And lastly it hastens
the distribution of Aliment. The dose morning and evening is from half a dram
to a dram in Sack or other Cordial Wine.

Pulvis Stomachicus, or a Stomachical Powder.
Take the Cream of white Tartar oftentimes moistened with spirit of Vitriol and
dried again two ounces, Hartshorn Spagyrically calcined half an ounce, salt of
Pearchstones and Crabs eyes, of each two drams; Magistery of Pearls and red
Corals, of each a dram; Oils of Cloves and Cinnamon, of each half a scruple;
white Sugar Candy eight ounces. Make of all a Powder.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. As the Medicine is noble, so it nobly comforts the
Heart, the Stomach, and all the rest of the members of nutrition; it corrects
the niceness and crudities of the Stomach, and prevents putrefaction and phlegm.
It wonderfully helps those troubled with the Gravel, Spleen, or vomiting their
food; also those who by continual and Chronical diseases are utterly
extenuated, and by that means are grown very weak, it roborates and
strengthens. Dose from half a dram to a dram in appropriate Vehicles.

Species Pleuriticae, or a Pleuritick Powder.
Take Sulphur sublimate two drams, Carduus seeds, Bay Berries husked, Misleto
of the Oak, roots of Zedoary, Olibanum, of each a dram and a half; teeth of a
wild Boar and of a Pike, flowers of wild Poppy, of each a dram. Make all into a
fine Powder.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This is a great Secret against all Pleuritick pains and
punctures of the sides, where the sick by reason of their violence is almost
dead. The dose is from half a dram to a dram in water of Hysop and Fenil, or in
wild Poppy-flowerwater morning, noon, and night, or be sure at the least five
hours between every dose. It is also given in Scabious water, and God assisting
it certainly cures.

Pulvis Pleuriticus secretissimus, or a secret Powder for the Pleurisy.
Take compound flowers of Sulphur half an ounce, wild Boars teeth and the
Iaw-bone of a Pike, of each two drams; Poppy flowers a dram. Mix them, and make
a fine Powder, which keep for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It cures, not without amazement to the Beholders, the
Pleurisy, all putrefactions, Imposthumes, etc. Dose from half a dram to a dram
in Chamomil flower and Poppy water, of each a sufficient quantity. There is not
a Remedy more effectual to be given, and certainly this only draught
edulcorated with a little white Sugar Candy, and given often, is a most
admirable help; which I have very often used, and always (by the blessing of
God) restored the sick to their former health.

Species Febrifugae.
Take the long shells of Shellfish prepared, Elks claws calcined without fire,
of each an ounce; salts of the lesser Centaury, of Carduus benedictus and
Wormwood, of each half an ounce; Tartar vitriolated, Magistery of Vitriol, of
each three drams; Calamus Aromaticus, Nutmegs, of each a dram and a half; seeds
of St. Iohns-wort, Cloves, long Pepper, Camphire, of each a dram; roots of
Tormentil, round Birthwort, Zedoary and Laserpitium, of each half a dram. Mix
them, and make a fine Powder.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It drives away all Fevers, especially Quotidian,
Tertian, and sometimes the Quartan is by it cured also. It is given in the Fit
or a little before in water of Carduus or a little Centaury, or in a draught of
warm Beer or Ale. The Patient being in his Bed, let him compose himself to
sweat. The dose is from a scruple to a dram, the age and strength of the
Patient considered.

Pulvis Febrilis probatus, or an approved Feaver-powder.
Take Calamus Aromaticus an ounce, roots of Gentian, round Birthwort, white
Ginger, of each half an ounce; salt of the lesser Centaury, Carduus, Wormwood,
of each three drams; Hartshorn calcined without fire, seeds of Marigold,
Camphire, of each a dram; white Sugar Candy an ounce and a half. Mix them, and
make a fine Powder. The dose is from half a dram to a dram in specific and
appropriate Vehicles.

Species Nephriticae, or a Powder for distempered Kidneys.
Take Crystals of Tartar an ounce, Magistery of Perch stones and Crabs eyes,
of each half an ounce; salt of white Amber a dram, Oil of Aniseeds a scruple,
white Sugar Candy four ounces. Mix all into a fine Powder.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It gives ease to those who are pained in the Kidneys;
it breaks the Stone and tartarous matter in the Reins and Bladder, and other
members, and brings it away. It is a present help for the Ischury, Dysury and
Strangury without any great trouble; it is indeed a Secret, and so it ought to
be esteemed against Stones of all kinds. The dose for preservation is one
scruple at the Quarters of the Moon in our Nephritick water; but in curing, the
dose is from half a dram to a dram in the before-said water, or in the water of
Restharrow, Parsley, or Ground-lvy.

Species Cholagogae, or a Choler-purging Powder.
Take Magistery of Scammony an ounce, species Diarrhodon Abbatis half an ounce,
acid Tartar two drams, red Roses vitriolated, flowers of the lesser Centaury,
of each a dram. Mix them, and make of all a fine Powder.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It carries off yellow Choler without trouble, and opens
obstructions; it relieves the Stomach, Heart, Liver, Lungs, Joints and Bowels,
and conserves and increases their strength; it cures the Heart-passion,
Consumptions, yellow Jaundice, etc. It is taken with good success by ancient
and weak people in burning and Tertian Fevers. Dose from half a dram to two
scruples.

Pulvis Carminativus, or a Carminative Powder.
Take Cummin seed prepared with Vinegar, seeds of Car away and Anise, of each
three ounces; white Ginger six drams, Mace three drams, Oriental Saffron a
dram. Of these make a Powder.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It discusseth that wind that distends the Guts, and by
its acrimony causes pains. It may be taken constantly, or in time of
necessity, by continuing of it certain days, and for the first month in some
Broth, or with water of Fenil, or Anise, or our Carminative water. The dose is
from a dram to a dram and a half.

Farina Virginea Nobilis.
Take River-flints calcined and pulverized six ounces, Pumice-stone prepared an
ounce, roots of Flower-de-luce half an ounce, Gallia moschata a dram, Oil of
Roses a scruple. Mix all, and make a Powder like Meal, which keep for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. There is not a more excellent Medicine to cleanse the
Teeth, and take off the corrosive Tartar, if they be daily and diligently
rubbed with a woollen Cloth and this powder, than this is; and therefore I do
commend this sweet and pleasant powder of Flints to the use of all.

Pulvis Haemorrhoidalis, or a Powder for the Piles.
Take fine Flour an ounce, Crocus Martis half an ounce, red Oriental Bole
prepared, roots of Mullein, of each two drams; white Hermodactyls infused all
night in spirit of Wine, and again dried, flowers of wild Poppy, white Sugar
Candy, Dragons blood, Olibanum, of each a dram and a half. Mix them, and of all
make a fine powder.

Virtue and Use. It presently stops the bleeding of the Haemorrhoids, and
wonderfully allays their vehement pains: And when it is used, make a Cataplasm
either of the White of an Egg spread upon a Pledget of Tow, or of stale Butter
upon Lint, on which sprinkle a little of this powder, and so apply it to the
bleeding Piles or Haemorrhoids.

Pulvis de Verbasco, or a Powder of Mullein.
Take of the green herb Mullein what quantity you please, put it into a
Crucible, and stuff in as much as you can, cover it with another Crucible, and
lute it well, then set it on the fire, that it may wax black, but not burn to
ashes, and when it seems to be enough, let the Crucible cool, and take out that
black matter, and reduce it into a fine powder; then

Take of this black powder an ounce, elect Rhubarb two drams. Mix them, and
make of all a fine powder.

Virtue and Use. This powder is a certain Experiment against the Condylomata
and blind Piles, the use of which is thus: Let such person take a piece of
Linen that is much worn, and wet a little of it with his own Spittle, and upon
that sprinkle some of this powder, and so apply it to the part, repeating it so
often, till the Piles are dissolved and discussed, which will be in a short
time.

Pulvis probatus, or an approved Powder, to dry, consolidate and heal the small
Pox.
Take meal of Lentils, Beans, and Orobus or Fitches, of each half an ounce; of
Litharge, of Ceruss washed, Tutty prepared, Pompholix, of each two drams;
shells of Sea-shell-fish prepared, roots of Reeds, Crocus Metallorum, of each a
dram. Mix them, and make a fine powder.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. After the seventh day when the small Pox are ripe, open
them with a golden or silver Needle, wipe off the matter, lest it should annoy
the part, and make them pit, or rather clip them with a pair of Scissers, lest
they should close up again; then sprinkle upon them the aforesaid Powder, and
strew it also in the Patients bed.

Pulvis Cyprius Violato-rosatus.
Take the roots of Florence Flower-de-luce four ounces, flowers of Violets new
dried an ounce, roots of round Galangal two drams, Oil of Roses truly drawn a
dram and a half. Mix them, and make of all a fine Powder.

Virtue and Use. Of this most sweet and delectable Powder little Bags may be
filled, which are variously used both by women and others. It may be also used
by it self, for hair, garments, linen, etc. and being sprinkled, does send
forth a most pleasant odor, recreating the Brain and all the Spirits. And this
we have invented for those who abhor Musk, Amber, Civet, and other most
powerful Odorificks.

Pulvis Cyprius Moschatus.
Take Styrax Calamitis five ounces, roots of the Florence Flower-de-luce four
ounces, the best red Roses, Rosemary, of each two ounces; Benjamin, Cassia
lignea, of each an ounce; Ladanum, Calamus aromaticus, Cloves and Coriander
seeds, of each six drams; wood of Aloes, yellow Sanders, Rhodium, of each half
an ounce; Orange and Citron peels, round Galangal, of each three drams;
Origanum, Marjoram, of each two drams; flowers of Bays three, flowers of
Lavender and Violets, of each a dram and a half; Musk half a dram, Ambergriese
a scruple. Mix them, and make a Powder for Clothes; the use of which was showed
before.

Pulvis Manualis Odoratus, or a Powder to wash the Hands with.
Take the expressed Faeces of sweet and bitter Almonds, of each four ounces;
Bean-meal two ounces, meal of Rice and Lupins, of each an ounce and an half;
roots of Flower-de-luce an ounce, white Roses dried, Benjamin, of each six
drams; Salt of white Tartar, white Chalk prepared, Spodium prepared, fresh
Sperma Ceti, of each half an ounce; Oil of Rhodium a scruple, Oil of Cloves and
Lavender, of each ten grains. Mix them, and make of all a Powder or Mixture.

Virtue and Use. This Powder makes the hands white and clean, and the skin
soft, if they are frequently rubbed and washed with it.

Pulvis Erysipelatodes.
Take fine Flour six ounces, burnt Lead, red Bole, of each two ounces; Mastich,
Olibanum, Ceruss, of each an ounce. Mix them, and make of all a fine Powder.

Virtue and Use. This Powder strewed upon blue Paper, is in the Erysipelas, or
such burning Sores, by it self applied to the part affected, and it is
incredible to tell how singular a Remedy it is in such a case; yet universal
things are to be premised, together with Bleeding, especially in strong robust
bodies.

SECT. VI. Of Pills.
Pilulae Alcephanginae nostrae.
TAke Leaves of Sena four ounces, roots of Polypody an ounce, black Hellebore
an ounce, Troches Alhandal, Orange peel, Cummin seeds, of each half an ounce;
Pontick Wormwood, Groundpine, Carduus and Paul's Betony, of each a handful; the
Cordial flowers, flowers of Stoechas, lesser Centaury and Chamomil, of each
three pugils. Let them be a little bruised, and then infused in a sufficient
quantity of Spanish Wine, then boil it away upon a gentle fire to the third
part, let all be strongly pressed and strained; and in two pound of the strained
Liquor dissolve of the best bright Aloe succotrina sixteen ounces. Keep it
stirring in a warm place, till it grows thick; and add Species of Diamoschu
dulce and Diambrae, of each half an ounce; magistery of red Myrrh and Mastich,
Oriental Saffron, of each three drams; Oils of Chamomil, white Amber rectified,
Rosemary, Cummin and Caraway seeds, of each ten grains. Let them be mixed and
well incorporated into a just consistence of Pills stuff.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is proper for all vices and pains of the Head, the
Vertigo, Hemicrania, Epilepsic, etc. it strengthens the sight, and preserves
the vigor of the mind; it repairs and restores lost hearing; it is excellent in
Hypochondriack Melancholy, and other melancholy Affects, in the Cancer,
Elephantiasis, Quartans, black Jaundice, etc. it opens all obstructions as well
of the Liver as Spleen, and also purifies the Blood; it pleas^ntly and gently
purges the Stomach of thick, flatu^^nt, and vicious humors, and strengthens
digestion; and lastly it preserves all the internal members from putrefaction.
The dose is from a scruple to a dram.

Pilulae Catholicae.
Take Pil. sine quibus, Aurea, Cochia, of each half an ounce; Extract of black
Hellebore and Coloquintida, of each three drams; Tartar vitriolated and
Scammony rosated, of each two drams; Spirit of Vitriol a scruple. Mix them, and
with Oil of Fenil seed make a mass for Pills: And if the Extracts be too
liquid, evaporate the Spirit of Wine over a gentle fire, till it is come to a
due consistence; and this direction is to be observed in all the other
Compositions of this kind.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It works by stool nobly and without any trouble: It
purges effectually the Brain, Stomach, and all the Organs of Sense of thick,
putrid, flegmy, choleric and tartarous humors, and all parts afflicted with
windy humors. It is very effectual in long lingering Fevers, in the Gout, and
other pains of the Joints, the Catarrh and Ringing in the Ears, etc. It
clarifies and keeps the Sight, and also strengthens it, and takes away those
clouds and obscurities that use to infest the Eyes. The dose is from ten grains
to a scruple.

Pilulae Benedictae.
Take Troches Alhandal first moistened with spirit of Sulphur, and again dried,
our Pil. Aloephanginae, Scammony rosated, of each a dram; spirit of Vitriol a
scruple. Mix them, and in a stone-Mortar and stone-Pestle, with our Aqua
benedicta Serpilli make a mass for Pills; from which afterward with Oil of
Chamomil Pills may be made, of every scruple five Pills.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They plentifully discharge all complicated humors from
the Head, Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Bowels and Nerves. The dose is from three to
four, five, or six Pills, especially in robust bodies.

Pilulae Familiares, or the Familiar Pills.
Take of our Pil. Aloephanginae two ounces, roots of resinous Ialap an ounce,
acid Tartar half an ounce, Magistery of Scammony, Extract of Rhubarb, of each
two drams; spirit of Salt rectified a dram. Mix them, and with Spanish Wine
make a mass for Pills: from which when need requires, with Oil of Aniseeds, or
the like, may be formed small Pills, which gild with gold.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. These Pills are excellent in drying Catarrhs, and in
opening Obstructions, nay, and have great virtue in various affects and
distempers of the Head, Stomach, Spleen, etc. They genttly purge the Brain,
Bowels, and sensitive Organs from thick, putrid, flegmy, choleric and
tartarous humors; and they also purify the Blood and Spirits, strengthen
digestion, and move appetite. The dose is from a scruple to half a dram, taken
daily till the desired effect be happily wrought.

Pilulae Proprietatis.
Take of our Pil. Aloephanginae four ounces, Tartar vitriolated an ounce, Lac
Sulphuris half an ounce, Extract of Lignum Aloes a dram. Mix them, and with
Malmsey Wine make a mass; from which with Oil of Fenil, Pills may be made in
the manner of Aloephanginae, that is, in quantity greater or lesser, and also
in number more or fewer, as there is occasion; then let them be well gilt, and
reserved for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It purges gently, yet radically all flegmy, thick and
putrid humors from the Head, Breast, Hypochonders and Stomach; also the corrupt
tartarous humors that are settled in the Ventricle, etc. and comforts and
preserves from putrefaction all the principal members. Furthermore it drys and
takes away all Fluxes or Catarrhs that fall upon any part from the Brain: It
helps Concoction, moves Appetite, fortifies the natural powers of the Body, and
clarifies the Blood and Spirit. It is of great force and virtue in all
pestilential Contagions, and kills and brings away Worms as well in Children as
in elderly people. They are of excellent use in the Epilepsie, Apoplexy, Cough,
Asthma, Consumption, Hectic Fever, Pox, Convulsion of the Nerves, pains in
the Joints, Gout, Sciatica, obstructions of the Veins and Bowels, etc. and are
ordinarily used by me rather to comfort than purge the body; yet they may be
used to lenifie and lubricate the Bowels, giving them at any time, either
morning or evening, or at any hour of the day, before or after meat, in almost
all diseases, but chiefly phlegmatic and Corrosives. They are also given with
good success in all continual and intermitting Fevers; for they do not only
relax the Belly, but restore and invigorate the strength of the whole body. The
dose is the same as in Aloephanginae nostrae.

Pilulae Anodynae, or a Pill easing Pains.
Take our Aloephanginae three drams, Tartar vitriolated, our Laudanum Opiate,
of each a dram. Mix them, and with Confectio Alkermes dissolved in our Aqua
Hypnotica make a mass for Pills.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They do only excel in mitigating and allaying sharp
pains, gripes, etc. and to procure sleep: and are useful in the Colic, pains
in the Kidneys, Joints, in the Pleurisy, and in all other diseases, and are
far more safe than Laudanum Opiatum, by reason the Tartar vitriolated and the
Aloephanginae are added, which prevent Constipations of the Belly, with which
the sick is often troubled after the taking Laudanum by it self. The dose is
from twelve grains to fifteen and a scruple, and from fifteen grains to half a
dram: For fifteen grains of this Pill contains in it three grains of Laudanum,
a scruple, four grains: twenty five grains of the Pill contain five grains of
Laudanum, and half a dram six grains, and they are to be taken at night going
to bed.

Pilulae Narcoticae, or a Narcotick Pill.
Take Thebane Opium Spagirically prepared and extracted three drams, species
Diambrae a dram, Salt of Oriental Pearls and red Coral of each half a dram;
Extract of wild Poppy flowers and Oriental Saffron, of each a scruple; Bezoar
stone, bone of a Stags heart, of each ten grains; the best Musk five grains,
the Oils of Cloves, Cinnamon, Marjoram, white Amber and Caraway seeds, of each
four drops. Mix them, and with Confectio Alkermes dissolved in our Aqua
Narcotica make a mass for Pills.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. For want of Laudanum Opiate we happily use these Pills,
which have frequently very good success. The dose is from three grains to four,
five, or six, going to bed.

Pilulae Cephalicae, or Head-Pills.
Take Scammony rosated three drams, Extracts of Pil. Cochiae and black
Hellebore, of each a dram and a half; Tartar vitriolated and species Diambrae,
of each half a dram; Oils of white Amber and Marjoram, of each ten grains. Mix
them, and make of all a mass, which afterward with Oil of Fenil make into Pills.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They wonderfully purge the Head, Brain, all the parts
of Sense, the Ventricle, Womb, and the other Bowels from cold, thick, serous,
flegmy and putrid humors; and it is excellent in the pains of the Joints,
Colic, etc. The dose is from a scruple to half a dram.

Pilulae Senectutis.
Take Extract of Balm three drams, species of Diamoschu dulce a dram and a
half, white Amber prepared a dram, our Troches of Pearls, Ambergriese, of each
a scruple. Mix them, and with Confectio Alkermes dissolved in water of Lily of
the valley make a mass for Pills; afterward with Oil of Cloves and Marjoram, of
each a like quantity, make Pills of the bigness of a small Pease, which gild
with gold.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. These Pills help and relieve the watchings of old men,
and those who are conversant in the greatest cares and troubles; For they give
hilarity and tranquillity of mind; and are of excellent use to drive away
thoughtful cares. The dose is from three Pills to four or six at night.

Pilulae Smaragdinae, or Pills of Emeraulds.
Take Emeraulds prepared a dram and a half, Sulphur of the Moon dried two
scruples, Hyacinth prepared half a dram, Magisteries of Oriental Pearls and of
red Corals of each a scruple. Mix them, and with Syrup of Citron rinds and
Nutmegs make a mass for Pills; from which mass make small Pills with Oil of
Aniseeds, and gild them with silver.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They drive away grievous and terrible dreams (which
otherwise debilitate the body by breaking the rest) and procure sleep: they
resist Poisons, and are effectually given to comfort the Spirits through the
whole body. The dose is a scruple at going to bed.

Pilulae Odontalgicae, or Pills for the Toothache.
Take Thebane Opium a dram, Camphire, seeds of Stavesacre, white Ginger, long
Pepper, Turkish Galls, white Chalk, burnt Alum, of each half a dram; roots of
Hog-Fenil, of Henbane, and the lesser Nettles, of each a scruple, species of
Sal Nitre a sufficient quantity to make it tart. Mix them carefully, and with
our Odontalgick Balsam make a mass for Pills; from which afterward with the
same Balsam make little oblong Pills sharp at one end.

Virtue and Use. By daily use we do esteem this a Secret; for if it be but
applied to the hollow Tooth, it immediately takes away the most tormenting pain.

Pilulae de Calce viva, or Pills of quick Lime.
Take unslakt Lime a dram, fine Wheat flour, long Pepper, Pomegranate rinds,
Turkish Galls, of each half a dram; seed of Henbane, Cloves, Thebane Opium,
burnt Alum, of each a scruple. Mix them, and with the Juice of the Roots of
Pellitory of Spain made thick, make a mass of Pills; from which afterward with
Oil of Origanum and Camphire, of each a like quantity, make little long Pills.

Virtue and Use. These Pills applied to aching Teeth, do presently remove the
pain, and render them more firm and sound: They kill the Worms that breed in
the hollow parts of the Teeth, and remove the Defluxions that fall upon the
Gums.

Pilulae Odoriferae, or Odoriferous Pills.
Take Styrax Calamitis two drams, Benjamin a dram, roots of Flower-de-luce half
a dram, Gallia Moschata and yellow Sanders, of each a scruple; distilled Oil of
Roses ten grains. Mix them, and with a little Infusion made of Cinnamon water
and Gum Tragacanth make a mass for Pills, to be applied to the Teeth, when
there is occasion.

Virtue and Use. They being applied to the hollow Teeth, take away the ill
favor and stink of them, and make the Breath sweet and pleasant.

Pilulae de Origano Cretico, or Pills of Origanum.
Take Origanum of Creet a dram, Gallia Moschata, Cassia lignea, Lignum Aloes,
yellow Sanders, Flower-de-luce, of each half a dram; Styrax Calamitis,
Benjamin, Cloves, Galangal the less, Nutmegs, Cubebs, Mace, of each a scruple.
Mix them, and with Confectio Alkermes dissolved in Marjoram water make a mass;
from which with Oil of Roses di^^i^^ed and Oil of Cinnamon, of each a like
quantity, make small Pills to the bigness of a Pease.

Virtue and Use. Purgation and other universal Medicines being first given, and
then three or four of these Pills taken, do wonderfully correct and amend the
stink and ill savor of the Mouth or Nose, whether it rise from the Brain or
Stomach, and render the Breath more sweet and pleasant. They also comfort the
Stomach, and help Digestion.

Pilulae Rosatae.
Take Scammony rosated half an ounce, Magistery of Ialap and Turbith, of each
two drams; Tartar vitriolated a dram, distilled Oil of Roses ten grains. Mix
them, and with Spirit of Roses make Pills of such a bigness, that nine may go
to a scruple.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They purge Choler powerfully, and also thick tough
Phlegm, and this they draw from the Ventricle, Thorax, Nerves, and the remote
parts of the body. The dose is from a scruple to half a dram and two scruples.

Pilulae Polychrestae, or Pills good for many things.
Take of our Extractum Polychrestum, Scammony rosated, of each half an ounce;
Tartar vitriolated a dram. Mix them, and with Oil of Aniseeds make a mass; from
which afterward with Oil of Marjoram make Pills.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They are called Polychrestae, because they are proper
to most affects of the whole body, and do almost purge all humors in it: For
which reason they are highly approved in complicated and Chronical Fevers,
Quartans, Melancholy, Apoplexy, Epilepsie, and various diseases of the Head,
Eyes, Ventricle, Liver and Spleen; for they purge Phlegm and both kinds of
Choler. They are also of excellent use in the Gout and pains of the Joints. The
dose from a scruple to half a dram and two scruples, especially in robust
bodies.

Pilulae Melanagogae.
Take of Pil. Indarum half an ounce, Lapis Lazuli prepared, Scammony rosated,
of each two drams; Extracts of Troches Alhandal, black Hellebore and Ialap, of
each a dram and a half; Essence of Sena and St. Iohnswort, of each a dram;
Oriental Saffron prepared. Dodder, of each half a dram; Indian Spicknard,
Cloves, of each ten grains. Mix them, and with Confectio Alkermes dissolved in
Rose Water make a mass; from which afterward with Oil of Citrons make Pills.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. How the impaired Intellect is restored by these Pills,
is yet a Secret; for they are of an excellent virtue in distractions of the
Mind, Madness, Melancholy, and Fear thence rising. Also to all vices that
proceed from Melancholy, as Cancer, Leprosy, Elephantiasis, Quartan, black
Jaundice, which is generated from the vices of the Spleen. They also cleanse
the blood, and purge serous humors, so that all that use them shall receive as
well health of body as mind. The dose is from a scruple to half a dram.

Pilulae Hydragogae.
Take true Turbith Mineral half an ounce, Extracts of black Hellebore and
Coloquintida, of each three drams; Extracts of Rhubarb and Elaterium, of each
two drams; Magistery of Coral rosated, Hyacinth prepared, of each a dram and a
half; Crocus Metallorum absinthiated, Gum of Peru rosated, sweet Spirit of
Vitriol, of each half a dram. Mix them, and with Oils of Cloves, Cummin, Mace
and Cinnamon, of each a like quantity make a mass; from which afterward with Oil
of Chamomil make Pills.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a stupendous and specific Cathartick in all ill
habits of body, Dropsy, Scald, Tetter, Ring-worm, and Itch, etc. For it
purget^ all thick and serous humors, and roborates the Bowels for nutrition.
Furthermore in the Gout, Jaundice, Pox, in all its Species, and to Patients of
all ages; yea in all kinds of inveterate and worst of Ulcers, as the Wolf,
Cancer, Fistula's, and others of this order: It is also a Remedy appropriate to
all Fevers as well continual as intermitting. The dose is from half a scruple
to a scruple, more or less; and it is given twice in the week, if strength will
permit.

Pilulae Spleneticae, or Pills for the Spleen.
Take Gum Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar of Squills, and then boiled to a just
consistence an ounce, Steel prepared with Vinegar of Tamarinds, Extract of Fern
roots, of each half an ounce; Tartar vitriolated and Aloes not washed, of each
two drams; Magistery of red Myrrh and of Mace, of each a dram; Salts of
Wormwood, Hart's-tongue, and the lesser Centaury, of each half a dram; seeds of
Ash and Oriental Saffron, of each a scruple. Mix them, and with Juice of
Fumitory made thick make a mass, which should be kept in Leather moistened with
Oil of Benjamin; and when it is to be used, with Oil of Rosemary make Pills.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It gives wonderful relief in all deplorable pains and
obstructions of the Liver and Spleen; for it moderately opens and strengthens
the Spleen, yea (universal Medicines being used before, as Attenuatives and
Purgatives) it takes away its hardness, tumor, and scirrhus, and this gently
and without trouble: And they ought to give before and after the use of these
Pills, Clysters, and to apply to the part affected Fomentations. The dose is
from a scruple to half a dram morning or evening, as the Disease and Complexion
requires.

Pilulae Dulces.
Take Juice of Liquorish dissolved in our pectoral Water strained, and again
boiled to a just consistence half an ounce, our species Diasaturni and our
Diasulphuris, of each half an ounce; Extract of the roots of Kexes, white Sugar
Candy, of each two drams; flowers of Benjamin, seeds of Quinces, of each a
dram. Mix them, and with our Diacodium Crocatum make a mass; from which
afterward with Oil of Aniseeds and Fenil make Pills.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. I do commend it in Catarrhs and all Pectoral diseases,
as the Cough, Asthma, straitness of the Breast, Phthisick, Hectic, Pleurisy,
etc. Dose from a scruple to a dram morning and evening.

Pilulae Peruvianae.
Take Magistery of the best Peruvian Gum, our Extractum Panchymagogon, of each
six drams; acid Tartar a dram and a half, rectified Spirit of Vitriol a
scruple. Mix them, and make a mass; from which afterward with Oil of Chamomil
make Pills so big, that a scruple may make five.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is used to evacuate thick and serous humors in ill
habits of body, Dropsy, pains of the Joints, Scabs or Scald, Jaundice,
obstructions of the Liver and Spleen; and also in Quotidian and Tertian
Fevers: in all which diseases we happily use it as an experienced Medicine.
The dose is from a scruple to half a dram and two scruples, especially in
strong bodies.

Pilulae Terebinthinae, or Pills of Turpentine.
Take Cyprus Turpentine washed in juice of Lemmons an ounce and a half, juice
of Purslain made thick six drams, Extract of the roots of Liquorish and
Rhubarb, Tartar vitriolated, of each three drams; the spongy brush that grows
upon sweet Briars, the stones of Medlars, of each a dram and a half; Salt of
white Amber, Nitre prepared, of each a dram; Magistery of the Peach stone,
Crabs eyes, of each half a dram. Mix them, and make a mass according to Art;
from which afterward with rectified Oil of Citrons make Pills.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They are admirably good to break the stone in the
Reins, and provoke Urine, and this chiefly to those of a hot Constitution; for
they expel the Tartar and Sand even to a miracle. They cure the Running of the
Reins, and such like Fluxes, and open the obstructions of the Liver and Spleen.
The dose is from half a dram to a dram taken a good distance of time before and
after meat.

Pilulae Stipticae, or the Stiptick Pills.
Take Extract of the juice of Liquorish half an ounce, species of
Diaplantaginis and Diamartis, of each three drams; Laudanum Opiate two drams,
Birch-fungus, Runnet of a Hare, Camphire, of each half a dram; Horse hoofs
burnt, Sandarac, Olibanum, of each a scruple. Mix them, and with Juice of
Liquorish dissolved in Pomegranate-wine make a mass; from which afterward with
Oils of Nutmegs and Cloves make Pills of the bigness of small Pease, and gild
them.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It stays all Fluxes of the Belly, from what cause
soever, and stops blood flowing from any part of the body; it stays the Courses
in Women, mitigates pain, and procures sleep. The dose from a scruple to half a
dram at bedtime.

Cicera Tartari.
Take Cyprus Turpentine washed in Violet water, and in the same water boiled to
a just consistence two ounces, acid Tartar an ounce, species of Diaireos simple
two drams, Nitre prepared a dram. Mix them, and keep your hands wetted in cold
Violet-water, and so make Pills the bigness of a Pease.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. We happily use it in all diseases proceeding from a
thick tartarous matter: And it is known by Experience, that some by the use of
this Pill have so cured and prevented the Gout, that it has not returned again
for many years, or else it returned more slowly; but in others it has been
more mild, and went off sooner. They are also commendable in all obstructions
of the Bowels and Veins, in the Hemicrania, Jaundice, Contractures, Dropsy,
Fevers, retention of the Terms, etc. It fortifies the Reins, and expels the
Stones from the Kidneys and Bladder, and does not only relieve the Ventricle
and parts about it, but strengthens them also. The use of these Pills is
excellent in the Asthma, Phthisick, Cough, etc. and in all other Pectoral
diseases. They sometimes work by Sweat, and sometimes by Urine, according as
the sick is propense to this or that. The dose in preservation, at the Quarters
of the Moon is from half a dram to a dram; but in curing, every morning from a
dram to a dram and a half.

Pilulae de Sandaraca.
Take of the best Sandarac half an ounce, Extract of Polypody, white Tartar, of
each two drams; white Amber prepared, black Pepper, Roch-Alum, red Sarcocol, of
each half a dram; Lacca washed, Nitre prepared, round Birthwort, seeds of wild
Rue and Parsley, of each a scruple. Mix them, and with the Juice of the lesser
Centaury made thick make a mass according to Art, and of every scruple make two
Pills, and gild them.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It extenuates fat, and makes people lean, and
attenuates all preternatural Carnosities in the humane body. It is given every
morning one Pill gilded.

Pilulae de Sabina, or Pills of Savin.
Take salt of Savin two parts, Oil stilled from Savin one part. They being
mixed, seal them Hermetically, and set them in a Philosophical fire so long,
till they are hard like a stone; afterward, Take of our Pil. Aloephanginae an
ounce and a half, of this Stone prepared an ounce, Venetian Borax three drams,
Extract of our species Dialauri, flowers of the lesser Centaury, the herb
Savin, of each half a dram; Oriental Saffron a scruple. Mix them, and with Oil
of Juniper make a mass; from which afterward with Oil of Cinnamon and Mace make
Pills.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. These Pills do so happily open the obstructions of the
Womb, and so plentifully move the Terms retained, that they deservedly claim
the first place among Physical Arcana's that move the Courses. The dose morning
and evening is from a scruple to half a dram.

Pilulae Uterinae, or Pills for the Womb.
Take Pilulae Aloephanginae an ounce, Faecula Bryoniae a dram, salt of English
Tin, salt of Mother of Pearl, salt of red Coral, of each half a dram; Extracts
of Castor and the Callus of Mares, of each a scruple; Oil of Angelica ten
grains. Mix them, and make a mass according to Art, of which when need
requires, with Oil of Amber make Pills, and gild them.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a peculiar and specific Medicine for the
suffocation of the Womb; for it happily raises women that are as it were
suffocated by Hysterical passion. The dose is from a scruple to half a dram,
continued for certain mornings successively.

SECT. VII. Of Rotula's, or little Rowls or Cakes.
Rotulae Imperiales.
TAke Confectio Alkermes half an ounce, Troches of Pearls a dram, Ambergriese a
scruple, the best Musk half a scruple, white Sugar dissolved in Rose Water
eight ounces. Mix them, and make Rotula's according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It strengthens the Head, Brain and Memory to
admiration: It also roborates the Heart afflicted with cold and trembling, and
affords great help in all its other affects. It gently draws away the continued
pains of the Head, discusseth the Vertigo, sharpens the Sight, drys up moist
defluxions of the Eyes; it prevents baldness, and prolongs life shortened by bad
diet, etc. The dose is one, two or three at a time often in the day.

Rotulae Smaragdinae, or Rowls of Emerauld.
Take of Emerauld prepared two drams, Elks horn Spagirically calcined a dram
and a half, seeds of male Peony gathered the Moon decreasing, Citron seeds
huskt, of each a dram; roots of white Diptamus, grains of Kermes, the lesser
Galangal, Oriental Saffron prepared, Cubebs, Misleto of the Oak, of each half a
dram; Magistery of Oriental Pearls, red Coral, Hyacinth prepared, of each a
scruple; Oil of white Amber rectified, Oil of Nutmegs, Mace and Cinnamon, of
each ten grains; Oil of Rosemary and Lavender, of each four drops; white Sugar
dissolved in an equal quantity of our Epileptick and Apoplectick Water sixteen
ounces. Mix them, and make of all little Rowls or Cakes.

Virtue and Use. They wonderfully preserve from the Apoplexy, Epilepsie,
Palsy, etc. They correct the Vertigo, and take away the debility of the Brain,
sharpen the Memory and Sense, comfort the Head, refresh the Spirits, support
and relieve the Faculties of the Mind, debilitated by study and continual
cares, which are dangerous to the Animal Faculties.

Rotulae Hyacinthinae, or Rowls of Hyacinth.
Take species Diarrhodon Abbatis, Diamargariton frigidum, of each half an
ounce; Hyacinth prepared two drams, flowers of Nitre a dram, Magistery of red
Coral a scruple, distilled Oil of Roses ten grains, white Sugar dissolved in
Water-lily-flower water sixteen ounces. Mix them, and make Rotula's according
to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It gives relief to the heat and inflammation of the
whole body, and repairs the imbecility of the virile force. They help the
Syncope, and wonderfully refresh, refrigerate, and strengthen those who have
long been dejected and afflicted with a long tedious disease. They do wonders
in Asthma's, Heart-passions, Epatick diseases, Jaundice, Consumptions, Coughs
and malignant Fevers. The dose is two, three, four or five often in the day.

Rotulae Cordiales, or Cordial Rowls.
Take species Diarrhodon Abbatis half an ounce, Confectio Alkermes two drams,
Troches of Pearls, Magistery of red Coral, of each a scruple; Oil of Cloves and
Mace, of each four drops; white Sugar dissolved in Cinnamon water eight ounces.
Mix them, and make a Confection in little Rowls.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They are great Fortifiers of the Heart, and preserve it
safe from all corruption and putrefaction, that it cannot be vitiated by the
malignant Air. The dose is two, three, or four for one time.

Rotulae Pectorales albae, or white Pectoral Rowls.
Take species Diatragacanth. frigidum and Diaireos simple, of each half an
ounce; Lac Sulphuris two drams, powder of Benjamin a dram, Oil of Fenil a
scruple, the whitest Sugar dissolved in milk of the seeds of white Poppy, and
Violet water, sixteen ounces. Mix them, and make Rowls according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They are good for the asperity of the Tongue and Jaws,
and alleviate the hardness and compression of the Breast and Thorax. They give
ease to those troubled with the Cough, Phthisick, Consumption and wasting, and
to those who are obnoxious to defluxions and destillations from the Head. The
dose every hour one, two, or three at a time.

Rotulae Pectorales Citrinae, or yellow Pectoral Rowls.
Take Lohoch sanum and expertum, species Diarrhodon Abbatis, of each half an
ounce; juice of Liquorish extracted, flowers of Sulphur, of each a dram; powder
of Benjamin, roots of Flower-de-luce, of each two scruples; Extract of Oriental
Saffron, Balsam of Sulphur with Oil of Aniseeds, of each a scruple; white Sugar
dissolved in Fenil water sixteen ounces. Mix them, and make Rotula's.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They purge the Lungs, lenifie the Breast, facilitate
the Spittle, and therefore give ease in a wonderful manner to those troubled
with the Cough, Pleurisy, difficulty of breathing, etc. The dose often in the
day from one or two, to three or four at a time.

Rotulae Pectorales rubrae, or red Pectoral Rowls.
Take species Diarrhodon Abbatis an ounce, Lohoch sanum and expertum half an
ounce, Confectio Alkermes two drams, juice of Liquorish extracted, flowers of
Sulphur, of each a dram; powder of Benjamin, roots of Flowerde-luce, of each
half a dram; Oil of Anisceds a scruple, white Sugar dissolved in Hyssop water,
first tinctured with red Sanders, sixteen ounces. Mix them, and make Rotula's
according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They purge the Thorax and Lungs, and strengthen them to
expectorate the thick and gross matter there lodged. Hence they give ease in
tedious Coughs, Asthma's and Pleurisies. The dose is one, two, three or four at
a time.

Rotulae Lac provocantes, or Rowls provoking Milk.
Take Crystals prepared half an ounce, red Corals prepared a dram, Pearls
prepared, long Pepper, of each half a dram; Oil of Fenil seeds a scruple, white
Sugar dissolved in water of Nutmegs three ounces. Mix them, and make
Confectionary Rotula's.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a great Secret in provoking Milk, and is
therefore given to Nurses every day, morning, noon and night. The dose is four
or five at a time.

Rotulae refectivae.
Take Troches of Pearls a dram, Magistery of red Coral, Ambergriese, of each a
scruple, white Sugar dissolved and extracted in milk of sweet Almonds with
Rosewater four ounces. Mix them, and make little Rowls.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They nourish and give strength in Chronical diseases,
they restore health and strength to those who despair of Cure, they conserve
Nature by roboration, and help to recover pristine strength. The dose is as
necessity requires, two or three being taken, and by degrees rubbed upon the
tongue, and afterward swallowed.

Rotulae stimulantes.
Take Venetian Borax two drams, seeds of Ashenkeys a dram, Boletus Cervinus,
flesh of Skinks, of each half a dram; long Pepper a scruple, the bodies of
Cantharides, Oil of Cinnamon, of each half a scruple; white Sugar dissolved in
water of Satyrion, and Rosemary flowers six ounces. Mix them, and make Rotula's.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They wonderfully irritate and excite Venery, and are
very effectual to repair that kind of impotence and lost virility. The dose is
at going to bed from three, four or five to six, more or less according as the
Patient requires. They may also be taken after the first digestion, that is,
after midnight.

Rotulae Aromaticae.
Take Galangal the less a dram and a half, Calamus aromaticus, grains of
Paradise, white Ginger, of each a dram; Cloves, Cassia lignea, Zedoary, Burnet,
long Pepper, Caraway seeds, of each half a dram; Cubebs, Nutmegs, Oriental
Saffron, Mace, of each a scruple; Oils of Cinnamon, Mint, Oranges and Rosemary,
of each ten grains; white Sugar dissolved in our Stomach-water sixteen ounces.
Mix them, and according to Art make a Confection in Rowls.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They calefie, corroborate and preserve from pain all
the principal members, the Head, Brain, Stomach, Heart, Liver, Spleen, Guts,
etc. They prevent the Colic, stay Vomiting coming of a phlegmatic cause,
excite Appetite, discuss the Flatulencies that distend the Ventricle, and cure
all that hurts the body coming of a cold cause. The dose is two, three, four or
five at a time.

Rotulae refrigerantes, or cooling Rowls.
Take species Diarrhodon Abbatis an ounce, Elaeosaccharum of Citrons, flowers
of Nitre, of each two drams; Crystals prepared a dram, Tinctures of red Coral,
and grains of Kermes, Sanders, of each half a dram; Magistery of Saturn a
scruple, distilled Oil of Roses four grains, white Sugar dissolved in juice of
Barberries and Goosberries equal in quantity sixteen ounces. Mix them, and make
Rotula's.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They are very cooling, and of excellent use to allay
thirst in acute Diseases and burning Fevers. They comfort the Stomach and its
natural heat, and relieve the Heart and Liver once heated. They gently and
pleasantly remove and repel all Inflammations as well internal as external. The
dose is two, three, four or five at a time.

Rotulae Carminativae, or Carminative Rowls.
Take of our Carminative Oil a dram and a half, Cinnamon and Cloves, of each ten
grains; white Sugar dissolved in our Carminative water sixteen ounces. Mix
them, and according to Art make all into little Rowls.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They dissipate the wind and ventose humors lurking in
the Ventricle and Guts. They help Digestion, and sour Belchings, and give ease
in the Nephritick pains by moving Urine, and bringing away the Stone. They are
given as necessity requires three, four or five at a time.

Rotulae Diacymini.
Take the species of Diacymini and Dianisi, of each half an ounce; of Diamoschu
dulce and Diambrae, of each a dram; Balsam of Sulphur with Aniseeds, Oil of
Fenil, of each a scruple; Oil of Oranges and Mace, of each ten grains, white
Sugar dissolved in our Aqua benedicta Serpilli sixteen ounces. Mix them, and
make a Confection in Rowls.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They powerfully dissipate the flatulencies of the
Bowels, and are good in all cold Distempers. They wonderfully relieve old
Folks, and all those troubled with distempers of the Brain, Vertigo, Stomach,
Arteries, Liver, Spleen; also in the Cough, Asthma, passion of the Heart,
Wind-Colick, Quartan Agues, etc. They help digestion, amend ill habits of body,
and free the Hypochonders when distended with wind. Let the sick take one or
more as he pleases.

Rotulae contra Vermes, or Rowls against the Worms.
Take of our species Diacina two ounces, white Sugar dissolved in water of the
roots of Couch-grass and Tansie, of each sixteen ounces. Mix them, and make
little Rowls according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They kill Worms and bring them away. They are given
some days together to Children troubled with the Worms, two, three, four or
five, at a time more or less, as need requires.

Rotulae Mithridaticae praeservantes, or preservative Rowls of Mithridate.
Take Extract of Mithridate prepared with distilled Vinegar a dram and a half,
Hartshorn Spagirically calcined, Citron seeds husked, compound flowers of
Sulphur, Emerauld prepared, Oriental red Bole prepared, of each a dram; roots
of Tormentil and Zedoary, of each half a dram; Troches of Pearls, Magistery of
red Coral, Camphire, of each a scruple; Oil of white Amber rectified, Oil of
Angelica, of each ten grains; Oil of Cloves and Rue, of each four grains; the
best Sugar dissolved in the waters of Sorrel and Roses sixteen ounces. Mix
them, and make all into little Rowls.

Rotulae Theriacales liberantes.
Take Extract of Venice Treacle prepared with distilled Vinegar a dram and an
half, Elks horn Spagirically calcined, sealed Earth, seeds of Sorrel, Tincture
of Sulphur, Hyacinth prepared, of each a dram; roots of Elicampane and
Angelica, of each half a dram; wood of Aloes, bone of a Stags heart, white
Amber prepared, of each a scruple; Oil of Camphire and red Myrrh, of each ten
grains; Oil of Cassia lignea and Zedoary, of each four grains; white Sugar
sixteen ounces. Dissolve the Sugar in Carduus and Scabious-water, and make
little Rowls for use.

Rotulae Angelicae praeservativae pro gravidis, or preservative Rowls of
Angelica for Women with Child.
Take Extract of the roots of Angelica made with distilled Vinegar a dram and a
half, Hartshorn Spagirically calcined, sealed Earth, Bole Armenick prepared,
roots of female Peony, seeds of Sorrel, of each a dram; Troches of Pearls,
Magistery of red Coral, Hyacinth prepared, of each half a dram; Mace macerated
in Vinegar and again dried, Cassia lignea, Oriental Saffron, of each a scruple;
Oils of white Amber rectified and Zedoary, of each ten grains; Oil of Cloves
and Citrons, of each four grains; white Sugar dissolved in water of Tormentil
and Betony sixteen ounces. Mix all, and make little Cakes.

Rotulae Zedoarticae pro Pueris, or Rowls of Zedoary for Children.
Take Extract of Zedoary made with distilled Vinegar a dram and a half, Elks
horn Spagirically calcined, white Amber prepared, sealed Earth, Oriental red
Bole prepared, of each a dram; roots of male Peony, of white Diptamus and
Tormentil, of each two scruples; Emerauld prepared, Hyacinth prepared, seeds of
Citrons husked, seeds of Sorrel and Cina, of each half a dram; Magisteries of
red Coral, Oriental Pearls and Crabs eyes, the bone of a Stags heart, Balsam of
Sulphur with Oil of Aniseeds, of each a scruple; Oils of Cinnamon, Mace,
Citrons, of each four drops; white Sugar sixteen ounces. Mix all, and with the
Sugar dissolved in water of Roses and Water-lily flowers make little Cakes.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They are good against the Contagion of the Plague, and
defend and preserve the body from being hurt by any malignant and infectious
Air. The dose, when there is occasion, is two or three at a time.

Rotulae Catarrhales calidae, or hot Rowls for a Catarrh.
Take species of Diamoschu dulce and Diambrae, of each a dram; species of
Aromaticum rosatum, Diaireos simple, of each half a dram; Frankincense,
Mastich, Hartshorn prepared, of each a scruple; white Sugar dissolved in
Betony-water five ounces. Make little Rowls, and smear them gently with Oil of
Cloves.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. When the humor is preternaturally sent from the Brain
to the Eyes, Nose, Mouth, etc. or if it falls upon any other part, and is
perceived to hurt the actions of that part, by altering it from its natural
quality and state, in such a case these Rotula's are of excellent use; for they
stop all cold Catarrhs, and comfort the Head and Breast. The dose is three or
four at a time.

Rotulae Catarrhales frigidae, or Rotula's for a cold Catarrh.
Take seeds of white Poppy bru^sed four ounces, of the heads that contain the
seeds grossly powdered two ounces. Let them infuse a few days in water of
Scabious and Coltsfoot, of each a like quantity: then distill them, and in a
sufficient quantity of this distilled Liquor dissolve an ounce of Mastich: let
it boil a little, and then filter it, to which add of white Sugar eight ounces,
and so make little Rowls according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. When the Catarrh is thin and sharp, the Head hot, and
the Face and Eyes appear red, the humor exasperating and exulcerating the part
upon which it falls, and a bitter saltness is perceived, and a Fever begun,
then are these Rotula's of great use. The dose is three or four at a time.

SECT. VIII. Of Morsels.
Morsuli Cephalici, or Cephalic Morsels.
TAke Conserve of the flowers of Peony and Rosemary, of each half an ounce;
species of Diamoschu dulce and Diambra, of each two ounces; Man's skull
Spagirically calcined, Elks horn prepared in the same manner, of each a dram;
roots and seeds of Peony duly gathered, Misleto of the Oak, of each half a
dram; Oil of white Amber rectified a scruple, Oils of Lavender, Nutmegs and
Caraways, of each four grains; white Sugar dissolved in our Epileptick and
Apoplectick Waters, of each sixteen ounces. Mix them, and according to Art make
little Morsels.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They are used as well in preserving from, as curing the
Epilepsie, Apoplexy and Palsy, and other dangerous diseases of the Head, Brain
and Nerves. The dose in preservation is from half a dram to a dram at all
Quarters of the Moon; but in curing it is given from a dram to two or three in
the Fit or a little after, either by it self, or in some proper Vehicle: And if
necessary, repeat it; but to Children, by reason of their age, half so much or
less is a sufficient dose.

Morsuli Regii.
Take green Pistick Nuts two ounces, Pines cleansed, sweet Almonds, of each an
ounce; Troches of Pearls, Magistery of red Coral, of each a dram; the Cordial
Flowers cut small of each a pugil, Oil of Mace a scruple, white Sugar dissolved
in Rose Water sixteen ounces. Mix them, and make them into little bits or
Morsels according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They are of a grateful taste, and comfortable above
measure. They nourish and restore those who languish under any Weakness,
Phthisick, Consumption, or are extenuated with a long Disease. You cannot err
in the dose, for they may be taken at Meat, or before or after it, as the sick
pleases.

Morsuli Rosati.
Take the best Conserve of red Roses two ounces, species of Diarrhodon Abbatis
half an ounce, species de Gemmis frig. Diamargar. frigid. of each two drams;
Confectio Alkermes, Troches of Barberries, flowers of Nitre, of each a dram;
Magistery of Pearls and red Coral, of each half a dram; Elaeosaccharum of Roses
and Citrons, of each a scruple; Cinnamon and Mace, of each ten grains; white
Sugar sixteen ounces, dissolve it in water of Roses and Strawberries, of each a
like quantity. Mix all, and make little Morsels according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They are proper for all intemperate heat of the Head,
Heart, Stomach, Liver, Womb and Reins, and are given successfully in burburning
choleric Fevers. They refresh those that are weak and dejected with a long
Disease, and restore them to their pristine strength. They help the trembling
of the Heart, the defection of the Spirits and Digestion, and those whose
Countenance is vitiated. The dose is from two drams to half an ounce.

Morsuli Pectorales, or Pectoral Morsels.
Take Lohoch sanum and expert. two ounces, species Diarrhodon Abbatis an ounce,
compound flowers of Sulphur, juice of Liquorish extracted, of each two drams;
roots of Flower-de-luce, Aliptae Moschatae, of each a dram; Balsam of Sulphur
anisat. Oil of Fenil, of each ten grains; white Sugar sixteen ounces, dissolve
the Sugar in water of Horehound and Coltsfoot, of each a like quantity. Mix
them, and make little Morsels according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They relieve those afflicted with a lingering Cough,
Hoarsness, Asthma, etc. They help difficulty of Breathing, cut and attenuate
the thick humors in the Breast and Lungs, and ease pain there. The dose is from
half a dram to one or two every hour, or when the Patient pleases.

Morsuli Refectivi de Cancris, or Refective Morsels of Crabs.
Take the carnous part of River-Crabs boiled in pectoral Waters two ounces,
Conserve of Damask Roses an ounce and a half, Pines cleansed, green Pistick
Nuts, sweet Almonds, of each macerated all night in Scabious-water an ounce;
white Sugar dissolved in our water of Calves Lungs five ounces. Mix them, and
in the end add Syrup of Mastich two ounces, Lac Sulphuris two drams, Troches of
Pearls and Oil of Nutmegs expressed, of each a dram; Balsam of Sulphur with Oil
of Aniseeds a scruple. Mix them, and with great diligence, according to Art
make a Confection into little Morsels.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is an Arcanum against the Phthisick and Consumption
of the body, which ought to be preferred deservedly before many other Remedies;
for there is nothing almost that does more conserve the radical moisture than
these. It restores lost strength, and comforts the principal members. The dose
is often in the day from two drams to half an ounce, more or less according to
the Complexion and Sex of the Patient.

Morsuli Stomachici, or Stomach-morsels.
Take Diacydonium simple two ounces, preserved China Ginger an ounce, Calamus
aromaticus preserved green half an ounce, Nutmegs, Cassia lignea, the lesser
Galangal, Mace, of each a dram; seeds of Coriander prepared, Cummin seeds, of
each half a dram; Oils of Cloves and Cinnamon, of each a scruple; white Sugar
dissolved in our stomachical Water sixteen ounces. Mix them, and make all into
little Morsels according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They wonderfully comfort a cold Stomach, and help it to
retain the meat. They roborate and strengthen the members of Nutrition hurt and
debilitated, and do powerfully excite the Appetite and Taste. They discuss
Flatulencies, and dissolve ventose Humors. They abate and take away the
swelling and extension of the Hypochonders, and restore the native heat. They
take away the ill savor of the body, and wonderfully help those who have cold
Bowels. The dose is from one dram to two.

Morsuli Epatici, or Morsels for the Liver.
Take roots of Scorzonera and Succory preserved, of each an ounce; species
Diarrhodon Abbatis, Conserve of red Roses, Raisins, of each half an ounce;
Citron flowers preserved two drams, Magistery of red Coral, Steel prepared with
Vinegar of Tamarinds, Spodium of Wolfs lungs dried, of each a dram; seeds of
Sorrel and Purslain, of each half a dram; flowers of white Agrimony, white
Sugar dissolved in our Epatick water frigid and calid sixteen ounces. Mix them,
and make all into little Tablets, and gild them with gold.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They are very good for the weakness and imbecility of
the Liver, they take away its obstructions, and give it strength. They are good
in the Jaundice, some kind of Dropsies, and ill habit of body. The dose is from
a dram to two and half an ounce.

Morsuli Martiales, or Morsels of Mars.
Take filings of Steel prepared with Vinegar of Tamarinds an ounce, Cassia
lignea, the lesser Galangal, Cloves, of each a dram; Mace, Oriental Saffron, of
each a scruple; Oil of Cinnamon half a scruple, white Sugar dissolved in water
of Wormwood and lesser Centaury eight ounces. Mix all, and make little morsels
according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They are profitable in all Obstructions, especially of
the Spleen, and help all the vices of the Stomach, Heart, Head, the paleness of
the Face, and provoke the Courses in Women, etc. They are taken in the morning
four hours before dinner, drinking a draught of Wormwood-wine after it, and
after taking it to use exercise for an hour. The dose from two drams to three
at a time.

Morsuli Viriles.
Take of our Confection succulata Inda an ounce, green Pistick Nuts, sweet
Almonds, Pine-nuts, of each half an ounce; preserved Nutmegs two drams,
Venetian Borax, lesser Galangal, long Pepper, Cardamoms the less, of each a
dram; the pizzle of a Bull and a Heart, of each half a dram; Galliae Moschatae,
seeds of Ashen-keys and Nettles, flesh of Skinks, Oriental Saffron, of each a
scruple; Oils of Cloves, Mace expressed, Cinnamon, of each ten grains; white Sugar
(dissolved in water of the roots of Satyrion and Rosemary flowers) sixteen
ounces. Mix all, and make little morsels according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They have an excellent and indeed a sudden operation on
those who are willing to be abundantly kind to the Women. I also commend them
to those who are slow, idle, or negligent in their duty (called by St. Paul
(...), debitam benevolentiam) so that when their cause comes before the Judge,
there is a Verdict against them, or to use my Authors own words for it, Ita ut
si deferantur ad Iudicem, causa cadant. The dose is upon occasion, happily
begun in the evening, and continued from a dram to two and half an ounce,
drinking after it a little Sack or other rich Wine.

Morsuli Diacretae.
Take Chalk three or four times washed in Violet water half an ounce, Crabs
eyes prepared two drams, Nutmegs, Bole Armeniack, of each a dram; Coral
prepared half a dram, Pearls prepared, Cinnamon cut small, of each a scruple;
Carp-stone, Mace torrefied, Oriental Saffron, of each ten grains; white Sugar
dissolved in Rose Water eight ounces. Mix them, and make little morsels
according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They are profitable and useful against the heat of the
Stomach (commonly called Heart-burning) which is no ways dangerous but
troublesome, and is often common to those most healthy, coming sometimes by
eating and drinking, as well as fasting, and they are desirous to belch, as it
were a fiery vapor shut in, that has not force enough to break forth: This
boiling pain do they resist, and also take away its cause. The dose is from one
dram to two.

SECT. IX. Of Troches.
Trochisci Vitae.
TAke Manus Christi simple eight cunces, Confectio Alkermes an ounce and a
half, our Troches of Pearls, Ambergriese, of each a dram; the best Musk, the
five precious Stones prepared, of each a scruple; Elaeosaccharum of Cinnamon and
Cloves, of each ten grains. Mix them, and with Tragacanth dissolved in
Rose Water, make little Troches sor use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They increase and renew decayed strength, and repair it
wonderfully, as it were by a Celestial power. They recreate the Spirits,
support the radical Moisture, and roborate the Head, Heart, Stomach and Liver,
etc. above measure; they discuss the vicious humors of the Stomach, and open
the obstructions of the Veins. They are proper in all cold Distempers,
restoring Age, helping Digestion, and resist all Putresaction. They prevent the
Vertigo, sharpen the Sight, and are a great Preservative from the Epilepsie and
Apoplexy. They hasten the Birth, and are a present Remedy in the distempers of
the Mind. The dose is one or two at a time. They may also be prepared with Musk.

Trochisci de Radice Rhodia, or Troches of Rose-root.
Take of the roots of Rhodia an ounce, the bark of the roots of Mandrake,
Peach-kernels, Opium Hermetically prepared, red Myrrh, of each six drams;
flowers of wild Poppy, Oriental Saffron, red Roses, of each half an ounce;
seeds of Henbane, Dill and Smallage, of each three drams; Nutmegs, Cubebs,
Camphire, of each two drams. Mix them, and with Mucilage of the seeds of
Fleabane and Quinces made of Lettice-water make Troches according to Art.

Virtue and Use. I have had Experience of these Troches in Melancholy, Madness,
Pleurisy, and excessive Watchings, yea in all pains of the Head, if they be
applied like a Liniment, or dissolved in water of Lettice and Roses, or in our
Hypnotick, or Woman's milk, and applied to the Forehead and Temples.

Trochisci Ophthalmici, or Troches for the Eyes.
Take white Lead washed an ounce, Hartshorn calcined without fire, Sarcocol,
Tutty prepared, of each half an ounce; Gum Arabic, white Tragacanth, dust of
Flour of each two drams; Mother of Pearls prepared, white Pompholix, Olibanum,
of each a dram; Opium Spagirically prepared, Camphire, of each half a dram. Mix
them, and with the Whites of Eggs make Troches for the Eyes, to be used in
Collyriums with appropriate Waters.

Virtue and Use. They are proper and useful for all kind of accidents and
passions of the Eyes, as Rheumatisms, Blood-shot, thin sharp Rheums, Pustules,
Burnings, Ruptures, Fistula's, Roughness, Itching, and all pains there; they
also consolidate and heal Ulcers of the Eyes.

Trochisci de Papavere, or Troches of Poppy.
Take Sugar Penids two ounces, white Poppy seeds half ^n ounce, Melon seeds
huskt, Gourd seeds, of each two ^rams; juice of Liquorish extracted, red Bole
Armenick ^repared, compound flowers of Sulphur, of each a dram and (...) half;
white Tragacanth, dust of Flour, of each a dram; Extract of wild Poppy flowers
half a dram. Mix them, and with Mucilage of the seeds of Quinces and water of
wild Poppies make little Troches.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. We happily use these in all sharp Catarrhs falling from
the Head upon the Breast and Lungs, which they powerfully stop, and restore the
Head to its pristine state again, and powerfully lenifie the pains of the
Breast. The dose is every hour or at certain hours, two or three rubbed on the
tongue till they dissolve.

Trochisci Glycyrrhizae, or Troches of Liquorish.
Take white Sugar Candy and Penids, of each four ounces; juice of Liquorish
extracted ten drams, powder of Diaireos simple, Diarrhodon Abbatis,
Diamagariton frigid, of each a dram; the four greater cold Seeds, Alipt^
Moschatae, Lac Sulphuris, of each half a dram. Mix them, and with a Mucilage
made of roots of Marshmallows and Violet-water make Troches.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They are of great use in hot and dry Coughs, they
restore the Voice lost, cleanse the Thorax, and are excellent with other
remedies to facilitate Spitting. They are proper for Children troubled with
Asthma's and straitness of the Breast, etc. They are given many times in the
day two or three at a time, according to the disease and strength of the
Patient.

Trochisci Cordiales, or Cordial Troches.
Take white Sugar Candy eight ounces, Consectio Alkermes an ounce, of the five
precious Stones prepared, of each a scruple; Oil of Cloves and Cinnamon, of each
t^^ grains. Mix them, and with Mucilage made of Tragacanth and Rose Water make
little Troches.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They comfort the Heart, and relieve the faintings
thereof, also the infirmities of the Mind. They help those who lie long under
Distempers, or languish under any weakness, and conduce much to the recovery of
their former strength. They take away the loathing of the Stomach, and help
Digestion. The dose is from three to six at a time.

Trochisci Ioviales.
Take Magistery of English Tin, Mother of Pearls, red Coral, of each a dram;
Oil of white Amber rectified a scruple. Mix them, and with Gum Tragacanth
dissolved in our Hysterical water make little Troches, each weighing half a
scruple.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They are of admirable force and operation in all kinds
of Suffocation; for if one or two be taken in the morning for three days
together in our Hysterical water, or in any other appropriate, they do, under
God, cure the Patient: for which Divine gift let God alone be blessed.

Trochisci de Alumine, or Troches of Alum.
Take crude Alum, roots of Pellitory, of each half an ounce, long Pepper a
dram, seeds of Henbane, Wheatmeal, white Chalk, Nitre prepared, of each a dram
and a half; white Ginger, Cloves, Opium prepared, of each a dram. Mix them, and
with Juice of the lesser Nettles make Troches.

Virtue and Use. They take away pain, being applied to the Teeth and Gums, due
Purgation or Phlebotomy being first used.

Trochisci de Satureja pro Lixivio, or Troches of Summer-Savory for a Lixivium.
Take dried Savory half an ounce, Marjoram and Origanum, of each two drams;
Lavender flowers, red Roses, Rosemary flowers, of each a dram and a half; wood
of Aloes, Gum Arabic, white Tragacanth, roots of Avens and Flower-de-luce, of
each a dram; Cloves, Nutmegs, Cardamoms the less, Cubebs, of each a dram;
Ambergriese and Musk, of each a scruple. Mix them, and with the Whites of Eggs
make Troches, each weighing a dram.

Virtue and Use. Boil two, three, or more of these Troches in a sufficient
quantity of Lixivium, and with that wash the Head in the morning fasting
(having first been at stool) and presently let the Head be rubbed and dried
with warm Linen: It takes away all the sweat and filth of the Head, and
strengthens it, opens the Pores of the Skin, drys up Catarrhs, comforts the
Memory, and quickens the Sense.

Trochisci de Nitro, or Troches of Nitre.
Take Rotula's of the juice of Barberries, and Rotula's of the juice of
Goosberries, of each eight ounces; species of Diarrhodon Abbatis moistened with
spirit of Vitriol, Nitre prepared, of each an ounce; powder of red Roses
vitriolated two drams, Oil of Cinnamon four drops. Mix them, and with Tragacanth
dissolved in Juice of Citrons make Troches.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They are of great use in the Quincy, Inflammation of
the Mouth and Tongue, boiling of the Blood, heat of Urine, burning Fevers, and
especially putrid Semi-tertains. The dose is from one dram to two in
appropriate Vehicles.

Styli Dentrifricii, or a Medicine for the Teeth.
Take the powder of calcined River-flints two ounce, Pumice stone prepared,
burnt Alum, of each half (...) ounce; roots of Florentine Flower-de-luce, white
ashes of Indian Tabaco, of each two drams; Gallia Moschata, oil of Rhodium, of
each a scruple. Mix them, and with Gum Tragacanth dissolved in Rose Water make
little Rowls to cleanse the Teeth.

Virtue and Use. They are most used to cleanse the Teeth, and to remove their
ill color: For when the Teeth turn yellow, black, etc. this Powder does
wonderfully cleanse them and make them white, if they be often rubbed and
cleansed with it.

Pomum Ambrae.
Take roots of Florentine Flower-de-luce, Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, of each half
an ounce; wood of Aloes, yellow Sanders, Styrax Calamit. Benjamin, of each two
drams; Ambergriese a dram, Alexandrian Musk half a dram, Balsam of Peru, Oil of
Rhodium, of each a scruple. All being diligently mixed, add of true Civet two
drams: then with Gum Arabic and Tragacanth, of each alike dissolved in water
of Marjoram, Narcissus, Roses and Lavender make a mass; of which make Troches,
Balls, Cakes, etc. which put into a Glass and kept, will grow hard.

Virtue and Use. It is a specific odoriferous Medicine, which in cold
Cephalalgia's, Vertigo, Epilepsie, Apoplexy, pestilential Air, Colic,
suffocation of the Matrix, falling out of the Womb, etc. and especially when
Medicines cannot be taken into the Body, if these be applied to the Nose or
other parts, they comfort the Heart and vital Spirits exceedingly.

Sapo odoratus, or perfumed Soap.
Take Venetian Soap dissolved in water of Narcissus a pound, roots of
Florentine Flower-de-luce an ounce, Styrax Calamit. Benjamin, of each half an
ounce; wood of Aloes, yellow Sanders, of each two drams; Ambergriese and Civet,
of each a dram; of Musk, Balsam of Peru, of each half a dram; the Oils of
Rhodium, Lavender, Cinnamon and Cloves, of each a scruple. Mix them, and with
Oil of Tartar per deliquium make little Balls: and as you are making them up,
anoint your hands with the aforesaid Oils.

SECT. X. Of Suffiments.
Suffimentum Angelicum.
TAke Styrax Calamitis and Benjamin, of each equal parts. Dissolve these in the
best Rose Water, and presently well pressed, afterward dried, pulverized, and
kept for use.

Take of this powder thus prepared an ounce, wood of Aloes two drams, red Roses
dried, and Ambergriese, of each a dram; true Civet and Musk, of each half a
dram; Balsam of Peru and Oil of Rhodium, of each a scruple; Ivory calcined till
it be black, a sufficient quantity. Mix all well, and with Rose Water make a
Paste, of which make little black Cakes, put them among Rose-leaves, and dry
them in the shade, then put them in a glass Vessel, and keep them for use.

Virtue and Use. They are used for a Perfume by Kings, Princes, and Great men;
for one or two being laid upon hot Coals, or infused and boiled in Rose Water,
give a most sweet, delectable, and celestial Odor, which does refresh the Brain
and vital Spirits, and prevents the contagious Infection of a malignant Air.

Suffimentum Imperiale, or an Imperial Perfume.
Take Styrax cleansed, Benjamin, of each half a^ ounce, wood of Aloes two
drams, true Civet a dram, Gallia Moschata a scruple, Oil of Cloves and Roses,
^f each ten grains. Mix them, and make all into little Balls or Cakes, which
keep for use.

Virtue and Use. These sweet Balls being laid upon hot coals, send forth a most
grateful Odor, which does not only correct a poisonous, stinking and putrid
Air, but sweetly and pleasantly refresh the internal Spirits of man; the Fume
also conveyed by a Tunnel (or other such Instrument) into the Orifice of the
Womb, does wonderfully help Women that are almost suffocated, and stays all the
inordinate motions of the Matrix. But when it is thus used, take care to cover
the Head close, lest the Patient should receive the odor by the Nostrils also.

Suffimentum Epilepticum, or an Epileptick Fume.
Take white Amber eleven drams, red Myrrh, elect Mastich, Gum Animae, Galbanum
and Elemi, of each two drams; Misleto of the Oak, seeds of Peony huked,
Iuniper-berries, shavings of Elks horn, of each a dram; Wormwood, Marjoram,
Lavender flowers, flower of Lily of the valley, red Roses, of each half a dram.
Mix them, and with an Infusion of Tragacanth made in our Epileptick water, make
little Troches or Balls.

Virtue and Use. These being laid on coals, and the Fume received up into the
Nose by one that is grieved with the Epilepsie, takes away the fit; and is very
profitable for those who are troubled with dangerous diseases of the Head, as
the Apoplexy and Palsy, etc. It is also used against the suffocation and
falling out of the Womb.

Suffimentum de Sandaracha.
Take of the best Sandarack four ounces, white Amber two ounces, elect Mastich,
seeds of Nigella, Coriander seed prepared, of each an ounce; red Roses dried,
Gum Animae, Olibanum, of each half an ounce; Styrax and Benjamin, of each two
drams; flowers of wild Poppy, and wood of Aloes, of each a dram. Mix them, and
make a gross Powder for a Fume.

Virtue and Use. Sprinkle this Powder upon hot coals, and let the Fume thereof
be received up into the Nose and Head, etc. for it is of excellent use in
stopping and drying Catarrhs, as well hot as cold.

Suffimentum de Succino albo, or a Fume of white Amber.
Take of white Amber four ounces, of Sandarack two ounces, elect Mastich,
Olibanum, of each an ounce; Gum Animae, red Myrrh, red Roses, of each half an
ounce; Tacamahac, Styrax, Ladanum, of each two drams; Origanum of Creet, Time
dried, Mother of Time, of each a dram. Mix all into a gross Powder for a Fume.

Virtue and Use. This is a most excellent Powder, for if it be laid upon hot
coals, and the Head and Caps, etc. fumed with it, it stops all Rheums, Catarrhs
and Defluxions, and defends and preserves the Head from those accidents.

Suffimentum de Tacamahaca.
Take of the Excrescences growing on Horses legs a^ ounce, Tacamahac, Galbanum,
of each half an ounce; Goats hoofs and yellow Amber, of each two drams;
Byzantian Blatta and true Castor, of each a dram Mix them, and with Turpentine
make all into Troches for a Perfume.

Virtue and Use. This Fume made in a Mortar, and a Retort cut in the middle and
set on it, and so by the little end of it conveyed to the Womb; and some also
applied to the Nose in the Fit, does instantly recover one that is suffocated,
and is sufficient to take away all suffocations of the Matrix. But the wonder
is, that the Womb should quietly sustain the stink of this Fume, seeing it is
so impatient and restless without it.

Suffimentum de Sabina, or a Perfume of Savin.
Take of fresh dried Savin seven ounces, Styrax, red Myrrh, Opopanax, Sagapen,
of each two drams; Cinnamon, both sorts of Pennyroyal, Bay Berries, Cummin
seeds, of each a aram; Troches Alhandal, Florentine Flower-de-luce, Asarum, of
each half a dram; Gallia Moschata, Alipta Moschata, of each a scruple. Mix
them, and with Turpentine make large Troches for a Perfume.

Virtue and Use. One of these Troches laid upon hot coals, and the smoke
received by a Tunnel (provided it be not a young Maid not devirginated, for to
such neither Suppositories nor Pessaries may be applied) it is a most approved
Medicine for the infirmities of those parts; but if the Woman be with Child,
the Musk and Amber may be omitted.

Suffimentum de Hypocistide, or a Perfume of Hypocistis.
Take Hypocistis an ounce, white Amber, bark of the Frankincense-tree, of each
half an ounce; moss of the Oak dried, Galbanum, Colophony, Asphaltus, of each
two drams; cups of Acorns, Bistort, Balaustines, of each a dram; red Roses,
Cloves, Castor, of each half a dram. Mix them, and with Turpentine make large
Troches for a Fume.

Virtue and Use. It is experimentally found good against the falling out of the
Womb, that is, when the Matrix falls from its natural place lower into the
privy passage, then let her receive this Fume by a large Tunnel morning and
evening, and she will be quickly eased.

Suffimentum de Cornu Caprino, or a Perfume of Goats Horn.
Take Shavings of Goats horn two ounces, yellow Amber, red Myrrh, of each an
ounce; wood of Iumper, flower of Sulphur, of each six drams; roots of
Elicampane, of Garden Angelica, Clovegilly-flowers, of each half an ounce;
Olibanum, Benjamin, Ladanum, Styrax, of each three drams; red Roses, Wormwood,
Garden Rue, Scordium, of each two drams; Bay leaves, Cloves, Camphire, of each
a dram. Mix them, and with Cyprus Turpentine make Troches for a Perfume.

Virtue and Use. It is good in time of the Plague to make a Fume in the
Chambers and other parts of the House with these Troches; for they do in a
wonderful manner rectify a corrupt and pestiferous Air, and cleanse and
preserve the whole House from all kind of Infection. Yet it is not convenient
to shut in this artificial Air all day; but (the North wind blowing, the Air
clear, and no ways tempestuous) let the windows be opened, and let the
Sunbeams be admitted, but chiefly in the morning about two hours after
Sunrising, because these winds have a singular faculty of frigidity and
dryness, and are judged to resist Putrefaction better than the Southern and
Western.

Suffimentum de Vitriolo, or a Perfume of Vitriol.
Take green Vitriol eight ounces, Nitre cleansed, red Myrrh, of each four
ounces; flower of Sulphur, yellow Amber, of each two ounces; fresh Bay Berries
and Iuniper-berries, of each an ounce and a half; shavings of Hartshorn,
Olibanum, of each an ounce; leaves of Scordium and Rue, red Roses, of each half
an ounce. Mix them, and make a Powder for a Fume.

Virtue and Use. Put this Powder into a sufficient quantity of white Wine
Vinegar, then pour by drops upon the sides of the fire (the better to make a
Fume) of this Liquor, and it consumes all poisonous Air in places where it is
used. It is also used to infectious Clothes, and renders them free from danger,
etc.

Suffimentum de Verbasco, or a Fume made of Mullein.
Take of the roots and leaves of Mullein, of each an ounce. Let them be
pulverized and mixed with Turpentine, of which make Troches according to Art.

Virtue and Use. Lay two or three of these Troches upon hot coals, so that the
fume may arise to the Intestinum rectum, and it is a singular and experimented
Medicine in the Tenesmus, and other fluxes of the Belly; but let the Patient
receive the Fume on a Closestool, or other such like convenience that is close,
lest the fume of the Medicine pass away without effect: And this is to be used
three or four times, or oftener in the day, and the Patient will quickly be well.

SECT. XI. Of Compound Salts.
Sal Apoplecticum, or an Apoplectick Salt.
TAke seeds of Rocket two pound, roots of the Lily of the valley, of Pellitory,
Avens, of each a pound; of wild black Cherries half a pound, berries of Iumper
and Bays, of each four ounces; Groundpine, Marjoram, Rosemary, Origanum,
Hyssop, Sage, of each three ounces; flowers of Marigold, Lavender, Primrose and
Betony, of each two ounces. Mix them in a Reverberatory, and thence (not in the
vulgar way, but) according to Spagirick Art draw a white and crystalline Salt;
which method observe in all others, and let this admonition be sufficient for
all.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a present Remedy in the Apoplexy and Palsy, etc.
for it excites, discusseth and attenuates the Humors, and restores sense and
motion to the whole body. The dose is from ten grains to twenty or thirty in
specific Vehicles.

Sal Epilepticum, or an Epileptick Salt.
Take roots of Palma Christi two pound, roots of Angelica, Peony and Pellitory
of the wall, of each a pound; seeds of Peony, shavings of Cyprus wood, Misleto
of the Oak, of each half a pound; Cinquefoil, Millefoil, Rue, Mullein,
Lavender, Rosemary, Henbane, of each four ounces; flower of Primrose, Stoechas,
Teil-tree, Peony, and Elder, of each two ounces. Being mixed, let them be
calcined in a Reverberatory, and then add the ashes of young Magpies and
Swallows, and Peacocks dung, of each an ounce. And with an appropriate Liquor,
according to Art, make a white crystalline Salt.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is effectual in all Epilepsies, Vertigo, Lethargies,
and other stupefying Diseases; it is also given to those who fear or are
troubled with dangerous diseases of the Head. The dose is from ten to twenty or
thirty grains in Teil-tree flower-water, or in our Epileptick water.

Sal Cordiale, or a Cordial Salt.
Take roots of Avens and Bugloss, of each two pound; the herbs Rosemary, Sage
and Balm, of each a pound; seeds of sweet Basil, Citron peels, of each half a
pound; the five Cordial flowers, Clovegilly-flowers, of each four ounces. Mix
them, and calcine them into ashes, the Vessel being close shut; then add ashes
of Cinnamon three ounces, ashes of Cloves and Cardamoms, of each an ounce and a
half; ashes of Oriental Saffron and Mace, of each three drams. From these ashes
thus mixed with Cordial waters, extract a white Salt according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is most useful in Lipothymies, Syncopes, and other
affects of the Heart, to strengthen and refresh the Spirits. The dose is from
ten to twenty grains, more or less, in Cordial waters.

Sal Pectorale.
Take roots of Liquorish two pound, Florentine Flowerde-luce, Elicampane, and
Marshmallows, of each a pound; roots of Comfry and Mallows, of each eight
ounces; both sorts of the herb Lungwort, Horehound, Hyssop, Coltsfoot,
Fluellin, Ground Ivy, Maidenhair, Scabious, of each four ounces; seeds of Fenil
and Anise, of each three ounces; flowers of Coltsfoot, Chamomil, and
Hearts-ease, of each two ounces. From these being mixed, and well calcined,
with Pectoral waters extract a most splendid Salt.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is excellent in Pectoral Diseases; for it does
attenuate thick, tough, and viscous Phlegm gathered in the Lungs, and does
enlarge and cleanse the Breast. Moreover it provokes Urine, and purges the
Reins and Ventricle. The dose is from ten to twenty and thirty grains in
Pectoral or other appropriate Vehicles.

Sal Stomachicum, or a Salt for the Stomach.
Take roots of Burnet two pound, Calamus aromaticus, white Ginger, of each a
pound; Sea-wormwood, Water-Mint, Sage, Rosemary, of each half a pound; Quinces
dried, and Zedoary, of each four ounces. Calcine all in a close Vessel, and
then add the ashes of the lesser Galangal, and Cinnamon, of each three ounces;
ashes of Cloves, both sorts of Cardamoms, Nutmegs, round Pepper, of each an
ounce. Mix them, and with Mint or other specific Water make a Spagirick Salt
according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It wonderfully roborates and warms a cold Stomach; it
helps Digestion, and Loathing of Meat. It is useful in all distempers of the
Nerves; it quickens all the Senses, allays pains of the Head, preserves old
people from Catarrhs, and gives ease in the Dropsy. The dose is a scruple,
more or less, respecting both Disease and Patient, in specific Vehicles.

Sal Epaticum.
Take roots of Agrimony two pound, roots of Chicory, and Scorzonera, of each a
pound; bitter Costus, Eryngo, Turmerick, of each half a pound; Calamus
aromaticus, Rhapontick, of each four ounces; Pontick Wormwood, Southernwood,
Agrimony, Hart's-tongue, Fluellin, Liverwort, Cascula, of each three ounces.
These being mixed, let them be calcined in a Reverberatory, then add ashes of
Rhubard and Cassia lignea, of each an ounce and a half. Then with some Epatick
or other convenient water draw a Spagirick Salt.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It takes away the hardness, wind, and obstructions of
the Liver, and dissolves the scirrhous Tumors there. It helps the ill habit of
body, and takes away dropsical Humors. It cures the Jaundice, and amends the
ill color of the Skin, moves the Terms, provokes Urine, and dissolves the
Stone. The dose is from a scruple to two in appropriate Vehicles.

Sal Spleneticum, or a Salt for the Spleen.
Take Pontick Wormwood two pound, Carduus benedictus a pound, Rosemary,
Hart's-tongue, Fluellin, and Ceterach, of each half a pound; roots of both sorts
of Fern, Calamus aromaticus, of each four ounces; bark of the Caper-tree
Tamarisk, Ash, of each three ounces; flower of Chamomil, the lesser Centaury,
Broom, of each two ounces. Bring all into Ashes, and with the distilled water
of the aforesaid Herbs extract a Salt according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It opens Obstructions, mollifies and resolves the
pains, tumors, and hardness of the Spleen. It is good for aged people, and
those troubled with Quartan Agues. The dose is every morning from a scruple to
half a dram in Hart's-tongue water or other convenient Liquor.

Sal Nephriticum.
Take roots of Parsley and Restharrow, of each two pound; roots of Dropwort and
Vervain, of each a pound; roots of Eryngo and Burnet, of each half a pound;
Beans dried, the cores of Medlars, of each six ounces; berries of Bays and
Juniper, Winter-cherries, and seeds of Gromel, of each four ounces; Ground Ivy,
Fluellin, Horstail, Fumitory, Strawberry leaves, of each three ounces; flowers
of great Mallows, Elder and Broom, of each two ounces; seeds of white Lilies,
of white Saxifrage, and Burdock, Barberries, of each an ounce and a half. Let
all be calcined into white Ashes according to Art, to which add ashes of Lignum
Nephriticum, of Peachstones and kernels, bitter Almonds, round Pepper, the
lesser Galangal, white Ginger, of each an ounce; Nitre prepared six drams. Mix
all, and with Rainwater make a most white Salt according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It breaks the Stone, expels Urine and Gravel, and helps
those that piss with difficulty, and relieves those who are troubled with other
distempers of the Reins and Bladder. The dose is from a scruple to half a dram
in water of Restharrow, Parsley, Burnet, or Ground Ivy, or any other other
Specific.

Sal Hydropicum.
Take of the whole Iuniper-tree cut small two pound, roots of Flower-de-luce,
Elder, red Mugwort, and Dwarf-Elder, of each a pound; roots of Swallow-wort,
Acorus, and Turmerick, of each half a pound; leaves and stalks of Pontick
Wormwood, the lesser Centaury, Agrimony, Carduus benedictus, Bindweed, of each
six ounces; flowers of Liverwort, Elder, and Broom, of each four ounces; seeds
of Ash, Rocket, and Cummin, of each three ounces. All being mixed, let them be
calcined in a Reverberatory, then add the ashes of Sarsaparilla, Cubebs,
Rhubarb, Nutmegs, and Mace, of each an ounce. Mix these Ashes, and with
Elder-water make a crystalline Salt.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It discusseth wind, and carries away water, and is good
in Dropsies of every kind; for it potently drys up the swellings of the
Microcosmical Earth, caused by too much moisture. It corrects the ill habit of
body, and exterminates all depraved Humors. The dose is from a scruple to a
dram in appropriate Vehicles.

Sal Uterinum.
Take roots of Bryony two pound, roots of white Diptamus, and Peony, of each a
pound; Misleto of the Oak, Dwarff Elder and common Elder-berries, of each half
a pound; Rosemary, Balm, Motherwort, Nep, and Pennyroyal, of each four ounces.
Mix all, and calcine them to ashes, and with Balm water or any other
appropriate Water extract a most white Salt.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It opens all obstructions of the Womb, helps
Convulsions, precipitates Suffocations and Fumes, and provokes the Terms. It
removes sterility, and takes away many other infirmities of those parts. The
dose is from a scruple to half a dram in appropriate Vehicles.

Sal Carminativum.
Take Chamomil two pound, Pennyroyal, Mother of Time, Water-mints, and Dill, of
each a pound. Let them be calcined according to Art into white Ashes, then add
the Ashes following, i. e. ashes of Anise, Cummin, Caraway and Fenil seeds, of
each two ounces; ashes of the lesser Galangal, white Ginger and Zedoary, of
each an ounce. Mix all, and with Chervil-water make a most white Salt according
to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is excellent to discuss wind. It helps the Gripes,
and allays all pain proceeding from wind. The dose is from a scruple to half a
dram in our Carminative water.

Sal Febrile.
Take Sal Armoniack diverse times sublimed, Nitre prepared, Salt of Carduus
benedictus, of Wormwood, and the lesser Centaury, of each an ounce. Dissolve
them all in Succory-water, and make of all a most white Salt according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a most excellent Alexipyretick in Fevers of all
kinds, whether Quotidians, Tertians, Semitertians or Quartans, etc. without
danger. It is given from half a dram to a dram two or three hours before the
Fit in Centaury-water or any other Specific, expecting Sweat toward the end of
the Fit: And the same dose is to be repeated, if the first or second dose does
not perform it.

Annotation. If any one proceeds so ingeniously, that from the forementioned
specific Compositions, he desires to prepare with the safe and secret
Spagi^ists the Essential Salts, as they call them, let him ^ake the simple
Herbs, or mixed with other Ingredi^nts, and being well dried by a temperate
heat, boil them in common Water (according to Art) till all their strength and
native Salt is well excocted, (for otherwise his labor is in vain) then pour
off the De^oction, and again boil that to the consistence of Ho^ey, or to the
thickness of a Syrup; put that into a ^ery cool place, till it shoots into
Crystals, which ^ake off, and purify well by diverse Solutions, Filtra^^ons and
Coagulations, until it be fit for Physical ^se. This excellent Salt is also
extracted from the ^uyce of Herbs made thick, concerning which see ^eguinus,
Lib. 2. cap. 17. And do thou know, Rea^er, that three grains of these Essential
Salts will be ^ore effectual than a scruple of the vulgar made by ^alcinations.

SECT. XII. Of Marmelades.
Marmelada Cephalica, or a Marmelade for the Head.
TAke Diacydonium simple four ounces, Rotula's of Diamoschu dulce and Diambrae,
of each two ounces; preserved roots of Peony an ounce, Conserve of Rosemary
flowers half an ounce, preserved Walnuts three, Nutmegs preserved in India one,
Emerauld prepared a dram, Elaeosaccharum of white Amber, Marjoram and Rosemary,
of each a scruple. Mix them, and without any other additional Medicine make a
Marmelade according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It roborates the Brain, and resists all the affects
thereof. It is also happily given in the Apoplexy, Epilepsie, Vertigo,
Lethargy, Palsy, Trembling, etc. The dose is from a dram to half an ounce.

Marmelada Stomachica frigida, or a cold Marmelade for the Stomach.
Take Diacydonium simple four ounces, preserved roo^ of Succory two ounces,
Rotula's of Diarrhodon Abbat^ an ounce, preserved Emblick Myrobalans, Conserve
(...) red Roses, of each half an ounce; Nitre vitriolated ha^^ a dram. Mix
them, and without any additional Medicine make a Marmelade according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It relieves the Stomach oppressed with hot Humors: It
comforts and provokes Appetite. Moreover it alters a hot Temperature, and is
happily given to those that have pains about the Heart, or are subject to
vomit. The dose is the quantity of a Chestnut.

Marmelada Stomachica calida, or a warming Marmelade for the Stomach.
Take Diacydonium simple four ounces, aromatic Rotula's, Succulata Inda, of
each an ounce; Bengale Ginger preserved, Calamus aromaticus preserved, Chebul
Myrobalans preserved, of each half an ounce; preserved Orange and Citron peels,
of each two drams; Elaeosaccharum of Cinnamon and Cloves, of each a scruple. Mix
all, and without any addition make a Marmelade according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It roborates the Ventricle and parts serving for
nutrition. It helps Digestion, moves Appetite, discusseth wind, and preserves
from putrefaction. It opens the obstructions of the Veins, and helps Hiccup and
Vomiting. The dose is the quantity of a Nutmeg.

Marmelada Pectoralis, or a Pectoral Marmelade.
Take Diacydonium simple four ounces, our Pectoral Morsels and Rotula's
prepared with the juice of Violets, of each two ounces; compound flowers of
Sulphur an ounce, preserved roots of Fenil and Elicampane, of each half an
ounce; extracted juice of Liquorish two drams, species Diaireos simple,
Confectio Alkermes, of each a dram. Mix them, and without any other addition
make a Marmelade, and cover it with gold.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It helps those who are troubled with infirmities of the
Lungs, Coughs, Asthma's, pains of the Breast. It also helps those who are
subject to a deflux of humors from the Brain upon the Thorax and vital parts.
The dose is from a dram to two.

Marmelada Cordialis calida, or a hot Cordial Marmelade.
Take Diacydonium simple four ounces, preserved roots of Borage and Bugloss, of
each an ounce and a half; aromatic Rotula's, species of Aromaticum Rosarum,
species de Gemmis and Diambra, of each six drams; preserved Citron peels and
Confectio Alkermes, of each half an ounce; Magistery of Oriental Pearls and red
Coral, of each a dram. Mix all, and make a Marmelade according to Art without
any other addition.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It strengthens and exhilarates the Heart and all the
vital Spirits hurt by cold, and refreshes them by its heat: It wonderfully
helps old people and women troubled with cold Diseases, and is very proper for
the distempers of the Womb. The dose is the quantity of a Nutmeg.

Marmelada Cordialis frigida, or a cold Cordial Marmelade.
Take Diacydonium simple three ounces, Manus Christi perlati, Rotula's of
Diamargariton frigid, of each an ounce and an half; Pulp of preserved Citrons,
Conserve of red Roses, of each six drams; preserved roots of Succory half an
ounce, Confectio Alkermes two drams, precious Stones prepared, of each a
scruple. Mix them, and bring all into a Marmelade.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It comforts the Heart, and extinguisheth the heat
thereof: it contemperates the heat of the Bowels, and is of excellent use in
Cardialgia's, Fevers, choleric Vomitings and extreme Thirst. The dose is from
half a dram to two.

Marmelada Epatica calida, or a hot Marmelade for the Liver.
Take Pulp of preserved Quinces four ounces, Diacubeba, Diacurcuma, Dialacca,
of each an ounce; preserved roots of Burnet, Fenil and Eryngo, of each half an
ounce; Cinnamon two drams, Rhubarb a dram, spirit of Salt congealed with Salt of
Wormwood half a dram. Mix them, and make of all a Marmelade according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is given to open obstructions of the Liver and
Spleen in intemperate and cold Constitutions; and is therefore good in all ill
Habits and Dropsies, and provokes Urine. The dose is from a dram to two, more
or less.

Marmelada Epatica frigida, or a cold Marmelade for the Liver.
Take the Pulp of preserved Quinces three ounces, preserved roots of Succory
and Scorzonera, of each an ounce and a half; Rotula's prepared with the juice
of Barberries and Goosberries, of each six drams; preserved pulp of Citrons,
preserved Spanish Lettice half an ounce, species Diarrhodon Abbatis first
moistened with Spirit of Vitriol two drams, the four greater cold Seeds, Nitre
prepared, of each a dram. Mix all, and make them into a Marmelade.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It cools the heat of the Liver, Stomach and Praecordia:
It extinguisheth thirst, and gives ease to those troubled with Fevers and a
heat in their Bowels. The dose is the quantity of a Chestnut.

Marmelada magnanima, or a magnanimous Marmelade.
Take Diacydonium simple four ounces, preserved roots of Satyrion, Succulata
Inda, of each two ounces, Pinenuts cleansed, and green Pistick Nuts, of each an
ounce; Chestnuts boiled in Sack, Nutmegs preserved in India, Confectio
Alkermes, of each half an ounce; Oil of Mace expressed two drams, Gallia
Moschata, Magistery of Oriental Pearls, of each a dram; Oil of Cinnamon a
scruple. Mix them, and without any other Ingredient make a Marmelade.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It incites to Venery, fattens, nourishes, restores
strength, comforts the Heart, and refreshes Nature. It roborates the Liver and
Ventricle, and digesteth Phlegm, etc. The dose is morning and evening the
quantity of a Nutmeg.

Marmelada Carminativa, or a Carminative Marmelade.
Take Diacydonium simple three ounces, preserved Orange peel, preserved
Citrons, of each an ounce and a half; preserved roots of Fenil, preserved
Calamus aromaticus, our Carminative Rotula's, of each six drams; preserved
Nutmegs, bone of a Hares foot, of each two drams; Zedoary, white Ginger, the
lesser Galangal, of each a dram; Elaeosaccharum of Cinnamon, Cloves, Aniseeds
and Mace, of each a scruple. Mix them, and make a Marmelade according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It discusseth the flatulencies of the Ventricle, which
are generated from thick and flegmy Humors. It allays the Gripes of the Belly,
and is effectually used against the Colic and Tympany. The dose is from one
dram to two.

Marmelada Splenetica, or a Marmelade for the Spleen.
Take Diacydonium simple four ounces, Diacurcuma, Dianthos, of each an ounce;
preserved roots of Elicampane and Scorzonera, of each six drams; Essence of
Hart's-tongue and Broom flowers, of each two drams; the fruit of Tamarisk and
bark of Caper roots, of each half a dram; Elaeosaccharum of Rosemary, Cloves
and Cinnamon, of each a scruple. Mix them, and without any other Medicine make a
Marmelade.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It roborates the Spleen, and dissolves the Scirrhus and
hard Tumors thereof: It removes Obstructions, and digests and cuts tough
Humors, it alters all its intemperance, and helps other Diseases thence
proceeding, the Body being first purged. The dose morning and evening is the
quantity of a Chestnut.

Marmelada Stegnotica, or an astringent Marmelade.
Take Diacydonium simple six ounces, preserved roots of Comfry and Succory, of
each two ounces; powder of the roots of Tormentil half an ounce, Magistery of
Coral rosated, Extract of Dragons blood, Hartshorn burnt and prepared, of each
two drams; Crocus Martis made by reverberation, Emeraulds prepared, sealed
Earth, of each a dram and a half; Oriental Bole, Nutmegs, seeds of Plantane,
seeds of Roses, of each a dram; Cassia lignea, Cloves, of each half a dram;
Oriental Saffron, Oil of Mace expressed, of each a scruple. Mix them, and make
all into a Marmelade of a just consistence.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It stays a Looseness although old, and in a wonderful
manner helps Dysenteries and pains in the Guts: It stays the immoderate flux of
the Terms and Piles, and all fluxes of humors from the Head to the lower parts.
The dose is from one dram to three in appropriate Vehicles.

Marmelada Terebinthinata, or a Marmelade of Turpentine.
Take Pulp of preserved Quinces four ounces, Cyprus Turpentine washed in
Rhenish Wine two ounces, species Diarrhodon Abbatis, roots of Liquorish, of
each half an ounce; powder of Aniseeds a little moistened with the Oil thereof
two drams, the four greater cold Seeds, of each a dram. Mix them, and without
any other additional Medicine make a Marmelade.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It purges the Reins, and carries off Sand and other
things that offend the parts. It mitigates the pains of the Loins and Back. It
removes Obstructions, provokes Urine, opens the Passages, cures the Strangury
and virulent Gonorrhoea: For the Turpentine is endued with excellent virtues,
and is an admirable help in many cases. The dose is from one dram to two early
in the morning.

Marmelada Nephritica, or a Marmelade for the Reins and Kidneys.
Take Diacydonium simple three ounces, preserved roots of Eryngo, Parsley and
Fenil, of each an ounce and a half; ripe Winter-cherries six drams, acid Tartar
three drams, Magistery of Perch stones, Crabs eyes, of each a dram; Salt of
white Amber a scruple. Mix them, and make a Marmelade of a just consistence.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It brings away the Stone and Gravel from the Reins,
Ureters and Bladder: It removes Obstructions, opens the Passages, and
powerfully provokes Urine. The dose is from one dram to two in specific
Vehicles.

Marmelada Hysterica, or a Marmelade for the Womb.
Take Diacydonium simple four ounces, Sugar prepared with Rosemary flowers two
ounces, preserved Calamus arcmaticus, preserved roots of Peony, of each an
ounce; Cinnamon, Faecula Bryoniae, of each two drams; seeds of Parsneps, Agnus
castus and Garden Rue, of each a dram and a half; Cardamoms the less,
Antophyllorum, Mace, of each a dram; Magisteries of English Tin, of Mother of
Pearl and red Coral, of each half a dram; Elaeosaccharum of the seeds of
Angelica, Marjoram, white Amber and Aniseeds, of each a scruple. Mix them, and
according to Art make a Marmelade of a just consistence.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It helps the suffocation of the Womb and the Whites,
and brings away any depraved Humor that is contained in those parts, by opening
the Passages, and removing Obstructions. The dose is the quantity of a
Chestnut, by it self, or in warm Wine, or in any Hysterical water.

SECT. XIII. Of liquid Confections and Electuaries.
Confectio Cephalica, or a Medicine for the Head.
TAke our species Dialunae an ounce and a half, roots of white Diptamus, Citron
seeds huskt, of each half an ounce; Kermes seeds or berries, seeds of Sorrel,
Extract of Lilies of the valley, of each two drams; Emerauld prepared, Salt of
man's Skull, white Amber prepared, of each a dram and a half; Essence of
Oriental Pearls and red Coral, of each four scruples; Oriental Saffron
prepared, lesser Galangal, Cubebs, of each a dram; bone of a Stags heart,
Hyacinth prepared, of each two scruples; Conserve of Peony flowers vitriolated,
Rosemary flowers, of each an ounce; white Sugar Candy dissolved in Aqua
Apoplectica, Syrup of the juice of Citrons, of each eight ounces. Mix them, and
make of all an Electuary.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is good for all, or at least the most dangerous
diseases of the Head, which it takes away and happily cures. And is very
agreeable to Suffocations, Vertigo, Apoplexy, Epilepsie and Lunacy, and was
only invented to dry the humidity of the Brain. The dose is from a dram to a
dram and a half, more or less, in appropriate Vehicles.

Confectio Opiata, or an Electuary of Opium.
Take Opium Spagirically prepared and extracted half an ounce, species
Diamoschu dulce and Diambrae, of each a dram; Magistery of Oriental Pearls and
red Coral, of each half a dram; Extract of wild Poppy flowers and Oriental
Saffron, Foreign Mumy, of each a scruple; Gallia Moschata, Oriental Bezoar,
bone of a Stags heart, Unicorns horn, of each half a dram. And with Confectio
Alkermes make an Electuary according to Art, to which add Oils of Cinnamon,
Nutmegs, Marjoram, Sage, white Amber and Cloves, of each four drops.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Medicine is called by this name, which signifies
an Opiate or an Electuary of Laudanum; for Laudanum opiatum is hard to
dissolve, and does usually remain in drops or little particles undissolved;
therefore in place of it this Electuary may be profitably used, the effect of
which is the same in use. It is given from five to six, seven and ten grains in
some appropriate Liquor, or in our Aqua Hypnotica, Cinamon-water, etc. or in
any other respecting the Disease.

Confectio Narcotica, or a stupefying Medicine.
Take Nutmegs half an ounce, Bole Armoniack, Opium Spagirically extracted, of
each three drams; Extract of wild Poppy flowers, Oriental Saffron, Trochisci
Ramich, of each two drams; Crocus Martis made by reverberation a dram and a
half, roots of Tormentil, Snakeweed and Zedoary, of each a dram; Magistery of
red Coral, white Amber prepared, burnt Hartshorn, Cloves, of each half a dram;
Camphire five grains. Mix them, and with simple Syrups of Poppies and Jujubes,
of each four ounces, make an Electuary according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It wonderfully mitigates all pain, but chiefly of the
Head, Breast, Stomach, Matrix and Belly: It does safely and powerfully provoke
sleep: It cures the bleeding of any part, gripes of the Guts, bloody Flux,
Pleurisy, Iliack Passion and Colic pains, pains in the Kidneys, etc. It
allays Vomiting, Hiccup and Cough. It gives ease in shortness of breath. It
stops the Terms and Piles; and is good in a Gonorrhoea and Satyriasm. The dose
is from half a dram to a dram at going to bed.

Confectio pretiosa, or a precious Electuary.
Take Elaeosaccharum of Citrons six drams, true Tincture of Coral, Magistery of
Oriental Pearls, of each two drams; Kermes berries, Elks horn Spagirically
calcined, of each a dram and a half; the best Mastich, wood of Aloes, lesser
Galangal. the lesser Cardamoms, of each a dram; Nutmegs preserved in India one,
the five precious Stones prepared, Ambergriese, Extract of Oriental Saffron, of
each two scruples, Alexandrian Musk, bone of a Stags heart, of each a scruple;
our Aurum Potabile half an ounce, Oil of Cinnamon and Mace, of each a scruple;
Oil of Cloves and Roses, of each a scruple; Conserve of Gilly-flowers, Conserve
of red Roses vitriolated, of each eight ounces. Mix them, and with Syrup of
Chermes berries make an Electuary according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a most noble Cordial Medicine against the
trembling and violent pulsation of the Heart; and there is not a more excellent
Medicine in the whole Republic of Physic for the distempers of the Mind than
this is: It is given with good success to old and weak people that are sick, to
recover their strength; for it refreshes and fortifies the vital, animal and
natural Spirits in all the Members, renews the humidum Radicale, and is a true
Preservative from the Vertigo, Epilepsie, Apoplexy, Leprosy, Gout, Scurvy and
Dropsy. The dose is from half a dram to a dram by it self, or in appropriate
Vehicles.

Confectio Pectoralis, or a Pectoral Electuary.
Take our species of Diasulphur nineteen drams, Diarrhodon Abbatis eleven
drams, of our simple Pectoral Syrup a pound, Conserve of red Roses tinctured
with our Elixir of Sulphur two pound, Oil of Cinnamon a dram. Mix them, and make
an Electuary according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a very pleasant Medicine to the Sight, Taste and
Smell; and is by me used in the Asthma, straitness of the Breast, Phthisick,
Hectic, and all affects of the Thorax, in which cases I have experienced its
wonderful power beyond other Medicines, and am willing to communicate it to be
used by others. It is to be given a little at a time, and often in the day, and
not to swallow it presently; for if so, then it passes to the Ventricle, and
not to the place affected. The dose is the quantity of a Hazel-nut, or of a
Nutmeg, more or less, according to the Disease and Age of the Patient.

Confectio Zingiberis Indi, or an Electuary of green Ginger.
Take green Ginger preserved in India fourteen ounces, species Aromaticum
Caryophyllatum, Diagalangal, Diarrhodon Abbatis, of each an ounce; Diacydonium
simple eight ounces, Oil of Cinnamon a dram, Conserve of red Roses vitriolated a
pound. Mix them, and with Syrup of the beforementioned Ginger make an
Electuary according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It comforts the Heart and Stomach, helps Digestion,
takes away Nauseating and Vomiting, warms and assists the parts and Organs of
Nutrition, resists Putrefaction, dissolves and discusseth ventose Humors,
excites the native Heat, repels all noxious humors of the Breast, and cures a
Cough contracted from Cold, it restores the Liver, Spleen, Reins, and other
Members to their native action, being depraved by Cold. This is a most
excellent and stately Electuary, and I often use it for great and rich people.
The dose is the quantity of a Nutmeg morning or evening, or in time of
necessity; but you may give more or less according to the Age, Sex and
Complexion of the Patient.

Zingiber Rosatum, or Ginger prepared with Roses.
Take Conserve of red Roses vitriolated twelve ounces, green Ginger preserved
in India four ounces, Oil of Cinnamon a scruple, Oil of Cloves half a scruple.
Mix them, and with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of the Juice of Violets
vitriolated, make an Electuary according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It comforts the Heart and Stomach, helps Concoction,
stirs up Appetite, allays Vomiting and Loathing, raises the native Heat,
refreshes the Spirits, takes away Putrefaction, dissipates Wind; and is a
famous and present Remedy in all cold Diseases. The dose is the quantity of a
Chestnut.

Confectio Citri, or an Electuary of Citrons.
Take Conserve of red Roses vitriolated a pound and a half, Rob of Barberries
and Goosberries, of each a pound; Syrup of the juice of Citrons, Oxysaccharum,
Syrup of the juice of unripe Grapes, of each half a pound; Pulp of Citrons
preserved, Citron peel preserved, species of Diarrhodon Abbatis moistened with
Spirit of Vitriol, of each six ounces; Nitre prepared thirteen drams. Mix them,
and with a little Cinamon-water make an Electuary: And let the Reader take
notice, That the pound here mentioned is not the Physical, but the common
pound, used in other things; and this is to be observed in all the Compositions
through the whole Book, therefore let this admonition serve for all.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. By cooling and moistning it does extinguish the heat of
burning Fevers, and mitigates the vehemence of their fiery quality. It cures
the Disease called Cholera, the bloody Flux, and contagious Diseases. It
resists Venery and Drunkenness. It roborates the noble Members, i. e. the
Heart, Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Reins, and other Bowels, and defends the weak
parts from an intemperate heat. It opens and resists putrefaction. It
represseth choleric Vomiting, stops bleeding, and is a good Medicine for
choleric Pustles. The dose is from a dram to two or half an ounce certain
times in the day.

Confectio Theriacalis, or an Electuary of Treacle.
Take roots of Tormentil, white Diptamus, the best Camphire, of each two drams;
Hartshorn and Elks horn Spagirically calcined, of each a dram and a half;
white Amber, Oriental red Bole, Hyacinth, Emer auld, of each prepared a dram;
Salt of Wormwood, Scordium and Carduus, of each half a dram; Magistery of
Oriental Pearls and red Coral, of each a scruple. Let them be all pulverized
asunder, and then mixed, and diverse times moistened with Spirit of Juniper, in
which Roots of Butter-bur, Betony and Ginger have been steeped: Then add Venice
Treacle and Mithridate of Damocratis, of each two ounces; Extract of Elicampane
roots and Angelica, of each half an ounce; juice of Fumitory made thick, juice
of Elder-berries, of each three drams; flower of Sulphur two drams, distilled
Oil of Garden Rue, Oils of Zedoary, Cinnamon, Myrrh, Cloves and Citrons
rectified, of each half a scruple. Mix them, and with Rob of Elder-berries make
an Electuary.

Virtue Use, and Dose. In operation and virtue this Composition far exceeds the
Treacle and Mithridate; and hence the reasonable Reader may easily gather its
use and strength. It is experimentally good in the Dropsy, Erysipelas,
Jaundice, Scab, Lues Venerea, etc. It is a most excellent Alexetery against the
Plague and all other Poisons, all which it virtually expels from the Heart by
Sweat to the circumference and superficies of the body: And the Poison being
once driven forth, the Patient ought to refresh himself with comfortable
things. The dose is from half a dram to a dram, more or less, according to the
age and strength of the Patient, the disease and time of the year, etc. it is
given in specific and appropriate Vehicles. In the Dropsy, etc. it is
exhibited in Water or Spirit of Elder four or five hours after supper, at going
to bed, and then toward morning it will sweat powerfully.

Confectio Magnanimitatis, or a Magnanimous Electuary.
Take Essence of Satyrion two ounces, recent Indian Nuts, Pine-nuts cleansed,
of each an ounce and a half; green Pistick-nuts, kernels of Hazel-nuts, sweet
Almonds, each an ounce; white Pepper, Calamus aromaticus, white Ginger, the
lesser Galangal, Cardamoms, of each half an ounce; Venetian Borax, our Aurum
Potabile, of each three drams; seeds of Rocket, Ashen-keys and Nettles, of each
two drams; Magistery of Oriental Pearls and red Coral, Salt of Sparrows, of
each four scruples; Boletus cervinus, of Bulls and Hearts pizles, the stones of
a Badger dried, the flesh of Sea-Skinks, of each a dram and a half; the best
Musk, Ambergriese, Oil of Mace, of each two scruples; Oil of Nutmegs, Cinnamon
and Cloves, of each a scruple. Mix them, and with Syrup of the Roots of
preserved Satyrion make an Electuary according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a great Secret in comforting the Venereal parts,
and is given to those who are debilitated there; for it gives help wonderfully
to old people, and to those who are cold by Nature. It potently restores
Virility lost, and stirs up Venery in those who have forgot it. It causes
erection of the Genital parts, though cold and utterly decayed. It increases
and corrects the Seed in both Sexes. The dose is from a dram to two or three,
at bedtime in Sack or Muskadine; or it is given in time of necessity to the
quantity of a Nutmeg, drinking after it a draught of good old odoriferous Wine.
But if the impotency were from birth, it cannot be cured, because the defects
of Nature are hard to be restored.

Confectio Pacifica de Succulata Inda, or a Pacifick Electuary of Succulata
Inda.
Take Succulata Inda four ounces, the preserved roots of Satyrion two ounces,
Cocks stones boiled in milk, preserved roots of Eryngo, Chestnuts boiled in
Sack, of each an ounce; sweet Almonds, Pine-nuts, green Pistick-nuts, kernels
of Indian Nuts, of each half an ounce; Cassia lignea, Boletus cervinus, of each
three drams; seeds of Ashen-keys, Venetian Borax, of each two drams; species of
Diamoschu dulce and Diambra, of each half a dram; Lignum Aloes, leaves of
Marjoram, Oriental Saffron, Nutmegs, of each a dram; Cloves, the lesser
Galangal, white Ginger, Cardamoms the less, long Pepper, of each two scruples;
Oil of Cinnamon and Mace, of each a scruple. Mix them, and with Syrup of
preserved Nutmegs make an Electuary according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Medicine is a great Arcanum for the weakness and
impotence in the virile parts, and has been hitherto reserved for my Friends
only. It restores impaired and lost Virility, it stirs up Venery in those who
have lost it, by taking away the cold impediments of the Testicles and Seminal
Vessels, and increases Seed in both Sexes, it does in a short space reduce the
weak, old and impotent persons to their pristine pleasure again. The dose is
daily (the body being empty) the quantity of a Chestnut, more or less,
according to the age, time and custom of the Patient, drinking after it a good
draught of rich Wine.

Confectio Satyrii, or an Electuary of Satyrion.
Take the preserved Testicle-like roots of Satyrion four ounces, Conserve of
Clovegilly-flowers, preserved Ginger of Bengal, of each two ounces; seeds of
Ashen keys, Venetian Borax, of each half an ounce; species of Diathamar three
drams, Nutmegs preserved in India one, Te^ticles of a Heart and a Badger dried,
of each a dram and a half; Boletus cervinus two drams, Cinnamon and long Pepper,
of each a dram; Magistery of Pearl and red Coral, of each half adram; Gallia
Moschata and Oil ^f Cloves, of each a scruple; leaves of pure Gold fifteen. Mix
all, and with Syrup of preserved Ginger make ^n Electuary according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It has a great force to provoke the desire of Coition,
and does egregiously excite ^oth Sexes thereunto; it does wonderfully increase
Sperm, and singularly restore those that are consumed and emaciated. The dose
is morning and evening from two drams to three with old rich Wine.

Confectio Stiptica, or a Stiptick Electuary.
Take Tinctures of Crocus Martis, of Celandine, Rhubarb and dried Nuts, of each
an ounce; Tormentil, Zedoary, Gum Arabic, Cloves, white Ginger, torrefied
Nutmegs, of each six drams; sealed Earth, white Am^er prepared, Calamus
aromaticus, the lesser Galangal, ^oth sorts of Cardamoms, Cinnamon, of each half
an ^unce; shells of River-crabs boiled in Vinegar, seeds of Bloodwort,
Plantane, and black Poppy, Orange peel, ^f each three drams; leaves of Sage,
Burnet and Mint, of each two drams; Bulls pizle, Coriander prepared, Acatia, of
each a dram and a half; Cypress-nuts, burnt Frogs, calcined Talk, of each a
dram. Let all be subtly powdered and mixed, and with Miva of Quinces make an
Electuary according to Art, to which add of our Carminative Oil three drams,
and keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It has been wonderfully experimented in all fluxes of
the Belly, as Dysenteries, Diarrhoea's, Hepatick Fluxes, bleeding at the Nose
and Terms, and also in other desperate ruptures of Blood: For it comforts the
Guts and internal Bowels, and refreshes Nature by Constipation. The dose is
from a dram to half an ounce in Sack or other generous Wine, either in the
morning fasting, or at any other time, the Stomach being empty.

Confectio Terebinthinata, or an Electuary of Turpentine.
Take Cyprus Turpentine washed in Rhenish Wine two ounces, white Sugar Candy an
ounce and a half, powder of Liquorish six drams, species Diarrhodon Abbatis an
ounce, the four greater cold Seeds, of each a dram; Nitre prepared a scruple.
Mix them, and with Syrup of Violets make a mixture.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is proper for those troubled with a Cough or
Consumption. It cleanses the Breast, and provokes Urine. It helps the
Strangury, purges the Reins, and eases the pains of them. It digesteth crude
Humors, loosens the Belly, etc. The dose is from a dram to two.

Theriaca Mulierum, or a Treacle for Women.
Take Venice Treacle three ounces, Jovial Bezoar half an ounce, Elks horn and
Hearts horn, of each Spagirically calcined a dram and a half, Extract of roots
of Angelica and Elicampane, of each a dram; Essence of Castor half a dram,
Magistery of Pearls and red Coral, of each a scruple; Oil of white Amber half a
scruple. Mix them, and with Rob of Elder-berries make an Electuary.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It cures almost all Diseases (in Women by Sweat) as
well hot as cold by a certain occult property; and for that Sex there is not a
more excellent and noble Diaphoretick given. The dose is from a scruple to a
dram in waters appropriate to the Disease: yet where the Disease is of a hot
Cause, we give it in cold Vehicles.

Theriaca Saxonica, or the Saxonick Treacle.
Take Rob of Elder-berries and dwarff Elder-berries, of each two ounces; Hearts
horn Spagirically calcined an ounce, juice of Fumitory made thick, simple Syrup
of Poppies, Spirit of Juniper, of each half an ounce; Oriental rod Bole two
drams, Oil of the seeds of Angelica, Oil of Zedoary, of each a dram. Mix them,
and over a gentle clear fire make them into the form of an Opiate.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a most noble Antidote, powerfully working by
Sweat and insensible Transpiration, it defends men from, and cures many and
grievous Diseases. It profligates and extinguisheth Fevers of all kinds,
whether intermitting, continual, or malignant: Also the Dropsy, Erysipelas,
Scurvy, Jaundice, Plague, suffocation of the Matrix, and other affects of the
Womb, the Pox, Scab, Itch, Leprosy, etc. nay, it deserves its praise so
justly, that no man is sufficiently able to proclaim its virtues. The dose is
the quantity of a Nutmeg, according to the Sex, Age, and Constitution of the
Patient, and the urgency of the Disease, it is given in any fit and congruous
Liquor, especially such as is appropriate to the Disease. I give it in many
affects (the body being first purged) in the evening at going to bed four or
five hours after supper, with a sufficient quantity of our Hartshorn water;
and toward morning it does use to sweat powerfully.

Theriaca Febrilis, or an Electuary for Fevers.
Take species of our Febrifuge three ounces, Conserve of Pontick Wormwood,
Conserve of Carduus and the lesser Centaury, of each two ounces; Venice Treacle
an ounce and a half, Hartshorn calcined without fire, Mineral Diaphoretick,
white Ginger, of each three drams; species of Diamoschu dulce and Diambra, of
each a dram and a half; Camphire dissolved in Spirit of Angelica half a dram.
Mix them, and with Rob of Elder-berries make an Electuary.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It cures almost all Fevers, and is very profitable
also in the Plague. The dose is from a dram to two in our Aqua Febrifuge, or in
Carduus, Scabious, or Marigold-water, etc. let the Patient drink it two hours
before the Fit, and being in bed, let him sweat; for by this means it cures the
Fever.

Electuarium Opticum, or an Electuary for the Eyes.
Take preserved Elicampane roots and preserved Chebul Myrobalans, of each two
ounces; long Pepper and Cloves, of each an ounce; Mace, the lesser Galangal,
white Ginger and Cubebs, of each half an ounce; Sea-Beans prepared, Pikes eyes,
Eyebright, Pennyroyal, Germander, Clovegilly-flowers, Rosemary, of each three
drams; seeds of the Mountain Osier and Fenil, of each two drams; seeds of
Parsley, Anise, Smallage, Dill, and white Saxifrage, of each a dram and a half.
All being pulverized, mix them, then with twenty four ounces of white Sugar
Candy dissolved in Spirit of Juniper, and the depurated Juyces of Sage, Rue,
Celandine and Hyssop, of each a sufficient quantity, and then boiled to a just
consistence, make an Electuary, to which add Oil of Cinnamon and Nutmegs, of
each a dram. And then again mix them, and reserve it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It comforts the Stomach, consumes superfluous Humors,
cleanses the Reins, and is good to expel all flatulent Humors. But it chiefly
restores a weak Sight, and has been wonderfully experimented in weakness of
the Eyes, Suffusions, etc. let the cause be what it will. The dose is
constantly in the morning fasting, and at night going to bed the quantity of a
Chestnut: And by so using of it, the Patient shall be able to read a small
print by a clear and free sight, without Spectacles, even to his life's end.

Electuarium Stomachicum, or an Electuary for the Stomach.
Take sweet Almonds eight ounces, aromatical Reed, white Ginger and Grains of
Paradise, of each an ounce; Water-mint, Zedoary, Iuniper-berries, roots of
Burnet, of each six drams; of Avens, Tormentil, Elicampane and Water-flag, of
each half an ounce; the lesser Galangal, Nutmegs, Mace, Cloves, elect Mastich,
long Pepper, Cinnamon and Cummin seeds, of each two drams. All being pulverized,
mix them, and with a sufficient quantity of Sugar dissolved in our Aqua
stomachali, make an Electuary; to which add of our Elixir of Vitriol a
sufficient quantity to make it tart, or you may use it without if you please.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It roborates the Stomach by heat, corrects its
softness, and helps its imbecility. It helps Concoction, and raises a
dejected Appetite. It comforts the lower Venture, and all the instruments of
nutrition. It is almost a peculiar Remedy for all cold Distempers; but it is
especially found to dry the superfluous humidities of the Stomach. The dose by
it self, is morning, noon, and night the quantity of a Nutmeg, drinking after
it three or four spoonfuls of Spanish Wine, or an ounce of our Stomachical
water.

Electuarium Absinthiacum, or an Electuary of Wormwood.
Take Conserve of Pontick Wormwood three ounces, Carduus, Fumitory,
Scurvygrass, of each an ounce; flowers of the lesser Centaury, Succory and
Elder, of each half an ounce; preserved Orange peels, preserved Indian Nuts, of
each six drams; species of Diacurcuma, Diacubeba and Dialacca, of each three
drams; Tincture of red Coral, Magistery of Crocus Martis, of each two drams;
Goose dung gathered in the Spring, elect Rhubarb, of each a dram and a half;
Salt of Wormwood a dram, Oil of Salt rectified a scruple. Mix them, and with an
equal quantity of Syrup of Hart's-tongue and Maidenhair make an Electuary.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It opens and removes all stubborn and desperate
obstructions of the Liver, Spleen and Gall, and is a noble Remedy in both kinds
of Jaundice, Dropsy, etc. The dose in the morning three hours before meat, and
at night going to bed, the quantity of a Chestnut, more or less.

Electuarium de Scorzonera, or an Electuary of Scorzonera.
Take preserved roots of Scorzoner a six ounces, Conserve of red Roses
vitriolated four ounces, species Diarrhodon Abbatis and Diacubeba, of each an
ounce; a Wolfs liver prepared, Nitre prepared, of each a dram; seeds of Sorrel
and Melons huskt, of each four scruples; Tincture of red Coral, Salt of
Warmwood, of each half a dram. Mix them, and with Rob of Barberries and
Goosberries, of each a like quantity, make an Electuary; to which add so much
Spirit of Sulphur as may make it grateful.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is generally good for all hot Constitutions, but
especially in the debility, obstruction and pains of the Liver: It mitigates
the heat and fervor of yellow Choler and burning Fevers, but chiefly it cools
and comforts a flatulent Liver. The dose is from a dram to half an ounce.

Electuarium de Nitro, or an Electuary of Nitre.
Take preserved Eryngo roots four ounces, species of Lithontribon two ounces,
simple Manus Christi an ounce and a half, Nitre prepared with Spirit of
Vitriol, Salt of Wormwood, of each six drams; Oil of white Amber rectified, Oil
of Aniseeds, of each half a dram. Mix them, and with Syrup of green Ginger make
an Electuary.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It powerfully breaks the Stone in the Reins and
Bladder, and expels it by Urine. Moreover it is a great Secret in the Colic,
suffocation of the Matrix, obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, debilitated
Stomach, and in most Fevers. The dose is from a dram to two or three morning,
noon and night at a distance from eating.

Electuarium Dysentericum, or an Electuary for the bloody Flux.
Take Conserve of wild Poppy flowers, old Conserve of Roses, of each three
ounces; our Narcotick Confection two ounces, Venice Treacle, Tincture of red
Coral, Bloodstone, Essence of Crocus Martis, of each two drams; Troches of
Amber, sealed Earth and Spodium, of each a dram; Oil of Nutmegs and Cloves, of
each a scruple. Mix them, and with our Diacodium Crocatum make an Electuary
according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a specific Medicine to stay all dolorifick
fluxes of the Belly, and blood flowing from any part, the Terms, Spitting, etc.
and is also good in the Piles, it induces sleep, consolidates Ulcers of the
Breast, Lungs and Bladder. The dose is from a dram to two or three at night
going to bed, or afterward, or in the morning fasting, or at any time of the
day, the Stomach being empty: It is given either by it self, or in Vehicles
respecting the Disease and part affected.

Diascordium Rosatum, or Diascordium Rosated.
Take Conserve of red Roses vitriolated eleven ounces, Bole Armoniack prepared
three drams, Scordium two drams, Diptamus of Creet, roots of Tormentil,
Bistort, and Gentian, Terra Lemnia, Cinnamon, Lignum Cassie, Gum Arabic,
Galbanum, Styrax Calamitis, of each a dram; long Pepper, white Ginger, Opium
prepared Spagirically and dissolved in aromatic Wine, seeds of Sorrel, of each
twenty three grains. Mix them, and with Syrup of the Juice of Citrons bring all
into the form of a thick Electuary.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. We happily use it according to the mind of Hieronymus
Fracastorius, in those cases where Treacle is not allowed, as to Children and
great-bellied Women: But in the Plague, and other desperate Epidemical
diseases, we are used to give it in this manner following.

Take of the expressed juice of Citrons an ounce, Syrup of the juice of Sorrel,
Vinegar of Elder flowers, of each half an ounce; Diascordium rosatum a dram and
a half, of our Bezoar powder half a scruple. Mix them, and make a Draught,
which works wonderfully, and virtually expels all poisonous noxious Humors by
Sweat.

SECT. XIV. Of purging Confections and Electuaries.
Catharticum Caesareum, or an Imperial Cathartick.
TAke green Ginger of China an ounce, Magistery of Scammony half an ounce,
Confectio Alkermes a dram and a half, species of Diarrhodon Abbatis moistened
with Spirit of Vitriol, Cream of Tartar, of each a dram; Gallia Moschata a
scruple, Oil of Cinnamon ten grains. Of the above mentioned Ginger so much as
will suffice to make all into the form of a Bole.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a pleasant Cathartick ^n all cold Distempers, and
is by us prescribed for Princes and Great persons: For it thoroughly purges the
body without any hurt or molestation. It refreshes the Mind, provokes
Appetite, strengthens all the principal Members, takes away the stink of the
Nose and Mouth, rectifies the Blood, dissipates Wind. The dose is from a dram
to four scruples.

Catharticum Regium, or the Royal Cathartick.
Take Confectio Alkermes vitriolated ten drams, Magistery of Scammony half an
ounce, powder of red Roses moistened with Spirit of Vitriol, acid Tartar, of
each a dram; Nitre prepared a scruple. Mix them, and bring all into the form of
a Bole.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This solutive Confection of Alkermes I invented for
dainty Constitutions; and is a most excellent Purge in malignant Fevers, and
all other hot Choleric distempers proceeding from mixed and complicated causes;
and is used by Kings and Princes: It purges both kinds of Choler without
trouble or any offense to the Stomach, and kindly draws out the other offending
humors, even from the Joints and Limbs, and carries off the tartarous humors
that oppress the Reins and Bladder: It refrigerates the Heart, mundifies the
Blood, and adds strength to all the principal Members. The dose is from a
dram to four scruples.

Annotation. For the ordinary and common sort of people, you may instead of
Confectio Alkermes substitute Conserve of Violets vitriolated, and the
Composition will be equally efficacious.

Catharticum Rosatum, or a Purge compounded with Roses.
Take Conserve of red Roses vitriolated seven ounce, Scammony rosated ten
drams, species Diarrhodon Abbatis moistened with Spirit of Vitriol an ounce,
Nitre prepared a dram and a half, Oil of Cinnamon a scruple. With a little Syrup
of Roses solutive vitriolated, mix them into the form of a Bole.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It expels yellow Choler without trouble, and purges a
hot Liver. It is a worthy Remedy for all distempers of the Joints proceeding
from a hot Cause, and for Tertian Fevers; and is also of a good and grateful
taste, and therefore pleasant to the Stomach and Bowels. It is an appropriate
and suitable Purge for tender Virgins, Children, and Old people that are
oppressed with Choler and choleric Nauseating. The dose is from two drams to
three, given with great profit and no trouble nor disturbance to the sick.

Catharticum Violatum, or a Purge compounded of Violets.
Take new Conserve of Violets vitriolated four drams, true Hermodactyls
cleansed from their busks three ounces, Magistery of Scammony ten drams, Tartar
vitriolated six drams, Cinnamon, Cloves, white Ginger, of each a dram; Oil of
Cummin seeds a scruple. With Syrup of the Juice of Violets vitriolated mix all
into the form of a Bole.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Confection of Hermodactyls is of admirable virtue
and forde in the Gout, Sciatica, and such like pains of the Joints; for it
safely purges all gouty humors: we have also seen many Patients languishing
with that tormenting pain, and rouling in their beds, to have been so restored
by the use of this Medicine twice, thrice, or more, and the help of external
Unctions, that they have soon returned to their former business. And they would
do wisely not to use it only under the impending pain; but for their
preservation, to use it twice every year, that is, Spring and Fall. The dose is
from two drams to three.

Catharticum Caryophyllatum, or a Purge of Clovegilly-flowers.
Take Conserve of Clovegilly-flowers vitriolated seven ounces, white and gummy
Turbith two ounces, Scammony rosated ten drams, of the best Cloves an ounce,
Cream of Tartar six drams, Cinnamon and Mace, of each a dram and a half; Oil of
Oranges a scruple. And with Syrup of Citron peels muskified mix all into the
form of a Bole.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It does pleasantly and plentifully purge all cold
Humors (but chiefly Phlegm) from the Head, Breast, Stomach, Joints, Guts, and
other principal Members, and also from those deputed for nutrition. It is good
for complicated and continual Fevers, and is very useful in the Colic coming
of a cold Cause; and for all other Diseases that proceed from frigid humors. It
is a good Remedy for those who are troubled with sour Belchings, they being
constantly troubled with Loathings, and do generally abound with Spittle. The
dose is from a dram and a half to three drams, (especially in strong bodies)
more or less, according to the age, strength, and season.

Zingiber Purgans, or Purging Ginger.
Take Conserve of Rosemary flowers four ounces, condited Ginger of Bengal three
ounces, Scammony rosated ten drams, species Diarrhodon Abbatis half an ounce,
the lesser Galangal and Mace, of each a dram; Cardamoms the less, Cloves, of
each two scruples; yellow Orange peels and Citron peels, of each half a dram;
Gallia Moschata a scruple. And with Syrup of the beforementioned candied
Ginger, make all into the form of a Bole.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It safely purges the whole body of Phlegm and all other
vicious Humors. It draws away Choler of both kinds from the Stomach, gives a
sweet Breath, comforts the Intestines being too cold, and removes all
Frigidity. It dissolves thick flatulent Humors, and clarifies the Blood;
neither has it any ungrateful smell or taste. It is very profitable in all
kind of Fevers, and in all other Diseases proceeding from a cold Cause; also
in the Colic, Wind, and pain of the Stomach, Heart, Liver, Spleen, Reins and
Back. The dose is from two drams to three in the morning early.

Cinamomum Laxativum, or Laxative Cinnamon.
Take white Sugar dissolved in Cinnamon water four ounces, Scammony rosated six
drams, species of Diacinamon half an ounce, Oil of Cinnamon a scruple. Mix all
into the form of a Bole.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It purges Choler, Phlegm and Melancholy from the Head,
Thorax, Stomach, Liver and Joints, etc. and that without any trouble: And this
Composition may be also made into a solid form. The dose is from two drams to
three.

Catharticum Cholagogum, or a Cholerpurging Medicine.
Take juice of red Roses expressed, white Sugar, of each eight ounces; species of
Diarrhodon vitriolated nine drams, Magistery of Scammony an ounce, Spodium a
dram and a half, Gallia Moschata a scruple. Let the Sugar be boiled to a
consistence with the Juice of Roses, and then let the Species (being
pulverized) be added, so make all into an Electuary of the Juice of Roses.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. I happily use it to purge hot and choleric Humors in
all hot and choleric Diseases and Affects. The dose is from two drams to three.

Catharticum Vitae, or the Purge of Life.
Take Venice Treacle three ounces, our species of Diaesula an ounce and a half,
Mercurius vitae a dram. Mix them, and with our Pectoral Syrup make an Electuary.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is an excellent Medicine in Fevers, Plague,
diseases of the Head, Pox, Leprosy, ill habit of Body, Dropsy, fetid Ulcers,
etc. and is a Secret in Quartan Agues; for it leaves no impurity behind it in
the body. The dose is from a dram to two: But let it not be given before meat,
but after it; and so the sick do vomit sooner and easier.

Diaturbith Minerale.
Take Mithridate of Damocratis four ounces, true Turbith Mineral, species
Diarrhodon Abbatis, of each half an ounce; our species of Diavitrioli and our
Carminative Oil, of each a scruple. Mix them, and with Syrup of Jujubes bring
them into the form of a thick Electuary.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is an excellent Purge in all desperate Diseases, as
the Dropsy, Pox, Gout and Jaundice; and by its expulsive force nothing is more
excellent and noble in Fistula's, malignant Ulcers, Plague, and most kind of
Fevers, etc. The dose is from a dram to a dram and a half, drinking after it a
little white Wine.

Confectio Passulata, or a Confection with Raisons.
Take Sena four ounces, roots of Polypody of the Oak two ounces, roots of
Scorzonera and Bugloss, of each an ounce; roots of Succory and Liquorish, of
each half an ounce; Spanish Wine four pound. In which boil the other
Ingredients being cut and bruised, and after it is pressed and strained, infuse
in it all night Flowers of red Holy-hocks, Peaches, Violets and Roses, of each
two pugils, Acacia, white Ginger, Cinnamon, and the lesser Galangal, of each a
dram. Then let them be strained and well pressed, and in the strained Liquor
again infuse small Raisons stoned and washed in white Wine six ounces,
Carthamus seeds husked three drams, Iujubes, Sebestens and Prunes stoned, of
each twenty one. Boil them, and extract the Pulp with a Sieve, and then add of
Manus Christi anisati four ounces, Pulp of Tamarinds and the best Manna, of
each an ounce and a half; Cream of Tartar an ounce. Mix them, and make them
into a soft Electuary.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a most sweet, mild and lenifying Medicine, and is
good for those who are apt to be bound in their body: For without trouble it
moves the Belly downwards, and gently purges yellow and black Choler. It also
mundifies the blood, and takes off its acrimony. It is also profitable in the
distempers of the Reins and Bladder, and prevents the generation of the Stone.
The dose is from three drams to half an ounce, more or less.

Catharticum Passulatum, or a Purge of Raisons.
Take of our Confectio passulata two ounces, powder of Ialap an ounce, Oil of
Aniseeds a scruple. With Syrup of Cinnamon make them into the form of a Bole.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It purges Choler of both sorts, Phlegm and Water, and
other offending Humors. It expels Wind, opens Obstructions, purifies the Blood,
and is good in the pains of the Joints, Colic and Reins. It helps those that
are troubled with the Asthma, old Cough and Pox. It is no trouble to the
Patient in the taking this Medicine, because it does partake of no ill savor,
and is therefore proper for those who loath other Medicines. The dose is from
two drams to three.

Cartharticum Peruvianum liquidum, or the moist Peruvian Cathartick.
Take of the Electuary Diacorus six ounces, Extract of Gum of Peru rosated an
ounce, species of Diarrhodon Abbatis half an ounce, Extract of Kermes-berries
three drams, Gallia Moschata half a dram, Oil of Mace a scruple. With a little
Syrup of preserved Citronpeels make all into a thick Electuary.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a good Medicine in all strong and contumacious
Diseases: It powerfully purges all serous humors, and water gathered in the
Abdomen, together with crude and thick Phlegm, from the remote parts of the
body; and is therefore good in the Gout and all distempers of the Joints, the
Dropsy Ascites and Anasarca also. The dose is from two drams to three.

Catharticum Peruvianum solidum pretiosum, or a solid and precious Purge of Gum
Peru.
Take Extract of Gum Peru rosated half an ounce, species Diarrhodon Abbatis two
drams, Confectio Alkermes a dram, Gallia Moschata a scruple, Oil of Cinnamon
half a scruple. Mix them, and with four ounces of white Sugar first dissolved
in Rose Water make them into little Morsels.

Catharticum Peruvianum solidum commune, pro tenuioris fortunae hominibus: Or,
a solid Purge of Gum Peru for the poorer sort of People.
Take Extract of Gum Peru rosated half an ounce, preserved Orange and Citron
peels, of each a dram; Cassia lignea, Cloves, white Ginger, Mace, of each a
scruple; Oil of Aniseeds ten grains. Mix them, and with four ounces of white
Sugar dissolved in Fenil-water make, according to Art, a Confection in little
Morsels.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It purges thick, serous and tartarous humors in the
Dropsy, Gout, Jaundice, Scab, Pox, and the like, and is in these cases a
Secret. The dose is from a dram and a half to two.

Passulae Laxativae, or Laxative Raisons.
Take leaves of Sena four ounces, roots of the best Turbith and Ialap, of each
an ounce; Magistery of Scammony, elect Rhubarb, of each half an ounce; Anise
and Fenil seeds, of each three drams; the cordial Flowers, of each a pugil. Mix
all these, and then infuse them in a sufficient quantity of rectified Spirit of
Wine, let them stand in infusion until the Spirit has imbided the Tincture,
together with the taste and virtue of the Ingredients: Then pour off the tinged
Spirit, and put into it nine ounces of small Raisons, let them digest until the
Raisons have sufficiently imbided the Spirit: Then at last (the Raisons being
taken out) add Cinnamon and Cloves, of each two drams; long Pepper, the lesser
Galangal, white Ginger, of each a dram and a half; Indian Spicknard, Gallia
Moschata, of each ten grains. With a sufficient quantity of solutive Syrup of
Roses make a Condite according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. They purge Melancholy and adust Humors, and carry off
serous Excrements, and keep down salt Phlegm, and neatly cleanse the body of the
Leprosy, foulness of the Skin and Scabs. It is an excellent Remedy in the
Gout, straitness of the Breast, Stone, Catarrhs, and the pain and tumor of the
Sides. The dose is from half an ounce to six drams, more or less, according to
the Sex and Complexion of the Patient.

Catharticum Terebinthinatum, or a Purge with Turpentine.
Take Turpentine often washed in juice of Lemmons three ounces, species of
Lithontribon an ounce, Magistery of Scammony seven drams, Cassia newly
extracted, the pith of Carthamus seeds, of each half an ounce; white and gummy
Turbith, Tartar vitriolated, of each two drams; Oil of Cinnamon a scruple, Oil
of Chamomil and Aniseeds, of each ten grains. With a sufficient quantity of
Syrup of Roses solutive mix all into the form of a Bole or a thick Electuary.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Terebinthinated Cathartick does chiefly purge all
phlegmatic, thick and tartarous humors that oppress the Reins and Bladder. It
dissolves coagulated Tartar; and it is an admirable Purge for all kinds of
stones in what part of the body soever they lie. The dose is from a dram and a
half to two, in good odoriferous Wine.

Terebinthina Laxativa, or Laxative Turpentine.
Take Turpentine washed in Rose Water two drams, Tartar vitriolated half a
dram, Salt of white Amber, elect Rhubarb, of each ten grains. Mix them, and
with Sugar and powder of Liquorish make a Bole for a dose.

Terebinthina Purgans, or purging Turpentine.
Take Turpentine washed in Violet-water two drams, acid Tartar a scruple,
Magistery of Perch stone, Crabs eyes and Scammony, of each ten grains. Mix
them, and with Sugar and powder of Cinnamon make a Bole for a dose.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a great Secret in the Gonorrhoea, Stone in the
Reins and Bladder, pains of the Back, etc. It is given an hour before supper,
or early in the morning, and it may be taken in a Wafer moistened in Wine.

SECT. XV. Of Lohochs or Eclegma's.
Lohoch Rosatum, or a Lohoch of Roses.
TAke Conserve of Roses tinctured with Spirit of Sulphur four ounces, Lohoch of
Coltsfoot roots prepared with Sugar two ounces, species Diarrhodon Abbatis an
ounce, Lac Sulphuris half an ounce, red Oriental Bole prepared, juice of
Liquorish extracted, of each two drams; Oriental Saffron prepared a dram,
flowers of Benjamin, Cardamoms the less, Mace, of each half a dram; Balsam of
Sulphur prepared with Oil of Aniseeds a scruple, true Oil of Roses four grains.
Mix them, and with our simple Pectoral Syrup make a Lohoch.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It helps those who are troubled with continual Coughs,
Hoarsness, Pleurisies, etc. It brings offensive matter from the Lungs with
ease, and effectually heals purulent Exulcerations as well of the Breast as
Lungs, and takes away the ill smell thence proceeding. It also helps those who
spit blood. The dose is the quantity of a Hazel-nut taken often.

Lohoch Violatum, or Lohoch of Violets.
Take fresh Conserve of Violets tinged with our Elixir of Sulphur four ounces,
Lohoch sanum and expert. two ounces, species of Diamargariton frigid. Diaireos
simple, of each half an ounce; compound flowers of Sulphur, Extract of
Liquorish roots, of each three drams; Oriental Saffron prepared, Styrax
Calamit. of each a scruple; Oil of Hyssop and Benjamin, of each four grains.
Mix them, and with our compound Pectoral Syrup make a Pectoral Lohoch.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Medicine is experimented in the Cough, Asthma,
Phthisick, difficulty of breathing and straitness of the Breast, and in other
diseases of the Breast and Lungs. The dose is the same as before.

Lohoch Pectorale, or a Pectoral Lohoch.
Take both our simple and compound pectoral Syrups, of each two ounces; Lohoch
of Coltsfoot roots, of sanum and expertum, of each an ounce; Manus Christi with
Aniseeds prepared six drams, species Diarrhodon Abbatis half an ounce, green
Ginger, of each three drams. Mix them, and make a Pectoral Lohoch according to
Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a certain Medicine for a Cough and Hoarsness
coming of cold or thick Phlegm contained in the Thorax and Lungs. It is a
present Remedy for all distempers of the Breast, difficulty of Breathing,
Pleurisy, pain of the Ribs, etc. The dose is the quantity of a Nutmeg often in
the day.

Lohoch seu Diacodium Crocatum, or a Lohoch or Diacodium with Saffron.
Take of the heads and seeds of white Poppy twenty one, sweet Bean cods, the
seeds being cast away, roots of Liquorish, of each three ounces; seeds of
Bombace, Marsh mallows and Quinces, Myrtle-berries, of each half an ounce; fat
Figs, Dates and Sebestens, of each eleven; flowers of great red Mallows,
Violets and Hearts-ease, of each two drams. Boil them in a sufficient quantity
of Fountain Water according to Art. Then take of this Decoction being strained
two pound, Sugar Candy rosated, Penids, of each half a pound. Make of all a
thick Syrup: Then toward the end of the Preparation add Syrup of the juice of
wild Poppies, Iujubes, of each two ounces; Extract of Saffron half a dram. Mix
them, and over a gentle fire let them boil to the consistence of Honey, which
aromatize with a scruple of Gallia Moschata.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a great Secret in all hot, thin, sharp, and salt
Defluxions and Destillations from the Head upon the Thorax and rough Artery,
which cause continual Coughs and Watchings: For it lenifies the roughness of
the Throat, and maturates the Spittle, by making it thick and glutinous, and
fit to expectorate. It allays thirst, mitigates heat, and procures sleep: Also
by cooling and moistning it roborates the Spirits, repairs strength, and
preserves the native heat. Moreover it cannot be expressed how profitable it is
for those who are afflicted with the Colic, Stone, and Gravel, Pleurisy Gout,
etc. It is also good for the overgreat excretion and evacuation of the Blood
and Terms; nay it is of good use in burning Fevers, Fluxes of the Belly,
Dysenteries, etc. which are caused by a sharp and choleric matter. The dose is
from a dram to two, three or four.

Lohoch Antiphthisicum, or a Lohoch for the Consumption or wasting of the Lungs.
Take of our Diacodium crocatum four ounces, Lohoch sanum and expertum and de
pulmone Vulpis, of each two ounces; our white, red and citrine pectoral
Rotula's, of each an ounce; our simple and compound pectoral Syrups, of each
six drams; green Ginger half an ounce, species Diarrhodon Abbatis,
Diamargariton frigid. of each two drams. Mix them, and with an Emulsion made of
white Poppy seeds, and the water of Calves Lungs an ounce and a half, over a
gentle sire boil it to the consistence of a Lohoch.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is of great efficacy and power in the Phthilick,
Asthma, Cough, Pleurisy, Catarrh, Hoarsness, and other vices of the Thorax and
Lungs: It extenuates those humors that are hard to be spit forth, and induces
sleep. The dose is the quantity of a Hazel-nut often in the day.

SECT. XVI. Of Syrups.
Syrupus Perlarum Orientalium, or Syrup of Oriental Pearls.
TAke water of Roses, Borage and Bugloss, of each six ounces; Salt of Oriental
Pearls half an ounce. These being mixed and dissolved, add of sweet Almonds a
quantity sufficient to make an Emulsion, with which afterward mix white Sugar a
pound, and then boil it to the consistence of a Syrup.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It roborates the Heart, Brain and Memory, preserves the
Body sound. It relieves the Consumptive, and keeps off Old age. It drys up
vicious Humors, amends Milk in Women, restores the humidum Radicale, and
increases Seed in both Sexes. It is also a certain Preservative from the
Apoplexy, Epilepsie and Palsy, and is to be given diverse times in the week.
The dose is from half an ounce to six drams, by it self or with other
Specificks.

Syrupus Corallorum rubrorum, or Syrup of red Coral.
Take Tincture of red Roses extracted with Succorywater, distilled from the
juice of the whole Plant, and as it were red, ten ounces, Salt of red Coral
half an ounce. These being mixed, dissolved and filtred, add of white Sugar a
pound, expressed juice of Barberries and Goosberries, of each four ounces. Again
mix them, and bring all into the consistence of a Syrup.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It comforts the weakness of the Heart, and much
increases its strength: It mitigates the intemperate heat of the Liver, Spleen
and Reins, and wonderfully relieves them in Obstructions. It cures any
Haemorrhage, mundifies the blood through the whole body. It is a good Remedy
for choleric Vomitings. It allays Thirst, refrigerates and strengthens the
Stomach. It restores and amends the other internal Bowels distempered by heat:
Whence it is a great Secret in the Dysentery, Lientery, pains in the Guts,
Liver-fluxes, Gonorrhoea, Flux from the Womb, etc. It is also good in
contagious Diseases, and gives ease in malignant Defluxions and Colliquations.
It strengthens and preserves the Child in the Womb, and prevents Abortion, if
while she goes with Child she takes half a spoonful at a time twice in a month.
The dose is from half an ounce to an ounce, either by it self, or in
appropriate Medicines.

Syrupus Vitriolato-rosatus, or a vitriolated Syrup with Roses.
In the Preparation of our Magistery of Corals (already mentioned) a red Liquor
will remain in the separation of the Coral from the Menstruum; to which if a
sufficient quantity of white Sugar be added and boiled to the consistence of a
Syrup, it will be red, and a most noble and efficacious Medicine, very
profitable in the Plague, Epidemical Diseases, Fevers, Dysenteries,
Liver-fluxes, vices of the Stomach, Scurvy, obstructions of the Liver and
Spleen, Inflammations, and many other Diseases. The dose is from an ounce to
two, by it self or with other appropriate Vehicles.

Syrupus Cephalicus, or a Syrup for the Head.
Take the juice of Carduus and Millefoil depurated, of each a pound; water of
Lavender and Betony, of each half a pound; roots of Avens and Peony, of each an
ounce; Cassia lignea, Nutmegs, Cubebs, of each an ounce and a half; Marjoram,
Vervain, Rosemary and Origanum, of each three drams; flowers of Lilies of the
valley, Teiltree, Primroses, Rosemary and red Roses, of each two drams; seeds
of Lavender, Fenil, Sage and Peony, of each a dram and a half; wood of Aloes,
Misleto of the Oak, Oriental Saffron, of each a dram. Boil them to the
consumption of the third part; afterward let them be strained and clarified,
and then add of white Sugar a sufficient quantity to bring it into a Syrup
according to Art, which aromatize with Species Diamoschu dulce and Diambrae, of
each a dram.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is an excellent Remedy in all dangerous distempers
of the Head, as inveterate Headache, Hemicrania, Epilepsie, Apoplexy, Palsy,
etc. It roborates the Head, Brain, and Ventricle, and is agreeable to those who
are troubled with a trembling of the Head and Heart. The dose is from half an
ounce to an ounce, by it self or with other appropriate Medicines.

Syrupus Pectoralis, or a Syrup for the Breast.
Take roots of Liquorish sliced, Coltsfoot, of each two ounces; roots of
Elicampane, Flower-de-luce, Angelica, of each an ounce; both sorts of Lungwort,
Maidenhair, sharp Sage, Horehound, Scabious, of each half an ounce; flowers of
Coltsfoot, Violets, Chamomil and Hearts-ease, of each two drams. Let them be
cut, bruised, and infused in water of Carduus and Fenil, of each three pound;
of Mallows, Fluellin and Marshmallows, of each a pound. Let them be boiled to
the consumption of the third part. Take of this Liquor strained six pound, and
infuse in it small Raisons four ounces, seeds of Carduus, Anise, Roman Nettles,
Quinces and Myrtleberries, of each half an ounce; of Dates, Iujubes, Sebestens
and fat Figs, of each twenty one. Boil them again to the consumption of the
third part, and then let them be strongly pressed and strained. Take of this
strained Liquor four pound, white Sugar two pound Boil them again, and as they
are boiling aromatize it with Oriental Saffron, Cardamoms the less, Mace and
Cinnamon, of each two drams. Let these be tied up in a thin Cloth, and boil
together with the rest, till it comes to the consistence of a Syrup; to which
last of all add three ounces of Cinamon-water, and keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is of wonderful force and power in all affects of
the Thorax, Vitals, Destillations and Obstructions; for it cuts and attenuates
thick Humors. It is also of good use in Consumptions, Wastings, and Ulcers of
the Lungs: And is a present Remedy for Asthma's and Coughs, and is profitably
used in the pains of the Hypochonders, and a Pleurisy beginning. It dissolves
suppurated matter, and helps to cast it forth; and is a great Secret in
Hoarsness and defect of the Voice. The dose is from half an ounce to six drams,
by it self or in appropriate Vehicles.

Syrupus Asthmaticus, or a Syrup for the Asthma.
Take white Sugar Candy a pound, water of Lohoch sanum eight ounces, Syrup of
Horehound and Liquorish, of each four ounces; Syrup of Maidenhair and Iujubes,
of each three ounces; Syrup of Hyssop and the juice of Violets, of each two
ounces. Mix them all well together, and boil them to the consistence of a Syrup.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It does chiefly help in the Asthma and Pleurisy. It
safely cleanses, opens and inlargeth the Thorax and Lungs, and also opens
Obstructions. It helps wheesing dry Coughs; and is profitably given in the pain
of the Breast and Hypochonders, the Stone in the Reins, etc. It is also very
agreeable to old people, and those who are cold by Nature. The dose is by it
self, or with Pectoral Waters, from half an ounce to an ounce.

Syrupus Cordialis, or a Cordial Syrup.
Take Cinnamon two ounces, roots of Bugloss an ounce, flowers of red Roses,
Borage, Balm and Violets, of each half an ounce; Cardamoms the less, Nutmegs,
wood of Aloes, of each two drams; Oriental Saffron and Mace, of each a dram.
All being cut and bruised, let them be macerated in three pound of good
odoriferous Wine, until the Wine has imbibed all the virtue of the
Ingredients; then boil it to the consumption of a pound. Take of this Liquor
strained two pound, white Sugar a pound and a half. Boil these together, and
toward the end add of each of our Cordial Waters four ounces. And boil all to
the just consistence of a Syrup.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It exhilarates and daily increases the Magnanimity of
the mind, and is a most efficacious Medicine in almost all melancholy Diseases.
Moreover it is of singular use in the passions of the Heart proceeding from
grief or sorrow, and this it does by roborating of that part. The dose is from
half an ounce to an ounce by it self, or in other convenient Vehicles.

Syrupus de Cassia Lignea.
Take Gelly of Quinces a pound. Boil it over a gentle fire to the thickness of
Honey; then mix with it our Tincture of Cassia lignea so much as may bring it
to the consistence of a Syrup: at last add to it an ounce of Elaeosaccharum of
Cassia lignea, and again mix them and reserve it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is agreeable to old, weak and frigid Patients, and
to those in whom the Radical moisture and natural heat are diminished. It
comforts all the principal Members: It roborates the Heart and a cold Stomach.
It helps the Syncope and trembling of the Heart: It allays Nauseousness,
Vomiting and Hiccup. It takes away the ill savor of the Breath, and makes it
sweet. The dose is from half an ounce to an ounce, either by it self, or in any
other specific Medicine.

Syrupus Diacitri Rosatus, or a compound Syrup of Citrons and Roses.
Take juice of Citrons and Lemmons first strained through a cloth or strainer
(but not pressed) and tinctured with powder of red Roses a pound, Rob of
Barberries and Goosberries, of each seven ounces; Syrup of the juice of unripe
Grapes, Syrup of Vinegar, Rasberries and Strawberries, of each four ounces;
Cinnamon water buglossated, in which species Diarrhodon Abbatis has been
infused, two ounces, Nitre prepared a dram and a half. Mix them, and boil all
into the consistence of a Syrup according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It potently refrigerates, penetrates, drys, and defends
the parts from Putrefaction. It is of excellent use in malignant choleric
Fevers and other contagious Diseases. It powerfully resists Sur feits by
drinking, Poisons and Pestilence. It extinguisheth Thirst, and all intemperate
heat of the Head, Heart, Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Reins and Bowels. It provokes
Sweat and Urine, represseth choleric Vomitings, and cures the Cholera. It
helps the passions of the Heart, Dysenteries, and griping of the Guts, the body
being first purged. The dose is from half an ounce to two, either by it self,
or in any other Vehicle respecting the Disease.

Syrupus Antiscorbuticus, or a Syrup against the Scurvy.
Take of the juice of Norway black Berries three pound, juice of Watercresses,
Brooklime, Sorrel and Scurvygrass, of each half a pound. These being mixed, add
of white Sugar a pound and a half, and so make a Syrup according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a most noble and approved Remedy against the
Scurvy. The dose is from an ounce to two or three, by it self, or with our
Antiscorbutick Water.

Syrupus de Pyrethro, or a Syrup of Pellitory.
Take of the best Agarick an ounce and a half, roots of Pellitory an ounce,
roots of Acorus, Burnet and male Peony, of each half an ounce; seeds of Peony
and Fenil, Iuniper-berries, of each three drams; Motherwort, Agrimony, Hyssop,
Primrose, wild Mints, Nep, of each two drams; flowers of Lily of the valley,
Mullein, Bugloss and Rosemary, of each a dram and a half; Cinnamon, Nutmegs and
Cubebs, of each a dram All being cut and bruised, let them be infused in water
of Sage and Rosemary, of each three pound. Let them stand and infuse a whole
night, and then boil them to the consumption of the third part. Take of this
Liquor strained and clear four pound, white Sugar two pound. Mix them, and boil
them to the consistence of a Syrup.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is very useful in all passions of the Nerves, as the
Palsy, Convulsions, Epilepsie, Hip-gout, etc. For it potently dissolves the
peccant matter, and mitigates pain. The dose is from half an ounce to an ounce,
by it self, or in any other convenient Vehicle.

Syrupus Nephriticus, or a Syrup against the Stone in the Reins.
Take of our Aqua Antinephritica and Lithontriptica, of each ten ounces; Salt
of the Perch stone and Crabs eyes, of each half an ounce. Being mixed and
dissolved, add flowers of Marshmallows new dried as many as suffices. Let
them stand in digestion a few days, until the Liquor be perfectly tinctured;
afterward with two pound of white Sugar boil it to the consistence of a Syrup.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is given to those troubled with the Stone and Gravel
from an ounce to an ounce and a half, by it self, or with some other agreeable
Vehicle; for it breaks and expels the Stone, though great, as you may see by
daily Experience how sand and fragments of Stones lie at the bottom of the
Urine.

Syrupus Stipticus, or a Stiptick Syrup.
Take Sloes ripe and dried a pound, roots of water-Acorus, Snakeweed, Tormentil
and Zedoary, of each an ounce; rinds of Pomegranates, dried Quinces, of each
half an ounce; Turkish Galls, red Roses, Balaustines, of each two drams; seeds
of Sorrel, Bloodworth and Plantane, of each a dram and a half. Boil all
according to Art in a sufficient quantity of white Wine till it be perfectly
tinctured. Take of this clear strained Liquor four pound, white Sugar two
pound. Boil it again till it comes to the thickness of a Syrup, and let it be
aromatized with Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Oriental Saffron, white Ginger,
the lesser Galangal, of each a dram; wild Poppyflowers and Clovegillyflowers,
of each half a dram. Let these be all tied up in a thin Cloth, and boiled in
the Syrup according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It helps Hepatick Dysenteries that arise from the
sharpness of the Humors. It moves Appetite to meat, helps those that cannot
hold their water. But it is chiefly agreeable to those who are afflicted with
long protracted Fluxes of the Belly, caused of a watery humor as well cold as
hot. It stops Vomiting, the flux of the Haemorrhoids, overflowing of the Terms,
etc. The dose is from an ounce to two, universal Medicines being premised.

Syrupus Dysentericus laxativus, or a purging Syrup for a bloody Flux.
Take roots of Polypody of the Oak two ounces, Liquorish, Burnet, of each an
ounce; roots of Tormentil and Succory, of each six drams; leaves of
Hart's-tongue, Agrimony, Fluellin, Knotgrass, of each half an ounce. Make a
Decoction in water of Comfry-roots, Plantane and Oak-leaves, of each a like
quantity: boil it to the consumption of the third part, and strain it. Take of
this strained Liquor three pound, the best Rhubarb an ounce and a half,
Mechoacan, yellow Myrobalans, leaves of Sena, of each an ounce; Troches of
Agarick half an ounce, flowers of red Roses, white Lilies, Elder, Chamomil and
Mullein, of each two drams; seeds of Anise, Quinces and Dill, of each a dram
and a half; Cassia lignea, Cloves and Nutmegs, of each a dram. Let them infuse
in a warm place all night, and in the morning let them be gently boiled, and
strained and pressed; and to the strained Liquor add of white Sugar two pound,
and make it into a just consistence of a Syrup according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It gently moves the Belly downwards without trouble,
and purges all sharp and choleric Humors, from whence proceed the Ulcerations
of the Bowels. Moreover it mitigates the pain, and its purging operation being
over, it stays the Flux. The dose in young people is from an ounce to an ounce
and a half: But in those full-grown, from two ounces to three.

Syrupus Pantagogus.
Take roots of Polypody of the Oak, white Hermodactyls, of each four ounces;
white and gummy Turbith, Mechoacan, of each two ounces; the best Rhubarb an
ounce and a half, black Hellebore prepared, the best Ialap, of each an ounce;
Troches of Agarick, of all the Myrobalans, of each half an ounce. Let them be
cut and bruised, and put into a sufficient quantity of white Wine, in which let
them infuse for certain days; afterward boil them according to Art, and in four
pound of the strained Liquor again infuse the following Ingredients: Sena three
ounces, small Raisons three ounces, Cream of Tartar an ounce, Maidenhair,
Fluellin and Fumitory, of each half an ounce; Anise and Fenil seeds, of each
two drams; flowers of Peaches, Violets and Roses, of Acacia and Epithymum, of
each a dram. Let them stand in Infusion all night, in the morning let them be
boiled, strained and pressed; and then with two pound of white Sugar boil them
to the consistence of a Syrup, adding these things following, Cardamoms the
less, Cloves, Galangal the less, Mace, white Ginger, Cinnamon, Spicknard, of
each half a dram. Let them be pulverized and tied up in a Linen cloth, and as
they boil rub them in the Cloth, that as they boil with the Syrup, they may
leave their virtue in it.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It does kindly, readily, and safely purge alk morbifick
and peccant Humors in all Diseases where Purging is requisite, and it opens the
obstructions of the Veins and Bowels. It is given to men or women of all ages,
to Old folks and Children, and to weak delicate bodies; yea, if need requires,
it is given to Women with Child, either by it self, or in waters that respect
the part affected. But in robust bodies it is quickened with some other strong
purgative Medicine, according to the diversity of the Disease. The dose is from
an ounce to two or three.

Syrupus Hydragogus, or a Water-purging Syrup.
Take German Flower-de-luce cleansed from its exterior bark, let it be well
stamped and pressed, and the juice pressed out put into a glass, and let it
stand till it settle and grow clear of it self; then take of this Juice sixteen
ounces, Cinnamon water four ounces, Magistery of Gum of Peru an ounce. Let them
infuse together in a Glass close stopped for twenty four hours, then pour it
forth, and add to it sixteen ounces of white Sugar, species Diarrhodon Abbatis,
the best Rhubarb, of each half an ounce; red Sanders and roots of Alkanet, of
each two drams. These being mixed must be tied up in a Cloth, and boiled with
the Syrup to a just consistence: And lastly, let the Syrup thus prepared be
aromatized with Cloves, Cinnamon, Mace, of each a dram; Gallia Moschata a
scruple.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a most glorious and Divine Cathartick in the ill
Habit of Body, and in Dropsies of all sorts, if from an ounce and a half to two
ounces, more or less, according as the Belly is loose or bound, it be given
twice or thrice in the week: For that Dropsy which cannot otherwise be cured
by humane skill, is cured by this Syrup alone.

SECT. XVII. Of Elixirs.
Elixir Vitrioli, or Elixir of Vitriol.
TAke Galangal the less an ounce and a half, Calamus aromaticus an ounce, water
Mints and Sage, of each half an ounce; the best Cinnamon, Cloves and white
Ginger, of each three drams; Nutmegs and Cubebs, of each two drams; wood of
Aloes and Citron peel, of each a dram. Pulverize all and mix them, and then add
to the Powder white Sugar Candy four ounces: let all be moistened like Spirit of
Wine, that it may make a Mixture like Honey, which put into a Glass, and pour
upon it the height of four fingers Oil of Vitriol of Venus or Mars, or in
defect of those, Spirit of Vitriol often rectified, and let them stand in
digestion three weeks or a month; at last pour off the Tincture and filter it,
and pour on more Spirit of Wine upon that which is left in the bottom of the
Glass, and draw a Tincture as before; and this work repeat the third time, if
need require, till all the Essence be extracted. Mix the several Extractions
and circulate them, and reserve it for use; yet it would be of far more
efficacy, if it were set in Balneo the space of fourteen days.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. There is not a more noble and efficacious Medicine in
the whole Republic of Physic for the Stomach than this is, as I can justify
by Experience; and therefore I will be brief in declaring its Virtues. It is an
incomparable Medicine in all distempers of the Stomach, and is given in our
Stomach-water or in water of water Mint, or in any other appropriate Liquor. It
comforts the Stomach and Intestines exceedingly, and warms all the principal
Members debilitated by Cold, and provokes Appetite. Moreover it preserves from
the Epilepsie and Apoplexy, purges the Brain, drys the Head and whole Body
oppressed with phlegmatic Humors and Catarrhs, and defends the Head from pain.
In the Epilepsie it is given in Peony-water, Lily of the valley, etc. In pains
of the Head, often proceeding from the impurities of the Stomach afflicting the
Brain, it is given in Betony-water, etc. In all Fevers it is given in water of
the lesser Centaury, Carduus, etc. The dose is from half a scruple to a scruple.

Elixir Sulphuris, or Elixir of Sulphur.
Take Oriental Saffron and red Myrrh, of each an ^unce and a half; Mastich,
Benzoin, Cardamoms the ^ess, Cinnamon, of each an ounce; juice of Liquorish,
Con^ectio Alkermes, roots of Elicampane, of each six drams; Alipta Moschata a
dram. Mix all and make a Powder, to which add white Sugar Candy two ounces,
then wet it with rectified Spirit of Wine, so as it may be made into a Paste;
afterward pour upon it well rectified Spirit of Sulphur, that it may swim above
it four fingers, let them stand thus and digest and circulate for a month. At
last what is tinctured and extracted separate by inclination, and what remains
in the bottom, pour on it fresh Spirit of Wine, separate them as before, and
mix the tinctured Liquors together, and keep them for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is an excellent Medicine in the affects of the
Thorax and Lungs. It cleanses the Breast from impurities and Catarrhs. It
takes away the Cough as well new as inveterate and confirmed. It gives content
of Mind to those afflicted with Consumptions, Melancholy, Sorrow, and eases
the pain of the Heart or Stomach. It helps the straitness of the Breast,
difficulty of Breathing, Chronical Asthma. Moreover it comforts the Heart,
preserves from Putrefaction, prolongs Life, and keeps back Old age: Neither
need we fear that its sharpness will irritate the Cough, for it soon penetrates
and resolves, and immediately gives ease. The dose or way of giving of it is in
some Vehicle that may take off its sharpness; for it cannot be taken by it
self, but always with an appropriate Vehicle: And is most profitably given in
our Pectoral Syrups or Waters.

Elixir Poeoniae, or Elixir of Peony.
Take roots of Palma Christi, Angelica and Pellitory, of each an ounce; Misleto
of the Oak, Fenil seed, Anacardus, of each six drams; flowers of Rosemary,
Stoechas and Lavender, of each three drams; shavings (...) Elks horn and Man's
Skull, true Castor, of each a dra^ and a half; dried Marjoram a handful, Spirit
of Win^ rectified two pound. Let all be cut and bruised an^ infused in a glass
Vessel close stopped, let them macerate and digest for fourteen days, and
afterward distill it by an Alembick: Then to the distilled Liquor add roots,
flowers and seeds of Peony duly gathered, of each an ounce; species Diamoschu
dulce, Diaxyloaloes, of each half an ounce. Mix them, and set them to digest in
a gentle heat for a month, often stirring them; afterward take the tinged
Spirit of Wine by inclination, and draw off at least half of it: let the rest
remain with the extracted Essence, of which take twelve ounces, Spirit of
Vitriol carefully rectified and Spagirically impregnate with native Cinnabar,
four ounces, Salt of Peony a dram and a half. Let them be all well mixed, and
set to digest and circulate for eight days.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It may be deservedly called a specific Epileptick
Medicine for its admirable virtues and properties: For in curing the Epilepsie,
it exceeds all other Remedies. It is also good in all dangerous diseases of the
Head, such are the Apoplexy, Palsy, Vertigo, Swimming, etc. Also in the stupor
of the Brain, Catarrhs, Suffocation of the Matrix, Colic, etc. it is of great
use. The dose and way of giving is to alter its acid sapor, and give it in
appropriate Vehicles, as suppose our Epileptick water, or in water of the
flowers of Peony, Lavender, Tiel-tree, Lily of the valley, etc. continuing of
it nine days together; and let the Patient fast for two or three hours at least
after the taking of the Medicine.

Elixir Febrile, or an Elixir for Fevers.
Take of our Species febrifuge four ounces, long Pepper, Cloves and Nutmegs, of
each an ounce; the lesser Centaury, Carduus and Wormwood, of each six handfuls;
Cinquefoil and Rue, of each three handfuls. All being pulverized and mixed,
extract their Tincture with the best Spirit of Wine, pour off the tinctured
Spirit and pour on fresh, so long till all the Tincture and Essence be
thoroughly extracted. Lastly, draw off half the Spirit in Balneo, and the
remaining Spirit, together with the Essence, filter through a brown Paper, and
in a glass Vessel well stopped keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. After the body has been duly purged, it preserves,
cures and drives away all kinds of Fevers. It is given in the Fit, or just
before it, so that it may work with the Fit. The dose is from a dram to half an
ounce in water of the lesser Centaury, Carduus, Wormwood, or in a draught of
warm Beer: But in robust bodies it is given from half an ounce to six drams. Or
it may in ill habits of body, Dropsy, etc. with good success be mixed with
common Drink; for by its bitterness it expels all Putrefaction, and by its
thinness it opens all Obstru ctions.

SECT. XVIII. Of compound Spirits of Wine.
Spiritus Vini Cephalicus, or a Spirit of Wine for the Head.
TAke Fenil seeds three ounces, roots of Peony dul^ collected, Misleto of the
Oak, Anacardus, o^ each an ounce; Iuniper-berries six drams Marjoram, Balm,
Origanum, Hyssop and Sage, of eac^ a handful; flowers of Stoechas, Lily of the
Valley, Ros^ mary, Primrose and Lavender, of each two pugils. L^ them be grossly
cut and bruised, and then infused in eight pound of common Spirit of Wine;
after due digestion, let them be distilled in B M. and in the distilled Liquor
again infuse Coriander seeds prepared, seeds of mountain Osier, Peony and
Caraways, of each half an ounce; species of Diomoschu dulce and Diambra, of
each three drams; Cardamoms the less, Nutmegs, the lesser Galangal, Coves, of
each two drams; sweet Cane, Cubebs and Mace, of each a dram; white Amber
prepared, wood of Aloes, Clovegilly-flowers, red Roses, of each half a dram.
Let them all stand in digestion for eight days, then distill them in Balnco, and
reserve the Spirit for use: they that please may edulcorate it with white Sugar
Candy, or with Essence of Peony flowers, Clovegilly-flowers, Violets, red
Roses, or grains of Chermes, or any other with which it may be variously tinged.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is of great use in all cold affects of the Head,
applied both internally and externally: Also it eases those who are sorrowful
and fearful, and it helps those also that talk in their sleep; for it does
not only warm, dry and comfort the Head, and consume cold Catarrhs, but also
roborates the other Members. I commend it for an excellent Medicine in the
Vertigo, Epilepsie, Apoplexy, Palsy, Convulsions and Trembling. The dose is
from one spoonful to two, etc.

Spiritus Vini Aromaticus, or an Aromatic Spirit of Wine.
Take Confectio Alkermes an ounce, roots of Florentine Flower-de-luce, red
Roses, of each half an ounce; wood of Cassia, Citron peel, wood of Aloes,
Cloves, of each two drams; Cardamoms the less, Nutmegs, Cubebs, Mace, Zedoary,
of each a dram. All being pulvetized and mixed, infuse them in six pound of
simple Spirit of Wine for eight days, shaking them often in the time; afterward
distill them in an Alembick, and the distilled Spirit edulcorate with a
sufficient quantity of white Sugar Candy.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It comforts the Heart in full-grown persons who are of
a cold Constitution; it also roborates the Breast, Stomach, Liver, Spleen, etc.
it also strengthens the Reins, and expels cold and serous Humors. The dose is
morning and evening from one spoonful to two.

Spiritus Vini Odontalgicus, or Spirit of Wine good for the Toothache.
Take Chips of Guajacnm four ounces, roots of Pellitory two ounces, seeds of
Stavesacre and Henbane, Pomegranate peels, Turkish Galls, of each four ounces;
Cloves, white Ginger, long Pepper and Olibanum, of each half an ounce; flowers
of wild Poppy, Thebane Opium, Camphire, of each two drams; Indian Tabaco, Sage,
Arsmart, wild Mints, of each a dram. Being bruised and mixed, infuse them in
six pound of simple Spirit of Wine, and let them stand in digestion fourteen
days, and then distill them in Balneo.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. Let it be held in the mouth a while, and spit out
again, and let this be repeated if there be occasion, and it is a present
Remedy; for it effectually takes away all the pain of the Teeth. Sometimes also
for the greater content of those who use it, it may be tinctured with flowers
of Poppies, and being tinctured, kept for use.

Spiritus Vini Otalgicus, or Spirit of Wine for the Hearing.
Take a hundred Pismires Eggs, bitter Almonds an ounce, roots of black
Hellebore, Garden Radishes, Sowbread, English Galangal, of each an ounce;
Pomegranate peel six drams, Bay Berries husked, Iuniper-berries, of each half
an ounce; seeds of Fenil, Cummin, Anise and Caraway, of each three drams; Pulp
of Coloquintida, true Castor, of each a dram and a half; Marjoram, Wormwood,
Savin and Rue, of each a dram. Bruise them, and being mixed, infuse them in
four pound of the best rectified Spirit of Wine, and after due digestion, let
them be distilled in Balneo; yet do it ingeniously, lest you break your Glass.
The Spirit being abstracted, add to it a sufficient quantity of live
Millepedes, and digest them all, so long till the Spirit be tinctured: this
being done, filter it and keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. A few drops of this Spirit dropped into the Ears
morning and evening, and the Ears stopped with muskified Cotton, take away
deafness and thickness of hearing; nay, it is an excellent Medicine in the
ringing, noise and hissing of the Ears, also in the thickness of hearing, etc.
But in these Affects, Bread a little under-baked and taken hot out of the Oven,
and the lower Crust broken off and dipped into this Spirit, and so applied to
the Ear (but it will be convenient to lay some Cloth to the part to keep it
from burning) so that the Vapor may be received into the Head, is much better.
And let this Method be continued till the evil cease.

Spiritus Vini Acovisticus.
Take Pismires Eggs and Millepedes alive, of each thirty one; bitter Almonds
half an ounce, Bay Berries husked, Iuniper-berries and Savin, of each two
drams; Cummin seeds, roots of round Cyperus Grass, of each a dram; Earthworms
thrice dried, Tabaco, Wormwood, of each half a dram; white Amber prepared, true
Castor, of each a scruple; Oriental Saffron ten grains. Let them be grossly
bruised and infused in sixteen ounces of Spirit of Wine, let them digest for
eight days, often shaking them in the time, then filter it, and keep the tinged
Spirit for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Spirit is a Secret in Deafness and thickness of
Hearing, and the noise in the Ears also, though inveterate. And the use of it
is this, drop a few drops into the Ear in the morning fasting, and at night
before supper, and afterward stop the Ear with some muskified Cotton.

Spiritus Vini Pectoralis, or a Pectoral Spirit of Wine.
Take small Raisons and Aniseeds, of each four ounces; Lohoch sanum and expert.
and Pine-nuts, of each two ounces; extracted juice of Liquorish an ounce and a
half, Conserve of flowers of Hyssop, Violets and Comfrey, of each an ounce;
Cinnamon six drams, species of Diatragacanth frigid. Diaireos simple, Diarrhodon
Abbatis, of each half an ounce; Cardamoms the less, Oriental Saffron, Mace, of
each a dram and a half; Maidenhair, Horehound, of each a dram; flowers of
Marshmallows, Clotsfoot and Sage, of each half a dram. All being bruised and
mixed, let them infuse eight days in eight pound of simple Spirit of Wine, then
dist^l in Balneo, and the abstracted Liquor edulcorate with white Sugar Candy.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is of excellent use in cold Catarrhs, diseases of
the Breast, Cough, old Asthma's and difficulty of Breathing. The dose is from
one spoonful to two. It also purges and cleanses the Breast from all thick
and viscid Humors, and opens all Obstructions there.

Spiritus Vini Juniperinus, or a Spirit of Wine with Juniper.
Take Spirit of Wine Iuniperated two pound, Sugar Candy bruised half a pound.
Mix them in a fit Vessel, and let the Spirit be set on fire, that they may mix
together, and while the Spirit flames, stir it sometimes with a Knife or a
Spatula, till the Sugar is all dissolved, then strain it, and tie up two
scruples of Oriental Saffron in a Nodulus, and let it hang in the Liquor, and
so keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a good Medicine in the Asthma, difficulty of
Breathing, vices of the Breast, Cough, weakness and windiness of the Stomach,
pains of the Belly, etc. Moreover it provokes Urine, helps the Stone, Ruptures,
Convulsions, and Suffocations of the Womb. The dose is from one spoonful to two
at a time.

Spiritus Vini Stomachicus, or Spirit of Wine for the Stomach.
Take of the best Cinnamon four ounces, Galangal the less, Aniseeds, of each two
ounces; Cloves, Nutmegs, of each an ounce; water Mints, Rosemary, of each half
an ounce; sweet Cane, white Ginger, red Roses, of each two drams. All being
grossly bruised, let them infuse in eight pound of simple Spirit of Wine, and
after due digestion, let them be distilled in Balneo, and the Spirit being
drawn off, edulcorate either with white Sugar Candy or with Gelly of Quinces.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is good for those who have a bad Appetite, and a
depraved Digestion, a cold distempered Stomach, Hiccup, Loathing of Meat,
Vomiting, Dog-hunger, four Belchings, straitness of the Breast, and for cold
Constitutions oppressed with too much humidity; but it is most agreeable to Old
folks, etc. It wonderfully comforts and restores the natural Heat, preserves
from Putrefaction. It sharpens the Sight, and the Mind also in those who are
apt to be forgetful, and keeps back Old age. The dose is from one spoonful to
two.

Spiritus Vini Nephriticus, or a Spirit of Wine for the Stone in the Kidneys,
etc.
Take roots of Restharrow and Marshmallows, of each three ounces; Cucumer two
ounces, Liquorish, Asarabacca, of each an ounce and a half; seeds of Gromel
three ounces, seeds of white Saxifrage, Roman Nettles, Parsley, Radishes and
Anise, of Rhubarb, round Birthwort, the lesser Galangal, Cinnamon, Mace, white
Ginger and Horstail, of each an ounce; Perch stone, Jews stone, Sponge, Lapis
Lyncis, Snail-shells prepared, of each six drams; Cassia fistula, Winter
Cherries, Iuniper-berries, Venice Treacle, Goats blood, Crabs eyes, Cockal bone
of a Hares foot, of each half an ounce. Being pulverized and mixed, let them
infuse in six pound of simple Spirit of Wine (or a sufficient quantity) let
them stand in digestion fourteen days, after let them be distilled in Balneo.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It breaks the Stone, and brings it away in small
pieces: It cleanses the Reins and Bladder from all impurities, and at last
makes the Patient produce a clear Urine: And what is more, it does so cure and
bring away the gravelly matter by Urine, that it shall never breed nor generate
any more. Moreover there is not a Remedy like it in the Colic and suffocation
of the Matrix; for it loosens most humors, and dissolves all ventosity. The
dose is from one spoonful to two or three.

Spiritus Vini Lithontripticus, or a Spirit of Wine for the Stone.
Take roots of Elicampane, Pimpinella and Parsley, of each an ounce;
Pearch-stone, River Crabs eyes, Goats blood, of each six drams; seeds of
Water-Carrots, white Saxifrage, Fenil, Anise, Gromel, Roman Nettles, Broom,
Iuniper-berries, Winter-Cherries, of each half an ounce; species of
Lithrontribon, Diathamaron, and Trion Pipereon, of each two drams. All being
bruised and mixed, let them infuse in four pound of simple Spirit of Wine for
the space of fourteen days, then distill them in Balneo for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It does not only break the Stone in the Reins and
Bladder, but brings it away also in sand and small pieces by Urine. The dose
either for Preservation or Cure, is from one spoonful to two, by it self, or
mixed with other Medicines.

Spiritus Vini Paralyticus, or a Spirit of Wine for the Palsy.
Take Earthworms dried, Iuniper-berries, seeds of Rocket, of each two ounces;
roots of Angelica, Pellitory and Aron, of each an ounce; flowers of Lavender,
long Pepper, Rosemary, Sage, green Garlic, of each half an ounce; Mastich,
Myrrh, yellow Amber, Euphorbium, Castor, of each three drams. Let them be
bruised and mixed, and then infused in four pound of well rectified Spirit of
Wine: let them digest for a month, then filter it, and the Spirit with the
Essence extracted reserve for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. The paralytick Members anointed with this tinctured
Spirit (universal Remedies being premised) and Linen Clothes wet in it, and
applied to the affected parts, you will find a wonderful operation, and a happy
restitution in a short time.

Spiritus Vini Theriacalis, or Spirit of Wine with Treacle.
Take Venice Treacle four ounces, roots of Angelica, Elicampane and
Swallow-wort, white Diptamus, Devilsbit, Snakeweed, Pimpinella, Tormentil,
Zedoary, Citron seeds, of each an ounce. Make all into a gross Powder and mix
them: on which pour eight pound of simple Spirit of Wine. Let them digest
fourteen days, and then digest them in B. M. and keep the abstracted liquor for
use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This is a most excellent Spirit to preserve people from
the Plague: And is also called a Catholic Medicine, because it consists of
just twelve Ingredients. It may be taken from one spoonful to two, three or
four hours before dinner, or before they go abroad; and is to be used every
morning. It prevents the danger of contagious Air, and does revive the Spirits:
But in curing it is given from two spoonfuls to three in Carduus-water, or in
our Aqua Cornu Cervi, and it expels the Venom plentifully by Sweat.

SECT. XIX. Of compound distilled Waters.
Aqua Epileptica, or an Epileptick Water.
TAke Roots of Peony duly gathered two ounces, roots of round Birthwort, white
Diptamus and Angelica, of each an ounce and a half; Misleto of the Oak,
Peacocks dung, Squills prepared, Anacardus, of each an ounce; seeds of male
Peony, Coriander, Caraway and Fenil, of each six drams; a dried Secundine of a
male Birth, Castor, of each half an ounce; Carduus, Millefoil, wild Rue, Sage
and Rosemary, of each two drams. Let them be cut and bruised, and infused in
twelve pound of Spanish Wine, and set to digest in a warm place for eight days,
the Vessel being often shaken in the time; afterward distill them by an
Alembick, and into the distilled Liquor again put these things following:
Flowers of male Peony, Lily of the valley, of each four ounces; flowers of
Betony, Teil-tree, Lavender, Balm, Borage and Bugloss, of each an ounce and a
half; Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Cubebs, Mace, long Pepper and Cloves, of each an ounce.
Mix them, and over a gentle fire in Balneo, distill them the second time.

Virtue, Use and Dose. It is an effectual Medicine against the Epilepsie,
Vertigo, Lethargy, Catalepsie and Subeth: which Diseases it chiefly cures. It
is given in the Fit from an ounce to an ounce and a half: But in preservation
at the four Quarters of the Moon, especially in all moist and nebu^ous
constitution of the Air, from one spoonful to two.

Aqua Apoplectica, or a Water for the Apoplexy.
Take seeds of Rocket a pound, seeds of Mountain-Osier, Caraway and Anise, of
each an ounce; roots of Avens four ounces, roots of male Peony, Pellitory and
water Acorus, of each two ounces; Iuniper-berries four ounces, Bay Berries
husked an ounce and an half, Groundpine, Hyssop, Marjoram, Origanum and
Vervain, of each half an ounce. Let them be grossly b^uised and beaten, and put
into a large Matrace with ten pound of Spanish Wine, and two pound of Spirit of
Roses. Let them stand in digestion fourteen days, and then distill them in
Balneo, and into the distilled Liquor put fresh flowers of the Lily of the
valley, Primroses and Lavender, of each four ounces; Sage, Marigold, Betony and
Rosemary, of each an ounce and a half; both sorts of Cardamoms, Cabebs, wood of
Aloes, Nutmegs, Mace, Cinnamon, the lesser Galangal, long Pepper and Cloves, of
each an ounce. Mix them, and again digest them for three days, and over a
gentle fire distill it in Balneo; and afterward rectify it by it self with a
scruple of Gallia Moschata, wrapping Cotton about the Snout of the Alembick. At
last the water being put into a close Glass, keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This is rightly called the water of Philosophers,
because it is of a wonderful virtue in comforting the Brain and Nerves. It also
strengthens the Memory and Intellect exceedingly. It preserves from the
Apoplexy and Palsy, and all other dangerous diseases of the Head. It does
excellently discuss and attenuate Humors, renders the Blood pure, and gives a
lively Color to the body: But chiefly and especially it cures the Apoplexy,
and may be as well outwardly applied as taken inwardly. The dose is from one
spoonful to two, etc.

Aqua de Xyloaloe, or a Water of Wood of Aloes.
Take of the species of Confectio Anacardina an ounce, seeds of mountain Osier,
Caraway, Fenil and Lavender, of each six drams; leaves of Marjoram, Rosemary
and Sage, flowers of Primrose, Stoechas, red Roses and Rosemary, of each two
drams; lesser Galangal, Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Cubebs, the lesser
Cardamoms, of each a dram. Let them be grossly bruised and cut, and infused in
four pound of Spanish Wine, let them stand in the Sun, or in some other place
to digest for a month; and then add to it water of the Lily of the valley and
flowers of St. Iohns-wort, of each two pound; water of the flowers of Bugloss,
Balm and Betony, of each a pound. Mix them and distill all in Balneo; and in the
distilled Liquor again infuse the best wood of Aloes four ounces, Cassia lignea
an ounce, species of Diaxyloaloes and Diambra, of each half an ounce; Oriental
Saffron a dram. Mix them, and after due digestion again distill them in Balneo,
and the distilled water reserve for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This is a most illustrious and renowned Water in
comforting and strengthening a weak Memory; for it opens all the obstructions
in the passages of the Brain, and consumes all thick and viscous humors in the
Head. The dose is from one spoonful to two taken in the morning, and at the
same time to anoint the nape of the Neck with the same liquor, and also rub it
in well, and let the Patient observe a regular Diet: So it strengthens the
Intellect, removes forgetfulness, and wonderfully sharpens the Wit.

Aqua Mastichina.
Take water of Water-Mints a pound, Cloves infused in Spanish Wine, of the best
Mastich an ounce. Let them boil in a double Vessel for two hours, and then
filter it, and edulcorate it with Syrup of Quinces, and keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Water is of great efficacy in the nauseousness and
loathing of the Stomach, in Vomiting and the Disease Cholera, which are known
Evils. It also strengthens the Stomach, and roborates the retentive Faculty.
The dose is two ounces.

Aqua Hypnotica, or a Somniferous Water.
Take seeds of white and black Poppy, of each seven ounces, Melon seeds husked,
seeds of Anise and Dill, of each an ounce; bitter Almonds two ounces, Liquorish
and Nutmegs, of each an ounce and a half; Cardamoms the less and Mace, of each
an ounce and half; Oriental Saffron, flowers of wild Poppy and Violets, of each
a dram. Let them be cut and bruised, and then infused in waters of Lettice
three pound, of red Roses and Water-Lily, of each two pound; of Purslain and
Endive, of each a pound. Mix them, and set them to digest in a warm place for
two or three days, and then distill them in Balneo.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Water is far more safe in continual watching,
sharp pains, and in the heat and dryness of burning Fevers, than those
Medicines made out of the substance of Henbane, Mandrake and Opium, because of
their virulence and excessive stupefactive quality. The dose is from half an
ounce to two, either by it self, or by adding Almonds and the four greater cold
Seeds to it, and so make it into an Emulsion.

Aqua Narcotica, or a Narcotick Water.
Take juice of the flowers of wild Poppy depurated sixteen ounces, Opium
dissolved in water of Nightshade two ounces, bark of the roots of Mandrake,
Oriental Saffron, of each half an ounce; Styrax Calamit. two drams, wood of
Aloes a dram. Mix them, and distill them in Balneo, drawing off the Liquor three
times from the same Faeces, which Chemists call Cohobation.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It provokes sleep wonderfully, and is a most excellent
profitable Anodyne in all pains, unquietness and extreme watchings: And it
operates to a Miracle in those troubled with sorrowful and pensive Melancholy;
for it refreshes the animal Spirits, takes away sorrow, and discusseth all
those ill Vapors that rise and offend the Brain. It restrains the heat of
Choler, and mitigates the fury of Phrensies and Madness, and suddenly produces
rest. The dose is from one dram to two.

Aqua Ophthalmica aurea, or the golden Water for the Eyes.
Take the Decoction of Brasil wood made with a little Alum in Spanish Wine,
water of the roots, herb and flowers of Valerian distilled in the same Wine,
Sugar distilled with a like quantity of ripe Strawberries, of each twelve
ounces; of fragrant Rose Water eight ounces, water of Fenil and Vervain, of
flowers of Succory, Eyebright, Pennyroyal and Garden Rue, of each six ounces;
Virgin Honey four ounces, Tutty prepared an ounce and a half, white Vitriol,
Crocus Metallorum, red Myrrh, Aloes rosata, of each half an ounce; white Sugar
Candy and Camphire, of each three drams; white Ginger, Cloves, black Pepper,
Bay Berries and Cinnamon, of each a dram; Salt of Celandine, Valerian and
Saturn, of each a scruple. All these being well mixed one with another, make of
all, according to Art, a Collyrium, which in a Glass close shut, set to digest
for a month either in the Sun, or in a gentle heat, shaking it every day, and
so keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is of admirable use in all affects of the Eyes: For
it perfectly cures all distempers of the Eyes, as Inflammations,
Bleer-eyedness, Fistula's, Films, Spots, etc. and it takes away the violent
pain thereof; and if it does not cure the same day, yet it does in a short
time, if a drop or two be but dropped into the Eyes carefully morning, noon and
night.

Aqua Ophthalmica viridis, or a green Water for the Eyes.
Take Virgin Honey eight ounces, ripe Strawberries three ounces, white Vitriol
and common Salt, of each half an ounce. Mix them, and let them stand in a cool
moist place, in a Copper Vessel often stirring it, till it wax green, or shows
it self of a green color; then add of Spanish Wine a pound, water of Roses and
flowers of Elder, of each half a pound; waters of wild Cummin, Eyebright,
Celandine, Valerian and Blue-bottles, of each four ounces. Let them be mixed
and set to digest in a well stopped Glass for a month in a gentle heat, or what
is better, exposed abroad both to the Sun and Dew for certain weeks, and then
the Liquor will appear green, and separate it self into the superficies, the
impure Faeces remaining in the bottom, from which it is separated; at last
having stood in the Sun long enough, pour it off and keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a most solemn Medicine for all distempers of the
Eyes, as Contusions, Inflammations, Ardor, Redness, Blearedness, Fistula's,
Pustles, thin Rheum, etc. And the use of it is thus, drop a drop or two into
the Eyes twice or thrice a day, and let the water be diffused all over the Eye,
that so the infirm part may be the sooner cured.

Aqua Ophthalmica subnigra.
Take of generous Greek Wine a pound, water of Celandine, white Roses,
Eyebright, Fenil and Garden Rue, of each six ounces; Cloves, Epatick Aloes,
Tutty prepared, of each five drams; Camphire six drams. Mix them, and in a
glass Viol expose them to the Sun all the Dog Days, shaking the Glass once a
day; which being done, keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It makes Rheum thin, discusseth redness, sucks up the
cause of Blearedness renders the Eye clear, and by its nourishing quality
extenuates the adjacent thick humors. The way of using it, is to drop a little
of it into the Eye, as before; or you may dip a Rag in this Collyrium, and lay
it upon the Eye.

Aqua Ophthalmica de Cancris, or an Eyewater of Crabs.
Take River Crabs alive (in the month of June, t^^ Sun and Moon being both in
Cancer) thirty one. Ad^ to these as much Celandine as will equal them i^
weight, beat these together, and then add to the^ Fenil seeds bruised an ounce,
Sea-Beans prepared, (...) Camphire, of each half an ounce; Cloves, Epatick Al^^
and Tutty prepared, of each two drams. Mix them, an^ divide them into three
equal parts, and distill the first in Balneo, then put the second part into a
Cucurbit, and pour the distilled water upon it, and draw it off again, as at
first, then put the third part in, and pour upon that all the distilled water
already drawn off, and so distill it the third time. And so you have that most
famous Water of Celandine truly prepared. And if you will, calcine the Faeces,
and extract a Salt, and add it to the Medicine, it will be far more efficacious.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This is a most precious Eyewater, and also esteemed at
a great price, of which Crollius in his Basilica Chymica has made mention in
these words: There may be made a wonderful and stupendous Ophthalmick of
Celandine and Crabs. Which if it be prepared by due artifice and time, it
virtually restores the Eye, though hurt to desperation, and agglutinates all
wounds in those parts in the space of twenty four hours. Thus far Crollius. But
the way of preparing it, out of mere envy he would not reveal, or else he never
knew it, unless by relation, or perhaps had stole it from another. Of this
Water drop one, two or more drops into the Eyes of the Patient, or it may be
used with a Feather dipped in the water, and then anointed with it twice,
thrice or four times a day, according as necessity requires: and let this be
continued till the Patient be restored to his former health again.

Aqua Ocularis interna, or a Water for the Eyes inwardly taken.
Take Juniper berries two ounces, Cassia lignea an ounce, seeds of Mountain
Osier and Fenil, of each half an ounce; seeds of Rue three drams, species
Diamoschu dulce, Nutmegs, wood of Aloes, of each two drams; leaves of
Eyebright, Vervain and Rue, tops of Rosemary, Sage, of Pennyroyal, Dill and
Fenil, of each a dram and a half; flowers of greater Celandine, Betony,
Lavender, red Roses and Rosemary, of each a dram. Let them be macerated in six
pound of Spanish Wine the space of eight days, and afterward distilled in
Balneo.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is very effectual (universal Medicines being
premised) for the weakness and dullness of sight, and to comfort the visive
Spirits, and to rectify the Brain and the humors thereof. The dose morning and
evening is from half an ounce to an ounce and a half.

Aqua Pectoralis, or a Pectoral Water.
Take bitter Almonds and small Raisons, of each half a pound; roots of
Florentine Flower-de-luce, roots of Liquorish, Marshmallows and Coltsfoot, of
each an ounce; roots of lesser Mallows, Comfrey and Elicampane, of each half an
ounce; seeds of Fenil, Anise, Quinces, Carduus benedictus, Carduus Mariae,
Myrtles and Nettles, of each three drams; Oriental Saffron, Cardamoms the less,
Mace, Cinnamon, of each two drams; both sorts of Lungwort, Fluellin, Horehound,
Ground Ivy, Maidenhair, Scabious, Hyssop and Sage, of each a dra^ and a half;
flowers of Chamomil, Coltsfoot, Violets and Hearts-ease, of each a dram. Let
them be cut and bruised, and infused in twelve pound of the best old Hydromel,
and digested for eight days, afterward distilled in Balneo.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It operates to a Miracle in all the distempers of the
Thorax, as straitness of the Breast, Asthma and Cough, etc. It cuts, attenuates
and deterges thick and viscous phlegm gathered in the Lungs and cavity of the
Breast, and renders it easy to be spit out. It also comforts the Stomach, and
with the help of our Species Diasulphuris it preserves from, and cures all
Putrefaction and Apostems. Moreover it does effectually help those who are
troubled with Phthisicks, Pleurisies, shortness of Breath, destillations of
Rheum, spitting of Blood, and other purulent Matter. The dose is from half an
ounce to one or two.

Aqua Antiphthisica, or an Anticonsumptive Water.
Take roots of great Comfry, flowers of red Roses, of each a pound; crumbs of
Wheat-bread four ounces, Pineapples and green Pistick Nuts, of each three
ounces; roots of China two ounces, flowers of Liverwort and Rosemary, pith of
Indian Nuts, of each an ounce; Mace half an ounce. Let them be bruised and
broken, and put into a large Matrace with water of Calves Lungs two pound,
Plantane water and Capon water, of each a pound; water of Cinnamon buglossated,
water of Fluellin and Scabious, of each half a pound. Let them stand in
digestion for eight days, often shaking them in the time; and afterward add to
them expressed juice of Coltsfoot and Goats milk, of each half a pound; the blood
of one Pig, Snails taken from their shells and bruised an ounce and a half,
Hens Livers three, Oriental Saffron a dram. Again mix them, and distill them by
an Alembick in Balneo Mariae.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Water has a wonderful operation, it certinly
cures the Phthisick or Consumption, it heals Ulcers of the Lungs, and cleanses
the Breast from thick humors: But in Phthisicks coming of Rheumatisms in the
Thorax, and in Asthma's, Pleurisy, etc. we usually give it in this Form
following with good success. Take of Aqua Antiphthisica nineteen ounces, white
Sugar candy three ounces, Lac Sulphuris two drams, flower of Sulphur a dram and
a half, Magistery of Oriental Pearls and red Coral, of each a dram. Mix them
ready for use. The dose is morning, noon and night from a spoonful to two. And
by the use of this Liquor only a man will grow fat, because it moistens,
lenifies, nourishes, comforts, restores the radical Moisture, and allays the
Cough: and is the only relief to extenuated, consumptive and hectical bodies;
for it restores them to their pristine health, and expels the Disease: but
before it be made use of, it should be diligently moved.

Aqua Pulmonis Vituli, or Water of a Calves Lungs.
Take the Heart, Lungs and Liver of a Calf (the fat and veins being cut off)
and add to it great Comfry roots four ounces, French Lungwort, Pimpernel,
Fluellin, Hyssop, Sage and Agrimony, of each half an ounce. Pour upon them a
sufficient quantity of the same water also, and boil them in a new well glazed
earthen Pot close covered. Take of this Broth, with the other things, three
pound, water of Borage, Bugloss and Roses, of each a pound; species
Diamargariton frigid. roots of Pimpinella, Cinnamon, of each an ounce; the for
greater cold Seeds, of each two drams; the Cordial Flowers, of each a dram. Mix
them, and distill them in an Alembick.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. Hectical and consumptive people may be nourished a long
time by the use of this Water; therefore not without reason was this
Description always esteemed among us of great price. The dose by it self is
from one spoonful to two.

Aqua Caponis, or Capon-water.
Take a Capon which you must boil in a well glazed new earthen Pot, according
to Art, with small Raisons, Pine-nuts and Liquorish, of each an ounce; Iujubes
and Sebestens, of each twelve; new dried Figs eight, Lungwort, Coltsfoot,
Endive and Lettice, of each half an ounce; flower of Violets and Betony, of
each a dram. The Decoction being finished, let all be bruised in a stone
Mortar, then take good Canary Wine three pound, water of Coltsfoot, Horehound
and Bugloss, of each a pound; the crum of white Bread steeped in Goats milk
half a pound, Conserve of Borage, Roses and Maidenhair, of each four ounces;
species of Diamargariton frigid. half an ounce, Cinnamon, Mace and Aniseeds, of
each two drams. Mix them, and distill it in an Alembick according to Art, and
the distilled Liquor keep for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Capon-water is most famous and effectual in all
Pectoral Diseases, as the Cough, Asthma, Phthisick, etc. and is given by it
self. The dose is from one spoonful to two or three.

Aqua Cinamomi Buglossata, or Cinamonwater Buglossated.
Take Bugloss water six pound, flowers of Violets and Roses, of each two pound;
Cinnamon a pound; bark of the roots of Bugloss three ounces, flowers of Borage
and Balm, of each an ounce; species Diarrhodon Abbatis half an ounce. Mix them,
and after due digestion distill them in Balneo.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It concocts, mollifies and resists Poisons; it also
comforts the Brain, Heart, Stomach, Liver and Spleen. It clears the Sight,
provokes Urine, and gives ease in diseases of the Reins and Bladder. The dose
is from one spoonful to two or three.

Aqua ex Cord Cervi, or Water of a Stags Heart.
Take a Stags heart cut into small pieces, Cinnamon half an ounce, Cloves,
Cardamoms the less, Galangal the less, Mace, Oriental Saffron, of each two
drams; wood of Aloes, yellow Sanders, Citron peels, seeds of Basil that smells
like Avens, of each a dram and a half; flowers of Lavender, Rosemary, Balm and
Sage, of each a dram. Let them be macerated all night in Spanish Wine, and in
the morning distill them in an Alembick in Balneo.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It comforts the Heart, and preserves it from trembling
and other dangerous accidents; sometimes also it cures the loss of Reason and
the defect of the Mind: For by its nourishing and increasing quality it raises
both the vital and natural Spirits, and relieves the Heart as speedily as any
thing. The dose is from one spoonful to two or three.

Aqua Cordialis frigida, or a cooling Cordial Water.
Take Conserve of red Roses a pound and a half, Rasberries a pound, species
Diarrhodon Abbatis, Diamargariton frigid. of each an ounce and a half; seeds of
Docks an ounce, Sanders red, white and yellow, of each half an ounce; the
Cordial Flowers, of each two drams. Mix them, and infuse them in these Waters
following: water of Sorrel, water-Lily, Strawberries, Violets, Borage and
Bugloss, of each a pound. Mix them, and digest them for some days, and then
again add Cinnamon water buglossated a pound and a half, juice of Quinces
depurated, juice of Lemmons and Citrons, of each half a pound. Again mix them;
and distill them by an Alembick in Balneo.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It does sweetly and effectually refresh and strengthen
the Heart in all burning Fevers, and all other hot and corrosive Diseases, by
which means it removes imbecility, and fortifies strength through the whole
body. It also helps those who are disturbed in Mind, whether it takes its
Original from the Heart or Stomach, it discusseth, and throws off all Poison,
and poisonous qualities that offend the Vitals, and it restores the Spirits
that languish with weakness from an excessive heat, to their pristine state and
strength. The dose is from one ounce to two.

Aqua Cordialis calida, or a hot Cordial Water.
Take Cinnamon four ounces, roots of Avens three ounces, Cloves, sealed Earth,
of each an ounce; both sorts of Cardamoms, Galangal the less, Mace, Zedoary,
the peels of yellow Oranges, Citron peels, seeds of Basil, of each half an
ounce; odoriferous wood of Aloes, Oriental Saffron, Spicknard, Pennyroyal
dried, of each three drams; flowers of Borage and Bugloss, of each a dram and a
half. All being pulverized and mixed, let them infuse eight days in four pound
of Spanish Wine; then add Cinnamon water distilled with Wine, Clove
gillyflowers, of each a pound and a half; flowers of Rosemary, Lavender, Balm
and Sage, of each a pound. Mix them, and in an Alembick in Balneo let it be
distilled.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It does help wonderfully in all cold affects of the
Heart, and is a good Remedy for its palpitation, and the defect of the Mind. It
cures the Syncope and Swooning, refreshes the vital Spirits: it takes away a
sorrowful heaviness and the cause thereof, and exhilarates the Heart. It also
restores those to health, who are weak by the continuance of a lingering
Disease, and is an excellent Roborative. It renders the whole body lively,
retards Baldness: For whosoever is old, and uses this Medicine, will need no
other Conservation for his Health. The dose is from one spoonful to two or
three at a time.

Aqua acetosa Stomachalis, or a tart Stomach-water.
Take white Sugar a pound, Conserve of Roses and Rose Water, of each four
ounces; Spirit of Vitriol rectified half an ounce. Make a Mixture; and when it
is strained, keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This tart Stomach-water is good in any intemperance as
well cold as hot; and is very effectual in the loss of Appetite or Loathing,
which is caused by the vitriolated Juice that is vitiated in the bottom of the
Stomach, and for this property it cannot be sufficiently praised: For it does
most excellently restore Concoction whether it be lost, impaired, or vitiated,
and fortifies the Stomach. It is to be given in some proper Vehicle (two hours
before meat without exercise, or an hour before meat with exercise after it)
respecting the disease; for in a hot distemper it may be given in
Pomegranate-wine or Syrup of Lemmons or of the Juice of Citrons, or Tincture of
Roses, etc. but in a cold defect with our hot Cordial or Stomach-water,
Wormwood-wine, Malmsy, or other generous Wine, etc. The dose of it is so much
as will make the Liquor it is taken in tart and sharp.

Aqua Stomachica calida, or a hot Stomach-water.
Take lesser Galangal an ounce and a half, Cloves, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, white
Ginger, Mastich, roots of Burnet, Elicampane, water-Acorus, of each an ounce;
water-Mints six drams, Rosemary, Sage and Wormwood, of each half an ounce; both
sorts of Cardamoms, sweet Reed, Mace, long Pepper, Cummin seeds, of each three
drams; Squinanth, Spicknard, wood of Aloes, of each two drams. Bruise and mix
them, and macerate them in eight pound of Malmsy Wine, and of Balm and
Pennyroyal water, of each a pound: let them digest eight days, and then distill
them in Balneo.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It warms the Ventricle, and rectifies the coldness
thereof. It allays the Gripes, pains and punctures of it. It also digests and
concocts Phlegm and crude Humors collected there. It stays Vomiting and
Loathing, and is a present Remedy for sour Belching. It is a Divine help in
Leanness and the disposition of Old age, and to excite appetite and heat in old
people, to expel thick ventose humors, to open obstructions, and to resolve
moist humors and corrupt superfluities. The dose is from one spoonful to two or
three, or from half an ounce to one or two.

Aqua Epatica frigida, or a cold Epatick Water.
Take ripe Strawberries a pound, species Diarrhodon Abbatis four ounces, roots
of Succory, Agrimony, Scorzonera and Eryngo, of each an ounce; flowers of the
lesser Centaury, Liverwort, Borage and red Roses, of each half an ounce;
Rhubarb three drams, Sanders three sorts, of each two drams; the four greater
and lesser cold Seeds, Dock seeds, of each a dram and a half. Let them be cut
and bruised, and infused in four pound of red Wine. Let them infuse eight days,
and then add water of the flowers of Liverwort, Purslain, Sorrel, Endive,
Melons, Succory, Rasberries and Dodder, of each a pound. Mix them, and distill
by an Alembick in Balneo.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. The use of this Water is most safe and happy in its
success, in all Fevers, as burning, Tertians, Quotidians, Quartans, and other
noxious distempers rising from the heat of body, in which the Liver suffers.
Moreover it corrects and amends the intolerable and corrosive heat of the
Stomach, Lungs and Spleen. The dose is every other hour from one ounce to two
or three, by it self or with some specific Syrup.

Aqua Epatica calida, or a hot Epatick Water.
Take species Diacubeba three ounces, roots of bitter Costus, roots of
Smallage, Turmerick and Fenil, Iuniperberries, seeds of Anise, Cummin and
Carrots, of each an ounce; sweet Reed, Rhubarb, Cassia lignea, of each six
drams; Spicknard, Oriental Saffron and Squinanth, of each three drams;
Southernwood, Wormwood, Agrimony, Mother of Thyme and water-Germander, of each
half an ounce; flowers of Liverwort and golden Stoechas, of each a dram and a
half. All being faithfully bruised and mixed, put them into six pound of
generous Wine, and let them digest eight days; afterward add waters of lesser
Centaury, Succory, Fluellin, Maidenhair, Chamomil, Fumitory, Horehound,
Harts-tongne and Liverwort, of each half a pound. Mix them, and distill them in
an Alembick in Balneo.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is happily given in all cold diseases of the Liver,
and the obstructions thereof. It is good in ill habits of body and Dropsy. It
also eradicates the old chronical distempers both of Liver and Spleen, and is a
good remedy against their cold and moist affects: For it cuts and attenuates
thick and viscous humors collected in those parts. The dose is from one ounce
to two or three, by it self or with appropriate Syrups.

Aqua Splenetica, or a Water for the Spleen.
Take roots of both sorts of Fern, of Polypody and Smallage, of each an ounce
and a half; roots of round Birthwort, water-Acorus, sweet Reed and Lovage, of
each an ounce; Rhubarb, Cappar bark and Tamarisk, of each six drams; Pontick
Wormwood, Mugwort, Agrimony, Fumitory, Hart's-tongue, Dodder and Spleenwort, of
each half an ounce; seeds of Lovage, Fenil, Anise and Caraway, of each two
drams. Let them be grossly bruised and mixed, and put into ten pints of Rhenish
Wine, and after eight days digestion distill them in an Alembick in Balneo.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It attenuates and mollifies thick matter and melancholy
Juice collected in the Spleen and Mesaraick Veins, and opens their
obstructions. It dissolves Wind and Tumors, and cures the black Jaundice,
Hypochondriack Melancholy, and Quartan Agues. The dose is morning and evening
from one ounce to three.

Aqua Antihydropica, or a Water against the Dropsy.
Take seeds of Rocket half a pound, Ash, Cummin and Smallage, of each an ounce
and a half; roots of Acorus, Avens, Swallow-wort, Turmerick, bitter Costus,
dwarff Elder, Carduus and Sarsaparilla, of each an ounce; Rhubarb, the lesser
Galangal, Nutmegs and Cloves, of each six drams; Cappar bark, the middle bark
of Elder and Tamarisk, of each half an ounce; Agrimony and Bindweed, the tops
of green Juniper, of each half an ounce; flowers of Liverwort and Elder, of
each two drams. Let them be cut, bruised and mixed, and put into eight pound of
Malmsey Wine, and after fourteen days digestion in a warm place (the Vessel
being shaken often every day) then add water of Pontick Wormwood and
Southernwood, of each half a pound; of both sorts of Liverwort, Mugwort,
Carduus and Mother of Thyme, of each a pound. Mix them, and distill them in an
Alembick in Balneo.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a most proper Remedy for the Dropsy: For it
heats and comforts a cold Liver, opens its obstructions, and restores it to its
faculties. It dissipates thick flatulent Humors, consumes the cause of ill
Habits and Dropsies, and expels it by its Diaphoretick force. The dose is from
one ounce to two or three.

Aqua Antiscorbutica, or an Antiscorbutick Water.
Take wild Radishes cut into small pieces a pound, roots of Polypody two
ounces, Masterwort, Angelica and Zedoary, of each an ounce and a half; chips of
Guajacam and Sassafras, sweet Reed, the lesser Galangal, of each an ounce,
Cardamoms the less, Oriental Saffron, Fenil seeds, bark of Cappars and
Tamarick, of each six drams. Let them be cut and bruised, and put them into six
pound of Spanish Wine, and set to digest in a warm place for eight days,
shaking the Vessel often; and then add water of Scurvy Grass, of the lesser
Nettle, of Watercresses, of Stone-crop, of Celandine, of Moneywort and
Fumitory, of each a pound. Mix them, and distill them in an Alembick in Balneo
Mariae.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It properly cures in these Northern maritime Regions
that disease which they call the Scorbute or Scurvy; for it opens obstructions
of the Spleen, mollifies and attenuates the feculent melancholy humor. It also
rectifies the blood through the whole body, and comforts the Spleen
exceedingly. It is to be given for diverse mornings successively from one ounce
to two or three.

Aqua Anticolica seu Carminativa, or a Carminative against the Colic.
Take the rind of yellow Oranges six ounces, roots of Zedoary three ounces,
Bay Berries husked and Iuniperberries, of each an ounce and a half; sweet Reed,
lesser Galangal, Cinnamon, of each an ounce; of the four greater and lesser hot
Seeds, seeds of Chervil, Nigella and Dill, of each three drams. Let them be
grossly bruised and mixed, and put into eight pound of Malmsey Wine. Let them
infuse eight days; and then add water of the juice of Chamomil thrice
distilled, of Mother of Thyme distilled with Wine, of each a pound. Mix them,
and in an Alembick in Balneo distill them.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It cures the Colic to a Miracle, which has its
Original from a cold and moist matter with wind, universal Medicines being
premised. The dose is from one spoonful to two or three, or from one ounce to
two or three.

Aqua Benedicta Serpilli, or Aqua Benedicta of Mother of Thyme.
Take Mother of Thyme with its flowers, and gather it in the morning before
Sunrising, the Moon decreasing, eight ounces, Roman Chamomil two ounces,
Savory and Thyme, of each an ounce. Put them into eight pound of the best
Rhenish Wine, and let them infuse certain days, and distill them, and in the
distilled Liquor again infuse Mother of Thyme with its flowers eight ounces,
Cassia lignea an ounce, wood of Aloes and Mace, of each half an ounce. Cut them
small, and after due digestion, distill them again in an Alembick in Balneo, and
so it is truly prepared.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It stops all Catarrhs and Defluxions, and preserves the
Head from them. It roborates the Brain, Stomach, and all the Intestines being
vitiated with Cold. It stirs an Appetite, provokes Urine, expels the Stone,
mitigates the pains of the Belly, but chiefly the Colic. It dissipates wind
from the Bowels and Hypochonders. It allays Pains and Hiccup, stays Vomiting,
provokes Women's Courses, brings forth the Birth, Afterbirth, and dead Child.
It dissolves concreted Blood. It is a good Remedy for those oppressed with a
Compression of the Lungs, difficulty of Breathing, or any Rupture in those
parts. The dose is from half an ounce to two.

Aqua Castitatis, or the Chaste Water.
Take sealed Earth four ounces, seeds of Agnus castus an ounce and a half,
seeds of Rue, water-Lily, Lettice and white Poppy, of each an ounce; seeds of
Hemp, Sorrel, Purslain, Gromel, Endive, Cummin and Coriander prepared, of each
six drams; roots of white Diptamus, Hounds-tongue, Bistort and Florentine
Flower de luce, of each half an ounce; of all the sorts of Sanders, Magistery
of Saturn and Camphire, of each three drams; Pontick Wormwood, water-Mints,
Shepherds-purse, Sowthistle, Vervain and leaves of Willow, of each two drams.
Let them be cut and bruised, and put into ten pound of red Stiptick Wine, let
them digest eight days, and then digest them in Balneo.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Water is not undeservedly called Chaste, because it
does so restrain and bridle the fiery prolifick Seed of Monks, Nuns, Widows,
and others who are appointed to live a single life, so that all libidinous
persons use it, who are Lovers of Chastity and Modesty, and are willing to
suppress those excitements without danger to their health: For by its frigidity
and a certain occult quality it dissolves the Venereal matter. Besides, it
cures the Gonorrhoea or Flux of Seed without any trouble, universal Remedies
being premised. The dose is morning or evening, or in time of necessity, from
one ounce to three.

Aqua Febrifuga, or an Ague-shasing Water.
Take of our Species febrifuga, the lesser Centaury, Carduus benedictus,
Cinquefoil and Wormwood, of each four ounces. Macerate them in Goats whey, and
distill them in Sand, cohobating thrice, that is, pour the abstracted Liquor
upon the Faeces three times, and draw it off again.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It does without doubt utterly extirpate bastard
Tertians and Quartans, universal Medicines being premised. The dose is from two
ounces to three either in the morning or in time of the Fit.

Aqua Hysterica, or a Hysterical Water.
Take dried Elder-berries three ounces, roots of Bryony, white Diptamus, Peony
and Zedoary, of each an ounce; Misleto of the Oak six drams, Cassia lignea, red
Myrrh, Cardamoms the less, Oriental Saffron and true Castor, of each half an
ounce; seeds of Agnus castus, Cummin, Carrots, of each three drams; flowers of
black Hellebore two drams. Let them be cut and bruised, and put into six pound
of Malmsey Wine, and there macerated for fourteen days; then add water of
Mugwort, Motherwort, Pennyroyal, Balm and Nep, of each a pound. Mix them, and
distii them in Balneo.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This salubrious Water cures and mitigates all the
Suffocations of the Womb, nay the worst of them, and all the grievous Symptoms
thence arising. The dose is from two spoonfuls to three by it self in the Fit,
or it may be given with a scruple of Species Diajovis, or with ten grains of
our Jovial Troches, or with twenty grains of our uterine Specific: But in
preservation it is given only one spoonful at a time at the four Quarters of
the Moon.

There is also another most famous Hysterical water for the Epilepsie, formerly
given by that excellent and worthy Man Dr. Jacob Martin, Physician of Lubeck,
and my Honored Friend; and this Water is still used in the Shops, and is
vulgarly called Aq. Lit. A. and is thus made:

Take the best Cinnamon an ounce, Cloves, Ginger and Nutmegs, of each six drams;
peels of Citrons and Oranges, of each half an ounce; Spicknard four scruples,
Endive, Pennyroyal, Scordium, Balm, Mint, female Southernwood and Motherwort,
of each two ounces; Sage eight ounces, Marjoram half an ounce, Rosemary four
ounces, true Castor sixteen scruples, burnt Wine six pound, Rhenish Wine
sixteen pound. Let them digest three days in a warm place, and afterward distill
them in Balneo.

Aqua Dominarum, or the Ladies Water.
Take Cassia lignea two ounces, roots of red Mugwort, Gentian and white
Diptamus, of each an ounce and a half; bitter Almonds, kernels of Peaches and
Cherries, of each an ounce; red Myrrh, Venetian Borax, seeds of Lavender, of
each half an ounce; Horehound, Rue and Savin, of each three drams; flowers of
Centaury the less, of Elder and white Violets, of each two drams; the kernel of
the stone Aetites, true Castor, Opopanax, Sagapen and Assa foetida, of each a
dram and a half; black Pepper, Oriental Saffron and white Amber, of each a
dram. Let them be grossly cut and bruised, and put into six pound of Malmsey
Wine, and digest them for eight days; then add water of Calamint, Bugloss,
Motherwort, Mugwort, Pennyroyal and Vervain, of each a pound. Mix them, and
distill them in Balneo by an Alembick.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It facilitates the Birth, and expels the dead Child and
the Secundine without delay, which if it be long detained, does great injury to
the Brain, Heart and Stomach, by the depraved Vapors that arise from it to
those parts: wherefore the education of it is not to be neglected, nor yet to
be done irregularly. This Water also by its present help provokes the detained
Courses. The dose is from a spoonful to three.

Aqua Antinephritica, or a Water for the Stone in the Reins.
Take roots of Restharrow a pound. Cut them small, and steep them in three
pound of generous Wine for three days, and then press them, and in the strained
Liquor infuse Liquorish, Saxifrage root and branch roots of Parsley, Eryngo and
Burnet, of each three ounces; Winter-cherries and Iuniper-berries, of each fou^
ounces; seeds of Gromel, Fenil, Melons and Nettles of each two ounces;
Sassafras and Nephritick wood, o^ each an ounce; Cinnamon and Mace, of each half
a^ ounce. Let them stand in Infusion for certain days; and then add juice of
Ground Ivy and Purslain, of each a pound and a half; juice of Fumitory, Parsley
and Fluellin, of each a pound. Distill them in Balneo, and cohobate the second
time.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It does to a Miracle amend the calculous disposition of
the Reins, by comforting the parts, and casting forth the stony matter. The
dose is two spoonfuls both for Cure and Preservation.

Aqua Lithontriptica, or a Water for the Stone.
Take the kernels of Cherries and Peaches, of each ten ounces; bitter Almonds
five ounces, flowers of Elder and Acacia, of each three ounces; roots of
Burnet, Restharrow, Vervain, Eryngo and common Mallows, of each an ounce; chips
of Ashen-tree, the stony part of Medlars, Goats blood prepared, Cinnamon, the
lesser Galangal, Perch-stone and Crabs eyes, of each six drams; Bayberries
busked, Iuniper-berries, Winter-cherries, of each half an ounce; leaves of
Ground Ivy three drams, seeds of white Saxifrage, and Roman Nettles, seeds of
Burdock, Parsley, Broom, Gromel, Carrots, of each a dram: Let all be cut and
bruised, and put into sixteen pound of Malmsey Wine, and digested fourteen
days, often shaking the Vessel, and afterward distill them in Balneo.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is given for the Stone of all kinds, but chiefly in
the Reins and Bladder, where it potently breaks and dissipates it, and from
thence wonderfully expels the long detained Sand with the Urine. It eases the
pains of the Loins, and in an instant opens the passage in the Strangury and
Dysary. The dose is from one ounce to two in the morning fasting, either by it
self or with appropriate Syrups.

Aqua contra ardorem Urinae, or a Water against the heat of Urine.
Take roots of Liquorish, Marshmallows, common Mallows and Florentine
Flower-de-luce, of each two ounces; of Pine-nuts cleansed and sweet Almonds, of
each an ounce and a half; seeds of Melons husked and Quinces, seeds of
Smallage, white Poppy, Endive and Lettice, of each six drams; Winter-cherries
and Myrtle-berries, Cassia fistula, and the lesser Galangal, of each three
drams; leaves of Violets, Dazies and Betony, of each two drams. Let them be cut
and bruised, and then infused in the following Waters: i. e. water of wild
Poppy flowers and both kind of Mallows, of each a pound and a half; water of
Plantane, Purslain, Violets, Lettice, leaves of Oak and Moneywort, of each a
pound. Let them digest some days, and then distill them in an Alembick in Balneo.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It takes off the heat and difficulty of Urine, and
obtunds the acrimony thereof that arises from hot Meats, etc. It deterges,
glutinates and cicatriseth all Ulcers and Ulcerations in the Bladder, Reins,
Ureters and urinary passages: For which it is a present Remedy, which I have
also experienced in Old people, who are subject to a heat in the Bladder, and
from thence are subject to make water often: This Water therefore sweeps away
all mucous, rough and painful filth and dregs of the Urine. The dose is from
one ounce to three.

Aqua contra Vermes, or a Water against the Worms.
Take shavings of Hearts horn four ounces, crude Mercury well cleansed with Salt
and Vinegar two ounces, the best Sena, seeds of Cina and Citrons, true
Corallina, of each an ounce and a half; Peach kernels, Rhubarb, Agarick and
Myrrh, of each an ounce; roots of white Diptamus the pith taken away, round
Birthwort and Zedoary, of each six drams; white Tartar, Nitre prepared,
Oriental Saffron, of each half an ounce; the tops of lesser Cantaury and
Tansie, chips of Hazel-tree, of each three drams. Let them be cut and bruised,
and then infused in four pound of Hydromel, and after eight days digestion add
to it water of Pontick Wormwood and Southernwood, of each a pound and a half;
of Carduus, Grass and Scordium, of each a pound. Mix all, and distill them by an
Alembick in Balneo.

Aqua Theriacalis, or Treacle-water.
Take Venice Treacle eight ounces, sealed Earth two ounces, roots of Angelica
and Tormentil, Elicampane, of each half an ounce; Hartshorn and Elks hoof
Spagirically calcined, Sassafras, Iuniper-berries, Citron peels, of each an
ounce; Boletus cervinus, red Myrrh, of each six drams; Diaphoretick Antimony
and Oriental Saffron, of each three drams. All being pulverized and mixed, let
them be infused in eight pound of Malmsey Wine for fourteen days, and then
distilled in Balneo with a gentle fire.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. Because this Water by its tenuity and thinness does
quickly insinuate it self into all the Members, and puts the native heat into
action, we happily use it in all diseases where Sweat is desired, as Fevers,
Jaundice, Putrefaction, Worms, Pox, punctures of the Sides, trembling of the
Heart, Plague, rectification of the Blood, etc. The dose is from half an ounce
to an ounce.

Aqua de Cornu cervino, or Water of Hartshorn.
Take Hartshorn Spagirically calcined two ounces, sealed Earth and Oriental
red Bole, of each an ounce; roots of Tormentil, white Diptamus, Scorzonera and
Zedoary, of each half an ounce; Sassafras, yellow Sanders, Cassia lignea, of
each three drams; seeds of Sorrel, Angelica and Citrons dried, of each two
drams; Oriental Saffron, Mace and Marigold flowers, of each a dram and a half.
These being cut and bruised, let them be infused in the depurated Juice of
Carduus and Sorrel, of each two pound; of Scabious and Fluellin, of each a
pound; of the husks of green Nuts and Scordium, of each half a pound. Let them
macerate 24 hours, then with a gentle fire distill them in Balneo with glass
Vessels, cohobating the second time.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Water has great force in the Plague and all other
poisonous Diseases, but especially in Women and Children, for whom the
Treacle-waters are not convenient. Of this water an ounce or two or more,
according to the strength and nature of the Patient, may be given either by it
self, or with other sudorifick Medicines in the place of Specificks, etc.

Aqua Aloetica solutiva, or a solutive Water of Aloes.
Take Epatick Aloes sixteen ounces, juice of the leaves of green Sena
expressed, Elaterium, of each four ounces; red Myrrh an ounce. All being well
mixed, let them be distilled in glass in Balneo by the help of a gentle fire.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. Anoint the Stomach often with this water, and lay on
after it a warm Cloth or Sponge, and you shall see a wondrous Operation: For it
is a most excellent Medicine, and only fit for Kings and Princes.

Aqua Cosmetica, or a Beauty-water.
Take Goats milk four pound, water of Aron roots, Bean flowers, white Roses,
white Lilies and Solomon's seal, of each a pound; white Virgin Honey four
ounces, white Sugar candy and white Frankincense, of each two ounces; white
Hermodactyls, Florentine Flower-de-luce, Venetian Borax, of each an ounce; Salt
of white Tartar, burnt Ivory and Camphire, of each half an ounce; flowers of
white Narcissus, of common white Mallows, of white water Lily, of each two
drams. Mix them and distill them in Balneo; for the richer sort, you may add a
scruple of Gallia Moschata with Cotton to the neck of the Alembick.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is used outwardly to cleanse and clarify the Face:
For it takes off Spots, Pimples, etc. from the Face, and it has a singular
faculty in amending the foulness of the Skin in the Jaundice. To accomplish
which, the Face must be often washed with it in the day. Or take of this
Cosmetick water six ounces, of the Mercurial Cosmetick two drams. Mix them, and
make a Lotion like Milk, with which anoint the Face often.

SECT. XX. Of mixed Liquors.
Nectar Vitrioli, or Nectar of Vitriol.
TAke white Sugar candy ten ounces, Spirit of Vitriol rectified two ounces. Mix
them, and in a glass Vessel close covered keep out the flies and filth: let
them stand for some months, till it all appear black like Pitch; then take of
this black matter four ounces, Rose Water an ounce and a half, water Mint-water
half a pound, Cinnamon water buglossated six pound, Syrup of the juice of
Citrons four ounces, Manus Christi simple two ounces. Mix them, and keep it for
use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is commended in all intemperature of the Stomach as
well cold as hot: For it refreshes the languid and decayed strength thereof.
It provokes Appetite, prevents Putrefaction. It is good in malignant Fevers,
and allays Thirst. The dose by it self is from two ounces to three.

Liquor Vitriolatus, or a Vitriolated Liquor.
Take Syrup of Violets and Roses, of each half a pound; juice of Citrons or
Lemmons four ounces. Mix them diligently, and being mixed, add water of Endive
ten ounces, water of Sorrel and Roses, of each eight ounces; of water-Lily and
Scabious, of each six ounces; of Cinnamon water buglossated two ounces, Spirit
of Vitriol so much as will make all tart and grateful. Again mix them, and keep
it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is of a curious cooling quality in the Plague,
Hungarian disease, burning Fevers, and all other Inflammations. It also allays
Thirst, etc. The dose is from two ounces to three.

Liquor Ophthalmicus subalbidus, or a whitish Water for the Eyes.
Take our Ophthalmick water of Crabs half an ounce, water of Eyebright and
Fenil, of each two drams; our Ophthalmick Troches and Powder, of each a
scruple. Mix them, and make according to Art a whitish Collyrium.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is of great virtue in the dimness and dullness of
Sight, and in Suffusions of the Eyes; and it may be dropped into the Eyes
without any pain, it being void of all acrimony whatsoever, and with it the
Eyes may be washed every morning, and so continue it for many days together.

Liquor Nitratus, or a Nitrified Liquor.
Take water distilled from the juice of Carduus benedictus nineteen ounces, Rob
of Goosberries four ounces, simple Manus Christi two ounces, Nitre prepared an
ounce. Mix them well, and keep them for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a most admirable Diaphoretick, Diuretic,
Bezoartick, Refrigerative, etc. and is good in all hot and malignant Diseases
whatsoever. The dose is by it self from one ounce to two or three.

Liquor Cephalicus, or a Cephalic Liquor.
Take of our Aqua Apoplectica four ounces, Aqua Epileptica and Lily of the
valley, of each three ounces; water of Marjoram, Betony and Sage, of each an
ounce and a half; Rotula's of Diambra an ounce, Confectio Smaragdina half an
ounce, Salt of white Amber a scruple. Mix them faithfully, and keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is of good use in all diseases of the Head, and
gives present help in the Cephalalgia, Hemicrania, Epilepsie, Apoplexy,
Madness, Vertigo, etc. It quickens the Senses, sharpens the Understanding, and
recovers a lost Memory. The dose is from one spoonful to two.

Liquor Pectoralis, or a Pectoral Liquor.
Take Cinnamon water buglossated and Capon water, of each four ounces; water of
Calves lungs, Ground Ivy, Fluellin and Coltsfoot, of each three ounces; milk of
Sulphur three drams, flower of Sulphur a dram and a half, Magistery of red
Coral and Oriental Pearls, of each half a dram. Mix all, and with Manus Christi
simple three ounces edulcorate it, and keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is of admirable use to all those who are troubled
with the Asthma, Pleurisy, Phthisick and Hectic. It comforts the Heart, and
to admiration it takes away the grievous and dangerous Coughs, and restores the
Patient to his former health. The dose morning, noon and night is from one
spoonful to two: But before this Liquor is given, it ought to be well shaken.

Liquor Cordialis, or a Cordial Liquor.
Take of our hot and cold Cordial waters, of each four ounces; of Cinnamon water
buglossated and water of a Stags heart, of each an ounce; Confectio Alkermes
two drams, Salt of Oriental Pearls and red Coral, of each a scruple. All being
mixed, let it be edulcorated with an ounce and a half of simple Manus Christi,
and reserved for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is good for the Heartburning and pains of the Heart
caused by sorrow. It cures Palpitation, Trembling and Swooning. It animates the
Spirits, exhilarates the Mind, refreshes those who are weak and languid. It
comforts the Heart in general, and preserves it from the Plague, and many other
evils. The dose is from one spoonful to two.

Liquor acidus Perlarum Orientalium, or an acid Liquor of Oriental Pearls.
Take Vinegar of the solution of Oriental Pearls, and again drawn off in Balneo
two ounces, Spirit of Vitriol duly rectified with Spirit of Wine. Mix them, and
you shall have a whitish liquor of wonderful operation, which keep as a
Treasure for your use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It strengthens the Head, Brain, Stomach, Heart, Liver,
and all the other principal Members. It preserves the body from the Apoplexy,
Epilepsie, Vertigo, Leprosy, Pox, etc. It raises an appetite in recovering
Patients. It cleanses the Eyes of clouds and dimness, resists Putrefaction and
Poison, and is the last refuge in all malignant Fevers and hot Diseases. The
dose is from half a scruple to half a dram.

Liquor acidus Corallorum rubeorum, or an acid Liquor of red Coral.
After the preceding manner is this acid Liquor of Coral prepared for the
affects of the Head, as Epilepsie, Melancholy, also the Dysentery, Flux of the
Womb, etc. and to rectify the Stomach and Blood. It is also a good Medicine to
root out many internal Diseases, and to refresh the Spirits and Mind. The dose
is from half a scruple to half a dram.

Liquor Nephriticus, or a Liquor for the Stone and Urine.
Take Citron water distilled by it self in Balneo, our Nephritical water, of
each a pound and a half; Syrup of the juice of Violets a pound, white Sugar
candy an ounce, Salt of Perch stone and Crabs eyes, of each two drams; Nitre
prepared with flower of Sulphur, salt of white Amber, of each a dram. Mix them,
and keep them for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is very effectual in breaking and expelling the
Stone both in the Reins and Bladder. It provokes Urine, and takes away the pain
which happens in those parts. The dose is in the morning fasting, or at a good
distance from eating, from one spoonful to three.

Liquor Diaphoreticus.
Take of our Treacle water six ounces, Spirit of Tartar often rectified three
ounces, Spirit of sealed Earth distilled by it self and rectified, Spirit of
Guajacum rectified, the acid liquor of Oriental Pearls, the acid liquor of red
Coral, of each half an ounce. Mix them, and in a Glass close shut let them
digest for three or four weeks, then filter it, and keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It expels all Poison from the Heart by Sweat. It is
good in Syncopes, sudden Fits, Epilepsie, Melancholy, Quinsie, Palsy, Dropsy,
Jaundice, Pleurisy, Pox, Plague, Epidemical disease, Asthma, malignant and
putrid Fevers, retention of the Courses, Contractures, Scurvy, Scabs or Itch:
For this Medicine does excel all others in taking away all Obstructions and
Putrefactions. And if it be given daily in the Palsy, it does wonders. It
penetrates the Nerves, Muscles, Marrow, and whatsoever it finds hurtful it
expels. The dose is from half a dram to two drams in our Hartshorn water, or
Carduus water, or any other Vehicle respecting the Disease.

Liquor refrigerans, or a cooling Liquor.
Take water of the juice of Succory four ounces, water of Rasberries, Carduus,
Roses, Endive and Sorrel, of each four ounces; Rob of Goosberries and
Barberries prepared without Sugar, syrup of the juice of Citrons, of each three
ounces; Nitre prepared eleven scruples. Mix them.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It cools and comforts admirably in Fevers and all
acute hot Diseases. The dose is from two ounces to three at a time.

Liquor Vulnerarius, or a Wound-Liquor.
Take roots of the lesser Galangal, Zedoary, Crabs eyes and Mace, of each half
an ounce; Foreign Mummy two drams, of Nux vomica fifteen grains. Let them be
grolly bruised, and infused in a pound of good generous Wine, let them stand in
a warm place.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. The dose of this Mixture is morning and evening a
spoonful, and if any thing remains fixed in the bottom of the body, it removes
it; but in wounds of the Head let the Nux vomica be omitted.

Liquor Camphoratus.
Take spirit of Wine camphorated two ounces, water of all the flowers and Frogs
spawn, of each an ounce and a half; the Anodyne Sulphur of Vitriol a dram,
liquid Styrax, Thebane Opium, spirit of Vitriol, of each half a dram. Mix them,
and keep them for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. Let it be applied to the part affected; for it allays
the pain of the Gout; and all pains proceeding of a hot Cause. Or it may be
given twice in the day with two scruples of prepared Nitre in Elder-flower
water.

Liquor Tartareus, or a Tartarized Liquor.
Take of the best Rhenish Wine a pound, Tartar vitriolated an ounce. Let them
be mixed and dissolved according to Art, and then add Barley water with
Raisons, boiled Cinnamon water and syrup of the juice of Violets, of each half a
pound. Mix them for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is an universal Digestive, and is given in many
Diseases, where purging Medicines are requisite. It is given warm, unless in an
intense Fever, or a hot intemperature of the Stomach be present. It is given
for a Fever in the morning; but if the Fit happen in the morning, it is to be
given in the evening. In Chronical diseases it is continued for five days, and
may be given twice in a day, that is, morning and noon: But in diseases of the
Head it is given at going to bed, and the Belly ought to be loose; for if the
Belly is bound, pain does usually succeed, because the matter that is moved and
cleansed away by the Medicine, if it cannot pass out of the body, it is
converted into wind, and that causes pain. The dose is, when occasion
requires, a good draught at a time.

Liquor Arthriticus, or a Liquor for the Gout.
Take Virgin Honey with the comb two pound, Vitriol calcined to a yellowness a
pound, River Flints calcined half a pound, Rosemary and Vervain, of each six
ounces; white Hermodactyls three ounces, Gum Ammoniacum, Mastich, Olibanum, red
Myrrh, Bdellium, Opopanax, of each two ounces; yellow Sulphur, Sea Salt, white
Tartar, of each an ounce and a half; juice of Henbane made thick, Foreign
Mummy, Thebane Opium, of each an ounce. All being mixed, pour upon them the
Spirit made of the Faeces of red Wine, or else of that Spirit which is left in
making Laudanum Opiatum, five pound, or so much as will suffice, and let them
digest for certain days: then put all into a glass Alembick well luted, with a
head sufficiently large, and a large Receiver, and distill them so long as you
can see any Spirit come forth. When all is cold, take the Caput mortuum, and
pulverize it, and pour the distilled Liquor upon it the second time and distill
it: And repeat this labor three or four times, and so you have the Liquor
Arthriticus prepared.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a Secret in all continual and inveterate pains,
and defluxions on the Members and Joints: Let the part affected be anointed
with it often in the day warmed, and at certain intervals of time also, till
all the tormenting pains cease.

Liquor Antipodagricus triunus, or an Antipodagrick Liquor of a threefold
Preparation.
1. Take of spirit of Wine well rectified two pound, Frog spawn water a pound
and a half, of Virgin Honey a pound. Mix them, and distill it in Balneo, and the
Liquor drawn off keep by it self; then take the Caput mortuum and pulverize it,
and then add to it Lixivium made of Vine twigs two pound, white Tartar half a
pound, phlegm of Vitriol not yet separated from the spirit four ounces, true
Castor six drams, Oriental Saffron half an ounce, Venice Turpentine two drams,
calcined Salt a dram. Let them macerate for the space of 24 hours, then distill
it, and keep the distilled Liquor by it self, then take out the Caput mortuum,
and pulverize it, and pour upon it all the Liquor before drawn off in the first
distillation. Mix them, and after due digestion distill them again the third
time: Lastly, the Liquors being mixed, rectify them in Balneo Mariae, and let
it be called, A Compound Water of Frog-spawn.

2. Take Cloves six drams, white Hermodactyls and Iuniper-berries, of each half
an ounce; Nutmegs two drams, Vervain and Elder flowers, of each two handfuls;
flowers of Lavender, Spicknard, Marjoram, Rosemary and Betony, of each a
handful. Cut those that are to be cut, and bruise the other, and infuse them in
five pound of Rhenish Wine: Let them stand in digestion 24 nights and days, and
then distilled in an Alembick, and called Aqua Arthritica, or the Gout-water.

3. Take Alum two pound, white Vitriol and Verdigriese, of each half a pound;
white Tartar, Litharge, Cuttlebone and Ceruss, of each four ounces. Let all be
most finely powdered and then mixed, set it upon the fire, and let it fume, so
that the Verdigriese may evaporate, and then call it Lapi^ Admirabilis, or the
wonderful Stone.

4. Now follows the Composition.

Take of the Compound water of Frog spawn four pound, of the Aqua Arthritica a
pound, of the Lapis admirabilis three drams, clear and white Nitre two drams,
Oriental Saffron ten grains. Mix them, and let them stand in infusion a whole
night, and afterward filter the Liquor, and keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. In this Liquor (which Chemists and Practitioners in
Physic use at this time with good success) wet linen Clothes, and frequently
apply these warm to the part affected, or at least three or four times a day,
and this continue till all the intolerable tormenting pains cease and utterly
vanish: For it is a singular and an incomparable Medicine in all Gouty pains,
and is well experienced in repelling the violence of the adventitious Humor,
and it is called Triunus from the three several Preparations in the Composition.

Liquor Vestimentalis, or a Liquor for Clothes.
Take Fountain water two pound, ashes of Hearts-ease the quantity of a great
Walnut, one Citron cut into small pieces. Mix them, and let them stand in
digestion twenty four hours, then filter it, and keep the clear liquor for use.

Virtue and Use. It takes away the filth, all greasy and pitchy Spots, as well
from Hats as Clothes, either in Silk, Woollen, or Linen. And the Spots being
taken out, and the place clean, it is to be rinsed immediately with fair water.

Liquor Mercurii vivi.
Take crude Mercury and Aqua fortis, of each an ounce. Dissolve the Mercury in
the Aqua fortis, and to the solution add Plantane water two pound, Lapis
medicamentosus made with Rose Water. Mix all, and keep it for use.

Virtue and Use. This whitish Mercurial water is to be applied to all the
external parts and diseases thereof: It drys up all old Ulcers and Wounds, and
skinneth them over, but especially the old sordid Aphrodisia. It takes away all
Morphew, Spots, Scurff and Pimples of the Face. It is also a good Remedy in
drying Erysipelas's, and healing Fistula's: But in applying it take heed, lest
you touch the Eyes or Teeth therewith.

Liquor Cerussae, or a Liquor of white Lead.
Take the best white Lead an ounce, of Pompholix half an ounce, of Lapis
Calaminaris and Litharge, of each two drams; Tutty prepared and Spodium, of
each a dram. Let all be finely pulverized and mixed, and then pour upon them
water of Housleek, Plantane and red Roses, of each three ounces. Again mix
them, and keep them for use.

Virtue and Use. It is used externally, and cools and drys any part infested
with a Tumor, Redness, or Inflammation. It allays pain, cures blood-shot Eyes.
It takes away the yellow spots of the Face and Body, and renders a man's
Countenance clear and vivid. The use of it consists in often using diverse day
together.

Liquor Tutiae, or a Liquor of Tutty.
Take Tutty prepared, Litharge and Ceruss, of each half an ounce; Camphire a
dram, crude Alum half a dram. Let all be diligently mixed, and then add water
of Plantane and Roses, of each four ounces. Again mix them, and keep it for use.

Virtue and Use. It cools and drys the external parts of the Body infested with
Tumors and Inflammations.

Liquor Mercurii Saccharatus, or a Liquor of Mercury with Sugar.
Take water of Plantane and Roses, of each four ounces; Ceruss an ounce,
sublimate Mercury, white Sugar Candy, and the best Spirit of Wine, of each half
an ounce. Mix them, and then add to it a scruple of Aqua fortis.

Virtue and Use. It cures all contumacious Ringworms, Tetters, and such like
disease of the Skin. But before it is used, let it be shaken, and the part
effected touched with a Feather or such like thing.

Liquor Mercurii Acetosus, or a sour Liquor of Mercury.
Take white Vitriol and Camphire, of each half an ounce; sublimate Mercury,
Ceruss, white Tartar and burnt Alum, of each two drams; white Pompholix half a
dram. Mix all and make a Powder. Take of this powder half an ounce, the best
Wine Vinegar four ounces. Mix these, and keep it for use.

Virtue and Use. We use it in the same manner as before, to cleanse the Skin.
It perfectly cures all Ring-worms, Tetters, and such like.

SECT. XXI. Of Emulsions.
Emulsio Rosata, or an Emulsion with Roses.
TAke sweet Almonds an ounce, seeds of white Poppy two drams, of the four
greater cold Seeds, of each a dram; Rose Water eight ounces, water of
Strawberries and Vervain, of each four ounces. Of these make an Emulsion, and
edulcorate it with Julep of Roses.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. I happily use it in all hot affects of the Head,
burning of the Stomach, Thorax, Breast, Heart, and all the lower Belly.

Emulsio Violata, or an Emulsion with Violets.
Take sweet Almonds an ounce, seeds of Violets tw^ drams, seeds of white Poppy
a dram, water of Violet^ eight ounces, water of Lettice and water-Lily, of eac^
four ounces. Of these make an Emulsion, which edu^ corate with Julep of Violets
to make it grateful.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is good in a hot intempe^ rature of the whole Body;
for it cools and moisten^ allays Thirst, induces Sleep, relieveth the Breas^
and resists the Acrimony of Choler. The dose is a moderate draught.

Emulsio Somnifera, or a sleeping Emulsion.
Take sweet Almonds two drams, white Poppy seeds a dram, Melon seeds half a
dram, Lettice seeds half a scruple, water of Violets and water-Lilies, of each
an ounce and a half; of our Hypnotick water a dram. Make an Emulsion, and
edulcorate it with a sufficient quantity of white Sugar Candy, and add
Magistery of Oriental Pearls and red Coral, of each three grains. Mix all for
one dose, and drink it in the evening at going to bed, and it gives rest.

Emulsio Pleuritica, or an Emulsion for the Pleurisy.
Take seeds of Carduus Mariae an ounce, seeds of Carduus benedictus half an
ounce, seeds of white Poppy two drams, water of Carduus Mariae six ounces,
water of Carduus benedictus, water of wild Poppy flowers, Chamomil flowers and
Scabious flowers, of each four ounces. Make an Emulsion according to Art, and
edulcorate it with Sugar Candy concrete in Syrup of Violets.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It cures the Pleurisy, and suddenly it allays all the
pains of the Sides, to the amazement of the Beholders; but it is convenient
that the sick should be daily purged, or at least the Belly kept open by
continual Clysters. The dose is from two ounces to three or four.

Emulsio Laxativa, or a Laxative Emulsion.
Take sweet Almonds two ounces, of the four greater cold Seeds, of each a dram;
water of Succory and Peach flowers, Acacia and Violets, of each four ounces.
Make an Emulsion according to Art, in which dissolve Manna two ounces. Let it
be then strained, and then add Cinnamon water buglossated half an ounce. Mix
them for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is experienced in Children who are subject to be
bound in their bodies. Also in acute and burning Fevers, in continual
Tertians, Hecticks, Marasmus, Synochus, etc. The dose is a moderate draught.

Emulsio Stiptica, or a Stiptick Emulsion.
Take sweet Almonds two ounces, white Poppy seeds half an ounce, the four
greater cold Seeds, of each a dram; Lettice seeds half a dram, water distilled
from the juice of Quinces and Millefoil, of each four ounces; water of
Plantane, Tormentil and wild Poppy, of each three ounces; water of Oaken leaves
and Cinnamon buglossated, of each an ounce and a half. Of these make an Emulsion
according to Art, to which add Iulep of Roses four ounces, Magistery of red
Coral a dram. Mix them.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It cools and binds, it cures the looseness of the Belly
and Dysentery coming of a hot choleric Cause: It also helps choleric Coughs,
and brings sleep. The dose is a good draught at a time.

Emulsio Cannabina, or an Emulsion of Hemp seed.
Take Hemp seed an ounce and a half, the four greater cold Seeds, of each a
dram. With water of Water-Lily flowers and Roses, of each a like quantity to
make an Emulsion. Take of this Emulsion fourteen ounces, Syrup of the juice of
Violets two ounces, Cinnamon water buglossated an ounce. Mix them for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is profitably given to stop the Gonorrhoea or Flux
of Seed, Pollutions, and other vices of those parts: It is also good in burning
Fevers, and other distempers of Choler and Blood. The dose is from two ounces
to three.

SECT. XXII. Of Clarets and medicated Wines.
Claretum Antepilepticum Laxativum, or a Laxative Antepileptick Claret.
TAke leaves of Sena two ounces, the best Turbith and Mechoacan, of each half
an ounce; filings of Elks hoof and man's Skull, Nutmegs, of each two drams;
roots and seeds of Peony duly gathered, Misleto of the Oak, of each a dram and
a half; the lesser Cardamoms, Cassia lignea, Cloves, of each a dram; flowers of
male Peony, Lily of the valley, Lavender, Teiltree, of each half a dram. Let
them be macerated in twenty six ounces of Rhenish Wine, and set in a warm place
to digest; afterward boil them a little, and then add of white Sugar three
ounces, strain them through Hippocrates Sleeve, and make a Claret.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It purges the Brain of those humors that breed
diseases there, as the Epilepsie, Failing-sickness, etc. and is indeed a Divine
remedy for the Epilepsie; for it effectually takes away the cause and tinder of
the disease. But all Epileptical persons who use this Claret, must take heed to
keep themselves from fear, anger, water, fire, wine, thoughts of grief, etc.
nay, let them shun all vehement motions of the mind while they are under their
Cure, and let them shun Drunkenness as the Plague. The dose is from three
ounces to four.

Claretum Antapoplecticum laxativum, or a laxative Antapoplectick Claret.
Take leaves of Sena two ounces, the best Turbith an ounce, Iuniper-berries and
roots of Zedoary, of each half an ounce; the best Agarick and black Hellebore
prepared, of each two drams; lesser Galangal, Cubebs, white Ginger and Cinnamon,
of each a dram; flowers of Lavender, Primrose, Marigold and Lily of the valley,
of each half a dram. Let all be infused and macerated in thirty six ounces of
Rhenish Wine in Balneo for two days; afterward boil it a little, and then add
four ounces of white Sugar, clarify it with Hippocrates Sleeve, and make a
Claret.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is of admirable use in the Apoplexy, Palsy,
Sleepiness, Stupor, and all other sleepy Diseases, walking in their sleep,
Memory lost, and in all other vices of the Brain. The dose is from three ounces
to four or five in the morning.

Claretum Passulatum laxativum, or laxative Claret of Raisons.
Take of small Raisons washed in Wine two ounces, leaves of Sena and Mechoacan,
of each an ounce; Liquorish, Cinnamon and Aniseeds bruised, of each half an
ounce; spotted Lungwort, Hart's-tongue, Coltsfoot and Horehound, of each a dram;
flowers of Liverwort, Hyssop and Sage, of each a dram; Oriental Saffron and
Mace, of each half a dram; fat Figs, Iujubes, Sebestens and Dates, of each
eight. Let them be macerated twenty four hours in Hydromel and old
Barley-water, of each three pound; then boil them a little, and add to it four
ounces of white Sugar, strain it through Hippocrates Sleeve, and make a Claret.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is an appropriate and praiseworthy Laxative in
difficulty of Breathing, Asthma, Pleurisy, inveterate Cough, pains of the
Sides, and in all other continual straitness of the Breast, etc. also in the
distempers of the Liver and Spleen. The dose is from four ounces to six.

Claretum Absinthiacum laxativum, or a laxative Claret of Wormwood.
Take leaves of Sena half an ounce, white Turbith and Mechoacan, of each six
drams; Pontick Wormwood and Iuniper-berries, of each half an ounce; roots of
our Flower-de-luce and Esula prepared, of each three drams; seeds of Fenil and
Caraway, of each two drams; sweet Cane, white Ginger, Cinnamon, Cloves and
Zedoary, of each a dram; flowers of Liverwort, Elder and Broom, of each half a
dram; Oriental Saffron and Dodder, of each a scruple. Let them be cut and
bruised, and infused in thirty six ounces of Rhenish Wine. Let them macerate in
Balneo, and after due digestion boil them a little, and add four ounces of
white Sugar, then strain it through Hippocrates his sleeve, and make a Claret.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a specific and select Laxative in the ill Habit,
Dropsy, obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, Fevers, Colic, Scurvy, Itch,
etc. and it does by degrees prepare and evacuate the peccant humors. The dose
is four ounces.

Claretum Rhabarbaratum, or a Claret Rhubarbized.
Take leaves of Sena two ounces, the best Rhubarb an ounce, roots of Scorzonera
half an ounce, Hart's-tongue and Liverwort, of each three drams; seeds of
Parsley and Smallage, of each two drams; the lesser Galangal, Cassia lignea,
white Ginger and Cloves, of each a dram; flowers of lesser Centaury, Liverwort,
red Roses and Succory, of each half a dram; Oriental Saffron and Dodder, of
each a scruple. Let all macerate in Balneo in thirty six ounces of Rhenish Wine
for two days, then boil it a little, and add to it four ounces of white Sugar,
strain it through Hippocrates sleeve, and make a Claret.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It purges Choler as well black as yellow from the
Stomach, Liver and Spleen, it also rectifies the Blood, opens Obstructions, and
cures the Affects thence proceeding. Hence it is an agrecable and appropriate
laxative Medicine in the Dropsy, Jaundice, Scurvy, tumor of the Spleen, and
pain of the Hypochonders, Fevers, etc. The dose is four ounces, adding a dram
of acid Tartar to the Liquor, and give it warm.

Claretum Antipodagricum laxativum, or a laxative Claret against the Gout.
Take Hermodactyls, the outer rind being taken off, leaves of Sena, of each an
ounce; white and gummy Turbith, Mechoacan, of each half an ounce; Germander and
Vervain, of each two drams; seeds of Anise and Fenil, of each a dram and a
half; Cardamoms the less, Cinnamon, Mace, Oriental Saffron, of each a dram;
flowers of Flower-de-luce, Mullein, Violets, Rosemary, of each half a dram. Let
them macerate in thirty six ounces of small white Wine in a warm place for two
days, then boil it a little, and add to it four ounces of white Sugar, and
strain it through Hippocrates sleeve, and make a Claret.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It purges thick Phlegm, especially from the Joints and
remote parts. And for that reason it is solely proper for the Gout, and other
differences and pains of the Joints. The dose is four ounces, adding to it a
dram of Crystal of Tartar, and so mix them and make a draught, which is to be
given warm in the morning; but if it should chance not to work by ten of the
Clock, especially in robust bodies, let the Patient take another draught again
after dinner: and thus repeat it for certain days, while there is occasion.

Claretum Stomachicum confortans, or a Claret to comfort the Stomach.
Take Cinnamon an ounce, water-Mints half an ounce, Mastich, Galangal the less
and Cloves, of each two drams; sweet Cane, Cardamoms the less and white Ginger,
of each a dram; heavy wood of Aloes, roots of Burnet and Zedoary, of each half
a dram. Let them macerate in thirty two ounces of Malmsey Wine for certain
days, afterward clarify it through Hippocrates sleeve, and so make a Physical
Claret.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a specisick Medicine almost against all the cold
vices of the Stomach, also against the trembling of the Heart, Syncope and
Vomiting; of which the Patient may take morning or evening, or in time of
necessity, from one spoonful to two or three, with a drop or two of Spirit of
Vitriol well mixed together.

Claretum Juniperinum, or a Claret of Juniper.
Take Spirit of Iuniper-wine three pound, water of Elicampane roots, of
Coltsfoot, Lohoch sanum, of each a pound; Cinnamon two ounces, Cloves whole half
an ounce. Let them infuse together for certain days, afterward strain them
through Hippocrates sleeve, and edulcorate the Liquor with sixteen ounces of
white Sugar Candy, and keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is of excellent use in the Asthma, Cough, and other
vices of the Breast, also in the weakness and windiness of the Stomach, Dysury,
Strangury and Stone. The dose is from one spoonful to two or three often in the
week.

Claretum Anisatum, or a Claret prepared with Aniseeds.
Take Spirit of Wine anisated three pound, water of Lohoch sanum, Horehound and
Violet flowers, of each a pound; Cassia lignea two ounces, Mace cut small half
an ounce. Let them macerate eight days, and then add twelve ounces of white
Sugar Candy to it, strain it through Hippocrates sleeve, and make a Claret.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is very good and proper for difficulty of Breathing
and Asthma's, and other cold affects of the Thorax arising from thick humors,
sticking to the Bronchia of the Lungs, also for an old Cough, Dyspnoea. The
dose, as before, is from one spoonful to two or three.

Claretum Chalybeatum, or a Claret prepared with Steel.
Take the best Malmsey Wine three pound, Steel prepared with Vinegar of
Tamarinds an ounce, roots of Scorzonera and cream of Tartar, of each half an
ounce; the lesser Galangal, Cassia lignea and Cloves, of each a dram. Put these
mixed into a glass Vessel, and let them digest in a warm place, often shaking
them for the space of two days; afterward strain them, and clarify them
through Hippocrates sleeve, and you have a chalybeate Claret.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It opens all the obstructions of the Liver, Spleen and
Meseraick Veins. It corrects an ill habit of Body, and expels all vicious
Humors, cures the black Jaundice, provokes the Terms, and stays them if too
superfluous. It expels water in Dropsies, and discusseth Wind: it promotes the
resolution of the Salt tending to Coagulation, and by its Martial rays it drys
the Microcosmical Earth swelling with too much moisture. But in the use of this
Liquor for the aforesaid Affects, it is convenient to give gentle Purgers as
often as may be, that as this Wine prepares the body and humors fit to be
purged, so the purging Medicines cleanse and carry it off, as in other Cures.
The dose of this Claret is from one ounce to two or three morning and evening:
But in defect of the Courses in Women, it is given five days before the New
Moon to young ones; but to those more in years, so many days before the Full
Moon, and so to proceed till the Courses appear.

Claretum Antinephriticum, or an Antinephritical Claret.
Take whole Barley and red Cicers, of each an ounce and a half; roots of
Restharrow and Eryngo, of each an ounce; Liquorish and Parsley, of each half an
ounce; Iuniper-berries bruised and Winter-cherries, of each two drams; seeds of
Gromel, white Thorn-berries, seeds of Marshmallows and small Mallows, of each
a dram and ahalf; flowers of Broom and Violets, of each a dram; fat Figs and
Sebestens, of each eleven. Let them be infused in small white Wine and
Rainwater, of each three pound for 24 hours, then boil them to the consumption
of the third part, that there may four pound remain, to which add of white
Sugar four ounces, clarify it with Hippocrates his sleeve, and make a Claret
of it.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It gives great ease to those troubled with the Stone;
for it dissolves, breaks and drives forth the Stone in the Reins and Bladder
with the Urine, by enlarging the Ureters and urinary passage, and by opening
the obstructions of the Loins and Reins and the other parts. The dose is every
morning fasting a good draught from three ounces to four.

Claretum Moschatum, or a Muskified Claret.
Take Cassia lignea half an ounce, Cloves two drams, Nutmegs, Mace and Citron
peels, of each a dram; roots of Florentine Flower-de-luce and the lesser
Galangal, of each half a dram; yellow Sanders and wood of Aloes, of each a
scruple; Ambergriese and the best Musk, of each ten grains. All being
pulverized and mixed, add to them twenty ounces of odoriferous Spanish Wine,
and let them stand in digestion for certain days; afterward add Spirit of Roses
four ounces, clarify them in Hippocrates his sleeve, and make a Claret, which
for delicate Palates may be edulcorated with Sugar Candy.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is of admirable use (other universal Medicines and
Purgations being premised) to amend the ill savor of the Mouth and Nose, and
render them sweet, it also roborates the Heart and Ventricle. Let the Patient
take a spoonful or two every morning fasting.

Claretum purgans, or a purging Claret.
Take leaves of Sena two ounces, roots of our Flowerde-luce an ounce,
Mechoacan, white Hermodactyls and Turbith, of each half an ounce; Agrimony,
Hart's-tongue and Fluellin, of each two drams; seeds of Fenil and Anise, of each
a dram and a half; Cassia lignea, Cloves, white Ginger and Cinnamon, of each a
dram; flowers of Broom, Balm, Bugloss and Sage, of each a dram and a half.
Infuse them all in a sufficient quantity of old Wine for 24 hours, and then
boil them, and in sixteen ounces of the strained Liquor warm dissolve four
ounces of the best Manna: Again strain it, and add of Cinnamon water an ounce,
Elaeosaccharum of Citrons a dram. Mix them well again, and make of all a
laxative Claret.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It purges phlegm and water, and that from the Joints:
It gives ease in the Headache and Epilepsie, and checks old Defluxions; and for
that reason gives ease in Gouts of all kinds. It is also a good Purge in all
pains of the Joints, Colon and Reins. The dose is from three ounces to four.

Vinum Antiscorbuticum, or an Antiscorbutick Wine.
Take Rhenish Wine four pound, juice of Scurvy grass, Watercresses, Brooklime
and Sorrel, of each depurated four ounces, roots of wild Radishes, Elicampane,
and our Flower-de-luce, of each cut into small pieces anounce and a half; seeds
of Rocket bruised an ounce. All being mixed, put them into a Glass in a cool
place, and reserve it for use, adding to it two Nutmegs.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This medicated Wine (universals being premised, and the
body duly purged) perfectly cures the Scurvy in these Northern and Maritime
Regions, where it is natural and domestic, and is also an infallible Medicine
in rectifying the Blood. The dose is from three ounces to four morning and
evening two hours before meat, and let the sick continue the use of this
Medicine till he finds himself better.

SECT. XXIII. Of compound medicated Vinegars.
Acetum Aromaticum odoratum, or a sweet Aromatic Vinegar.
TAke Florentine Flower-de-luce an ounce and a half, flowers of Lavender, red
Roses and Clovegilliflowers, of each an ounce; Cloves and Cinnamon, of each half
an ounce; Nutmegs, Mace, lesser. Galangal and Zedoary, of each three drams;
Orange and Citron peels, of each two drams; Styrax Calamitis, red Myrrh,
Benjamin, of each a dram and a half; flowers of Rosemary, Rue, Marjoram and
Sage, of each a dram; Gallia Moschata, wood of Aloes, Spicknard, of each half a
dram; of Wine Vinegar a sufficient quantity. Mix them, and when the Vinegar is
tinctured and well impregnated with the Ingredients, keep it for use.

Virtue and Use. A linen Cloth wetted in this Liquor, and applied to the Nose,
and the smell thereof received up into the Nostrils, does very much comfort the
Brain, quickens the Sense, refreshes the Spirits, and does plentifully restore
the decayed strength of the Mind and Intellect, and is of singular use in the
other diseases of the Heart.

Acetum Theriacale, or a Vinegar of Treacle.
Take Venice Treacle an ounce, Elks hoofs Spagirically calcined, Bay Berries,
seeds of Carduus benedictus, of each half an ounce; leaves of Vervain, Scordium
and Rue, of each two drams; red Myrrh and Citron peels, of each a dram and a
half; roots of Tormentil, Angelica, Zedoary and Butterbur, of each a dram;
Camphire, wood of Aloes, Mace, of each half a dram; Wine-Vinegar in which
Lavender flowers have been infused, a sufficient quantity. Mix them, and let
them stand till the Vinegar be well tinctured, which pour off and keep for use.

Acetum Mithridaticum, or Vinegar of Mithridate.
Take Mithridate of Damocratis, sealed Earth, roots of Tormentil, Elicampane
and Angelica, of each six drams; Hartshorn calcined without fire, powder of
Vipers and red Myrrh, of each half an ounce; seeds of Citron husked, seeds of
Sorrel and Bay Berries, of each three drams; flowers of Marigold and
Clove-gillyflowers, of each two drams; Oriental Saffron, Cloves and Camphire,
of each a dram; Wine Vinegar in which Roses have been infused, a sufficient
quantity. Mix them, and when the Vinegar is well colored, keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. These two Vinegars are of excellent use in the Plague;
for they resist its impression, and preserve from Putrefaction, and whosoever
shall take a spoonful of either of them in the morning, shall not (by the
Providence of God) be infected that day. But in the Cure the dose of either of
them is two spoonfuls, with a scruple of our Solar Bezoar or Aurea Hadrianea,
etc. There is another way commended for its use, which is this: In the morning
before the Patient goes abroad, let him wash the Pulse of his Wrists with these
Vinegars, and also carry a Sponge in his hand wet in the same. But those who
have a dry Brain, and are troubled with watching, must not smell to it often,
if at all.

Acetum Zedoarticum, or a Vinegar of Zedoary.
Take roots of Zedoary an ounce, roots of Tormentil, Angelica and Scorzonera,
of each half an ounce; Bayberries husked, Iuniper-berries, of each three drams;
flowers of Marigold, Lavender and red Roses, of each two drams; red Myrrh, wood
of Aloes and Mace, of each a dram and a half; Cloves and Nutmegs, of each a
dram. Infuse them in Wine Vinegar in which Elder flowers have been steeped, a
sufficient quantity, till it be perfectly colored, then strain the Vinegar,
and keep it for use.

Acetum Myrrhatum, or a Vinegar with Myrrh.
Take red Myrrh an ounce, roots of Gentian half an ounce, Carduus, Rue,
Wormwood, Scabious, Fluellin and Scordium, of each two drams; Oriental Saffron,
Cassia lignea and Castor, of each a dram. Macerate these in a sufficient
quantity of Wine Vinegar in which Clovegillyflowers have been infused, and
after eight days digestion filter the Liquor, and being clear, keep it for use.

Acetum Rhizoticum, or a Vinegar of Roots.
Take the roots of Tormentil, Snakeweed, Burnet, Angelica, Valerian,
Masterwort, Devils-bit, white Dictamus, Elicampane, Swallow-wort, Zedoary and
Burdock, of each half an ounce. Let them infuse in a sufficient quantity of
Wine Vinegar impregnate with Sage, and after due digestion strain it, and keep
it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. These three preceding Vinegars have great force against
pestilential Poisons, and are armed with various virtues to that purpose; for
if the Nostrils or Pulses be often wet therewith, or a Sponge wet therewith,
and often smelt to, or Flints or Bricks red-hot and quenched in it, and the
Liquor drunk, is very effectual both for Preservation and Cure; but in the Cure
a spoonful or two may be given to provoke Sweat, the strength of the Patient
considered; but for Preservation half a spoonful is sufficient.

Acetum Bezoarticum, or a Bezoartick Vinegar.
Take roots of Scorzonera, Angelica and white Dictamus, of each an ounce; roots
of Tormentil, Zedoary and Elicampane, of each half an ounce; Camphire a dram
and a half. All being pulverized and mixed, infuse them in Spirit of Wine left
in making our Solar Bezoar, and distilled Wine Vinegar in which Elder flowers
were infused, of each equal parts to that quantity, that it may rise six
fingers above the Ingredients; let them stand in a Glass close stopped, till the
Liquor be perfectly tinctured, then filter it, and keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Bezoartick Vinegar is endued with excellent
virtues, that if half an ounce or an ounce be taken by it self, or with a small
quantity of any Cordial water, it wonderfully relieves those infected with the
Plague, or bit or stung with any venomous Creature, to the admiration of the
Beholders, and restores them to perfect health again. It is of no less effect
in poisonous Draughts; it s^rengthens the Heart, refreshes the Spirits, etc.
And for preservation's sake in any of the cases mentioned, you may give half a
spoonful in the morning; but to cure give it from half an ounce to an ounce in
water of Carduus, Swallow-wort, Scordium, and the like.

Acetum Diaphoreticum, or a Diaphoretick Vinegar.
Take Sarsa parilla and China, of each an ounce; Sassafras six drams, Elder
flowers half an ounce, Cassia lignea two drams. Let them be cut and bruised,
and infused in a sufficient quantity of sharp Wine Vinegar, let them digest so
long till it be of a red color, then filter it, and keep the filtred Vinegar
for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Vinegar is commendable for its use in curing the
diseases of the Head and Brain, strengthening the Liver, opening the Spleen and
the obstructions in the Dropsy, expelling the Stone, in discussing Wind,
staying Vomiting, helping Digestion, resisting Putresaction, and curing the
Pox, and incipient Elephantiasis; in all which cases it has an excellent
Diaphoretick faculty. Also by reason of its great dryness and moderate heat, it
is an excellent Remedy for all kind of Defluxions; but it is hurtful to those
who are extenuated and weak. Also a Sponge dipped in this Vinegar and smelt to
often, is very profitable against the Plague, especially other Remedies not
being neglected. The dose is from one spoonful to two by it self, or in
appropriate Vehicles.

Acetum Hystericum, or a Hysterical Vinegar.
Take dried Rue and dwarff Elder-berries, of each an ounce; Sagapen and
Galbanum, of each half an ounce; roots of Hogs sesmel and Castor, of each two
drams; the Callus or Protuberances on Mares legs, Assa foetida, of each a dram.
Let them infuse in a sufficient quantity of sharp Wine in Balneo for five or
six days, till the Vinegar be perfectly tinctured, then filter it, and keep it
for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. The smell and odor of the Fume upon hot Coals,
immediately raises Women that are suffocated, etc. it is also good in the
Vertigo's, Lethargies, and other sleepy diseases. And if it be taken inwardly,
it also performs the same. The dose is from half a spoonful to a whole one.

Acetum Vomitorium, or a Vomiting Vinegar.
Take bark of the roots of Thapsia four ounces, ^oots of fresh dried Asarabacca
two ounces, seeds of Cart a^us or bastard Saffron an ounce, Cinnamon half an
ounce. All being bruised and mixed, infuse them in four pound of the best Wine
Vinegar. Let them digest in a Glass close shut for a month, often shaking them
in the time; after distill them in Sand in a Copper body with a Leaden top to
it: And so you shall have distilled Vinegar impregnated with Saturn, and a
little sweet; all which keep for use, not rejecting the phlegm.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a sweet and pleasant Vomit, and purges all
Humors as well cold as hot, and is given in Quotidian and Tertian as well true
as bastard, both which it cures: it takes away debility and loathing caused by
super fluous sharp humors: it is also an approved Medicine in renewed Fevers
after seven Fits. The dose is from two ounces to three, more or less. And to
delicate bodies it is given in Syrup of Vinegar.

SECT. XXIV. Of Epithems.
Epithema generale, or a general Epithem
GOod in Melancholy, Madness, Phrensies, immoderate Watchings, pain and
disorder of the Head in general from any cause.

Take water of wild Poppy, Lettice and Roses, of each four ounces; of our
Troches of Radice Rhodia an ounce. Mix them for an Epithem.

Another of the same efficacy.
Take water of Henbane, Sage and Vervain, of each four ounces; our Troches of
roots of Rhodia an ounce. Mix them for an Epithem; and when there is a
necessity of using it, wet a double linen Rag therein, and press it gently, and
apply it warm to the Temples and Forehead: and this direction is also to be
observed in the following Epithems.

An Epithem for the pain in the Head coming of a cold Cause with or without a
Catarrh. Take water of Betony, Rosemary and Vervain, of each four ounces; Peach
kernels half an ounce; Cubebs three drams, Nutmegs and Sandarack, of each a
dram; roots of Mandrakes half a dram. Mix them, and make an Epithem, and apply
it warm.

Another in a hot Cause.
Take water of Chamomil, Sage and Rosemary, of each four ounces; Peach kernels
half an ounce, the best Olibanum two drams, Cloves, Mace and wood of Aloes, of
each a dram; roots of Zedoary half a dram. Mix them for an Epithem.

An Epithem for pains of the Head coming of a ho^ Cause, with or without a
Catarrh. Take water of Roses, Violets and common Mallows, of each three ounces;
all the Sanders, of each a dram and a half; white Amber prepared a dram,
flowers of wild Poppy and Vervain, of each half a dram; Camphire a scruple. Mix
them for an Epithem for the Head.

Another in the same Case.
Take water of wild Poppy and Roses, of each three ounces; man's Skull calcined
without fire a dram, Oriental Saffron half a dram. Mix them for an Epithem for
the Head, which operates wonderfully.

Epithema Hypnoticum, or a Sleep-bringing Epithem.
Take water of Roses and Lettice, of each four ounces; Opium Spagirically
prepared a dram, Oriental Saffron half a dram, of the spongy knot growing on
wild Roses a scruple. Mix them and dissolve them faithfully; the mixture being
prepared, wet a linen Cloth in it, and apply it warm to the Temples, and
moisten the Nostrils with it also, and presently they begin to sleep.

Another to procure Sleep.
Take water of Nutmegs, Lettice and Night shade, of each four ounces; seeds of
white Poppy half an ounce, seeds of Henbane and Dill, of each two drams; roots
of Hounds-tongue a dram and a half, flowers of Elicampane, yellow water-Lily
and Violets, of each a scruple. Bruise the Seeds in a stone Mortar with a
wooden Pestle, then mix them and press them, and so make an Epithem for the
Head.

An experienced warming Cordial Epithem.
Take water of Cinnamon, Balm and Bugloss, of each three ounces, Elks horn
Spagirically calcined, Cloves, Nutmegs and Citron peels, of each a dram and a
half; wood of Aloes a dram, Pearls prepared, red Coral prepared, of each half a
dram; seeds of Marjoram and Basil, of each a scruple; Oriental Saffron and
Rosemary, of each a scruple. Mix them for an Epithem for the Heart.

Another for the same Case.
Take water of Roses, Basil and Clove-gillyflowers, of each three ounces;
species of Diamoschu dulce and Diambra, of each a dram and a half; Dianthos and
Gems calcined, of each a dram. Mix them, and make an Epithem to be applied to
the region of the Heart.

A cooling Epithem in the Syncope and other Affects of the Heart.
Take water of red Roses four ounces, water of Sarrel and water-Lily, of each
four ounces; Vinegar violated an ounce, red Coral prepared, all the Sanders, of
each a dram; sealed Earth and Bole Armeniack, of each two scruples; of the five
precious Stones prepared, bone of a Stags heart, Pearls prepared, Mace,
Cinnamon, Camphire, of each ten grains. Mix them for an Epithem for the Heart.

A most noble Epithem in the Palpitation of the Heart.
Take water of Marjoram, Basil, Balm, Roses and Malmsey Wine, of each three
ounces; Vinegar rosated an ounce, species de Gemmis calid. of Diambra and
Diamoschu dulce, of each a dram; wood of Aloes and Mace, of each two scruples;
Cinnamon and Rosemary, of each half a dram; bone of a Stags heart, Pearls and
red Coral prepared, Citron peel, of each a scruple; the five precious Stones
prepared a scruple. Mix all for an Epithem for the Heart.

Another for the Palpitation of the Heart.
Take water of Roses, Sage and Borage, of each three ounces; odoriferous Wine
an ounce, Vinegar violated half an ounce, species Diathameron and Diamargariton
frigid. of each a dram and a half; Hartshorn Spagirically calcined, Cassia
lignea, yellow Sanders, Cardamoms the less, of each half a dram; Oriental
Saffron, flowers of Cloves and Rosemary, of each a scruple. Mix them for an
Epithem to be applied to the Breast.

An Epithem for the Weakness and Inflammation of the Liver.
Take water of Water-Lilies, Wormwood, Endive, Roses and Succory, of each two
ounces; Vinegar rosated an ounce, species Diatrion santalon half an ounce,
Crystals of Saturn two drams, Rhubarb a dram and a half, red Coral prepared two
scruples, seeds of Purslain and Sorrel, of each a scruple; Camphire, Mace and
Spike, of each ten grains. Mix them, and make an Epithem according to Art.

Another in the same Case.
Take water of white Epatick flowers, Rasberries, Strawberries, and the lesser
Centaury, of each three ounces; Vinegar prepared with Sanders an ounce and a
half, species Diarrhodon Abbatis, roots of Scorzonera and Plantane, of each two
drams; Salt of Endive and Succory, of each half a dram; the four greater cold
Seeds and the four lesser cold Seeds, of each a scruple. Mix them for an
Epithem for the Liver.

Epithema Hepaticum in causa frigida, or an Epithem for the Liver grieved with
a cold Distemper.
Take Malmsey Wine four ounces, water of Agrimony, Paul's Betony and Mother of
Thyme, of each three ounces; Spirit of Juniper an ounce and a half, species of
Diacurcuma and Diacubeba, of each two drams; Rhubarb, sweet Cane, Cane, Cassia
lignea, of each a dram; Salt of Pontick Wormwood and Southernwood, of each two
scruples; Oriental Saffron, seeds of Cummin and Lavender, of each half a dram;
Squinanth, flowers of yellow Stoechas, of each a scruple. Mix all for an
Epithem.

Epithema in Inflammatione Renum praesentissimum, or an Epithem for an
Inflammation of the Reins.
Take juice of Plantane and Night shade depurated, of each four ounces; water
of Housleek and Purslain, of each three ounces; odoriferous Wine and Wine
Vinegar violated, of each an ounce and a half; Nitre prepared. Mix them, and
make an Epithem to be applied to the region of the Reins, as the manner is. But
it is to be noted, If cooling Epithems are to be applied to noble parts, they
are not to be applied cold, but warm, except the heat be very intense, and then
it may be used cold.

SECT. XXV. Of Decoctions.
Decoctum Catarrhaie, or a Decoction for a Catarrh.
TAke clear Fountain water nine pound, clarified Honey five pound, Sage,
Origanum, Marjaram, Hyssop and Rosemary, of each an ounce. Boil it to the
consumption of the third part, and then strain it, and to the strained Liquor
add roots of Elicampane, Coltsfoot and Florentine Flower-de luce, of each six
drams; seeds of Roman Nettles, Carduus, Anise and Fenil, of each half an ounce;
Maidenhair, spotted Lungwort, Scabious and Horehound, of each two drams; the
Cordial Flowers, and flowers of Coltsfoot and wild Poppy, of each a dram. Let
these macerate 24 hours, and then add Cubebs, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Cardamoms the
less, white Ginger, Galangal the less, Cloves, of each a dram. Then let them
boil once, and so put them into some glass Vessel, and let it there stand a
whole day, and make a clear Decoction according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is very effectual in Catarrhs falling from the Head
upon the Breast and the parts thereabouts. The dose is a good draught at a
time, or the Patient may drink so much daily, as his thirst requires.

Decoctum Cosmeticum, or a Beautifying Water.
Take Venetian Borax, white Sugar Candy and sublimated Mercury, of each two
drams. Let them be finely pulverized and tied up apart in a linen Rag, and
boiled in four pound of May-dew gathered off from the Wheat, till the Mercury
be dissolved, and in the strained Liquor while warm, dissolve two drams of
Camphire, then filter it, and keep it for use.

Virtue and Use. It is only applied outwardly to the spots of the Face, which
it takes away, and leaves the Skin white and clean: But in using of it, take
heed lest it touch the Eyes or Teeth.

Decoctum Arthriticum, or a Decoction for the Gout.
Take small Raisons eight ounces, shavings of Guajacum eight ounces, roots of
China an ounce, roots of Liquorish and water-Acorus, of each half an ounce;
Cinnamon and the lesser Galangal, of each a dram. Let them be cut and bruised,
and then infused 24 hours in ten pound of Barley-water; afterward boil them
over a gentle fire to the consumption of the third part, and make a clear
Potion according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. I use this happily in all Catarrhs and running Gouts,
proceeding from a destillation of cold Humors, especially where the sick is
very dry, I also ordinarily give it in ill Habits and Dropsies for their common
drink; for it roborates and drys the body of all its superfluity. The Patient
cannot well err in the dose, but let him drink at his pleasure.

Decoctum Pectorale subacidum, or a Pectoral Decoction a little tart.
Take Fountain Water two pound and a half, Virgin Honey two pound, the best
Wine Vinegar a pound and a half. Boil it over a gentle fire, till it comes to
four pound, in which infuse small Raisons three ounces, seeds of Carduus and
Roman Nettles, of each an ounce; roots of Elicampane, Florentine Flower-de-uce
and Coltsfoot, of each half an ounce; Maidenhair, Scabious and Hyssop, of each
two drams; Dates, Iujubes and Figs, of each eight; flowers of Coltsfoot,
Violets, Borage and Bugloss, of each a dram. Let them macerate twenty four
hours, and then boil them over a gentle fire to the consumption of one part, at
last strain it through Hippocrates sleeve, and aromatize it with a little
Cinnamon.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It attenuates thick humors in the Phthisick, Asthma,
Cough, and other Pectoral diseases, it cuts the tough, softens the hard, and
brings forth the unprofitable humors, it also resists Putrefaction. The dose is
from half an ounce to an ounce.

Decoctum Pectorale subdulce, or a sweetish Pectoral Decoction.
Take small Raisons and white Sugar Candy, of each four ounces; roots of
Liquorish, Coltsfoot and Florentine Flower-de-luce, of each an ounce; spotted
Lungwort, Paul's Betony, Hart's-tongue, Maidenhair and Horehound, of each an
ounce; seeds of Myrtles, Anise and Fenil, of each three drams; flowers of
Chamomil, Marshmallows, Bugloss, Liverwort, lesser Centaury and Violets, of
each a dram and a half; Dates, dried Figs, Iujubes and Sebestens, of each
eight. Let them be cut and bruised, and infused 24 hours in four pound of
Hydromel, two pound of the water of the Juice of Scabious distilled, then boil
them to the consumption of the third part, and about the end of the Decoction
let it be aromatized with Galangal the less, Cinnamon, Cardamoms the less, and
white Ginger, of each a dram; Oriental Saffron half a dram. Then strain it
through Hippocrates sleeve, and make a clear Potion, which edulcorate with
white Sugar Candy.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It relieves those troubled with Asthma's, distempers of
the Liver, Pleurisies, Coughs, etc. and the continual use of this Decoction for
some time cures the Consumption: For it facilitates the Spitting, mundifies the
Breast, heals the Ulcers of the Lungs, etc. nay, and it opens the obstructions
of the Liver and Spleen also. The dose is morning, noon and night from two
ounces to three.

Decoctum Rad. Chinae Pectorale, or a Pectoral Decoction of the Roots of China.
Take the best and heavy roots of China cut cross into little round and thin
pieces three ounces. Infuse it in water of Scabious, Coltsfoot and Paul's
Betony, of each two pound. Let them stand in infusion 24 hours in a glazed
Vessel in a warm place, well covered with Clothes; then add Bugloss an ounce,
roots of Liquorish and Elicampane, of each half an ounce; seeds of Cudwort and
Fenil, of each two drams. Mix them, and boil it to the consumption of the half,
and toward the end of its boiling aromatize it with a dram and a half of
Cinnamon, let it cool by degrees, and strain it through Hippocrates sleeve, and
make a clear Potion of it, which edulcorate with Syrup of Violets four ounces.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. The use of this Decoction does not only give ease in
the Catarrh, Asthma, and Pectoral diseases, but also rectifies the whole Body;
and has a singular force in curing Ulcers of the Lungs: But it ought to be
considered, whether the Patient has a Fever or not; for if he has a Fever,
he must abstain from the use of this Decoction. It is given twice in the day
for sweating; but in the Cure it is used to be made of the Diaphoretick wood:
and for his ordinary drink at dinner and supper, he may use the following
Decoction of Raisons.

Decoctum Passulatum, or a Decoction of Raisons.
Take small Raisons four ounces, Barley husked three ounces, roots of the best
China, Liquorish and Scorzonera, of each half an ounce; Cinnamon two drams,
flowers of Violets dried a scruple. Boil them in six pound of Fountain Water to
the consumption of the third part, then let it be strained and clarified with
the Whites of two Eggs, and make a clear Potion of it.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. Let the sick use this Decoction at Meals for his
ordinary drink; for it has a certain singular faculty in curing the distempers
of the Thorax and Liver; for by lenifying and deterging, it gives great ease in
the vices of the Lungs. The dose is a good draught at a time.

Decoctum Citri, or a Decoction of Citrons.
Take Citrons (rind and pulp cut into thin round pieces) three or five, white
Sugar four ounces, Fountain Water six pound. Boil it to the consumption of the
third part, then strain it, and the Decoction being clear like Wine, keep it
for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. We do usually appoint this for a common drink to those
who are sick of the Plague, Epidemical diseases, burning Fevers, Choleric
diseases, Inflammations, small Pox and Meazles, Stone, immoderate Thirst,
Cholera, etc. because it curiously cools and moistens the Heart, Stomach,
Liver, Spleen, Reins, and also comforts the other Bowels that are hot and
impaired, and preserves them from putrefaction. The dose is a good draught at a
time; but for delicate Palates, it is prepared without the rind of Citrons, and
so prepared it is more palatable. And a little Wine being mixed with it, may
prove an honest excuse to prevent drunkenness.

Decoctum Hepaticum, or a Decoction for the Liver.
Take the stalks of Spanish Lettice preserved three ounces, roots of Succory
and Scorzonera preserved, of each an ounce and a half; seeds of Melons bruised
and Currants, of each an ounce; the Liver of a Wolf half an ounce, flower of
white Epatice, Violets, Succory and water-Lilies, of each a dram; species
Diarrhodon Abbatis, Triasantalon, of each tied up in a Nodulus half a dram. Let
all be boiled in six pound of Barleywater to the consumption of the half, and
being strained, clarify it with the Whites of Eggs; afterward add the juice of
acid Pomegranates and Citrons, of each six ounces; Syrup of blue Violets
vitriolated four ounces, Cinnamon water half an ounce. Mix them, and make a
clear Decoction.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is of great power and use in contemperating the heat
of the Heart and Liver; for it cools and comforts, and is good to lenifie the
Breast and Lungs, and to humect the Praecordia's. The dose is from three ounces
to four, or a good draught.

Decoctum Spleneticum, or a Decoction for the Spleen.
Take leaves of Sena and Sea Coleworts, of each an ounce; roots of Cappars,
Fenil, Grass, Flower-de-luce and dwarff Elder, of each three drams; Rhubarb,
Dodder, species Diarrhodon Abbatis, of each two drams and a half; Maidenhair,
Hyssop, Hearts tongue and Betony, flowers of the lesser Centaury, Hops and white
Liverwort, of each a dram. Let them be cut and bruised, and then infused 24
hours in water of Scurvy Grass, Fumitory, Sorrel and Paul's Betony, of each
eight ounces. Afterward boil it according to Art, and make a clear Decoction,
in which dissolve Cream of Tartar six drams: that being dissolved, add these
Syrups following, i. e. Syrup of Scurvy Grass, of Succory simple, of Fumitory
and Agrimony, of each an ounce; Spirit of Salt corrected half a dram. Mix all.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Decoction is excellent in the Obstruction, Tumor
and Scirrhus of the Spleen; also in the Scurvy, rectification of the Blood, ill
disposition or inclining to a Dropsy. The dose is every day from two ounces to
three.

Decoctum Antictericum, or a Decoction for the Iaundice.
Take Southernwood half an ounce, Goose dung collected in the Spring, and tied
up in a Nodulus three drams, roots of Celandine, Turmerick, Rhubarb and
Zedoary, of each a dram and a half; Nutmegs and Bay Berries ^u^ked, of each a
dram; seeds of Cummin and Anise, of each half a dram; Oriental Saffron and
white Lilies, of each ten grains; the best white Wine four pound. Boil all to
the consumption of the third part, and make a clear Potion.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. Let him that is sick with the Jaundice drink a draught
of this Decoction warm every morning for six days together, and it perfectly
cures the yellow Jaundice. But the poorer sort may instead of Wine use good
clear Beer or Ale, and be as effectual.

Decoctum Ficuum, or a Decoction of Figs.
Take fifteen fat Figs, Raisons two ounces, Hartshorn and pulp of Tamarinds,
of each an ounce; roots of Liquorish and Mock-chervil, of each half an ounce;
Barberries two drams, seeds of Carduus and Fenil, of each a dram and a half.
Make a Decoction in Barley water, and being strained, clarify it with the
White of an Egg, then take of this Liquor a pound and a half, Syrup of the
juice of Citrons four ounces. Mix them for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It safely and without any danger expels and drives
forth the small Pox and Meazles, and curbs the malignity of them. The dose is
often in the day from one spoonful to two; but if the Belly were too loose, add
Gum Tragacanth in the place of Pulp of Tamarinds.

Decoctum contra Mictionem Sanguinis, or a Decoction against Pissing of Blood.
Take roots of Liquorish an ounce, seeds of white Poppy and Myrtle-berries, of
each half an ounce; Acorns and Acatia, of each two drams; Paul's Betony,
Maidenhair, Ceterach, Sage and Burnet, of each a dram and a half; flowers of
red Roses a dram, and of wild Poppy a scruple. Boil them in a sufficient
quantity of Fountain Water, so that two pound may remain, which edulcorate with
Syrup of the Juice of Violets for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a very good Medicine for those who piss blood;
for it does quickly and without any trouble take away the affect, and cure it
really. The dose is morning and evening from two ounces to three or four.

Decoctum Satyriacum.
Take seeds of Ashen-keys an ounce, Boletus cervinus, Bulls pizzle, Venetian
Borax, of each half an ounce; roots of Pellitory and Aron, of each three drams;
long Pepper, Castor, Ginger and Canamon, of each two drams; Cloves, the lesser
Cardamoms and Cubebs, of each a scruple. All being cut and bruised, let them be
put into a new clean glazed Vessel, and pour upon it a sufficient quantity of
Malmsey Wine, and let them boil in a Vessel well luted according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. He that would be presently and powerfully armed for the
Sports of Venus, let him drink a little draught of this Decoction morning and
evening.

Decoctum contra Herniam Intestinalem, or a Decoction against the Rupture of
the Bowels.
Take seeds of Thorough-leaf and Cummin, of each an ounce; roots of Aron fresh
dried, roots of water-Acorus, Tormentil and great Comfry, of each half an
ounce; the herb Perwincle, Sanicle, Winter-green, golden Rod, Mouse-ear,
Rupturewort and Orpine, of each two drams; red Roses, Balaustines, the lesser
Galangal and Cloves, of each a dram. Let them be cut and bruised, and boiled in
a sufficient quantity of the best white Wine to the consumption of the third
part, and make a clear Decoction according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. Internal Balsams being given with it, cure the Rupture
without any trouble, and is in this case a singular Experiment. The dose is a
good draught morning and evening.

Decoctum contra Uteri Haemorrhagiam, or a Decoction against a Plux of Blood
from the Womb.
Take roots of Succory an ounce, roots of Tormentil, Avens, Liquorish and
Plantane, of each half an ounce; Gum Arabic, Elder-berries dried, Hartshorn,
Coriander prepared, of each three drams; Shepherds-purse, Bloodwort, Burnet,
Sorrel, Horstail, Rosemary, of each two drams; grains of Mastich a dram and a
half, red Roses dried, Nutmegs, of each a dram. Make a Decoction in a
sufficient quantity of Water of Millefoil and white Wine to twenty four ounces,
and in the clear strained Liquor dissolve four ounces of Syrup of the Juice of
Quinces.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is a Secret in the unmeasurable purgation of the
Terms, and the continual destillation from the Womb. The dose is morning and
evening from three spoonfuls to four, or a little draught.

Decoctum contra Menses suppressos, or a Decoction against the suppression of
the Terms.
Take Cinnamon an ounce and a half, roots of red Mugwort, Smallage, Asparagus
and Fenil, of each half an ounce; Venetian Borax, Bay Berries husked,
Iuniperberries, of each three drams; Centaury and Savin, of each two drams;
Motherwort, Maidenhair, Nep, Pennyroyal, Calamint, Mother of Thyme, of each a
dram and a half; flowers of Chamomil and Bugloss, Oriental Saffron and Mace, of
each a dram. Boil all (but the Saffron, Mace and Cinnamon) in a sufficient
quantity of good old Wine to the consumption of the third part, and then at
last add the Species, and make a clear Decoction according to Art, which
edulcorate with Syrup of the Juice of Mugwort and Maidenhair.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Decoction is approved by often Experience; for it
wonderfully and potently brings down the Terms, the retained Secundine and dead
Child (if not rightly disposed for birth) it brings away without danger. The
dose is morning and evening at going to bed a moderate draught drunk warm, and
continue it so long till the Terms appear.

Decoctum contra Scabiem, or a Decoction against the Itch and Scab.
Take Agrimony, Origanum and Paul's Betony, of each half an ounce; roots of
Elicampane, Scorzonera and Swallow-wort, of each two drams; Cinnamon and Mace,
of each a dram. Boil them in four pound of the best Beer to the consumption of
the half, and make a clear Potion.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. Universal Remedies premised, and the Body being duly
purged, it certainly drives forth the Itch and cures it. The dose is morning
and evening a good draught at a time warm.

Decoctum Vulnerarium, or a Vulnerary Decoction.
Take Ladies mantle, red Beets, Winter-green, Sanicle, Periwincle, golden Rod,
seeds of Angelica, of each equal parts. Let the Herbs be cut small, and the
seeds of Angelica bruised only, and let them be well mixed one with another,
then take I suppose there may be a mistake in that half ounce, which is but a
little to boil in two pound of any Menstruum.
half an ounce of this mixed Powder tied up in a linen Rag, and boiled in two
pound of Rhenish Wine in Balneo, and make a clear Decoction.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It cures all Wounds and Blows in what part of the body
soever they are, and expels Iron, Wood, Lead, and other such things. And it
consolidates and heals more in a week, than other vulnerary Potions do in a
month, and is such an Experiment, that all Chirurgions deservedly ought to
receive it with both hands, and with a thankful mind. The dose is morning, noon
and night two or three spoonfuls warm.

Decoctum Ligni Guajaci, or a Decoction of Guajacum.
Take shavings of Guajacum a pound, the bark of it four ounces, roots of China
two ounces, Sarsaparilla and Sassafras, of each an ounce. Infuse it according
to Art in sixteen pound of clear Fountain Water for 24 hours, and then boil it
in a new glazed Pot close covered to the consumption of one half, and let this
serve for a Sudorifick. Afterward boil it again in twelve pound of Barley water
to the consumption of one third, and keep this for ordinary drink. And to this
last Decoction you may add a few Raisons, and aromatize it with Cinnamon, if you
please.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Decoction has a most admirable faculty in the
French Pox, and chiefly in those who are full with Ulcers, which loathsome
disease this Decoction cures. Of this first Decoction the Patient may take one
good draught warm in a morning, and another two or three hours before supper,
and let him drink of the second Decoction as often as he pleases in the day
besides.

Another of Lignum Sanctum, or the Holy Wood.
Take Lignum Sanctum a pound, the bark of it four ounces, Sarsaparilla two
ounces, Sassafras an ounce. Let them digest 24 hours in sixteen pound of
Fumitorywater, and then distill them in an Alembick, and in the distilled Liquor
boil Raisons four ounces, roots of Liquorish and China, of each an ounce; seeds
of Fenil and Anise, of each half an ounce; the herbs Betony and Succory, of
each two drams. Let it be strained according to Art, and keep the strained
Liquor for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It drys, attenuates, expurgates, and provokes Sweat;
and therefore does resist Putrefaction and Contagion. It amends the vices of
the Brain, cures the Pox, strengthens the Liver, opens the Spleen, and is very
good in the Scirrhus thereof. It is of good use in the Dropsy. It heals
malignant Ulcers, and cures the Leprosy and Elephantiasis, etc. The dose is a
good draught at a time twice a day given warm.

Dococtum adstringens, or an astringent Decoction.
Take roots of Tormentil and Snakeweed, of each an ounce; dried Quince six
drams, seeds of Docks and seeds of Roses, of each two drams; dead Nettles with
their red flowers a dram and a half, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, the lesser Galangal and
Cloves, of each a dram; Sebestens nine. Boil these according to Art in three
pound of Plantane to the consumption of one third, and in the clear strained
Liquor dissolve one dram of Camphire, and if you please edulcorate it also with
Miya of Quinces.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is an experienced Medicine in Dysenteries and other
Fluxes of the Belly; and it also cures diverse Haemorrhages. The dose is a good
draught in a morning fasting.

Decoctum Polypodii purgans, or a purging Decoction of Polypody.
Take roots of Polypody of the Oak and Raisons stoned, of each two ounces;
Carthamus seeds and Barley, of each an ounce and a half; Liquorish half an
ounce, Hyssop, Scabious, Coltsfoot and Germander, of each a dram; Iujubes
fifteen, fat Figs six, and Dates cleansed from their skin four. Boil them in so
much Whey, that there may remain about twenty one ounces, and about the end of
the Decoction add Leaves of Sena three ounces, Troches of Agarick three drams,
seeds of Fenil and Anise, of each a dram and a half. Let them stand over the
fire a while, but not boil much, then make a clear Potion according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. We happily use it in the Asthma, Phthisick, Pleurisy,
and other Pectoral diseases. The dose is from four ounces to five; and the body
being purged, let the Patient drink our Pectoral Decoction called Subacidum or
Subdulce, as occasion serves.

Decoctum Galli antiqui farcinati, or a Decoction of an old Cock stuffed.
Take Polypody an ounce and a half, Carthamus seeds an ounce, Cinnamon three
drams, leaves of Sena, white Turbith and Orange peel, of each two drams; white
Ginger, the lesser Galangal and Mace, of each a dram; species Diacymini and
Dianisi, of each half a dram; and one Bay-berry. The Species being mixed and
put in a linen Rag, let them be put in when the Cock is almost boiled enough.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is very useful in the Colic, when it proceeds from
a thick, flatulent and phlegmatic Cause.

Decoctum Sanguinem mundificans, or a Decoction to cleanse the Blood.
Take Citrine Myrobalans an ounce, flowers of Violets dried a dram, Prunes
nineteen, Sebestens and Iujubes, of each eight. Boil them in water of the
flowers of Acatia to three ounces, in which dissolve of our potable Scammony a
scruple, Oil of Cinnamon and Aniseeds, of each a drop. Mix them, and make a
draught for one dose.

Virtue and Use. It purges Choler of both kinds, Phlegm and other Humors: It
also mundifies the Blood, and keeps the body laxative in Fevers.

Decoctum Senae, or a Decoction of Sena.
Take elect Sena three drams, acid Tartar a dram, Fumitory water warm four
ounces. Let them infuse all night, and in the morning let them boil a little,
yet so, as that the Tartar may be thoroughly dissolved, and in the strained
Liquor, while it is warm, dissolve of the best Manna six drams. Again strain
it, and then add Cinnamon water a dram, Elaeosaccharum of Citrons ten grains.
Mix them, and make a purging draught for one dose to be given warm.

Virtue and Use. It is a good Purge for the whole Body; for it opens the
obstructions of all the Bowels, and mundifies the blood. But in the first place
it purges Choler both black and yellow, and Phlegm also. It cleanses and
strengthens the Head, Brain, Heart, Lungs, Liver, Spleen, and all the Senses of
the Body, and carries off all that offends them: It retardes Age, increases
Youth. Moreover it is an excellent Medicine in all chronical, tartarous, and
melancholy diseases, as the Epilepsie, Dotage, Deliria's, Heach-ach, Gout,
Elephantiasis, Scabs, Pustles, Itch, and all other vices of the Skin. It is
also profitably given to Women with Child and to Children and Men of all ages;
for it purges modestly without any molestation: But for Children and young
Patients half, or a third part of it, is sufficient.

Decoctum Senae cum Rhabarbaro, or a Decoction of Sena with Rhubarb.
Take elect Sena two drams, the best Rhubarb and acid Tartar, of each a dram;
of Fumitory water warm four ounces. Let them infuse all night, and in the
morning let them boil a little, enough to dissolve the Tartar; afterward, the
expression being made, and in the strained Liquor while warm, dissolve of the
best Manna six drams. Again strain it, and then add Cinnamon water a dram,
Elaeosaccharum of Aniseeds ten grains. Mix them, and make a purging draught for
one dose, which is to be taken warm.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It purges Phlegm and both kinds of Choler chiefly from
the Stomach, Liver and Spleen, etc. It mundifies the Blood, opens all
Obstructions, and cures all Affects thence proceeding, as Jaundice, Dropsy,
Tumor of the Spleen, putrid and continual Fevers, pains of the Hypochonders,
etc. Let no man wonder at the small dose of Sena in this Prescript; for four
drams of Sena infused in four ounces of Fumitory water, do not purge more than
two drams macerated in the like quantity, because the water does extract as
much as it can, and leaves the rest: therefore two drams of Sena are sufficient
to quicken other things in four ounces of Water.

Decoctum Rhabarbari, or a Decoction of Rhubarb.
Take of the best Rhubarb a dram and a half, red Roses dried half a dram, roots
of Liquorish sliced, and flowers of Marshmallows, of each a scruple. Let them
be cut and bruised, and infused all night in three ounces of Plantane water
warm, in the morning strain it, in the strained Liquor dissolve of the best
Manna half an ounce, Elaeosaccharum of Nutmegs ten grains, Spirit of Vitriol
four drops. Mix them for one dose, and give it warm in the morning for a
draught.

Virtue and Use. It is very effectual in all Fluxes of the Belly: it gives one
or two motions, and by those it expels the cause of the bloody Flux.

Annotation. Many use Rhubarb torrefied, which is an evil practice, because it
consumes the virtue of it, and the terrene part only remains, and so makes it
more stiptick.

Decoctum Violatum purgans, or a purging Decoction of Violets.
Take leaves of Sena two ounces, Fenil seeds and acid Tartar, of each half an
ounce; dried Violet flowers, and the best Rhubarb, of each a dram and a half;
white Ginger and Cinnamon, of each a dram; Galangal the less and Cloves, of each
half a dram. Let them infuse all night in Fumitory water warm, in the morning
boil them a little, and afterward strain it, and take of the clear strained
Liquor ten ounces, Syrup of Succory with Rhubarb and Syrup of the juice of
Violets, Syrup of the juice of Sorrel and Oxysaccharum simple, of each an
ounce. Mix them and make a Potion, which divide into four equal parts for four
doses.

Virtue and Use. It is good in Tertian and Quotidian Fevers, etc. and gently
purges all humors that offend, it is likewise an excellent Remedy for the
Stone. And is given in the running Gout, Scurvy, Sciatica, and such like
diseases, and is to be continued four mornings successively.

Decoctum Nucis Cupressi, or a Decoction of Cyprus Nuts.
Take Cyprus Nuts, Turkish Galls, of each eight ounces; filings of Iron
prepared with Vinegar, Roch Alum, of each four ounces; medicinal Stone and
Pomegranate peel, of each an ounce and a half. Let them be bruised and mixed,
and boiled according to Art in a sufficient quantity of red Wine or Plantane
water.

Virtue and Use. It is applied outwardly, and does extenuate and consume all
superfluous Carnosities, etc. The way of using is to wet a Sponge in it warm,
and having squeezed it, bind it upon the part.

Decoctum Nigrum, or a black Decoction.
Take crude Alum a pound, green Vitriol half a pound, Turkish Galls four
ounces, Verdigriese and white Tartar, of each two ounces. Mix them, and boil
them in eight pound of Wine Vinegar to the consumption of one half; then add of
Spirit of Wine rectified a pound. Again let them be mixed and filtred, and then
kept for use.

Virtue and Use. A linen Rag wet in it and applied to the part, drys and heals
old Venereal Ulcers in any part of the body, and takes away other Defluxions
and Excrescences of evil flesh, and roborates and mundifies the part affected.
It also perfectly cures Wounds and Bruises in other Creatures.

SECT. XXVI. Of Gargarisms.
Gargarismus de Althaea, or a Gargarism of Marshmallows.
TAke Roots of Marshmallows an ounce, of common Mallows half an ounce, leaves
of Violets, Strawberries, Hyssop and Sage, of each three drams; leaves of
Peaches and Cherries, of each two drams; shavings of Ivy wood, Album Graecum
prepared with Marigold water, Honey of Saturn, of each a dram and a half;
Vitriol of Mars and Venus, of each a dram; flowers of Marigolds, Marshmallows,
wild Poppies and Bugle, of each a dram. Let them be grossly cut, bruised, then
mixed and boiled in Fountain Water and Wine Vinegar, of each a pound and a
half: let them boil to the consumption of one third, and toward the end of its
boiling add of Rob of Elder a sufficient quantity to make it grateful.

Virtue and Use. It is of good use in the Quinsie, Imposthumes of the Throat,
Jaws, Tongue and Uvula, it dissolves and discusseth the Inflammations of the
Tonsils, and allays and amends the pain and difficulty in swallowing; but the
Patient ought to use this Gargarism every hour. And it is to be observed, That
all Gargarisms are to be used warm.

Gargarismus de Glycyrrhiza, or a Gargarism of Liquorish.
Take roots of Liquorish sliced an ounce, Album Graecum two drams, Roch Alum a
dram. Boil these a little in water of Plantane, Roses, common Mallows and
Bugle, of each equal parts, and a sufficient quantity of all. Take of this
strained Liquor a pound, white Wine three ounces, Diamoron and Dianucum, of
each a dram and a half. Mix them, and make a Gargarism.

Virtue, and Use. It is of excellent use in a desperate Quinsie and other
distempers of the Mouth and Throat, if the Patient uses it often and warm.

Gargarismus Lacteatus, or a Gargarism of Milk.
Take new Milk from the Cow two pound, Album Graecum half an ounce, Honey of
Roses two spoonfuls, Verdigriese half a dram. Boil them, and when strained,
make a Gargarism.

Virtue and Use. It is effectual in the Quinsie, repels the Tumors and pains of
the Jaws and Mouth, and detergeth and heals Ulcers in those parts: and it is to
be used often.

Gargarismus de Cortice Granatorum, or a Gargarism of Pomegranate bark.
Take of Pomegranate rind half an ounce, Endive, Scabious, Night shade and
Burnet, of each three drams; seeds of Sorrel and Quinces, Barberries, of each
two drams; burnt Alum a dram and a half, flowers of Marshmallows, Balaustines
and Bugle, of each a dram. Boil them in water of Roses and Plantane and red
Stiptick Wine, of each a pound, to the consumption of the third part, Take of
this strained Liquor two pound, Diamoron and Dianucum, of each two ounces;
Syrup of Pomegranates, clarified Honey and Vinegar of Roses, of each an ounce;
Spirit of Nitre so much as will make it grateful. Mix them, and make a
Gargarism to be applied warm.

Virtue and Use. This is also proper for the Quinsie; and it does in a
wonderful manner as well allay the Inflammation, as dissolve the Imposthume,
and is attended with a singular discussive faculty: But the use of it must be
often repeated.

Gargarismus de Auricula Judae, or a Gargarism of Jews Ears.
Take Barley husked half an ounce, Liquorish sliced and Jews Ears cut, of each
two drams; flowers of Marshmallows a dram. Let them boil a little in a
sufficient quantity of Plantane water. Take of this clear Decoction a pound,
Syrup of Violets two ounces, Nitre prepared a dram. Mix them for a Gargarism,
with which let the Mouth be often washed.

Virtue and Use. The Medicine is of great worth, as by Experience it has been
proved, against Inflammations, dryness, roughness, sores and fissures of the
Tongue, Jaws, and neighboring parts, which often happens in continual,
malignant and burning Fevers, from hot, sharp and putrid Vapors that rise to
those parts.

Gargarismus de Tormentilla, or a Gargarism of Tormentil.
Take roots of Tormentil and water-Acorus, of each an ounce; Pomegranate bark
and bark of the roots of Acatia, of each half a dram; Balaustines and Alum, of
each three drams; Rosemary, Cinquefoil, Stone-crop, Sage, Plantane and Hyssop,
of each two drams; flowers of Marigolds and red Roses, of each a dram. Boil
them in Fountain Water and Wine Vinegar, of each a pound and a half, to the
consumption of one third, in the end add of Honey of Roses so much as will make
it grateful.

Virtue and Use. It cures the Putrefaction and Scurvy of the Mouth, it renews
the Gums perished by any disease, or rotted by an Imposthume. It fastens the
Teeth, and makes the flesh grow up to them again; and it also contracts the
Uvula that is fallen. In short, it is of good use in all the vices of the
Mouth, Tongue, Palate and Tonsils, nay Ulcers and Inflammations also: And if
used warm often or every hour, it restores them to their perfect health again.

Gargarismus de Pyrethro, or a Gargarism of Pellitory.
Take roots of Pellitory of Spain two drams, the best Olibanum and white
Ginger, of each a dram and a half; seeds of Henbane bruised, of Sage, of each a
dram; long Pepper a scruple. Boil them in Wine Vinegar and Fountain Water, of
each half a pound, and make a Gargarism.

Virtue and Use. It is excellent and very effectual in pains of the Teeth; for
it has an Anodyne faculty. But the sick must use it often in the day, till the
pain cease.

Gargarismus de Hyoscyamo, or a Gargarism of Henbane.
Take roots of Henbane an ounce, roots of the lesser Nettles, Cinquefoil and
Pellitory of Spain, of each six drams; shavings of Lignum Sanctum, Box and
Tamarisk, white Frankincense, seeds of Stavesacre, of each half an ounce;
Pomegranate rind, long Pepper, white Ginger and Cloves, of each three drams;
Sage, Mother of Thyme, Calamint, Peachwort, Origanum, of each two drams. Mix
them, and make a gross Powder, which keep for use. And when the use of it is
required, Take of this gross Powder an ounce and a half, Wine Vinegar and
Fountain Water, of each a pound. Boil them, and make a Gargarism.

Virtue and Use. The Liquor being strained and warm is to be held in the mouth:
and being so used, it stays the most painful and tormenting pains of the Teeth.

Gargarismus de Acatia, or a Gargarism of Acatia.
Take of the best and fresh Acatia half an ounce, of Cyprus Nuts, Balaustines,
the outer rind of Pomegranate, of each two drams; the herbs Marjoram, Hyssop
and Sage, of each a dram and a half; roots of Florentine Flower-de-luce and
Alum, of each a dram; Acorns and red Roses, of each half a dram. Let them boil
in a sufficient quantity and equal parts of red Wine and water of Oaken leaves,
to the consumption of the third part; then take of this strained Liquor a pound
and a half, Rob of Nuts two ounces, Spirit of Vitriol a scruple. Mix them, and
keep it in an earthen Vessel.

Virtue and Use. It fastens loose Teeth, and preserves them so; but the Gums
and Teeth must be often washed with it.

Gargarismus de Papavere, or a Gargarism of Poppy.
Take four heads with the seeds of white Poppy, the spongy heads that grow upon
sweet Bryar two, roots of Plantane and Bistort, of each half an ounce; seeds of
Nigella, flowers of wild Poppy, of red Roses and Balaustines, of each a dram.
Boil them in Lettice and Rosewater, of each a sufficient quantity. Take of this
strained Liquor twelve ounces, Syrup of Poppy simple, Diacodium violated, of
each an ounce and a half; Pomegranate Wine and Tincture of wild Poppy, of each
an ounce; phlegm of Alum rectified half an ounce. Mix them for a Gargarism,
which is to be held in the mouth.

Virtue and Use. With this Gargarism let the Mouth be often washed; and let it
be also held in the Mouth without gargling, and it prevents Catarrhs caused by
sharp, thin and hot Rheums.

SECT. XXVII. Of Lixiviums.
Lixivium Benedictum.
TAke Ashes of common wood of Juniper, of red Mugwort, of Broom, of Beans in
the shells, of Wormwood, of each an ounce. Mix them, and with a sufficient
quantity of strong white Wine make a Lixivium according to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is of excellent use for those grieved with the
Dropsy, called Hydrops; for it does powerfully and effectually expel the water
by Urine, and by this means we have cured several of the Dropsy, giving no
other remedy than this for certain days. The dose is in the morning fasting
from two ounces to three.

Lixivium Sapientiae.
Take roots of Avens, Pellitory of Spain and Asarabacca, Misleto of the Oak, of
each an ounce; Olibanum and yellow Amber, of each half an ounce; Rosemary,
Marjoram, Balm, Origanum, leaves of Sage and Bays, of each two drams; flowers
of Lavender, red Roses, Peony, Betony and Primrose, of each a dram. Boil all
these in a sweet Lixivium, and keep it for use.

Virtue and Use. The Body being purged once a week, let the Head be diligently
washed with this Lixivium, and it restores the loss of Memory, etc. caused by
cold and moisture: For it wonderfully comforts the Brain and Memory, and
strengthens the animal Spirits, and also preserves from the Apoplexy and
Epilepsie.

Lixivium Cephalicum, or a Lixivium for the Head.
Take leaves of Sena six drams, roots of Florentine Flower-de-luce, and seeds
of Carduus, of each three drams; the herb Eyebright with the flowers, Vervain,
Marjoram, Rosemary, Sage and Origanum, of each three drams; the best Agarick a
dram and a half, flowers of yellow Stoechas, Chamomil, red Roses and white
Violets, of each a dram. They being all cut and mixed, let them be boiled in a
good Lixivium, then let it be clarified according to Art, and it is prepared.

Virtue and Use. It is very profitable in pains of the Head. It roborates the
Brain, Nerves, Eyes, and all the other Senses. Let the Head be washed with it
twice in the week: But they who are cold and moist naturally, ought to use
Lotions for the Head but seldom; but those who are hot and dry, may use them
more frequently.

Lixivium Antiasthmaticum, or a Lixivium for the Asthma.
Take roots of Liquorish sliced, Florentine Flower-de-luce and Elicampane, of
each half an ounce; yellow Amber, white Frankincense and Myrtle-berries, of
each three drams; Sage, Betony, Hyssop and Origanum, of each two drams; seeds
of Nigella and Caraways, of each a dram and a half; flowers of Chamomil, red
Roses, wild Poppies and Rosemary, of each a dram. Let them all be put into a
little Bag, and boiled in a sweet Lixivium, afterward clarified and kept for
use.

Virtue and Use. Let the Head be washed with this Lixivium once or twice in the
week: For in the Asthma it drys and stops Defluxious falling from the Head upon
the other parts; but after the Head is washed, let it be quickly dried and
covered.

Lixivium Diureticum, or a Diuretic Lixivium.
Take wild Flax with its flowers, Broom with its flowers, dwarff Elder both
root and branoh, leaves and flowers of Elder, of each a like, and a sufficient
quantity of all. Burn them to ashes according to Art, of which with a
sufficient quantity of Rhenish Wine, make a clear Lixivium.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It powerfully expels water by Urine from those who have
the Dropsy, and is a Secret in the Dysury, etc. The dose is from two ounces to
three, by it self, or in any other specific Vehicles.

Lixivium Tartari, or a Lixivium of Tartar.
Take white Tartar calcined till it is black what quantity you will: And with
distilled Rainwater make a Lixivium, in which afterward boil Orange peel, and
the tinctured Lixivium being strained and clear, keep for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This being given for certain days, does dissolve and
expel the Stone, and insensibly brings away all the mucilaginous matter as well
from the Reins as Bladder. The dose is one spoonful in some specific Vehicle.

Lixivium Tingens, or a Dying Lixivium.
Take of Lixivium of Vine branches or cuttings two pound, roots of Bryony,
Celandine and Turmerick, of each half an ounce; of Saffron two drams, flowers
of Mullein, yellow Stoechas, Broom and St. Iohns-wont, of each a dram. Let them
boil together, and make a clear Lixivium according to Art.

Virtue and Use. It cleanses the Hair, and makes it clear and yellow; but it
must be often washed with it, till it be perfectly dyed.

SECT. XXVIII. Of Baths.
Balneum Artificiale ubi Thermae naturales desunt, or an Artificial Bath where
the natural are wanting.
TAke of yellow Sulphur three pound, Sea Salt and roots of Pellitory of Spain,
of each a pound; white Tartar and Nitre, of each half a pound; Juniper and
Bay Berries, of each seven ounces; of Earthworms washed in Spirit of Wine, and
again dried six ounces, Rosemary, Sage, Marjoram, Lavender, Hyssop, Groundpine
and Thyme, of each an ounce; flowers of Chamomil, Mullein, Melilot and St.
Iohns-wort, of each half an ounce. Boil them in water for a Bath according to
Art.

Virtue and Use. This Bath should be often used; for it refreshes paralytick
Members, warms the nervous parts, drys, roborates, and restores them to their
pristine motion: Yet general and particular Evacuations ought to precede.

Balneum contra Sterilitatem seu difficultatem impraegnationis probatum: Or an
approved Bath against Barrenness or difficulty of Conception.
Take roots of Madder, Parsley, Polypody and Valerian, of each three ounces;
seeds of wild Rue and Darnel, of each two ounces; green Iuniper-berries an
ounce and a half, Motherwort, Mother of Thyme, Balm, Mugwort, Fumitory, of each
an ounce; Marjoram, Lavender, Agrimony, Melilot and Mullein, of each six drams;
Calamint, Chamomil and Origanum, of each half an ounce. All being grossly cut
and bruised, let them be boiled in a great Cauldron to the consumption of the
third part, of which make a Bath according to Art.

Virtue and Use. This Decoction together with the Herbs, Roots and Seeds, put
into a great Vessel or Bathing Tub, and in that let the barren Woman, after she
has been well purged from her Terms, sit up to the Navil, so that all the
lower Belly may be bathed and refreshed; and let this be continued for twelve
days, and the Bath to be renewed every third day: And during the twelve days
let her forbear Coition; for by the use of this Bath only, many barren Women
have been made fruitful. But when the Woman goes out of the Bath, let her body
be well covered with Cloths, lest the cold Air should hurt her.

Balneum Stipticum contra Uteri Haemorrhagiam probatum, or a Stiptick Bath
approved of in Fluxes of Blood from the Womb.
Take crude Alum two pound, roots of Plantane, Tormentil, water-Acorus and
Bistort, of each four ounces; bark of the roots of Acacia, Pomegranate rind and
Turkish Galls, of each three ounces; flowers of red Roses and Balaustines, of
each two ounces; the herb Burnet, Shepherds-purse, Sage and Millefoil, of each
an ounce. Boil all in a sufficient quantity of water, in which while it is
boiling, Iron and Steel is quenched often, and make a Bath according to Art.

Virtue and Use. Let the Bath be moderately hot, and the Woman sit therein up
to the Navil every morning fasting for an hour or two, and let this be
continued for certain days, and by the Providence of God she will be perfectly
cured.

Balneum contra suppressionem Menstruorum probatum, or an approved Bath against
the suppression of the Terms.
Take of the whole plant of Mugwort four ounces, roots of Angelica, Madder,
Asparagus and Smallage, of each two ounces; seeds of Parsley, Iuniper-berries,
and Bayberries ^^^ked, red Myrrh, of each a dram and a half; the herbs
Centaury, Savin and Pennyroyal, of each an ounce; Fenil, Mother of Thyme and
Balm, of each six drams; Wormwood, Groundpine, Horehound, Pellitory, Nep,
Mercury and Rosemary, of each half an ounce. Let them boil in a large Vessel in
a sufficient quantity of River-water to the consumption of the third part, then
put it into a bathing Tub for use.

Virtue and Use. Let the Woman sit in it up to the Navil, and continue in it
for half an hour, then let her be dried and put to bed: yet this is not to be
used once only, but to be repeated three or four times a week.

Balneum in Icteritia ad Cutem detergendam expertum, or a Bath to cleanse the
Skin in the Iaundice.
Take white Tartar a pound, roots of Florentine Flower-de-luce, white
Hermodactyls and Solomon's Seal, of each four ounces; whole Beans, Lupines,
whole Barley, of each two drams; leaves of Misleto of the Oak an ounce and a
half, Wormwood, common Mallows, Pellitory, Celandine and Sopewort, of each an
ounce; flowers of the lesser Centaury, Chamomil and water-Lilies, of each half
an ounce. Make a Decoction for a Bath according to Art.

Virtue and Use. Let the Patient as it were swim in the Bath, that is, be
covered all over with the water; and when he goes out of the Bath, let him go
into his bed, and sweat there the space of an hour, and let this be continued.

Balneum contra Calculum Renum and Vesicae, or a Bath against the Stone in the
Reins and Bladder.
Take roots of Marshmallows and common Mallows, of each three ounces; roots of
Parsley and Restharrow, of each two ounces; roots of Vervain, Eryngo, Fenil and
Brambles, of each an ounce and a half; Bay Berries husked and Linseeds, of each
an ounce; flowers of Marshmallows six drams, of the herbs Chamomil, Tansie,
Dill, Melilot, Mullein, Pellitory of the Wall, Saxifrage, Cinqfoil, Violets and
Strawberries, of each half an ounce. Mix them, and boil them for a Bath
according to Art.

Virtue and Use. Let the Patient sit in this Bath while he is in his greatest
pains. And it is successfully used after other Evacuations: but while the sick
is in the Bath; Potions should be given him for to break the Stone.

Balneum medicamentosum, sive Lotio pedum, or a medicinal Bath, or Wash for the
Feet.
Take Lapis medicamentosus four ounces, the best Alum three ounces, the inner
bark of green Elder an ounce and a half, of the herbs Mugwort, dwarff Elder,
Cinqfoil, St. Iohns-wort, Dill, Maidenhair, of each six drams; ashes of
Guajacum, common Salt, of each half an ounce. Boil all in River-water for a
Bath for the Feet.

Virtue and Use. Pour it into some convenient Vessel fit to bathe the Feet in;
it is good in the Scurvy, and in other diseases to take away Tumors of the
Feet: but the Patient ought to continue in the Bath two or three hours in the
morning fasting, and this must be continued for three or four days together;
and when he comes out of the Bath, let him wipe his Feet with a Towel.

Balneum Nitrosum pro pedibus, or a Nitrous Bath for the Feet.
Take of the best Nitre half a pound, Sea Salt four ounces, flowers of
Chamomil, Marshmallows and red Roses, of each an ounce; of the herbs Betony,
Origanum, Sage and Rue, of each half an ounce. Mix them, and boil them, and
make a Bath for the Feet.

Virtue and Use. Let the sick use this, morning and evening; for it draws away
the flegmy matter that lies in the Joints, and draws down the humors from the
upper parts; when he has done bathing, let him wipe his Feet with a clean
Cloth.

Balneum Hypnoticum pro pedibus, or a Bath for the Feet to procure Sleep.
Take the bark of the roots of Mandrake, of Henbane and common Mallows, of each
an ounce; leaves of Violets, Melilot, Lettice, Nightshade and Dill, of each
half an ounce; eleven heads of white Poppy with the seeds, flowers of
water-Lily, Chamomil and Roses, of each two drams; one of the spongy brushes
growing on sweet Bryar. Mix them, and according to Art, make a Bath for the
Feet.

Virtue and Use. This Lotion for the Feet should be used in the evening either
before supper, or going to bed, for so it discusseth lassitudes, and sweetly
induces sleep; but let not the Feet be wiped after the use of it, but wrapped
in linen Clothes.

SECT. XXIX. Of Vesicatories.
Vesicatorium in dolor Capitis and Dentium, occipiti post aures applicandum:
Or a Vesicatory to be applied behind the Ears in the pain of the Head and Teeth.
TAke Venice Treacle two scruples, Cantharides their wings and heads cut off,
Hares fat, of each half a dram; roots of Pellitory of Spain and Nutmegs, of
each a scruple. Mix them, and with a sufficient quantity of Leaven make a
Vesicatory according to Art for the part where the pain is.

Vesicatorium aliud in Cephalaea, etc. or another Vesicatory in the Headache.
Take Cantharides macerated in Vinegar a dram, white Ginger and long Pepper, of
each half a dram; Marjoram a scruple. Mix them, and with a sufficient quantity
of Leaven make it into a good convenient body; afterward with half a Nut-shell
apply it, till the Blister be raised; which being cut, apply Colewort leaves to
it, and keep it running.

Vesicatorium in omni mentis Alienatione, Phrenesi, Melancholia, Mania etc.
probatum: Or an approved Vesicatory for all distempers of the Mind, as
Frenzy, Melancholy, Madness.
Take Cantharides with their heads and wings cut off four scruples, Hares fat a
dram, white Amber prepared and Cubebs, of each a scruple; fat Figs two, and a
little Vinegar. Mix them with a sufficient quantity of Leaven and a few drops
of Spirit of Wine, and without fire bring them into the form of a Plaster,
which apply to the Crown of the Head, the hair being shaved off.

Vesicatorium in Augina expertum, or an experienced Vesicatory in the Quinsie.
Take Leaven half-an ounce, roots of Marshmallows and Florentine
Flower-de-luce, of each two drams; Cantharides a dram and a half, juice of
Liquorish and Oriental Saffron, of each a scruple, fat Figs two. Mix them into
the form of a Plaster, and lay it on the Breast; for it draws the matter
thither, and is a worthy Experiment.

SECT. XXX. Of Pessaries.
Pessus aperiens contra Menses suppressos, or an opening Pessary for the
suppressed Terms.
TAke Roots of red Mugwort, white Diptamus, Asarum, white Hellebore and Madder,
of each two drams; Scammony, Marjoram, Savin, Oriental Saffron, of each a dram;
Bay Berries husked, red Myrrh, true Castor, Sagapen, Epatick Aloes, of each a
scruple; seeds of Stavesacre, Nigella, Watercresses and Rue, of each half a
dram. Let all these be well incorporated with Juice of red Mugwort, or with
Turpentine, and make a Pessary the length of the middle finger, and the bigness
of it also; and in making of it up, let a third pass along the middle of it,
coming out at the end a hands breadth, to pull it out of the body again; or the
Powder may be put into a Bag made of a thin Cloth, with the addition of a
little Cotton, make it to the bigness of a large finger, and put it into the
body.

Pessus adstringens contra Uteri Haemorrhagiam, or an astringent Pessary
against a Flux of Blood from the Womb.
Take Mill-dust half an ounce, roots of Tormentil and Bistort, of each two
drams; Ashes of Frogs, Crocus Martis, Turkish Galls, Dragons blood, Bole
Armeniack and burnt Hartshorn, of each a dram; Hypocistis, red Roses,
Balaustines, Acacia, Olibanum, Mastich, of each half a dram. Mix them, and with
Plantane water and the White of an Egg make a Pessary according to Art, which
is to be put into the privy parts of a Woman.

Pessus contra Suffocationem and Praecipitationem Uteri, or a Pessary against
the Suffocation and Precipitancy of the Womb.
Take roots of Florentine Flower-de-luce and red Roses, of each three drams;
Styrax Calamitis and Benjamin, Cloves, Spicknard and Gallia Moschata, of each a
scruple. Mix them, and according to Art make a Pessary in the form of a
Suppository, which being tied with a third, let it be put up into the body at
night.

If the Woman be barren because of fatness or much moisture, then the following
Pessary is of good use.
Take Darnel seed which is found growing among Wheat half an ounce, Hares
Runnet, burnt Alum, Castor and liquid Styrax, of each two drams; red Myrrh,
Opopanax, Galbanum, Calamint, round Pepper, of each a dram; Musk and Amber, of
each half a scruple. Let all be well incorporated, and make two Pessaries of
this Composition, one of which let the Woman keep in her privy parts from noon
till night.

Annotation.

1. If after sharp Pessaries, a pain remains in the passage, let them
immediately put up something dipped in Oil of Violets, or it may be mixed with
some Mucilage of Fleabane to prevent Ulceration.

2. If the Pessaries are strong, they cannot retain them above an hour; but if
weak, a whole night.

3. Pessaries are generally put up after Bathing, and in like manner so are
Pessaries made of soft Cotton or Woollen, and dipped in Juyces.

SECT. XXXI. Of Suppositories.
Species ad Suppositoria acuta conficienda, or a Species to make sharp
Suppositories.
TAke Seeds of Coloquintida half an ounce, roots of white Hellebore, the lesser
Es^la, and white Hermodactyls, of each an ounce; bark of yellow Myrobalans,
roots of Polypody, leaves of Sena, Troches of Agarick, of each half an ounce;
Sal Gem and Nitre, of each two drams; flowers of Chamomil a dram. Mix them, and
make a Powder which keep for use.

Suppositoria sicca, or dry Suppositories.
Take Wheat flour four ounces, common Salt half an ounce, Coloquintida seeds an
ounce, white Hermodactyls, white Hellebore, the lesser Esula prepared, of each
half an ounce; roots of common Mallows and white Tartar, of each two drams;
Opopanax and Sagapen, of each a dram. Mix them, and with the Yolks of Eggs,
according to Art, make dry Suppositories.

A Suppository in the Epilepsie, Apoplexy, Vertigo, Subeth, Congelation,
Stupor, etc.
Take Troches of Alhandal, Troches of Agarick, of each a dram; black Hellebore,
leaves of Sena, of each half a dram; Sal Gem and Nitre, of each a scruple. With
a sufficient quantity of Honey make two Suppositories thick and long, as the
manner is.

Suppositoria Anodyna, or an Anodyne Suppository.
Take seeds of Cummin and Rue, of each two drams; Foreign Mummy, Thebane Opium,
of each a dram; wild Poppy flowers and Oriental Saffron, of each half a
scruple; Styrax Calamitis and true Castor, of each a scruple. Mix them and make
a Powder, which mix with Honey for use.

Suppositoria Stiptica contra Dysenteriam Ventrisque fluxus, or a Stiptick
Suppository against the Dysentery and Flux of the Belly.
Take Hypocistis an ounce, Turkish Galls and Acacia, of each half an ounce;
Pomegranate rind three drams, roots of Marshmallows and Liquorish, of each a
dram; Hartshorn burnt, Crocus Martis and Dragons blood, of each half a dram.
Mix them, and with the White of an Egg and Juice of Plantane make Suppositories
according to Art.

Suppositoria Dysenterica Anodyna and somnum conciliantia, or a Dysenterical
Anodyne and Sleep-procuring Suppository.
Take of boiled Honey three ounces, seeds of white Henbane and black Poppy, of
each a dram and a half; Thebane Opium, Balaustines, Spodium and Olibanum, of
each a dram; flowers of wild Poppy and Oriental Saffron, of each a scruple. Mix
them, and make Suppositories according to Art.

Suppositoria Carminativa, or a Wind-breaking Suppository.
Take Orange peel and Chamomil flowers, of each a dram and a half; seeds of
Cummin, Caraway, Mountain-Osier, Ameos; Agnus castus, Chervil and Rue, of each
a dram; pulp of Coloquintida and common Salt, of each a scruple. With a
sufficient quantity of Honey make Suppositories according to Art.

SECT. XXXII. Of Clysters.
Enema Nutriens, or a nourishing Clyster.
TAke of Beef and Capon Broth, of each eight ounces; Barley cream and Cows
milk, of each four ounces; the best Wine three ounces, Sugar of Roses an ounce,
Wheat bread dried and pulverized half an ounce, Yolks of two Eggs. Mix them,
and make a Clyster according to Art, and let it be injected, as the manner is.

Annotation. Such Clysters are sometimes given in the Quinsie to nourish and
conserve strength; also in the Tumors of the Jaws, not being able to open their
mouths; in the Stomach, being stopped either with Tubercles or Ulcers; in the
Convulsion of the Mouth, Palsy of the Tongue, and the like Diseases. It is
also of great use when the sick can take nothing of nourishment by the mouth,
nor retain any thing in the stomach: But it is to be given when the body is
emptied of Excrements, or when they go to rest; for otherwise it mixeth with
the Excrements, and so becomes ineffectual. In short, it is a great Nutritive
to the sick.

Enema Bilem evacuans, or a Clyster evacuating Choler.
Take small Raisons three ounces, Barley husked and Linseeds, of each two
ounces; Rhubarb an ounce. Boil these, and when it is strained, Take one pound
of the Liquor, Oil of Violets three ounces, the best Manna an ounce, Electuary
of the juice of Roses an ounce. Mix them, and make a Clyster.

Enema Pituitam purgans, or a Clyster purging Elegm.
Take roots of Elicampane and Pellitory of Spain, of each an ounce; the herbs
Calamint, Horebound and Pennyroyal, of each half an ounce; Troches of Agarick
tied up in a thin rag, white Turbith, of each three drams; Carthamus seeds two
drams, flowers of Chamomil and Rosemary, of each a dram and a half. Boil these,
and take of the strained Liquor a pound, Oil of Rue three ounces, Malmsey Wine
two ounces, Honey of Squills an ounce, benedicta Laxativa and Diaphaenicon, of
each half an ounce; common Salt two drams. Mix them, and make a Clyster.

Enema Humores melancholicos deturbans, or a Clyster purging Melancholy.
Take roots of Polypody of the Oak an ounce, roots of Parsley, Fenil and
Asparagus, of each six drams; the herbs Fumitory, Dodder, Hart's-tongue and
Melilot, of each half an ounce; flowers of Chamomil, Borage, and Bugloss, of
each two drams; seeds of Fenil and Anise, of each a dram, Boil these, and take
of the strained Liquor a pound, Oil of Dill two ounces, Honey of Rosemary an
ounce, Confectio Hamech and Diacatholicon, of each half an ounce, Sal Gem a
dram and a half, Extract of black Hellebore two scruples. Mix these, and make a
Clyster.

Enema Phlegma and Hydropicorum aquas purgans, or a Clyster purging Phlegm and
water in Dropsies.
Take roots of Couch-grass, Parsley, Asparagus and Cinqfoil, of each an ounce;
leaves of Sea, Coleworts and Mercury, of each six drams; flowers of Elder,
Broom, Stoechas and Rosemary, of each half an ounce; Agarick tied up in a thin
cloth, Mechoacan and Bay Berries, of each three drams; seeds of Fenil, Caraway
and Cummin, of each two drams. Boil these, and take of the strained Liquor a
pound, the expressed juice of the roots of our Flower-de luce three ounces, the
expressed juice of the inner bark of Elder two ounces, Oil of Rue and Dill, of
each half an ounce; Benedicta laxativa six drams, common Sa't two drams. Mix
these, and make a Clyster.

Enema in Cephalalgia, Vertigine, Scotomia, Phrenetide, and in aliis Capitis
affectibus: Or a Clyster in the Headache, Vertigo, Giddiness, Frenzy, and
other affects of the Head.
Take leaves of Alexandrian Sena an ounce, roots of Bryony and Agarick, of each
half an ounce; leaves of Marjoram, Chamomil, the lesser Centaury, Sage and
Origanum, of each two drams; flowers of Lilies of the valley and Rosemary, of
each a dram and a half; pulp of Coloquintida and black Hellebore, of each a
dram. Mix them, and boil them in a sufficient quantity of Rainwater to the
consumption of half; and then take of the strained Liquor one pound, Oil of
Vervain three ounces, Honey of Rosemary flowers an ounce and a half, common
Salt two drams. Mix them, and make a Clyster.

Aliud Enema Cephalicum, or another Cephalic Clyster.
Take roots of Asarabacca newly dried an ounce, Wheat bran half an ounce,
Calamint, Betony, Mallows, Mercury and Chamomil, of each two drams. With these
make a Decoction, and of it when it is strained, take one pound, and add to it
Oil of Elder flowers three ounces, Honey of Roses two ounces, Electuary of
Diasena an ounce, Sal Gem a dram and a half. Mix these for a Clyster.

Aliud Enema fortius, or another Clyster stronger.
Take roots of black Hellebore half an ounce, seeds of Coloquintida bruised
three drams, Chamomil, Vervain, Marjoram, Origanum and Marshmallows, of each
two drams; seeds of Fenil, Caraway and Anise, of each a dram. Boil them, and
take of the strained Liquor a pound, Sallet Oil three ounces, Honey of Rosemary
flowers an ounce and an half, common Salt three drams, Essence of the leaves of
Sena a dram. Mix them, and make a Clyster.

Annotation. Concerning the Laxatives in these Clysters, it may be either
increased or diminished according to the Sex, Age, and Complexion of the
Patient, which is also to be observed in all the other Compositions.

A specific Clyster in Melancholy, Madness, Sorrow, Congelation, Quartans,
Scabs, Ring-worms, Morphew, Cancer, Elephantiasis, Scirrhus of the Spleen, and
all other Diseases proceeding from Melancholy.
Take roots of Polypody of the Oak two ounces, bark of Indian Myrobalans an
ounce, Fumitory, St. Iohnswort, Marjoram, Dodder, Hops, Stoechas, of each half
an ounce; black Hellebore two drams. Boil these, and take of the strained
Liquor a pound, Oil of Chamomil three ounces, Hiera Logadi, Tartar vitriolated
and Sal Gem, of each a dram and a half. Mix them for a Clyster.

Aliud Enema specificum in Melancholia, or another specific Clyster for
Melancholy.
Take the bark of Bugloss roots two ounces, leaves of Alexandrian Sena an
ounce, Masterwort, lesser Celandine, Dill, Roman Chamomil, Fumitory and
Gentian, of each half an ounce. Boil all, and take of the strained Liquor a
pound, Oil of Roses three ounces, Confectio Hamech an ounce, common Salt two
drams, Oriental Saffron a scruple. Mix them for a Clyster.

Enema in Subeth and Stupore, or a Clyster in the Lethargy, etc.
Take roots of the Lily of the valley an ounce, leaves of the lesser Centaury,
Stoechas and Origanum, Calamint, Sage and Asarabacca, of each half an ounce;
Cartha^^^ and Coloquintida seeds, the best Agarick, of each three drams. Boil
these, and take of the strained Liquor a pound, Oil of Chamomil three ounces,
Diasena half an ounce, common Salt three drams, Extract of black Hellebore. Mix
them for a Clyster, and give it warmer than ordinary.

Enema forte in Epilepsia and Suffocationibus, or a strong Clyster in the
Epilepsie and Suffocations.
Take seeds of Carthamus an ounce, the best Agarick half an ounce, pulp of
Coloquintida three drams, lesser Centaury, Lavender, Marjoram, Hyssop, Betony
and Rue, of each two drams; true Castor, flowers of the Lily of the valley and
Rosemary, of each a dram and a half. Boil these, and take of the strained
Decoction a pound, Oil of Chamomil three ounces, Honey of Roses two ounces,
Cream of Tartar and Sal Gem, of each a dram. Mix them for a Clyster.

Aliud Specificum, or another Specific.
Take roots of Angelica and Peony, of each an ounce; the best Agarick and
Misleto of the Oak, of each half an ounce; Peacocks dung and yellow Amber, of
each three drams; Lavender, Sage, Chamomil, Mallows, Origanum and Stoechas, of
each two drams; seeds of Fenil, Caraway and Dill, of each a dram. Boil them,
and take of the strained Decoction a pound, Oil of Rue three ounces, Hier a
Pachii an ounce, common Salt three drams. Mix them for a Clyster.

Enema in Spasmo, or a Clyster for Convulsions.
Take roots of Pellitory of Spain and dwarff Elder, of each an ounce; leaves of
Betony, Sage, Marshmallows, common Mallows, Mother of Thyme, of each half an
ounce; flowers of Marshmallows, St. Iohns-wort and Mullein, of each two drams.
Boil these, and take of the strained Decoction a pound, Oil of Chamomil three
ounces, Diaphaenicon an ounce, Fat of an Eel half an ounce, Sal Gem a dram and
a half, the best Turbith a dram and a half. Mix them, and make a Clyster.

Enema forte in Apoplexia and similibus, etc. or a strong Clyster in the
Apoplexy and the like, etc.
Take the best Agarick half an ounce, lesser Centaury, Origanum, Rosemary,
Stoechas, Germander and Calamint, of each two drams; pulp of Coloquintida a
dram and a half. Boil all, and take of the strained Decoction a pound, Oil of
Rue three ounces, benedicta Laxativa an ounce, Honey of Rosemary flowers half
an ounce, common Salt two drams, vitriolated Tartar a dram. Mix them, and make
a Clyster, which apply presently.

Aliud Enema Apoplecticum fortius, or a stronger Apoplectick Clyster.
Take roots of our Flower-de-luce, wild Cucumers and Sowbread, of each an
ounce; Troches of Agarick half an ounce, leaves of lesser Centaury, Marjoram,
Origanum, Lavender and Calamint, of each three drams; Gum Bdellium, Opopanax
and Ammoniacum, of each two drams; pulp of Coloquintida a dram and a half. Boil
all, and take of the strained Decoction a pound, Oil of Rue three ounces,
Benedicta laxativa and Electuary Episcopi, of each six drams; common Salt three
drams, Essence of the leaves of Sena a dram. Mix them for a Clyster.

Enema in Paralysi and Resolutione, or a Clyster in the Palsy.
Take roots of Pellitory of Spain and Acorus, of each an ounce; white
Hermodactyls and the best Agarick, of each half an ounce; the herbs Rosemary,
Asarum, Cowslips, Hyssop, Calamints, of each two drams; pulp of Coloquintida a
dram. Boil all, and take of the strained Decoction a pound, Oil of Rue three
ounces, Hiera Pachii an ounce, common Salt half an ounce. Mix them for a
Clyster.

Aliud Enema Paralyticum specificum, or another specific Clyster for the
Palsy.
Take Iuniper-berries and roots of dwarff Elder, of each an ounce; white
Hermodactyls and seeds of Coloquintida, of each three drams; Marjoram,
Groundpine, Stoechas, Rue, Sage and Origanum, of each two drams. Boil them, and
take of the strained Decoction a pound, Oil of Primrose flowers three ounces,
Diaphaenicon an ounce, Sal Gem a dram and a half. Mix them for a Clyster.

Enema contra inflationem Ventriculi, or a Clyster for the Wind in the Stomach.
Take bark of the roots of Elder an ounce, the herbs Calamint, Pennyroyal,
Garden Rue, Chamomil and Bayleaves, of each half an ounce; seeds of Fenil,
Anise, Cummin and Carrots, of each two drams; of fat Figs seven. Boil these,
and take of the strained Liquor a pound, Oil of Dill three ounces, clarified
Honey an ounce and a half, Diacatholicon and Diaphaenicon, of each three drams;
common Salt a dram and a half. Mix them, and make a Clyster, which give warm.

Enema ad Iliacam Passionem, or a Clyster for the Iliack Passion.
Take Marshmallows root and leaves an ounce and a half, Barley husked an
ounce, flowers of Chamomil and Elder, of each half an ounce. Boil them, and
take of the strained Liquor a pound, Linseed Oil three ounces, Cassia extracted
an ounce, Epatick Aloes half an ounce, Sal Nitre a dram and half. Mix them, and
make a Clyster.

Enema Carminativum, or a Carminative Clyster.
Take roots of Zedoary and Iuniper-berries, of each an ounce; Roman Chamomil,
Dill, Fenil, Mercury and Chervil, of each half an ounce; seeds of Agnus castus,
Caraway, Cummin, Anise and Bishops-weed, of each three drams; pulp of
Coloquintida a dram and a half. Boil them, and take of the strained Decoction a
pound, Oil of Rue three ounces, Electuary of Bay Berries an ounce, Cassia new
drawn half an ounce, common Salt two drams, Castor a scruple. Mix them, and
make a Clyster.

Enema discutiens, or a discussive Clyster.
Take roots of Elicampane and Orange peel, of each an ounce; the four Emollient
Herbs, Calamint and Origanum, of each half an ounce; seeds of Fenil, Dill,
Anise, Cummin, Caraway and Mountain Osier, of each two drams. Boil them, and
take of the strained Decoction a pound, Oil of Chamomil and Rue, of each a dram
and a half; Diaphaenicon an ounce, Honey of Rosemary flowers and brown Sugar,
of each six drams; Electuary of Bay Berries half an ounce, Sal Gem a dram. Mix
them for a Clyster.

Enema Ventrem leniens in Colica, or a lenifying Clyster in the Colic.
Take the inner bark of Alder and Elder, of each an ounce; Chamomil, Melilot,
Pennyroyal, Calamint and Origanum, of each half an ounce; seeds of Fenil,
Anise, Carthamus and Mallows, of each two drams. Boil them, and take of the
strained Decoction a pound, Oil of Dill three ounces, Diacarthamus an ounce,
common Salt two drams. Mix them for a Clyster.

Enema aliud Ventrem leniens in Colica, or another lenifying Clyster in the
Colic.
Take roots of Fenil and Smallage, of each an ounce; the herbs Mercury, common
Mallows, Pellitory of the Wall and Arrach, of each half an ounce; flowers of
Chamomil, Elder and Peaches, of each two drams. Boil them, and take of the
strained Decoction a pound, Oil of Linseed four ounces, brown Sugar Candy an
ounce, Diaphaenicon six drams, Sal Gem a dram and a half. Mix them for a
Clyster.

Enema Ventrem leniens in Colica ab Apostemate, or a lenifying Clyster in the
Colic caused by an Imposthume.
Take roots of Comfry and Marshmallows, of each an ounce; leaves of common
Mallows, Violets and Melilot, of each half an ounce; flowers of Marshmallows,
Acacia and white Lilies, of each two drams. Boil them, and take of the clear
Decoction a pound, Oil of Chamomil four ounces, Electuary of the juice of Roses
six drams, Cassia fresh drawn half an ounce, Cream of Tartar two drams, common
Salt a dram and a half. Mix them for a Clyster.

Enema in causa a duritie Faecum, or a Clyster in Costiveness of the Bowels.
Take roots of Marshmallows and common Mallows, of each an ounce; leaves of
branch Ursine, Pellitory of the Wall, Marshmallows, of each six drams; flowers
of Chamomil, Linseed and Foenugreek, of each half an ounce. Boil them, and take
of the clear Decoction a pound, Oil of Sesamum three ounces, Benedicta laxativa
a^ ounce, common Salt three drams. Mix them for a Clyster.

Enema Colicum, quod vehementer probatur, or a Clyster for the Colic, when the
pain is vehement.
Take Broth of fat Meat a pound, Oil of Chamomil and Dill, of each two ounces;
clarified Honey an ounce and a half; Cream of Tartar three drams, Gal Gem a
dram and a half.

Enema dolorem Colicum sedans, or a Clyster allaying the pain of the Colic.
Take roots of Marshmallows and common Mallows, of each an ounce; flowers of
Chamomil, Melilot and Elder, of each half an ounce; seeds of Fenil, Anise,
Cummin, Flax and Smallage, of each two drams. Boil them, and take of the
strained Decoction twelve ounces, Malmsey Wine four ounces, Oil of Chamomil and
Dill, of each two ounces; Benedicta laxativa an ounce, the Yolk of an Egg. Mix
them, and make a Clyster.

Enema Anodynum, or an Anodyne Clyster.
Take roots of Marshmallows, white Lilies and Liquorish, of each an ounce;
leaves of Melilot, Chamomil, Violets and common Mallows, of each half an ounce;
seeds of Foenugreek, Flax and Quinces, of each three ounces; the bark of
Mandrake and wild Poppy flowers, of each a dram. Boil them, and take of the
strained Decoction a pound and a half, fresh Butter not seasoned, the Yolk of
an Egg, Extract of Oriental Saffron ten grains Mix them, and make a Clyster.

Enema refrigerans, or a cooling Clyster.
Take leaves of Strawberries, Purslain, Violets and Lettice, of each half an
ounce; the four greater cold Seeds, of each three drams; Damask Prunes twenty,
flowers of water-Lilies, Mullein and Roses, of each a dram. Boil them, and take
of the strained Decoction a pound, Oil of Violets three ounces, Honey of Roses
an ounce, Electuary of the juice of Roses six drams, Nitre prepared a dram. Mix
them, and inject it.

Enema calefaciens, or a warming Clyster.
Take roots of Elicampane and Pellitory of Spain, of each an ounce; leaves of
Calamint, Mercury, Hyssop and Origanum, of each half an ounce; flowers of
Chamomil, Stoechas, Rosemary and Sage, of each two drams; Agarick tied up in a
cloth, seeds of Cummin, Anise and Bishops-weed, of each a dram and a half. Boil
them, and take of the strained Decoction a pound, Oil of Rue three ounces,
Benedicta laxativa an ounce, Sea Salt three drams, Extract of Wormwood a
scruple. Mix them for a Clyster.

Enema Stipticum in fluxibus Ventris, or a Clyster in Fluxes of the Belly.
Take of dry Cheese prepared an ounce and an half, roots of Hounds-tongue,
Pomegranate rind, Turkish Galls, of each an ounce. Boil them in a sufficient
quantity of Stiptick Wine, and take of the clear Decoction a pound,
Frankincense pulverized three drams, the Yolk of an Egg. Mix them, and give the
Clyster warm.

Enema aliud Stipticum, or another Stiptick Clyster.
Take Oil of St. Iohns-wort six ounces, Honey of Roses, Goats Suet and new Wax,
of each three ounces. Melt them together over the fire, and make a restringent
Clyster.

Enema adstringens, or an astringent Clyster.
Take roots of water-Acorus, Tormentil and Snakeweed, of each an ounce; leaves
of Pimpernel, Ribwort and Plantane, of each half an ounce; seeds of Sorrel,
Purslain and Myrtle, of each three drams; flowers of yellow Mullein, red Roses
and Balaustines, of each a dram and a half. Boil them all in Milk burnt to, or
in Smiths water, and take of the clear Decoction a pound, Mill-dust an ounce,
Gum Arabic and Tragacanth, of each a dram. Mix them, and make a Clyster
without Oils.

Enema aliud adstringens, or another astringent Clyster.
Take roots of Tapsus barbatus, Plantane and Bistort, of each an ounce; leaves
of Horstail, Knotgrass and Rupturewort, of each half an ounce; Balaustines and
Pomegranate peel, of each two drams; red Roses and Sumach, of each a dram. Boil
them in Chalybeate or Smiths water, and take of the clear Decoction a pound,
juice of Millefoil two ounces, Goats Suet an ounce and a half, Oriental Saffron
a scruple. Mix them, and make a Clyster, which give after detersive or
purgative Clysters.

Enema ad Lienteriam and Diarrhoeam.
Take roots of Mullein, Snakeweed and Tormentil, of each an ounce; leaves of
Millefoil, St. Iohns-wort and Bramble, of each half an ounce; Cyprus Nuts and
Myrtle-berries, of each two drams. Boil them, and take of the strained
Decoction a pound; Honey of Roses an ounce; Hypocistis and Acacia, of each two
drams; Laudanum a dram. Mix them, and give it Clyster-wise aft^^ Detersives by
purging and astringent Medicines.

Enema and tergens and siccans, or a drying and cleansing Clyster.
Take whole Barley half an ounce, leaves of Wormwood and Myrtle, of each half
an ounce; Lupines and Lentils, of each two drams, flowers of the lesser
Centaury and red Roses, of each a dram. Boil them in Rainwater, and take of
the strained Decoction a pound, Honey of Roses three ounces. Make a Clyster,
and give it warm.

Enema consolidans, or a consolidating Clyster.
Take roots of Tapsus barbatus and great Comfry, of each a dram and a half; of
the herb Plantane, Horstail and leaves of Myrtle, of each half an ounce; red
Roses two drams. Make a Decoction in Chalybeate or Smiths water, and take of it
when strained a pound, of Goats Suet two ounces, Mill-dust a dram, Mastich half
a dram. Mix them, and make a Clyster.

Enema ad Bilem alterandum in Dysenteria, etc. or a Clyster altering Choler in
a Dysentery.
Take Barley husked and Linseed, of each two ounces; small Raisons an ounce,
common Mallows and Violets, of each half an ounce. Make a Decoction, and when
strained take of it a pound, Oil of Roses three ounces, brown Sugar an ounce
and a half, the Yolk of an Egg and a little Salt. Mix them, and give it for a
Clyster.

Enema dolores Dysentericos sedans, or a Clyster allaying pains in the bloody
Flux.
Take of Cows milk half a pint, Oil of Violets three ounces, the marrow of a
Stag an ounce, Mill-dust half an ounce, Tragacanth two drams, of the fish
called a Pike two drams. Mix all for a Clyster, which inject warm.

Enema aliud dolores Dysentericos sistens, or another Clyster taking away pain
in the bloody Flux.
Take Liquorish and Rice, of each an ounce; red Roses two drams, flowers of
wild Poppy a dram, Oriental Saffron half a dram. Boil them in Cows milk, and
take of the clear Decoction a pound, Oil of white Lilies three ounces, Goats
Suet an ounce, Mill-dust half an ounce, Olibanum two drams, Styrax Calamitis a
dram. Mix them, and make a Clyster.

Enema aliud Anodynum, or another Anodyne Clyster.
Take Barley husked two ounces, roots of great Comfry and Linseed, of each an
ounce; flowers of wild Poppy, Violets and Roses, of each a dram and a half.
Make a Decoction in Milk, of which take a pound, brown Sugar an ounce, the
Yolks of two Eggs, Extract of Oriental Saffron a scruple, Opium Spagirically
prepared ten grains. Mix them for a Clyster.

Enema dolorem and ardorem leniens, or a Clyster asswaging Pain and Heat.
Take Oil of sweet Almonds, Oil of Linseed expressed, of each half a pound;
Mucilage of Quince seeds made with Milk four ounces. Mix them, and make a
Clyster.

Enema aliud dolores Dysentericos placans, or another Clyster asswaging pain in
the bloody Flux.
Take of the Decoction of Barley and Milk, of each half a pound; Oil of Roses
three ounces, juice of Plantane two ounces, brown Sugar an ounce, Goats fat
half an ounce, Philonium persicum a dram. Mix them, and make a Clyster.

Enema Diureticum, or a Diuretic Clyster.
Take roots of Liquorish, Marshmallows and Couchgrass, of each an ounce; the
herbs Saxifrage, Pellitory of the Wall and Mallows, of each half an ounce;
Raisons and Iujubes, of each three drams; of the four greater cold Seeds
bruised, Winter-Cherries and seeds of Gromel, of each two drams; flowers of
Chamomil, Broom and Mother of Thyme, of each a dram and a half. Boil them, and
take of the clear Decoction a pound, Oil of bitter Almonds and Oil of
Scorpions, of each an ounce and a half; Salt of Restharrow a dram and a half.
Mix them, and make a Clyster to be injected.

Enema in Calculo Renum and Visicae, or a Clyster for the Stone in the Reins
and Bladder.
Take roots of Liquorish, Marshmallows and common Mallows, of each an ounce;
seeds of Gromel and stones of Medlars, of each half an ounce. Boil them, and
take of the strained Decoction ten ounces, Oil of Violets three ounces, Cassia
new drawn ten drams, Benedicta laxativa half an ounce, common Salt a dram and a
half. Mix them, and make a Clyster.

Enema Calculum comminuens, or a Clyster to break the Stone.
Take roots of Parsley, Restharrow and Marshmallows, of each an ounce; the
herbs Pellitory of the Wall, Paul's Betony and Ground Ivy, of each half an
ounce; seeds of Burdock, common Mallows, Gromel and Saxifrage, of each two
drams; Iuniper-berries and Bay Berries husked. Winter-Cherries, of each a dram
and a half; flowers of Chamomil, white Lilies and Marshmallows, of each a
dram. Make a Decoction, and of that take twelve ounces, Oil of Scorpions simple
and Violets, of each two ounces; Salt of Eryngo and Fenil, of each a dram. Mix
them for a Clyster.

Enema aliud in Calculo Renum and Vesicae, or another Clyster for the Stone in
the Reins and Bladder.
Take roots of Liquorish, Marshmallows and white Lilies, of each an ounce; the
herbs Pellitory of the Wall, Flaxweed, Ground Ivy and Paul's Betony, of each
half an ounce; flowers of Marshmallows, Elder and Chamomil, of each two drams.
Boil them, and take of the strained Decoction twelve ounces, Oil of Mullein two
ounces, Honey of Roses an ounce, Cassia new drawn six drams, Cyprus Turpentine
and Benedicta laxativa, of each half an ounce; the Yolk of an Egg, Sal Nitre
half a dram. Mix them for a Clyster.

Enema aliud in eodem casu, or another in the same case.
Take roots of Marsh and common Mallows, of each half an ounce, white
Hermodactyls, Album Graecum and Ground Ivy, of each two drams; seeds of
Marshmallows, Gromel and Fleabane, of each a dram and a half; flowers of St.
Iohns-wort, Broom, Melilot and Flaxweed, of each a dram. Boil them, and take of
the Decoction twelve ounces, Anodyne Oil of the seven Flowers two ounces,
Cyprus Turpentine mixed with the Yolk of an Egg an ounce, Benedicta laxativa
half an ounce, Nitre prepared a dram. Mix them and make a Clyster, which I my
self make use of.

Enema mirabile in Calculo renato, or a wonderful Clyster for the Stone in the
Reins.
Take the roots of marsh and common Mallows, of each an ounce; white
Hermodactyls six drams, the four emollient Herbs and Dovesfoot, of each half an
ounce; seeds of Parsley, Anise, Ivy and Seseli, of each three drams; the four
greater cold Seeds, of each a dram and a half; flowers of Chamomil, Broom,
Marshmallows and Melilot, of each a dram. Boil them, and take of the Decoction
twelve ounces, Oil of Scorpions simple and Oil of sweet Almonds, of each an
ounce and a half; brown Sugar two ounces, Cyprus Turpentine washed in white
Wine an ounce, Benedicta laxativa an ounce and a half, Salt of Nitre a dram.
Mix them and make a Clyster, which does use to bring away great plenty of thick
gross humors.

Enema in dolor Calculi, or a Clyster in the pain of the Stone.
Take Album Graecum an ounce, Figs fifteen. Boil them in white Wine, and take
of the Decoction twelve ounces, Oil of bitter Almonds and Oil of Poplar buds,
of each an ounce and a half; the fat of a Duck, fresh Butter not seasoned, of
each half an ounce; common Salt a dram and a half, the Yolk of an Egg. Of these
make a Clyster, which works wonderfully.

Enema ad dolorem Nephriticum, or a Clyster for the pain in the Kidneys.
Take roots of Liquorish, Marshmallows, Couchgrass and Asparagus, of each an
ounce; of the herb Flaxweed, Mallows and Melilot, of each half an ounce;
flowers of Marshmallows, Chamomil, St. Iohns-wort and Broom, of each a dram;
seeds of Parsley, Winter-Cherries and Gromel, of each a dram and a half. Boil
them, and take of the Decoction twelve ounces, Oils of white Lilies, bitter
Almonds and Scorpions, of each an ounce; clarified Honey, Benedicta laxativa
and Venice Turpentine, of each half an ounce; Sal Gem a dram and a half. Mix
them, and make a Clyster.

Enema ad Scirrhum Uteri, or a Clyster for the Scirrhus of the Womb.
Take roots of white Lilies, Marsh and common Mallows, of each an ounce; the
herbs Mercury, Pellitory of the Wall and Arach, of each half an ounce; seeds of
Quinces and Flax, of each two drams; flowers of Chamomil, Melilot, Mullein and
Marsh mallows, of each a dram. Make a Decoction in water, and to the Decoction
add fresh Butter not seasoned and Sallet Oil, of each four ounces. Let it be
often injected to the quantity of four ounces at a time.

Enema ad Vermes in Ventriculo, or a Clyster for Worms in the Stomach.
Take Liquorish and Barley cleansed, of each an ounce; sat Figs and Damask
Prunes, of each twenty; Aniseeds a dram and a half. Boil them, and take of the
Decoction half a pound, brown Sugar and the best Honey, of each an ounce and a
half. Mix them, and make a Clyster without Oil or Salt.

Enema ad Ascarides, or a Clyster for the little Worms in the Guts.
Take roots of round Birthwort and Gentian, of each an ounce; the herbs
Wormwood, Southernwood and Carduus, of each half an ounce; Peach leaves and the
tops of the lesser Centaury, of each two drams; flowers of Horehound two drams.
Make a Decoction, of which take twelve ounces, of a Lixivium four ounces. Mix
them for a Clyster, which inject by degrees, that is, twice in the same hour.

Enema ad evacuandum Vermes interfectos, or a Clyster to bring away Worms.
Take Liquorish and Myrrh, of each an ounce; Sebestens twenty five. Make a
Decoction, of which take a pound, brown Sugar an ounce, crude Honey six drams,
the Yolk of an Egg and a little Salt. Mix them, and without Oil make a Clyster.

Enema in Rhagadiis, rimis, seu scissuris Any, or a Clyster for the chops or
clefts of the Fundament. Probatum.
Take Oil of Violets five ounces, Butter not seasoned three ounces, Mucilage of
Tragacanth, seeds of Fleabane and Quinces, of each an ounce and a half; brown
Sugar an ounce. Mix them, and make a Clyster.

Enema pro Pueris, or a Clyster for Children
Take Chamomil and Pellitory of the Wall, of each half an ounce; roots of
Liquorish two drams, leaves of Sena a dram. Boil them, and take of the clear
Decoction six ounces, the best Manna half an ounce, Oil of white Lilies two
drams, common Salt a scruple. Mix them, and make a Clyster.

Enema aliud pro Infantibus, or another Clyster for Infants.
Take of Marsh-mallow roots half an ounce, the herb Melilot two drams, flowers
of Marshmallows and Mullein, of each a dram. Boil them, and take of the
Decoction three ounces, brown Sugar half an ounce, Oil of Chamomil a dram and a
half, Calabrian Manna a dram. Mix them and make a Clyster, which give warm.

Annotation.
1. Clysters are of great use, and are most noble and mild Medicines in all
passions and affects of the Head.

2. If a Purge he given, and it should not work in two or three hours, let a
moderate Clyster be applied, that it may be drawn downwards.

3. If the Patient should not retain his Clyster long enough, let there be
another presently applied; and if this should not stay with him, a third also
is to be given; for the sick person is not to be constrained to keep them, but
others to be again repeated.

4. Commonly two Clysters a day may be administered, or at the most three,
beyond which it is not safe to proceed, and let there be at least four hours
between each of them.

5. But if one Clyster should work well and effectually, let that one suffice.

6. In the Epilepsie, Apoplexy, Convulsion, Palsy, etc. sharp Clysters are
generally to be used; yet let not one or the other be used that may hinder.

7. In the bloody Flux, because of Ulcers in the Bowels, Clysters are to be
used warm, but not hot.

8. In the Stone of the Reins and Bladder nothing is more excellent than
Clysters for the drawing away of the superfluous humors; but the quantity of
them ought to be sometimes less than usual, because repletion increases the
pain of the Bowels. Afterward the matter being thus discharged, the parts
mundified, and the pain assuaged, Diuretics may be given.

9. If you would give Clysters for the Worms, Oils are not to be mixed
therewith; for the Worms do usually shun Oil.

10. If one Clyster or more should be given in a day, although compounded with
the strongest Catharticks, and should have no operation, in such a case take
water well impregnate with Salt, and make a Clyster which apply warm; for this
never fails, but returns with great plenty of the offending Excrements, and is
indeed a great Secret. For example, Take warm water a pound, common Salt an
ounce and a half: which being mixed and dissolved, give it for a Clyster.

11. Whosoever is troubled with difficulty of breathing, is not to be forced to
retain a Clyster.

SECT. XXXIII. Of compound Oils.
Oleum Otalgicum, or an Oil for the Hearing.
TAke Roots of black Hellebore half an ounce, pulp of Coloquintida three drams,
leaves of Sena and Bay Berries, of each two drams; Millepedes alive, Alipta
Moschata and Cloves, of each a dram and a half; the herb Rosemary, Mouse-ear,
Marjoram and Savin, of each half a handful. Boil them in Wine, and take of the
strained Decoction three ounces, Oil of bitter Almonds two ounces, Oil of
Iuniperberries and Oil of Peter, of each half an ounce; Oil of Pismires a dram
and a half. Again boil them to the consumption of the humidity, and reserve the
Oil for use.

Virtue and Use. It helps difficulty of Hearing, and takes away the ringing in
the Ears, if a few drops of it be dropped prudently into the Ears morning and
evening, or Cotton dropped therein and applied.

Oleum Acovisticum ambratum, or an Oil for the Hearing with Amber.
Take Oil of bitter Almonds four ounces, Oleum Nardinum compound, Oil of white
Lilies, of each two ounces; the juice of Origanum, Marjoram, Rue, Leeks,
Radishes and Onions, of each an ounce. All being mixed, boil it to the
consumption of the Juyces, and the Oil being strained, add to it Spirit of Wine
well impregnate with Millepedes, sharp Wine Vinegar, of each half an ounce;
Ambergriese, flowers of Mother of Thyme, Savin-berries, Cummin seed and Mace,
of each a dram; Cubebs, white Hellebore, Mastich, Ladanum and Styrax Calamitis,
of each half a dram; true Castor, long Pepper, Oriental Saffron and Nitre
prepared, of each a scruple. Every Medicine being pulverized by it self, and
all diligently shaken together, let them be again boiled in Balneo to the
consumption of all the humidity, and being cold, and the Oil pressed and
strained, mix with it Oil of Pismires and Aniseeds, of each a dram; Gallia
Moschata finely powdered a scruple. Mix them, and keep them for use.

Virtue and Use. It is an excellent experienced Medicine against Deafness and
thickness of Hearing, also for the ringing in the Ears, caused of Vapors,
Humors or Wind: It also asswageth the pain of the Ears, breaks Imposthumes, and
cures running Ulcers. And the use of it is thus, drop a few drops of it into
the Ears morning and evening, stopping the Ears after it with muskified Cotton,
and thus using it for three or four days, it performs the Cure.

Oleum Carminativum, or a Carminative Oil.
Take Oil of Cummin seed half an ounce, Oil of Fenil seed, Aniseed and Caraway
seed, of each a dram; Oil of Dill, Oranges and Chamomil, of each half a dram.
Mix them and keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This is a true Anodyne Medicine; for it discusseth
Wind, and cures the pain of the Belly and Matrix, and all other diseases
arising from Wind. Sometimes also it lenifies and allays the pains of the
Breast, Stomach, Spleen, Guts, Reins and Bladder. It is also a present help for
flatulent and Hypochondriack Melancholy. The dose is from four drops to five in
appropriate Vehicles.

Oleum Nephriticum, or an Oil good in the Stone.
Take Oil of white Amber rectified, Oil of Turpentine and Juniper, of each four
ounces; Leaven of coarse Bread, common Salt and white Tartar, of each two
ounces; water of Ground Ivy, Parsley and Restharrow, of each three pound. Mix
them, and distill them in an Alembick, afterward separate the Oil, and keep it
for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It potently breaks the Stone in the Reins and Bladder,
and expels it by Urine: And moreover it allays the pains of the Colic. It
roborates the Womb, and makes the Birth easy, if it be drunk in water of
Vervain. And being taken in Teil-tree-flower-water, it helps in diseases of the
Head and Nerves, as the Falling Sickness, Stupefaction, etc. and the Nostrils
anointed with it, preserves from all Poison and pestilential Air. The dose is
from five drops to six in specisick Vehicles.

Oleum septem Florum, or an Oil of the seven Flowers.
It is prepared of Oil Olive by many repeated Infusions of the flowers of
Violets, Elder, Roses, Chamomil, white Lilies, Mullein and red Marshmallows.
Let the flowers be infused apart in Oil, every sort in its season, so that they
may be fresh, let them digest in the Sun, and after due maceration let every
sort by themselves be strongly pressed, and this labor with other fresh
flowers is often to be repeated, etc. And at last you shall have a true
Balsamic and Anodyne Oil appropriate to all pains, as well cold as hot, and
this Oil keep for use.

Virtue and Use. It is truly Anodyne, and mitigates the pains of the Head and
Cephalalgia; and being laid to the Forehead and Temples of those in a Frenzy
and watching, induces sleep. It eases the distension of the Hypochonders, and
allays the pains of the Thorax, Ventricle, Colon, Womb, and nervous parts. It
is a present remedy for Pleuritick, Consumptive and Hectical persons, and soon
allays the intolerable heat of burning Fevers, and the immoderate heat of the
Liver and Reins. In short, it extinguisheth all intemperate heat. It mollifies
the hardness of the Womb, and composeth many other accidents of those parts. It
ripens all hot Tumors, and discusseth Lassitudes. It is also effectually used
with the White of an Egg, or the Mucilage of Quince seeds for Burns and Scalds.
Lastly, given in Clysters, it allayeth the pain of the Belly, moves to stool,
and carries off serous Excrements.

Oleum Sabinae Crocinum, or Oil of Savin with Saffron.
Take distilled Oil of Savin four ounces, Oil of Oriental Saffron three drams.
Mix them, and put to it two ounces of rectified Spirit of Wine impregnate with
Mugwort, lesser Centaury and Cinnamon. Boil it to the consumption of the Spirit,
then separate the Oil and keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It is approved in moving the Courses in Women. The dose
is morning and evening from five drops to six or seven in water of Mugwort or
Pennyroyal. Also in Malmsey, or other generous strong Wine, or in our Decoction
against the Terms suppressed, it is profitably given: But is most usually given
at the time when the Courses use to come down, that Nature assisting, the
Medicine may work with more force and efficacy.

Oleum Balsami, or the Oil of Balsam.
Take Sallet Oil a pound, Oil of St. Iohns-wort and Bay Berries, of each an
ounce; Oil of Iuniper-berries and Peter, of each half an ounce; Oil of Rhodium
and Spike, of each two drams; Oil of Angelica seeds and Aniseeds, of each a
dram; Cyprus Turpentine washed in Violet water half a pound. Mix them, and with
a sufficient quantity of Roots of Alkanet, make according to Art an Oil or red
Balsam.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It heats, opens, discusseth, attenuates and penetrates.
Hence it helps in all cold distempers, and dissipates wind wonderfully. It is
of excellent use in the Palsy, the Original of the Nerves being anointed with
it. It cures deafness, singing, and pain of the Ears, coming of a cold Cause.
The Spine of the Back being anointed with it, it takes away the pain and
shivering cold of the Reins in Agues. It drives away Fevers, resists
Putrefaction and the Plague. It breaks the Stone and expels it. It provokes
Sweat, and is an excellent Remedy used internally and externally in the
Convulsions, Colic, Dropsy, Tympany, Contractures, Suffocation of the Matrix,
debility of the Stomach, etc. The dose is from a scruple to a dram in Vehicles
respecting the disease.

Oleum Formicarum, or Oil of Pi^^ures.
Take Pismires alive and seeds of Rocket, of each what quantity you please. Mix
them and bruise them, and make as it were a Paste: Put this into a Glass, and
expose it so long to the Sun and Air, till it becomes Oil, which separate by
expression, and keep for use for our Venereal Balsam.

Virtue and Use. If the soles of the Feet, Privy parts, and Perinaeum be
anointed with this Oil, it wonderfully raises and revives those who are
stupefied and benumbed, and is good in other such kind of cases.

Oleum Lignorum, or Oil of Woods.
Take Lignum sanctum three pound, Sassafras and Rhodium, of each eight ounces.
Mix and distill them according to Art, and you shall have an Oil and Spirit,
which often rectify apart, and keep them for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This Spirit has a Diaphoretick force, and expels by
Sweat whatsoever is noxious to the body. The dose is from half a dram to a dram
in specific Vehicles; but the Oil is experimentally found good in a
Gonorrhoea, and does powerfully resist Contagion and Putrefaction: and for that
reason is of great use in the French Pox, for pocky Ulcers, Pustles, Crusts,
Tetters and Scabs, by anointing them with Oil only, are cured. The dose
internally is from three drops to six in some convenient and appropriate Liquor.

SECT. XXXIV. Of Balsams and odoriferous Medicines.
Balsamum Polychrestum.
TAke Sallet Oil a pound, Oil of St. Iohns-wort and Bays, of each an ounce; Oil
of white Amber rectified, of Iuniper-berries and Peter, of each half an ounce;
Oil of Spike two drams, Oil of Nutmegs, Oranges and Rosemary, of each a dram;
Oil of Chamomil and Cummin, of each half a dram. Mix them, and add a pound of
well rectified Spirit of Wine, in which for eight days, Frankincense, Mastich,
Benjamin, Styrax Calamitis, Mumy, Cochinel, flowers of lesser Centaury, great
Comfry, Roses and Violets; also the Roots of Alkanet have been all infused.
Then add Cyprus Turpentine well washed in Rose Water half a pound, our Balsam
of Sulphur with Aniseeds six drams. Again carefully mix them, and let them
stand either in a Furnace or the Sun, often stirring them for fourteen days;
afterward abstract the Spirit of Wine by a gentle heat in Balneo, and in the
bottom will remain a most red Balsam, to be reserved for public and common use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This noble Balsam is very effectual as well internally
as externally used; it is thin in substance, because of penetration, by which
means it refreshes all the Members; for it drys, attenuates, opens,
discusseth, and heats. It wonderfully assists in all cold Destillations of the
Head, but does principally relieve those troubled with the Apoplexy, Epilepsie,
Vertigo, and loss of Memory, if the Coronal Suture, the Nostrils, Temples,
hinderpart of the Head, Crown, etc. are frequently anointed therewith. It is
happily given in the ringing of the Ears, caused by thick Vapors, dullness of
Sense proceeding from cold and frigid Humors. It does to a Miracle cure all the
cold punctures and pains of the Brain, Breast, Liver, Spleen, Womb, and all the
Nerves and Joints, and all other nervous parts. It is of good use in the
extensions of the Hypochondres, and dissipates and discusseth the Scirrhus and
hard Tumors there, and produces a good Color. It is a S^cret in the Palsy,
Convulsions, Hip-gout, etc. It purges the Lungs of thick and viscid humors,
and roborates the Stomach, if it be anointed therewith. It helps shortness of
Breath, and potently dissipates internal Wind. It is an Arcanum in the Colic,
if the Navil is but anointed therewith, and at the same time taken inwardly. It
dissolves coagulated Blood, the part being anointed, and at the same time taken
inwardly to procure Sweat. It being taken in Parsley water, or any other
convenient Liquor, and at the same time the Region of the Reins and Bladder
anointed therewith, expels the Stone, and other impurities in the Urinary
passage, and also provokes Lust and causes erection. It helps the Suffocation
of the Womb, and the parts being anointed, brings away the Child from the Womb.
In Quartans and other Agues and Fevers, if it be applied warm from the Nape of
the Neck down to the Hips, and rubbed in before a good fire a little before the
Fit comes, it mitigates and takes away with the using the cold pain and
shiverings of the Back and Shoulders, and drives away the Fever. Lastly, it
preserves the whole body, and defends it from Putrefaction, Poison, and all
pestilential Air. The dose internally is from a scruple to half a dram or a
dram in specific and appropriate Vehicles.

Balsamum Apoplecticum, or a Balsam for the Apoplexy.
Take Oil of Nutmegs an ounce, Oil of white Amber rectified half a dram, true
Oil of Roses and Cinnamon, of each a scruple; Oil of Lavender and Marjoram, of
each fifteen grains; Oil of Benjamin and Rue, of each ten grains; Oil of Cloves
and Citrons, of each four grains. Having mixed them well, add thereto
Ambergriese a dram and a half, true Civet four scruples, the best Musk a dram.
Mix them faith^^lly, and make a Balsam of a just consistence according to Art.

Virtue and Use. There is scarcely to be found in the whole Republic of
Physic an Apoplectick Balsam, which is more illustrious in Fame, more noble in
Virtue, more worthy in Honor, more ready for Help, and more fragrant in Smell,
than this is: For by anointing the top of the Head, the Nostrils and Pulses
therewith, it does miraculously raise the vital, animal and natural Spirits,
and most sweetly refresh them.

Balsamum Hypnoticum, or a Balsam to procure Sleep.
Take Oil of Nutmegs expressed five drams, vulgar Oil of Roses, Violets and
water-Lily, of each two drams; Oil of Henbane seeds expressed, and of white Poppy
seeds expressed, Oil of Bricks and Benjamin, of each a dram. Mix them faithfully,
and then add these following: Unguentum Populeon an ounce, a Stags marrow three
drams, Opium dissolved in Spirit of Wine, Extract of Oriental Saffron, of each
a dram; Amber and Musk and true Oil of Roses, of each a scruple. Mix them, and
make a Balsam according to Art.

Virtue and Use. By anointing the Nose, and Pulses of the Temple and Arms, and
if need be, the Ears and soles of the Feet with it, it sweetly produces sleep,
and mitigateth the pains of the Head.

Balsamum Memoriae, or a Balsam for the Memory.
Take Oil of Nuts expressed half an ounce, oil of Bricks and Castor, of each
three drams; oil of Myrrh and Frankincense, of each a dram; oil of Lavender,
Rosemary, Marjoram and Rue, of each a scruple; oil of Cloves, white Amber,
Cinnamon and Benjamin, of each ten grains. Mix them, and with the Caput mortuum
of expressed Oil of Nutmegs make a Balsam of a just consistence, to which add
true Gallia Moschata two scruples. Again mix them, and keep it for use.

Virtue and Use. It is a great Secret in recovering the Memory lost, or to
comfort and conserve it: But it is hurtful in Women's Hysterical distempers, and
therefore the Gallia Moschata may be omitted, or to suppress the odor of it,
the weight of Oil of white Amber may be increased. The use of it is thus,
anoint the hinder-part of the Head therewith morning and evening.

Balsamum Odontalgicum, or a Balsam for the Toothache.
Take the Oils of Origanum, Cloves and Camphire, of each two drams; Opium
Spagirically prepared, flowers of Nitre, of each a dram; species Diambrae and
red Sanders, of each half a dram. Mix them, and with the Caput mortuum of
expressed Oil of Nutmegs, or in defect of this, white Wax half an ounce, make a
Balsam according to Art.

Virtue and Use. It is effectual in the Toothache of what cause soever, but
especially cold. A little Lint or Cotton wet in it, and the Tooth stopped
therewith, does immediately take away the pain, if the Tooth be hollow.
Moreover it kills Worms, and brings away humors plentifully by the Mouth.

Balsamum Puerorum dentientium, or a Balsam for Children breeding Teeth.
Take May Butter not salted three ounces, sat of a Hen and a Duck, of each two
drams; flowers of wild Poppies a dram. Boil them in Juice of living Crabs
bruised and with water of Blue-bottles and Extract of roots of Marshmallows,
of each two ounces. Let them boil to the consumption of the Juyces; then being
pressed, add white Sugar Candy four ounces, Gallia Moschata vera a scruple, the
Yolk of one Egg. Mix them, and make a Balsam according to Art.

Virtue and Use. Infants in breeding their Teeth, are often in danger of their
life, because of the hardness of the Gums, by reason of the great pain that
attends it; but the use of this Balsam does so rarifie and mollify the Gums,
that it removes all fear of danger, and makes them breed their Teeth easily, if
the Gums be frequently anointed therewith.

Balsamum Paralyticum, or a Balsam for the Palsy.
Take Oil of Galbanum distilled with Spirit of Turpentine, oil of Amber
rectified, of each an ounce; oil of Rosemary and Angelica, of each a dram; oil
of Chamomil, Cloves and Sage, of each half a dram; oil of Lavender a scruple.
Mix them, and with a sufficient quantity of expressed Oil of Nutmegs make a
Balsam or soft Liniment of a just consistence, to which for the Rich you may
add Troches of Gallia Moschata a scruple.

Virtue and Use. This Balsam applied to the Nape of the Neck and Brain, as to
the Original of all the Nerves, also to the paralytick Member, does wonderfully
help and relieve the part afflicted with the Palsy, because it penetrates and
roborates all the Nerves, which in this disease is most requisite.

Balsamum Spasmaticum.
Take the fat of an Eel an ounce, oil of Galbanum distilled with Spirit of
Turpentine half an ounce, oil of Earthworms and white Lilies, of each three
drams; oil of white Amber rectified, of Rosemary and Angelica, of each a dram
and a half; oil of Iuniper-berries, Chamomil, Origanum and Bays, of each a
dram; oil of Cloves, Lavender, Sage and Rue, of each a scruple. Mix them, and
with Oil of Nutmegs expressed and white Wax, of each a sufficient quantity make
it into a Balsam according to Art.

Virtue, and Use. This Balsam challenges the first place in the Cure of
Convulsions (which Disease usually proceeds from the repletion of cold humors
in the Nerves) Universals being premised, and the body duly cleansed, it cures
the Members convulsed and infested with trembling, by penetrating the Nerves;
nay, and it stops the convulsive motion also. And in the use of it observe,
That the Unction be not applied to the part affected only, but from the Neck
down to the last Vertebrae of the Back twice or thrice a day. In the mean time
let the Patient take care that he takes not cold, lest a cold and moist humor
should fall upon the part affected. Let him or her also shun windy Diet,
Gluttony, Crudity and Lechery.

Balsamum Stomachicum, or a Balsam for the Stomach.
Take Oil of Nutmegs by expression two ounces and a half, oil of water-Mints
half an ounce, oil of Oranges, Cloves and Mace, of each a dram; oil of
Rosemary, Lavender, Wormwood, Cummin and Dill, of each half a dram. Mix them,
to which mixture, if you please, add, to contemperate the heat of it, vulgar
Oil of red Roses and white Wax a sufficient quantity, to make a Balsam
according to Art.

Virtue and Use. It is good for a cold Stomach when digestion is hurt by wind
and flatulencies; it also corrects the acid and nauseous belchings of the
Stomach. It stays phlegmatic Vomiting, and discusseth the wind that offends the
Guts. The Stomach is to be anointed therewith twice a day, that is, morning and
evening when digestion is finished.

Balsamum Aromaticum, or an Aromatic Balsam.
Take common oils of Wormwood, of Nard compound, of water-Mints and Mastich, of
each two ounces; oil of Nutmegs by expression six drams, distilled Oil of
Cloves and Calamus aromaticus, of each a dram; oils of Rosemary, Lavender,
Oranges, Benjamin and Cummin, of each a scraple. Let them be diligently and
faithfully mixed, and then add Species Diatrion Pipereon, Gum Tacamahacca, of
each two drams, Gallia Moschata ten grains. And with a sufficient quantity of
the Caput mortuum of the Oil of Nutmegs by expression make a Balsam according
to Art.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It warms a cold Stomach, helps Digestion, dissipates
Wind, etc. The dose at once is the quantity of a Hazel-nut, and after unction a
double warm Cloth to be laid upon the place.

Balsamum Absinthiacum, or a Balsam with Oil of Wormwood.
Take Oil of Nutmegs by expression two ounces, common oil of Wormwood and
compound oil of Nard, of each an ounce; oil of Mastich half an ounce, distilled
oil of Wormwood a dram, oil of water-Mints and Thyme, of each a dram; oil of
Cloves and Mace, of each a dram. Mix them, and make a Balsam of a just
consistence.

Virtue and Use. The Stomach anointed therewith wonderfully helps the coldness
of it, strengthens digestion and retention, and stirs up an Appetite to eat, it
also dissipates wind. It is also very profitably used for the pains in the
Guts, Stomach, Colic, bloody Flux. It also helps the cold affects of the Brain
and Nerves.

Balsamum Sulphuris Anisatum, or a Balsam of Sulphur with Oil of Aniseeds.
Take Oil of Aniseeds six ounces, flower of Sulphur an ounce. Mix them, and
digest them in a Glass so long, till the Oil of Aniseeds has perfectly
extracted the Tincture of the Sulphur, then pour off the red Oil, filter it and
keep it for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. This is a perfect Balsam heating, drying and preserving
from putrefaction, in which are all the virtues of the natural Balsam, and its
greatest conservative virtue. It is of admirable use in all pectoral Catarrhs,
Coughs, Asthma's, Phthisicks, Pleurisy, Colic, Plague, Fevers, Epidemical
diseases, Epilepsie, French Pox; yea in all Imposthumes and Putrefactions of
the whole body, etc. The dose is from three drops to five or six in specific
and appropriate Vehicles.

Balsamum Zibethae, or a Balsam of Civet.
Take Oil of Nutmegs by expression an ounce, true Civet half an ounce. These
being well and faithfully mixed, add distilled oil of Soap rectified, our
Carminative oil, oil of Wax rectified, of each a dram; oil of Cloves and Mace,
of each half a dram; Amber and Musk, of each a scruple. Again mix them, and
make a Balsam according to Art.

Virtue and Use. By anointing the Navel with this Balsam, it does not only
allay the intolerable pains of the Colic, but also discusseth and resolves the
malignant, crude, Nitrous and vicious humors. In Coition also it affords great
pleasure to Women, if the Glans is but anointed with it. Also in the
Suffocation of the Womb, if the Husband do but anoint himself in the aforesaid
manner, and cohabit with his Wife, it is a most excellent and present Remedy;
for the Matrix immediately descends. It would also be better, if at the same
time some fetid thing were applied to the Nostrils, such as Castor or Assa
foetida.

Balsamum Terebinthinae, or a Balsam of Turpentine.
Take of that bright red Powder made by evaporation from oil of Turpentine what
quantity you please. Pulverize it well, and extract a Tincture according to Art
in the best Spirit of Wine, digest the tinged Spirit for fourteen days;
afterward again abstract it by the gentle heat of Balneo to the mediety, or
till the oiliness appears, which after due filtration keep for use.

Virtue, Use, and Dose. It potently expels the stones of the Reins and Bladder,
mitigates the pains of those parts, and cures the Gonorrhoea. The dose is from
five to seven drops or half a scruple in some convenient Vehicles. Also
externally used to the Region of the Reins by unction, does wonderfully relieve
the Patient troubled with the Stone in the Kidneys.

Balsamum Medicamentosum, or a Medicinal Balsam.
Take Tincture of Roses extracted with water of Lapis medicamentosus, Virgin
Honey, of each four ounces; burnt Alum an ounce, the sweet Earth of Vitriol and
Gum Lacca, of each three drams. Boil them to the consistence of a Balsam, then
add red Coral prepared, Dragons blood, of each two drams; Sarcocol, red Myrrh
and Mastich, of each a dram; oil of Rhodium, Nutmegs and Savin, of each a
scruple. Mix them, and make them into a Balsam of a just consistence.

Virtue and Use. It is of good use to the Gums when they are putrid, swelled,
overgrown and black; for it preserves them from putrefaction and cures them.
Moreover it fastens loose Teeth, and covers them with new flesh, and amends
other vices of the Mouth. It perfectly and suddenly heals the Cancer, Noli me
tangere, Scurvy, Imposthume, Ulcers, Corrosion, etc. and takes away all
impurities of the Gums. Use it morning and evening, or often in the day by
rubbing the part affected, and let the Mouth be washed with Sage water or any
other appropriate Liquor.

Balsamum Stipticum, or a Stiptick Balsam.
Take of our Stiptick Plaster four ounces, oil of the Yolks of Eggs so much as
is sufficient to make it into a Balsam, to which add Oil of Cloves, Nutmegs and
Sage, of each a scruple. Mix them, and keep it for use.

Virtue and Use. It roborates the Stomach, and strengthens the whole lower
Belly anointed therewith, it helps Digestion, stays Vomiting, cures the disease
Cholera, Lientery, Diarrhoea and bloody Flux. It also strengthens the Womb,
restrains the Courses when immoderate, prevents Abortion, and roborates the
Reins.

Balsamum Venereum, or a Venereal Balsam.
Take roots of Pellitory of Spain and Euphorbium, of each an ounce; Cantharides
half an ounce. Boil them in two pound of Malmsey Wine to the consumption of
half, and to the strained Decoction add Sallet Oil four ounces. Again boil it
till the humidity be consumed, and to the remaining Oil add Oil of Nutmegs
expressed an ounce, of our oil of Pismires half an ounce, oil of Indian Nuts and
Castor, of each a dram and a half; Oleum Moschatellinum, oil of Cloves, Mace
and Spike, of each a dram; pure and true Civet, the best Musk, of each a
scruple. Mix them, and with the Caput mortuum of Oil of Nutmegs expressed, or in
defect thereof a sufficient quantity of white Wax, make a Balsam of a just
consistence.

Virtue and Use. If the Yard and parts adjacent, to wit, the Region between the
Anus and the Scrotum where the body of the Yard lies, also the great Toe of the
right Foot are bathed with this Balsam, it provokes Lust. It is an excellent
enticement of the Womb, and causes a wonderful erection by stimulating the
parts, and that constantly, neither does it suffer erection to cease; but when
you are willing it should cease; wash the parts which were before anointed.

Balsamum Uterinum, or a Balsam for the Womb.
Take May Butter without salt an ounce, oil of English Tin, oil of yellow Amber
and Turpentine, of each a dram and a half; Gum Tacamahacca, Assa foetida,
Galbanum and Savin, of each a d^am; true Castor half a dram, Goats Suet a
sufficient quantity to make all into the consistence of a Balsam.

Virtue and Use. If the Navil be anointed with this Balsam warm, and a piece of
Walnut-tree rind laid thereon, it mitigates all the pains of the Womb, and
brings it into its proper place; but let the Woman abstain from sweet things,
and instead thereof anoint her Nostrils and Breast with Oil of white Amber and
Oil of Castor.

Balsamum Podagricum, or a Balsam for the Gout.
Take juyces of Housleek, Rosemary, Gourd, Tabaco, Henbane, Germander and
Vervain, of each six ounces; Vitriol calcined till it be yellow, white Tartar,
Sea Salt calcined, of each three ounces; the Fat of a wild Cat, of a Goose and
Fox, the Marrow of a Stag, of each an ounce and a half; oil of Turpentine,
Bricks, Juniper and Soap, of each an ounce; oil of the lower Iaw-bone of a
Horse, oil of Saturn and Spike, of each a dram; Gum Ammoniack, Opopanax,
Sagapen, Mastich, Olibanum and Foreign Mumy, of each half an ounce. Mix them,
and boil them to the consumption of the humidity, and reserve all the fatty
part for use.

Virtue and Use. Bathe the parts grieved with this Balsam warm morning and
evening, and lay Linen Clothes upon the part affected after bathing, and (...)
does to a miracle allay the pains of the Gout; for it does quickly, by altering
and penetrating, dissolve the tartarous and knotty Concretions, and takes away
at once almost all gouty and cramp-like pains proceeding from a cold Cause.

Balsamum Saponis, or a Balsam of Soap.
Take Venice Soap dissolved in juice of Lemmons a pound, white Virgin Honey
four ounces; Mercurial Cosmetick, white Sugar Candy and roots of Florentine
Flowerde luce, of each an ounce; Salt of white Tartar, white Sperma Ceti, Alum
saccharated, Venetian Borax, of each half an ounce; odoriferous Balsam of P^^^^
two drams, Gallia Moschata a dram, oil of Rhodiu^^ ^^^amon, Cloves and
Lavender, of each a scruple. Mix them, and make of all a Mixture like Balsam.

Virtue and Use. Use it in washing and rubbing the Hands, which it makes white
as Snow, and renders the Skin neat and soft.

SECT. XXXV. Of Ointments.
Unguentum Paralyticum, or an Ointment for the Palsy.
TAke Oil of Amber rectified, oil of Bricks, of each an ounce and a half; oil
of Juniper, Templinum and Turpentine, of each an ounce; oil of Bays, Peter and
Spike, of each half an ounce; oil of Castor and Pepper, of each two drams. All
being mixed, pour upon it four ounces of our Paralytick Spirit, ^^d boil it to
the consumption of the Spirit; afterward add Alum prepared an ounce, distilled
oil of Rosemary, Nutmegs, Cloves, Origanum, Wormwood, Lavender, Angelica and
Sage, of each a dram. Mix them, and with a sufficient quantity of yellow Wax
make an Ointment according to Art.

Virtue and Use. It powerfully restores paralytick Members, and by digestion
consumes the peccant matter sticking to the Nerves, Muscles and Tendons: it
comforts the nervous parts with heat, and restores them to their pristine
motion, and is of good use in the Gout proceeding of a cold Cause; and in the
Hip-gout, called the Sciatica, it is most excellent. Let the Patient be
anointed morning and evening in a warm place, universal Medicines being before
used.

Unguentum Ophthalmicum, or an Ointment for the Eyes.
Take May Butter not salted, and washed in Eyebright water four ounces, true
Dragons blood finely powdered half an ounce, white Sugar Candy and Tutty
prepared, of each two drams; Pearls prepared and Sarcocol, of each half a dram;
Camphire ten grains, Opium Spagirically prepared four grains. Mix them, and
make an Ointment according to Art.

Virtue and Use. If a little of this Ointment (universal Medicines being
premised) be applied to the corners of the Eyes and to the edges of the
Eyebrows, it takes away all defluxions of Rheum, by temperating the heat,
allaying the pain, removing the redness, mitigating the sharpness, and stopping
and drying the Rheum, and it also wonderfully strengthens the Eyes.

Unguentum Pectorale, or a Pectoral Ointment.
Take Oil of Pistick Nuts expressed, oil of Pine-nuts expressed, and oil of sweet
Almonds, of each an ounce and a half; May Butter unsalted, Capons grease and
Goats Suet, of each an ounce. These being mixed, add to it three ounces of our
Pectoral water, and boil them together to the consumption of the water, then
add Essence of Oriental Saffron two drams, distilled oil of Chamomil, oil of
Fenil, Mace, Dill and Aniseeds, of each a dram. Mix them, and with white Wax
make an Unguent according to Art.

Virtue and Use. It is properly applied to the pains of the Breast, for by
anointing it therewith, it dissolves phlegm in it, and heals all imperfections
there, it warms, moistens and mollifies, etc. Use it morning and evening before
a gentle fire.

Unguentum Pleuriticum, or an Unguent for the Pleurisy.
Take the Fat of Field-Mice four ounces, May Butter without salt two ounces,
oil of Walnuts, sweet Almonds, of Poppy by expression, and oil of Bays, of each
an ounce; juice of wild Poppy flowers six ounces. Mix them, and boil all to the
consumption of the Juice; afterward add Oil of distilled Chamomil and Dill, of
each a dram and a half; oil of Bricks and Cummin seed, of each a dram. Again
mix them, and with a sufficient quantity of white Wax make an Unguent.

Virtue and Use. After the beginning of its violence, and in allaying the pain
of the Pleurisy, and dissolving the Imposthume, this Unguent is of wonderful
use, which is applied to the part grieved, not ceasing from anointing till the
pain desists: And know for your credit, that this Remedy is effectually
prevalent, used to any other strong pain in the whole body, to the great profit
of the Patient. Note, That Plasters and Unguents in all Pectoral diseases,
ought to be laid upon the Breast before, and upon the Back behind; but in the
Pleurisy they must be applied more upon the Sides.

Unguentum Anodynum, or an Anodyne Ointment.
Take our Anodyne oil of the seven Flowers six ounces, oil of sweet Almonds,
oil of Henbane and Poppy expressed, oil of Earthworms and St. Iohns-wort, of
each an ounce; Fat of a Goose and wild Cat, of each six drams; juice of Tabaco
depurated, juice of Germander and Vervain, of each four ounces. Mix all, and
boil them to the consumption of the Juyces, afterward with a sufficient
quantity of white Wax, make an Ointment according to Art.

Virtue and Use. It mitigates pain in any part of the body, from whence indeed
it has its name: But in a case where excessive cold is the cause, add to two
ounces of the Ointment. Oil of Peter, Juniper and Bricks, of each a scruple,
and mix them for use.

Unguentum Spleneticum, or an Ointment for the Spleen.
Take Oil of Capers three ounces, oil of Rocket seeds expressed, of Nigella
expressed, of Hemp expressed, of sweet Almonds, of each an ounce; oil of Juniper
half an ounce. All being mixed, pour upon them four ounces of Juice of
Hart's-tongue expressed, and boil them to the consumption of the Juice; then add
distilled Oil of Mastich, Cummin and Myrrh, of each a dram; oil of Ammoniacum,
Chamomil and Wormwood, of each half a d^am; Extract of Saffron two scruples.
Again mix them, and with a sufficient quantity of white Wax, make an Ointment.

Virtue and Use. The Region of the Spleen being bathed with this Ointment
before a fire, opens and comforts it, and preserves it from scirrhous Tumors;
it also eases the pains, and discusseth the flatulency thereof.

Unguentum Spasmaticum, or an Unguent for Convulsions.
Take Oil of Snails distilled per descensum, oil of Earthworms and Sesamus, of
each an ounce and a half; the Fat of a gelded Ram, Hedge hog and Fox, of each
an ounce; May Butter without salt, Stags marrow, of each half an ounce; Spirit
of Juniper three ounces. Mix them, and boil them to the consumption of the
Spirit; then add distilled oil of white Amber three dra^s, oil of Chamomil and
Bays, of each a dram and a half; oil of Rosemary and Sage, of each a dram. Mix
them, and with a sufficient quantity of white Wax, make an Ointment.

Virtue and Use. It is chiefly useful in Convulsions, after due Evacuation; for
it being applied to the grieved part, and the Nerves with their Originals being
anointed, does mollify, resolve and refresh the Nerves, etc. Let the part
grieved be anointed morning and evening warm, and you will quickly find ease.

Unguentum Renale, or an Unguent for the Reins.
Take our Anodyne oil of the seven Flowers four ounces, oil of white Poppy
seeds expressed two ounces, Ointment of fresh Roses and Populeon, of each an
ounce; Capons grease and the marrow of a Stag, of each half an ounce; red
Sanders and Nitre prepared, of each two drams; juice of the flowers of red
Marshmallows six ounces. Mix these, and boil them to the consumption of the
Juyces, after with yellow Wax make an Ointment.

Virtue and Use. It has an excellent faculty in cooling and moistning; for
wheresoever there is need of humectation and refrigeration, this may safely be
used. But first the Back, Loins, etc. anointed with it, cures all heat,
inflammation of the Reins, and Stone, nay, it allays and mitigates pain coming
of a hot Cause in any part of the body.

Unguentum Nephriticum.
Take simple oil of Scorpions six ounces, oil of flowers of Mullein, Chamomil,
Poplar and Dill, of each an ounce; oil of Cherry kernels expressed and bitter
Almonds, of each an ounce and a half; fat of a Hen, Goose and Duck, of each six
drams; Butter made red with Crabs, Ointment of Marshmallows, of each two
ounces; Balsam of Turpentine three drams, juice of Pellitory of the Wall
expressed a pound. Mix them, and boil it to the consumption of the Juice, and
then with Wax make an Ointment.

Virtue and Use. Let the Reins, Loins, and Back downwards as far as the Privy
parts, be often in the day anointed with this Unguent; for being so anointed,
it wonderfully dilates and opens the passages, that the stones and sand may
pass downward with the more ease. It lenifies the pains in the Kidneys,
relaxeth the Ureters, and makes the stone and tartarous matter soft.

Unguentum ad Ambusta, or an Ointment for Burns.
Take Whites of Eggs two parts, Sallet oil one part. Let them be wrought
diligently together and exactly mixed, that they may be made into a white
Ointment.

Virtue and Use. This Liniment is of most excellent use, although it seems to
be but of little worth or esteem; yet I tell you, That there has not been
found hitherto a more secret and present Remedy for all Burns than this is: For
it quickly, safely and perfectly takes out the fire, lenifies and stops the
pain, and cures all Ulcers by fire, let them be made of what matter they will,
and leaves no Scar behind it, so that it may be deservedly reckoned among the
domestic Arcana's, and communicated to Posterity. And this is the way of using
it: Let the Patient anoint it often in the day with a black Hens feather, till
the Crust falls off, and the part be perfectly restored (but let no other
external Applications or Ligatures, etc. be used.)

Unguentum de Calce viva, or an Unguent of quick Lime.
Take quick Lime four ounces, Auripigmentum an ounce and a half, roots of
Florentine Flower-de-luce an ounce, yellow Sulphur and Nitre, of each half an
ounce; of the strong Stiptick Lixivium of Beans two pound. Mix them, and boil
them in a glazed Pot to a just consistence, which you may thus know: If a
Feather be smeared therewith, and it easily sheds its down, then add Oil of
Spike half an ounce, or any other odoriferous Oil, and so make an Unguent or
Pultis.

Virtue and Use. The Hair in any part of the body being anointed with this
Unguent, does in a wonderful manner soon fall off, and then the bare place must
be anointed with Ointment of Roses.

Unguentum de Rapis, or an Ointment of Turnips.
Take Hogs Lard two ounces, oil of Chamomil, Roses and Violets, of each an
ounce; oil of Wheat expressed, oil of Urine, of each half an ounce; Man's Grease
and Deers Suet, of each three drams; Ashes of River Crabs, Olibanum, of each
two drams; Mucilage of Marsh-mallow roots, of Linseed and Foenugreek seed, of
each six drams; juice of Turnips expressed eight ounces. Mix all, and boil them
to the consumption of the Juice, and with yellow Wax make an Unguent, and
toward the end mix with it the Yolks of four Eggs.

Virtue and Use. It cures Fissures, Ulcers and Imposthumes on the Hands, Feet
and other Members which are caused by Cold, etc. and the part affected is to be
anointed twice or thrice a day till it be healed.

Unguentem Medicamentosum, or a Medicinal Ointment.
Take old Hogs grease a pound, white Turpentine six ounces, Lapis
medicamentosus and white Tartar, of each an ounce and a half; crude yellow
Sulphur, white Lead washed, Litharge, red Lead, of each an ounce; both sorts of
Hellebore, long Pepper, Tutty prepared, Pompholix, of each half an ounce. Being
mixed, add the depurated Juyces of Dock roots, Pilew^rt, the herb Fumitory,
Scabious, the inner bark of Elder, of Lemmons, of each four ounces: boil them
to the consumption of the Juyces; and then add liquid Styrax, counterfeit
Cinnabar, of each an ounce and a half; oils of Bays, Juniper and Eggs, of each
an ounce; sublimate Mercury three drams. Mix them, and make an Unguent for use.

Virtue and Use. It heals the Scabs of the Hands and whole Body: It also cures
running Sores, Tetters, Itch, Elephantiasis, sore Heads, and Alopecia; it also
takes away the Scurff and Scabs of the Head. Let the parts be anointed every
morning; but the disease declining, it may be done once in two or three days.
But use not the Ointment before the body has been duly purged, because by
anointing the parts the Pores are contracted and shut, and the respiration of
the evil humors hindered, by which means they putrify within, from whence
Fevers and Imposthumes are often produced.

Unguentum de Sevo hircino, or an Unguent of Goats Suet.
Take Goats Suet an ounce, oil of Eggs, sweet Almonds, Henbane seeds expressed,
and oil of Poppy, of each half an ounce; Duck, Hen and Goose grease, of each
three drams; Litharge of Silver prepared, white Lead washed, Tutty prepared,
red Lead, of each a dram and a half; Pompholix, burnt Alum, white Sugar Candy
and Olibanum, of each a dram; Oriental Saffron a scruple, Camphire, Opium
prepared, of each ten grains. Mix them, and with white Wax make an Ointment.

Virtue and Use. It heals without trouble Fissures, Clefts and Chops in the
Hands, Feet, Breech, Breasts and Privy parts of Women, on the Prepuce in men,
on the Eyebrows, Nose, Ears, or any where else, caused from cold, heat, and
dryness, salt, sharp or choleric humors.

Unguentum Mobile.
Take Gum Galbanum, Opopanax and Ammoniacum, of each an ounce. Dissolve them in
Wine Vinegar, then let them be strained and well pressed, separate them from the
Vinegar, and being separated, add of Man's grease, of Dogs, Stags and Bears
grease, of each half an ounce. Mix them and put them into a Cucurbit, adding to
them Oil of Turpentine and Bays, of each half an ounce; oil of Hartshorn two
drams, oil of Sulphur prepared with half so much oil of Walnut, oil of sweet
Antimony distilled from the Emetick powder by a Retort, oil of Vitriol
edulcorated with flakes of Iron, oil of Saturn, of each a dram. Again mix them,
and let them digest in the Sun or other warm place for certain days, stirring
them daily with a wooden Spatula, and so you will have a most precious
Ointment, with which Paracelsus cured as well inveterate as recent Ulcers in a
few days.

Virtue and Use. It cures all inveterate, putrid and rotten Sores; also Wounds,
Venereal Ulcers, Pimples, etc. the Wolf, Cancer and Gout. It also heals all
Amputations, and bruised Muscles and Members, etc. It does well in the
Leucophlegmatica in the Head, the hair being shaved off, and this applied to
the part affected. In Ruptures and other old affects of the Groyn it gives
present ease: and that I may speak all in short, the virtue of this Unguent
cannot be expressed in a few words. Let it be used either with the Feather of a
black Hen, or with Stuphs, applying after it a Plaster of Sticticum or
Diasulphuris.

Unguentum Carminativum, or a Carminative Ointment.
Take Elder flowers two pound, May Butter without salt a pound, juice of
Chamomil expressed with Wine half a pound. Boil them in Balneo to the consumption
of the humidity, and when it is strained, add Oil of Caraways six drams, oil of
Cummin two drams, oil of Fenil seeds a dram. Mix them, and make an Unguent or
Liniment.

Virtue and Use. It is a Secret in the Tympany and flatulency of the Ventricle:
the whole Belly must be anointed with it twice a day, in the morning and at
night going to bed.

Unguentum Stipticum, or a Stiptick Unguent.
Take Oil of Myrtles eight ounces, oil of Quinces and water-Lilies, of each
four ounces; oil of St. Iohn-wort and Roses, of each two ounces; juice of
Plantane, Shepherds-purse and Millefoil, of each seven ounces. Mix all, and
boil them to the consumption of the Juyces; then add Dragons blood and Crocus
Martis, of each an ounce; Oriental red Bole prepared, sweet Earth of Vitriol,
red Coral prepared, of each half an ounce; ro^ts of Tormentil and Bistort, of
each two drams; seeds of Roses, Plantane and Barberries, of each a dram; a
little Vinegar. Mix them, and with Wax make an Unguent according to Art.

Virtue and Use. It is wholly Stiptick, and by unction it is used to the Reins
and Belly: It stops the Terms, and other immoderate Fluxes as well of the Womb
as Reins.

Unguentum contra Vermes, or an Ointment against the Worms.
Take Epatick Aloes three ounces, Extract of Gentian an ounce and a half.
Dissolve them together in a sufficient quantity of Spirit of Wine, and being
dissolved, add Oil of bitter Almonds, and Peach kernels, common oil of
Wormwood, of each six ounces; Bulls gall three ounces, Wine Vinegar an ounce
and a half. Mix them, and boil it to the consumption of the Spirit of Wine,
Vinegar and Gall, and toward the end add red Myrrh an ounce, Troches of
Alhandal and oil of Savin, of each three drams. Mix them, and with a sufficient
quantity of Wax make an Ointment.

Unguentum Herniosum, or an Unguent for Ruptures.
Take five and thirty Yolks of Eggs boiled hard, May Butter without salt half a
pound. Mix them, and upon a Charcoal fire boil them, always stirring and
scumming it, and when it appears like pure Oil, let it be strongly pressed, and
reject the Faeces; afterward in the expressed Oil, being yet warm, dissolve of
our Balsamic oil six ounces, oil of Peter four ounces, Oxycroceum Plaster five
ounces. Mix them, and make an Unguent according to Art.

Virtue and Use. It cures the Rupture of the Bowels; but the Patient must lie
on his back in bed for eight or fourteen days, shunning excess both of meat and
drink, and let him take heed of windy Diet, the part affected must be anointed
twice a day, morning and evening, and the part duly swaddled or bound with
things convenient, and by the Blessing of God he will be certainly cured. But
in the mean time let him drink of our Decoction contra Herniam three or four
spoonfuls at a time, and with these Remedies I have cured innumerable.

Unguentum contra Pediculos, or an Ointment to kill Lice.
Take Oil of Bays and Templinum, of each four ounces; juice of Rue expressed six
ounces. Mix them, and boil it to the consumption of the Juice, then add
Quicksilver killed with the juice of Sage an ounce and a half, seeds of
Stavesacre, Nitre prepared, Epatick Aloes, of each half an ounce; roots of
Docks and white Hellebore, Indian Tabaco, of each two drams; Camphire and oil
of Spike, of each a dram. Mix them, and with a sufficient quantity of Wax make
an Unguent.

Virtue and Use. Experience it self teaches the excellent use of this
Ointment; for it kills all kind of Lice, and is of good use in the Camp of Mars
as well as Venus.

Unguentum ad Livorem Faciei, or an Ointment for the black Bruises of the Face.
Take white Tragacanth half an ounce. Dissolve it in Rose Water to the form of
a Liniment, then add Roots of Solomon's Seal finely powdered four scruples,
Camphire two scruples. Mix them, and make a Liniment.

Virtue and Use. It is by Experience found good for the black and blue spots or
marks on the Face or elsewhere, caused either by Contusions, Blows, or any
other violence, and restores the part to its native and pristine color, if the
part affected be anointed or imeared with it, and so continue using it till it
be well.

SECT. XXXVI. Of Plasters.
Emplastrum Epilepticum, or a Plaster for the Epilepsie.
TAke Oils of Castor, Rue, Flower-de-luce, of each an ounce; roots and seeds of
Peony and Pellitory of Spain, of each a dram; Misleto of the Oak, Squills
prepared, Elks horn and Man's Skull both Spagirically calcined, of each two
scruples; Frankincense, Mastich, Ladanum, Galbanum and Opopanax, of each a
dram; flowers of Lavender, Arabian Stoechas and Indian Spike, of each a pugil;
distilled oil of Rosemary and Hyssop, of Nutmegs by expression, of each a
scruple; of Rosin and Wax a sufficient quantity to make a Plaster according to
Art.

Virtue and Use. It is applied to the Coronal Suture in the Epilepsie and other
dangerous affects of the Head, and gives present help, and by a specific
quality does virtually resist it.

Emplastrum Hypnoticum, or a somniferous Plaster.
Take Unguentum Populeon and yellow Wax, of each three drams; Opium
Spagirically prepared, oil of Nutmegs by expression, of each a dram and a half;
Tacamahacca, Mastich and Sandarack, of each a dram; Styrax Calamitis, Olibanum
and Rosin, of each half a dram; Gallia Moschata, Extract of Saffron, of each a
scruple; distilled oil of Roses ten grains. Mix them, and make a Plaster of a
just consistence according to Art.

Virtue and Use. It being laid to the Temples, Forehead and Pulses, it
produces a pleasant sleep, and that especially if it be laid on at night going
to bed. Moreover it is of excellent use to stop Defluxions from the Head, and
to allay pain: But for Hysterical Women, the Gallia Moschata is to be omitted.

Emplastrum Stomachicum, or a Plaster for the Stomach.
Take of Gum Tacamahacca four ounces, the best Ladanum and Benjamin, of each
two ounces; Colophony and yellow Wax, of each an ounce; our Balsamum
Absinthiacum and Balsam of Peru, of each half an ounce; distilled oil of
Origanum, Mother of Thyme, Zedoary and Rosemary, of each a scruple; white
Turpentine a sufficient quantity to make it into a Plaster of a just
consistence.

Virtue and Use. It frees the Stomach from crudity and wind, and helps the
weakness and distention of it; for it heats and wonderfully helps digestion,
and stays Vomiting and Loathing, if it be laid to the Stomach, and there
continued.

Emplastrum Spleneticum, or a Plaster for the Spleen.
Take Oil of Capers and Chamomil, of each four ounces; juyces of Hart's-tongue,
Wormwood, Rosemary and Agrimony, of each three ounces. Boil them in Balneo to
the consumption of the Juyces, then add Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar,
Ammoniacum and Bdellium, of each an ounce; of Melilot Plaster and Diachylon
simple, of each six drams; distilled oil of Juniper, juice of both sorts of
Fern made thick, of each half an ounce; seeds of Agnus castus, Garden Rue and
Broom, of each a dram and a half; Rosin and Wax so much as will make all into a
Plaster of a just consistence according to Art.

Virtue and Use. Spread this Plaster upon red Leather, and being covered with a
fine Linen Cloth, sprinkle upon a sufficient quantity of Oil of Rosemary, and
so lay it to the Region of the Spleen, whose swelling and hardness it softens
and dissolves: it likewise comforts and opens the Spleen.

Emplastrum Marciale.
Take Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar, Tacamahacca, of each an ounce; white
Turpentine and yellow Wax, of each six drams; Assa foetida, red Myrrh and
Castor, of each three drams; Magistery of English Tin, oil of yellow Amber, of
each a dram and a half. Mix them, and make a Plaster according to Art.

Virtue and Use. It is effectually useful either in the rising or falling of
the Matrix; for being laid to the Navil, it refreshes the Womb, and suddenly
reduces it into its proper place: and indeed in this most cruel Disease it is
the only and best Plaster for the Womb in being, and also approved, etc.

Emplastrum Carminativum, or a Carminative Plaster.
Take Oil of Iuniper-berries and oil of Rays, of each four ounces; juice of
Elder made thick, juice of Rue and dwarff Elder, of each three ounces; Pigeons
and Goats dung macerated in Vinegar, Ship Pitch, of each two ounces; flowers of
Chamomil an ounce and a half, red Myrrh, Sandarack, Mastich and Olibanum, of
each an ounce; roots of Angelica and Elicampane, roots of English Galangal and
sweet Costus, round Cyperus, Zedoary, of each half an ounce; white Turpentine
sufficient to make a Plaster, toward the end add distilled Oil of Cummin and
Caraways, of each six drams; and so make a Plaster according to Art.

Virtue and Use. It is effectually applied in the Dropsy, and to discuss wind:
It also allays all pain proceeding from a cold intemperature of the Stomach,
Guts, Liver, Reins, Bladder, Womb, and from the flatulencies of those and other
parts. In the Dropsy it is to be spread upon a thick Linen Cloth, and applied
to the whole Belly, shunning the Region of the Liver.

Emplastrum Stipticum, or a Stiptick Plaster.
Take Colophony, Turpentine and yellow Wax, of each six ounces; Crust of Bread
toasted and macerated in Vinegar four ounces, oil of Nutmegs expressed three
ounces, Mastich, Sandarack and Olibanum, of each two ounees; sealed Earth, Bole
Armenick, water-Mints and Wormwood, of each an ounce; sweet Cane and Cloves, of
each half an ounce; Balaustines, red Roses, Cyprus Nuts, Pomegranate peels,
Turkish Galls and Dragons blood, of each two drams. Mix them, and with a
sufficient quantity of Oil of Quinces, make a Plaster according to Art.

Virtue and Use. It is a most excellent Plaster in the Dysentery, Lientery,
Diarrhoea, the Cholera and Vomiting in Children, and for those who cannot
retain their meat: in all Fluxes it is applied to the lower Belly; but for
disorders of the Ventricle it is applied to the Stomach, being spread upon
Leather cut like a Buckler, and laid on: cover it with a Linen Cloth, and let
it be neatly applied.

Emplastrum Sticticum seu Puncturale, or a Stictick Plaster for Punctures, etc.
Take Cyprus Turpentine four ounces, Gum Elami two ounces, yellow Wax and
Colophony, of each an ounce; red Lead finely powdered and Dragons blood, of
each six drams; Styrax Calamitis and the Lodestone, of each half an ounce;
roots of round Birthwort, Foreign Mumy, of each two drams; Epatick Aloes and
burnt Alum, of each a dram. Mix them, and with Vulnerary Balsam make a Plaster
according to Art.

Virtue and Use. This Plaster is of excellent use in green Wounds and
Punctures, in what part of the body soever they are, though in the Head: all
which it drys, mundifies, consolidates and heals, and hinders the growth of
corrupt proud flesh. Moreover it draws out Iron, Lead, Arrows, pieces of Wood,
Darts, etc. that are struck into any part of the body; it also draws any thing
out of Wounds that offends them, it mitigates pain, and cures the biting or
stinging of any venomous Beast.

Emplastrum Diaphoreticum, or a Diaphoretick Plaster.
Take yellow Wax eleven ounces, Colophony and Bdellium, of each four ounces;
yellow Amber three ounces, Gum Ammoniack dissolved in Vinegar and white
Turpentine, of each two ounces; Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar, Sandarack, of
each an ounce; Mastich and Frankincense, of each half an ounce. Mix them, and
make a Plaster according to Art.

Virtue and Use. It consumes, discusseth and draws out Phlegm, as by the use of
it may appear, certain drops of water standing upon the Skin and Plaster when
it is pulled off: Hence it is good in the Sciatica, swellings of the Feet,
King's Evil swellings, and Tumors of the Glandules, where we are not willing to
bring them to Suppuration. It takes away pain and the Scorbutic hardness of
the Legs, and is of good use in fractured Bones, pains of the Joints,
Luxations, Falls and Contusions; for it consumes the humidity of humors that
falls upon the part. Other ingenious and successful Practitioners use this
following, which is of great virtue also, which use is the same with this: Take
yellow Wax sixteen ounces, Bdellium pulverized five ounces, Colophony and Ship
Pitch, of each four ounces; yellow Amber three ounces, Gum Ammoniack two
ounces. Mix them, and make a Plaster, which make soft with Oil of Eggs.

Emplastrum de Pice, ejusdem fere operationis, pro tenuioribus fortunae
hominibus: Or a Plaster of Pitch, of the same operation, for the poorer sort of
people.
Take Ship Pitch a pound, yellow Wax four ounces, white Turpentine two ounces,
yellow Amber an ounce and a half, Frankincense an ounce, clarified Honey and
liquid Varnish, of each two spoonfuls. Mix them, and make a Plaster.

Emplastrum de Galbano Crocatum, or a Plaster of Galbanum with Saffron.
Take Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar six ounces, Melilot Plaster and Diachylon
simple, of each three ounces; yellow Wax two ounces, white Turpentine an ounce;
Oriental Saffron six drams. Mix all, and make it into the just consistence of a
Plaster.

Virtue and Use. It is of most excellent use to mollify and dissolve hard and
scirrhous Tumors, and to allay and mitigate the vehement pains of the Breast,
Shoulders, Dugs, Sides, Hypochonders, Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Reins and Womb,
etc. whether they arife from crude humors, or thick flatulencies, or any other
cold intemperature of the Members. Moreover it mollifies, asswages, concocts,
digests, incides and dissolves Wens as well inveterate, as those more new and
recent. We also use it happily in Convulsions and Hiccupping, etc.

Emplastrum de Galbano, or a Plaster of Galbanum.
Take Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar an ounce, Ship Pitch half an ounce,
Diachylon simple two drams, Sal Armoniack a scruple. Mix them, and make a
Plaster.

Virtue and Use. It being spread upon Linen, it is applied to the Corns and
other Excrescences of the Feet that are troublesome and painful in traveling,
and it is changed once in three or four days.

Emplastrum mitigativum, emolliens, sedans, or a mitigating emollient Plaster.
Take Oxycroceum Plasters two ounces, Diachylon simple, Diachylon compound and
Melilot, of each an ounce. Mix them, and with Oil of Chamomil make a Plaster.

Virtue and Use. It maturates, extracts, discusseth, resolves and mollifies all
hardness and scirrhous Tumors in the Hypochonders, Breast, Stomach, Liver,
Spleen and other parts, it also forcibly mitigates and allays pain.

Minium coctum, or red Lead boiled.
Take eleven ounces of Oil Olive, white Lead pulverized two ounces. Boil them
to the consistence of a Plaster, then add red Lead finely powdered four ounces,
Goats Suet a pound and a half, red Sanders six drams, yellow Wax and burnt
Alum, of each three drams; red Roses pulverized a dram. Mix them, and make a
Plaster according to Art.

Virtue and Use. It cools and drys; and is therefore effectually applied to
burning Sores. It potently cures Wounds, old, malignant and inveterate Ulcers,
which spread by the Acrimony of the humor, and are difficult to consolidate; it
heals all the Exulcerations of the Skin, Heats and Excoriations, be the cause
what it will.

Galbanum coctum, or boiled Galbanum.
Take Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar and yellow Wax, of each six ounces; white
Turpentine four ounces. Mix them, and make a Plaster of a just consistence.

Virtue and Use. Great are the virtues of this Plaster in mollifying and
dissolving; for it digests, mollifies and dissolves the knots and hard
scrofulous Tumors arising on any of the principal Joints and Members. It takes
away the Warts and Corns on the Feet. Being applied to the part affected, it
removes the pain in the Head called Hemicrania. It roborates the Nerves and
Womb, and eases pain in any part proceeding from an influx of cold humors.
Being applied, it heals the biting and stinging of any venomous Creature,
Scorpions, Weasles, Polcats, etc.

Emplastrum Saturni, or a Plaster of Saturn.
Take Lead burnt and washed two ounces, Goats Suet and yellow Wax, of each an
ounce and a half; Turpentine six drams, Lapis Calaminaris prepared, and white
Lead washed, of each half an ounce; Pompholix, Tutty prepared, of each two
drams; red Myrrh, Mastich and Olibanum, of each a dram; Epatick Aloes, Camphire
and Nitre prepared, of each half a dram. Mix them, and make a Plaster of a just
consistence.

Virtue and Use. This noble Plaster of Saturn is as it were a Divine help, of
late found out by me, and by my Experience I have found it good for Burns,
Inflammations, Tumors, the Persian Fire, etc. It is also good for Wounds, all
malignant, fetid, insanable and corroding Ulcers, as Fistula's, Wolf, Cancer,
Polypus, Noli me tangere, etc. and the like deplorable Ulcers of Saturn, which
by this Plaster are cured and filled with flesh in a few days. And this is our
true and sincere Description of the Plaster of Saturn, of which there are many
Prescripts abroad, but there is none true but this.

Emplastrum Arthriticum, or a Plaster for the Gout.
Take fresh Sallet Oil a pound, red Lead finely powdered two ounces. Being
mixed, boil them to a moderate consistence of a Plaster; then add yellow Wax a
pound, seeds of Henbane finely powdered, Colophony, white Turpentine, of each
four ounces. Mix them, and make a Plaster according to Art.

Virtue and Use. The Plaster is really Anodyne; and therefore universal
Medicines being first prescribed, it is most profitable in the Gout and running
pains, and to other cruciating pains also at any time; for it wonderfully
allays and pacifies all the injuries of pain.

Emplastrum Narcoticum, or a Narcotick Plaster.
Take the juyces of Housleek six ounces, of Henbane, Hemlock, Rosemary, Vervain
and Nightshade, of each three ounces; Oil of white Lilies, Camphire, flowers of
Mullein and Chamomil, of each an ounce and a half; Marrow of a Stag an ounce.
Let them be boiled according to Art in Balneo to the consumption of the Juyces;
then add of Virgins Wax and Colophony, of each two ounces; Ceruss an ounce and
a half, Opium Spagirically extracted, flowers of wild Poppy, of each three
drams; Foreign Mumy two drams. Mix them, and make a Plaster according to Art.

Virtue and Use. It cools and wonderfully allays the tormenting pains of the
Gout, and mitigates the Herpes, Erysipelas and Phlegmons. It potently
extinguisheth all other hot intemperatures, nay, the burning heat of
Inflammations. It also eases the pains of the Head, and being applied to the
Temples and Pulses, it induces sleep.

Emplastrum foetidum, or a fetid Plaster.
Take Assa foetida three ounces, seeds of Snap-dragon seven, three Oaken
Leaves, red Coral and powder of the Lodestone, of each a dram and a half. Mix
them, and make a Plaster with Oil of St. John's Wort.

Virtue and Use. It has been stupendiously experimented in any kind of
Witchcraft, and is as it were a thing sent down from Heaven: For being laid
upon the Center of the Member where the tormenting pain is, it does not only
drive away the Witchcraft, but also all Phantasms and Enchantments, without
Superstition, immediately vanish; yet in the interim let the Patient drink of
the following Decoction.

Take the herb Snap-dragon with the seeds, St. Iohns-wort and Winter-green, of
each alike. Boil them in Oil or Wine to the consumption of the third part, and
drink a good draught morning and evening.

Emplastrum de Carne bubula, or a Plaster of Beef.
Take Beef well dried and pulverized, Oil of Tartar and yellow Wax, of each two
ounces; white Turpentine, Lapis Calaminaris, Pumice-stone, red and white Bole,
Litharge, Mastich, burnt Alum, Oil of Eggs, of each half an ounce; red Myrrh,
Olibanum and Camphire, of each two drams. Mix them, and with two ounces of
sharp Wine Vinegar, make a Plaster according to Art.

Virtue and Use. It heals Wound^, and old, malignant, corroding, cancrous,
Saturni^e Ulcers, which are difficult to consolidate, it fills them with flesh,
drys them, and brings them to cicatrize. And Fistula's which are not grown
callous, this Plaster heals. It is also of good use in all Putrefaction, Piles,
and other Swellings of the Fundament, as also all other distempers and
accidents in those parts, as Chops, Fici, etc. And lastly, it is successfully
applied to all depascent Ulcers of the Paps and Privities.

Emplastrum Talpinum, or a Plaster of a Mole.
Take May Butter without salt half a pound, green Rue and fresh roots of
Solomons-seal. Boil these till the Butter appear green, then let it be strained
and pressed, and to the expressed Butter add yellow Wax half a pound, Ship Pitch
four ounces, Oil of Saturn an ounce, one live Mole burnt, Virgin Honey two
spoonfuls, white Oats and Wheat dried over the fire in a Drying Pan till they
be black, and then pulverized, of each a handful. Of these make a Plaster.

Virtue and Use. It is most properly applied to Wounds and old stinking Ulcers;
all which it drys and heals, fills them with good flesh, and brings them to
cicatrize, drawing from them all sordid and filthy humors, though they lie deep
in the flesh.

Emplastrum contra Herniam, or a Plaster for the Rupture.
Take Rosin six ounces, Turpentine three ounces, Oil of Eggs and Dragons blood,
of each an ounce; great Comfry roots and red Sanders, of each half an ounce;
Crocus Martis made by reverberation two drams, burnt Alum a dram. Let the Rosin
and Turpentine be melted together, and being removed from the fire, sprinkle
the Powders in, and then add the Oil; all being well mixed make a Plaster,
which by the help of hot water may be made into Rolls.

Virtue and Use. It is a present Remedy in all kind of Ruptures; but in the
first place it cures the Rupture of the Guts and Navil. Let this Plaster be
applied to the part affected, that is, to the lower Belly, first bringing the
Guts into their place by degrees, then the Mons Pubis and the Scrotum being
shaved, apply it there also, and let all be kept together by fit Ligation or
strait Drawers, lest the things fall off, and let this be continued till the
Patient be perfectly well. During which time let him lie on a soft bed, and be
at quiet, observing a regular Diet, and let him shun a cold intemperate Air,
Wind, Noise, Clamor, Singing, Laughing, Weeping, lifting great weights, or any
other violent motion. And let him also abstain from all flatulent windy Diet,
and eat only thick, viscid and adstringent Aliment, the quantity of which ought
to be small, for hunger helps forward the Cure.

Emplastrum Diachylon Anodynum, or an Anodyne Diachylon Plaster.
Take the Anodyne Oil prepared from the seven Flowers four and twenty ounces,
Litharge well cleansed twelve ounces, Mucilage of the seed of Henbane and
Fleabane, of Quinces and Flax, the middle bark of the Teil tree, roots of
Marshmallows extracted with water of Nightshade four ounces. Let the Litharge
be finely powdered and prepared, and then put to the Anodyne Oil, then let them
boil over a gentle fire, always stirring them till they are well mixed. Remove
them from the fire, and let it cool a little, the^ put in the Mucilages, and
mix them all well together, and bring them all to a just consistence, etc.

Virtue and Use. It mollifies, allays pain, dissolves humors gathered in any
part; it digests and ripens hard Inflammations and hot Tumors, and cures all
things that are inflamed. Moreover it gives ease in the Gout, and is an
excellent Medicine to bring down and abate a hot intemperature.

Emplastrum de Spermate Ceti, or a Plaster of Sperma Ceti.
Take white Wax four ounces, Sperma Ceti two ounces, Galbanum dissolved in
Vinegar an ounce. Mix them, and make a Plaster.

Virtue and Use. It being laid to the Breast of Women after their Delivery that
do not give suck, and there worn for certain days, heals and removes all the
pain caused by the Milk, and all hard Tumors and swellings in those parts: The
Milk also coagulated or concreted it dissolves, and also consumes the abundance
of it.

SECT. XXXVII. Of Cataplasms.
Cataplasma de Fermento, or a Cataplasm of Leaven.
TAke old Leaven an ounce and a half, yellow Amber three drams, Nutmegs and
Cubebs, of each half a dram; water-Mints and Cloves, of each a scruple; Castor
and wood of Aloes, of each ten grains. Mix them, and with a little simple
Spirit of Wine and Wine Vinegar, of each alike, bring all into the form of a
Cataplasm.

Virtue and Use. Let it be applied warm to the top of the Head, and repeat it
often, it curiously discusseth the cause of the Palsy of the Tongue, and does
so consume and evacuate the matter from the superior parts, that always, not
without admiration, the motion and speech returns: and indeed it is a Secret in
recovering the Speech, and drying Catarrhs.

Cataplasma Febrile, or a Cataplaesm for Fevers.
Take Gunpowder pulverized, common Salt melted, of each an ounce; Spiders web,
Nutmegs and Olibanum, of each two drams; the herb Wormwood, Shepherds-purse,
small Nettles and Rue, of each a handful; white Turpentine a sufficient
quantity to make a Cataplasm for the Pulses.

Virtue and Use. This Cataplasm being put between two Cloths, and laid to both
the Wrists two hours before the Fit, cures all Fevers in Children, but
especially bastard or spurious Tertians, and wonderfully allays the violence of
the Fit.

Cataplasma Scorbuticum contra Tumores Pedum, or a Scorbutic Cataplasm against
the Swelling of the Feet.
Take Wheat-bran well powdered half a pound, Meal of Barley and Beans, of each
three ounces; Meal of Lupines and Lentils, of each an ounce and a half; Venice
Soap two ounces, flowers of Chamomil two ounces, of Marshmallows an ounce,
Litharge of Silver and red Bole Armeniack, of each half an ounce; roots of
China and Rhubarb, of each three drams; Fungus of Eldertree (I suppose he means
Jews Ears) seven. Boil them in Juice of Elder expressed to such a thickness as
may make a Cataplasm.

Virtue and Use. This Cataplasm in the Scurvy is applied warm to the Feet at
night, so that the whole Tumor be covered with it, and there lie all night, the
next night let it be renewed and again applied, and this continue and repeat so
long till the Tumor be dissolved; which by the use of this Cataplasm and the
Blessing of God will soon succeed, and the parts be corroborated.

Cataplasma de Cineribus, or a Cataplasm of Ashes.
Take the Ashes of Hermodactyls, roots of Asphodel, Bean stalks, Elder wood,
Figs, Cutting of Vines, dwarff Elder, of each alike. Mix them, and with white
Wine make a Lixivium.

Take of this Lixivium four pound, of brown household Bread a sufficient
quantity. Boil them to a thickness, and then add sharp Wine Vinegar half a
pound, Lapis medicamentosus three ounces, powder of Cummin seed, Bay Berries
and Cloves, of each an ounce. Boil them gently, and make a Cataplasm according
to Art.

Virtue and Use. It is spread upon Linen Cloths, and applied to Dropsical
Tumors and Swellings (Evacuation being first made) there let it lie for certain
hours, and when it begins to raise the skin, apply it lower toward the Knees,
and so by degrees still downwards till you come to the Feet.

Cataplasma de Nido Hirundinis, or a Cataplasm of a Swallows Nest.
Take a Swallows Nest, Album Graecum an ounce and a half, roots of
Marshmallows and white Lilies, of each an ounce; Figs and Dates, of each
three. Boil them in common water to the form of a thin Pultis, then add Oil of
Violets, meal of Chamomil, Foenugreek, Flax and Wheat, of each six drams; the
brain of a Cat half an ounce, of an Owl and Swallow burnt, of each two drams;
the Yolk of an Egg, Oriental Saffron a scruple. Mix them, and make a Cataplasm
for the Neck.

Virtue and Use. It is often applied warm to the Neck in a desperate Quinsie,
and is indeed a Secret. But the Album Graecum should be gathered from the Dog
when the Sun is in Leo, and the Dog should be shut up and fed with nothing but
bones of a Calf gelt or otherwise, and give him not much water, and the first
three days what the Dog voids throw away, but what comes afterward gather for
use.

Cataplasma contra Singultum, or a Cataplasm against Hiccupping.
Take Leaven three ounces, Iuniper-berries, red Roses and water-Mints, of each
a dram; Cloves, Nutmegs and Mace, of each half a dram; strong Wine Vinegar a
sufficient quantity, make a Cataplasm, with which mix Oil of Cummin and
Caraway, of each half a scruple.

Virtue and Use. This is only useful in the Hiccup, which being put between two
Cloths, and laid to the Stomach warm, gives ease, especially if it be often
applied, and it is a singular Medicine.

Pannus Linteus Crocatus, or a Linen Cloth prepared with Saffron.
Take a coarse Linen hempen Cloth, wash it five or six times in Frog Spawn
gathered in March and filtred, so that the little black things like Eyes may be
separated, and dry this Cloth by it self in the shade, not in the Sun, or by
any other heat. Then take Vinegar of Elder-flowers and Oriental Saffron a
sufficient quantity, and make a Tincture, in which boil that coarse hempen
Cloth, till it has imbibed a deep Saffron-colour: this being done, remove them
from the fire, and let them cool together, then take the Linen Cloth thus
saffronized, dry it in the shade, and keep it for use.

Virtue and Use. It has been often experienced in the Gout and Erysipelas (yet
general Medicines and Evacuations ought not to be omitted) for this Cloth being
laid to the part affected, that being first anointed with Venice Soap, stops
and allays all pain, and in the most racking pains of the Gout is really a
Divine Remedy.

THE EPILOGUE.
THus at length, benevolent Reader, by the favor of God I have finished this
new Edition of my Medico-Chymical Compositions, increased and enriched with
many Additions, and this with much diligence used in revising, correcting and
amending (where perhaps any thing amiss, or less fit for Public use had
casually slipped in) which Edition so revised, corrected and amended is such, as
not in Title only, but in very deed it proves it self a real Treasury and
Storehouse of Medico-Chymical Preparations, most efficacious in expelling all
Diseases of humane Bodies: Yet I doubt not, but I shall find some
Hadriano-Mastiges, like Dogs, barking and biting at, sometimes this and
sometimes that in this my Work, and not only at the Work, but the Author
himself also. And if perhaps they cannot disparage the Work as being good in it
self, and already enough praised by the most expert Physicians, yet will they
calumniate me the Author, (I say next to God) me the Author of this Work. And
these, as I have already found, snarling and biting, are not of one sort, but
of diverse. Some of them not having any thing like it, much less better;
(therefore it is plain, either they are wholly unwilling to excel, being
hindered perhaps by Envy, if not Idleness, or which is most probable, a
non-ability) and what is my real Work, by the Grace of God, they ascribe to the
borrowed Labors of others, lest the proper Author should enjoy the Reputation
due to his Merit, (which he himself denies to none who deserves it) and already
set up in the Temple of Fame (by all good men) as a token of Gratitude. Which
that they may throw down, or at least asperse with blots of suspicion, they use
their best endeavor, casting abroad diverse suggestions, but those vain and
frivolous. The chiefest, and which they think will carry the Prize, is this:
Art is long and tedious in attaining, man's life short; How then can it be (say
they) that these so many singular Experiments diffused through the whole Art of
Physic (struggling with a most long Experience and Practice) can be the work
of one man? I could here, if I would, make long Recitals, what, and how much
others before me have performed singly and alone, both in this and other
Faculties not only to their own praise, but to the admiration of others, and
not in any extraordinary number of years neither; but letting them pass, I will
now speak to my own Work, performed by the Blessing of God, that when I am
dead, my Labors may speak for me. I confess I found the Work difficult and
toilsom; but yet (by Gods assistance) so attainable, that by the Light of Grace
and Nature, and with great Cost, I have found out and discovered such things,
as have been happily used and approved, in the many and diverse cures of great
Princes and others in the current of my life, which I am not now afraid
(desiring to promote the Public Good) to expose to the whole World. Which
things thus published by me, if they shall enviously proceed in denying them to
be mine alone, let them go on, and show by what other persons they have been
found out, and by whom communicated to me. But this demonstration being likely
to fail, another sort worse than the first, supplying their places, and aiding
their Malice, whenas whatever is performed in this Treatise, is neither in it
self, nor otherwise discommendable, being like good Wine, its own Bush, they
ascribe all to a familiar Spirit. They did well, if by this Spirit they chiefly
meant him by whom all things are wrought in all, from whom and in whom, and by
whom all things are, in whom we are, live, and move, i. e. the Divine and
Omnipotent Spirit, familiar to all good men, of whom a Heathen Poet,
acknowledging his gifts, says: Est Deus in nobis, agitante calescimus illo,
Sedibus aethereis Spiritus ille venit.
God moves in us, seen by our vital heat,
Sent from above from his Ethereal seat.
To whom alone, as Giver and Mover of all things, whatsoever is good I ascribe
as received from him, and that he may still remain in communion, and be
merciful and propitious to me, is always my daily prayer: Again, if in a
secondary and subordinate respect, they intended or designed under the Name of
a familiar Spirit, the Spirit given me by the gift of the Omnipotent, whereby
as a subservient and instrumental Cause, it being moved and instructed by its
Principle, I was enabled to take this Labor upon me, and bring it to effect, I
mean the Power, Genius and Faculties of my Mind, informed, enlightened and
confirmed by Art, Use and Experience: which Spirit, unless I should have always
familiar to me, and never separated from my actions, sayings and thoughts,
there would be but little difference betwixt me and a Brute, a Trunk, or a
Stock: I say, if they meant this Spirit, they meant right. But whereas by
apparent signs it appears what Spirit they point at, i. e. that, which
committing it self to the service of rash impious men, desiring his privy
suggestions, permits it self to be kept sometimes in Crystals, sometimes in
Rings, and other sorts of Enclosures, nay to be bought and sold (to the great
danger both of Soul and Body) to the Possessors, and that indeed deservedly:
but enjoying the testimony of God the Searcher of hearts, and of a good
Conscience void of those impious Accusations, I account these my Traducers and
Detractors, attributing to an evil Demon the gifts of God divinely bestowed
upon me, and which I have used to his Glory and the good of Mankind, worthy of
no other Title than what our Lord Christ gave the Pharisees, A generation of
Vipers, who ascribed his Divine Works to Beelzebub, who being totally evil
himself, and Author of all that is bad, can do nothing but ill, and if he seems
to do any thing under the appearance of good, his design is for mischief. They
therefore who through Envy and Malice ascribe to the Devil and Satan Gifts
divinely given for the good of Mankind, and as they deserve with their Patron a
Satanical and Diabolical Name and Title, so also, unless they repent seriously,
they shall not escape a punishment worthy their wicked offense. Besides these,
I have experience of the sawciness and audacious boldness of some (whom I may
call Catapancritons) who according to their custom and Dog-like impudence
wherewith they bark at, inveigh against, and bite at every thing, and esteem
nothing but what is their own, all things else, even the Arts and Liberal
Sciences, with their Founders and Favorers (although themselves have scarce
tasted them) they look on them with a disdainful frown; neither do they
entertain them only with derision and mocks, but with scurrilous reproaches,
terming them vain Trifles, nay Dung and Dross. Without doubt with the same
temerity and boldness will they handle me, unmindful in the mean time, poor
wretched Fellows, unseasoned, parboiled, Medicasters and Mountebanks, or to
speak more plainly, Asses in Folio, how meanly they themselves are furnished
with the knowledge of Physic and all other Arts and Sciences. But as the
Proverb is, The more ignorant, the more impudent: so is it customary with these
acute Zoilus's and Aristarchus's (forsooth) that when they cannot become known
by their own Worth and Virtue, they endeavor it another way, that is, by
detracting the Fame of others, and crying up themselves and their own Deeds,
they hope for Esteem and Repute, and this chiefly among the ignorant and
simple; but remember the Proverb, (...), It is easier to carp than to copy. But
alas what a pitiful Fame and a vain empty Glory is that, which when it comes to
the Touch, what they so Thrasonically boast of plainly comes to nothing, and so
runs the fortune of Icarus, and undergoes the like disgrace, having arrogantly
emulated his temerity, that it becomes subject to Horace his Scoff, Risum
teneatis amici. The Disease which by such an ignominious Event, this affected
Glory and repulse draws upon it self (I speak both what I have known and seen)
finds no Cure by Chickens boiled over and over again, much less by Sigils,
Amulets, Characters, Superstitions, Incantations, Rites, Ceremonies, Figures,
Cabalistical Tables, Magical Cures, and a thousand other vanities, which as it
self is mightily pleased in, so it imposes upon others, under the name of a
more secret sort of Physic. But as to this Thrasonical Tribe of Censors,
admiring only themselves and their own Works according to the supercilious
Authority and License which they arrogate to themselves, Marking (as the
Proverb is) with a black Coal the Works of others; but whatever they be, why
make I many words? Rats betray themselves by the mark they leave behind them,
so our Censors do themselves by their own rash and insipid Judgments: For which
they deserve no other reward, than what Midas had for his Judgment against
Apollo, as the old Byword goes, King Midas wears the Asses Ears: But Ovid
expresses it more fully in Lib. 11. Fab. 4. of his Metamorphosis. -- -- Nec
Delius aures
Humanum patitur stolidas retinere figuram;
Sed trahit in spacium, Villisque albentibus implet,
Instabilesque illas facit, and dat posse moveri.
Caetera sunt hominis, partem damnatur in unam
Induiturque aures tarde gradientis aselli.
Which is thus translated by our Countryman Sandys, -- -- Phoebus for this
gross abuse
Transforms his ears his folly to declare,
Stretched out in length, and covered with gray hair,
Unstable, and now apt to move. The rest
The former figure of a man possessed
Punished in that offending part, who bears
Upon his skull a slow-paced Asses ears.
And let not this reward be envied, our Midas lets them please themselves, that
they are conspicuous, when compared with others, let them live after their own
wishes, let them abound in their own sense, and persuade themselves that they
only know, and are able to do what others may admire. In the mean time, candid
Reader, I shall not desist to improve the Talent that is given me, but improve
all my endeavors for the service of the Physical Republic, and promote
whatsoever may accommodate thee. Upon which account I had rather obey the
desires of my friends, Princes and Great men, both in publishing this and my
former Piece, than fear the Currish Censures of barking Zoilus's. First of all
I collected these things for my own Use and private Practice, as a Storehouse
always at hand, wherever I should be, at home or abroad, and had no thoughts
of publishing them; but the Authority of the chiefest Physicians of almost all
Germany, being importunate with me, and persuading me to a Publication,
prevailed with me to change my mind, and to make those things public, which
were collected only for private use, considering also, that I was not born for
my self alone, but also for such as should need my Labors. To such then do I
willingly communicate these things of mine, and not to those (...)
self-conceited Aristarchus's, of whose Judgments (whenas they themselves are as
yet ignorant of the Fundamentals of Physic, or prepossest with natural defect,
or perhaps newly come out of the Barbers Shop or Stable, unpreparedly rushing
upon these our Labors, precipitately judge them either imperfect,
unprofitable, or more than needs, and yet themselves produce nothing of more
Wit, Excellency, or Safety) I make no reckoning nor account. I was unwilling
enviously to keep any thing secret, to the end, that he who pleases, may to
the Glory of God and good of his Neighbor, put them in practice; and that any
one being in peril of Health and Life, and want help, may come hither as to a
Sanctuary, and take hence, as from a well-furnisht Armory, wholesome Weapons and
Remedies against all Diseases and Distempers whatsoever, the various and
manifold use of which, as it abundantly affords, so it evidently approves them
to those who make trial, which all Fundamental and Dogmatical Physicians and
safe Practitioners confess with open mouth. Try you that please, the Event will
administer Praise and Commendation enough; if they cannot please and satisfy
all, it is enough that they content the Good, Skilful and Experienced.

Sincere Reader, let these things suffice, spoken by way of Epilogue,
concerning this our Physico-Chymical Treasury and Storehouse, a Work of great
Labor and Toil, and now enriched with not a few Additions promised in my
former Edition, use it and enjoy it, till such time, as by License of the
Fates, other things perhaps more secret (and no less my own Inventions than the
former) may be made public for the Eternal benefit of the Physical Republic:
In the mean time farewell.

FINIS.
The first Table of the Sections.
Sect. Page. 1. Of select and other precious Chemical Medicines 1 2. Of liquid
Tinctures 46 3. Of Extracts 58 4. Of certain Preparations 83 5. Of Species and
Powders 88 6. Of Pills 114 7. Of Rotula's or Cakes 129 8. Of Morsels 138 9. Of
Troches 144 10. Of Suffiments 150 11. Of compound Salts 155 12. Of Marmelades
162 13. Of liquid Confects and Electuaries 169 14. Of purging Confects and
Electuaries 185 15. Of Lohochs or Eclegma's 194 16. Of Syrups 197 17. Of
Elixirs 208 18. Of compound Spirits of Wine 212 19. Of compound distilled
Waters 220 20. Of mixed Liquors 247 21. Of Emulsions 259 22. Of Clarets and
medicated, Wines 261 23. Of compound medicated Vinegars 269 24. Of Epithems 279
25. Of Decoctions 279 26. Of Gargarisms 296 27. Of Lixiviums 301 28. Of Baths
304 29. Of Vesicatories 309 30. Of Pessaries 310 31. Of Suppositories 312 32.
Of Clysters 314 33. Of compound Oils 333 34. Of Balsams and odoriferous
Medicines 338 35. Of Ointments 350 36. Of Plasters 361 37. Of Cataplasms 374
The Second Table.
Of Chemical Operations, and the Preparations of Medicines.
A.
ARcanum duplicatum 12 Arcanum Vitrioli, or the Arcanum of Vitriol 27 Aurea
Hadrianea 60 Amber muskified 42 Aurum potabile 9 Argentum potabile 11 Aqua
Apoplectica, or a water for the Apoplexy 221 Aqua Epileptica, or a water for
the Epilepsie 220 Aqua de Xyloa^oe, or a w^^^ of the wood of Aloes 222 Aqua
Mastichina, or a water of Mastich 223 Aqua Hypnotica, or a somniserous water
ibid. Aqua Narcotica, or a Narcotick water 224 Aqua Ophthalmica aurea, or a
golden water for the eyes ibid. Aqua Ophthalmica viridis, or a green water for
the eyes 225 Aqua Ophthalmica subnigra, or a bl^ckish water for the eyes 226
Aqua Ophthalmica de Cancris, or an Eye-water of Crabs ibid. Aqua ocularis
interna, or an internal water for the eyes 227 Aq^a pectoralis, or a pectoral
water 228 Aqua Antiphthisica, or a water for a Consumption 229 Aqua pulmonis
vituli, or a water of a Calves lungs 230 Aqua Caponis, or Capon-water ibid.
Aqua Cinamomi buglossata, or water of Cinnamon with Bugloss 231 Aqua ex cord
Cervi, or water of a Stags heart ibid. Aqua cordialis frigida, or a cooling
cordial water 232 Aqua cordialis calida, or a hot cordial water 233 Aqua
acetosa stomachalis, or a tart ^tomach-water ibid. Aqua stomachica, or a hot
Stomach water 134 Aqua Epatica frigida, or a cold Epatick water 135 Aqua
Epatica calida, or a hot Epatick water ibid. Aqua spl^^etica, or a water for
the Spleen 136 Aqua Antihydropica, or a water against the Dropsy 237 Aqua
Antiscorbutica, or an Antiscorbutick water ibid. Aqua Anticolica, or a water
against the Colic 239 Aqua castitatis, or a chaste water, i. e. to induce it
ibid. Aqua sebrifuga, or an Ague-chasing water 240 Aqua Hysterica, or a
Hysterical water ibid. Aqua Dominarum, or the Ladi^s water 241 Aqua
Antinephritica, or a water for the stone in the Reins 242 Aqua Lithontriptica,
or a water for the Stone 243 Aqua contra ardorem urinae, or a water against
heat of ^rine 244 Aqua contra vermes, or a water against the worms ibid. Aqua
Theriacalis, or Treacle water 245 Aqua de cornu cervino, or a water of
Hartshorn ibid. Aqua Aloetica, solutiva, or a so^utive water of Aloes 246 Aqua
Cosmetica, or a Beauty-water ibid. Acetum aromaticum, or aromatic Vinegar 269
Acetum Theriacale, or Vinegar of Treacle 270 Acetum Mithridaticum, or V^^^gar
of Mithridate ibid. Acetum Zedo^rticum, or Vinegar of Zedoary 271 Acetum
Myrrhatum, or Vinegar of Myrrh ibid. Acetum Rhizoticum, or Vinegar of Roots
ibid. Acetum Bezoarticum, or a Bezoartick Vinegar 272 Acetum Diaphoreticum, or
a Diaphoretick Vinegar 273 Acetum Hystericum, or a Hysterical Vinegar ibid.
Acetum vomitorium, or a vomiting Vinegar 274 Aurea Hadrianea, or the golden
Hadrianean medicine
B.
BEzoarticum Ioviale, or Jovial Bezoar 14 Bezoar potabile 34 Balneum
artificiosum, etc. or an artificial Bath 304 A Bath against barreness ibid. A
Stiptick Bath approved in fluxes of the womb 305 A Bath approved against the
suppression of the Terms 306 A Bath cleansing the skin in the Iaundice ibid. A
Bath for the stone in the Reins 307 A Bath or Wash for the Feet ibid. A Nitrous
Bath for the feet 308 A Bath for the feet to procure sleep ibid. Balsamum
Polychrestum 338 Balsamum Apoplecticum, or a Balsam for the Apoplexy 340
Balsamum Hypnoticum, or a Balsam to procure sleep 341 Balsamum memoriae, or a
Balsam for the memory ibid. Balsamum Odontalgicum, or a Balsam for the
Toothache 342 Balsamum puerorum, etc. or a Balsam for breeding of teeth ibid.
Balsamum paralyticum, or a Balsam for the Palsy 343 Balsamum spasmaticum ibid.
Balsamum stomachicum, or a Balsam for the Stomach 344 Balsamum aromaticum, or
an aromatic Balsam ibid. Balsamum absinthiacum, or a Balsam with oil of
Wormwood 345 Balsamum Sulphuris a^isat^m, or Balsam of Sulphur with oil of
Aniseeds ibid. Balsamum Zibethae, or a Balsam of Civet 346 Balsamum
Terebinthinae, or a Balsam of Turpentine ibid. Balsamum medicamentosum, or a
medicinal Balsam 347 Balsamum Stipticum, or a Stiptick Balsam ibid. Balsamum
Venereum, or a V^ereal Balsam 34^ Balsaum Uterinum, or a Balsam for the Womb
ibid. Balsamum Podagricum, or a Balsam for the Gout 349 Balsamum Saponis, or a
Balsam of Soap ibid. Bezoarticum Solare, or the Solar Bezoar 358
C.
CRocus Metallorum absinthiacus, or Crocus Metallorum absinthiated 15
Catharticum argenteum, or a siver Cathartick 20 Cinamomum laxativum, or
laxative Cinnamon 188 Cornu cervini praeparatio, or the preparation of
Hartshorn 84 Cranei praeparatio, or a preparation of man's Skull ibid.
Cochlearum testarum praeparatio, or a preparation of fish-shells 85 Cicera
Tartaris 126 Confectio cephalica, or a Confection for the head 169 Confectio
Narcotica, or a stupefying Medicine 170 Confectio pretiosa, or a precious
Electuary 171 Confectio pectoralis, or a pectoral Confection 172 Confectio
Zingiberis Indi, or an Electuary of green Ginger ibid. Confectio Citri, or an
Electuary of Citrons 173 Confectio Theriacalis, or an Electuary of Treacle 174
Confectio Magnanimitatis, or a magnanimous Electuary 175 Confectio pacifica, or
a pacifick Electuary 176 Confectio Satyrii, or a Confect of Satyrion 177
Confectio Stiptica ibid. Confectio Terebinthinata, or an Electuary of
Turpentine 178 Confectio passulata, or a Confection with Raisons 190 Confectio
Opiata 169 Catharticum Caesareum, or an Imperial Cathartick 185 Catharticum
Regium, or a Royal Cathartick ibid. Catharticum rosatum, or a P^^ge of Roses
186 Catharticum violatum, or a purge with Violets 187 Catharticum
Caryophylatum, or a Purge of Clove-gillyflowers ib. Catharticum Cholagogum, or
a Purge for Choler 189 Catharticum vitae, or the vital Cathartick ibid.
Catharticum passulatum, or a purge of Raisons 191 Catharticum Peruvian. liquid
ib. Catharticum Peruvianum solid 197 Catharticum Peruvianum solidum commune,
all three made with Gum of Peru ibid. Catharticum Terebinthinatum, or a purge
of Turpentine 193 Claretum Antepilepticum laxative 260 Claretum Antapoplecticum
laxative ibid. Claretum passulatum laxativum, or a laxative Claret of Raisons
262 Claretum Absinthiacum, or a laxative Claret of Wormwood 263 Claretum
Rhabarbaratum, or Claret Rhubarbarized ibid. Claretum Antipodagricum, etc. or a
laxative Claret for the Gout 264 Claretum stomachicum confortans, or a
comforting Claret for the Stomach 265 Claretum Iuniperinum, or a Claret of
Juniper ibid. Claretum Anisatum, or Claret with Aniseeds ibid. Claretum
Chalybeatum, or a Claret of Steel 266 Claretum Antinephriticum, or Claret for
the Stone 267 Claretum moschatum, or a muskified Claret ibid. Claretum purgans,
or purging Claret 268 Cataplasma de Fermento, or a Pultis of Leaven 374
Cataplasma febrile, or a Pultis for Fevers ibid. Cataplasma scorbuticum, etc.
or a Pultis for Tumors of the Feet 375 Cataplasma de Cineribus, or a Pultis of
Ashes ibid. Cataplasma de nido Hirundinis, or a Pultis of a Swallows nest 376
Cataplasmacontra singultum, or a Pultis for the Hiccup ibid.
D.
DIascordium rosated 184 Diaturbith Minerale 189 Diacodium with Saffron 196
Decoctum Catarrhale, or a decoction for a Catarrh 279 Decoctum Cosmeticum, or a
beautifying water 280 Decoctum Arthriticum, or a decoction for the Gout ibid.
Decoctum pectorale, etc. or a tart pectoral decoction 281 Decoctum pectorale
subdulce, or a sweet pectoral decoction ibid. Decoctum Chinae pectorale, or a
pectoral decoction of China 282 Decoctum passulatum, or a decoction of Raisons
283 Decoctum Citrinum, or a decoction of Citrons ibid. Decoctum Hepaticum, or a
decoction for the Liver 284 Decoctum Spleneticum, or a decoction for the Spleen
285 Decoctum Antictericum, or a decoction for the Iaundice ibid. Decoctum
Ficuum, or a decoction of Figs 286 Decoctum contra mictionem sanguinis, or a
decoction against spitting of blood ibid. Decoctum Satyriacum 287 Decoctum
contra Herniam, etc. or a decoction for the Rupture ib. Decoctum contra
Haemorrhagiam Uteri, or a decoction against a flux of blood from the Womb ib.
Decoctum contra Menses suppressos, or a decoction against the suppression of
the Terms 288 Decoctum contra scabiem, or a decoction for the Itch 289 Decoctum
vulnerarium, or a vulnerary decoction ibid. Decoctum Guajaci, or a decoction of
Guajacum, and sanctum 290 Decoctum adstringens, or an astringent decoction 291
Decoctum Polypodii purgans, or a purging decoction of Polypody ibid. Decoctum
antiqui Galli, or a decoction of an old Cock 292 Decoctum sanguinis
mundificans, or a decoction to cleanse the blood ibid. Decoctum Senae cum
Rhabarbo, or a decoction of Sena and Rhubarb 293 Decoctum Rhabarbi, or a
decoction of Rhubarb 294 Decoctum violatum purgans, or a purging decoction of
Violets ibid. Decoctum Nucis Cupressi, or a decoction of Cypress-nuts 295
Decoctum nigrum, or a black decoction ibid. Diverse Prescripts with Lauda^um
from page 69 to 83
E.
ELaeosaccharum of Citrons 44 Extractum Panchymagogon 62 Extractum
Polychrestum, or an extract good for many things 63 Extractum specificum, or an
extract for the Dropsy ibid. Extractum Diasenae or an extract of Sena 64
Extractum specificum Emeticum, or a vomiting extract 65 Extractum specificum
Colicum, or an extract for the Colic 66 Extractum specificum uterinum, or an
extract for the Womb 67 Electuarium stomachicum, or an electuary for the
Stomach 181 El^ctucrium Absinthiacum, or an electuary of Wormwood 182 Electuary
of Scorzonera ibid. Electuarium Opticum, or an electuary for the Eyes 180
Electuary of Nitre 183 Electuarium Dysentericum, or an electuary for the bloody
Flux ibid. Elixir of Vitriol 208 Elixir of Sulphur 209 Elixir of Peony 210
Elixir for Fevers 211 Emulsion with Roses 258 Emulsion with Violets ibid.
Emulsion to procure sleep 259 Emulsion for the Pleurisy ibid. Emulsion
laxative ibid. Emulsion Stiptick 260 Emulsion of Hemp seed ibid. Epithema
generale, or a general Epithem 275 Epithems for a pain in the head ibid.
Epithems to procure sleep 276 Epithem for the Syncope 277 Epithem for the
palpitation ibid. -- Another for the same ibid. Epithem for inflammations of
the Liver 278 -- Another in the same case ibid. Epithem for a cold distemper of
the Liver ibid. Epithem for the inflammation of the Reins 279 Enema nutriens,
or a nourishing Clyster 314 Enema bilem evacuans, or a Choler-purging Clyster
315 Enema pituitam purgans, or a Flegm-purging Clyster ibid. Enema humores
melancholicos, etc. or a Clyster purging Melancholy ibid. Enema Phlegma and
Hydropicorum aquas purgans, or a Clyster purging water and phlegm in Dropsies
316 Enema in Cephalalgia, Vertigine, etc. or a Clyster for the Headache,
Vertigo, and other affects of the head ibid. Enema aliud Cephalicum, or another
Clyster for the head ibid. Enema aliud fortius, or another stronger 377 Enema
specificum, or a specific Clyster good in all melancholy diseases ibid. Enema
aliud specificum, etc. or another specific Clyster for melancholy ibid. Enema
in Subeth, etc. or a Clyster for the Lethargy 318 Enema forte in Epilepsia and
suffocationibus, or a strong Clyster in the Epilepsie and Suffocations ibid. --
Aliud specificum ibid. Enema in Spasmo, or a clyster in Convulsions 319 Enema
forte in Apoplexia and similibus, or a strong clyster in the Apoplexy, etc.
ibid. Enema aliud Apoplecticum fortius, or a stronger Apoplectick clyster ibid.
Enema in Paralysi, or a clyster in the Palsy 320 Enema aliud Paralyticum, or
another clyster for the Palsy ib. Enema contra inflationem Ventriculi, or a
clyster for wind in the Stomach ibid. Enema ad Iliacam passionem, or a clyster
for the Iliack passion 321 Enema Carminativum, or a Carminative clyster ibid.
Enema discutiens, or a discussive clyster ibid. Enema ventrem leniens in
Colica, or a lenifying clyster in the Colic ibid. Enema aliud ventrem, etc. or
another lenifying clyster in the Colic 322 Enema ventrem leniens in Colica ab
Apostemate, or a lenifying clyster in the Colic from an Aposthume ibid. Enema
in causa a duritie faecum, or a clyster in costiveness of the bowels ibid.
Enema Colicum, etc. or a clyster for the Colic when the pain is vehement 323
Enema dolorem Colicum sedans, or a clyster allaying pain in the Colic ibid.
Enema Anodynum, or an Anodyne clyster ibid. Enema refrigerans, or a cooling.
clyster ibid. Enema calefaciens, or a warming clyster 324 Enema Stipticum in
fluxibus ventris, or a clyster for the flux^s of the belly ibid. Enema aliud
Stipticum, another ibid. Enema adstringens, or an astringent clyster ibid.
Enema aliud adstringens, or another astringent clyster 325 Enema ad Lienteriam
and Diarrhoeam ibid. Enema and tergens and siccans, or a clyster cleansing and
drying ibid. Enema consolidans, or a consolidating clyster ibid. Enema ad bilem
alterandum, or a clyster to alter Choler in Dysenteries 326 Enema dolores
Dysentericos sedans, or a clyster allaying pain in the bloody flux ibid. Enema
aliud dolores, etc. or another clyster to assuage pain in fluxes ibid. Enema
aliud Anodynum, or another Anodyne clyster ibid. Enema ardorem and dolorem
leniens, or a clyster asswaging heat and pain 327 Enema aliud dolores
Dysentericos placans, or another clyster asswaging pain in bloody fluxes ibid.
Enema Diureticum, or a Diuretic clyster ibid. Enema in calculo Renum and
Vesicae, or a clyster for the stone in the Reins and Bladder ibid. Enema
Calculum comminuens, or a cylster to break the stone 328 Enema aliud in calculo
Renum and Vesicae, or another for the Stone, etc. ibid. Enema aliud, etc. or
another in the same case ibid. Enema Mirabile in Calculo renato, or a wonderful
clyster for the stone in the Reins 329 Enema in dolor Calculi, or a clyster
for the pain of the Stone ibid. Enema ad dolorem Nephriticum, or a clyster for
the pain in the Kidneys ibid. Enema ad Scirrhum uteri, or a clyster for a
Scirrhus of the womb 330 Enema ad vermes in ventriculo, or a clyster for worms
in the Stomach ibid. Enema ad Ascarides, or a clyster for the little worms in
the guts ibid. Enema ad evacuandum vermes intersectos, or a clyster to bring
away dead worms 331 Enema in Rhagadiis, rimis seuscissuris, or a clyster for
chaps or clefts in the Fundament ibid. Enema pro pueris, or a clyster for
children ibid. Enema aliud pro infantibus, or another for infants ibid.
Emplastrum Epilepticum, or a plaster for the Epilepsie 361 Emplastrum
Hypnoticum, or a plaster to procure sleep 362 Emplastrum Stomachicum, or a
plaster for the Stomach ibid. Emplastrum Spleneticum, or a plaster for the
Spleen 363 Emplastrum Martiale ibid. Emplastrum Carminativum, or a Carminative
plaster 364 Emplastrum Stipticum, or a Stiptick plaster ibid. Emplastrum
sticticum seu puncturale, or a plaster for punctures 365 Emplastrum
Diaphoreticum, or a Diaphoretick plaster 366 Emplastrum de pice, etc. or a
plaster of pitch of the same operation ibid. Emplastrum de Galbano Crocatum, or
a plaster of Galbanum with Saffron 369 Emplastrum de Galbano, or a plaster of
Galbanum ibid. Emplastrum mitigativum emolliens sedans, or an emollient
mitigating plaster ibid. Emplastrum Minii cocti, or a plaster of red Lead
boiled 368 Emplastrum Galbani cocti, or a plaster of boiled Galbanum ibid.
Emplastrum Saturni, or a plaster of Saturn ibid. Emplastrum Arthriticum, or a
plaster for the Gout 369 Emplastrum Narcoticum, or a Narcotick plaster ibid.
Emplastrum foetidum, or a fetid plaster 370 Emplastrum de Carne bubula, or a
plaster of Beef 371 Emplastrum Talpinum, or a plaster of a Mole ibid.
Emplastrum contra Herniam, or a plaster for the Rupture 372 Emplastrum
Diachylon Anodynum, or an Anodyne Diachylon plaster ibid. Emplastrum de
Spermate Ceti, or a plaster of Sperma Ceti 373
F.
FArina Virginea 111 Flowers of Nitre 30 Flints prepared 86
G.
GEmma vitae, or the Gem of life 32 Guin of Peru rosated 41 Gargarismus de
Althaea, or a Gargarism of Marshmallows 296 Gargarism of Liquorish 297
Gargarism of Milk ibid. Gargarism of Pomegranate bark ibid. Gargarism of Jews
Ears 298 Gargarisms of Tormentil ibid. Gargarisms of Pel^itory 299 Gargarism of
Henbane ibid. Gargarism of Acatia 300 Gargarism of Poppy ibid.
H.
HEllebore white its preparation 85
L.
LIxivium Benedictum 301 Lixivium Sapientiae ibid. Lixivium Cephalicum, or a
lixivium for the head 302 Lixivium Antasthmaticum, or a lixivium for an Asthma
ibid. Lixivium Diureticum, or a Diuretic lixivium 303 Lixivium Tactari, or a
lixivium of Tartar ibid. Lixivium tingens, or a dying lixivium ibid. Liquor
Vitriolatus, or a Vitriolated liquor 248 Liquor Ophthalmic^s subalbidus, or a
whitish liquor for the eyes ibid. Liquor Nitratus, or a liquor Nitrified ibid.
Liquor Cephalicus, or a liquor for the head 249 Liquor pectoralis, or a
pectoral liquor ibid. Liquor cordialis, or a cordial liquor 250 Liquor acidus
Perlarum Orientalium, or an acid liquor of Oriental Pearls ibid. Liquor acidus
Corallorum rubeorum, or an acid liquor of red Coral 251 Liquor Nephriticus, or
liquor for the Stone ibid. Liquor Diaphoreticus ibid. Liquor refrigerans, or a
cooling liquor 252 Liquor vulnerarius, or a Woundliquor ibid. Liquor
Camphoratus ibid. Liquor Tartareus, or a Tartarized liquor 253 Liquor
Arthriticus, or a liquor for the Gout ibid. Liquor Antipodagricus triunus, or
an Antipodagrick liquor of a threefold preparation 254 Liquor vestimentalis, or
a liquor for clothes 256 Liquor Mercurii vivi ibid. Liquor Cerussae, or a
liquor of white Lead ibid. Liquor Tutiae, or a liquor of Tutty 257 Liquor
Mercurii saccharatus, or a liquor of Mercury with Sugar ibid. Liquor Mercurii
acetosus, or a sour liquor of Mercury ibid. Lohoch Antiphthisicum, or a Lohoch
for a Consumption 197 Lohoch rosatum, or a Lohoch of Roses 194 Lohoch violatum,
or a Lohoch of Violets 195 Lohoch pectorale, or a pectoral Lohoch ibid. Lohoch
seu Diacodium crocatum, or a Lohoch with Saffron 196 Linen Cloth prepared with
Saffron 377
M.
MAgistery of Coral rosated 38 Magistery of Bezoar 37 Magistery of Scammony 40
Magistery of Gambogia 41 Magistery of Mars aperitive 23 Magistery of Jupiter 25
Magistery of Saturn 26 Magistery of Parsley 45 Marmelada Cephalica, or a
Marmelade for the head 162 Marmelada Stomachica, etc. or a cold Marmelade for
the Stomach ibid. Marmelada Stomachica calida, or a hot Marmelade for the
Stomach 163 Marmelada pectoralis, or a pectoral Marmelade ibid. Marmelada
cordialis calida, or a hot cordial Marmelade 164 Marmelada cordialis frigida,
or a cold cordial Marmelade ib. Marmelada Epatica calida, or a hot Marmelade
for the Liver ibid. Marmelada Epatica frigida, or an Epatick Marmelade 165
Marmelada magnanima, or a magnanimous Marmelade ib. Marmelada Carminativa, or a
Carminative Marmelade 166 Marmelada Splenetica, or a Marmelade for the Spleen
ibid. Marmelada S^egnotica, or an astringent Marmelade 167 Marmelada
Terebinthinata, or a Marmelade of Turpentine ibid. Marmelada Nephritica, or a
Marmelade for the pain in the Kidneys 186 Marmelada Hysterica, or a Marmelade
for the womb ibid. Mercurius dulcis 22 Mercurius vitae corrected 23 Millepedes
prepared 85 Morsuli Cephalici 138 Morsuli Regii 139 Morsuli rosati ibid.
Morsuli pectorales, or pectoral Morsels 140 Morsuli refectivi de Cancris, or
refective morsels of Crabs ibid. Morsuli Stomachici, or Stomachmorsels 141
Morsuli Epatici, or morsels for the Liver ibid. Morsuli Martiales, or morsels
of Mars 142 Morsuli viriles ibid. Morsuli Diacretae, or morsels of Chalk 143
N.
NEctar of Vitriol 247 Nitre prepared 85 Nitre vitriolated 28
O.
OLeum Acovisticum ambratum, or an Oil for the Hearing, with Amber 333 Oleum
Otalgitum, or an Oil for hearing ibid. Oleum Carminativum, or a Carminative Oil
334 Oleum Nephriticum, or an Oil good in the Stone 335 Oleum septem florum, or
an Oil of the seven flowers ibid. Oleum Sabinae crocinum, or Oil of Savin with
Saffron 336 Oleum Balsami, or the Oil of Balsam 337 Oleum Formicarum, or Oil of
Pismires ibid. Oleum Lignorum, or Oil of Woods 338 Opium prepared 96
Oxysaccharum Emeticum, or a Vomit of Oxysaccharum 19
P.
PAssulae laxativae, or laxative Raisons 192 Pessaries for the suppression of
the Terms 310 Pessaries astringent for fluxes of blood from the womb 311
Pessaries for the suffocation and precipitation of the womb ib. Pilulae
Aloephanginae nostrae, or our Pills, etc. 114 Pilulae Catholicae 115 Pilulae
Benedictae 116 Pilulae familiares, or familiar pills ibid. Pilulae proprietatis
117 Pilulae Anodynae, or pills easing pain 118 Pilulae Narcoticae, or Narcotick
pills ibid. Pilulae cephalicae, or head-pills 119 Pilulae senectutis ibid.
Pilulae Smaragdinae, or pills of Emerauld 120 Pilulae Odontalgicae, or pills
for the Toothache ibid. Pilulae de Calce viva, or pills of quick Lime ibid.
Pilulae odoriferae, or odoriferous pills 121 Pilulae de Origano, or pills of
Origanum ibid. Pilulae rosatae 122 Pilulae polychrestae, or pills good for many
things ibid. Pilulae Melanagogae ibid. Pilulae Hydragogae 123 Pilulae
spleneticae, or pills for the spleen 124 Pilulae dulces ibid. Pilulae
Peruvianae 125 Pilulae Terebinthinae, or pills of Turpentine ibid. Pilulae
Stipticae, or the Stiptick pills 126 Pilulae de Sandarach 127 Pilulae de
Sabina, or pills of Savin 128 Pilulae uterinae, or pills for the womb ibid.
Pomum Ambrae 149 Pulvis Bezoarticus Imperialis, or the Imperial Bezoartick
powder 88 Pulvis Epilepticus, etc. or the wonderful Epileptick powder 90 Pulvis
Ophthalmicus, or a powder for the Eyes ibid. Pulvis refectivus, or a refective
powder 94 Pulvis excellens contra tussim infantum, or an excellent powder for
the Cough in children 95 Pulvis Stipticus, etc. 100 Pulvis Stipticus aliud, or
another Stiptick powder 101 Pulvis Polychrestus Imperialis, or the Imperial
powder good for many things 104 Pulvis Dysentericus, or a powder for the bloody
flux 105 Pulvis Stomachicus, or a Stomachpowder 107 Pulvis Pleuriticus
secretissimus, or a most secret powder for the Pleurisy 108 Pulvis Febrilis
probatus, or an approved Feaver-powder 109 Pulvis Carminativus, or a
Carminative powder 111 Pulvis Haemorrhoidalis, or a powder for the Piles ibid.
Pulvis de Verbasco, or a powder of Mullein 112 Pulvis probatus, or an approved
powder to heal the small Pox ibid. Pulvis Cyprius Violato-rosatus 113 Pulvis
Cyprius moschatus ibid. Pulvis Manualis odoratus, or a powder to wash the hands
ib. Pulvis Erysipelatodes 114 Preparation and Calcination of River-flints 86
Preparation of the sweet earth of Vitriol ibid.
R.
ROs Mineralis, or the Mineral Dew 13 Rotulae Imperiales 129 Rotulae
Smaragdinae, or rowls of Emerauld ibid. Rotulae Hyacinthinae, or rowls of
Hyacinth 130 Rotulae Cordiales, etc. ibid. Rotulae pectorales albae, or white
pectoral rowls 131 Rotulae pectorales citrinae, or yellow pectoral rowls ibid.
Rotulae pectorales rubrae, or red pectoral rowls 132 Rotulae lac provocantes,
or rowls provoking milk ibid. Rotulae refectivae ibid. Rotulae stimulantes 133
Rotulae Aromaticae ibid. Rotulae refrigerantes, or cooling rowls 134 Rotulae
Carminativae, or Carminative rowls ibid. Rotulae Diacymini ibid. Rotulae contra
vermes, or rowls for the worms 135 Rotulae Mithridaticae praeservantes, or
preservative rowls of Mithridate ibid. Rotulae Theriacales liberantes 136
Rotulae Angelicae, etc. or rowls for women with child ibid. Rotulae Zedoarticae
pro pueris, or rowls with Zedoary for children ibid. Rotulae Catarrhales
calidae, or rowls for a hot Catarrh 137 Rotulae Catarrhales frigidae ibid.
S.
SApo odoratus, or persumed soap 149 Sal Apoplecticum, or an Apoplectick salt
155 Sal Epilepticum, or an Epileptick salt 150 Sal Cordiale, or a Cordial salt
ibid. Sal pectorale ibid. Sal stomachicum, or salt for the stomach 157 Sal
Epaticum 158 Sal Nephriticum 159 Sal Hydropicum ibid. Sal Uterinum 160 Sal
Carminativum ibid. Sal Febrile 161 Sal Spleneticum, or a salt for the spleen
158 Scammony rosated 39 Species Diasolis 88 Species Dialunae, or the compound
species of the Moon 89 Species Diamartis, or the compound species of Mars 90
Species Diamercurii, or a species compounded of Mercury 91 Species Diajovis, or
a compound powder of Jupiter 92 Species Diaveneris, or a compound species of
Venus ibid. Species Diasaturni, or a compound species of Saturn 93 Species
Diasulphuris, or a compound species of sulphur ibid. Species Diavitrioli, or a
compound species of Vitriol 95 Species Diacinnabaris, or a compound powder of
Cinnabar 96 Species Dianitri, or a compound species of Nitre ibid. Species
Diatartari, or a compound powder of Tartar 97 Species Diacrystalli, or a
compound powder of Crystal ibid. Species Diasuccini, or a powder compounded
with Amber 98 Species Diacretae, or a compound powder of Chalk ibid. Species
Diaboracis, or a compound species of Borax 99 Species Diaterebinthinae, or a
compound powder of Turpentine ib. Species Diamumiae, or a compound species of
Mumy 100 Species Diaolibani, or a species compounded of Olibanum 101 Species
Diatabaci, or a compound species of Tabaco ibid. Species Diamarjoranae, or a
compound species of Marjoram 102 Species Diabalustinae, or a compound species
of Balaustines ib. Species Diabuglossae, or a compound species of Bugloss 103
Species Diaplantaginis, or a compound powder of Plantane ib. Species Dialauri,
or a compound powder of Bay Berries 105 Species Diajalapiae, or a compound
powder of Ialap 106 Species Diaesulae, or a compound powder of Esula ibid.
Species stomachicae, or a compound powder for the stomach 107 Species
Pleuriticae, or a Pleuritick species 108 Species Febrisugae 109 Species
Nephriticae, or a compound powder for distempered Kidneys 110 Species
Cholagogae, or a Cholerpurging powder ibid. Spiritus vini cephalicus, or a
spirit of wine for the head 212 Spiritus vini Aromaticus, or an Aromatic
spirit of wine 213 Spirit of wine for the Toothache 214 Syirit of wine for the
Ears ibid. Spiritus vini Acovisticus 215 Spiritus vini pectoralis, or a
pectoral spirit of wine 216 Spirit of wine with Juniper ibid. Spirit of wine
for the stomach 217 Spirit of wine for the pain in the kidneys 218 Spiritus
vini Lithontripticus, or a spirit of wine for the Stone ibid. Spirit of wine
for the Palsy 219 Spirit of wine with Treacle ibid. Spirit of salt coagulated
30 Spirit of Vitriol coagulated 31 Styli dentifricii, or a cleansing medicine
for the teeth 148 Syrupus Perlarum, etc. or syrup of Pearls 197 Syrup of red
Coral 198 Syrup of Roses vitriolated 199 Syrupus Cephalicus, or a syrup for the
head ibid. Syrupus pectoralis, or a pectoral syrup 200 Syrupus Asthmaticus, or
a syrup for the Asthma 201 Syrupus Cordialis, or a Cordial syrup ibid. Syrupus
de Cassia lignea 202 Syrupus Diacitri rosatus, or a syrup compounded with
Citrons and Roses ibid. Syrupus Antiscorbuticus, or a syrup against the Scurvy
203 Syrupus de Pyrethro, or a syrup of Pellitory ibid. Syrupus Nephriticus, or
a syrup against the stone in the Rei^s 204 Syrupus Stipticus, or a Stiptick
syrup 205 Syrupus Dysentericus laxativus, or a purging syrup for the bloody
flax ibid. Syrupus Pantagogus 206 Syrupus Hydragogus, or a water purging syrup
207 Suffimentum Angelicum 150 Suffimentum Imperiale, or an Imperial Perfume
ibid. Suffimentum Epilepticum, or an Epileptick Perfume 151 Suffimentum de
Sandaracha ibid. Suffiment of white Amber 152 Suffiment of Tacamahaca ibid.
Suffiment of Savin ibid. Suffiment of Hypocistis 153 Suffiment of Goats horn
ibid. Suffiment of Vitriol 154 Suffiment of Mullein ibid. Species for sharp
Suppositories 312 Suppositoria sicca, or dry Suppositories ibid. Suppositories
in the Epilepsie 313 Suppositories in the Dysentery ibid. Suppositories to
procure sleep and ease pain ibid. Suppositories to bring away wind 314
T.
TArtar to vomit 17 Fartar Nitrified ibid. Theriaca Mulierum, or a Treacle for
Women 178 Theriaca Saxonica, or the Saxonick Treacle 179 Theriaca Febrilis, or
an Electuary for Fevers 180 Terebinthina laxativa, or laxative Turpentine 194
Terebinthina purgans, or purging Turpentine ibid. Turbith Minerale verum, or
the true Turbith Mineral 21 Tincture of Antimony 48 Tincture of Coral 46
Tincture of Mars 47 Tincture of Sulphur 48 Tincture of Tartar 49 Tincture of
Lacca 50 Tinctura Proprietatis 51 Tincture of Iuniper-berries ibid Tincture of
wild Poppy 52 Tincture of Cassia lignea ibid. Tincture of St. Iohns-wort 53
Tinctura Vitae 54 Tincture of Guajacum ibid. Tincture of Sassafras 55 Tincture
for the Toothache ibid. Tinctura Uterina 56 Tinctura Diaphoretica, or a
Diaphoretick Tincture ibid. Tinctura Stipica, or the Stiptick Tincture 57
Trochisci Vitae, or Troches of Life 144 Trochisci de Radice Rhodia, or Troches
of Rose-root ibid. Trochisci Ophthalmici, or Troches for the Eyes 145 Trochisci
de Papavere, or Troches of Poppy ibid. Troches of Liquorish 146 Trochisci
Cordiales, or Cordial Troches ibid. Trochisci Ioviales 147 Troches of Alum
ibid. Trochisci de Satureia pro Lixivio, or Troches of Summer-Savory for a
Lixivium ibid. Troches of Nitre 148
V.
VEsicatorium in dolor Capitis, etc. or a Vesicatory for a pain of the Head
and Teeth 309 Vesicatorium aliud, etc. or another Vesicatory for the Headache
ibid. Vesicatory for distempers of the mind, madness, etc. ibid. Vesicatorium
in Angina expertum, or an experienced Vesicatory in the Quincy 310 Vinum
Antiscorbuticum, or an Antiscorbutick Wine 268 Unguentum Paralyticum, or an
Ointment for the Palsy 350 Unguentum Ophthalmicum, or an Ointment for the Eyes
351 Unguentum pectorale, or a pect^ral Ointment ibid. Unguentum Pleuriticum, or
an Ointment for the Pleurise 352 Unguentum Anodynum, or an Anodyne Ointment
ibid. Unguentum Spleneticum, or an Ointment for the Spleen 353 Unguentum
Spasmaticum, or an Ointment for Convulsions ibid. Unguentum Renale, or an
ointment for the Reins 354 Unguentum Nephriticum ibid. Unguentum ad Ambusta, or
an ointment for Burns 355 Unguentum de Calce viva, or an ointment of quick Lime
ibid. Unguentum de Rapis, or an ointment of Turnips 356 Unguentum
Medicamentosum, or a medicinal ointment ibid. Unguentum de Sevo Hircino, or an
ointment of Goats Suet 357 Unguentum Mobile 358 Unguentum Carminativum, or a
Carminative ointment 359 Unguentum Stipticum, or a Stiptick ointment ibid.
Unguentum contra Vermes, or an ointment against the Worms ib. Ungu^ntum
Herniosum, or an Unguent for Ruptures 360 Unguentum contra Pediculos, or an
ointment to kill Lice ibid. Unguentum ad Livorem faciei, or an ointment for the
Bruises of the face 361 Unicornu Minerale, or the Mineral Unicorn 1 Unicornu
Solare, or the Solar Unicorn 5
Z.
ZIngiber purgans, or purging Ginger 188 Zingiber Rosatum, or Ginger prepared
with Roses 173
THE THIRD TABLE.
Of the Diseases mentioned in this Treatise.
A.
ABortion prevents, etc. 39 199 348 Amends milk in Women 44 Agues 7 17 53 135
158 189 237 240 274 295 317 340 374 Anodyne 83 147 224 234 239 334 336 353 368
369 Appetite 29 65 104 107 117 133 141 162 163 173 181 185 209 217 234 235 239
248 250 345 Apoplexy 7 17 31 43 62 84 94 101 117 122 130 138 144 149 151 155
162 169 171 198 200 209 211 213 222 249 250 262 302 313 319 339 341 Asthma 7 16
20 51 57 59 62 88 94 94 105 107 117 125 127 130 132 135 140 146 163 171 172 191
195 197 201 201 216 217 228 229 231 249 252 262 265 266 281 282 292 346
Arthritick pains 54 See Gout. Arteries 135 Amputations 358 Afterbirth 239 242
288
B.
BAldness 51 129 233 Barrenness to cure 99 160 305 311 Belly loosen 178 190 206
292 322 Birth to help 9 99 144 239 242 335 340 Bladder 50 53 See Stone Burning
and Scaldings 336 355 369 Bitings of Serpents 52 365 Bleeding to stop 174 178
Blood congealed 20 47 100 239 Bloody flux 17 33 62 126 171 174 345 348 Blood
rectifies 44 38 57 105 106 117 185 186 188 191 198 238 251 269 285 293 294
Blasting 44 Breast pains in Women 373 Breast 49 51 94 112 131 132 140 146 157
163 170 178 195 196 201 201 210 214 216 217 217 228 229 231 265 281 282 283 283
335 336 339 352 367 367 Brain strengthens 49 52 54 89 94 101 105 116 117 119
129 133 135 138 150 162 163 198 209 211 222 222 231 239 250 270 291 293 302 339
345 Bowels 91 98 104 110 111 116 117 127 133 135 141 164 165 167 174 178 186
188 198 198 203 207 335 364 Breathing difficult 94 105 125 131 171 193 195 196
217 229 239 262 266 340 Bruises 100 366 Broken bones 366 Breath to sweeten 29
43 53 55 95 121 121 185 188 195 202 268
C.
CHaps on the hands, etc. 357 Choler 292 293 294 Cancers 7 64 115 123 317 347
358 369 Catarrhs 12 44 51 52 55 55 68 83 101 102 103 116 117 125 137 146 152
152 157 193 196 197 199 201 209 210 211 213 216 229 239 268 273 279 280 283 303
339 346 374 Cephalalgia 62 149 249 336 Child dead 239 Child in the Womb 44 199
Chronical diseases 17 59 132 191 253 Carbuncle 9 59 7 Cleanses the Eyes 42 See
Eyes. Comforts the Brain 12 42 44 See Brain. Comforts the Heart 38 42 44 51 See
Heart. Concoction, See Digestion. Consumptions 44 49 93 94 94 102 110 117 130
131 139 141 178 198 201 210 229 230 282 336 Colic 26 31 42 49 50 62 66 69 94
100 118 133 135 149 166 171 183 188 188 191 196 211 218 238 239 263 292 321 322
322 323 323 335 337 340 345 346 346 Contractures or Cramps 43 50 57 59 127 252
337 Convulsions 43 47 52 62 160 204 213 217 319 337 339 343 354 Conception 55
Cough 20 51 52 83 94 94 101 105 117 125 127 130 131 132 135 140 146 163 171 172
178 191 195 195 197 201 201 210 216 217 228 230 249 260 262 265 266 281 282 346
Carnosities 127 295 296 349 See Wens. Cardialgia's 164 Corns 367 368 Catalepsie
221 Cholera, See Humors choleric. Chaste to keep 240 See Venereal Lust to
restrain. Clysters how to use them 331 Cramp 349
D.
DEafness, See Hearing. Decay by age 44 See Nature restore. Distempers of Mind
12 17 43 See Melancholy. Deliriums 17 Digestion helps 29 42 44 54 55 67 117 144
147 157 163 172 173 217 273 345 348 363 Diaphragma 56 Defluxions and
Destillations, See Catarrhs. Dropsy 16 17 21 22 23 24 27 31 41 44 47 48 50 57
59 62 64 65 94 123 125 127 142 157 158 160 165 171 175 179 182 189 190 192 208
212 236 237 251 263 264 273 285 291 294 237 364 Diarrhoea 29 57 178 Dysentery
31 33 47 52 57 84 91 98 104 167 178 197 198 203 205 251 260 291 313 326 326 327
365 Dislocations 366 Dropsical swellings 375
E.
EYes 90 115 116 122 129 144 145 181 225 226 226 227 228 231 248 250 257 302
351 English sweat 31 59 Epilepsie or Falling sickness 7 12 16 17 20 27 43 46 62
69 84 89 90 94 96 101 102 105 115 117 122 130 138 144 149 151 156 169 171 198
204 209 211 213 221 241 249 250 251 251 261 268 293 302 313 318 335 346 362
Elephantiasis 7 64 115 123 273 291 293 317 339 Erysipelas 35 59 88 114 175 179
256 370 377 Epidemical diseases 14 20 31 35 39 61 107 252 284 346
F.
FAce to beautify 247 256 257 280 Fevers 15 16 26 27 29 31 31 33 35 44 47 50
57 59 62 65 69 89 102 106 109 110 115 116 117 118 122 123 125 127 130 140 148
161 161 164 165 174 179 180 183 183 186 186 188 189 190 197 203 209 212 223 232
235 248 248 249 253 260 260 263 264 284 294 336 340 346 Flux of the Womb 198
305 Flux of blood in Women 84 311 Flux of the Liver 198 Fluxes of the Belly 27
39 52 57 68 98 103 126 155 167 178 183 197 205 206 260 291 294 313 324 324 324
325 359 Phlegm to cut 140 166 201 228 282 Fat to make 166 Feet swelled 365 375
Fundament chaps, etc. 331
G.
GAll 182 Giddiness, see Vertigo. Green Sickness 24 41 48 Gout 7 16 20 22 31 44
50 59 62 65 69 94 97 100 106 107 116 117 122 127 171 187 190 191 192 193 196
253 256 264 268 280 293 295 349 369 370 373 377 Gonorrhoea 24 27 29 39 41 47 91
100 168 171 194 198 240 260 338 347 Gripings 52 54 160 171 203 234 See Bowels.
Gravel, See Stone.
H.
HAir to cleanse 303 Hair to fall off 356 Hands to whiten 114 350 Hands Ulcers
there 356 Head-diseases 23 56 96 102 102 103 115 116 117 122 129 130 138 142
144 145 156 157 167 169 170 189 200 213 249 250 353 258 268 273 275 276 293 335
336 368 Haemorrhoids 91 111 205 Haemorrhage 198 291 See flux of Blood. Heat of
Urine 148 Hearing 17 115 116 215 216 333 334 337 339 Heart pains or distempers
69 89 101 103 105 130 135 140 142 143 163 164 171 188 203 210 233 250 258 Heart
strengthens 47 52 54 94 107 110 129 131 133 134 144 146 164 171 173 174 186 198
198 202 202 214 231 232 232 249 250 268 293 Hypochonders eases 67 106 117 141
201 201 237 239 264 294 335 336 339 367 367 Hypochondriack Melancholy 47 115
335 Hungarian Fever 18 19 29 29 30 35 59 See Fevers. Hemicrania 51 62 127 200
249 Hiccup 69 107 163 171 202 217 239 377 Humors cold and phlegmatic 95 97 102
108 116 117 117 119 122 166 187 188 189 191 193 214 234 292 292 293 294 315 316
366 Humors Choleric 39 40 97 106 110 116 117 122 122 162 174 183 186 186 188
189 190 191 193 203 206 224 264 284 315 326 348 365 Hysterical Passions 128 See
Suffocation of the Womb. Hectic, see Fevers. Hoarsne's 140 195 195 197
I.
JAundice black 115 123 125 127 130 142 158 175 179 182 190 192 237 252 264 266
285 294 306 Jaundice yellow 7 16 17 22 24 31 31 50 57 59 65 84 110 125 127 130
142 158 175 179 182 190 192 252 264 285 294 306 Ill habit of Body 24 41 47 57
59 189 208 263 Inflammations of the Throat 19 47 148 Enchantments 7 53
Intermitting Fevers 23 See Fevers. Imposthumes 49 59 94 100 102 108 228 296
346 347 Iliack Passions 59 66 171 321 Inflammations 30 31 52 130 134 257 296
320 369 370 373 Joints distempered 7 44 65 69 106 107 110 116 117 118 125 186
186 187 191 191 254 268 308 339 366 Itch 7 50 123 179 263 289 293
K.
King's Evil swellings 366 Kidneys 47 50 53 110 118 157 167 171 172 174 178 181
188 191 193 198 214 218 279 335 336 355 359 364 367
L.
Leprosy 23 31 47 50 57 59 64 94 97 123 171 179 189 193 250 291 Lientery 57
198 326 348 365 Life prolongs 14 33 54 Liver 31 52 54 59 62 65 105 110 115 116
122 124 125 126 128 133 134 135 142 144 158 165 166 172 174 182 183 186 188 198
214 231 236 237 250 262 263 273 278 278 282 283 291 293 336 339 367 367
Love-potions 17 Lungs 52 110 132 157 163 195 201 201 210 228 229 239 266 283
283 293 339 Lunacy 89 169 Lethargy 89 156 162 221 262 274 313 318 Looseness, See
Flux. Lice 361 Lipothymies 156 See Syncope. Loins 167 243 354
M.
MAtrix, see Womb. Madness 7 13 17 43 53 69 123 145 224 249 275 309 316 317
Malignant Fevers 30 84 See Fevers. Mange 64 123 179 Marrow 57 252 Melancholy
7 13 16 17 20 24 43 46 51 53 59 62 65 69 103 105 122 123 130 145 189 191 193
202 210 224 236 251 251 275 293 309 315 317 Menses to stop 91 104 See Terms.
Mind dullness amends 53 115 144 146 See Spirits and Memory. Muscles 57 252 358
358 Morphew 7 Milk increases 98 132 198 Members or parts, etc. 103 115 117 185
254 358 Memory 12 44 105 129 148 198 222 222 232 232 233 249 262 270 302 339
341 Measles 284 286 Mouth sore, etc. 297 298 299 314
N.
NAture restores 43 See Spirits restores. Nerves strengthens 52 57 94 116 117
127 138 157 204 222 252 302 335 336 339 345 350 354 368 Nephritick pains 69
Noli me tangere 7 347 369 Numbness of the Limbs 338
O.
OBstructions opens 16 24 31 33 47 50 53 59 65 168 168 191 201 201 212 235 237
252 266 282 293 294 Obstructions of the Liver 47 See Liver. Obstructions of the
Spleen, See Spleen.
P.
PAleness of the Face 142 Pains in the Back 107 188 194 337 340 354 Pains in
the Sides 193 196 259 262 367 Palpitation of the Heart 42 43 See Trembling.
Palsy of the Tongue 374 Palsy 31 43 47 50 51 56 62 130 138 151 151 162 198
200 204 211 213 219 222 251 252 262 304 320 320 337 339 343 350 Pain in the
Guts 84 See Bowels. Pains in the Head 16 17 20 42 65 See Head. Plague 13 15 16
20 22 29 31 31 49 52 56 59 61 107 117 137 175 179 180 184 189 190 220 246 248
252 270 272 273 284 346 Pestilential Fevers 29 See Fevers. Pimples in the
Face 29 50 Pleurisy 7 16 20 22 50 52 57 59 69 94 118 125 131 132 145 171 195
196 196 197 201 201 229 229 249 252 259 262 282 292 336 346 352 Poisonous
Draughts 20 88 Poison 31 35 38 44 52 59 84 107 175 203 231 ^32 250 335 340
Pestilential Infection 3^ 38 149 150 151 154 199 203 220 246 250 252 272 335
338 340 Frenzy 27 43 69 See Madness. Phthisis or Consumption 7 26 52 127 131
139 172 195 197 229 229 231 249 281 292 346 Prolongs life 14 33 Polypus 369
Provokes lust 43 See Venereal. Provokes sleep 52 83 See Sleep. Pox French 20 22
23 44 47 50 57 59 94 117 175 290 338 346 Purge Choler 39 40 See Humors
choleric. Putrid Humors 56 108 Preserves from old age 4 10 14 Prickings in the
sides 27 50 52 57 59 108 108 Pissing of blood 104 286 Piles 105 112 167 171 184
371 Pox small 35 59 112 179 189 190 191 192 250 252 273 284 286 291 Powder-bags
113 Pleasure in Coition 346
Q.
QUincy 20 29 57 148 251 296 297 298 310 314 379
R.
REstrain Thirst 29 See Thirst. Resists Putrefaction 19 29 31 31 33 38 43 49 50
Ringworms, See Tetters. Restore strength 44 See Spirits restore. Reins, See
Kidneys. Resolution of the Nerves 43 See Nerves. Respiration 49 See Breathing.
Rottenness of the Gums, See Teeth. Running Sores 64 See Ulcers. Rust cleanses
86 Rupture 31 217 239 287 358 360 372 Rheums 94 94 107 152 226 301 Running of
the Reins 126
S.
SCabs, Scalds, Itch 59 97 123 125 175 179 192 193 252 293 317 357 358 Sciatica
7 62 69 117 187 204 295 339 351 366 Scrofulous Tumors 368 Sinews, See Nerves.
Sight, See Eyes. Seed increases 43 44 198 Subeth 221 313 See Lethargy. Scurvy
15 16 29 41 47 48 51 97 171 179 203 238 252 263 264 269 295 307 347 366 Sleepy
disease, See Lethargy. Spleen 16 26 29 31 52 54 59 62 65 105 108 115 116 122
124 125 126 133 135 142 158 165 166 172 174 182 183 188 198 214 231 236 262 263
264 273 291 293 335 339 353 363 367 367 Spitting of blood 62 91 104 229 Spots
in the face 361 See Face. Spots in the Eyes 44 See Eyes. Spots in Clothes 256
Stomach 16 20 28 51 52 54 65 67 91 99 107 110 115 116 116 117 133 134 135 141
142 143 144 157 162 165 170 172 174 181 181 183 186 188 198 209 210 214 223 228
231 239 239 248 250 251 258 265 337 339 344 345 363 367 367 Stone 30 31 44 45
50 52 69 97 100 105 108 126 127 134 158 159 167 168 183 186 191 193 193 194 196
201 204 217 218 219 231 239 243 243 251 265 267 273 284 293 303 307 327 328 328
328 329 335 335 337 340 347 354 Stone in the Kidneys 19 30 31 31 39 44 97 100
110 Sores old 358 368 371 371 Sweat to provoke 203 245 251 272 291 337 338
Stomach loathing 53 See Appetite and Stomach. Stinging of venomous Creatures 52
Schirrus of the Womb 330 Suffocation of the Womb 31 39 47 52 56 67 68 147 149
151 151 152 153 160 168 179 183 211 217 218 241 274 311 337 340 346 Syncope or
Swooning 42 130 156 202 233 250 251 265 277 335 Strangury 100 105 110 168 178
243 265 Sleep to provoke 52 83 118 119 120 126 184 196 197 223 224 258 260 276
276 277 308 313 336 341 362 370 Spirits restores and refreshes 119 120 140 144
150 151 15^ 164 171 173 185 196 202 202 210 232 232 233 250 251 270 302
Surfeits 203 Swellings, See Tumors.
T.
TEtters or Ringworms 50 64 257 258 293 317 Teeth 55 56 86 111 120 121 147 148
214 299 300 309 342 347 Terms provokes 24 45 48 53 53 55 57 59 106 127 128 142
158 160 239 252 266 288 306 310 336 Terms stops 39 47 48 68 91 104 126 167 171
184 197 205 266 288 248 359 Thirst in Fevers 29 31 134 164 196 198 203 235 248
252 258 284 284 Thorax 54 See Breast. Trembling 213 Trembling of the Heart 43
57 162 200 202 232 233 250 265 277 277 Tenesmus 57 155 Throat 94 296 297
Tympany 105 166 337 359 Tumors, and Tumors of the Spleen 257 257 264 285 291
294 307 317 336 353 366 367
V.
VEins obstructed 207 Venereal Lust to abate 26 174 240 Vapors from the Womb 25
See Womb. Venereal Lust to increase 92 133 143 166 175 176 177 287 340 348
Venereal Ulcers 22 296 358 Vertigo 12 17 43 51 62 84 89 102 115 129 130 135 144
149 156 162 169 171 211 213 221 249 250 274 313 316 339 Urine to stop 91 Urine
provokes 19 45 50 52 53 53 105 134 157 158 159 160 165 168 168 178 203 217 218
231 237 239 243 249 251 303 327 Vomiting 39 53 59 69 107 108 133 163 163 164
171 172 173 174 198 203 205 217 239 265 273 344 348 363 365 Ulcers 64 104 124
184 189 190 229 244 256 256 283 291 297 338 347 369 Voice restore 94 146 See
Hoarsness. Urine hot 244
W.
WAlking in ones sleep 262 Watery humors purge 21 See Humors phlegmatic.
Weakness of the Stomach 44 51 69 See Stomach. Whites 24 29 39 168 Wens or
Carnosities 367 Warts 368 Weakness 69 See Spirits restore. Worms 22 29 31 57 91
107 117 117 135 330 330 331 359 Wind in the Stomach 42 105 134 141 265 Wind 44
45 52 54 55 67 134 160 160 166 172 173 185 188 191 217 266 273 314 334 340 344
345 363 Witchcraft 52 370 Wounds 101 252 256 289 296 358 365 Womb and Matrix 15
55 92 105 106 119 128 128 149 153 160 164 170 251 334 335 336 339 348 449 3^4
367 368 Wolf 358 369
Books Printed for Awnsham Churchill.
DIaling: Plain, Concave, Unequal, Projective, Reflective, Refractive. Showing
how to make all such Dials, and to adorn them with all useful Furniture,
relating to the Course of the SUN. Performed Arithmetically, Geometrically,
Instrumentally and Mechanically: And illustrated by Sculptures, Engraven in
Copper. Comprised in Eleven distinct Tractates, the Contents whereof follow
next after the Presace to the Reader. Collected, Methodised and Published by
William Leybourn.

The Touchstone of Precedents, relating to Judicial Proceedings at Common Law.
By G. F. of Gray's Inn, E^quire.


