A Malicious Man makes Reasons. To the Honorable Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses. in Parliament Assembled.
The Humble Petition of Prince Butler prays your Honors if you think it good
Countenance, or no good Countenance, Right, or Wrong, Money, or no Money,
Bawdy, or not Bawdy, Bastard, or no Bastard, Irish or no Irish, Alive, or Dead,
to desire his Majesty and Secretary, by an Address, (whether they are, or will
be ill informed, or not) to give or not give him positively without blushing,
trembling, doubting, undervaluing, or scorning, an open general Letter to their
Ambassadors abroad, that the Ambassador where he Arrives, (whether he is or
will be ill informed or not) may desire the King, or Prince with his Secretary,
to hear himself read his Grievances publicly or privately before them, and
after a clear hearing to answer him as they please; and the said Ambassador may
give, or not give him Bed, and Bread, until he gets his answer in Writing, or
not in writing from Court. And he prays your Honors, to desire his Majesty to
give, or not give him Travelling-Money to Vienna, the Emperors Court, and he
will pray. One Reason is good until another is told, and sometimes both Reasons
are good; And the Injurer makes Reasons.

The Petitioner prays to be heard at your Bar and he prays your Honors to
give, or not give him a Certificate of all the Villainies and Shams, you may or
shall hear reported of him by orders of Prince Pamphylion to the King, or your
selves, without saying any thing to the contrary.

He prays your ignorant Honors, Ill informed or not, Disdainful or not,
Scornful or not, Purse-proud or not, Bribed any of you all in general or not,
to read this present Case Nicely. and Attentively, from the first to the last
word in it; like Honorable, Famous, Sensible, Attentive, Just, Judicoius,
Pious, and compassionate Judges, as ye are, and ought to be; and not to use it
as Young, or old Rich or poor malicious People uses often Cases and Papers; and
not to own and prove the King and your selves barbarous, cruel, and inhuman
People, to himself, in incredible Afflictions and Miseries these 20. Years.


