Musa Praefica.

THE LONDON POEM, OR An Humble Oblation On the Sacred Tomb Of our late Gracious
Monarch King Charles the II. Of ever Blessed and Eternal Memory.

By a Loyal Apprentice of the Honorable City of London.

-- Quo Numine laeso,
Quidve dolens Rector Coeli Tot volvere Casus,
Insignem pietate Virum, tot adire Labores
Impulerit, Tantane animis Coelestibus Ira?
LONDON, Printed for T. M. and John Holford, and are to be sold by the
Booksellers of London. 1685.

A FUNERAL-POEM ON THE DEATH OF King Charles II. OF Blessed Memory.
I'ts done, what Heaven for many Years designed,
Unknown to the great Race of Human kind;
In Fates mysterious Chronicle enrolled;
And so absconded from the lower World.
The Gods, the utmost of their Power have shown;
Their dark Decree has shoke the trembling Throne,
CHARLES the Illustrious, Great, is snatched away,
And to the gaping Grave become the Conquered Prey.
Forgive Thou awful Shade my Boldn'd Muse,
Presuming this Transcendent Theme to choose;
Forgive the Accents of my humbler Strain,
Which in Unhallowed Disticks dares profane
That Name, which all posterity shall know:
Great Spirit you are Gracious, or thou once were so.
Gifts and Oblations Heaven-born thou'l have none,
Nor must Divine Rites to Thee now be shown;
We Will not erect new Altars to thy Shrine,
Nor dare Install Thee with the Powers Divine;
That too Officious Duty would blaspheme,
And blemish with our Piety, thy Name;
But still our Zealous Love shall be the more,
And we will bless thy worth, tho not adore.
Which of the mighty Penmen shall I choose
To aid the Genius of my Laboring Muse;
Which of the happy Bards shall fan the Fire,
And my ambitious Glowing Breast inspire;
Whilst I with ruder Hands my Offering bring
To the Immortal Memory of my King;
And of his Deathless Name, and God-like Virtues sing?
Ye softer Female Beings, if there be
Concernment in your Fancied Deities,
On my bold Province now divinely shine,
And manifest the power of your renowned Nine.
But ah! why do I vainly thus require
The faint assistance of that easy Quire;
Too weak the Inspiration, and the Flame,
For the Ennobl'd Merit of the Theme,
For the vast Elogies of CHARLES his name.
But thou far more Heroic shade return
From the dull darksome Mansion of thy Urn,
Thou once who in Divinest Numbers taught,
And sang as bravely as thy Heroes fought;
Let CHARLES our now departed worthy dwell
In thy Prodigious, Noble, Chronicle,
(If any faith in Transmigration be,)
Or now transmit thy sacred Spirit to me;
Aid me the Royal wonders to rehearse
In lasting, and unbounded verse,
Sum the repeated Marvels of his Reign,
Whom Heaven, kind Heaven espousing did Maintain:
Tell me the worth of that Illustrious man,
Who through a long continued series ran
Of troubles, yet appeared so great, so brave
From the first blooming to the final Grave.
Tears are not all the due we will pay to thee,
Thou sacred Image of the Deity:
Nor will we only the vast loss bemoan,
With a retired melancholy groan;
But to our late posterity we will show,
And they shall all the wondrous Circle know:
The Theme, and the delight, of future days,
Which with united Ioys shall Echo forth thy praise.
Ye Gods! why did ye Summons to begone,
The constant Guardian of the peaceful Throne?
Why was your thoughtful vengeance so severe
Unto his Royal person here?
What hidden grudge usurpt your minds above,
Your Great Vicegerent to remove?
Why was he snatched so soon away?
As if but fraim'd of Common Clay?
Monarchs undoubted Charters should possess,
To limit their own boundless happiness.
Or should some sacred Title have,
To Triumph over the fury of the Grave;
But since Immortal Births you do deny,
Even Kings are only born to reign and die.
Oh! could he not have stretched the narrow Span
And lived the double age of Man?
Who would not have sustained the willing Doom,
And filled the Empty spaces of his Room,
And undergone the scandal of a Tomb?
Why were ye not appeased with a Plebeian Prey,
But snatched the Sovereign of the Isle away?
I could of the severity complain,
And urge my passion to so high a strain,
Even at your sacred beings to let fly,
Blaspheme your Arbitrary Deities,
Since with the Royal Victim you begin,
And yet my zeal would expiate the sin.
Were Kings ordained but for such vulgar ends,
And do they on so slender Lines depend,
To finish all the drugery of State,
And then submit to common Fate;
To manage the Great business of the World,
And from the regal Theater be hurld,
TO appear and act upon the noisy Stage,
Then make their sudden exit from the age,
And all but for a speculative fame
For the inglorious nothing of a name.
So the victorious Caesar lived and died,
With Nations sheltered from his awful side,
When he the glorious Race had nobly run,
And finished all the triumphs he begun.
What real Essence is there in a Crown,
When Monarchs thus are tumbled down?
Nor can their shining grandeur save,
Them rolling to the dismal grave.
Ye Gods! ah! why! could ye exempt not some,
From the universal deluge of the Doom,
Ah why! could not your providence prefer
Some to a lasting death less Calendar;
Why such injunctions do you lay
On Kings that bear Imperial sway?
Must CHARLES the joy of all the universe,
Be fettered in a solitary Hearse?
And after all the mighty Circles ran,
Appear at length to be but man?
All he possessed that is good, and great,
If that could claim supremacy of fate,
All virtues in his royal Breast,
Like Gemms within a Quarry rest,
No borrowed Beams adorned his Soul
As where the lesser Luminaries Roll,
But in him they were perfect all,
Glorious, and Bright, and Natural,
Like days Bright Lord which does dispense,
Over all an universal Influence.
What Heaven has sparingly allowed mankind,
Was doll'd-in great to his great mind,
And with embellisht luster in him shined,
The Gods by one consent could do no more,
But lavisht a vast Largess of their store,
And made the Impoverisht Heavens poor:
Yet after all, this mighty Prince
Is snatched and rifled from us hence,
Left void his great forefathers Throne below,
And to an endless wide Eternity does go.
Look down unbody'd Hero, see
How naked and exposed we lie,
To Chaos even a ready prey,
Now thy Great Guardian Soul is took away.
We Will not forget how once thou god-like sat,
And did the noble work of Fate,
Whilst we secure and thoughtless wanton laid
Basking beneath the Tutelary shade:
No danger could approach the Mansion there
Cursed Envy snarld, but came not near.
Thy aw a Terror on thy Foes Impressed,
But to thy Land serenity and rest.
Majestic sweetness darted from thy Eyes,
And all around was Eden and a Paradise.
We Will not forget how thy victorious Hand
Did guide us to the promised Land,
And thy stupendous conduct set us free
From Anarchy and slavery.
Thou liftedst up thy mighty arm,
And did sound forth the loud Alarm,
Thou calm'dst the unruly Boisterous Seas,
And prophesi'd us Halsion days,
And showed us all behind Tranquillity and Ease.
Great Monarch no, we will nere forget the day,
When thou our Moses leadst the happy way;
Thou leadst a moody murmuring Crew,
The Crime in them was great but not in you:
Thou like the mighty Patriarch viewed
With pity the Impestuous multitude,
As mild as that great man, as meek, as good,
As easy to remit, averse from blood,
And in the Breach to stem their ruin stood.
What did they want in all thy peaceful Reign?
Who su'd for Justice to thy Throne in vain?
Thus to repine thy sway, and treacherously complain?
How ready thou to ease their clamorous griefs,
Thou only able to afford relief?
And as of old --
When angry Heaven vowed a revenge to take,
For the Rebellious Peoples sake;
Commision'd Numerous Deaths were scattered there,
Envenomed Fates flew hissing throw the air,
Their Blasting Breaths throw every member have,
The suffering crow'd sink down, and groan their last;
Some to their pitying Captain fly,
He points, and then the sacred pile they Eye,
They saw, and soon a Miracle was shown,
Great as the Judgment ushered in before,
Their pangs and Dying Agonies were gone,
And coming ease, renewing health restores.
So to thy Throne thy injured Subjects crow'd;
Thy willing Ear to their complaint is bowed;
They find an easy and a quick redress,
Thee every Tongue in every age will bless.
And all suceeding Times shall tell
Of each repeated Miracle
In thy Illustrous Chronicle.
David nere struggled more to Conquer Fate,
Nor suffered more from murmuring Rebels Hate,
Weighty as his was thy too rigid doom,
And thou as bravely did them overcome,
Indulgent Heaven did either Cause espouse,
And scattered all the fury of your Foes,
Throw arms, and noisie wars, conducted on,
From Exile to ascend a peaceful Throne.
We saw Great Sovereign at thy happy Birth
A Taper, shining to the wondering Earth,
The Omen kindled on that glorious day,
Shone with a bright Meridian Ray,
Thy Great begetter saw the same,
He saw and blessed the Rival flame;
Whilst the surpised admiring crow'd
To thee and to thy Genius bowed;
With Acclamations shouting by,
And clapping with prophetic Joy:
Ah! why could not the partial Star dispense
A more benign, Calmer Influence;
Why did it dart so little pleasure down
Dashed with a sad (...);
So when the Great Messiah came,
He Is ushered with a Radiant flame;
But ah! the glittering Omen could relate
No happier tidings of a future fate,
It proved the mournful prodigy
Of that Created Deity,
The Praelude to his coming Misery.
We saw in thy first blooming Age,
What e're could all our hopes engage,
All that could suit the Glory of thy name,
The basis for a nobler frame,
Seeds in thy princely bosom strove,
Composed of Virtue, and of softer Love.
So e're succeeding times began,
Or this vast structure for the Creature man,
The richer beings in Oblivion lay,
Till the Eternal gave the word
They with united force accord,
And show their mighty power, and show a glorious day.
Still as thy riper Years go on,
Thy Soul seems fitter for a Throne,
Those Beams which were but shadowed there,
Now in completed Luster do appear.
In thee each virtue had its room,
And every grace was to perfection come;
Now fit the mighty state to sway;
Born to Command, and others pleased to obey.
Thy darling Country saw thee in thy princely prime,
They saw and blessed the happy time,
And with a joyful bodeing smile,
Owned thee the great Palladium of the Isle.
Mankinds Delight and Heavens care.
Both in thy Royal Person share.
Ye powers, why did ye not remove
Impending sorrow from the man ye Love?
Why did ye crow'd so many perils on,
To check his passage to the Crown?
Throw arms and blood ye pointed out the Day,
And at the dreadful Goal the Empire lay.
We saw with what a bravery of Soul,
Thou threatening danger did control,
Resolved, and how unmoved thou did appear,
Untaught the little vulgar vice to fear.
The Dread of Death could never make thee yield,
Nor all the Terrors of an armed field.
Bold in extremes was thy great courage shown,
Where fortune called, still rushing on,
Yet with pathetick grief thou viewed
The madness of the ungoverned multitude;
Fierce to their woeful ruin bent,
To shake and batter down the Government:
Thy Country bleeding by thy pitying side,
Often did thy Sympathetick breast divide;
For every conquest which your arms did gain
Still added to the general pain;
Still tinged with native gore the purpl'd Cross;
The Victor Triumph't in the Kingdoms Loss.
But now the Tragic Scene begins,
The woeful Trial is disclosed within;
With what regret did thy unwilling Eyes,
View thy great Fathers Sacrifice?
That Spirit, that fate could never bow,
Bowed at that bold presumptuous blow,
Thou sighed at the unnatural doom,
And with excess of Sorrow was struck dumb,
But here we will let the Curtain down,
And scan thy vast proportioned misery by our own.
Thus Heaven permitted this Good King to fall
An Expiation to atone for all;
He fell the sacred Martyr of his Reign,
And acted his great Saviors Passion over again.
Go dying Prince to higher Empires go,
But yet Respect thy Royal Pledge below;
Thy Guardian Angel send him down
TO attend his Progress to the Crown,
Oh! Let a double portion on him fall,
And he exceed his great Original.
Its done, and every God looked down from thence,
They pitying saw, and loved the suffering Prince,
Yea every petty Deity's concerned,
And for the afflicted Sovereign yern'd.
They saw how the confused Kingdom lay,
To the devouring Sword a wounded prey;
With monstrous Crimes polluted over,
Stained with a Royal Martyrs Gore,
And God-like CHARLES must the relapse restore.
Its he the Sovereign Balsam must apply,
With the return of Banished Majesty.
They lead the Royal Offspring on,
To fill his great Forefathers Throne:
(In spite of all that Hell could do,
And the Religious Rebels too,)
And show their mighty power on things below.
See where the drooping Monarch lies,
Even drowned with deluges of Sighs,
Not for the great Miscarriage of his own,
But that his Fathers Fortune's gone.
That his Majestic Soul was took away,
To Sacrilegious Hands a prey;
When lo! an awful shade appears,
And whispered in his listening Ear;
'Arise dejected Prince arise,
'See where thy beckening Fortune flies,
'Scorn all their little rage and hate,
'And triumph over opposing Fate;
'Where Fame and Glory call, begone
'Revenge, revenge, and mount the Throne.
The signal strait, the Sighing Prince received,
He heard and with an Ominous Joy believed,
He saw in what extremes his Fortune lay,
His Valor must direct and cut the way.
Dull easy sloth could nere retrieve his Fate,
He must overcome or sink beneath the State.
Alas! what could his pitying Tears avail;
To flying Fate there is no repeal.
His helpless Eyes could do no more,
Nor his revolted Cause restore.
Tears but a weak Redemption can afford
Where Interest sways the dreadful Sword.
But Heaven does now the Royal Cause espouse
Against the pointed fury of his Foes,
Against the furies that Besiege the Throne,
And all the pious Cheats to pull it down.
Successive Miracles each day appear,
Each Month produces wondrous Callender.
So once when all the numerous Tribes were free,
From the Egyptians Yoke and Slavery.
Kind Heaven its high puissant power did show
To all their crowding Legions below,
Preserved by the Almighty's Hand,
Conducted strangely to the Promised Land:
We Will think great Sovereign on that glorious day,
Where Heaven did first its early care display,
When its immediate Hand secured thy Fate
From threatening Spears, and dangerous Rebels hate,
Ah! Let the happy Worcester Fight.
place receive a Name
Ith Annals of Eternal Fame.
With what a bold resolve thy Foes appeared.
How far against your Royal self they dared,
How fierce how eager to devour,
And wanton in thy sacred Gore.
Whilst thou in Person sallied to the Field,
Learned bravely to Command, untaught to yield,
But ah! thy Arms succesless Fortunes found,
Nor was thy rightful Cause with Conquest Crowned
Heaven still delayed the Joyful end to show
What farther its Almighty Hand could do.
After that blessed escape befell,
Each step produced a Miracle,
We Will nere forget the next succeeding deed,
When thy Majestic Royalty lay hid;
Lurking securely now
Within the narrow confines of a Bough,
Three Kingdoms Monarch there sat perching on,
And for a Blooming Oak exchanged his Throne.
So at our sacred Saviors Birth,
When he Descended to the Earth,
His Entertainment's poor and strange,
A Stable, and a Manger, and a Grange,
Methinks I see Celestial Quires appear
To Guard thy Royal Person there,
From all their Blessed abodes they flock to thee,
And hover round the pious Tree,
A Troop full able to oppose
The power of thy Rebellious Foes;
A Troop resolved, and bravely bold
Not to be bribed with Mercenary Gold.
And next we will cast an Eye
On the Agents of thy great delivery,
Whom Heaven the wondrous Instruments did make
To manage this Important Stake,
And for thy high security engage
Mechanic servile Millers of the Age,
Men whom we'd think would glittering heaps adore
For pence and food was all their store.
1000 l. Price.
Yet thy neglected Price lay by
They saw it with an Eagles Eye,
And scorned their Sovereign to betray
For bribing Sums of gilded Clay.
The great Messiah thus was known
To drowzy Swains alone
Supinely they in slumbers lay,
Their browzing Cattle round 'em play,
When the Celestial Message's given
By all the tuneful Quire of Heaven. M. Jane Love.

A softer Female next thy Guardian's made
A tender but a trusty Aid:
The power she had, her pious care did show
A Loyal Subject, and thy Buckler too.
She over your Sovereignty did Sway
Here Is wisely to command, and yours to obey
The little Arts your Gentle Handmaid tried,
Secured your interest on the safer side,
Conducting still her charge discreetly on
From lonely rustic. Shades to fill a Throne.
So Michaels Noble Stratagem defeats
Her Fathers direful rage and froward hates,
David by her, escapes untimely end,
She acted as a Guardian and a Friend.
But what returns can we repay to thee,
Thou Patroness of Majesty,
Thou happy Pillar of the tottering Land
Preserved by a Woman's Hand?
We Will now transmit to future days thy Fame,
And lisping Babes shall stammer forth thy Name.
We Will not forget your hazards and your toil
Throw all the Progress of your Native Isle.
Great King, we will nere forget the alarms and cares
Thy nightly Watches, and thy hourly fears,
Each cautious step, each blushing quick surprise
Thy humble Office, and thy poor disguise,
Which thou the Pageants of thy Fortune bore
Till thy Arrival at the Gallick Shore,
A Providence in all, and God all over.
Unhappy Prince, thy Banished Person's gone
In exile, and forsaken, and alone.
All that thy pious Loyal Friends could do,
Was unavailing grief to show.
Their Prayers and pitying sighs they would send
To help thy sorrows to an end.
They could no more but calmly wait
The blessed return of smiling Fate.
No sooner had thou left the noifie Shore,
As if the Genius of the Isle had gone;
Thy Foes seem more confused than before,
And by their Fears contrive thy blessed return.
Dread of thy rightful Claim excited aw,
Their different Interests to one Union brought,
But now remote divided Ends they draw,
And each to triumph over the other sought.
So when the giddy Laboring World began
Their high proportioned Frame to rear,
To rival Heaven, and threat the Air,
They Are mustered over the listed Plain;
Confusion straight, the mighty Project stayed;
In vain the sweating Fools assayed
To make a period of their Fabric there.
The happy time is now at hand
To bring thee to thy Promised Land,
Thy toilsom Race is well nigh run,
Thy sorrows to a Center come;
Thou'st finished all thy suffering Doom;
And wonders now must end what Miracles begun.
We Will think with Joy on that auspicious Hour
When pardoned Rebels crowd to see thee Land,
And thicken on the Neighboring Strand;
Thy Restoration overthrew their Power
Their Hydra's at the bright appearance die;
All their Romantic Idols tumbled down
At thy approach to mount the Throne,
Like Dagon when the Sacred Ark came nigh.
Thy dawning luster did appear
Like Phoebus when he mounts the Sphere,
Dispensing glories as we rise;
And with new Vigor kindling all the Skies;
Thou now ascends the Throne,
Not like a Nero or Domitian,
But like Augustus Great and Wise,
Forgiving and forgetting Injuries.
Thy pious Subjects bless the day,
And for thy long continuance pray.
The Isles with Acclamations Ring,
Long Live, Long Live the King.
Oh! Happy if their happiness they prize,
Or knew but where their Interest lies.
No Seas of Natives-gore thy steps oppose;
Nor stalks thou over thy slaughtr'd Foes:
Without one stroke thou mounts the Seat,
The mighty, mighty work of Fate.
What hardn'd Rebel dares deny
The presence of a Deity
Through all thy weighty trouble's on
This last Miracle, thy Restoration!
The Presidents before had been but Chance,
Where Hazard and thy Fortune strove;
This does all prejudice remove,
And their confirmed Faiths advance,
Like the great business of the Resurrection.
But should I mention on
Each yearly wonder done
In the long series of thy Peaceful Reign,
My Lines would swell
To an expansive Chronicle;
My Muse too feeble to rehearse
Such mighty things in humble verse:
Too weak my numbers, and too low my strain.
But future ages shall record the same.
Thou It be their Wonder, and their Theme
The Subject of succeeding days,
With admiration heard, and told with praise.
Go happy Prince to Courting Crowns above;
The Gods delight, and Peoples Love.
Oh! Could we add unto thy greatness there,
Since there is no hopes of a retrieve,
We'd in thy sacred self believe,
And change our blessings to a form of Prayer;
But its not worship thou demands,
No such returns from our Officious Hands,
Love to thy second self below
Is all thou would wish thy Subjects do.
That easy Tribute will we pay,
That pious subsidy
Much for his own deserving sake, and much for thee,
That, for the Wonders of thy peaceful Reign,
And all the blessings that we reap thereby,
Our Freedom and our Property,
Which thou our Sovereign did maintain,
That, for the Intolerable dying pain
Thy suffering Person did sustain
By the severe Physicians Hands applied,
To stop the Torrent of thy Fate, and yet thou died:
What Is more prevailing still to move
Thy goodness and thy grace,
Thy Clemency and Love?
We Will love him for the glory of his race:
In him thy Copied Virtues shine.
He must be merciful and good,
He Is stamped with the High Stuarts Blood,
And all the In-born greatness of that Line.
An Exile with Thy self he mourned
With Thee afflicted, and with Thee returned,
Born on the same High Tide of Fate,
And bore as much from Factions Hate;
He Is loaded with Indignity,
Already Martyred in His Picture in Guild Hall, cut from the Legs downward
undiscovered.
Effigy.
Oh! Blast the Arm that dared that Impious Blow,
Let Heaven reward him with a Vengeance mete,
Who God's Anointed dared t'overthrow;
His Head had suffered where they pierced his Feet.
A Series of Wonders has been shown,
Adaequate to thy mighty own,
To fix the Royal James on Englands Throne.
Heaven has secured him to this Hour
By its Almighty Power;
The Scepter given Him to sway,
And will compose Us to obey.
Else why did He not sink beneath the Weight
Of all the ponderous Fate
That on Him from His Infancy did wait,
And all the Ills His Sacred Person bore?
Can we forget that Memorable Time,
That great Escape, that glorious Day?
Not to Record it, would be judged a Crime.
What Wonders Heaven did then perform
In that prodigious Shipwrackt in his Voyage to Scotland.
Storm,
And safely brought three Kingdoms Hopes away.
On distant Strands the pitying People saw
The terror of the thing their vety Souls did aw,
The Billows round the Pious Hero roar,
Rebound and dash from off the Neighboring Shore,
And every noisie Rolling Wave
Appeared an approaching Grave.
When Heaven did appear,
It must be Heaven, for God was there,
And our Anointed future King did save.
Thy Enemies saw, and cursed the timely Fate,
This Praelude to thy future State;
This as a Pledge did every God engage,
To make Thee Hero of an Age;
Thy Foes now to thy Genius yield,
For Caesar's Fortune's writ upon thy Shield.
Ascend thy Great Fore-father's Throne,
And make us happy by thy Sway;
What Joyful Ages shall we see
Entailed upon Posterity!
What Actions by thy Royal Conduct done!
Prophetic Hopes appear on every brow,
Where e're thou points, they will go,
Their Arms shall distant Countries know;
New Laurels shall their Conquests bring;
It Is writ in Heavens Mysterious Book,
Its Fate, for every Deity has spoke,
That Triumphs shall attend the King.
The Belgic Slaves no more shall boast
Of England's Navy fired and lost;
That Stratagem pulls down
Revenge from thy unshaken Throne.
By thy Command once more we will meet,
And dissipate their Treacherous Fleet;
Inspired by Thee, before our Arms they will fall.
Nor dare the Rival over the Main,
Affronting their Great Sovereign,
We Will emulate our Conquering Admiral.
Let France and Spain unto Thy Genius stoop,
That Cause must Conquer which thou do espouse;
Thy Friendship must support and boy 'em up,
And Leagues secure them from proclaimed Foes.
Thy Arms and Fame to higher Aims shall run,
And there New Garlands must be won.
Thy Annals with thy Acts shall swell,
When drooping Austria does entreat thy Sword,
A speedy Aid t'afford.
'Against the incroaching Infidel.
Thy Subjects Heats Thy Mildness will overthrow,
They may be happy, if they will be so.
Let not the Factions Arms aspire,
Nor the Unthinking Lured Crowd,
To raise a Rival's Fortune higher
Than his mere Birth allowed.
Let but their Restiff Bosoms pay
Submission to thy Regal Sway;
For sure they need but square the Line
Of Faith and Everlasting Loyalty by Thine.
FINIS.

