Mysogynus: OR, A SATYR UPON WOMEN.

IN DOMINO CONFIDO

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for John Langly, Bookseller in Oxford. MDCLXXXII.

An Advertisement.
Courteous Reader,
THE Author would let you to understand, that he intends not to determine
whether or no the stronger has any just cause of quarrel with the weaker Sex;
or if they have, that he designs not that this Paper should contain an
Indictment: But being one that loves peace and quietness, thought good to
disburden his (yet unprejudiced) mind, that he might sleep more undisturbedly.
It is far from our drift to make the Married man pick a quarrel with his Wife,
or the unmarried out of Love with his Mistress; but to make both the more
admire what they find admirable: Such is the use the Author himself makes of
it, and such, he hopes, you will too.

MYSOGYNUS: OR, A Satyr upon Women.
LAte come from Derby's Peak, where Women do
Beat their poor Cuckold Husbands black and blue;
And, which is worse, make nothing of it too:
I Am mad to see the poor men thus abused,
And would by all means have them better used.
And now were I outlandish, then I Would rant
With liberty of Tongue, which now I want;
I Would force a smart Burlesque on those sly Creatures
That thus Tongue-tyed us with their slier features.
Poor Countrymen! not only choused of their right hand,
(They cannot the privilege of the Wall command.)
Not only cowed, but to laugh at them too;
They Have gulled them of their wordst' express their woe:
What shall I do for English words to employ
On this dire theme, which Foreigners enjoy:
Foreigners, that know how to use command,
Like Caesar, when they have got the upper hand.
But we are mute, or have our language lost,
Which these Decoys have to themselves ingrost.
You Would think, they will scold in such a lasting style,
That one poor Tongue could not serve all the while.
Till then, I Have made my Satyr quite complete,
I Will shake the Letters of the Alphabet:
But I do want for what I would contrive,
Unless you will allow me twenty five;
But our School-Dames allow but four, and say,
That after Z there is no Et caetera.
Conscious that if Et caetera should be known,
We should prove scolds in telling them their own.
How haughtily upon the Englishman they tread,
Stark drunk with Pride, they ride a free Horse dead.
We'll never endure't, come subject Hearts,
I Will paraphrase upon a Woman's parts;
And when I cannot think what bad enough to say,
I Will brand her name with black Et caetera.
Whatever was left unfit in the Creation
To make a Toad, after its ugly fashion,
Of scrapings from unfinished Creatures had,
Sure was the body of a Woman made:
Yet there is some finer Atoms daubed upon,
Which makes her seem so beauteous to look on.
Nor better is a Woman's end, nor can,
Born only to Nightmare the Soul of Man.
Nor is he only plagued by her birth,
She is an Universal Curse unto the Earth.
Some say, the ground with barrenness is cursed,
Where in the Morn she strains her body first.
Surely she was not the end of the Creation,
But made by the by, huddled at any fashion.
She Is some imperfect thing, it needs must follow,
She sounds so loud, impertinently hollow:
So shrill and empty, that you would swear in faith
She Would no more Soul in her than a Cannon has;
Unless inhabited by incarnate Devils,
Sent to disturb men's peace with their loud evils.
You Would think that she was made, so fair her face,
Only for to officiate the Devils place:
Why are we men not fearful at her sight,
As at the Devils walking in the night:
The one as hurtful as the other, nay
She is more Devil of the two, they say.
In the beginning of the World, says one,
When man did absolutely rule alone,
When there was no such thing as Woman known,
To be man's partner in his Regal Throne,
When Man was gotten not with Copulation,
But Men spawned Men, after a brisker fashion;
A more ingenious way of Propagation:
When Men were bent, whatever stop was given,
And nolens volens, had gone all to Heaven;
Then threw the Devil these same Golden Balls
To stop his full career with gentle falls:
Then first was man bewitched; then first
Did man make Reason truckle to his Lust;
Then first was Man bed-ridden with these Devils,
Certainly of all, this sure the worst of Evils.
Infernal Imps, I thought, but now and then,
Were wont to haunt the seats of living men;
But now these Spirits incarnate, are so bold
They are familiar, and will have, and hold
Of whatsoever's his, and will control,
Where e're he goes or comes, his haunted Soul.
Woman! What shall I say? Infernal Creature:
Thou'st so degenerated man's soft Nature,
That he has quite forgot his Primitive state,
And thinks it natural to copulate
With an Hell-bred Familiar, (such his fate)
And counts his Offspring all Legitimate.
Think with the Atheist, that there is no God,
Nor can this cunning Creature be his Rod,
Sent down at second thoughts to plague poor men,
I Will whip her fame as bad, I Will warrant then;
I will invent some wicked thing upon her,
That you would think impossible to sham on her;
To make her what she is, one way or the other,
I Will make her ragged Atoms to hang together:
Then let us strive to make a tall, a proper,
A fair, deceitful, that is, a Woman of her;
Who cannot a necessary good commence,
Because she is a being came by chance;
So may Men pray that some Chance would surround her,
And take her there, where Chance, her Maker, found her.
And now within so boundless, huge a place,
Whose vast immensity admits no space,
To be called up or down, (gone to be lost)
Thousands of Atoms eternally are tossed;
So that I do despair amidst them all,
Of finding out Woman's original.
Thus spying Nature laboring, I find,
The large frame begun within my larger mind,
I see things coming gradually to perfection,
At length completed by coacervation:
Nor had this Joynted Baby of my mind,
Scarce all its shuffled parts combined;
But straight some unforced Particles we see,
That will with no part of the frame agree,
Which hookt together by themselves, became
The imperfect thing that Men do Woman name;
Hence it is, we in her composition find
Such a strange medley made of every kind;
From Man a snip of Rationality,
The rest from Beasts, the Goat, and Chatter-Pye.
Then whatever Nature thought unfit to be
Mixed with the substance of the Creature, she
Designed to be the Masterpiece of her Art,
Does all lie centred in a Woman's Heart;
All the crookt Atoms, and the rough, that joined,
Raise Malice, Fear, and Passions in the mind;
All those from whose cross disposition rise
Envy and Hate, Despair and Jealousies,
Nature rejected, as unfit to be
Ingredients of Man, the Creature she
Intended for the Worlds Epitome:
Then whatsoever's left, that can produce
A Hellish mould, fit for the Devils use;
Whatever's Ill, Depraved, or what not
That is so thought, falls not to Woman's lot:
Evil is so ingrafted in her parts, you would swear
She Would not one dram of good to boast of there;
Her wicked qualities, which we think occult,
From the disposition of her parts result:
She Will lie, and cog, and flatter with the best,
Though Nature otherwise teaches Humane Breast;
Woman is so unnatural a Beast.
She is against Nature so entire a Sinner,
It is impossible for goodness to be in her;
All the depravity that is, control,
And have predominancy in a Woman's Soul,
Kneaded, and woven in her parts within,
And are inseparable as her Skin.
When careful Nature had the World quite ended,
Sound Wind and Limb, then she had it befriended,
If she had quite expelled this rotten part,
Which so corrupts all other to the Heart;
Then the straight-limb'd World might chance perhaps
To have lived strong, and free from all her Claps;
Nay, it would have been eternal, for I Am sure,
What has no cause of corruption, will for e're endure:
Such would the World be, had not Woman been;
For all Corruption, Putrefaction, Sin,
And what is worse, if worse there be, all came
From Woman, and Woman as their Parent, claim;
Like Prometheus Vulture, she feeds on Man's poor Breast;
Like Brass, she cankers some, and eats the rest.
She Will kill, as does a Basilisk, or worse if it can,
Insensibly she blinds, and burns the Man.
Her outside's fair and pleasing, when the while
She kills as craftily as the Crocodile;
Usurps his right, raigns over her fellow slaves,
Nor will not admit her Lord to go her halves;
She alone was the cause, when she usurped the Throne,
Nor any other was it, that Hell it self was known.
Whate're's irregular done, it is she does do it,
Univerfal Mischief is her Attribute.
Now, Reader, if thou have what is worse to say,
Pray say it, for that is hers, Et caetera.
FINIS.

