EPOTOPAIGNION. The Loves of HERO and LEANDER, A Greek Poem, WRITTEN BY
MUSAEUS, Translated by Sir ROBERT STAPYLTON Knight, Gent. in Ordinary of the
Privy Chamber to the PRINCE.

OXFORD, Printed by Henry Hall. 1645.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY VERY GOOD LORD, HENRY Lord Marquess of DORCHESTER,
Earl of KINGSTON, etc.
And one of the Lords of His MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy Counsel.
MY LORD,
THe secret love of Hero and Leander first brought to light in the pure Greek
of divine Musaeus, was afterward new molded in Latin by the fluent Ovid; in
imitation of whose Epistles, the most eminent Poets of all Climates have (in
their native languages) written upon this subject so many Paraphrases and
Essays, that like the numerous streams of Nile, they almost overflow the
remembrance of their fountain. I confess the report of Poems borrowed from
Musaeus made so great a noise, that to me the Author had been lost in the
crowd of his Imitatours, if I had not heard his soft lines sweetened by your
Lordship's accent; but then, I could not be satisfied till I made trial how
the Greek would go in English: my intent being to translate and dedicate it
privately to your Lordship. The Translation was forthwith dispatched, the
Dedication is now presented, but the intended Privacie lay not in my power; for
my acquaintance (who would know what I was doing) had engaged me for so many
Copies, that I held it my safest course, rather to venture upon the Printers
pardonable errors, then to run the hazard of gross mistakes in ignorant
Transcribers. Yet, as I could not make it altogether private, so I resolved it
should not be altogether public, and have therefore suffered no more to be
printed, then the just number promised; which coming into friends hands, I
cannot fear any rigid censure. But if some pretending Critic shall assault
me, I shall smile to see him retire with double speed, beholding the name of
the illustrious and learned person that privileges

Your Lordship's most humble servant, ROBERT STAPYLTON.

Musaeus, ON THE LOVES OF HERO and LEANDER.
SPeak Goddess, of the Torch, a witness made
To love stolen, Nuptials convoyed through the shade,
Never seen by the incorrupted morning-light;
Of Sestos and Abydos: here by night
Leander swimming, Hero married there.
Hark, the Torch ruffled by the wind I hear,
The steering Torch that did to Venus guide,
The flaming Signal of the clowded Bride,
The Torch that for night-service aerie Jove
Should make a Star, the star of wandering Love,
The marriage-starre, because it still gave aim,
And watched the marriage-houres with sleeplesse flame;
Till by the rude wind the envious Gust was blown;
And then (aye me) change Hymen's softer tone,
And let our Verse with one sad close be crowned,
Of The Torch extinguished, and Leander drowned.
Upon the Seashore, parted by the flood
Two Cities Sestos and Abydos stood,
Just o'rethwart neighbors; his bow Cupid bent,
And to both Cities the same Arrow sent,
Wherewith a youth and virgin were inflamed,
He sweet Leander, she chaste Hero named,
He at Abydos, she at Sestos borne;
Stars, like each other, which their Towns adorn.
Do me a favor if you pass that way,
Ask for the Tower where Sestian Hero lay,
And held the Torch, wafting Leander over:
Ask for his Dwelling on the adverse shore,
Where still his fun'rals old Abydos keeps,
And in his Love's and Death's remembrance weeps.
But dwelt he at Abydos? how then came
He to love Hero, she to catch his flame?
Fair Hero, virgin-Priestesse to the Power
Of Venus, her great Parents in a tower
From them apart, near to the Sea had placed;
Another Venus, but so strictly chaste,
That she at female meetings never appeared,
Nor her young play-mates charming Dances heard,
Regardfull women's envy to decline,
For at a Beauty women will repine.
But she with incense Venus still appeased,
Often with his heavenly Mother Cupid pleased,
Whose Quiver trembles full of shafts that glow,
But yet those flameing shafts she escaped not so.
The Sestians now that Feast they so much prize
To Venus and Adonis solemnize.
Over to this Holyday in boats-full throng
All the Islanders that to the Sea belong;
Some from Aemonia, from moist Cyprus some,
All Phrygia, all Cythera's women come;
None dance on Libanon in perfumed air;
No passengers but to this Feast repair;
There wants of neighboring Abydos none;
Of young men that love maids not any one,
For they to follow will be sure, where fame
Shall celebration of a Feast proclaim.
Not that the immortal Gods their zeal pursues,
But troops of mortal beauties to peruse.
Now through the Temple Virgin- Hero past,
And from her face a lovely splendor cast,
Like the clear Moon when rising she is beheld;
Her snovvy cheeks in scarlet circles svvell'd,
So looks the blowing Damask Rose, You Would swear
In Hero gardens full of Roses were.
She blush't all over, in the polish't stone
Beneath her feet reflected Roses shone.
From her flovv'd many Graces; then of old
They ly'd that Men but of three Graces told,
For in each smiling eye of Hero sprung
A hundred Graces: Thus said every tongue,
Venus has now a Preistesse worthy her,
All men this maid to her whole Sex prefer,
Venus 'es Preistesse a new Venus seems,
So her the heart of conquered Youth esteems.
Nor was there any but he Hero loved,
And wished she were his Bride: where e're she moved
Through the strong fabric of that sacred place,
Alleyes all hearts and longings went her pace.
One Youth admiring of her spoke these words,
I Have seen what beauty Sparta's Clime affords,
And what in Lacedaemon so much takes,
Where Beauty to the world her Challenge makes;
But one so sweet so modest I Have not seen,
Sure one of the Graces here attends Loves Queen?
I Have tired my sight, not satisfied my eye,
Let me but sleep with Hero and then dye.
I would not wish to be a Power divine,
So I might live at home, and Hero mine*
But if unto thy Preistesse to pretend
Be Sacrilege, one like her, Venus, send.
Thus every youth said: there another had
A wound, and with concealing it ran mad.
But brave Leander, this rare maid when thou
Beheldst, thou would not of dumb wounds allow,
But at the fiery arrow's very fall
Thou Wilt with fair Hero live, or not at all.
Love at her eye-beames did his torches light,
And fired Leanders bosom at first sight.
For beauty in a maid whose fame is pure,
Flies like the feathered shaft, and hits more sure.
The eyes are loop-holes, her eye's fatal dart
Glanc't through his eye, and gazed upon his heart.
Amazement, fear, shame, impudence, he felt;
His sense amazed on her perfections dwelt,
His heart shook, shame restrained him, love controlled
That shame, and made him impudently bold.
He softly walked and stood before the maid,
And to her slily a side-looke conveyed,
With silent eyes foarding the virgins mind.
When she Leander's cunning love did find,
She joy'd in her own beauty: and even She
Often lifted her fair eyes by stealth to see
Leander's face, then looked away again;
He joyed that he did love, nor she disdain.
While now a private hour Leander watched,
Day to the West the light's small stock dispatched,
Point-blanke the shadowed evening-starre appeared.
Then to approach her he no longer feared,
But as he saw the sky with sables hung
He silently her rosy fingers wrung,
And fetched a deep sigh: she did nothing say,
But, as if angry, snatched her hand away.
Finding her discomposure he grew bold,
And of her rich flowr'd vesture taking hold
Pulled her into the Temples secret'st part:
As 'twere a Pilgrimage against her heart
Lingringly followed the slow-footed Maid,
And threatening, thus in women's language said:
What, stranger, art thou mad? why pull'st thou so
A maid? away, leave, let my garment go.
Shun my rich Parents anger. To court me,
Priestesse to Venus, it befits not thee.
It Is hard to come unto a Virgin's bed.
Thus lessons, maids are perfect in, she read.
Leander hearing female fury sound,
The Symptoms straight of yiedling virgins found,
For when with men maids once are furious grown
Their very threatenings promise them our own.
Then her sweete-smelling pure-skinn'd neck he kissed,
And spoke these words, wherein love's pangs assist.
Venus next Venus, Pallas whom I love,
Next Pallas, daughters to Saturnian Jove,
For by no mortal form art thou expressed*
Blessed he that got thee, she that bare thee blessed;
The womb most happy that did thee create!
Hear thou my prayer, and pity my love's fate.
Preistesse to Venus like to Venus do,
Come, be the Preistesse of her pleasures too,
These ceremonies learn: a maid and be
Preistesse to Venus, it befits not thee.
Maids Venus loves not; her true rites if thou
Would know, they are the nuptial bed and vow.
Do you love Venus? Love's soft laws fulfill,
Call me your servant (call me, if you will,
Your husband) chased and caught by Cupids art,
Brought to your service by his golden dart,
As rough Alcides by the golden wand
Of Hermes, to the Lydian Maid's command;
But in this voyage to your presence made
My steps sweet Venus not fly Hermes swayed.
The Arcadian Virgin Atalanta fled
(Thou know) affectionate Milanion's bed,
In love with single life; this Venus moved,
Who made the once-despis'd her sole-belov'd.
Dear, be more kind lest Venus take it ill.
Thus he persuaded her against her will,
Softning her mind with love and passion mixed;
Silently on the ground her eye she fixed,
Ashamed the Twilight should her blushes meet,
Re-polishing the marble with her feet,
And gathering, at every little check
Given by her heart, her robe about her neck.
All tokens that a maid's consent fore-run,
Who if she do but loose her tongue, she is won.
Love's bitter-sweetenesse now she working felt,
Fair Hero's heart a gentle flame did melt,
Leander's lineaments her soul amazed.
But while her eye upon the pavement gazed,
On her fair neck his never-weary'd sight
He fixed, until prevented by the night,
The deaw, that long had on her blushes hung,
Then dropped, and these words from her sweetest tongue.
Stranger, thy words might on a rock have wrought,
Who thee the various ways of Courtship taught?
Who did (alas) thee to my Country send?
But all which thou have spoke is to no end,
For how a wandering stranger as thou art
And faithless, can I fix thee in my heart?
Nor can we marry publicly it is clear,
For of no marriage will my parents hear.
And should my Country thee a stranger shroude,
Thy dark love could not long be in a cloud;
News with advantage slander will unfold,
What Is done in corners in highways is told.
Yet let me know thy name and native coast;
My great name Hero I suppose thou know.
In this vast Tower dwell but my maid and I.
And though my native Sestos be so nigh,
Such is the doom my cruel Parents give,
I banished thence must the Seas neighbor live.
Nor with young maids at Dancings I appear,
But day and night from Sea winds blustering hear.
Thus speaking, with her veyle her face she hid,
Again blushed, and her self for speaking chid.
Leander, on love's highest torture racked,
Was soon inspired how love's design to act.
For man's heart powerful Cupid conquers twice,
First with his arrows, then with his advise;
Which ever heales the wounds his arrows made.
While he that hurts us does our cure persuade.
He helped love-pos'd Leander to revolve;
Who lastly sighing uttered this Resolve:
Virgin, to come to thee, I would not fear
Billows of fire, or water though it were
Innavigable: to arrive thy bed,
No deep gulf no high flowing tide I dread;
But thy wet servant shall the waves confront,
And nightly swim the raging Hellespont.
Only on your high Turret set a light
Which shining in diameter by night,
I may become Love's ship, that light my star,
Beholding which, not looking up so far
As slow Boots, or the frozen Waine,
Or rough Orion, I may safely gain
My obvious native soil: but (dearest) watch
For fear the boistrous wind the flame should catch,
And blow my life out, which to air must slide
With that bright flame unto my life the guide.
Of what I am, if you more knowledge claim,
Leander is fair Hero's husbands name
Their secret marriage their night-league thus made,
The Torch love's Ensign was to be displayed.
She to set up the Light, he did indent
To swim the Sea: their nuptial Eve thus spent,
Against their wills they part, she to her Tower;
He, least dark night his sense might overpower,
Took marks to know the Tower by, and sailed over
To fair Abydos his strong native shore,
Both longing for a whole night's marriage-fight,
Often wishing for the bed-adorning night.
Night now soft rest upon her raven wings
To all but to love-sicke Leander brings,
Who on the loud Sea's ever-chasing Bay,
Did but for Hymen's shining summons stay,
Expecting the sad Torch, and to be led
By that bright Usher to his private bed.
As soon as e're thick darkness veyl'd the night
Hero advanced the Torch, which then gave Light;
Leander's eager spirits Cupid fired,
And as the Torch burned, still his flame aspired.
But from Sea hearing the angry billows scold,
At first he trembled, after growing bold,
Thus speaking to himself his heart he eased,
Love's cruel, the Sea not to be appeased;
But the Sea's water, I Love's fire contain,
Heart drink in fire, and scorn the flowing Maine.
Against lovers what by Sea can be contrived?
Know not, that Venus from the Sea's derived,
Who both the Ocean, and our stars commands?
Then his fair limbs he stripped with both his hands,
Turbanded with his silken robe his head,
Leapt from the shore, of the waves his body spread,
And up against the flaming torch still bore,
Himself the ship, the pilot, and the Oar.
On her high turret Hero watched the flame,
And as stiff gales from any quarter came,
Still screen'd it with the sacred robe she wore,
Till tired Leander reached the Sestian shore.
Down from the Turret Hero making have,
Her breathless husband at the gates embraced,
And to her bedchamber in silence led,
There wiped his locks that trickling foame still shed,
And nointed him with roses that consumed
The offensive smell, and left him all perfumed;
Twining about him then, yet panting laid
On her soft Down, these softer words she said.
Husband, the have labored sore, exceeding sore,
Husband, the have labored much, no husband more;
Fish-slime and brine have made thy penance great,
Come now, into my bosom drop thy sweat.
Thus she, he straight untied her zone, and they
The laws of gentle Venus did obey.
They had a wedding, but no Dancing there,
A Bride-bed, but they did no singing hear;
Their sacred Nuptials no Poet praised,
About their private Bed no torches blazed,
No Dancer in a nimble caper sprung,
No hymns the Father or grave Mother sung.
But darkness at love's hours the bride-bed made,
Dressed up the Room, the Bride's veyle was the shade.
Far from Epithalamions were they matched;
Night only at their ceremonies watched;
Aurora never did Leander veiw,
A bridegroom in that bed he so well knew.
Who swam back to Abydos, breathing still
Those Hymenaeall sweetes that never fill.
But long-veyl'd Hero mocked her parents sight,
A Virgin all the day, a Wife by night;
Both often chid the Morning to the West,
And thus the fury of their loves suppressed,
Enjoying secret but short-lived delights,
For short time dates their strange stolen marriage-rites.
Approaching Winter in a moment forms
The sky's Vertigo into horrid storms,
The howling winds as with a beesome sweep
The wet false bottom of the boiling Deep,
Calkt ships which Mariners dare not commit,
To faithless Seas are in the harbor split.
But no rough Winter-Sea can thee affright,
Strong-soul'd Leander, but when the once kind Light,
Now false and cruel, gave thy love the sign,
Fearelesse thou leapdst into fierce Neptune's Brine.
Unhappy Hero should, now winter came,
Have spared Leander, no more fed the flame
Ofth at frail Comet, by whose blaze they held
Their night-commerce; but love and fate compelled.
And now upon the lofty Turret reared
Fates brand, no longer Hymen's torch appeared.
'Twas Night, when most the winds their spirits spent,
And against the shore their rallied forces bent,
When with accustomed hope Leander fed,
Climbed liquid mountains bound for Hero's bed,
Wave upon wave was pil'd, the Maine wrought high,
The earth shook, the Sea was mingled with the sky,
The winds fell out, the East and West-winde fought,
The South against the North strong tempests brought,
The merciless and foaming surges roared;
Poor youth he sea-borne Venus often implored,
Often Neptune King of Seas would have inclined,
And Boreas of Atthis put in mind,
But none helped. Fate by Love was not controlled,
Quite over him the justling billows rolled;
His strong legs fail him, motionlesse now stands
The nimble vigor of his active hands,
The water down his throat at pleasure flowed,
The giddy Seas their useless drink bestowed.
And the false torch out as the sharp wind tossed,
His Love and Life bemourn'd Leander lost.
The Sea her waking eyes did still survey,
And in her sad breast flowed another sea.
Day not her Husband Hero seeing then,
The Sea's broad back viewed to the utmost kenne,
To see if any where Leander came,
Who, as the torch went out, might loose his aim.
But when she saw him on the billows borne
At her tower foot, and by the rocks all torn,
She near her heart rent her embroidered gown,
And to the body, shrikeing out, leap't down.
For her lost Husband she her self destroyed,
And even in death each other they enjoyed.
FINIS.

