depiction of headless man standing atop three figures

CORPUS sine CAPITE visibili, An Aenigmaticall EMBLEM; OR, A MODEL Of these
distempered Times.

BEING An apparent BODY, well proportioned, upright and straight, but yet
without any visible HEAD, in this Our most Unhappy Mereridian of LONDON.

Lately conceived in a Dredine or Slumber.

And now, Delineated, penned and produced, to the open view of the WORLD.

By I. M. Student of Exon. in Oxon.

This Corporate CITY seems to want a HEAD:
And that is the Cause all Trading's grown so dead.
LONDON, Printed by Luke Norton, in the Year, 1642.

depiction of headless man standing atop three figures

THE DESCRIPTION AND explanation of the precedent EMBLEM.
With some few Digressions not impertinent unto the Matter intended.
READER, This Emblem here before thine eyes,
May seem a Wonder full of Quiddities,
And if it should appear so, at first view,
Yet think it not so strange, as it is true:
It Is in a Christian manner meant and penned,
Containing nothing good men to offend,
How-ever at some things Thou may admire,
Thy Love and gentle Censure I desire:
And if thou would know more, observe it well,
The meaning in plain Terms I Will briefly tell.
The DIADEM encompast with a Wreath,
Does show the Crown is safe though Mars does breath
Such furious, bitter blustering blasts abroad
As if an ARMY were in every Road;
In every Way each City Town and Village,
Ready to Murder Plunder spoil and Pillage.
The SCEPTER seen within the Lawreat Band,
Shows that the Regal Power most firm does stand.
The ANGELS that on either side support,
Do show that GOD is our Defense and Fort;
He guards the CROWN and SCEPTER with his Wing,
Though (for the present) we can see no KING:
His Grace (though strangely led, and like to fall,
Dwells yet in the hearts of his good Subjects all.
And though remote a while he does remain,
He Will in good time (I hope) return again.
The LORD (I trust) will so illuminate
Our SOVEREIGNS Eyes, that he may see the state
And sad Condition coming on us all,
Threatening as well His Ruin as Our Fall.
The little Sentence in the Wreath set down,
Shows Patience is a Jewel, Virtues CROWN,
And our long patience waiting for our KING,
May prove a Comfort, though it seems a Sting,
For in His absence he the more may try
His flatterring Foes, with all their Treachery:
And more he sees them troublous to the State,
The more their Projects he will detest and hate.
The Body well composed and well bent,
Portends a Wise Religious PARLIAMENT,
Wherein both Houses are so joined together,
They startle at no Storm's, They fear no Weather;
Come Life come Death, the full resolved are
To maintain true Religion, that is their Care;
Likewise the Rights of KING and PARLIAMENT;
Good Ancient Laws to hold is their Intent;
They would make sure the Subjects Liberty,
And with his Freedom his Propriety;
This is their Aim, that Prince and People all
May live and love, rise up but never fall,
By Strife or Discord into vile contempt;
They would have all Contentions quite exempt:
And they desire for Truths sake which they loved
All Iealousies and Fears may be removed:
That no mis-prisions, nor strange mis-constructions
Should be produc^d to work our sad destructions.
This double BODY so upright is placed,
That it is not apt to swerve, nor be disgraced;
There Is no deceit invelop'd in the breast
Where Equity and Justice sweetly rest.
The POPE whereon this Body seems to tread,
Shows ROMES Religion here is almost dead;
The Crosier Staff and Beads do plainly point
Idolatry to be thrust out of joint;
Romes Rags and rusty Relics all must fly
Here Is no permission now for POPERY.
The Wretch profane, and vile Incendiary,
The Rebels all may now no longer tarry;
Gods Enemies begin their doleful Song,
They must pack hence, they have been here too long:
Truth treads on those that strives to domineere
The POPE, the REBEL, and the CAVALLIER.
The little Motto coming from the Pope
Shows whilst he breaths he has a Divelish hope,
To mount his Triple head again; but see
He is so trampled down it cannot be;
And his Adherents have been queld of late
By Pillaging their Arms their Coin and Plate.
The Sentence over the Pope describes plain
We should shun superstition which is vain;
Nay worse then vain, for those that live therein
Press down their Souls with ponderous loads of Sin,
Into the very Pit of horrid Hell,
Where all the wicked shall for ever dwell.
The Sacred Book wherein lies Gods Command,
Implies both Houses for the Truth do stand;
And by its lying open, you may spy
It is not clasped to the LAYETY:
It is a Well, where all may quench their thirst,
Where all should drink, but none until they burst,
As many do, who are so full oth' Spirrit
They dare Preach any thing, whoever hear it,
Nonsense or Blasphemy, no matter what;
Some are brave Fellows if they can but chat
And babble much in these our purer Days,
Wherein Mechanics show Divines new ways.
The Ploughman when into a Cart he climbes
Exceedes the learned Doctors of our Times,
The Turner. Cooper, and the Souter may,
(For ought we know) preach twice on every day:
Nay more, they can with their old working Tools
Prove all the Ancient Fathers to be Fools;
Austine profound, Bernard and Chrysostom,
They Will quickly make into subjection come;
Grave Nazianzen, Ambrose, Gregory,
They will confute and that Extemporie,
If any man of common sense or wit
Would give but credit to each Fool in's Fit.
The Sentence which upon the Book is written
Says GODS Word still shall last, though Envy-bitten,
The other Latin Sentence does unfold
That we our true Religion fast should hold.
The Sword that is drawn, denotes in some sense,
A love to Peace; yet Posture of Defense;
One of the Motto's there prescribes plain,
No Man but by his own Default is slain:
The Other averres, If GOD be on our side,
We need not care for Papal power or pride;
If great JEHOVAH do but take our parts,
What earthly Potentate can wound our hearts?
When David was but young, of growth but small,
He slew Goliath that was great and tall.
The Purse and flaming Heart do both express
The Coin and Plate that is brought with cheerfulness,
To maintain Arms with State, with hand and heart,
If War must be against the malignant part.
The words Thesaurus populi do show,
These bounteous presents from the people flow:
The Rich, the Poor, the Widow with her Miite;
All bring in what they can in open sight;
That all the world may notice take and see,
Their gifts come from them with alacrity.
From high to low, from aged unto youth,
All good men know it is to support the truth;
Yea such a Truth; that were extinct and gone,
Our wretched souls are utterly undone:
But we do yet enjoy't, let us hold our own,
Lets stand up for the Gospel and the Crown:
Gods Word is on our side, and he I hope
Will make us able to confound the Pope.
Thus far have I unfolded what is meant
By this dark Emblem of our Parliament:
The Reasons also I have signifi'de
Of all the Adjuncts to be seen beside.
But Oh, the chief where I should first begun,
Invisible does seem, the less is done;
Things do not go so forward as they might,
If one that is wanting daily were in sight.
This Head not seen into your minds may bring
The grievous absence of our gracious King.
That Cloud which will not let us see our Sun,
Has been the cause of all our woes begun;
Of all our troubles, and of Irelands sorrows,
Whose every day grief of the next still borrowes.
Lord look upon them in their great distress,
Send them a speedy and a quick redress;
And grant good God (oh hear our fervent prayers)
That our case here may nere be like to theirs.
And gracious God (if so it be thy will)
Keep not our discontented Sovereign still
From out our sight; that misty Cloud remove,
Stream down on him and us thy Rays of love.
Lord take away those fears and jealousies,
Which have been cause our sad miseries:
Let King and Parliament be all as one
Let all mistakings be forgot and gone,
Let CHARLES come to us Lord, and with him bring
A branch of Olive as a peaceful King,
Let Judah come and sit in his own Throne
Let Subjects all enjoy and know their own,
Let peace and plenty dwell amongst us here
That we noe homebred nor out-foes may fear,
Let King and People be no more affrighted
But let them all in love be reunited,
Then may we all rejoice, until which time
I have small list to write in Prose or Rhyme.
The end of the Explanation of the precedent EMBLEM.
The distinction betwixt Peace and War, with the Authors propitious Wish.
WHen Adam with his fairest Eve was placed,
In Eden, then the world with peace was graced,
But when the subtle Serpent did begin,
To bring in hatred, then began our Sin,
He taught our Parents disobedience first:
He drew them on till we were all accursed:
They both excluded were from Paradise,
And we were made Co-heires of their Vice.
Then Caine his only Brother Abell slew:
When he should nere have more for ought he knew:
Contention, strife and malice do not care,
Whom first they kill, nor Friends nor Foes they will spare:
Mars and Bellona still are hath'd in blood,
And very seldom have done any good:
But heavenly Peace is held the thing of things,
The chiefest Darling of the King of Kings:
Peace was King JAMES his choice, God grant that he,
To CHARLES his Son a President may be:
And grant, O Lord, (if 't be thy blessed will)
That we may have true peace and keep it still.
An Emphaticall Dream.
WHen glorious Phoebus had run out his Course,
Whirling his Chariot from the East to the West,
And Cinthia bright had took a kind remorse,
Of Mortals, lighting them unto their rest;
I laid me down my heart full sore oppressed:
And long I had not been upon my Bed,
But many Whimsies came into my Head.
My wearied Eyes would feign have had some sleep,
My vexed Cogitations longed for Peace,
My troubled Fancy such a quoile did keep;
As if my Cares begun would never cease;
My Soul each minute prayed for her release:
All sublunary things, seen, heard, or read,
In my Conceit seemed then to want a Head.
At length I fell into a DREAM or Slumber,
You must conceive I was perplexed much,
My Thoughts disturbed so then, I now cannot number;
Yet part thereof, I briefly here will touch,
If in few Lines one may great Matters couch:
What e're I saw, seemed then without a Head,
Which was the cause the World is grown so dead.
Me thought I was transported from the Vale
Of dark Obscurity, where long I Would lived;
Industry put her curious Works to sale;
Her dainty Pieces wittily contrived,
All showed, few bought; so few or none there thrived:
And still me thought all things did want a Head,
And that is the cause the World is grown so dead.
Thousands of Objects came before mine eyes,
All in good earnest nothing in dirision,
Horror mine intellectuals did surprise;
Amazement seizd my senses of each Vision;
All things distracted seemed with division:
Bad News both far and near was hourly spread,
Which is the cause the World is grown so dead.
Me thought I saw whole Houses, Families,
All full of sorrow, paler then the Moon,
Some wrung their hands, and some with watery eyes,
Cried out no Takings! We are all undone;
No moneys to be had 'twixt Sun and Sun:
All Trades (but for Militia) now are fled,
Which is the cause the World is grown so dead.
Me thought I saw each Village, and each Town
All in an uproare struggling for the best,
Some standing for, and some against the Crown,
Tumults from North to South, from East to West,
All Volunteers of either side, none pressed:
This Land has long been sick, now pained in the Head,
Which is the cause her Trading's grown so dead.
Me thoughts I saw each County, Shire, and City,
Weltring in blood, or wearied with turmoiles,
Brave houses plundered, which to see was pity,
And Cavalliers even glutted with rich Spoils,
No place quite free from these outrageous broils:
Rumors of Wars through every Coast were spread,
Which is the cause the World is grown so dead.
Me thought I saw full many a Corporation,
Without a Magistrate, a Mayor, or Guide,
Whereat a near approaching Desolation,
Threatened their ruin, to pluck down their pride,
Grave Senators I saw much vilifide:
Upon Authority each Boy would tread,
Whence now it is come, the World is grown so dead.
Me thought I saw a Kingdom all in Arms,
And (which is strange) divided in it self,
Guns shooting off, Drums beating up Allarmes,
The Rich most ready to produce their Pelf;
And some that had but two Spoons on their shelfe:
But all that while oppressed with care and dread,
Which is the cause the World is grown so dead.
Me thought I saw both Universities,
Distracted quash't, and stricken with amaze,
Religion minced with Diversities
Of strange opinions, makes the vulgar gaze,
At Academians and their shame to emblaze:
Scholars are scoft and scorned, Schools want their Head,
The Arts may sleep, for Learning now is dead.
Me thought I saw the several Inns of Court,
Look red for anger of a long Vacation:
Places of Justice had but small resort,
No Clyents, but a few for recreation,
'Cause Lawyers smel't so of Equivocation:
Their Judges fail, Courts want their chiefest Head,
Which is the cause our Laws do seem so dead.
Me thought I saw a Diocesan CHVRCH,
A stately PALACE, and a Bishoppricke,
All stand forlorn, the Deanes and Chapters lurch,
The Metropolitan touched to the quick,
The Surrogates and Proctors all were sick:
Their headstrong Humors have brought low their Head,
Which is the cause their Calling is so dead.
Me thought I saw a second Heaven on Earth,
A Parliament of noble Peers and Commons,
All which according to their States and Birth,
Came and attended at their several Summons,
Such Men, for Wisdom never were the Romans:
They cheerfully begun first with their Head,
But now he is gone, their joyful Hopes are dead.
Me thought they had a world of discontent,
Fears, Doubts and Iealousies did often arise,
Between the absent King, and 's Parliament,
The grounds few knew, though they were nere so wise,
Unhappy those good Council do despise:
This great Assembly wanting thus their Head,
May judge his absence makes the World so dead.
Nevertheless, me thought they did proceed,
With such alacrity and cheerfulness,
As if they would felt poor Irelands vvounds to bleed,
And sympathized in Our great Distress,
They Have done their best our griefs all to redress:
But o their King, their Sovereign and their Head,
His absence makes their living hopes half dead.
Me thought I saw huge Regiments of men,
Striving their Sovereign daily to subvert,
With sugared Words, and with deceitful Pen,
With Vaunts, and Brags, and with alluring Art.
They Have captivated, and seduced his Heart:
By these our King has strongly bin misled,
Which is the cause the World is grown so dead.
Papists, and others Popishly affected,
Monopolists, Projectours, Cavalliers,
Such of the CLERGY as are disaffected
Unto the King and State, increase our fears;
Bankrupts, and Rascals hourly send us Ieares:
Our present Troubles far and near are spread,
Which is the cause the World is grown so dead.
These are the Shavers that have bred these Wars,
These have our King from's Parliament divided,
These have occasioned all our Strifes and Iarres,
By these GODS Children daily are derided,
Good Remedies (I hope) will be provided:
But now such heavy News of Wars is spread,
That all the World, all Trades, all Things are dead.
The King (seduced) needs must be disturbed,
The Subject and the Kingdom are distracted,
The Cavalliers may suddenly be curbed,
Good Statutes may be acted, and transacted,
Their Plots confounded that have long compacted:
Then will Our Hopes with Happiness be fed,
Mean while I grieve to see the World thus dead.
These were my Dreams, or this my DREAM at least,
Which much perplex't my trembling Thoughts with fear,
At length I waked, and found my DREAM no jest,
As by these Times may very well appear,
Let Us therefore pray to GOD Our Father dear:
That every Thing may have it is proper Head,
And then all Trades will cease to be so dead.
God bless Our King, his Royal Consort bless,
Lord teach them both to know and keep thy Word,
Bless all their Offspring, shield them from distress,
Thine holy Spirit unto them afford,
And keep us all from Famine, Plague, and Sword:
And if thou please to be our General Head,
We then shall live for aye, and never be dead.
Bless likewise Lord our hopeful Parliament,
Bless both the Houses, Peers, and Commons all;
Give them their full desire, their hearts content,
That Truth may raised be, and Falsehood fall;
And prosper their Designs both great and small:
Grant them the sweet fruition of their Head,
That these our Times may be no more so dead.
Bless also Lord, brave Essex that great Earl,
Bless his Lieutenants, Captains, and Commanders,
Bless all his Soldiers, give us Peace (that Pearl,)
Reduce all such as err, each one that wanders
In any by-pathes, keep us all from slanders:
For his sake that his blood for us has shed,
And grant our Faith and Hope may never be dead.
And grant that our thrice noble Earl may bring
The joyful Ensigns of Triumph, and Honor,
That we may see the Person of our King,
That Peace may be displayed in every Banner;
As for the Whore of Babell out upon her:
Let Unity throughout great Britain spread,
And then all Trades will be no more so dead.
FJNJS.

