Murder, Murder. OR, A bloody Relation how Anne Hamton, dwelling in
Westminster nigh London, by poison murdered her dear husband Sept. 1641.
being assisted and counseled thereunto by Margeret Harwood.

For which they were both committed to Jail, and at this time wait for a
trial.

Women love your own husbands as Christ does the Church.

Printed at London for Tho. Bates, 1641.

A bloody Relation of Anne Hamton, who poisoned her husband at WESTMINSTER.
Gentle Reader,
IT is not my purpose to make thee now laugh, but if possible it be to be sad,
not to rejoice but lament, not to be frolic, but to dissolve into fountains
of tears, because a daughter of Jerusalem has committed an abomination.
Harken to me you that be wives, and give attendance you which as yet are
unmarried, regard the words of Saint Paul which commands that every wife should
love her own husband as Christ the church, not to be highminded toward him,
but humble, not to be selfe-willed, but diligent, not to be like a strange
woman, which wandereth abroad in the twilight to get a prey, but to be
constant and loving to him, for why? ye be both of one flesh.

A man must forsake his Father, Mother, Brethren, and Sisters, to cleave to his
own wife, and so likewise the wife for the husband. But I must tell of one who
would never agree to any such pious matter.

Before I come to which relation I cannot abstain my self from exclamation,
let all the forests wherein fierce lions are contained be joined in one, and
privy search made, to know if ever female did the male destroy; Oh no! for
though by nature they be fierce and bloody, yet does nature so much govern
them, that those which are couples, be linkt in friendship, never disagree. Oh
then thou savage woman, why unto blood were thou addicted, as to destroy thy
loving and kind husband? the relation of which, shall be divulged throughout
this universe.

In the parish of Saint Margarets Westminster, dwells one Anne Hamton, in the
house of Margeret Harwood; this Anne Hamton had a husband which like a loving
man indeed delighted in nothing more but to see his wife pleasant: for he would
often say my wife being troubled it behooves me not to be at rest* she being
pleasant I ought to be joyful: But she, most unkind woman, was of a contrary
disposition; for she at her own house, would take an occasion to be merry,
when the greatest mischief had befallen him. He was a very laborious man, but
she, a light huswife, when he was working she would be gossiping, with one
young fellow or other, or else with such women as were like to her self: never
was she more joyful then when she was out of her good husbands company: what
her husband got by taking pains, she spent by taking her pleasure: his money
being thus consumed, and his goods wasted, he upon a time spoke to her after
this manner.

Wife, what do you mean to do? how do thou intend to live? my money you
spend, which I get hardly, my goods you waste, you never got the worth of a
joyntstoole, my company you hate, you must have better. O wife, wife, take
counsel by me thy hitherto loving husband, forsake that company which hate not
thy body, but soul, do not drink healths to thine own confusion, nor with so
greedy an appetite swallow thine own destruction; repent in time of thy
wickedness lest when thou think thy self in security, the Lord does cut
thee off, and what will then become of thy poor soul; love me thy husband,
hate those which entice thee to wickedness, trust not to their smiling
countenances, for in their hearts do lie hid nothing but abominations. If thou will (I say) have my love, hate such, or else never more think to enjoy, that
which as yet you have always had.

What harm was there in all this which he spoke unto her? But notwithstanding
she forsooth took it in distaste, and giving him a scolding reply, she left
the room, and went to her companion in mischief, Margerite Harwood, which was
her Landlady, to whom she revealed the secrets of her heart, saying, that her
husband was an enemy to good fellowship, and continually wrangled and brawled
at her, because she affected it. In which she lied, for he always spoke in a
very loving manner unto her, except she overmuch provoked him.

Moreover she said that she should never be in quiet until by some way or
other she were shifted of him.

The devil finding an occasion how to accomplish a mischievous intent, always
makes use of it, he knows how to please every ones wicked humor. Wherefore
he tempted the Landlady with bloody cogitations, for she hearing her Ningles
unjust complaint, she cried out that it was her own fault, for letting such an
abject villain to live; hang him, cut his throat, or poison him, for he is not
fit to live upon the earth amongst good fellows. To condescend to whose
counsel, she seemed very unwilling, but at length the devil got the better of
her, and then she did agree to poison him. And for the same intent she went and
got five drams of poison, enough to have destroyed ten men, and mixed it amongst
his food, which he no sooner had taken, but that he presently did swell very
much, which she perceiving, did run to her Landl^dy who asked her how much she
had given him* she r^plyed, five drams; well done, said she, if five will not
be enough, ten shall, and thereupon they went up to see him, but he was then
burst. Then did they both dissemble a lamentable cry, which caused the
neighbors to come in to see what was the matter, where they did behold such a
woeful spectacle as was sufficient to exhaust tears from the dryest eye
composed of Pumice stone; for there did they see his nails quite pilled of,
his hands did seem only like two great boyles, his belly seemed as if hot
irons had been thrust into it, his visage was so much defaced by the quick
operation of the scalding poison, that had they not well known the body, they
would have sworn it not to have been the man which they came to visit: they
all easily perceived that he was poisoned.

A Chyrurgion being sent for, ripped up his body, and found the poison lying
round about his heart. As also there was found poison in a paper in the window;
the Chyrurgion calling for a Venice glass put the same therein, which
immediately broke the glass.

Wherefore they sent for an officer, and apprehended upon suspicion both his
wife and Landlady, whose consciences cannot but confess that they washed both
their hands in his innocent blood.

They are both in the Gatehouse prison of Westminster, nigh London, expecting a
day of trial, which time will not be long; till when I ^est: the^ (gentle
Reader) sh^lt thou have by Gods permittance a more perfect relation.

FINIS.

