He that Views Murfords face, sees but a Ray
Of light reflected, or a glympse of day
But he that reads his Arras woven line
C^^n templates Phoebus as he brightly shine


Fragmenta Poetica: OR, MISCELANIES OF POETICAL MUSINGS, Moral and Divine: BY
NICH. MVRFORD.

Vtque arts pariat solertia, nutriat usus. Claud.
Ad Coelum volito, ut in Deo quiescam.
LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, at the sign of the Prince's Arms in S.
Paul's Churchyard. 1650.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
WHether English resident in the Netherlands; Netherlander enjoying the benefit
of the English Tongue; or Domestic English; (for it may light into the hands
of all sorts of you) I entreat first your judicious reading, and then your
favorable censuring of this small Poem: And lay not pride, or sauciness unto
its charge, because it walks into the world before some of its elder brethren;
for as the noble S. Theodore de Mayern said in his Epistle before the
Insectorum sive minimorum animalium theatrum, of learned Moufet, who was near
of my name, of the same Country, (France) and perhaps of my kindred; (for
blood, as rivers, run into many places (high and low) and yet came from one and
the same fountain; and ebbs of fortunes sometimes cause false Orthography in
one and the same name) speaking of the said Books, laying dormant in his study,
attributes it Typographorum inhiantium culpae; And in the same Epistle to the
said Posthume Work, he exclames, O tempora, in quibus eruditorum hominum
sudores, ex pretio operis solvendo, and aere, in charta, and atramento
comparandis locando, vel ex vulgi (pessimis ut plurimum applaudentis) depravato
sensu, non ex rei essentia, vel subjecti dignitate, aut solida ejusdem
explanatione aestimantur! And indeed, if any solidity appears in a Book, the
Vulgar say, it smells too much of Anchorism; but I say of those Books that are
all compacted of whimsies, they are like Bristol stones, not valued by a
judicious Jeweller, and as one wittily observed on a foolish Book, to which was
written Finis, -- Nay, there thou lie my friend:
In writing foolish Books there is no end.
But (I am made to believe) that as this small Pamphlet is not wholly void of
some holy Sonnets; so it is not wholly without some (not unprofitable) Satyrs,
etc. Wherefore I hope the Stationers shall have no cause to sigh out, It will
not sell! To conclude, Reader, I wish thee as much pleasure in the reading, as
I had in the writing of it.

Pray, and Farewell.

Precatio Authoris!
DIc mihi quid scribam! da tu mihi vota vovenda!
Sic been semper agam, sic bona vota mea.
Gratia sit servo ad servatum jussa beata!
Ille beatus enim, qui tua jussa facit.
L'Auteur au Lecteur de son ouvre.
Petit Livre, faicte moy e'la service
Monstrer l'Anglois la virtue par la vice;
Mon Dieu, and mon maistre son nom eslever,
Faicte devoir donner tout l'honeur.
Idem ad eundem.
My little Book, pray do me the small service
To show England true virtue by mere vice;
T'extoll my God, and Masters name above,
Strive thou my Soul in praisfull strains to move!
Den Wensch.
Och dat mine Boecrken Engel-landt nu moghen
Volle maken Engel-ghelyk menschen,
En ick ghelyk even Engel hoogh ghebore,
Moghen te schrieven als sanctus Paulus fore!
To the Author.
Even as the nasty Swine both flies and hates
All fragrant Ointments; (for what recreates
Our senses unto them is pestilent.)
Just so of thy strong lines the very sent
Will make the Borish Rusticks scud amain,
Never desiring to read Verse again.
Let Hinds base things admire. May Phoebus still
Thy cups full of Castalian liquor fill
Up to the brim; for them that can Compose
Like Thee, the Muses darling: unto those
I leave --
Ralph Piggott. Esquire

Upon the Authors Poems.
Where Is the best Inn? here Reader: Stay
Pray, light and drink: What, haste away?
Here Is Attick Juncates; and for Wine,
Nectar both Moral and Divine.
Take mine Host's proffer: It Is a crime
Not to be drunk with Extatick rhyme.
J. A.

On the Authors mixed Poems.
WHat is it you want? Wit or Wine?
Fancies Moral or Divine?
Read these Poems: what you crave,
You can no sooner ask, then have.
O. B.

Nich. Murford Authori Hospiti Amicissimo.
I Hugg thy Fancy much, because Divine;
Nature is excellent in its refine.
Divine Raptures, are, Natures complements,
And gives perfection to mixed Elements.
And since mine Host can reach heaven with a rhyme
I Will honor only Sack, Nectar sublime:
And pray a blessing to the Authors pains
In heaven immortal, on earth honest gains.
Owen Barn, Gent.

Upon the Authors Work.
Thy curious Miscellanies of delight,
shall be Wits offspring, Art's Hermaphrodite.
Idem.

Upon his Inn.
Your Inn's the Star, but from your self the Beam
Of Light, to it, as from the Sun does stream.
Idem.

Or thus,
No more the Star shall be to me
Of such an Inn a sign, but Thee.
Idem.

To the Reader of those Poems.
Hospitis in mensa, vultum non fercula pensa.
Idem.

Ad Authorem.
ALma tibi matter fuit Anglia, Gallia nutrix,
Et Germana dehinc hospita tellus erat.
Hinc tres sermones retines, veluti genuinos,
Romanum quartum lectio multa dedit.
Addidit ingenium praestans natura, sic ortus
Es vates Lauro dignus Apollinea;
Sed quod divinum resonat tua Musa Poema
Omnes mirantur, quod super Astra volas;
Nec mirum, non dat Tellus, Naturave Mentem,
Coelitus emissa haec, sydera summa petit.
Tho. Parkin, Medicinae Doctor.

Englished.
THy Mother England was, thy Nurse was France,
Duitzlandt thine Hostess. Hence thou did inhance
Three native Tongues; then Industry begot
Latin the fourth. Thy wit by Nature's lot
Was such, that thou a Poet masculine
Becam'st by drinking Helicon divine.
But that thy Muse so sacred is, and high,
Men marvel thou should mount above the Sky;
No marvel: Place, nor Nature Thee soul gave,
From Heaven it came, and Heaven again does crave
T. P.

Au Lecteur.
Chansons plein de sens,
Oraisons plein d'encens;
Poesy, and Piete
Sont insemble icy.
Tho. Parkin.

To his worthy Friend Mr. N.M. Merchant, on his Fragmenta Poetica, (...).
NOt to applaud when desert makes it due,
Has as deep share in ill, as to avow
The Act (by not reproving it) seen done,
Such were my Error, O Poetic Son
Of Pallas, if I don't (perusing) praise
Thy touring raptures, meriting rich Bays.
Good Nich, march on; May thy quaint headpiece shine
As Limbeck of those learned sisters Nine!
The cordial Vote of a True friend of thine.
Nich. Toll, Pastor at Lynn.

To the Author.
WHen wholesale Men are bankrupt, and none left
To trade in wit, but those who do it by theft;
Such as retail rhyme weekly by a sheet,
To gain perhaps the Counter or the Fleet:
In such a Fancy-famin not to raise,
But make wit cheap; deserves a double Bays.
This thou have done in these thy works, nay more;
For thou have brought Pernassus to our shore;
Salt Owse a fresh Muse has, when Cam's are salt;
Lyn has a capering Nymph, when Oxford's halt:
Warehouse of Wit, fill still; let others gain,
By fetching Fortunes goods from France or Spain!
Thou have a higher trade, which none o'them uses;
Thy stock is verse, thy factors are the Muses,
Thy returns Fame; thine is such Merchandise,
As feeds not Custom, and quite starves Excize:
Trade on wits Merchant, give the world to know
Chaucer was bred in Lyn, and so were Thou.
Raptim Tho. Toll junior, Gent.

To the Author Mr. N.M. upon his divine POEMS.
COmmend thy Verse sweet NICH? I need not! tush,
When Wines are good, they never want a Bush.
Commend thy Verse? I cannot! it is a Task
To do it well, would Cleavelands Fancy ask;
Yet this I Will speak for thy immortal credit,
It is no spurious piece: but MURFORD did it.
At these thy Lines, whos'er shall take offense,
They understand them not, they have no sense.
Let who will cavil at thy Book, what is in it
Is not imperfect; but it is done in PRINT.
Tho. Leech, A.M.

GO thou away with all the praise of mine,
Who Own'st these Poems Moral and Divine.
What? can not do enough, but over-do't,
Draw us such Wine, so good, and Sugar to it?
Let others brows be crowned with a rush,
The Lawrel's thine; yet this Wine needs no Bush.
Thy Star's a glorious Sun, and gives more light
Then can b'obscur'd by foulest envies spite.
To his esteemed friend M. Nich. Murford, On his Fragmenta Poetica.
THat Memnons image tuned by the heat
Of glittering rays showered down from Titans seat
Proved Vocal, I Will not doubt, since sparks of wit
And Scintillations of thy brain made fit
Our indisposed Fancies, to produce
Impressions propagated from thy Muse.
For those Poetic flames in us begun,
Are all derivative from thee our Sun.
That humane souls are Numbers as of old
Xenocrates affirmed, is now controlled,
Since thine such rare endowments does possess,
Which are both Singular, and Numberless;
Yet why go I about thus to confine
Thy boundless praise to th'compass of a Line,
Which he that would express, and make it known,
Must write a Volume larger then thine own:
Let this suffice, that we adorn thy praise
Now, not with Ivy, but Immortal Bays.
To the Book.
THou Pallas vented from most pregnant brains,
Go, teach the world new Mathematick strains;
This little Quadrature to us imparts
The Circle of all Sciences and Arts.
Those scandalizing pens which at thee wonder,
Shall know, that Bacchus was begot with thunder.
J. Bastard. A. B.

To his worthy friend M. Nich. Murford, Upon his Fragmenta Poetica.
IN Faith I wonder, yet in Truth I see,
Pallas will leave the Universitie,
And come to Lynn; she has already sent
Her headpiece to thy house, her sacred tent,
Which is a sign she will come. Affirm who dare
A man in the Moon to be, he is in the Star,
Whose drink's no White, nor Claret, no such mean,
He drinks not Hippocras, but Hippocrene;
Whose radiant splendor, whose quaint courteous uses
Make him an Host fit for the thrice three muses.
Mourn then ye Heliconian Brats, give over
Your wonted wanton Garbs, invest no more
Your Selves with colors diapred; put on
Sable accoutrement, Pallas is gone.
No news, alas; that wit would soon decay,
Who knew not, when the head was taken away?
The sacred brains must putrify we know,
Seeing the Pia Mater's wounded so.
Star-gazers, have your wits sequestered been,
As well as wealth, that none this Star have seen?
It neither rise nor falls, that ye may know it,
It hangs over Helicon, go quickly to it:
Where you shall find him, whom you will swear to be
Natures perfection, Wits Epitome.
Sic obtestatur Tuissimus Carolus Cromer, Cantabr. Coll. Corp. Christi.

To his very good Friend Mr. Nich. Murford, upon his POEMS.
DEar Friend, I Will swear thy Verses I must call
Not sublunary, but Celestial;
For sure th'Intelligences moved thy brain,
And were the primum mobile of thy strain
In Poetry; thou do so sweetly sing,
That were not Treason, I Would proclaim thee King
In Homer's stead; and could I have my will.
Thou should be chief of all the bifork'd Hill.
Thy head that Capitol of wisdom too,
Does more then Nature, much as Art can do.
Thy Star works great effects of Chimistrie,
Aurum it make's to some Potabile;
It also wonders works upon Men's Wits,
And makes them think the lower Orb has fits
Of th'trembling Ague, and they will swear by Jove,
Copernicus speaks true, the Earth does move;
And for thy Book, the praise it gets of mine,
Is only this, it is exc'lent good, and Thine.
Tho. Parkin, junior. A. B.

Upon the pithy Poems of Mr. Nicholas Murford, MERCHANT.
I Do not here appear to praise thy Book,
Because I have acquaintance with Thee took.
I do not praise thy Book, because of Thee;
But praise Thee for thy witty Book, all see.
Merchant of wit, who tradest in it much,
And sell'st to such, to buy that do not grutch,
Thy German, French, and Belgic voy'ages; none
Can be compared to this, to Helicon:
Ah! what great pity was it, that such Wit
Did never in an Academy sit?
For if thou had, what had been ancient blades?
Thou had outdone great Homer's Iliads:
Yet notwithstanding, oh! how thou do shame
Some that from learned Ox, and Came have came?
When thou writ'st to thy Book, thy Friends, thy God,
How is thy soaring Pegasus then shod!
When thou have lad'n thy Ships, and caetera,
Then nulla dies sine linea.
Thy witty, wholesome Satyrs lash not men;
But heart-corrupting, and Soul-wounding sin.
When thou art pleased to write upon thine Inn,
Rash men think no man e're in such came in:
But to the STAR thy Tavern, if men come,
The first words are, Is the good man at home?
And then (with much respect) most happy he
Who has thy most delightful company.
Never did I see man so much respected
In such a calling, one so perfected!
In brief, if one would praise Thee, it is thus,
The Author is, Vnus in omnibus.
Thy Book repleat is with Wits purity,
Full of Divine wit; but no surquedry.
Caesar, if not Caesar, would wish to be
(I verily do think) like unto Thee.
(As Alexander said to Diogenes)
God help poor Kings, they ha'nt such happy days!
If thou abused art by a dull Elf,
Thou Wilt jeer him so, he will choose to hang himself,
As once did one of old. Thus these thy lays
Engaged me Secretary of thy praise,
And thou deservest to be Secretary
To England's best, and gallantst Noble, marry.
J. B.

A l' Autheur.
MOn melieur Amy (plustost) ma foy
Vouz merit Secretaire du Roy.
Robert Thorowgood Merchant.

To the Author M. Nicholas Murford, Merchant. Nurs-child of Maro. Anag.
THy Poems on a Pillory makes me stand
With both my ears fast nailed, and fixed hand
Upon thy Book, which took me when I see it
(As flies are taken) fettered by the feet
Of thy smooth verse. Thou, whose smooth chin does write
Thy date of years the hours of day and night,
That abler wits admire to see thee climb
To so great height in such short space of time.
Poetrie's now grown Staple-Merchandize
Free from Old Custom or the New Excise.
Silvester, Spenser, Johnsonn, Draiton, Donn,
May see Verse measured by the Last and Tunn,
While Dutch, French, Spanish, English liquours use
TO adorn thy house, their learnings grace thy Muse;
Thy frolique Nimble Genius like thy Star
That twinkling brings the Magi from afar
Into these Northern parts to come to Lynne
To see two Rarities, thy Works, thy Inn,
Which with thy Star and Stable represent
A second Bethlem. Next comes sweet Content:
When men were wise and happy, then this Theme
Was welcome news, that now seems but a dream.
The ancient Bards reserved this dish of meat
For Kings to taste on: then were Crowns complete.
But since their learned days Content and Kings
Are from us fled with their high-towring wings
Not seen, felt, heard, or understood, Unless
That in a Gallie, this a game at Chesse.
Thy Muse has made thee Momus-free, each word
Mur'd with a Wall, and Moted with a Ford,
Thus garrisoned, in this the Nectar flows,
In that the Laurel springs to bind thy Brows.
Let the poor Scoundrel praise the poor-patcht words
Of ebrious Poets sheets, sung on two bords
Upon a pair of Trussels in a Fair,
Or Market, where the Clowns and Girls repair;
And let the Romancer his stories gild
With Ladies loves, Knights conquering, Giants killed.
Let the bold weeks-man write his wrong-set news,
That may by Patent all the world abuse,
With six days works of new-created lies
To bind up Gally-pots and bottom pies.
Let them seek praises where they will for me,
All that I have or can, belong to thee,
And to thy Star that calculates thy fate
To be divine Apollo's right hand mate,
And make me wish my self a Star, to be
A pointer in the Guoards to say that is He.

And for thy Book, let never greasy thumb,
Nor shallow-brain upon thy pages come,
Nor doults that must be forced to read it twice,
Nor ignorance attempt to ask the price,
Nor stammering fools, that hack and mar the sense,
The sellers power's repealed to take their pence;
Thy worthy Work shall make thy Pen so famed,
And get thee glory that thy Book's Nick-nam'd.
Then march-on MURFORD never be afraid,
The Muses love to have young beginners trade;
And I short to express thy worth, thy rhyme,
Crave leave to end and mend another time.
Jo. Bradford.

To my exceedingly respected friend Mr. Nicholas MVRFORD, Merchant.
WHen Reason, Fancy, Wit, and Grace
In tender years take each their place,
These make the man. All these I see.
Concur in this thy Book, and Thee.
Thou Merchant Murford may be well,
For this thy Book does much excel,
And set's forth Reason, Wit, and Grace
In every line, in their due place.
Good Friend, hold on, and write a-gain;
This Book will sell, and thou wilt remain
Encouraged still for future Wark,
And get the name of learned Clark.
E're long thou wilt hear men will relate
Thee to be Poet laureate.
Thus think I of thy Book, and Thee,
And am thy faithful friend and free.
W. Skynner, Gent.

The Invocation. To the most High GOD. His humble Servant Implores his most
favorable assistance.
OH all-wise God! with the least word who can
Make me dull wretch, as clear as Solomon;
Daign from the Orbs to view this Work of mine,
And with Diviner raptures it refine?
Great God! I crave thy Spirit, and do refuse
To this my Work to invocate a Muse.
"A sacred heat inspires my Soul to try
If Verse can give me what base Earth deny,
A true content; therefore (Lord!) I Will think on
"Thy Jordan for my purest Helicon;
"And for bifork'd Pernassus, I will set
"My fancy on thy sacred Olivet;
For thy Diviner Poet David did
That which was never attained to by Ovid.
Nay thou who Aetna curb'st, and the wild Sea,
Shall of my Songs be Alpha and Omega.
Let my Divine things be perspicuous,
And even my worst (my God) be virtuous!
Let me have holy fraud: with roundelaies
Let inter-mixed be most sacred lays!
Let my but moral things have virtue on,
And my Divine have pure Religion!
Let my wit draw the Reader with such Art,
That Grace may sweetly captivate his Heart!
Oh let my Epigrams jeer him from bad,
My Satyrs make him to leave vice be glad!
My Elegies to make him mourn for's folly,
My holy Sonnets learn him to be holy!
"Grant Verse may find him; who a Sermon flies,
"And turn delight into a sacrifice!
Let me not be like those live ill, preach well,
Who save men's souls; yet send their own to Hell!
POEMS. The STORM and CALM: Sent from Embden to M. Edw. Ma. and M. Tho. Ly.
WEary with Reading and with Meditation,
Upon my spirit settled a Vexation:
Having no Compass, nor no Chard to view,
Since we did only drive, and over-view,
What did our hasty spirits Griefs renew,
I thought in Verse to parley once with you.
The sometime-mounting Sea is now so calm,
As if it were surprised with a qualm:
The wanton Sails do beat the quiet Maste,
And the Sun's heat does make Wood pitch to taste:
Two days before I gave the land-sight shilling,
Which I to give, as they to take was willing,
The Mariners were almost at a strife
To have me hear what each would say to's wife.
The thievish Irish we had quite given over,
Concerning thoughts that they could us discover:
We anchored with Hope's anchor, and our own;
Then from the ground they both again were shown.
Now a dissembling voice of wind does speak;
But presently we cannot hear him squeak.
The sleepie Sea that before so boisterous was,
Is now as smoothe as the most even Glass:
One now would think the water to be dead,
Or with dead sleep to be heavy as Lead;
Which not to wake, the stormy folk I cry-on;
"O it is not good to wake a sleeping Lion!
For not long since, in the same ship we were,
When the mad Wind I thought would tear her gear;
And carrying by the board a Maste, might quail
The stoutest heart; the skeening of a Sail,
The shipping of a Sea, the Deck in water
For full five hours in my conceit was greater:
But all together, in my vainer mind,
Would make a man to fear the raging wind:
And if the Wind, which was but God's mere Creature,
O how much more God, who was the Creator!
But when the Ship was like to over-set,
The Sea-men's eyes were dry, though bodies wet.
In stead of praying, some did curses vent;
Which that they did, I would they might repent.
Titan withdrew his golden locks; our Ark
Now in the day must wander in the dark.
One time we think we must for Norway go;
Then for Scotland; then neither is it so;
For we have hopes for Tinmouth, then for Humber:
Thus doubtful fears our doubtful souls incumber.
So dangerous was our Voyage, that I vow,
I love your presence, but woul'n't have it now.
Thus have we here the calm Prosperity,
And the great storm of fierce Adversity;
Which I desire to draw to use: a Moral
May here drawn out be for us mortals all.
The first, her Sun, will take away our cloak,
Before the other's blustering wind can choke.
In Court Elisha had need doubly have
Elijah's spirit, who was in the wave
Of soul-trying, yet good Adversity,
Which is the heavenly University.
Oh Lord, give me my portion of these,
Or either, as thou think fit, and do please.
To the Right Worshipful Thomas Revet Mayor elect of Kings Lynn. The PRESENT.
WHile wealthy Senators, and Burghers rich,
Make privy search the row The Ocean and each ditch
For curious, rarer, and scarce heard of Fishes,
With Love and Pride to furnish your vast dishes;
And neighboring Knights and Gentry hunt each Park,
Search Fields and all for the nimble Deer in the dark,
Ere that Aurora has her tresses dighted,
Or Phospher has the Hemisphere belighted,
The winged creatures with observant eye
Watching, and waiting if they can epsy:
While these (having obtained) offer their Presents,
My Muse their way does wave, and not resents;
But for King John's Cup, brings Nectar sublime,
And (for one dish) Ambrosia divine.
And if you Music affect and admire,
Apollo shall descend with his sweet Lyre.
The Muses shall with trenchers wait upon you,
If there chance not to be servants enough;
Nay, I Will dispeople Air, Sea, and the Earth,
Rather (dear Sir) then there should be a dearth
At your great Festival; and could I charm,
None should in thought, word, deed, produce you harm:
And I hope (Sir) you will please for to give way
To hear a Poet Prophet turn, and pray.
May Envy sleep under your foot! Oh, may
Your year of charge seem as one joyful day!
May we Plebeans with true Love, not Hate,
Obey your just commands, as you the State!
May you have Conscience, and have Policy,
Before this People to walk prudently!
May your two houses have one single heart,
And (Solon-like) to govern well, the Art!
May the great God's receivers, even the Poor,
Relieved be at their houses, and your door!
May Lyn still flourish, and increase by Trade,
Ploughing the Ocean with the Naval blade!
May Spain, France, Belgia, Germany,
Our flood of fortunes even like Venice spy!
May Alms support the aged, may Trades the youth,
And may your praises be spoke by each mouth!
May children (yet unborn) say REVET did
All that was good, in nothing he misdid!
That to your memory there may be regard,
When Death upon you place a Corpse du guard.
Nay stay: for I have not done (Sir;) here is not all:
For here is a Feast you will says Poetical:
But could men's cordial and their often wishes
Supply your Board, then you should have these dishes:
And to speak truth, of old they were no babies
Who used this saying, Creed quod habes, and habes.
First Course.
Collars of Brawn, stiff like a well-starch'd Ruff,
Sallet, and Capon boyld tender enough,
Gurnet, and Mallard, after the same sort,
With a forced boyld meat, ordered with port;
A roasted Neats-tongue, with a Pudding in it,
(Even such a tongue as never did use to sin it.)
A made dish of Puff-paste, with a fair Shoulder-
Of Mutton o-leaves, capers before the houlder.
A Chine of Beef, Chewets of weak-brain'd Veal,
A Sican, an Olive-Pye, a Pig shall not squeal.
A leg of Mutton, Lark-pye, and a Turkey,
With Ven'son-Pasty, Capon, Custard work I,
And ha'nt the least remorse,
Or thought of the second Course.
Now I have time, and now with all my force,
I Will muster up my wished second Course.
Second Course.
A tender Kidd, with a couple of Rabbits;
A Kickshaw fried, or baked, (void of raw bits)
A roasted Mallard, brace of Partridges;
A Chicken-pye to march along with these.
A brace of Woodcocks, a couple of Teals;
A cold baked Meat, a dish of Plovers, Quails;
A dish of Snipes, a cold baked Meat; thereby
A dish of Larks, a Quince, or Warden pie.
A dried Neats tongue, an Oyster-pye; then on
A dish of Puffs, a Joul of Sturgion.
A fair laid Tart of Puff-paste, and sweet sucket,
A dish of pickled Oysters (Cloves bestucked.)
In Ord'ring of these Dishes I Am so hoarse,
I Have not strength to name the looked for third Course.
Apology.
I know not how you relish these my Dishes,
Nor if you daign acceptance of my Wishes.
Some judge them like Apelles fruit, and some
To such, as soon as to your Feast would come.
So we are Feast-hainers; th'difference is here,
You feed the Mouth, and I do feed the Ear.
Epigrams and Epitaphs.
I. Cheater.
Have thou, Cheater, of gold such quenchless thirst?
I would 'twere melted, then drink while thou burst.
II. Hold-Cook.
Cornutus was Cornutus called by's wife;
And was there not great cause of flaming strife?
She thought to shame her Man. Alas! poor heart,
I fear in the world to come she will have the smart.
III. The Rule.
It Is good to speak no ill of other men,
And of our selves to speak no good again.
IV. The Spice.
All Vices have their taste from Avarice;
So is it one, though a corrupting, Spice.
V. The Serpent.
Sigismund's Stork a flatt'rer light upon,
Because he bit worse then a Scorpion.
VI. But marrs.
In Dutch, But Maer is; from 't I clearly spy
That our word Mar proceeded lineally:
For we say such an one's honest and wise,
But he is greatly given unto lies.
Wherefore judge all men, you both near and far,
If But, so used, don't the Sentence mar.
VII. Imbarbus.
The Author those that flout him thus does hit;
He wish to have never more Beard then Wit.
VIII. Imperfect.
Sure there is a mystery in Religion lurks;
Papists want Faith, and Protestants Good works.
IX. Tautologie.
I know not if it is question, or command,
In these words, hear, conceive, and understand.
X. Epitaph on M. S.
Behold a wonder! here lies slain Anag.

One in three hours that rose again.
XI. Epit. on S. B.
Here lies a Squire, yet scarce a Gentleman;
A member only of the Pint and Can.
XII. Epit. on Al. Camock.
Here lies an Elder, Merchant, Poet, Artist,
Who having ruled, traded, writ, wrought, 's dismissed.
XIII. Epit. on M. Good-rich.
Here lies one, whose name does speak him even
On Earth accepted, and beloved in Heaven.
XIV. Epitaph on the late K.
Zeal, Learning, Patience, Valor here does lie,
Superlative, even unto ecstasie;
That steered a State War-tost, not by Self-will:
Blame then the Storm, not th'Pilot's want of skill.
XV. The Translator.
Thou second Sidney, if what is laid is true,
That thou translat'st old English into new:
Nay it is said, that thou do him transcend;
For thou amendest All with thy good End.
To Sir R. S. Epistle.
SIr, after my vowed service's remembrance,
I will betray my bolder Ignorance,
In letting my Muse take another flight;
Then let her on your nobler hand alight.
Whenas not great, yet good Roger a Gaunt
Your kind acceptance of my Muse did plant
Within my head, my head most thankful still,
Issued an Order to my baser quill,
My quill in hand (unjust) I bite my nails,
Because my head in brave invention fails.
I would say something, but I know not what,
My Muse is so beflagged, dull, and flat.
Yet now suppose me (dear Sir) in your presence,
Filling your ears with eloquent nonsense,
Inviting you, not, as I was your guest,
But, as a Trav'ler, to th'Star in the East,
Where, to speak without pure, fantastic flams,
Your choicest dish shall be of Epigrams;
And they perhaps to you may seem less vain
Then the strange dishes of wild France or Spain:
For if I should make preparations thus,
You Will take me to be Heliogabalus:
And now I think on it, I might save my prate;
For you was here, I think, too long of late:
And if I should speak out, and speak it flatly,
You were too lately here, it were no flatly.
Then may I to your house invite my self,
O bold, adventurous, and audacious elf,
Shall I re-enter then your Houses door?
I shall be then unmannerly to Snore,
And go to Downham, ere I take my horse,
Or take my feet, and that you will say is worse.
There Is inconvenience in their full-crown'd -- glasses;
For they will take letters out, and put in -- lasses;
Nay they will take wit out, and of men make -- asses:
Clipping true English comes from ful-fill'd -- bowls,
Blindness at noonday, as the weak-ey'd -- owls.
I like not learned Horace's thrice three,
Although they of th'uneven Muses be,
To ravished high-flown Poets hieroglyphics,
Methinks they bite sharper then keen Jambicks;
Nor that strange imitation of the Graces,
(Although but three) which gives men's wits short races;
But rather like that composition fine,
Ear-tickling wit unto heart-chearing wine;
And since you use both, I would visit you,
But have no Beucephal to mount I vow:
Wherefore I Will this propose, if t'int too course,
I Will for a limbed change a winged horse.
A SONG, Made at my last coming out of Germany.
WE are Neptunian boys that come
For to see fair Albion's shore,
We wish, we wish to see our home,
And to leave the brutish bore.
Then now let our sails be spread, be spread,
Then now let our sails be spread,
The curled billows let us plow,
And Neptunes watery bed.
Jove give us a fair wind,
Our Ark heels as an hind,
That we stay not behind.
Oh Jove South-east,
Or else North-east,
Or sweet East!
Neptune, grant Triton t'usher us
With his auspicious sound;
It Is music not superfluous;
But pleasures there abound.
If that the Monster sets sail
Unto that joyful noise,
Who is not moved with a gale,
But then does feel his joys
He that with his mouth does drink up Seas,
And eat up floating flocks;
He that the grassie Islands fleas,
And shakes the firmest rocks.
Oh let us his strength see,
Objects let us not be;
In him shall we see thee.
Our mouths up raise,
With louder praise,
With shrillerlays!
The fiercer Seahorse, that fell fish,
Whose tooth so fair sharp is,
The Mare-man, merry Mare-maid fish,
Whose ditty pleasant is;
That fish so musical, and kind
Unto the sons of men;
The Dolphin brave, whose sweeter mind
Saved Orion with her fin.
The wily Seal that land's,
And defends her with sands,
Who has watch in her bands:
The snorting Porpus,
Husband to the Sea-sus;
Thus, thus, thus!
The summer Mackril, and the Herring,
That swim in such great flocks;
The wide-mouthed Sharb who is so learing,
The Dog the fishers pox.
The flail-fin'd Thresher, and Sword-fish,
The muddy Eel and Lamprel;
The harmless Whiting which men wish,
And the Sea-wolf so fell:
The Fountain-fish that spouts,
The Flying fish that scouts,
The Load-fish that so pouts.
Great Jove, we stand
Within thy hand,
Now wish Land.
14 Junii, 1649. Epithalamium to M. G. Heather, who that day married Mistress
J. Revet.
WHat mean the clamorous bells? the Juvenal fry?
The Virgin-Troop, that march so amorously
To th'place of Rendevouz? The mounting bells
Are loud-mouthed Drums, and Trumpets that excells,
Beating a Call unto god Cupid's wars:
But oh! who don't delight in such sweet jars?
Cupid leads on the frisking Cavalry;
The pleasant Amazons march orderly
Under Latona's banner; and Mars brings
Some Officers to order flanks and wings.
Alas! 'twas needless to bring Vulcan He'ther;
For Nature learns to Revet well together.
Their colors white, and they show innocence;
Yet cease not this your fight, oh! in-no-sence.
Here is no danger; bravely sound the charge;
Bring up your canon, and stoutly discharge:
Yet how was my brain het with such fond fuel?
It is no Battle, but a single Duel;
And seconds may be in a-green-way then;
But pray stay Gallants while your time come, when
Ye may go fight too; in the interim
Go bite your handkerchiefs, and think on them.
Come, Bridegroom, let me whisper in your ear;
Coun^el is good to all that will it hear;
Lavolta's you must dance; and mounting then,
Your Bride will dance all the dances over again.
Music, pray cease; for I dare lay a shilling
The sense of Hearing is not like the Feeling.
Uncivil guests, be gone, and bid goodnight,
Or else if I come, I Will put out the light.
Ye senseless animals to talk of noon;
What if they did? I say 'twas not too soon.
Come, leave your tatling, gossips, and be gone;
Ye make the Bride blush like a rose in June.
Blush not (sweet Bride.) Go, Hymen, light your torch,
And usher out these guests out of the porch:
For if the proudest of you dare to tarry,
I Will scourge you with a smart make-Satyr, marry.
And for these lingering Virgins, oh, Priest, lo,
If you would but marry them, then they would go.
The PRAYER.
FAir Bride, may every night you go to bed
Give your good Husband a new Maidenhead,
And if he chance to ever think amiss,
May your sweet lips then charm him with a kiss.
Then that the World may see yon are no starters,
May a son bless you at lawful three quarters!
A Farewell to the World. Satyr 1. OR A Comment on a Copy of Verses.
"FArewell, ye honored rags, ye Crystal bubbles;
"Farewell, ye lying joys, ye pleasing troubles.
Wise Solomon says, Earth's most choice things merit
Is vanity, with vexing of the spirit.
These rags are worn, these crystal bubbles choking,
These joys are lies, these pleasing troubles croking.
Therefore, vain World, of thee I take farewell,
Before I reasons fully to thee tell.
"Fame's but an hollow Echo, gold pure clay,
"Honor the darling but of one short day.
Fame's a mushrum, which Pliny does repute
Nature's chief miracle having no root:
E le had those Grecians, and those Romans brave
For their achievements never found a Grave;
And besides where shall empty Fame be hurled
When God does make a bone-fire of the world?
Great store of Gold can not be gotten in,
And kept (says learned Erasmus) without sin.
And that deceitful, though most glorious clay,
Behold! makes it wings, and flies away.
Ah! how was Julius Caesar s honor laid
In blood? And how most strangely wa'st betrayed?
How faild great Pompey's state? whose story sad
Would make a man in honor half grow mad?
How were those wretched Kings, that for the riot
Of their proud foe, did draw his Chariot?
How was it with that poor dejected King,
His vile deposing by foes suffering?
How was it with one of the Royal blood,
The nearest heir, ah! who not only stood
Barehead, but barefoot ran, oh cruelty!
After the train of mounted Burgundy.
Stanly presuming of his surer hold,
Was'nt only unexpectedly controld,
But at no warning, oh the viler deed!
By crooked Richard shortened by the head.
Fame has no root, gold tried is but dross,
And by that vaunting honor is most loss.
"Beauty's chief Idol's but a damask skin,
"State but a golden prison to keep in,
"And torture freeborn minds; imbroid'red trains
"Are but the issues of fantastic brains.
A dash of natur's tincture laid upon
The skin, by sickness washed of anon,
Is beauty. And what but a fair blossom,
That drops, as fruit offer's thereon to come?
What but a flower, oh ye fondling mortals!
Which with one hot Sunbeam wealtreth, and falls?
He that did with a thousand beauties ly,
Said favor is deceit, beauty vanity.
State still ingendreth Envy, and we see,
Each has a cudgel for a laden Tree.
All the cures 'ith Street in fierce pursuit are gone
Of that poor cur that runs with the bone.
How many even in this age of ours,
Whom wealth betrayed, and made malefactors?
One says, State is n't only a prison foul;
But does avouch it the bane of the soul.
How fearful are the great to tread awry,
Because they are watched by many a spy?
Imbroid'red trains, what are they? even the best
Are borrowed from some stranger bird, or beast;
And all attires. The Bever ownes the Hat.
As for the silk-stocking, the silkworm owneth that.
The Sheep the Suit and Cloak. The Boot and Shoe the Neat,
And if this stripped the Gallant scarce would sweat,
Beauty's a paint detected, States a Cage
Of Iron, Trains a folly in young age.
"And blood allied to greatness is but loan
"Inherited, not purchased, not her own.
What thy Father by his worth deserved
Belongs not to thee, nor for thee reserved;
Says one (and be it known he was no babble)
It is thine own deserts must make thee noble;
For that which by our Ancestors is sown,
Because not ours, is scarcely called our own;
Greatness of blood without claiming desert,
By wise men is not valew'd worth a fart.
"Fame, Riches, Hoonur, Beauty, State, Trains, Birth,
"Are but the fading pleasures of the Earth.
Add, if you please, strength, valor, pleasure, wisdom;
Corruption all these does overcome.
"I would be high, but see the Sun does still
"Level his beams against the rising hill.
I see the common humor does abet
The ax to be in the blood of Nobles wet.
LAUD and STRAFFORD had n't had so ill a fate,
But that they mounted were in Church and State.
Therefore advance I wish not in extremes,
For fear the Sun should melt it with his beams.
"I would be rich, but see man too unkind,
"Digging the bowels of the richest mine.
And therefore is it that it seems reason
To make rich men guilty of high Treason.
Oh how men pine when a fair house is shown,
That (they think) a too wealthy man does own!
"I would be wise, but that the Fox I see
"Suspected guilty, whilst the Ass goes free.
Oh the great safety of a Fool! the Gull
(A bird much found among the Worshipful)
Danger afflicts not: but the Nightingale
The thorns her breast prick, and she it does wail.
The Flail and Sword-fish do not find a fault
With silly quiet fish, but the Whale assault.
Therefore but note the mystery of it;
Wise men cut off, Fools saved for want of wit.
"I would be poor, but see the humble grass
"Trampled upon by each unworthy ass.
As that Soldier leaping short of the ditch,
The Company (each one) made him their bridge:
Yet none but Asses to the humble can
Forget so much the other is a man.
"Wise suspected, High envied more,
"Rich hated, Fair tempted, scorned if Poor.
"Would the world now adopt me for her heir,
"And Beauty's queen entitle me The fair:
Were I as famous even as Hercules,
With Croesus riches, and of both the Indies,
And as much honor as an Alexander,
Walking with Venus in loves sweet Maeander,
And as much state as (sometime) Solomon,
As rich attire as Cleopatra on
My back, with near alliance unto Kings;
Lord, what are these but flattering fading things!
Were I the most Angelick creature living,
Who, though a widower, need not go a wiving:
"Could I vye Angels with rich Indian meads,
"Or with a speaking eye command bare heads.
Had I all Vsurer's baggs in mine own keeping;
(But they, nor I, could not then rest by sleeping)
Or could my nobler eye speak Majesty,
And make men humbly at my feet to lie.
"Could I be more then any man that live's,
"Fair, rich, great, all in superlatives.
Were I more, then can be, most fair, most rich,
Most wise, most great, it would be a lying itch,
Which seems to tickle at the first; but lo!
It make's a man into half frenzy go.
"I count one minute of my holy leisure
"Beyond too much of all this worldly pleasure.
One spiritual ejaculation
Is better then to rule a mighty Nation.
How sweet is it, for to converse with God,
Holding his Scepter out instead of Rod!
With Paul to be in the third Heavens rapt,
Which for to be, each humbled foul is apt.
"A Book of Prayers shall be my lookinglass,
"Wherein I Will see, and court sweet Virtue's face.
In Prayer I will see God's face; virtue
By Heathens called is now Religion true.
Shunning of vice, and loving that is good,
Now virtue's beauteous face has lost her hood.
"Here will I sit, and sigh my hot youth's folly,
"And learn t'affect an holy melancholy.
Ah! here I Will grieve for with sad sighs, and groans,
Sins by my marrow-hot-inflamed bones.
My sins of youth with David I Will lament,
'Till God does say thou do, and I Will repent.
"And if contentment be a stranger then,
"I Will never look for it, but in Heaven age'n.
'Twas that made Israel safe in the red Sea,
The blessed three Children in the fire to be
Vnscorched, and David to fight Goliath,
And Jesus earthly Mother blessed Maria
Escape Herod's cruelty. Joseph in the pit,
And in the Prison so for to embrace it.
Stephen amid a shower of stones to stand
Thrice blessed, holding of Christ by heart, and hand.
Note 'twas contentment under God's great hand,
That made them waighting for deliverance stand.
If then contentment be'nt in faith to God,
Contentment by me is not understood.
D. Rogero Sotheby Mercatori, ut pignus observantia D.D.D. hunc Papam-Daemon.
N.M. Satyr. 2. The PICTVRE.
Haec pictura videt monachum nunc esse per omnes;
Sed modo verte parum, Demon ut ipse videt.

RUn, run, run, run: what are you mad to stay?
Sluggard, there is no Lion in the way,
To stop thy flight from a more monstrous beast
Then the strange formed Creatures of the East.
Thou piece of lying holiness avaunt,
Thou gold-devouring, gaping Cormorant,
Thou beast with seven horns, heathen in heart,
Although thou have of lies guilding the Art.
Thou Tyber-Tyger, thirsting after blood
Of such as thou will never be so good;
Methinks that those that come to kiss thy Toe,
Should let their eyes a little further go,
And there see with an half eye, and half blind,
How foul he is under his vizard behind:
His Tripple Crown declares that triple evil,
Of failing flesh, base world, and cursed Devil;
Nay throw him down from off his Papall-seat,
And he uncased then will make you sweat.
Look one way here, and then a Pope you see,
And but revers't the Devil a Pope is he,
A two horned Devil, and there is no hope
That he can e're return again to Pope.
But take him at the best he is so evil,
That I must style him here a right Pope-Devill,
Or Devill-Pope, which is not my mere humor,
Or taking up on trust of lying rumor;
But as the Devil proud was, so is he,
And as it was his ruin, 'twill his be.
The Devil we know all was such a liar,
That he deceived our Grandam Eve's desire,
And promised to give Man-God the Orb,
Whenas he need not his heart so disturb;
For it was none of his to give; so the Pope
Blasphemously does give to sinners scope
To swim in sins, and this it is deceives,
He says his pardon punishment reprieves,
And says he cannot err, oh error great,
Crept unto such a learned abused seat.
Simil. Thus have I seen a picture that one way
Was man, the other a woman's face display.
So have I heard of Crocodiles deceit,
Dissembling Childrens cries have laid a bait.
So have I seen an apple good to the eye,
To the better proving mouth has given the lie.
So have I known a brass ring gilt all over,
Which trying time the falsity discover.
Such Pictures, Crocodiles, Apples, and Rings,
May with the Pope be called deceitful things.
The Map of vice: Italian Atheism,
Spains pride, French lightness, and their Schism,
Dutch drunkenesse, Jews superstition,
And such that if I would make inquisition,
I could compare him I dare here protest
To no one man; but to Lucifer best.
Manfroy's ambition comes short of his;
Ravillacks murder that, then his was less.
Nero's vile cruelty he does out do,
And Paris theft like his is nothing so;
More Tyrant then Caligula; more vile
And wavering then the Emperor of Nile
Was to Gods chosen Israel; reason
Will say he has outdone Sylla's vile treason.
It Is true he is like Caligula in this
He does repine at all men's happiness.
Cleopatra, and Semiramis lusts
To his great storms, are but as smaller gifts.
Proud Dioclesian that called the Sun
Brother, comes behind him, for he don't shun
T'usurp Christ's place to be head of the Church;
For cursed Avarice he is as much
Guilty as base Hermocrates, who did
Bequeath his goods unto himself when dead.
The Sabies were not so idle as he,
Nor do I think that any man can be.
The Tyrant Dionysius by drink
That lost his eyes, was not his match I think.
Wherefore I pardon crave to have begun,
That which by betters must be over-don,
Since I come short in all things; but I hope,
Some will from this more understand the Pope,
And at my younger hands take it not evil,
Since I do justly style him a Pope-Devill.
Duitz is te spraek met via'ndts, (so segg'sy) maer,
As met even via'ndt wy spraek, wy foudt bewaer;
J'ck can niet swart whit segg'; so van de Paep,
Jck can niet segg' hy opsta'et, as hy slaep.
De Jude will niet dat Christus hier heeft' west,
De Paust dat hy soudt regulere; de best'
Wy weet elk soek sijn selve; oh lieve Here!
Coninck van konincks du must reguleere,
En de hovaerdich monnick seggen wy
Must weer wesen Servus Servorum Dei.
Drunkenesse Satyr. 3.
When I thus ruminate, oh Heavens me bless!
The Apish tricks of wilder Drunkenness.
Those thirty Tyrants in that Heathen State
More dire, unheard of things did never create,
Then these mad thirty Sons of Drunkeness,
Some seeming virtues; yet most horrid vices.
Oh wonder! here the miracle still lies,
It does delight it self in contraries.
Witty, Foolish, waking, sleepy, angry,
Pleasant, faith-full-lesse, valiant, cowardly,
Quarrelsom, loving, healthful, sick, then come
Covetous, liberal, speaking and dumb,
Lame, walking, secret, open, lecherous, chaste,
Care-full-lesse, proud, humble, mad quiet's last.
1.
Witty, or empty boldnsse for conceit,
Is subject to be cheated by deceit.
How have I heard a vafering blade dispense
With a conceited wit; but mere nonsense?
How have I heard a thunder thumping wit
Sometimes his friend, sometimes himself to hit?
Sim So have I seen a glittering weapon stand
In a mad man's ill-regulated hand.
2.
Foolish, for motly Drunkards slaver, yaun,
As it they were a witless changelings spaun,
Wanting the utterance of words, drawing
To void his Urine, like beasts, his Cud chawing.
Sim. So have I seen, an Idiot in the street,
Showing his ware to all that do him meet.
3.
Waking, when he has far more need of sleep
Against it do his senses cent'ry keep,
His eyes speak want; yet does his pride say no,
He says he is sober when he is nothing so.
Sim. So have I seen expenses that were large,
When he could not defray one hafe o'th charge.
4.
Sleepy, that friends cannot raise him to a bed,
Heavy with Drunkenness, as duller lead.
The noise of dreadful thunder, nor of waves
That Lion-like do roar, nor he that raves
Tormented by Perillus bull, or winds
Impetuous rage this man still sleeping find's.
Sim. So do Chirurgions their Patients keep
From sense of pain by a benumming sleep.
5.
Angry, still finding fault, and ever thinking
That he is jeered, never content (but drinking)
Oh! he has no respect, not worthy he
(And there he is right) of the good Company.
His eyes red, glaring, rouling, sparkling so,
A, if he would devour those that say no
To his affirmed lies: in his short madness.
Now are his cheeks become as pale as ashes,
Then fiery, and swollen up, as with poison.
His quivring head and hands shaking upon
His senseless Trunk, and his Lips quivering,
His foul mouth foming, and his tongue doubling,
His reeling feet unconstantly shifting,
And his full-gorged stomach always lifting,
And the whole man wholly unlike himself,
So furious is this our ridiculous else.
Sim. So have I seen a Curr to bite the stones
Thrown at him whereby he breaks his jaw-bones.
6.
Pleasant, he speak's as one learning the Sauter,
Mopping and mowing he ingend'reth laughter
By much of which a fool is known: how merry
Is he become by drinking searching sherry?
Dancing Corranto's, and fine Northren Jiggs,
Unmercifully thumping wentches giggs.
Sim. So here is the difference of this frollick wherry
Others are mad fools; but this is the merry.
7.
Quarelsome, as those that do whore and drab,
Or Alexander who did Clitus stab.
So that Tyrant Cambises being reproved
For Drunkeness shot his Son much beloved,
And said unnat'rall Father, whose words stunk,
See what a steady hand I Have now I Am Drunk.
And some men then commonly give the Glove
For desperate Duells where they, had firm love.
Some men (some what more harmless) for they will cusse
On no occasion giving counter busse.
Sim. So have I heard men (if I don't mistake them,)
That know men's words better then they that speak them.
8.
Loving so fervently his drunken mate,
That you would think there was no place for hate,
Vowing he will lend him hundreds, when alas!
The borrower (God know's) his own case was.
He love's, he love's, he love's with so great vigor,
As you can scarce believe, (but it is the liquour)
And he begins friendship with another,
Who he does swear shall be dearer then is Brother;
But it may chance to fall ever they do part,
That he does give his hand in lieu of heart.
Sim. So have I seen two Children kiss each other
But now, and presently each strike the other.
9.
Faithful if it may be called so; for some
Unto his friend a second will become,
And to his drunken inflamed friend add fuel
To perpetrate a wretched dangerous duel.
Sim. So have I heard, that one did swear, and swagger
He Would kill himself, and the Devil reached a Dagger.
10.
Faithless pretending friendship; yet his coin
Endeavoring by wiles for to purloyn,
And by that cursed play of Cards, and Dice
Trim up his own new clothes with nits and lice.
So does the Crocodile weep, and yet watch
If by his wiles a prey he well can catch.
11.
Valiant, he dare tell Beelzebub he lies,
And in this humor Hercules defies,
Dare fight a Troup, out-dare the thundering Ordnance,
Against every man his vap'ring fists advance.
But when he is sober he is another temper,
And his surname is Innocentius semper.
So have I heard one has contemned the Mayor,
And the next day has waited at his stayr.
12.
Cowardly, and as Pusillanimous,
As with the frog was that combating mouse
In Aesops Fables, or those famous Clownes
By Sidney placed in the Arcadian downs,
Each other by their Challenges so frighting,
That they can scarce refrain their britches --
Box him, and beat him, call him rogue, and rascal;
Yet he most virtuously does put up all.
Sim. So have I seen a strayed our in 'th streets,
Bitten by all; yet cringes t'all he meets.
13.
Healthful, so that his stomach is not squesy,
Although his wit may be somewhat too lazy.
Sim. So have I seen at Sea a Seaman young,
Not sick, but did no work, but with his tongue.
14.
Sick, that you would connsell him to make his Will;
But you in fine shall not find him half so ill.
Sim. So have I seen a vagrant lame in show,
That if detected, was found nothing so.
15.
Covetous in extremes, that he wont pay
His reckoning upon that self same day
He did with Bacchus feast, nor draw his coin;
For he supposes his own hands purloyn.
Sim. So have I seen the spirits tormenting rack
Grudge at the clothes he wore upon his back.
16.
Liberal, that he will give his hat from's head,
His Britches from his britch; nay it is se'd
His palfray he will present to him perchance,
Through impudence that to him did advance.
Sim. So have I seen a Child in a pleased vain
Give's bread and butter, and cry for it again.
17.
Speaking like Marcus Tullius Cicero,
His nimble tongue in it is careers shall go
Of all discourse a true Monopolizer,
When as (God wot) he scarce is thought the wiser.
Sim. So have I heard Rooks to vociferate,
When birds far more harmonious still sat:
18.
Dumb, as was Aesop, and a mouth as shut,
As he for prating whose Coxcomb was cut;
As mute as fishes are, creatures immured,
Or those that have not wit to speak a word.
Sim. So have I seen a Malefactors crime
Has made him speechless for that dreadful time
19.
Lame as the Savoy can afford, his feet
Alas! subject too often for to meet:
A true Noun Adjective cant stand alone;
But as the Maeanders on Indentures done,
Sim. So reel his feebled feet. So have I seen
A man in sickness that full weak has been.
20.
Walking, that by his well-trod steps you would think,
Drink was'nt in him, nor was the man in drink;
So like a sober man, and not defeated,
That wiser men then I might well be cheated,
Sim. So are there whores like honest women; shame!
For every like (ye know) is not the same.
21.
Secret, he wi'nt declare what he will do.
Ye shall not know when he to -- does go,
Nor when he kissed that handsome woman: no;
His secrets in his secret breast do grow.
Sim. So have I seen men in an high-stretch'd frolic
Whisper the escape of the tormenting Chollick.
22.
Open, he will tell you what purse he did cut,
That he did lie with such a dirty slut,
What are his resolutions, how fine
He will be when at such a place he dine.
Sim. So have I known a wench whose tongue did burn
In sleep to tell who did her a good turn.
23.
Leacherous, unto Whores, to girls, to boys,
To dirty drabs, and in such brutish ways,
As whether it may cause my grief, or mirth
I know not, but the vilest Jade on'th Earth
Was for his turn, with, Madam, one salute,
Sometimes she is stubborn, sometimes prostitute.
Sim. So do we see the feavour crave for cold,
When it is present death I dare be bold.
24.
Chaste as Diana, because lust is past,
I therefore think it scarce is called chaste.
Sim. So is occult a murtherous intent,
Because his murderous humor has no vent.
25.
Careful of all his friends that have excess
Even unto riot by their Drunkenness.
Oh cover him says he upon the bed,
Because the bolder wine has stormed his head,
Lend him your hand down those two dangerous stairs,
Wake him betime, to think on his affairs.
Sim. So have I seen one that excusd'd his friend
From drinking much; yet he has drunk his end.
26.
Careless, he weig's nor life, nor limb, nor gold,
Hazards his life, and limb, throw's gold untold,
And swears he will pave the house therewith, he hates
That odious crew of ruminating pates.
Sim. So have I seen men mazed at Sea, and stand
Expecting Death whilst freed by 'another hand.
27.
Proud, and so haughty, that a poor Mechanic
Shall not the drops fallen on the Table lick,
Wonders at men's intrusions, and think's
The man much honored still that with him drinks,
He that he cuff's, is knighted, and his spit
Miraculously does engender wit.
Sim So have I seen a man conceive applaud
From Auditors, when his conceit was fraud.
28.
Humble, that he will salute him, that before
He would have honored with a nod, not more,
Your very humble Servant, Sir: I vow,
As at the Heathen Alters so he will bow
Sim. To evr'y man. So does the Mast i'th'wind:
But it impetuosity combined.
29.
Mad, that he makes men camping-bals, he wrings
Men's arms, as Buts of wine are wrung in slings.
He tears the Clothes, abuse your fame, and thumbs,
Your faces, backs, your bellies and your bumbs.
Sim. As hardly tame does reason such men's sprites,
As water, fire; or counsel Bedlamites.
30.
Quiet, he the object, you the Instrument,
Do to him what your wits can ever invent,
He is not moved, he is no man of passion;
But is, alas! an object of compassion.
Sim. So have I seen a mad Bull so bemir'd,
That his mad Frenzy now is wholly tired.
In fine, all Writers, that did, do, or ever can
Write learnedly, can never define this man,
This Proteus metamorphised to shapes
Of all beasts; but most like to those of Apes.
The Rimer routed. Satyr 4. OR, Replies to R. D. his Papers by N. de Monford.
R. D. his first Paper.
A Cup of good Sack
To strengthen the back,
brought home by the good Shipmaster;
I pray you good NICK,
At this time be you quick,
You shall be the Poetaster.

The Reply.
OH who DOB, who -- what turned a Poet-tarter?
So have I Music heard from a skilled farter;
But there are accents, and your Verse had none;
And if they would sense, then were my senses gone:
But you will say 'twas Fancy. Such a look,
As he that mistook a bold tenter-hook
That seized upon his Cloak, fearing a brute,
And ruder Sergeant, said, Sir, at whose suit?
In such confused fear, I fear you writ
This Sonnet, and by it think your duller wit
Did want the thing you spoke of, quickening sack,
Then be good fellow ROBIN, you shall not lack
A half pint from him, who when you do come
Shall wish the Muse speak better, or be dumb.
R. D. Watchmaker, his second Paper.
SO go Sir NICHLIS go,
Your verses like Tobias dog, so, so,
Whatsoever you seem to be,
There is more Poets then we;
For tainter hooks, they are in rook-alley,
Near to the travally:
And for my Cloak, I have but one
Once paid for good deed done.
For the thing you call my fancy,
It Is my wife, her name NANCY.
There are those drink sack in Beer-glasses,
Yet go free of Poets lashes:
Every Poet has his Brother,
Let Us not lash one another:
We are brave fellows both,
No matter who is master,
So long we have the troth,
And love the Poetaster.
Thus much I thought for to rehearse,
And here I write my Comment on the Verse.
Which by your self are beautifide:
Not by me villifide
But rather gratifide:v
If not by you mis-edifide
They are well fortifide {right }
As also well qualifide o
Which if your self have justifide x
And from good Sack mortifide
Which as yet was never certifide ^
And under your hand testifide:
For which you shall be notefide T
Of such as are stupefide ^
When their brains are purifide V
And with much lashing mundifide):
Unpared and unexemplifide (
Or at least so much rectifide y
That you deserve to be stilefide
And also deifide
In the mean time your fame is magnifide
Your person dignifide {right }
I hope you will be satisfide T
When you are not damnifide X
If your fame be turpefide):
And your pains be ladifide (
You shall not then be nullifide {right }
Nor yet by me ratifide (
Our work you have not mollifide ^
Nor calamities amplifide 2
And so my lash is wearifide
The strange explanation of the Characters.
Kiss my Hostess, {left } muzel her maid rayl'd on
^ Half drunk 2 drunk in ample manner
T To know drunk or sober.
Thus the Verse with quoted margent,
And so I end the Cloak and Sergeant.
(He begins again)
W That is chidden for being halfdrunk
V To get a Fox and cost nothing
That is mistaken in drinking
{right } That is drunk a Cup in a morning
Qualifide: that is, Civil in drink
X That is, drink off the whole Cup
That is, give over small Beer
= That is, to know when to drink
I have pledged the health
T Known for a good drinker
Sleep after drunkenness
Cast in your stomach
^ Begin on a Monday as do Shoo-makers
Fox mine Host
Rayl'd on for not paying the shot
A Hey stille: go home before night
For holding out {left } for drinking to the bottom
{left } Paying the shot x going on the score
7: Clip the Kings English.
REPLY.
DULMAN, know I Am a Merchant more then Vintner,
Though I abide at home these times of winter;
And your torn numbers and your piecemeal rhyme
^n which you keep not measure, tune, or time,
(...) have received, deceived, since you so so it,
And since I did mistake you for a Poet.
Kind Brother, since thou take all upon thee,
(Dear one-Cloke) much admired by fools, and me.
Dull Rimer, know I am as much above
Thy foolish anger, as thy flaming love.
Methinks I heard thee, and thy Muse thus mutter,
(And I scarce heard ye, ye did both so stutter)
"Hold for the Lord-sake Nich' las, lest you take us,
"And use us worse then Hercules used Cacus!
But fear not, ROBIN, since thou know my spirit,
And that pure love my milder breast inherit;
Nor let thy years despair to write again,
I Will learn a boy in five, nay, thee in ten.
Thy falfc spell made a Comet in thy verse,
Whenas thou meant'st a Comment to rehearse,
Which might have made thee seen as well as I,
That thou should fall great Prince of Poetry.
I wonder much that thou should so long use it,
And take delight to seek to be abused.
Your reverend years do almost me deter
From writing of your proper Character:
Startle not at it, though it seems tart,
'T as no more Gunpowder, then has a --
The Character.
A Hoary head, an elocution,
As those that march to execution;
And in a crowd, if one should strike a blow,
His brains might be struck out he is so slow
In making of his just defense. Oh pity!
Such a bad utt'rance in a man so witty.
His face when I first saw, I said God sent us,
I think, the effigies of Macelenius;
But hear ye, mark ye me. Oh sweeter Sire!
This man in Winter makes his dear wives fire,
And watches all the day, except one bring
Tidings V to get a Fox, and cost nothing;
And more then this the man is a rare singer,
And Charactered, and T known for a good drinker;
And like the wiser men of famous Gotham,
He is renowned for {left } diving to the bottom
Of the profouudest bowls; in fine a Greek
That does as Shoo-makers begin with week,
And I do fear, yet do'th' contrary wish,
You were half drunk ^ clipping the Kings English,
In this your brainsick brain-work. O be quiet!
Or else go feed upon a wittier diet:
And if you were drunk when you writ, go sleep on,
Since you were beat poor man with your own weapon.
And mark ye me, hereafter always write
Only to him whom your fierce verses fright,
And cannot answer; for I see it is vain
To write to him can answer you again;
But if your folly shall not be never forgotten
Then I will jeer you unto dead, and rotten.
The Epilogue.
IT may be (Gentlemen) yee'll blame me much,
That I did here enter the Lists with such;
But if a Child, or maimed man do post
One that contemn's him: lo! his credit's lost,
If he accepts him not; And though they'nt gainers,
Yet it is meet to beat such to good manners.
This Thing is such an one: I thought my answer
Sufficient was; but that he was an Anser.
Then mine unto his second paper, I
Assuredly did think would satisfy;
He yet persists, appointing three of's Friends
To judge of our tongue-Combate, and his ends
Of Poetry; it was judged, and yet the Stint
Had a desire to be a fool in Print.
Wherefore that I might fully pallats please
I Have set ye here a dish of moldy cheese:
And do demand a better Champion,
Then such an one, as Chevy-Chase did chaunt on,
Wishing the Reader to pronounce him yeoman,
Commanding him to sing to babes, and women.
Colendissimo, literatissimoque Moecenati D. Martino HOLBEACH. The Travells:
Satyr 5.
I Must confess, dear Sir, I must confess,
I Am bound to pray, that God still would you bless,
As men obliged use to do; but hold,
Oh foolish Muse! verses thou know ar'nt gold,
And Debts are paid with coin, with lovely coin,
Then I will re-pay you in your own Coin;
Was it not letters that you learnt me, say?
Then I will pay you in the selfsame way;
But that can not be so, for some have sworn
That Poets are not made, but rather born.
I have another fetch. They say that friends
Covet to hear their friends Adventures; ends
Are but bad presents, and I would be loath
To give your longing mind less then whole cloth.
Since I ran from Minerva's Temple: fie,
Need drove me out. Why should I then so lie?
I Have seen the seventeen-headed Belgia,
And that most fruitful land called Gallia;
I Have seen also most pleasant Germany,
And in all three too much Idolatry,
And Profanation. O! who would think,
Their Towns half drowned with water, they with drink?
The high and mighty States there is weakness in,
There are some Heathens with most Christian King,
And the famed Majesty Imperial,
In his Empire, alas, command's not All.
I have observed, if I may it say,
That which full many men would pass away.
Lawrell-crown'd Caesar, and the potent French King,
With' potent States are led within a ring
Of endless turmoils, and of lasting strife,
These are dependants on a Princes life.
Antiochus his words I verify,
"That Kingly rule is noble slavery;
And if my Travels had as Sand's his been,
I could naught see but vanity and Sin,
With Spirits great vexation. -- I lie,
Sometimes I find a minutes jollitie.
The rouling French, and throat-hoarse Dutch I vow,
Are nothing like the language used with you,
Yours is right Caesar's right tongue, and I wish
I had fed longer upon that sweet dish;
Yet travel has imboldned me, and I
Have piec'd my Latin with mine Industry;
So that I take no counsel from the Judge
To give him answers, if he does not grudg
To ask me questions in the Latin tongue;
But it is not with us, as it is you among,
If we break Priscian's head, we then with laughter
Say it is chance-medley, and not dire manslaughter.
Here I read all the world in Amsterdam,
People of Abra'm, and th'Tartarian Cham,
Hot-liver'd Spaniard, and the sprightly French,
Who dance best Anticks, and best court a wench,
The swarthy Portugal, and to be brief,
Of all of Babels languages the chief;
Only I must make bold to make intrusion,
There Is order here, as there was wild confusion;
And here are some things too which are most vile,
And some things which do make my worship smile.
A man may gnaw, walking in the Streets if 'ts clear,
He shall not be Burgemaster the next year.
They Are far from pride, for they call every man
(Without Sir) by's name; or Tom, or Sam,
With Uncle to it, or Father; and I Have heard
An old man call a child Father; deterred
I was to hear it, lest the good Old man
Was out his Wits by some smart-gnawing pain.
And now they slay their Brethren; every Boor,
And Shopkeeper has one slain at his door;
So that I thought the men were Butchers all;
Yet Sattin-doublets scarce became the Stall.
They Are of opinion too, that th'Sabbath-day
Was n't made to work, but for a worse thing, P'ay:
Accordingly they ramble out the Town
To give their Wives and Sweet-hearts a green-gown;
And if a man says unto you Avou,
He never meant the Cann should come to you;
But plays childrens play; and is it so
Said I? then mine out of my hands shall not go;
And if there be a quarrel or a strife,
Then it must be decided by the Knife.
But this I Will say, and this truth me affords,
They are true hearts, the Frenchmen but mere words;
They have more good too, for they all employ
That filthy idleness would else destroy.
They shame most Nations by their Industry,
And with them is the truest Palmistry;
^or they can see what Fortunes men shall have,
As he by's lab'rous hands does gain or save;
They make all Children Children, and the young'st
Must share the greatest share the rest amongst;
^or th'oldest are brought up, and they do'nt spy
What help Brethren do give, no more do I.
The French exceed in Complemency, and
Men should in all things sometimes make a stand:
They Are superstitious too, and Pharisees;
^or in the streets to pray, they will swarm like Bees
^n their Processions; and the Peasants
To speak the truth are mere, mere, mere pedants;
^ut the Gentry are the mapps of Courtesy,
and the deservers of Nobility.
Thus if I show not Learning, nor Fancy,
Nor by all styled noble Industry,
Nor proved affection, I think no less,
But that you see a striving thankfulness
In your servant N. M.

The Epitaph upon the right worshipful Thomas Slany Mayor of Lyn.
STay Passenger, and let thy trav'ling ey
Read here lie's all the frail mortality
Of a good Mayor, and prudent Captain,
Industrious Merchant, who did scrue the main
In such long voyages, that I prefer
Him an imbetter'd, far-gone Traveller
Here lies a Saint: I lie, for his sweet spirit
Is gone to God where it shall ever inherit
Incessant joys; and in frail flesh all spy
There can not be an entire sanctity,
So that the Saint's in Heaven: but behold here
Does lie a well-belov'd Commissioner
Of ill-belov'd Excise, a true black Swan,
And yet unspotted, conscientious man.
Here lies the man of approved moderation,
Alas, we want such Pillars in our Nation!
Here lies the true great Almner of the poor,
And therefore cruel Death was their undoer,
Ah! for that which he did, was but a part
Of that which was resolved in his heart;
But being now dissolved, oh receivers
Of God, the poor are called, I fear deceivers
Of expectation will promise such;
But when they die will not give half so much.
Anag. Proud Death has slain this man although so deer,
And in contempt of mortals nayls him here.
His knowledge came from Heaven, and thereto
Did lend when here he did intend to do.
I doubt whether he gave, or else received
More honor by his Gown with justice reav'd.
He loved public peace, although his stars
Allotted him to live in homebred wars.
He was hated (although it seems roved;
Because he could not be enough beloved.
To others good he was intent so much,
That he seemed to neglect himself, None such!
He overcame himself, and left to try
Whether he lived, or died more piously?
He wrung tears from envy it self now slain,
And lives in mouths, and minds of men again.
An Elegy on the death of Mr. William Barnard, Son of John Barnard of Kingston
upon Hull Esquire
Will Pens lie still when such a Subject is
Of our approaching misery, though his Bliss?
Can Poets silent be when Prophets dye?
Or was his death without a mystery?
Oh, would there had been such a constant race
In some Archbishops of their scanted Grace!
Amired seaventeen! that melts the ey
Of Englands Eye, the University.
Spiritual, and yet by Phlegm over come,
Who when of God disputing, all were dumb!
Friends cannot but grieve, that thou coming to Town,
Passed by their Houses, and did lay thee down
At thine old Inn the Star; thou mind'st thy way
So much that thou would not make any stay.
And like great Alexander, who did aver
Himself to be the Son of Jupiter,
And not of Philip; so thou seemed'st here,
To own Jehovah, leave thy Father dear.
Alas! I can not make Cities to mourn
With levelled walls in grief excessive torn
By Alexander for his dear friends death
Nor in Panegyricks to spend my breath
As the Ancients did; yet I will raise a Tomb
Sall last until the last of days do come;
Shall live when Marble dies: These numbers here
Shall on Record in the days to come appear.
Oh, this it is to be good! the rotten ways
Of some lewd youths deserve not these our Baies.
Is there one more in the University,
Nay in the universe so good as He?
England, thou want more Barnards; -- oh, that I
Might live, and dye, oh God, so holily!
Ah, had thou lived, thy Life would have made Rules
For Graduats, and made the most bear Gules
Within their Faces for the obvious shame,
That would accoast them hearing of thy Fame.
Thou that amazed the Schoolmen, commonly
In most discourse preaching Divinity.
Throw down thy Quill, my Muse, and pray have don,
It Is vain to put a Candle to the Sun.
An ACROSTICK.
W -- It so refined, as th'purer Gold, so prized;
I -- ngenuous, that men Him Idolized.
L -- aw both Divine and Humane he much knew;
L -- earning beyond his Years (God knows) but few:
I -- ngenious, and then apply't to merit:
A -- miable, whose sweet Diviner spirit
M -- ajesty great and comely did inherit.
B -- eauty of Holiness possessed his heart;
A -- rts were in him (wonder!) beyond all Art:
R -- ighteousness dwelt within his Soul. His Pen
( N -- aso-like) won the hearts of Learned men.
A -- rms he bore against Vice: As forced with charms,
R -- eading good Authors: Fit against Lusts alarms;
D -- oing (the best of Cures) and yet no harms.
EPITAPH.
HEre lies grave Youth, Wisdom sublime,
Second devout S. BERNARD in his Time.
A Sophister, yet hating Sophistry;
(If I should say his Spirit lies here, I ly)
Some Doctors Freshmen are compared with Him,
And their great Lights compared with His are dim.
If Scholars ask what his Degree was; even
This young-old Saint commenced not here, but 'n Heaven.
Such Sons, such Scholars, and such Saints as He,
Are not for Men but for the Deity:
And if thou would know (Reader) who here does ly,
Here lies a Man to judge an Angel by.
One so prepared for Death: that (certainly)
Brave Soul, he only took one day to dye;
Yet, Reader, thou may still inquire whose Tomb 17.
This is; then thou shall know at th'day of doom. 17.
His years in number to these numbers come. 17.
Elegij-Epithalamion: To his indeared Bro. in Law T. S. on the death of his
CHILD.
SWeet babe, I do admire thy wiser course,
That to end pain had so timely recourse
Unto the way of lasting happiness
By Death who unto Heaven the Usher is;
"For Life's a frost of cold felicity,
"And Death a thaw of all our misery;
You Are freed from freezing winters, summers parchings,
Thirst, hunger, anger, sorrow, love, hate, things
Which make life miserable; now cursd War,
And fearful pestilence are from thee far:
Both mind, and Carcass pihching poverty
Don't interrupt thy blessed tranquillity;
Vice-drawing Riches in thy station
Can not delude thee by temptation;
Enchanting beauty though never so brave
By all her sleights can thee not now enslave,
And now ear-tickling, and heart-swelling Fame
Cannot make thee proud to get a glorious name.
Ambitious honor cannot swell up thy mind
To leave the taunt of Treason vile behind.
Lust, Pride, nor Avarice, Sloth, Drunkenness,
Slander nor any thing can thee unblesse.
"Long use of life is as a lingering foe,
"And gentle Death the only end of woe;
And this in all men's eyes surely seems plain,
Life is but lost, where Death is counted gain.
The longer life, the greater is our guilt,
Life must by life be paid, and so life's spilt.
Thou could not bear the burden of distress,
Therefore this life to thee were wretchedness.
We first do bud, then bloom, then seed, last fall
So do our shaddows turn nothing at all.
Wherefore thy death no Elegy com's on;
But a joyful Epithalamion;
Or if we be so foolish, as to weep,
Thou do thy joyings in the Heavens keep,
Which was created glorious, and which
Is delectable, beautiful, and rich;
For habitation comfortable; for
There the King Christ is, the Law love, the Honor
Pure verity, the Peace felicity,
The most sweet life, lasting Eternity.
There Is light without darkness; mirth without sadness;
True health without flesh-consuming sickness;
Wealth without want; credit without disgrace;
Beauty without blemish, (not on a face;)
Ease without labor; riches without rust;
(Nothing that frets is there, nor dirt, nor dust)
Beatitude 'thout misery God lends;
And consolation that never ends.
Now I am not content, but fast resolved,
When God does see his time, to be dissolved.
Elegy on one HVNT a Groom, slain by his fellow servants (being unarmed) upon
some words, he having in haste (other servants being absent) carried his Master
a basin of water, before Gentlemen, with his Doublet off.
To Sir R.S.
GRieve not, dear Sir; for what man ever could vaunt,
That he had never a rash, foolish Servant?
Or what man, though he were full wise and holy,
But in his House sometimes has happened folly?
What was Amnon's unto his sister, oh!
Why then do you torment your Spirit so?
I should have thought (his doublet off) he might
Before have thought upon this simple fight:
But then we should have found him better armed,
And then the Knave had not the fool so harmed.
Thou Varlet, Coward, Irchin, Mans-shame, weasell,
Could thou armed, fight one armed with Heasell?
Oh unheard of pusillanimity!
And, oh, unparalleld simplicity!
Where were the noble Spirits, and the hands,
That used to combat it on Callis sands?
They used to change their weapons, and to see,
Most nobly, that their lengths did not disagree;
Or have their Seconds, or their Surgions
To search them, and their arms: but out upon's!
That ever blood ran in veins so base, ignoble,
Or that a Sword was drawn by such a babble!
And, oh, thou Coxcomb Groom, that were forewarned
By h s Duel-like words, and not fore-armed!
For, if thou had had with thee tempered steel,
You both might have been heard, and yet not feel --
Each others blows, and (now) that fatal day
Might happy been, in parting of the fray.
Good God? what thing is man, that breaks thy laws
For matters of poor flies, or meaner straws?
Such Cainabals sure are incorrigible;
For thou forbad'st it ever since Cain killed Abel.
Thou wretched Dueller, now that good Tree,
(That wonted was) cannot (now) shelter Thee:
For (now) it not only cannot shelter Thee,
But pours received water (now) upon Thee!
Wherefore we see, to perpetrate a Duel,
Before both God and Man is to doe-ill.
EPITAPH.
Here lies one, whom Death did HUNT
From the womb unto the Font;
Watching him at advantages,
With naked sword he at him flies:
And being a WALKER he out-ran,
And wounded mortally this Man.
I thought the Groom had not been able
To Have shunned the danger of the Stable
By furious Horses: But, alas,
Those escaped; he was slain by an Ass!
An Elegy upon the Death of my Daughter Amy.
I Am not as that Emperor, who did
The nuntios of the death of's Son forbid
To be made known by's Spouse, or by his Servant;
And therefore she by sable weeds did plant
That knowledge in his troubled head. Nor as
The King Aegeus
that (but suspecting his child, was
Destroyed) seeing the Ships blacker, come as
By shadow of the Sun, or age, alas!
Did from a rock, his Son then sailing by,
Add to his Triumph, a sad Tragedy.
Nor as one of our R. 2.
Kings; whose passion
For his lost Lady, made him so far gone
In a kind of wild frenzy, for to raze,
And make a Chaos and confused Maze
Of The House where Death her struck: yet I can grieve,
(Dear Babe) that God didn't give thee a reprieve
For some few years, since I am confident
My sins thee from this Earth away have rent.
Ah! how I sigh that Beautie's rival is
Converted to the poor impurer ashes!
That Globe-like face, those twinkling stars thine eyes,
That Angel's face, that front that did arise
Like Heavens milky way, those purer hands
That would have bound Gallants in amorous bands,
If thou had lived; that aequall symetry
That made men judge thee pure Divinity,
"And truly I do think of worse and less,
The Heathen's made them Gods, and Godesses.
Who ever saw such matron looks? such smiles?
Such speaking actions? woman-childish wiles
To make her self disport? but oh! I make
My self new grief, and make my heart re-ake!
In meditating of thy change so fast
By a Consumption that thou seemed to fast,
Whose body was so light it might have gone
To Heaven without a resurrection.
So frail a thing is flesh! so have I seen
The Princely Rose, the fragrant flowers Queen
Hon'ring a Garden one day, and the next
Look pale like one with anger much perplexed.
Ah! here I see seeming Angelick beauty;
A watery buble, vanity, a ly!
I think it not meet to tear the Earth's moist womb
To make thee a too large half Acre Tomb,
Nor am I able, nor as Hatton's is
Above the House a mounting Pyramid.
What profit's thee a sheet of Lead? what good
If on thy Course a Marble quarry stood?
Long, and large Epitaphs what good have they?
They Are but accounted mere Tautology.
And Epitaph's (I think) upon the dead
Are better far not written then not read.
The EPITAPH.
HEre lie's wise and beauteous dust,
Ah, for mortality has rust!
Beauteous, if Ingredients be
The ruddy-Rose and white Lilly.
Wise to dye, since Life was pain,
And Death in Christ, not loss but gain.
Lastly a mystery was adoing,
In nine months coming, nine months going,
And as nine Muses verses showing.
Elegy by the Author unto his yoak-fellow from beyond the Seas.
I Know thou can not choose but laugh to see,
That I again in verse do now court Thee:
When you should court with due obedience
They say, poor men! that of it is want of sense,
However men don't use a siege to lay
Unto that Town that give's them peaceful way:
But I from Amiana now apart
Must stay; yet Heaven does know she has my heart.
Oh! see our Heavenly Father now will have
That unrest that thy earthly once us gave,
We must not for a time enjoy each other,
Which makes me think on that which you do smother
In dark oblivion. The pleasant Nights!
That you, and I performed Lovers rights
In giving each the other's soul, and yet
Thou never foundst me lustful Marmorit,
Nor I thee Helen; for I dare protest
Our purer loves could well endure the test
Of continency, and of constancy;
For frowning Friends could never make us lie.
And Heavens best know thou might Adonis be
For any knowledge that I had of Thee,
Or an Hermophrodite, and thou I know
Did not know if I were man, or no,
Or a virago Metamorphized,
Which would betray lawful pleasures in bed.
Well thou the lodestone; I the Iron was,
Thou loved'st me, and I no Debtor was.
What harm did we by out immortal love?
We taught false lovers fraud for to remove.
"What Merchant's ships have our swelling sighs drowned?
"Who says our tears have over-flow'd his ground?
Methink's this should be comfort to you now,
He that you trusted did hold truth with you.
Indeed it grieved me that the babe should be
So sick, as when I parted last from thee,
A babe so like us both, that they do say
She is her Father's picture, then say they
She is not so, she is like her mother; troth
Say'th the wisest, I think she is like them both,
And thou say (pars pro toto) if she die,
Then thou poor soul within her grave must ly.
But pry thee think of Abram's faith, and trust;
For Abram's faith, entit'led Abram just:
When God had bid him sacrifice his Son,
His only Son, and he would have it done;
But God prepared a Lamb, since he had tried
That Abram's outward show had not belied
His heart; wherefore trust in him, and thou wilt see,
His Providence upon both her and me.
The INN.
IF I be (Gentlemen) in my will crossed,
And cannot wait on you, pray read your Host,
Whose Muse (such as it is) presumed herein,
To speak somewhat of him, Servants and Inn;
And though I soar not, sorry I should be,
Since here is no wit, if not some industry;
And I do this entreat, and only so,
Read it if ye have nothing else to do;
For ye know well by LAW it is in USE,
And therefore GOOD, not BAD (if no abuse.)
LAWFUL Since in the sacred Word we see
To Wayfarers such place appointed be;
And who with it a cavil dare beginn,
Since God the Word has taken up his Inn?
Then use it well, and not use ill your selves;
For that is it which makes your Ships but shelves.
Best things abused we know are made bad,
Wine made to make the heavy, sad heart glad,
If too much taken causes Drunkenness,
And Gluttony proceeds from meats excess.
Meet vestures doted on, all men deride,
And beasts old clothes ill-us'd, are turned to Pride:
But this infers not that we use no wine,
Or that we should not breakfast, sup, or dine,
Or that because fine Clothes make fond fools proud,
We should use Heavens tapestry, a Cloud,
And nothing else to cover us. Oh no!
For you may safely herein further go:
But use it lawfully, and there is no flaw;
For it is allowed by the Common Law.
Only he that intends to keep an Inn,
Must pray to God to keep out entering Sin.
VSEFVL if Merchants bargain, or if they
Are gathering up their Bargains fruits onth' way,
And there on equal terms two parties meet,
(That cannot friendly see each in the Street)
And have their business arbitrated; since
Each man in's House has a pre-eminence.
It tells us that we are but Travailers,
And that our Journey tends unto the Stars.
And that we have not an abiding home,
Until we do unto Olympus come.
Far Travailers can tell ye th'benefit
Of a good Inn, and giv't that Epethite:
Nay, I am not the first that did beginn
To say, nothing's more useful then an Inn --
When fiery Sol does parch the moistning humor,
When to quench thirst, the Trav'ler is a fumer,
When tedious way has toyld the new-come guest,
He finding welcome, how sweet is his rest!
When SANDS in's Travails in wild sands had been,
How welcome then was his oft-wished Inn!
And ye are here as welcome, if ye please.
Or ever you were in all your passed days.
But to proceed, useful was that Hostess
(At first as they say) but of Holiness,
And honor a sweet Lady HELENA,
Who was the truly-beauteous Coelia,
Not ignorant of the Wayfarer's curer;
Good Hostess; for Physician never was surer.
Good Hostess, that would be a Stable-keeper,
So in her heart of Christ she might be keeper.
Thus ye see Holiness came from an Inn,
And a brave Nobleman (ye know) was seen
To love and court the Daughter of an Host
With honor too, and thought his love not lost;
For worth is found in them by worthies often,
Although for bad ones, good ones often are scoft;
Nay, reverend DOD said once he had been lost,
If great Jehovah had not been his Host.
Who Is that that calls me, would you have me fly?
The other two you shall have by and by.
NOT BAD, for here your Host shall not draw you on
To lose your time by base delusion,
Your Hostess neither show her self so wild,
As of her honesty to be beguiled.
The Drawer shall not withdraw what is due
In measure in the half pints that ensue.
The Tapster neither by his fraud, nor sloth
Shall dare to bum your Jugg with cheating froth.
The Maid shall not show with a lascivious Art
That leachery does harbor in her heart.
And the Host'ler shall be no Oat-stealer:
But to your speechles horses a just dealer.
What servant have I that dare others prompt,
Or do it himself to add to your Account?
And for my self, and second take my word,
Our consciences will not such Acts afford.
Only as ye are dealt by; so I pray,
For what ye call, and have ye'll please to pay.
BUT GOOD. For Sabboth-dayes shall not be profaned,
Although the wider world thereby be gained;
And cursing, swearing, and such God-les deeds,
I do desire to pluck up, as bad weeds.
But if you lodge, or bargain, or be merry,
You having Beer, tobacco, and my Sherry,
Canary, Malligo, French-wine, or what
My House afford's, if ye accept but that
In civil ways; for oh! Il'd not begin
To answer for another man's gross sin!
And gray-coat, bare-coat shall have due respect,
Only thereby no Gentlemen neglect.
Whereby I hope our star terrestrial
Shall prove it self truly celestial,
And (Gentlemen) at your peculiar cost,
You Are welcome kindly to your younger Host:
And since his Inn's so good, oh be so good!
As not to drown your Host within a flood
Of wild and merciless strong Beer, and Wine;
For if ye do, the fault will not be mine,
If servants serve you badly, for my eye
Make's guests all times served observantly,
Nay, if ye force your Host to be a Cupper,
Your Hostess absent, ye may lose your supper:
Lastly I have adventured often by Sea;
But fear it is greater now to use this Plea;
For some men have such uncontrouled spirits,
That at my words they will rave like Bedlamites.
Thus your Host show's in his Poetic mood
His Inn Lawful, Useful, not Bad but good.
The end of the Moral Poems.
NE PLUS ULTRA.
TRIN-UNI DEO, SACRUM. In nomine Sacro Sanctae and individuae Trinitatis, AMEN.

Long-suffering.
THe Hawk preys on the trembling Partridge, and
Chickens do feel the Kites harsh hand,
The smaller fresh-fish that do haunt the Dike,
Are justly fearful of the Pike.
The Fish at Sea, that have not strength their Bulwark,
Do tremble much for fear of the Shark.
The stronger beasts the weaker ever did rule,
The surly Lion bangs the Mule.
Great Princes castigate (oft-times) the less,
The strong man beats the weak t'excess.
But, O my God, I skill not these thy ways!
Thou do deserve our bounden praise!
Thou that to Attoms could the world convert,
In a short time, as thou in making were.
Thou that could take the breath out of the Nostrill,
Which we, O God, do daily feel;
Who art displeased with our heinous sin,
Thy mercies, Lord, do not hold in. --
Is this th'manner of men, oh my Lord God!
What man forgives with power shod?
And can it be my God does still forgive!
I will leave sin then, if I live.
SHIPWRECK, OR, An Elegy on the Drowning of John Olly, and his whole Company
at Sea, by the overwhelming of his Ship, etc.
I Cannot dispute what was the cause the Ship
Wrestling with Ocean should receive this trip.
I know the Northern Seas are dangerous,
Men say the Master was too covetous;
But I see many do arrive their Port,
And judge the other barely a report.
Some think the Ship was ill-conditioned,
And from the Sea did turn her crazy head,
Oh God, thou know the cause, and only thou
Who let some pass in, and some pass through --
The surly waves. Oh that we here beneath
Could think we were within an inch of death,
When in a Ship! But the contagion
To those used to it, is never thought upon.
Perhaps, o God, some in the Ship might think
Their drink their God; therefore thou gav'st them drink.
Perhaps, some thought their goods their God, o brave!
And therefore thou said, Let your Gods ye save,
Whom ye adore; and without question
This thing was given us to look upon
With more then common eyes; of good it is full,
It shows thee Just and also Merciful.
Just, for thou art just in all these thy ways,
And for thy Mercy, Lord, we must thee praise.
What? but one moment thinking the Ship safe,
And in another, post the help of the weaf!
Merchant and Master might think on Lynn Haven
But now: now taking of a voyage to Heaven.
Oh thou, my soul, take thou a great remorse
On those that trust (vain trust) in Ships of force.
Her Ordnance that sometime do stand in steed,
Now in the Storm might do the fatal deed.
Oh the sad shreik of the poor Company,
That now, now, now must dye so mis'rably!
How did Death sit within their looks? was there
Time to make their Repentance true, sincere?
Was there none swearing in that dangerous Storm?
Or did the fear of Death them all transform?
Yet, Lord, thy ways of Providence we hallow;
For thou sometimes receiv'st souls from the gallow;
And these might have, as large warning in the Storm;
Alike the Deluge general Microcosm;
The waters came on them ever they aware were,
So did thy hand, oh Lord! find them out here;
And I fear, Lord, that thou have spared us,
Who are for guilt as meritorious.
PAIN.
WHen Pain oppresses me, and my heart heaves,
O Lord, thrash out some Corn out of these sheaves.
When I shriek out, oh God!
Scourged with thy sharper Rod,
Let t'be for Sin,
I sigh within!
When my Pain makes me sigh, O good Lord, oh!
Oh then let Grace in my heart further go,
And work some greater good,
To think upon thy blood,
Which for me bled,
For me was shed.
When thou afflictest me with thine own hand,
Who millions to serve thee can command,
My Sins themselves present,
Oh then incontinent,
Then let my spirit
Apply thy merit.
When I am weak'ned, and am overcome;
Yet let me not in praises ever be dumb,
For my sweet Savior
Endured a worser shower;
For me he cried,
For me he died.
Therefore in Pain let me not think amiss;
For all my Pains are not like one of his.
Content.
I Smile to hear my friends ask why I keep
A TAVERN, and thereby to break my sleep.
Epaminondas was a General,
After a private Captain; yet no fall
Did he account it: And do I not well,
To keep an Inn, think it an Hermit's Cell?
S. Paul's resolve I cannot but well resent,
I Have learned in each estate to be content;
And my Ambition is to keep a TAVERN,
To know how well I such a place can govern.
In patience to possess my soul, I crave;
And what I ask in says, Lord, I shall have.
I am a Merchant still; yet do not start
From selling French, and Spanish Wine by th'Quart.
Of Zeno I have read in purples dealing,
Impoverished upon the salt-seas failing;
Yet saying this, although his 'state half cracked,
I sailed best when as I was shipwrack'd.
Brave was his resolution, who did lie
His two last years torn by the Strangury.
Had lived his middle age most prosp'rously,
Who in the midst of torments thus could say;
Oh my Lord God, how gracious have thou been!
Forty eight years of health, but two of pain:
Blessed be thy name for th'mercy in forbearing,
And for thy Justice, Lord, in me afflicting.
I cannot but scorn and pity great Augustus,
Who so betrayed humane frailty thus;
After th'defeat of some choice Troops, he falls,
And frantick-like knocks his head against the walls,
Utt'ring unmanlike Exclamations,
Varus restore me my lost Legions!
When we are miserable, oh our tempers!
Then we do add unto it by distempers.
I see the Indian now Husbanding
One Tree, and t'all his household uses bring,
Timber, Thatch, Meat, Oil, Honey, Medicine,
Sauce, Drink, Utensils, Ships, Cables, Sails, Wine;
And tell me, pray you, what is it that frets
The pleasant spirit of Anachorets?
Says the Apostle, having food and raiment,
Oh let us learn to be therewith content!
No murmuring for guilty subornations;
For here is no cause in these our meaner stations.
No checks for secret, vile contrivances
Of public, high-handed great villainies.
Great men in Great bottoms sail in the deep,
Poor men in Barks still near the shore do creep;
And I have seen the small one gain the Creek,
When th'great one, (God thou know) was often to seek!
I am not troubled here with Titius vulture:
Though my Estate is small, my state is sure.
Here (Aethiopian-like) with my door open
I sleep, while people do both go and come.
What Lucius wrote, I do affirm no less,
That one hours mischief drowns the great'st excess.
My Case was worse, when I was in restraint;
And yet that has been th'case of many a Saint.
My Case was worse, when vulture-Povetry
Did gnaw my mind, and I no meat could come by.
I wi'nt repine, because my misery
Is laid upon me, Lord, so fav'rably;
And I will be content upon this ground,
I shall not want, if'ts better to abound:
Nay, I do beg, O Lord, (with holy fear)
Not to be so cursed, to be happy here.
With David, Lord, I do desire to sing,
The Lord my Shephard is, I lack no thing.
En hour content se dit.
The Opinion, sent to Sir R.S.
MY firm Opinion, dear Sir, is this,
And God inform me, (if I be amiss!)
Or shall I boldly speak with leave, and fear not
What fond Religion my Tenants are not.
Kind Familists, or wider Libertines,
Erastians, Anti-trinitarians,
Cross Anabaptists, bold Arminians,
Conceited, fond Manifestarians;
Fierce Millenaries, Antinomians,
Socinians, condemned Arians,
Cursed, abhorred Anti-scripturists,
Giddy Brownists, conceited Perfectists,
Mortalians, Enthusiasts so strange,
And Seekers through forbidden things that range,
And such like, I detest, don't understand,
Only believing what my God command;
Fear God, and love my Neighbor, Christian love,
Is the true badg of our Master above:
Yet from them we may learn; for from a Turk,
A thing I read of makes my bowels work;
An Englishman in his unwiser rage
Did strike a Turk his guide; yet on the stage
Never came his passion: for's villainy
Shall I neglect my duty? no says he;
Nor I neglect to own my proved Religion,
Although I do incur the Sects derision;
On truth of Scriptures are my tenants grounded,
Which would make Atheists Christians, if well sounded.
1.
Had it not been the Word of God alone,
The falsehood had detected been, and shown.
2.
And for the Penmen of the Scripture, see!
They set not forth their own nobility,
Glory, or Virtue, but with one consent,
Declared the will of him that had them sent:
Yea, faults disgraceful to themselves, and those
Their issues they did true-free-ly disclose;
A proof that natural Reason did not boast;
But merely guided by the holy Ghost.
3.
Thirdly, the style is writ plain, and simply;
Yet full of purer grace, and majesty;
For it does curb the proud, exalt the meek,
And offer Christ to those that do him seek.
4.
The Scripture is an history so old,
Four thousand years before Christ's birth was told,
Old Authors do accord with Scripture so,
As that part which in History does go,
And miracles confirm it, The Sun stands,
The dead are raised, and nothing it withstands.
5.
The record of the spirit which who resents,
Is argument against all arguments,
And because likely you may it resent,
I Have placed Joh. 7.17 one way, and Matt. 7.7, 8. Luke 11.13 and James 1.7.
quotations that are pertinent;
But if y' expect me to answer all objections,
I don't intend to make such larger Sections;
Yet since the Scripture is God's written Word,
I choose that true Religion it afford.
I would improve the duty in the Law,
And Gospel-promise both embrace, and aw,
The one a spur for holiness to fit;
The other to unbelief a curb, or bit.
Out of the sense of my necessity,
In highest manner grace to magnify;
Yet to avoid wild Antinomianism,
And on the other side to avoid the Schism
Of Pharisaical Po'pry; neverth'less
Mortification, and holiness,
To does both punctually, and exact,
And indeed here is the right sense, and the act.
Working salvation with fear and trembling,
As if there were no grace to justify,
And yet so firmly resting and believing,
As if no good thing had been done us by.
Sim. As these our bodies live by earthly food,
So true Religion does our souls most good.
As Earth is softened by Iron used with art,
So does Religion temper the hardest heart:
Yet as sore eyes cannot gaze against the Sun,
So wicked minds brook not Religion.
As Medicines makes sick bodies whole and sound,
So does Religion wash out Errors wound.
Like as a torch us in the dark directs,
So does Religion guide from wandering Sects.
As want of food the body sterve, and scant,
So pines the the Soul through pure Religions want.
Examp. Brennus for wronging of Religion
Was smitten with a thunder bolt from Heaven.
The chiefest Oath the Athenians had was this,
Pugnabo pro sacris, and cum aliis, and solus,
Pherecydes Religion nick-nam'd;
For which he was by worms alive consumed.
Methinks I hear you ask what Regiment
I vote within the Church, since detriment
Came by the Bishops lordings. Then I say,
Bishops that do both watch their flock, and pray;
It was the Judgment of that learned King,
Which I here quote, since he did Scripture bring
To prove his Tenet. Only this indent,
Civil affairs out of his element,
As it was said of Andrews, and a Church
Kept in his house. I hope none lie at lurch,
Here need's n' Oedipus. Then for the rule of state
If God shall please! that way that was of late,
But howsoe'r, (as the' Shepherd sai'd o'th Weather,)
I this my strange, yet good opinion gather,
That there shall be such times, as I please, see!
Such as please God shall pleasing be to me.
This is m'opinion (dear Sir) and why
Should I be guilty of a needles ly?
For Herbert says, nothing does need a lie,
A fault that want's it most, grow's worse thereby;
Then (Sir) since yon do know my'pinion weak,
If I re-visit you, vouchsafe to speak.
But pray do not so grossly me mistake,
As to think all was Gospel that I spoke,
For as Basil gravil'd Eunomius
The Heretic (pretending boldly thus,
That he knew God's divinity, apart)
With one, and twenty questious of an Art;
So you may me in twenty questions more,
And you may well judge me foolish therefore,
But I take liberty of Conscience
Here to declare of truth the naked sense,
And am grown proud, since you do not refuse
To honor with acceptance the dull muse, of sir your servant
N. M.

Lords DAY.
THis holy day,
(Which Heaven display,)
I do adore,
Five thousand years,
(Free from all fears)
Sabbath's name bore.
Now sixteen hundred,
('It Is to be wondered)
Called Lord's Day.
By It to serve thee,
'Twas made we see,
Not for to play.
Each seventh thought,
Should thee be brought,
For they are thy due;
But thy seventh day,
Half's cast away;
Oh it is too true!
Yet I Will thee seek,
(Who art so meek)
Of the week each day;
For thy mercies,
Justice likewise,
I Will praise or pray.
THE SINNER. The Argument.
While Ioab does besiege warlick Rabbah,
David does adultery with Bathsheba,
Send's for Vriah for to cover it,
But he would not home, nor drunk, nor sober yet;
He carrie'th Ioab the letter of his death,
Ioab the news to David then sends,
And David Bathsheba dow marries.
SECT.
IT came to pass after the year expired
The time that Kings go forth to battle 'tir'd
In Warre-presaging steel; David commands
His General Joab with his warlike hands
Extracted out all Israel, and they stroyed,
The Ammonitish children, Rabbah besieged;
But David at Jerus'lem tarried,
And 't came to pass in a cool evening tide,
That David rose from off his bed, and walked
Upon the roof of the Kings house, thus talked
His eyes unto his lust, that bathing woman
Ir very beautiful to look upon;
And he sent, and inquired of the woman;
Is It not Bathsheba, daughter of Elan
Says one, wife of Uriah the Hittite?
And David sent, and took her for a night,
And she came in to him, and he lay with her;
(For her uncleanness was taken from off her;)
And she returned to her house, conceived,
And sent, and told, I am with child by David,
And David sent to Joab, send Uriah.
And Joab sent to David wronged Uriah,
David demands of him how Joab did,
How the people, and how the War prospered?
And bid him go to 's house, and wash his feet,
And after him he sent a mess of meat;
But Uriah slept at the Kings house door,
Not going to his own; but chose the floor,
And when they David told of it, he said,
Came thou not from the journey? why have not laid
At thine own house? And Uriah replied
The Ark, Israel, Judah in tents abide,
And my Lord Joab, and his servants all,
(And am I better than my General?)
In open field encamped are, shall I
Then to my house to eat, drink, and to lie
By my Wife's side? as thou live, O King,
And as thy soul, I will not do this thing.
And David said, tarry here this day, and the morrow.
And thou shall go; so he stayed there with sorrow,
And when David had called him, he drank,
And ate before him, and he made him drunk;
And at Even, according to his use,
He lay with' servants, went not to his house.
And 't came to pass in the morning, that David
A letter by Uriah poor had writ,
Unto Joab, saying in the main battle
Appoint Uriah, and retreat until
He smitten is, and die; and Joab did
Accordingly (in which he much mis-did.)
And by a messenger he certifi'd
How good Uriah valiantly died,
And when his wife had heard that he was dead,
For him, (as she had cause) she then mourned,
And when that Tempus luctus was ore-past,
David sent, and fet her to 's house in haste,
And she his scarcely lawful wife became,
And bare by him, and unto him a son;
But this thing of David's hot lustful love
Displeased God, that sits, and sees above.
MEDITATION.
NOthing can show David like as himself;
His Poesy 's a ship, ours but a shelf.
Whose sin forgiven is, is most blessed,
And blessed he, whose sin is covered.
Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord
Imputes not iniquity; O God!
And in whose spirit there is no guile. When I
Kept silence my bones waxed old, and dry,
Through my roaring all the day long, alas!
For day, night, thy hand on me heavy was:
My moisture unto Summers drought is turned:
My sin unto thee I acknowledged,
And mine iniquity I have not hid:
I said, to confess my sins I will begin,
And thou forgavest the guilt of my sin.
Thus David could in former time confess,
And beg for pardon for his wickedness;
But he that was foretime Gods Champion brave,
Left but unto himself is now a slave
Unto his lust, his lust, his lust, his lust,
For which most bitter waters taste he must.
Here may we learn occasion to fly
That soul-confounding, foul iniquity.
Here may we see the tricks we have to sin,
And how our selves we do beleaguer in,
To hug our Cockatricial lusts, which will
With their infectious breaths our poor souls kill.
I am with child to meditate of all
The accidents in this our David's fall;
Sampson by beauty was surprised, and
Who have obeyed not Beauty's command?
Victorious Hercules, mighty, and sweet,
Laid down his courage at fair Beauty's feet;
The Lybian lions (they say) lose their might,
If on a Beauty once they set their sight.
Zeno the prince of Stoics did agree
That Beauty's like could very hardly be:
But grant that Nature Beauty thus gave place;
How cam't that Beauty conquered David's Grace?
If Flesh submitted unto Beauty's lure,
Oh! how could Spirit servitude endure!
Oh! then, my soul, learn thou here to repent,
And God-displeasing sins be sure relent
At thy first sinning: and, Oh God above,
Guide my soul always by that holy Dove;
And let thy deputy within my soul,
Great Conscience, my smallest sins control:
And let me weep, and meditate, and weep,
And pray thee that from such sins thou me keep.
Had David been in Joab's place, no doubt
His lazy lust had then received a rout:
Had Grace in Joab General been, I say,
He Would not so prized that darling of one day,
That bubble Honor, and had not made guilty
His King with murtherous adultery.
Good David fallen into such a sin!
Thus do we see that dangerous Beauty's gin.
Eve's whining voice lost Adam's paradise,
And Bathsheba's fair looks caused David's vice.
Justly lamented David, now I see
The power of soothing Prosperity:
We heard not of thy causing Drunkenness,
When God thee with Adversity did bless.
Nothing but sing and weep, and weep and sing,
God's Word unto our listening ears did bring.
Obedient Son, good Shepherd, loving Father,
Careful Servant, stout Captain; (yet not smother
God's praises to augment thine own:) Music
Came from thy skilful hand to the brainsick;
In all thine Offices renouncing man
More then the falsly-styl'd Capuchian.
By this I know the Scripture to be right,
Since David here confessed in the world's sight,
A sin to him disgraceful: he did write,
But the holy Ghost unto him did indite.
We must make haste that David may repent;
In which sure none will think the time misspent.
The REPENTANT. The Argument.
Nathan's quaint parable of the Ewe-lamb
makes David judge himself to be in blame.
David by Nathan's words being reproved,
confesses his sin, and is pardoned.
David mourns and prays for the child in breath;
Solomon's born, and named Jedidiah.
David takes Rabbah, (Uriah's death)
and the people thereof he tortureth.
SECT.
ANd the Lord sent Nathan unto David laid 2 Samuel 12.

Sleeping in sin, and unto him he said;
There were two men in one City: pure need
Oppressed the one, the other did exceed
In flocks and herds; but the poor man had naught
Save only one little ewe-lamb, which he had bought
And nourished, and it grew up together
With him and with his children; and the weather
Did scarce afflict it; of his meat it fed,
And drank of his own cup; in's bosome-bed
It lay, and was unto him as a daughter:
And the rich man put it unto the slaughter,
Having a traveller coming to's board,
And of his coin to take could not afford,
Of his own flock or herd to dress; yet can
Take the poor man's lamb for that wayfaring man,
And dressed it. And David's anger was
Greatly kindled against the man: alas!
He thought not of himself; for then surely
He Would not have said, The man shall surely die
That did this thing, and had no pity. Then
Nathan said to David, Thou art the man.
Thus says the God of Israel, I, I
Anointed thee King with a hand most high;
And out of Readiness hand did deliver thee;
Thy master's house eke I did give to thee:
Thy master's wives into thy bosom fell;
I gave thee Judah, and mine Israel.
And if these were too little in thine eye,
I would have given thee greater dignity, etc.
Wherefore have thou despised God's great command
To do evil in his sight with a hand
So high? thou have killed Uriah poor
With sword, and made the Hittite's Wife a whore,
And taken his Wife to be thy Wife,
And by Ammon have taken away his life.
Now therefore the sword shall never depart
Thine house, since thou, despised me in heart,
And taken Uriahs Wife to be thy Wife,
Thus says the Lord, behold, I will make strife,
And evil against thee out of thine house,
And I will take thy wife before thine eyes,
And give thy neighbor them, and he shall lie
In the sight of the Sun thy choice Wives by:
For thou did secretly; but I will do
This thing before Israel, and the Suns sight too:
And David said unto Nathan, I have
Sinned, I have sinned, sinned I have.
And Nathan said to David certainly,
Thy sin is put away, thou shall not die,
Howbeit because thou have by this deed given
Occasion that the great God of heaven
Men speak of may blasphemously,
The child born unto thee shall surely die.
And Nathan went unto his house and the Lord
Stroke David's child by Uriahs wife with his rod,
And it was very sick, David therefore
Besought God for the child, and did implore
The Almighty by fasting, and he went in,
And lay all night upon the earth for 's sin.
And the Elders of his house arose and would
Him raised have from off the earth's cold mould;
But he would not, neither did he eat bread:
And on the seventh day the child was dead,
And David's servants feared to tell him so.
For they said, when the child was alive, lo,
We spoke unto him, and he would not hear;
How will he vex, if this arive his ear?
But when David saw that the servants whispered,
David perceived that the child was dead.
David said to 's servants, Is the child dead?
And they said tremblingly, the child is dead:
Then David rose from off the earth and washed,
'Nointed himself, and his apparel changed,
And came to the Lords house and worshipped.
Then he came to his own, and he required
Them to set bread before him, and he eat,
Then said his servants unto him hereat,
We wonder thou did fast and weep for the child
Alive, but dead thy sorrow is exiled;
And he said, while the child was yet alive
I wept and fasted, God may lend it life,
And be gracious to me, said I; now it is past,
He being dead, wherefore should I refast?
Can I bring him here back again? 'twill be
That I shall go to him, he not return to me:
And David comforted his Bathsheba,
And he went in, and with her he did lay;
She bare a son and called 's name Solomon,
And the Lord loved him, and Nathan's word
Named Jedidiah, because of the Lord.
And Joab fought against Rabbah, took the City.
And he sent David word, (a pleasant ditty)
Now therefore come with 'rest of Israel,
Encamp and take the City, least they tell,
It Is Joabs City; so the King came down,
And fought and took the City, and the Crown
Of their Kings head, great was the Cities spoil;
He put them under saws and harrows vile,
And all their Cities to the vexation;
Then he returned, and I to meditation.
MEDITATION.
HEre may we see good Nathan's holy fraud,
Yet he knew well, David must not be clawed,
At such a time, for he says, thou 'rt the man
O let truths Champions charge in the van,
All sinners thus, and let the sinners fall
From sin and rise in faith in general,
Not blaming holy Nathans who do strive
To marry us to Christ, from the world un-wive:
A stranger came to David, 'twas a stranger
Indeed to him, but in the world a Ranger.
For this his sin, that would sorrow the stones,
Me thinks I hear good David's sighs and groans.
Saying, ye gate unto iniquity,
My un-restrained lust and liberty;
By this my foul abhord adultery,
To nature I have done an injury,
But to the God of Nature more. O sin!
By thee my sorrow does but now begin.
Sin! sin! sin! sin! a worse then thee cannot be;
For here had been no evil but for thee.
Oh grief beyond tongue-eloquence! whose smart
Is only truly known within my heart.
My soul, my soul receives violence
By this my beastly base concupiscence.
Nay, how know I, but by continuance,
My lust may grow to damned impudence?
Oh in my soul I have a gnawing sense!
Greatness does make it great incontinence.
How will the Wicked now rejoice and say
With scorn, See how the Saint is fallen away!
What wrong shall I do to thy Church, O Lord,
Unto this holy, holy, holy Word!
My owl-sight eyes were dazzled with her light,
Yet saw too clearly in that darker night.
Oh that I had not up my roof so gone!
Or that I there, there, there had been alone!
That that too nimble tongue had not me told
What th'woman was; for that made lust so bold.
What did I wish to have been alone? Unwise;
That caused me to be tyrant lust's prise:
For had my God been with me, I had not
Been such a wretched, foolish, sinful sot.
If for adultery my soul thus find
To grieve, What shall she do for that behind,
Abhorred murder? Now my soul falls down,
And's truly dead (pro tempore) in a swoon.
Oh lend thy mercy, Lord, Oh Lord support
My failing heart, that I may thus report
To all succeeding ages. Oh my God!
Let the holy Spirit have again abode
Within my heart; and pardon all my sins,
And eke prevent Satan's enchanting gins.
Dread Majesty! Oh let thy mercy shine
Upon my darkened soul: let light divine
Descend into it, that by that clear light,
I may of thy paths have a certain sight.
But teach me to repent, and that is as good
As if thou had sealed my pardon with thy blood.
I Will let him speak himself. A hand or eye
"By Hilyard drawn, is worth an History
"By a worse Painter made, says learned Done:
Therefore hear David's verse; for I have done.
Verse 1. PSALM 51.
1. HAve mercy upon me, O gracious God,
According to thy loving kindness Lord,
According to thy mercies multitude,
Blot out my heinous sins which did intrude.
2 Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity,
and cleanse me from my great impiety.
3 For I acknowledge my sins, and they be
before my weeping eyes continually.
4 Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and
done this in thy sight with so high a hand,
That thou might be justified when thou speak,
and be always most clear when thou judge.
5 Lo I was shapen in iniquity,
and in vile sin did my mother conceive me!
6 Lo thou desir'st truth in the inward part,
and thou shall teach me wisdom in my heart.
7 Purge me with hyssop, I shall be clean so,
wash me and I shall be whiter than snow.
8 Make me to hear sweet joy and gladness voice,
that the bones which thou have broke may rejoice.
9 From my sin Lord hide thine all-seeing eyes,
and blot out all my great iniquities.
10 Create in me a clean heart, O my God,
and constant spirit give in me abode!
11 O cast me not from out thy blessed presence,
take not from me thy holy Spirits sense!
12 Restore to me the joy of thy salvation,
and uphold me with thy free Spirits motion.
13 Then will I teach transgressors great thy ways,
and sinners shall convert by me thy says.
14 O free me from bloud-guiltiness, O Lord!
thou God of my salvation it afford.
15 My tongue shall sing thy Righteousness, O God,
Lord open thou my Lips, and them upraise,
then shall my mouth show forth thy louder praise.
16 For thou desir'st no sacrifice, I Would bring
it else; thou delight'st not in burnt-offering.
17 Thy sacrifices are a broken spirit,
a broken contrite heart is thy best merit.
18 Do good in thy good pleasure unto Sion,
build thou the walls of thy Jerusalem.
19 Then shall thou pleased be with sacrifice
of our lame, hasting, but half Righteousness;
with burnt-offering, and whole burnt-offering,
then shall they bullocks to thine altar bring.
MEDITATION.
HEre is a Lesson of concernment here,
A David's Lesson, which may seem a mere
Folly to foolish folk. What mourn so much,
For a then living child, and yet to grutch,
After 'twas dead? O here is a work of Grace
Which now repenting David does embrace!
He Would prayed for its life in either World;
And since God's just deserved anger hurled
The Babe from mourning David, David is
Informed by faith that it its makers is,
And he therein afflicted for his sin,
Which he desires to be contented in.
He throws not Cities down as Alexander,
At his friends death, nor let their passion wander.
He Is not so frantic in his vain laments,
When his child traveling removes his tents,
As to demolish the Palace where it died,
As one of our Kings did (if not belied)
Heathens can learn men better Lessons; Fie,
Will men the Eternal great Decree deny?
Hector to's wife Andromache said why
Do you grieve my death? all men are born to die.
Gorgias ask't in's sickness, how he fares,
Says, sleep now yields me to his brother death.
But to our Theme. David now confesses.
His dearest Bathsheba, whose sweet childs death
Has overwhelmed her heart with sorrow; yet
She now considers it was Natures debt,
And it is mere courtesy if we are spared
To seventy years, for death is not debard
From shooting us any time if God
His nimble feet with a command has shod.
So David went in and did lie with her,
And she did bear a son, which son did bear
An Emblem of God's love even in his Name.
By God by Nathan given; for Solomon
Is Jedidiah called, 'cause of the Lord.
And Joab had fought Rabbah with the sword,
And he sent for David, saying, come thou
With the rest of the people, or I vow,
The City will by my name called be,
Which I confess our King, belongs to thee.
Here was right Captain General, for lo,
He knew how to entitle David to
The honor of the action; faithful man,
In this matter (I pray) who blame thee can?
So David marched to the town and took
What ever the conquered people look
Upon as once was theirs; their Kings rich Crown
From off their Kings head, and set on his own.
Thus do I see that that old phrase does hit,
Fortior qui se, quam qui fortissima vincit.
Adieu a la Monde. To the worshipful JOHN MAY Esquire senior, Alderman of Lyn.
WIt, Valor, Riches, Honor, Beauty, Birth,
Are Baits for Mortals, laid by Stepdame Earth.
1.
Cato for Government the pride of Rome,
From whom so many wholesome Laws did come,
Who did foretell proud Caesar's tyranny,
Egyptian Ptolomy did tell his folly,
Who if he would followed his Counsel wise,
He had not failed in his Enterprise;
He that did lead the Romans by the ears,
And could exhilarate amidst all fear
To others; Lo! he stabs himself, alas!
Virtue, thou stoodst in need of Christian Grace.
2.
Unconque'd Caesar that third thousand Town
Had taken by assault, and had beat down
Three hundred Nations: a Million
Of Prisoners taken; nay, he who had won
Infinite Battles; 'midst the Senate grave,
From violent death, alas! could not him save.
3.
Lucullus, who by Victories obtained
Against potent Kings, a mass of Gold had gained,
And made the richest Triumphs that Rome saw,
Ere while she gave the conquered World her Law.
He who scarce knew his Treasure, lost his wits,
Therefore his grave an hasty poison fits.
4
Great Alexander that the World did aw,
And with his Sword did write the Persians Law,
He that did captive Kings, and face their Van,
That princely issued Macedonian,
At last ('it was thought) by poison lost his breath;
For he that conquers Kings, cannot conquer Death.
5.
Fair Alcibiades whose beauteous face,
Did give unto his actions winning grace,
Which made King Agis Wife be won unto
That which was both a shame to grant and do.
He that was called the pleasant sweet prospect,
Whose Beauty like the orient Pearl project,
Could not prevail with Murderers venomed darts,
Nor yet, alas! with their more cruel hearts.
6.
Pyrrhus descended from Achilles brave,
Whose loud-mouthed fame shall never find a grave,
One of the noblest Families in Greece,
Successively found valors masterpiece,
Was slain from off a house by a thrown Tile,
For such a peerless Prince a death too vile!
MEDITATION.
1.
Omnipotent Lord! who know my secret thought,
And before whom secrets revealed are brought:
Since thou art omnipotent, I e're shall strain,
To show all mundane things but merely vain.
I Will fear to meddle with that Engine wit,
Because it does the Enginier of 't hit:
However I Will not trust to it, for vain
Are all things that proceed from man's mere brain.
Thy wiser Solomon when he was jolly,
He placed a heaven in that, but found it folly.
2.
I Will fear all Dalilahs, prevent a gust;
Desire to anchor sure, in spite of lust:
I Will not presume upon my valor, O!
How short a way could I in my strength go?
Thy Sampson too much trusting to his strength,
Was overcome, and vilely used at length.
3:
What shall I strive to catch a bird in the air?
For Riches make them wings and fly affair,
And ^arr. Give me not over much my God!
Wise Agurs Prayer is mine, enough for food
And Raiment; if thou think fit to give more,
Some I Will return unto thee by the poor.
Thou made thy Job (the richest of the East)
Even (for a time) to Vermin vile a Feast.
4.
I Will seek not honor, for alas! the man
That has it acts but the Comoedian.
He holds it but until the Play is done,
Perhaps before the Plaudite it is gone.
Thine own dear David, now an honored King.
A Shimei now on him Reproaches fling.
5.
I Will grieve not for a withered Rose, I Will scorn
All such things that do die, as soon as born.
Should I ere over-love a face that turns
To ashey pale in sickness when it burns?
An Absalom was hanged upon a Tree,
What Beauty great did men then in him see!
6.
I scarcely call my Fathers merits mine,
Good Parents do convince bad Childrens line
Of their degenerate, depraved acts.
Except I Am good, what help my Fathers facts?
A Rehoboam is the more made guilty,
By his good Fathers, of iniquity.
Wit's weak, Valor does fail, Riches do fly,
Honor halts, Beauty fades, and Birth does lie:
Therefore (O Lord) I only crave but thee,
Let others crave those earthly things for me.
Solomon's Caveat of the Harlot.
I Take it wisdom here for to repeat
Those things of her the Wiseman does relate.
The lips of a strange woman drop as honey, Prove. 5.3.

Her mouth smoother than oil (to get your money)
Her end as bitter is as sour Wormwood,
Sharper it is than a two-edged Sword.
Her feet go down to Death, her steps to Hell;
Least thou should ponder her path of life well,
Her ways are moveable, not to be known,
(And every one that courteth here is her own.)
My Son keep thy self from the evil Woman, Prove. 6.25.

The flattering tongue of the perverser Woman.
After her Beauty lust not in thine heart,
Nor let her take thee with her eyelids art;
For by a Whore a man is brought to naught,
And the adulteress man's life has sought.
Can fire be in the bosom, and cloths not torn?
One to tread on hot Coals, his feet not burn?
So he that to his neighbors wife ere went,
And touched her, shall not be innocent.
The window of my house I looked through, Prove. 7.7.

And did behold a young man that was shallow,
Passing the streets through unto her corner,
He went he way unto the house of the scorner.
In the evening in the half-dark twilight,
In the black, dark, dismal, and dangerous night.
And behold! there did meet him a Woman,
With the attire of a right Harlot on,
Subtle of heart (she is both loud and stubborn,
Her feet abide not in her house, she is gone
Without, now in the streets (is a suborner)
And she lies in wait at every corner)
So she caught him, and kissed him (so slim!)
And with an impudent face said to him,
I have Peace Offerings with me, but now
Even this day Sweetest have I paid my vow,
Therefore came I to seek so diligently
Thy sweeter face, and lo! Now I have found thee,
I Have decked my Bed with Tap'stry Coverings,
With carved Work, fine Linen, and such things,
I have perfumed my Bed (O don't be gone!)
With precious Myrrh, Aloes, and Cynamon:
Come let us take our fill of Love (my Dear)
Until the morning let us solace here,
For the Good man is not at home you see,
(I Am sure he will stay) he is gone a long journey.
O of such Whores the deeper subtilty!
And of their slaves the great simplicity!
Lord, let thy servant rather beg at the door,
Then ere ensnared by a damned Whore!
The end of the Divine Poems.
Sickness.
I Feel my strength of the sudden me to fail,
I feel insulting sickness me assail;
Then I think on my sins, my flesh so frail.
There is a God!
I do observe my meat, my drink, my air,
My exercises, study; yet my care
Prevents not; I may be choked with an hair.
There is a God!
One hand does ask the other how it fares,
(By the Pulse) mine eye asks m' urine how it shares,
With this distemper, while I Am worn with cares;
Yet thou 'rt my God!
My fear of Sickness does as much afflict,
As of fore-passed sickness the relict;
Thus by thy Sergeant is thy servant kicked.
Strengthen, oh God!
Throw cold water on fire, oh this is jolly,
This is thy servants wonted peevish folly,
Wrap a hot fever in cold melancholy.
Make wise, oh God!
I cannot hold, oh Lord, glory I must,
Of the holy Ghosts temple I am some dust,
No marble is so precious, I must
Remember God!
The remedy's as bad as the disease,
Purging a weak man, oh how can this please!
Or how can this, oh Lord, thy servant ease!
Yet there is a God!
I take down drugs, then wormwood bitter fare,
As loathsome as the loathsomest that are,
Listen to all receipts both near and far:
Which bless oh God!
Yet thou art just in all thy acts alone,
Who so often lead me for my sins to groan;
As for my pain in sickness I have shown,
Pardon oh God!
My Parents would not let servants correct me,
And let not Satan, oh God, ever afflict me,
Not by Satan would I afflicted be:
Grant this, oh God!
Yet Lord, how much have I been a mistaker,
And almost had forgotten God my maker!
Oh therefore am I of this Pain partaker:
Forget oh God!
The Bell that toles for some departing soul,
Makes me think I may taste of Death's brimm'd boul;
And then, oh Lord, how can I it control?
Make fit, oh God!
I study not how my soul first came in,
But how 'twas guilty of most heinous sin,
To study of its end I do begin:
Oh help, o God!
Wih St Augustine this shall be my station,
I do desire to know my transmigration,
And that I certain be of thy salvation:
Which grant, oh God!
The soul of the man that died I prayed for,
And for to judge him damned I do abhor;
But charitably think him saved; for
You Are good, oh God!
The body whence the soul so loath did part,
T'exchange for heaven, is so that now all Art
Acknowledge must they set her out in part:
Poor flesh, oh God!
Who would not be affected much to see,
A morning River sweet that ran clearly,
A kennel grow, and to run muddily?
Such is man, God!
Then hopes of cure my heavy heart do raise,
Oh open then my lips to show thy praise,
For Lord, my duller flesh skils not thy ways:
Almighty God!
Oh how I then did think to lead a life,
Lord, like a member of thy dearer wife
Thy Church, which ever grant be void of strife:
Thou peaceful God!
These holy thoughts confirm thou in mine heart,
That I may praise thy name with utmost art,
And that I may from thy Laws never start:
Grant this, oh God!
Lord keep me from a sad relapse, I crave;
Then shall thy servant strength and pleasure have:
But, oh Lord, let me not thy strength to wave:
Oh Lord my God!
For 'twill be sad to run the course again,
To purge, to sweat, and to do all in vain;
Do thou thy blessings therefore on me rain:
My gracious God!
Let not thy servant poor ever be relapsed,
Into those sins which are truly repealed,
And thou, oh Lord, have fully pardoned:
Thou art my God!
The PROTECTION.
To th'Admirall, Vice- or Reer-Admirall;
Renowned Captains unto each and all.

WE greet you well: and will that this our Son
By you nor yours no violence be done
His Merchandise, or ought pertains unto him:
For if you do, you do not only undo him,
But do affront our high authority,
And shall do by us most unworthily.
You sons of Neptune, hereby we do charge
You, if you take him, that you him discharge
And his goods free; or if you be so ill,
As to deny't, then answer't at your peril;
For be it known unto you from this Place,
He Is ordered for to trade in Wit and Grace.
We three, and thrice-three straightly do command
The proudest of you not to lay your hand
Upon this our dear Son, from Rupert brave,
Unto the meanest thrommet, or base slave;
For by great Jove our Father, and our Mother
Fair Venus; your neglect we will not smother.
Great Pallas, and Minerva we'll inform,
If he abuse this our choice Microcosm;
Then we'll inform our mother Mnemosyne;
And ye shall never taste Nectarean wine:
But shall be punished by the punishment
Great Jove for such offenders did Invent.
Given at Olympus high, Signed and sealed by And at Parnassus Hill Signed by
our sacred Quill.
The Graces
Agiaia Thalia Euphrosyne
The Muses
Clio Melpomene Thalia Euterpo Terpsichore Erato Calliope Urania Polymnia


CONCLUSION.
I Know I shall be counted madd and rude
By the wild, giddy-headed multitude,
To write in such strange days, for now men sink
Their judgments, having drowned them first with drink.
Envy and Ignorance, I Am confident
Will scarcely well this work of mine resent.
Amongst the Wits it is Epidemicall,
On their Rivals Momus-like for to fall.
Like to the ignorant no foe to wit,
And he is condemned that do'nt each humor fit.
One would have obscene Poems, the other plain,
A third one writing in a lofty strain;
One tedious things affects; another short;
Another says Verse only should make sport.
Some, that he is no Poet, holds no Quill,
Except he equal Homer, or great Virgill;
Some, none should write, except like Scaliger,
Who could in thirty Languages confer:
Or such, as Aristarchus, that (no less)
Two hundred Books could fit unto the Press.
Or he whose memory is full as terse
As Seneca's, who could at first rehearse
Hundreds of words after the hearing; then
I think no mortal men should use a Pen.
But I am like Heraclitus; no Tutor
In Cham, or Ox, was ever my Co-adjutor,
Wherefore the truer Poet some men say;
But they their ignorances do betray.
Other affairs command this Book so small,
And my late sickness crushed the growth withal,
And made the Copy the worse writ; I fear
By that the Printer will abuse the Reader,
And much more me, somewhat my noble Friends,
Who me their quaint Encomiasticks lends
Unto my Book. I have of this a sense,
There Is no dispute against Experience,
And at the Press I cannot be; wherefore:
Good Printer, let your care appear the more.
I seldom use more Letters then there is need,
With witty, learned Howell, and th'more speed,
With much more ease is found; wherefore excuse
The humor (since it is lawful) of my Muse.
And I am tired in re-writing, see!
The reason is, because it is old to me.
Now without malice, I do wished to be
To all e'r-lasting, (Stationer but to thee.)
What shall I never quiet be? Now news,
That I do such a friend in Verse abuse,
In daring for to consolate in Verse
After an action that required Cypress,
Rather then Bays. Now that I writ my self
Most famous Poet, when the prating Elf
I shrewdly judge, can scarcely read English.
Lord, free me from these prating fools I wish!
Or else in these things let this be my sense,
"Thou take a Text, and preachest Patience.
Here Is one with Swearing makes the room to shake,
Saying, O fool, why do thou these pains take?
Is this the way to grow rich? oh thou fond man!
Come hither, cheer thy spirits with a full Cann.
Will Verse pay debts, or will your lofty Rimes
Mount you to place of trust in these our times?
Oh the injustice of conceited Owls,
That think none godly, but those that wear Cowls!
None wise, but those that with his wit do jump,
Although for it he lab'rously does pump.
Let those that hunt the stately Stagg with hounds,
Not be (unjustly kept) in th'Shepherd's bounds.
Those that Hawking delights, not be impeded
From that refreshment which great Princes used;
Those that in catching silly Fish delight
Be hindered from it; Nor that love the flight
Of a broad Arrow; Those that learn Defense,
Or those that love to pleas the hearing Sen e.
Then whence I pray you can a man surmise
That it is unfitting thus to Poetise?
If ye please Zoilists to court your Whore,
Why should I stop you entering at the door?
If you do fight as stoutly as game-Cocks,
What helps, if they do pay you with a Pox?
If Swearing please your humors, and if good?
Does me, why do you use this carping mood?
Some cavil at my Readings fruits; yet see
From many slowers hony's got by the Be;
And the Spider, whose work is all her own,
As worthless by the Broom away is thrown.
Some that things Moral with Divine are mixed,
When some men loves on th'Book by that are fixed;
And seeking (perhaps) for Verse that is fine,
May be made amorous of Verse Divine.
Lastly, Readers, my Musings I Will amend
If ye accept this, or else here is
THE END.
Soli Deo Sola Gloria.
The Alphabeticall Table.
Conclusion page 63 The Devil-Pope page 14 Epigrams and Epitaphs page 5
Epithalamium to Mr. G. H. page 9 Epistle to Sir R. S. page 6 Elegy to my
Yoak-fellow page 35 Elegy to Brother T. S. on the death of his child page 31
Elegy on the Shipwreck of J.O. and his company page 40 Epitaph on Tho. Slany
Major of Lyn page 28 Elegy and Epitaph on my Daughter AMY. page 33
Long-suffering page 40 The Protection page 62 The Rimer routed page 21 The
Sinner page 47 The Storm and Calm page 1 Song at the Authors last coming out
of Germany page 7 Solomon's Caveat of the Harlot page 59
FINIS.

