THE Humble Address of John Musgrave, To the Supreme Authority, The Parliament
of the Common Wealth of England.
To the Right Honorable William Lenthall, Speaker to the Honorable House of
Parliament; and to every individual Member thereof.
Right Honorable,
BEfore this Parliament begun, I suffered not a little, lost the favor and
friendship of my great kindred, for asserting the Common Liberty against the
arbitrary proceedings of the corrupt Judges in the case of Ship Money.

Upon the Trial of the Earl of Strafford, I was produced as a witness,
attended upon my own charge; and then it was said, I did the Parliament an
acceptable service, as my Lord Commissioner Whitlock well remembers. Upon my
return into the Country after the said Earl's Trial, I was committed to
Carlisle Castle by Sheriff Dikes; because I gave evidence again the Earl upon
his Trial.

Upon the late King's leaving the Parliament, and going to York, I was accused
and committed for Treason, for my affection to the Parliament. Afterward for
refusing the Oath of allegiance, and for adhering to the Parliament, I was
condemned in praemunire, to forfeit lands and goods, and to be imprisoned during
life, and a hundred pound, after I got my liberty, was bidden by Sir Philip
Musgrave, to bring me in alive or dead, and the little estate I had, then
seized on, and my self declared Traitor. I was forced to fly into Scotland for
my life, (the Parliament having no Garrison near us) where I lived in exile two
years, until our Country was reduced to obedience of Parliament.

I discovered the treachery of Sir Wilfride Lawson, and others entrusted for
the Parliament, who (while I attended here) betrayed the Country twice into the
enemies hand.

While I was prisoner to the Parliament in the Fleet, I did give intelligence
to the Armies Agitators, and otherwise was useful to the Army, as Col. Saxby,
and Lieut. Col. Joyce, can give account of, which the L. General took special
notice of, upon his coming up to the Parliament against the City: And the L.
General upon his march for Scotland, recommended my petition to Mr. Weaver, to
present to the Parliament; but Mr. Weaver going into Ireland, could not do it.

Upon special order from the Council of State, I brought in my exceptions to
the now Commissio^ers of the Militia for Cumberland, made good the ^^me, they
being all disaffected to the present Go^ernment, and most of them formerly
actually in ^rmes against the Parliament. The other day, they suffered 26 men,
to carry away Colonel Henningham Steward from Rose Castle, within two miles of
Carlisle, without resistance, though they had timely notice of it, and none of
the enemies forces within 30 miles of Carlisle; which as they are treacherous,
discovered them also to be base and cowardly.

The Commissioners for the Militia in Cumberland, are also Commissioners for
sequestrations, and for Ministers, who protect Delinquents from sequestrations,
and keeps in their places malignant and disaffected Ministers.

That by an order of Parliament (made the 18. of February, 1650.) for concealed
delinquents in Cumberland, the Parliament and Common Wealth will be cheated of
five thousand by year, if the Commissioners for sequestrations in Cumberland
(as that order directs) have the disposing of the concealments; the
Commissioners for sequestrations there being Delinquents, and sequestrable.

That most of the Delinquents in the North, who have compounded at Goldsmiths
Hall, have compounded at far under-valewes; and more concealed not compounded
for: But all such as solicit for the Common Wealth, receive such
discouragements from the Commissioners at Haberdashers Hall, as few men will
make any further discoveries: If desired, I shall particularize wherein.

That some in the North have compounded with Sir Arthur Haslerigg, and paid
their Fines, yet their estates are kept under sequestration, and the
Commmissioners for compounding, will not give order (...) discharge the same;
but wearies the parties out wit^ delays, to the great oppression of such.

That I have brought in to the Common Wealth by discoveries, (upon my own
charge) four thousand pounds by year, whereof the Common wealth is now actually
possessed; And my discoveries not perfected, I will undertake if finished, will
amount unto above ten thousand pounds per annum; But until I have my petition
read, in Alderman Allan's hand, I am wholly disabled, as discouraged, further
to proceed therein.

If you refuse to receive our petitions, remove Delinquents out of the Militia,
bring to examination our complaints, as those under you in Authority have in
the Northern parts, from time to time betrayed and given us up to the enemy;
and by oppression enriched themselves: Pardon my boldness, we cannot but
impute the fault hereof to you, and you will make your selves guilty of the
loss, harm, and blood, the enemies shall do and shed in this Nation; our
Country being a door or inlet for any enemy.

If you will revoke your Order of the 18. of November, 1650. I will undertake
without any charge to you, out of the moyeties of my discoveries, to raise ^000
l. for a manufacture in Cumberland; and 1000 l. for the distressed
well-affected there; and will raise and maintain 200 horse with their Riders,
under faithful Commanders, whom the General shall approve of; the other moiety
of the discoveries to come into the public treasury, the fifths for my travel
and charges only deducted.

If you approve not of this, then pardon all our ^orthern Delinquents; for
better so, then the whole profits of them, to be swallowed up by a few
malignant men, who enrich themselves thereby, and cheat the Common Wealth of
thousands.

Whereas it may be objected, multiplicity of State-businesse hinders private to
be heard by you.

1. I answer, our noble General and the Officers of the Army, upon complaint
from Country men of disorder in any Soldier, might give the like answer; but
we see not the least offense upon that account passed by, but examined, and
severely punished; and thereby it is the best ordered disciplined Army that
ever Europe had.

2. I observe not withstanding the objection, the great and eminent Lawyers of
the House, for a ten shillings fee, will wave all State business in
Parliament, and attend at the Bar of any Court in Westminster Hall, and so
whole Terms, and take their perambulations for money with the Judges in their
several Circuits.

3. I see and observe, Cavaleers and Delinquents frequently and daily have
their petitions read, and ready dispatches, without any long attendance: so
public business is but pretenses and mere excuses, no reality or weight in it.

We have none sitting in Parliament for Cumberland, but Sir John Ipsley, who
never to this day preferred a petition for any well-affected in Cumberland; but
ready ever to serve Cavaliers and Delinquents here, I will forbear to say more,
in hope he may grow better, as older) and Alderman Allan, who has such great
employments and State-businesse, that he cannot mind us.

I never sought nor affected a place or office, neither ever will. I never had
sallery or profit for any service I ever did you. Many grow rich by your
offices, I desire to recover my own by your Justice, whereby I may be the
better enabled to serve my Country: And if my petition in Alderman Allan's hand
may be read, as I doubt not your Justice, so the Commons will be benefited
thereby, many thousand pounds.

Being friendlesse and meanlesse, otherwise then by this address to come unto
you. If any man of honor, upon reading the same, consider mine and my
Countries condition procure us right and justice, I shall be thankful, and
bless God for it; till when, I will live in hope, and ever be as I write,

The second of the 9 th. month, 1651. Your Honors humble servant, for Justice
sake, John Musgrave.

The Copy of a Letter, written by the Church at Broughton in Cumberland, to
John Musgrave.
Kind Friend,
UPon your return from London the last Michaelmas Term we were much gladded the
Council of State was pleased to hear you upon your exceptions to the
Commissioners of the Militia, and for their Declaration to redress our
grievances complained of by you in your Remonstrance (but when we understood
that Sir Arthur Haslerig had procured the same men whom you excepted against,
not only to be Commissioners for the Militia, but for the Ministry) we were
cast down, conceiving the Enemy to be potent and prevailing more on you,
because of your negligence, though formerly you have been very active and
suffering for your Country, yet in this we cannot but blame you, being
confident that if the Council of State had known what manner of men they were,
how disaffected to the present Parliament, either Cavaliers, or of the Scottish
faction, not one of them would have been approved by the Council of State,
unless the Governor of Carlisle, who in regard he is a stranger is wholly
guided by the other; As for the Militia, they pursue not the Act, but take a
disposing power of men's estates, setting some the half horse, where his estate
is not equal, to such they impose but a third part: And for the Ministry, they
approve of few or none, but such as be either of the Scottish faction, and
raylers against Independents, or if worse may be, such as are Malignants and
Royalists; but for honest men they cannot abide, such they remove and put out
of the Ministry under the name of Sectaries and Independents; as Mr. Lampit,
Mr. Baggerley, and Mr. Wharton; if any be for the Presbytery, though he deny
the Engagement, approved of, and allowed, our Justices of the Peace do impose
bookswearing upon some of the States friends, and for denying of the same do
fine them in ten pounds, threatening them, and scoffing and calling as they
think good. Mr. Musgrave be not weary of well doing, though you have no money
nor wages from us, slight us not, it concerns you nearly; If the enemy be thus
holden up, you can expect little ease, and less security; therefore as you
tender your own welfare, and your friends peace, be not sluggish, or longer
silent, but stand for the cause of God and his people; Be bold, it will be your
honor, whatsoever the success be, trust God: Sir, however bad our condition
is, we will not cease to trouble you, hoping you will take in good part what we
have written; you will not forsake your suffering friends, or in silence leave
us under our enemies hands; Let the God of power enable you to finish what ye
have begun for the good of his Church and people in these parts, to whose
protection and care we recommend you and our cause, this 31. of the Ninth
month, 1650.

Your Brethren in affection, and signed by the direction of the Church at
Broughton in particular, viz. Joh. Robinson, Munge Rothery, Gowen Wheelwright,
John Tiffin* John Bow, John Scot, Francis Smith, ThomasThompson, John Nicholson.
For Mr. John Musgrave.
The Council of State, after my two years attendance, notwithstanding their
many promises, and declaration, have left me and my cause wholly to the
Parliament.



FINIS.

