A PIOUS SERMON, preached by that late painful and profitable Minister of Gods
word HUMPH. MUNNING, Rectour of BRETENHAM in the County of Suffolk.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by Roger Daniel, Printer to the Universitie. 1641.

To Mr WILLIAM COPINGER, Esquire; and Mris MARY COPINGER, his beloved wife.
Worshipful, my loving and very good friends in the Lord:
WHen I had preached this Sermon, some of ill will, I think, to draw me into
the jealousy and danger of the time, reported that I had meddled (I know not
how) with the ceremonies of the Church. A very strange thing, that meat, drink,
apparel and pastime (for these are the indifferent things that I meddle
withal) should sound in any wise man's ear, as the ceremonies of the Church.
But such hearers we must sometimes meet withal, who will offer like violence
to our words and meaning, as Cacus did to Hercules his oxen. Wherefore being
provoked by this wrong, I took a little pains to look over my notes again, and
setting my memory a work with them, I wrote out the Sermon wholly and at large
as here it is. Which when I had done, I saw nothing to the contrary therein
(though I confess no great matter is to be seen in it) but that to some good
minds (especially if friendly and lovingly disposed toward the poor and
contemptible author) it might be of some good use unto true godliness in this
kind. And peradventure the presumption of putting it into the hands of some
such persons, might be as little sin, as the casting of it aside into some
dusty corner with other waste papers. Wherefore your selves being of such
deserving toward me, as if there were any thing of worth in me, I must of
necessity ow it to you; I am bold to put these papers (such as they are) into
your loving hands: where if they do no other good, yet they shall testify my
thankfulness toward you, and be ready to clear my innocence in that supposed
crime, when need requires.

God give you both, with a happy and blessed new year, all renewments of his
grace and holy Spirit, to his glory in you, and your endless comfort in him.

Bretenham, January, 1. 1619. Yours, with his best and best deserved
affections, HUM. MUNNING.

1. COR. 10. Verse. 31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do,
do all to the glory of God. 1. COR. 10. Verse. 32. Give none offense, neither to
the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God: 1. COR. 10. Verse. 33.
Even as I please all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit, but the
profit of many, that they may be saved.
TO discern things that differ (as the Apostle speaks, Phil. 1.10.) is a
necessary grace in a Christian, and requires true wisdom indeed. But I am
deceived, if the wisdom and perspiciency of a Christian be not of as necessary
use, and as much to be required in indifferent things as in those that differ.
For in these things of a middle and indifferent nature, where we have no direct
nor express commandment of God to overruled us, but are left (after a sort) to
the liberty of our will: here we do commonly Aut haesitare, aut praecipitare.
either go too slow, or too fast: here zeal without knowledge, or knowledge
without zeal, does dangerously miscarry us: here Satan, taking advantage either
of our ignorance or of some other corruption within us, does set his traps for
us; yea, here he makes one Christian set a trap for another: here, for the most
part, we are Jactatores libertatis.
boasters of our liberty, carrying our selves too strongly upon it, and see not
that we are snared in it, and how Satan makes nets of indifferent things,
wherein we are easily taken, and hardly escape without some loss or hurt to
our selves or others. Into this net, or toil, the devil had got the Christian
Corinthians, where with the over-free use of indifferent things, namely of
meats sacrificed to idols, they did gore and wound the consciences one of
another. The Apostle therefore seeing their danger, and in theirs foreseeing
ours, does take great pains to deliver them and us out of these briers; so
great, as in no other point that I know, except the main of our justification
by faith, he has taken any greater: giving unto the Corinthians, and in them
unto us, with other instructions of like nature, certain general rules,
whereby a wise and good Christian may walk safely in these things: neither to
scrupulously tying up himself and others from the use of them altogether; nor
yet loosely and dissolutely abusing his liberty in them, as an occasion to the
flesh.

Of these general rules this that I have read unto you is one, and the
principal: it is the conclusion of the whole discourse or disputation about
indifferent things, from the beginning of the eighth chapter. And it seems to
me that the Apostle sets it down by way of anticipation, thus: The Christian
Corinthians, upon occasion of that which the Apostle had urged before, might
reply and say, Why, Sir, if there be such danger in eating and drinking,
feasting and companie-keeping with our friends, and other things of this
nature, that (as you say) God is provoked, and our souls endangered thereby;
what shall we do? we had best utterly abstain, and throw away our liberty that
we seem to have in these things, for ever. To this reply of theirs the Apostle
rejoyneth in these words. Nay, (says he) I say not so unto you: but if you
will take it, I will give you a safe and sure rule to walk by in these and all
other like things. And that is this; Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye
do, do all to the glory of God, and to the edification of your brethren. You
are wise men and full of knowledge; use your wisdom in the practice of this
rule, consider the circumstances and especially the end of all your actions,
and do thereafter.

So we have here a Rule, or (as the Apostle calls it Gal. 6.16.) a Canon for
a Christian to walk by in all his actions. And indeed it should be the Rule of
all rules, and the Canon of all canons, to rule and overruled all that a
Christian does in all things, and even in those wherein he may seem to himself
to be most at liberty, even in things of a middle and indifferent nature.

And here we have three things to consider of. First, the actions or things
that are to be ruled. Secondly, the rule it self, whereby they are to be ruled.
And thirdly an example.

The actions or things to be ruled are set down by a distribution: Whether ye
eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do. The Apostle does instance in eating and
drinking, because they were the things in question at that time. And yet lest
we should think the rule to appertain only to eating and drinking, he adds
the general, Whatsoever else; to teach us that all our actions must fall under
a rule.

The rule whereby these things are to be ruled, is the end. And that is double:
first, the glory of God; secondly, the edification of our neighbor. The first
is set down in plain and express terms; Do all to the glory of God. The second
is set down by a remotion of the contrary; Give no offense, cause none to fall
or to stumble, no Jew, no Grecian, much less any of the people and Church of
God.

The example is taken from himself: As in all things I please all men. In all
things of this nature, in all indifferent things, I do not so much respect mine
own liberty or commodity, as how the action will fall out to others; not using
my liberty or power in any thing, but where I may further the salvation of
others thereby.

Now (to take these things as they ly in order) first concerning the actions or
things to be ruled, they are (as we see) specially eating and drinking, but in
general all things whatsoever. For so the Apostle, Whether ye eat or drink, or
whatsoever ye do. From which general words of the Apostle this general
doctrine does arise unto us, namely, That all things whatsoever a Christian man
does, must be done by a rule. And a Christian has no such liberty, to do what
he list, at least, to do as he list in any thing. Though God has given us
great liberty in many things; yet no such liberty, as to be irregular or out of
rule in any thing.

And the Scripture says the same thing in other places, though in other terms.
For that same integrity that God requires of Abraham, to walk before him and
be upright, the undefilednesse in the ways of the Lord, that David speaks of
in the Psalms, the sincerity and unblameablenesse that the Apostles exhort
unto otherwhere, Walking honestly and pleasing God in all things; what is all
this, I say, but the observing of a rule in all things that we do, as the
Apostle here requires.

And the best interpreters upon this place affirm so much.

Piscator.
One says, This ought to be the scope of all our actions. Hemming
Another says, Let this rule be observed in all things. And Marlorat.
a third says, No part of man's life, no action TAM MINUTA, not such a minute,
not such a minim of an action in a Christian, but must be referred to this end.

The general will the better appear, if it be laid open in some particulars.
And first in this wherein the Apostle instanceth; Whether ye eat or drink. What
is more free, or wherein has God given more liberty to man, then in eating and
drinking? Every moving thing that lives (says God Genesis 9.3.) shall be meat
for you; even as the green herb have I given you all things. And Deuteronomy. 12.20.
If thou shall say, I will eat flesh (because thy soul longs to eat flesh)
thou may eat flesh whatsoever thy soul lusts after. And the Apostle
tells us, 1. Tim. 4.4. Every creature of God is good, and nothing to be
refused, if it be received with thanksgiving. And in this chapter, verse 25.
Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, that eat, asking no question for conscience
sake.

Behold here liberty enough! And blessed be God that (as Mr Calvin says) we
need not cat our meat with a doubtful and fearful conscience. And to teach
otherwise, were a doctrine of devils.

What then? For all this liberty, might a Jew therefore, during the time of
the Leviticall law, have eaten of swines flesh, or any other legally-unclean
creature? No, you say, That was forbidden by the Law, and therefore not
indifferent. But I say, The thing was indifferent still in its own nature, and
the prohibition of the law was but a restriction in the use for a time.

Or what shall we say to that temporary exception in the Apostles time? Might a
believing Gentile during that time have eaten of things strangled or of blood?
or may we now abuse our liberty in eating and drinking (I do not say to
surfeiting and drunkenness, but) to the breach of any honest and Godly
politic law amongst us? Nay, we see that notwithstanding this great liberty
in this matter, yet the Apostle doubts not to give rules to our eating and
drinking, and such rules as do both restrain and limit the outward act, and
also in some sort do bind the conscience, and make a man guilty of sin in the
neglect of the same. So as notwithstanding our liberty in eating and drinking,
yet we may not be libertines therein.

Let us see the like in apparel. The fair, or (as Tremellius translateth) the
desirable garments of Esau, the parti-colored coat that Jacob made for his
son Joseph, the changes of raiment that Joseph gave to his brethren, and the
vestures of diverse colors that the kings daughters wore being virgins; all
these do declare what liberty God has given unto us in the use of apparel.
Nolo ut de ornamentis auri, vel vestis, properam habeas in prohibendo
sententiam.
A liberty that seemed so great to that learned Father Augustine, that he
gives this Item or Caveat to Possidonius about this matter, I will not (says
he) that you be very forward in censuring or judging any for their garments or
ornaments of gold. And experience does teach us every day, that as much grace
is to be found under a gay coat, as under a gray one.

And yet for all this, when the daughters and ladies of Jerusalem would keep no
rule in their apparel, who knows not how sharply the Prophet rebukes them?
Isai. 3.
Yea the Princes themselves and the Kings children are threatened that God will
punish them for being clothed with strange apparel. Zeph. 1.8.
And the holy Apostles, giving rules of sobriety in apparel to Christian
women, do teach us that all our actions and fashions in this matter must go by
a rule. And I think all good minds do mourn, to see how out of all rule men and
women are now adays in all callings and conditions. I say, in all; I except
not that which should be an example of humility and Christian sobriety to all
the rest. Surely our pride does testify to our face, and we are too far gone
in affecting the mark of dignity in our habits and apparel: which, besides
our sin against God and our Christian rule, is also, as one censureth it (and
I think, truly) a note of pusillanimitie and b^se debilitie in our selves.

And to touch that a little, wherein men are most irregular: even the
recreation of a Christian (if any be at all) must be done by a rule. For if we
must eat and drink by a rule, if we must apparel our selves by a rule: why
must not our recreation be by a rule also? Danaeus, de ludo alea, cap. 1.
Certainly, when the Apostle says, WHATSOEVER ELSE YE DO, there is no remedy
but play and pastime must be comprehended in this general, says a great
Divine.

I know what wars men are at in their judgments about this matter of play
and pastime: and I mean not to be a stickler between them at this time, further
then my Text does thrust me in whether I will or no; and that is thus far.
Certainly either play must not be used by a Christian at all: or if it be, it
must be done by a rule, yea by this rule, as all other things ought to be. And
if any man think his pastime an action not serious enough to hold proportion
with the glory of God, let him take heed how he meddle with it: for how dare a
Christian divert or turn from this end in any thing that he does?

And thus far we have seen the generality of this doctrine laid open in
certain particulars. Now one or two things for the use of it.

Omnia licent every man takes by the end: but his Non expediunt no man looks
after. Every man eats, drinks, plays, apparelleth himself as he lists,
says and does what he lists, without any regard of God or his weak brother.
And that which me thinks is strange, all this irregularitie shrowdeth it self
under the protection of Christian liberty.

Why I, you say, is it not a part of our Christian liberty, to use without
scruple of conscience indifferent things? I grant it is: but how? to use them
as we list our selves, without all regard to the glory of God, or the good of
our brethren? God forbid that any man should once dream, that Christ has made
such a purchase for us. To use them, there is our liberty; and this liberty
is rather in the conscience, then in the outward act: but to use them as we
list our selves, without any regard to God and to our brethren; this is more
then liberty, more then Christian, yea more then Civil. For even the Civilians
themselves (if I be not deceived) do define their liberty thus, Liberty (say
they) is a natural power, whereby a man does what he will, so far as the
laws do permit. And so, Christian liberty is a supernatural power obtained by
Christ, whereby a Christian does what he will, according to his Christian rule,
or, according to the rule of Gods word. We must therefore, by this doctrine,
learn to abhor that abuse of liberty, and unrulinesse, which we see to be
afoot in these days, even amongst Christians themselves.

On the other side, this doctrine must teach us, for

Well then, you say, if we must be tied to a rule, let us see what that rule
is. That we shall see by and by. In the mean while understand that we must take
heed of those crooked and perverse rules that most men do follow. The example
of the multitude, a foolish rule: you know how God forbids it unto us. The
fashion of the world, that is, of the time and age wherein we live; a dangerous
rule: the Apostle gives us a great charge that we cut not out our conversation
after the pattern thereof. Ne vos configurate seculo i^^i; Romans 12.2.
The profits and pleasures of this life seem golden rules to some: but indeed
they are naughty rules, and the latter of them fitter for beasts then for men.
Arbitria Judicum, Responsa prudentum
Nay, I go further, the decrees of civil Judges, and maxims of wisemen, which
the Statesmen and Politicians tell us are the grounds of all laws, and must
overruled all; yet even these are no sufficient rules for a Christian, no rules
in conscience: for these rules may be bent, and are bent oftentimes to serve
the wills and pleasures of men. But we must have such a rule as may be without
all exception and variation: a rule that must be, as some learned speak in the
terms of the Schools, inobliquabilis and indeviabilis: a rule that no good man
dare, nor no wicked man can bend to his private affection.

Well then, what is this rule? The Apostle tells us, it is this, even to do all
to the glory of God, and the good of our neighbor. This must be the continual
and perpetual end of all our actions. And as in shooting a man takes his aim
and level from his mark: so a Christian in doing must be ruled by this end.

Indeed not only from the end or object is an action always construed to be
good; the integrity or rectitude of other circumstances must concur withal:
but chiefly the end makes or marres all. And though a good end does not wholly
warrant an action to be good: yet an ill end does ever vitiate and corrupt it.
As for example; What action can be better then that which now we are in hand
with, namely, the hearing and speaking of the word of God? and yet (God be
merciful unto us) how fowly does an ill end ofttimes corrupt it? If then we
will have our actions sound and good indeed, we must take heed we do them to a
good end; be sure of this, that the end be good.

This end, as the Apostle here propounds it, is double: one principal, and
that is the glory of God; the other secondary or subordinate, and that is the
edification of our brethren.

First and principally do all to the glory of God. To this end our Savior
speaks when he says, Matthew. 5.16.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven. To this end David exhorts the men of
his time, Psalm. 29.2.
to give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name. But I will not stand to
heap up Scriptures to this purpose: let us see what the thing is which the
Apostle calls the glory of God.

Glory is well defined by a heathen writer thus; Frequens de aliquo fama cum
laud. Wilson dict.
It is (says he) a frequent fame or good report of a man with praise: By a
Christian writer thus; It is praise increased, and abundantly published. Then
to do a thing to the glory of God, is to do it so, as from thence God may be
much and honorably spoken of, the praise of God may be increased and
abundantly published. When the wisdom, the mercy, the justice, the goodness
of God do shine in our actions, and we do them to this end; then they are done
to the glory of God. So by occasion of those works that our Savior Christ did,
Matthew. 9.8.
the Evangelist says, that the people did glorify God, that is, did speak
great and glorious things of God. Gal. 1.24.
And Paul, after his conversion and calling into the Ministry, did all things
so as the people did glorify God in him, or for him. So here, Do all things to
the glory of God, that is, do all things so, as from every thing that you do
men may take occasion to praise and magnify the name of God.

This doing of things to the glory of God is the matter of the first petition
in the Lords prayer, and of the third commandment in the Decalogue: from which
two places they that will may fetch matter enough to this argument.

But forasmuch as our failing in this rule arises not so much from our
ignorance in the rule, as from our want of affection to the rule: let us
therefore consider a little of some good and weighty reasons that may stir
and move us to the practice of it.

And first, let me reason from the end of our creation. Prove. 16.4.
The Lord (says the Scripture) has made all things for himself: that is, for
his own glory. From hence I reason thus: That end which God respected in making
of man, ought man to respect in all his actions: But God in making of man
respected his own glory: Therefore the glory of God ought to be the end of all
our actions. Else we shall divert and turn, not only our own actions, but also
the very workmanship of God in us, to another end then he that made us meant
and intended. Which if a man himself will account a great wrong in the work of
his hands: how much more shall it be a sin and presumption against the
glorious and omnipotent Architect of all the world!

A second reason may be taken from the merit and deserving of God in our
creation and all that he has done for us. Glory, that is fame and renown,
always follows merit and deserving; but all worthiness and true deserving
is in God. Est fama multorum magnorumque meritorum, Cic.
No man does absolutely deserve any thing at the hands of another man; because
every man is bound by some debt or duty one to another. Only God, who is the
great and free-giving God, does deserve at our hands: And therefore all glory
is due unto him: and so due, that a learned and witty Divine says, Ejus
omnitatem, nostram nullitatem, Alsted.
we must acknowledge all to him, and nothing to our selves. And this the four
and twenty Elders (who are the common type of all the holy assemblies here upon
earth) do teach us, when they fall down before him that sat on the throne, and
cast their crowns before the throne, and give this reason thereof, Thou art
worthy, O Lord, Rev. 4.11.
to receive glory: -- for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure
they are, and were created. He that has made all, and bestows freely and
liberally all gifts of creation and preservation upon all: is he not worthy to
have glory at the hands of all? It is the Apostle's reason in another place: 1.
Cor. 6.20.
Glorify God in your bodies and souls; for they are Gods. And indeed, is it
much for us to eat and drink to his glory, of whose liberality we have every
bit of bread and every drop of drink that we have? Or is it much for us to
apparel our selves to his glory, without whom we have not so much as a
fig-leaf to hide our nakedness? It were infinite to follow this argument in
all the particulars: I come therefore to a third reason, and that is this;

The example of all the best and most excellent servants of God in all ages
does provoke us hereunto: whose hearts have been so fired with the zeal of Gods
glory, that, to the end they might promote that, they have utterly neglected
themselves. David was even devoured and eaten up with it: Moses and Paul
preferred it to their own salvation: the holy Martyrs gave their lives, and
endured all torments, that God might be glorified by them. How miserable and
wretched are we, and how nothing akinne to those holy servants of God, if we
will not so much as bridle an inordinate desire, not abstain from a liberty or
commodity which we may spare well enough, not forgo a whit of our vain
pleasures and delights of this life, for the honoring and glorifying of the
name of our God! Surely great reason there is, that we should admit of this
rule, and willingly let the glory of God be the end of all our actions.

But (beloved brethren) is it thus with us? Give me leave to deal plainly and
roundly in a matter of so great respect. Yet will I say nothing of open and
notorious wicked persons, Atheists, Epicures, Drunkards, Whores, Thieves,
Usurers, Cozeners, the Foxes and Wolves, Quibus anima data est prosale, ne
putrescant. Cic.
the Horses and Mules, the Dogs and Swine of the time, who would rot and stink
as they go, if they had not a reasonable soul in them, to keep them from
putrefaction. The lives and actions of these are not in derogation of Gods
glory, but in a mere opposition and contradiction to it. I come to others who
seem to have some fear of God in them, and I hope have so too; and yet are in
nothing studious of the glory of God as they should be. For tell me I pray you,
Our immoderate purchases and bottomless covetousness, our heaping of livings
and possessions one upon another, as the old giants are said to have heaped
mountains one upon another; are these things to the glory of God? Is it
glorious to God, that they who profess to be his children, should be shifters
and carvers for themselves, lifting, heaving, and shoving for the world (as Mr
Perkins says) as if they had no Father in Heaven, nor no Divine providence to
trust unto? and then for a cover of their worldliness do mock God, and say, O
we must have a care, etc. Is it a glory to God that it shall be spoken and
written of Turks, that they are honest, just, plain-dealing men, and true of
their word: and we, who are the servants not of Mahomet but of Jesus Christ and
of him are called Christians, dare not trust one another? The proud and lofty
carriage of the rich, gaping over the heads of the poor; (as the Prophet
speaks;) and, on the other side, the rude and insolent behavior of the
poor, the vile rising up oftentimes against the honorable: is it to the glory
of God? Come we to our meetings and merriments, our carnal rejoycings, Deus
bone, quae sunt nostra gaudia! quae sunt nostra prandia! Curios simulamus, and
Bacchanalia vivimus, Musc.
our eating and drinking like Epicures, when we profess Christians: can God be
glorified by such irreligious behavior? Our babish and gaudy attire in our
apparel, being sick of some fantastical fashion to day, and full and weary
of it to morrow, putting all workmen to their wits end to follow the
oft-turning weathercock of our restless and unchangable fantasies: Our idle
pastimes, not as a parenthesis to the period of our labors, but our labor a
poor and short parenthesis to the large and long leaves of our pastimes: Our
unbrotherly contentions, filling all the Courts and Consistories in the
kingdom, and setting every day a work such swarms of attorneys and advocates
as we do: are these things indeed, think you, to the glory of God? And not to
be infinite, though in a subject that will scarcely suffer me to find any end:
Is it to the glory of God, that his great and Divine majesty should be dallied
withal in his most holy word: that men shall call for sermons and erect
exercises, with great show of godliness; and when all comes to all, the
Ministers and Preachers of the word shall be of no other use to a great many,
but as minstrels and pipers are, for their delight and pleasure? as God says
to the Prophet, Ezekiel. 33.32.
Thou art unto them as a very lovely song of one that has a pleasant voice --:
for they hear thy words but they do them not. Alas, these words of the
Apostle, willing us to do all to the glory of God, do even shame and confound
us. Our own glory is aloft, but the glory of God is under foot everywhere: and,
as if there were no danger to be competitours and corrivals with God in a thing
so precious unto him, we divest him daily of his glory, to invest our selves.
Well, let this Scripture a little school us, let us remember that if we be as
we should be, Plantatio Domini, ad glorificandum eum, Isai. 61.3.
we are his workmanship, formed and planted by him to the praise of his glory.
And he is worthy of all our labor and endeavor that can be employed that way.

But I shall not reach my project, if I come not to the second part of the
rule, namely the end of our actions in respect of our brethren. And that must
be to edify them. As God must be glorified, so our brethren must be edified in
all that we do.

To edify, is to build up. And all men are builders, but some men do build the
wrong way. For even he that gives an offense to his brother, does build him up
some way: he destroys him and pulls him down in goodness, Scandalum est
aedificatio ad delictum; Tertull.
but he builds him up and sets him forward in evil. Take heed, says the
Apostle, that you do not so build up one another, Give no offense to any man.

There be two words about this matter, differing in sound, but in sense and
use, I think, all one. Scandal is one, and Offense is the other.

Scandalum is properly and literally tigillum, the bridge of a trap, which is
set for a mouse or such other creature: which as soon as the unhappy creature
touches, the trap falls and the poor beast is taken. Spiritually and
Metaphorically, a scandal is any word or act said or done by one man, which
falls out to the hurt and destruction of another man in the case of conscience
and religion.

Offendiculum, the word that the Apostle uses here, is a block or stone in a
man's way, whereupon he stumbleth: either out of ignorance, as a blind man does;
or of weakness, as aged and infirm persons do. In religious use it is every
occasion of sin that one man gives to another, either by false doctrine or
bad example. And this latter is often in the use of indifferent things. The
poor, blind, ignorant, weak Christian goes on pretily well and cheerfully in
the way of godliness, till he comes to such a block or trap: there he
stumbles, there he is taken; either to his utter destruction, or to his great
hindrance in the way to eternal life.

Such a stumbling block was the eating of meats sacrificed to idols among the
Corinthians. By which act, indiscreetly and uncharitably done of some, three
sorts of men were offended.

First, the unbelieving Jews, seeing the Christians to eat of things offered to
idols, which they justly and by the law of God detested; they by this thought
the worse of Christian religion, and were set the further off from it: as the
Turks and Jews at this day are offended and set off from our religion by the
idols and images of the Papists.

Secondly, the Grecians, that is, the unconverted Gentiles, these were offended
likewise, though not grieved. For they thought the better of their own
heathenish and idolatrous religion, because the Christians did partake with
them in their sacrifices; and so were hardened in their superstition.

Thirdly, weak Christians, ignorant as yet of the Christian liberty under the
Gospel, and holding it in conscience a sin to eat of such things; yet were
drawn on by example of others to eat against their conscience, and so were made
guilty of sin.

Thus it was amongst the Corinthians in this matter of idolothytes, or things
sacrificed to idols: which, out of the case of scandal or offense might
lawfully have been used of them; but, in the case of offense to a weak brother,
was a sin and offense against God also. And the like evil (as I think)
falls out amongst us at this day, by the daily abuse of our Christian
liberty in other things. For,

First, the Papists seeing how loose and lawless we are in many things, they,
though well enough pleased, yet are truly offended, thinking all our religion
nothing but a carnal liberty; and are ready upon every occasion to blaspheme
and say, Behold the fruits of your Gospel! So they are utterly set off by this
block.

Secondly, the carnal Protestants, usurers, proud and covetous persons, they
are hardened in their sins by the example of our seeming best professors.
Behold, say they, these that profess most are as deep in these things as we:
they think to go to heaven for all this; and why should not we?

Thirdly, weak and ignorant Christians, who for the most part do not inwardly
consider the nature of things, nor examine the reasons of their actions, but
are carried wholly by example; they stumble and fall everywhere, thinking they
may safely do as others do, yea though they do things whereof their conscience
does accuse and condemn them.

To remedy this great evil there is no way, but to listen to the counsel and
look to this rule of the Apostle; Give no offense, set no traps, lay no blocks
in any man's way. Let this be a part of your Christian rule, which God himself
has here conjoined, and therefore must be observed with the respect of his own
glory.

The doctrine of offenses in this scandalizing and scandalized age, were
necessary to be better known then it is. But every man cannot sail through a
sea of so many and such intricate questions. At this time it shall be enough
for me, to deliver unto you one point of doctrine, which (as I think) does
naturally and necessarily arise out of this Scripture. And that is this, That
how lawful soever a thing be in it self, yet if I see that my using of it at
this time, and in this manner, is like to be a snare, a trap, or a
stumbling block to my brother: that is, there is danger lest by this means my
brother either fall away utterly from religion, or if not so, yet fall into
some sin for the present, which, for ought I know, may be deadly unto him: or
if not so, yet the good opinion which he had of me, as of a Christian and
fellow-member, is diminished; and so, whereas before he went the more
cheerfully toward heaven for my company, he goes now for this act of mine the
more sadly and heavily: In this case, how lawful soever the act be in it self,
by all other laws of God and men; yet now by the law of charity and by this
rule of the Apostle, it becomes unlawful to me, and I ought not to do it. I
say, in all indifferent things which are in our own power, where our liberty is
not justly restrained and limited by a superior authority; there a Christian
must walk by this rule, He must give no offense in any thing that he does. But
you will say, the action is lawful; why then may I not do it? The Apostle
tells thee, thou must first see how it will fall out to thy brother: the
issue or event may be evil to some weak brother, though the action be not ill
in it self. I, but I will use my liberty, whatsoever becomes of my brother. I,
but now walk thou not charitably, says the Apostle: destroy not him with
thy meat, with thy pleasure, with thy pastime, with thy apparel, for whom
Christ has died. Charity must ever overruled our liberty, Charitati
subjicienda libertas.
according to that of the Apostle, Gal. 5.13. Brethren, ye have been called
unto liberty; only use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love
serve one another. Upon which words that excellent servant of God Mr Calvin
has a saying worthy to be written in letters of gold, Ubicunque regnat
charitas, illic mutua est servitus.
or rather in the heart of every Christian. Wheresoever (says he) Charity
bears rule, there men are servants one to another.

Now this doctrine being true as I make no question but it is; it does first
show us how uncharitable most men are, who look no further then to themselves
in any thing. So they may have their profits, their pleasures; let other men
stand or stumble, sink or swim, they care not. This is no less sin, then to
destroy a brother. For though a brother perish not always in this case, yet no
thank to him by whom the block was laid.

Secondly, let this persuade good Christians to make conscience of this part of
the rule, as well as of the former: to do all things, as to the glory of God,
so to the edification of our brethren. And remember that that which was so dear
and precious to Christ, cannot be vile to any true Christian. And to have a
tender care of our brethren, especially of our weak brethren, who are Christ's
little ones, is a sweet fruit of our love to Christ, and a sure token of his
Spirit dwelling in us.

Thus we see what our Christian rule is: Deum ignominia afficit, gratia
excidit, and reus fit irae Divinae, donce resipuerit, Hemming. in locum.
and let him that refuses to submit himself to this rule, hear how a learned
man and a great Divine censureth him: He dishonors God, he falls (in some
sort) from grace, and is made subject to the wrath of God, till he repent.

Now to this rule the Apostle adjoyneth an example, even his own: Even as I do
in all things. It were worth our time and attendance (if time would suffer us
any longer to attend) to see how wise, how charitable, how conscionable the
Apostle was ever in all his carriage and behavior toward others in this
respect: always binding himself to his own rule, and preferring the good of
others before his own liberty or commodity in every thing. But to end with the
time, to what purpose serve examples, but to be followed? And if neither rule
nor example will hold us to our Christian duty; we must look for our reward
with libertines and lawless hypocrites at the hands of a just and righteous
God.

FINIS.

