DISCOURSES UPON Cornelius Tacitus.

Written in Italian by the Learned Marquess Virgilio Malvezzi.

Dedicated To the Serenissimo Ferdinand the second Great Duke of Thuscany.

And Translated into English, by Sir Richard Baker, Knight.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for R. Whitaker, and Tho. Whitaker, at the Kings
Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard.



1642.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM Lord Viscount Say, and Seal, Master of his
Highness Court of Wards and Liveries, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Counsel.
Most Honored Lord,

I Should not have the boldness to present this book unto your Lordship, if
(besides the great service I owe you) the Argument of the Book did not invite
me to it: for consisting of Politic Discourses and considerations of State;
it is most fit to be presented to Counselors of State; amongst which I knew
not whom better to present it to, then to your Lordship: and no less then the
Argument of the Book, the Author thereof invites me to it; for being a
learned Lord of Jtaly, none more fit to entertain him then some learned Lord
of England; of which number this Kingdom affords none more eminent then your
Lordship: I must not speak so much as I think, for offending the modesty of
your ear; but I may boldly speak so much as all the world sees; that nature
and Art have joined together, to make you perfect in your place, which is to be
a faithful Counselor to the King, and a loving Patriot to your Country: for
both which, if I should not my self acknowledge an obligation to you, I might
worthily be thought, unworthy to be accounted, which I specially desire to be,

Your Lordships humble and devoted servant,

RICHARD WHITAKER.

TO THE SERENISSIMO FERDINAND the second, great Duke of Thuscany, my most
gracious Lord.
SEeing to nothing I am more bound, then to serve your Highness, I cannot
consequently have any greater desire then to be accounted your servant: that as
the benefits which our House continually receives, are publicly known; so
the marks of my devotion may publicly appear; which after dedicating my
self to your Highness, I cannot better manifest, then by offering these
Discourses; which are so far unequal to your greatness, and to what I ow
you, that it may well appear to be rather done for confession of my debt, then
for satisfaction of that obligation, which as it can only receive abatement
from your commands, so commands coming from so great a Prince, will have force
again to make it the greater. Vouchsafe then to honor me with commanding me,
thereby to make me the more obliged: and be pleased to accept these weak
labors, with looking upon the value which your Heroical Name gives them. And
upon the weight which my devotion puts upon them, with which I wish to your
Highness all those felicities; which as you give manifest proofs to merit, so
by the divine goodness you shall happily obtain: And so I present you the
most humble Reverence,

Of Your Highness most devoted servant,

VIRGILIO MALVEZZI.

To the Reader. That young men may be good writers, in the Politics: and why
Cornelius Tacitus gives so great contentment to them that read him.
IN antiquis est sapientia, and in multo tempore prudentia. If it be true, as
true indeed it is, which the holy Text by the mouth of Job intimates, that
only old men are wise, certainly it is in nothing more true, then in things
which belong to action. Whereupon the Queen of Saba hearing the most wise
Solomon, although by the answers he gave to her questions, she found he was
deeply seen in the secrets of Philosophy, and in the mysteries of Divinity,
yet she made no show of wondering at it: but when she found him endowed with no
less excellency in things belonging to action, then she brake forth into words
of astonishment. Major est sapientia and opera tua, quam rumor quem audivi.
Beati viri tui and beati servi tui, qui stant coram te semper, and audiunt
sapientia mtuam. Showing thereby, that it is no great marvel, for a young man
to be excellent in things of contemplation: the marvel is, if he be excellent
in matters of action: seeing those require only, sharpness of wit, which
easily grows in verdant spirits; these, soundness of judgment, which gets
not maturity but by long experience: and for this cause Aristotle excluded young
men from active Philosophy: and a regard also to this had the Author of the
Tryviall saying, That young men may be good Mathematicians, but not good
Philosophers. I therefore may justly be taxed with overgreat boldness, to
take upon me to speak in matters of Action, being so young a man as I am, when
it were fitter I should stand to learn of others, then to put my self forward
to be a Teacher. And for this (as S. Gregory well observes) our Lord Christ, in
his childhood, though he had taught and confounded the Doctors, yet by all
means would have his mother find him harkening to them, as to learn of them.
The consideration of this would have stayed me from undertaking such a work,
were it not that I detest so much the name of idleness, that for avoiding of
that, I rather venture to incur the blame of too great boldness. Publishing
these my discourses, which in one course of the Sun have had their beginning,
increase and finishing; and God grant, that in the same year, after the order
of nature, they have not also their decrease, and abolishing: and that in
coming to the light, they begin not (like their Author) from darkness, and
then tarry in darkness still. Yet it is true, that I have ways enough, to
desend my self from such calumniations. And first, as to this particular
objection, that young men are not fit for action; we must know, that all action
is preceded by contemplation, which is the action of the mind and
understanding, seeing a thing cannot be in the will, till it be first in the
understanding; according to that well known rule, Nihil volitum quod non sit
praecognitum. As for example, before it be determined to strike battle, it is
deliberated in counsel, which is nothing else, but to contemplate whether the
action be good or bad. And this Sallust shows us, where he says, Nam and
priusquam incipias consulto; and ubi consulueris, mature facto opus est. And
therefore to execute and do a thing well, it is needful to have gotten a
habit in the action, which habit growing from many acts often iterated,
requires an experience which cannot be had without length of time, and
oftentimes, not without a temper in the affections. Now for contemplating an
action, there need not so many things; but as he that is to execute a thing,
cannot do it well if he have not the habit; and the habit he cannot have but
by doing many Acts: so he that is to contemplate an action that is to be done,
must necessarily have a knowledge of that action, which we may call a habit of
the understanding; and if that arise from many acts iterated, this also is
produced by many acts contemplated; and produced it cannot be, if there be not
a knowledge of the things that have happened in the World: and such knowledge
cannot be had, without reading of Histories, seeing a young man by reading of
Histories, can come to know more, then a man of a hundred years old; because
the one has but feene and heard the accidents only of his own time, the
other has read all the principal things that have been done from the
beginning of the World to the present time. I conclude then, that in those
things wherein contemplation and action belong both to the same; in those
ordinarily a young man cannot be fit; but where contemplation is not joined with
action, there he may be most fit. And therefore one that has read Histories
ought not to be blamed if he take upon him to write of things belonging to
action, seeing affection cannot hinder him from speaking the truth, nor want of
experience from finding it out. And this opinion of mine is no way differing
from that of Aristotle: who says, That young men are no good hearers of moral
Philosophy, because action and contemplation in moral Philosophy are not
distinct, but joined together; and therefore said that he who contemplates
well, and operates otherwise, cannot have the name of a good morallist: so as,
Aristotle excludes not a young man, as one that cannot contemplate well, but as
one that cannot operate well, by reason of impediment of affection and want of
habit. As to that other objection, that young men should always stand to hear
and learn of others: I suppose I shall be excused by any that have observed in
Plato, that they sufficiently reap profit by speaking, who while in speaking
they show their ignorance, give occasion to others to correct them: and this
also is my desire, so as the correction come from the hand of Socrates.
Besides, I am not without hope of commendation for my judgment, if not in the
form at least in the matter; if not in the composition, at least in the
choice. Rather indeed, seeing an ill-favored Image, is yet well valued, if
wrought in a Diamond: I am out of doubt, that these my Discourses shall be
valued by reason of the Author, from whom I take their matter; Cornelius
Tacitus, an Author so famous, and so highly esteemed through all the World,
and especially in these our times; and the matter such, that I am enforced to
seek out the causes whereof in truth there may be found many: part taken from
the things he relates; part, from the manner of his relating them. The things
he relates are actions of Princes, and from thence the first benefit we take,
is that we learn many profitable things, as living in an age, where all the
World is governed Princes. Where in other times, as when in Italy there were
many Commonwealths; we see, that expert Politicians, laying aside Tacitus,
gave themselves to write Discourses upon Livy, who will always be more
esteemed of by men that live in a Commonwealth: as he, that showing the ways
how Rome came to be a free State, and how it grew great, will be a means of
learning many excellent instructions. But now that we are under Princes, there
is no doubt, but the greatest content will be, to learn things of this nature;
as the conditions of Princes, the cunning of Courtiers, and such like. All this
Tacitus expresses, where he makes comparison between the Histories of others,
and his Annals. Igitur ut olim plebe valida vel cum Patres pollerent, noscenda
vulgi natura, and quibus modis temperanter haberetur, senatusque and optimatum
ingenia qui maxim perdidicerant, callidi temporum, and sapientes credebantur;
sic converso statu, neque alia rerum quam si unus imperitet, haec conquiri
tradique in rem fuerit, quia pauci prudentia, honesta ab deterioribus, utilia
ab noxiis discernunt, plures aliorum eventis docentur. Secondly, the continual
slaughters of principal Senators, the fall of Courtiers, the violent deaths
of Princes, and such like; are things, from which the first delight we can
take, is this, to know how much we are bound to our Lord God, that we are borne
in so much better times, secure of our lives, of our goods and honors. This
delight Cornelius Tacitus had, when considering with himself, the difference,
that was between the times of those Emperors of whom he writ, and the times
of Trajan and N^rya he said, Rara temporum faelicitate, ubi sentire quae velis,
and quae sentias dicere licet. Another is, that finding their tragical
accidents, they work in us the like effect, as a Tragoedy is wont to do:
which is to purge, (as one calls it) the affections of terror and compassion:
as it happens in a soldier, who being used to see wounded, and dead men, is
never moved by any accident, either to pity or affrighting. He therefore that
shall read in Tacitus, so many deaths, banishments, imprisonments, and other
cruelties, will never for every light occasion, be either moved with terror,
or with compassion. Or else, as others conceive, these accidents moving us to
terror or pity, will purge our minds from such passions: as for example, when
we read, that Nero through lust and cruelty, came to a miserable end; this by
terrifying us, will make us resolve, to the end we may not incur the like
misery, to keep our selves from the like qualities. And this effect Tacitus
made account his Annals would work in us, as he writes, Exequi sententias haud
institui nisi insignes, per honestem, aut notabili dedecore, quod praecipuum
munus Annalium reor, ne virtuces sileantur, ut quae pravis dictis factisque ex
posteritate and infamia metus sit. To these may be added, that speaking of bad
Princes he can do no less then always to blame them; a thing which (as in
another plaee I shall show) not only makes the Writer be held for truer, but
makes the Readers pleasure be the greater, as taking it for a praise to
himself, to be free from those vices, which he sees blamed in others. In
regard whereof, Tacitus says, Obtrectatio and livor pronis auribus
accipiuntur. And thus much concerning the pleasure that is taken from the
things he relates. Then concerning the pleasure that is taken from his manner
of writing: it consists first in his Laconick style, which is so much more
pleasing then the Asiatick, as clean Wine is then that which is mingled with
water. Secondly, it gives great satisfaction, not to loose time, in reading
many lines, with little instruction. Thirdly, his very obscurity is pleasing to
whosoever by laboring about it, finds out the true meaning; for then he
counts it an issue of his own brain, and taking occasion from those sentences,
to go further then the thing he reads, and that without being deceived, he
takes the like pleasure as men are wont to take from hearing metaphors, finding
the meaning of him that uses them. But because Tacitus in saying, that his
Annals have little pleasure in them, Caeterum ut profutura, it a minimum
oblectationis afferunt, shows to be contrary to this any opinion: It is
therefore to be known, that for as much as concerns the present, there may
two kinds of pleasure be taken from a thing; one of the senses, another of the
understanding: as we may say in Music, there are two pleasures may be taken:
one from the goodness of the voices that sing, another from the goodness of
the songs that are sing the first is taken by the sense of hearing, whereof the
sound is object: the second is taken by the understanding, which finding the
Composers cuming in making of Descants, and helping of discords, takes great
delight. The first pleasure is common to all that have ears: the second, of
such only as understand it. The like happens also in painting, where one kind
of pleasure is taken from the daintiness of the colors, and the beauty of the
picture: and another, that is taken from the due placing of the parts, and
resemblance of the Muasbles and of this, the pleasure is so much the greater,
in that it cannot be taken but by one of understanding, who therefore takes
delight in another cunning, because by it be discovers his own. Thus when
Tacitus says, that his Annals are little pleasing; he means, in the pleasure
which is taken by the sense: and this appears plainly, by the words he adds,
where giving the reason, why other Histories are more pleasing then this, he
says, Nam situs Gentium, varietates Praeliorum: Clari Ducum exitus, retinent
ac redintegrant legentium animos. This difference of pleasure, Seneca
expressed, when he said, that Virgill affords one kind of pleasure, being read
by a Humanist: and another, being read by a Philosopher. I conclude then, that
Tacitus is an Author exceeding pleasing; specially to those, who studying the
Histories with understanding, little care whether the Latin be as good as that
of Caesar.

It remains to advertise the Reader of these my Discourses, that finding
Hebrew or Greek Texts cited in Latin, he may be pleased to conceive I did it,
to avoid cumbring the Leaves with allegations: seeing if they had been brought
in the foresaid Tongues, they must have been again translated, for their sakes
that understand not those Tongues. I should, I know, have done more conformable
to custom; if I had cited them in Italian rather then in Latin: but this also
I avoided, that I might not take away the force of sense, which the words bear
in that Language.

Lastly, I will not stand to contest with those, who have a custom to be
always blaming: because he that shall deal so with these my weak Discourses,
will find himself much deceived in his opinion: for wherein he thinks to
differ from me, he will directly agree with me; seeing I have printed them to
no other end but to make my selse known a servant of the Serenissimo the Grand
Duke; who out of his benign nature, will be pleased to accept that little
which a servant is able to present unto him. Withal I advertise, that to blame
a Book, may be the work of understanding men: but to blame the Authors of
Books, the work of none but malignant men: That I leave to every man's liberty:
This, I conceive, he deserves not, that is not conceited of his own wisdom.

The Contents of the several DISCOURSES.
Discourse the first. OF the diverse forms of government that Rome had: and how
it happens that Cities for the most part have their beginnings under Kings,
rather then under any other form of government. p. 1 Discourse second. How the
City of Rome came from being governed by Kings, to be a free State: and the
difference is between a beginning and a cause. p. 8 Discourse third. A
Parallel between the conspiracy of Marcus Brutus against Caesar, and that of
Lucius Brutus against Tarquin: whereby we may see, why the one brought in
liberty, and the other tyranny. p. 21 Discourse fourth. That the power of a few
cannot consist in any number, better then three. p. 25 Discourse fifth. Of what
kind of discord the Author intends to speak. p. 28 Discourse sixth. Whether
an external war with the enemies of the faith be the best means to hinder
discords among Christians. p. 30 Discourse seventh. What is the fittest time to
proceed in discords with the enemies of the faith. p. 45 Discourse eighth. What
discords conserve States, and what corrupt them. p. 60 Discourse ninth. Of
concordant discord: and how it ought to be managed for the good of Cities. p.
61 Discourse tenth. How hard and dangerous a matter it is to write Histories:
when the easiest time is to find writers: and which of them deserve most
credit. p. 67 Discourse eleventh. From whence flattery proceeds: how many kinds
there are of it, and which of them is hurtful to a City. p. 81 Discourse
twelfth. What things help Augustus to the Empire, and what means he used to
maintain it. p. 91 Discourse thirteenth. How Princes may get the peoples love:
how a private man ought to make use of the peoples favor; and what part it
has in bestowing the Empire. p. 99 Discourse fourteenth. How the Donatives
which are given to Soldiers are profitable to raise a man, and to maintain
him in the Empire: and when it is that Military discipline is corrupted by
them. p. 107 Discourse fifteenth. How much it imports a Prince for getting the
peoples love, to maintain plenty, by what means scarcity happens, and how it
may be helped, and how a Prince may make use of it. p. 113 Discourse sixteenth.
What kind of ease it is that Tacitus speaks of, and how it may be reconciled
with some places in other Authors. p. 121 Discourse seventeenth. That Cities
subject to another City, better like the government of a King than of a
Commonwealth, and that every City would gladly have their Lord to live amongst
them. p. 125 Discourse eighteenth. What means a Prince may use with safety to
set them in a way, that are to succeed them in the government. p. 137 Discourse
nineteenth. That old men are apt to be carried away by women, and of what age a
Prince should be. p. 145 Discourse twentieth. That to maintain and suffer
Magistrates to continue, although without authority, is a matter of great
moment. p. 155 Discourse twenty one. That Tiberius was part good, and part bad:
how it happened that he fell not into dangers as Nero did. Whether it be good
to be brought up in the Princes house: and finally, how their secret vices may
be known. p. 159 Discourse twenty two. How much it imports a Prince to be
chaste. p. 168 Discourse twenty three. How and when the government of women is
odious. p. 171 Discourse twenty four. That at one and the same time to make
known the death of the Prince, and the assumption of the successor, is a
thing very profitable for States that stand in danger. p. 179 Discourse twenty
five. That those men who possess the State of another, are but in a dangerous
condition, as long as any of the former Lords line remain alive: and what
course is to be taken, to free themselves from such danger. p. 183 Discourse
twenty six. A Parallel between Tiberius and Solomon. p. 189 Discourse twenty
seven. That it is a dangerous thing to obey Princes, in services of cruelty and
tyranny. p. 190 Discourse twenty eight. That Princes ought not to reveal the
secrets of their State, and how it happens that oftentimes men are drawn to
speak some things which ought to be concealed. p. 198 Discourse twenty nine.
How Princes should make use of Counsel. p. 204 Discourse thirty. How Princes
ought to make use of Magistrates and Officers p. 210 Discourse thirty one. Why
Tiberius made a show he would not be Emperor, and that to make Princes
discover things they would have concealed is dangerous. p. 219 Discourse thirty
two. What course a Prince should take to secure himself from Generals of
Armies: and what course Generals should take to secure themselves from the
Prince, and from a Commonwealth. p. 329 Discourse thirty three. Of Succession
and Election. p. 347 Discourse thirty four. Whether Tiberius did ill, in
causing Augustus his will to be read: and why Augustus in the third place, made
many his heirs that were his enemies. p. 354 Discourse thirty five. That
corrupt Commonwealths, have need of a Monarch to reform them. p. 357 Discourse
thirty six. Why the City of Rome from a Regal power under Romulus, recovered
liberty under Tarquinius, and from the Regal power of Augustus was never able
to shake off servitude. p. 363 Discourse thirty seven. That to elect a wicked
successor, ^by to get glory to himself, is a beastly course. p. 371 Discourse
thirty eight. That a Prince should be both loved and feared. p. 378 Discourse
thirty nine. Whether an Aristocracy or a Monarchy be the more profitable for a
City. p. 388 Discourse forty. That it is a great help for attaining a Kingdom,
to have a wife of the Blood-Royall: and in what danger a Prince is that has
none but daughters. p. 408 Discourse forty one. Whether it be better to refuse
dignities, or to seek after them. p. 425 Discourse forty two. That it is
easier to pass from one extreme to another, than from an extreme to the
middle. p. 433 Discourse forty three. That Germanicus could not carry himself
in such sort as to keep Tiberius from suspecting him: and that he refused the
Empire for fear of death, and not out of goodness. p. 434 Discourse forty
four. That it is a hard matter to settle the insurrection of an Army. p. 442
Discourse forty five. That what kind of affairs it is fit to carry their wives
with them. p. 444 Discourse forty six. Whether Germanicus did well to grant so
many things to the Army being in mutiny, what other course he might have taken:
lastly, that in diversity of times, and upon diversity of occasions diverse
courses are to be taken. p. 448. Discourse forty seven. That Tiberius did well
not to stir from Rome. p. 460 Discourse forty eight. That to punish seditious
Soldiers by the Soldiers own hands, is very profitable, and that Ministers
for the most part, in punishing exceed their limits. p. 469 Discourse forty
nine. Whether an Army be apter to rebel, that consists of one Nation only, or
that which consists of many. p. 475 Discourse fifty. That to pass from one
extreme to another is dangerous, and how it happens, that successors commonly
take courses, differing from their predecessors. p. 477 Discourse fifty one.
What course is to be used in demanding peace, and when it is fit time. p. 482
Discourse fifty two. With what cunning Tiberius introduced and augmented the
Law of treason. p. 491 Discourse fifty three. Whether it be good, that Officers
should continue in their places, and why this course was observed by Tiberius.
p. 497
Vrbem Romam a principio Reges habuere.
CHAP. I.
Of the diverse forms of Government, that Rome had: and how it happens, that
Cities for the most part, have their beginning under Kings rather then any
other form of government. The first Discourse.

THe Almighty God, understanding and comprehending himself infinitely; in as
much as the understanding himself, proceeding from himself, returns into
himself: joyneth together by an admirable circulation, the beginning with the
end.

The Angelical spirits as they have a twofold contemplation, so they cause a
twofold motion: For by contemplating of God, their own knowledge returning in
an acknowledgement of its original: they move the Heavens circularly, in a
like motion to that of the first mover, from East to West: and by contemplating
of themselves, they cause another circular motion contrary to the former, from
West to East. And seeing all mortal things are influenced by the motions and
light of the Heavens. It follows necessarily, that they all follow the
heavenly influences with moving in a circle. What marvel then, if the
government of the City of Rome, (as here in few words is delivered by Tacitus)
have had its circular motion; passing from a regal government, begun by
Romulus; to a popular or free estate under Brutus; and from that, to an
Aristocraticall government under Pompey, Crassus, and Caesar; under Lepidus,
Anthony, and Augustus; and then at last, with a wonderful circulation
returning again to a government Monarchical, as it was at first. Whereupon
the Prophet Ezekiel, not without great mystery, showing us in his first vision,
four beasts, which in the opinion of many, are figures of the four Empires of
the World; he sets before every one of them a wheel; to intimate in what a
circulation they are turned about. And this circulation or alteration, though I
cannot say, it is inalterable; yet I may truly say, It is so natural, that
even Aristotle himself, discoursing upon the passages of Rule and Dominion;
foresees and observes that as a Philosopher; which Tacitus as an Historian,
relates here of Rome. Et ob hoc forsan Rex ab initio repertus est; quod
difficile erat viros plures excellenti virtute reperiri, praesertim cum tunc
civitates parvae forent. So Tacitus here, Vrbem Romam a principio R^ges
habuere. Aristotle goes on, Sed cum postea contingeret, ut plures pari virtute
reperirentur, non amplius tolerarunt Regem; sed commune quiddam quaerentes,
resp^blicas constituere: So Tacitus here, Libertatem Lucius Brutus Instituit.
Aristotle proceeds, Cum vero deteriores facti, lucrum sibi quaererent, ex
gubernatione rerumpublicarum; Paucorum hine potentiam exortam fuisse, credendum
est: Honorabant enim Divitias. So here we see, from whence the power came which
Pompey, Crassus and Caesar had; and from whence also the Triumvirat of
Augustus. Aristotle again, Ex his vero in Tyrannides transiere. So Tacitus
here, Lepidi atque Antonii arma in Augustum cessere.

But for as much as Aristotle shows, that from the end of one circulation
another begins; while pursuing this Argument, he says, Ex Tyrannis rursus ad
Plebem: he that will consider in Rome, those forms of government, which for
their small continuance, I have omitted; shall find plainly, that even in those
also, there has been a manifest circulation: For after the Regal under
Romulus; it came to be a free estate under Brutus; from that, to be a
government of a few under the decemviri: lastly, to be in the hand of a tyrant,
under Appius Claudius; after whose death she recovered again her liberty; and
then passing under the Power of a few, settled at last in a Tyranny under
Augustus: and if there happened afterward no new circulation, the reasons thereof
shall be showed in another discourse.

But conceiving it to be the fittest course for examining of these revolutions,
to proceed by showing the causes of them; thereby to make men the better see
that the events of former times have not been casual, and happened by chance;
and also the better be able to prevent the like accidents that may hereafter
happen; I will therefore make my beginning at the Power Regal; with which, it
ought not to seem strange, that Rome at first was governed; seeing it has been
the like in the foundings almost of all Cities: as both Salust witnesses,
Igitur Initio Reges; nam in terris, Nomen Imperii id primum fuit: and Justin,
Principio rerum, Gentium, Nationumque Imperium penes Reges erat: and also
Aristotle, Fuerat enim antiqua civitatum gubernatio paucorum and Regia: and
besides these, there are many examples in the holy Scripture, that show it, to
have been so: Cain, before the flood, was founder of the first City that ever
was in the World; and he, as S. Austin writes, was a King; as also his
successors: likewise after the flood, the great City Babylon was scarce built;
when Nintrod, (as the Scripture says) Coepit esse Potens in terra.

There being therefore no doubt of the case: having so many and great
authorities to confirm it; the next thing is, to search out the causes;
amongst which, the first may be taken from the first founding. For Cities are
sometimes founded by one alone; and he a Private man; as Rome, by Romulus:
sometimes by one alone, but he a Lord of other Cities, as Constantinople by
Constantine: oftentimes by many joining together; and those many, either all of
one Country; who for shunning of danger, assemble themselves into one City: as
the Athenians did at Athens: or else such as quite leave and forsake their
ancient habitations; which may happen, either in time of peace; when men are
forced by the great overswarming of people to seek new dwellings; as the
French did, when they built Milan: or else in time of war; when men flying
from a Country wasted; retire themselves into fresh places: and this may
happen, under some one that is Head or Chieftaine; or without Head: without a
Head, as Venice; under a Head, as Lavinium, Padoua, and Athens: the first,
built by Aeneas: the second, by Antenor; the third, by Theseus.

Now a City which is built by one alone, whether he be a Private man, or a
King; is no sooner founded, but it comes presently to be under a Power Regal:
Those again that are built by many joining together: whether it be, that they
fly, by reason of war; or whether it be, that in peace, to enlarge
themselves, they seek new countries: These also fall presently under the power
Regal; because these things cannot well be done, but where there is a
superior, that is Head; as Milan did under Bellovisus; Padua under Antenor;
Lavinium under Aenaeas; and Athens under Theseus.

But if a City happen to be built by many that are equals and have no chief
amongst them: in this case only, it may be that Cities have not their
beginning under Kings: of which, there may be many occasions. First, when the
end was not first public to build a City; but rather for private commodity;
where menmight place their persons and goods in safety: which in other places
by reason of wars they could not do; and in case of such danger, many
building houses, now one and then another, have thereby made as it were a
Village, and at last a City. Which having been built insensibly and by fits,
is therefore not governed by Regal power; which it would have been, if it had
been built at once by a number of people united together: a thing impossible to
happen, where there is not a Head: as Plato in his Dialogue of Laws has
learnedly taught. And therefore Venice having been founded in the foresaid
manner; has been able to begin; is and will be able to maintain it self a
free City; there concurring together with the wisdom of him that built it;
the valor of him that governes it. Secondly, this may happen thorough the
condition of those, who without a Head join together to the founding of new
Cities, for if they be pious and religious; of quiet dispositions, not greedy
of command, and such as have had their education in a Commonwealth, where they
have learned rather to content themselves with equality, then to aspire to
sovereignty: there is no doubt but they will rather set up a free estate, then
a Regal; as it was at the founding of Venice. Thirdly, it may happen by reason
of their weakness who were the founders; amongst whom there being none fit or
worthy to be a King, they are all Commanders. For this reason (though falsely)
Tarquinius speaking to the Thoscans and Veientanes, would have it, that the
City of Rome was become a Republique: Se Regem augente bello, Romanum Imperium
a Proximis scelerata Conjuratione pulsos eos inter se, quia nemo Vnus satis
dignus Regno visus sit, parts Regni rapuisse.

These are the occasions by which it happens, that sometimes Cities in their
beginnings are not governed by Kings: but because it is a thing that seldom
hapens, we may well say; that the first reason, why the greatest part of
Cities, in their beginnings, are governed by Kings, is their founding: which
without a head, can ill be done. A second reason we may take from the
Inhabitants; who in the beginning being but few; are apt to tolerate the Regal
Power: an instruction that Aristotle gives, Propter paucitatem enim hominum,
non crat magmis memerus mediocri^; itaque pauci cum essent, multitudine and
Institutione; magis ferebant ab aliis gubernari: and this certainly Livie
meant when he said; that if Brutus had deposed any of the first Kings, while
the multitude was yet unfit to bear any other government then the Regal; the
Commonwealth had thereby been Endangered. Dissipatae res nondum adultae
Discordia forent, quas fovit tranquilla moderatio Imperii, eoque nutriendo
perduxit, ut bonam frugem libertatis, maturis jane viribus far possit. A
third reason and like unto this, may be taken from the difficulty to find many
in the first founding of a City, that are of ability and fit to govern: for
which reason perhaps, Aristotle says, Rex ab Initio repertus est, quia
difficile erat, viros plures excellenti virtute reperiri. And so much the more,
the City being then, (as Lucius Florus says) in her childhood; and
consequently, wanton and given to pleasures; and therefore had need of such a
schoolmaster as a King is, to keep them in awe; whom liberty else would soon
corrupt. And to this purpose it is that Livie speaks, and that of the liberty
of Rome. Quid enim futu^m fuit, si illa Pastori^m convenarumque plebs transfuga
ex suis populis, sub tutela Inviolati Templi, aut libertateni aut certam
impunitatem adepta, soluta Regio metu, agitare caepta esset Tribunitiis
procellis. No man therefore ought to marvel, that our Lord God, in the time of
the Mosaicall Law, never gave to the Hebrews a Commonwealth, as long as either
immediately by himself; or else by the means of Kings or Judges, he governed
them in fear, under severe laws; where of when men came to be more perfect,
he abated the rigor; as Saint Austin excellently expresses, saying, Deus
Hebraeis diversa pro qualitate temporis, imposuit Praecepta; erant enim sub
lege quast puert sub Pedguogo incluse: and therefore Saint Paul says, Sub lege
custodiebamur in Christo, nutriens nos tanquam parvulos sub rigore and
Diseiplina. The last reason is, because a City in its Beginning has need of
Laws, which may better be given by one alone, then by a multitude; where of
Aristotle gives the reason, Quia Vnum nancisci and paucos facilius est quam
^ltos qui recfe sentiant, and possint leges condere, and jus constituere.

Now having showed, that not without just cause, the City of Rome was in its
beginning governed by Romulus: it will not be amiss, to examine the situation
of the City, and therein to show the Founders wisdom in the building it. First
therefore the site of a City, (according to Aristotle) ought neither to be too
remote from the sea; nor yet too near it; to the end, that by too much
remotenes, it be not deprived of many commodities, which the Sea is wont to
bring in; and by too great neernesse, it be not exposed to the danger of
sudden assaults. Secondly, It ought to be in a good air; as the thing, which
of all other, can most annoy us; being continually, not only about us, but
taken into us. Thirdly, it ought to be in a place of plenty; without which,
there can never accrue any greatness to a City. Fourthly, it ought to be in a
place, easy for carriage and bringing in of commodities. Fifthly and lastly, it
ought to be in a place of advantage for assaulting its neighbors: and
difficult it self to be assaulted. Now that Rome was situated according to
these rules of Aristotle, is related by Livie, where he says: Non sine causa
Dii hominesque hunc urbi condendae locum elegerant, saluberrimos colles; here
he shows the goodness of the air: Flumen optimum quo ex Mediterraneis locis
fruges advehantur. Here he shows the facility of carriage, either by Land or
Water. Mare vicinum ad commoditates; nec expositum, nimia propinquitate ad
pericula classium externarum Nationum: Here he shows a neerenesse to the sea
in respect of profit: and a remoteness, in respect of danger. Italiae Medium
ad Incrementuan urbis natum unice: Here he shows the difficulty for being
assaulted, by people far off, being in the midst of Italy; and by people
near hand, by reason of its own strength. We may therefore conclude: that a
City built to grow great, cannot possibly have a more excellent situation,
(according to Aristotle) then Rome had.

Libertatem Lucius Brutus Instituit.
How the City of Rome came from being governed by Kings, to be a free State;
and what the difference is between a beginning and a cause. The second
Discourse:

HAving showed the causes for which the City of Rome, was in her first
beginning governed by Kings: I conceave it to be no less necessary, to make
inquiry how it happened, that leaving that kind of government, it came under
Brutus, to be a free State: and seeing, of the causes that may be alleged,
(setting them aside that are supernatural) some are Philosophical, and some
Political; these consisting in the things done; those in the order of number,
and influences of the Heavens; I say first, speaking as a Politician; There are
many of opinion, that this alteration of government in Rome, was caused by the
ravishing of Lucretia, by Sextus Tarquinius: which opinion Aristotle seems not
much to decline; while speaking of the causes, by which Monarchies and States
come to be changed, he omits not to name for one, the lust and lasciviousness
of the Prince: which (as he shows by many examples) have been the cause of
change in all kinds of Commonwealths and Monarchies. Others may say, that this
change of government in Rome, proceeded from this, that Tarquinius had taken
away all authority from the Senators; and had by devises procured the utter
abolishing of the Senate; which also was the cause, that the Monarchy of Rome,
passed afterward from the house of the Caesar's, into that of Galba. The cause
likewise of the change in Syracusa, from a Monarchy to a popular State; when
Hieronymus not following the steps of his grandfather Hieron; divested the
Senate of all authority; and was therefore by conspiratours most miserably
slain. For as the stomach, which is the seat of natural heat; as long as it
has in it any little nourishment, leaves the body in peace and quiet; but if
it be altogether without, it then draws nourishment from the head, and thereby
oftentimes destroys the body: so if the Senate have but some little authority
left it, it then rests satisfied and contented; but if it be wholly deprived of
all authority, it then turns head upon their head, and falls upon the Prince;
and oftentimes becomes the ruin of the City. And even this is one reason, that
Octavius Augustus, after the death of Caesar, was able to continue in his
Empire; because he left to the Senate, part of that authority which Caesar had
before abolished; at least had plotted to abolish.

By the examples hitherto brought, I conceave it may be gathered, that these
were the true Political causes, why the City of Rome, changed its regal
government, to a free State; but because to say but this, would be to confound
beginnings with causes; it is necessary to expatiate a little; that so
returning back, I may leave no man incapable of this truth.

We must therefore know, that between a beginning and a cause, there is great
difference; not speaking of them either Philosophically, or Theologically;
although in each of them, it might easily be showed. In Theology; because the
Father is the beginning of the Son; and the Father and the Son, the
beginning of the Holy Ghost; yet neither the Father is cause of the Son, nor
the Father and Son cause of the Holy Ghost, as Thomas Aquinas does learnedly
demonstrate. In Philosophy; seeing Aristotle in his Physics; and in his books
of Generation and Corruption, shows manifest difference, between beginnings and
causes. But because Aristotle in distinguishing the^, takes the^ not always in
the sense that we take them; and oftentimes also confounds them; as in his
Metaphysics; where he shows that a cause and a beginning, are as Ens and
Vnum; which are convertible one with the other; and in another place affirms,
that all causes are beginnings: and in Divinity likewise the Greek Fathers
mingle oftentimes in the Persons of the Trinity, the causes with the
beginnings: as Saint Gregory Nazianzen and others: we therefore in this place,
will forbear to speak of them, either Philosophically, or Theologically; but
will frame our Discourse, by way of actions; showing into how great errors
those men have run, who confound causes with beginnings: a thing which
Tacitus is not guilty of, who in his History saying; Struebat jam fortuna in
diversa part terrarum initia causas Imperii; shows plainly he knew that a
cause and a beginning were not both one thing.

We may therefore take causes to be those that are in the understanding;
beginnings, those by whose means, that which is in the understanding is put in
execution. And so a cause comes to be, the first in the intention; and the last
in execution; a beginning, the last in the intention; and the first, in
execution.

This, Polybius well understood where he says, Causae omnibus in rebus primae
sunt; Principia vero ultima causarum: equidem ita existimo, Principia dici
Primas omnium actiones in rebus quae judicatae as deliberatae sunt; causas vero
quae judicium deliberationemque praecedant. And thereupon excellently well he
says, That the cause of the second war of the Carthaginians with the Romans,
was the indignation of Amilcar Hannibals father: who, though he were not
overcome by Land of his enemies the Romans, yet the Carthaginian Forces being
put to the worse by them, he thought it his best course to make peace, and to
lay down Arms for the present, reserving in his mind a perpetual
indignation; which cncreased afterward by their threatening of war, at such
time as the Carthaginians distracted with other discords, and thereby not able
to withstand them, lost Sardinia. Whereupon, Amilear incensed with a new
indignation, had an intention to make war upon them, many years before
Hannibal passed into Italy. These were the causes of the war: but the
beginnings of it were afterward the siege of Saguntum: and Hannibals passing
over the River Hiber. So you see, the beginnings were not at the same time; but
were long before preceded by the causes.

To roturne now to our purpose, concerning the alteration of States: it is
seldom seen, that the cause and the beginning happen both at one time. The
cause that moved Caesar, to change the State in Rome; was an impatience of
equality; which being borne and bred with him, was hastened in him, by the
threatening of his enemies, pressing him to give over his Consulship, and to
give an account of what he had done; a thing of great difficulty and danger in
Commonwealths, as was seen in the case of Scipio, of Furius Camillus, and
others. But the beginning was his passing over the river Rubicon. So likewise
the change which the Israelites made in the time of Samuel, from Judges to
Kings; had a beginning diverse from the cause; there being in their hearts
sometime before a desire of Kings, through an impatience of liberty, (as
writers hold) which afterward took beginning from the injustice of the sons of
Samuel.

The cause then that Rome came to be a free State, was Romulus, and the
Citizens growing to perfection. Romulus, because he being sole King, made such
laws and ordinances in the State, that showed he had more regard to prepare
the Romans for liberty, then to establish the Monarchy to his successors:
seeing he reserved to himself no other authority but to assemble the Senate;
nor other charge but to command the Army in time of war. It may be said then,
that either Romulus showed but small sign of wisdom, to make ordinances
contrary to himself; whereof being afterward aware, he meant with a greater
error, to take from the Senate that authority, which being now established, was
soon after, the cause of his death. Or we may say, and better, that Romulus as
having no children, had no desire to leave Rome under a Regal government; and
the City having none in it, but imperfit men, he had no power to leave it a
free State; until by being governed first by one alone, they should learn to
be able of themselves to hold that, which to come to know, they needed first,
to be guided by a King. Just as swimming masters use to do; who bear a hand
over them they teach, until such time as they grow able to govern themselves;
and then they leave them at their own liberty. This made Tyberius (as Dion
reports) praise Augustus so much: though not without flattcry: saying, he had
imitated those Physicians, who barring their Patient, the ordering of his own
body; they first restore the Body to health, before they allow him the ordering
of it. Insomuch, that after the death of Romulus, the people not yet grown to
perfection, there was not one man that once spoke of liberty; but all agreed to
desire a King. Regem tamen omnes volebant (says Livy) libertatis dulcedine
nondum experta. It was not thus at the time of the Tarquins; for the people
being then grown to perfection, there was in the City good store of Common
wealths men; fitter to govern, then to be governed. And so came up this
government most agreeable to nature; which is (as the Philosopher says) that
he be commander of others who is wiser then others. And therefore Numa
Pompilius needed no guard to safeguard his life; seeing governments that are
natural, are a guard to themselves. From hence it was, that our Lord God, the
first time he gave a King, (as the holy Scripture says) Non erat similis ei in
Israel; meaning to show, that he is not worthy to be ruler over others, who is
not wiser then others. There being then in those times, such excellent men in
the City of Rome, as ought rather to give then to take laws from the
Tarquines; they had in them, an ardent desire, to obtain that liberty in
possession, which they had now prevented with merit. And therefore it appears,
that Junius Brutus, even from his youth, had this intention: for going with the
sons of Tarquin to the Oracle, to ask which of them should be Lord of Rome,
and the Oracle answering; he that first should kiss his mother, he presently
kissed the Earth; and yet he knew not then, that Tarquin should ravish
Lucretia. Now if this injury only had been the motive to Brutus, certainly
then, as the injury came from a particular person; so the revenge should rather
have been taken upon that particular person, then upon the power Regal; and
yet we see the contrary happened: for Brutus in the oath which he caused his
confederates to take, made this one part, not to suffer any to reign; not
only not the Tarquines, but not any other person whatsoever. Nec illos nec
alium quemquam regnare Romae passurum. A manifest argument, that he had more
desire, to abrogate the regal Power, then to vindicate the adultery. So much
more, as the conspirators addressed themselves against the dignity rather then
against the life of the offender. The cause then of this alteration in the
state of Rome, was the Citizens spirits being grown to such perfection, that
they could no longer tolerate Kings: and this no sooner then they were arrived
at such perfection. In sign whereof, I consider amongst so many Kings as Rome
had; how only Tully Ostillus, the predecessor of Tarquinius superbus, had the
intention to make it a free state, which certainly had taken effect, if his
death had not prevented it. Ac tam moderatum Imperium, tamen quia Vnius esset,
deponere eum in animo habuisse, ni scelus liberandae patriae consilia agitanti
interemisset. Which because we cannot ascribe to the only goodness of Tullus;
seeing Numa Pompilius, a better man perhaps then he, never had any such
thought: we must needs say, that Numa seeing the Citizens unfit for a
republicke, set them in a way to that perfection, to which arrived under
Tullus. It should be an easy matter, for such Citizens to conserve that
liberty, which under a good Prince they had received. And here experience
shows that, which Aristotle speaking naturally, knew well in matters
politic; for assigning the cause, why Power regal changes oftentimes to a
free State, he alleges no other reason, but the passing from imperfection to
perfection: saying thus, Sed cum postea contingeret, ut plures pari virtute
reperirentur, non amplius tolerarunt Regem; sed commune quiddam quaerentes,
respublicas constituere.

Moreover, that the ordinances of Romulus had not been sufficient, if with it
there had not concurred a perfection in the Citizens; will be easily conceived,
if we consider the case of Moses who was blamed by Jethro for ruling himself
alone: I do not believe it was, for that he did not judge well; or for that,
he took too great pains: but rather, for that he showed not to be more
intentive to strengthen his own power, then to prepare for others the goodway;
of which this was the chief and first foundation; Vt non aliter ratio constet
quam si uni reddatur. And therefore, he appointed them a Senate, which by their
authority, might serve to set the people in a way to know their own good;
showing them the way, with which being once acquainted, he might leave them
afterward to walk in it of themselves: in such sort, that Moses no less then
Romulus directed the Israelites the way to liberty; but they, never attaining
to know the way, as never coming (I speak not in matters of Religion) to that
perfection, to which the Romans attained: as these could not endure Kings; so
those had no will to live in liberty; for although they met with the same
cause, extrinsecall; yet they had not the same cause, intrinsecall; which Moses
well knew, when perceiving his death to approach, he made his prayer to God,
that he would provide them a leader, to the end, that as sheep not knowing the
way, if it be not showed them by a shepherd, they might be by him directed.
Provideat Dominus Deus spirituum, omnis carnis, hominem qui sit super
multitudinem hanc; ut possit exire and intrare ante ^os, vel introducere, ne
sint sicut oves sine ductore. And he that will more plainly see their
imperfection, let him confider, that in the long absence of Moses, they never
demanded any other leader; there being none amongst them sit to govern them;
but only desired, that Aaron would make some Gods, Facnobis Deos qui nos
pracedant. Whereupon for all the many beginnings the Israelites had, from which
they might have taken occasion, to erect a Commonwealth; yet they never did it:
because as causes be not sufficient, if with them there concur not
beginnings; so beginnings a^e of no force, if they come not accompanied with
causes; and causes availenot neither, if they be not good. The death of Caesar
was a beginning from which a Common wealth might have been erected; but because
it was grounded upon a cause that was not political, proceeding rather from
the hatred and spleen against the Prince, then upon any mature judgment, or
judicious counsel; it was not therefore sit, to bring them to a be free
State. So when the Senators killed Romulus; they had by that a beginning of
liberty: but it happening upon the same occasion, as that of Caesar, they hardly
had so much brain to agree among themselves to choose a King. So as when there
concur not causes, beginnings oftentimes are left unpursued: that I cannot
but say, if Lucretia had been ^avished by Romulus; yet Rome for all that had
never gotten liberty. It behooves therefore to take great heed, when there be
occasions first, not to give the least cause of a beginning: and therefore the
Ifra^, being moved to demand a King, upon a very great occasion, namely their
unfitness to suffer liberty; they took for a beginning a most weak cause,
namely the old age of Samuel; and yet for all he could do, in showing them the
burtheus of tyranny; telling them as a Prophet, that instead of a King, they,
should have a tyrant; he could never persuade them to leave demanding a King.
And therefore David, after his great sin, knowing he had given the people
great cause to rebel, avoided all occasions, from which they might take never
so weak a beginning; and for this cause forbear to punish Joab, though
provoked to it by just indignation; and left the revenge of it, to his
successor. Whereupon we may believe, that Tarquinius Superbus, and his son
showed little discretion, seeing so many worthy men desirous of liberty; that
they would give them occasion of beginning it: The one by taking away all
authority from the Senate; and other, and that more hainously, by ravishing
Lucretia: considering that the insolency of the sons, makes always the
Prince himself odious, as Guicciardine relates of John Bentivoglio. And hereof
we have a like example in the holy Scripture, of Hemor Hevaeus Prince of the
Sichemites; who lost his Kingdom, thorough the ravishment his son Sichem
committed upon Dyna the daughter of Jacob and Lea: whereof the holy text in
Genesis says; Egressa est autem Dyna filia Leae ut videret mulieres regionis
illius; quam cum vidisset Sichem filius Hemor Hevaei, Princeps terrae illius,
adamavit eam, and rapuit, and dormivit cum illa; vi opprimens virginem: and in
the end of the Chapter, Arreptis duo filii Jacob Simeon and Levi, patris Dynae
gladiis; Ingressi sunt urbem considenter: Interfectisque omnibus masculis Emor
and Sichem pariter necaverunt; and depopulati sunt urbem in ultionem stupri.
Thus the cause which gave the Romans occasion of a beginning, if we consider it
of the sons part, may be conceived to be this; that he was the first, that
had ancestors in such height of greatness; a thing that commonly puffes up
men, and makes them proud; as Galba said speaking of Nero, Si ante oculos Nero,
quem longa C^sarum serie tumeutem; and therefore the first that arrive to any
height of greatness; they always endeavor to shun contempt; but their
successors, while they give themselves to pleasures, in that very time, they
make themselves contemptible; and give occasion to others to oppress them.
Which Aristotle expressly teaches us, where he says, Plerique eorum qui
Dominationes adepti sunt, eas usque ad extremum conservaverunt; sed qui ab
illis susceperunt, confestim ut ita dixerim, perierunt omnes; in voluptatibus
enim viventes efficiantur facile contemnendi; ac multas perhibent occasiones
opprimendi sui. This was the very cause of altering the Principality of the
Acheans (as Polybius relates) for that Principality having had beginning in the
virtues of Tisamenes, the son of Orestes; It had ending in the vices of the
successors of Ligius, Postea vero moleste far Regnum coeperunt, quia filii
ligii non jam legitime, sed per Tyramtidem Provinciam gubernarent.

And this is so true, as both Aristotle affirms, and is confirmed by
experience; that the first purchasers of a power, do for the most part
maintain it; and that in their successors it commonly vanishes; that I
cannot choose but make a little digression, to show the reasons of it: The
first is, because they who acquire any thing with labor, account and love it
as an issue of their own: and therefore use as much diligence in keeping it,
as they took pains in getting it; from whence it is, as Plato intimates, that
those men are commonly the greatest lovers of riches, who by their own
industry have been the getters: and therefore our Lord God in Esaias, promising
infinite contentments and exaltations to his people, in giving the reason of
this so great happiness; he says, Dominabitur ^ui qui fecit te. A second
reason, and perhaps a better is, because they who first acquire an estate, must
needs do it by way of some eminency; either of subtilty, or wit, or force, or
such like; wherein excelling others, they show themselves in that kind, to be
more virtuous then others, as Aristotle in the first of his Politics says;
that to overcome, is not without virtue; and seeing Empires are easily kept by
those arts, by which they are acquired, Nam Imperi^ facile iis artibus
retinetur, (says Salust) quibus a principio partumest; it will be an easy
matter, for him that has acquired it, seeing he must necessarily acquire it by
way of virtue, by the same way to maintain it. Whereas his successors very
seldom succeed him in virtue; and easily loose that, for the getting whereof,
they have taken no pains. A third reason is, because he who rises first to a
power, contents himself with every little authority; as Aristotle says,
Contigit autem hoc maxim, post mutationes rerum publicarum: Non nine statim
mutantur; sed contenti sunt ab initio homines, parva concessione potentiae:
Whereupon it ought not to seem strange; but rather it is ascribed to the
Prince, for a great favor, that which oftentimes he grants for his own
security; and all that, wherein one has more power then others, yet arrogates
no more to himself then others; is received of subjects, as so much given
them. Where the successors commonly have more pride and less virtue, then
their predecessors: and think not themselves Princes, if they raise not their
own authority by depressing of others; as Hieronymus did in Syracusa; and as
feroboane when he said, Grossior est minimus digitus meus, dorso patris mei.
And this is so much more distasteful to subjects, to see themselves more
restrained by him, that has less worthiness; that it seems to invite them
to conspiracies; as to the one, and the other of those before mentioned, it
happened. A fourth and last reason is, because those men who come newly to a
power, are commonly suspicious of loosing it again; and therefore doubting
their own children, they are contented to see them plunged in vices; and
estranged from the love of the subjects; whereupon, they coming afterward to
the Principality, cannot choose but run a hazard.

But to return from whence I digressed; the cause why Tarquinius used such
cruelty to the Senate, which made them so much desire liberty; was in my
opinion, because Ancus Martius was preferred before him; and thereupon
conceiving great indignation against the Senators and people; and coming
afterward to the government; he meant to be revenged upon the^ with bridling
them a little. And such men should never be made Emperors, as from whom there
can be nothing expected, but effects of cruelty. An instruction which Cornelius
Tacitus gives us; while discoursing of the causes, why the Romans speaking of a
successor to Augustus by reason of his approaching death, would not have
Agrippa Postbumus, mentions this as the chief, Trucem Agrippam and Ignominia
accensum: For Tiberius being preferred before him in the lifetime of Augustus;
and having suffered banishment in the Island of Pianosa; he was full of spleen
and indignation; which no doubt he would have showed, if he had ever come to be
Emperor. For this very cause also Otho misliked the election which Galba made,
and was doubtful of Piso; Ingenio trucem, and longo exilio efferatum.

The Beginning then of the change of government in Rome, to speak as a
Politician, was the lasciviousness of Lucius Tarquin; and the pride of his
father: but the causes were, the ordinances of Romulus, and the perfection of
the Citizens.

But to speak of the causes as a Philosopher; we may assign two; answerable
to that which Aristotle relates to have been the opinion of Plato; one from the
influence of the Heavens, the other from numbers. As for the first of these; by
reason of the uncertainty of the years, and perhaps of the Art, I take not
upon me, with any probability to discourse; and therefore passing to the other,
which is number: Plato says, that the number of seven, has great operation in
the changes of Commonwealths, which may first be observed in the Commonwealth
of our body; wherein from seven to seven there is a contiuall change; and there
want not examples hereof in all kinds of government; as we may see in Esaias, in
feromy, in Damel, in Saint Matthew, in the Sabbatisme, in the Monarchy of Cain,
and in so many other places; that we must needs believe this number to bear a
great sway in changes generally, as by others before me has been observed; yet
considering it as to my purpose, it has not perhaps by any been observed but
now by my self, that to the foresaid causes of the change of government in
Rome, this of the number of seven may also be added, seeing after seven Kings,
(as every one knows) it came to be a free state; yet I mean not that numbers
can enforce, but only incline, as instruments of that Almighty God, who Omnia
posuit innumero, pondere and Mensura.

A Parallel between the conspiracy of Marcus Brutus against Caesar, and that
of Lucius Brutus against Tarquin: whereby we may see why the one brought in
liberty; the other, tyranny. The third Discourse.

HAving showed Rome at last came to be a free state, by means of the
conspiracy of Lucius Brutus against the Tarquines; I conceive it necessary to
examine, why the conspiracy of Marcus Brutus against Caesar, having been moved
with the same intention, yet wrought not the same effect; and no better way to
come to know it, then by comparing them together.

Many things are wont to concur in favor of an action; whereof some are
antecedents, and give it as it were birth; other are concomitant, and give it
nourishment; others again are subsequent, and procure it strength.

The action of Brutus in killing Tarquin, was aided by the three foresaid
things, to make Rome a free state; First the ordinances of Romulus, which
tended rather to bring in liberty, then to preserve a Monarchy: then the
aptness of the Citizens, who now grown fit of themselves to govern, could no
longer endure to be governed by others; and lastly the insolency and proud
tyranny of Tarquin, so extremely distasteful to all the Citizens. Thus Romulus
set them in a way; the perfection of the Citizens made them fit; and the
insolency of the Tarquines made them desirous. Now if we look upon the action
of Marcus Brutus in killing Caesar; we shall find there were all the three
causes too; but because they were contrary, they therefore brought forth a
contrary effect. The first was the domination of Cinna, of Sylla, of Pompey and
of Marcus Crassus: who set the City in a way, and made it plyant to tolerate
Monarchy. The second was the imperfection of the Citizens, which was grown so
great, that where Rome had sometimes been a City much honored for virtue; it
was now become through evil custom, most abominable. Thirdly, there
concurred the great clemency and goodness of Caesar; with which he had gotten
and tied unto him the hearts of the people; so as, instead of the ordinances of
Romulus, to set them in a way of liberty; there praeceded here the ways of
Marius and others, to lead them into servitude. In stead of perfection of the
Citizens, which made them fit to live a free people; there concurred here
imperfection, which made them good for nothing but to live in bondage; and
where in the one there concurred the cruelty and Pride of the Tarquines, to
make them desire liberty; in the other, there concurred the affability and
clemency of Caesar, to make them content with servitude.

Now again if we come to speak of the causes concomitant, there were three
things concurred in aid of the conspiracy against the Tarquins. First, the
ravishing of Lucretia; sufficient of it self, as a public injury, to cause a
public insurrection. And therefore Virginius speaking against Appius
Claudius, who would have ravished his daughter, said to the people, with a
purpose to set them in commotion; Illis enim quoque filias, sorores, conjuges
esse; sed quo impunitior sit, eo effraenatiorem fore, aliena calamitate
documentum datum illis cavendae similis injuriae. Secondly, the just
indignation of Lucius Brutus against Tarquinius. Thirdly, his acquainting the
people with his intention: letting them know the causes that moved him; and so,
they having a part in the conspiracy, could not choose but approve it; and
having a part in the danger, not choose but maintain it. Thus the adultery
committed with Lucretia, gave a color to the conspiracy: the just indignation
of Lucius Brutus, set a gloss upon the Author; the communicating it to the
people, made them a party in the cause, and facilitated the action. Now in the
fact of Marcus Brutus against Caesar, there concurred the many favors and
graces which the Prince had always showed to all; the many benefits which
Marcus Brutus had received, the murder committed in the Senate, without the
peoples knowledge; and where the ravishing of Lucretia; gave a color to the
banishing of the Tarquins; the favors of Caesar discovered the ill intention
of the conspirators; and where in the one, the offense done to Lucius Brutus,
set a gloss of praise upon the author: in the other, the benefits bestowed by
Caesar, set a blot of ignominy upon Marcus Brutus, and made him hateful to all
the people: and where the Commons being made partakers of the conspiracy
against the Tarquins, conceived it was done for the public good; here the
Commons knowing nothing of the matter, conceaved it was done for private
profit. Lastly, if we look to the things subsequent; we shall also in them
find great contrariety. For after the death of the Tarquins, first, there
followed an easing the people of taxations; and a maintaining them in plenty,
to the end they might taste the benefit of liberty; secondly, they put to death
those Noblemen, that had been adherents to the Tarquines; to the end they might
be made sure for making innovation. Thirdly, they extinguished the whole race
of the Tarquins, to the end they might be out of fear, of the States ever
coming to any of them again. And thus they secured themselves from the
people, from the Nobility, and from the blood Royal. Now after the death of
Caesar, all things were clean contrary: First, where in that case, the benefit
of liberty was made appear to the people: Here Antonius with a most eloquent
Oration, reading Caesar's Will, wherein he had given a great Donative to the
people; made them sensible, how much more it would be for their profit to have
a Prince. Secondly, where in that case, the partakers were all put to death;
here, they were all left living. Thirdly, where in that case, there were Armies
levied against the line of the Tarquines; to the end, they might never be able
to recover the government: here, Armies were levied in aid of Augustus, to the
end, he might more easily make himself Prince. Let no man therefore marvel,
if where the intention was equal, yet the success was not equal; by reason
of the difference, and inequa lity of the accidents. I have omitted in this
discourse some other differences, that were between these two conspiracies;
meaning to speak of them in another place.

Pompeii Crassique Potentia cito in Caesarem, Lepidi atque Antonii arma in
Augustum cessere.
That the power of a few cannot consist in any number better then in three. The
fourth Discourse.

THe Commonwealth of Rome, leaving the government of one, and passing by the
number of two, where it stayed a while under Marius and Sylla; settled at last
in the number of three: the first time under Caesar, Crassus, and Pompey; the
second time, under Anthony, Lepidus and Augustus. Which how much better it was,
then to have stayed in two; every one may know, that will but consider, either
Philosophically, or Theologically, or Politically, what great force there is in
the number of three, for the conservation and union of things. Indeed Aristotle
had no better way to show the necessity of the Materia Prima, then this; seeing
there being a form and a privation which are two; it was never possible they
should be united together, but in a third: in which, and by which they might be
conjoined. Also the school of Theophrastus, contented not it self, to deliver
for Principles, Radical moisture, and Natural heat; knowing, that two alone
are destructive; but he added a third; that is, salt and cold, and dry; to the
end, that with cold he might associate Radical moisture; and with the dry,
Natural heat; and consequently make a perfect union of the three, that is
Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury. It is therefore no marvel, if Divines also make a
Trinity in the Deity, not only a Father and a Son, but also a Holy Ghost: who
(as many of them say) unites the Father with the Son; and it is very
convenient, that from that Essence which is one, there should come three, a
child of unity. Again, if we examine it Politically why three should be
conservative; we shall find it manifest of it self; because if one of the
three should aspire to be sole Prince; presently the other two would join and
oppose, and utterly frustrate his design. And if two of the three should grow
at variance, the third would either by interposing reconcile them; or standing
neuter, as only a looker on, they would grow friends of themselves; for fear
least the other should reap the benefit of their victory. And therefore
Aristotle found fault with Plato for making a Commonwealth to consist of only
Prince and People, and consequently of only two forms: saying it had been much
better, to have made it to consist of three; which yet to many seems a Paradox;
because as multiplying of good, makes a more good; so multiplying of evil,
makes always a more evil. And why then would he rather have three corruptions
then two? for no other cause as I conceave, but that he would plainly show he
knew the number of three to be conservative; and the number of two,
destructive; there being nothing that more ruins Cities, then to be divided
into two without a third; as Aristotle in many places shows: and praising that
City for the best, which is full of middling sorts of men; for no other cause,
but because there are in it the three; that is, rich, poor, and of a middling
rank; and shows that where these are not, it is impossible a City should
continue. To come then to a Monarchy, it was of necessity, that the number of
three should be destroyed; and to destroy three, It was of necessity, either by
increasing it to bring it to four; or by abating it, to bring it to two; just
as the apostate Lucifer, would have done to divide and destroy the heavenly
Monarchy; when leaving the circumference founded upon the divine Center, he
framed another higher Circle founded upon the center of himself, bringing the
one to two; which because it could not continue, he was therefore cast into
Hell: where seeking again to destroy the Divine Monarchy, by bringing it to
two; he persuaded Eve to eat the forbidden fruit. We may say then, that as long
as the number of three stood firm in Crassus, Caesar, and Pompey, So long the
government came not to be a Monarchy; but as soon as Crassus died, and that the
number came from three to two, there presently grew dissension between Caesar
and Pompey, till Caesar at last made himself sole Emperor. Likewise in the
Triumvirate of Augustus, none of them was so hardy as once to stir: but
Lepidus being gone out of the three, there fell discord between Mark Anthony
and Augustus; who by the death of the other, remained sole Emperor. It is
therefore no marvel that the Jews, seeing the government of Judges was to
come to two, under the sons of Samuel, demanded a King; considering that two
and four which proceeds from the same root, is no less a child of the devil;
then three and one which is the root of it, is the child of God. And therefore
God blessed not the second day; and in the creation, the Holy Ghost by the
mouth of Moses, makes mention of three things; the Heaven, the Earth, and the
waters. Which perhaps moved Plato in his Timaeus, to make three Elements, three
and one being union; two and four, disunion.

Cuncta Discordiis civilibus fessa, nomine Principis subimperium accepit.
Of what kind of Discord the Author intends to speak. The fifth Discourse:

BEing by occasion of this passage, of necessity to speak of discords; and
oftentimes to commend them, though with some distinction: I cannot omit to
explain my meaning; which is, that where I affirm, discords fit to be
fomented; I mean always amongst the enemies of the Christian faith; amongst
whom discords are of such benefit, that the Prophet Abacuck in express terms
says: Fluvios scindes terrae; which S. Hierome expounding says, Reges terrae
adversum populum tuum dimicantes divides and disperges. For in holy Scripture,
by Rivers oftentimes are meant Kings: because as rivers watering the fields in
fit time and place, make them fruitful; or otherways with unseasonable
overflowing, destroy them: so Kings with the sweetness of justice, increase;
or otherwise, with unmeasurable cruelty, overthrow the Kingdom. The Prophet
therefore desires, that the Princes of the Earth may be divided, meaning such
Princes, as make a God of earthly things; to the end, that by such division,
they may more easily be overthrown: there being nothing more hurtful, not only
to the good, but even to the wicked themselves, then the concord of the wicked.
As S. Austin declares it, where he says, Sicut multum nocet discordia inter
bonos; ita valde dolendum est, quando mali pacifice vivunt; quando vero
discordant, tunc mundus aliqualiter tranquillatur: Nam sicut concordia malorum
contraria est concordiae bonorum; ita optandum est, quod boni pacem habeant,
and mali discordes sint: nam per discordiam, mali aliquando optimi efficiuntur;
cognoscentes quid sint, and quid erunt. From these words it may be clearly
gathered, that it is as great a good to put discord between the wicked, as to
preserve union between the good: and therefore Abraham in his Sacrifice,
divided the Goat and the Ram, but the Turtle-dove and the Pigeon he divided
not: of which Saint Austin speaking says; that by this, the Holy Ghost would
intimate, that carnal men should be divided between themselves: but good and
spiritual men should be kept in unity: of whom the Prophet Esaias speaking,
after he had said, Et fluent ad eum omnes gentes he adds, Non exercebuntur
ultra ad praelium: as if he would say, that between the good, there shall be
always peace. And therefore the Dove returning into the Arc, brought in her
mouth an Olive branch; to show, that the peace between good men ought to be
perpetual: as the leaves of the Olive which are never dry; or as the Oil
which gets by time, not less perfection, but more purity. Let peace therefore
be kept amongst the good, and let discord be raised amongst the wicked;
imitating the discretion of Physicians, who divide and cut off corrupt members:
but preserve and keep united, the sound. Whereupon our Lord God in S. Matthew,
has left written: Non veni mittere pacem, sed gladium: which place S.
Chrysostom expounding, says: Quia videlicet praecipua singularisque Pax tunc
praestatur; quando quod tabo vel sanie corruptum est abscinditur, at que
projicitur, quando factiosa and improba pars repellitur aut omnino destruitur:
sic certe coelis terra conjungi potest. Nam and medicus hoc modo reliquum
corpus conservat facile; si quod reduci ad sanitatem non potest, ceciderit
atque abjecerit, and militiae Dux ad solvendam militum conspirationem, alterum
in alterum concitat So did God in the Tower of Babel: So did S. Paul in the
conspiracy plotted against him; and this may suffice for declaration of my
meaning.

Now as to our purpose; seeing discords may be divided into internal, and
external: Internal, between Citizens of the same City: External, between one
City and another: because it is a subject no less large then difficult; I will
divide it into four discourses: In the frist, I will handle whether an external
war with the enemies of the Christian faith, be the best means to hinder
internal discords amongst Christians. In the second, in what manner, and at
what time discords should be raised with the enemies of our faith, for our most
advantage. The third shall show, what discords they are, that serve to uphold
the forms of states. In the last I will show, that by reason of our
imperfection, there is necessary a certain discord, which may be called a
Concord.

Whether an external war with the enemies of the faith, be the best means
to hinder internal discords among Christians. The sixth Discourse.

ARistotle in his Politics seems to think, that fear may be a great means
to uphold Commonwealths; where he says, Conservantur autem Respublicae non
solum ex eo, quia procul sunt a periculis, sed etiam interdum, quia propinquae
sunt; homines enim formidantes, vigilantius intendunt ad reipublicae custodiam:
Itaque oportet eos, qui rempublicam salvam esse volunt, formidines quasdam ut
caveant neque dissolvant, quasi nocturnam quandam custodiam reipublicas
observationem. Whereupon, many are persuaded, that a foreign war is the
only means to maintain peace at home. And Sallust having an eye to this,
says, Metus bostilis in bonis artibus civitatem retinebat And the Romans as
long as they had Carthage for an opposite, were free all that while from civil
war; and therefore Scipio Nasica, accounted the wisest man of his time, and as
such chosen by the City, to have the keeping of the Mother of the Gods in his
house, as the Oracle had commanded; gave counsel that by no means Carthage
should be destroyed, Timens inf^ animis (says S. Austin) hostem securitatem:
and tanquam pupillis civibus tutorem necessarium videns esse Terrorem: and in a
manner with the same words has Livy intimated the same conceit, Disciplina
erat custos infirmitatis, qua inter validiores optime Timor continet. And
therefore the Athenians (as Plato relates) never attained to greater
perfection, then when the Persians assailed Greece. But yet this Rule, as many
other in the Politics, though it be sometimes good; yet is not to be trusted
always and in general: for a Politician in this case must do as a Physician:
apply to one complexion one medicine; and to another, a diverse; and oftentimes
to the same Patient; in diversity of diseases, diversity of medicines: and more
then this, to the same Patient in the same disease, apply diverse medicines
according to diversity of times. And therefore Vindicianus the Physician (as S.
Austin relates) having given a medicine to a sick friend of his, at that time
it healed him; but after some years the same man falling again into the same
disease; and using, without farther counsel of his Physician, the former
medicine, it did him no good; whereat marvelling and asking Vindicianus the
cause, he answered, Quod non intellexerat videlicet^ illi aetati jam non hoc se
fuisse facturum: and the reason is, because we must not so much consider, that
the person which uses the medicine is the same; as that the time is diverse;
and if the diversity of time be of so great moment; of what moment is the
diversity of individuals? We may therefore conclude with Aristotle in many
places of his Ethics; that in things belonging to particulars, there cannot be
given any Rule universal.

I will therefore distinguish men, and consequently Cities; seeing Cities are
nothing else, but a communion of men assembled together to live well, as the
Philosopher defines them: afterward, I will divide the times: and lastly, the
forms of states.

Of men, some are quiet, some turbulent, some addicted to Merchandise, some to
study: so of Cities, whether by any power of the Air, or of the influence of
the stars, some one is full of sharp wits, fit for merchandising; others of
stout spirits, fit for Arms: some have ordinances which lead them in a way of
peace; others, of war: sometimes they are both by nature and art of so strong
a situation, that in regard of their difficulty to be assaulted, they are
altogether careless of Military profession.

In this last case, it will be an easy matter to maintain peace at home, to
which they are either called by nature, or aided by art; and especially if the
inhabitants shall give themselves to such exercises, which keep men from
dissentions. But if the Citizens be of stout natures and imperfect, (I mean
not in essence; for I well know by divinity, that every creature, in its
essence is perfect,) it will then be necessary there should be fear: and this
S. Austin meant when he said, Infirmis animis hostem securitatem: and there is
good reason for it; for if they fear to be overcome of an Enemy, they will
strive to overcome their own will; and take for a master, the fear of virtue.
And therefore our Lord God, when he gave Joshua the Land of Promise; as he had
promised to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: yet he destroyed not all enemies, but
left a part of the Land in the power of the Philistines: and others, mentioned
in the Book of Joshua; and this he did, as knowing that the Imperfection of
that people, whom the Holy Ghost by the mouth of Moses, calls Gens durae
cervicis; could not better be upheld and kept, then by the fear of enemies.
And this the Holy Ghost expresses likewise in the book of Judges; where
speaking of those Nations which remained in the Land of Promise, he says, Hae
sunt Gentes, quas dereliquit Dominus ut erudiret in eis Israelem. It is
therefore no marvel, that our Lord God, knowing the weakness of Ada^, as soon
as he saw him fall into the imperfection of sin; to the end he should not
commit the like error again, presently put him in the midst of discords and
enmities: when he said to the serpent, Inimicitias ponam inter te and mulierem,
and semen tuum and semen illius: and for this cause it is, that he has left to
the Catholic Church so great adversaries, as himself expresses in S.
Matthew; In sign whereof, he would not suffer the servants to pull up the
Tares, but would have them to be let to grow with the Corn; least plucking up
the one, they should withal root out the other. Now for those Cities, where
the Citizens are given to merchandise, they by all means ought to shun war,
as being things of very different nature, to stand in the shadow writing Bills
of account; and to endure heat and cold, fighting in the field; as S. Thomas
teaches us where he says, Est otiam Negotiationis usus contrarius
quamplurimum exercitio Militari; Negotiatores onim dum umbram colunt, a
laboribus vacant; and dum fruuntur delitiis, molleseunt aninto; and corpora
redduntur debilia ad labores Militares inepta.

But if Cities be so formed with Laws, that they have better means to make
resistance in war, then to conserve themselves in Peace; in this case, it
will be necessary to have war with foreign Nations, to maintain peace in
their own Nation; otherwise it will run a manifest hazard to be ruined, as
it happened to the Lacedaemonians, of whom Aristotle says, Ad partem enim
virtutis tota ordinatio illarum legum contendit, scilicet Bellicam; haec autem
utilis ad victoriam consequendam; Itaque salvi erant bellum gerentes; peribant
vero, rerum potiti; quoniam nec oti^n agere, nec quicquam aliud exercere
sciebant praestabilius, quam rem Militarem. And therefore the City of Rome
which was formed by Laws and Ordinances, to enlarge it self, and grow greater
by war; no sooner laid down Arms with Enemies, but it took them up with
friends; that having none at last with whom to contend, it contended with it
self; and became overthrown by its own forces. And therefore Livy says, Nulla
magna civitas diu quiescere potest; si foris hostem non habet, domi invenit, ut
praevalida corpora ab externis causis tuta videntur, sed suis ipsa viribus
onerantur. But if they have Laws and Ordinances to live in peace, their best
course is to hold them to peace.

The second division we brought before, was of times; which may be divided into
two: One, wherein war has been but of late: the other, wherein peace has
been long: if peace has been long, why should we take any other course, and
not continue peace still? but if our case be the former, it will then be ne
cessary to maintain at least some face of war; be cause as all habits
whether of body or mind, are hard to be left; so spirits once grown fierce with
war, when they want means to exercise their fierceness upon enemies with
honor, will hardly be kept from using it upon friends though with shame. Thus
it fell out (that I may keep me to Tacitus) amongst the Suevians and the
Cherusci, people of Germany; who after the departure of the Romans, being
secure from foreign enemies, they then, out of the custom of waging war, and
desire of glory, turned their Arms upon their friends at home: and therefore
Tacitus says, Sed Suevi praetendebantur auxilium adversus Cheruscos orantes;
nam discessis Romanorum, ac vacui externo metu, gentis adsuetudine, and tunc
aemulatione Gloriae, arma in se verterant. So the Romans most stout and warlike
from the time of Scipio Nasica until the birth of our Savior, being in a
manner quiet abroad, were in continual war at home; and the peace which they
came to at last was under a Prince; where of Tacitus says, Post haec Pax
quidem, sed cruenta: because it was under Augustus, who finding the City tired
with discords, made himself sole Lord: whereupon S. Austin speaking of those
times says, Eaque libido dominandi quae inter alia vitia generis humani
immoderatior inerat Populo Romano postquam in paucis potentioribus vicit,
obtritos fatigatosque caeteros etiam jugo servitutis oppressit. And this of may
be rendered many causes: the first is, because in Cities used long to war,
the people, at least great part having no other occupation, give themselves to
be soldiers; and if they fail of that employment, they must necessarily
either sterve for want of victuals, or else stir up discords and seditions;
that so under one side or other, they may get a living. Et ex civili praelio
(says Tacitus) Spem majorum praemiorum. Not being possible, that soldiers
accustomed to gain by war, should be content with peace, as Dion excellently
observed in Caesar; and therefore Livy says, Mercenarii milites pretia
militiae casura in Pace, aegre ferebant. Whereupon Solomon, seeing that the
greater part of his people having in David's time been accustomed to continual
war, and had not any other trade of living, would of necessity be forced to
die for hunger, he therefore, though now in peace, would not disband them, but
kept them still in Arms; as it is written in the Book of the Kings; knowing
there is nothing, that sooner makes men Rebel, then to have their Trade taken
from them, by which they gain their living: and therefore when S. Paul spoke
of destroying the Temple of Diana in Ephesus; those Silver-smithes who lived by
making such Images, presently rose up in Arms, and were ready to have killed
him. So also it was, when S. Paul healed the woman possessed; because Magnum
quaestum faciebat Domino suo: from hence it is, that it will always be
impossible to break the Uscocchi, from using pyracy; seeing they have no other
trade, by which to live. The second cause may be taken from the Nobility; who
will easily be moved to raise discords in time of peace; by reason of a habit,
which as it is produced by many Acts iterated, so it necessarily produces
iterated acts, and also by reason of that desire of greatness, which always
accompanies the Nobility; and again, by reason of the skorn it takes at
equality, and much more at servitude: which is so much harder to be endured, as
superiors, in peace are harder to be dealt with. Revocante Nobilitate (says
Tacitus) cur in pace durius servitium?

Having now divided Cities and Times; It remains, that we divide the forms of
States: which as to our purpose are of three sorts; Monarchy, Optimacy, and
Popular. The Commonwealth of the Optimates, either has under it many Cities
and Kingdoms, as Rome and Carthage had; and at this day, Venice has; or they
have but some few Cities, as the Athenians, the Spartans and others: or lastly,
they have but only one City; as Pisa in times past: and Lucca, and many free
Cities at this present. The first form of Commonwealth, which is that which
has Kingdoms under it; either it uses to wage war with its own Arms, as
the Romans; or with foreign Arms, as the Carthaginians: if it use and be able
to wage war with its own Forces, then either we speak of war far off, as
of the Romans with the Carthaginians; or of war in their own state, as of the
Romans with the Thuscans. If the case be of war far off, waged with their
own Forces, this will be the Treacle of civil discords. First, because those
who are likely to move them, may under color of honors, be sent to the wars
abroad, and spirits that are warlike, are willing enough of themselves to go
where there is fighting, though without any such color. Thus it was with the
Romans, (as Livy relates) who sending forth the hottest spirits of their youth
to the wars abroad, they in the mean time remained quiet in Rome. Consules
educta ex urbe Juventute, tranquilliorem caeteram turbam fecerunt. And even by
this way, not only all fear of civil discord will be taken away; which only
proceeds from unquiet spirits; but also all suspicion of any rebellion in the
subject Cities: as well because they will be weakened both in men and money, by
levying Auxiliary soldiers: as also because they will be kept in aw by an Army
in the field. But it must be here observed, that they make not then too
dangerous a war, where their whole Forces must be employed, for then the
subject people will be apt to rebel; as the Thuscanes, who seeing the Romans
busied in a war with their whole Forces, they then fell to rebel.

Now if we speak of a war near home, either it is some slight war, or
else some war of moment. If but a slight war, it ought to be nourished with
all endeavor; as the Romans did with the Genouese, making use of that war,
as of a Military school; but if it be a war of moment, and near the State,
it ought to be avoided by all means possible. The reason is, because the
Cities that are subject to a Commonwealth, do all with an ill will bear
their yoke: in confirmation whereof, Tacitus says, Neque Provinciae illum
rerum statum abnuebant. As long as Hanniball made his war far off from
Rome, although he obtained many victories, yet not so much as any one Castle,
(as Polybius relates) rebelled against Rome: but when he got his victory at
Trasimene, and by consequence not far from Rome, all at once rebelled: and
yet for all the overthrows they had had in Sicily, in the firm Land, and at
Sea, they never made the least sign of revolt. The like happened to the
Venetians, after the overthrow they received at Geradada. It is therefore no
marvel, that Agathocles being besieged in Syracusa, and not able to endure the
siege; when by reason of his tyranny every one rebelled against him: No marvel
I say, that not able to endure the war in his own state, he removed it to the
Carthaginians in Affricke; as knowing, that Cities subject to Commonwealths,
do with an evil will endure their yoke: and his enterprise took effect as he
desired. These Commonwealths therefore, by all means possible ought to shun a
war near home.

But where the custom is to wage war with foreign Arms; there all kind of
war, whether near home, or far off, is to be shunned. Because mercenary
Arms are insatiable, licentious, and for the most part, either they never
finish a war; or once finished, they cannot be gotten away again, without
destroying and making spoil in the Country. Or else with mutinies put the
Cities in danger. It was a good invention, which Glisco General of the
Carthaginian Army in Africa used; after the war was ended with the Romans;
for knowing the ill condition of a mercenary Army, he thought to send the
soldiers home to Carthage, by little and little: in such sort, that the first
might be gotten home to their own houses, before the others should recover the
City; a judicious conceit, but which seldom takes effect: because oftentimes
the soldiers perceive it, and will not be divided; as it happened with the
Switzers in times past: and sometime, though they be divided, yet it has no
good issue: as it happened to the Carthagenians, whose Cities all at once
rebelled; and Carthage it self was not far from loosing. And in truth, they
then perceived, how dangerous a thing it is, to wage war with mercenary
forces; whereupon for this cause, when Scipio afterward came into Africa; they
knowing themselves to be no matches for the Romans, to be able to wage war at
their own home, Suant plebem imbellem in urbe (says Livy) Imbellem in agris
esse, mercede parari auxilia. These Commonwealths therefore ought rather to
keep themselves from discord, by employing their Citizens in merchandising, in
governments and Offices, and by not suffering the quiet spirits to grow
turbulent, north turbulent to stay in Cities, where the people ought to be
kept without Arms: Imitating herein, the Carthagenians rather then the Romans.

Now if we come to speak of those Common wealths, that have but few, or but
one City under them; in this case they ought by all possible means to seek to
preserve peace, as the Switzers, the Lucchesi, and such others do, being very
obnoxious for such, to become a prey to the more potent, as it has always
happened to the Athenians, to the Lacedaemonians, and the Genouesi. From hence
it is, that the King of France, to preserve the Commonwealth of the Swizzers,
has always procured to quench that fire, which some have endeavored to
kindle for their ruin. And if any object, that the Commonwealth of Rome, when
it was yet but little, not only maintained it self, but grew greater by the
means of war; I answer, that in that time the States in Italy were not great,
as now they are; and from hence may be drawn a reason, why the Athenians, and
the Lacedaemonians were never able to get further then their first bounds,
without endangering their state; and Rome was able to make it self Lord of a
great part of the World; and it is, because the one were environed with two
mighty adversaries; the other, with many, but weak ones.

Lastly, to give a general rule; all those Commonwealths whose ordinances tend
rather to conservation then augmentation; ought to use any other means to keep
themselves from discords at home, rather then war.

It remains to speak of a Kingdom, which is either settled and natural; or
else dangerous and new: if we speak of that which is natural, I account that
to live in peace as well abroad as at home, is both necessary and easy,
especially in our times, wherein Cities and Kingdoms are without the least
blemish of tyranny, all governed by Princes just and pious: and this the rather
ought to be done, because in peace, the wits of men are cultivated; their
manners refined, good Arts flourish, merchandising is less dangerous, and
plenty of all things easily maintained. And therefore in Esaias it is said,
Conflabunt glaclios suos in vomeres; which means nothing else, but that peace
causes the earth to be manured, and riches easily to be increased. Whereupon
the Ancients feyned, that the God of riches was nursed by peace.

Now to Kingdoms that are new, and not well settled, every thing is dangerous,
whether it be of peace or war; but war, perhaps less; as bringing with it
but one danger: which is, that the Army being in the hand of a General, the
Empire seems to be in his power. As Tiberius doubted, that Germanicus potius
vellet accipere quam expectare Imperium. But then it brings with it many
benefits, not only in favor of the Prince, but of the subjects also. On the
Princes behalf, because he by sending forth to the wars, the most potent and
stout spirits, may himself in the mean time remain secure at home. And
therefore King Ferdinand kept always some little war abroad, to the end the
Nobility should not mutiny in Spain. And Henry the second had counsel given
him to keep the French busied in some war, to the end they might not mutiny
in France. And this rule ought always to be observed, where the people have
not lost their stoutnesse of courage. On the Subjects behalf, because while
such stout spirits live in peace; they are apt to seek, as having no other
means, their own security, by the death of the Citizens. And this Tacitus
means, where in the first of his Histories he says, Sub Tyberio and Caio and
Claudio tantum pauci adversa pertimuere. Again, it is well that cruel men,
such as tyrants use to be, to the end they may leave the Citizens in peace,
should have war with strangers abroad, upon whom to wreke their cruelty. From
whence it comes, that this race of men is more cruel in their age, then in
their youth: and therefore oftentimes in the holy Scripture are likened to
Lions; which, as Aristotle relates, in their old age enter into Cities and make
spoil of people: and this proceeds (says he) because thorough weakness of
body, and defect of teeth, not being able in the fields to follow the chase
after beasts; they enter into Cities, and prey upon men: so tyrants, when
weakened with age, they can no longer quench their thirst of blood upon enemies
in war; they then for exercise of their cruelty fall upon their friends in
peace. So did Herod the great, and many others, of whom Histories are full.

But to return to our purpose: peace after war is much more dangerous;
because leisure gives time to think, thinking takes notice of subjection; and
stoutnesse gotten in war, breeds a desire to free themselves by any bad way
whatsoever. In regard of this, Solomon coming to be in Peace, after a long
war which his father had, made many warlike expeditions, as appears in the
Book of Kings: and to this it seems David exhorts, where in the Epithalamium
he made, he says, A^cingere gladio tuo super f^ntur tuum potentissime. Where
it is to be noted, that Faemur oftentimes is taken for pleasures: as though he
would say, Couple Arms with pleasures; stand not slumbering in idleness; so
many writers interpret it: and perhaps in regard of this, Augustus would never
be without some little war in Germany; rather for these reasons, quam
cupidine proferendi Imperium vel istud ob praemium. And Tyberius upon the same
ground, was well pleased that troubles should rise in the Eastern parts;
Caeterum, says Tacitus, Tyberio haud ingratunt accidit; turbari res orientis,
ut ea specie Germanioum suetis legionibus abstraheret; novisque Provinciis
impositum, dolo simul and casibus objectaret.

Lastly; a Popular state ought always to procure peace; for if there be war,
either the people go forth to fight; and then the Nobles in the mean time,
will have means to change the state; or else the Noble men go, and then
having an Army in their hand, they are able to make alterations at their
pleasure. Whereupon Isocrates in his oration of peace says, that a popular
state is strengthened by peace, and by war, ruined.

But having showed in this my discourse, that to many Commonwealths it is not
good to have war: to the end I may not dissent from that place in Aristotle
alleged in the beginning, I now say, that Aristotle commends not fear as a
thing fit always, but sometimes; and does not specify what kind of fear it
is ^meanes. For understanding whereof, we must know, that Commonwealths
oftentimes are endangered by too much security: as the City of Rome ran
headlong into hazard, for want of fearing. Which uses to happen from two
occasions: one from the inveteratenesse of the danger: the other, from the
greatness and power of them that are offended. Rome at the time when it was
freed from the tyranny of Tarquinius was not great; and being near to danger,
it stood in fear: being grown suspicious, partly for the fathers name called
Superbus; and partly for the sons house built higher then ordinary (weak
causes God knows.) But when the City was grown into greatness; and forgot the
danger by reason of inveteratenesse; it then left fearing, and afforded such
beginnings; that gave Caesar advantage to bring it in subjection. So the
Florentines extinguished the name of liberty in Pisa; and used great diligence
at the beginning to prevent rebellion; as standing in fear, as well for the
freslmesse of the offense, as for the smalnesse of their Forces: but after some
years, Florence being grown greater, and the offense through time forgotten,
they began to leave fearing; and as not fearing, rebelled under Charles the
eighth, which was in a manner the ruin of Florence. Seeing then when Cities
are without fear, they live without foresight; it is profitable for
Commonwealths (as Aristotle in that text says) that some such accident should
happen, as may teach them the danger of security: and therefore the Rachiensi
(as Polybius relates) while they lived inconsiderately, suspecting nothing;
they were upon the point of losing their City to the Slavonians; but having
repelled them; it was afterward a great good unto them, as that which made them
stand in fear; Vt per negligent^m in periculo fuerant and urbem and Patrios
lares amitendi; per fortitudinem nihil mali perpessi, in posterum p^ius suis
rebus consul^t. And in truth, if we consider the accident which of late years
happened in Venice; the prudence with which those Senators managed that
disorder, and the good ordinances made for preventing the like hereafter: we
cannot but say with Aristotle, that the accident proved to the City of Venice,
of great benefit. Lastly, I conclude, that they who will not be in war
actually; at least let them make a show to be in it potentially; Ostendite modo
bellum and pacem habebitis; videant vos paratos ad vim, jus ipsi remittent: and
therefore Augustus was never without an Army, upon the frontiers of enemy
Nations; and Solomon also did the like.

Thus it stands sufficiently proved, when external discords, or to say better,
foreign wars are profitable: that is, speaking of men and Cities, if they be
turbulent and imperfect, and have laws tending to war; to such, they are
profitable, or rather necessary. But if their laws be tending to peace; or if
the people bemild and gentle, and by reason of their strong situation,
accustomed to peace, or merchandising: in this case, there is no inconvenience,
but they may live quictly and without war. Then as concerning times, we have
showed, that in times when war has been lately, it will do well; but not
so, when there has been long peace. Then as concerning states we have proved
that Commonwealths that are potent, and able to wage war with their own
Forces, shall do well to maintain a war far off, but not near home. But
if they be not able to wage war without foreign Force^, they shall then do
well to embroyle themselves with no war at all, either near or far off.
And as for Commonwealths, that are but petty ones and of small power; it is
best for them, to look to their own safety. Then for Kingdoms that are well
settled, we have liked well of peace: for them that are dangerous, of war.
Lastly, that a popular state take care how to live.

What is the fittest time to proceed in the discords with enemies of the faith.
The seventh Discourse:

THis sentence of Tacitus standing good, Cuncta discordiis civilibus fessa,
nomine Principis sub Imperium accepit: many grow to believe, that because
discords made the way easy for Augustus to make himself Emperor of Rome,
therefore every one may easily make advantage of the dissentions of others. But
because they neither consider the diversity of persons, nor distinguish the
times, nor are acquainted with the causes; they therefore oftentimes deceive
themselves, determining these things absolutely and in gross, which are not to
be admitted but with distinction. To find out therefore the truth in this
matter, indeed weighty and worthy of consideration, I say, that discords may be
either internal between Citizens, or external between Cities of one Province:
if between Citizens, then sometimes they are between Nobles and Nobles,
oftentimes between Nobles and Plebeians, and many times between Plebeians and
Plebeians. If they be between Cities, it happens that sometimes they be equal,
sometimes unequal; likewise he that aspires to be a Lord, either is a
stranger, or Citizen: if a stranger, either he is stronger then the others, or
weaker; and either he has intelligence, or has none: if a Citizen, either he
is chief of a faction, or not.

These heads I shall endeavor to examine; beginning with the stranger; who by
civil discords aspires to make himself Lord; understanding by civil
discords, not those only which are between Citizens of the same City, but
between diverse Cities of the same Province, as Plato understands them, where he
says, that if Graecians contended with Graecians, it was a sedition, and not a
war; showing plainly, that such a one ought to be called a civil discord.

I say then, (to return to my purpose) that such stranger, either has
intelligence with one part of the Citizens, or he has not; if he have
intelligence, then is the time: so did Germanicus, when he assaulted the Catti,
a people in Germany; Nam spes incesserat dissidere hostem in Segestem, and
Arminium: whereupon, having Segestes on his side, it was an easy matter to
prosper in his enterprise; and of such cases Histories are full.

But if this stranger have no intelligence, either it is in the beginning of
the discords; or when they are inveterate: and thereby one or other of the
sides, wasted and spent; if it be the beginning, it will do no hurt, but good:
so it happened to the Thuscans, and the Veientanes; so to the Athenians, while
Agis approached their walls; so to the Sabines, and the Prenestines against the
Romans. Of whom Livy says, Nam in spe ventum erat, discordia intestina Rem
Romanam dissolvi posse. But in truth it was but ill advised of them; and in
such a manner, as while they sought the death of the sick Roman state; they
applied a medicine that restored it to health. Whereupon Livy inferres, Sed
externus Timor maximum concordiae vinculum, quamvis infestos suspectosque
jungobat inter se animos. And therefore Aristotle says, Cogit enim in unum
communis metus; etiam eos qui p rius erant inimicissimi. And this will the
rather happen, if they be enemies naturally; either through long wars between
them; or else through diversity of Ay re; which consequently produces
diversity of tempe ratures: from whence arises diversity of customs, and
these would rather die a thousand deaths, then come to be in subjection to
their enemies. Whereupon it was seen in the beginning of Charles the fifth;
that while the Kingdom of Spain rose up in Arms, and strongly mutinied
against their own King; France seeing it, and having recovered Navarre, brought
their Army upon Spain, and presently they came to concord. The best way
therefore will be, to take another course, (I mean always against infidels)
which is, to let them wast themselves; imitating the worm which gnawes in wood
in such sort, that afterward it is easily broken; so discords should be
fomented in enemies countries, that afterward more easily they may be overcome;
but yet staying time, that the wood be first consumed, that so at one blow it
may be broken. In regard whereof, David says, Quasi tonerrimus ligni
vermiculus qui octingentos interfecit, impetu uno: in as much, as having by
little and little, and by secret ways weakened his enemies, he afterward
easily as wormeaten wood broke them at one blow. Whereupon I conceive, that the
Romans are therefore by the Holy Ghost, called a Worm in Jonas; where he
says, Et paravit Deus Vermem, ascensu diluculi in Crastinum; and perc^ssit
haederam, and exaruit: this place being meant, (as Robert Abbot with many other
writers interprets it) of the destruction of Jerusalem, by the Romans under the
Empire of Vespasian, who having prepared a siege against Jerusalem, and
understanding there were discords risen amongst them, he delayed the
enterprise, Obsidionem Jerusalem distulit, ratus ejusmodi civilibus discordiis
facilius Judaeos consumptos deleri, quam armis Romanorum: and after a while,
assaulting the City, he destroyed it. I observe moreover in that Chapter of
Jonas, that the sun came not first upon the Prophets head; but the worm that
dried up the gourd, so also we must dry up our adversaries with discords, and
then set upon them with our Armies. This Coriolanus meant, when he appointed
his soldiers to spoil the fields of the Plebeians; but to leave the fields of
the Senators untouched; which he did not do for any hatred to the people, but
out of a further reach, by this means to foment their discords. The importance
of this, the ancient Romans knew well; who after the first war in Sicily,
seeing the Carthagenians, I may say their natural enemies, in a great
straight, through the revolt of the Cities of Afric, and the rebellion of
their own Army, yet never for this made war upon them; which would rather
have brought concord to their enemies, then victory to themselves: but letting
them tire and weary themselves with their own discords, they then set upon them
so wearied, and without shedding of blood, made themselves Lords of all
Sardinia with increase of Tribute.

But in case they would not stay so long, till the enemy might try out
himself: they should then do well to bring with them in their Army, some person
of the blood; and that has pretension in the state; but yet so, as to do it
without forcing. When Charles the eighth had intention to make war upon
Bajaset the great Turk, because he knew how vain a thing it were to believe
that a Kingdom, in Religion, in customs and in language different, should
receive him; he therefore took with him the brother of Bajaset: and the like
did Situlces King of the Thracians; and Osman Basha by the commandment of
Amurath, going to destroy the King of the Tartars, took with him Islan brother
of that King; and it succeeded well; whereupon (as Argentone relates) Lewis the
eleventh stood in fear of the league, only because they brought his brother
along with them. But if the discords be inveterate, and the Citizens through
them grown weak, it is then always time to assail them; and there can be no
doubt of victory. Thus Greece was easily overcome by any stranger that took
this opportunity.

And thus much concerning discords, of Citizens between themselves; or of
Cities that are under one Lord; in which it is sufficiently showed, how a
stranger ought to carry himself: Now we will show, what course he ought to
take, with other Provinces or Cities that are in discord between themselves.
These Cities then are either of equal force, or of unequal; if of equal,
then ought he to foment both sides: and thereby they coming at last to be
unequal, he shall then take part with the weaker side; but yet so, as not to
weaken himself: as Croesus in Justin teaches us, who ayding the Babylonians
against Cyrus, he so much weakened his own Army, that after the taking of
Babylon, he also himself was easily overcome. And therefore he says, Ibi
fortuna prioris praelii (that is of Babylon) percussum jam Croesi exercitum
nullo negotio fudit. The matter therefore must be so carried, that if the
contrary side happen to be Conqueror, yet you may be able to maintain the
war your self: if conquered, it will then be easy for you to make your
self Lord both of the one and the other. For it is not fit when a man may have
need of his money and his Forces in defense of himself, that he should rashly
wast them in the service of another. Such was the counsel (as Thucidides
relates) that Nicias gave the Athenians, while he dissuaded them from the war
in Sicily; there being no discretion, to uncloath (...) self, to cloth
another. Which is so true, that it is written by the Holy Ghost in Ezechiel,
while speaking of the four beasts, he says, Sub (...) autem pennae eorum
rectae alterius ad alterum: and this as S. Gregory interprets it, intends to
express the aid that is due from a man to his neighbor. It follows after,
(...) duabus alis velabat corpus suum; to show, that for ayding of others, it
is not fit to dismantle our selves.

To return to our purpose, in that we spoke of before: that is, what way is to
be held in ayding the weaker side: a better example cannot be given then that
of Phillip King of Macedon, who seeing the Cities of Greece at variance between
themselves, he fomented the weaker side: and after he had wearied the one and
the other, he brought them both under his Dominion. Philippus Rex Macedonum
(says Justin) libertati omnium insidiatus, dum contentiones civitatum alit,
auxilium inferioribus ferendo, victos pariter victoresque subi^ Regiam
servitutem coegit. According to this advice, Ferdinand King of Spain fomented
so well the discord between Francis King of France and him of Aragon; that
weakening the one, and oppressing the other, he made himself Lord of the
Kingdom of Naples; without wasting of either soldiers or money; a Kingdom
gotten before by the King of France with so much blood. This also many Writers
attribute to the Venetians, who calling Lewis the twelfth into Italy, hoped
by this means to make themselves Lords of many Cities in Lombardy and Romagna;
with this conceit, Lewis il Moro, called in Charles the eighth King of France;
but this man endangered himself unhappily; and the other were not far from
absolute ruin. Upon occasion whereof, I cannot omit to show their error, who
make doubt, that a third man should enjoy the benefit of their victory, and
what remedy there is for it. Secondly, how it happened that Ludovico Sforza by
raising discord between the King of France, and them of Aragon, lost his state;
when Philip by raising discord between the Graecians, and also Ferdinand King
of Spain, got so much by it. Concerning the first, there can no better
counsel be given, to two, who striving together, have a third looking on, to
set upon the winner, then to persuade them to peace; or else juridically to
hear their differences: but because, this seldom or never has place amongst
Princes; and war oftentimes for many occasions either cannot or will not be
avoided: therefore I cannot better deliver my opinion, then by showing the
example of Metius, who being upon the point of striking battle with Tullus
Hostilius, and knowing that which side soever was victor, must needs (not
having to fight with sheep) exceedingly weaken it self with loss of
soldiers; whereby the Thuscans who were equal in Forces to the one and the
other, and by this loss of men should remain the stronger, might take occasion
to draw the victory of the conquering side to themselves; he invited Tullus
Hostilius to a parlee: and with these reasons persuaded him to put the fortune
of the victory upon a few, that not only the Victor might be out of danger, but
might also have it in his power, to oppress the Thuscanes; which proposition
Tullus accepted; and though there be many that blame him for it, yet I think,
they mean it in some other case; because it is not likely, that a warlike
spirit as Tullus was, if he had not certainly known the manifest danger of
falling to be a prey to the other, would ever have consented to such a duel;
which in the case of another, is never without blame, being a thing unworthy of
a valorous Captain, to lay the fortune of many upon a few; but as this case
was, I find no other error in Tullus Hostilius, but that he would hazard the
whole Army upon three men; but if the condition had been, to fight with one
squadron of Foot, and another of Horse, I could not then but have commended it:
and the reason is, because by such a fight it would plainly have appeared,
which of them in a set battle would have had the victory, there concurring in
it, the skill of the Captain, and part of all parts of the Army; which have
the same proportion with one another, as the whole has with the whole;
according to the vulgar rule, Eadem est ratio totius ad totum, quae est partis
ad partem: But in the case of Tullus, one of the Armies might be inferior to
the other, in Horse and Foot and Captain; and yet have three braver men in any
of these kinds in it, then the other.

Concerning the second Point, Ludovico Sforza did well, for securing himself
in the State of Milan, to move the King of France; but he did not well
afterward, to move him against the Aragonesi; for he ought (at least if he
could; and if he could not, he should not then have meddled in it at all) to
have made use of the King, as an aid in peace, but not as a Captain in war:
and so was the counsel which Phaneas the Etolian gave: that they should call
in Antiochus and make use of him as an Umpire, but not as a Captain: Phaneas
(says Livy) Reconciliatore pacis, and disceptatore de iis quae in controversia
cum populo Romano essent, utendum potius Antiocho censebat quam duce belli. And
therefore Ludovico Sforza had not done ill to call in the King of France, as
for his purpose to make himself free Lord of Milan, if it had been in his
power to make him return again: but seeing the case required to make use of
him in war, now it was his ruin: because to seek to rise by the discords of
others, is not a work for an inferior, but either for an equal, or a greater.
Whereupon to Philip King of Macedon, and to Ferdinand King of Spain, it proved
well; but to Lodowick Sforza, it brought utter ruin; and to the Venetians
exceeding danger; although he with indiscretion set forward his own
destruction; these with judgment, freed themselves from the danger. And
therefore in the foresaid case, he that is inferior in Forces ought to seek
always rather to extinguish, then to kindle fire. Amurath the great Turk was
minded to make war upon the King of Polonia; between whom lay the state of
Petrasco Prince of Pogdania; and he, as a wise man, knowing the damage he might
sustain, either by having his Country wasted with the Great Turks Army; or
after the war ended, by wholly loosing it, as lying in the mouth of the
Polack; he so treated with them, that he made them friends. But many Cities in
Italy, not observing this rule, whilst they fomented discords between Pyrrhus
and the Romans; remained, after the war ended, a prey to the Romans. So the
French, when Hanniball came into Italy, perceived though too late, they had
exposed their Country as a Prey to his Army. So the Etolians calling in
Antiochus to make war upon the Romans; were themselves the first a prey to
the Romans, as it had been foretold them. But although we have showed by the
example of Craesus, that it is not good in discords, so to aid one side; as to
weaken ones self: yet is not this rule to be observed, where one is so much
too strong, that the other without great aid is not able to withstand: because
in this case to abandon a friend, would be a strengthening of the enemy; as the
Corfuans in Thucydides excellently showed, in the Oration they made to the
Athenians, whereupon the Rhegini fearing the Army of Pyrrhus King of the
Epirots; the Romans came with great Forces to their aid; but the end was, they
became Lords over them. Which they of Corfu, not observing in the discords of
Durazzo, and denying them aid, were cause that they yielded themselves to the
Corinthians, and consequently increased the Forces of their enemies. But
Germanicus carried himself with great judgment in ayding Segestes; knowing,
if Segestes were overthrown, his faction would join it self with Arminius; and
consequently the Forces of his enemy be increased. This the Campans declared,
demanding aid of Rome; Si defenditis, vestri; si deseritis, Samnitum erimus.
Capuam ergo and Campaniam omnem vestris, an Samnitum viribus accedere malitis,
deliberate. So as this is a lesson which men should learn, to give present
assistance to their friends that need it; otherwise they cannot avoid being a
prey to others: and this is delivered by S. Matthew in a Parable; where they
not coming that were invited to the marriage, others were called that stood in
the streets.

It is therefore to be observed, when we make other men's case our own, that
our power be more then theirs: because else, either they will be hindered from
getting victory; or getting victory be kept from being masters of the victory;
it is not therefore for Princes or Cities that are weak, to make war; which
are to call in one more powerful then themselves to their aid: for by this,
they do but procure a stronger enemy: The Campani oppressed by the samnites,
put themselves into the hands of the Romans, and so increased their Forces: and
for this cause perhaps it is, that Lucca continues a Commonwealth.

Having showed, that we ought with all our Forces, to aid the weaker side; when
of it self it is not able to subsist: it is to be observed, that in doing it,
we make not show of such preparation, as may make our friends suspicious of us:
which Phillip King of Spain not observing; whilst under pretense of ayding the
King of Scots against the Queen of England; he prepared so great a Fleet, that
the Scots might easily perceive, that Fleet was not meant for resisting of
England; but for making himself Lord of Scotland. Into this error also the
Athenians ran; who under color of ayding the Catanesi against the
Syracusans, meant to make themselves Lords of Sicily, and therefore came with
so great an Army (as Justin says) Vt iis terrori essent in quorum auxilia
mittebantur: whereupon they failed of their purpose, by reason it was easy for
the Lacedaemonians, to put a suspicion of this into the Sicilians heads. And
therefore Vitiges being within Ravenna, besieged by Delisarius; and hearing by
the Ambassadors of the King of Austrasia, that he offered to aid him with
fifty thousand French; astonished at so great a succor, put himself into the
hands of Justinian. Therefore weak Cities ought not to go in quest after
war; because they are like, either to be overcome of their enemies, or to be
in servitude to their friends; seeing they who call to their aid a greater
power then their own, may be said to lean upon the point of a Spear, or upon
a broken Reed; upon which, he that leanes, is like to find rather death then
aid. And therefore our Lord God, speaking in Esaias to his people, who had called
the Egyptians to their aid, Ecce confidis super baculum arundineum, confractum
istum, super Aegyptum: cui si innixus fuerit homo, intrabit in manum ejus; and
perforabit eam; sic Pharao Rex Aegypti omnibus qui confidunt in co. Which
Aratus Head of the Achaeans knowing, refused to receive the aid of Antigonus.
Verebatur enim si forte Rex victoria potitus, Cleomene ac Lacedaemoniis
superatis ad extremum aliquid novi contra Rempublicam Achaeorum tentare. And if
these Cities find a necessity to make war for their own defense, or
otherwise, and that not able of themselves, it behooves them to call in, others
to their aid: they shall then do well, to call in more then one; so the Pisans
did against the Florentines, who aided by the Venetians, by Lodovico Sforza, by
the Genouesi, and by the Senesi, went a long time dallying, and kept them all
off from getting to be Lords over them.

I cannot omit to advertise, when one gives aid to another, and the case stands
so, that their Forces being joined, they are able to resist, or else not: that
in this case, he ought to come with all his Forces; that if one resist not, the
other may: and in this was the error of the Campani, in ayding the Sedicini,
who therefore were both of them ruined. Campani magis nomen ad praesidiunt
sociorum quam vires cum attulissent: fluentes luxu obduratis usu armorum in
Sidicino pulsi agro, in se deinde molem (...) belli verter^nt: and if the
Romans had not aided them, they had been in manifest hazard of destruction.
And therefore I cannot commend the course which the Athenians took in a
battle of the Corfuani with the Corinthians; in which having brought a
squadron of Galleys in aid of the Corfuans, they gave order, not to come into
the fight, until they should see them routed; there is no doubt, but that if
the Athenians had come in to fight in the beginning of the battle, the
Corfuans had got the victory: but staying, as their commission was, and not
giving aid to their friends in time; they added reputation to their enemies,
and lessened their own Forces; so as either they should not have offered their
aid at all; or they should have given it in the beginning.

Let us now come to a Citizen that aspires to make himself Lord of his own
Country, being held by infidels; in which, if the discord be between the
Nobles and the Plebeians, it is a hard matter to compass: yet in this case, it
is better he should make himself head of the people; who have both more will
and power then the Nobles, as being a greater number; and though they be of
inferior rank to the great ones: yet it is with them as with Bulls; who suffer
themselves to be mastered, because they know not their own strength. Which
Manlius well knowing, speaking to the people said, Quousque tandem ignorabitis
vires vestras? It happens also for want of judgment, and scarcity of money;
but all these things are helped by making some great man Head, that is wise and
rich; the people being like sheep where one leaps, the other follows. And this
Moses knew, when being told by God, of his own death, he prayed him to provide
his people a Leader, that they might not be as sheep without a shepherd, Ne
sint sicut oves sine ductore; the people therefore are more able; and the more
able, if they have a Head.

It remains to show, that the people are more willing; and more easily
persuaded to raise a Plebeian to the Principality, then one of the Nobility:
First, by reason of the hope, which every one naturally has of new things,
specially the common people; therefore Sallust says, Sed omnino cuncta plebs
novarum (...) studio, Catilinae incoepta probabat. Secondly, because the people
envies not the inequality of Honors; but the inequality of Riches; and this is
the reason why it was never seen, at least very seldom, that one Noble man
helps to raise another Noble man to the Principality: and this Aristotle knew
when he said, Nam multitudo quidem graviter fert inequalitatem patrimoniorum;
praestantes viri honorum oequalitatem. Whence it is no marvel, if after the
death of Romulus; the Nobles found no way to make a King: and if it had not
been for the people, it had scarce been ever done. And Livy speaking of this
says, Et esse igitur aliquod caput placebat, and nemo alteri concedere in
animum inducebat. It is therefore best, the discord being between the Plebeians
and the Nobles; (I mean always as I said before, as far as may be done with
a good conscience) to make himself Head of the people; which yet is not
without great danger, and very fallacious, as I shall show in another discourse
upon those words, Et ad tuendam Plebem Tribunitio jure contentum. If the
discord be between Nobles and Nobles; then he that would make himself Prince,
either is head of one part, or not; if not, he ought then to procure the
concord of them that are (...); because their discord will be a cause, he can
have but one side in his aid; and that but weakly (...) where, if they be made
friends, by this (...); they will both of them remain, as it were obliged to
him; and perhaps will do it the more, because they cannot but think it a
great matter, for one man to hinder the proceeding of their enemies, who will
therefore afterward without any other regard, run headlong to aid him, not
caring what he be. This my opinion will be sufficiently proved by the example
of Caesar; who seeing Pompey and Crassus at variance, wrought so with them,
that he made them friends; as knowing, that to his purpose, for making himself
Prince, this discord of theirs would be a great impediment. But if he be head
of a Faction, then is the time to make himself Lord securely; because having
half the Nobility of his side, if he can withal get the favor of the people,
he will undoubtedly be able to get the Empire. And so is this place of Tacitus
of which we speak, to be understood; that Augustus in the dissentions of the
Pompeians and the Caesareans, of whom he was Head, made himself protector of
the people: that there were dissentions between them, is seen by that he says,
Cuncta discordiis civilibus fessa; neque Caesareanis partibus nisi Caesar Dux
reliquus: and that he had made the people his friend; is known by those words,
Et ad tuendam Plebem, Tribunitio jure contentum.

The sum of all I have said, is this: If a stranger in a civil discord,
seek to make himself Lord: (I mean by civil, that which is between Cities
and Persons that are under the same Dominion) if he have intelligence with
them; either it is in the beginning, and then he shall not stir, but rather
be a means of concord; especially between those that are naturally enemies;
between whom it behooves him to foment discords: to the end, that being
weakened, his way may be eafie; or else assaulting them with Arms, be sure to
have in his Army one of the blood, but yet without power; although in another
discourse I shall show that this is a weakness: or else it is, when discords
are inveterate; and consequently the Citizens wasted: and then every thing is
like well enough to succeed. We have also showed, that a stranger who seeks to
get the Dominion of Cities, which are at war under diverse Lords; ought to
foment the discords, if they be of equal power, so far as that they may come
to be unequal, and then to take part with the weaker; yet no further, then
only that they may be able to resist their enemies; always being careful,
that the aid be not so great, as to weaken him that gives it; unless, when
without excessive aid, they cannot prosecute the war; and that there be
danger, least they fall into their enemies hands; for then it behooves to make
it his own cause: but all in such sort, that he give no cause of suspicion to
his friends. I have said also, that it is no small skill, to foment discords,
and that no man ought to make use of a great power, for his interest in war but
only in peace; when he is not offorce sufficient to be able to send it away
again. And as for those, that lie between greater Princes that are at
variance; let them, as Laurence de Medici did, use means to make them friends.
Weak Cities, in my opinion, should never intricate themselves in any war;
and where there are two, that stand in fear of a third; if they will follow my
counsel, they shall never lead forth all their Forces. Now if he be a Citizen,
who in the discords of the City, seeks to make himself Lord of it; let him
know it will be hard to compass, when the discord is between the Nobility and
the people; but in this case, the best way is, if he can, to make himself Head
of the Commons. If again the discord be between the people amongstthemselves,
it is then almost impossible: but easy, when it is between Nobles and Nobles;
especially if he be Head of a Faction; and if not, then to stand neutrall.

What Discords conserve States, and what corrupt them. The eighth Discourse:

THus then we see, that of those three distinctions, there is one proper for
conserving the Prince; that is, the discord between the Nobility and the
Commons; as sufficiently has been showed.

Now the state of the Optimates (to return to our purpose) is easily
preserved, so long as there grows no discord between Nobles and Nobles:
because, as we have said before, the dissentions of the Nobility rest upon two
Heads; whereof the one soon prevailing over the other, brings it within his
power to make himself sole Lord; so much the rather, because in a State of
Optimates there is always discord between the Nobility and the Commons; and so
much, that the people ill brooking the Senate, will rather be willing to have a
King. We must therefore know, that in a State of Optimates, as the dissension
between Nobles and Nobles, is very hurtful; so that between the Nobility and
the people is very profitable, and greatly fortifies and upholds it, so long as
there concur not with it, discord between the Nobles. The reason is, because
the people being at variance with the Nobles, it will be a cause, that they
standing united, will not incur the danger before spoken of. Thus we see, the
Romans after the expulsion of the Tarquins, continued easily in their
government; because in that time there was perpetual discord between the
Nobility and the People. In which discords when the people came to be
oppressed, the Nobles fell into Factions, and then the City in a few years
came to be a Monarchy.

Of concordant discord; and how it ought to be managed, for the good of
Cities. The ninth Discourse.

THere is nothing more profitable for the concord and good government of a
City, then a discord between the parts: a City being a body composed of many
parts, as our body is of (...) four Elements. And as in this, if it be well
Organized; in such sort, that all the four Elements be in a due proportion,
there will then need no discord to maintain it, there being none that seeks
its own destruction: and therefore it sweetly enjoyes a quiet rest: so in a
City, there will be no unquietness, if all the parts be equal; I mean not
equal, simply; for it were not fit, that all in a City should be equal in
dignity and riches; being necessary, some should be rich and some poor: but
equal in such manner as it is in the body, whose good consists in this, that
all the members be equal: for there are two kinds of good, (as says S.
Thomas) one, the good of the whole; and the other, of the parts: and likewise
two natures; one universal, the other particular: the good of the whole
consists in the entirity, and in the distinction of the parts: and therefore it
is better for a man, to have a Head, Feet, Hands, and the other members, then
that all should be Head: but the good of the part, should be more good and
perfect, if it could attain to the degree and perfection of the superior
part; and therefore the Foot should be more Noble, if it were a Head; but the
body should not be more perfect, if it wanted a Foot: so in a City it is sit,
there should be Plebeians; and the equality that is required, ought to be
Geometrical and not Arithmeticall; and where this is, a City shall not need
dissension, to make it be well governed; but because as Galen in his Method,
speaking of bodies that are in health, simpliciter, and absolutely, says, This
symmetry of humors consisting In Puncto is very hardly found; and found
impossible to be kept: as also Hippocrates speaks of those bodies, that are
in the height of healthfulnesse, Neque enim in melius verti, neque diu sistere
valent; reliquum est ut in deterius dilabantur: so also a City, is either never
found in such a symmetry of parts; or if at any time found, never long
continues. And therefore Tacitus speaking of such a composition says, Laudari
facilius quam evenire: vel si evenit, haud diuturna esse potest.

It is of necessity, that in the body, there be predominant either cold or
heat; or dry or moist: if cold be predominant, there is heat to oppose it; if
dry, the moist: so in a Commonwealth, all things must be reduced to equality;
for not only they which overtop others, but they also that are in misery, are
dangerous: in like manner, as it happens in buildings, which come to decay, as
well by stones that stand too far out; as by those, that stand too far in:
and therefore the Mason always measures the walls and fits the stones; not by
cutting them away, but by setting them in the right place: and thus our Lord
God would have it be done in his holy Church; and therefore when Ezechiel saw
it in the top of a mountain, he stayed not long, but there came a man of
metal like brass. Et F^niculus lineus in manu ejus: the Septuagints read it,
Funiculus cimariorum in manu ejus: where S. Gregory interprets it, after my
meaning; and Aristotle also knowing this, gives counsel, when one part in a
City is oppressed, and another oppresses; that then the Magistrates should
relieve the part oppressed, and reduce them to equality.

There are three things that may bear sway in a City; either the power Regal,
or that of the Nobles, or the Authority of the People: if the Regal Power be
predominant, then the people who are many, must oppose it; because one and many
are contraries: and and perhaps for this it is that Plato says, that a
Commonwealth should be framed of two ingredients; a people, and a King; because
the people alone being many, may be a bridle to the King; and the King alone to
the people. If the Nobility be predominant, then the people, as being directly
contrary to the Nobility, must be opposed against it: whereupon, as we said
before, as long as the City of Rome used this opposition, it could never be
destroyed by the Nobility: In this regard, Sulpitius called a squadron of the
youth, the Senators Treacle, as opposed against them.

If the people be predominant, then the Nobility must be set against them; and
as when cold is predominant in a body, if another cold should be set to strive
with it, it would instantly, Ipso facto, destroy the body: So when the people
is predominant, if the people should be set against them; or when the Nobility
is predominant, the Nobility should oppose it; the Commonwealth presently would
go to wrack; as it fell out in Rome. But not only, when the like is opposed
against the like, both a body and a Commonwealth may be ruined; but as well
also if a contrary be opposed, and not in a due manner: and therefore Galen
says, that contraries may be of three sorts: that is, Greater, lesser, and
equal. It is a greater contrary, when to a distemper hot in two degrees, a
remedy is applied cold in three degrees: a lesser contrary is, when to a
distemper hot in two degrees, a remedy is applied cold in one degree; the
equal is, when to equal heat, equal cold is opposed; which being so, says
Galen, the cure of a distemper must not be by a greater contrary; because this
not only takes away the distemper, but introduces the contrary: as if to a
distemper, hot as two; a remedy be applied, cold as three: this indeed will
take away the heat, but then in place of it, bring in a distemper cold in one
degree. Neither also is a cure to be made with a lesser contrary, because this
would not reach to take away the distemper: but the cure must be made by an
equal, which cannot introduce a contrary, but only reduce the distemper to a
due proportion. And thus is it to be done in Cities: for if the people grown
two degrees above their rank, should have the Nobility opposed in three
degrees: this would not only take away the predominancy of the people, but
would bring the Nobility one degree out of just proportion: and the contrary
will happen, if it should be less: and therefore in the Commonwealth of Rome,
as long as the people were able to counterpease the power of the Nobles;
although it were in discord, yet it continued and kept it self free: but after
the death of Tib^nius and Caius Gracchus, when this contrary became unable to
withstand the Nobility, the Commonwealth presently was endangered; as well for
the inability of the peoples opposition, as for that it gave occasion to raise
discord amongst the Nobles. That the contrary in this case was not fit and
able, Salust shows where he says, Caeterum Nobilitas factione magis
pollebat; Plebis vis soluta atque in multitudinem dispersa, minus poterat.
Besides the Nobles themselves opposed not well, in opposing Sylla to Crassus;
and worse, in opposing (...) to Anthony: because as the opposition the people
made was too weak,: so the opposition of the Nobility was too strong; and was
therefore the (...) of the Commonwealth. That contrary therefore which with
discord shall be opposed to him, that exceeds proportion, ought to be such, as to
have no greater power, nor other end, but only to reduce the other to his due
place; but yet with ways befitting a Christian: for I like not that course of
Tarquinius Superbus, which he intimated by cutting off the heads of the Poppies
(an invention used by many, and related also by Aristotle) For in the
commonwealth of the body, what worse evil, then the gout in the feet or hands?
yet to heal it, I never saw the foot or the hand cut off; but purgations
applied to bring them to their natural temper. Being in all evils better to
oppose the beginning, then be forced to (...) off the part, by letting it run
to a Gangrene or Convulsion. For as this oftentimes brings death to the whole
body; so in a Commonwealth, the dismembring of a Citizen that is grown out of
order, is occasion oftentimes of the ruin of the State; as it fell out in
Caesar.

I am to advertise, that I intend not to put division between men and men, but
between men and the actions of men; for as the first is extremely ill, so the
second is as good. And therefore the Prophet says, Nonne qui oderunt te Domine
Oderam; and super inimicos tuos tabescebam; and of this kind of hate, Christ
spoke when he said, Non veni mittere pacem, sed gladium in terra. Whereupon it
being an evil action, for one to exceed his degree and thereby seek to
oppress the City; it ought to be hated, and to seek to bring him to
proportion; but that done, the hate then must be laid aside; and therefore all
the holy Fathers agree, that to know what (...) is good, and what bad, there is
no better way then this, to look if the action ceasing for which they hate,
they also cease to hate; otherwise it appears, they hated the person, and not
the action. Secondly, it must be observed, when I show, that for Cities to be
well governed, it is necessary there should be discord: I mean not that kind
of discord which is destructive, a discord in the whole; but that which is a
discord in a part; and in the whole, a concord: in like manner, as the Heavens
turning with one motion from East to West; and with another from West to East,
they are discordant in the parts; but in conservation of the whole concordant.
So not without a great mystery of nature, that is of God; the Planets by whose
influence he governs earthly things, are by their Maker so placed in the
heavenly Orbs; that one contrary stands neighbor to another: to the end, that
with an harmonious discord, they may have a concordant influence, for the good
of the Universe. From hence it is, that Jupiter is next to Saturn; because
Saturn being old and dry, an unfortunate Planet, it was necessary he should be
allayed with the goodness of Jupiter, who with heat and moisture, in an
admirable manner opposes him. So unfortunate Mars is tempered with fortunate
Venus, (to speak in the terms of Astrologers) who allaies the malignity of
Mars, in such manner, as we see oftentimes, the choler of a man, to be
mitigated with the sweetness of a woman. In like sort (to descend lower) if
the Elements were not discordant, there would arise no alteration, and
consequently no generation: so if the parts in Music were not discordant,
there would be no harmony. The parts therefore are discordant; the Heavens,
discordant; the Planets, discordant; and all for conservation of the Universe.
Whereupon, and it is the doctrine of Aristotle; as from the contrariety and
discord of the Elements, arises the peace of the Universe: so from the
opposition in the parts of a City, (I speak in the sense I said before) there
arises the conservation of the whole. Which perhaps Plato meant, when by the
mouth of Socrates he said, that the profit of a City consists not in concord.

Sed veteris Reipublicae Prospera vel Adversa claris Scriptoribus memorata
sunt: temporibusque Augusti non defuere decora ingenia; donec gliscente
adulatione deterrerentur. Tiberii Caiique and Claudii ac Neronis res,
florentibus ipsis, ob metum falsae: postquam occiderant, recentibus compositae
sunt.
How hard and dangerous a matter it is to write Histories: when the easiest
time is to find writers and which of them deserve most credit. The tenth
Discourse.

THe words of Tacitus above cited, give me occasion of two discourses; one,
concerning the writing of Histories: the other, concerning flattery. Concerning
the first, I intend to show the difficulty it brings with it, what danger
Historians undergo: of whom it is easiest to write, and in what time. As for
the difficulty, it may grow either in regard of him that reads, and is not
interessed; or from him that reads, being interessed: or lastly from the times,
in which one writes. Beginning then with the general, that is, of him who
reads, and is not interessed; there is no doubt, but the Historian with such a
one, will find some difficulty, to be thought a true writer. Seeing he must
necessarily relate actions; either worthy of praise, or worthy of blame: if of
blame, it is attributed to malice; if of praise, it is received with envy:
because as Thucydides says in the person of Pericles, in the oration he made
to the people of Athens, at the funeral pomp of those that were slain in
war; The praises of the dead if they be heard by friends, never seem enough;
if by strangers, so long as they go no further then possibility, they are
received with patience, but if they pass that bound, they are then as
fabulous, either scoffed at, or else envied. This case, Salust translated out
of Thucydides, where he says, Arduum videtur Res gestas scribere; primo quia
facta dicris exaequanda sunt; Dein quia plerique quae delicta reprehenderis,
malevolentiae and invidia dicta putant; ubi de magna virtute atque gloria
bonorum memores, quae sibi quisque facile factu putet, aequo animo accipit;
supra, vel^ti ficta pro falsis duoit. It is therefore true, that between these
two extremes, that writer shall always be more believed, and be held in
better account, who in blaming shall discover the vices and defects of others;
then they who in praising, shall make their virtues too resplendent; because a
reader, takes blame, in it self for a praise; if at least he have not himself
those vices for which one is blamed; and praise he takes for blame, if he find
not those virtues, for which the Historian extols him. Besides, to blame being
always with danger; and to praise, rather with benefit; he who blames, will
be always taken for a man free and sincere; and he that praises for a
flatterer. To this perhaps Tacitus had an eye, when he said, Obtrectatio and
livor pronis auribus accipiuntur; quippe Adulationi foedum crimen servitutis;
malignitati falsa species libertatis inest.

The second difficulty is caused by persons interessed; which are either
Princes, or Commonwealths: if Princes, either they are virtuous, or vicious:
if vicious, let the History be written either of his life, or of any others
that is like his, it will be taken, as if by relating the faults of others
openly, his own faults secretly be cast in his face. This by Tacitus is
learnedly expressed, where he says, Reperies qui ob similitudinem (...),
aliena malefacta sibi objectari putant. So likewise if the virtues of some
other Prince; or of his own ancestors shall be praised; he will take it, as
an upbrayding to him his own vices, and thereupon be moved to indignation and
envy; and for default of virtue in himself, will with an ill will hear the
praises of another. Etiant gloria (says Tacitus) ac virtus infensos habet; ut
animus ea propinquo diversa arguens. Which our Lord God meaning to show by the
mouth of Ezechiel says, Fili hominis, ostende domui Israel Templum, ut
confundantur ab iniquitatibus suis, and metiantur fabricam, and erubescant ab
omnibus quae fecerunt. And S. Gregory expounding this place, says that the
Temple of God is then showed in confusion, when the actions of a just man are
showed to a wicked; and our Lord God, to show that wicked men cannot abide to
hear the life of good men spoken of, says, Vt ostendat Templum, he says not,
Vt videant Templum, meaning to show, as S. Gregory expounds it, Sponte sua
considerare nolentibus, rectorum opera narrare; These therefore with an evil
will, hear the praises of others; which Tacitus knowing, forbore to write the
life of Agricola, a good man, in the time of wicked Emperors, but stayed till
Trajans time, as having seen manifest examples, of many writers, that lost
their own lives, without any benefit to those of whom they writ, by being
themselves slain, and their books burnt, while under wicked Princes, they
would publish their Histories of such persons: and therefore he says, (...)
cum Aruleno Rustico, Paetus Thrasea Herennio Senecioni, (...) Helvidius laudati
(...), Capitale fuisse; no que in ipsos (...) Authors, sed in libros quoque
saevitum.

But greater danger an Historian in curres, if under a wicked Prince, he dare
write his history, because, either (...) his vices, he shows himself a
manifest slatterer, and no wise Historian, who without truth, (as Polybius
says) is as unprofitable, as a man without eyes; or else writing the truth, he
shall in so doing, make his own grave.

But say, he writes under a good Prince, either he must relate the actions of
the Prince himself, or of his house; if of himself living, the Historian can
never avoid suspicion: and it is not enough to say, that under such
praiseworthy Princes, there will be no need, to part from truth, because there
are few men that do not conceive their own actions to be greater then they
are, or at least that desire not, others should think them so: whereupon, when
they find, that an Historian relates them not, in such a height as they
conceive, or desire that others should; no doubt, they will think he blames
them, as not sufficiently praising them.

Now if under a virtuous Prince, they write the History of his family, there
grows another difficulty of great moment; which is, that a great part of the
Cities and Provinces having been sometime Commonwealths, and from
Commonwealths become Kingdoms; seldom without shedding the blood of the
Citizens, and oftentimes of the Princes: the relating these things under a
Prince, now Lord of the City, whether he be good or bad, is dangerous: first,
on the part of the Citizens, who reading the death of their ancestors; or
their greatness in the time when it was a Commonwealth: by the one, they are
stirred up to hate, by the other to desire: and taking into their
consideration, that greatness in which they were, and those injuries which
they suffered; because they cannot revenge these, nor regaine those, but by the
death of the Prince, they are oftentimes drawn to make cruel conspiracies.
Secondly, on the part of the Prince, who in reading such Histories, seeing
continually before his eyes, those Citizens, whose fathers either killed or at
least conspired against his ancestors; seeing he cannot believe they should
love him; he will hardly be induced to love them, knowing well, that things
which are tolerated, by force, when occasion happens to remove that force, will
never be tolerated.

To this may be added another difficulty, on the part of the Citizens: who love
not to hear the disgraces of their ancestors related in Histories; and are
thereby moved to indignation: this Tacitus meant, where he says, At multorum
qui Tiberio regnante, poenam vel infamiam subiere, Posteri manent. And
oftentimes Tacitus himself forbeares to speak of such; as he did of those who
suffered disgraces under Nero, of whom he says, Quos fato perfunctos, ne
nominatim tradam, Majoribus eorum tribuendum puto.

Again to relate the wars, which these Princes or their Ancestors had with
others; how dangerous it is, Crescentius Cordus may be an example; who for
praising Brutus and Cassius, was forced miserably to end his life, as the said
Tacitus relates. It is true, this uses not to happen, but under wicked
Princes, as Tiberius was. For Augustus, as the said Tacitus relates; made
rather a jest, then took indignation at any such things: and thus much
concerning a Prince.

Now in writing Histories under a Commonwealth; there appear again a thousand
difficulties: First, if he make relation of their beginnings, he shall make
himself odious to all in general, and to every one in particular. To all in
general, because all things having but weak beginnings, men like rather to
hear the History of the Commonwealth, in its virility, then in the weakness
of its infancy. To particulars, because hearing relation made of the beginnings
of their Houses, which commonly are but mean, they cannot read such Histories
with any patience; at least, not with liking: and therefore in some Cities,
such writings have not been admitted. This conceit Titus Livin^ expresses to
the life; where he says, Et legentium plerosque (speaking of himself, who
writ the beginning of Rome) haud dubito, quin primae Origines proximaque
Originibus, minus praebitura voluptatis sint, festinantibus ad haec nova,
quibus jampridem praevalentis populi vires seipsas conficiunt.

Moreover, if they write of wars; not only they incur the same danger we
spoke of before, under a Prince; in too much praising those, with whom the
war has been held: but besides, in this kind, it is easier to offend in a
Commonwealth, which consists of many; then in a Kingdom, which consists but
of one. Whereupon, it seems to be more easy to write the truth of one alone,
then of many; but withal more dangerous, because the hatred of private
Citizens may be shunned; but the hatred which comes from the publik person of
the Prince, and reaches to life and goods, are impossible to be shunned.

It is therefore dangerous to write under a Prince, whether he be good or bad;
and whether the History be of the Princes own actions, or of his ancestors;
and whether in foreign war, or in war at home. And it is dangerous
likewise to write under Commonwealths; not only to write of their beginnings,
but in other times also.

It remains to show, whether it be more easy, to find Historians under a
Kingdom, or under a Commonwealth.

The Prince may be a tyrant, and living; the Commonwealth may be corrupt, and
continue: and while it continues, hardly will any Citizen, out of love of his
Country, be drawn to disclose those things, which ought to be kept secret;
and as little whilst a Tyrant lives, will any man register his disorders for
fear: Whereupon not without cause, the most wise Solomon in his Proverbs
says, Nomen impiorum putrescet, not Putrescit; because in the time present,
his stinch is not smelt; or to say better, none will be so bold, as to discover
it; and if in the one, or the other, an Historian be found so hardy, as to
write, he will certainly flatter. And therefore Tacitus says, Tiberii Caiique
ac Neronis res florentibus ipsis ob metum falsae.

Also Historians take no care of those that come after, but consider only
their own interest: and knowing how much trouble they endure, that in such
times can but live, when they hold their peace; they are out of heart for
writing of Histories, and though they should have a will to do it, yet they
could have no means, as not being informed of public affairs, which being
done only by the Prince, and out of his Element, he neither understands them,
nor meddles in them, nor regards them: all which, Tacitus took into
consideration, when he said, Postquam bellatum apud Actium, atque (...)
potestatem ad unum conferri pacis interfuit; magna illa ingenia cessere; simul
veritas pluribus modis fracta; primum inscitia reipublicae ut alienae; mox
libidine assentandi, aut rursus Odio adversus Dominantes; ita neutris cura
posteritatis, inter infensos and obnoxios.

But if this tyrant Prince be dead, and the tyranny altered: also if a corrupt
Commonwealth shall be abolished, and in place of it, shall come a Prince; in
this case, there will not want Historians, but yet not without some doubt of
truth. On the part of the Commonwealth now abolished, by reason of flattering
the new Prince; on the part of the Prince now dead, by reason of the hatred
that is borne to a tyrant: and to this Tacitus had an eye, when he said,
Postquam occiderunt, recentibus (...) compositae sunt: saying in another place,
that Historians who write of tyrants, write many things through hatred, which
are not true.

If lastly we speak of writing Histories under a welgoverned Commonwealth, or
under a Prince that is a Monarch; in this case, it will be easy to find
writers good store: and therefore Tacitus says, Sed veteris Reipublicae
prospera vel adversa, claris Scriptoribus memorata sunt; where we must observe,
he says, veteris: to signify that he means the Commonwealth, in those first
times, when it was not corrupt. And as to the purpose, concerning a good
Prince, he adds, Temporibus Augusti non defuere decora ingenia. Where also we
see, he speaks of the first years of Augustus, which were indeed his best:
and therefore our Tacitus writ only the latter time of Augustus, which was his
worst, and consequently more hard to find Writers that had written truly. So
also did Acchias, who writing the History of Solomon, omitted the beginning of
his reign, as being the best; and began at his declining. According then to
Tacitus, there will be writers good store, both under a Commonwealth, that is
well governed; and under a Prince, that is well disposed: but in my opinion,
more under the good Prince.

First, because of the greater profit; for a Prince will take more notice of a
Writer that relates particular actions; then a Commonwealth will do, for
relating universal: and here is to be noted, a difference between the Records
of a Prince, and of a Commonwealth. The Records of a Commonwealth, Intensive
(give me leave to use this word) being in my opinion less then of a Prince:
the reason is, because as it is in the Proverb, He that serves the public,
serves no body: for the benefit being received of none as proper, is little
regarded, and therefore little recompensed of the public; whereupon we see
Joseph received a greater reeompence for the benefit he did to Pharao, then
ever we read given by any Commonwealth. But Extensive, I hold it more
profitable to serve under a Commonwealth; because the memory of a benefit done
to a Prince, as being a particular person, dies with him: but the memory of a
benefit done to a City, continues as long as the City continues; and not only
toward him that did it, but to his posterity also: where of we have a clear
example in the foresaid Joseph; who Intensively was rewarded by King Pharao,
beyond measure, being more King then Pharao himself. But Extensively, it
proved more hurt then benefit, his successors being put to slavery by him,
whose grandfather with all his people, Joseph had preserved before from famine.
This reason by me alleged, is written by the Holy Ghost in Exodus, where he
says, Surrexit in terra Rex novus, super Aegyptum, qui ignorahat Joseph, and
ait ad populum suum; Ecce populus Israel multus and fortior nobis est; Venite,
sapienter opprimamus eum. And therefore, (as I shall show in another place) men
more esteeming a present profit, then a future, will be moved rather to write
of a Prince, then of a Commonwealth.

Secondly, by reason of less danger, because an Historian in praising a
Prince, has nothing else to think of; and being indeed a good Prince, he may
praise him truly; and therefore Tacitus discoursing of such Princes, breaks
out into these words, Rara temporum faelicitate, ubi sentire quae velis, and
quae sentias dicere licet. But in a Commonwealth (as I said before) it is
impossible to write so, but that amongst so many, some or other will be blamed;
and oftentimes the Hate that grows from one, proves more hurtful, then the
love of all the rest proves beneficial; because these hold themselves not much
obliged, as counting it but their due; the other conceave an irreconcilable
hate, as counting it a wrong.

Thirdly, Historians will more willingly write the deeds of a Prince, then of
a City; because men take more pleasure to praise such as are above their own
rank; envy, as every one knows, being properly amongst equals: and therefore
in Commonwealths, every one looks rather to be praised himself, then to
praise others: whereupon Sallust, not without cause lamenting the scarcity of
Writers that Rome had, says, At populo Romano nunquam ea copia fuit, (that is
of Writers) quia prudentissimus Negotiosus maxim erat; Ingenium nemo sine
corpore exercebat; Optimus quisque facere quam dicere, sua ab alis benefacta
laudari, quam ipse aliorum narrare malebat. And thus much concerning the
persons under whom, and of whom an Historian writes.

Now concerning the time, there may be given three kinds of Historians: some,
who relate things happened in their own time; some, things done time past; and
others, things to be done in time to come. They who relate the Accidents of
time past, without having had any former relation, are called Prophets: as
Moses writing of the Creation of the World; so many who have written of things
to come, are called Historians; as Esaias, who has written as well of our
Church; as if he had written of things past; Ita enim Vniversa Christi (says
S. Hierom) Ecclesiaeque mysteria prosequutus est, ut non putes eum de futuro
vaticinari, sed de praeterito Historiam texere.

But leaving those who write with such Authority, that of their truth there can
be no doubt, our discourse shall be of the other; and because (as we have said)
many write of the times past; others, of their own times: and of these, some
are such as have been present at the things they relate; and others have them
only by relation: there being great difficulty in all the (...), it is
requisite, that together with the difficulty, we should also examine, which of
them is most worthy to be credited.

They then who relate things which themselves have seen done, may easily be
drawn to vary from the truth; as moved with passions, sometimes of hate,
sometimes of envy, and sometimes again of love; and therefore Plutarch counts
it a business of great difficulty and this perhaps Livy means, when speaking
of such Writers, he says, Etsi non flectere a vero; solicitum tamen efficere
possunt. And Polybius to give the greater authority to his History, labors to
show that the story of the first war of the Romans with the Carthagenians,
written by Fabius Pictor a Roman, and by Philo a Carthagenian, was by those
Authors, each of them in favor of his own Country, stuffed with lies. And
indeed it is not unlike, but they might vary from the truth, and yet out of no
corrupt affection; but that each of them writ as he believed, though not as it
was; seeing things to which men are affected, seem always, in the good,
greater; and less, in the evil; according to that rule of Aristotle, Intus
existens prohibet Extraneum: and therefore to an eye, looking through a green
Glass, every thing seems green. So to the palate offended with choler, every
thing tastes bitter: and therefore David made his prayer to God, to keep him as
the Apple of his eye, Custodi me Domine ut pupillam oculi: which as it has in
it no color, and therefore sees things as they are; so he desired to be
without affections, that he might know the truth of things. Whereupon it
appears, we may conclude, that they who write of their own times, and have
not the virtue of the apple of the eye; may easily vary from the truth; not
only by malice, but sometimes also by ignorance; it being impossible, that a
man should be an eyewitness of all he writes; and should be present at all
Actions and Counsels in such manner, as not to need the information of others;
and even those who are present at any action, do seldom all of them agree in
the relation.

On the other side, it appears there is more credit to be given to an
Historian that writes of his own time, and of those things at which he has
himself been present, then to others; seeing they are forced to stand to that
which is left them by the ancients, either written in History, or preserved in
memory, as Plutarch well observes. And because it is seldom, but there is more
then one Writer of the same History: and for him that will relate them, he must
necessarily make use of those, who have formerly given the information: it is
an easy matter, in such a number of writings, for an Historian to be
confounded; and be able but as a blind man, to give advertisement of things,
whereof he is himself to be advertised. Besides, those first writings or
memories of which this Historian makes use: they also, may have been written,
out of affection.

Lastly, there are not wanting reasons to prove, that he who writes a History
of his own time; though he have them but by relation, is the more worthy of
credit; because in such, the difficulties that are found in the others, are
abated; seeing, by not having been present, and had no part in the actions they
relate; they are also void of those affections, which make Historians speak
less truth: and by writing of their own time, they are not tied to stand to
the books of others, who never agree with one another. And therefore the holy
fathers, from this difficulty have drawn an Argument to prove the truth of the
Gospel; because four Writers agree in all points. Neither by this example is
my opinion abated, but rather strengthened; it being necessary, that to make
four men write agreeingly in all things, there must be one only to instruct
them all, which is the Holy Ghost.

But neither is this kind of Historians without difficulty; rather as I
conceive, in greater then any other: as partaking himself alone of all those
difficulties, which we in the two first observed; because although he be not
present at the things, yet he is present at the time; and this has force to
stir affection even in those that are not near the time, as every one finds
by experience in himself. Secondly, he who gives the information, may be moved
by some passion himself; and then he will the less care for writing a lie,
when he has his intent, and the blame another. Thirdly, if he take more then
one to give him information; he will fall into the same difficulties, as he
that writes Histories of the times past: seeing it is seldom seen, that two
agree in their relation; and oftentimes, one alone is contrary to himself.

And thus there is difficulty we see in all manner of times, and of Writers;
whether they write of the time past, or of their own times; and whether they
write by relation from others, or as eyewitnesses themselves.

For resolution, we may conclude, that more credit is to be given to those
things, which are related by Historians that have been eyewitnesses of things
done in their own time, so long as the Writers be honest men. Whereupon we give
more credit to the Histories of Argentone, relating accidents, at which he was
himself present, then we do to Jovius, who writ by relation from others, when
himself perhaps was all the while at his Bishopric. Yet I say not, that
Jovius is not worthy of credit, seeing it is not my profession to lay blame
upon any. This Argentone has made us know this difference, while enterlacing
the Histories of Lewis the eleventh with those of England; he uses much
cunning to make us believe him; as one that was not present at the things done:
and therefore for the most part, names the persons who gave him information:
that from the greatness and credit of his informers, he might win credit to
his own writings. And this was the very case of S. Luke, who writing in his
Gospel the life of our Savior; because he had not himself been present,
therefore to procure himself credit, at his very beginning he says, he had it
by relation from persons that were present. Sicut tradiderunt nobis, qui ab
initio ipsi viderunt, and ministri fuerunt sermonis: but when he was to write
the Acts of the Apostles, at which he had been present; then without making any
Promise or Proaeme: he begins with saying, Primum quidem sermonem feci de
omnibus, O Theophile: and this for no other cause, but because he knew, how
much a History has more credit, when things are written by one that has seen
them. It is no marvel then, that S. John, for gayning himself credit says,
Ego vidi, and testimonium perhibui, quia hic est filius Dei. And therefore it
was Gods will, that the Apostles should bear witness of him, Et vos
testificamini de me, quoniam ab initio mecum estis. And S. Peter in the Acts,
when he would persuade the resurrection of Christ to be believed, says, Qui
simul edimus and bibimus cum illo. Whereupon S. Chrysostom, considering why S.
John names himself, where he says, Sequebatur autem Petrus, and alius
Discipulus, gives the reason in these words, Et sui meminisse coactus est, ut
intelligas ea, caeteris diligentius, quae in Principis aula facta sunt
enarrare, utpote quia aderat.

As for the objection made before, it is plainly cleared, if the Writer be an
honest man. For in a good Historian, there are two things required; an ability,
and a will: and one of these parts he that writes of things himself has seen,
has certain in him more then others; which is, that he is more able to write
the truth, then any other; and as for the will to do it, it cannot be wanting
in him, if he be honest: and if he be not honest, then no doubt another that
writes of times past may be worthy of more credit then he.

Donec gliscente Adulatione deterrerentur.
From whence flattery proceeds: how many kinds there are of it, and which of
them is hurtful to a City. The eleventh Discourse.

COncerning flattery, there have been discourses morally written, by infinite
writers; and in such manner, that they have given cause rather to admire them,
then left any place to add any thing unto them. I therefore, as I use to do,
will handle it as a Politician, briefly, and yet perhaps in such a way, as has
not been done by any. Showing first, that Princes themselves are the cause of
flatterers. Secondly, how many kinds of flatterers there are. Thirdly, in what
the essence of flattery consists. And lastly, which of them are hurtful to
Cities.

Concerning the first, it is in common experience, that flatterers are the
ruin of Princes; and yet it is easy to show that Princes are themselves the
forgers of this their ruin; because if they were furnished with virtue and
goodness; flatterers could find no matter in them to work upon: and so,
either there would be no flattery at all, or at least not hurtful. And
therefore those wise virgins who stood waiting for the Bridegroom by night,
having Oil for themselves; which in the Scripture, is often taken for praise,
Oleum (...) nomen tuum: as Lyranus interprets it, they needed not procure from
others the Oil of flattery. Et Oleum peccatoris non impinguet caput meum: so
as Princes themselves being the cause of flattery, and not the Subjects; all
the fault of it, ought to be laid upon them. Whereupon it is no marvel, that
in the Acts, while Herod making an oration to the people, was flattered of
them, calling his voice the voice of a God; suddenly an Angel stroke him, and
he was eaten up of worms. Statuto autem die, Herodes indutus vestitu Regio and
sedens super Tribunal, concionabatur ad Illos: populus autem clamabat, vox Dei:
statim autem illum percussit Angelus Domini: what fault was it in Herod, that
the people applauded him, calling his voice, the voice of God? and yet he was
stricken, and not the People. We may say then, that our Lord God by this example
would show, that Princes themselves are more cause of the peoples flattery,
then the subjects are; which, as a Pen, writes such things, as he that moves
it draws; of which, it is but the instrument, and no efficient cause.

Before I come to the other two heads; that is, how many kinds of flattery
there are; and which of them be hurtful to a City: I am forced to premise a
little doctrine, of which I shall have use, in the explication of the one and
the other.

We must therefore know, that flattery is a moral action: one of its
contraries being friendship, which is a moral virtue; and because contraries,
(as witnesses the Philosopher) are all under the same genus; as white and
black under color; therefore flattery also must be under the genus of moral
actions: of which there are many so bad, that nothing can make them good, as
adultery, and such like. This opinion was held by the master of the sentences;
by the authority of S. Austin, where he says, Bonum est continentia, malum est
luxuria, inter utrumque indifferens, ambulare; capitis naribusque purgamenta
projicere, sputis rheumata jacere, hoc nec bonum, nec malum est; sive enim
feceris, sive non feceris, nec justitiam habebis, nec injustitiam. Thirdly, an
action may in his own nature be good; yet so as by means, it may become bad:
as to fast, to pray, to sacrifice, and the like. Qui enim de rapina Deo
sacrificium offerunt (says S. Austin) idem facit, ac si filium in conspectu
patris victimet. Lastly, an action may be given, which of its own nature is
bad; and yet by some other cause, may become good. Murder is a wicked thing,
yet Elias in killing the false Prophets did a good work, and showed himself
zealous of the honor of God.

Those actions then which are subject to alteration, may receive it from three
things: first, from the object; a carnal act performed with a wife, is good;
but if with another man's wife, is wicked. Secondly, from the circumstance: the
Sacrifice which Saul made, because it wanted the due circumstances, was not
accepted of God. Thirdly, it may receive this alteration from the end; that is,
from the intention: but because the end may comprehend under it, both the
object and the circumstances; therefore we must know, that it may be considered
three ways: First, as it is an object, that terminates the act; and then it is
called an intrinsecall end. Secondly, as it happens to some act, as a
circumstance. Thirdly, as it is in nature of a cause, and then it is called,
Cujus gratia: when therefore we say, that an action may receive goodness or
badnesse, from the end; we mean it the third way.

The action in which flattery consists, is such as may receive alteration, from
the intention, or from the object; or from the circumstances. What action of
its own nature more adulatory, then to feign ones self crook-backt, with one
that is crook-backt; as Platos scholars did? or to stammer with one that is
stammering, as Aristotle's did; or to fiegne himself wry-neckt, with one that
is so, as the Courtiers of Alexander the great did? or to feign ones self
poor blind, with one that is poor blind, as the flatterers of Dionysius did?
It is indeed the greatest kind of flattery (as Plutarch accounts it) that can
be; and yet these and the like actions, Saint Paul did, as he writes himself;
with the Jews, he feigned himself a Jew; with those that are weak, to be
weak: and in short, with all, he feigned himself all. Et factus sum Judaeis
tanquam Judaeus; ut Judaeos lucrare iis qui sub lege sunt, quasi sub lege
essem; cum ipse non essem sub lege; ut eos qui sub lege erant lucrifacerem; iis
qui sine lege erant, tanquam sine lege essem; cum sine lege Dei non essem; sed
in lege essem Christi, ut lucrifacerem eos qui sine lege erant: factus sum
infirmus infirmis; ut infirmos lucrifacerem: omnibus omnis factus sum, ut omnes
facerem salvos. See here, that act, which of its own nature, was most
adulatory, being used by S. Paul, became virtuous and beneficial; and the
reason of this can proceed from nothing, but from the intention; because as
those other were moved, with their proper interest; So S. Paul was moved with
the zeal of God. Vt Judaeos lucrarer, ut eos qui sub lege erant lucrifacerem,
ut omnes facerem salvos. For there cannot a better way be found, to reduce men
to the right way, then to counterfeit to be such as they are: And even so, do
many Physicians use to do; who oftentimes having a patient troubled with a
melancholicke humor in the brain; in such sort, as that they think
themselves to be earthen Pots: they also feine themselves to be such, to the
end, that they taking meat, their patient also by their example may take meat,
and not die with hunger, out of a conceit that earthen pots could not eat. And
in this manner oftentimes they heal their patients; and feigning themselves to
be fools, have cured them of folly. Thus also did S. Paul, who circumcised
Timothy, with a purpose to take away circumcision; whereof Saint Chrysostom
speaking, says, Vide opus, circumcidit, ut circumcisionem tolleret. Not
without cause therefore did Marcus Tullius blame Cato, that would not flatter
the people with counterfeiting their fashions, thereby to get the Consulship;
and have freed his Country from the imminent tyranny of Julius Caesar. And the
rather, it being a thing commended of God himself, Cum perverso perverteris:
that is, with wicked men, one must feign himself wicked, to reduce them to
goodness.

This Act, which in S. Paul received alteration from the end, may also in the
contrary receive alteration from the circumstance; and was used therefore by S.
Peter, who when he went to Antiochia, was hindered by S. Paul himself, Et in
faciem restiti quia reprehensibilis erat: although the Act of S. Peter was the
same, and done with the same intention that S. Paul's was; yet by reason of one
circumstance, which was, that by his example, the Gentiles were drawn to
Judaise, he deserved reprehension.

To come then to the second head, which is, how many kinds of flattery there
are: I say first, there may be an Act of its own nature exceeding good, and
yet be apt to become a flattering act: as, to praise a man for something he
has done, to the end he may with more boldness reprove him afterward, is a
good act: and therefore S. Paul knowing that the Corinthians, for the love they
bore to certain persons, were fallen into schism, at first, he praises them,
where he says, Gratias ago Deo meo, semper pro vobis in gratia Dei, quae data
est vobis in Christo Jesu; quia in omnibus divites facti estis in illo, in omni
verbo and in omni scientia, sicut testimonium Christi confirmatum est in vobis,
ita ut nihil desit vobis impulsus gratiae: certainly a greater praise then
this, he could not possibly give; but he adds afterward, Obsecro vos fratres
per nomen Domini nostri Jesu Christi ut id ipsum dicatis omnes, and non sint in
vobis schismata; see here, after his praising them, how sharply he reprehends
them. The contrary happens when one praising a man, speaks the truth, but with
an ill intention; for it is then true flattery: and such, a Prince should never
endure to hear. And therefore S. Paul, passing with many others by a place,
where stood a maid possessed with a devil; and hearing himself praised by
that devil for a servant of God, he made him hold his peace, driving him out
of the mayds body. Factum est autem euntibus nobis ad orationem, puellam
quandam habentem spiritum Pythonem obviare nobis, quae quaestum magnum
praestabat Dominis suis; Divinando, haec subsecuta Paulum and nos, clamabat
dicens: isti homines servi Dei excelsi sunt, qui annuntiant vobis viam salutis:
hoc autem faciebat multis diebus: dolens autem Paulus, and conversus spiritui,
dixit; praecipio tibi in nomine Jesu Christi, exire ab ea, and exiit eadem
hora. There is no doubt, but the devil in praising Saint Paul and his
companions said the truth; but because he did it not with a good intent, but to
the end, that another time he might tell a lie, and be believed; therefore S.
Paul made him go forth of the maids body. And so ought it to be done to those,
who sometimes speak the truth; but to the end, that another time they may more
securely flatter. That such kind of praising is flattery, may easily be proved.
For either it must proceed from friendship, or from mildness, or else from
flattery. But it proceeds not from friendship, because a friend never praises
out of interest; nor it proceeds not from mildness, because he by Aristotle is
defined to be mild, who exceeds in his praises to give contentment; and
differenceth him by this from a flatterer, who praises for his own interest.
So as we truly and upon good ground take this to be flattery; the rather being
defined by S. Chrysostom, Adulatio est quando quosdam colit quispiam, non
propter quae colere oportet, sed ad captandun terrena; where this word Colit
stands in place of the Genus; as being common both to a friend, and to him that
is mild: and these words Ad captandum terrena, stand in place of the
difference; in which the essence of flattery consists.

Secondly, there may be an action, which of its own nature, is neither good nor
bad, but from diverse causes may receive a diverse form. And it is where virtue
is indeed and truly in a Prince, but is increased and made greater in the
praising it. The liberality that was in Tiberius being celebrated by the
Senators more then was cause; not to the end, he should increase it for the
public good; but to the end, to make him privately the more their friend, was
flattery, which could not be so called, if it had been done for the public
good. And therefore when Metellus was extolled for the great valor and
prowess he had showed in managing the war; because it was done to the end,
he should continue, and hold on his course, as he did, was no flattery, but a
good act, and so recorded by Historians.

Thirdly, there may be an act, of its own nature bad and flattering; yet
capable to become good from the intention: and it is when a Prince is praised
for those virtues and conditions which are not in him, but which should be in
him, so long as he is not guilty of the contrary vices.

Fourthly and lastly, there may be an act, I will not say, essentially
flattering; but which seldom and very hardly can change its nature; and it is,
when a Prince is praised for a virtue, being stained with the contrary vice; as
to call one merciful, that is cruel.

It remains to show, which of these kinds is hurtful to a Prince, and
consequently to the subjects. Concerning the first, seeing flattery consists of
two things; an action, and an intention: as being an action, it is transient;
as being an intention, it is imminent; as being an action it is good, as an
intention bad: lastly, as an action it is founded in the merit of the Prince,
in which it passes away; as an intention, it is founded in the ill quality of
the actor, in whom it remains; so as it cannot be hurtful to the Prince but
by accident; when it is done, as to make an introduction, but hurtful to him
that uses it: who thereby shows himself a wicked man, and an interessed
flatterer. For there is this difference between moral acts and works
artificial, as Aristotle says, that works of art pass away in the matter;
and remain not in the workman; but acts of virtue remaining in our selves,
require a goodness in the actor; which is of small importance in works
artificial. But although in this, there appear no great hurt, yet it will be
always good to imitate S. Paul, in discarding such persons: or rather to
imitate our Lord Christ, who being flattered of the devil, (as Theophilact
interprets it) when in Saint Luke, he said, Scio te qui sis, sanctus ille Dei:
he instantly rebuked him, Et increpavit illum dicens; obmutesce and exi ab eo.

The second way that may either hurt, or profit a Prince, is taken from the
object; for this praise is about an object, either good or bad: I mean, he
whose virtues are extolled, is either virtuous and just as Metellus was, or
vicious and wicked as Tiberius was. In the first case, it does well, and was
therefore very profitable to the Commonwealth: but in the second case, I like
it not; in regard whereof, S. Gregory says, Injustus audita land sua
polluitur, justus purgatur: pavet enim si talis non ostenditur, qualis ab
hominibus putatur.

The third way is a little more difficult; yet as it is easy to be known, and
hard to be done; so it can do but small hurt, to a City or a Prince. For if he
shall believe there is such an opinion had of him; he will endeavor so to
carry himself, that his actions may answer that opinion, if not to attain to
that for which he is praised, at least to hide the contrary. And for this
perhaps Varro (as S. Austin relates) said, that it is profitable for a City, to
flatter Princes, with making them believe, they are Sons of the Gods; because
finding such an opinion had of them, either they will believe themselves to be
such indeed; or at least believing themselves to be accounted such, they will
endeavor to do nothing, that may be unworthy of Sons of the Gods.
Nevertheless, (to return to our purpose) this way also receives goodness
from the object; seeing, if we deal with bad Princes, it is no good course, to
make them think, those virtues to be in them, whereof they have not any
spark; because, either they will believe that they are such; and then will
never endeavor to be such; or at least, finding there is such an opinion had
of them, they will content themselves with having the name. But on the other
side, if we have to do with a good Prince, it cannot be but very profitable;
seeing although he should not believe himself to be such, nor had in such
account; yet finding such virtue to be universally praised, he would for
meriting the praise, apply himself to it: and much more, if he believe such an
opinion to be had of him, for fearing of going less. Therefore S. Austin
says, Gratias (...) tibi uberes, quod nos laudas tanquam tales simus:
magnopere enim hortaris ut tales esse cupiamus. With this intention he
conceives in another Epistle, that Cicero praised Caesar for clemency, Talem
esse ostendebat Principem qualem illum fallaciter predicabat. So as from this
kind of flattery, there will grow no hurt, but rather good: and the more, if
the flatterer meaning to praise a Prince for something that is not in him, he
praise him not for some vice; for this would rather provoke him to anger, to
hear those vices attributed to him of which he is not guilty: and which are so
much better known, as they are less like.

The last way also may be either good or bad. The Senate of Rome understanding
that Macrinus the most cruel man in the World, was chosen Emperor, presently
determined to give him the name of Pius; which was not done without great
judgment and mystery: and it did some good (though he accepted not the name) to
mitigate in some part his cruelty. But contrariwise, when Nero afterward having
killed his mother, and an infinite number of Senators, found himself
applauded, and the name of a valiant man given him; it drowned him altogether
in a flood of vices. Seque in omnes libidines effudit: and a little after,
Postquam cuncta scelerum pro egregiis accipi videt, exturbat Octaviam, and so
following. From these two contrary, at least unlike effects; I am moved to
search out the reason, why the one of them, should be profitable rather then
hurtful; and the other be the ruin of so many Citizens? To which I say, that
this Act may receive alteration, either from the circumstance, or from the
object. From the circumstance, seeing this praise may either be given for a
virtue, far different and contrary to a vice with which the Prince is
tainted: or it may be given for a virtue, which is near to that vice. If in
the first case, we call one that is cruel, merciful; as it is easy to be
known, so it will do more good then hurt; because this is rather a modest
admonishing the Prince, then an impudent praising of his vices; but in the
second case, to call one that is cruel, and a murderer of his Senators and
Citizens, by the name of a valiant man, and a freer of his Country; as it is a
flattery hard to be known, so it is both to Prince and City most pernicious.
Of the first sort, was the case of Macrinus: of the second, that of Nero. As
concerning the object, he whom we praise for a virtue, either is stained
before, being Prince, with the contrary vice, as Nero was: or else he comes but
newly to be Prince, as Macrinus did; if he were stained before, it can do no
good, although the praise be for a virtue most remote from the vice; but if he
come but newly to be Prince, it may then do some good.

I will not omit (though this be not the proper place for it) to advertise,
that a flatterer is a person, of whom a Prince ought to stand in fear; seeing
two sorts of men may be his ruin: either, they that are too free; who using
their freeness in dispraising their Lord, must needs give him cause to be
afraid; or else they, that are too wary, who concealing their thoughts, are apt
to make conspiracies; and the flatterer being of this sort, a concealour of his
thoughts, gives the Prince just cause to fear him. And therefore Tiberius an
understanding man, neither liked those that flattered too much, nor those that
spoke too freely; unde Augusta and lubrica Oration, (says Tacitus) sub Principe
qui libertatem metuebat, adulationem oderat. And in another place, speaking of
flattery, he says, Quae, moribus corruptis perinde auceps si nulla, and ubi
Nimia est.

Postquam Bruto and Cassio coesis, nulla jam publica arma Pompeius apud
siciliam oppressus, exutoque Lepido, interfecto Antonio, ne Julianis quidem
partibus nisi Caesar Dux reliquus; posito triumviri nomine, consulem se ferens
and ad tuendam plebem Tribunitio Jure contentum, ubi Militem donis; Populum,
annona, cunctos dulcedine otii pellexit.
What things help Augustus to the Empire, and what means he used to maintain
it. The twelfth Discourse.

Cornelius Tacitus not only in these words, but also in a good part of the
first Book, entreating of Augustus, labors to show what means he used to
attain the Empire; and what to uphold him, having attained it. And my meaning
is to follow his course, and punctually to examine all things: dividing my
Discourse into two parts: the first, to show the ways which Augustus used to
attain the Empire; the second, the ways by which he maintained it.

The ordinary ways, as experience and men teach us, to come to a Principality,
are either by fortune, or by virtue, or by wickedness, or by craft, or by
election; or lastly by succession.

Augustus then came to the Empire by fortune; which help him three ways: the
first, that when Brutus and Cassius who were his enemies were dead; and that
Lepidus and Antonius his partners in greatness were extinguished; he only
remained of the Caesarian faction: and therefore Tacitus speaking in what manner
fortune aided him, says, Postquam Bruto and Cassio caesis; nulla jam publica
arma, Pompeius apud siciliam oppressus; exuto Lepido, Interfecto Antonio, ne
Julianis quidem partibus nisi Caesar Dux reliqu^s: and so following.

This only aid of fortune, is the ablest way to raise one to a Principality:
and therefore Pericles, (as Plutarch in his life relates) by this only means
became Prince of Athens, Postquam Aristides vita decessit, Themistocles
exulatum abiit, Cimonem bella, plerique citra Graeciam detinuere, ibi demum
Pericles populo se dedit.

But thisalone did not serve Augustus, but fortune in another manner gave him
assistance: for the stoutest Citizens, being part banished, and part slain in
battles, it was an easy matter to attain the Empire without any let. This
second aid of fortune, Tacitus expresses, where he says, Insurgere paulatim,
munia Senatus, Magistratum legumque in se trahere; nullo adversante, cum
ferocissimi peracies, aut proscriptione cecidissent.

Not less apt then the first, is this aid, to make a change in States; seeing
the people of Tarantum, only because the greater part of the Nobility were
dead in war, was easily able to change the state: whereupon Aristotle says,
Contingit vero quandoquidem id, (the change of the State) per fortunam, veluti
apud (...); cum superati praetio a Lampigensibus Nobilitatis magnam partem
amississent.

But fortune not content with this neither gave Augustus another aid also, to
make himself Emperor: which was, that he found the Commonwealth wearied with
discords, and the Provinces oppressed by Magistrates; which Tacitus describing
says, Cuncta discordiis civilibus fessa, nomine Principis sub Imperium
accepit: and of the Provinces he adds, Neque Provinciae illum rerum statum
abnuebant, suspecto Senatus populique Imperio, and that which follows.

This way was the only cause that brought Visconte to be Lord of Milan; and
Bentivoli to be Lord of Bologna.

Yet fortune by all these ways had not power her self alone, to bring
Augustus to the Empire; though (as we have showed) each of them of it self
were apt to do it: but secondarily there concurred with them his own valor,
which he showed in so many battles: and lastly, in that Navall fight; by means
whereof he came to be Emperor. And although this alone had been sufficient to
bring him to the Empire, as was seen in Vitellius, who by getting the victory
only in one battle against Otho, made himself Lord of Rome; yet Augustus,
besides fortune and his own virtue, brought himself forward by desert, as
having enlarged the Roman Empire, Mari Oceano, haud amnitibus longinquis septum
Imperium: by this way have many come to be Princes, as Saturnius, and others.
And Aristotle himself approves it, where he says, Praeterea ob beneficia
accepta Reges Creavere. Which Saint Thomas expounding, says, Vel quia pugnavit
contra (...) pro illis, vel invenit artem aliquam iis necessariam.

But besides fortune, virtue, and merit, Augustus brought himself forward by
wickedness and perfidiousnesse also, which aided him two ways: First, by
making use of those arms to oppress his Country, which he had received to
defend it, Arma quae in Antonium caeperat contra Rempublicam versa: and indeed,
there cannot be a greater wickedness, then when benefits are turned against
him of whom they are received: and therefore our Lord God meaning by the mouth
of Esaias, to show the ungratefulness and wickedness of the Hebrew people,
says, Filios enutrivi, and exaltavi, ipsi autent spreverunt me, Where the
Chaldee paraphrase says, Tulisti de auro meo, atque de Argento meo, quae dedi
tibi, and fecisti tibi Imagines Masculinas. This way was also followed by Hiero
the Syracusan, who employed that Army to oppose the Commonwealth, which he had
received to defend it.

But neither did this wickedness of Augustus serve his turn, in committing so
many murders, as Tacitus describes where he says, Pietatemerga parentem and
tempora Reipublicae obtentui sumpta. And again, Cassii and Brutorum exitus
paternis (...) datos: deceptos post Antonium Tarentino Brundusinoque faedere:
and nuptiis sororis illeptum, subdole affinitatis poenas mortis exolvisse. But
not only this wickedness, with so many other causes spoken of before,
concurred; though this alone were enough to bring a man to a Kingdom; as it
did Agathocles the Sicilian, and Cleomenes the Spartan and many others; a way
unworthy to be imitated not only of Christians, but even of Barbarians: But
besides all these, that which aided Augustus was craft and policy: for being
called in by his own Citizens, and they divided into Commons and Nobility; The
Commons by reason of oppression by the great ones: the Nobles by reason of
common diffension, desired rather to have a King and be safe, then to have
liberty, and be in danger: So as Augustus, Ad tuendam plebem, took upon him
the dignity of a tribune; and to be aided by the Nobility, advanced them in
honors and riches, who Novis ex rebus aucti, tuta and praesentia, quam veter a
and periculosa mallent. For safety is so sweet a thing, that the people liked
better of servitude with safety, than of liberty with danger. And therefore the
Israelites finding that the Canaanites were a valiant Nation, were ready rather
to turn back into Egypt and be slaves; then to stay in Canaan and be in
danger. As it happened also in Exodus, when they saw Pharao coming, Nunquid
non erant Sepulchra in Aegypto, quando sedebamus super ollas (...)? And
therefore the Romans having driven out the Kings, doubted lest the the people,
if the Tarquins should make war upon Rome, would not to resolve, rather to
receive the tyrant again, and live in peace; then continue in liberty, and be
still in danger. Nec hosts modo timebant (says Livy) sed suos met ipsos
cives, ne Romana plebs, metu perculsa, receptis (...) urbem regibus, vel cum
servitute pacem acciperet. And here is to be noted, that men will always be
more moved with private interest, then with public profit; and that every one
had rather be a slave and rich, then to be free and poor. Whereof I will bring
one example out of Dio: Caesar having before him the Army of Scipio, caused
Letters to be carried into the enemies Tents, wherein he friendly promised the
Soldiers honors and riches, and to the Countrymen, to save their goods
untouched; and by this means, he drew them all to come to his side: on the
contrary, Scipio also being forced to use the same device of sending Letters
into Caesar's Camp, persuaded them to be of his side, in defense and for the
good of the Commonwealth; putting them in mind, of the great benefit of
liberty: for all which persuasions, there was not a man that would offer to go
from Caesar; whereby we may plainly see, that ordinarily men prefer profit
before honesty. And where it may be objected, that people infinite times make
insurrections only for their liberty: it is easily answered, if we consider
that under that name of liberty, they always think, or are made believe,
there is great profit to be had: and therefore they desire liberty, not as an
end, but as a means to another end.

But to return to our purpose; besides so many causes alleged, concurring in
favor of Augustus; this of election also is to be added: that he was chosen by
the Senate, by the people, and by the Soldiers; by which means infinite
others have obtained the Roman Empire: and so it happened amongst the
Graecians, so the Pope, so the Kings of Polan, so the Emperor in our times, by
this means only of being elected, attain their Principalities.

Lastly, it may be also said, that he came to be Emperor by succession, as
being the next of kin to Caesar, to whom by right of succession, besides his
being made his heir by his Will, the Empire belonged.

We may then say, that Augustus came to be Emperor, neither by fortune, nor by
wickedness, nor by policy, nor by merit, nor by election, nor by succession,
but by all of them together; seeing each of these, (as I have before showed)
being apt of it self to raise a man to the Empire, certainly all of them
concurring in Augustus could not choose but effect it.

And thus much for his attaining the Empire; now for holding it, thus gotten:
we say, that an Empire may be held, either from the Nobility, or from the
people, or from the Soldiers; and that either by love or by force. With the
people it is held by procuring of plenty, and that the poor be not wronged by
the rich; there being nothing that makes a Prince more beloved of the people,
than to keep them safe from the insolency of great men. And therefore the Holy
Ghost meaning to show the cause, why all Nations should serve that King, says,
Omnes Gentes servient ei, quia liberavit pauperem a potente: and a little
after, Et honorabile Nomen eorum coram illo. S. Hierome reads it, Et pretiosus
crit sanguis eorum coram illo, That is, they shall hold the honor of the King
in great account, and shall not leave unpunished whosoever shall imbrue their
hands in his blood; as was seen in the conspiracy against Caesar. This
therefore Augustus knowing, took upon him the power of a Tribune, Et ad
tuendam plebem Tribunitio jure contentunt: and suffered them not to be in want,
knowing that safety without plenty is little esteemed: and therefore he says,
Populum annona.

Now for Noble men, they are of two sorts; stout, and timorous. In the stout,
there is no trusting, being men that extremely skorne a servile condition; and
consequently extremely hate a tyrant. And therefore it was necessary, Augustus
should send such into banishment or to the wars; and they once dead, he then
remained secure and without fear of any new hatred. To the timorous and quiet
are to be given honors; for a Gentleman has no other end, but honor: and of
these, the Prince ought to make use in peace; and as for war he need not
fear them: therefore Tacitus says, Caeteri Nobilium quanto quis servitio
promptior opibus and honoribus extolluntur: ac Novis ex rebus aucti, tuta and
praesentia quam vetera and periculosa mallent. Where it is to be observed, that
by caeteri he means, those only that were not stout: there following, without
any words between, Cum ferocissimi per acies ant proscriptione cecidissent.

Augustus then did well, to advance many of the Noble men, above the others;
and especially those, that showed themselves most ready to do him service.
First, to the end, that such example might draw others to the like servitude,
thereby to gain the like honor. Secondly, to the end that seeing honors
attained to under a Prince, which could never have been attained in a
Commonwealth, they might the better be contented with such a State; and
therefore Aristotle amongst the means for conserving a Kingdom, forgets not
to speak of this, where he says, Atque eos viros qui aliqua in re
honorabiliter se gesserint honorare; ita ut non existiment unquam se magis
honorari in civitate degentibus potuisse. Thirdly, Augustus did well, to
advance many great ones above others, because as where equality is, a Kingdom
there is hardly raised, and liberty easily maintained: so where there is
inequality, a Kingdom there is easily preserved: and therefore a Prince is to
be commended, that removes many from equality; to the end there may be seen a
certain proportion, and not one to be unequal, and all the rest equal. The
reason of this, in my opinion, is, because when only one is seen unequal, all
the rest will have a desire to reduce him to equality, and by some means or
other to rid him away; but when there are many unequals, the inferiors not
only will never be moved to conspire against the Prince, because they should
never by this means come to equality: but also they will not suffer any other
to do it, resting satisfied in this, that as themselves have many unequals,
their superiors; so those have the Prince unequal, and their superior: and
in this at least they shall be equal, that they are all of them inferior to
one.

But because obedience is hardly found, especially in new states, if there be
not force concurring; whereupon the Throne of Solomon, which by Writers is
taken for obedience, was compassed about with twelve Lions; seeing they who
desire to be obeyed, ought together with generosity, have force also to make
them be obeyed; and therefore the holy Ghost in the mouth of Solomon says,
Sicut Turris David, collum tuum; quae aedisicate est cum propagnaculis; mill
clypei pendent ex ea; omnis armatura fortium. This Tower has so many defenses,
because it is put for a figure of obedience; meaning to show, that they who
desire to preserve obedience, have need of all sorts of Arms to defend it: for
these causes, Augustus knowing this, and having an Army in his hand, able to
make him be obeyed by force, if need should be, he made the Soldiers sure to
him, by donatives of which they are most greedy: whereupon it may be said, that
Augustus maintained his Empire, neither by the Nobility, nor by the people, nor
by the soldiers; neither by love, nor yet by force, but by all of them
together.

Et ad tuendam plebem Tribunitio Iure contentum, ubi Militem donis, Populum
annona, cunctos dulcedine otii pellexit.
How Princes may get the peoples love: how a private man ought to make use of
the peoples favor; and what part it has in bestowing the Empire. The
thirteenth Discourse.

AS safety is not enough to give the people satisfaction, if it be not
accompanied with plenty: and therefore the Israelites, though they lived safe
under their leader Moses, yet when plenty failed, they desired again the
servitude of Pharao: so neither does plenty give satisfaction, if it be not
accompanied with peace, as was plainly seen in that people; for when those men
returned whom Joshua had sent into the Land of Promise, to make known the
fruitfulness of the Country, yet when they heard there were in it great store
of Giants, only for this, they liked better to stay in the Wilderness in
peace, then to go to a Land flowing with Milk and Honey with war: the
desire of living quietly prevailing more with them, than the enjoying of plenty.

Three things then are required in a people, to make them absolutely happy:
safety from being oppressed by those at home; peace with those abroad; and
plenty. Whereupon our Lord God meaning to show the happiness in which his
people should live, expresses these three things by the mouth of his Prophet
Esaias, where he says, Sedebit populus meus in plenitudine pacis, here is peace:
In Tabernaculis fiduciae, here is safety: In requie opulenti, here is plenty.
Such a like happiness Tacitus shows that Rome had; or to say better, the
people of Rome under the Dominion of Augustus; where he says, Et ad tuendam
plebem Tribunitio jure contentum: see here, by making himself protector of
the people, he made them safe from oppressors at home: Vbi populum Annona, see
here, plenty: Cunctos dulcedine otii pellexit, see here the safety from
foreign enemies, which is peace; for by the word Otium in this place (as I
shall show in another discourse) he means nothing else but peace.

But because many gather from this place, seeing Augustus obtained and
maintained his Empire by the love of the people; that therefore this is the
true way, for all others to rise from a private man to be a Prince; and the
rather because a place in Aristotle confirmed by many examples seems to
concur in this opinion, where he says, Et profecto antiquorum Tyrannorum
plurimi ex popularibus hominibus facti sunt; I shall be forced in discoursing
of this matter, to proceed with distinction, as finding many places directly
contrary to this; and particularly in the foresaid Tacitus, who in another
place shows, that the peoples favor is rather a ruin than a fortune to great
men; where in the third of his Annals he says, Breves and Infaustos Rontani
populi amores.

I say then, that he who is in the peoples favor, either he has a mind to
make himself Prince, or he has not: if he have no such mind, he shall do
better to avoid those demonstrations with safety, which without any benefit
makes him run into danger; seeing a good intention is not sufficient, where
it is equally dangerous, to have such imputation, whether wrongfully or justly,
as Tacitus well says, Si objiciantur etiam insontibus, periculosa: because
Princes, as soon as they see the peoples favor enclining to another,
presently have him in suspicion; and therefore David began to be hated of Saul,
as soon as he knew the people loved him: whereupon in the book of the Kings,
the holy Spirit says, Posuitque eum Saul, supra viros belli, and acceptus erat
in occulis Vniversi populi, maximeque in (...) famulorum Saul: and a little
after, Non rectis ergo oculis, Saul respiciebat David, a die illa and deinceps.

Likewise when the mystical David, Christ, was seen to the Jews, to enter
triumphantly into Jerusalem on Palme-sunday, with great applause of the
people, they presently began to conspire against him: The like happened to
Germanicus, whose case was much like that of Aristobulus; both of them being
gracious with the people; young men of goodly presence, both; both of them next
to the Crown; under most cruel tyrants, Herod the great, and Tiberius Nero;
both of them for the same causes put to death by fraud: one bewalled
counterfetly of Herod; the other, feignedly of Nero; by whom in truth they came
to their deaths. Of these then, it may be said, Breves and (...) populi amores.

But if he that is in the peoples favor, have an intention to make himself
Prince, we must then distinguish: for either the peoples favor toward him
grows out of a coffeehouse toward the Prince; or it comes out of anger
arising from some sudden accident: if in the first case; he that will make
use of their favor, if he be able to hide it, which is a difficult thing,
shall do well to wait for some good occasion: seeing he may assure himself,
that as coffeehouse increases by little and little, and is nourished in
minds once discontented; so it is hard, or rather impossible, it should vanish
on a sudden: and therefore if he stay for a good beginning, where there has
preceded a good occasion, as I have showed in another discourse, there can be
no doubt of having good success. Princes therefore must take heed, they give
the people no such occasions; which are so much more dangerous, as they are
less violent: because in such cases, men are not moved with every light wind;
but waiting for a fit opportunity, they then show their minds when they see
they have power to do it, with the ruin of the Prince. And there needs no
other proof of this, than the examples of the Aragonesi, and of Ludovico Moro.
But if the people be moved to aid him, out of choler, this, as it is less
dangerous for the Prince; so to him that would make use of it, it is more
difficult: First, because when the beginnings are not preceded by fit
occasions, as has been showed in the like cases, it seldom takes any good
effect: And therefore when the people would have risen against Tiberius, only
out of choler, because he had taken from them that small authority they had;
this insurrection not being preceded by mature judgment, there was none would
take upon him to be Head; and so the enterprise came to nothing Secondly,
because the occasion which is founded upon choler, will soon cease, and is
never able to continue; and as it grows cool, makes men repent them of what
they had done. And you cannot say, that having provoked the Prince with choler,
there is now a necessity to follow that Head for fear; with whom, partaking in
fault, they partake also in fortune; for this is directly the overthrow of the
business, because having provoked the Princes mind with their insurrection,
and knowing they may please him again with killing their Head, they will
easily be drawn to murder him. Nevertheless, he that will make use of the
peoples favor, for rising to any honor, which he thinks is his due, let him
give them no time to think of the matter, but once persuaded, let him suddenly
venture. Don Antonio of Portugal, finding he had the peoples favor, instantly
without delaying any time, made use of it, and it took effect. So Bardanus
called in by the Parthians, that would drive out Gotarze, went about it with
all suddenness; and having gotten possession, knowing the inconstancy of that
people, he suddenly fortified all the principal places of the Country. It is
therefore no marvel, that Caius Cassius gave counsel to seize upon the
Kingdom suddenly, knowing the Parthians to be fickle and inconstant; and this
suddenness ought the rather to be used, because for the most part, a people in
insurrections is drawn to do things, which though good, yet are repugnant to
their Genius: and therefore if time be given them, they soon perceive their
error, and thereupon repent, and put presently their repentance in execution.
The Soldiers of Neroes guard, were with great cunning persuaded to give their
consent to his death; but when they had time given them to perceive their
error, they suddenly turned to take revenge, and it took effect. Miles
Vrbanus longo Caesarum Sacramento (...), and ad destituendum Neronem art magis
and impulsu, quam suo ingenio traductus: and that which follows. Another
example we have in the second of Tacitus his Annals; where speaking of Vonone,
whom Tiberius at their desire had sent to the Parthians, he says, that at
first they received him with great applause, Et accepere barbari Laetantes
prout ferme ad nova imperia; but those people thinking afterward of the matter,
though he were a King of good conditions, and profitable for them, yet, because
he came from the Emperor of Rome, and consequently contrary to the Genius of
that Nation, they first repented them, and afterward expelled him. Mox subiit
pudor degeneravisse Parthos petitum alio ex orb Regem; and that which
follows. This then may pass for a general rule, always when either through
eloquence, or threatening, or reward, or any other cunning, a man is induced to
do a thing against his genius, seeing it depends upon his will, it is like to
last no longer then he has time to think upon it: and therefore the best
course in such cases, is so to manage the business, that having once
persuaded him, it be not left in his power to repent, as Bardanus did, by
fortifying himself presently. So Jehu who in the life of Joram, was accepted
King by Gods appointment, seeing the good inclination of the people toward
him, and knowing that if he gave them time he should never persuade them to set
upon their natural Lord, he went instantly to find out Joram, and slew him.
This reason is taken into consideration by Abulensis, where he says, Quia
totus vigor Jehu erat in hoc, quod populus concorditer adjuvare illum volebat:
si tamen differret opus ad aliquantulum tempus, forte animi virorum
tepescerent, and nollent insurgere contra Dominum suum antiquum. But the
contrary of this being done by Julius Campitolinus, and Spurius Aemilius in
Livy, both the one and the other were forsaken of the people, and they run
themselves into no small danger. For the people indeed are never able to
continue long in dissentions, having trades which they must necessarily follow
to get their living; which Aristotle considering, is of the mind, that there
cannot be a better kind of people in a City, then that which consists of
Husbandmen; because being forced to attend their occupation, they are not able
to stay long in seditions. He therefore that will make use of the people, for
the purpose aforesaid, let him dispatch it, and do it so speedily, that they
may have no time given to repent them.

I cannot omit here to examine the reason, why the people oftentimes do good
actions upon the sudden, and such as upon mature deliberation they would not
do; and forbearing for brevities sake, certain reasons which every one of
himself may easily conceive, I only say, that this proceeds from the weakness
of their understanding; It being their custom, either to do nothing that is
good, or else to do it upon the sudden; because as Aristotle says, All weak
things come soon to their accomplishment and height: seeing nature, which is
moved by the intelligences, and by God, bestows little time upon the growth of
base things, as is seen in Pompions, and other Herbs of small moment. Another
reason may be taken from the said Aristotle, who speaking of the Ancients who
made the first principles contraries, says, Quasi a veritate ipsa coacti;
whereas S. Thomas learnedly shows, that as a stone of its own nature descends
downward, and fire ascends upward; so the understanding naturally follows the
better appearance: and therefore weak understandings, if they do at any time
any good thing, they must do it naturally, and consequently upon the sudden;
for if they have time to think upon it, then the counsel which they give, or
the action, which they do, will be no longer natural but Artificial; and
therefore weak understandings are not perfected by deliberation, but rather
confounded, and by this means would oftentimes go astray. This then is the
Philosophical and Real reason, why many having done something that is good,
do afterward by thinking upon it, and deliberating, spoil and overthrow it.

For resolution therefore, and to make the forealleged passages to agree, I
say, that the people are not the whole cause of raising one to a Royalty, but
only concur as a cause in part; neither yet the people together with the
Nobility, sufficient to make an alteration, where there are Soldiers; and
therefore not without cause Tacitus says, Breves and infaustos populi Romani
amores: because the City of Rome was never without Praetorian soldiers. Of
this there is a plain example, in the whole siege of Nola, in Livy; and to
speak of our own times, in Verona, where the people having a mind to rise in
favor of the Venetians, yet because the soldiers of the King of France and of
the Emperor were within it, they were not able to do any thing of moment. We
may therefore conclude, that the people alone can never be an absolute means
to raise a man to a Principality, if it be not upon a sudden, and that there
be no Soldiers in the place; for against them there is no good to be done,
although they should have the Nobility to assist them: but the people together
with the soldiers, may easily raise one to the Empire, and when Tacitus says,
Breves and infaustos populi Romani amores, he means it of the people alone; but
in this present place, he speaks of the people and soldiers together; which
plainly appears, because having said, Et ad tuendam plebem Tribunitio jure
contentum, he adds, Vbi militem donis: showing he well knew, that together
with the people, the soldiers must concur. And Aristotle differs not from
Tacitus, nor yet from my opinion, but rather confirms both the one and the
other: seeing, where he gives a reason, how it happened, that in ancient times
the favorites of the people came to be Lords, he says, that the same man who
was powerful with the people, was also Leader of the Army; and so, had both
people and soldiers of his side. And adds withal, that whosoever of late
time has attempted any thing, relying only upon the people, has never brought
his purpose to any good pass: A manifest argument, that the people concur as
a cause in part, if the soldiers join with them: Vetustis quident temporibus
(says he) quando idem erat potens in populo ac Bello, Dux, Popularis
Respublica in Tyrannidem mutabatur, and profecto antiquorum Tyrannorum plurimi
ex popularibus hominibus facti sunt: causa autem cur tunc fierent, non autem
nunc, illa est, quod qui tunc in populo maxim poterat, ex iis erat qui bello
(...).

Ubi Militem donis.
How the Donatives which are given to soldiers are profitable to raise a man,
and to maintine him in the Empire^ and when it is that Military discipino is
corrupted by them. The fourteenth Discourse.

THere are two things chiefly that move men to follow the wars; Acquiring of
honor, and increase of riches; and both these are in Donatives: for Donatives,
as to the thing it self, is an increase of wealth; and coming from the
Princes hand, as a testimony of the soldiers valor, they are an increase of
Honor. It is therefore no marvel that Augustus, not only at his entrance into
the Empire, but even from his childhood, used with Donatives to win the
soldiers love, seeing they are able to corrupt the wisest and best men; as our
Lord God in Exodus has left written, Nec accipies munera quae etiam excaecant
prudentes and subvertunt verba justorum. Whereupon not without cause, S. John
in the Apocalypse, calls them by the name of Witchcraft, where speaking of Rome
under the figure of Babylon he says, Quia mercatores tui erant Principes
terrae, quia in venesiciis tuis erraverunt omnes Gentes. Where S. John intends
to show, according to the opinion of some, that Rome by means of gifts, as it
were with sorcery, had drawn the greatest part of the world, to the adoration
of Idols. Tiberius therefore knowing what power there is in them, when Junius
Gallus had moved in the Senate, that Gifts and Honors should be bestowed upon
the soldiers of his Guard, he sharply reproved him (says Tacitus) veluti
coram rogitans, quid illi cum militibus esset, quos neque ditu Imperatoris,
neque Praemia nisi ab Imperatore accipere par esset.

Yet the introduction of Donatives was to the Commonwealth of Rome of exceeding
great damage. First, they have been, (as I shall show in fit place) in great
part the cause, why the City of Rome, freed once from tyranny by Lucius Brutus,
was never afterward able, being oppressed by the House of the Caesar's, to
recover its liberty; the Donatives having put the election into the soldiers
hands, and they, not to lose so great a gain, would always rather have an
Emperor for their private profit, than a Commonwealth for the public benefit.
Secondly, because having an Army in their hand, on which the election and
safety of the Emperors depended, as men greedy of money, they were moved to
stand for him who offered most, in such sort, that at last they came to set it,
at who gives more: and because as Aristotle in his Politics well observes,
when Honors are bestowed in a City, in regard of riches, it is an easy matter
for every Plebeian to become Honorable; and therefore no marvel that Elius
Pertinax an Hostlers son, came to be chosen Emperor.

It is therefore a clear case, that these Donatives were the ruin of the City
of Rome; from whence also may be inferred, that they were hurtful to the
Prince, whose profit depended upon the welfare of the City. But because the
contrary happens where tyrants govern, I shall be forced to examine, whether
the introduction of Donatives were for the Emperors benefit, or no. Many
approve the affirmative part, as moved not only by the said place of Tacitus,
where he shows, they were to Augustus a special help; but by the example
also of Caesar, who by this means, both obtained and maintained the Empire.
And it availes not to say, that he was there slain, because seeing one man's
indignation was enough to make a Prince be murdered; the difference that may
be taken from the ones well, and the others ill governing, for conserving the
Empire, ought not to be taken from a violent death, but rather that death being
revenged, and the ancient successors replaced in their states: I see not, how
there can be a greater sign, of proceeding with judgment for his own
security, being able even after his death, with his only name, to procure his
revenge, and to settle the Empire in his own family; a hard matter oftentimes
for the best Princes to obtain, who yet have the favor of God, to die a
natural death. This example therefore, (to omit many others, of which
Histories are full) is an evident proof, that Donatives to the Soldiers, were
profitable to the Roman Emperors, not only to attain the Empire, but also to
maintain them in it. Nevertheless, for the Negative part, there want not
examples to the contrary, not only of Otho, but of infinite other Emperors, who
by giving excessive Donatives, lost the Empire.

For resolution, we must proceed with distinction; either he that comes to the
Empire, is the first that brought in Donatives, as Caesar the Dictatour, and
Octavius Augustus were; and then not only they help to attain, but also to
maintain the Empire: and therefore Tacitus intimates it as a praise to
Augustus, where he says, Vbi Militem Donis; or else he is not the first, but
finds it a custom brought in before, and then as it may be a good means to
attain the Empire; so it is a certain ruin for maintaining it. The reason of
this difference is, because the soldiers not being accustomed to receive
Donatives; the first time it is given the^, they acknowledge it as a gift of
the Princes bounty, and account themselves obliged for it; and more than so,
not knowing whither they should receive the like from others, they endeavor to
uphold him in the Empire, hoping hereafter to have those things by merit, which
the Prince at this time has given them of courtesy. But if they have been
accustomed to have Donatives, and it has been a use amongst them, then, where
in the first, they acknowledged them the only bounty of the Prince, and
received them as gifts of grace; now accounting them as debt, they take them as
rewards of due, which if it be denied them, it then causes an implacable
hatred against the Prince, and at last, his ruin; and if it be granted them,
yet this increases not the soldiers love, who count not themselves beholding
to the Prince for them, but as fellows accustomed to have money without pains,
they spend it frolickly, and that spent, they expect new Donatives; which if a
Prince may satisfy a while, yet he cannot hold out to do so long, but that at
last he must be feign to deny them; and when this happens they presently fall
to choose a new Emperor of whom they may receive it; and this has been in
Rome, the ruin and death of many, as every one may read and see. We may
therefore conclude, that Donatives to the soldiers are very profitable to all
for attaining the Empire, but that the introduction of Donatives for them that
were not the first, is very pernicious for maintaining them in it. And Galba
having already attained the Empire, and knowing this, openly made it known,
that he meant to give no more Donatives to the soldiers, as resolved to take
away so great an abuse, Accessit Galbae vox, pro Republica, honesta, ipst
anceps; legi a se Militem, non emi, but it had an unhappy issue: First, because
(as I have showed in another Discourse) the Soldiers were against their genius
induced to abandon Nero; and therefore it had been fit, with the same cunning
to have held them in, and not have suffered them to be conscious of their
error, Miles Vrbanus longo Caesarum Sacramento imbutus, and ad destituendum
Neronem, art magis and impulsu, quam suo ingenio traductus, postquam neque
dari Donativum sub nomine Galbae, and that which follows. Secondly, having
gotten no reputation amongst the soldiers, and by reason of his age, being apt
to be contemned, he should rather with liberality have gotten their love, than
through covetousness have procured their hate. Non enim ad hanc formam (says
Tacitus, to not giving donatives to Soldiers) Caetera erant; invalidum senem;
and that which follows. Thirdly, if he would not give donatives himself; yet
at least, he should have taken order, that no other in his prejudice, should
have given them; which because he did not do, he therefore with his avarice
was by Otho's liberality easily oppressed. Quoties Galba apud Othonem
epularetur, cohorti excubias agenti, viritim centenos (...) divideret, qua^
veluti publicam largitionem Otho securioribus apud singulos praemiis,
intendebat, adeo animosus corruptor ut Cocceio Proculo speculatori de part
finium cum vicino ambigenti, universum vicint agrum sua pecunia emptum, dono
(...) per: focordium (...). Fourthly, to take away a custom so (...), he
should have contented himself in the beginning, with only moderating it,
especially, seeing he might have obtained his purpose, with any small donative,
Constat potuisse conciliari animos (faith (...)) quantulacunque parci senis
liberalitate; (...) antiquus vigor, and nimia severitas, cui jam pares non
(...). By which words we may plainly see, that Tacitus blames not his severity,
but the excessivenesse of it: whereupon Vespasian who knew as much as Galba
knew, took a better course, and had his intent. For moderating only the
donatives of the soldiers, he left them not altogether without hope of having
some; and by this means, he preserved himself in the Empire, and yet corrupted
not the soldiers: Ne Vespasianus (...) plus civili bello (...), quam alii in
pace, egregie (...) adversus militarem largitionem, eoque exercitu meliore.

If any should now enquire, whether donatives to the soldiers corrupt Military
Discipline, or no? I would briefly answer, That rewards uphold it, but that
donatives corrupt it: and the reason is, because donatives being such as are
given without cause, the soldier may always by the same right demand them;
and whilst he stands waiting for this aid from the Prince, he becomes idle and
good for nothing. But rewards given for some notable service, cannot but for
such service he demanded, and that soldiers should endeavor to do such
services, is a matter of great profit to Military difcipline. And therefore
Caesar, with Reward, made his Soldiers more valorous, and Otho, with donatives
corrupted them.

Populum Annona.
How much it imports a Prince for getting the peoples love, to maintain
plenty, by what means scarcity happens, and how it may be helped, and how a
Prince may make good use of it. The fifteenth Discourse.

ABove all things for winning the peoples love, a Prince must take care there
may be plenty; in regard whereof, Caesar ordained two Aediles, whose employment
was only to this purpose. Also Augustus knowing of how great importance this
is, (as Tacitus relates) amongst other secrets of his government, had always a
great jealousy of Egypt, from whence all the Corn for maintenance of plenty
in Rome, came; and indeed both the one and the other understood it rightly,
because, as the want thereof is apt to cause insurrections amongst the people,
as was often seen amongst the Israelites against Moses, who if God had not
mightily protected him, had oftentimes for this only been in manifest danger:
so on the contrary, the only plenty of things is enough of it self to raise a
man to the Empire; As was seen at Rome, when the City was so oppressed with a
dearth, that the Citizens chose rather to die in the water of Tiber, than to
stay upon the Land, and be starved with hunger. And he that will see an example
of this, may consider how our Lord Jesus Christ, having fed a multitude that
followed him in the Wilderness, he had presently the acclamations to be a
King, or a Prophet, Illi ergo homines (says S. John) cum vidissent quod Jesus
fecerat signum, (that is of the bread and fish he gave them) dicebant quia hic
est vere Propheta qui venturus est in mundum, Jesus ergo cum cognovisset, quia
venturi essent ut raperent eum, and facerent eum Regem, fugit interim in
montem; but they another time, desiting to eat, asked him bread, Domine semper
da nobis panem bune; and he at that time denying to give them temporal bread,
the multitude, which before when he gave them meat, had called him a Prophet,
and would have had him for their King, now they call him a Carpenters son,
for no other cause, but because he denied them corporal bread, when he meant
to set them at Gods own Table: Murmurabant ergo Judaei die illo, quia dixisset
ego (...) panis (...), qui de Caelo descendi, and dicebant nonne (...) est
(...) Joseph cujus nos novimus patrem and matrem? For there is no such
happiness to the people, as to have wherewith to fill their bellies. Whereupon
as S. Chrysostom observes, in making mention of the miracles and stupendous
Acts of Moses, they omitted all other, though far more mavelous, and
mentioned only that of Manna, Patres nostri (...) Manna in deserto.

A Prince therefore must of necessity, either maintain plenty, or else leave
his Principality, and specially one that comes newly to the Empire, as Augustus
did. And therefore Esaias, Prophesying of one whom the Israelites should require
to accept the Kingdom, shows that if they knew him not able to maintain
plenty, they should not accept him, In domo mea non (...) panis nolite
constituere me Regem super vos. Being assured, he could never hold his
Principality with dearth, as it happened to Prometheus King of the Scythians, who
not being able to maintain his people in plenty, by reason the Land was
overflowed with the River (...), he was cast into Prison; and because Hercules
turned that River into the Sea, and made the Country fruitful, the fable came
up, that an Eagle devoured the liver of Prometheus, and that Hercules freed him.

Having showed, that Augustus in the beginning of his reign, won the people
to him by procuring of plenty, it will be necessary to show, how dearths
happen, and by what means they may be helped, and how far the Prince is faulty
in them.

A dearth may happen first, from the barrenness of the soil, as it happened
to the Israelites in the Wilderness.

Secondly, It may happen, for want of Husbandmen to till the ground, which if
it were tilled, would be very sufficient and have to spare, as in times past,
it happened in Mesopotamia, and in our time would often happen in the Sea
coasts of Siena, if the care of the Serenissimo the great Duke did not supply
the want of Husbandmen.

Thirdly, it may happen through abundance of people, and smalnesse of
Territory, as in ancient time it would have happened at Rome, and would in our
time at Florence, if the one had not then had the Countries of Egypt and
Sicilie for a Granary, and the other had not now a gracious and provident
Prince for a purveyour.

Fourthly, it may happen through the sterility of the season, and of the year,
as particularly this year 1621.

Fifthly, many times there are Husbandmen and land enough to till, but is not
tilled, either by reason of war, or for some other cause, as it happened at
Rome not long after the banishment of the Tarquins; the people (as Livy
relates) by reason of dissentions with the Senate, refusing to till their
grounds, in such sort that they wanted not much of dying for hunger.

Lastly, it happens oftentimes, either by reason of a siege, as in Jerusalem,
where mothers did eat their own children; or through incursions of enemies,
as in Athens all the time of the civil war.

And although in none of these cases, any just blame can be laid upon the
Prince, yet it is his part to use all means, with money, diligence and power,
to make resistance against fortune, nature, and all accidents whatsoever.

In the first case, I shall not need to trouble my self to show, how a dearth
may be helped in desert places; seeing he might well be accounted a man without
brain, that would build a City, in a Country altogether barren: and though it
were so with the Israelites, yet their Tabernacles were for passage and not for
habitation.

If it should happen in the second case, that is for want of men, where there
is Land sufficient; here the Prince must induce men to marry, and draw in
strangers to dwell in the Country; the first will take effect, if the course
of Lycurgus be observed, who seeking to make the City of Sparta populous,
allowed great exemptions to them that begot children, or else if disburthening
them of taxes, (as the Duke of Parma at this day does in his State of Castro)
he shall give occasion, that gathering wealth, they may endeavor to have
children to whom to leave it; and by this course, he shall be able to draw
strangers also to come and live there. For men run willingly even with danger
of their lives, where they see there is certain and present profit to be had,
never having a thought of a future and uncertain death. Whereof we have example
in the State of Milan, where in some places the air is so unwholesome, that few
of the inhabitants ever come to be forty years old; yet in these places, men
growing rich, although they see this example daily before their eyes, yet they
choose rather to dwell there, than in other places of wholesome air. Another
course also may be taken, for this inconvenience, by drawing thither, a
foreign Nation, as Antiochus did, who causing two thousand families of Jews
to come and dwell in the Countries of Mesopotamia and Babylon, (as Josephus
relates) assighed them Land to till, and places where to build, and then
exempting them for ten years from tribute, he lastly gave order, they should
have so much Corn given them, as might serve them to live, till their own
should be reaped.

And lastly, those who dwell in such air, and in such Countries, should
indeed, have no other burdens laid upon them, but only the burden of bringing
up their children, Pauperes satis stipendit pendere (says Livy) si liberos
educent. But notlling prevails so much to make a place populous, as the
Princes living there: and so (...) Hostilius did; and we have experience of it
at Petiglidho, where whilst the Orsini that were Lords of it, kept their
residence, it was infinitely fuller of people than it is at this day, under the
(...) the great Duke of Thuscany, though governed by him, with admirable
justice and clemency; of so great importance is the presence of their natural
Lord, that many times men had rather have a tyrant, that should live amongst
them, than a good Prince, that should be far of.

Another way is no wadaies used by Princes for peopling such places, and it is,
by confining some petty delinquents thither; because, if they live, they
increase the number of the inhabitants; and if they die, the Prince receives no
loss by it. This invention whether good or bad, is yet most ancient; and we
have an example of it in Tacitus himself, Actum and de (...) Aegyptiis (...)
pellendis, factunque (...) consultum, ut quatuor millia libertini generis, and
superstitione infecti, queis Idonea aetas, in insulam Sardiniam (...),
coercendis illic latrociniis, and si ob gravitatem (...) vile damnum.

If the defect grow in the third case, that is, from smalnes of Territory,
where the people are many, the remedy here used, has been to send forth
Colonies; so Pericles did, to help a dearth that was at Athens. In this case
Plutarch in the life of Numa, gives a counsel, which is, that in such a City,
care must be taken that Trades be in account, and that idle persons be
punished; but the best course of all will be, that the Prince spare no cost to
fetch Corn, where it may be best had; so a thousand times did Tiberius, and so
Nero, who not regarding the great charge he had been at by Sea, nor the great
loss he had in Tyber, with infinite expenses, provided that the price of Corn
might not be raised. This course was notably followed, by the Serenissimo
Cosmo, second great Duke of Thuscany, who by the way of Livorno, and other
places, procured at his infinite charges, a perfect plenty; and sometimes out
of his own purse, has kept of Alms six thousand persons. I forbear to say,
that many years together, he spent of his own, to keep down the price of
Corn, above a hundred thousand Crowns: An act that exceeds any act whatsoever
of the Ancients, seeing that which moved them, was their own interest, and
matter of state; but that which moved him, was only the office of a Prince, and
the zeal of a Christian.

In the fourth case, provision will be made from other Countries, by such ways
as have been showed.

In the other two cases, where dearth may happen by reason of wars, caused by
sieges, and by incursion of enemies, the Commonwealths of the Swizzers, have
found out an excellent way, who in places under ground, have in store for many
years, all things belonging to victuals, and also to Trades; which course,
with great prudence, the Commonwealth of Lucca has taken to imitate.

But above all, the Prince must take heed, that he be not himself a cause of
the dearth, by making merchandise, and by engrossing, nor yet by suffering
others to do it, for then the fault will be laid upon the Prince, and the
Subjects will have just cause to complain. Likewise, that when the people are
in want, he continue not feasting, and feed upon dainties, as showing to take
little care of his Subjects misery; a thing most pernicious to Princes, who
should always take such part as the people do, thereby to encourage them the
more contentedly to bear their labors. This in the old Testament our Lord God
teaches us; who when the Israelites were in the Wilderness, and like
Shepherds dwelt in Tabernacles, he also would dwell in Tabernacles himself;
afterward when changing their course, they entered into war under their Judges
and Kings, and their Army used Tents, he also would then dwell in Tents too;
and when David desired to build him a Temple, he would not suffer him, until
such time, as there being peace under Solomon, every one might dwell in his own
house, and then he was contented to have a house also built for him. All this
is expressed in the Book of Kings, where he says, Neque enim habitavi in domo
ex die illa qua eduxi filios Israel de terra Aegypti, usque in diem hanc, sed
ambulabam in Tabernaculo and in Tentorio per cuncta loca, quae transivi cum
omnibus filiis Israel. But because this course was not imitated by Augustus,
who when the people died in the streets for hunger, himself made a sumptuous
banquet, where (as Suetonius relates) the guests sat in form of Gods and
Goddesses, and he in shape of Apollo, the people infinitely distasted it, and
was moved to great indignation. Auxit caenae rumorem, summa tunc in civitate
penuria, ac fames, acclamatumque postridie est, frumentum omne Deos coniedisse.

But if he shall be no occasion of the dearth, and much less show himself to
rejoice at it, he may then convert it to his own profit, either by getting of
money, or increasing his authority, or otherwise by winning the love of his
people. Pharao King of Egypt, by means of a dearth and Joseph's counsel
became Lord of all Egypt, Emit igitur Joseph omnem terram Aegypti, vendentibus
singulis possessiones suas, prae magnitudine fantis, subjecitque eam Pharaoni,
and cunctos populos suos, a novissimis terminis Aegypti, usque ad extremos
fines ejus; which purchase was not distasteful to the people, for the cause
aforesaid; but rather they accounted themselves obliged to the King for it,
saying, Salus nostra in manu tua est, respiciat tantum nos Dominus noster, and
laeti serviemus Regi. Whereupon I conclude, that when a great famine was in
Rome, and the Senators had fetched Corn from Sicilie, then had been a fit
time to take the authority from the people, which they had usurped. This,
Coriolanus in Livy well knew, whose conceit yet was not approved of others; not
because it was not sufficient being used with less violence, to take away that
authority, but because it was not sufficient to maintain it, seeing the
Senators having a purpose to augment the Commonwealth, and consequently to
make use of the peoples Arms, they might conceive, that those Magistrates who
had left their authority in time of dearth, would afterward, the dearth
ceasing, resume it again by force.

A dearth then thus managed, will be a means to get the Prince, both authority
and riches, and the love also of his Subjects. As we see in Herod the great,
who being a Prince the most hated of his people that ever any was; yet only by
relieving them with Corn, in a time of dearth, he made himself beloved,
obliged, and freed from a thousand dangers.

Cunctos dulcedine otii pellexit.
What kind of ease it is that Tacitus speaks of, and how it may be reconciled
with some places in other Authors. The sixteenth Discourse:

IN these words Cornelius Tacitus shows us, that Augustus by means of
procuring ease, got himself the love of all men. And because, he as a new
Prince, ought rather to have sought how to maintain himself in his Empire;
then how with his own danger to procure delights to his Subjects; it seems, he
might for this be reproved, there being a precept of Aristotle in his
Politics, where teaching the true way that a Prince ought to take, for
maintaining him in his State, he persuades this specially, not to keep the
people in ease, and gives us for example the Kings of Egypt, who to the end
their people should not stand idle, caused so many Pyramides, and Mausoleums to
be built, as Pisistratus the tyrant built the Olympus, and Polycrates a
thousand Fabrics about Samos, Haec enim omnia (says Aristotle) fuerunt
instituta ad otium and quietem populorum tollendam, ut illi quotidianis
molostiis occupati, vacare non possent ad consilia contra tyrannos ineunda. And
there is reason for it, as is said in Ecclesiasticus, Cibaria and Virga and
Onus Asino, Panis and Disciplina and opus servo, operatur in disciplina and
quaerit libertatem, jugum illorum curvat collum, and servum inclinant
operationes assiduae servo malevolo tortura, and compedes, mitte illum in
operationem ne vacet; multam enim malitiam docuit otiositas. And so much more
might Augustus be blamed for it, seeing (as we have showed before) he
maintained the people in plenty; and now if to plenty be added case, it cannot
choose but be the ruin of any City whatsoever. Haec fuit iniquitas Sodomae,
(says Ezechiel) Abundantia panis and otii.

And again, because this ease assigned by Tacitus came presently after a
war, his fault may be the more, there being a passage of Aristotle in his
Politics, where he says, That the Lacedaemonians passing from war to ease,
incurred great danger.

Thirdly, there is a place in Livy also, that crosses this of Tacitus, where
he says, that Tarquinius Priscus, after his fight with the Latins returning
to Rome in peace, kept the people in continual and laborious exercises, of
which Livy says, Majore inde animo Pacis opera inchoata (...) quanta mole
gesserat bell a, ut non quietior populus domi esset, quam militiae fuisset.

To reconcile then these four Texts, it must be showed, that neither of them
is repugnant to another, but that all of them agree together. First, I
distinguish of ease, which, as to our purpose, is of two kinds; ease, which is
a desisting from any action at all; and ease, which is contrary to war;
because war being a violent action, those soldiers which are in peace,
although they have other exercises, yet are said to be at ease; seeing
desisting from war, they desist from that violent action, which is proper to
them. In this sense Aristotle once took ease, where speaking of the
Lacedaemonians, he says, Splendorem enim veluti ferrum, per pacem amittunt;
causa hujus est legis positor, qui non ita instituit, ut in otio stare possint.

By means of this distinction, this place of Tacitus is reconoiled with the
first place out of Aristotle; seeing (...) by ease here, means not an ease
contrary to all action; for Augustus both with sports and plays, and
buildings, held the people in continual work, insomuch that he could boast,
he had made Rome a City of Marble, which he found but of Brick; but he means
it of that ease which is contrary to war. And this is plainly seen, because
having said before, Cuncta discordiis civilibus sessa, he presently comes in
with this very word, Cunctos dulcedine otii pellexit. Thus Aristotle agrees
with him exceeding well, in that Text, where he likes the people should be held
in action but not in war: and indeed in such actions, as debase men, and are
worse then ease. So dealt Pharao with the Israelites, putting them to make
Brick, and other most base works. Whereupon it is said in Exodus, Praeposuit
i^aque eis Magistros operum, ut affligerent eos operibus; and a little after,
Oderant filios Israel Aegyptii, and assligebant cos, and invidentes eis, atque
ad amaritudinem perducebant vitam eorum, operibus duris luti and lateris,
omnique famulatu.

But to this resolution, that place of Livy before cited is most contrary,
wherespeaking of Tarquinius Priscus, he shows, that returning from the wars, he
held the people in hard and cruel labors. For answer whereunto we must
distinguish, that the Princes are either in terms of getting more, or else but
of keeping that they have already gotten; if to get more, then it is necessary
to hold the people in hard labors, to the end they may not lose courage, and
be imbased in their spirits. And therefore no marvel that Tarquinius Priscus
teaches us to hold the people in hard labors, seeing the Romans at that time
had no other end, but to enlarge their Empire. But if the Prince have no aim
at augmentation by new acquests and stands not so much in fear of external
enemies, as of friends at home, he then ought to let the people enjoy a
negotious ease, of buildings, and plays, and such like things. And this made
Augustus take this course, because he aimed not at all, at any amplifying of
his Empire, as from many places in Tacitus may be gathered, and particularly
from that place where in the first of his Annals he says, Bellum ea tempestate
nulnum, nist adversus Germanos, abolendae potius injuriae, ob (...) cum Prisco
Varo exercitum, quam cupidine proferendi Imperii. And in another place where he
says, Consilium coercendi intra terminos Imperium, whereby we see, he was
minded rather to restrain, then to enlarge the Empire.

Lastly, it remains to reconcile that other place of Aristotle in the second
of his Politics, where by the example of the Lacedaemonians, he shows, that
after war, to be left to live at ease, is a dangerous thing.

For Resolution whereof, I say, that the passing from war to ease, is then
dangerous, when men return from a short war, and in which they have had the
better; because they that get victories, by reason of the pride which victory
brings with it, are apt in Cities, to raise commotions. So it fell out amongst
the Lacedaemonians, and so a thousand times it has been like to fall out
amongst the Romans, whereof, in the whole first decad of Livy we may see
examples. But when men come from a war bloody and long; then they love and
are glad of peace. Whereupon in our case the Romans coming from an infinity of
civil wars, in which to win was no better than to lose; and being now
weary, as is gathered by the words, Cuncta discordiis civilibus fessa, they
became not only desirous, but apt also to tolerate ease.

It is now sufficiently proved, that Tacitus, or to say better, Augustus is no
way discordant either from the precepts of Aristotle, or from the examples of
Livy, but that with great judgment, he undeavoured to win every one with ease.

Lastly, it is necessary to reconcile Tacitus with himself, who in this place
praises ease, and yet afterward examining the causes of the tumults in
Germany, he says, Habebantur per otium; as though ease were the cause of those
rebellions. To which I briefly say, there is great difference between the ease
that is in a City, and the ease that is of soldiers in war; because the end
of a City, is to live in peace, whereof the ease spoken of before is a
companion; but the chief end of soldiers at the wars, is to fight, to which
ease is contrary and an enemy: and so the soldier with ease, and the Citizen
by war, are deprived of their ends, and consequently in short time run into
danger.

Neque Provinciae illum rerum statum abnuebant, suspecto Senatus Populique
Imperio ob certamina Potentium, and avaritiam Magistratuum: invalido legum
auxilio, quae vi, ambitu, postremo pecunia turbabantur.
That Cities subject to another City, better like the government of a King,
than of a Commonwealth, and that every City would gladly have their Lord to
live amongst them. The seventeenth Discourse.

Cornelius Tacitus in these words makes us know, that the Provinces subject to
the people of Rome, liked better the government of a King, than of a
Commonwealth, as it happens generally to all Cities that are subject to
another: So Guicciardine relates of Cremona, that it liked better to be under
the King of France, than to be governed by the Commonwealth of Venice. And
hereof we have a manifest example in Pisa, which being sold by Gabriel Maria
Visconte, to the Commonwealth of Florence, there was scarce one Citizen that
would tarry in it. But more than in any other, we may see the truth of this, in
the Lycians, who having tried what it was to live under a King, and under a
Commonwealth, they called the servitude of that, in comparison of this,
liberty. Neque miserabilis legatio Lyctorum, qui crudelitatem Rhodiorum quibus
ab Lucio Cornelio attributi erant, quaerebantur fuisse sub ditione (...) eam
Regiam servitutem, collatam cum praesenti statu pnaeelaram libertatem visam:
Non publico tantum se (...) imperio, sed singulos injustum pati servitium.

Of these points we will speak, first in particular of Rome, then in general
give the reasons; Lastly, we will show, that every City would we glad to be
under a particular Prince, and one that should dwell amongst them.

Concerning the first; all those changes of State, which come from a worse,
must needs be welcome; from whence it is, that after the expulsion of the
Tarquins, liberty was so pleasing, Et ut laetior esset (says Livy) proximi
Regis superbia fecit. That in our case, the Commonwealth was corrupted even to
the worst degree, is sufficiently expressed by Tacitus in the foresaid words.
First, by reason of the discord of the great ones; one of which factions there
was a necessity to follow, and that overcome, all then remained at the
discretion of the other. Secondly, by occasion of the Magistrates, who sought
rather to satisfy their avarice with money, than to take care for the
executing of justice. Thirdly, because the laws had now no more place, as being
easily corrupted by force and money. Just cause therefore had the Provinces, to
be glad of the government of Augustus.

But because this liking of a subject City, to be rather under a Prince than
under a Commonwealth, (as we have said before) is a common liking of all
Provinces and Cities that are under another, It will be necessary to search out
the reason, why it is so. And for a first reason, (...) certain politioian
brings this, because Commonwealths are more durable than Kingdoms; and being
more durable, there is less hope to shake off their servitude, and are
therefore the more hated. Secondly, because Commonwealths having no other
care, but to make themselves greater, and others less; they endeavor only to
weaken the subject Cities, and to strengthen their own body; a thing which
Princes care not to do: and for this, he brings the example of the Samnites,
who as long as they were of themselves, maintained war with the Romans a
hundred years; a manifest sign, they were then a strong people; but
afterward falling in subjection to Rome, they became most weak, and of no
force.

But because the first of these reasons is false, and the second follows no
less in Kingdoms than in Commonwealths, (with leave of so great a man) I
have conceived perhaps a better reason, and it is, because the Provinces and
Cities having been at war, and by reason of the war, grown to hate one
another, and that hatred in process of time become natural, as it was between
the Romans and the Carthaginians, between the Pisanes and the Florentines, and
others; it happens, that being overcome, they are held in subjection by their
natural enemies; which subjection is so much the more distasteful, as being
between persons that are equal: and from hence it is, that so gladly men seek
to shake of the yoke. So, many times did Pisa, so Spain with the Romans, who
doubting the like of Greece; as knowing by their continual rebellions, that
they il brooked their subjection to the Commonwealth of Rome, they destroyed
many Cities, and at last Corinth.

But if it happen that this Commonwealth fall into the hand of a Prince, there
is no doubt but the other Cities and Provinces will be glad: a principal
reason is, because where these served, and those ruled before with inequality,
now under a Prince, they both serve equally; and coming to be commanded, by
persons much their superiors, the Dominion is so much less hated, as the
person is greater that commands; and therefore we see, that Pisa which under a
Commonwealth was always in rebellion, now that it is under a Prince, has
lived, and does live, and is like to live, in most quiet peace; it is true
indeed, there concurres the graciousnesse of the Prince that sweetens all
things. Another manifest example we have in the Roman Histories; and it is,
that Spain, as long as the City of Rome was a Commonwealth, was continually in
rebellion; nor could ever be quieted, till the said City came into the hand of
a Prince under Augustus. I omit the example of the Philistines, who never left
warring with the Israelites, from the first day (I may say) they entered into
the Land of Promise, until they were settled in a Regal government under David.

To come to the third head: not only Cities and Provinces cannot abide to be
under the rule of a Commonwealth; but neither do they like to be under a
Prince that is a stranger, and that dwells not amongst them; which Prince may
either be of different customs and language, as the King of Spain to Naples
and Milan; or of the same customs and language, but of diverse Provinces, as
the King of France to Burgundy and Britain; or else of the same Province, the
same tongue, and the same customs, as many Princes of Italy, to many Cities.

In the first case, they are not well brooked, but tolerated with an ill will:
First, by reason of the difference of customs, which is able to make a Prince
odious, though he be not a stranger: whereupon Tacitus speaking of Ven^ne given
to the Parthians to be their King, shows, that because he was of different
customs from the Parthians, though of better than theirs, he was with ignominy
expelled the Kingdom. Accendebat dedignantes and ipse diversus a Majorum
institutis, raro venatu, segni equorum cura, quoties per urbem incederet,
lecticae stamine, fastusque erga patrias epulas, irridebantur and Graeci
Comites, ac vilissima utensilium annulo clausa, sed prompti aditus, obvia
comitas, ignotae Parthis virtutes, nova vitia, and quia ipse majoribus aliena
perinde odium pravis atque honestis. For the very same reason, the Goths took
it ill, that Amalasunta caused Attalaricus to be brought up in the Roman
customs, although they were better than their own. And therefore Isabel Queen
of Spain, by her last Will, left Ferdinand her Husband to be Governor of
Castile, for so long time, until Philip who was to succeed, being a stranger,
might learn the customs of the Spaniards. And for this cause, the Jews at
the coming of the Messiah, were troubled together with Herod, and liked better
to be in subjection to one of their own customs, though a stranger as Herod
was, than to the Messiah that was of different, though better customs;
although they knew by the words of Moses, Prophetam suscitabit Dominus de
medio fratrum tuorum, that he should be their own Countreyman, of which S.
Chrysostom gives the reason, Fuerunt isti turbati, quia injusti non possunt
gaudere de adventu justi.

Secondly, because difference of Language is a most odious thing; and this out
of his singular providence God foreseeing, and meaning to hinder (...)
enterprise, to make himself a Monarch, he confounded the Tongues, and thereby
easily gave a stop to their proceeding. On the contrary, when our Lord meant
that his Apostles should make some fruit of their labors, he would not have
them preach in a strange Tongue, and therefore gave to every one of them, all
Tongues, that so more easily they might draw men to receive the Faith. And the
Romans knowing, what advantage there is in this, compelled all their subjects,
when they spoke in the Senate, to speak in the Roman tongue. And Rabsaces,
knowing of how great importance, the likeness of Language is, to win the love
of the people, to the end the Israelites might the willinger receive the
government of Senacherib, though Sohna the Jew, out of a contrary end, prayed
him to speak in the Syriack tongue, Loquere lingua Syriaca ad servos tuos; yet
he an understanding man (as is written in Esaias) Clamavit Lingua Judaica;
whereupon Esaias, in another place, showing the hate and fear, which the City of
Jerusalem had of the King of the Assyrians; amongst other causes, names their
differing in language, Populum impudentem non videbis, populum alti sermonis,
ita ut non possis intelligere disertitudinem linguae ejus.

Thirdly, when to difference of customs and language, there is added
remoteness, it will add no doubt a great degree of distastfulnesse. First,
because they will be more obnoxious to the dangers of war. And therefore the
Tribe of Dan, seeing Lais to be far off from Sydon, which had then the
government, attempted to bring it in subjection, and it took effect. And that
this was the cause that moved them, may be gathered from words in the Book of
Judges; Euntes igitur quinque viri venerunt Lais, videruntque populum
habitantem in ea absque ullo timore, juxta consuetudinem Sydoniorum securum and
quietum, nullo eis penitus resistente, magnarumque opum and procul a Sydone,
atque a cunctis hominibus seperatum. And that by this means, they easily made
themselves Masters of it, is written also a little after, where he says,
Sexcenti autem viri tulerunt sacerdotem, and quae supra diximus, veneruntque ad
Lais ad populum quiescentem and securum, and percusserunt eos in ore gladii,
urbemque incendio tradiderunt; nullo penitus ferente praesidium, Eo quod procul
habitarent a Sydone. So it happened to the Saguntines, who being far remote
from the Romans their confederats, were destroyed before they could be aided.
And therefore the Armenians standing in doubt of this, put themselves into the
hands of Mithridates, and revolted from the Romans. So the people of Syria
desired to live under the government of the Parthians, as being near unto
them, and neighboring upon them. Secondly, because people that are far off,
must of necessity be governed by a Deputy, who by reason of the Princes
remoteness must have great authority given him, and consequently may at his
pleasure, contrary to the Princes meaning, play the tyrant over them. For all
those things that have motion from another, and a motion of their own besides,
how much they are less near to the first mover, so much they are more able to
move their own way. From hence it is, that the Moon, being of all the Planets
the farthest off from the Primum mobile, is moved faster in her own motion, and
slower in the diurnall motion, than any of the other. The contrary whereof is
seen in Saturn, which being near to the Primum mobile, has the slowest
motion, and makes the least resistance.

Yet in the second and third case, they will more easily be tolerated; although
as well in this as in that, there is a general rule that seems to cross it;
which is, that every City would gladly have a Prince that should be resident
amongst them, and also be a native of their City. That one of the same Nation
and City is most acceptable, is plainly seen, because the people for the most
part waves justice, and regards not so much the general good, to choose the
worthiest; as their private benefit, to choose the nearest. And therefore the
Prophet Esaias says, Apprehendet enim vir fratrem suum Domesticum patris sui,
and dicet; vestimentum tibi est, Princeps noster esto. Where S. Thomas observes
well, that every one seeks to make him King, that is nearest, and not him that
is best. Indeed this respect of neernesse is of special force; as we may see
in David, who being chosen King, was followed only by the Tribe of Juda, Sola
autem domus Juda sequebatur David. So Abimelech was more willingly received of
the Sichemites, then the sons of Jerobeam, when he said unto them, Simul
considerate quod Os vestrum and Caro vestra sum, They were all presently moved
to say to him, Frater noster es. The Milanesi exposed themselves to a thousand
dangers, out of a desire they had, to be governed rather by one of the Sforzi,
then by the King of Spain or France. And the Faentines chose rather a bastard
of Manfredi, then to be under the Church. So the Armenians (as is said before)
subjected themselves to (...), and revolted from the Romans. Finally, we have a
notable example of this, in the life of Aratus, to whom it was imputed. as a
great fault, that he would rather call to his aid, Philip King of Macedon, then
put his Cities into the hands of Cleomenes a Spartan. Quod si omnino (says
Plutarch) Cleomenes injustus fuerit, atque Tyrannicus, tamen Heraclidarum
genere, patria (...) suisse, and quidem iis qui rationem aliquam Graeciae
Nobilitatis (...), Spartanorum obscurissimum potius, quam primum inter
Macedonas Ducem deligendum fuisse. Whereupon our Lord God, meaning to give the
man Regal power over the woman, to the end it might be tolerated with more
contentment, made her of a ribbe of Adam. And to conclude, in Deuteronomy, he
commanded his people, they should not choose a stranger to be their King.

But because this my opinion is full of difficulty, seeing oftentimes a City
desires to be governed rather by a stranger then by one of their own Citizens,
it will be necessary to use distinction; either it is the first time a Kingdom
is erected, or else they have been used to Regal power before: if it be the
first time, they will then rather choose to serve a stranger, then one of their
own Citizens: First, because knowing the Citizens beginning they are apt to
scorn him. So it fell out with the Israelites, the first time they had a King,
for being most desirous to see who it should be, when they saw it was Saul,
they scorned him. Number salvare nos poterit iste? and despexerunt eum. Secondly,
it happens often by reason of factions that are in the City; for such desire
rather to be governed by a stranger, as a man indifferent, then by a Citizen
that is an enemy. Seeing such a one coming to the government, would certainly
sill the City with blood and slaughter. Whereupon Livy says, Cum pars quae
domestico certamine inferior sit, externo potius se applicet quam civi cedat. A
third reason is drawn from envy; for an envious man endeavors always to
obscure the worthiness of his Countrymen, as lying more in envies way then a
stranger, whereof S. Hierome says, Propemodum natural est semper, cives
civibus invidere; invidia autem est, tristitia de aliena excellentia, ut est
proprii boni diminutiva. Bonum autem absentium non (...) nostra, quia non
confert eis, Ideo non invidemus, bona autem praesentium conferunt bonis
nostris, and comparatione excellentiae eorum, ostenditur parvum esse bonum
nostrum, and hoc est illud Diminui. And of this we have the example of our Lord
Christ, who being persecuted by his Countrymen, was invited by Abagarus a
foreign Prince, that would have made him in part King with him in his City. A
third reason may be this, that Countrymen know a man from his infancy, when
there is yet no virtue in him, and thereupon consider him but as such a one
still; where strangers that come not to know a man but in his perfection,
cannot, nor know not how to consider him other then as such. So the said S.
Hierome says, Quia cives non considerant, praesentia viri opera, sed fragilis
^ecordantur Infantiae. It is therefore no marvel, that the Florentines chose
rather, to be governed by a French man, then by one of their own Citizens. Our
Lord God, knowing how difficult a thing it is, to choose at the first time,
ones own Countreyman to be Prince; In the old law, to the end the Israelites
having a desire to have a King, and not yielding one to another, might not
subject themselves to a stranger, he made a law, they should choose none to be
their King, but only an Israelite, Non poteris alterius generis hominem in
Regem facere, quod non sit frater tuus; But because he knew, it would be a hard
matter for them to agree upon the choice at the first time, he therefore made
that election himself, Eum constitues quem Dominus Deus tuus elegerit de medio
fratrum tuorum. And when lastly he came to choose him, to the end he might be
less envied, he took a course, that causes least envy, and that was by Lot.
But if the people have been accustomed before to a Regal subjection, in this
case they will rather like to be governed by one of their own Country then a
stranger; and so much the more, if some of his family have been Governor
before; there being then no place for either envy, fear, or for equality. It
is therefore no marvel, that Caesar was but ill beloved, and was slain, and
that (...) lived quietly, and had the love of all men, seeing Caesar raised his
House from equality; and Augustus found it in superiority, in which the
Dictatour had left it: whereupon when I consider how it happened, that our Lord
God would at the first time make a King by election, and afterward would have
it to go by succession in David; I cannot conceive a better reason than this,
that he knew after the first time, the election of a King would be without
difficulty.

In this particular, let every one be of what opinion he please; but for this
other point, I do not think it will be denied me, that all Cities and
Provinces like better to be governed by a particular Prince, that dwells amongst
them, then by any other how great soever he be. For this cause it was, that the
Spaniards were not well pleased when Charles the fifth was made Emperor; and
were ready to rise, because they feared he would leave dwelling in Spain, and
make his residence in Germany. This desire was the cause, that the Persians, to
have a King in their own Province, set up Cyrus against Astyages, who resided
in Media; and out of this desire the Britains covenanted with the King of
France, that his eldest son coming to the Crown, his second son should be
Duke of Britain; whereof there can be no other reason, but the desire to have
a particular Prince, that should dwell amongst them, as being indeed of
special benefit to the people. First, because living amongst them, he spends
those Revenues in the Country which he draws from the Country. Secondly,
because of the greater care the Prince has of them; and because of the peoples
neernesse to their Lords ear, to whom they can present their suites in their
own persons; without wasting themselves in journeys, and lying at Innes.
Lastly, because if the Prince being Lord of many Provinces, reside in one of
them; the other must be feign to be governed by Deputies of that Province. The
Emperors of Rome residing in Italy, governed all the Provinces by Italians, a
thing most distasteful to all the people; because to one that is not grieved to
be subject to a Prince that is a stranger, yet it grieves him to be governed by
men of a Province that is a stranger: as many people that are content to be
subject to the King of Bohemia, yet refuse to be subject to the Kingdom of
Bohemia. And the King of France, after many times losing Genoua by this means,
at last he resolved to govern it by Genuesi. So in Milan he made Trivultio
Governor, wherein though he erred, yet the error was in the Individual, and
not in the Species; as putting the government into his hand, that was Head of a
Faction. But if the Prince be resident in the Province, though he be a
stranger, yet with better liking he will be tolerated; because such commonly
not only govern the places where they reside, but all other places subject to
them, by Citizens of that Country where they reside. The King of Spain,
residing in Spain, governes all his subject Kingdoms by Spaniards, a thing
which not only winnes love to the Prince, but profit also to the Province. To
this may be added, that those people shall always receive more favors, who
are near to the Fountain from whence those favors come, then they shall do
that are further off; seeing, (as S. Thomas learnedly observes) how much a
thing is nearer to its beginning, so much it partakes more of the effects of
that beginning. And for this cause Dionysius Areopagita says, that the Angels
as being nearer to God than men are, do therefore partake more of the divine
goodness then men do.

I cannot omit to advertise, that all the difficulties before spoken of, are
easily allayed, after the first heats are once passed, as often as there is found
a prudence and graciousnesse in the Prince, which is indeed of mavelous great
moment, as was seen in the Romans, who though they hated strangers, and were
resolved to have no stranger be their King; yet when (...) (a stranger) was
propounded to them; in regard of his eminent virtue, they accepted of him.
Whereof Livy says, Romani veteres peregrinum Regem aspernabantur, and a little
after, Audito nomine (...), patres Romani, quanquam inclinari opes ad Sabinos,
Rege inde sumpto, videbantur, tamen neque se quisquam, nec factionis suae
alium, nec denique Patrum aut civium quenquam praeferre, illi vero ausi ad
(...) omnes (...) Pompilio Regnum deferendum decernunt. Whereupon it is no
marvel, if at this day many Provinces and Cities, whereof some have a Prince
that lives far off; and some, a Prince that is a stranger, of customs and
language different; yet they all live in great contentment, only thorough the
just government of him that rules them. I desire therefore that this discourse
of mine may be received, as of the times past, my purpose being to search out
the reasons of things have formerly happened; and not expressly or tacitly to
tax any Prince, Commonwealth or City, nor so much as any particular person:
For above all things, I abhor slandering, and specially of those to whom as
superiors I owe Reverence.

Caeterum Augustus subsidia dominationi Claudium Marcellum sororis filium
admodum adolescentem: Pontificatu and curuli Aedilitate Marcum Agrippam
ignobilem loco, bonum Militia, and victoriae socium geminatis consulatibus
extulit, mox defuncto Marcello generum sumpsit, Tiberium Neronem and Claudium
Drusum privignos Imperatoriis nominibus auxit.
What means Princes may use with safety to set them in a way, that are to
succeed them in the government. The eighteenth Discourse.

IT is plainly seen, that Augustus to the end the Senators nor any other,
should ever hope to reduce Rome to its ancient form of government, held this
for a special Maxim of State, to advance his nearest kindred; and to set some
one of them in the way for managing the Empire, that so making him privy to all
affairs, making him known to the fouldiers, making him beloved of the people;
and lastly, making him favored of the Senators: both he after his death might
have his way made to come to the Empire; and on the contrary no hope might be
left for any to attempt any thing against the life of the Prince, being propped
up with so many Pillars. And therefore, Vt (...) insisteret, he raised
Marcellus, he advanced Marcus Agrippa; and after them, Tiberius Nero, (...)
Drusus, (...) and Lucius sons of Agrippa; and lastly, would have Tiberius to
adopt Germanicus and (...) to be his successors. And accordingly, (...)
advanced to the Consulship, and other honors, (...) and (...); and after them
Caius Caesar. Whereupon by the example of such great men, this course perhaps
may be thought worthy of imitation, as well for securing ones self from
danger, as also for lessening in part the burden of those great labors, which
so great a dignity brings with it: so much the more as we have in Cornelius
Tacitus, a manifest example of Sejanus, who by no other means was stopped in
his course, but only by the number of successors Tiberius had ordained; and
this stopping, as in conspiracies it uses, was cause at last, that the Prince
discovered all his practices. But because of the other side, the desire of rule
blinds the minds of the most inward and domesticke friends; It seems to be no
safe course for a Prince, whilst he lives himself, to give any great authority
to successors. For Invidia Regni (as Livy says) etiant inter Domesticos
infida omnia atque infesta (...) caused his son to be elected King, but this
served not his sons turn, who thereupon would have killed his father. So
Absolon meant to do, and when with safety he might have expected the Kingdom,
after the death of his old father David, he would rather with wickedness
prevent it, and run (...) allong into (...), (...) etiam (...), (says (...)
upon another occasion) ^ tarda cum securitate praeniatura, vel cum exitio
properant. And therefore Selim being assumed into part of the Empire, by his
father Bajaset, could not stay to expect it with peace, but sought by the death
of his father, to make himself sole Lord. And the like intention had Mustapha
toward Sultan Solomon, and thereby lost his life. Finally, this advancing of
his successors, had but ill luck with Augustus; for Tiberius (as is commonly
conceived) caused him to be poisoned: and with Tiberius it proved not much
better, who also toward the end of his life, had the kindness of Caius
Caesar, to help him to his death. For resolution, it may be said, that where a
State is quiet, accustomed to pass by succession, in children legitimate;
there it is in no wise sit, to take them into part of the Empire, there being
no cause, with ones own danger, to take away hopes where there are none, or to
seek for props where no part threatens ruin. But on the other side, when the
State is in danger, not accustomed to live under a Prince, and is apt to
rebellions; in such case, it may do well, to call him that is to succeed, to
be a cosort in the Empire. To this purpose it seems the example tends, which
Tacitus relates of Augustus: he caused Tiberius to be called Filius, to show he
was his successor; Collega Imperii, to enter him in managing affairs; Consors
Tribunitiae Potestatis, to make him gracious with the people; Omnique per
exercitus ostentatur, to make him beloved, and known to the soldiers.

Nevertheless having considered a little better of this matter, I have altered
my opinion, concerning the last; and as to the example of Augustus, though it
proved well for his successor; to bring him to the Empire, yet it proved but
ill for his own person: for by this means, he became as it were a servant to
(...), who finally caused him by his own wife to be poisoned.

I therefore conceived, the better course would be, to advance the managing of
the Empire; not one alone, but many; because, by this means, not only he
shall make himself secure from those of the City; but from those also of his
own Family. This lesson I learn from Aristotle in his Politics, where he
says, Communis vero custodia omnis Dominationis unius est, neminem unum prae
caeteris magnum facere, sed plures, nam se invicem custodiunt: being an
excellent remedy against the insatiablenesse of men, to afford them some one,
upon whom they may vent their ambition, without turning it against the Prince.
For this cause perhaps, the ancients invented the name of fortune; to the end,
that men falling into any great disaster, should not turn their anger against
God, but lay the fault upon the false Deity of fortune. And in truth there is
none has more need to make use of this invention then Princes; because
naturally, men seeking to rise above their degree; when they have another like
to themselves, they may turn their practices against him, and not attempt any
thing against the Prince, as they would do, if they had not some upon whom to
work, and vent their ambition. This good fortune happened to Tiberius, for when
Sejanus would rise above his degree, first he had Drusus against whom to turn
him; and afterward the sons of Germanicus, in oppressing of whom, he lost so
much time, that all his practices came to be discovered. To this opinion of
mine, the course of Augustus was not contrary, but it seems he followed it as
long as he was able; seeing Tacitus relates, that he advanced not Marcellus
alone, but together with him Marcus Agrippa; and when Marcellus died, he left
not Agrippa alone, but joined with him Tiberius Nero, and Claudius Drusus; and
when Drusus died, he yet left not Tiberius alone, but brought forward Caius and
Lucius: and although when both these died, he left Tiberius alone; yet it
cannot be said, he did well in doing so: and therefore Tacitus makes an excuse
for him, that he did it by reason of age, Nan^ senem Augustum adeo devinxerat,
ut nepotem unicum Agrippae (...) in insulam Planasiam projiceret: in which if
he had done well, Tacitus had not needed to make his excuse: and even Augustus
himself perceived at last his error, as he that always held it for a maxim
of State, not to have only one, but many upon whom to lean, Vt pluribus
munimentis insisteret: whereupon at last, the poor old man opening his eyes,
and seeking to provide for it in a time, when he had done better to dissemble
it, having overslipt his time so long, he made show to call Agrippa Posthumus
home, Et inde spem fore (says Tacitus) ut penatibus avi redderetur. And the
making that show, was a hastener of his death. Also Philip after he had put
Demetrius to death, he perceived his error to let Perseus stay alone;
whereupon he meant to bring in his familiar friend Antigonus, for a
counterpoise, giving out, he should succeed him in the Kingdom, but was
prevented by death. Therefore Tiberius also considering this, advanced not
Germanicus alone, but Drusus with him, Seque tutiorem rebatur, utroque filio
legiones obtinente: knowing well, it would be impossible they should ever join
together in any attempt against him. Quia arduum and difficile est, eodem loci
concordiam and potentiam esse: whereupon he was secure he should always have
them of his side. And when Germanicus died, he left not Drusus alone, but
brought in Sejanus, whereof Drusus infinite times complained, Crebro quaerens
Incolumi filio adjutore Imperii, alium vocari. And when Drusus was dead, and
Sejanus left alone, Tiberius was then in no small danger; which he perceiving,
had determined to bring in Nero son of Germanicus; but afterward being
secured of the fall of Sejanus, he put him to death; and then Caius Caesar
remained alone. Whereupon Tiberius finding himself in the same straight, in
which Augustus was when Tiberius was left alone; although he knew the danger,
and that it was no safety for him, that all favor should be cast upon one; yet
being old, and ill-beloved of all, having thoroughly considered, what course he
might best take to secure himself from Caius Caesar; he could find none, as I
conceive, but such as would rather be a course to hasten his death; and
therefore in that case he showed himself much wiser then Augustus: and
although Cornelius Tacitus attribute it to another matter, where he says,
Consilium cui impar er at sato permisit: which was to make choice of another
successor; yet I, without taxing his opinion, would think that he forbore
this new election, lest coming to the ears of Caius Caesar, it might put him
upon some practice to procure his death, as he himself had done before to
Augustus; and the rather as knowing himself to be exceeding weak, Reputante
Tiberio publicum sibi odium, extremam aetatem, magisque fama quam vi stare res
suas.

But because Augustus and Tiberius knew well, how much it imported, to have
more successors then one: yet each of them was brought at last to have but
one, and could not help it: it will be fit to think upon some way, how a
Prince that is brought to such a straight, may both enter such a successor in
affairs of State, and yet secure himself from domestic dangers. As for the
entering him, and setting him in a way; it will be easily done, by putting him
into those steps, which himself passed to attain the Empire: and by this way,
the House of Austria at this day maintains it self in the Empire. An
instruction of Augustus, and afterward followed by Tiberius, who coming to the
Empire by means of the Tribuneship, they also used to make their successors
Tribunes. Id summi fastigii vocabulum Augustus reperit, ne Regis aut dictatoris
nomen adsumeret, ac tamen appellatione aliqua caetera imperia praemineret:
Marcum deinde Agrippam socium ejus potestatis, quo defuncto (...) Neronem
delegit, ne successor in incerto foret: sic cohiberi pravas aliorum spes
rebatur, simul modestiae Neronis and suae magnitudini fiebat, quo tunc exemplo
Tiberius Drusum summae rei admovet. The difficulty then consists only in
securing himself against his successor, being too potent; and the best way,
that I can learn out of Histories is this; not to suffer him together with the
dignity, to get the love and affection of the Subjects. This Augustus put in
execution, until he was blinded by his wives entreaties. For when he demanded
the Tribuneship for Tiberius, under color of excusing him, he laid open all
his ill conditions, thereby to make him odious. Etenim Augustus paucis ante
annis, cum Tiberio Tribunitiam potestatem a Patribus rursus postularet,
quanquam honora oratione quaedam de habitu cultuque and institutis ejus
jecerat, quae velut excusando exprobraret. To what end should Augustus demand
honors for Tiberius, and himself dishonor him? but only to this, that as by
means of the dignity which could not be denied him, he meant to settle in him
the succession, so by means of making known his vices, he meant to make him
odiou^ and thereby secure himself, that he might never be able through the
peoples favor, to contrive any plot against him. Tiberius also made use of
this course, and therefore caused Drusus to be present always at the sports of
the Gladiatours; to the end, that by showing himself delighted with the sight
of blood, he might be known to be of a cruel and bloody disposition, and
consequently be of all men hated. Whereupon Tacitus discoursing upon the
reasons, why Tiberius himself would not be present at them; amongst other, he
mentions this, where he says, Non crediderim ad ostentandam saevitiam
movendasque offensiones concessam filio materiem, quamquam id quoque dictum
est. Another time, when Tiberius saw Germanicus and Drusus contesting with the
Senate, he wonderfully joyed at it; as well because their contention was about
disparaging a Law, as because of the hate they incurred by it, Laetabatur
Tiberius, cum inter filios ejus and leges Senatus disceptaret.

Having commended the course, for a Prince to design more then one successor,
by whom to be supported, there must care be taken to hold the balance even
between them, otherwise he shall expose himself to manifest danger; in regard
whereof, Augustus never brought Tiberius openly forward until such time as he
was left alone, Drusoque pridem extincto, Nero (...) ex privignis erat, illuc
cuncta vergere, and that which follows. So Tiberius as long as Germanicus
lived, used them with great equality: but after Germanicus death, he then
discovered his love to Drusus. Tiberius Drusum summae rei admovet; incolumi
Germanico, integrum inter Duos Iudicium.

But because it is a most difficult thing, to observe this equality, and to
carry an even hand, as that which was in Christ accounted a matter of
admiration, that he so carried himself toward his Apostles, that they could
never know which of them he favored most, every one thinking himself to be
the man, whereupon they often contended which of them should be the greatest;
it is fit to consider, to which side the Prince ought rather to incline.

For resolution whereof, I conceive, that a Prince (as indeed he can do no
less) shall do well to favor the weaker party, for by means of his favor
he shall make him stronger then the other; and yet shall not need to doubt him,
as being of himself the weaker. So did Tiberius, who if ever he showed any
spark of partiality, it was to Drusus.

Nam senem Augustum devinxerat adeo, ut nepotem unicum Agrippam Posthumum in
Insulam Planasiam projiceret. And a little after, Nulla in praesens formidine,
dum Augustus aetate validus, seque and Domum and pacem sustentavit: postquam
provecta jam (...), aegro and corpore fatigabatur.
That old men are apt to be carried, away by women, and of what age a Prince
should be. The nineteenth Discourse.

THe old age of Augustus (as we may conjecture by these two Texts, which for
more convenience I have joined together) brought forth in the City of Rome,
many evil effects: First, by suffering himself to be ruled by his wife Livia,
who with no small subtilty persuaded him to discard Agrippa Posthumus, and to
leave Tiberius Nero his successor in the Empire. Secondly, because thorough
old age, he was no longer able to govern the City, his family, or himself.

By occasion then of the first, we will examine, whether it be true, that old
men are apt and easy to be led away by women; and finding it to be so, we will
show the reason: and by occasion of the second, it will be fit to examine, at
what age a Prince is fittest to govern.

Concerning the first, there will need no great labor to show by examples and
by reason, that the wives of old men may obtain of them whatsoever they
desire. Adonia the son of David had made himself King in his fathers life;
and by reason of age, as being the eldest, it was his due, as Solomon himself
confessed, whilst denying a favor, which his mother in behalf of Adonia
requested of him, he said, Ipse enim est frater meus major me; yet how easily
did Bersabee persuade her old husband David to put by Adoniah, and to make her
son Solomon his successor? whereof the holy Scripture in the Book of Kings
says, Ingressa est itaque Bersabee ad regem in cubiculo, Rex autem senuerat
nimis. And seeing the holy Scriptures have never a word that has not some
mystery in it, we may well gather by these words Rex autem senuerat nintis,
were written to intimate, that the suite of Bersabee was much facilitated by
the old age of David. Another example in the book of Kings we have of Solomon,
who in his old age was so led away by his Concubines, that most perfidiously
leaving the true worship of God, he set up Images, built Altars and Temples
unto Idols, whereof the holy Spirit in the said Book gives the reason saying,
that Solomon being now grown old, was easily drawn away by women, Cumque jam
esset senex, depravatum est cor ejus per mulieres, ut sequeretur Deo^ alienos.

The effect then is manifest: it remains that we show the cause why this
should happen in old men, and not in young. And first, it may be attibuted to
length of time: for as a stone, though never so hard, is mollified and broken
by often falling of water, so the long suits of women accompanied with their
dalliances and allurements, are able to penetrate the hardest heart: and
therefore Job says, Lapides excavant aquae, and alluvione paulatim terra
consumitur; whereof Saint Gregory makes the like interpretation, as I do here
of the example of Solomon, Videamus qualiter lapides excavant aquae: and
alluvione paulatim terra consumitur. Solomon quippe immoderato (...), atque
assiduitate mulierum ad hoc perductus est, ut qui prius Templum Deo construeret
(...) etiam perfidiae substratus, Idolis construere Templu non (...). Sicque
factum est, (...) ab assidua carni^ petulantia, usque ad mentis persidiam
perveniret. Quid it aque aliud quam aquae excavarunt lapidem? and alluvione
paulatim terra consumpta est; quia surrepente paulatim infusione peccati, terra
cordis illius ad consumptionem defluxit.

A second cause is, because in old age by reason of weakness, the virtue of
resisting feminine allurements fails, which in youth by reason of vigor are
easily resisted. This cause Cajetan means, when speaking of Solomon he says,
Quamvis mulieres junctae fuerint Salomoni Iuveni, non tamen diverterunt a
Iuventute ad cultum Deorum, sed in Senectute paulatim emollitus est animus
ejus, crescente amore, and deficiente virtute.

A third cause I would allege my self, and it is, That all love is founded
upon some interest, either good or bad: and seeing that of women can never be
founded upon virtue, by reason of the incapacity of that sex; it happens
oftentimes to be founded either upon beauty or upon profit: For in women
commonly there are two desires; or to say better, two affections: one of rule,
the other of lust; and when these fail, then also their love cease. From
hence it is, that seeing an old man, can never believe (unless age has taken
away his brains) that women can love him for beauty; it follows necessarily,
he must believe they love him for profit; of which if there be no hope, neither
can he hope, they will ever love him. And therefore when he knows he cannot
satisfy their affection one way, by reason of the weakness of his age, he
must of necessity seek to satisfy it the other way, and consequently agree to
all their desires. And therefore no marvel if Tacitus say, that Augustus grown
old, was led away by women.

Concerning the second point, before we come to examine which is the best age
in a Prince, for governing his people, we must take notice, that in men there
are four ages: old age, childhood, youth, and consistence, or middle age. Thus
Hippocrates distinguishes them, which for the present shall pass, without
questioning the truth of the distinction. Secondly, it must be noted, that I
speak not of Princes that are by succession; for they have their officers and
Deputies, by whom they may always govern well; but I speak of Princes that
are by election, and particularly in Kingdoms that stand in danger; into
which, many by reason of age have fallen.

In this case, it is not well, that a Prince should be in his childhood;
whereupon our Lord God, by the mouth of the Prophet Esaias, threatening the
destruction of Jerusalem, after saying, Ecce enim Dominator Dominus
exercituum, auferet a Jerusalem, and a Juda, validum and fortem, and virum
bellatorem, omne robur panis and omne robur aquae, Judiceni and Prophetam,
Ariolum and senem: he says, and dabo pueros Principes eorum, by whose
government, how great disorders were to grow, is showed in the process of that
Chapter, and therefore Solomon in Ecclesiasticus cries out, Vae tibi terra,
cujus Rex est puer.

The reason of this is, because in a Governor, there are four things
required: the first is knowledge and prudence, whereupon Solomon considering
himself to be but a child, prayed not to God for Riches or Honor, nor yet for
long life, but for Wisdom to be able to judge rightly, saying, Ego autem sum
puer parvulus, and ignorans egressum and introitum meum. Et servus tuus est in
medio populi quem elegisti, populi infiniti qui numerari and supputari non
potest, prae multitudine. Dabis ergo servo tuo cor docile, ut populum tuum
judicare possit, and discernere inter bonum and malum. Whereupon S. Gregory
makes a good observation; that in holy Scripture, Princes and Prophets are
called Videntes, Seers, as those that have need of Prudence and Knowledge, that
being to lead the blind, they be not blind themselves; for then will Cities go
to wrecke; and easily be destroyed; as Esaias says, Omnes bestiae agri venite ad
devorandum, Vniversae bestiae (...), speculatores ejus caeci omnes.

The second thing required in a Prince is fortitude, to be able to bridle the
people, and to bear the weight of the Scepter. And therefore Solomon in
Ecclesiasticus says, Noli (...) fieri Judex, (...) valeas virtute irrumpere
iniquitates; ne forte extimescas facie^ Potentis, and ponas scandalum in (...)
tua. And Job speaking of the burden that lies upon Princes shoulders, says,
Sub quo curvantur qui portant orbem, which S. Gregory upon that other place of
Job, Ecce Gigantes (...) sub aquis, expounds saying, Gemero sub aquis means
nothing else, but to be oppressed with the weight of Subjects, taking waters
for people, as the Angel in the Apocalypse delivers, Aquae multae, populi multi:
Whereupon not without great mystery our Lord God, meaning to make Peter Prince
of the people, he called him first to walk upon the water.

Thirdly, Princes ought more to regard the common good of their subjects, then
their own private profit; that they may not be like those, of whom the Prophet
Sophony speaks, Judices ejus lupi (...), non relinquebant in Mane: but like
to the Apostle Paul, who says, Non quaero quae vestra sunt, sed vos.

Fourthly, there is required Experience, Qui non est tentatus quid scit? says
Solomon in Ecclesiasticus, Et qui non est expertus parva recognoscit. And
therefore the Ancients have a fable, that Phaeton having taken upon him to
guide the Horses of the Sun, was thrown down headlong. In as much then, as a
child through defect of age, can neither have knowledge, nor experience; and
thorough weakness of body, can neither be strong nor constant: and finally,
thorough time spent in pleasures, will more regard his own interest, then the
people; there can be no doubt of his unfitness to govern others, who without
doubt is not well able to govern himself.

The other age contrary to this, is old age; in which as a thing most odious,
men commonly are subject to contempt: Ipsa aetas Galbae (says Tacitus) and
Irrisui and fastidio erat. And a little after, Precarium sibi Imperium, and
brevi transiturum. But besides their being contemned, oftentimes they govern
ill, because (as Aristotle writes in his Politics) Habet etiam intellectus
suam (...), that the understanding also has its old age; seeing by weakness
of natural heat, and want of radical moisture, they generate naughty blood,
from which consequently arise naughty spirits, which passing to the Heart, and
from the Heart distributed to the senses, makes them they can but ill (...)
their office. And therefore in old men, we see the senses are always weakened,
as the Philosopher says, (...) nostra intellectio ortum habet a sensu; the
understanding making use of the senses to understand by: insomuch, that they
being grown old, it may reasonably be said, the understanding is grown old:
whereupon (...) meaning to show, that Camillus though grown old, was yet able
to govern, says, He had all his senses perfect, Sed vegetum (...) in vivido
pectore vigebat virebatque integris sensibus.

A Prince therefore should not be old, as well because such are apt to be
contemned; as because, becoming a child again, he will govern ill: whereupon
not without cause, Tacitus speaking of Augustus, says, Postquam provecta jam
senectus, aegro and corpore fatigabatur; and that which follows. And Galba
knowing this, and meaning to help these inconveniences of old age, he adopted
Piso, saying, Et audita adoption desinam videri senex, quod mihi unum
objicitur. And our Lord God meaning to furnish his Captain Moses, with all
the parts required in a Prince; to the end, that through old age, he might not
be contemned, nor through want of understanding come to govern ill; suffered
not his senses, nor yet his flesh to grow old with years, but preserved them
in a flourishing state, Non caligaverunt oculi ejus, says the Scripture, and
this opinion all Writers follow.

It remains, to show, which is the fitter age, of youth, or the consistent
age: for Resolution whereof, I say briefly, that if a Prince be to attend the
wars, it is then better he should be young; as well for the labors of the
body, as for the vigor of blood, which grown cold in old men, were never able
to perform those things, which are required in a warrior. Whereupon we see,
that many great Captains, who in their youth have done admirable acts; in
their old age, have lost many advantages, through weakness of spirit; as it
happened to Metellus, in the war against Sertorius in Spaino, (as Plutarch
relates.) And therefore Moses showed great judgment, who amongst the Elders
he had chosen, having two young men, Eldad and Medad, he caused them to stay in
the Army; showing thereby, that in matters of war they should be young men.
And our Lord God meaning to aid the Maccabees in a battle against their
enemies appeared in the form of a young man upon a white Horse.

But if we speak of Princes, that are to judge the people in peace; in this
case, the age that inclines to old age, is certainly fittest; in sign whereof
our Lord God who in the Canticles, as being a Bridegroom appeared in form of
a young man, Comae ejus sicut elatae palmorum, nigrae quasi Corvus, when
afterward he appears as a King and Judge of Daniel, and in the Apocalypse, he
comes described with gray hairs, Caput autem ejus and Capilli erant candidi,
tanquam lana alba, and tanquam Nix; and this is for as much, as for the most
part is wont to happen.

But because the contrary of this is often seen, that some man in his youth
governes much better then in his age; I cannot omit in this place to advertise,
that canities or whiteness by age, consists not so much in hairs or in years,
as in the whiteness of the thoughts: whereupon, in the Canticles, the
Bridegroom says to the Bride, Vulnerasti cor meum, in uno oculorum tuorum,
and in uno crine colli tui, and S. Luke, Sed and capilli vestri numerati sunt;
and S. Gregory upon Job, expounding that place of Deuteronomy, Levitae tenentur
radere pilos carnis suae: expounds it, id est, cogitationes superfluas.

He then shall be accounted old, and to have gray hairs, that is full of white
thoughts; whereupon Solomon says, Senectus venerabilis est, non diuturna,
neque annorum numero computata, cani autem sunt sensus (...) and aetas
Senectutis, vita Immaculata. When our Lord God would have Moses to choose
persons that should assist him in judging the people, he said not, Choose out
seventy old men; but, seventy whom thou know to be old: where it plainly
appears, that he speaks not of the old age of the body, for that every one is
able to know; but of the old age of the mind, and so S. Gregory expounds it in
those words, Congrega mihi septuaginta viros Israel quos tu nosti quod Senes
populi sunt. While he says, In quibus senioribus, quid aliud, quam senectus
cordis requiritur, cum tales jubentur eligi, quod senes esse sciuntur? si enim
senectus in eis corporis quaereretur, a tantis sciri poterant, a quantis videri
^dum vero dicitur, quos tu nosti, quod senes populi sint, profecto liquet, quia
senectus (...), non corporis eligenda mintiatur. For an old man that is gray by
reason of years may be a child in regard of conditions; and therefore Esaias
says, Puer centum annorum moriatur; whereupon it follows not, to say, a
Prince is young, therefore he will govern ill; a Prince is old, therefore he
will govern well; because it oftentimes happens, that the same man, is in
youth, old; and in age, young; as Solomon who in his youth governed divinely
well, both himself and his state, but afterward in his old age, he
overthrowes himself, and consequently his subjects. So Nero in the beginning
of his youth, governed with so great prudence, that he is rather to be
imitated, then that he can be surpassed: but in process of time, he so
perfidiously carried himself, that sparing neither his schoolmasters, nor his
mother, nor finally himself, he cast himself, and (as much as he could) the
state into absolute ruin.

It will not then be from our purpose, to search out the reason, how it happens
that many in their youth govern well; and in their old age, become cruel; and
throw themselves headlong into vices. First then, I say, it happens by reason
of age, which (as we have showed before) of its own nature, causes contempt;
and the Prince doubting this, and thinking to remedy it with cruelty, plungeth
himself in it, to show there is valor in him: so did Tiberius who in his
youth endeavored by all means to hide his acts of cruelty; but in his old
age, changing opinion, he was never well, but when he was talking of them, and
when he could say something to make it appear, that he was cruel; for no
other cause, but that he thought this the only way to keep him from contempt.
Whereupon, if the Senators had known this reason, they would never have
marvelled to hear him recite his acts, and the death of his nephew Drusus: and
although Tacitus ascribe this to his great confidence, where he says,
Penetrabat pavor, and admiratio callidum olim and tegendis sceleribus obscurum,
eo confidentiae venisse, ut tanquam dimotis parietibus, oftenderet nepotem sub
verberibus Centurionis, inter servonum ictus extrema vitae alimenta frustra
orantem; yet I hold, he did it rather in the sense aforesaid, and I conceive
that Tacitus in substance understood as much himself.

Secondly, this is wont to happen, because in the beginning men are not secure
in their states, and therefore seek by good means to make themselves secure;
but once secured, they then yield themselves wholly to be governed by sense: and
therefore David when he had vanquished his enemies, and made himself secure in
his Kingdom, he then committed the adultery with Bersabee, and the slaughter
of Vrias, whereof S. Bernard speaking says, Sapiens David, sapiens Solomon
fuit, sed blandientibus nimis secundis rebus, alter ex part, alter ex toto
desipuit.

Thirdly, because a Prince in old age, has either gotten him a good name or a
bad: if a good, then conceiving that whatsoever he does, can never take away
the good name already gotten, he easily runs into vices; if bad, then
despairing in so short a time, as being now old, to remove that bad name, he
thinks it all one what he does; and thereupon contemning fame, would be
content the World might end with himself. So did Herod the great, who gave
order that as soon as himself should be dead, a great number of Noblemen,
that were then prisoners should be slain. And Nero was contented it should be
thought, that he grieved for nothing so much, as that he had not the whole
World in his hand, enclosed in a glass, that he might cast it to the ground
whenever he should die. But if a Prince be young, although he have gotten the
name of a cruel man, yet hoping in time he may redeem it and get a better, he
will not easily plunge himself in vices.

Fourthly, this is wont to happen, when Princes are but of little judgment;
because as when of themselves they are prudent, they always govern better in
the third age; so when of themselves they want discretion, they govern better
in their youth, then afterward; seeing in that age, it is no disgrace to suffer
themselves to be guided by men of ability; as was seen in Nero, who in his
youth was contented to be advised, and to follow the counsel of Seneca,
Burrhus and Corbulo, but coming to a riper age, either they take a liberty no
longer to regard the advice of good Counselors, or else they count it a shame
to be a Prince upon props: or lastly they are instigated by others, thorough
hate they bear to the greatness of those able Counselors. All these things
concurred in Nero: for first he rejected the reverence of his schoolmasters,
seque in omnes libidines effudit: and then there wanted not instigatours, who
told him it was a shame, Certe finitam Neronis pueritiam, and robur juventae
adesse, exueret Magistrum, satis amplis Doctoribus instructus Majoribus suis.
So as, having no brain himself, nor harkening to them that had, he came in a
short time to utter ruin. So the Emperor Constantinus Sestus, was contented
at first to be ruled by his mother Irenea, but growing elder, he cast her off,
and came to be stark naught. And Rabbi Solomon says, that as long as Nathan
the Prophet, who was Salomons schoolmaster lived, Solomon took no strange
woman to be his wife: and this opinion is followed by Abulensis.

Domi Res tranquillae: eadem Magistratuum vocabula.
That to maintain and suffer Magistrates to continue, although without
authority, is a matter of great moment. The twentieth Discourse.

I Have always heard it resolved, that when a City changes from being a
Commonwealth, to be a Kingdom, it should do well, to leave if not the same
authority, yet at least the same Magistrates. And the same I have found written
in all Politician Authors; and for authority, they allege this place of
Tacitus, Eadem Magistratuum vocabula: where he shows; that Augustus changed
all things in Rome, but only the name of Magistrates: and they give this
reason, that seeing it is only a bare name, much in show, and little in
substance, the Prince can lose nothing of his own Right by it; and yet by this
means he shall be sure to get the love of his people, who are fed with such
vanity.

This opinion, held, written and observed of every one, contains in it two
things: one, that as to the Prince, the leaving of Magistrates is of great
profit: the other, that as to the subject it is a mere vanity, and serves
only to puff up the people.

Although this opinion be general and entered in such sort into men's conceits,
that there seems to be no contending against it; yet it may be lawful for me
to deliver what I think of it; seeing I seek not to be believed, by any other
strength, then by that of reason. I say then, I could never come to know, that
this leaving the name of Magistrates, is any weakness, but have always
accounted it a matter of great moment; for proof whereof, we must know, that
as all other kinds of state, so a Commonwealth also consists of two things;
that is, of matter, and of form. In a Monarchy, the form is the Prince; and
the City is the matter. In a Commonwealth, the form is the Magistrate that
rules; and the thing that is ruled is the matter. From hence it is, that when
these two things do not meet and join together, a City cannot be said to be
free: whereupon, if it should be without any Prince, and should withal be
without any Magistrates, it could not be called a Commonwealth. The Armenians
after the death of Ariobarzanes, being unwilling to serve his successors,
remained without any Lord; but having no form of a Commonwealth, they were
never the more free. Whereof Tacitus speaking, shows he knew that well, which
I said before, where he says, Ariobarzano morte fortuita absumpto, stirpem
ejus hand toleravere, tentatoque foeminae imperio, cui nomen Erato; eaque brevi
pulsa, incerti solutique and magis sine Domino quam in liberate, profugum
Vononem in Regnum accipiunt. If then the Prince taking away the matter, which
is the City, shall leave the form, which are the Magistrates, he shall give
not only a vain contentment, as those men say, but also a great hope to
recover liberty: of which they should be out of hope if the Prince, together
with the authority, should also take away the Magistrates; seeing although they
should be without a Prince, yet they should be nere the nearer for being in
liberty, but rather would never be quiet, until they had a King again, as it
fell out with the Armenians: and if they should agree to have a Commonwealth,
it would never be durable; as was seen in Florence after a driving out of
Petrus de Medici: and therefore the Romans had great fortune to find a form
made to their hands; for the Kings being expulsed, they had then nothing else
to do, but only in their stead, to make two Consuls. This thing both Romulus
and Tarquinius, Caesar and Nero knew to be of great moment, who endeavored all
they could to extinguish the Senate. And indeed, those Provinces that have been
without Magistrates, have never been able to come to liberty, as was seen in
the Assyrians, and is at this day seen in the Persians, and in the Turks, and
others. For it is an easy matter for an image of wax, if it be broken, to be
renewed again, so long as the form by which it was framed remains entire;
seeing with one only action, the new form will be taken away, and the old
will be introduced: but if together with the Image, the mould also should be
taken away; it would then be very hard to return it to the old form; as
requiring two actions, one to break the form that is of new; and the other,
to renew the form that was before.

Moreover, this only appearance of Magistrates, besides that it facilitates the
recovery of liberty, causes also a desire of liberty, which if it do no other
hurt, at least it puts them in mind of a Commonwealth, a thing to Princes most
pernicious: and lastly, it gives occasion to the principal men to assemble
together without suspicion; and therefore, if I be not deceived, Julius
Agricola told Tacitus oftentimes, that the taking away these apparences of
liberty, had been very useful for hindering the rebellions of the Irish. Saepe
ex eo audivi, legione una and modicis auxiliis debellari obtinerique Hiberniam
posse. Idque etiam adversus Britanniam profuturu^, si Romana ubique arma, and
velut e conspeetu libertas toleretur.

Thus in my opinion it is sufficiently proved, that to leave the names of
Magistrates, although without authority, is not a puffing up, or a vanity that
blinds the people; but indeed a matter of great moment, for regayning of
liberty. Yet I blame not Princes that take this course, and especially those
that are at this day, who having no doubt of their people, ought to allow them,
not only the names of Magistrates, but also Magistrates with some authority:
and as little do I like, that a man coming new to a Kingdom, should take
this course; only I put them in mind, that all they who have gone about to
extinguish Magistrates, have either been (...) or banished, except only
Cleomenes.

Tiberium Neronem maturum annis, spectatum bello, sed vetere atque insita
Claudiae Familiae superbia, multaque indicia saevitiae, quanquam premantur
erumpere: Hunc and prima ab infantia educatum in domo (...), congestos Juveni
Consulatus, Triumphos ne iis quidem annis, quibus Rhodi specie secessus exulem
egerit, aliquid quam Iram and simulationem and secretas libidines meditatum.
That Tiberius was part good, and part bad. How it happened that he fell not
into dangers as Nero did. Whether it be good to be brought up in the Princes
House: and finally, how their secret vices may be known. The one and twentieth
Discourse.

TAcitus discoursing of the successors of Augustus, whilst he lays open the
virtues and vices of Tiberius shows us also, the capacity and incapacity that
was in him for succession in the Empire: his capacity was first, by reason of
his ripeness in age, being such as in our former discourse we required in a
Prince, then his ability in Military affairs; and the long experience he had,
being brought up in Augustus his house, and employed continually in State
businesses; and seeing Princes ought to be able both to govern the people in
peace, and to rule them in war, I know not any man could be fitter for the
Empire then Tiberius.

On the other side, Tiberius was proud, cruel, and lascivious; and seeing a
Prince ought to govern with mildness, to have care of the subjects lives; and
above all, rather to defend their honor, then oppress it: there is no doubt,
but Tiberius was more incapable of such a dignity then any other; because as
being proud, he could never be pleasing in his government: and as being cruel,
he was readier to destroy his subjects then to preserve them: and lastly, as
being lascivious, he was likelier to dishonor his Citizens, then to do them
honor and thus, as there were in him all those virtues that make a Prince
admirable; so there were in him all those vices that make a state miserable.
And because for the most part, the good is overborne and suppressed by the bad;
we may justly say, that Tiberius was altogether incapable of the Empire, his
Experience being obscured by his pride; his valor in war, by his cruelty in
Peace; and lastly his ripeness in years, by his greenness in lustfulnesse.

Tiberius yet together with his many vices, had also some virtues, and
therefore was not wholly good, but part good; nor wholly wicked, but part
wicked: and this is the cause why he continued peaceably in his Empire, which
Nero did not, because Nero had many vices, and never a virtue; Tiberius though
he had many vices, yet withal he had some virtues; and a vice can never hold
out long, if it be not founded upon some virtue. A lascivious man, if he have
not some temperance, will never live ten days to an end: a Thief, if he use
not some mean in his robbing, but will be stealing day and night, secretly and
openly, he will quickly make his own Gallows. Therefore Saint Chrysostom
says, Talis est natura mali, ut non consistat nisi virtuti cuipiam (...). Nam
mala non habent naturam, ut ex se possint subsistere; nisi (...) aliquid a
virtutibus ceperint. And Aristotle having an eye to this, where teaching the
way how to maintain a tyranny, says, that a tyrant ought at least to be part
good, and part bad, Insuper moribus talis esse, ut recte se habeat ad virtutem,
vel semibonus quidem sit, and non malus, sed semimalus. This was one of the
causes why Nero being cruel, ruined himself, and Tiberius being cruel, kept
himself safe; because Nero was a cruel beast, and Tiberius a cruel man. He
killed men, out of greediness of the blood of others; and this only for
security of himself: the one used his cruelty foolishly, and the other
politickly; or rather we may say, wisely; Est enim quaedam Prudentia falsa
(says S. Thomas) vel per similitudinem dicta, cum enim Prudens sit, qui been
disponit ea quae sunt agenda propter (...) bonum finem, ille qui propter malum
finem aliqua (...) congruentia illi fini, habet falsam prudentiam, in quantum
illud quod accepit pro fine, non est vere bonum, sed secundum similitudinem sic
dicitur aliquis bonus latro; and that which follows.

But having said, that in Tiberius there was virtue as well as vice; but that
Nero was all vice: for which some man with no small color of truth may
reprehend me, seeing in all Histories we find, that Nero was perhaps more
virtuous then any other of the Caesarean family: I therefore think it
necessary to advertise, that all virtues are not virtues in a Prince; But
rather many a one, no better then a vice. Poesy, Music, Paynting, and all
those Sciences and Arts which depend upon sharpness of wit, a Prince having
need to procure himself a soundness of judgment, and not a subtilty of
brain, for contemplating of those things which consist only in Idaea;
therefore in these and such like, a Prince ought to content himself with a
mediocrity of knowledge; not for his own practice, but only to enable him to
taste the pleasure from them that do practice them. Sunt enim quaedam e
liberalibus scientiis, (says Aristotle) quas usque ad aliquid discere honestum
sit, penitus vero sese illis tradere, atque usque ad extremum (...) velle,
valde noxium est. Philip King of Macedon, hearing his son Alexander play
excellent well on an instrument, reproved him, saying, It is a shame for a
Prince to play so well; it is only fit for him, to be able to take delight,
when he hears them do it, that make it their profession. And seeing this
delight cannot be taken without being intelligent of the Art, therefore this
censure of Phillip seems not much different from my opinion; that a Prince, if
it be possible, should know all Arts and Sciences, but not practice them. Nerva
composed verses, and finding it a profession not fit for a Prince, he gave it
over, Sed cohibet vires (says Martial speaking of him) ingeniumque pudor.
Seeing then Nero was virtuous and excellent in these kinds of Arts and
Sciences, in which it is not for a Prince to be too conversant; we may justly
say, that he was vicious in virtues; a thing which (...) happens to those that
are too greedy of getting knowledge. Whereupon Tacitus commended Agricola, that
he could bridle this greediness, Retinuitque quod est (...), ex sapientia
modum. For this desire to know more then is fit, is neither Politically, nor
Morally, nor Theologically good, Quemadmodum omnium (...) (says Seneca) sic
literarum etiam intemperantia laboramus. And S. Paul, Noli sapere plusquam
sapere oportet, sed sapere ad sobrietatem. That which Tacitus calls, To hold a
mean in studies, Seneca calls, to be temperate; and S. Paul, to be sober.

It comes into my mind, now that we are in this di gression, to give another
reason, why Tiberius maintained himself in the Empire, and Nero perished in
it: and it is, that Nero scorned fame, and Tiberius much esteemed it. And if a
Divine should object, that the contemning of fame in this world, is a necessary
virtue in all good men; I would answor, as it is true, that to contemn worldly
fame, is one of the best things a Christian can do; so it is one of the worst
things a Heathen or a wicked man can do; because there will be no vice or
villainy, which he will not dare to do, if he regard not fame; as was seen in
Nero, who not regarding fame, left no wickedness unattempted.

But to return to our purpose and principal intent, which is, to show the
meaning of that place in Tacitus, upon which we have undertaken to discourse; I
say, that many from that text, make it a rule, that one who has been brought
up in the Princes house, should not be made Prince, because of Tacitus his
saying, Hunc and primum ab infantia (...) in domo Regnatrice: and their reason
is, because in such places he learnes to be proud and insolent.

First, I do not think, that Tacitus mislikes a successor should be brought
up in the Princes House, neither that he makes it a cause of pride absolutely;
because not only it is commendable, but in a manner necessary, that Princes
should be brought in their Houses to whom they are to succeed; seeing, that
though a Prince be of the same state, and of the same blood Royal which ought
to succeed in the Crown; yet if he should be brought up any where but in his
own house, it would be cause enough to make him odious to all his subjects.
And therefore Tacitus says of Vonone, that although he were of the blood
Royal of the Parthians, yet because he had been brought up in Rome, his
subjects would not endure him, Quamvis Gentis Arsacidarunt ut externum
aspernabantur.

They therefore deceive themselves, who favoring either brothers or sons of
the great Turk, have a hope to settle them in the Ottomane Empire: for though
they be of the blood Royal, yet they will always be accounted strangers, and
thereupon rejected. Whereof continually we have heard and seen examples, no
other good having ever come of it, but that it has showed the Christian piety
of those Princes, who in zeal to God, have given shelter to such persons.

Secondly, he being commonly of an intolerable carriage, who from a servant
comes to be a master, as well because he passes from one extreme to another;
as because, to be a servant abaseth the spirit; as was seen in Tigranes, of
whom Tacitus says, that he therefore lost his Kingdom, Cum advenit Tigranes a
Nerone ad capessendum Imperium dilectus, Cappadocum ex Nobilitate, Regis
Archelai nepos, sed quod diu obses apud urbem fuerat usque ad servilem
patientiam dimissus, neque consensu acceptus. And therefore our Lord God, would
not that his Captain and Leader of the Israelites, Moses, should be as others
were, a servant to Pharao, but would have him bred and brought up in the Kings
house; and for this it was, that the Parthians expelled Vonone, Si mancipium
Caesaris, tot per annos servitutem perpessum, Parthis Imperitet.

Thirdly, because being in some part raised above equality, as they are, who
live in Princes houses, they are with less envy of the subjects, taken to be
their Prince. Whereupon Servius, although (as some think) he was the son of
a bondwoman; yet because he had been brought up in the Princes house, he was
accepted for King. The Lacedaemonians also, when they wanted a King, they took
Laconicus, only because he had been brought up in the Kings house.

Fourthly, because in such places, there is no doubt but they may better learn
how to govern, and be set in a way of managing affairs: and therefore Dion in
the life of Adrian, would have a special regard to be had of this, in choosing
a Prince: and our Lord God, meaning to fit David, for being a King, made him in
Saul's life time, to go to live in the Kings Palace; to the end, he might
learn the customs of a King, and be made to know the degree, before he took
it; where if suddenly upon Saul's sin, he had been made King, he should have
come unknown to all the people.

It is not therefore to be found fault withal, that he who is to rule others,
should be brought up in his house that rules; neither in my opinion had Tacitus
any such meaning; or to say better, he whose words Tacitus reports.

For they do not simply and absolutely find fault with Tiberius his education
in Augustus his house, neither yet, that he had so great dignities and honors
conferd upon him; for these did rather prepare him to govern well, then to
make him proud; but the fault they find is this, that in his youth, and whilst
he lived in the Princes house, he was raised to so many and to such a number of
Offices. The fault therefore was not, that he was brought up in the Princes
house, but that he had so many offices and honors bestowed upon him; and this
neither not so much, as the unseasonablenes of them. And therefore Tacitus
says not simply, Congestos consulatus and honores, but Congestos Juveni
consulatus. Which is very manifest, for seeing Tiberius had also in his mature
age, great offices and honors, Tacitus must needs be understood to speak of
those which he received in his youth, apt to make men grow proud, as in another
place he excellently shows, in the person of Tiberius; for the sons of
Germanieus being much honored by the Pontifex, who in his prayers to their
Gods, made mention of them together with Tiberius, he forbad him saying; that
young men grow proud by receiving honors before their time. Movit ne quis in
post^runt mobiles adolescentium animos, praematuris honoribus ad superbiam
extolleret. And thus much concerning his pride.

Secondly, Tacitus taxes Tiberius with cruelty, which though he endeavored all
he could to hide, yet he could not keep it from appearing. From whence we may
know, there cannot be a worse nature, nor a worse Prince, then he who having in
him the vice of cruelty, strives for some ends to hide it, seeing having once
gotten his intent, with heaping upon himself much hatred, he after makes his
greediness of blood appear the more, by flushing it out all at once, (at lest
if he do not as Cleomenes did) and where if he had not hid his vice, every
one might have known, upon what to work and consequently few should have
needed to fear. Now that he hides it, and men cannot penetrate into the
Princes mind, it gives occasion for all in general to fear. The Senators
therefore of Rome, seeing Otho dissemble his vices, were much displeased at it:
Otho interim (says Tacitus) contra spem omnium, non deliciis, neque desidia
torpescere; (...) voluptates, dissimulata luxuria, and cuncta ad decor^nt
Imperii composita; coque plus formidinis afferebant, falsae virtutes, and vitia
reditura. Yet it is to be understood of those who dissemble; but for a certain
time, as Otho would have done, and as Nero did; but if we ask, which is the
better Prince, of him that being cruel desires to use his cruelty covertly, or
he, that is openly cruel, I hold directly, that this is the worse; for, using
his cruelty openly, either he knows not his vice, or he cares not what men say
of him: if he regard not what men say of him, there cannot a worse thing be; if
he know not his vice, he comes to be a cruel fool; where he that hides it,
shows that both he knows his vice, and also desires a good report: whereupon
it follows he cannot so often put his cruelty in execution; for then he should
be a more fool then the other, to think that an act often repeated, should
never be perceived; and if any one object that this must needs be the worse, as
joining to the vice of cruelty, the vice of craft: I answer, that this man's
government will be so much better, as it is less distasteful, to be governed
by one that is crafty, then by one that is a fool: whereupon the Senators of
Ronie never feared Tiberius so much, as when they saw him give over his
dissembling: and therefore Tacitus in another place says, Penetrabat pavor,
and (...) and tegendis sceleribus obscurum, eo confidentiae venisse, ut tanquam
dimotis (...) ostenderet nepotem, sub verberibus Centurionis inter servorum
ictus, extrema vitae alimenta frustra orantem. But it is so hard a matter to
hide a vice that is natural; and to hide it so, as that no sign of it may
appear; that almost all they, who have had a purpose to dissemble; in short
time have been discovered. So it happened to Philip, so to the Emperor
Domitian, so to Sylla, to Tiberius and to Nero; and finally, to Theodotus King
of the (...): being a thing impossible, though there be a habit gotten of
dissembling, to cover a vice that is natural. In regard whereof, Plutarch
says of Philip, Insita a natura vitia adscititium habitum vicerunt, paulatim
foris superhibuerunt, and ingenium Regis deterere. Whereupon our Lord God in S.
Matthew, meaning to teach us to know such kind of men, says, we must observe
well their deeds, Attendite a falsis Prophetis qui veniunt ad vos in
vestimentis Ovium: and to show us the way how to know them, it follows, A
fructibus eorum cognoscetis eos, where Theophylact adds, Nam licet ad tempus
simulent, successu tamen temporis producuntur. I will not forbear to bring
another pregnant way, which Galen teaches us, to come to the knowledge of
these dissimulations, who says, that if a virtue be natural, as (for example)
mildness, whether the provocations be great or little, yet they will not move
a man to choler; but in all occasions, he will show himself constant; but if
it be feined, then perhaps in light occasions he may hide it; but in great, it
will violently break out and show it self: and therefore Tacitus meaning to
show the dissimulation of Tibernes uses these words, Multa indicia saevitiae,
quanquam premantur erumpere: where this word (...) shows, that not upon light,
but upon great occasions, it discovered it self with violence. Thirdly Tacitus
blames Tiberius for luxury; of which head, I intend to speak in the following
discourse.

Ne iis quidem annis, quibus Rhodi specie Secessus exulem egerit, aliquid quam
Iram and simulationem, and secretas libidines meditatum.
How much it imports a Prince to be chaste. The two and twentieth Discourse.

LUxury is a much greater vice, then cruelty; this taking away the life only
of the subjects, that the honor: and chastity on the contrary, is so
profitable both to the acquiring, and to the conserving a Dominion, that every
one (though of an ill nature, and a worse intention) that aspires to a
Principality, will yet take care, if not to be chaste, yet at least to seem so,
and to hide his vice of lust until he have attained and be settled in the
Empire. Whereupon Daniel speaking of Antichrist, says, Deum patrum suorum non
reputabit, and erit in concupiscentiis foeminarum: which place is translated in
these words, Et concupiscentiis mulierum non subjacebit. Writers therefore
interpret, that Antichrist knowing of what importance chastity is for getting a
Kingdom, will counterfeit himself to be so, thereby to get himself love, and
to bring him forward, and finally to make him Emperor. But after he has once
gotten the Empire, he will then no longer hide his filthy concupiscence, but
making himself a prey to vices, will show himself to be truly their child.

This profit Tiberius Nero knew, and therefore strove all he could to hide his
lust, Et secretas libidines meditatum; but when he had once gotten whither he
aspired, and had set sure footing in the Empire, he then suffered himself to
fall headlong into all kinds of vices. It is not therefore enough, to
counterfeit to be such, before a man comes to his greatness, as that wicked
one did, and as this impious one will do; but a Prince must truly, both in
the beginning, in the middle, and in the end not only show to be, but be in
truth and sincerely free from lust: first, for zeal to God, and then for his
own good and the States: on his own behalf, because there is nothing that
more ruins a Prince, then to be abject, base, and despised: Nothing that more
upholds him, then Majesty, Gravity and Reverence; and because Princes that are
given to Just can never have any of these respects, It is therefore necessary
they should keep themselves chaste. In consideration of this, David after his
adultery committed with Bersabee, taking notice of his error, prayed to God
and said, Read mihi laetitiant salutaris tui, and spiritu Principali confirma
me. As though he should say, O Lord God, I forgot that I was a King and a
Prince, through the concupiscence of the flesh, into which most miserably I am
fallen; I humbly pray thee, that from henceforward, thou would confirm in me
the spirit of chastity, that so I may return to be a King and a Prince: and
this is so true, that by the figure Antonomasia, chastity is called Gravity,
and Majesty; and therefore S. Paul writing to Titus says, In omnibus teipsum
praebe exemplum bonorum operum; In doctrina, in integritate, in gravitate. S.
Hierome in his Comment upon that place, instead of gravitate, reads castitate;
for the same word, which in Greek signifies Gravity and Majesty, signifies
also Chastity: and therefore, as Gravity and Majesty are necessary for a
Prince, without which he should not be a Prince; so Chastity also is no less
necessary: and as it is impossible that Majesty and lust should be in company
together, Non been convenient, nec in una sede morantur, Majestas and Amor; so
it is impossible that Majesty and chastity should not be together, which only
of it self is able to make Princes be reverend. Which S. Paul in the foresaid
Epistle shows where he says, Vt qui ex adverso est Revereatur, nihil habens
malum dicere nobis. Seeing chastity is reverenced even of her enemies.

On the part of the Subjects, there is no doubt but the chastity of the Prince,
is of great consequence for their good: First, in regard of his example, seeing
Cities, and consequently the Citizens, alter as they see the Prince alter: and
therefore when Dionysius the Tyrant, sent for Plato to teach him Geometry, all
the City and Palace was presently full of dust, every one seeking with all
diligence to be a Geometrician. And Saint John in the Apocalypse, meaning to
express the changes, which are made in Cities, through the change that is in
Princes, describes one and the same horse, to be sometime red, sometimes white,
and sometimes black, which happened by the diversity of their riders,
according to whom it changed color. By the horse, (as the greater part of
Writers say) is signified the Empire of Rome; and by those that rode upon it,
the Emperors; according to whose vices the Empire changed, and in nothing more
then through chastity; seeing the Prince may by violence violate the honor of
his Subjects, if he be not chaste. In which regard S. Paul says, Obsecro
orationes fieri, pro Regibus, and pro omnibus qui in sublimitate sunt
constituti, ut tranquillam vitam agamus in omni pietate and castitate. Where he
plainly shows, that the chastity of the Subjects depends upon the chastity of
the Prince, while he says, let us Pray for Kings, to the end we may live
chastely.

Chastity therefore is profitable for the Subjects, and necessary for him that
will rise to honor; in sign perhaps whereof, S. John in the Apocalypse, makes
the Virgins appear on the top of the Mount: as though he would say, that chaste
persons can easiliest rise to great degrees, who in the Scripture oftentimes
are figured by Mountains. Let Princes therefore be far from lust, and as
(according to the opinion of Hugo the Cardinal) they have the Name of God in
common to them with Virgins: so also let them have chastity in common to them
with Virgins, but yet in such a manner as Princes are able to have it; for so
they shall the better discharge their Office, to the honor and glory of God;
which is the thing above all they ought to have before their eyes.

Accedere Matrem muliebri Impotentia, serviendum Foeminae.
How and when the government of women is odious. The three and twentieth
Discourse.

FOr declaration of this place of Tacitus, where he seems to make it an odious
thing to be governed by women: we will first show, in what things it is, that
women's Dominion over men is odious; and then, what Authority Princes should
allow women in the government.

To begin with the first: I say, that women may bear rule three ways; the
first, themselves alone directly. Secondly, themselves alone indirectly.
Thirdly, themselves together with their sons, husbands, or other men.

The first way of bearing rule; that is, directly and properly consists in the
acts of jurisdiction, as in judging; to which there being required great
knowledge, great prudence, and inflexibility: it is not possible, that women,
by reason of the weakness of their understanding, can in any degree be fit:
and therefore in the law, there is a prohibition against that Sex. And indeed
there is no example found to the contrary, but only that of Debora, who in the
old Testament is numbered among the Judges; and judged the people of Israel,
with so great prudence, that she has left of her self an eternal memory. But
yet this case can be no bar to our assertion; seeing it may easily be
answered, that Debora gave not judgment of her own brain, but gave answers
to questions in manner of a Prophetess, saying only that which was revealed
to her by God.

The second way of bearing rule, less proper and indirect, is nothing else,
but to have a power to command; which by accident also may happen to women, who
being daughters of Princes, may succeed their father in the State. Although the
power of commanding may seem proper to the man, and no way common with women;
yet seeing the possessing of riches, is equally common to the man, and to the
woman; and that it oftentimes happens that the jurisdiction follows the
riches, and the thing possessed; it may also happen, that as the woeman is
partaker of the riches, so she may be also of the jurisdiction to them annexed.

A third way, is to command in company with men; and themselves, not have the
command alone; as many times, Wives with their Husbands, Mothers with their
Sons, and Grandmothers with their Nephews; which oftentimes may be, and
oftentimes is, but whether well or ill, shall be showed hereafter.

It is therefore clear, that a woman cannot bear rule directly and properly;
that is, in that kind of ruling which is called judging: but yet may in that
which is said to be commanding; and especially in the third way, with sons
and other men.

As to the second point, whether the Dominion of women be odious, or no; we may
distinguish it thus: either we speak of women alone, and by themselves: or
else of women accompanied with men. If we take it the first way, there is
nothing more odious, nothing more abhorred of men, then to be commanded by a
woman, as being a thing repugnant to reason; contrary to Gods commandment, and
most contrary to the law of nature. Our Lord God said to the woman; Sub viri
potestate eris. Aristotle says, that naturally the more perfect bears rule
over the more imperfect; and the better over the worse: whereupon the woman (as
Aristotle in a thousand places witnesses) being more imperfect then the man,
and being by Pythagoras placed in the number of evils, and man of good, it
would certainly be a monster in nature, that the perfect should be servant to
the imperfect, the good to the evil; and especially that sex being (I say not
always, but for the most part) void of prudence and of valor; full of pride;
and fuller of lust; and consequently most unsit to govern: of whom Tacitus
says; Non solum imparem laboribus sexum, sed si licentia adsit, saevum,
ambitiosum, potestatis avidum. The government therefore of women; when they
rule alone, not only is odious, but is also most miserably administered:
neither can the example of Debora (whereof I spoke before) be justly objected;
but rather I may my self make use of that example, in confirmation of my own
assertion; for if she governed well, it was because she was a Prophetess; and
if her government were not odious; it was because a man commanded: for our Lord
God, being willing the Israelites should be ruled by a woman; and knowing that
by reason of their natural imbecillities, they are not fit to rule, he infused
into Debora a Prophetical spirit, and meaning she should be received without
distaste, knowing how distasteful a thing it is to men to be governed by women,
he appointed her Barak for a companion in the government; to the end, that
commanding by his assistance, it might not be thought, as of her self alone,
the command of a woman.

I will here forbear to speak of infinite Kingdoms and States, that by the
government of women have been utterly overthrown, of which all ancient and
modern Histories are full; as well, for that it is a thing so well known, as
for that it is not much to our purpose. For when Tacitus says, Serviendum
foeminae, he means not, that a woman should command alone, either as Judge or
as Princess; but he means the third way, together with men, seeing he speaks
of Livia, who having been the cause of Tiberius his coming to the Crown: it
might be doubted, whether she also were not to govern, as well as he. That
which we are to examine is this, what authority ought to be given in such
cases, by men to women; and whether their government in this sort be odious or
no? For answer whereto, we must proceed with distinguishing, either we speak
of States not well settled, where the men are stout and warlike; or else of
States, that live quietly and in peace, and are governed by a Prince secure. If
we be in the first case, I am absolutely of opinion, that the Dominion of women
is most odious; and therefore Semiramis, as knowing this, durst not venture to
take upon her the Empire, openly; Haec (says Justin) nec immaturo puero ausa
tradere Imperium, necipsa Imperium palam tractare, tot ac tantis gentibus vir
patienter uni viro, nedum foeminae parituris. And the reason of this is nothing
else, but that those Subjects being stout and warlike, would never have
consented to be governed by her, if they had known her at first to be a woman.
Which we may well think, seeing with these very subjects, it was enough for
Sardanapalus that he had but the likeness of a woman, to make him despised,
and afterward be slain. Indignatus tali foeminae (says Justin of him in the
person of Artabanus) tantum virorum subjectum, tractantique lanam ferrum and
arma portantes parere. And this is the case, which Tacitus means when he says
Serviendum foeminae; showing, it would be odious in a warlike people, as the
Romans were, and dangerous in a new Prince as Tiberius was, to govern in
company of a woman.

Now if we ask, what authority should be given to women in such cases, I say,
they should not be suffered to entermeddle in matters of judgment, nor of the
state, themselves alone; not so much for their incapacity, as for the contempt
they are apt to fall into, though they should govern never so well. And
therefore the Roman Emperor Alexander, a man most just, and furnished with all
the qualites of a good Prince; yet because he suffered his mother to meddle in
matters of State, though she did it with great prudence and justice, he fell in
short time into contempt, and finally of the Soldiers was miserably slain. In
truth a singular example to show, that warlike minds can never endure the
government of women, and that their honor is the Princes disparagement; which
Tiberius (a wise man) knew, and could say, Moderandos foeminarum honores: and
Tacitus, no less wise then he, gives the reason of it saying, Muliebre
fastigium in sui diminutionem accipiens.

Yet they must not altogether be left without honor, but some authority it is
fit they should have, especially such as are the cause of the Princes coming
to the Empire. And therefore the wise Solomon, who through the good means of
his mother Bersabee with old David, was assumed to the Royal dignity, not
only honored her exceedingly, but would have her sit with him upon his
Throne; as is written in the Book of Kings, Venit ergo Bersabee ad Regem
Salomonem, ut loqueretur ei pro Adonia, and surrexit Rex in occursum ejus,
adoravitque (...), and sedit super Thronum suum, positusque est Thronus matri
Regis, quae sedit ad dexteram ejus. But yet I cannot find, in holy Scripture,
that ever she gave judgment, or spoke in counsel, or gave audience in
affairs at any time. The authority and honor therefore that is to be allowed
to women, in States that are not secure, ought not to be immediately in
themselves, but by assistance of their husbands. And this counsel David gave
to Solomon, in the Psalm Eructavit, speaking to his Bride, where he says,
Filia Tyri in numeribus, vultum tuum deprecabuntur: Where he says not te, but
vultum tuum, that is, thy husband; meant by the word countenance, as Theodoret
and S. Basil interpret it. He then that is to be resorted to, and to be sued
unto, must be the man, and not the woman; and the honors that are done to the
women, ought to pass by the way of their husbands: and therefore it is said in
Esaias, (...) invocetur nomen tuum super nos. This course Tiberius took most
notably, who when his mother made any suite in his name, he presently granted
it; and more then so, he many times at the suit of Livia required those things
of the Senate, which without blushing he could not have asked; but when it was
moved to give her honors immediately without passing by the means of
Tiberius, he then presently opposed it, saying, Moderandos foeminarum honores.

But if we speak of those Princes that live securely in peace, and are well
settled in their states, as at this day many are in Italy; then, either those
women that should govern together with the men, are in judgment and
understanding fit for it, or else they are altogether unfit: if unfit, it may
then be enough for them to look to matters at home, and Domestical affairs;
but if fit, I cannot then think any thing more just, or more convenient, or
more profitable to a Prince, then to call such women of his blood, to bear a
part of the burdens of government; both because by their experience and
prudence they may assist the Prince as much as any other; and also because by
reason of their own interest, and the singular affection they bear to their
husbands, their sons or nephews; there can be none found, that with more
sincerity and faithfulness, and without any by-respects, will help them to
bear so great a burden, as a Kingdom is; and so much more, as they are
always like to be partakers as well of the dangers, as of the profits of the
Prince. A thing which is not found in strangers, and such as are mercenary,
whose profit oftentimes looks another way, and is divided from the Princes
profit. Whereupon S. (...) upon that place of Esaias, Pater filiis notam faciet
veritamet: says, Non revelatur servo veritas, quia servus nescit quid faciat
Dominus ejus, sed nec Mercenarius rapitur ad contemplandam veritatem, quia
propriam quaerit utilitatem. And therefore Augustus a most wise Prince, had
often conference with Livia, Numa Pompilius with Aegeria, Cyrus with Aspas^a
Tarquinius with Tanaquill, and Justinian with his wife Theodosia. Princes
therefore ought not to despise the counsels of women of their blood, but to
hold them in great account; whereof, in my opinion there is in Genesis a Golden
Text: Sara having spoken to Abraham to send away Agar and Ismael, it seems he
was not very willing to give credit to the words of a woman; which God knowing,
said unto him, Omnia quae dixerit tibi Sara, audi vooem ejus. Moreover, when
our Lord God made the woman, he said, Faciamus ei Adjutorium simile sibi: and
why then should we seek after other helpers, and not take those who are made
of purpose for our aid? According to this my opinion was decided the
controversy in Tacitus, between Valorius Messalina and Caecina, where it was
concluded, that in governments which stand in danger, it is not fit to bring in
women; but very fit, in governments that are peaceable and secure. In which I
say more, that a Prince who is young, cannot do better, then not only to be
counseled (a thing in part also fit, where States are dangerous) but to suffer
himself also to be governed by women. Theodatus King of the Ostrogothes, in
the beginning of his Reign carried himself, with great moderation, as long as
he agreed with his wife, but when he left to follow her advice, he filled with
injustice all his Kingdom. The Emperor Constantinus Sestus, never governed
well, but when he suffered his mother Irene to direct him. And Solomon never
run into disorderly courses, as long as his mother Bersabe^ lived; of whom he
scorned not to be taught, as himself in the Proverbs says, Filius fui patris
mei, tenellus and Vnigenitus coram matre mea, and docebat me atque dicebat,
suscipiat verba mea cor tuum, custodi praecepta mea, and vives. And therefore
S. Chrysostom upon S. John says, Nihil potentius muliere bona ad
instituendum, and informandum virum, quodcunque voluerit, neque tam leniter
anticos, nec magistros patietur, ut conjugem admonentem atque consulentem,
habet enim voluptatem quandam admonitio uxoria; cum plurimum amet cui consulit,
multos possum afferre viros asperos and immites, per uxorem mites redditos and
mansuetos. Who knows not, that Tiberius never plunged himself so much into
all kinds of wickedness, as after his mothers death? And the reason which all
men allege to prove women unfit for government, is of no force; of force I
know in general; but that in particular, women should not be as fit as men, I
hold it a great folly to think; having my self, although but young, not only
found written in Histories, but seen in experience, many women able to have
governed the whole World: and to these the frailty of their sex, is so far
from being a hinderance, that rather they are worthy of the more praise, for
overcomming natural defects, with supply of virtue.

Vix dum ingressus Illyricum Tiberius, properis matris literis excitur, neque
satis compertum est, spirantem adhuc Augustum apud urbem Nolam, an exanimem
repererit, acribus namque custodiis domum and vias sepserat Livia, laetique
interdum (...) vulgabantur, donec (...) quae tempus monebat, simul excessisse
Augustum, and rerum potiri Neronem, eadem fama detulit.
That at one and the same time, to make known the death of the Prince, and the
assumption of the successor, is a thing very profitable for States that stand
in danger. The four and twentieth Discourse.

THere is nothing makes me more believe, that Tiberius had given order to his
mother to poison Augustus, then his very being far off from Rome, at the time
of his death; an invention followed by all those, who by such means have taken
away the life of great personages. So did Piso, after he had (as is said)
poisoned Germanicus: so did Lodowick Sforza, who knowing that his Nephew had
taken poison, and could not long be living, he would not stay in Milan, but
went to Piacenza to the King of France. The cause, as I think, why they do so,
is to the end the World may not suspect they had any hand in their deaths; and
although, they cannot but think, that men of understanding will suspect them
the more, yet this is nothing to the Prince, who seeks but to a void the heat
of the people, who without any judgment, are carried through love or hatred, to
do such things, as men of judgment would never do.

Tiberius was then in Slavonia, when his mother sent him word of Augustus his
sickness; who (as may be thought) was dead before Tiberius came to Nola; yet
he oftentimes gave forth, he had good hope of his speedy recovery; and this he
continued so long, till he might be provided of things needful for
accomplishing his purpose; and that done, he at one and the same time, with one
and the same voice, made known the death of Augustus, and his own assumption
to the Empire.

We have in Tacitus another example very like to this, of Agrippina the mother
of Nero, who upon certain words she heard Claudius utter in his Wine, that he
meant to give the Empire to Britannicus, she poisoned him; and being dead, she
gave out there was good hope of his amendment, until she had made ready all
things needful for making Nero Emperor. The words of Tacitus are these,
Vocabatur interim Senatus; votaque pro incolumitate Principis Consules and
Sacerdotes nuncupabant, cum jam exanimis vestibus and fomentis obtegeretur, dum
res firmando Neronis Imperio componuntur. Jam Agrippina velut dolor victa, and
solatia conquirens, tenere amplexu Britannicum, veram Paterni oris effigiem
appellare, ac variis artibus demorari, ne cubiculo egrederetur. Antoniam quoque
and Octaviam sorores ejus attinuit, and ounctos aditus custodiis clauserat,
erebroque vulgabat, ire in melius valetudinem Principis, quo miles bona in spe
ageret, tempusque prosperum ex monitis Chaldaeorum attentaret. Tunc medio diei,
tertio ante Idus Octobris, foribus Palatii repent deductis, Comitante Burrho
Nero egreditur. I have related these words of Tacitus at large (as not able at
this time to discourse upon them:) to the end, that every one may see, what
devices Agrippina used at the death of Claudius to bring Nero to the Empire.
The very like course to this, was taken by Servius Tullus, in company of
Tanaquill the wife of Tarquinius Priscus, who seeing her husband wounded so
dangerously, that he was upon the point to die, she shut the Court gates, and
gave out that the wound was but light; and that in a few days they should see
the Prince abroad, but that in the mean time, he had commanded Servius Tullus
to take his charge, and to be obeyed as himself in person: by this device,
Servius getting possession of the Royal authority, was able in few days so to
setle himself in the Empire, that it was an easy matter, at one and the same
time, to make known that Tarquinius was dead, and that himself was Emperor.
Which fact Livy relating, says, Servius cum trabea and lictoribus prodit, ac
sede Regia sedens, alia decernit, de aliis consulturum se esse Regem (...),
itaque per aliquos dies, cum jam expirasset Tarquinius celata morte, per
speciem (...) fungend^ vicis, suas opes sirmavit, tum (...) palam facta, ex
comploratione in Regia orta, Servius praesidio firmo munitus, primum injussu
populi, voluntate Patrum Regnavit. Also Arius Aper, after he had secretly in a
litter slain Numerianus the son of the Emperor (...), gave out in the Army
enquiring where he was, that for an infirmity in his eyes, he kept him out of
the wind, intending first to accomodate his own designs, and then to publish
Numerianus his death; and if his plot succeeded not, that was long of other
occasions. It is therefore no marvel that Tiberius following the course of
Servius, was able to attain his end, as well as Servius, especially having
many things to help him, which to the other were wanting.

This therefore is an excellent way, secure and worthy of imitation, in
Kingdoms that are not well settled, and where the people are desirous of
change; for to suffer no Interregnum, but in one and the same time, to make
known the death of the one, and the assumption of the other, is the only
means to hinder innovations. The reason of this, in my opinion is, because as
Wax is more apt to take a form, when it is without any, then when it has a
form before, seeing in the first case there needs but one action, which is to
imprint a new form; where in the second case, there need two: first to take
away the old form, and then to bring in a new, which certainly is double as
difficult: and therefore a certain Philosopher, would be doubly paid, when he
took one to teach, that had been taught before, because he must take double
pains: first, to remove the false Images imprinted in the fantasy; and then
to bring in the true: so a City (to return to our purpose) being a matter that
cannot consist without a form, it will be more easy to bring in it a new
form, if it have none before, then if it have; and therefore if Tiberius had
made known the death of Augustus, before his own assumption to the Empire,
the City had remained without a form, and consequently with small difficulty,
either the Senate or the people, or the soldiers might have brought in
another: but coming at one and the same time, to know both the one and the
other, the Empire seemed rather to change Prince, then form. Our Lord God knew
the Israelites to be a people, Durae cervicis, apt to rebel, and desirous of
innovations; and therefore he called Moses up to the Mount, to the end they
might not know of his death, before they knew Josua the son of Nun to be his
successor. We may therefore conclude, that this course of Tiberius is not to
be blamed, especially taken to a pious end.

Primum facinus Novi Principatus fuit Posthumi Agrippae caedes; quem ignarum
Inermemque quamvis firmatus animo Centurio aegre confecit. Nihil de ea Re
Tiberius apud Senatum disseruit: Patris Jussa dissimulabat, quibus
praescripsisse Tribuno custodiae adposito, ne contaretur Agrippam morte
adsicere quando^ue ipse supremum diem explevisset.
That those men who possess the state of another, are but in a dangerous
condition, as long as any of the former Lords line remain alive: and what
course is to be taken to free themselves from such danger. The five and
twentieth Discourse.

Tiberius apprehended, he could never live securely in the Empire, if he made
not away Agrippa. For he being of the line of Augustus, and nearer to the
Crown then himself, a sierce man and of beastly conditions, would always be
a refuge to the soldiers and people of Rome, whenfoever they should fall into
distaste of their Prince: and the rather for that he being a violent man, and
without judgment, would never have stood upon danger, but not fearing death it
self, would have ventured upon any occasion. And these are the men, who though
but private men, are to be feared of all: and therefore Pomponius stood in
fear of Titus Manlius, Et quod haud minus timendum erat (says Livy) stolide
ferocem viribus suis cerneret.

This course of Tiberius has for the most part been followed by all Princes
and Commonwealths in the changes of State, when from one line it passes to
another, the new always extinguishing the old, as though without this course,
they were never able to live in peace. So the Romans, as long as the race of
the Tarquins continued, were never without war. And this is one of the causes
I alleged, why the conspiracy of Marcus Brutus against Caesar, had not so good
success, as the conspiracy of Lucius Brutus against the Tarquins; because in
this, they destroyed not only the line of the Tarquins, but all those that
were of the name: where in that of Caesar, they only cut down the tree, but
left the root behind; from which sprung up Augustus, who receiving nourishment
and aid from those very men that had killed his uncle, in a short time he grew
to be so great a Tree, that he crushed them to pieces, that went about to cut
him down. For this very cause, in Egypt, in Cappadocia, in Soria, in
Macedonia, and in Bythinia, they often changed their Kings, because they took
no care to extinguish the line of the former Lords, but only to get their
places. And therefore Bardanus in Tacitus is justly blamed, who instead of
extinguishing Gotarze the former Lord, stood loosing his time, in besieging the
City.

But these and a thousand other examples, (which for brevity I omit) it may be
held for a maxim of State, that whosoever gets a Kingdom from another, he
ought to root out the whole line of him that was Lord before.

But this rule cannot be thus left, without some aspersion of impiety: and
therefore, for resolution, I think best to distinguish; because if we speak of
a Christian Prince, that has gotten the state of another, who is enemy of the
faith, he may justly do^ as best pleases him, by any way whatsoever to take
them away, that can pretend to the State; yet not so neither, unless he find
them so obstinate in their ^ect, that there is no possible means to remove
them from their error; and so much our Lord God himself, by the mouth of the
Prophet Samuel, appointed Saul to do to Amalech, (...) ergo vade and percute
Amalech, and demolire Vniversa ejus, non parcas ei, and non concupiscas ex
rebus (...) aliquid, sed interfice a viro usque ad (...), and (...) atque
Lactantem.

But if we speak of a Christian Prince, that by force gets possession of a
State, from one of the same faith let him never go about to destroy the line
of him that possessed it before; for, besides that it is a thing unworthy of a
Christian, it seems to me, to be rather their invention, who meaning to live
wickedly, would be glad to have no bridle, for if a Prince shall carry himself
lovingly toward his Subjects, using them as children, and not as servants, he
need not be afraid of any whomsoever. For this cause, the Senators of Rome,
having driven out the Tarquins, had more (...) to govern the City, as fathers,
then to extinguish the line of him that had been Lord, which was indeed
incomparably more for their good: as in the second book of the first Decad of
Livy, every one may see.

Rather, many times it is better to bestow honors upon them, from whom a state
is taken, and to leave them a part, thereby to retain the rest more securely.
So did Cyrus, who having taken Lydia, and dispossessed Craesus, who was Lord of
it before, he left him at least a part of his patrimony, and gave him a City to
be his own. And indeed if he had done otherwise, he might easily have lost
all: therefore Justin says, Craeso and vita, and patrimonii parts and urbs
Barce concessa sunt, in qua (...) non Regiam vitam, tamen proximam Majestati
Regiae degeret. And then shows the benefit that comes by it, where he says,
Haec Clementia non minus Victori, quam victo utilis fuit: quippe ex Vniversa
Gracia, cognito quod illatum Craeso bellum esset, auxilia veli^t ad (...)
extinguendum incendium (...) Craesi (...) apud omnes urbes erat, ut passurus
(...) bellu^ Gracia fuerit, si quid crudelius in Craesum consuluisset. If the
King of France had done thus, when Ferdinand of Aragon would have yielded up
the Kingdom of Naples to him, if he would have left him but Lord of Calabria,
perhaps he had not lost both the one and the other: and in truth, it had been
his best way to have done so, at least for so long time, till he might have
made himself sure and firm in the Kingdom of Naples: and then for the other,
he might have taken it from him again at any time. So did David, who took
away half of the substance which Saul had given to Mephibosheth; and gave it
to his servant Siba, for a doubt he had, lest he should desire his fathers
Kingdom. This interpretation Procopius made of it, when he said, Vt
substantiam (...), (...) ipsius dejiceret, ne Regnum affectaret, alias enim
illum qui adversus Dominum suum mendacium dixerat, quem punire potius debebat,
nequaquam participem cumeo fecisset.

Alexander the Great, when he waged war with Kings far off from Macedonia,
he not only when he had overcome them, never sought to extinguish their line;
but which is more strange, to them from whom he had taken a Kingdom, he
restored the same Kingdom again. A great act of Magnanimity, and which may
and ought to be used, in the like case to that of Alexander Magnus; that is,
when Countries far remote from the Seat of the Kingdom, and in customs,
Jaws, habit and language very different, are easily overcome; and so much the
rather, when the war is waged, more for desire of glory, then for getting of
ground; seeing it is always better, to seek to hold that by a way of
clemency, which by a way of force can never be held.

But in case it be feared, least leaving the former Prince, in the Countries
taken from him, he should practice to make a revolution; he may then have
states given him to govern in other places: So Cirus did, who having overcome
the Medes, and deprived Astyages of his Kingdom, he would not leave him in
Media, and yet would not deal hardly with him neither, but he made him
Governor of Hyrcania, and although Justin say, it was done, because Astyages
himself had no mind to return to the Medes; yet to my understanding, it is
more likely, that Cyrus did it as fearing, least he who had procured his
nephews death, to bring himself to the Kingdom, being now deprived of it,
would never be quiet, when any fit occasion should be offered to him.

Another way there is, which others have used, and it is, to keep such about
themselves, and to hold them in esteem of Kings: so Herod the great had begun
to do with Aristobulus, and with Hyrcanes, but the cruelty of his nature made
him fall at last, to take the same course that others do. This counsel
therefore, was much better followed by David, who leaving Saul's patrimony to
Mephibosheth the son of Jonathan, he held him always about himself in great
honor, and all succeeded exceeding well.

And in case all these courses seem to be difficult; either, thorough the
undanted spirit of him that was Lord before, or by reason of the extraordinary
affection the people bear him; in this case, the best course is, to send them
into banishment for some long time, as the Pope did in Bolognia.

But to return to our purpose: Tiberius not without cause stood in fear of
Agrippa, which is plainly to be seen by this, that not only Agrippa, but one
only servant forging and taken upon him his name, was like to have raised no
small insurrection in the people and Senators of Rome; and because Tiberius
could not put this Agrippa to death, without incurring an exceeding blot of
cruelty, he therefore had recourse, to that remedy so much used by Princes;
which was to feign that Augustus had commanded it. So also did the Emperor
Adrian, who would have it believed, that all the murders he committed were
done by his predecessors command; which not only abates the hatred and name
of being cruel, but converts it also into piety, as done for executing the
will of the dead. And yet in this there would be no blame, if such murders
were committed out of zeal of justice, out of which zeal, David being willing
that Joab should be punished for two murders, and Semei for the injury he had
done him; to take away the hatred, that for this might fall upon Solomon, he
commanded him at the time of his death to do it; to the end, that he afterward
putting it in execution, might seem rather (as in this indeed he was) a just
King, and a pious executour of the will of his deceased father, then a cruel
Prince.

But because Ludovico Moro, taking to him that state, which belonged not to
him, by means of his Nephews death, has much resemblance to Tiberius; I am
willing to show it a little more clearly, by a Parallel. Augustus being dead,
Tiberius succeeded in the Empire, and caused Agrippa Posthumus to be put to
death, to whom the succession of right belonged. Ludovico Moro succeeded in the
Duchy of Milan, and caused (as it is believed) John Galeozzo, the true heir,
to whom that Duchy of right belonged, to be put to death. Tiberius doubted,
that because Augustus was gone to visit Agrippa, he would appoint him to be
Emperor. Ludovico Moro feared, that because Charles the eighth was gone to
visit John Galeozzo, he would make him Duke of Milan Tiberius would have it
believed, that he was elected by the Senate, and not through the wickedness
and plots of his mother Livia. Ludovico Moro would have it believed, that he
was made Duke of Milan by the people, for the good of the state, and not
through his own villainies. Tiberius made a show, as though he were unwilling
to take upon him the Empire, Moro also dissembled the like. In one only thing
they differed, that to the one it proved safety; to the other, ruin; and it
is, that where Tiberius as soon as he came to the Empire, he presently put
Agrippa to death; Ludovico stayed so long from putting his nephew to death,
that he was forced, for putting it in execution to call in the King of France,
to his manifest and utter ruin.

A Parallel between Tiberius and Solomon. The six and twentieth Discourse.

SEeing in these Discourses, and particularly in the next before, we have
spoken of Tiberius, and brought also many examples of Solomon, I have thought
it no unfit curiosity, to compare them together. Tiberius was borne of Livia,
who was taken by Augustus from Nero. Solomon was borne of Bersabee, who was
taken by David from Vrias. Bersabee was with child, (although by David) when he
took her to wife; Livia also was with child, when she went to be married to
Augustus. Augustus had many near of kin to whom to leave the Empire, as
Agrippa for one. David had his son Adoniah, to whom by right of age, as being
the elder, the Kingdom belonged. Finally, Augustus grown old, at the suit of
Livia, appointed Tiberius to be his heir: and David grown old, at the
persuasions of Bersabee, ordained Solomon to succeed him. Solomon being come to
the Crown, killed Adoniah, to whom the right of it belonged: Tiberius being
come to the Empire, caused Agrippa to be put to death, who was rightful heir
of the Empire: Both the one and the other governed with great judgment in the
beginning; but at last, Solomon loosing Bersabee, and Tiberius, Livia; both the
one and the other plunged themselves into all kinds of lustfulnesse. Whereupon
there rebelled against Tiberius, Sejanus the dearest servant he had: and
against Solomon, Jeroboam the most inward friend he had. Tiberius used to
speak darkly: Solomon also used the like speaking, as may be seen by his
Parables and Proverbs.

Nuntianti Centurioni ut mos Militiae: factum esse quod imperasset, neque
imperasse sese, and rationem facti reddendam apud Senatum, respondit. Quod
postquam Sallustius Crispus particeps Secretorum (is ad Tribunum miserat
codicillos) comperit; metuens ne reus subderetur, juxta periculoso, ficta
seuvera promeret, monuit Liviam, ne arcana domus, etc.
That it is a dangerous thing to obey Princes in services of cruelty and
tyranny. The seven and twentieth Discourse.

SAllust had taken order, and provided all due means for putting Agrippa
Posthumus to death, by the commandment of Tiberius; but he desirous to show he
had no hand in the fact, denied to the Centurion who was the executioner of it,
that it was done by any command of his; saying, that for what he had done, he
must give account, not to him, but to the Senate. Which Sallust seeing, and
doubting least the mischief might fall upon his head; Veritus (as Justin
says, speaking in the person of Arpagus in the like case) (...) infantis
necati ultionem, quam a patre non potuisset, a ministro exigeret: he began to
counsel Livia, Ne arcana Domus, ne consilia amicoru^, ministeria militum
vulgarentur.

The conceit of Tiberius was good, that he would have, (as I imagine) the
Centurion go to the Senate to tell them, he had executed the Commandment of
Augustus about the death of Agrippa; but yet that of Sallust likes me better:
because there is no likelihood it would ever be believed, that Augustus
appointed the death of a Nephew, for security of a son in law: seeing as he
could get nothing by it, so he might loose much; because the Prince showing he
cared not to have his death known, there is no doubt but men would talk of it
with more boldness: from which talk, there oftentimes grow ill affections
against the Prince; whereas, if Tiberius had passed it (as he did) in silence,
it would not have come to many men's ears, and they that would have heard it,
would have kept it secret, as knowing how dangerous a thing it is, to discover
and talk of that which Princes would have to be concealed. Besides, if he made
it be told in the Senate, he did by such feigning more incense the minds of all
men; seeing doing it, without telling it, he had used but force, but telling it
withal, he used craft; and because it grieves inferiors more, when they are
overcome by craft, then when they are oppressed by force: consequently, they
would have taken greater indignation for the death of Agrippa, if to the force
there had been added this craft, to make the Senate believe such tales, as one
would not look should be believed of Children. And therefore we see the Roman
Nobility took it ill at Neroes hands, that he would go about to make them
believe, that the shipwreck of his mother was a thing happened by chance; and
that she had sent Agerinus to kill him, which were all but foolish devises, to
cover his most nefarious fault. Yet I say not, if Tiberius had used that
cunning before spoken of, that he had been ere the more in danger by it; seeing
they who understand these tricks, are men of brain, who as they have judgment
whereby they discern such subtilties of the Prince; so by the same judgment
they know how to hide them, by making a show that they believe them. And upon
such men it is that the people, (the Princes only fear) cast their eyes, and
believe verily all that to be true, which they see wise men make a show to
believe: as one that looks only upon the bark of things, discernes not that
which is true, from that which is feigned; whereof, we have an example in
Tacitus, in the fore-alledged case of Nero, in which, although the chief men
had taken distaste to be mocked with those foolish inventions of Nero, yet they
all made show to believe it when it was told them. Miro tamen certamine
Procerum, decernuntur supplicationes, apud omnia Pulvinaria. Herod was much
afraid, if he should cause Saint John to be beheaded, least the people would
make some insurrection; whereupon he found this trick, to bind himself by
oath; thereby to make the people believe, that it was against his will he put
him to death, but that he was tied by oath; and it succeeded well with him, for
the chief men, both out of interest and out of fear made show to believe him;
and the people believed him indeed: yet in this present case, when together
with securing themselves from the people, they may also avoid the distaste of
the Senate; this opinion of Sallust likes me better.

But be it how it will, this is a clear case, which we may gather from this
place, that those Officers who have served their Lords, and been their
instruments in cruel and tyrannical executions, have come themselves at last,
for the most part to a miserable end. And this happens for diverse reasons.

First, because oftentimes they surfeit of them, and knowing their own
villainies, in which many times they go so far, that Neque peccata, neque
Remedia pati possunt, as Livy says, they feel themselves torn in conscience,
which is always gnawing, Sicut vestimentum sic comedet eos vermis, and sicut
lana, sic devorabit eos tinea; a misery which for the most part happens to
tyrants. And this Plato teaches us, as Tacitus speaking of Tiberius relates,
Ad^o Facinora atque flagitia sua ipst quoque in supplicium verterent. Neque
frustra Praestantissimus sapientiae (that is Plato) firmare solitus est, si
reoludantur Tyrannorum mentes, posse aspici laniatus and ictus; quando ut
corpora verberibus, ita saevitia, libidine, malis consultis animus dilaceratur.
As was seen also in Nero, who after he had killed his mother, was continually
affrighted in his mind, as fearing the wagging of every leaf. And Alphonsus of
Aragon had always apparitions before his eyes, where he thought he saw those
Lords, whom he had put to death. So the King Theodoricus, having put Boethius
and Symmachus to death, when the head of a great Fish was served to his table,
he thought he saw the head of Symmachus threatening him; wherewith affrighted,
he cast himself upon his bed, and died. So Poets feine, that Oresies having
killed his mother, was tormented by the Furies: whereupon the Ancients, seeing
these tyrants standing always in continual terror, Sonitus terroris semper
in auribus illius; and cum pax sit, ille insidius suspicatur: have conceived
that such men were frighted with the Ghosts of those whom they had killed.
Seeing therefore these Princes cannot hinder a thing done, from being done;
they desire at least to have them taken away, who having been their
instruments, do with their presence refresh the memory of the villainies they
have committed: So Tacitus says, speaking of Anicetus whom Nero employed to
kill his mother. Levi post admissum scelus gratia, dein graviore odio, quia
graviorum facinorum ministri, exprobrantes aspiciuntur. And therefore Tiberius
used often to rid away those servants, who^ in such villainies he had employed.
And that his cruelty might not want work, in their places he supplied still
others; which (...) relates where he says, (...) ministros ut praeventi ab
aliis nolebat, ita (...) in eandem operam recentibus, veteres and pergraves
afflixit.

Secondly, they oftentimes put to death such servants; specially whom they have
employed in murdering any of the blood Royal: and the reason is, lest having
now imbrued their hands in Royal blood, they should (...) stick to murder
them too. So Perseus put him to death, who had been his instrument in killing
Demetrius; so Otho all those who had been his ministers in killing of Galba.

Thirdly, this happens sometimes for securing of Princes, that their villainies
may not be known: for when they have done them, and can find no other way to
hide them, they then lay another upon them; as David did, who to cover his
adultery, committed a murder; and therefore they put all those to death, who
have any hand, or have any knowledge of their faults: so did Bassianus the
son of Severus, who having caused his brother Geta to be killed, caused also
Letus that had been his Counselor, and all other that were acquainted with
it, to be slain. Perseus also standing in fear of the Roman Army, appointed
Niceas to cast all his Treasure into the Sea; and Andronides, to burn the
Navy: but afterward, being sensible of his cowardice in showing such fear, and
ashamed of it; to the end it might not be known, he caused both of them to be
put to death.

Fourthly, it often happens that such servants run a hazard, because a
Prince having used them, in the executing a thousand cruelties and tyrannies,
through which they come to be odious to all the City; he hopes that by putting
those servants to death, the odiousness shall be turned upon them as whereby
the subjects shall be made believe, that those cruelties were committed without
their consent. So Valentinus used to do, who having employed (...) d'Orco,
with great cruelty to extinguish the factions of Romagna; after most
tyrannically, he had made himself Lord of it, and had obtained his purpose;
not without bringing upon himself the infinite hatred of all his subjects; at
last he cut in pieces that miserable minister of his, to the end, the hatred of
his subjects might be turned upon him: and the like did Tiberius to Sejanus,
and of such examples Histories are full. Rather indeed, tyrants ingrosse to
themselves such fellows, to the end, that when the scores of seditions shall
be cast up, they may excuse themselves, and make the people wreck their anger
upon the servant.

Fifthly, such servants run a hazard; because the foundation upon which they
build their Lords favor is soon ended: the cause of their favor, being only
the hatred that is borne to another, which cease as soon as he is dead; and
consequently the affection cease, which was borne for putting the murder in
execution: so much Tacitus intimates, speaking of Plancina, who after the
hatred to Germanicus was ended, was her self in danger, Vbi odium and Gratia
desit, jus valuit.

But these ways never bring forth any good effect to a Prince: First, because
it is false, that they can ever cancel the remembrance of such villainies out
of their minds; seeing their own conscience is too great a witness against
them. Whereupon, although our Lord God, (as Theodoret says) took away the
life of that son of David, which was borne in the adultery with Bersabee,
that it might not remain a shame to him, for the ^inne he had committed, Vivus
erat futurus argumentum sceleris ac iniquitatis, (...) Regis qui erat, and
Propheta, curant gerens Dominus, non sinit eum vivere: yet it served not to
remove the gnawing of his conscience: as he says, Peccatum moum coram me est
semper. Secondly, this is no sufficient way to keep their crimes from being
known, Nihil occultum quod non reveletur, neque coopertum, quod non sciatur.
And if it be not known at other times, at least it shall not be hidden at the
day of judgment. Thirdly, it is no fit way to make the people believe, that
the cruelties executed by servants, were done without the Princes consent; and
although it have sometimes succeeded well, yet this has not been because the
people believed it, but (as I said before, upon the place of Justin) because
when the people cannot wreake their anger upon the Prince, they will for the
present upon his ministers, and afterward when time serves, upon the Prince
himself: as it happened to Valentinus. Sometimes also, the people make a show
to believe that the villainies committed, were done without the Princes consent;
to the end, that to preserve this good opinion of himself, he may, after the
death of such ministers, give over his cruelty: and lastly, it saves them not
from being slain; for if they be not by them, they are by others, and
oftentimes by themselves, as it happened to Otho.

This way therefore does no good at all, and is the worst wicked course that
can be imagined, being nothing but a mere multiplying of villainies. It is
true, if a Prince should employ a servant to kill a delinquent, and so both of
them should juridically deserve death; in this case, he should commit no
error, in putting also the servant to death; but herein, he should imitate our
Lord God, who oftentimes makes use of the wicked to punish the wicked; and they
once punished, he then as a loving father, having corrected his child, casts
the rod which was the instrument of correction, into the fire; and more then
this, he oftentimes punishes those whom he has used for executing his anger,
Vae Assure; virga furorismei, and baculus ipse est, says the truth in the mouth
of Esaias. So our Lord God made use of the King of the Assyrians, and of his
Army, to punish the people of Israel, for their sins; and that done, he
punished also the Assyrians themselves, in such sort that he destroyed them
all. There is no doubt but our Lord God did it all with exceeding great justice
and providence, punishing justly those Assyrians, who besides their being a
most persidious people, they fell upon the Israelites (as Theodoret expounds
it) not for any zeal of executing Gods justice, but only for the hatred they
bore to that Nation.

To return to our purpose, I conclude that Sallust had an excellent brain,
not to suffer the cause to be brought before the Senate, which if it had been
there agitated, and Tiberius not discover himself, all the mischief would
have lighted upon him, and they would have been revenged upon the servant,
when upon the Prince they could not. So it happened to Piso, who having been
employed by Tiberius to kill Germanicus, and the cause brought before the
Senate; Tiberius shifted it off from himself, and it fell to Pisoes lot to
suffer for it. Not without cause therefore did Sallust: Monuit Liviam, ne
arcana domus, ne consilia amicorum, ministeria militum vulgarentur.

Monuit Liviam ne arcana domus, ne consilia amicorum, ministeria militum
vulgarentur.
That Princes ought not to reveal the secrets of their State; and how it
happens, that oftentimes men are drawn to speak some things which ought to be
concealed. The eighth and twentieth Discourse.

ALI States, whether they be Commonwealths or Kingdoms, have certain
foundations, or as we call them secrets, by which they govern themselves, both
for conservation and augmentation. And therefore they endeavor in such sort to
conceal them, that they may not be known to any but their successors. So did
Augustus, in giving instructions to Tiberius; so did David, acquainting Solomon
with them at the time of his death: so finally did Charles the fifth, teaching
them to Philip the second when he renounced the Empire: for if these secrets by
which they govern, should be publicly known, it would be a great advantage
against them, for loosing their states. And therefore Sosybus, understanding
that Cleomenes the Spartan, was informed of all the most inward secrets of
Ptolomey, would not suffer him to go out of Egypt, for fear (as Plutarch
relates) he should raise some sharp war in that Kingdom, whereupon finally
he put him to death. We may see also, that the Romans never were in greater
danger to be overthrown, then when by Coriolanus, their own Citizen, and
consequently acquainted with all their secrets, they were assaulted. This
praecept was so well observed by the ancient Roman Commonwealth, that though
we have all the Histories of those times, yet to this day we know not,
otherwise then by some conjecture, by what means it was, that they maintained
their government, and augmented it.

Justly therefore did Sallust advise, Ne arcana domus vulgarentur: that is,
that those secrets of State, upon which the Empire is founded, should not be
made known to any but to the Prince. And Solomon in his Proverbs observes as
much where he says, Coelum sursum, terra deorsum, and cor Regis inscrutabile.

But because oftentimes men overshoote themselves, in discovering the secrets
of their mind, it shall be our work in this Discourse, to show what policies
are wont to be used to make men reveal their secrets; and then, what remedy
there is for it, which consists indeed in only the knowing them, as it is in
snares, which if they be known, are easily avoided.

Secrets then are either discovered of ones own accord, or else one is drawn
to discover them, by some other. The first case may happen by many occasions:
First, out of a certain vanity, that is commonly in all men, to show they are
privy to the secrets of Princes; and this is most seen in women and young men:
and thus the conspiracy of Catiline came to be discovered. Secondly, it may
happen through drunkenness, which is apt to disclose any secret, how great
soever, as it happens at feasts. And therefore Solomon would not have Kings to
drink Wine, Noli regibus O Lamuel, noli regibus dare (...), quia nullum
secretum est, ubi regnat Ebrietas: there being this nature in Wine, that it
makes those things be laid open, which should be hidden: as we see in Noe, who
no sooner drunk Wine, but he laid open those parts, which he should have
hidden. And this is one reason why the Ancients painted Bacchus naked; thereby
to intimate that Wine discloseth secrets. Thirdly, it happens oftentimes
through hatred and indignation, which they, to whom secrets are imparted,
conceive against the Prince: whereupon, they knowing the danger of this, as
soon as they find they have discontented one in whom they had confidence,
either they poison him, or some way or other bring him to his end. So dealt
Ptolomy (as we said before) with Cleomenes, certainly a most wicked course.
Fourthly, secrets oftentimes are disclosed out of hope of reward; so did
Elvidius the freed man of Scevinus, who acquainted Nero with a conspiracy
against him, only out of hope to be well rewarded. Nam cum secum servilis
animus praemia perfidiae reputavit. Lastly, this happens sometimes through
fear of punishment. And therefore Cifrone (as Philip Cominaeus relates) when
he saw himself carried to die, would then reveal to the Duke of Burgundy, the
treason which the Count of Campobasso had plotted against him. And thus much
concerning the revealing of secrets of ones own accord. And though it may seem
to be in our own power to hold our peace, (as Tacitus says) Si tam in nostra
potestate esset, oblivisci, quam tacere; yet many times a man is allured, and
in a manner forced to discover his mind; a thing which may many ways be done.
First, by Rhetoric and Eloquence, which moving the affections, and stirring
up the peccant humor of him whose secrets we desire to know; he without
perceiving it, is easily transported, to reveal what ever is in his breast.
This cunning was used by Sejanus against Nero, and against Agrippina also, when
Agrippinae quoque proximi inliciebantur pravis sermonibus tumidos spiritus
perstimulare. Whereupon, it is no marvel, that Latiaris finding the peccant
humor of Sabinus, easily drew him to tell him at full his coffeehouse.
Igitur Latiaris jacere fortuitos primum sermones (feeling him first a far
of,) mox laudare Constantiam, quod non ut caeteri florentis domus anticus,
afflictum deferuisset, simul honora de Germanico, Agrippinam miserans
disserebat. Another way the foresaid Latiaris used, and it was to feine a
confidence, with making Sabinus believe, he was his true friend, and pretending
to be of his mind, in those dangerous things which he would not have
communicated to another, iique sermones tanquam vetita miscuissent, speciem
arctae amicitiae facere. And this is an easy way, by entrusting some secret to
a man, whose mind we desire to know, as Tacitus plainly expresses, where he
says, Nihil eorum Vitellianos fallebat, crebris ut in Civili transfugi^s and
exploratores cura diversa sciscitandi, sua non occultabant. Thirdly, men are
oftentimes drawn to discover secrets, by being asked upon a sudden, because
the understanding operating naturally, and not having time to operate with art,
must needs either answer that which is the truth, or be silent and say nothing,
or lastly entangle it self. Whereupon (...) who loved none of his qualities
better then his (...); yet being asked upon the sudden could not hide the
displeasure he had taken against Asinius Gallus, of whom, perculsus improvisa
interrogatione paululum reticuit. As likewise interrogations often multiplied,
confound secrets in the mind, and therefore Tiberius in the death of Piso,
Crebrisque Interrogationibus exquirit, qualem Piso diem supremum noctemque
exegisset atque illo pleraque sapienter, quaedam inconsultius (...). The same
way also he used with Syllanus, who Creberrime Interrogabatur. Fourthly,
oftentimes men of themselves, and against their will discover secrets, either
by their voice, or by some motion not usual, or by some cast of their eyes,
and other exterior signs, by which the secrets of the heart are often
discovered: Tiberius knowing this, to the end he might not make appear the
secret contentment he took at the death of Germanicus, would not show himself
in public: Tiberius atque Augusta publico abstinuere, inferius Majestate sua
rati, si palam lamentarentur, anne omnium oculis vultum eorum scrutantibus,
falsi intelligerentur. By this way the conspiracy of Scevinus came to be known,
Simul affluentibus solito Convivium initum servorum charissimi liberate, and
alii pecunia donati, atque ipse moestus, and magnae cogitationis manifestus
erat, quamvis laetitiam vagis sermonibus simularet. Fifthly, it is easy to
draw a secret from ones mouth, by asking him, not with doubtful, but
affirmative words; thereby seeming to know that, which he desires to know: so
dealt our Lord God with Eve, who to the end she should not deny her sin,
omitted as a thing known, that which he would have had her to confess,
saying, Quare hoc fecisti? and so not enquiring of the fact, he asked of the
cause: and this he did (says Abulensis) not for any need he had to use this
way, for knowing the truth, but only for instructing of us.

These then are the ways by which secrets oftentimes, are voluntarily and of
ones own accord disclosed; either out of vanity, or through drunkenness, or
through hatred, or for hope of reward, or for fear of punishment; and
sometimes also a man is drawn to disclose secrets, by Art, that is, by moving
the affections, and by finding out the peccant humor, and by entrusting his
own secrets, or by asking questions upon a sudden, or by reiterating
interrogations, or by means of some motions and actions of the body; or
lastly, by feigning to know it already.

Princes therefore must be well advised, to whom they impart these secrets;
that they entrust them not to such, as may afterward voluntarily discover them;
and servants to whom they are imparted, must be very vigilant, that they be not
drawn from them by any cunning.

But although ordinarily and for the most part, secrecy be a commendable thing,
yet not commendable in all things, seeing to hold ones peace, or to deny in
some cases, is not only unprofitable, but pernicious, as making some act or
accident, to be more and with worse circumstances published, which would not be
if it were confessed freely. Into this error fell Vitellius, In hunc modum
etiam Vitellius apud milites disseruit, praetorianos nuper exauctoratos
insectatus, a quibus falsos rumores dispergi, nec ullum civilis belli metum
asseverabat, suppresso Vespasiani nomine, and vagis per urbem militibus, qui
sermones populi coercerent, id praecipuum alimentum famae erat. And in another
place, of the same Vitellius, he says, Fractis apud Cremonam rebus, nuntios
cladis occultans, stulta dissimulatione, remedia potius malorum, quam mala
differebat. Quippe Confitenti, consultantique supererant spes viresque, cum e
contrario, laeta omnia fingeret, (...) ingravescebat. Mirum apud ipsum de bello
silentium. Prohibiti per civitatem sermones, eoque plures, ac si liceret vera
narraturi, quia verebantur, atrociora vulgaverant. More wisely did Galba carry
himself, when, Ne dissimulata seditio in majus crederetur, ultro asseverat
quartam and duodevicesimam legiones, paucis seditionis authoribus, non ultra
verba ac voces errasse, and brevi in officio fore. But yet, if one would desire
to have some accident to be kept secret and concealed, there is no better way,
then immediately and by himself to give out false rumors, and to spread
reports contrary to the truth, as Scipio did, to whom when Ambassadors came
from Syphax, he searing least by concealing their message, the army would grow
jealous, and suspect something, suddenly called them to counsel, where with a
cheerful countenance he told them that Syphax had sent to solicit him to
come into Afric: and although the truth was, that he sent rather a threatening
message; yet his readiness and resolution prevailed so far, that the Army
did verily believe it to be as he said. And thus it ought to be done as often
as the discovery of a secret may be hurtful, as it was in this case; but when
concealing may be prejudicial, as it was with Vitellius, a contrary course
must then be taken.

Monuit Liviam ne arcana Domus.
How Princes should make use of Counsel. The nine and twentieth Discourse.

BY occasion of Sallust, who without being required by any, put forward
himself to give Livia counsel, either I cannot, or I like not to forbear the
delivering my own opinion, or that at least, which best likes me, concerning
the counselling of Princes. Where, I will first show how necessary it is for
Princes to have counsel. Secondly, the ways that are used in it. And lastly,
delivering my own opinion, I will (as my custom is) endeavor to prove it,
with reason, and with Authorities. And beginning with the first, I say, that
nothing is to Princes more necessary, then to be counseled; whereupon David,
though as being a Prophet himself, he had no need of another Prophet, yet our
Lord God, gave to him as to a Prophet-King, another Prophet to be his
Counselor. And therefore not without mystery, it is said in Ecclesiasticus,
(as a certain Writer observes) Surrexit Nathan Propheta in diebus David: as
though by these words In diebus David, he would intimate, the need that Princes
have of Counselors. Also Moses, though himself most wise, yet followed the
counsel of Jethro: and Solomon was not without counselors; and even God
himself, when he made man, by saying, Faciamus hominem ad imaginem and
similitudinem nostram, would seem to take counsel; no doubt for our
instruction, that we should do nothing without counsel. And David speaking of
our Lord God said, Glorificatur in consilio sanctorum, Magnus and terribilis
super omnes qui in circuitu ejus sunt. And our Lord Jesus Christ, to show of
how great importance counsel is, to counsel himself, as in Saint John where
he says, Vnde ememus panem? and in another place, Quid tibi videtur Simon,
Reges terrae a quibus accipiunt Tributum vel censum, a filiis suis, an ab
alienis? and Peter answered, Ab alienis. Also the Apostles, though instructed
by the Holy Ghost, yet oftentimes made use of counsel; as Saint Paul, who went
as far as Jerusalem, to take counsel of Saint Peter and Saint John. It is
then most evident, and which none is so blind but sees, that all men have need
of counsel, whether they be learned or ignorant; yet with this distinction,
that the Learned make most benefit, and have least need; the ignorant have most
need, and make least benefit.

But as it is necessary for a Prince to have counsel, so it is hard for a
Writer to show the way he is to hold in being counseled, as being a thing in
ancient time very diversely used, and with great variety observed.

The first way has been to take no counsel at all, but to do all things of
his own head; so did Charies the eighth, and many others. And this they do,
as conceiving, that to ask counsel of another, shows want of judgment in
ones self; and that by this means a Prince makes himself inferior to him
that gives him counsel, then which there is nothing to Princes more
distasteful.

Others doubting to commit some error, by doing all things of themselves, and
for the reasons aforesaid, not willing to be counseled by others, have
therefore neither taken any counsel of others, nor yet done any thing of their
own head: which quality, Writers attribute to the Emperor Maximilian, who
refusing to be counseled by any, used to give out what it was he went about;
and then listened to hear, whether it were liked of, or no; and if it were, he
then put it in execution; if not, he would then alter it of himself. But in
truth this was no good way, nor fit to be followed, because while he sought to
avoid disparagement, by showing himself to be less judicious then others, he
fell into that which disparaged him more, by showing himself to be mutable and
inconstant. Which being once known, every one could then tell, not only how
to counsel him, but also how to reprehend him, nothing being worse, then to
subject ones self to the debatings of the common people. And Emilius knowing
this, while he was passing with his Fleet to Larissa, and hearing that this
course was much murmured at by his followers, he called the Rhodians to him,
and demanded of them, whether the Haven of Patera, were of capacity to hold his
whole Fleet, and they answering, no; he thereupon took occasion to return,
and not to go thither; and this he did, to the end, that altering his course
upon so good a color, they that had murmured, might not take heart to give him
counsel.

Others have used another way quite contrary to the first, and I doubt is at
this day more used then is fit; and it is, to give ear and hear what every
one says, and to take any man's counsel, that will give it; which thing (be it
spoken with others leave) seems to me, not only to be subject to confusion,
but also to contempt; because every one will then pretend to counsel the
Prince, who hearing continually such diversity of opinions, must needs be
confounded in himself, and despised of others: whereupon in the Histories of
Tacitus, when it was debated to send Ambassadors to Vespatian, Elvidius
Priscus was of mind, that men of great wisdom and judgment should be sent,
who might help the Prince, with good advises; but Marcellus Epirius was of
another mind, as knowing it to be a most distastefull thing, to give a Prince
counsel without being required. Whereupon although Plato commend Cyrus for
giving leave to any of his subjects to speak his opinion in any thing that was
to be done; yet to me it seems a thing dangerous for him that gives it, and
more for him that takes it. And therefore Claudius harkening once to counsel
in this manner, was confounded, not knowing what he should do, turning
himself sometimes to one man's counsel, and sometimes to another, Ipse modo
huc, modo illuc, ut quemque suadentium audierat: and at last finding his
error, he called a counsel.

A Prince therefore in my opinion, ought always to have about him him, a Band
of experienced men; In quibus sit veritas, and qui oderint avaritiam; by truth
is meant wisdom, which (according to the Philosopher) is nothing else but a
knowledge of the truth; and by covetousness are understood all vices; because
as the Scripture says, Avaritia est Principium omnium malorum: if then they
have wisdom, they will be able to give counsel; and if they be free from
vice, they will give it. but yet, I hold it not fit, that at their own
pleasure, without being called by the Prince, they should fall a counselling;
which perhaps Sallust knowing, was the cause he durst not give Tiberius
counsel, about the death of Agrippa, Sed monuit Liviam, ne arcana domus;
consilia amicorum, ministeria militum vulgarentur: an arrogance not sufferable
in a servant, to presume to give his master counsel, without being called. And
who knows but this presumption in Sallust, might be the cause of his fall?
seeing he was out of the Princes favor before he died, as Tacitus relates.
Amasias being reproved by the Prophet answered, Nunquid Consiliarius regis es?
by which it appears, that those Kings used not to be counseled but by their
Counselors.

But if it be arrogance in a servant to give counsel not being asked, it as is
much indiscretion in a Prince, not to ask it. This is that I would have
Princes to do, have always about them a Band of choice counselors, to ask
their advice in all his affairs: so did Nerva, so Solomon teaches to do,
when in his Proverbs, he says, Gloria regum est investigare sermonem; that is,
a Prince ought not to stand expecting he should be counseled, but rather it is
fit he should go and seek after counsel.

After a Prince has heard the opinions of his counselors, it may be doubted
whether he ought to deliver his own opinion; and when, and in what manner he
should do it. As far as I can judge, I think it not fit he should deliver
his own, either first or last, or in the midst. For if he do it first, all
the rest will presently consent; and if he do it last, every one will come
about to his opinion: as it happened to Henry the third, who (as Historians
relate) deliberating about the death of the Duke of Guise, called four to
counsel, of whom when two had spoken their opinions, the King had scarcely
heard them out when he delivered his own, clean contrary to theirs: whereupon
the two that were to speak after, presently fell to be of the Kings opinion;
and the two that had spoken before, retracting their former advice, consented
to that the King had determined; which determination was the ruin afterward
of France, and of the King himself. So in Spain, when it was deliberated
about making peace between Henry the fourth King of France, and the King of
Spain; after Il Moro had spoken, and the Kings son being present replied the
contrary, all the rest came presently to be of his opinion: Whereupon, not
without great judgment, Cneius Piso in Tacitus, when Tiberius would deliver
his opinion in a certain cause, said, Quo loco censebis C^esar, si post omnes,
vereor ne imprudens dissentiam, si primus, habebo quod sequar. Therefore
Tiberius another time commanded Drusus that he should be the first to deliver
his opinion.

The Prince therefore should be silent, and finding his Counselors of
different opinions, let them debate the matter between themselves, that he may
see who gives the best reasons; so he shall avoid contempt, by not suffering
himself to be counseled, without asking it; and he shall not be flattered, if
concealing his own opinion, the truth is made manifest, by l^tting them debate
it between themselves: and lastly, he shall show himself more learned and
more wise then the other, if of himself without any others direction
intervening, he shall determine the matter. All these things (in my opinion)
are comprised in that place of Ecclesiasticus, Audi tacens simul and qu^rens;
how can he be still, that asks and hears? but only as I have explained it;
to ask counsel in all things, to hear counsels, and in hearing them to be
silent; and after, of himself to determine as reason advises. In this regard
the ancient Poets feigned that Jupiter took counsel to be his wife; meaning
to show, that it is necessary for Princes to be counseled; and after, that his
wife being great with child, he swallowed her up, and became himself great
with child in his head, and at the due time was delivered of Pallas, which is
wisdom; to show that counsel would be ruminated in the mind, and that a
Prince ought not to suffer his counselors to be delivered themselves; but
ought by swallowing them up, to make that to be his own issue which was
another.

That a Prince ought to determine of himself, and ought not to determine of
himself; that is, determine with counsel is the best, of those that are given
him, and so not of himself; seeing the counsels are other men's: and yet of
himself, seeing the determination proceeds from his own judgment: I
conceive, it is sufficiently expressed in the book of the Kings, where Solomon
says, Dabis ergo servo tuo cor dooile; having said before, Da mihi sapientiam.
For explanation of which passage, we must know, that understanding can have no
knowledge of things, but such as either it invents of it self, or learnes of
others. To the finding them of it self, is required a sharpness of wit, and
being found, a judgment to choose the good, and refuse the bad: and lastly, a
memory to retain that which is imprinted. To the learning them of others, is
required a perspicacity, which is all one with docility, and makes the
understanding apt to apprehend those things which are taught by others. There
is required also judgment, to discern good things from bad; and lastly, a
memory to retain them. So as the memory is as the matter of the one and the
other, the judgment as the Form of them both, and perspicacity and acuteness
are as the differences. Solomon desires Wisdom, but not with acuteness to
invent things; that is wisdom which consists in the sharpness of wit, but he
desires wisdom together with dociblenesse; that is, wisdom and perspicacity,
which is all one with dociblenesse: perspicacity, to be able to understand
rightly the opinions and reasons of his counselors; and wisdom, that is
judgment, to be able to discern the good from the bad. Solomon therefore
shows, that a Prince ought not to care for inventing of his own head, but to
content himself with having dociblenesse, to understand things invented by
others; and wisdom to know the truth, and to discern the good from the bad.
And therefore he says well, Da mihi sapientiam: and after, Dabis ergo servo
tuo cor docile: Where we must observe, that though he say, The Heart, and not
the Understanding, yet he means the same thing; seeing those faculties, which
Galen attributes to the understanding, many others attribute to the heart: and
in holy Scripture it self, the heart oftentimes is put for the understanding:
as in Esaias it is said, Excaeca cor populi hujus, and aures ejus aggrava, and
oculos ejus claude, ne sort videant oculis suis, and auribus suis audiant, and
cord suo intelligant.

Neve Tiberius vim Principatus resolveret, cuncta ad Senatum vocando. Eam
conditionem esse Imperandi, ut non aliter ratio constet, quam si uni reddatur.
How Princes ought to make use of Magistrates and Officers. The thirtieth
Discourse.

SAllust counsels Tiberius, to take heed that he remit not so many causes to
the Senators, as thereby to weaken his own soveraighty, there being nothing
so proper to a Prince, as to be sole Commander. A counsel worthy to be well
considered, by occasion whereof, it will be ^it to discourse: First, how
Princes ought to order the remitting of causes to the Senate, or to other
Officers; and then whether they should take the administration of all things
into their own hands.

It seems a thing impossible, that one man alone can by himself be able to
judge all causes, which Jethro, Moses father in law, considering, and seeing
him to take the reckonings of all the people of Israel, without assistance of
any; and wondering at it, he said, Vltra vires tuas est, negotium; solus illud
non poteris sustinere.

For Resolution then, either we speak of giving Authority to a Senate, or else
of committing causes to other Officers. If we speak of the Senate, either the
causes are great and weighty, or else but of small moment. If they be great,
then ought the Prince to reserve them for himself to determine: if slight, and
of small value, he may do well to remit them to the Senate, that so he may
please them with a show of liberty, without any prejudice to himself. This
Tiberius well understood; and therefore when the subject Provinces made suit
for the continuance of certain Franchises, he remitted them to the Senate; to
the end, that being matters of small moment, the Senate might determine of them
as they pleased; which Tacitus expresses where he says, Tiberius vim
Principatus sibi firmans imaginem antiquitatis Senatui praebebat.

Secondly, the affairs that are handled, are either such, as deserve reward
and grace; or else such as are odious, and deserve punishment and censure. If
they be such as deserve reward, the Prince ought to determine of them himself:
but if they be odious and deserve punishment, he ought then to shift them of
from himself and leave them to the Senate; or if he cannot to the Senate, at
least to other Officers. Honores autem (says Aristotle) ipsemet tribuere
debet; poenas and animadversiones per alios infligere, per Magistratus (...)
and per judicia: So Simonides in Xenophon advises Hiero: so Simonides in Dio,
Augustus. Our Lord God when he punishes, he does it by the ministry of
others, Immissiones per Angelos malos: whereof Saint Chrysostom speaking
says, Igitur quando servare oportet, per seipsum hoc facit, ita (...) in
salutem generis Humani, and (...): tunc inquit, (...) Angelis, congregate
facientes iniquitatem, and projicite in Camino, de justis vero dicit, non sic;
sed qui vos suscipit, suscipit me, and (...), ligate illius manus and pedes,
and (...) in tenebras exteriores: videillic servos qui (...), (...) autem
beneficiis opus est, seipsum Benefactorem vo cat. Venite Benedicti Patris
(...), percipite (...) vobis regnum, quando loquendum cum Abraham, ipse adest,
quando in Sodoma (...), servos mittit, and iterum: euge serve bone and fidelis,
supra pauca fuisti fidelis, supra multa te constituam; and tunc ipse benedicit;
(...) autem (...), non ipse, sed servi (...). By this, you may see, that a
Prince ought to have no hand in punishments, but leave all such distastefull
things to Officers.

It was handled in the Senate to take order for restraining of luxury, which
was now grown excessive, and beyond all measure; and because there was scarce
a man in the whole City free from this vice, it was a thing exceeding (...), as
Tacitus shows, where he says, Nec ignoro in conviviis and circulis incusari
ista, and modum posci, sed si quis legem sanciat, poenas indicat, iisdem illi
civitatem verti: splendidissimo cuique exitium parare, nentinem (...) expertum
clamitabunt. Tiberius therefore finding of what nature the cause was, would not
determine it self, but cast it upon the Senate, as Tacitus in his person
says, Si quis ex (...) tantam angustiam vel (...) pollicetur, ut (...) obviam
queat, hunc and (...), and exonerari laborum meorum partem fateor, sin accusare
vitia (...) dein cum gloriam ejus rei (...) sunt, simultates (...), ac mihi
(...), Credit P. C. me quoque non esse offensionis avidum: Which the Senate
perceiving they also remitted the cause to the Aediles: and so it vanished.

In this point, there is no Kingdom better governed, then that of France,
which leaves all matters to the Parliament, that might any way make the King
distasted; and matters of most importance, the King himself in his Privy
Counsels determines. And thus much for giving Authority, and remitting causes
to the Senate.

Now if we speak, how a Prince ought to serve himself, of his Officers; I say
generally, that the less he does by their ministry, the better; whom he
should use as instruments to execute, and not as principals to deliberate. For
between the governing reason, and the things that are governed, there may
intervene another reason, two ways: one, when it supplies some thing which was
wanting in the governing reason: for example, If it have not ordered and
provided all things, but left some to be ordered by the inferior reason, which
it takes notwithstanding by means of the superior reason providing: and in
this manner, the inferior reason is a means, and intervenes as a reason to
the disposition of the government. Secondly, the inferior reason may be a mean
in the government, as a servant, and not as reason: that is, that the
principal reason, dispose all things how small and particular soever; and then
give the execution to the inferior reason, as to a servant. In the first way
our Lord God did not serve himself, of the inferior reason; for he provided
every thing, great, small, universal and particular: but in the second way he
serves himself in the government of humane reason, yet not as humane but as
ministerial. And this is the doctrine of Cajetan: whereupon if it be true that
Kings are called Gods, Ego dixi Dii estis, and filii Excelsi omnes; then ought
they as far as they are able, to imitate the Great Maker and Governor of all
things: that is, to determine all things they are able to determine; and leave
the execution to their Officers. But if a Prince shall leave it to his
ministers, to determine, and provide things necessary for the state; he shall
not then make use of his ministers, as ministers; but rather as of reason,
which is nothing else, but as of King.

Let a Prince therefore leave to his ministers, such things as are proper for
ministers; and such as for their smalnesse, need not the understanding of a
Prince; and though he be able to do such things of himself, yet by all means
let him leave the care of them to his ministers; for therefore in the Scripture
we see all things of small moment were done by Angels: it was an Angel that
appeared to Agar, they were Angels that destroyed the Tower of Babell, Angels
that burnt Sodom, an Angel that showed the way to Eleazar: but great things
were always done by God himself, as the delivering of the Hebrews out of
Egypt, the giving the Land of Promise, to Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob: and the
reason why our Lord God would do^ thus, (say Writers) was, to the end, least if
the Hebrews had received such great benefits from Angels, they might have
thought, that all their good came from them, and consequently have adored them
as Gods. So likewise, if a Prince shall suffer his ministers to bestow great
things upon the people, they will be ready to take the minister for Prince, as
from whose hand they receive all favors. Our Lord Jesus Christ, going to raise
Lazarus, was able no doubt, of himself to remove the stone from the grave,
seeing he was able to raise one that had been four days dead; but because it
was so small a matter, he would not do it himself, but said to the Jews,
Tollite (...) lapidem, whereof Saint Austin says, Sed quia ab hominibus fieri
poterat, homines facere praecepit: quae autem Divinae virtutis erant, sua
potentia demonstravit. So also, a Prince ought to commit such things to
servants, which are proper for servants; and do such things himself, as are
proper for a Prince.

And yet to this opinion of mine, the counsel of Jethro is no way discordant:
for though I grant, that a Prince cannot do all things of himself; yet I deny
not but he may do all things of himself, that are of importance: for so we
may find did Moses, if the words be well considered, Constitue ex eis
Tribunos and Centuriones and Quinquagenarios, and decanos, qui judicent populum
omni tempore; quicquid autem majus fuerit, referant ad te, and ipsi minora
tantum Iudicent. See here, how Jethro shows plainly, that a Prince ought to do
all things himself, that are of weight; which is so true, that if he do
otherwise, he shall show himself not only ignorant and irresolute, but by
preferring his servants, he shall give them occasion, from getting authority,
to get into the Kingdom it self, and set him at naught; seeing there is no
readier way to make ones self King, then by drawing all businesses of the
Kingdom into his hand. And therefore Sejanus knowing this to be the only
means for attaining the Empire to which he aspired, used many devices to work
himself into affairs; so much, that at last he got Tiberius to go live in
the Country; to the end that the Emperor being out of Rome, all matters might
pass through his hands alone. And indeed Tiberius was by this very near to
have lost at once both life and reputation; but that perceiving at last his
error, he would ever after, not only dispatch businesses himself, when he
was in health, but even when he lay dying.

The like art and cunning was practiced by Assan Beglerby of Greece, and prime
Favorite of (...) the Great Turk, who persuaded him not to stir out of the
Seraglio, making him believe, there were plots laid to kill him if he came
abroad; which, Amurath sillily believed, and kept himself up (...), leaving
Assan in the mean time to manage all affairs alone, whereby he had a fair
field to play the tyrant at his pleasure; and the State had soon been ruined,
and with the State the Prince, if Amurath at last perceiving his error, had
not gone out of the Seraglio, and provided in time for all things necessary. No
man knew this better, then Lewis the eleventh, King of France, a Prince no
less judicious then valiant, in peace and war admirable; who took so much
pleasure to dispatch affairs of his Kingdom himself, that it may be truly
said, he died dispatching business.

Many opposing this opinion, allege, that Princes are not Hackney men nor
Porters, to kill themselves with labor: but (with reverence I speak it) I yet
hold, that either Princes must leave their States, or else must be content to
labor for the subjects good. In figure of this it is, that in Esaias the (...)
power is laid upon the shoulders, where he says, Dabo clavem domus David super
(...) ejus. Likewise in the old law, besides the twelve precious stones, wherein
were written the names of the twelve Tribes, which the high Priest bore in his
Rational upon his breast; there were also in two stones, engraven six names
apiece, which by Gods appointment he carried upon his shoulders: by which was
intimated, that it is not sufficient to have the subjects in his breast; that
is, to love them: but he must also carry them upon his shoulders, that is,
endure any labor for their good. And for this only cause perhaps, a Prince in
Deuteronomy is likened to an Ox, that should not be dainty and given to rest;
but apt to labor, and to carry the yoke upon his shoulders.

Two things remain to be advertised: the one, that when I say, a Prince ought
to do all principal things himself, I mean not things of the Law, which
consist in the judicial part, where only particular things and of private
interest are handled; and have nothing to do with the maine of the state; but
I mean it in the deliberative part, where public matters of the Kingdom are
handled, and such businesses, in which consists the foundation of the state:
and therefore with good reason is by Aristotle preferred for the judicial part.

Secondly and lastly I advertise, that this my discourse is not meant of
Princes that are unfit; for as those Princes that are judicious, cannot do
worse, then to suffer themselves to be ruled by their ministers; so those that
are of little judgment cannot do better then to do all things by faithful
and prudent ministers, as Nero in his beginning did under Burrhus; Seneca and
Corbulo, men fit to have ruled the whole World; and whom as long as he
employed, his state was so managed, that justly a wise Emperor said; no
Prince, how judicious and wise soever, could possibly govern better then Nero
at his beginning did: but as soon as he left to be ruled by those worthy men,
it may as truly be said, No Prince how foolish and wicked soever, could
possibly govern worse then Nero did.

Nam Tiberius cuncta per Consules incipiebat, tanquam vetere Reipublica, and
ambiguus Imperandi.
Why Tiberius made a show he would not be Emperor, and that to make Princes
discover things they would have concealed, is dangerous. The one and thirtieth
Discourse:

Tiberius after the death of Augustus, as though he were doubtful to take upon
him the Empire, as a burden too heavy for his shoulders, made a show he would
restore it to the Commonwealth, Se in parten^ onerum vocatum a Divo Augusto,
experiendo didicisse, quam arduum, quam subjectum fortunae, Regendi cuncta
onus. But to the Praetorian soldiers, he gave watchwords as Emperor, Signum
Praetoriis cohortibus ut imperator dederat. Lastly, he made it be spread in the
Army, that he was already elected Emperor by the Senate. Dabat and famae, ut
vocatus electusque potius a Republica videretur, quam per uxorium ambitum, and
senili adoptione irrepsisse. And because these were three ways, all of them
(in my opinion) used with great mystery, I will search into them a little
narrowly.

First then, Tiberius made a show he would restore liberty, whereof one reason
Tacitus alleges, where he says, Postea cognitum est, ad introspiciendas
Procerum voluntates, inductam dubitationem: as though he would say, He was
moved to do thus, thereby to see whether the chief men either desired
liberty, or otherwise distasted his Dominion; to the end, that coming to know
every ones mind, he might work his own ends, and security accordingly.

This reason, if Tacitus bring it as a popular reason, may pass; but if he
bring it as the true intention of the Prince, it is very unlikely, as not at
all suiting with Tiberius subtilty: and if it be Tacitus his own invention, it
comes far short of his great wit. For two kinds of Noblemen may be considered
in the Senate: The one, of men eminent for judgment and valor; the other, of
men little experienced, and less witted. If Tiberius had any doubt or fear,
it could be of none but of those eminent men: for, as for there est, either they
will never dare to attempt any thing against the Prince; or if they attempt,
never succeed. And for this it is we said before, that Augustus had great luck
to find the City full of such men, Cum ferocissimi per acies, aut
proscriptione cecidissent. I say then, that if any were moved to lay himself
open and discover his mind, upon Caesar's words, It must needs be, they were of
those of little judgment; because men, I say not of great, but of any mean
understanding, would never be brought to believe, that a man so greedy of the
Empire, and that by plots and wiles had procured his own mothers death, and
the death of Augustus himself; would after attaining it with so much labor
relinquish it again, and restore them to liberty. So that, if Tiberius by this
means did discover the mind of any Senator, it must needs be of those, of
whom as he could justly have no fear; so it should be absurd, without any
benefit to take revenge. For this cause, Marcus Lepidus gave counsel in the
Senate, that Lutorius should not be put to death, VitaLutorii in integroest,
qui neque servatus in periculum Reipublicae, neque interfectus in exemplum
ibit. Studia illi ut plena vaecordiae; ita inania and fluxa sunt. Nec quidquant
grave ac serium ex eo metuas, qui suorum ipse flagitiorum proditor, non virorum
animis, sed muliercularum adrepit.

It is not therefore likely, that Tiberius a man so wise, and of so great
judgment, would ever be moved upon such slight grounds, to cover his
intention; we must therefore look out some other reason, that may be more
likely.

There were two things, of which Tiberius might be afraid: First, of the
Senate, least not brooking his government, they should rise in Arms against
him: secondly, of Germanicus, least having a powerful Army in his hand, and
withal the favor of the people, he should with a little danger, prevent a
succession that was uncertain. To meet therefore with both these
difficulties, he feigned in the Senate and with the people, that he was
unwilling to be Emperor; to the end, that if the Senators should make any
demonstration against him; the people might believe they were not moved to it
for the publik good, but only for their private hatred; seeing to seek to
kill a Prince that would reftore liberty, is a sign they love not liberty.

I would therefore construe it, that when Tacitus said, Vt introspiceret
Procerum mentes; he meant, that Tiberius, before he declared himself to accept
the Empire, desired to see first, whether any in the Senate made any
opposition, that so (as I have said before) by using the name of liberty, he
might the better prevent such mischief; and the rather, as not having omitted
any other essential things, for strengthening of himself, as I shall show
hereafter.

The second reason, why Tiberius was moved to such feigning, is set down by
Tacitus in those words, Cansa praecipua ex formidine ne Germanicus in cujus
manu tot legiones, immensa sociorum auxilia, mirus apud populum favor, habere
Imperium quam expectare mallet: Tacitus then says, that Tiberius feigned to be
unwilling to accept the Empire, because he doubted Germanicus would pretend
unto it: in truth, he that should take these words in an ordinary sense, must
needs make it one of the poorest reasons that can be given; for what has the
not accepting the Empire to do with Germanicus? rather insteast of helping
him, it would be his greatest hurt, seeing the irresolution of Tiberius might
encourage Germanicus to attempt many things which he would not have done, if he
had known him to be Emperor, and Tiberius himself, being aware of this, writ
Letters to the Armies, as being Emperor already; Literas ad exercitus tanquam
adepto Principatu misit. And if any shall say, that he spoke in such terms,
because he was ashamed to call himself by a name, which might easily be taken
from him, I say, that this would have been a most dangerous vanity, because I
conceive that Tiberius seeing the love of the people to Germanicus proceeded
only from a hope they had, (as Tacitus in another place shows) that if he came
to the Empire, he would restore the government to the Commonwealth: he knew,
that by making them the same offer, he should both diminish the peoples love to
Germanicus, and also abate his own hatred, which the name of a Prince brings
with it; and yet by this not deprive himself of that authority which should
strengthen him. From hence it is, that to the soldiers he gave the sign of
being Emperor; as well because, if occasion were they should defend him; as
also because he knew they loved a Prince better then a Commonwealth, under
which they are deprived of Donatives, and driven out of the City. Whereupon he
might doubt that if they should find Tiberius unwilling to accept the Empire,
and so fear the restoring of liberty, they should thereupon he moved to choose
another Emperor. Asinius Gallus finding Tiberius at this ward, to make him
speak plainly, whether he meant to be Emperor, or no, asked him what part of
the Empire it was he desired, making as though he believed really that he meant
not to be sole Emperor, a thing which brought him to his ruin; seeing Princes
speak many things which yet they would not have others to take as they are
spoken. Caesar was by some called King; and though he were well pleased with
it; yet he said, he would not be called King, but Caesar; and yet when the
Tribunes upon these words of his, prohibited any to call him King, he took it
in so ill part, that from that time forward, he put them out of office. The
reason of this is, because they who take these courses, it seems would either
put the Prince to a necessity, of loosing his authority, or else to lay open
his intentions, which is a thing most odious. Whereupon another time, Tiberius
complaining, he thought himself not secure: Asinius Gallus pressed him to tell
of whom it was he stood in fear, promising they should be all put out of their
offices; and he Eo acrius accepit, recludit quae premeret. The same Gallus at
another time, as it were seeking how to make the Prince offended with him, gave
counsel, that Magistrates should be new chosen every five years; and that the
Legates of Provinces, who had not yet been Praetors, should by having such
legation, be the next admitted to the Praetorship, and that the Prince should
be tied every year to name twelve Candidates: which counsel no doubt did
Altius penetrare, and arcana Imperii tentandi, seeing it restrained the Princes
authority, and limited it to a certain time, and to a determinate number; and
privileged the Legates of Legions to attain to the Praetorship without other
election or dependence upon him, which much distasted Tiberius: and therefore,
pretending that this counsel of (...), tended only to enlarge his own
authority, he refused it. To be short, when Princes are not willing to be
understood, it is fit to make show of not understanding them; it being a
dangerous matter, to enter into the search of Princes secrets: Abditos
Principis sensus, and siquid occultius parat exquirere, illicitum, anceps, nec
ideo assequare.

Nusquam Contabundus nisi cum in senatu loquebatur; Causa praecipua ex
formidine, ne Germanicus in Cujus manu tot legiones, Immensa sociorum auxilia;
mirus apud populum favor, habere Imperium quam expectare mallet.
What course a Prince should take to secure himself from Generals of Armies:
and what course Generals should take to secure themselves from te Prince; and
from a Commonwealth. The two and thirtieth discourse.

Tiberius beginning to suspect Germanicus, that having the love of the Army,
he would rather take the Empire, then expect it; We by occasion of this, will
first discourse, of the doubt, which a Prince, or a Commonwealth may have, to
stand subject to Generals of Armies; Secondly, of the danger such Generals
stand in, of falling into the suspicion of them they serve: by which oftentimes
is caused their death; and how they should carry themselves to avoid it.

Concerning the first; there is no doubt, but a General having once gotten
Reputation, oftentimes puts the Prince whom he serves in danger: which commonly
happens; First, because they are not rewarded according to their merit; as it
happened to Ferdinand King of Spain; who having never rewarded the great
Captain, might well fear he would take it in scorn; and thereupon seek to
right himself; by procuring to himself the state. Secondly, It may happen by
reason of the insolences; which victory commonly brings with it; as it
happened to the Thebans, who having made Philip of Macedon, their General; he,
after the victory gotten, took away their liberty. Thirdly, It may happen
thorough suspicion; which the Commonwealth or Princes take of them that serve
them; which suspicion once perceived by the General; he must necessarily put
another in danger, to secure himself; because to seek to justify himself in
such suspicions, is for the most part, in vain; as may be seen, under a
Prince, in Corbulo; and under a Common wealth, in Scipio Africanus. The very
same happened to the Romans, who threatening Caesar, about bringing in his
account of managing the Army; and showing a suspicion they had of him; were
cause, that he took this fear of theirs, for a beginning to make himself
Lord of Rome; which, when no foreign Force was able to bring it into
servitude, was by their own forces easily oppressed.

I am persuaded the danger is so manifest, which Commonwealths, or Princes
incur by occasion of Generals; that every one knowing it sufficiently of
himself, will never look I should stay to prove it, either by Examples or by
reasons; and especially seeing there are few Histories, that are not full of
such accidents.

But having said, that this danger proceeds from three occasions; It is
necessary to examine every one of them. Concerning the first, which was the
ingratitude of the Prince: It will be easy to remedy that, by recompensing him
that serves; for by this means, he shall have no cause, to seek to have all
by force; when he may have a part with love. It is true, a Prince in rewarding
such, should not do it, by giving them Cities or goods; in the places where
they have waged war; for either, they are Conquerours of the whole Country;
and then by possessing goods there, they will take occasion after the victory,
to make themselves the Lords; or else not conquering the whole Country; the
contrary part will still be growing: and then they, not to loose the reward
given them, will either proceed slowly in the war; or else turn to that side
that has the better. This Guicciardine attributes to Prospero, and Fabritius
Colonna; who having been rewarded by the King of France, with Dukedomes, and
Castles in the Kingdom of Naples; when they saw the Aragonesian side get the
better; they went and took pay of Ferdinand. Therefore Princes shall do well,
to reward them in other states, where they have not warred; and where their
reputation is not in Fame: and thus I have known it many times done in our
time. Also they shall do well, not to put them into choler; although faulty
perhaps in other things; so long as it is not in matters essential, and proper
to their places. So did David with Ioab; bearing with many Insolences and
murders committed by him; to the end he should not fall into choler, and make
Insurrection.

Concerning the suspicion, which the Prince may show to have of a General; and
which is wont to be followed with rebellion; It will be an easy matter to
remedy that, if the Prince will not fall to suspect for trifles; which is the
quality of base persons; as Isocrates intimates in his Euagoras; or else, if
suspecting him, he conceal his suspicion, till he remove him from the Army;
So did Domitian with Agricola: So did Tiberius with Germanicus, who removing
him out of Germany, sent him into Africa with Cueius Piso. And this, the Queen
Teuca (in Polybius) not observing, was cause that Demetrius her General in
Slavonia, understanding that the Queen was by his Adversaries incenst against
him, and fearing her Indignation; he sent to Rome to deliver into their hands,
the City, the Army; and all he had under his charge.

The third cause alleged before, was the pride and reputation which victory
brings with it: for remedy whereof in particular, and of the rest in general:
there have been advertisements given by many, in diverse manners.

The first way is, for a Prince to go himself in person; and for a
Commonwealth to send thither, their Principal Magistrate; so the Turk in
times past, has used to do; to go himself in person; So the Commonwealth
of Rome used to do; sending forth the Consul or Dictatour. But in truth, in
this way, the Remedy seems to me, more dangerous then the evil, because if
the Prince go himself in person; he must be sure to have always the
victory; for otherwise if he loose, he will either be slain or taken
prisoner: If ^aine, as was Charles of Burgundy, what hinders but the victour
may enter upon the State, at least make spoil of it? If taken prisoner, as was
Francis King of France, and Syphax King of Numidia; I see not, but his State
will be as much in danger; and therefore of this man's State, it was easy for
Massinissa to get possession: and for the other, his Repuration, and state and
life were all Endangered. We may then conclude, that this way of encountering
disorders, is a dangerous way.

A second way is, every year to change the General, as the Ancient Romans
used to do; and as at this day the Commonwealth of Venice, in their Maritime
Navy uses to do. But yet in this way also there may infinite disorders
happen: First, if the Army chance to mutiny, which is commonly the Correlative
of an Army; In this case, a man new come, not beloved, not feared, will be
little fit to appease such tumults. Secondly, they that make war in this
manner, are like to do but little good, because the Soldiers can have no
confidence in such a one: and it is the confidence in their Captain, that for
the most part, is the cause of victory. For confirmation whereof, we may see
in Livie; that the same Army, which under other Captains was always beaten,
when it came to be commanded by Furius Camillus, had always victory: and this,
by reason of the great confidence, the Soldiers had in him. Thirdly there
appears another danger, not inferior to any; and it is, that when a General
knows he shall be changed at the year^s end: either he will not with any
great heat begin that, which he knows he cannot finish; or else beginning it,
and impatient that another should be companion of his victory, he will rashly,
and precipitantly hazard both the Army and himself; which has been the
cause, that the Romans have lost whole Armies: as it happened at Trebia against
Hanniball; where Cornelius the then Consul, to the end he might have all the
glory himself; unadvisedly stroke battle with Hanniball, and was with much
danger to the commonwealth, utterly defeated, of whom Livie says: Stimulabat
and tempus propinquum Comitiorum ne in novos Consules differretur, O occasio in
se unum vertendae gloriae!

But granting this Captain should have made a good beginning, and have
prepared a fair way for victory, yet certainly when he hears a successor is
to come, though he praecipitate not himself as Cornelius did; at least he will
do all he can to hinder, that another shall not rcape the benefit of his
labors, or otherwise will not stick to make any shameful Peace; as Marcus
Attilius did, who having beaten the Carthaginians by Sea and land; and upon the
point of obtaining a Complete victory; yet when he heard another Consul was
to come into Africa; to the end, the fruit of his labors should not be reaped
by him, he presently fell to a Trea^ie of peace. So Scipio, one time by
occasion of Tiberius Claudius, another time, of Cneius Cornelius, precipitated
the victory with making peace. Ferunt postea (says Livie) Scipionem dixisse,
Tiberii Claudii primum Cupiditatem; deinde Cnei Cornelii fuisse in mora; quo
minus idbellum exitio Carthaginis finiretur. There be some, that have hindered
their successors from victory, by overthiowing of purpose all that themselves
had well begun; such a one was Quintus Metellus; who having very near subdued
Spain, when he heard that Pompey the Consul, was to come in his place, he
disbanded al his Soldiers, gave all his provision of victuals to the
Elephants, and broke up the Army; So also in Numidia, hearing that Marius was
to come his successor; he endevour'd all he could to mar the Enterprise.

Others again, although their predecessors have done nothing to hinder them;
but have endeavored to leave them the victory, in a manner prepared; yet to
the end all should be attributed to themselves, have refused to make use of the
ways and courses their predecessors had used. Whereupon our Lord Christ, when
he would do the Miracle of wine, he rather made use of water, a thing already
created, then of any new matter; whereof Saint Chrysostom says, It was a
manifest argument, that he who made wine of water, was the same God, who had
made water of nothing. Nam si ipsi Deo contrarius Opifex fuisset: non utique
alienis usus esset Christus ad propriae virtutis demonstrationem. And Saint
Ambrose speaking of the first miracle, which Christ did on the Sabbath, says;
Et been Sabbatho coepit, ut ipsum se ostenderet Creatorem, qui Opera Operibus
intexeret; and prosequeretur Opus quod ipse jam coeperat. And thus when a
General is changed, the Instruments also, and all other things are changed
with him: and therefore Cneius Pompeius being sent Successor to Lucullus in
Asia; altered all that Lucullus had done, for not only it is the nature of men,
that succeeding another in any office, they will seldom follow their
predecessors courses, but in this case, there is another reason for it also;
to the end, It may not be thought, that getting the victory, they get it more,
by their Predecessors carriage then by their own; and therefore no mervaile,
that Drusus took contrary courses in Germany, to those which Germanicus before
him had begun. I conclude then; These Generals to whom a successor is sent,
are either needy of glory: or else they have gotten glory enough: If they be
needy, they will then precipitate the Army and themselves to get it; as
Cornelius did with Hanniball at Trebia: if they have glory enough already, they
will then endeavor to make a Peace, that they may not hazard their Reputation
with a successor, as Corbulo did, when he heard of one that was to come in
his place. Corbulo meritae per tot annos gloriae, non ultra periculum faceret.
But there are two oppositions, may in this place be made, which I cannot omit,
and I ought not to shun: The first is, that the Romans changed their Generals
every year, and yet they always got the victory, as in the first Decad of
Livie may be seen. The second, that the Venetians, men of so great valor and
prudence, that they may serve for an example to all the world; have always
taken this course, and always it has succeeded well.

To these reasons it is no hard matter to give an answer. And first, for that
of the Romans, it may be said, that this happened thorough the weakness of
their neighboring Nations, with whom they had war. Secondly, and perhaps
better; that although in the Roman Army, they sent yearly a New Consul: yet
there were many others in the Army, who had been Generals themselves before:
a thing which at this day, is not possible: seeing every one thinks scorn to
go a private Soldier: not only if he have been a General; but if he have
been but only a simple Corporal before. Thirdly, the wars they had then,
were at the gates of Rome; and were such wars, as were finished, I say not in
one year; but oftentimes, in one day. But when they came to have wars far
off, and that lasted long; they then suffered their Generals, to continue many
years; and grow old in their places. From hence it was: that at one and the
same time, having war with Hanniball in Italy; and with Asdrubal in Spain,
they very often changed their Generals in Italy, but Cneius Pompeius that was
their General in Spain, they never stird. So as when they had to do against
Powerful Armies, in places far off, they were then forced, to send a Scipio
Africanus, or a Caesar, or some such, as knowing how much it imports the
maine of the war, to have one sole commander.

As to the Particular of Venice, It is no mervaile, that they in their Fleets
at Sea, do every year change their Generals, seeing the war, and the
Generals Office, end both at once, because actions at Sea, are begun and ended
all at one time; but when they make war by land, they change not then their
Generals every year, as in Histories may be seen. Lastly, in the
Commonwealth of Venice, one reason there is; and in Rome there was; which
makes the matter, the less dangerous: and it is, because that Commonwealth
has so many in Sea matters so expert and excellent, that they might easily
change their General every day without any danger; which I cannot say ever
happened to any other then to the Commonwealth of Rome, and to that of Venice;
and the reason is, because in these Commonwealths, men of valor are rewarded.

A third way to secure a Prince from his Generals of Armies, is to send
Persons of trust, and of his own blood; as Tiberius did, in sending Drusus and
Germanicus: but neither does this course like me; First, because Princes have
not always, of their blood, that are fit to be Generals. Secondly, although
they have, yet it seems to me so much the more dangerous, as the Army is in a
man's hand of more Power, and specially one, not far from the Crown; and for
this cause, Ludouicus Sforza, chose rather to leave the Castle of Milan, in the
custody of a stranger: who afterward betrayed it, then of his own brother.
And it availes not to say, he is a near kinseman, seeing as I have elsewhere
said, Jnvidia Regni etiam inter Domesticos infida omnia facit: there being few,
qui malint expectare quam accipere Imperium. And therefore Jsocrates in his
Oration concerning the Government of a Kingdom, says, that a Prince should
bestow the highest Honors upon those of his blood, but the solidest Honors
upon those that love him. When Vespasian was made Emperor; his Son Domitian
had the honor: but Mucianus, the Authority. Caesar Domitianus Praeturam cepit,
ejus Nomen Episrolis Edictisque praeponebatur; Vis penes Mucianum: by all
means, there was care taken to order it so, that he might not usurp the
Empire. The like course Otho took: Profecto Brixellum Othone, honor Imperii
penes Titianum fratrem, Vis ac Potestas penes Proculum Praefectum. If afterward
it succeeded well with Tiberius, It was because, Vterque filius legiones
obtinebat.

A fourth way is, when a General has gotten Reputation by some victory; then
presently to remove him before he grow too famous, and use him in the wars
no more. So did Pharao by Moses; when employing him against the King of
Aethiopia, he no sooner got the victory in a battle, but he presently called
him back into Egypt. So did Anthony with his Captain Ventidius; after he had
overcome Pacorus. So did the King of Spain in calling home Gonsalvus. But
neither does this course like me: for either the victory will make an end of
the war, and then there will be no need of calling him home: and yet the
Prince not without danger: seeing one victory alone, if it be final, will be
sufficient to get the General a Name, and make him presume. And if that one
victory end not the war, the Prince then that takes this course, will have
little will to proceed any further, for the reasons before alleged. and if by
ill luck, Fortune should chance to turn: he will be forced, with shame and
danger, to send the same General again; as the King of Spain would have
done, after the defeat at Ravenna, for if the French had followed the victory,
which was hindered by the death of the General, the King of Spain had
determined to send Gonsaluo again into Italy.

The last remedy which has been invented, to prevent this danger, specially
in Commonwealths, is to join two Generals together in the Army: So the
Romans used often times to do, So the Carthagenians, So finally the Athenians;
yet I cannot satisfy my self, that this is a good way; First, because it is
commonly the overthrow of the action: as was seen by the King of France, in
the Kingdom of Naples, by the Duke of Vrbine, and by the Cardinal of Pavia,
in the Popes Army, by Marcus Varro, and by Paulus Aemilius amongst the Romans,
whereof in all Histories, there are Examples.

Secondly, this way is not sufficient to take away the danger, we speak of, as
was seen in Augustus, who although he had two companions Hircius and Pansa,
joined with him, yet could not they hinder him, from getting into his hand, the
Army of both the one and the other, having first by devises, put them both to
death; as Tacitus intimates, where he says; Caesis Hircio and Pansa, (sive
hostis illos, seu Pansa veneni vulnere effusum; ^five milites Hircium and
machinator doli Caesar abstulerant) utriusque copias occupavisse.

Thus for a Prince to go himself in person, is dangerous, to change his
Generals every year, is not commendable, to send one of his own blood, not
safe; to remove a General after getting a victory, worst of all; lastly to
make more Generals at once then one, of little benefit, and consequently, how
to avoyde this danger, is very difficult. The best counsel I could give,
should be that which Augustus gave to Tiberius; Consilium Coercendi intra
terminos Imperium, and in brief, as much as may be, to avoid wars: and
therefore Tiberius knowing these difficulties, although he heard of the
Rebellion of the Grysons, yet he made no show of it, because he had no mind
to send thither any person of reputation: Dissimulante Tiberio damnum, ne cui
bellum permitteret. But because it is impossible, but that occasions of war
will sometimes happen; I should like well, in such case, that a Prince being
doubtful of his General, should go himself to be near the Army; but not to
be in the Army; or if in the Army, yet he should never expose himself to
danger, unless the maine of the state depended upon it. This, Charles the
fifth King of France knowing, (for which hewas called Charles the wise) would
be himself in person in the Army; but when the battle was to be fought, he
then attyred a servant of his, in his own Armor, and by this means, the Army
had the benefit of the Princes presence, without the Princes danger. Pyrrhus
also put his Armor upon another, finding how feign the Romans were to kill
him. David, as long as matters were in manifest danger, thought it necessary to
fight himself in person. But if the presence of the Prince can do no more
good, or else, if having lost a battle, he have Forces (...) to renew his
Army, in this case, a Prince should not do well to go in person, and
therefore David, in the like case, saying, Egrediar and (...) vobiscum, the
people answered; Non exibis, (...) enim fugimus, non magnopere ad eos denobis
pertinebit; (...) media pars ceciderit de nobis, a non satis curabunt, quia
(...) unus pro december millibus computaberis. Otho therefore showed little
Judgment, and had ill counsel, when deliberating about a battle against
Vitellius, he let it be known, that he meant not to go himself in person,
seeing when the maine of the business is at stake, the Prince ought then to
go himself, because, if his Army should be lost, he were as good be lost
himself, as was seen in Otho; for he staying behind, and not going in person
in the Army, both abated the courage, and also the number of his Soldiers.
Their courage, because they looked for him, Militibus ut Imperator pugnae
adesset poscentibus, Their number, because he retained many companies for his
own Guard, and though Tacitus, in that oration which Otho made, seem to show,
he had forces enough to renew the Army, and that he killed himself only because
he would not do the Commonwealth so much hurt, yet I cannot believe, that a
man so wicked as Otho was, would ever be so Compassionate, and take such pity
of the Commonwealth:

A Prince then ought to go himself in person, when either the danger is such,
that if the Army be lost, the whole state is lost: or when it is such, that
Ioosing the battle, the Prince cannot do better, then to dye: seeing there
is no doubt, but it is a great encouragement to the Soldiers, to see their
prince amongst them, as it happened in the battle at Tarus, where the only
presence of the King, was the cause, they got the victory, whereupon, it is no
mervaile, that the Israelites going upon a difficult action, and hearing that
our Lord God, their chief Prince would not go himself, but would send an
Angel to be their General; Et mittam (...) tui Angelum, ut eiiciam
Chananaeum, and Amorrhaeum, and Ethaeum, and Pheresaeum, and Iebusaeum, and
intres in terram fluentem lacte and melle, Non enim ascendam tecum, that the
people hearing themselves thus vilified, made the greatest demonstrations of
sorrow that could be, Audiens autem populus sermonem (...), luxit; and nullus
ex more indutus est cultu suo: so as, if the Lord God did not go himself, the
people could have no heart to undertake that Enterprise.

But if the state of the Prince, though that Army be lost, be able in any sort
to defend it self, in this case the Prince shall do well, not to go himself
in person; but shall set only One General over the Army, and himself not to
be far off, but so, as in occasion of certain victory, he may remoove into
the Army; This Joab teaches us, when he advised David, to come into the Camp,
being now in his power, to take the City of Rabbat, to the end, the glory of
the Action might be David's, and therefore in the second of the Kings, he
says: Misit Ioab nuntios ad David, dicens, Dimicavi adversus Rabbath, and
capienda est Vrbs aquarum. Nunc igitur congrega reliquam partem populi, and
obside Civitatem, and cape eam; ne cum a me vastata fuerit Vrbs, Nomini meo
ascribatur Victoria. Maharbale left by Hanniball to Oppugn Saguntum, left the
Oppugnation in good terms; and then stayed for Hanniballs coming. Strataque
omnia (says Livie) recentibus ruinis, advenienti Annibali ostendit. In this
manner, a Prince shall fully secure himself, from any General, whose
Reputationi growing only from the victories he has gotten, the Prince shall
convert all that Reputation upon himself: and therefore Ioab said; Ne
ascribatur Nomini meo Victoria.

But if the Prince be not willing to be himself in such actions, he may yet
with his only being near, prevent all inconveniences, by employing one
General still: and himself in no danger; imitating herein Moses, who sending
Joshua against the (...): would not be himself far off; Egressus pugna contra
Amalech, and ego stabo in vertice collis. This course was a great help to
Philip the second, with the Duke of Alva. From hence it is, that as long as the
Romans had war near home, they never doubted any General, of their Army,
but when they had war far off, the Senate no more then the Prince, not
being able to follow the Army, they then began to doubt, and a while after, it
fell out as they doubted; as it is in daily experience, that Princes, in war
near home, never make any doubt of their Generals. Moreover, if he be not in
the Army, he is sure to be safe: and this I hold to be the most principal
thing that can be, because it would be much, if a Prince carrying away, (as the
Proverb is) the Hide, although he should loose his whole state, and all his
Army, should not be able to find means, to come afresh upon the enemy; as was
seen in Massinissa, in Iugurtha, and in Ludovico Moro, until he was taken
prisoner: and would to God we might see no Examples of it, in our times.
Howsoever, whether Princes be in the Army, or be not, they shall do well to
look to their own safety.

It is then clear that a Prince should have but one General, and himself not
to be far off: as we may learn from our Lord God: who not only is near,
but in Essence, in Presence, and in Power, is in all things: and having made
use of Michael the A^changell, as his General in the first battle, as it is
written in the Apocalypse; Factum est (...) magnu^ in Coelo, Michael and Angeli
ejus (...) cum Dracone, and Draco pugnabat and Angeli ejus, and non valuerunt,
neque locus inventus est eorum amplius in Coelo: He will make use of him also
in the last, as may be gathered from Daniel: In tempore autem illo (speaking of
Antichrist) Consurget Michaell Princeps magnus: qui stat pro filiis populi sui,
and veniet tempus quale non fuit ab eo, ex quo Gentes esse coeperunt usque ad
tempus illud. And thus much concerning a Prince.

Now Commonwealths in this point have greater difficulties. There is a
Politician that counsels, they should send of their own Citizens: and he
instances in Venice, who making their Generals, Bartholmew of Bergamo, and
Nicholas Orsino Count of Pitigliano, that were strangers, they lost at Vayola
in one battle, all they had gotten with infinite labors, in eight hundred
years; and another time (says he) they were feign to put Carmignola (another
foreign General) to death. I lay no blame upon this opinion, but yet I
commend rather, that commonwealths should employ such strangers to be their
Generals, with whom, for their own security, they may send a pair of the
(...) Senators, that they paying the Soldiers, may not suffer the Soldiers
love to be cast all upon the General, and representing the Senate, not suffer
any thing to be done without their consent. This way is at this day used: but
is not new, as that which was known in the time of the Carthagenians, as far
as I can find by Polybius: who shows, that Xantippus their. Captain, would
not strike batraile with the Romans, until he had (...) their leave, who were
sent by the Carthagenian Senate. Xantippus accept a a Ducibus Carthaginensium
potestate, pugnandi copiam ^ostibus facit. The Example of the Romans in
opposition to this, is of no force; because that was an Age, not greedy of
Dominion; but when it cameto be so, they then too well perceived, how dangerous
it was to put an Army into the hand of a Citizen, as was seen in Marius, in
Sylla, in Caesar the Dictatour: in Anthony, in Augustus; and in a thousand
others. So also it would have been in Pompey, if he had gotten the victory of
Caesar, Pompeius occultior (said Tacitus) non melior. Secondly, it availes not
to say, that the Venetians were forced to put Carmignola to death, seeing the
Romans also caused Scipio, when they had banished him, to be put to death: and
it was their ruin, they could not do as much to Caesar: being a much harder
matter, when a General is to be put to death, to put it in execution, if he
be a Citizen, then if he be a stranger, because a Citizen has always a
Faction in the Senate, that will defend him: and therefore in Rome, there was
never any General put to death, where a stranger as having none to stand for
him, will easily be oppressed, as I shall show hereafter. Thirdly, the example
he brings of the defeat the Venetians had at Vayola, is of no^ force, seeing
there are none that make war, that have not sometimes defeats; and who ever
had more then the Romans? who though their Generals were always Citizens, yet
in three Defeats they had, one at Trebia, another at Cannae, and another at
(...), they lost all they had, (I may say) but only the City of Rome, which
Hanniball after his victory, at Cannae, might have taken also, and would not.
And if there were nothing else to make me be of this Opinion, yet the Example
at this day, of the Commonwealth of Venice, a City full of such excellent men,
would persuade me to it.

We have now showed, the best course that Princes or Commonwealths can take,
to secure themselves from their Generals: It remains to show, what course
Generals may take to secure themselves, from Common wealths and Princes. And
because we have said, that a Prince may doubt them, either because they have
not been rewarded, or by reason of the Glory they have gotten, or thorough
suspicion, which oftentimes Princes and Commonwealths do vainly conceive; I
say.

The first of these is easily to be avoided, if the General shall show
himself to be without interest; and not to care for any thing but the honor,
for by this means he shall keep the Prince from any jealousy in this behalf,
and shall not precipitate himself into danger.

As concerning the second, of Glory, they shall do well to imitate the
Allmaines: who (as Tacitus relates) used to attribute all the praise of their
great achievements, wholly to their Princes. And this precept a General may
observe, either by requiring the Prince to come, when he sees a victory is
certain, as Ioab did, or if the Prince cannot come, then to cause his name to
be called upon in the Army, and to erect Trophies to him; and therefore
Germanicus knowing this, after he had subdued many Nations of Germany, in the
Title he published of them, made mention only of the Prince: and of himself
said nothing at all. Debellatis inter Rhenum Ablimque nationibus, exercitum
Tiberii Caesaris, ea Monumenta Marti and Iovi and Augusto sacravisse. De se
nihil addidit, metu invidiae, an ratus (...) facti satis esse; and indeed there
is nothing more pernicious to Generals, then to ascribe victories to
themselves. This was it, that brought Saul to hate David, in his victory of the
Philistine Giant: and it is indeed a great Vanity, where there are manifest
deeds, to puff them up with words. It was many times said to our Lord Christ,
Daemonium hahes, and he answered; Daemonium non (...); another time, when he
had heased a blind man, and it was said unto him Daemonium habes, he made no
(...) at all, because the work he had done, answered for him, that he had not
a devil; where therefore there are great works, it is needless to add words.

The greatest difficulty of a General, is to keep himself from being
suspected, for this has be^ne the undoing of an infinite number of worthy
Captains; amongst whom, speaking of Princes, was Corbulo; One of the greatest
soldiers, the Romans ever had; and speaking of Commonwealths, Paullus
Vitelli, a famous Captain of his time, who only upon suspicion, was by the
Commonwealth of Florence, beheaded.

A general then may incur danger, in two things, in sulpition, and in death;
To prevent suspicion, be cannot do better, then to use severity in the Army;
following the example of Hanniball rather then of Scipio, and therefore Corbulo
in his Beginning, while he used Discipline, Incurred no danger. To this may be
added, that which we spoke of before, which is, to shun all vain glory, but
because it is sometimes impossible, not to incur suspicion; the best
instruction I can give in this point, is to advertise, in which of the two
Services, is the greater danger.

I say then, that strangers shall run more hazard, by serving a
Commonwealth, then by serving a Prince; and subjects shall run more danger,
by serving a Prince, then by serving a Commonwealth; an example whereof, we
have given in Paullus Vitelli; who being a stranger, and serving a
Commonwealth, lost his life. This made Xantippus, who was general of the
Commonwealth of Carthage; as soon as he had gotten one glorious victory
against the Romans, to leave the Army, and return home. The reason of this
distinction, is in my opinion, plain, because Generals under a Prince; either
they have friends to defend them, or they have not: if they have not, then they
lie open to calumnies without any defense; if they have, then will the danger
be the greater; because the Princes suspicion will be the greater, to see them
have such friends and adherents in the City; where if the General be a
stranger; there can be had of him no such suspicion. Now, if it be in a
Commonwealth; the stranger having few adherents will be little defended from
the blows of calumnies: where the Citizen having his faction to protect and
assist him; will easily avoid the danger, at least of life. And this is the
reason Polybius brings; why Xantippus, after the victory he had gotten, left
the Army: where he says, Nam praeclara facinora, and res a quocunque egregie
gestae, magnam plerumque invidiam, and graves Calumnias conflare solent, quiqus
Cives quidem affinium ac amicorum multitudine freti, facile resistunt hospites
vero omnis praesidii expertes, utroque malo quam celerrime conteruntur. And
where under a Prince, to have Citizens to defend him, is a dangerous thing; the
suspicion increasing with the defense; under a Commonwealth, it is a benefit,
to have part of those, to take his part, that may deliberate; and therefore in
the Commonwealth of Rome; when they have not been able to answer the
Accusation; yet they have been able to escape death; in such sort, that for any
misadventures in battles, or for any suspicion of the people or of the (...);
I never could see any that incurred danger: where under a Prince, there may be
found a thousand examples.

Above all, Generals must take heed, they take not courses, against the nature
of him they serve; for in so doing, they may be sure, they shall never be
well thought of for what they do; and besides, with their own danger, they
shall breed a jealousy in them they serve. This had happened to Alvianus at
Geradada; if he had not been taken Prisoner; because being in the service of a
Commonwealth, so advised and wary in all their affairs, he by giving
battle so precipita^tly, showed he knew not, at least, observed not the
nature or them (...). And therefore Corbulo (as Tacitus relates) venturing upon
hazardous attempts, under Claudius a timorous Prince; not only was blamed for
it; but was feign, with little honor to himself, and much (...) of the
Prince, to leave the Army, and withdraw himself: Corbulo semina rebellionis
praebebat; ut laeta apud pleros que, it a apud quosdam Sinistra fama. Cur
hostem conciret? adversa in Rempublicum casura, cum prospere egisset;
formidolosum paci; virum in signem and ignavo Principi praegravem. Ideo
Claudius adeo novam in Germanias Vim probibuit; ut referri praesidia cis Rhenum
Iuberet.

Dabat and Famae, ut Vocatus Electusque potius a Republica videretur; quum per
uxorium ambitum; and senili adoptione irrepsisse.
Of Succession and Election. The three and thirtieth Discourse.

BY occasion, that Tiberius would rather have it be thought he was chosen
Emperor, by the Senate, then by Augustus; we think fit, to examine these
points; when Election is good, and when succession; and lastly, which of them
is the better.

To begin with the last; because upon this, the other depend; there are many of
opinion, that Election is the better; which (they say) may be proved by
Examples and by reasons. By examples, because of all the many Emperors that
Rome had, if any were ever good; they were those, that came in, by Election:
and if we look into the holy Scripture; we shall find, that the Judges came
no sooner to be by succession, but they ended in the sons of Samuel; and the
Regal Dignity as soon as it came to be by succession, presently became a
Tyranny, beginning in Solomon; and Increasing in Roboam; who were not Elected,
as Saul and David were. Then again by reason, it may be proved; because
Election is in our own power: where succession is in the power of Fortune,
which, though it may sometimes give a good Prince, yet it cannot continue to
do it so long, but that at last (as Aristotle observes) It will give a had,
who alone is enough to overthrow all the good, his Predecessors had done. To
this may be added, that successors are always full of domineering pride,
which makes them believe, they are greater then ever their Ancestors were; and
having had no part, nor labor in acquiring the Kingdom, they little care for
conserving the Kingdom; and lastly, having honor and glory enough; they
trouble not themselves for getting of more; where he that comes in by Election,
will by the same virtues with which he has attained the Empire, be able also
to conserve the Empire; and seeing he has perhaps but little glory by his
Ancestors, he will endeavor to get glory by himself.

On the other side, there want not reasons to prove, that succession is the
better: and the first is taken from Aristotle, who in his Politics, speaking
against Plato shows: how different and much greater the love is, that is borne
to things which are our own: whereupon a successor having the Kingdom as his
own, and one that is chosen, having it but as lent; It must needs be believed,
that a successor is likely to make the better Governor: Men commonly not
having so great care, of things which they have but for term of life; as of
things in which they have inheritance, and may leave them to their Heir. To
this may be added: that the conditions of those, who come newly to their
greatness; (as Aristotle speaking of the Commonwealth of the Chalcedons says)
are evermore intolerable, as a Poet says, Asperius nihil est humili cum surgit
in altum. Moreover they who come in by Election, as not having had education in
the Princes house, can have but mean information of the affairs of state;
where if sons succeed, as no New Dignity accrewes unto them, so no occasion
of growing proud befalls them; and being trained up and acquainted with
affairs: as they themselves will be better able to govern; so both People,
and Nobility will be willinger to be governed by them; the People, as having
been accustomed to obey their Fathers; The Nobility, as being far removed
from Equality: we may add further; that succession takes away all occasion of
discords, which in Election, must needs fall out; and falling out, It is
impossible, a person of any goodness should be chosen, or if a virtuous person
happen to be chosen, yet having been contested against, by some part of the
Electours, he cannot choose but bear them grudges; and hardly be able to
govern as a King should do.

For resolution, I say; that Election and succession, be it good or bad, may be
considered either with regard to the Prince, or with regard to the people. If
to the Prince; then the question is, which of them is the more available either
for his security, or for his Reputation.

Beginning then with Reputation, there can be no doubt, but it is more honor
to a Prince to be Elected, then to succeed: seeing this comes by Fortune,
without any merit in the successor; the other comes by merit which is wholly
in him that is Elected. This Galba understood; when adopting Piso, he said,
Generari nascique a Principibus fortuitum, nec ultra aestimatur, adoptandi
Iudicium integrum; and si velis eligere, Consensu monstratur.

As for security; I hold it safer to succeed, then to be chosen, because he
that is Elected, is either chosen by the Prince, or by the People, or by the
Senate. If by the Prince, he will want many of those graces, which make a
successor secure: as the merits of his Father: which saved Solomon from utter
ruin, and the being of the blood Royal, has been a cause of preserving many
in their states. Besides this, he will have many things in his disfavour; as,
that he is but newly risen up from Equality, and diverse other. If we speak
of those that are Elected by the People, I cannot deny but they will have the
people of their side: but then consequently, they will have the Nobility
against them: and so of the one sort, they are like to be hated; and to the
other sort, obliged; and being never able to satisfy so much, as the
obligation requires, in short time there will follow, with a general hatred,
their own particular ruin. Lastly, if he be Elected by the (...); he is like
to have the people his enemy, and be sure to be himself a flave to the
Nobility, whereupon, we may conclude, that Election is the more Honorable;
and succession the more secure.

Concerning the last point; which is, whether of the two is the more profitable
to Cities; Election or succession; I say, that if the Prince choose him, and be
the Electour, either he is a good Prince, or a bad; if a good, he cannot choose
but make a good choice, and consequently will be better for the City, then
succession (...) that being certain, and this uncertain, and therefore the
Election of Antoninus, was better then the succession of Marcus Aurelius: and
yet Marcus Aurelius was no less virtuous then Antoninus. But if the Prince be
bad; no doubt then, but choosing a successor, he will choose one stark
naught, and therefore it was thought that Augustus chose (...), (...) deterrima
sibi gloriam quaerens; as Dio and Tacitus say; and not only for getting
themselves glory, as in this case, but sometimes they will do it, out (...)
sympathy of Conditions, in which regard, Otho speaking of Galba, who had chosen
Piso, as (...) a man as himself, said; Ac ne quo saltem in successore
Galbaespes esset; accersit ab exilio, quem tristitia and avaritia sui
simillimum (...), whereupon, in this respect, it is better a Prince should be
by succession, then by Election, seeing at least, it will be put into the hand
of Fortune, and such a one like to succeed, as a better were not like to be
Elected. With this opinion of mine, agrees that which Capitolinus in the life
of Messalina relates, as a Common Proverb: sapienter electi Principes sic
agunt; per Imperitos electi, sic pereunt. If again the Election be made by
the soldiers, as oftentimes was done at Rome, in this (...) likewise,
succession will be better then Election: because soldiers make Election only
for their profit; and of (...) to make the like profit, of another, they
murder one as soon as they have chosen him: So says (...), in the life of
Galba; Et (...): libidine que (...) Imperatore veluti Clavum Clavo expellebant;
(...) vero palatium (...) domus breviori temporis spatio quatuor Imperatores
excepit, militibus tanquam in Scena, modo introducentibus aliquem, modo
educentibus. If lastly the Election be by the people, either they are at
variance with the Nobility, or Not: if they be at variance, no doubt they will
then make choice of a Factious person; one of a turbulent spirit, and an enemy
to the Nobles; as they did in the choice of Tribunes in Rome, at the time when
there was dissension, between the Nobility and the people; and though there
were no discord between them; yet I could never like of Election by the people,
who being for the most part corrupt, and little able to discern who is good,
and who is bad; and apt to value men by riches, and not by virtue, cannot choose
but make a most unworthy choice. Neque enim Illis (says Tacitus) Iudicium aut
veritas. But if the Senate be at concord with the people, then no doubt, the
Election will be excellent, as being made by a number of understanding men; and
therefore we see, that Numa Pompilius who was thus chosen, proved one of the
best Kings, the Romans ever had: there concurring in his Election, the choice
of the Senate, and consent of the people. It is true, such Election is hardly
made; because few would like to (...) another to that degree, which he aims
at himself: And if any man should object, that it proves well in Venice, where
the Election of their Duke, is always made by the Senate, I would answer
(taking no notice of the kind of that Dignity) that this happens, because that
Election is made by most understanding men; who aim more at the Commonwealths
profit, then at their own. But if the Senate or Magistrate, that is to make the
Election, be it self corrupt: we may then expect a choice between good and
bad; because a very good one, they would not choose, for fear least out of his
preciseness, he should reform many things to the undoing of the wicked; and a
very bad one, they would not choose, for fear least he should be the undoing
of the Kingdom. To which purpose are those words of Tacitus; Exoptimis
periculum sibi, expessimis dedecus publicum metuebat.

I here advertise, that neither the Reasons alleged at first, nor yet this
last, are in any opposition to the Kingdoms that are at this day, whereof the
greatest part goes by succession; for there is great difference between
speaking of times, in which were Tyrants; and times in which are civil
Princes; who have so many Counsels, so many orders and Consultations, that it
is impossible, but they must govern well. No man therefore ought to take my
Discourse as a taxing of Princes in these times; but whether it be Election, or
succession, I hold that way always to be best in a City, which has formerly
been used.

Lastly for resolution of those Arguments which in the beginning were brought
against Election: (Those against succession being tacitly already answered) I
say, that either we speak of choosing a private man to be Prince; and then
those difficulties will bein force; or else we speak of choosing one, who is
already mounted to the height of a Prince; and then those difficulties will be
laid asseepe: and this we see notably observed at this day, in places of
Election; as in creation of the Pope, which can never fall upon a person, that
is not first a Cardinal, It being fit, that one should first come out from
Equality, before he should rise to the highest degree of superiority, and that
he should first be taken into part of affairs, who is to come afterward to
govern the whole. So likewise in Election of the Emperors; we see always
Princes of such blood to be chosen, that coming to the Empire, they seem not
to come to any new greatness.

Tiberius therefore (to come to our purpose) having been chosen by Augustus,
that was a Tyrant, had reason to have it believed, that he was chosen by the
Senate, rather then by old Augustus, Comparatione deterrima, or per (...)
ambitum: but if Augustus had been an excellent King; I believe he would then
have rather had it thought, that he was chosen by the Prince. So did Solomon,
who coming to the Crown after David, would have it known, that he was made
successor by his father: Vt notum fiat universo Populo Regem eum a Patre
Declaratum.

Nihil primo Senatus die agi passus, nisi de supremis Augusti; cujus
Testamentum inlatum per virgins Vestae, Tiberium and Liviam haeredes habuit.
Livia in familiam Juliam; Nomenque Augustae adsumebatur. In spem secundam,
Nepotes Pronepotesque. Tertio gradu Primores Civitatis Scripserat, plerosque
invisos sibi, sed Jactantia gloriaque ad Posteros.
Whether Tiberius did ill, in causing Augustus his will to be read; and why
Augustus in the third place, made many his heirs that were his Enemies. The
four and thirtieth discourse.

ONe of the first things that Tiberius did in the Senate; was the causing
Augustus his will to be read; where Livia and himself were made his heirs in
the first place: In the second, his Nephews; and Grandchildren. In the third
place: the principal men of the City; many of whom were known to be his
enemies. In this, there are two things we may wonder at; one that Tiberius
would have this will of Augustus to be read openly; the other, that Augustus
had set many in his will, that were his Enemies.

Beginning with the first, I say; that Tiberius not belonging to Augustus by
any respect of blood; but only by being his Son in law; to be preferred by
Augustus will, before Agrippa Posthumus, that was his Nephew, to whom by Right
of kindred, the Empire belonged; It seems that in true politic consideration,
Tiberius did ill, to cause a thing so odious to be published, which he ought
rather, if it had been possible, to have hidden: as was seen in Claudius, who
by his Testament making his Son in Law, Nero his heir; and preferring him
before Britannicus, his true and legitimate Son; Agrippina a subtle woman,
after the death of Claudius, would not suffer his will to be read; least the
people should mutiny; to see a son in Law preferred before a Son: I
estamentum tamen haud recitatum, Ne antepositus filio privignus, Injuria and
Jnvidia animos vulgiturbaret. By this example related by the same. Tacitus, we
must necessarily say, that one of them, either Agrippina or Tiberius did ill:
or else we must be driven to show some difference between these two cases:
which may be, and is in many things. First, because Britannicus was Claudius
his Son; and Agrippa, Augustus his Nephew, but by the line of women.
Secondly, because Agrippa was far off; and perhaps dead, when Augustus his
will was read; Britannicus was living, and present there in Rome: and so by his
presence, might have given occasion to the people, of making in (...), which
Tiberius needed not to fear: and lastly Tiberius was a man of ripe age,
experienced in the wars, and conversant in affairs of state, where Nero was
but a child, and had hitherto given no proof of himself at all; and besides,
it caused much less envy, to see a Son in Law of so excellent qualities,
preferred before a Nephew rude and foolish, and full of Indignation; then it
would have done to see a rude Son in Law, preferred before a Son of so great
expectation: and because to be made heir by the former Prince, is a great
help for being accepted by the Subjects, as by the Example of Solomon and
others, I have elsewhere showed; Tiberius knowing, that those things would be
no trouble to him, which to Nero would have been pernicious; he therefore did
very wisely and with great Judgment, to make it known to all men; that
Augustus by his will had left him his heir.

The other Error which was intimated in the beginning, consists in this: that
Augustus in his will, naming many of his enemies to be his heirs; seemed by
this as it were to encourage them to oppose those of his own blood; that so
they might come to that, of which his will had given them a hope. And it would
not be reasonable to say, that he was moved to do it; (as at this day in some
places is used) as not thinking he should dye; to the end, that they seeing
themselves made his heirs, might not longer be his opposites, but rather be
tied to be at his service; an invention which has no other effect, but to make
him that uses it, be known for a man of little brain, with prejudice to his
Posterity. This reason therefore is in it self of little strength; and squares
not with Augustus, seeing his will was made in secret, and of as little
strength is that Reason which Tacitus brings, in these words, Iactantia
Gloriaque apud Posteros; which is, that Augustus did it to get himself glory
in aftertimes, as much as to say, that he preferred public profit, before
private hatred, and that he made no reckoning of the injuries done him; no
doubt a great Glory; but yet not such, as was worthy of Augustus his
Consideration.

We may say then, that Augustus not without great cunning took this course, to
secure both himself and his successor: seeing, that if any were likely to
conspire against the Prince: it was those principal men whom he named in his
will; whereupon by this demonstration of affection, he thought to bind their
hands: because believing the Prince did truly love them, (men being apt of
themselves to believe they deserve to be loved) and more, to believe those
demonstrations, which being made in a Iast will, seem to be far from
flattery, they could not choose but lay away all hatred: and though they should
be suspicious, though aware of the devise, yet they should have no means to
conspire against the Prince, seeing the people, they might be sure, would be
against them: as they who looking to the appearance of things, take no notice of
fictions, and hate ungratefulness; and this was it, that spoiled the
conspiracy of Marcus Brutus; because the people understood that he was adopted
by Caesar to be his son, and named in his Testament, and for him to conspire
against him was such an ingratitude, that they were easily persuaded to take
revenge; so much is that accursed vice detested.

Non aliud Discordantis patriae remedium, quam ut ab uno regeretur.
That corrupt Commonwealths have need of a Monarch to Reform them. The five
and thirtieth Discourse.

IF Agis the Spartan had known the foresaid reason brought by Tacitus in
excuse of Augustus, he would certainly have attained the end he aimed at;
which was to restore his Country to the first Ordinances and laws that the
most wise Lycurgus had made: but his fault was, that he sought to do that by
many, which he was to have done himself alone: which Cleomenes perceiving, and
advised by the wife of Agis, whom after his death he took to wife himself,
and having heard her a thousand times relate the case of her deceased husband,
he came to know, that Non aliud patriae Discordantis remedium quam ut ab uno
regeretur; whereupon (though wickedly) he put down the Magistracy of the
Ephori, and easily brought the City to such terms, that within a few days, he
was able, without any fear of the Citizens, to leave his Country, and go^
person to the war: and if the City in the mean time ran a hazard; it was not
by any default of Cleomenes, but for want of money, as Plutarch witnesses,
where he says; Quemadmodum exercitatione robur membrorum adepti Athletae,
spatio temporis opprimunt at que superant agiles, artificiososque; Ita
Antigonus magnis opibus instructus, his que bellum reficiens, defatigavit
tandem superavitque Cleomenem, vix habentem, unde tenuiter (...) mercedem,
civibus alimenta suppeditaret: and therefore was forced to give him battle,
where if he could have stayed but only two days, Antigonus must of necessity
have returned back, into Macedon, and Cleomenes had remained Lord of all Greece.

It is therefore held by all Experienced Politicians, for an infallible Rule,
that not only for the founding of Commonwealths, but also for the Reforming
of them; the Government of one alone is necessary; and this, Romulus knowing,
(though wickedly as for the Act) killed his brother, and was cause of the death
of his Compagnion. So Cleomenes (as we have said before) desiring to reform his
Country of (...), which was at the last Cast of Ruin; no less wickedly then
Romulus, killed all those that might oppose his Power, and gave them new laws
and new ordinances for reformation of the City. And not unlike to these was
Hiero the Syracusan, who seeing his Country in a near degree of ruin; was
forced to make use of those Arms to make himself Lord of the Country, which
he had received for defense of the Country. It is therefore no marvel, that
Augustus seeing Rome so full of Discords, so much degenerated from the ancient
laws and customs, and so deeply plunged in a thousand kinds of wickedness,
did imitate Romulus in being the cause of his Companions death; did imitate
Cleomenes, in putting many Senators to death, that might have opposed his
greatness; and lastly did imitate Hiero the Syracusan; in turning those Arms
against the Commonwealth, which he had received of the Commonwealth, to
defend it against Anthony; as knowing well, that to rectify the City and
reduce it to reformation, there was no other way, but only for himself to
govern alone. For having a purpose to set up an Aristocracy; he was first, (as
Aristotle in his Ethics teaches us) to bow the staff the contrary way to
make it afterward straight; and if in doing this, he used violence, it was,
because it was impossible to do it otherwise. And therefore Plato in his book
of laws, says; that it is impossible to pass from the Government of a few,
to a good Commonwealth: because it is seldom seen, that they who are in
authority, will yield to any of their fellows to reform them; where Plato
showing the difficulty of reforming a Commonwealth; shows withal, that it
must be done, by reducing the government into one man's hand. And if Augustus
afterward, did not pursue his purpose; and left not the City in liberty; it
was, because he saw the Citizens were not fit for it; as Galba, in the oration
he made at the Adopting of Piso said: Imperaturus es hominibus, qui nec totam
libertatem; nec totam Servitutem pati possunt; and (...) this cause it was,
that Augustus made himself sole Lord; Non aliud Discordantis (...) remedium,
quam ut ab uno regeretur; and therefore he gave them half a liberty; leaving
a great authority in the Senators; and not a little in the people; which
Tiberius afterward took away, and he put them in half a servitude, being
himself superior in all causes. The like conceit had Galba, when he made
himself sole Lord of the Empire; as in the foresaid oration, every one may
see. Augustus therefore is no more to be reproved, then Cleomenes, and Galba,
and Hiero are, and if his purpose took not effect, it is not to be attributed
to his fault, but to the ill fortune of his successor; seeing as long as he
lived himself, till he came to his decrepit age; he maintained the City in
great quiet, and the whole world in Peace, Nulla in praesens formidine, dum
Augustus aestate validus, seque, and Domum, and Pacem sustentavit. And if to
Romulus there had succeeded Tarquinius Superbus, and to Augustus Numa (...);
(...) think the City of Rome had in her beginning been ruined; and after by
Augustus been restored. And as after him the City of Rome fell to a Tyrant,
and the power of the Caesar's ended in Nero, so also the Power of Romulus ended
in Tarquinius Superbus, the Power of Cleomenes, in himself, that of Hiero, in
his nephew Hieronymus, and finally, that of Galba, presently after his death,
fell to a Tyrant: and all these Powers, except that only of Cleomenes, came to
ruin by wicked successors. The reason, why these men's power was not able to
hold out long; and to conserve their Cities in tranquillity, is by some
assigned, to the accommodations, which either are so ordered, that all the
parts of the City rest contented, and then it will last; or else the
Accommodation (...) founded upon the Person, who by his authority makes it apt
to continue, and then it will last no longer, then while he lives, or at most,
till it fall into the hands of a wicked successor, this, in my opinion, David
knew well, when in a Psalm he said, Deus Iudicium tuum Regi da, and (...) tuam
filio Regis; as though he would say, it is not enough for the continuance of an
empire, that the first King be good; but it is necessary, his successors be
good also, and then it is like to last a long time. (...) cum sole, and ante
lunam, in Generatione and Generatione; but because after Solomon, there
followed a wicked successor, the Kingdom was in part dissolved. So the
Kingdom of Romulus succeeded well with him, because there came after him Numa
Pompilius, who by giving good laws, filled it with Religion, but afterward in
Tarquinius Superbus it came to ruin. So also that of Hiero came to nothing,
through a wicked successor. So the reformation which Augustus made of his
Country, succeeded ill to him, because there came after him a Tiberius, a
Caius, a Claudius, and lastly a Nero, who abrogating Laws and Religion, it
could not choose but come to ruin. The reformations therefore are ill founded,
and never last long, that are founded upon the Authority of one, seeing the
City is eternal, and the Prince mortal; but then are reformations like to
continue, when they are founded upon those that receive them. Wherein, for
another reason, I would help my self with a doctrine of S. Thomas, where he
says, That when a form comes to be perfectly received of the matter, although
the Agent that introduced the form, be removed, yet the form remains in the
matter still; if Fire be introduced in Wood by another Fire, though the agent
be removed, yet the Fire remains in the Wood still; but when a form is
introduced unperfectly, or to use the word of S. Thomas, Inchoative; there, If
the Agent be removed, either it lasts but little, as water that is heated; or
else goes wholly away with the agent, as the enlightening the air, by the
departing of the Sun. So likewise when a Prince has perfectly introduced good
Ordinances in the matter of a City; although he die himself, yet they will
still remain: but if they be introduced but unperfectly, that is, not fully
established; then certainly, either they will last but little, as water heated,
or with his death that introduced them, will die also, as the enlightening of
the Air.

To return to our purpose, I said before, that the City of Rome was not
capable of liberty: and therefore that Augustus was not too blame, for not
giving it liberty; that it was not capable, is manifest, seeing in process of
time, the Empire coming into the hands of such persons as more regarded the
good of their Country, then their own dignity; such as Trajan, Antoninus
Pius, Marcus Aurelius, and others were: if they had known that it had been for
the good of the City of Rome, to have had liberty, they certainly would have
given it.

I have been willing to give examples of Hiero, as being indeed most like to
Augustus. For he being a Citizen of Syracusa, had in his hand an Army for
defense of his Country; and by devises cut them all in pieces that were not
for his turn: and afterward, with those very Arms he made himself Lord of
Syracusa, in which government he raised not himself above equality, ruling
with much prudence, and contents of the Subjects; as also he enlarged the
Dominion of Syracusa: and lastly intended to leave it in liberty, but that he
did it not, there were two impediment; the first, because the City was not fit
for it: and therefore Livie says, Syracusaeque cum breve tempus affulsisset,
in antiquam servitutem reciderant. And in the same book, speaking of the
people of Syracusa, he says, Aut servit (...), aut superbe dominatur,
Libertatem quae media est, (...) modice, nec habere sciunt. A second impediment
were the women, who through desire of rule, wrought so with him, that he left
his Nephew Hieronymus his successor, a most perfidious and cruel man, and
far differing from the conditions of his uncle. Augustus likewise was a
Citizen of Rome, and had in his hand an Army, for defense of his Country; when
he put all those to death, that were able to oppose him, and then turning those
very Arms against his Country, he made himself (...) Lord; in which
government he used great equality, showed great prudence, enlarged the Empire,
and lastly had a purpose to leave it in liberty, whereof he had often speech
with (...) and Agrippa; and if he left it not in liberty, it was long of two
things: one, because the City was not capable of liberty, Non (...)
discordantis (...) remedium, quam ut ab uno regeretur: and as Galba said of the
Romans, Nec totam libertatem, nec totam servitutem pati possunt. A second cause
was Livia, who having besotted the old man Augustus, persuaded him to leave
Tiberius his successor, a cruel man, and one that was no more of kin to
Augustus his conditions then to his blood, as Tacitus shows where he says,
(...) Tibero morum via. And thus it appears that Augustus and Hiero were very
like; but yet in one thing they had very unlike fortune; for the Empire of
Augustus ended not in himself, but was continued in Tiberius, who also was
able to elect a successor after him; but with Hiero it was not so, for his
Kingdom ended in his Nephew Hieronymus, who was miserably slain. And the
reason of this, is because Tiberius in company of many vices had some virtue,
(as I said before speaking of Nero) but Hieronymus, without any virtue, had all
the vices of Tiberius.

Non aliud discordantis patriae remedium quam ut ab uno regeretur.
Why the City of Rome from a Regal power under Romulus recovered liberty under
Tarquinius, and from the Regal power of Augustus was never able to shake off
servitude. The six and thirtieth Discourse.

TO make that be better understood, which we said before; that the City of Rome
in the time of Augustus, was not fit to receive liberty; I conceive it will be
a good help to examine the reason, why from the Regal power of Romulus, it
came to liberty under Tarquinius; and afterward from the Regal power of
Augustus, it was never able to free it self from servitude.

The first is a general reason, and brought by all Writers: that is, the
imperfection and corruption of the Citizens. For liberty, (as I shall show in
my Discourse of Optimates) requires men perfect, and not corrupt, at least so
many as may be enough to make a Senate. But surely, this reason, (with leave of
the many great men that allege it) may be of some force to prove that the City
of Rome under Augustus, was not capable to receive liberty, but it is of no
force to prove, that from the Regal power of Augustus, it might not as well
recover liberty, as it had done from that of Romulus. Seeing the City of Rome
was never so full of imperfect men, in the time of Augustus, as it was in the
time of Romulus, when there was in it indeed a nest of the scumme of the most
wicked men, that were in all Italy. We may say then, that both the one and the
other of these Kings had an intention to set his Country in liberty, (as of
both of them, in diverse discourses, I have made it appear) but neither of them
in his life time, put this intention of theirs in execution. And the reason is,
because when men are imperfect, and not fit to tolerate liberty, it is
impossible that in the life of one Prince alone, they can be brought to
perfection, in such sort, as to be made fit to receive it; but this must be
wrought by the continuance of many good successors, who may all of them intend
to prepare the Citizens for it: and because it was thus with Romulus, therefore
after him the Romans obtained liberty; but being not so with Augustus, who had
many wicked successors after him therefore the City after him continued
always in most, miserable servitude.

A Second reason, was the slaughter of Caesar: which not being sufficient, to
reduce Rome to liberty, was therefore sufficient to make the Regal power
unalterable. For Augustus making himself Lord of the Empire by force; was able
by the same force to secure himself in it, the rather under the Excuse of
Caesar's slaughter; and the corrupt times of the Commonwealth, which served him
for Engines to put many things in execution, that fortified his Power. Pietatem
erga Parentem (says Tacitus) and tempora reipublicae obtentui sumpta;
whereupon, the best Political instruction, that in like cases can be given, is
this; that when a Family has lost the authority it once had in a City; It is
better to yield it up with love, then to strive by force to recover it with
danger: for this has been the cause, that many Cities relapsed under Princes,
have never after been able to recover liberty; a relapse in all things, being
always worse then the first Evil: and of this there want not examples, if
there were need to bring them.

A third reason, and of importance is, because the Election was come into the
hands of the Soldiers; who by reason of the gains they made: and of the
unmeasurable Donatives that belonged to them, at the Coronation of Emperors;
would never be brought to give their consent for the introducing of liberty, in
which it is wont, to be the first lesson, He that labors not shall have no
pay: and so much more, as Commonwealths that are good, need no such guard.

Fourthly, I conceive it to be of some moment, that after the death of Nero in
whom the house of the Caesar's ended; yet Rome was not then reduced to liberty:
seeing Galba being chosen, every one of those great ones, might begin to hope,
that it might be their turn at some time or other, to come to the Empire; and
consequently very likely, they were not much discontented with that form of
Election: and so much, (in my opinion) did Galba himself express, in the
speech he made to Piso, when he said, Sub Tiberio and Caio and Claudio unius
familiae quasi haereditas fuimus: Loco libertatis erit, quod Eligi coepimus:
and finita Juliorum Claudiorumque domo, optimum quemque Adoptio Jnveniet: as if
he would say, Now that the line of the Caesar's is extinct, everyone may hope to
attain that degree; which hope I conceive, may be the cause, that those potent
men, in whose hands it is to alter states, like best of that form, in which
the first degree they can hope to attain, is that of Excessive greatness: and
from hence perhaps it was, that Caesar the Dictatour, was never much troubled
with the Conspiracy of Catiline, but rather excused and defended it, as less
caring for the Cities liberty, then that it should come under the Power of one
alone, which Power he doubted not in time to attain to himself.

Fifthly, the greatness of the Roman Empire, was it self, (in my opinion) a
great cause, It could never return to liberty, because at the time of the
(...), being but in low estate, it was more reasonable, they should desire
Equality: which in small things is easily borne: and because else, they must
have passed a thousand difficulties: as the subduing of Ryvall Commonwealths,
the Conquering of Enemy Princes, and the like, where in the time of Augustus,
the City being grown great, and become mistress of the world; her Ryvalls
spent, and all things at Peace and quiet; it was not now easy to support
Equality: and therefore from that time afterward, there was no contesting but
for the Empire, and a man will easily hazard both life and reputation, where
the reward that may be gotten by it, is both great and secure, but where the
reward is but little, full of toil and danger; there men are contented and
glad to have company: and therefore Brutus brought Rome to be a Commonwealth;
whereupon we see in our times, that (Venice excepted) all other Commonwealths
are of no great moment, and all this (as I conceive) Tacitus very lively
expresses, where he says; Vetus ac jampridem Jnsita mortalibus Potentiae
Cupido, cum (...) magnitudine adolevit, erupitque. Nam rebus modicis Aequalitas
(...) habebatur, sed (...) subacto orb, and aemulis urbibus Regibusve excisis,
securas opes concupiscere vacuum fuit, prima inter. Patres plebemque certamina
exercere. Modo turbulenti Tribuni, modo Consules (...), and in (...) ac foro
(...) Civilium be llorum. Mox e (...) infima Cajus Marius, and nobilium
saevissimus Lucius (...), Victam armis libertate^, in (...). Post quos Cneius
(...), (...), non melior, and nunquam postea nisi de principatu quaesitum.

A sixth reason may be taken from the Ordinances and laws of the Romans, which
though at the first times of the Commonwealth they were good, yet in process
of time they became naught, It being not possible, and indeed not sit, to make
a law, that is simply and at all times good, as it happens with Physicians, who
cannot prescribe meats that are simply good for all, seeing respect must be
had to temperatures, and bodies in health simpliciter, (to use Galens word)
that if a meat could be found good for all diseases; that meat simply should be
naught. It is necessary therefore that laws should have conformity, with the
men; and with the times, whereupon the law of Moses being given to one People,
was not simply good; but contained in it many precepts, repugnant to our
Christian Policy; and if any man object, that the law given by Christ our Lord
in the New Testament, is simply good I answer, that this Law was not given to
one particular people, but to all the whole world: Ite per universum mundum,
Praedicate Evangelium omni Creaturae, says our Lord in Saint Matthew. Now the
Laws and Ordinances of the Romans, were all intended for increase of
Dominion, and consequently for war: whereupon it is no marvel; if that City,
having now attained to Peace, and no more need of Augmentation, but only of
Conservation, became incapable of receiving liberty; and being bred and
accustomed to getting, having now nothing more to get, they all endeavored by
the same Arts to get the Empire.

Seventhly and lastly, I have drawn a reason of excellent Doctrine from
Aristotle in his Philosophy, for knowledge whereof, it is to be known, that
living bodies have naturally a Term and bound beyond which they cannot go; as
witnesses the Philosopher in his Books of Animalls: where he says;
Perficiendi cujusque animalis certa est magnitudo; tum ad majus, tum ad minus,
quem terminum non supergrediuntur, ut vel majora, vel minora evadant; and in
his Physics he says: Quod impossible est, carnem aut os, aut aliquid aliud,
quantumcunque magnitudine, aut in majus aut in minus; and finally in his Books
de Anima he says; Natura autem Constant ium omnium Terminus est, and ratio
Magnitudinis and Augmenti; by which authorities it is manifest, that all
Natural things, have a certain bound which they cannot exceed; and this
happens because nature has made them for their proper operations, which they
cannot execute but under a certain and determinate greatness: seeing therefore
a Commonwealth is nothing but a body consisting of many bodies, and ordained to
the intent to live well; It ought to have a due greatness, fit to maintain it
self; which greatness if it exceed, it will not be able any longer to
exercise its operation, in regard whereof Lyvie says; Donec ad ea tempora
pervenerunt, ut magnitudine propria Laborarent; whereupon as long as the City
of Rome stayed within its certain bound, so longit maintained it self a
Commonwealth; but after it exceeded this greatness; it then fell into the
hands of Kings, and could not otherwise have subsisted. This, Tacitus in the
mouth of Galba meant, when he said: Si immensum imperi^ Corpus stare ac
librari, sine Rectore posset, dignus er am a quo Respublica inciperet. The body
then of the Commonwealth, was grown so vast and great; that it was not able
to suffer liberty: for although to possess much, be commonly good; yet it is
not always good for every body: as we see in wrestlers; whose Constitutions,
(as witnesses Hippocrates) have no greater Contestation, then with their own
goodness; as being full of so many good humors; that thorough the excess of
them, they are not able to exercise their due operations: and therefore
necessarily must either break or be evacuated. And this happens not only in
bodies, but as well also in Kingdoms and Commonwealths: Trajan by subduing an
infinite number of Provinces; had so enlarged the Empire, that it was come Ad
Maximum quod non; to a pitch above the proportion of a Monarchy; and
perceiving the danger of it; he had recourse to the Remedy prescribed by
Hippocrates; Quocirca statim bonum habitum solvere oportet, and giving some of
those Provinces Freedom; he Evacuated (I may say) the Empire; like to this was
the counsel of Augustus (cited by us before) Addideratque Consilium Coercendi
intra terminos imperium. Likewise in Commonwealths, I think none will deny;
but that the Swizzers, the free Cities, and Lucca, the only Commonwealths
(after Venice) that are at this day in the world, have for no other cause held
out so long, and maintained themselves to this time; but because they have not
arrived to that bound, of Maximum quod non magnitudinis; and their little
Greatness has been their defense, and made them great. Also to the
Venetians, it has been no small help for preserving them in liberty: because
they have not exceeded the bound, of Maximum quod Non: And therefore the Image
in Daniel, as soon as it came to have a head of Gold, was struck by a stone
falling from the mountain, and cast down to the ground. This Image, by many
writers, is taken for the Empire, which having Feet of Earth, no sooner come to
have Heads of Gold, but they presently fall; seeing the Circulation of this
world, is founded upon Ascending and Descending, and that which is the end of
Ascending, is the beginning of Descending, as Aristotle learnedly teaches:
where he speaks of a Circle; because humane powers are like to shadows, which
never continue at one stay; as Job excellently says: Et fugit velut Vmbra, and
nunquam in eodem statu permanet; and in another place, Elevati sunt ad modicum,
and non subsistunt, where S. Gregory citing that place of the 72. Psalm,
Deiecisti eos dum allevarentur, and that of Saint James, Quae est Vita Vestra?
Vapor est ad modicum parens, and expounding that place of the Prophet Esaias,
Omnis Caro Foenum: Carnalis Gloria dum nitet cadit; dum apud se Extollitur,
repentino intercepta fine terminatur. Sic namque aurarum flatu in altum stipula
rapitur, sed casu concito ad Ima revocatur. Sic ad Nubila fumus extollitur, sed
repent in nihilum tumescendo dissipatur. Sic ab infirmis, Nebula descendendo
se erigit, sed exortus hanc solis radius, ac si non fuerit, abstergit. Sic in
herbarum superficie, nocturni roris humor aspergitur: sed diurm Luminis subito
calore siccatur. Sic spumosae aquarum bullae inchoantibus fluviis excitatae, ab
intimis certatim prodeunt, sed eo celerius diruptae depereunt, quo inflatae
citius extenduntur. Cumque (...) ut appareant, Crescendo peragunt, ne
subsistant. I cannot bring a better example, in conformity to this Doctrine,
then of Venice; which was never in any great danger: but when it was at the
greatest, as drawing then near to the bound, of Maximum quod Non; whereupon,
if it had not been for the strength of its situation, (as Historians say)
assisted with the great Prudence of the Senators, and with the great valor of
the Citizens, in defending Padua, It had utterly come to ruin. And therefore
Augustus seeing, Non aliud Discordantis patriae remedium, quam ut ab uno
regeretur, made himself Emperor, wherein notwithstanding Christians must not
imitate him, whose duty it is, to set Religion before Country and life, and
Commonwealth and all: rather suffering death, then be drawn to commit any
wickedness: and rather then imitate Augustus; follow the course of Marcus
Aurelius, who though he saw his Country upon the point of loosing, and himself
also, thorough the wickedness of his Compagnion, yet he took all things
patiently, and would not put him to death, though it was in his power to do
it. For Conclusion I say, that a Prince ought not to govern his Country by
force: although force be sometimes necessary for correcting of Errors: as
Sallust teaches where he says; Nam Vi quidem Regere patriam, aut Parents,
quamquam and possis and delicta corrigas; Importunum tamen est.

Comparatione Deterrima sibi Gloriam quaesivisse.
That to Elect a wicked successor, thereby to get glory to himself; is a
beastly Course. The seven and thirtieth Discourse.

BY that which Tacitus and Dio relate, many conceive, that Augustus made choice
of Tiberius, whom he knew to be a proud and cruel man, to be his successor;
to the end, that the ill conditions of Tiberius so much differing from his
own, might turn to his Glory. I cannot indeed deny; but that a worse
successor, is apt enough to make a less evil Predecessor be thought a good
one: which Galba well knowing, speaking of Piso said; Nero a pessimo quoque
desiderabitur. Mihi ac tibi providendum est; ne etiam a bonis desideretur. He
seeing, that if a wicked Prince, should come after Nero; his errors would be
converted, to the others Glory; and this is so true, that the holy Spirit, in
the mouth of Ezechiel said, that the wickedness of the Hebrews, before the
coming of our savior; made the people of Sodom and Samaria to seem Just,
which could not certainly happen, but long of the Comparison, Vivo ego dicit
Dominus Deus, (these are the words of Ezechiel) quia non fecit Sodoma soror
tua, ipsa, and filiae ejus, sicut (...) tu, and filiae tuae, and a little after;
Et Samaria Dimidium peocatorum tuorum non (...), sed (...) sceleribus tuis, and
Iustificasti sorores tuas in omnibus (...), quas operata es; Ergo tu (...), and
porta confusionem tuam, quae vicisti sorores (...) is (...), (...) agens ab
(...). (...) sunt a te. And he that would see a passage more like to that of
Tacitus; let him read those words in Jeremy, where he says: Iustificavit
animam suam aversatrix Jsrael, (...) praevaricatricis Iudae.

But yet this way of acquiring Glory, attributed here to Augustus, is not to be
imitated, not only of Christians, but not so much as of impious Barbarians:
seeing there are better and directer ways, (I mean not, to govern well, but
speak only of a successor) because, if they have children to succeed them in
the Kingdom, there will Glory enough accrue to the father, if he give them
good education; whereby they may come to prove good: This Solomon affirms in
his Proverbs where he says, Filius sapiens (...), or as others read it, Filius
sapiens Gloria patris, that is, a wise son is the honor and Glory of his
Father, and keeps him alive, after he is dead: and therefore it is said in
Ecolesiasticus, Mortuus est pater ejus, and (...) non est mortuus, (...) enim
reliquit sibi post se; and therefore Princes need not desire, their successors
should be worse then themselves, seeing they may hope for more glory by them,
if they shall be better, and therefore David took great Joy to hear, that
Solomon was like to be greater, then himself had ever been: Sed and Solomon
sedet super Solium Regni, and Jngressi servi ejus, benedixerunt Domino nostro
Regi David dicentes: Amplificet Deus Nomen (...), super (...), and magnificet
Thronum ejus super thronum tuum: rather indeed, a wicked suecessour is a
Prejudice to a good Prince. Therefore writers say, that Marcus Aurelius had
dyed a happy man, if he have not left Commodus his successor; for this cause,
many of the Ancients (as (...) (...)) were of opinion, that Children living,
might make their dead fathers unhappy: in such sort, that he who living was
happy, yet could not be called happy, if after his death, he had ill (...) and
were unfortunate in his children.

To give therefore his successors good education, is a matter of much honor
to Princes, and in case they prove not to have those virtues which are required
in a Prince, he must not suffer Paternall piety to prevail with him, but
wholly abandon, and utterly dis inherit them of the royal dignity; (though as
Aristotle says) it be hard for a father to do.

This Plato expressed in his Common-weath, who ordained, that they should be
Princes, who in their Nativity had Gold mingled with Earth, meaning, that if
their Sons had together with Earth, either Iron or brass in them, they
should not then be admitted to the Kingdom. Qua propter ipsis Principibus, and
Primo and maxim Deus praecepit, ut nullius rei majorem curam custodiamque
(...), quam natorum, ut dignoscant quid ex quatuor his potissimum illorum
animis sit immixtum; and si quis ex ipsis nascatur (...), aut serreus, nullo
pacto misereantur, sed honorem illi naturae convenientem, tribuentes,
interopifices vel agricolas mittant: and therefore Moses was contented, that
our Lord God, should choose Iosuah, of another Tribe, to be his successor,
rather then his own Son. In consideration whereof, Saint Hierome says,
Moises amicus Dei, cui (...) ad faciem (...) loquutus est, potuit utique
successores Principatus filios suos facere, and Posteris propriam relinquere
dignitatem: sed extraneus de alia Tribueligitur Jesus, ut sciremus Principatum
in populos non sanguini deferendum esse, sed (...); and this is the true way
for acquiring of Glory: so much more, as it is more repugnant to Natural
affection.

And if it happen that in default of children, he be to choose a stranger for
his successor, what better can he do, to get himself glory, then to choose a
person of prudence and virtue, in whom, his Judgment in choosing may appear?
and if the Prince living be good; it will increase his glory, that he has
chosen another that is good: if bad, it will lessen his own ill name, to have
chosen a good successor. So it happened to Adrianus, (as Julius Capitolinus
and Spartianus relate) because Antoninus Pius succeeding him by way of
Election, and knowing that the Senate meant to burn all the Acts of Adrianus,
as to whom they were deadly enemies, for the many slaughters he had committed
of the Nobility, he out of his goodness, pacified the Senate: placed Adrianus
amongst the Gods, and erected a Temple to his Name. Igitur nec ipse (said he)
Princeps vester ero, si omnia Acta ejus in quibus est Adoptio mea, rescinditis.
This Glory Galba sought after, when adopting Piso, he said, Vt nec mea Senectus
confer plus Populo Romano possit, quam (...) Successorem.

Thus a Father receives honor, by a good Son, and Predecessors, by good
successors; whereupon, that great Orator, who spoke in praise of Philip King
of Macedon, could not find auy greater praise, then that of his son: Hoc tibi
unum sufficiat, te filium (...) Alexandrum.

Tacitus therefore is not to be blamed, as he, that alleges not his own
opinion; but relates it only as the opinion of others: for as for himself, he
shows rather, he thought Augustus worthy to be blamed for it; and he had
reason, because, though a Prince by choosing a wicked successor, make his own
actions to seem good; yet this is so far from making him praiseworthy, that
it brings him more dishonor, as being a concurrent cause, of all the Evil his
successor does.

Let not men therefore blame Tacitus, at all adventure, but consider, that all
that which Tacitus says; it is not Tacitus that says it, neither the things
he relates, are they all to be imitated, no more then all those things which
Moses relates, who relates a thousand villainies of the Hebrews: seeing it is
the part of Historians, to speak of all things, whether good or bad: the good,
to the end we may follow them; the bad, to the end we may avoid them; and this,
says Tacitus in the third of his Annalls, is the end of an (...): Exequi
sententias, haud institui, nisi in signs per honestum, aut notabili dedecore,
quod praecipuum munus Annaliumreor, Ne virtutes sileantur, utque gravis Dictis
Factisque ex posteritate, and Infamia metus sit.

Tiberioque etiam in rebus quas non occuleret, seu Natura, sive adsuetudine,
suspensa semper and obscura verba, and a little after: At Patres quibus unus
metus si intelligere viderentur, in questus, lachrymas vota, effundi.
That a Prince should be both loved and Feared. The eight and thirtieth
Discourse.

FRom the obscure speaking which Tiberius used, the senators conceived no
little fear, and wished, the Prince would speak in such a manner, that he
might be understood.

I cannot in truth blame Princes, for speaking obscurely: seeing vulgar and too
open speech abase th them, and make them vilified: the rather because I see our
Lord Christ, (as Saint Matthew, and Saint Mark (...)) solitus erat loqui in
parabolis, and Solomon, for the most part, used to speak Riddles; whereupon,
it may justly be said of Princes, who lay themselves open to all men's view,
that which Solomon says, in the Canticles: Oculi tui Columbarum, absque eo
quod intrinsecus latet, that is, the eyes being beautiful of themselves,
appear more beautiful, when they are shaddowed and covered with some
Feathers; and so the Discourses of Princes, will be so much the fairer, as they
are in some part, covered with a little obscurity; and therefore Solomon in his
Proverbs, commends much this kind of speaking, where he says; Mala aurea in
lectis Argenteis, qui loquitur verbum in tempore suo.

But because the obscure speaking of Tiberius was not to this end, but only ut
intro spiceret Procerum mentes: it neither ought, nor can be praised; being in
truth, the fashion of a Tyrant, and thorough which, those Principal Senators
remained full of fear, who were governed before by Augustus with so much love;
upon occasion whereof, we will make this discourse, what carriage a Prince
should use, to make himself, to be both loved and feared.

It has been debated in times past, whether a Prince ought tobe loved (...)
feared of his Subjects, or whether loved and feared both at once, yet no writer
has been found so void of Judgment, as not to know, that nothing is to a
Prince more profitable, then to be loved and feared both together, but that
they think it a very hard, and almost impossible thing they should meet
together. So as many have liked, he should rather make himself be loved, then
be feared. I therefore will endeavor to make it appear, that a Prince shall
not do well, to make himself only to be loved. Secondly, that he shall not
do well, to make himself, only to be feared; and lastly, that he ought (...)
one and the same time, to make himself, be loved, and feared, both together:
showing, that not only this is easy to be done, but impossible that a Prince
should be good, if he couple not together these two Extremes.

Concerning the first, this is certain, that if love come not accompanied with
fear, the Prince in short time, will grow into contempt: which Moses
understanding, who had not perhaps his equal in mildness, yet after, for the
love he bore the people, he had prayed our Lord God, Aut dele me de libro
vitae, aut parce populo huic: when he came down from the mount, he caused
many thousands of them to be out in (...), thereby showing, that together with
the love of the Prince, there should be severity, which begets fear.
Therefore Saint Austin says, Estote misericordes, pensantes quantum Moses
misericordia floruit propter populum, pro cujus salute petiit deleri de libro
vitae; and quando iterum zelo rectitudinis; cum obtinuisset Veniam, ait ad
populum, Ponat vir gladium super femur suum, Ecce quod vitam omnium cum sua
morte petiit, paucorum vita cum gladio destruxit. Intus igne amoris, and foris
accensus Zelo Iustitiae and severitatis; where it is plainly seen, that a
Prince ought not only to be loved, but to be feared also: seeing love alone
of it self, is cause of contempt: and therefore Job said: Si quando ridebam
adeos, non credebant; and Lux vultus mei non cadebat in terra, that is, his
Gravity was so great, that though he laughed, yet they stood with fear and
reverence: where we must weigh those words; Lux vultus mei non cadebat in
terra, which according to another sense, in the Hebrew, is rendered in Latin,
Lucem vultus mei non abiiciebant: that is, they despised not my mirth. So as,
Fear is so necessary, that Domitian, although terrible to the Senate, as
governing with fear, yet after his death, he was wished for again of all men,
seeing with that fear, he kept his own officers in awe; whereupon it happens
sometimes, to be worse for a Prince, with too much mildness, to make himself
be loved, and therefore the Kingdom of France, under Charles the simple, and
Charles the gross, was (as an Author writes) most miserable, on the contrary,
at the end of Francis the first, it was a flourishing Kingdom, although they
were mild; and he a sharp and terrible King; afterward again, in the time of
Henry his son a most gentle Prince, the treasury was all wasted: Pertinax and
Heliogabalus with their mildness, had brought the Empire almost to ruin, when
afterward Severus Africanus, and Alexander Severus raised it up again, with
incomparable Severity. It is not therefore enough for a Prince to be loved, but
he must be feared also.

Concerning the second point, which is, that fear alone is pernicious to a
Prince, is easily proved: first, from that place in Genesis where Noe with his
sons going out of the Arc, our Lord God said unto him, Tremor and Timor
vester sit super cuncta Animalia terrae: as though he would say, you must make
your selves be feared of beasts, not of men. And therefore Moses coming down
from the Mount, with a horny splendor, and finding that it made his face
strike the people into fear, he covered it with a veil; whereby he shows
plainly, that a Prince ought not to make himself only to befeared. This also
our Lord Christ shows, who amongst the first precepts he gave his Apostles,
gave this for one, that they should carry no Rod with them; where S. Ambrose
well observes, that a Prince ought to govern more with love then fear. And in
another place he says, David Rex, cum omnibus aequabatsuam militiam, fortis in
praelio, mansuetus in Imperio; Ideo non cecidit, quia charus fuit (...), and
diligi a subjectis quam timeri maluit. Timor enim, temporalis tutaminis servat
excubias, nescit diuturnitatis custodiam. And therefore it is said in the
Psalm, Memento Domine David, and omnis mansuetudinis ejus. Whereupon S.
Bernard upon those words of the Canticles, Dilectus meus mihi, and ego illi qui
pascitur inter Lilia, amongst those Lillies where the Spouse feeds, reckons
gentleness and love, by which he reigned. Specie tua (says the Prophet) and
pulchritudine tua, intend prospere, proceed and Regna.

Therefore love alone is not good, because it causes contempt; and fear alone
is not good, because it begets hatred. This the Ancients meant to signify, by
the Fable of Jupiter, who at the Frogs desire to have a King, gave them a
Block, and he not stirring, the Frogs despised him; whereupon Jupiter changed
their King, and gave them a Storke; but he eating them up, they hated him more
then they despised the other: by this they meant to show, that a King should
not be so gentle, to have more of the block then of the man; nor yet so
severe, as to resemble a beast, in sucking the blood of his Citizens. A Prince
therefore ought to join the one with the other; which how easy and necessary
it is, may easily be known, if we distinguish fear into two kinds: one, a
fear which is but a reverence, as a filial fear is, whereof, the holy Text
in Job says, Vir rectus timens Deum. The other, a fear which is a terror;
and this is that fear which Adam had, when he heard the voice of our Lord God,
Adam ubies? and he answering said, Vocem ^uam Domine audivi, and abscondime and
timui, quia nudus essem. Secondly, we must distinguish of men; that some are
perfect, and some unperfect; which is common also to all Cities, whether great
or small.

I say then, that if the men be imperfect, it is fit to make them fear; not
the filial, but the servile fear: and therefore Esaias says, Sola vexatio
tantum dabit intellectum auditui: and Jeremy, Per omne flagellum, and dolorem
erudieris Jerusalem. And Solomon in his Proverbs says, In labiis sapientis
invenitur sapientia, and virga in Dorso ejus, qui indiget cord: by the Rod is
meant fear; and by Ejus qui indiget cord, are meant the wicked; who are said
to be without heart; as Osee the Prophet says, Factus est Ephraim, quasi
Columba seducta, non habens cor. With these men therefore, it is fit to use a
Rod of Iron to make them fear, being the only means to return the heart
into its place. The Ninivites had removed their hearts out of their proper
places: and our Lord God, with his Rod, Ad quadraginta dies and Ninive
subvertetur, brought them again into their right places. Because (as Aristotle
in his Physics says) Every thing that is made, proceeds from its like; but
every thing that is borne, from its contrary. Quodlibernon non fit a quolibit,
sed a suo contrario. So to beget love, where it is not, we must not use Love,
but its contrary, which is fear; and as in Generation the Contrary departs,
when the thing is generated; so when Love is once generated, the fear departs,
whereupon Saint Bernard and Saint Austin, Compare fear to the Needle, and love
to the Thread, because the Needle brings in the thread, and having brought it
in, departs away. A Prince therefore ought to make himself be feared, even
with Servile fear, by the wicked.

It remains to show, how a Prince ought to carry himself, toward men that
are good and perfect, but having showed before, that love alone begets
contempt, and fear hatred, it is fit, he make himself be loved, and feared,
both at one time; but not with that servile Fear, which for the most part is
cause of Rebellions, as was seen at the time, when our Lord God appeared to
the Jsraelites upon the Mount; which begetting in them a great fear, there
followed a Rebellion; but with that f^are, which is a virtue; For knowing of
which fear, it is to be known, that fear may have two objects; the one is,
some terrible mischief; the other is the Person, who has power to do the
mischief; as Saint Thomas says: and because our purpose is not in this place,
to speak of the first object, but only of the second; as speaking of a
Prince; I say, that he may be considered, in as much, as he has power to hurt,
or in as much, as he has will to hurt: if we consider him, in as much as he
has will to hurt, in this manner, he ought not to make himself be feared; but
leave the subjects to fear him of themselves; So our Lord God would be feared,
and not be feared; So Saint Paul to the Philippians says, Cum metu and tremore
vestram Salutem Operamini: See here, Saint Paul would have us to fear, not of
God, that is, that God has not a will we should be saved; for, Deus vult ommes
homines salvos fieri, but he would have us to fear, least our actions be
such, as to provoke our Lord God to anger. Therefore in the mouth of the
Prophet Esaias he says, Fear not, Saint Paul says, we must fear, Esaias says,
we must not fear, therefore Esaias means, that we must not fear Gods will,
and Saint Paul means, that we must fear our own works. So a Prince ought
not to carry himself in such manner, that there be fear of his will, because
his will should always be for the good of his subjects; but that there be
fear in the subjects, of their own works.

Again, if we consider the Prince, the second way, that is, in as much as he
has power to hurt, in this sense, he ought so to carry himself, that his
Person may be feared, because he that has power to punish, must have (as Saint
Thomas says) such eminent authority, as can hardly be resisted, for if it may
casily be resisted, it will be no cause of fear. And therefore oftentimes,
though there be no fear of mischief from One in eminent authority, yet the
Reverence that is borne to eminency, is justly called Fear: So in Saint Luke,
accepit autem omnes timor, and magnificabant Deum. So also that place of Saint
Paul is to be expounded, Reddite omnibus Debita: cui Timorem, timorem; cui
vectigal, vectigal; and he that will be feared in this manner, must do some
great and wonderful things; that men admiring them, may acknowledge his
eminency above others; whereupon our Lord Christ, stroke a fear into the
Jews, when they saw him do such great miracles: Repleti sunt timore,
dicentes, quia vidimus Mirabilia hodie. And the subjects, though good, need not
be greeved to fear the Prince in this manner; this being a virtuous fear,
which was in Christ also toward his father; as witnesses Saint Thomas in the
foresaid place, Alensis, Bonaventure, Gabriel, and with them the whole School
of Divines. So as a Prince ought to make himself universally to be loved, and
generally to be feared: in confirmation whereof, S. Gregory says, Talis debet
esse dispenfatio Regiminis, ut his qui praeest, ea se circa subditos mensura
moderetur, quatenus and arridens timeri debeat, and Iratus amari, ut eum nec
nimia laetitia vilem reddat, nec immoderata severitas odiosum. And in another
place, weighing those words of Job, Cum sederem quasi Rex, circumstante
exercitis, eram tamen moerentium consolator. S. Gregory exhorts a Prince to
do, as the Samaritan did, who powered into his wound, that was hurt upon the
way, Wine and Oil, Vt per vinum inordeantur vulnera, per oleum faveantur. And
the Psalmist says, Virgatua, and baculus tuus, ipsa me consolata sunt: The Rod
serving to strike, and the staff, to defend. This also was expressed in the
Arc, in which, together with the Table of the Law, was put the Rod with the
Manna, there being necessarily required for observing the Law, love and fear.
In sign whereof, our Lord Christ in his transfiguration upon the Mount Tabor,
appeared in the midst, between Elias, who to move men, wrought by fear; and
Moses, who wrought all by love. And therefore in the Scripture, when the
qualities of a Prince are spoken of, always with beauty to make him be loved;
there is joined, Power, to make him be feared. Whereupon in Salomons
Epithalamium, after he had praised the Bridegroom for his Beauty; speciosus
prae filiis hominum; he praises him also for his strength; Accingere gladio
tuo super faemur tuum Potentissime. So in Genesis in the Benediction of Juda,
and in Deuteronomy, in the Benediction of Joseph: Quasi primogeniti Tauri,
pulchritu^o ejus; corn^a Rhinocerontis cornua illius. And in the second of
Kings, Saul and Jonathas amabiles and decori in vita sua, and Aquilis
velociores, Leonibus fortiores. And of God himself the Prophet says, (...)
est, indutus est Dominus fortitudinem and praecinxit se: and in the Proverbs,
Fortitudo and decor indumentum ejus: and in the 28. Psalm, Dilectus
quemadmodum filius unicornium; that is, though as beautiful, he is worthy to
be loved, yet as powerful also he deserves to be feared.

A Prince then ought to make himself be feared of wicked men, with a servile
fear, and this he shall do if he duly punish them for their faults; and he
ought also to make himself be feared of good men, with a reverentiall fear:
and this he shall do, if he give proof of his valor, by doing great actions:
(as I have showed before) which justly make a Prince be feared with
reverentiall fear. And because above all things, he ought to procure the love
of his subjects; we must know, that never was any Prince so good, whom some of
his subjects did not hate; nor ever any so bad, whom some of his subjects did
not love: as may be seen in Tarquinius Superbus, whom some of the principal
youth of the City so much loved, that they made a conspiracy in his behalf. So
Nero (as Galba witnessed) had many that loved him; Nero a pessimo quoque
desiderabitur. And this happens by reason of sympathy of conditions; there
being in all Cities, whether little or great, some men that are warlike, and
some peaceable; some that are ignorant, and some learned; some that are good,
and some bad: whereupon seeing a Prince must of necessity be either good or
bad; warlike, or peaceable; ignorant, or learned; it will follow, that if he
be learned, he shall be hated of the ignorant; if he be warlike, of the
peaceable; if good, of the bad. And this is the work of contraries, whose
nature being to destroy one another, it is as impossible that one of these
should love the other, as it is impossible, that one should love his own
destruction.

The second difficulty, which makes it hard for a Prince to procure himself to
be beloved, is justice; which if it be not duly administered, it makes a Prince
odious to all good men; and if it be duly executed, either in civil or
criminal causes, it will be an occasion every year to get him the hate of
many, and even of those that are good, there being few men that like of
justice, when it goes not on their side. These many then, whose hatred the
Prince is like every year to incur, being multiplied many years, must needs
at last make a mighty number; and from hence, (as I conceive) may be drawn an
excellent reason how it happens in governments, that the first year for the
most part Governors are well beloved; the second year, they are hated, and
the third year detested: as every one looking into it, of himself may see.

Yet a Prince amidst all these difficulties, must not be discouraged: First,
because he need not care much to be loved of any, but only of the good: to
which purpose Galba said, it needed not trouble them, to see Nero beloved of
the wicked; but this was a matter that needed regard, to give no occasion, he
should be wished for again of the good: Nero a pessimo quoque desiderabitur:
Mihi ac tibi providendum est, ne etiam a bonis desideretur. Secondly, the end
of a Prince, is as of an Orator, or of a Physician, who being to introduce a
form in another, and not having it in their power to do it, yet they have
discharged their office, if they have applied fit means to introduce it: no
better a Physician is he that heales, then he that heales not; nor any better
Orator he that persuades, then he that persuades not; so long as they use the
fittest means, he to heal, and this to persuade. So for our purpose, seeing
love is in him that loves, in such manner, as honor is in him that honors:
a Prince shall have performed his charge, and done as much as he need to do,
as long as he has used all fit means, to procure his subjects love, by doing
good to all, by maintaining them in plenty, by showing himself far from
cruelty, by defending them from their enemies: and finally, by making it
appear, that he loves them exceedingly; seeing this is a sure rule, He that
will be loved, must love.

Vnum esse Reipublicae Corpus, atque nuius animo Regendum.
Whether an Aristocracy, or a Monarchy be the more profitable for a City. The
nine and thirtieth Discourse.

ASinius Gallus having too sharply spoken to Tiberius, and finding his own
error, and the Princes indignation; meant with a flattering speech, to cover
the one, and pacify the other: and therefore showed, that for an Empire to be
well governed, it was necessary it should be governed by one alone. And because
from this place of Tacitus many gather, that he held the government of a
Monarchy to be better then that of optimates: I conceive it to be no digression
from our purpose, that I show first, according to my understanding, the truth
of this question; and then declare, how this place of Tacitus must be
understood. And herein, no man need to marvel, that I vary from the opinions,
or to say better, from the approved opinions, of many excellent men, as though
I meant to vilify them; but I desire they would take into consideration, the
River of Rho^e, which although it seem by his course, as though it meant to
drown the legitimate sons of the Celti, yet indeed it exalts them, and gives a
true testimony of their legitimate birth to all that see it. So it will be no
small matter, if I with my weakness, can make the others worth appear the
greater.

To come then to the matter: It is commonly held, and all men almost are of
opinion, that a Monarchy is the better. For proving whereof, there being two
ways; one, Authority: the other, Reason: in each of these, there will not be
wanting means sufficient to make it plain. In considering authority, the
first that present themselves, are the holy Fathers, S. Chrysostom, Justin,
Athanasius, Gyprian, S. Hierome, and finally S. Thomas in many places.
Secondly, come Philosophers, natural and moral: Plato, Aristotle, Sen^ca,
Plutarch, Herodotus, and finally amongst Poets, Homer.

If we come to reasons, there present themselves an infinite number: and first,
if we consider profit, we shall find, (as S. Thomas says) that a more
profitable government cannot be found, then that of a Monarch; seeing the
profit and welfare of that which is governed, that is, of Cities and Provinces,
consists in nothing but in conserving of unity, which we call peace: at which,
they who govern must chiefly aim: and seeing there is no government so fit to
preserve peace, as that of a King, we cannot choose but give it the name, to be
the better, and the more profitable. Because peace consists in nothing but
unity, which certainly is better had in one, who is by himself one, as a King
is; then in those that are many, as Optimates are: as we see, (...) thing which
is hot of it self, is a more efficient cause of heating, then that which is
but hot by accident, the state of Optimates being never good, but in as much as
they who govern it, approach by accidental union, to be one.

But laying profit aside, and entering into consideration, which of them is most
natural, who sees not, that a Monarchy is the most? seeing nature governes and
moves all the parts of our bodies, by one only which is the heart: likewise
the sensitive soul is governed by the rational; and Bees naturally are
governed by one that is King: and if Artificial things be so much the better,
as they imitate nature; and the Artificers work be so much the perfecter, as
it holds similitude with nature; then certainly, must every one needs yield,
that in the multitude of governments that State is the best, which is governed
by one alone.

Again, if we look upon experience, we shall find, that in a house, there is
but one Master; in a flock, but one Shepherd; and in the old Testament, the
Israelites were always governed by one alone, whether under Kings, or under
Judges.

But laying also this aside, and coming to examine the power: who sees not
that a Monarchy is far more potent then an Aristocracy, considering that of
the four Empires and powers of the World: that is, the Assyrians, the
Persians, the Grecians, and the Romans; only one of them was under Optimates.

Then if we consider order: where is it more found, then in a Monarchy? where
every one is subject, but he only that rules the rest; there being no order
between equals, but only between superior and inferior.

If then we consider duration and stability, this certainly is most found in
the government of one alone, seeing Omne Regnum in se divisum desolabitur: and
every one knows, that division falls out more easily in an Optimacy, then in a
Monarchy: as experience has made it manifest in the Monarchy of Ninus, which
continued without interruption, a thousand two hundred and ninety years. If
then we consider, which is furthest off from discords, we may take example in
Rome, which was never without discords, but when it was under Kings.

But laying all these considerations aside, it will be proof enough of this
assertion, to consider the similitude, that is between the government of God,
and that of a Monarch, because as he rules all the World, so a King rules all
his subjects.

By these reasons it might be concluded, that a Monarchy, as being most
profitable, most natural, most potent, most durable, most orderly, most free
from discords, and finally most like to the government of God, should without
comparison be better, then a State of Optimates. But seeing there are many
difficulties in the question, I hope I shall have leave to examine the truth of
it a little better. And where it may be discoursed of in two senses; the
spiritual, and the temporal: In the spiritual, it cannot be denied, against
Calvin and other heretics, but that a Monarchy is the best kind of government
that can be given: and of this there needs be no disputing, being as clear as
the Sun, both by authority of Scripture, by determination of Councels, by
consent of the Church, and finally by the common opinion of all the Fathers,
such a Monarchy having been instituted by our Lord Christ himself.

But in the second case, which is, considering it in the temporal sense; I
hold the Question may hold disputation, and be handled politically: where we
shall not find, all the reasons that were in the former: because a King, as a
King, may err a thousand times a day: but the Pope, as Pope, can never err,
as being assisted by the Holy Ghost. Whereupon, as it is undoubted, that in the
spiritual, there cannot a better government be then a Monarchy: so in the
Temporal, every one may be left to take which side he likes best. The first
question being between an Israelite, and an Egyptian, was consequently easily
determined by Moses; but the second between the Israelite, and the Israelite,
was very hard to be determined. And therefore as (...). Gregory Nyssen well
observes, by killing the Egyptian, Moses ended that strife, but for the strife
between the two Israelites, he was never able to accord them. So the strife,
which we had with Heretics may easily be determined, by killing them with the
holy Scripture, but with strifes that grow between our selves, are left to
every ones free liking: and therefore very hardly can be ended.

He then that would hold an Aristocracy to be better then a Monarchy, might
easily prove it by reason, and by authority. By reason, because (as S. Thomas
says excellently well) that government is the best, and the most profitable,
that can best procure the unity of the Citizens: whereupon we must necessarily
confess, that an Optimacy is the best; for seeing that an univocall rises not
but from an univocall; and that the unity of the Optimates is more univocall to
that unity which is required in the people, then the unity of a Monarch is;
therefore also it is more fit, and able to produce it: for, the unity of the
Prince, is an unity of person, and of end: unity of person, as much as to say
unity of number: as being one alone, unity of end, because all his cares are
directed to one sole end, which is the good of his subjects; but the unity of
the Optimates, is an unity of end, in plurality of persons, I say plurality,
but not disunion; because the Optimates being many persons, cannot have unity
of number, but agreeing in the end which is the good of the City, in this they
are one. And the unity of subjects ought to be an unity of end, in plurality of
persons: so as by this, it manifestly appearing that the unity of the Optimates
is more univocall with that of the people, then the unity of the King is;
therefore consequently it must be granted, that it is more able to produce it.
There being two things necessary to generation, (as Cajetan says) first, the
distinction of that which is generated, from that which generates: the second,
that there be a similitude in nature, between the one and the other, because,
that which Generates, intends to introduce a thing like to it self, and
therefore (says he) where there is more Identity and similitude in nature,
between that which Generates and that which is generated, there the generation
will be perfitter, and more easy, and from hence it comes that the Univocall
generation is more excellent then the Equivocal, and therefore, seeing the
Identity, between the unity of the Optimates, and that of the People, is more
then the unity of the Prince, and that of the People; it follows, that the
generation shall be more noble, more persit and more easy, and the more,
seeing that unity of a King, which is unity of number, is rather contrary to
the union we speak off, because as one in number is a denying of more parts;
So unity in number, is an affirming of more parts, rather that one, which is of
number, is the ruin of a City; as Aristotle prooves strongly against Plato,
where he says; Atqui constat, quod ea si procedat, ut una fiat magis Civitas
non erit. Est enim Civitas multitudo qu^dam, secundum Naturam, quae dum fit una
magis Domus erit ex Civitate, and homo ex Domo. Vnam enim magis Domum censemus
esse quam Civitatem, and hominem unum quam Domum; quare etiamsi posset quis^iam
am hoc facere, tamen non esset faciendum, (...) perimit Civitatem. So as, a
City should not make it self one in number, but in discipline, as the said
Aristotle says, Oportet cum Civitas sit multitudo, per Disciplinam communem
facere. And although, to show that the unity of a King is better, then that of
Optimates; It might be said, that the unity of number shows Perfection; God
being one by reason of Perfection: and many holding, that in every sort of
Angels, there is one chief: as that which concerns their Perfection; yet I
could easily answer with Saint Thomas: that one as it implies Negation, adds
nothing to the Perfection of being; and if we take one as excluding other
things, and as in its formal sense, it signifies to be alone and solitary:
This of it self expresses no Perfection, but rather many times imperfection,
because in God, the being alone by Essence, proceeds from Perfection; but if he
should be one in Person, it should be an imperfection. So as one, if you take
it for solitary; signifies not so much Perfection, as imperfection.

But if we come to consider the Naturalnes of this government; we cannot then
have a better thing, to make it manifest, then the government of our body,
which accordingto the doctrine of Plato (with the consent of Aristotle) is
governed by nature Aristocratically, with three faculties, The sensitive, the
Animal, and the Vital; the sensitive consisting in the Brain, which is the
Beginning of all the sinews; the vital, in the heart, the beginning of all
the Arteries; The Animal in the Liver, the Fountain of all the veins:
whereupon every member containing Arteries, Nerves and veins, they
consequently are governed by three, by the liver, by the heart, and by the
brain; and therefore that Doctrine of the heart, which is brought in
opposition, is false, which Aristotle in his works of Physic, has many times
confuted. And their Reason, to say a house is governed by one alone, is of no
force: which rather is a reason that makes for us, seeing that, as nature,
amongst things that are unequal, as those in a house are, has ordained the
Government of one alone, so between those that are Equal, as it is in a
Citt^y, there should be an Optimacy, which by (...): in the first of his
Politics, is plainly Intimated. Neither is it of any force to say, that Bees
naturally are governed by one alone, or that the sensitive soul is governed by
the Rational, or that a Flock is guided by one Shepherd, seeing the King of
the Bees (as Pliny says) is much greater then any of the other bees, and the
rational faculty is so much more noble then the sensitive that hardly there can
be assigned any proportion: and finally, the shepherd is so beyond comparison
superior to the flock, that it is most reasonable and indeed most natural,
he should command; and therefore when in a City, there is any one found, so
much superior to all the rest, as the King of the Bees is in greatness to the
other Bees; or so much in Nobleness, as the rational faculty is to the
sensitive, or so much in ability, as the Shepherd is to the flock, then such a
one in all reason should be King; as Aris^otle grants where he says: Quicunque
igitur distant tantum quantum Animus a corpore, and homo a bestia, per hunc
modum se habent: having said before, Hic imperans, illa vero parens. And in
another place he says, if any one in a City, be found so much excelling all
the rest, as Jupiter excells men, that man by right should be made King: Sed
siquis excellat virtute, quid de eo sit faciendum? Non enim dicendum est, ut
talis vir sit de civitate pellendus: atqut neque gubernationi aliorum, talis
vir erit subjiciendus, perinde enim est, ac si qui Jovem Gubernare velint. This
very thing God meant to show, when he gave to man the rule over beasts as
Solomon Interprets it, when asking wisdom, to the end God should give it him,
he said Et sapientia tua constituisti hominem ut Dominaretur; as though he
would say, as thou have showed, in giving Regal Dominion to man, that he who
will govern others, should in wisdom be as much superior to his subjects, as
a man is to Beasts: so you are bound, having made me King over so many People,
to give a like proportion of wisdom, as not able otherwise to deserve to be a
King.

With this supposition then we may grant, that the government of a monarch is
the better, as whereof we have an example in the Pope: but this is to handle the
question Secundu quid: for if we handle it simpliciter; we denyit.

If we come to consider the Power, which is required for Augmentation, I then
verily think there is none so ignorant, but that he knows, how much an
Optimacy is fitter for augmenting, then a Monarchy, whereof we have Example in
Athens, which, as soon as it freed it self from the Tyranny of Pisistratus, It
presently grew to be of inestimable greatness. And if you will not stand to
this Example, then take Rome, which was no sooner freed from Kings, but that it
came to so great greatness, that it could not be oppressed but by it self.
And it availes not to say, that of the four Empires, one only was a
Commonwealth, that is, that of the Romans, and that the other three were
Monarchies, as that of the Assyrians, of the Persians and of the Graecians,
because if this reason were of any force, It would prove, that a Tyranny is the
best government of all, seeing it is then a Monarchy, when the subjects are
used, as Children, and not as the Persians and Medes did, and at this day, the
Turk, who uses his subjects as servants, or to say better, as slaves.

In coming to consider duration; I care not to prove, that Optimacy continues
longer, then Monarchy, seeing this would not serve to prove my intent that
therefore it is better, for duration as Aristotle says, increases not
goodness, and therefore one white thing, that continues longer then another,
is not thereby whiter then the other; but rather the best things of this world,
as they are hard to find, so being found, they are soonest lost, as Galen faith
of bodies, that are come to the height of health; and Tacitus, the like of
states; whereupon it is no marvel, that the Monarchy of the Assyrians
continued longer, then any Commonwealth ever did, which happened, because
Tyranny held a proportion with that People, seeing People that are (...), are
necessarily to be governed by a Monarch, and not by Optimates. And therefore
our Lord God, always governed the Israelites by one alone, because that rude
people was not able to suffer Liberty, as liking better to live under a Tyrant,
as they made appear, when they demanded a King of Samuel; for though he
threatened them, they should have a Tyrant, yet this made them not give over
their demand. So when the Senate of Rome granted liberty, to Paslagonia and
Cappadocia; the Cappadocians saying they could not live without a King, the
Senate was feign to send them Ariobarzanus, to be their King; whereof Livie
says, Barbari quibus pro legibus semper Dominorum Imperia fuerunt, quo
gaudent, Reges habeant; and Aristotle speaking of this shows, that they were
by Nature made to serve; Obidenim (says he) quia magis aptae sunt Natura ad
serviendum Nationes barbarum quam Graecorum; and eorum qui in colunt Asiam:
quam eorum qui Europam, per serunt servile Jugum aequo animo, and ob hoc
Tyrannica sunt (...) Regna. And therefore from hence, there can no argument be
drawn, that Monarchy, is a better government then Optimacy, seeing (as
Aristotle says) although one Form of Commonwealth be in it self better; yet
for some people, another that is not good, may be more profitable. There might
also be brought another Reason, why Tyrannies are of longer Continuance, then
Aristocracies, a Reason, which has been intimated, by a certain Author; and
it is because they are more hard to be surprised, because where all are
servants, there can be none to lend a hand, to let in strangers, as has been
often done in France, in England, and other places: which will always happen,
and has often happened to Monarchies, because such Princes hold their subjects
rather as Companions, then as slaves; and therefore in this point, the Turk
stands secure; and if Alexander Magnus overcame Darius, it was his own Act. It
is indeed true, that as Monarchies are more hardly taken then Commonwealths;
so more easily they are held, where commonwealths are easily taken, (all the
subject Cities being male content, and consequently ready to assist strangers;
but being taken, they are hard to be held by reason of the name of Liberty;
which makes them apt every minute to fall into rebellion. Tyranny then is the
most durable of all kinds of states, and if the reason above alleged were of
force it would prove it also to be the best, which no man that has brains
will say. But let us come to consider the order of Optimates; which is the
same, that is in an I^strument of Music, order so much commanded by all the
Holy Fathers, and by all Philosophers; where many Diverse sounds make but one
sound, of which order, Saint Chrysostom in admiration says Et est videre
mirabilem rem: in multis unum: and in uno multa. And then, if they will
consider, the unaptnesse it has to Discords, let him take the City of Venice
for an example, which for many ages together, has never had any. And it
availes not to say, that where many are, they may be at ods between
themselves, but one cannot be at odds with himself, for I answer with
Aristotle, Quod studiosi viri sunt omnes ut Ille unus. And the Example of Rome
is of no force, because when the Discord entered between the Nobility and the
People, It was not then an Optimacy but a mixed Estate: and by reason of the
predominating Element, might be called a Popular state, and if ever it were an
Optimacy, it was in the beginning, in which they lived in exceeding great
concord, until the state came to be corrupted, rnd here we must advertise,
that when we compare a Monarchy with an Optimacy, we compare them in their
perfection, and not in their corruption: because it is of the Essence of an
Optimacy, that all in it should be good men, for else we should dispu^e
Aequivocally.

But to let many other things pass, who knows not that a City will be better
governed by Optimates; then by a Monarch? seeing the most virtuous, Governes
best, and a King being but one virtuous, and the Optimates many virtuous,
seeing many know more then one, although that one, in some thing may exceed
those many, as Aristotle excellently shows in his Politics, yet if you grant
that the Optimates be all virtuous men; you must withal grant, that they are
able to govern better, then any King whatsoever; and the rather, because a
King deserves then most praise, when he is governed himself by good
counselors, and consequently in as much as he is ruled by many, in the manner
of Optimates. So our Lord God appointed Moses, that he should rule by the
counsel of Iethro. And this me thinks might serve to make men capable, that
an Optimacie is better, then a Monarchy, yet there is a further Reason: For
not only an Optimacy may Govern better, as being more virtuous; but as being
more then a King, who not being able himself alone, to govern all the state,
Solus illud non poteris sustinere; he must of necessity commit it to officers;
and who knows not, (...) how much more love and Justice the people are
governed, by the Lords themselves being virtuous, then under a King by officers
that are strangers; they governing their own, and these another man's; and
therefore Aristotle speaking against Plato says; that Propriety, a thing being
ones own^, is a special cause of love, and makes the greater care be taken of
it, Nam de propriis maxim Curant homines; and if men (as he shows) use little
diligence, in things that are common; they will use much less in things that
are neither common nor proper: as we see it daily, (though it be but a homely
instance) that a husbandman will till land better, that is his own
possession, then that which he is hired to till; as in that, regarding his own
particular profit; in this; the Common: in the one, the present only, in the
other, the present and the future both. And if it be answered, that a King may
have good officers; I say, that when we grant the government of a King, to be
good, we (...), that he be good himself; but it follows not, that a good
King must necessarily have good Officers, seeing it is not a thing essential
to him: and though we should grant it to be essential, yet it is not
constituent, but only consequent; though I rather think it is neither one nor
other; but for the present, let it it be as it will: This is most certain,
that in Optimacy, for all to be good, is both essential and constituent; for
otherwise (as I have said) we shall but labor in Aequivocals.

Also secrecy gives an Optimacy right to be preferred before a Monarchy: for
proof whereof, the example of only the Venetians may suffice, who (as
Guicciardine relates) have always kept their counsels secret: a thing which
Princes cannot do; who being to consult with persons, not interressed in the
affairs that are handled, can never be sure, but that they may reveal them.
And though none of these reasons were sufficient to win persuasion to this
opinion, yet this certainly must needs be sufficient, to show, how much the
government of God, is more like to an Optimacy, then to a Monarchy: and this
will be easily showed, because our Lord God operates Immediatione virtutis; and
is, in all things, I^diatione suppositi: to which kind of operating and being,
the Optimates approach nearer, then the Monarch; who must of necessity make use
of Officers, as not able being but one, to be himself in all places: whereby
it often happens, that a State is more governed by the Officers virtue, then by
the virtue of the Prince. But the Optimates being many, may all together do
that of themselves, which a Prince does together with officers, and may govern
the State by their own virtue, and consequently operate Immediatione virtutis:
yet I mean it, in the manner, that a second cause can operate: knowing well,
not only in Theological verity, but also in Philosophical doctrine, that all
virtue proceeds from Heaven: as Aristotle in his Meteors teaches us, where he
says, Oportet hunc mund^m inferiorem, superioribu^ lationibus esse contiguum:
and therefore in a certain manner, the government of Optimates is more like to
that of God. And it availes not to say, that our Lord God is but one alone,
that governes the whole world; because in him is one Essence, indeed one Will,
one Soul, one Intellect only; but then in three Persons really distinct, in
three Suppositi, in three Hypostases, in three Substances; (as substance is
distinct from Accidents, which are In alio tanquam in subjecto.) And finally in
three Subsistences, as subsistence signifies Essentiam per se subsistentem:
which three Persons, do in such sort govern the universe, that although the
works of Creation be attributed to the Father, the works of Wisdom to the
Son, the works of Love and Grace to the Holy Ghost; yet all the three
concur equally in all works ad extra, which are common to them all. The
Universal therefore is governed by three Persons with one will alone: and the
Divine Unity, is an unity of end in plurality of Persons, such as we have
showed the unity of Optimates to be. And this is that unity, which our Lord
Christ, desires should be in us, as being like his own, as he shows in S.
John, where he says, Pater Sancte serva eos in nomine tuo (speaking to his
Father) quos dedist^ mihi (...) sint unus sieuti and nos. And a little after,
Non pro eis rogo tantum, sed and pro eis qui crediture sunt per verba (...), in
me; (...) omnes (...) sint, sicut tu Pater in me, and (...) in te. So this is a
clear Text, and by every one interpreted to be meant of that unity, which
ought to be in all the faithful, which our Lord God would have to be like the
unity of the Divine Persons: and as in them there is a real distinction of
persons in unity of Essence; so in the many faithful, there ought to be one
Spirit, one love, one will. They then that have plurality of persons in one
will, are in that manner one, as the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost are,
as in the Gospel our Lord Christ expounds it.

And now who is he, that by the force of so many reasons, will not confess,
that an Optimacy, as being more profitable, more Noble, more potent, more
natural, more secret, more concordant: and finally more like to the government
of God, is far a better kind of state then Monarchy.

As for authorities, I commonly make no great reckoning, but only of those
which I am bound to believe, by commandment of the holy Church; other
authorities must convince by reason: and this leave S. Austin gives me, where
he says, Neque quorum libet disputationes quamvis Catholicorum and laudatorum
hominum velut Scripturas Canonicas habere debemus; ut nobis non liceat, salva
Honorificentia, quae^illis debeatur hominibus, aliquid in eorum scriptis
improbare, atque respuere, si forte invenerimus quod aliter senserint, quam
veritas habet, divino adjutorio, ut ab aliis intellecta ^nobis. Talis ego sum
in scriptis alionum, quales volo esse intellectores meorum. And in another
place he says, Sacrae Scripturae est adhihenda fides, alios autem Scriptores
licet nobis impugnare. But because it becomes not my youth and weakness, to
stand in defiance with so many excellent and worthy men; I will endeavor to
make it appear, that some of the Authors cited before for the contrary, spoke
not in our sense; and that some of them speak of our side; some of them
irresolutely, and some again, with passion.

Beginning then with the holy Fathers, I say, they spoke in another sense,
meaning it of the spiritual Monarchy: and though many times they speak
generally, which may reach as well to a temporal Monarchy, yet this they did
to the end, that Heretics seeing it granted them, in the government of
Cities, an Optimacy to be better then a Monarchy, should not from hence take
occasion to affirm the like of the spiritual Monarchy, And this is a course,
that has been much used by the holy Fathers, who sometimes have not yielded to
things most clear and evident, only because they would not give heretics
occasion, by ill interpreting them, to make simple people incline to their
opinions. It is a matter clear and evident, and granted by all Divines, that
in God there are three Hypostases, and yet many of the holy Fathers, and
particularly S. Hierome, have not been willing to grant it; for no other
reason, but least Gatholicks granting three Hypostases, heretics should
thereupon make simple people believe, that in God there were three Essences:
and this interpretation is made of it, by all the Doctors upon S. Thomas.

Leaving then the opinion of these Fathers, who speak in another sense, let us
come to Philosophers: where I cannot but account my assertion safe; having
Aristotle, Plato, and Pythagoras of my side. And it availos not to say, that
Aristotle in his Ethics understands it one way; and in his Metaphysics
another: seeing Aristotle when he speaks of the same things in diverse Books,
speaks of them diversely; and Arts and Sciences consider oftentimes the same
things, and yet not in the same manner. A Philosopher and a Physician, both of
them consider the same body; but a Physician considers it as it is capable of
healing, and a Philosopher as it is capable of motion. So as I never make
reckoning of the authority of Aristotle; but in places, where he handles Ex
professo; because many times, he discourses in one manner morally in his
Ethics: and in another manner diversely in his Politickes; so in his
Rhetoricks, he speaks of felicity in one manner, and in his Ethics in
another. In his Physics he discourses as a Philosopher one way, another way
in is Problemes. The authority then of Aristotle in matters Political, must be
taken from his Politics; where I am much deceived, but he is of my opinion:
though all men cite him for the contrary; I know not how he could possibly
speak more plainly, then where in his Politics he says, Si ergo plurium
Gubernatio bonorum autem virorum omniae Optimatium dicitur, unius autem Regnum,
optabilius esset civitatibus ab optimis Gubernari, quam a Rege. And in a
thousand other places, whereof some are cited here and there in my Discourse;
and other, every one may look out of himself, being all so clear that they
have no need of my interpreting them. It is true indeed, that once he was
transpoted to say, that the Regal government is the best of all; because a
Tyranny is the worst: but he spoke then in Idaea, meaning if there could be
found one as much superior to others, as God is to men: and therefore in
another place, where he leaves his Idaea, and comes to Fact, he says, that all
Kings are tyrants: seeing there cannot any one be found, so much superior to
others in goodness, as that he should be worthy to command alone. Non fiunt
nunc amplius Regna (says Aristotle) sed si qua fiunt, Monarchiae, and
Tyrannides magis sunt; Ob id quia (...) spontanea Gubernatio est, ac Majorum
proprie, and plurimi pares sunt, neque usque adeo praesellentes, ut ad
magnitudinem, dignitatemque (...) gradus se possint attollere. And then that
reason, which Aristotle brings, (...) bona pessima, is false; and is not to be
understood as men commonly take it. To prove it to be false, is easy: seeing
not only Plato, but Aristotle himself says, that the government of
Optimates, is better then the popular: yet in the second of his Politics he
says, that the worst forms of government, are a Tyranny, and a Democracy; so
as if that reason were true, the corruption of Optimates should be worse then
that of the people. Besides I should always hold, that the corruption of an
Optimacy is worse then that of a Monarchy; seeing an evil is so much worse as
it is multiplied: specially, being impossible that those few should ever be in
concord. And in truth, this reason may be strongly fortified by example; seeing
in the government of Caesar, Pompey, and Crassus, and in that of Lepidus,
Anthony, and Augustus, both of them comprised under the worst form of a few,
assigned by Aristotle; the Commonwealth of Rome, was more torn and wasted then
under Nero, or any other Tyrant whatsoever. Then again, the proposition is not
so to be understood, but thus, that an evil will appear so much worse, as a
man has been accustomed to a greater good, as it would be a greater evil, to
a Prince who has always lived deliciously, to be cast into prison, or into
servitude, then to a Husbandman that has been used to digging and hardness;
because in the Prince is corrupted a greater good: but in Genere entis, the
same evil is all one, to a Husbandman, and to a Prince. Thus much by way of
digression.

To return to our purpose. As concerning Plato, although he be alleged for
the contrary, yet seeing he is but wavering, and speaks diversely; sometimes,
as in his Dialogues of a Commonwealth, that an Optimacy is the best; and
sometimes as in his Dialogues of a Kingdom, that a Monarchy is the best: and
oftentimes, that a government mixed of People and Tyrant is the best: we shall
do well to waive his words, and have recourse to that he showed in de eds, as
better expressing men's minds then words. And Plato being asked of Dio, how a
Commonwealth might best be governed, he found fault with Monarchy, and
counseled him to bring in Optimacy: by which it appears, that this indeed,
was his very opinion. Now for Pythagoras, we say, The Pythagorans endeavored
all they could, to bring into Italy the government of Optimates: and if it
succeeded not, yet that happened not for want of judgment, but of forces. Then
for Plutarch, if he understood it otherwise, we may say he had reason, as being
the Schoolmaster to an Emperor; and therefore should have showed himself very
simple, to blame a Monarchy. As for Homer, he no doubt is most fit to be
brought in proof of that, which I my self in another Discourse, have
resolved; which is, that an Army indeed, should be governed by one alone, the
Verse which is commonly alleged out of Homer, being spoken by Agamenmon to the
Army. And lastly, Herodotus also had reason to conclude, that amongst the
Persians, a Monarchy was a fitter government then an Aristocracy; because the
Persians were a rude imperfect Nation, as we have showed in another place.

But because the most of the Arguments, brought against my opinion, are taken
out of a book of S. Thomas, entitled, De Regimine Principis: I desire men
would take notice, that I go not about, to impugn the Doctrine of that Saint,
of whom I have made choice for my Advocate with God, and for my Master in all
Sciences: but the truth is, that book is none of S. Thomases, as is easily
proved, seeing in that book many persons are spoken of, which lived not till
long after S. Thomas his time, as in the 20. Chapter of the third Book, De
Regimine Principis, it is said, that Adul phus succeeded Ridolphus Count of
Habspurg in the Empire, which happened in the year 1292. full eighteen years
after S. Thomas was dead; and in many other places, which for brevity I omit.
But let the book be whose it will, there is nothing in it against my opinion;
seeing he means only, that a Monarchy is the better, where the people are
imperfect: and this is no more, then what I have said my self. As in his
fourth book, and eighteenth Chapter he says, Quaedam autem Provinciae, sunt
servilis naturae, and tales Gubernari debent Principatu Despotico; Includendo
in Despotico etiam (...) qui autem Virilis animi, and audacia Cordis, and in
Confidentia suae Intelligentiae sunt; tales regi non possunt, nisi Principatu
Politico; communi nomine extendendo ipsum ad Aristocraticum. This Text
sufficiently shows the Authors opinion; and it differs not from mine.

As for the authority of Tacitus, before alleged; it is easily answered, if
we consider, that he speaks not those words as his own opinion: but by the
mouth of Asinius Gallus, who having offended the Prince before, meant afterward
by flattering words to pacify him.

In the last place I advertise, that I counsel not People to change their
government, though it be not an Optimacy; but rather, I like that every Country
should keep the form of government they have; Ferenda Regum Ingenia (says
Tacitus) neque usui Crebras mutationes; and in another place, Vlteriora mirari,
Praesentia sequi: bonos Jmperatores Voto expetere, qualeseunque tolerare,
because to alter the form of government, is a mischievous thing: not only
when it is good; but even when it is bad; whereupon it is better to endure a
Tyrant, then to rise up against him: for if he should prevail, he would grow
more cruel, as having been provoked; and if he should be put down, there
would grow a thousand differences about ordering the government: and oftentimes
he, that was the forwardest to put down the Tyrant; would be the readiest to
be Lord in his place, and would then govern the more cruelly, for fear to be
put down, as his Predecessor was. And this is his Doctrine, that made the
Book De Regimine Principis. Let People therefore keep that form of
government they have, and remember that notable Aphorism of Hippocrates,
Consueta longo tempore, etiamsi deteriora, Insuetis minus molesta esse solent.

Lastly I advertise, that governments would be proportioned to the Nature of
the People; and therefore in some places a Monarchy may do well, where an
Optimacy would not; whereupon, we see many Cities in (...), as Perugia,
Florence, Siena, Bolonia, and others, which never were in peace, till they came
to be under a Prince.

Nec ideo Iram ejus lenivit pridem in visus, tanquam ducta in matrimonium.
Vipsania Marci Agrippae filia; quae quondam Tiberii uxor fuerat; plusquam
Civilia agitaret.
That it is a great help for attaining a Kingdom, to have a wife of the blood
Royal: and in what danger a Prince is, that has none but daughters. The
Fortieth Discourse.

HAving at this time, no convenience to Discourse upon all the Books of
Tacitus: I am forced to take all occasion, though never so small, to handle
those things, which more properly would be treated of in another place; I shall
therefore desire my reader, that if in these Discourses, I open many Sentences
of Tacitus, which might fitter be opened somewhere else; it may be rather
attributed, to defect of occasion, then to want of Judgment.

This Passage of Tacitus, in which Tiberius showed himself doubtful of
Asinius Gallus, that Plusquam Civilia agitaret, as having taken one to wife,
that had been his wife before: gives me occasion, first to show there is great
reason to suspect such, as get them wives of the blood Royal; as being a
special help for attaining the Empire, and having attained it, to maintain
it. Secondly, to show the danger a Prince is in, that has none but Daughters;
and lastly to show the course he ought to hold, that would secure himself in
these cases. Saul had reason to doubt David, having taken his daughter Micholl
to wife, and knowing this important point of state; he sought by a thousand
impertinencies to free himself, but being forced at last to give her to him,
the Scripture relates, that he then began to fea re David exceedingly,
whereupon it is said, Deditque ei Saul Micholl filiam suam, and it follows,
Michol autem diligebat eum, and Saul caepit timere David. The most wise Solomon
who also knew this danger, when Bersabee unadvisedly asked Abisac the Shunamite
for Adoniah, answered, Quare postulas Abisac Shunamite Adoniae? Postula ei and
Regnum; and as he denied to Adoniah his wife, So Tiberius denied to Agrippina
her husband, whereof Tacitus speaking, says; Caesar non ignarus quantum ex
Repubitca peteretur, ne tamen offensionis aut metus manifestus foret, sine
reponso, quanquam Instantem reliquit. Likewise the same Tiberius knew, that
when Seianus demanded Livia, who had been the wife of Drusus, it was as much
as to demand the Kingdom, and therefore denied her to him, saying Falleris enim
Seiane si te mansurum in (...) Ordine putas, and Liviam quae Caio Caesari, mox
Druso nupta fuerat, ea mente acturam ut cum equite Romano senes^at. It is no
marvel also, if ^itellius showed to be afraid of Dolobella, as being in the
same case Tiberius was with Asinius Gallus, having taken her to wife, who had
been his wife before; Vitellius metu and odio (says Tacitus) quod Petroniam
uxorem ejus mox Dolobella in matrintonium accepisset, vocatum per epistolas,
vitata Flaminiae viae celebritate, divertere Interamnam, atque ibi Jnterfici
Iussit. And therefore Phalti showed great Judgment, who when Micholl married
before to David, was given him by Saul, yet he never touched her, but (as Rabbi
Solomon says) laid a sword between Micholl and himself, when he was in bed
with her, to keep him from touching her: and indeed it was well he did so,
seeing no sooner was Saul dead, but that David, not thinking himself King, if
his wife were married to another, said to Abner, Non videbis faciem meam
antequam adduxeris Micholl filiam Saul.

This therefore is a special help, for attaining a kingdom; and our Lord God,
although he be able of himself, to accomplish whatsoever he pleases; yet as
willing to make use of second causes; he caused David, to the end he might more
easily attain the Crown, to which he was designed Abaeterno; and to which
Samuel had anointed him, to take to wife adaughter of Saul's. And Solomon who
was all wisdom and prudence, shows it us himself and finally the most
subtle Seianus, having an intent to get the Empire, knew this way to be, if
not necessary, at least most profitable.

Thus my intention is proved by Examples, but because there is more force in
Reasons to move the understanding; and therefore Philosophers never speak, but
they bring their reason; I have therefore sought out one, which I have found,
me thinks, in Aristotle, in his Books of generation; where speaking how
Elements are transmuted, hesaith: In Elementis habentibus Symbolam qualitatem,
facilior est transitus. As the Earth which is cold and dry, is more converted
into water, which is cold and moist; then into air, which is hot and moist; as
agreeing with that in one quality, of cold; and disagreeing with this in both:
So in our case, the attaining to a Kingdom, being in a private person, a
transmutation more difficult then that of the Elements, it will more easily be
attained, where there is one symbolizing quality, then where there is none.

He therefore is more likely to attain the Empire, who being himself a private
man, shall have a wife of the blood Royal; then he, that both himself and his
wife are of private estates.

A Second Reason (omitting Philosophical, to come to a Political) is, that
people bearing affection to their Prince, more easily suffer themselves to be
governed, as long at there remains in the Kingdom any spark of his blood.
Darius a man of exceeding great Judgment, coming from a private man to be a
Prince; for confirming him in the Empire, took to wife a daughter of Cyrus; as
knowing, of how great importance it was, to have a wife of that blood, which
had been King before; where of Justin says; Principio igitur Regni Cyri Regis
filiam Regalibus nuptiis Regnum firmaturus in matrimonium accepit; ut non tam
in extraneum translatum, quam in familiam Cyri reversum videretur. The like
consideration had the sons of Tigranes; and if with them, it had not good
success, this happened upon other occasion; and therefore good cause had
Tacitus to marvel, where he says; Nec Tigrani diuturnum Jmperium neque
liberis ejus, quanquam sociatis more externo in matrimonium Regnumque. This
brought Demetrius to be King of Macedon; that he had Fila to wife, who was
daughter to the old King Antipator.

From this passage now spoken off, with good consequence comes in, the second:
that a Prince is in great danger, who has none but daughters: seeing if he
marry them, he can never be secure, that his son in law will not take the
Kingdom from him: for the facility, we have showed to be by this occasion.

To meet with this danger, many have taken diverse courses: the first has been
to marry them to mean men; and such, as may have no thought of coming to the
Empire, before the time; because such a one seems rather likely to be
assistant to the Prince, in his affairs; seeing he may justly hope for more
faithfulness from a Son in law, then from strangers; and need not make doubt
of a person, that is not of any Noble Lynage. This conceit was in Augustus; and
Tacitus expresses it in the Person of Tiberius; At enim Augustus filiam suam
Equiti Romano meditatus est. Mirum hercule, si cum in omnes Curas
distraheretur; Immensumque attolli provideret, quem Conjunctione tali super
alios extulisset Cajum Proculeium, and quosdam in sermonibus habuit; Insigni
tranquillitate vitae, nullis Reipublicae negotiis permixtos.

This indeed would be no ill course, so long as those persons of mean
condition, be not of a spirit to aspire to the Empire, such as those named by
Tiberius were, in whom, those words of Tacitus are to be considered:
Tranquillitate vitae: as though he would say, a man free from audacious and
haughty though^ and such may safely and without danger be advanced to honor.
Whereupon Aristotle in his Politics, meaning to teach, what kind of men may
safely be raised and made great, he says, (...) si que^ extollere oporteat non
(...) cum qui sit moribus (...) hujusmodi homines aptissimi sunt, ad invadondu
circa (...). And if Augustus gave her afterward to Agrippa, Ignobilem loco
bonum Militia, and victor^ socium this happened because he could not choose but
fear Agrippa; whereupon he was forced, either to put him to death; a thing
most scandalous not only in a Christian, but even in a Heathen; or at least to
put him in some certain hope of coming to the Empire. This, Dio in the mouth
of Moecaenas teaches us, who speaking of Agrippa says, that when a Prince
makes a servant too great, and advances him too highly, giving him excessive
and unlimitted authority, he has then no way to secure himself, but either to
kill him, or by some match to make him his kinsman.

Cyrus also followed this course, who married: his sister to Sibares, a person
of most base estate: and as he took the same course that Augustus did, so it
was upon the same occasion that Augustus had, whereof Justin says, Sybarem
Caeptorum quem juxta nocturnum visum ergastulo liberaverat comitemque in
omnibus rebus habuerat (all one with those words (Victoriae socium) Persis
praeposuit, sororemque suam ei in matrimonium dedit. And because Galba took
not this course with Otho, which Cyrus took with Sybares, and Augustus with
Agrippa; It lost him the Empire, as in the first book of Tacitus Histories, is
to be seen.

But yet in truth, this course seems to me both very dangerous, and very
uncertain, because although he to who^ their daughter or other of their blood
is married, be himself a man ignoble and of little spirit, yet he may have a
son, that may resemble his grandfather more then his father. Astyages was of
this opinion, and put it in practice, doubting the future husband of his
daughter, and no less, the nephew that should be born of them: Neque Claro
(...) (says Justin) neque civi dedit filiam, ne paterna maternaque nobilitas
Nepotis animum extolleret: sed de gente obscura tunc temporis Persarum Cambysi
mediocri viro in matrimonium tradidit. And see how vain his conceit was;
seeing of her was born Cyrus, who in few years took the Kingdom from his
grandfather Astyages by force.

Again this course takes ill success oftentimes, through the haughtiness of
the women, who though married to men of mean spirits, and quiet dispositions,
yet stir them up, and provoke them to do things which of themselves they
would never do, or at least, not do so soon. Tullia the daughter of Servius
was one of these, who impatient to wait upon succession, forced in a manner her
husband Orontes Tarquinius, to enter upon the Kingdom, with the death of her
father; thinking it but fit, that being borne of the Blood-Royall, she should
be able both to give and to take away the Kingdom at her pleasure, whereof she
oftentimes complained, Ipsa Regio semine orta, nullum momentum in dando
adimendoque Regno faceret. Thus Tarquinius by the instigation of this infernal
fury, got possession of the Kingdom: and it made Servius no whit the safer,
that he had married his daughter to Orontes Tarquinius, a man (as Livy reports)
of a mild and peaceable disposition, Mitis ingeniiIuvenem.

To be brief, the daughters of Kings, either cannot, or know not how to live
in a private estate. And therefore Damarata the daughter of Hiero King of
Syracusa; and married to Andromadorus, with such violence instigated her
husband, that she forced him extremely against his will, to take possession of
the Kingdom; which Livy showing, where he alleges the reason, why
Andromadorus was moved to seize upon the Kingdom says, Qui fessus tandem
uxoris vocibus, monentis nunc esse tempus occupandi Regnum.

A second way used by some, for freeing themselves of this danger, has been to
make such women to enter into Monasteries, or to spoake after the custom of
the Ancients, into Temples; and so remove them from their husbands and sons,
of whom there might be fear: to the end, that they in such places observing
chastity, the Princes might live secure from the one and the other. This course
was followed by Amulius, who having driven out Numitor, and killed his son;
he made his daughter who only remained, under color of honor to become a
vestall Virgin, thinking by this means to secure himself, both from her, and
from any whom she should marry, and from any sons that should be born of her:
where of Livy (...), Fratris filiae Rheae Silviae per speciem honoris cum
vestalem vestal^ legisset perpetua virginitate spem partus adimit. But neither
did this course do Amulius any good: for of her were borne Romulus and Remus,
who deprived him of his Kingdom.

I find therefore another way perhaps better: and it is to keep these women
at home with him, of whose husbands or sons there may be any doubt, bearing
many Princes in hand, he means to marry her to them; but in the mean time,
not to bestow her upon any: for by this means, not only they shall be safe
from any danger of their own, but from any also that may arise by enemies,
either foreign or at home: seeing out of this hope, every one will be ready to
defend them; and where by marrying her, they might have one defendour indeed,
but him with danger, now holding them all at a bay, they will have many
defendours without danger. This course was notably put in practice by the Duke
of Burgundy, who (as Argenton relates) having one only daughter, he Promised
her to the Duke of Guyenne, and to Nicholas Duke of Calabria, and to Philibert
Duke of Savoy; and finally, to Maximilian Duke of Austria: and (as Argentone
verily thinks) never meant to marry her to any at all, as long as himself
lived. And in truth, if this Duke had carried himself as wisely in other
things as in this, he had never so foolishly overthrown himself, as he did.

Quippe Augustus supremis sermonibus cum tractaret, quinam adipisci Principem
locum suffecturi abnuerent, aut impares vellent; vel iidem possent cuperentque:
M. Lepidum dixerat capacem, sed aspernantem; Gallum Asinium avidum, at minorem:
L. Aruntium non indignum, and si casus daretur, ausurum.
Whether it be better to refuse Dignities, or to seek after them. The one and
fortieth Discourse.

AMongst the last secrets of State, with which Augustus before his death
acquainted Tib^rius, he propounded three for the Empire, in a ^verse manner:
One that desired it, but was unworthy: Another that was worthy, but despised
it: A third able to discharge it, and if occasion served, would attempt it: Of
which three, when Augustus dyed, there was none left living but Marcus Lepidus,
who was the man that was worthy of it, but despised it. Omnesque praeter
Lepidum, variis mox criminibus struente Tiberio, circumventi sunt. We shall not
need to examine which of these would have done best, in the case proposed by
Tacitus, but rather consider the like persons in a Dignity or Office, which
the Prince should give. We will therefore examine, First, which is best; either
to deserve an Honor, and despise it; or else not deserving it, to seek it.
Secondly, whether he that deserves ought to stay till the Prince offer it; or
else put himself forward by some honest ways to obtain it.

Concerning the first: It seems, that as to desire Honors, of which one is
not worthy, is a presuming of himself, and as an act of Pride, is worthy of
blame; So not to accept those Honors, of which a man is worthy, as being an
act of Humility, is exceedingly to be commended.

But if I shall speak my mind freely, I conceive that he is more to be blamed,
and commits a greater error; and deserves the Princes displeasure more, who
refuses Honors out of contempt, then he that seeks them without merit;
because the one by desiring them, shows he holds them in great account; the
other by slighting them, shows he makes no reckoning of them. Whereupon, as
contemning is odious to a Prince, and valuing pleases him; so more distasteful
must he needs be, that being worthy rejects an Honor, then he that seeks it,
and is not worthy: And this is Saint Chrysostomes Doctrine, where he says,
Quare judicio quidem meo, qui istos despiciunt, contem^ntque, multo
sceleratiores, and pejori supplicio digni fuerint, quam fuerit Dathan una cum
suis omnibus. (...) enim, tametsi Principatum ad se non spectantem sibi
vindicabant; tamen miram quidem de eo Principatu animo opinionem ^onceperant:
Id quod declaravit, ingens rei concupitae studium. And a little after: Neque
enim perinde est ad despicientiae rationem subducendam, honorem aliquem
indebitum appetere, and tot tantaque bona fastidire: verum facinus hoc tanto
est illo gravius, quanto inter se dissident intervallo, Fastidium and
Admiratio. So as he not only incurres the Princes disliking, but deserves also
his reprehension; seeing he that seeks a Dignity without desert, comes within
compass of being proud by admiring; where he that deserving it despises it,
is as proud as the other, if not more, as counting himself worthy of greater
honors; and while he despises honors equal to his merits, he falls into as
great a degree of presumption as the other, and is guilty of contempt besides.
This David understanding, although he knew he could not fight with Goliath in
armor, yet (as Robert Abbat observes) to the end he might not seem to
despise the honor the King offered him; he put on Saul's Armor, and tried
whether he could use it. Accinctus er go David gladio ejus super vestem suam,
coepit tentare si armatus posset incedere; non enim habebat consuetudinem,
dixitque David ad Saul, non possum sic incedere: and so he laid away those
Arms through impossibility, which if he had laid away thorough contempt, it
might have made him odious. Marcus Fabius, when the Senate offered him the
honor of Triumph, refused to accept it, and thereby got the greater glory:
whereof Livy speaking, says, Adeo spreta in tempore gloria, interdum
cumulatior redit: where the word In tempore is to be noted; as though he would
say, if he had refused it at some other time, he might be thought to refuse it
out of pride, as accounting the honor too little for his merits: whereupon see
(as Dio relates) that Caesar never refused any honor the Senate offered him,
to the end they might not think him proud.

Another error also he falls into, that despises a Dignity conferred upon
him; and it is, that he shows himself unfit for it: so much Plutarch makes
Numa Pompilius tell his father. And Junius Blaeus, when the great men who hated
Vitellius, went about to make him Emperor, and he refused it; for so doing was
thought unworthy.

Concerning the second: Whether he that is worthy of a Dignity, and despises
it not, ought when occasion is offered, then to seek it, or else to stay till
it be offered.

In this case, I distinguish of Offices, which may either be of Honor, or of
Danger: In this last case, there is no doubt, a man ought not to stay till his
Prince require him; but finding himself fit for it, he ought to offer
himself; because Princes oftentimes in such cases, would have their Subjects
to understand their thoughts, without further expressing. Our Lord God had a
purpose to send one to threaten the Israelites, a perfidious Nation, and that
used to stone and kill the Prophets, but not willing to impose the charge of
this message upon any; he seemed as though he knew not whom to employ: as it
is written in Esaias, Quem mittam, aut quis ibit nobis? Then Esaias knowing perhaps
by a Prophetical spirit, that this was an employment of danger, stayed not to
be required, but readily offered himself, saying, Ecce ego, Mitte me: Where
besides the reason alleged before, there may an excellent lesson be learned,
either little known, or little used now adays in Courts: and it is, that Esaias
offering himself, spoke in general, Ecce ego, mitte me; as though he would
say, Send me whither you please, I am ready to go: But on the contrary, I have
seen men offer their service unto the Prince, as if they would put a halter
about his neck, standing upon terms; If you will bestow upon me such or such
an honor, I will then serve you: and when offices are to be bestowed, set
themselves down for one of the chiefest; a fashion much used, but with little
judgemen^: because by so doing, they manifestly show they seek to serve
themselves, and not the Prince. The obedience of Abraham was not of this sort:
who, when our Lord God commanded him to go out of his Country, saying,
Egredere de terratua, and de domo Patris tui, and veni in terram quam
monstravero tibi; presently without asking whither he should go, he put
himself on his journey. So also it is written in the Apocalypse, where Saint
John speaking of the Elect, says, Et sequuntur agnum quocunque ierit.
Whereupon the Prophet compares himself to a beast, Vt jumentum factus sum apud
te, A beast carries that which his owner lays up on him, and does that which
his owner pleases; he is not ashamed if he carry Earth, and he grows not
proud if he carries Gold: So ought the Servants of Princes to do, go
whithersoever they command them: carry Earth, or carry Gold; that is, go in
employments great or small, as occasion is offered. This is the conceit of
Saint Gregory, upon occasion of that place of Esaias, Ecce ego, mitte me: and
although he apply it to Preachers, yet I conceive it may not unfitly be applied
to our Discourse.

But to return to our purpose, and come to the second case proposed before,
and is a little more difficult; which is, if occasion be presented of bestowing
an honor, whether a man ought to offer himself, and seek it; or otherwise
stay and wait till the Prince appoint him?

Every one perhaps (at least the greatest part) will think it better, he
should be required: First, because it is a sign of less ambition. Secondly,
because when a Prince, of himself puts a servant in any employment, he is
bound to defend him in it; if in any thing he should err. Thirdly, by the
example of Moses, who when God said, he would make him Leader of his people;
not only he stayed to be required, but he also refused it: And in truth I was
once of opinion, that from hence might be gathered the reason why Esaias (not
being required) offered himself; and Moses being required, refused; and it is,
because Esaias knew he went in an employment of danger, and Moses in an
employment of honor: whereupon it seems that we also, in some o^casions
should stay to be required, and in some other offer our service.

Yet notwithstanding all these reasons, I should always hold the contrary: and
for the first reason, that it is less ambition; I know not what ambition can
be greater, then to desire an honor, to deserve it, and yet look to be
required.

As for the second reason, which is, That the Prince is bound to defend him, if
he commit any errou^: I am easily able to prove the contrary, both by reason
and example. Saul the son of Cis sought not after the Kingdom of Israel,
but sought after his Fathers Asses; and meeting with Samuel, who had much talk
with him about the Kingdom, he showed himself wholly averse from it: and if
it had not been that God commanded him expressly by the mouth of Samuel, he
would never have suffered himself to be anointed King. Moses also in like
manner feeding his sheep, without the least thought of governing the
Israelites: when God commanded him to undertake it, yet with great importunity
he opposed it. So likewise Eli the Priest, not only sought not to be Judge
over the people, and the Priesthood, but was indeed not capable in regard of
his Family: whereupon after some repulse he accepted it. Yet neither Saul, nor
Moses, nor Eli, were the more excused of God, for having offices put upon them
without their own seeking: but the first committing a notable error, after
the victory of Achab, was by our Lord God (by the mouth of Samuel) deprived of
his Kingdom, which was transferred upon David; and finally brought to a
miserable end. And Moses, when water failed, had condign punishment, being
denied to gather the fruit, which in so many years, and with so much sweat and
labor he had sowed. And lastly Eli, for too much bearing with the faults of
his Sons, was by our Lord God severely indeed, but yet justly punished.

These men therefore if they err, not only will not be excused, but will
perhaps become more odious to the Prince, and be more severely punished for
their doings. Whereupon our Lord God, (as Origin observes) when Saul left to
govern after his Commandments, denied that he had made him King; and
therefore he says in Osea, Ipsi regnaverunt, sed non ex me; Principes
extiterunt, and non cognovl. The reason is, because they who are thus chosen,
not only err in prejudice of themselves and their office, but in prejudice
also of the Princes discretion; who shows little judgment to make choice of a
person that is not fit for the charge: and so, he that should be a Protector
to defend the error of another, shall need a protection himself for his own
error. So as the Prince will have no place to say, that his Servant erred
thorough ignorance, because by saying so, he should presently show himself of
little judgment, to employ a man whom he did not know; and therefore the
Servant must needs show he has committed errors of malice, and consequently
to have done the Prince dishonor; at which the Prince must needs take greater
indignation: and all these things being not found in him, that has an Honor,
or Office, upon his own requiring it, makes him more easily excused by the
Prince, who erres in an employment himself has sought for, than him, who of
the Princes own motion is elected; and is therefore more obliged to demean
himself well in it.

Concerning the third reason brought of Moses, I say that we are not in his
case; seeing Moses refused the Dignity, not only because it was a place of
Honor; but because, and the more, because he thought himself not fit for it:
and this is not that we speak of, presupposing a fitness always. That he knew
himself not to be fit is apparent; where he says, Quis sum ego ut vadam ad
Pharaonem, and educam filios Israel de Aegypto? as though he should say, I am a
worm, unfit for so great a dignity, which afterward he shows again in
Exodus; where answering God, he says, Obsecro Domine, Non sum Eloquens: as
though he would say, this is an employment that requires an Eloquent man; and
as for me I can scarce speak: whereby it manifestly appears, that Moses
refused it not for the greatness only of the dignity, which certainly he
esteemed highly; seeing in those words, (...) quem missurus es, he shows it
was an office fit for the Messiah; but for this rather he refused it, because
he knew himself unworthy, and not proportioned for such a place.

Whereupon, the reason why Esaias offered himself without being required; and
Moses being required, excused himself, and Jeremy would not have preached to
the Hebrews, in my opinion is this; because Esaias could not say, he was unfit;
seeing, although at the first, till an Angel had purged him with a coal, he
stood mute, bewailing his inabilitie to speak; Vae mihi quia tacui, quia vir
pollutis labiis ego sum: yet after he heard the Angel say, Et auferetur
iniquitas tua, and peccatum (...) mundabitur; as thinking himself now fit for
any employment whatsoever, since he had his lips touched with a coal: that
is, since he had God in his mouth, he made no stay, but offered himself
presently. And Moses also, after he heard he should have this coal in his
mouth, Et ero in ore tuo, he never offered to make any reply to God. So Jeremy
at the first said, A, A, A, Domine Deus; Ecce nescio loqui, quia puer ego sum;
but when he heard God say, Ne timeas a facie eorum, quia tecum ego sum, ut
eruam te, dicit Dominus. Et mifit Dominus manum suam, and tetigit os meum, and
dixit ad me; Ecce dedi verba mea in ore tuo: he also finding that coal in his
mouth, prepared himself to perform the employment which was commanded him.
And now I conceive the reasons alleged to the contrary, are sufficiently
answered; whereby it is manifest, that it is better to seek a dignity not
deserving it, then deserving it to despise it: And again, that it is better,
when one deserves it, and despises it not, to offer himself, then to have it
put upon him.

Nihil in vulgo modicum, terrere ni paveant, Vbi pertimuerint, impune contemni.
That it is eafier to pass from one extreme to another, then from an extreme
to the middle. The two and fortieth Discourse.

SEeing Virtue is situate and consists in the midst, no marvel if the
ignorant multitude, leaving one extreme, instead of coming to the middle, go
to the other extreme: whereupon Averroes said exceeding well, that a Coward
becomes sooner bold, then valiant; Facili^ est a superabundantia ad defectum
venire; and ab hoc ad iilam, quam ad medium. And a little after, Timidus enim
facilius aliquid audax operabitur, quam forte. It is therefore no marvel, if
the people pass from Timiditie to Boldness; seeing it passes also from base
servitude to proud domination: Aut servit humiliter, (says Livy) aut superbo
dominatur; Libertatem quae media est, neque spernere satis, neque habere
sciunt. It may be said by some, that I contradict my self; having said in
another discourse, that it is a most difficult thing to go from one extreme
to another, without passing by the middle first. And besides, a Text in
Aristotle may be brought for it; where he says, Medium est in quod continue
mutans prius devenit quam in ultimum: For answer whereunto, we must know that
there are two middles; one which is Secundum Mutationem; (give me leave to use
these terms) and in this, it is more easy to go from one extreme to the
middle, then from one extreme to another: and this is that which Aristotle
means in his Physics, and I in my other Discourse. The second middle is
called Per Abnegationem, and it is the middle, which is between Excess and
Defect; and in this, it is more easy to pass from one extreme to the other,
then from one extreme to the middle: and this is the midst, I mean in this
Discourse.

Faustis in Germanicum ominibus, and si vellet imperium promptos ostentavere.
That Germanicus could not carry himself in such sort, as to keep Tiberius
from suspecting him; and that he refused the Empire for fear of death, and not
out of goodness. The three and fortieth Discourse.

GErmanicus being invited by the Legions in Germany, while they were in
mutiny, to take upon him the Empire; not only was displeased with it, but in
great choler refused it; by occasion whereof, I conceive it fit to examine,
whether this act of Germanicus were done out of goodness, or out of fear.

All Authors for the most part are of this opinion; that he refused the Empire,
as one that was most free from any such ambition; seeing, having the love of
the people, as by a thousand Demonstrations was apparent; and withal an Army
in his hand: It seemed an easy matter for him to have made himself Emperor,
if he had affected it; and in truth, he showed partly his good intention,
seeing, when it was offered him by the Army, he not only came down from the
Tribunal in a great chafe, but also fell presently into praises of Tiberius:
Tunc a veneratione Tiberii orsus, flexit ad victorias triumphosque Tiberii,
praecipuis laudibus celebrans, quae apud Germanias illis cum legionibus
pulcherrima feeisset. An excellent course in truth, and used also by Saint
Paul, and Saint Barnabas, who having done a miracle in Lystra; and seeing the
people ready to offer sacrifices to them, as to Jupiter and Mercury; Vbi
audierunt (as is written in the Acts) Apostoli Barnabas and Paulus, conscissis
tunicis suis, exilierunt in turbas clamantes and dicentes: Viri quid haec
facitis? and nos mortales sumus, similes vobis: and then fell presently to
preach Christ Jesus.

Yet looking a little narrower into this Fact of Germanicus; I am of opinion,
he did it more for fear, then love; there being no doubt, but that men,
although assured of succeeding in an Empire, yet to make that present which is
future, they will not stick to hazard their very lives; a small present
pleasure, being always a stronger motive, then a much greater that is future:
And the reason is, because the will which has good for its object, in such
manner, as the external senses have theirs, is not moved with any, but that
which is present. But it may be said unto me, that the future also may be
present, In esse cognito, and objectivo; to which I answer, that this
Abstractive presence has not the like force as the Intuitive has; seeing the
Intuitive even in future things is much more perfect then the Abstractive is;
whereupon those Divines who hold, that future things are not present with God,
but only In esse cognito; affirm, that the having them in esse cognito, is as
much with him, as for us to have them present; and therefore this knowledge in
God they call intuitive, grounding it upon a doctrine of Aristotle, in his
Books De Anima; where he says, if the Species of things could be conserved in
such manner as they are, our sight would never be altered, although an object
far off were made to be present. Indeed, that which is good, or true, or
appearing so, and is present, does so much the more forcibly move, then that
which is future; that many men for things present, which are not truly good,
but only in appearance, lose the eternal good of the beatificall vision. So
as it is no marvel, if many men, though in other things wise, have been
content with a doubtful end to prevent a secure succession; as Absolon, and
infinite others, of whom Histories are full. Whereupon I cannot choose but
think, that if Germanicus could have come securely to be Emperor, he would
never have been so angry at the Soldiers invitation: but because he knew it
was not without infinite difficulty to be effected, he therefore showed
himself averse from harkning to it. And it availes not to say, he had the
Army of Germany in his power; seeing there wanted not Legions and Armies in
Hungary, in Sclavonia, and other places, that would have stood for Tiberius;
and this no man knew better then Germanicus, as appears; where speaking to the
mutinous Army, he said, Non mihi uxor aut filius Patre and Republica cariores;
sed illum quidem sua Majestas, Imperium Romanum caeteri exercitus defendent.
And of as little force is the second reason, for his being beloved of the
people; seeing when there are Soldiers in a City, the people are able to do
little: as it happened to the people of Tarentum, who favored the
Carthagenians; to the people of Vicenza, who favored the Venetians; to the
people of Milan, who favored Francisco Sforsa; and whereof there may be found
a thousand Examples.

Many other difficulties Germanicus should have met with; and this amongst
others is not of least moment, that Augustus Caesar had declared Tiberius to
be his Successor; in which consideration, Bathsheba used means that David
should declare Solomon for his Successor; knowing, that whomsoever he should
name, though he were not the eldest, yet should be accepted. Verumtamen Domine
mi Rex, in te oculi recipient totius Israel, ut ni dices eis quis sedere
debeat in solio tuo post te. Which words Hugo Carenfis thus expounds; Ille quem
volueris regnabit post te, and hunc quafi Regem sequetur populus, and non
alium. Besides, Tiberius had gotten the hearts of the Praetorian Soldiers; and
to make a Prince be accepted, it is a matter of great importance to come
accompanied with the guard of the deceased King: and therefore the Holy
Scripture in the Book of Kings, reckoning those up who went with Solomon, makes
mention of the Captain of the Guard with his Soldiers. D^scendit Sadoc
Sacerdos, and Nathan Propheta, and Banaias filius Iehojadae, and Cerethi, and
Pheleti: Whereupon David said a little before, to Sadoc and Banaia, sending
them to Solomon; Tollite vobiscum servos Domini vestri; meaning they should
take with them the Soldiers of his Guard. To all these difficulties may be
added the knowledge Germanicus had of Tiberius; to be a man of excellent
virtue, and of singular wisdom; Maturum annis, spectatum bello; which things
all together, made the difficulty so great, that I cannot choose but believe,
Germanicus refused the Empire, as Claudius Pompeianus did, when it was offered
him; Sed ille recusavit, quia Imperatorem Pertinacem videbat. So Scipio the
Carthaginian, when he was proclaimed King by the Army of Spain, would not
accept it; Quia Rome intolerabile nomen Regium erat. It is therefore no
marvel, that Germanicus entered into choler upon it; seeing to ascend to the
Empire, is a thing that requires two extremes; either to show himself
desirous, and at the same time to be near at hand for procuring it; or else,
to show himself wholly averse from it, not only in effects, but in desire;
because they who stand far off in effects, and near hand with desire; easily
in a little time come to ruin. Esse privatis cogitationibus progressum, (says
Tacitus) and prout velint plus minusve, sumi ex fortuna imperium cupientibus
nihil medium inter summa aut praecipitia. Christ our Savior was as far from
desiring to be a worldly King, as could be; and therefore being called to be a
King by the people, he presently got himself far off from the multitude,
because his hour being not yet come, in which he meant to expose himself to
die; he knew it stood him upon, to avoyde such appearance: and more (as Robert
Abbat observes) our Lord Christ never spoke of his being a King, till the time
of his Passion; knowing that the very name of a King carries death with it. If
Germanicus had done thus, after he had quieted the mutinies of the Army; had
returned to Rome, and had left the Legions behind, that had called him
Emperor, he had then freed Tiberius from suspicion; who understanding the
inclination of the Army, could not choose but be in continual fear, least the
Empire should be taken from him: Whereupon, knowing the danger he stood in, he
was not willing that Germanicus should conquer Germany; least having once made
himself Lord of that Country, he should do as Caesar did, having conquered
France. Seeing victorious Armies are formidable and invincible things, and in
this case the more; Germanicus being much more like to Caesar, then to Cato;
the one, (as Salust says) aspiring to the Empire; the other, desirous to
preserve the Commonwealth: between themselves, both like and unlike; like in
Age, in Eloquence, in nobleness of mind; and finally in glory: but unlike in
this, that Caesar made himself famous by his services and courtesies; Cato by
sincerity and holiness of life: Caesar got him a name, with being gentle and
merciful; Cato by being severe and stern. He by giving, by helping, by
pardoning, came to be famous: This by finding fault with Donatives, and by not
pardoning any, nor so much as himself, came to be adored: Cato was the scourge
of the wicked; and Caesar, the refuge. Caesar was commended for affability,
and Cato for constancy; and because Caesar aspired to the Empire, and Cato was
always a good Citizen; we may therefore say, that the manners of Cato ought
to be imitated of those that are not ambitious; and the manners of Caesar, of
those that are: and therefore seeing Germanicus (as may be gathered by his
life) had all those manners and fashions of Caesar; I cannot but conclude, but
that his ambition was to aspire to the Empire. So as indeed, he was not well
advised to take such courses, and give Donatives to the Soldiers; Quibus nisi
ab Imperatore, neque praemia accipere par esset, as Tacitus in the second of
his Annals says: where we may see, that Tiberius knew well of what great
importance Donatives are to corrupt the Soldiers. Secondly, Germanicus was not
well advised, to procure the applause of the Legions, with such artifice as he
did; and then manage it only with courtesy and love, which perhaps I should
not blame, if he had been Lord of Rome: but seeing not only he was not Lord,
but was suspected of him that was Lord; he should not have used the Soldiers
with such plausiblenesse as he did. And it availes not to say, that if he
would do any good in Germany, it behoved him to procure the love of the Army,
seeing he might have done as much good with fear, as he did with love; and
never have put the Prince into jealousy: and Generals in war proceed and
prosper, as well with the one as the other. Scipio Africanus prospered with
love, and Hannibal with fear. The course of Scipio will always do well,
where the Commander is Prince; at least, if he can avoid contempt; a companion
oftentimes of mildness: and indeed, Scipio by his mildness fell so far in
contempt, that if at last he had not turned his course to a way of fear, he
had been in danger to be utterly undone.

I have the more willingly used the example of Scipio in this case, because
indeed in many things he was most like Germanicus: As Scipio was sent into
Africa, where his father had managed the war before; so Germanicus was sent
into Germany, and might follow the steps of his father Drusus, who had been
there before. Scipio was a young man of most goodly presence, and Germanicus a
young man of most beautiful aspect. The one, and the other, of most pleasing
carriage toward confederates; toward friends and enemies. Against Germanicus
the Legions in Germany rebelled, upon the death of Augustus; against Scipio the
Armies in Spain rebelled, upon the false report of his death: both of them
took the same course for reducing the Armies to obedience, and both of them
were blamed for it: Germanicus by Tiberius, as a corrupter of the Army; Scipio
by Fabius Maximus, for the like; Natum eum ad corrumpendam Disciplinam arguere;
sic in Hispania plus propter seditionem militum quam bellum amissum. Each of
them was more able to commit no errors themselves, then to correct the errors
committed by others. Both of them victorious in battles; and as Scipio at
last made the Senate suspect he meant to make himself Lord of Rome; so
Germanicus made Tiberius suspect he meant to make himself Emperor of Rome. To
Scipio the Army offered the Empire, and he refused it; to Germanicus also the
Army offered it, and he with great indignation likewise refused it. Scipio
after all his victories died in exile, thorough the ungratefulness of the
Senate; and Germanicus died out of Rome, thorough the ungratefulness and
practices of Tiberius. To the one and the other was sent a Successor, to the
end they should not finish the war: and if Germanicus were in this not well
advised, as I have showed before; and perhaps had a meaning to make himself
Prince; certainly Scipio was not much better advised; of whom that Tribune in
Livy says, Dictatorem (...) consuli non legatum in Provincia fuisse, neque ob
aliam rem eo profectum, quam ut id quod Hispaniae, Galliae, Siciliae, Africae
jampridem persuasum esset hoc Graeciae, Asiaeque; and omnibus ad Orientem
versis regibus gentibusque appareret; unum hominem caput columenque Imperii
Romani esse. These are not ways for men to use, that have no other end then to
be good Citizens; rather, their courteous carriage toward the Soldiers, was
done with a mind to make use of them in the City; as Livy in another place
shows: Scipionum nomini auspiciisque omnes assuetos quos secum in patriam ad
meritum triumphum deducere velitis, quos consulatum petenti, velut si omnium
communis agatur honos, ad futuros speret. It is therefore no marvel to see so
great likeness between these two Captains, seeing Germanicus took Scipio for
his example to imitate; as may be seen in the voyage he made in Egypt: Sine
milite incedere, pedibus intectis, and pari cum Graecis amictu; Publii
Scipionis (...), quem eadem factitavisse apud Siciliam, quamvis flagrante adhuc
Poenorum bello, accepimus. Yet in matter of fortune they were something unlike;
for Scipio was able to settle, and I may say to finish his victory, which
Germanicus was not suffered to do: but if the war which the Romans had with
the Carthagenians, had been Ob amissum cum Quintilio Varo exercitum, potius
quam cupidine proferendi Imperii; as that of Germanicus was; I make no doubt
but Scipio would have been as little suffered to finish the war, as
Germanicus was. Now if we ask which of them deserved most praise, and was most
worthy of commendation; I account Germanicus so much worthy of more, as he was
able in so great virtues to be like Scipio, in a time so unlike; and under a
Tyrant Prince: and though by a little unadvisednesse he fell to be suspected
of Tiberius, yet he is more to be excused then Scipio was; seeing a Tyrant
Prince is sooner put into suspicion, then a well-governed Commonwealth. And
therefore Corbulo (as Tacitus relates) being hindered by a Letter from Claudius,
for going forward with his enterprise; called the ancient Roman Captains
happy: Jam Castra in hostili solo molienti Corbuloni hae litterae redduntur;
ille re subita, quamquam multa simul offunderentur, metus ex Imperatore;
contemptio ex Barbaris; ludibrium apud socios; (...) aliud prolocutus, quam
beatos quondam Duces Romanos.

Periculosa severitas, flagitiosa largitio: seu nihil militi; seu omnia
concedentur, in ancipiti Republica.
That it is a hard matter to settle the Insurrection of an Army. The four and
fortieth Discourse.

BEing a little after to examine the ways, how to settle and compose the
Insurrection of an Army; I will in this place, by occasion of this Text, only
say, That to grant them all their demands, is dangerous; because they will make
it but a step to make greater demands. The Ianizaries made an Insurrection
against Amurath the Great Turk, demanding the head of Ebraim Beglerbey of
(...); and the Great Turks entirest friend: and when Amurath gave consent to
their demand, they then fell to demand a thousand other extravagant things; and
put the Great Turk into no small danger. On the other part, to grant them
nothing they demand is as bad: as that, which exasperates them in such a
degree, that they can hardly be ever pacified after; as in the case of Galba
was seen. All this we have now said, is expressed in Polybius, by a most
excellent similitude; whose words as most worthy to be read, I have thought
good to set down at large, as they are translated into Latin, Si quis haec
recte intueatur (he speaks of the (...) Army being in mutiny) non dubitet
affirmara (...) modo corpora hominum, and quaedam in illis ulcera, ita (...),
ut sanari nullo modo possint, sed id long magis humanis animis accidere; ut
enim in ulceribus evenit, ut si illis medicamentum curandi gratia adhibeas,
ulcus ipsum vi medicaminis augescit, si vero curam ejus negligas, long sua
ipsius natura extenditur, neque prius definit, quam omne subjectum corpus
corruptum labefactumque (...); ita animis quoque consimiles interdum morbi ac
tabes accidunt, ut nullum ex reliquis ani^libus homine (...) atque efferacius
fiat, cui si interdum veniam aut impunitatem aliquam concesseris, aut aliter
benignitate cum prosequutus fueris, id omne dolum fraudemque existimans,
deterior (...), and (...) beneficum long magis infidus; (...) vero te contra
opposueris, nihil est adeo durum, crudele, nefarium, quod non facile
aggrediatur, laudem (...) temeritatem temeritatem existimans, donec ad extremum
omnino, efferatus animus humanam naturam exuat.

Eo in metu arguere Germanicum omnes; quod non ad superiorem exercitum
pergeret; ubi obsequia, and contra rebels auxilium, satis superque missione
and pecunia and mollibus consultis peccatum; vel si vilis ipsi salus, cur
filium parvulum, cur gravidam conjugem inter furentes, and omnis humani juris
violatores haberet? Illos saltem uno and Reipublicae redderet.
In what kind of affairs, it is fit to carry their Wives with them. The five
and fortieth Discourse.

UPon this passage, there are two Discourses seem to offer themselves: The
first, whether it be fit for Governors to carry their Wives with them, and
consequently whether Germanicus did well, to have his Wife and Children in the
Army. The second, how insurrections of Armies may be quieted.

Beginning with the first, I say, that Officers may be sent by the Prince, in
three kinds of employment: in governments, in war, or in Embassages. If they
go to be Governors, it is then a fair course, and far from being dangerous, as
was agreed upon in the Senate, in favor of Valerius Messalina against Caecina,
that they might take their Wives with them: Neque enim ut olim obsideriurbem
bellis, aut Provincias hostiles esse. But yet in my opinion, it is fit in this
matter to proceed with distinction, because if we speak simpliciter, I should
think it better, they should not lead their Wives with them, as those who for
the most part can do little good, by reason of their unskilfulnesse in
affairs, and may do much hurt by reason of their avarice and pride; whereupon
as Caecina well said, there seldom came any appeals against the Governors of
Provinces, for oppressing the people, but they were more against the Women than
the men, Cogitarent ipsi quoties repetundarum aliqui arguerentur, plura
uxoribus objectari. To this may be added, that by reason of their weakness,
they give ear to the most wicked of the Province, they keep a Court of
themselves, give audience, divide Tribunals, and cause a thousand other
errors, which by the foresaid Caecina are well expressed, His statim
adhaerescere deterrimum quemque Provincialium, ab his negotia suscipi,
transigi, duorum egressus coli, duo esse Praetoria, and that which follows:
whereupon I have reason to believe, that the ancient Romans made the Laws, that
it should not be lawful for Governors of Provinces, to carry their Wives with
them, not so much for the danger they incurred, by being in Countries of little
safety, as least the people newly come under the Roman Empire, should through
the avarice and pride of the Women be provoked to rebel. The reason that
Valerius brings to beat down that of Caecina, is this, that to charge Women for
doing ill Offices in a Province, is but a weak argument, seeing it is their
Husbands fault, who allow their Wives to take more upon them than is fit:
Frustra nostram igna^iam alia ad vocabula transferri, nam viri in eo culpam, si
foemina modum excedat: and therefore Sara in the holy Scripture knowing this,
when Agar contested against her with proud terms, she complained not of her,
but of Abraham, as knowing it to be the men's fault, if their Wives grow
insolent. This reason makes a fair show, but it clears not the difficulty,
seeing it makes no matter, when a Province is ill governed, whether it be long
of the Man, or of the Woman, so long as it is done; whereupon I should think
it better, to provide for things before they be done, according to the advice
of Agricola, who Officiis and administrationibus potius non peccaturos, quam
damnare cum peccassent: then to watch with danger when they shall be done; and
consequently, if it may be, to leave their Wives at home: and the rather,
seeing Princes commonly send persons of age to be Governors, and consequently
easy to be led by their Wives, as in another Discourse is showed: yet it is
true, as I said before, that I would make an Exception to this Rule, when Women
are judicious and very wise, for then no doubt, they may be of great assistance
in the Government. The other reason which Valerius brings, that Wives are a
recreation to their Husbands, and make them the better able to bear the labors
of their Government, is a mere mockery, seeing men that take upon them such
charges, should have no thought but of the Princes service, nor take pleasure
in any thing but in discharging their places.

But be it as it will, it imports us little for the present: this at least is
clear, that in employments of war, it is never fit to carry their Wives with
them, and therefore the Romans (as Caecina reports) would have them when they
went into foreign Countries, where there was danger of war, to go always
without their Wives, Haud enim frustra placitum olim, ne foeminae in socios,
aut gentes externas traherentur, inesse mulierum comitatui quae pacem luxu,
bellum formidine morentur: Therefore as Aristotle says well, speaking against
Plato, Women in the wars are good for nothing but to be a let, and reckoned
inter impedimenta, which is then the more to be observed, when they go with an
Army that may be likely to mutiny, and therefore when the Army of Germany fell
to mutiny, Germanicus at last perceived what a mischief it was, to have Women
amongst seditions: and who knows but he forbore to use discipline and force
against them, only for the Women's sake? We may then conclude, it was not well
done of him, to carry his Wife with him in the Army. Our Lord God, Maker and
Governor of all things, knew the Israelites would rebel against Moses,
whereupon having made him his Captain General; and he upon the way with his
Wife Sephora, God met him, and threatened to kill him. Cumque esset in itinere,
in diversorio occurrit Dominus, and volebat occidere eum: which Saint Austin
interprets thus, that God made this show, because Moses led his Wife with him,
as not being convenient, when a man goes about great affairs, he should be
troubled with Women, and therefore he says, Forsitan in hoc loco possum
intelligere quod displicuerit Deo, quare Moses tanta mirabilia fact^rus, uxoris
impedimentum secum ducere vellet in Aegyptum.

But if now he go upon Embassage, then if the Women be but mean of
understanding, let them never be carried, as those that may do much hurt; but
if they be discreet and wise, it will do well to take them along, as those that
may do much good, because one of the chief things an Ambassador is to look to,
is to understand and find out secrets, and none fitter to find them out than
discreet Women, seeing oftentimes, either Senators in Commonwealths, or
Princes in their Kingdoms, or their Officers and Secretaries, discover
unadvisedly to their Wives many secrets of State, which they afterward being in
company with Ambassadors Wives, (to show their intolligence in great matters)
easily blab out again, and are apt to reveal, and in this manner in some Courts
of Italy, matters of great consequence have been boulted out by some discreet
Ambassadors. And how came Tiberius to know that Augustus went to visit Agrippa
Posthumus in the Island of Pianosa, but by this means? For Augustus having
Fabius Maximus in his company, he unadvisedly told it to his Wife Martia, and
Martia as unadvisedly told it to Livia, and Livia to Tiberius, which was the
cause of Fabius his death, and as it is thought of Augustus his too. Quippe
rumor incesserat, paucos ante menses, Augustum electis consciis, and comite uno
Fabio Maximo Planafiam vectum, ad visendum Agrippam, multas (...) utrinque
lachrymas, and figna cha^itatis, spemque ex eo fore, ut juyenis penatibus uvi
redder etur. Quod Maximum uxori Martiae aperuisse, illam Liviae, C. Navum id.
Caesari.

We may then conclude, that men's secrets come easily to be known by the means
of Women, and therefore Tyrants (as Aristotle says) allow oftentimes great
Authority to Women, to the end, they may reveal their Husbands secrets.

Satis superque missione and pecunia and mollibus consultis peccatum.
Whether Germanicus did well to grant so many things to the Army being in
mutiny, what other course he might have taken; lastly, that in diverfity of
times, and upon diverfity of occafions diverse courses are to be taken. The six
and fortieth (...).

Germanicus returning from collecting the taxes, found the Legions in mutiny,
demanding that the veteran soldiers might have leave to go home, and to have
their pay increased, and also to have the Legacy left them by Augustus, and he
to quiet them, yielded to many of their demands, for which he was by many much
blamed, as in the words here alleged appears. By occasion whereof, we
purpose to examine what courses are fit to be taken, when Armies are in
Rebellion.

I say then, that all mutinies and insurrections require not one kind of
Remedy, but according to the diverse times in which they happen, to the diverse
occasions upon which they happen, and lastly, to the di verse Captains under
whom they happen, a diverse remedy is to be applied. For if the General be a
man of whom the Army stands in awe, he may expose himself to any danger
without any danger, and have all things succeed well. The Macedonians in
Afia, being quite tired with the War, and far from their Coun^ry, fell to
mutiny under Alexander Magnus, standing upon the like terms as they in Germany
did, where Cicatrices ex vulneribus, verberum notas exprobrant, so here, Omnes
fimul missionem postulare coeperunt, deformia or a cicatricibus, canitiemque
capitum ostentantes: whereupon Alexander calling the soldiers together, to
hear him speak, no sooner ended his speech, but he thrust into the midst of
those infuriated beasts: and caused the most insolent of them to be taken, and
not a man of them durst offer to make resistance, Defiluit deinde (says
Quintus Curtius) frendens de Tribunali, and in medium armatorum agmen se
immifit, notatos quoque qui ferocissime oblocuti erant, fingulos manu
corripuit, nec ausos repugnare, tredecim asservandos custodibus corporis
tradidit, quis crederet saevam paulo ante concionem obtorpuisse subito metu?
and cum ad supplicium videret trahi, nihil ausos graviora quam caeteros. And
thus this brave Resolution in a General of whom they stood in fear, sufficed
to pacify this great insurrection. But if a Captain be only loved and not
feared, let him never put himself upon such adventure, or think in such sort
to cyment the matter, for it will undoubtedly be his death; whereupon we see
that Germanicus though he exposed himself to no danger, yet was not far from
losing his life, as by reading Tacitus we may perceive. And the reason of this
difference is, because as Choler overcomes Love, so Fear overcomes Choler,
which (as Aristotle says) being with hope of Revenge, as far as is possible,
that Hope is taken away by Fear; and in the place of it enters Sorrow, as
Avicen excellently shows in his Book De Anima. And for this cause also it
happens, that more Armies mutiny under Captains that are loved, than under
Captains that are feared, as was seen in the Army of Alexander the Great, and
in that of Annibal, Captains that were feared, the contrary in the Army of
(...), and in that of Scipio, Captains that were loved.

It is very clear, that Germanicus was never able to take any of these violent
Resolutions, yet I commend not the course he took to pacify the mutiny of his
Army, by yielding to them in so many things, because being suspected of the
Prince, any course had been fitter for him than this, by which he corrupted
military discipline, and by giving of his own, he as it were bought the Army,
and therefore where Tiberius heard, in what manner he had pacified them, it
troubled him not a little; Nuntiata ea, Tiberium laetitia curaque adfecere,
gaudebat oppressam seditionem, sed quod largiendis pecuniis and missione
festinata, favorem militum quaesivisset, bellica quoque gloria Germanici
augebatur. And so much more as there wanted not other ways to have appeased
the sedition, and the first way for him being so well beloved, had been that
which in matters of love is of such force, and that is, by making them jealous
he would leave them, and go to some other Army, showing how little he regarded
this mutinous Army; and in truth, if any notice might have been taken of such
conditional propositions, I verily think, the sedition by it self only would
have bin appeas^d; and there are two things that move me to think so; One, the
Example of Alexander the Great, who in a mutiny making show as though he
regarded not his Macedon soldiers, by taking Persians for the Guard of his
Body, and doing them other Honors, all the Macedonians prostrated themselves,
and in most humble manner sued unto him, whereof Quintus Curtius says,
Postquam vero cognitum est, Perses ducatus datos, barbaros in varios ordines
distributos, atque Macedonica iis imposita nomina, se vero ignominiose penitus
rejectos esse, non jam amplius conceptum animis dolorem perferre potuerunt, sed
concursu in Regiam facto, interiori duntaxat retenta tunica, arma ante januam,
poenitentiae signum projecerunt, ac prae foribus stantes, intromitti se,
sibique ignosci suppliciter atque flentes orabant, utque Rex suppliciis suis
potius saturet se, quam contumeliis, ipsos nisi venia impetrata, non
discessuros. See here the fruit of jealousy. The second thing that makes me
believe, this way would have succeeded well with Germanicus, is the Example we
have, in the very mutiny it self of the same Army, wherein when the granting
them so many things, would not yet pacify the sedition, then Germanicus (not
to this end, but to set them out of danger) was sending away his Wife and
Children, to be out of the reach of this tumultuous Army, which the soldiers
perceiving, and thereupon growing jealous that any other strange people should
keep their Captains Wife safer than Roman Legions; to the end, he should not
send her away, they presently grew quiet, Sed nihil aeque flexit (says
Tacitus) quam invidia in Treueros; orant, obsistunt, rediret, maneret; pars
Agrippinae occursantes, plurimi ad Germanicum regressi. And if the departing of
his Wife only could prevail so much, what jealousy would they have had at the
departing of their beloved Captain? certainly, without making them any other
promises, this alone would have pacified the sedition: and in case this
jealousy alone had not been sufficient, he might then have gone to the other
Army, and sent messengers to let them know, that if they delivered not up into
his hands the heads of the Rebellion, he would come and cut them in pieces good
and bad, a thing which without doubt would have done much good, as was seen,
when at last he was forced to use such terms with his soldiers under Caeciua,
At Germanicus quanquam contracto exercitu, and parata in defectores ultione,
dandum adhuc spatium ratus, si recenti exemplo (...) ipsi consulerent,
praemittit literas ad Caecinam, venire se valida manu, ac ni supplicium in
malos praesumant, usurum promiscua caede. This once heard by the soldiers,
they presently cut them all in pieces that were guilty of the mutiny: and if
this way yet would not have been sufficient, seeing this tumult was grown out
of idleness, and he was not willing to use violence, he might have taken the
other Army, and put himself in the way to go against the Enemy; this course
Caesar took, who when the Army in France rebelled, he took one Legion which he
specially favored with him, and gave leave to the mutinous Legions to go home
to Rome, which once seen, there was not a soldier that left not presently his
mutinying and follovved him: a most easy way, for if any thing hinder an Army
that is in mutiny (I mean not out of hatred) from pacifying and appeasing, it
is a fear they have to be punished, which fear cease as soon as they are
taken to go against the Enemy, every one hoping by some notable deed to cancel
the blot of their Rebellion, and therefore as soon as those first Legions were
quieted, they presently demanded to be led against the Enemy: Puniret noxios,
ignosceret lapsis, and duceret in hostem. Whereupon we see that after such
mutinies, Armies commonly show more valor than at any time before, as Livie
shows in a thousand places; and this Germanicus knew full well, who after the
slaughter the soldiers of Caecina had committed, led them presently out
against the Enemy. Truces etiam tum animos cupido involat ^undi in hostem,
piaculum furoris, nec aliter posse placari Commilitonum manes, quasi si
pectoribus impiis honesta vulnera accepissent; sequitur ardorem militum Caesar.
And further, if Germanicus were not willing to depart from the Army, being in
mutiny; yet the mutiny, having been caused by a sudden motion, he needed not
have been so hasty, to seek the appeasing of so new a mutiny, but might have
given the Soldiers deliberation; and then reason taking place, he might
without doubt have quieted them at his pleasure. Our Lord Christ in a parable,
would not have the tares to be rooted out with the corn, as long as it was in
blade and green; but appointed to stay, till they were dry; and then dividing
them, cast the tares into the fire: so should he do with Armies that are in
mutiny, that seeks to preserve them, and not to destroy them all.

He had another excellent way, and most worthy for a General to follow; and it
was, to threaten, that whosoever did not follow him, should be counted a
Rebel; and as a Rebel, should be proceeded against; a way of exceeding great
force, and especially in tumults, where there is not a head; and where they are
all equally stub borne, and every one fears for himself, as was seen in
Saul; who being declared King, was yet not followed, but only of some few;
whereupon, an occasion falling out for relieving the City of Jah, to the end
the whole Army should follow him, he caused two Oxen to be cut in pieces, and
be spread about all the borders of Israel; threatening, that whosoever did not
follow him, should have all his herds of cattle cut in pieces, as those Oxen
were: Quicunque non exierit, and secutus fuerit Saul, and Samuel; sic fiet
bobus ejus: and where the Israelites before would not all follow him, now out
of fear of the particular punishment, there was not a man that did not follow
him. Invasit ergo (it follows in the holy Text) Timor Domini populum, and
egressi sunt quas^ vir unus. Now that it had been easy for Germanicus, by
taking this course, to have quieted the tumult, is very evident; seeing Menius,
only by this course, brought one of those Legions to return back into their
Quarters; where finding a particular punishment was designed, where before they
had a purpose to kill him; now every one readily was content to follow him:
Raptum vexillum ad ripam, and fi quis agmine discessit pro desertore fore,
clamitans, reduxit in Hyberna turbidos; and nihil ausos.

Germanicus also might have used another excellent way; and it is, he should
have caused some trusty Centurion or Soldier, to declare to this mutinous
multitude, the danger into which they were fallen, and the error they had
committed; for such people commonly give credit to men of such rank, as was
seen in Julius Arufpex; who showing to the people of Germany the danger they
should incur, by rebelling against the Romans; he easily quieted them, though
he had Julius Valentinus that opposed him. At Julius Aruspex (...) primoribus
Remorum vim Romanam pacisque bona dissertans; and sumi bellum etiam ab ignavis,
strenuissimi cujusque periculo geri; jamque super caput Legiones,
sapientissimum quemque reverentia, fideque; juniores periculo ac metu
continuit, and Valentini animum laudabant, confilium (...) sequebantur. So
Cerealis also speaking to the Treviri after that manner, appeased them; as by
the process of that Oration he makes in Tacitus, may be seen. The very same
manner Drusus used with the Legions of Illyricum; employing one Clement a
Centurion, in grace with the Soldiers, for his means to pacify that
sedition. Accitur Centurio Clemens, and (...) qui alii bonis artibus grati in
vulgus; in Vigiliis, stationibus; custodiis portarum se inserunt; spem
offerunt; metum intendunt. And that this way would have been available also to
Germanicus, is evident; seeing Caecina making use hereof, with two of those
Legions; he so wrought them, that they spared not to punish the chief of the
sedition.

Another way also he might have used; and that was, to have pretended himself
their Captain in the Sedition: or if not himself, (which in many respects was
not fit for Germanicus) at least, to have caused some other principal man to
feign himself to be of their opinion; and all other remedies failing, I
suppose this might have stood Germanicus in great stead; because men commonly
give great credit to their counsels, who are interessed in the matter, as
believing they speak sincerely. For this cause, David caused his trusty friend
Chusci the Arachite, to feign himself of Absaloms side; to the end he might
hinder the counsel of Achitophel, and it happily succeeded. So Gamaliel
standing amongst the Priests, was a means to save Peter's life. Spurinna being
in Placentia, for defense of that City; and seeing the Soldiers bent to fight
with the Vitellians, who far exceeded them in number, and in all advantages;
(...) himself to be of their opinion: seeing them in such a tumult, and
thereupon leading them forth, he easily made them see their error, and
perceive the danger; and showing them good reasons, he reduced them to
obedience. Fit (...) alienae comes Spurinna; primo coactus, mox velle (...),
quo (...) authoritatis inesset confiliis, si seditio mitesceret. And a little
after, Ipse postremo Spurinna, non tam culpam exprobrans, quam ratione
ostendens, relictis exploratoribus, caeteros Placentiam (...) minus turbidos,
and imperia accipientes. The Nolani also, seeing the people bent to take part
with Hanniball, seigned themselves to be of the same opinion; and by this means
gained time till Marcellus came: Vbi Senatum metus accepit, si palam contra
tenderent, resisti multitudini concitatae non posse; clam (...) dilationem mali
inveniunt: placere enim fibi defectionem ad Annibalem simulant. This in truth
is an exquisite way, when a peo ple cannot be mastered, then to second them;
because, being not suspected, they may do much good: an example hereof we have
in the first book of Tacitus, of that Clement the Centurion; who speaking to
the Army, said not, do you, and say you; but let us do, and let us say;
thereby to show he was interessed as well as they; Quanquam filium Imperatoris
obsidebimus, quis certaminum finis? Percennioni and Vibuleno sacramentum
dicturi sumus?

Seeing then Germanicus had so many ways, availeable to appease the
Insurrection, and he made use of the worst; I cannot but think he was either
very unadvised, or very malicious.

Having now distinguished the Captains; it remains (for performance of my
offer) to distinguish the occasions and the times. The occasions then, may in
part be just, or wholly unjust: Of the first kind, are want of Pay, want of
Victuals, and such like; and in such insurrections, it is necessary, if he
can, to give the Soldiers satisfaction; if he cannot, to show at least that
he is not any cause of the want: and if it be in default of Victuals, the
Captain shall do well to eat in public of the same meats that others eat;
to show, that he himself suffers as well as the Army: This way has often
been used, and always with good success. The occasions that are unjust, are
wont to happen, either out of some sudden anger, upon denial of some
particular demand; or else out of hatred, and a resolution not to serve. In the
first case, it is no doubt, more easy to pacify an Insurrection, then in the
second; because hatred is much more durable and incurable, then anger is; as
that which grows from a more durable occasion then anger does: that growing
out of a habit, and this out of passion; and as a passion passes away sooner
then a disposition, or a habit; so anger is sooner passed over and gone, then
hatred: Besides, it is also much the worse, because (...) wishes an enemy
evil, as it is evil; where he that is angry wishes an enemy evil, but not
as evil: but Sub ratione boni, (to use this term) esteeming the evil to be
just, as being vindicative; and seeing it is manifest, (according to Saint
Thomas) that to wish evil under the color of good, has less evil in it
then to wish evil simply: it follows, that hatred is not only of more
continuance; but of a worse condition also then anger is. In the first case
then, that is of anger; a valiant Captain shall either by temporizing, or else
by bold opposition, which is indeed more becoming a generous spirit, easily
appease them. The Legions in Germany, under Flaccus Ordeonius, were in mutiny,
and would kill the Captain for putting a Soldier in prison: whereupon Vocula,
Legate of a Legion, being a bold and courageous Captain, gave order the
prisoner should be put to death; which so affrighted the Soldiers, that they
were presently quiet: for indeed, it is the nature of common people, if they
fear not others, they will make others fear them; but if they fear, they
will be as quiet as Lambs; and a child may beat them: according to that place
of Tacitus; Terrere ni paveant, ubi pertimuerint, impune contemni. And
sometimes they love a man the better for making them fear, as admiring the
greatness of his spirit: whereupon we see, that those Legions, after that
Vocula had put the Soldier to death, would have him to be their Captain:
Conscendit Tribunal Vocula (says Tacitus) mira constantia; prehensumque
militem ac vociferantem duci ad supplicium jussit. Et dum mali pavent, optimus
quis que jussis paruere. Exin consensu Ducem Voculam poscentibus, Flaccus
summam rerum ei permisit. Another time those Legions mutinying again, took
that Flaccus Ordeonius and bound him; but upon the coming of Vocula, they
presently unbound him: and Vocula meaning to punish this disorder, forbore for
a time, till their choler were over; by which means the day following, he
eafily put to death the Authors of the mutiny. Is postera die, authors
seditionis morte affecit; tanta illi exercitui diverfitas inerat, licentiae
patientiaeque.

But if the occasion grow from hatred, and from a resolution to serve no
longer; I then see not any way there is to pacify it: because if they demand
Pay, or such like, they do it to this end; that being denied it, they may have
color for their insurrection; and to grant them that which they demand, is to
give them occasion to ask afterward things impossible. This very thing
happened to Flaccus; who having sent certain companies of Batavians toward
Rome; and they by the way receiving Letters from Civilis, fell to demand a
thousand impertinencies: of which, when Flaccus had granted them a part; they
then took occafion to demand far greater. Iisdem diebus, Batavorum and
Caninefatium cobortes, cum jussu Vitelli in urbem pergerent; missus a Civil
nuntius assequitur. Intumuere statim superbia, ferociaque and pretium itineris
Donativum, duplex stipendium: augeri equitum numerum, promissa sane a Vitellio
postulabant, non ut assequerentur, sed causam seditioni. Et Flaccus multa
concedendo, nihil aliud effecerat, quam ut acrius exposcerent, quae sciebant
negaturum. The like befell the Carthagenians, whose rebelling Soldiers finding
many of their demands granted, they became more insolent then before: for it is
not always true, that Humility is opposite to Pride; but sometimes, and
particularly in this case, Humility makes the Pride the greater: such men
thinking, that whatsoever is granted them, is not granted them out of humanity,
but out of fear; and thereupon taking heart, they grow to demand far greater
matters. This, those Senators in Livy meant to infer, when they said, Certum
habere majores quoque si divinassent, concedendo omnia, non mitiorem in se
plebem, sed asperiorem; alia ex aliis iniquiora postulando, cum prima
impetrasset. And Tacitus also, when in the life of Agricola, he says, Nihil
profici patientia; nifi ut graviora, (...) ex faoili tolerantibus imperentur.
Whereupon against such, there is no better way then to show teeth; (as the
Italian Proverb is) which is, to be rough with them: seeing it is easy for
one to make himself be feared, if from being vilified before thorough
mildness; he suddenly, contrary to expectation, alter his countenance, and
look big.

There is another way also that may be used; and it is, to go gaining of time
so long, till all things needful may be provided; and then, to cut them all to
pieces: seeing, (as I said before) that to quiet such, is a thing impossible.
He that would now see a manifest example of the difference that is between an
Army, that mutinies out of hatred, and a determinate will; and an Army that
mutinies upon some other occasion; let him look upon Vocula, who two several
times found it easy to appease a sedition, grown in the Army out of anger;
but the third time, when out of a determinate will and hatred they rebelled,
and meant to run to the Enemy; he then seeking to quiet them, was instantly by
them slain. And thus (...) concerning the occasions.

Now for the times; either they are of peace, or of great enterprises that are
in hand; or of the Enemies approaching. In the first, there want not ways;
seeing they can never do much hurt. In the second, though it seems hard, yet
it is but easy; and the best way is, to make a show, not to regard them. The
Soldiers of Augustus foreseeing a war which was like to be against Anthony,
(as Dio relates) desired leave to be excused from the service; not because they
would be so indeed, but because they meant to hold Augustus (as the saying is)
to hard meat, and make him grant what they demanded, for fear they should
leave him; and he as crafty as they, finding it not fit, for a Captain to
submit himself to the Soldiers wills, answered them, They had reason to ask
leave, and gave it them; retayning only those that had served in the wars
ten years: and thus by slighting those other, and showing he cared not whether
they stayed or no; There was not a man went from him, but all stayed with him.
The last time is of all the hardest, or rather is impossible; and that is, when
they are in face of the Enemy: and in this case, the best way is, to seek to
quiet them by any means, though never so bad, and by granting them all they
demand; whether it be just, or unjust. The Romans having their Enemies at hand,
and being at variance with the people, who retired to the Hill Aventine, and
would not stir a foot against the Enemies, unless they might have their
demands granted: the Senate resolved to satisfy them howsoever, and therefore
granted all they demanded; Eam per aequa, per iniqua, reconciliandam Civitati
esse.

At Romae nondum cognito, qui fuisset exitus in Illyrico; and Legionum
Germanicarum motu audito; trepida Civitas incusare Tiberium.
That Tiberius did well not to stir from Rome. The seven and fortieth
Discourse.

ALthough the City of Rome, when they heard the Armies of Pannonia and Germany
were in sedition, openly complained of Tiberius; and blamed him, that he would
not go in person to appease those tumults; yet Tiberius for all that, was
resolved not to stir from the City: which resolution, though it succeeded well
with him, yet it is not necessarily to be commended; seeing oftentimes a
Council not very advised, has yet through the favor of fortune, had
admirable success; and on the contrary, a mature deliberation, an unhappy
issue. So as, seeing wise men ought not to judge of Deliberations, which are
subject to Accidents, by only the understanding: It is no marvel (...) some
imagine, that Tiberius understood not this, who would stay in Rome, when the
Armies were in such confusion. Seeing in Insurrections, the authority of a
Prince, and specially when he is (...) bello, is able to prevail much: Nothing
in such cases being of greater moment then Majesty, by means whereof, notonely
Augustus, (who by one word speaking, appeased a great Sedition) but infinite
others have had in tumults happy success. Yet notwithstanding all this, I am
of opinion, that in so great a man as Tiberius was, the Deliberation was not
less advised, then the success was happy; seeing (as Tacitus says) if he had
gone, he must of necessity have gone to one Army, before he went to the other;
and by so doing, should have showed himself partial, the only way to have
lost their love to whom he went last as in the process of Tacitu^ his
Histories is often to be seen. To this may be added the danger; that if the
Army by his coming should not have been quieted, there had been afterward no
other refuge: And therefore for my part, I should think it the best course,
when rebellions a^ise, to send thither some such person, that if he be
slighted, another greater may be sent, and not to show the uttermost at first.
This is made plain to us by our Lord God in Saint Matthew, where in a Parable
he says, that a Father of a Family, seeing the husbandmen of his Vineyard
suffering all things to go to wrack, and having none to send to them but
servants and his son: at first he sent servants, and them they killed and
stoned; and then at last he sent his son, which was the last refuge in this
case, as Tiberius was in ours: Whereupon he says, Pater familias Dominus Vine^
(...) servos ad Agricolas, qui ex illis alios occiderunt, alios lapidaverunt;
Novissime autem misit ad eos filium suum, dicens, Reverebuntur filium meum; hoc
est ^nim ultimum refugium. Thus our Lord God sent first his Prophets, to
pacify the Rebellion of men; of whom when part were slain, and part despised,
he came at last himself in person. It is therefore the best course, to try
first all other ways, before a Prince expose himself amongst Rebels; for if
he should be slighted, there then remains no further refuge. Quod aliud
sub^dium, fi Imperatorem sprevissent? and therefore Galba had counsel given
him, to try the minds of the Praetorian Soldiers, being in mutiny, by some
other: Nec per ipsum Galbam cujus integra authoritas majoribus remediis
servabatur; and so much the more, because the Prince being away, the Soldiers
perhaps will bear respect to his Ministers; as fearing otherwise, least the
Prince may seek to be revenged: but if the Prince go himself in person, and
be killed; what fear can they have of any to revenge it? whereupon it is
written in Saint Matthew, Hic est (...), venite occidamus eum; and occupemus
haereditatem (...). To this may be added, that if Tiberius had gone himself
to these Armies, he must have been forced to cut in pieces the whole Legions:
for if the Army in Germany should have stood upon such terms with him, as it
did with Germanicus, he must for his honors sake have made them resent it in a
very great degree; and could never have condescended to many things which
Germanicus granted: Majus enim quid a Principe expectatur: seeing there are
many things tolerated by Generals of Armies, which if the Prince were there
himself, would never be tolerated. Whereupon, when Moses prayed God that he
would be the Armies Guide into the Land of Promise; He answered him, I will
send an Angel to be their Guide; for if I should go my self, and the Army
happen to rebel, I should be forced utterly to destroy them. Non enim ascendam
tecum, quia populus durae cervicis est; ne forte disperdam te in via: and
therefore Princes oftentimes should avoid such encounters, that they may not
aggravate their Subjects faults. And for this, Germanicus said, he would send
away Agrippina from the Army, least her death should be the more grievous for
aggravating the Soldiers fault. And Jeremy, when the Synagogue went about to
kill him; seemed to grieve for nothing so much, as that his death should
aggravate their offense. Cognoscite, quia fi occideritis me, sanguinem tradetis
contra vosmetipsos. Lastly, if there were no other reason for it, this one
would much prevail with me: that a Prince come newly to his State, and but ill
beloved of all, should upon no occasion stir out of the City, and specially
in his beginning; seeing the presence of the Prince is of greatest force to
hinder Rebellions. Whereupon it is no marvel, that Pistoia rebelled against
Aguccio of Fagivola, as soon as they saw him gone out of the City. And
likewise Florence against Charles the King of France his brother. And the
people of Israel fell one time to mutiny, for no other cause, but because their
Leader Moses was gone from them, being called up by our Lord God into Mount
Sinai. If then the people of Israel so much bound to Moses, and after so many
years, who had freed them from the bondage of Egypt, had nourished them with
Manna in the Wilderness, had made water flow out of Rocks, and many such like
benefits; yet only because he was gone up to Mount Sinai to speak with God
for their good, could find in their hearts to rebel: what would have been
done against a Tyrant, a perfidious man, an enemy of the City; and in the
beginning of his Empire, if he had gone into Germany to pacify those tumults?
and so much the more, as not having any trusty person to leave behind him in
his stead, for the Senate was his enemy; his mother repented that ever she
help him to the Empire: and as for the Traitor (...), what trusting was there
to him? And indeed, if there had been any whom he might have trusted, it would
have done him no good; no more then it did Moses to leave Aaron in his place.
Also Abimelech Prince of the Sichemites, going out of the City, in the
beginning of his Empire, left in it his assured friend Zebull, yet it did him
no good; for no sooner was he gone, but the people mutinyed, and made Gaall
their Prince; as plainly appears in the Book of Judges. So as we may conclude,
Tiberius should have hazarded himself exceedingly if he had lest, and thereby
lost the City of Rome: which he knowing (says Tacitus) Fixumque Tiberio fuit,
non amittere caput Imperii. For, having the Senate and people his enemies;
These for taking away their Liberty, Those for taking away their Authority; and
then the Armies in mutiny, and calling upon Germanicus to be Emperor, he might
well think, that if Germanicus had once seen him out of Rome, he would never
have refused the Empire in choler. To this I add, that though Tiberius had
been sure of the City of Rome, yet he had no reason to put himself into the
hands of the Army; which having intended to kill the Legates, and Germanicus
himself; plainly showed, they had cast off all respect and reverence. Ne in
colluvione rerum Majestatem suam contumeli^ offerret.

As for the reasons before alleged, they are of (...) forces to say, that
Majesty is able to appease tumults. Ire ipsum and opponere Majestatem
imperitoriam debuisse: for Majesty when it is not accompanied with force,
runs always a hazard; at least, for the most part, as was seen in the
Prophets, who came unarmed; which the Roman Soldiers well perceived, in a
discord they had with the people: In which Livy says, Huic tantae tempestati
cum se consules obtulissent, facile experti sunt, parum tutam Majestatem fine
viribus esse: seeing (as he says a little after) there is not a more weak
thing then Majesty is, when it is alone. Nihil contemptius, neque infirmius,
si fint qui contemnant: Yet I say not but that Majesty may do some good at a
first brunt, before it be sound to be nothing but a shadow without substance,
consisting only in opinion. I do not therefore marvel that the Emperor
Rodolphus passing in his Coach to the Army that was in mutiny, without staying
a jott, in manner of a lightening, was able to quiet it. For so also it
succeeded well with Caius Fabius, who passed from the Capitol to the Mount,
where he meant to sacrifice, thorough the French Army, in habit of a Priest;
seeing it was done in so short a time, and upon such a sudden, as they had not
space to take notice of it: Whereupon we see, that Ferdinand of Arragon, going
forth amongst the people in a tumult, suddenly appeased it; but then upon
consideration of this reason, he presently returned into his Castle. And for
this it was, as I conceive, that when Drusus had quieted the Legions of
Illyricum, he would not stay the coming of the Ambassadors; but instantly
went away to Rome: Whereupon those old Senators, who at the first taking of
Rome, stayed in their houses in their Senators Robes, were by the majesty of
their persons for a little time defended; but it was not long ere the French
perceived that this majesty of theirs was without any power, only in opinion;
so as they began at first to scorn them, and at last to kill them.

It may therefore be concluded, that to trust to Majesty without force, is a
dangerous business; and therefore Tiberius meaning tacitly to answer the
objection, said, Majestate salva, cui e longinquo major reverentia; meaning to
show, that Majesty does not the like good near hand, as it does a far off;
seeing the further it is off, the greater it grows; the nearer it comes, it
grows the lesser. This was plainly seen, when Scipio and Lucius Quintius
standing in competition for the Consulship, it was given to Lucius Quintius,
for no other cause but this: whereof Livy says, Accedebat quod alter decimum
jam prope annum assiduus in oculis hominum fuerat: quae res minus verendos
magnos homines ipsa satietate facit. And of this, besides Examples, there may
be given Philosophical reasons: The first, because reverence to a man far
off, must needs grow from Fame; and Fame cannot come, but it must needs pass
by the mouths of many; so as the first mouth which begins to relate it to
another, always adds something out of love and affection to him, whose
actions he relates: and the second mouth when it comes to his turn, cannot
relate again, without adding something of his own; and so that other to
another, In infinitum. Seeing we consift of parts that have a natural
instinct, never to return things in the same manner they receive them, without
imparting something of theirs: so the stomach converts the meat into Chylus;
the liver, the Chylus into blood; and so from hand to hand: Whereupon, not
without cause it is said of Fame, that it increases as it flies, like a
snow-ball falling from a hill; which, though little at first parting, yet every
place where it passes adding snow unto it, It grows at last to a huge
bigness; and this greatness it gets by removing far off from its beginning.

Another reason, if I be not deceived, may be drawn from the conception of the
understanding, as being able to form in it self a conceit of things, more or
less perfect, then it is it self; If of things more perfect, then it forms a
conceit more imperfect; as while it conceives God: If of things less perfect,
then it forms a conceit more perfect; and therefore in Gods understanding, all
things are in such a manner, as he himself is. In understanding, material and
sensible things are much more perfect then they are in themselves: the
understanding being more perfect, because spiritual; whereupon all
Philosophers hold, that the pattern of a House is more perfectly represented
in the understanding, then the fabric of the House it self is in existence:
so as by this reason, it is plain, that a thing is greater contemplated then
seen: And so it follows, That the Majesty which is contemplated, as
represented only to the understanding; is greater then that which is beheld,
as presented to the sense. Whereupon the Prophet Esaias, meaning to show, who
they are would follow Christ most; says, Et qui non audierunt contemplati
sunt: as though he would say, that they were most like to admire the Majesty
of Christ, who had neither heard him, nor seen him, but only contemplated him.
Plato therefore spoke not idly when he said, That love increases by
remoteness, in regard of the Idaea. And Aristotle said well, That when men are
not known, they are reverenced; and when known slighted: which was found true
in Saul; who when at first he was chosen King, the people desired infinitely to
see him; and as soon as they saw him, they began to despise him.

It is therefore manifest enough, that remoteness is an increase; and by the
contrary, that nearenesse is a diminisher: For the vulgar sort, of whom we now
speak, judges things according to sense, from without and in the bark; so as
coming to have those things to be present, which they conceived to be great;
and not judging them answerable to their expectation, they quickly grow to
contemn them, and count all but fables they had heard of them: Therefore our
Lord God knowing that this race of people stands only upon apparences, he gave
them Saul to be their King; which Procopius relating, upon those words;
Foenitet me quod constituerim Saulem, says, Saulem elegit propter egregiam
staturam; non quod ipse qui omnium est Opifex, tanti eam faoeret: sed propter
populum, qui ea quae sensibus apparent pulchra, tantum inspicit, and admiratur.

This also may happen thorough men's defects, as well in their minds as bodies;
seeing there is no man so perfect, but he has some defect or other; which Fame
carries not abroad, but Nearenesse discovers. No marvel therefore that the
common people of Rome, seeing Galba not to be so handsome a man as Nero, began
to despise him: which happened also to Lewis the eleventh. With good reason
then, and notably well did Tiberius make answer to the objection of the City;
Ire ipsum, opponere Majestatem: by saying, Majestate salva; cui e longinquo
major Reverentia.

De sententia legati statuunt tempus, quo seditiosissimum quemque and seditioni
promptum (...) invadant. Tunc signo inter se dato, irrumpunt contubernia,
trucidant ignaros.
That to punish seditious Soldiers, by the Soldiers own hands, is very
profitable, and that ministers for the most part, in punishing exceed their
limits. The eight and fortieth (...).

AS soon as Germanicus had punished the heads of those Legions that were
amongst the Cauci, those other Legions, which were governed by Cacina, went
away to the Vbij, whereat Germanicus taking great indignation, was preparing to
(...) them by force, who thus voluntarily had revolted from him; yet he would
first send letters to Caecina, advertising him, that if the soldiers did not
themselves punish their seducers, he would come upon them with his Army, and
kill both good and bad together; when they who were free from the contagion
heard this, they determined between themselves (yet with Caecinaes consent) to
kill all those soldiers that had any hand in the Rebellion, and after the
sign given for the Execution, they fell with great confusion to cut in pieces,
as well good as bad, in such sort, that Germanicus coming to the Camp, with
tears reproved them, for so severely executing his will, and passing their
bounds.

By occasion of this passage, there are many things that offer themselves to be
discoursed of; the first, what the occasion was, why in the former Rebellion,
only the Heads were punished, and in this were punished all that any way were
guilty of it; secondly, whether this way of punishing by their own Companions
be good. Thirdly and lastly, by occasion of these soldiers, who in punishing
their Companions, far exceeded the command given them; we will see whether
this happen not also in the Officers of Princes, and why for the most part,
they punish more, and reward less than they are commanded.

Concerning the first, there was great reason why these should be more severely
punished than the other, because having their Example before them, they yet
persisted in the same rebellious courses, as Tacitus shows in these words, At
Germanicus quanquam contracto exercitui, and parata in defectores ultione,
dandum adhuc spatium ratus, fi recenti exemplo fibi ipfi consulerent. But
seeing their Example did not mend them, they were justly punished more than the
other. So God punished Lamech more than Cain, and yet Lamech had not killed a
brother, but only because he was not amended by the others Example, and thus
Theophylact upon Saint Matthew expounds it in those words, Vt veniat super vos
omnis sanguis justus, qui effunditur super terram, a sanguine Abel justi, usque
ad sanguinem (...), whereupon this Author says, super Iudaeos illos, qui tunc
erant, dicit, veniat omnis sanguis injuste effusus, plus enim punientur quam
patres sui, nam neque post tanta exempla emendati fuerunt, ficut enim Lamech
post Cain, plus enim punitus fuit; licet non interemisset fratrem, eo quod non
fuisset ad exemplum Cain emendatus. Good reason therefore had Germanicus to
have them be more punished, who were not amended, by having an Example before
their eyes, so Scipio Africanus did, and many others: but because contrariwise,
the first of^entimes are more punished than the second, as was seen in Ananias
and Saphyra, in the Acts of the Apostles; in the Deluge, in the subversion of
Sodom, and infinite many in our time, who committing the same faults, yet have
not the same punishments, (I speak not of the Eternal) I wouldtherfore make
distinction, either it is the same party that commits both faults, and then the
Law is, he should be more punished, for the second time offending, or else they
are several pa^ties, and then, either of faults committed against some new
Law, and then the first are more to be punished than the second, to the end
there may grow no abuse, and that the Law with more care may be observed, or
else we speak of faults committed against a Law already established, and then
the second is more to be punished than the first; in regard of the Example he
has before him. To come finally to the particular of these Rebellions; if the
first time, the fault be severely punished, it will be a cause, that hardly it
will be committed the second time; but if by ill fortune, it be committed, and
they rebel the second time, there will be then little hope to quiet them;
because the fear to be punished, as at the first time, will hinder them from
quiching; and if in the first insurrection there be not used an excess of
rigor, it will be an occasion, they will easily make insurrection the second
time; but yet it will be easy then to quiet them, as it happened to Scipio.

Concerning the second, to punish the seditious by the soldiers own hands, is
occasion of many laudable effects. First, the hatred goes always against them
that act the punishment, and therefore when the Army now quieted, would have
Germanicus to punish the offenders, he answered, Ipfi exequerentur; whereof
Tacitus a little after showing the reason, says, Nec Caesar arcebat, (meaning
that had done the slaughter) Quando nullo ipfius jussu, penes ^osdem saevitia
facti, and invidiaerat.

A second reason is, that seeing all the seditious cannot be punished, but
only the Heads; unless he should destroy the whole Army, it seems that if
the baser sort be not punished, it will give them means to be able, and
occasion to be ready upon every light distaste to mutiny again, which by
punishing the Heads by the proper hands of the multitude, will be remedied and
prevented, because they will find none afterward forward to incite them, when
they see such an Example of their ungratefulness toward them them that
incited, and were their Heads before, and of themselves, they will be never
able to make any innovation, Nihil ausuram plebem principibus amotis.

Thirdly, because the General by this means will remove the hatred which
might grow by such slaughters, from himself to the soldiers; this way John
Bentivoglio in Bolonia took, when being advertised by his Adversary Duke
Valentine, that many of the principal of the City had a meaning to receive him
into Bolonia with an Army, which perhaps Valentine did, to the end that
Bentivoglio might shed the blood of his Nobles, and thereby make the Heads of
them his Enemies, and finally be murdered by them, but he giving credit to
what Valentine writ, caused his son Hermes and the greater part of the young
Nobles of Bolonia to go and commit those slaughters, to the end that they
imbruing their hands in the blood of Bentivoglio his Enemies might run the same
fortune with himself, and consequently never after abandon their Prince,
because if he should chance to be driven out, they might be sure themselves to
fare no better; so as Bentivoglio made that a means to make himself secure,
which Valentine intended should have made him odious. Herod fearing John the
Baptist, and meaning to put him to death, invited to supper all the principal
men of Galile, to the end that they also might have a part in the slaughter,
and thereby be tied to defend him, if there should be need, of which the holy
Text in Saint Mark says, Herodes autem metuebat Johannem, sciens eum virum
justum and sanctum, and custodiebat eum; and audito (...), multa faciebat, and
libenter eum audiebat; and cum dies opportunus accidisset, Herodes natalis sui
coenam fecit, Principibus, and Tribunis, and Primis Galileae, and that which
follows. A pestilent course, because as well in the case before as in this,
there was a most cruel and unlawful Execution. But if (as in our case we
presuppose) there should be an occasion deserving death, I then conceive, it
would not do well, unless execution of the slaughter were conferred upon their
own companions; And thus did Moses, who almost just in the same manner as
Caecina did, punished his people when they rebelled against him, or rather
against God, in worshipping the golden (...), for he caused the Tribe of Levi,
to enter into the Camp, and to go from one end to the other, forward and
backward, and cut them all in pieces whom they found to have upon them a
certain mark, which what it was I will not at this time stand to speak of; Si
quis est Domini, (says Moses) jungatur mihi; congregatique suntomnes filij
Levi ad eum, quibus ait, Haec dicit Dominus (...) Israel, Ponat vir gladium
super faemur suum, ite and redite de porta usque ad portam, per medium
castrorum, and occidat unusquisque fratrem and amicum, and proximum suum: and
therefore the way which Caecina used in the Rebellion was a good way.

Fourthly, those Soldiers which were no partakers in the Rebellion are the
gladder, if they can wash their hands in the blood of the offenders; Laetabitur
justus, cum viderit vindictam, manus (...) lavabit in sanguine peccatoris.
Whereupon in that first sedition, when the Soldiers had killed them that were
guilty, as though that slaughter were their own absolution, they rejoiced;
Gaudebat caedibus miles, tanquam semet absolveret.

It remains to show whether it be true, that Officers in execution of
punishments use to exceed their commission: and that it is true, is plainly
showed by Saint John in the Apocalypse, where a voice saying to the seven
Angels, Ite and effundite septem phialas irae Dei interram: they went and
powered them out, not only upon the land, but upon the rivers also, upon the
fountains, upon the sea, and even upon the sun: upon the same occasion, in
another place of the Apocalypse, an Angel cried aloud to four Angels, to whom
power was given to hurt the Earth and the Sea, saying, Nolite nocere terrae and
mari neque arboribus: he needed not have said, arboribus, seeing those Angels
had power to hurt but only the Earth and the Sea, he therefore cried so (as a
Writer observes) because he saw those Angels interpreted the power given them
to hurt, in too large a sense, as meaning to hurt not only the Earth and the
Sea, but the trees also; or perhaps he doubted, least as Officers interpret
always too largely the power given them to inflict punishments, so they should
interpret too narrowly, the power given them to bestow benefits; whereupon he
thought it not enough to say, Nolite nocere terrae and mari, and therefore
added, neque arboribus: so also in Esaias, our Lord God commanded that the
Israelites should be humbled by the King of the Assyrians, and he intended to
destroy them, God commanded him to tread upon them, and he went about to put
them all to the sword.

This therefore is an ordinary thing with Officers to restrain favors, and
enlarge punishment, which grows upon this, because as building their fortunes
upon the Princes treasure and honors, they think every thing lost to
themselves which is given to another, and therefore always interpret favors
narrowly, and punishments largely, as well to second the Prince in his anger,
and make him the more gracious to themselves, as taking to heart the wrongs
that are offered him, as also to make the delinquents faults seem greater than
they are; to the end, the Prince seeing them so cruel to them, that so
perfidiously had vvronged him, may take notice how faithful they are in his
service, and how much they resent his injuries.

Iunctoque Ponte tramittit duodecim millia E legionibus sex, and viginti socias
cohortes, octo Equitum Alas, quarum (...) seditione intemerata modestia suit.
Whether an Army be apter to rebel, that consists of one Nation only, or that
which consists of many. The nine and fortieth Discourse.

BY occasion of auxiliary Soldiers, (which for any thing can be gathered from
the forealleaged words of Tacitus) stood alvvayes quiet, and kept themselves
in good order, when the Roman Legions oftentimes sell into seditions; Iam
drawn to think, that Armies composed of diverse Nations, are less apt to be
mutinous than those which are all of one Nation; having a manifest Example
thereof in the Army of Hannibal, which being composed of an infinite number of
Nations, differing in Language, in customs, in Religion, yet they never
mutinyed nor rebelled, although they had a thousand times occasion, by the many
wants they suffered, which Livy wondered at, saying, Quippe qui cum in hostium
terra, per annos trede^ jam procul a domo, varia fortuna bellum gereret;
exercitu non suo civili, sed mixto ex colluvione omnium gentium, quibus non
lex, non mos, non lingua communis, alius habitus, alia vestis, alia arma, alii
ritus, alia sacra, alii prope dii essent, ita quodam uno vinculo (...), ut
nulla nec inter ipsos, nec adversus ducem seditio (...). The reason of this is,
because being of diverse language, they do not so easily accord, and if one part
should happen to mutiny, it is easy to oppose it with another, which either
through emulation, or some other cause, can seldom times be brought to agree
together; besides it happens, because if one of those Nations chance to mutiny,
and abandon the Army, yet the Army will not be much weakened by it, as a
thousand times has been seen in Flanders in the King of Spaines Armies, and
other places. When Hannibal meant to pass into Italy, the Carpetani forsook
him, and he making show he had given them leave, made no matter of it, and his
Army was not thereby weakened, where if his Army had consisted of one Nation,
he had never been able to pass into Italy. And this Ludovico Il Moro found,
against whom when his Army rebelled, which consisted all of Swis^ers, he was
forced to (...) his state, and be taken prisoner.

But if by ill fortune an Army consist^ of diverse Nations happen to mutiny, as
it is hard to happen; so if it happen, it is impossible to appease it, of
which the Carthaginians had a notable experience, when having an Army of that
sort, they vvanted not much of loosing their whole state, and Carthage it
self. The reason is, because there cannot be speeches made to the whole Army
when it consists of diverse Languages, as there might be if it consisted but of
one.

An Army then, if only one Nation, is more apt to mutiny, but is withal more
easy to be quieted; an Army of diverse Nations is less apt to mutiny, but if
it mutiny, is impossible to be quieted: moreover, it is to be known, that as
such Armies seldom grow tumultuous against their Commanders, so amongst
themselves, there grow tumults often, and of these cases Histories are full,
their being always discord where there are diverse Nations. Rebe^ca being great
with child by Isaak, and having in her womb Jacob and Esau, she felt a great
striving of these two sons, which put her to much pain, whereof complaining
to our Lord God, he answered, (...) gentes sunt in utero tuo, and duo populi ex
ventre tuo (...) as though he would say, Marvel not if they strive together,
seeing they are two diverse Nations, which thou have in thy body.

Alia Tiberio morum via, sed populum per tot annos molliter habitum, nondum
audebat ad duriora vertere.
That to pass from one extreme to another is dangerous, and how it happens
that su^cessours commonly take courses differing from their predecessors. The
fiftieth Discourse.

TO pass from one extreme to another without coming to the middle, not only
is dangerous, but in many things is held impossible, as in motion, in such
manner that some Divines deny, that Angels can move from one extreme to
another, without passing by the middle, so as Hippocrates with good reason in
his book of Aphorisms, mislikes the passing from a surfeit to a diet; and yet a
surfeit is bad, a diet good, but the passing from a surfeit to a diet is most
dangerous, whereof Aristotle in one of his Problemes, brings Dion^sius the
Tyrant for an Example, who in the siege of his City, forbearing to eat and
drink as he was wont, by this passing from Intemperance to Temperance, he fell
into a Leprosy. What is worse than a corrupt Commonwealth? What better than a
regal Government? yet he that has gone about to pass from the one to the
other, as it were at one jumpe, either it has not been succesfull; or it has
not been durable: whereupon we see that Musicians will not make a passage from
a Discord (as a seventh) to a perfect Concord, as a fifth, without passing
first to a sixth, and when they mean to make good a second they go to a third,
and not to an eighth. By (...) degrees the Commonwealth of Rome came to a
(...) all power; for from a Democracy, it passed to an Oligarchy; from that, to
the Government of One; and this One not willing to make that jumpe contented
himself to be called Dictator, for if he had been called King, he had run a
manifest hazard, as was plainly seen, when Antonius would have put a Crown upon
his head; and indeed Cicero said, that Anthonies tongue calling him King, was
more the occasion of Caesar's death than Brutus his dagger. After him comes
Augustus, and Caesar having passed from one extreme, it was now easy for him
to pass toward the other extreme, and therefore he was able after taking upon
him the Tribunitiall dignity, to take upon him also that of Emperor; but he
came not full out to the other extreme, seeing he carried himself as a
companion, an equal, and as it were a Citizen with the rest, at least in show;
as leaving some authority to the people, and deliberating in a manner of all
things with the Senate. After Augustus came Tiberius, and he was able fully to
reach the other extreme; but yet not all at once: For, first he raised
himself from equality; then he took from the people that little authority they
had; and then lastly would be feared, and acknowledged for Prince. Alia Tiberio
morum (...) sed populum per tot annos molliter habitum, nondum audebat ad
duriora vertere.

Augustus then, a Prince of that Prudence, as every one knows, not only
ordained new sports for recreation of the people; but he in person would be
present at them. Tiberius on the contrary, an excellent man, full of all the
State wisdom that can be in a Prince, was (...) from delighting in the
sports; yet durst not take them quite away. Whereupon, it should seem to him
that would consider these things to the full; that one of them did do well the
other ill: seeing of two contraries, when one is good, the other must needs be
bad. Yet, I am of opinion that both of them did well; and if they had done
otherwise, they would have met with difficulties. For, as for Augustus, there
was reason, that the people, who for so many years had been toyled with
continual wars, should be refreshed with some recreations; as Augustus did,
by ordaining of sports, and himself oftentimes to be present at them; that he
might not at first show that inequality, from which but a few days before he
had been raised: But because, as after a cruel Prince, if there come another
that is cruel; he easily, by reason of the peoples hatred, runs a hazard: So
if after a Prince so mild, that rules only with love, there come another
Prince of like nature, he easily falls into contempt, and thereby stands in
hazard of his state. It was therefore necessary, that Tiberius, to make a
complete settling of his power, should use a little rigor; and differing from
Augustus, should show how much a Prince differs from a private person, by
getting himself not only love, but fear also; which cannot well be maintained
by him that carries himself mildely, and suffers himself to be often seen.
Tiberius then, being to use a diverse manner, he could not in those
beginnings, Ad^duriora vertere; seeing (as I have said) that passing from one
extreme to another, is extremely dangerous, and was it that ruined Galba; for
the people and the Soldiers being accustomed to the bounty of Nero, finding
themselves upon a sudden restrained, could not endure it; Nocuit antiquus
rigor: and nimia severitas cui jam pares non sumus: and therefore they who
conspired the first time against Nero, meant to make Piso Emperor; a man that
favored sports and pleasures exceedingly: Idque pluribus probabatur, qui in
tanta vitiorum dulcedine, summum Imperium non restrictum, nee perseverum
volunt. The City of Ferrara was accustomed under Duke Alphonso of glorious
memory, to live in delights and sports; and therefore when it came into the
hands of Pope Clement the eighth, a man of singular prudence, and never enough
to be commended; he would not upon the sudden restrain the people, but
leaving them their delights, maintained them with sweetness in the Vigils, and
Turneaments, and other generous Exercises.

But that Tiberius, Successor of Augustus, was unlike to his Predecessor, is
no marvel; seeing it is commonly so, and in all times has ever been so. Numa
Pompilius was most differing from Romulus. David a warlike man, had for his
Successor Solomon a peaceable man. To Moses a Lawgiver, succeeded Josua a
warrior. I forbear to bring modern Examples, as a thing odious; and look,
that every one should of himself consider, that he who in a government
succeedes another that is cruel, is commonly merciful; and he who succeedes
one that is grown odious to the people, makes himself commonly odious to the
Nobility. And this is so true, that I think it more needful to seek out the
reason, then to doubt the effect; and although the search of it be difficult,
yet I would say first, that every one having a certain inbred desire to outgoe
his Predecessor, which is a thing easier to be done, in matters wherein, he
either excelled not, or did ill, they betake themselves to a contrary course.
Whereupon, if Numa Pompilius would have gone about to exceed Romulus in war,
he had never attained it; but to excel him in Religion, which by his
Predecessors was little esteemed, was easily done. Drusus also going into
Germany, if he would have meant to exceed his Predecessor Germanicus in glory
of Arms, it would not perhaps have succeeded with him; but to exceed him in
crast and stratagems, (...) easily succeeded. From hence it is why many
believed (as Plutarch relates) that Tiberius Gracchus, seeing he could never be
able to exceed Fluvius Posthumous in glory of war, sought to get himself
fame by peace; and by bringing in new Laws among the people.

Secondly, Princes and Governors have before their eyes a political passage,
which is held for an infallible rule; that Governors ought to imitate their
Predecessor in things commended, and not to imitate him in things distasted:
and so much Nero in Tacitus promised to do. And therefore a Prince, finding
that his Predecessor had made every one his enemy thorough cruelty; he too
much desiring to avoid the like, ende^vours by all means to win their love
with mildness; into which he transports himself, sometimes so far, that to
avoid hatred, he falls into contempt.

Thirdly, Princes and Governors carry a certain envy toward their
predecessors, and desire to be more beloved then they: whereupon for example;
if the predecessor were beloved of the Nobility, he will seek to be beloved
of the people, by being their (...). First, because the people will be gladder
of his coming to be Prince, then the Nobility will be; as those that cannot
look for more at this Princes hands, then they had at the others; and
consequently cannot choose but show some passion, at either the death, or at the
departing of the predecessors: which how odious a thing it is to a new Prince
(...) teaches us; where he shows, that after the death of Augustus, the
Senators made show to have no less joy in the new Prince, than they had in
the old: At Romae ruere in Servitium Consules, Patres, Eques: quanto quis
Illustrior, tanto magis falsi ac festinantes, vultuque composito; ne laeti
excessu Principis, neu tristiores primordio lachrymas, gaudium, quaestus,
Adulationes miscebant.

Secondly, because it is more easy to content the part oppressed, then the
part advanced; as every one knows: and thus much for this.

Simul Segestes ipse ingens visu, and memoria bonae societatis impavidus; verba
ejus in hunc modum fuere.
What course is to be used in demanding Peace, and when is the fit time. The
one and fiftieth Discourse.

SEgestes boldly and without any fear, being brought before Germanicus, with
great confidence delivers his Speech; though it might be doubted, he had a
hand in the death of Varro, and of the three Legions that were with him: and
because this place of Tacitus contains in it many Arguments of Discourse; I
will first examine, when it is a fit time for men to seek friendship with their
Enemies, and in what manner they ought to excuse themselves; and though I may
seem to go astray from this place of Tacitus, yet I will not omit to explain
the words it contains; that we may see why Segestes speaking of himself,
spoke with great boldness: and coming afterward to speak of his son, with
great humbleness craves pardon. Pro Iuventa and errore filii, veniam precor.
Wherein we may see, how men that desire to clear themselves of any thing laid
to their charge, ought to treat for procuring of Amity.

Such men therefore, either they have committed some fault, or they have not:
if they have committed any fault, either they were at first friends, and
afterward are become enemies; or else they have been always enemies. If they
have been always enemies, either they have been Principalls, or but
Adhaerents. Beginning then with the last; if these enemies that desire to
become friends, were only Adhaerents; they may then do it, by abandoning
their friends in danger without any cause given them; but then withal, they
must do it with much blushing, or else will never be accepted. Seeing he
becomes for ever odious to the world, whosoever is stained with such a blot; as
was seen in Bernardino Corte of Pavia; who being left by Ludovico Moro, to
keep the Castle of Milan, rendered it up to Lewis the twelfth; and finding
himself afterward blamed for it of the French themselves; he died with grief.
I cannot forbear to relate an example of hatred that is borne to Traitors;
which Guicciardine reports in the person of Burbon, whom the King of Spain
employed, to require a Captain to deliver up his Palace to the King of
Spain; who answered, he could not deny the King; but that as soon as Burbon
was gone out of it, he would set it on fire, as a place infected, and unworthy
to be inhabited by men of honor. It is true, that this answer, in my opinion,
contained under it another mystery, which I cannot now examine, as being out
of my road; and therefore will leave it for the Reader to consider it of
himself. This at least is a clear case; that Traitors are odious even to
those, in whose favor they have done the Treason; whereof many reasons may be
given. And first, a reason taken from the danger they incur, who keep such
fellows about them; and are like to do as much to them as they have done to
others: seeing a man that is grown infamous, cannot do better, then to make a
gain of his infamy; as the Lawgiver said, speaking of Harlots. Secondly,
because Obligation is a heavy burden, which men willingly disburthen
themselves of, as soon as they find any little color likely to do it: A
Prince therefore being obliged to one for becoming a Traitor for his service,
pays him willingly with becoming ungrateful for his reward; and thinks the
hatred that is borne to Traitors is color enough for it. A third reason may be
taken from the pleasure men seem to take, in overcomming rather by Force, than
by Fraud; and therefore oftentimes they kill the Traitors. So the Sabines did
to the daughter of Spurius Tarpeius, who had opened to them the Castle of Rome:
Seu ut vi capta Arx videretur. So the Romans taking the Fortress of Tarentum,
by the treason of the Brutii; put them all to the sword Brutii quoque multi
interfecti, seu per errorem, seu vetere in eos infito odio; seu ad proditionis
famam, ut vi potius atque armis captum Tarentum videretur. Fourthly, they are
so odious, that they are always in danger, in regard of the Example; for if
Princes should make much of them, and hold them in any account; they should
give an Example to encourage others to do the like to themselves: This reason
Livy also alleges in the foresaid case of the Sabines; Seu prodendi Exempli
causa, ne quid usquam fidum proditori esset.

Lastly, Segestes says of such, Nam proditores etiam iis quos anteponunt
invisos: and in truth, these reasons are so clear, that I should marvel there
could be any Traitors; if it were not for the force which particulars have to
darken an understanding, that is clear in universals.

Secondly, this may happen for some ill usage from them, to whom he adheres;
and in such case, he may speak without blushing: but yet he ought not to stain
his honest parting with taking reward. And so much Indibile did, when passing
with his Soldiers from the Carthagenians to the service of Scipio; he rather
excused himself for abandoning his friends; then expected thanks for the aid
he brought. Whereof Livy says; Propiorque excusanti tranfitionem, ut
necessariam; quam glroianti eam velut primam occafionem raptam. Saire enim
transfugae nomen execrabile veteribus (...) novis suspectum esse: neque enim se
reprehendere morem hominum, fi tam anceps odium causa non nomenfaciat: Meri^a
deinde sua in Duces Carthaginenses memora^it avaritiam contra little
superbiamque, and omnis (...) in se, atque populares. Itaque corpus duntaxat
suum ad id tempus apud eos fuisse: animum jampridem ibi esse, ubi jus ac f^
crederet coli: se id Scipionem orar^; ut tranfitio ^bi, nec fraudi apud eum,
nec honori fit. Likewise segestes in his speech to Germanicus, amongst other
principal things he says, this is one; that he had not left his friends to
get reward; Neque ob praemium, sed ut me perfidia exolvam: but because, knowing
Peace to be more profitable, he advised those people to give over war: and
Anthony, who by means of his faction prevailed, thought the contrary;
therefore for his own safety, and that he might not be oppressed, he had left
that side, and was come to the Romans. The very like to this does Livy relate
of Appius Clausus, who advised the Sabines not to enter into war with the
Romans; and finding he was not able to withstand the ^action, which persuaded
the contrary, he went away to Rome; Cum Pacis ipse Author, a turbatoribus belli
premeretur, nec par factioni esset; ab lacu Regillo magna clientium comitatus
manu, Romam transfugit.

Thirdly, it may happen by his being dead, to whom he adhered; and then, though
the case may seem more difficult, yet it is more easy; at least, if he can
make it appear, that he adhered to the other, more for love to him, then for
any hate to the contrary side; and in such case he may speak boldly, and the
more boldly the better. Herod the great had followed the fortune of Antonius
until his death, not for any hate he bore to Augustus, whom he never knew, but
for the love he bore to Mark Antony, from whom he had received benefits, after
whose death he feared not to present himself before Augustus, to whom he spoke
with a gravity becoming a King, and by this means was received of Augustus
into a firm league of friendship: the reason of this is, because the cause of
their enmity being ceased, which was the love to the person now dead, and the
profit growing by him, they will think to have them hereafter their true
friends: as conceiving they will be the same to them as they were to the
other before, vvhereupon we read in Tacitus that Otho seeing how faithful
Celsus had been to his enemy Galba, took him out of the hands of the Soldiers,
by putting him in prison, and then gave him a charge, and held him as his
special friend, and Celsus served him as faithfully, as he had served Galba,
Celsus constanter servatae erga Galbam fidei crimen confessus, exemplum ultro
imputavit, nec Otho quasi ignosceret, sed ne hostis metum reconciliationis
adhiberet, statim intra intimos amicos habuit, and mox bello inter duces
dilegit, manfitque Celso velut fataliter, etiam pro Othone fides integra and
infoelix.

Such then as these shall not need to make any excuses, but only show the love
they bore, and the faithfulness they used toward their friends now dead, and
that they did nothing for any hatred they bore to this side, but for the love
they bore to the other; out of this respect I conceive it was, that Caesar
pardoned all those that had borne Arms against him, saying, that they who had
taken part with Pompey out of friendshiphaddone him no wrong: to these things
may be added, the force that a free confessing has (not only in this case,
but in all other) to procure ones pardon; and the Reason is, because one cannot
voluntarily confess an error, but he must withal at the same time commend
and praise him to whom he confesses it; seeing no man would willingly confess
an error, if he did not hope it would be pardoned: and out of such hope he
grows confident, and falls to praising the Prince for his clemency; things of
great force to move one to pardon: whereupon not without mystery, the word
Confiteor in the holy Text signifies not only to confess, but also to praise:
and we see that our Lord Christ, who being without sin needed not to make
Confession to his Eternal Father, yet notwithstanding he said, Confiteor tibi
Domine coeli and terrae; which means nothing (as Saint Austin and all the
Fathers expound it) but, I praise thee Eternal Father, Lord of Heaven and
Earth. We may justly say then, that this word Confiteor signifies as well To
praise, as to confess, seeing in confessing, one is praised. And thus much for
Adherents.

Now concerning a Principal: if he have been always an Enemy, either it is in
time of war, or in time of peace; if in war, either he is superior, or
inferior; if superior, either he knows he is able to hold out, or else he
doubts he is like to go down: if he know he be able to hold out, he ought not
then to seek after amity; and therefore the Romans meaning to destroy Carthage
refused peace: but if he doubt himself, and find difficulties in it, he shall
then do well to accept of peace, if it be required. This made Lutatius the
Consul (as Polybius relates) after he had overcome the Carthaginians by sea,
not to refuse peace when it was offered him by Amilcar, because he found there
were many difficulties yet remaining, before he could get an absolute victory;
rather if he stand in doubt he shall come to be inferior, he shall then do
well, not only to accept of peace, if it be required, but to require it
himself: it is true, it is an hard matter to persuade men against reputation,
whereupon we see, it succeeded not well with Hanno, when after the defeat the
Romans had at Cannae, he counseled the Carthaginians to demand peace, whose
counsel was rejected, not so much for his being of a contrary faction to that
of Hannibals, as for the reputation. I cannot therefore but account the Senate
of Venice to be full of men of great wisdom, who after the victory the
Christians had gotten in a naval battle, yet taking into consideration the
depth of things, they made a peace with the Turk, accounting it less evil
for the conservation of their State, to live in peace, than to be turmoiled
with war.

But if such a one be inferior, either he knows he is like to be inferior
still, or else he is in hope to get the better; if thus, not only he ought not
to seek for peace, but not to accept it, if it be offered. Perseus having
overcome the Romans in battle, by the advice of his friends demanded peace,
but the Consul denied it. So Pyrrhus after he had won the first battle
demanded peace, and was denied it. But if he be inferior, and has no hope to
get the better, he shall do well not to stay to the last, seeing as long as he
has any strength left, he may demand peace with the more boldness, and make
the better conditions: so Hannibal before his last battle demanded peace of
Scipio, with great majesty; where if a man stay till he be at the last cast, he
must come as a suppliant, and ask with submission, and be fain to take what
conditions he can get, and it is great foolery to go to ask pardon, with
boasting of his merits, and standing upontermes. And this our Lord Christ
expressed in the Parable of the Pharisee and the Publican; where the Publican
humbly asking pardon for his sins was heard, and the Pharisee not, because
instead of humbling himself, he boasted of himself, saying, Deus, gratias ago
tibi quia non sum ficut caeteri hominum, raptores, injusti, adulteri, velut
etiam hic Publicanus, jejuno bis in sabbato, decimas do omnium quae possideo.
The reason of this saying is, because when one confesses his errors he makes
himself judge, and consequently him his advocate, to whom he confesses,
where he that speaks with insolence makes himself his own advocate, and
consequently him judge to whom he speaks; vvhereupon how much it is better
for a delinquent to make him he has offended to be his advocate than his
judge, so much it is better to ask pardon with humility than with boasting:
and therefore, when after the Romans had entered Afia, and had gotten some
victories, an Ambassador coming to Scipio from Antiochus, to demand peace; he
was answered by Scipio, Quod Romanos omnes, quod me ad quem missus es ignoras
minus miror, cum te fortunam ejus a quo venis, ignorare cernam; Lyfimachia
tenenda erat, ne Chersonesum intraremus; aut ad Hellespontum obfistendum, ne in
Afiam trajiceremus, fi pacem a sollicitis de belli eventu petituri eratis,
concesso vero in Afiam tranfitu, and non solum fraenis, sed etiam jugo accepto,
quae disceptatio ex aequo cum imperium patiendum fit, relicta est? And finally
he gave him this counsel, Nuntia meis verbis, bello abstineat, pacis
conditionem nullam recuset. For this cause the Etolians did ill, to speak so
boldly after they were brought to the last cast, and that they would not accept
of such conditions of peace as the Romans offered them, seeing it is a mere
foolery to stand upon terms with a Conqueror, as they at last perceived, when
the Consul bringing out his Forces, they were glad to humble themselves, and
abate their boldness; Tunc fracta Phaneae ferocia Aetolisque aliis est, and
tandem cujus conditionis essent, sensere, and Phaneas se quidem, and qui adfint
Aetolorum scire facienda esse, quae imperentur. There is therefore in such
cases no better course than to lay conditioning aside, and to put ones self
into the victors hand, who no doubt will remit the more when he finds it is
left in his power to do it: so Alorcus counseled the Saguntines to do, that
seeing they had now no hope left, they should rather put themselves into the
victors hand, than stand upon conditioning; Haud despero, cum omnium potestas
ei a vobis facta fit, aliquid ex his rebus remissurum: which when the
Saguntines would not do, they were all put to fire and sword.

I cannot omit by way of digression, to speak of a custom the Romans had;
which at first sight seems to have been a great error, and it is, that they
offered the same conditions of peace in the uncertain beginning of a War, as
after they had gotten an absolute victory; as by the answer of Scipio to the
Ambassadors of Aniochus may appear, Romani ex his quae in deorum immortalium
potestate erant, ea habemus quae dii dederunt, animos, qui nostrae mentis sunt,
eosdem in omni fortuna gessimus, gerimusgque neque eos secundae res extulerunt,
nec adversae minuerunt; ejus rei, ut alios omittam, Annibalem vestrum vobis
darem testem, nifi vos ipsos dare possem: posteaquam Hellespontum trajecimus,
prius quam castra regia, prius quam aciem videremus, cum communis Mars, and
incertus belli eventus esset; de pace vobis agentibus, quas pares paribus
forebamus conditiones, easdem nunc victores victis ferimus. This way of doing
served, it seems, to no other purpose, but to encourage their Enemies, to
cyment their fortune, till they should be brought to extremity, and I make no
doubt but that Antiochus having before him the Example of the Carthaginians,
would never be brought to accept conditions of peace till he was brought upon
his knees with the War. To take away this difficulty, it would not suffice to
answer, as Scipio said, that it came from generousnesse of spirit, that they
altered not for fortune, seeing little praise can be given to such a dangerous
and prejudicial Generousnesse, and therefore I should rather attribute the
cause to too great a greediness of getting that which is another; seeing the
Romans made war with Antiochus, and with the Carthaginians, as thinking they
could not be quiet, if the one were Lord of this side the mountain Taurus, and
the other were possessed of Afric, and this being their motive, there is no
doubt but the War would neverend, till they had triumphed both over Africa, and
over Asia: Whereupon when War is waged with such people, we must make account
either to get the victory, or otherwise to be absolutely destroyed: and
therefore when Samuel meant to show Saul, that God intended to root out his
House, to the end he might know he would not pardon him till he were utterly
destroyed, he called our Lord God by the Name of Triumpher, Porro Triumphator
in Israel non parcet: as though he would say, as they who fight to triumph, do
not pardon till they have utterly destroyed their Enemies, so O Saul, will our
Lord God do with thee. But to return to our purpose, if they who would come to
amity were friends before, and are afterward become Enemies, they must then
come with blushing and with great humbleness, at least if they can show no
just occasion, but let them not then stay til they come to extremity, for then
they vvil never be accepted: therefore the Capuans did ill, not to open their
Gates to the Romans within the time given them; for when they were come to
extremity, it availed not then to open their Gates, but all of them were
miserably put to the svvord.

The last case is of him that demands amity, and comes to excuse himself, as
having never committed any fault, alvvayes really been a friend, and never done
them any vvrong; and such an one may, or rather must speak boldly. Such a one
was Segestes, who speaking of himself, Memoria bonae societatis impavidus,
never asked pardon. Such then may speak with confidence, and ought to be
hearkened to of the Prince with patience: and this way was a great help to
Terentius in Tacitus, who being accused for having had friendship with
Sejanus, he confessed it boldly, showing not only that he was his friend, but
that he had labored much to come to be so, as seeing him a Companion of Caesar
in his Consulship, a Kinsman, an inward friend, and a stay of the Empire; and
this constancy of his prevailed so far that not only he was pardoned, but his
accusers also were ill entreated. Saul must pardon me, if I think him in this
case, a more Tyrant than Tiberius, seeing when Abimelech the Priest was accused
for giving David meat, and the sword of Goliath, and was charged for it by Saul,
he made the like answer as Terentius did, Et quis in omnibus servis tuis
sicuti David fidelis, and gener Regis, pergens in imperium, and gloriosus in
domo tua. But the boldness and innocence of Abimelech was not so great, but
the cruelty of Saul was greater, who for this cause put him to death;
certainlya most perfidious act, seeing as I have said, and say still, He that
is innocent and comes without fault, both ought to speak with boldness, and
ought to be heard with patience: and herein Princes should imitate our Lord
God, who takes pleasure in such disputes, as S. Austin witnesses in his
exposition of those words in the Psalm, Jucundum fit ei eloquium meum; which
he reads thus, Suavis fit ei disputatio mea; and then says, Ostendit Propheta
suavem Deo esse disputationem, and argumentationem gratam, quae post peccatorum
poenitentiam fit, cum eo pias querelas proponendo and irae illius refistendo
viriliter: so Job spoke, pretending to be innocent, Ad Omnipotentem loquar, and
disputare cum Deo cupio; and a little after adds, Quis mihi tribuat ut
cognoscam and inveniam illum, and veniam usque ad solium ejus, ponam coram eo
judicium, and os meum replebo increpationibus, ut sciam verba quae mihi
respondeat. And therefore Esaias having in his first Chapter said, Lavamini and
mundi estote; he adds, Venite and arguite me; which Saint Gregory
interpreting, says, Ac fi patienter dicat; recta agite, and animad verfionis
meae motibus non jam per deprecationem gemitus, sed per fiduciam authoritatis
obviate: whereupon after Job had said, Taedet animam meam vitae meae, with
great confidence he adds, Dicam Deo, Noli me condemnare; as the foresaid S.
Gregory in a thousand places excellently observes: with good reason therefore
Terentius spoke boldly to Tiberius, rather as disputing than as entreating;
with good reason Segestes in our case showed he did not fear, seeing neither
the one nor the other had committed any fault: whereupon there was no just
cause that Tiberius should not accept Terentius for his friend; and Germanicus,
Segestes.

Vt quibus initiis, quanta Tiberii art, gravissimum exitium irrepserit, dein
repressum fit; postremo arserit, cunctaque corripuerit, noscatur.
With what cunning Tiberius introduced and augmented the Law of Treason. The
two and siftieth Discourse.

PErsuaded by the foresaid words of Tacitus, in which he shows what cunning
Tiberius used to bring in the Law of Treason; I have much mused in what that
cunning consisted, seeing neither Tacitus declares it, but would have us gather
it out of the History our selves, neither can I think, I have fully
apprehended his meaning, I will therefore only say that little which my
weakness has been able to conceive of it, that some stronger brain may
thereby the more easily find out the truth.

First then it might be said, that he used this cunning, when being asked, An
judicia Majestatis redderentur? He answered, Exercendas esse leges. The cunning
consists in this, that being asked in a particular which concerned only
himself, he answered in a general, which concerned the profit of the whole
City; as though he should say, for as much as concerns me, which is the
particular of Treason, I make no reckoning, nor require any to be made; but as
much as concerns the Law, I would have that to be observed, seeing it is of
great importance, that Laws be not abused: and in confirmation of this his
will, he granted pardons to all those who at that time were accused of any
crime, and consequently with great sweetness gave a beginning to a most bitter
thing; because by his pardoning the Law was set on foot, and he brought it in,
with such a kind of clemency, that it remained ever after in the Princes power
to take it away again.

But in the introducing this Law by Tiberius, his cunning may perhaps be better
considered another way; for understanding whereof, we must take into
consideration, two cases that are in Tacitus; the first, is in this place,
where Falanius and Ruberius being both of them accused, Falanius for placing
amongst certain priests of Augustus one Cassius a Buffone; Ruberius for
violating with perjury the name of Augustus; Tiberius with diverse ways
coloring their error, cleared them both; Scripsit consulibus, non ideo
decretum Patri suo coelum, ut in perniciem civium is honor verteretur, Cassium
histrionem solitum inter alios ejusdem artis interesse ludis, quos matter sua in
memoriam Augusti sacrasset: nec contrareligiones fieri, quod effigies ejus, ut
alia numinum fimulachra, venditionibus hortorum, and domuum accedant:
Jusjurandum perinde ^svimandum, ac si Jovem fefellisset. Deorum injurias diis
curae. It was not long after, but Marcellus was accused for speaking ill of
Tiberius, vvhereat though he seemed a little angry, yet he suffered him
notwithstanding to be acquitted. The second case we are to consider, is written
in the second Book of his Annals, where Apuleia Varilla being accused of
Adultery, and for speaking scandalous words of Augustus, of Tiberius and of
Livia, he gave sentence, that for what she had spoken against Augustus she
should be punished, but for what she had spoken against himself, he would
have no matter made of it, and being then asked by the Consul, whether she
should not be punished for the words spoken in disgrace of Livia, for that
time he made no answer, but the day follovving he desired in his mothers name,
that the words against her, might be no prejudice to Apuleia.

Now if these cases be well underst^od, we shall easily discover the cunning
of Tiberius, which consisting in the way of introducing and enlarging the
Law, has need to take in a former consideration; and it is, that the Law of
Treason, as concerning the name was in use also in the time of the
Commonwealth, but contained not the same Heads, he only being then intended
to fall into this crime, who practiced any thing against the Commonwealth,
either by raising of Armies, or by making seditions amongst the People, never
making reckoning of words, nor of such small matters, but only of heinous
things, as Tacitus in this place delivers.

To come then to our purpose, Tiberius being asked, if he would have the Law
of Treason to be observed, ansvvered, the Laws must be observed, as though he
would say, he would have them in use, as they were in the time of the
Commonwealth: whereof he gave a proof in the first case, where Augustus and
Livia, and himself being injured, he pardoned all: and so you see the birth of
the Law. Afterward in the second case, where himself and Augustus and Livia
were injured, where in the first he had said, Deorum injurias diis curae;
speaking of Augustus: in the second, he would have Apuleia for the words she
had spoken against Augustus, to be punished; for the injury done to himself
and Livia, he pardoned her: and so you see the growth of the Law: in
confirmation whereof, Tacitus has these words, Adolescebat intercalex
Majestatis. And here is to be considered, that Tiberius meaning to begin the
growth of the Law of Treason, would not begin it, with making it be
observed in his own case, but in the case of Augustus, requiring that boldly
for another, which without blushing he could not have required for himself:
and so much more in this case, as the demand was colored with paternall
piety, and therefore obliged the Senate the more, to punish them also who
should use any such words against himself. Finally, there passed not much
time, but by means of this Law, not only they were punished who committed
crimes against the Prince, but it came to that pass, that to every petty
fault, and though but against a private person, they gave the name of Treason,
that so they might have color to inflict capital punishment at their
pleasure, as in a thousand places of Tacitus his Books is written.

Id quoque Tiberii morum ^uit, continuare Imperia, ac plerosque ad finem in
iisdem exercitibus aut Iurisdictionibus habere.
Whether it be good, that Officers should continue in their Places; and why
this course was observed by Tiberius. The three and fiftieth Discourse.

Tiberius (by as much as these words of Tacitus show) used not to change his
Officers, whereby it happened, that oftentimes they died in their charge; but
because Tiberius had many particular occasions that made him observe this
custom, which in other Princes are not usual; We will first speak of it in
general, whether it be a good course; and then in particular; and lastly we
will give the reasons of all.

Concerning the first, We cannot proceed without distinction: when the
question is therefore, whether it be good to continue Officers, We may either
mean it of Officers of War, or of those of Peace: If we speak of Officers in
War, either it is in a war where the Prince desires to make new Acquests;
or else in a war which he makes only for reputation, or some other small
interest. If he make it, with a purpose of enlarging his Dominion, I cannot
then commend the change of Officers, so long at least as there is no demerit in
the Captain; (and this, for the many reasons I have showed in a Discourse
before:) but if he have no other end, but only to continue the war, he may
then change them as he pleases: whereupon we see, that Tiberius himself making
war in Germany for Reputation only; Potius quam cupidine proferendi impenii:
changed his General, calling home Germanicus.

If we speak of Officers in Peace; either they are mean places, which can
neither bring honor nor damage to the Prince, or some midling places; that
have other Officers above them; or else they are chief and Principal places,
that have none above them; and in these (to begin with the last) to continue
the same men, is in a manner necessary (so long at least as they carry
themselves worthily) as well because they are better acquainted with
businesses; as also because it is a hard thing to find men able to discharge
such places: and lastly, because if they should be removed; to exalt them, is
impossible; they being now at the highest; and to abase them, is dangerous:
whereof in the Book of Kings we have a notable Example in Jeroboam, who
rebelled against Solomon (as some Rabbines interpret; and very well in my
opinion) only for being put in an Office meaner than that he had before: For
where before, he was collectour of the Tributes, of the Tribes of Manasses and
Ephraim, he was now made overseer of the building of Millo, a much inferior
place than the other. In this case therefore it shall do well to use the
custom of Tiberius, to continue them in their places, during their lives:
provided that they be not made hereditary, as in some Kingdoms has been done,
with much detriment to the Prince.

Again, if we speak of midling places; to suffer them to continue, without
hope of being changed, brings forth commonly many evil effects. The first is
because all men labor for advancement, and their aim is always at principal
places: endeavoring so much the more to do good service, as they know it to be
a means to raise them higher; there being no doubt, but he will serve better,
that has advancement for his end, than he that has only conservation for
his Object: as we see, that young men eat more than old, because the end of
these is only to conserve themselves; but of the other, to augment themselves.
And therefore Sinan the Primovisior General of the Turk, against the
Persians, knowing he could rise to no higher Dignity than he had already, was
willing to hearken to Treatyes of peace, and pursued the war but coldly.
Whereupon Benhadad (as in the sacred Text is written) had good counsel given
him, that where in his army he had Two and thirty Kings, he should put in
their places as many other valiant men, because They being at the highest,
would never strein themselves much to fight, as knowing they could rise no
higher: where other men to get advancement, would bestir themselves with
greater vigor. This reason Abulensis brings in these words. Amove Reges
fingulos ab Exercitutuo, and pone pro eis principes. For confirmation of this I
have now said, the Example of Seianus (in my opinion) serves very fitly, who as
long as he had any hope to be advanced higher, he continued a good servant,
and an excellent counselor to his Prince: Quia Seianus incipiente adhuc
potentia, bonis confiliis notescere volebat, but as soon as he was got to such
a height that he could not hope to rise any higher, he then fell from his good
service, and plunged himself in manifest villanyes. This reason Tiberius
understood well, and therefore when Sejanus was grown to a mighty height of
greatness, to the end he might have occasion to continue his good service,
made a show he would yet raise him higher, Ipse quid intra animum volutaverim,
quibu^adhue necessitudinibus immiscere te mihi parem, omittam ad praesens
refer. Id tantum aperiam, nihil esse tam excelsum, quod non virtutes istae,
tuusque in me animus mereantur. This is an excellent way, and ought to be
observed with those who hold the prime places. Those therefore that are in
midling places, should not be continued still, but have hope given them, that
by their good service they may rise higher. Otherwise, besides the reasons
alleged, there would follow another inconvenience, that when they of the
chief places die, the Prince should want others to put in their rooms; and
consequently should be driven, to go begging in foreign parts for principal
Officers: who not being acquainted with businesses, and little affectionate
(unless for their own ends) to the Prince; they were like, (in my opinion) to
do but ill service, as neither knowing, nor being known. Whereupon the
Apostles, being make make an Election, did not use this manner, Oportet ex his
viris qui nobiscum sunt congregati, in omni tempore: and as it follows. To this
may be added, that Princes should continue meaner Officers in their places, but
to make them fit for greater. This course the Venetians have always used, and
it was the ancient custom of the commonwealth of Rome, that when by the death
of Senators there were places void, they would fill them up out of the ranks
next below them: an excellent course certainly; for their carriage being
continually seen in less matters, It may easily be gathered what good service
they are like to do in greater. From hence it was, that Fabius Maximus knew,
that Titus Ottacillus was no fit man to govern an Army; Titi Ottacilli in
minore re experti operam tuam sum^ haud sane cur ad majora tibi fidamus,
documenti quicquam dedisti: But though I like well the changing of Officers,
yet I like not they should be changed often. First, because it is the property
of them that are to leave a place, to burn (as the Proverb is) their Cabbins;
not so much for any hatred or envy they bear to their Successors, as for
their own benefit: Whereof we have an example in Saint Matthew; where he
relates, that one had been possessed with a Devil many years, and never
found any hurt by the evil Spirit all that while; but when the Devil
perceived he was to go forth of his body, he then fell to tearing him in most
cruel manner. And just so it is with some that are in offices; if they think
they shall stay any while in their places, they do not then so suddenly fall to
fleece the Subjects; but if they find they shall shortly leave them, they then
begin to use extremities. And therefore the Officers of Galba, (as Tacitus
reports) doubting they should stay but a small time in their places, by reason
of the Princes old age, fell to fleecing: Jam afferebant vaenalia cuncta (...)
liberti. Ser vorum manus subitis avidae; and tanquam apud senem festinantes.
But seeing it is necessary sometimes to change them, (as we have observed
before) whether the change be sooner or later; the best course is to do it upon
a sudden; that they may not do as Farmers use to do, when they are to part
with a Farm, who to make the greater Vintage in their last year, care not how
barren they make the Vines for the year following.

Now if we speak of those mean places, which bring some profit to the
Officers, without any danger to the Prince, as some Magistrates that serve for
show, with little substance; in these the changes should be often; as well to
the end, many may come to partake of the profit, as also thereby to get the
love of all. And this differs not from the opinion of Tiberius; who when the
Senate would have persuaded him to make a Magistrate, that continued in his
place but one year, to continue in it five; he would not grant it. Grave
moderationi suae tot eligere, tot differ; Vix per fingulos annos offensiones
vitari; quamvis repulsam propinqua spes soletur; quantum odii fore ab his, qui
ultra Quin quennium projiciantur. I know well, that this was not the meaning of
Tiberius; but yet the sentence he gave may serve for my purpose. It remains
to show, why Tiberius would never be drawn to change those he had once put in
Offices: The first reason which Tacitus alleges, is set down in those words;
Tedio novae cura, semel placita pro aeternis servavisse: that is, Tiberius
finding it a trouble to make new Elections, was willing to continue the old;
but seeing Tacitus tells not why it should be a trouble, it seems to be but a
cold reason which he brings: we may therefore rather say, that (as other
Authors relate) Tiberius had in such manner used cruelty against any that had
any virtue in them; that unless he should place men in Offices, that were
unfit, he had much ado, and hardly could find any: and therefore no marvel,
having once found some, if he were afterward loath to remove them. To this may
be added (as Tacitus a little after says) that though he saw many great wits
in the City, that would have been able to discharge such Offices; yet he,
standing in fear of such men, chose rather to let them die in idleness, as
seeking to put men in places, to which they were only equal: Neque supra;
that is, such as should not be good at making Innovations: of which sort of
men, there is in all places great scarcity; and therefore when he once found
such a one, he was never willing to change him; as by whom he might have good
service done him; and that without danger. And this is an Exception to the Rule
I made before; when they who are employed are but equal to their employment,
and cannot hope to be employed in any greater business; not for default in the
Prince, but of ability in themselves. Again, it put him to the more trouble, as
having a most acute wit; and consequently a wavering judgment, as Tacitus
shows us in those words: Vt callidum ejus ingenium, ita anxium judicium; a
thing which always happens to such persons, because being men that know much,
they pierce into all difficulties; and consequently hardly resolve upon any
thing, finding the darkness of difficulties even in the light it self: as
Moses, the first time that God called him, having yet but a gross brain,
thought every thing Light; but the second time, when his brain was purged, he
thought every thing Darkness. The last reason, which Tacitus brings, (for the
other to my seeming, are but confirmations of the first) is set down in these
words; Quidam invidia, ne plures fruerentur; that is, Tiberius would not change
his Officers, because he would not have many to be enriched by them. This
conceit I cannot believe, that either Tiberiut, or Tacitus had; but that it is
a mere idle fancy of the vulgar: seeing amongst the chief Precepts that
Aristotle gives to Tyrants, this is one; Not to suffer Riches to be reduced
into few hands: And besides, we may give the words a fitter exposition; which
is, That T^berius having very few friends, if he should change his Officers
often, he should be forced at last to bring in some that were his enemies:
Whereupon out of very envy, least any enemy of his should grow rich, or get
reputation; he was never willing to change his Officers often: which, when at
last he could not avoid, but had placed in the Provinces certain of his
enemies, he would never suffer them to go to their charge, but kept them
always near about him, a course which many Princes take with their enemies;
as by a thousand Examples (which for brevity I omit) may easily be known:
wherein it happens to Princes, contrary to that of private men; for these are
safest, when their enemies are furthest off; but Princes, when they are
nearest: and to this purpose are those words of Tacitus; Quae baefitatione
postremo eo provectus, ut mandaverit quibusdam Provincias, quos egredi urbe non
erat passurus. I should not give this sense to this place, if my interpretation
were not made good by a passage in Suetonius; where he says, Vnum and alterum
consulares, oblatis Provinciis, non ausus a se dimittere, eosque adeo detinuit,
donec successores, post aliquos annos praesentibus daret.

I conclude then, that Tiberius did well to continue Officers in their charges;
as well for the scarcity he had of fit persons, as also, and more, because he
used to employ men that were only equal to the businesses: Other Princes
shall do well to avoid all extremes.

One only thing remains to be advertised; that when I commend the course, not
to change Officers often; I mean it should proceed from the Princes own will,
not thinking it fit he should bind himself to let them stay in their places
any determinate time; as three years, or five, or more; without leaving
himself a power to remove them: For this would be to the Princes great
prejudice; which Tiberius considering, made the fore-alleadged answer to
Asinius Gallus; Grave moderationi sue, and as it follows: whereby we may
plainly see, that though Tiberius did not like to change his Officers often;
yet he liked well to have it in his power to change them often.

FINIS.

