SYLVANA:

A PASTORAL, Lamenting the DEATH Of our Most Gracious Queen MARY Of Blessed
Memory.

By Mr. MANNING.

Interitum montesque feri, Sylvaeque loquuntur.
Virg. The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for J. Weld, at the Crown between the Temples-Gates in
Fleet Street. MDCXCV.

To the Right Honorable Sir JOHN SUMMERS, Knight. Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of
ENGLAND, and one of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
AMongst the pious acknowledgements, which have been lately paid to the Memory
of our late Queen, This comes, though less deserving, to crave your Lordships
Patronage. The true concern of its Author, will, I hope, in some sort excuse
the errors of the Poem. It Is Pastoral, my Lord: A kind of Verse, used amongst
Shepherds in old time, that admits of nothing affected, or disagreeing to the
purest Innocence, such as was practiced in the Golden Age. I presume not hereby
to inform your Lordship of the Nature of Pastorals, but to vindicate that Verse
from the ill opinions of some, who, methinks, by disapproving of it, must be no
Friends to Virtue and Innocence. But least I prove troublesome to your
Lordship, whose Hours are of infinite Value and Importance, I humbly beg your
Lordships acceptance of this Essay, and the Honor to subscribe my self,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble, and most devoted Servant F. M.

A PASTORAL: Lamenting the Death of the Late QUEEN.
Damon. Melampus. Mel. COME hither, Damon: I have one demand
To make, which well deserves a Faithul hand.
I know thee grateful, and of tender mind,
Ready to please, and molded to be kind.
You well recall how at Adonis Feast,
Amongst the tuneful Swains, at your request,
At your request, though much unskilled in Lays,
I played upon my Pipe, and sung my Damon's praise.
Shepherd, I piped, and sung with all my Might,
Because 'twas pleasing in my Shepherds sight.
Now all I ask is, Grant me one soft hour,
Soft as Aglae's Arms, in yonder Bower:
An unfrequented place, secure of shade,
Fertile in wilds, for Grief most fitly made.
There with Harmonious Reed, and tuneful breath,
Thou shall begin a Song of great Sylvana's Death.

Dam. Oh! I am most unfit for such a task,
Not able to perform the Boon you ask.
For so exalted does the Theme appear,
That it exceeds a lowly Shepherds Sphere.
Besides, should I retire with thee and sing,
My Flocks would stray to the forbidden Spring:
Believe me, it is an ugly Water-place,
Muddy, unwholesom, round it noxious grass.
Such faults all thereabouts are lately seen,
That now my Sheep graze always on the Green.
Yet to oblige the Swain, my gentle Friend,
For sure I love the well: I Will strive to bend
My Art-less Voice, and tune my mournful Reed,
Pipe a sad strain, for Oh Sylvana's Dead.

Mel. I know, kind Shepherd, that the Subject's great,
A lofty Theme, deserving utmost State.
Could thou like Orpheus move inanimates,
Or play at famed Arion's wondrous rate;
Were thou the Favorite of all the Nine,
The first in Song of all the tuneful line:
If such thou were in voice, and such in Lays,
Yet would thou not suffice to show Sylvana's praise.
But come, my Swain, what though thou art not made
To sing great, lofty strains, in Roman shade;
A Shepherd's humble Verse is full as well,
To show a true concern, and tender zeal.
As to thy Flocks, I Will view them all the while,
(And sure my eyes are good,) least any spoil
Be made, or they run roving to the Spring;
Now let us sit, and sweetly, Damon, sing.

Dam. Mourn British woods, let every Swain deplore,
Lament each Nymph: Sylvana in no more.
O mournful time! O great and dismal cross!
Such as the Woods n're saw before this loss.
Where have we been Melampus? how employed?
Wrapped up in joys, with various pleasures cloyed?
It must be so: so calm was our Estare,
Minds so united, and so fixed our Seat.
We were so happy, but alas! the time
Is grown more dismal, and more sad the clime.
O mournful State! the Woods all changed appear,
The Trees all withered, and the Streams not clear.
Mourn British woods; let every Swain deplore,
Lament each Nymph: Syluana is no more.
Was ever Land so fortunately blessed?
Were ever shady Groves so well possessed
Of Lords? a pair without example seen,
The happiest, lovingst Shepherds of the Green.
He, the Great Swain, unmatched in virtue, Love,
Greatness, and all things else that Heroes move.
Great in himself, but Greater in the Pride
He took in his all-shining lovely Bride.
A Shepherdess so exquisitely Fair,
So Wise, so Good, in every thing so rare,
That all Perfections seemd to center there.
So kind she was, so just, so fit to sway,
She knew both how to Govern, and Obey.
When Great affairs called the Great Swain abroad,
Sylvana, to transact at home employed,
With so much Prudence managed all Affairs,
That she revived our hopes, and banished all our fears:
Each Thing, each State so gracefully became,
Whatever she undertook immortalized her Name.
Mourn, British woods; let every Swain deplore.
Lament each Nymph: Sylvana is no more.
O Direful loss! O most untimely Fate!
Ye wretched Nymphs, mourn your unhappy State!
Where Is the support of all your Glories fled?
Mourn all your Ornament Sylvana Dead.
Where are ye now, ye Woods? and where, ye Groves?
How fare your Turtles, and how greet your Loves?
Who shall adorn your Arbours, trim your Boughs
Who crops your Trees, and who your Grass-beds mows?
Where are ye now, ye Rivers? where ye Springs?
And ye, false Rocks? and where it is Echo sings?
Deserted all, all the sad loss bemoan,
So Universal is the sorrow grown.
Mourn, British woods; let every Swain deplore;
Lament each Nymph: Sylvana is no more.
Look where Apollo stands, the Apollo was called Nomius a (...) pascuum,
because he fed the Sheep of Admetus.
Nomian God,
Giving his answers by a silent Nod:
No more Admetus flocks the Shepherd feeds,
No more A River of Thessaly, upon whose banks Apollo is said to have fed the
flocks of King Admetus.
Amphrysus hears his Oaten reeds:
See Pales too, how grief has changed her face,
No longer seen that wonted, lively grace;
Which made the Shepherds in a jovial ring,
Dance to her Praise, and to her Honor sing.
Bacchus himself with all his jolly throng
Contemns his Plays, and sadly walks along.
No more they trip it on the softened ground,
Nor more does the two-handled Bowl go round.
But all intent upon a solemn grief,
The common care, pursue no vain relief.
Behold great Pan, see, see the flowing tide
Of Tears, with Daphnis piping by his side.
What is it he plays, or to what tunes his breath?
He plays, hard Fate! he sings Sylvana's Death.
Let Hills and Dales express their Panick fears,
Lament ye Rocks, and soften into Tears.
Farewell ye Gentle Streams of Thamisis,
Sylvana will no more your Waters Grace:
How have I seen upon a Summers day,
When Phoebus did extend a glorious Ray,
A Fleet of well built Boats, a goodly sight,
Attend the loved Sylvana's Barge, nor parted till the night.
Weep all ye River Gods, bewail this loss,
Ye silver Streams bemoan this fatal cross.
Farewell ye Sheep, ye skipping Goats adieu,
Sylvana walks no more in Fields with you.
Farewell ye little Kids, and tender Lambs,
A long farewell to Steers and butting Rams.
Stop, ye melodious Brids, your tuneful Throats,
Alas! no more delight your warbling notes.
Sylvana, that rejoiced to hear your Charms,
O wretched Fate! is seized by Death's cold Arms.
But let sad Philomel her Songs rehearse,
She varies not from her complaining course.
Sing, mournful Bird, thy freedom justly take,
The Burden of thy Song Sylvana make.
Ye Pitying Swans, a timely offering bring,
And to the Great Sylvana's Praise your dying Accents Sing.
Strew Leaves, ye Shepherds, on the Desert Gound,
Sylvana Wills it: Let no Spring be found
Unshaded, then in sad Procession move,
And show the Sheperdess your latest Love.
Then raise a Tomb, of costly make, refined,
Of Whitest Marble, suited to her Mind.
Which done, a round it all her Name rehearse,
And six thereon a Monumental Verse.
'Here lies Sylvana, hear it every Wind,
'The Greatest, Fairest, best of Womankind.
'Unequall'd in her Virtue, Wisdom, Love,
'In Goodness nearest to the Gods above.
'Snatcht by Grim Death in her securest State;
'All Nature grieves at her untimely Fate:
'Grieves, that so good a life should have so short a date.
Mourn, British Woods; let every Swain deplore,
Lament each Mymph: Sylvana is no more.
Inexorable Death! Thou Bane to Joys!
Who, undistinguishing, the World annoys.
Could thou not find amongst the meaner sort
An Object, fitter for thy fatal Dart?
Must our Britannia's glory thus be gone?
Did poor Sylvana ever do thee wrong?
Oh no! She knew not wrong, she was all good,
The sweetest, kindest Nymph of all the Wood.
Thou pityless Destroyer of the Fair,
When all seems calm thou still art making War.
What could provoke thee to commit this Fact?
Believe me, 'twas a bold, and daring Act,
To seize the Shepherdess, void of all fear,
When the Great Shepherd stood himself so near.
Behold that Shepherd now, whom last we Named:
Lord of this Island, much for Hunting famed.
The Lupine-Chase beyond the rest he loves,
Eager of sport, each Year to Gallia roves.
There Lives a Mighty Wolf, of swiftest pace,
Commanding all the VVoods about the place:
Unlimited, and ready to Devour,
His Cruelty as boundless, as his Power.
Thither with earnest steps our Swain repairs,
To ease the Country of its raging fears.
Resolved to tame the Monster fierce, and wild,
Or not to leave him, till he proves more mild.
Often has he made him smart, and often repelled
His Gratest force, and often his Rage has quelled.
See where he lies now, prostrate on the Greund,
No Comfort for the Shepherd can be found.
He who n'ere knew how to Lament, or Yield,
Unconquered in the Chase, and in the Field:
Look how he Weeps, Expanding both his Arms,
No more to taste the Loved Sylvana's Charms.
Sylvana is the only word he speaks,
Sylvana is the only sound he likes.
Name Business to him, Name Affairs of State,
His Answer still deplores Sylvana's Fate.
Such Magic in Sylvana's Name appears,
That tho it heightens Grief, it is Music to his Ears.
Mourn, British Woods; let every Swain deplore,
Lament each Mymph: Sylvana is no more
She Is gone, it is true, without Redemption fled,
But rests not properly among the Dead.
Her Soul Immortal, as her Fame on Earth,
Has mounted Heaven, and gained a second Birth.
The Good shall always live, The actions of the Just
Shall ever Bud, and Blossom in the Dust.
Her stop, my Muse: Now, Shepherd, let us have,
My Flocks by this time want their Noons Repast.
But first Melampus, mind me what I say,
I shall expect your Muse another Day.

FINIS.

