The Mind OF THE FRONTISPIECE.

THE Spheres, (which ever moving are) imply
That Arts, and Learning, if unactive, die.
Our Subject's Worth, is by URANIA meant,
Our Poet's, PAN, and MERCURY present,
Who sings rough Matter in smooth Verse, to invite
The Ignorant to Learn, the Learned Delight.
THE SPHERE of M. MANLIVS* made An English POEM.
By Edward Sherburne, Esquire*

CAELIQVE VIAS ET SIDERA MONSTRAT.

NATVRAE VNIVERSITAS.

VNIVERSITAS INTERPRES.

W. Hollar fecit 1673



THE SPHERE OF Marcus Manilius MADE AN ENGLISH POEM: WITH Annotations AND AN
ASTRONOMICAL APPENDIX.

By EDWARD SHERBURNE, Esquire.

LONDON,

Printed for Nathanael Brook, at the Sign of the Angel in Cornhil, near the
Royal Exchange, MDCLXXV.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE.
DIEV ET MON DROIT
CR
royal blazon or coat of arms
TO HIS SACRED MAJESTY Charles the II. King OF GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE and
IRELAND, etc.
MAY it Please Your Majesty, To Vouchsafe Your Royal View to this Copy; The
Original was by a Great Master, and dedicated to the Great Augustus. Having
been long buried by Barbarity, and Ignorance; It hopes now to rise unto New
Life, and Luster, by the Gracious Aspect of Your Sacred Majesty.

The Author now first alters his Native Language, exchanging it for that of
Your English Subjects; Be pleased Great SIR, to afford Him Your Ear, never
denied to Strangers, whom Fortune happily casts upon Your Royal, and
All-obliging Goodness.

He briefly represents the Splendid Economy of the Celestial Spheres, the
Pattern of the most Flourishing Empires; then most Glorious when most
conformable to the Heavens.

-- imitatur Olympum Officiis Augusta Domus -- These Rudiments of Astronomy
crave Acceptance from Your Majesty, who in Your Late Naval Expeditions, have
been pleased to show Your Self so great a Favourer of that Learning, by
encouraging the Noble and Generous Youth of these Nations, to enable themselves
thereby, for that Your Service.

SIR, It would have seemed an unpardonable Omission, not to have added Your
Name to the Constellations, who by your Excellent Virtues justly deserve, and
without Question shall in due Time obtain a most Eminent Place among them. But
Your Clemency and Moderate Government makes your Subjects to pray,

Serus in Coelum redeas, diuque Laetus intersis Populo -- Which Blessing upon
Your Sacred Self and Us, None more fervently implores, than

May it please Your Majesty, Your Majesty's most Obedient Subject and Servant,
EDW. SHERBURNE.

THE PREFACE.
THE High Esteem, which the Ancient Romans had for Astronomical Learning;
appears even by their Public Games in the Circus Maximus; whose Order and
Disposition represented that of the Heavens. The Circus being of an Elliptical
or Oval Figure; having twelve Gates or Entries resembling the twelve Signs of
the Zodiac. In the Midst an Obelisque, as the Sun: On each side thereof three
Metae, denoting the other Six Planets, which in their respective Courses mark
out the several Intervals or Spaces, into which the Mundane System is divided.
So that the Circensian Games seem not to have been so much, an Exercise of
Charioting and Racing, as an Astronomical Cursus; wherein the People were not
only delighted by the Exhibition of corporal Games, but had their Cassiodor.
Variar. l. 3. Epistol. 51. Sic factum est ut Naturae Mysteria Spectaculorum
composita Imaginatione ^uderentur.
Minds also instructed to apprehend the Course and Order of the Celestial
Bodies, which in the Great Circus of the World are continually moving.

This Method of inculcating Knowledge with Delight (though in a different way)
Manilius has likewise pursued; who intending to exhibit to the Age wherein he
lived the Rudiments of Astronomy, chose to represent the same in a Poetical
Dress, that so his Readers might be allured to relish with the greater Gusto
the initiating Principles of a Science not easily acquired; and he thereby gain
to himself the Repute which good Poets chiefly affect, of being able at once
both to instruct and please.

What upon this Account he has delivered in the first of his five Books of
Astronomicks, which of it self is a Complete and entire Poem of the Doctrine of
the Sphere; We have adventured, as well for its Brevity and Politeness, as its
Perspicuity and Usefulness, to transfer into our Native Tongue.

But some perhaps will demand,

Daphni quid Antiquos coelorum suspicis Ortus?

Why, in an Age wherein the learned World is so fruitful in Accurate
Productions of this Kind, obtrude We upon the Reader a Piece of less curious
and less knowing Antiquity?

This frivolous Objection will easily be obviated and answered, if we shall but
duly consider, that it is a design no less commendable for the Industry of this
present Age, gratefully to revive the valuable (but too much obscured and
unregarded) Helps, by which the Wits of former Times have benefitted Posterity;
than it is to labor in the Pursuit of new Discoveries and Inventions; which
many times are rather pretended than real Improvements; and are (some of them)
found to be, but the Disguises and Alterations of elder Ingenuity.

And we may without derogating or detracting in the least, from the worthy
Endeavors of the Learned, modestly affirm, that there are some Particular
Notions, touching the Nature of the Heavens and the Celestial Bodies, delivered
in the Piece we now publish, which having been revived, and of late days
reasserted by some of the most eminent Modern Astronomers, have been received
with general Applause, and thereby have added no little Honor to their Names.

To instance in the following Particulars.

First, The Opinion of the Fluidity of the Heavens, against the Aristotelean
Hypothesis of Solid Orbs, appears in this Work to have been expressly delivered
by Manilius near 1700 years since; which, by the Noble Tycho, Galilaeo,
Scheinerus, and others, has of late Days with all the Acumen of convincing
Reason been defended, and demonstrated.

Secondly, That the Fixed Stars are not all in the same Concave Superficies of
the Heavens, equally distant from the Center of the World, but that they are
placed at unequal Distances in the Ethereal Region, some higher, some lower,
(whence the Difference of their apparent Magnitudes and Splendour) is by the
famous Kepler (Epitom. Astron. l. 1,) and other Modern Astronomers lately
asserted; and seems by many to be taken for a Novel Opinion; which yet in this
Piece we find to have been many Ages since, declared by our Author.

Thirdly, The Assertion, which by the most knowing Astronomers of these Times
is embraced, affirming the Fixed Stars to be of a fiery Nature and Substance,
and consequently endued with native and propper Luster, and that they are (as
Galilaeo terms them) so many Suns, conform, and like unto this Sun of ours,
appears in this very Poem to have been long since maintained by our Manilius.

Fourthly, What by help of the Telescope has been lately detected and
demonstrated by Galilaeo, Kepler, and others, that the Galaxie is a Congeries
of Numberless small Stars, was by the sole Perspicil of Reason, discovered by
the Ancients, and is here by our Author proposed as the most probable Solution
of that Phenomenon.

Of the Parts of this Poem, their Distribution and Order, and of our Endeavors
in explicating the same both in our Notes and Appendix, We hold it not amiss in
this Preliminary Discourse, to give the Reader some Account.

The Poem begins with a Succinct Indication of the Original and Progress of
Arts and Sciences, more particularly of Astronomy, of which last, besides what
We have noted in our Marginal Illustrations; We have added, for the
Satisfaction of the more Curious, a Compendious History, continued down to the
Age wherein Manilius lived; together with a Catalogue of the most Eminent
Astronomers from the first Parent of all Arts, and Mankind it self, to this
Present.

It is continued on with a Description of the Mundane System, and of the
Celestial Signs and Constellations; The first of which we have explained
according to the various Hypotheses both Ancient and Modern; The latter we have
described by the Number of the Stars that compose them, their several
Denominations in most of the Learned Languages, and as they are distinguished
into profane and Sacred Figures or Morphoses, according to the different
Uranography of the Ancient Ethnicks, and some late Christian Astronomers.

The Description of the Celestial Circles makes up the next Part of this Poem;
for the better understanding of which, over and above what is explained in the
Marginal Notes; We have added a Cosmographical, Astronomical Synopsis, for the
most part according to Mersennus; to which We have likewise annexed the twelve
Propositions of Theodosius de Habitationibus in English.

And seeing our Author has briefly touched upon the fiery Nature of the Fixed
Stars; We have thought fit in the Appendix to make some further and more
curious Enquiries touching their Substance, their Light, Color and
Scintillation, their Number, Figure, Magnitude, Place, and Distance from the
Earth, or rather the Sun.

In the next Place the Planets are enumerated; whose several Denominations (by
which they were known and distinguished by the Ancients) We have given in our
Notes; and in the Appendix have further enlarged touching the Nature and
Substance of the Sun, his Maculae and Faculae (which are likewise represented
to View in a particular Scheme) something also being said of his Vertiginous
Motion, Magnitude, and Distance: Of the Moon and of her Spots, whereunto we
have added the Selenographick Schemes of Hevelius and Grimaldi with their
respective Nomenclatures; and have exhibited a like brief Account of the
Nature, Substance, Structure, Figure, Magnitude, and Distance of the other
Planets.

The Poem concludes with a Corollary of fiery Meteors and Comets: These We have
in Part explained in our Notes; and have more fully in the Appendix discoursed
of their Names, Kinds, and several Species, their Matter, Place, and Efficient
Causes; adding in the Close a Chronological Historical Table of the most
Notable Comets, that have appeared since the Flood to this present. Having in
the Illustration of the Whole, observed (in some Measure) the Method prescribed
by the great Imp. Iustinianus Institut. l. ^. Titul. 1.
Roman Legislator, which cannot better be expressed than in his own Words. Ita
Omnia videntur tradi commodissime, si primo levi ac simplici Via, deinde
diligentiori, atque exactiore Interpretatione Singula tradantur.

And seeing it is Customary in publishing Works of this Nature, to premise
something touching the Authors: It may justly be expected we should here do the
like in reference to

MANILIUS his Life, Country, Quality, Studies, Writings, etc.
Of this, (though we are not ignorant, that in a Subject so obscure, and to
which Antiquity affords so dim a Light, it will be hard for us either clearly
to discern, or certainly to determine; yet,) for the Satisfaction of the
Curious and Ingenious Reader, We shall in the following Discourse endeavor to
give, if not a full, at least a fair and probable Account.

Who this Manilius (whose Name the following Poem bears) should be; partly
through the Silence of those Authors which are come to our Hands; partly
through the Loss of others, of which the Injury of Time has deprived us, is
left very uncertain. The best means that we can use for the clearing of a
Matter so dark and dubious, will be to take a View of Those, who by the Name of
Manilius have been recommended to Posterity, as qualified with the Knowledge of
good Letters, and among them to consider, which in all rational Appearance may
be the Person we look for.

Varro in his fourth and sixth Books De Lingua Latina, makes mention of one
Manlius or Manilius a Poet, out of whose Works he cites these Verses

Deli Gemellos Creta Titana Deos
Latona pariit, casto complexu Jovis.
(Which Verses may happily be taken out of Chrestus Manlius, whom Gyraldus
reports to have written De Deorum Hymnis) and these Others

Cascum duxisse Cascam non mirabile est,
Quoniam Canoras conficiebant Nuptias.
Or as Jos. Scaliger reads the last Verse

Quoniam Charon eas sanciebat Nuptias. But finding no express Evidence (besides
the bare Name) to prove the Manilius mentioned by Varro, to have written any
thing on the Subject of Astronomy, much less to have been the same with the
Author of this Poem; We shall wave this Authority, and pass on to some others
more Explicit and Declarative.

Pliny l. 35. c. 17. tells us of one Manilius surnamed Antiochus, who with
Publius Mimus and Staberius Eros, was brought to Rome, all three, of Servile
Condition, but Persons of good Literature. His Words are These. Pedes Venalium
transmare advectorum, Creta denotare instituerunt Majores; Talemque Publium
(Syrum,) Mimicae Scenae Conditorem, and Astrologiae Consobrinum ejus Manilium
Antiochum, item Grammatices Staberium Erotem eadem Nave advectos videre Proavi,
i. e. Our Ancestors used to mark with white Lead or Chalk the Feet of such
Slaves as were brought over from beyond Sea to be sold. And such an one was
Publius (Syrus) the Founder of the Mimick Scene, and his Cousin German Manilius
Antiochus, of Astrology, and Staberius Eros of Grammar, whom our great
Grandfathers saw in that manner brought together in one and the same Ship.

This Manilius, Laurentius Bonincontrius (who near two Ages since commented
upon our Author) conceives the same with Manilius, who wrote this Astronomical
Poem: To confirm which Opinion, he produces the Evidence of a Silver Medal in
his Possession, whereon was the Figure of a Man, in an Exotic Habit, with a
Sphere placed near his Head, with this Inscription MANILI. the same is affirmed
(says Lilius Gyraldus) by Stephanus Dulcinus; and the said Gyraldus further
assures us that a familiar Friend of his, one Nicholaus Trapolinus, had by him
another Medal of the like Stamp and Inscription.

But against this Opinion of Bonincontrius, and Gyraldus, Scaliger opposes a
double Argument, one, drawn from the seeming inveracity of that supposed
Evidence; No such Medal being at this Day to be found in the Cabinets of any,
no not the most curious Antiquaries; the other from the Reason of Time; for
Manilius Antiochus being brought to Rome (as Scaliger supposes) in the
beginning of Sylla's Days, must needs, if he were the same with the Author of
this Poem, have been (as he reckons) 120 years old when he began to write (an
ill Age to play the Poet in) this Piece being written in the later years of
Augustus his Reign. But the Author in the Proem of this Work wishes for long
life to complete his intended Poem; Wherefore (says Scaliger) certainly he was
not then old, who wished he might live to be so. But leaving this Argument at
present, to be anon reassumed. We shall go on in our further Enquiry.

The same Pliny l. 36. c. 10. speaks of one Manilius a Mathematician, who upon
the Obelisque which Augustus erected in the Campus Martius, for finding out the
Hours of the Day by the Shadow of the Sun, with the Increase or Decrease of the
Days and Nights, placed a gilded Ball. Cujus Vertice Umbra colligeretur in
seem tipsam, alia Incrementa jaculantem Apice, ratione (ut ferunt) a Capite
Hominis intellecta, says Pliny, who commends the Design, as a Thing worthy of
Knowledge, and the Invention of a pregnant Wit.

To this Person Scaliger conceives this Work may with fairer Probability be
ascribed than to the former; which Opinion is by diverse other learned Persons
likewise embraced.

The excellently learned Doctor Isaac Vossius conceives yet, that the Manilius
Antiochus, and the Manilius Mathematicus, before mentioned are not two distinct
Persons, but one and the same under different Titles and Appellations, and the
very Author of the Poem we now publish. Whose Particular Sentiments upon this
Subject, and Arguments confirming the same, he was pleased not long since to
impart to Me, by his most obliging Letter, in Answer to some Queries by Me
proposed in one of mine to him, upon Occasion of my intended Publication of
this Piece, which for the Readers Satisfaction, I shall here make Public,
though not in his own Words, yet as near as may be in his own Sense.

And first in Answer to Scaliger's Argument, drawn from Reason of time, against
Manilius Antiochus, upon the Supposition, that Staberius Eros, (one of the
three beforementioned) set open his Grammar School in the Time of Sylla, ninety
five years before the Death of Augustus; And that therefore (according to
Scaligers Computation) Manilius could not probably be less than 120 years old,
at the time when this Poem was written. He urges by way of Reply, that
Suetonius (from whom Scaliger takes the Ground of his Argument) does not say,
that Staberius Eros opened his School in Sylla's Time, but that he taught
Gratis, the Children of Those, who in Sylla's Time were proscribed. The Words
of Suetonius are these. Sunt qui tradunt tanta eum (scilicet Staberium)
honestate praeditum, ut temporibus Syllanis Proscriptorum Liberos gratis and
sine Mercede ulla in Disciplinam receperit: How long that was after the Times
of Proscription will be needless here to declare; and that Manilius was not so
old as Scaliger conceives, when this Piece was written, may be made out from
this, that he was the Cousin German of Publius Syrus, who that he was brought a
Young Boy to his Patron, Macrobius affirms; from whom likewise and from the
Verses of Laberius, it may, not obscurely, be collected, that he was but a
Youth when he came upon the Stage against Laberius, which was a little before
the Death of Julius Caesar, and of Laberius also; to whom he succeeded on the
Mimick Stage in the second Year of the CLXXXIV. Olympiad, that is in the Year
of Rome DCCXI. as Eusebius testifies; And therefore seeing it is manifest that
Manilius published this Poem soon after the Varian Defeat, which happened in the
DCCLXII. of Rome; it is as evident likewise that between the Youth or
Adolescence of Manilius, and the Time wherein he writ this Piece, there could
not pass above one and fifty years; and consequently there is no Reason to
assign so great an Age to Manilius as Scaliger here does; since perhaps he was
not Seventy years old, when he had finished this his Astronomical Poem.

As to what Scaliger subjoyns touching Manilius his Wish for long life,
together with a cheerful Old Age, and the Inference he thence makes, that he
could not reasonably be then thought to be Old, who wished he might live to be
so. The Argument is but weak: for Senium is one thing, and Senium Annosum
another. Nor does he simply wish Vitam Annosam, but Vitam Annosam quae
conjuncta sit cum molli Senecta, which may be wished for even by those who are
very old.

As for the Name of Antiochus, he seems to have taken it from the famous
Philosopher Antiochus Ascalonita, often mentioned by Cicero, Plutarch, Sextus
Empiricus, and others; whose School not only Cicero, but Varro, Brutus, and
diverse others are said to have frequented, and in all Probability this our
Manilius also, as being not only of the same Nation, but happily born in the
same Town: (Ascalon.) So that it may seem no VVonder if after the manner of
those Times, he took upon him the Name of his worthy Tutor and Instructor. For
that he was a Syrian is not only manifest from his Consanguinity with Publius
Mimus; but may likewise be collected from the Title, or Inscription of this
Work, which in an ancient and excellent Manuscript in the Possession of the
said Doctor Vossius, is this: M. MALLII POENI ASTRONOMICON, DIVO OCTAVIO
QUIRINO AUG. That the Phaenicians were by the Romans called POENI, is manifest
out of Horace, Cicero a pud Nonium, and our Author in this very Poem. He
concludes therefore that this our Manilius, or, (as he is rather pleased to
call him) Manlius, was a Phaenician, and in all Probability Native of the same
Town as Antiochus his Tutor, whose Name he assumed.

From this Dedication of his Work to Augustus, by the Name of Quirinus, as the
Inscription shows, will appear the Error of those, who imagine the same to have
been dedicated to Tiberius or some later Roman Emperor. And the reason of
attributing the Name of Quirinus to Augustus may be made clear from the Words
of Suetonius, Censentibus quibusdam Romulum appellari oportere, quasi and ipsum
Conditorem Urbis, etc. Dion likewise tells us; (...). That (Augustus) Caesar
extremely desired to be called Romulus, and Joannes Philadelphensis (scripto de
Mensibus, in Aug.) (...), etc. Octavianus Son of Octavius was after his great
Victories honored with diverse Names; for by some he was called Quirinus as
another Romulus, etc.

As to the other Manilius by Pliny styled Mathematicus; he conceives, that
Titular Distinction to make no Difference in the Person; but that he is the
same with the former; further adding, Omnino existimo and illum quoque de
Nostro Manilio accipi debere. And whereas Salmasius affirms that the Name
Manlius (or Manilius) is not to be found in that Place of Pliny in any ancient
Manuscripts, and therefore ought to be expunged out of the Printed Copies; he
makes it appear that Salmasius is extremely mistaken; by the Testimony of
several ancient MS. of. Pliny in his Possession, whereof one is in a Character
written above 8 or 900 years since: In all which, the Word Manlius is found
though with some small difference in writing of the Name. Nor does he think the
Name of Marcus praefixed to Manlius ought to be scrupled at, upon the account
that none of the Manlian Family after the CCCLX. Year from the Building of
Rome, could or did use that Praenomen, seeing that Prohibition, as Cicero (in
Philip.) intimates, is only to be understood of the Patrician Race: Now that
this Manilius, or (as he calls him) Manlius was, before his Manumission, a
Slave; not only the Place of Pliny already cited, but the very Agnomen of
Antiochus sufficiently evinces; for as much as a Greek Agnomen joined to a
Roman Name, is always a most certain Token of a Servile Condition.

With this rational Discourse of so incomparable a Person, both my Self and
Reader might well rest satisfied; Did We not meet with another Manilius,
mentioned by Pliny (l. 10. c. 2.) of Senatorian Dignity; honored by him with
the Character of the most diligent of all the long Robe, and enobled with the
greatest Learning without any Teacher. Who is said first of all the Romans to
have written of the Phaenix, That there was never any man that saw it feed,
that in Arabia it is Sacred to the Sun; and (to omit the mention of some other
Particulars) that it lives 660 years, and that with the Life of this Bird, is
consummated the Conversion of the great Year; In which the Stars return again
to their first Points, and give Significations of the same Seasons as at the
Beginning. That this Great Year begins about High Noon on the Day, wherein the
Sun enters the first Degree of Aries, and was completed (as he declares) when
P. Licinius, and M. Cornelius were Consuls, etc.

This person (not taken Notice of by any others that have written touching our
Author) Monsieur Tristan in his Historical Commentaries (Tom. 1.) conceives to
be the same with our Manilius. The Reasons inducing him to embrace this
Opinion, being grounded upon the Concinnity of Time, and Conformity of Study.
The Subject here mentioned clearly implying him to have been conversant in the
like Astronomical Exercises as our Author, whom not improbably he believes to
have made these curious Remarks touching the Phoenix and the Annus Magnus, in
the sixth Book of his Astronomicks, which is now lost: though, as Scaliger
affirms, extant in the Time of Firmicus, who from thence collected his (...)
Sphaerae Barbaricae, as he did from the fifth Book, yet extant, his (...). For,
that Manilius wrote of the first Kind as well as of the last mentioned, may
appear by these Verses.

Quae mihi per proprias Vires sunt cuncta canenda,
Quid valiant Ortu, quid quum merguntur in undas?
The Elogy which Pliny gives him, seeming likewise (as Tristan observes) to
insinuate, besides a particular Respect, a kind of Intimacy and Acquaintance,
between this Manilius (supposed our Author) and Pliny; who, as he was a Person
very curious might be desirous to be known to him upon the Score of his Eminent
Learning; and happily enjoyed what he desired, about the end of Tiberius his
Reign; at which time Manilius might be far advanced in years, and Pliny a Young
Man.

I am not yet ignorant, that the Learned Pighius in his Roman Annals, and some
other knowing Persons are of Opinion, that this Elogium ought to be applied to
Titus Manilius Son of Publius, and Nephew of Marcus Manilius, whom Cicero in
Roscio calls Ornatissimum Senatorem: But with the leave of those Learned
Persons; I do not find that among the Characters which Cicero gives him, there
is any one of his Learning or Erudition; for though he says he was a most
honorable Senator, of a great Age, by Nature pious and Religious, and of a
plentiful Fortune, yet he honors him not with any Encomium of his Studies, or
of his great Proficiency in all Sciences; which doubtless he would have done,
had he merited eminently in that kind.

In all Reason therefore We may conclude the Manilius mentioned by Pliny, to be
different from that of Cicero, and with much seeming probability suppose him
(as Tristan does) to be the same with our Manilius, Author of this Poem, who by
Petrus Crinitus de Poet. Latin. is reported (we wish he had strengthened his
Assertion by some Authentic Testimony) to have been of illustrious Extraction,
which adds some further Weight to Mounsieur Tristan his Conjecture.

But since this cannot be made out by other Arguments than what are merely
probable, we shall sorbear to determine positively thereupon; but leave the
Reader freely to judge which has the best Pretense to be entitled to this
Work, the Slave or the Senator.

As to that Opinion started by Gevartius, that this our Manilius was the same
with Manlius Theodorus (who 400 Years after the Death of Augustus, and of our
Author t^o, was Consul, and Praefectus Praetorio in Illyrium, under the
Emperors Theo^, Honorius and Arcadius, and who by Claudian is celebrated for an
excellent (...), Philosopher and Astronomer.) It is so groundless, and so
unworthy the Name of Gevartius, that we shall not spend time in refuting it,
since the Reader may find suffici^nt Evidence against it from the Pen of our
Author in this very Poem, without the help of those Arguments, which from
thence are drawn by Tristan in his Commentaries before mentioned ( Tom. 1. p.
114, and 115.) and Barthius in his elaborate Animadversions upon Claudian (p.
112.)

The Name of Manilius is no less controverted than his Person; some affirming
it to be Manilius, some Manlius, and others contracting it ( compendio improbo,
as Barthius terms it) into Mallius. But his true Name, (uncertain whether
derived to him by Adoption or Descent) seems to be MANILIUS, which was the Name
of a Roman Family distinct from that of the Manlian, as is apparent, both by
the Capitoline Tables, and other Evidences in the Roman Story, of which see
Schottus de Famil. Roman. and Glandorpius in his Onomasticon. This Name of
Manilius all the Ancient Editions in the very Infancy of Printing, give him,
and most Manuscripts; particularly, as Barthius (in Claudian.) notes, that of
Corpus Christi College in Oxford; and (as he adds) he is so named, with the
Addition of the Praenomen, Marcus; above 600 Years since by Gerbertus Rhemensis
Bishop of Ravenna, and afterward Pope of Rome, in his cxxx. Epistle in these
Words. Age ergo, te solo conscio, ex tuis sumptibus fac mihi scribantur, Marcus
Manilius de Astrologia, Victorinus de Rhetorica, Demostenes Ophthalmicus, etc.
And though some Ancient MSS. call him Caius, yet generally all the late printed
Copies give him the Name of Marcus Manilius; Which, as being confirmed by the
most prevailing Authority, we admit of.

Of his Studies, his own Writings give us the clearest and the best Account. By
those, (that is to say his five remaining Books of Astronomicks, for other
Writings of his, the learned World is not acquainted with) he is represented to
Us to have been an Excellent Mathematician, Astronomer, Astrologer, a great
Humanist, Philosopher, (and which comprehends all the rest) an admirable Poet.
In Astronomy and Astrology he chiefly followed the Doctrine of the Chaldeans
and Egyptians. In Philosophy, though he was generally conversant in all the
different Opinions of the Ancients, yet, he more particularly adhered to that
of the Stoics, with which he seems to have been thoroughly imbued; as may
appear by several Instances; particularly that excellent Proem of his fourth
Book; a Taste of some Part of which, We hold it not amiss to give the Reader.
It begins thus.

Quid tam sollicitis Vitam consumimus Annis?
Torquemurque metu, caecaque Cupidine rerum? etc.
Why waste We Life in Years of anxious Pain?
With fears tormented, and blind Love of Gain?
Worn old with Cares, not Age; which in the Acquest
We loose, and with no End of Wishes blessed,
Act as to live still, yet never live indeed:
So much more Poor, as our Desires exceed.
What We have not We covet; what We have
We count not; and though Nature little crave,
We hoard up Matter for vast Luxury,
And purchase Spoil with Superfluity;
With Gain buy Loss; as if the End of all
Our Wealth, were only to be Prodigal.
Lay, Mortals, Lay these Cares, these Follies by;
All governed is by changeless Destiny,
That rules the World; and Times long Courses run
In a linked Series, not to be undon.
Even in our Births We die; and our last End
Does on our Live's Original depend, etc.
Of the Time or Manner of his Death We find Nothing recorded.

What Stock of Credit and Esteem he has left behind him, will best appear by
the Censures which the ablest Critics of these later Ages have given of him,
and of his Writings. Some of which for the Reader's Satisfaction we shall here
enumerate.

JUDGMENTS of the Learned on Manilius.
We begin with ALDUS MANUTIUS, in his Edition of our Author.

Manilius (says he) was the first of all the Latins who wrote of Astronomy,
and therefore, when in many Places of this Work he not a little glories
therein, deservedly to be born with; for it is an Argument of no mean Wit and
Industry, to have explained such difficult Matter, so aptly and so clearly in
Verse as he has done; to have only attempted, though not performed such a
Design, being abundantly Praiseworthy and Noble.

By ANGELUS POLITIANUS (in Nutric) He is styled Bis Vates, Doubly a Poet; for
describing so excellently in Verse the Babylonian, and Egyptian Astrology.

PETRUS CRINITUS (De Poet. Latin.) thus speaks of Him.

Marcus Manilius is reputed to have been of Illustrious Extraction; and
flourished at Rome, when Augustus happily swayed the Empire thereof; and
doubtless was most acceptable to so great a Prince for the Eminency of his
Learning, and Excellency of his Wit. He employed his Study and Industry chiefly
in Mathematical Arts, with so much Proficiency, as he thereby gained from the
World no mean Applause of his Ingenuity.

ALEXANDER ab ALEXANDRO (Genial. Dierum l. 2. c. 21.) speaking of several
Authors signalized by Fame for their eminent Skill and Knowledge in Celestial
Matters, reckons, among the Greeks, Berosus, Eudoxus, Aristotle, Empedocles and
Aratus; among the Latins, Julius Firmicus and Marcus Manilius.

REMBERTUS DODONAEUS (in Isagog Cosmogr.) citing the Verses of Manilius proving
the Figure of the World to be Spherical, adds this Encomium,

As sings that Divine Poet.

ADRIANUS TURNEBUS in Adversar. gives him the Title of a Noble Poet, adding
withal, that he was an Honor and Ornament even to Poesy it self.

LUDOVICUS CARRIO (emendat. l. 2.) styles him a most Grave and Learned Poet.

MONSIEUR de MESMES, in his Institutions Astronomiques, written long since in
French, calls him, The Gentile Astronomical Poet.

The Incomparable JOSEPH SCALIGER ( to whose Learned Labors our Author ows his
Second and better Life) thus writes of him in his Preface to his last Edition
of him.

As for MANILIUS I cannot say, whether I should rather wish that he had been
publicly read in the Schools, or lament that he has lain hitherto so
neglected. A most ingenious Poet, and Polite Author; having illustrated so
Obscure a Subject in such Luculent Verse, and displayed a Matter of it self
Morose, in such a pleasing Character. All his Proemial Inductions, His
Transitions and Excursions are beyond Censure, than those Nothing can be said
more divine, nothing more copious, more weighty or more delightful.

Then coming more particularly to the Censure of this Part which We now
publish.

Certainly ( says he) it is a Piece so useful and advantageous to all Generous
Youth, as it ought to prepare their Way to the Elements of Spherical Learning.

And again in his Epistle to the Learned Stadius.

I exhort all knowing and worthy Professors, that when ever they go about to
instruct their Pupils in the first Elements of the Sphere, they would initiate
them therein by this first Book of our Author; for whence ( says he) can they
better derive the Principles of that Science, than from this most Disert Poet;
who has omitted Nothing which may seem pertinent to that purpose.

The Learned ISAAC CASAUBON (Annot. in Strabon. and alibi) honors him with the
Title of a most Elegant Poet.

PAULUS MELISSUS in his Encomium upon Scaliger's first Edition of our Author,
thus sings of Him.

Jove pitying humane Weakness; gave to Us
Th'Inspector of the Stars, Manilius.
Who to Rome's Nephews first the Knowledge brought
Of Heavens high Orbs, and their hid Motions taught.
JOANNES AURATUS upon the same Occasion describes him thus:

Manilius, like another Atlas bears,
Or an Alcides, on his Head the Spheres
FRANCISCUS JUNIUS in the Dedicatory Epistle before his Edition, gives him this
following Elogy.

Manilius for Gravity of Style, Propriety of Language, and Usefulness of
Argument is to be preferred before many.

And again.

In my Judgment he expresses all Things briefly, gravely, sweetly, and most
commodiously for the Instruction of all that read him.

CHRISTOPHERUS SCHEINERUS in his Accurate Work entitled Rosa Ursina, delivers
this Censure of him.

Marcus Manilius, (whom some call Caius Manilius) wrote most elegantly (much
above any Others) of the fluidity, and Liquidness of the Heavens. That
egregious Author having with extraordinary Clearness, Roundness and Elegancy
expressed all things concerning the Heavens and the Celestial Bodies.

GASPAR BARTHIUS (in Adversar.) gives him the Commendation of a most judicious
and ingenious Poet; and one of the most elegant of the Augustaean Age, and (in
Animadvers. in P. Statium) adds; that he was a Poet most consultive in
Philosophy. No less Praise is afforded him by

JOANNES GLANDORPIUS (in Onomastic. Roman.) who gives him the Character of a
Noble Mathematician and Poet, and One who first of all the Latins wrote of
Astronomy in Verse.

JULIUS NIGRONIUS (de non legend. Libr. Amator.) reckons him among the most
Useful and Instructive Authors. I exhort ( says he) that Young Persons read
such Authors as they may peruse without offense to good Manners, such as
Persius, Seneca, Silius, Lucan, Claudian and MANILIUS. Of the same Judgment is

ARNOLDUS CLAPMARIUS (in Nobil. Triennio) where he thus advises the Generous
Young Student. Read, and read over again Homer with Theocritus and Virgil;
Horace with Pindar; Lucretius and MANILIUS, with Aratus.

The most eminently learned and judicious HUGO GROTIUS In the Preface to the
Edition of his own Latin Poems, shows us the Esteem and value he set upon our
Author. I acknowledge my self ( says he) to be now and then full of Lucan's
Spirit, sometimes above measure studious of MANILIUS.

The excellent GERRARD. JO. VOSSIUS (l. de 4. Artibus Popular.) speaking of
that Part of Philosophy which is comprised under the Title of Grammatica
Exegetica.

Without this ( says he) how can any interpret Lucretius, or Manilius,
Parmenides, or Melissus? who besprinkle their Writings with many things drawn
from the inmost Recesses of Philosophy.

PAGANINUS GAUDENTIUS sometime Public Professor of Law and Rhetoric at Pisa,
in his Treatise De Initio and Progressu Philosophiae apud Romanos; ranks him
among the Eminent Lights of Learning in the Augustaean Age; concluding with an
Epigram ( which for Brevities sake we forbear here to insert) in Honor of so
great a Poet and Astronomer, as he there styles him: And in his Obstetrix
Literaria thus further Discourses of him.

If any shall go about to describe Arts and Sciences in a Poetical Style, he
takes not more from Poetry than the bare versifying Part; for he then begins to
assume from his Subject the Part either of a Philosopher, Astronomer,
Physician, or such like, in which kind certainly Empedocles, Lucretius and
MANILIUS were more than Poets.

BRIETIUS in Syntagmate de Poet. Latin. comparing the Latin Poesy with the
different Ages of Man; makes the virile and perfect State thereof to consist of
Virgil, Horace, Ovid, Tibullus, Propertius, and our MANILIUS.

Add we to these the Opinion of the most Ingenious

Mr. ABRAHAM COWLEY, Who in his Essay of constituting a College for the
infusing into Youth, Knowledge and Language at the same time; conceives the Way
to be by breeding them up in Authors or Pieces of Authors that treat of solid
and Learned, that is Natural Matters. Among which he commends Virgil's
Georgicks, Gratius, Nemesianus and MANILIUS.

To accumulate more Encomiums, were superfluous; Hear himself now speak his own
Character.

OF The two Hemispheres OF THE STARS.
THe One serves for the Northern Constellations; the Other for the Southern.
The Stars are expressed according to their several Magnitudes, as may be seen
in the Scale thereof set down in the Southern Hemisphere. And the
Constellations are only pricked out, wherein (with Galluccius) the Middle Way
is taken, betwixt not placing them in any, or representing them in too dark
shadowed Figures, as some have done.

In the Projection, the Eye is supposed to touch the South Pole, for the
projecting of the Northern Hemisphere upon the (...) of the Equator, and
contrarily for the Southern. So that the Stars are placed in either by the
Arches of right Ascension measured upon the Equator, and by their Distances or
Declinations from it, set off from a Scale of Double Tangents, which this and
All other Stereographical Projections require: Amongst which, I account this
the most proper and useful to be here placed, because by adding an Index made
as above said, and divided as you see one of the Semidiameters done in either
Hemisphere, any Star may easily be found either on the Projections or in the
Heavens; And the Way or Course of a New Star or Comet may be traced upon them
by any that have but ordinary Skill in the Sphere; and may serve very well
instead of a Celestial Globe; and being held up before one in the Night, placed
according as the Heavens require, will plainly show the Position at that Time.
And are ready, to those that are yet more Curious, by the putting on a
particular Horizon, for other several Uses. But yet these Instruments are not
true Astroscopes; there is not any point to place the Eye in, for discerning
the Stars in the Heavens as they are placed in the Hemispheres; for that will
require another Polar Projection much like this following, viz.

The Eye is to be supposed at the Center of the Sphere, projecting on a Plane
touching the Sphere at the Pole Point, in which the right Ascension is measured
as before by the Angle at the Pole Point, and the Polar Distances are set off
by the Tangents of the said Arks; On which Supposition an entire Hemisphere
cannot be projected; And this is no other than the Plane of an Equinoctial
Dyal, which being placed Erect to the Axis, if the Eye be supposed therein at
the Distance of the Radius from the Plane, and if at the Situation of each Star
on the Plane. Holes were supposed or made in the Plane; if the Eye beholds two
known Stars shining through their proper Holes, at the same Time it should
behold All the rest likewise shining through their Holes, to which their Names
being affixed, this Projection becomes an Astroscope to teach Beginners to know
the Stars, and will also serve as a Nocturnal for finding the Stars hour, and
by Consequence, by Aid of the Sun's right Ascension, proper to the Day of the
Month, the true hour of the Night likewise.

The Polar Dyal or Meridional Plane, as Kircher in his Ars Magna Lucis and
Umbrae affirms, has been applied by Griembergerus; as an Astroscope to teach
Tyros how to know the Stars in both Hemispheres, and to find the Hour of the
Night by the Rotation of the Plane, affixed as it were to the Handle of a
Carpenter's Wimble; the Axis thereof being conceived to be Parallel to the Axis
of the World, and the Eye, at a Knot tied in a Thread on the said Axis, to be
the Center of the Earth, is supposed to behold the Stars shining through their
proper Holes as before; the Distance from the Eye to the Plane being the Radius
of the Projection.

But neither of these Astroscopes are the same as Schickardus treats of; His is
supposed to be the Surface of a Cone; In the Circle of the Base whereof
conceive a Thread to represent a Diameter; a Knot in it the Center, a
Perpendicular from that Knot to the Side of the Conick Surface the Radius, and
a Line passing through the Vertex of the Cone (which represents the Pole Point)
and the Foot of that Perpendicular to be a Tangent Line each way, in which, the
Stars are to be placed according to their Distances from the Pole, counted from
the Pole Point, in respect of the Graduation of the said Tangent; the Arches of
right Ascension being measured by the Periphery of the Circle in the Base of
the Cone, and this Surface is to be conceived to be directed to the Pole, and
that the Eye is at the Knot or Center of the Base of the Cone, beholding two
known Stars shining through their Proper Holes, and at the same time it shall
likewise behold the rest shining through their respective Holes; The Rotation
of this Figure about an Axis serving as a Nocturnal to give the Hours of the
Night.

Other Astroscopes there are; As one, that being rectified and set to the Hour
of the Night, the Sight through two Pinnacides shall be directed to that Star
to which the Instrument is rectified. Of All which to treat, is not our present
Design, and 'therefore shall refer the Reader to the Authors and Composers of
such kind of Projections or Astroscopes.

map of northern constellations map of southern constellations

THE SPHERE OF MARCUS MANILIUS.
DIvining S^lmasius (in Diatrib. de Annis Climact. and de Antiqu. Astrolog.)
expounds divinas Arts according to the opinion of the Stoics; who held the
Stars to be Deities, and thinks that Manilius gave to Astrology that Epithete
in regard of the Divinity of its subject: We rather take it in the same sense
as Divinatrices. So Horace uses the Word Imbrium Avis Divina Imminentum: so
Iuvenal. Satyr. 10. Exta and candiduli Divina Tomacula Porci. See Scaliger, and
Barthius Adversar. lib. 25. c. 2.
Arts, and Stars So we have chosen (for the better cadence of the Verse) to
render -- conscia fati sydera -- not assuming a greater liberty than the sense
of the words will bear, in making conscia fati in this place (according to the
Tenet of Manilius) to express as much as praesciae venturi. How far yet this
foreknowledge of the Stars extends, is not agreed upon by the Ancients. Some
(with Plotinus, in libro si faciunt Astra, as cited by Macrob. in somn. Scip.)
believe, that the Stars of themselves know nothing of Fate, but that men
skilled in the Art of Divination read it in the Book of the Stars, as in the
Tables of the Gods; as Birds are not conceived to be skilled in Augury, though
from their voice or flight, men knowing therein foretell future events: Others,
that the Stars know all things, but not that they effect what they know or
signify. Some that the Stars carry about (as included within them) the Fate of
all things, and what they know requisite to be done, produce into act. Which
last Opinion, though by Seueca (Epistol. 80.) proposed as doubtful, is by
Manilius (in the height of Stoicism) positively asserted: See Lips. Philosoph.
Stoic. l. 2. c. 14. And Vossius l. 2. Idololatr. c. 49.
foreknowing The Proem.
Fate,
So Ausonius, Omnia quae vario rerum metimur in Actu
Astrorum Dominatus agit; terrenaque tantum
Membra homini; e superis Fortuna and Spiritus Auris.
And (before him) Seneca: Ex syderum quinque levissimis motibus Fortunae
Populorum dependent: and Maxima ac Minima proinde formantur, prout aequum
iniquumve sydus incessit. Some went yet further, and assigned peculiar Stars to
the particular condition of Persons, as the large and bright to the Rich, the
lesser to the Poor, the obscure to the feeble and decrepid: But this opinion is
by Pliny exploded as a vulgar error, Sydera quae affixa dicimus mundo, non
illa, ut existimat vulgus, singulis tributa sunt nobis: Clara divitibus, minora
pauperibus, obscura defectis, and pro sort eujusque lucentia ad munera
mortalibus. Non tanta coelo Societas nobiscum est. Vid. Plin. l. 2.
Varying the diverse Turns of Humane State,
(The Work^ of Heavens The Stoics held the World to be a rational Creature,
and to consist of Heaven and Earth, as Soul and Body: The Heavens (according to
them) being the same to the whole, as reason to man. Hence Arnobius (l. 3.
advers. Gent.) In Philosophiae Memorabiles studio, atque ad istius nominis
columen (vobis laudatoribus) elevati, universam istam molem Mundi, eujus
omnibus amplexibus ambimur, regimur, ac sustinemur, Animans esse unum, Sapiens,
Rationale, Consultum, probabili Asseveratione definiunt; with whom consents
Hilarious in Genes. Haec tamen Aethereoquae machina volvitur Axe,
Non tantum pictura poli est, sed celsa voluntas,
Men's Ratioque subest. --
Upon which Verses Barthius (l. 31. Adversar. c. 12.) notes, that Men's and
Ratio Coeli est Astrorum, ut vocant, Influentia, quae Genus gubernat humanum.
Expressing the sense and meaning of our Author; but how truly, the thing I
leave to be considered.
high Reason) We bring down
In Verse, from Heaven; and first move Helicon^ Aoniae Baeotiaeque Mons Musis
Sacer (Vib. Sequester) so called, according to Plutarch (l. de Nominibus
fluviorum and Montium) from Helicon, the Brother of Cithaeron, of which see
there the Fable. Or, as Casaubon (in Pers.) conjectures from the Hebrew word,
Halike, i. e. Ambulatio, in regard the Ancients used to have there their Walks,
and to confer and discourse of natural and divine Matters: Where also as
Athenaeus (l. 14. Deipnosoph.) from the Authority of Amphion Thespiensis
reports, there was a College instituted for all Musical Exercises, in which
the Youth of those Times were accurately instructed. But Bochartus conceives
the name derived from the Arabic, Halic, or Halica, which signifies a high
Mountain, for such is it described to be by Strabo l. 8. and l. 9.
Helicon,
And it is green Groves, with unacquainted Rimes,
Offering strange Rites, not known to former Times.
Caesar! thy Countries Augustus Caesar: of whom Horace, Ames dici Pater atque
Princeps. A Title first given to Julius Caesar (as his Coins attest) for his
singular Clemency. Yet Cicero enjoyed it before either of them, though not in
the same Extent and Latitude, yet as the Encomium of a good Patriot: hence
Iuvenal Satyr. 8.

-- Roma Parentem Roma Patrem Patriae Ciceronem Libera dixit. The reason of
this Imperial Title Seneca gives ( in de Clementia Io) Patrem quidem
appellavimus, ut sci ret sibi datam esse Potestatem, quae est Temperatissima
subditis tanquam Liberis consulent, suaque post illas reponens. The Ceremony of
Augustus his Instalment in this Titular Dignity, is thus described by Suet
mius. Valerius Messala was deputed by the Senate to present him with the Votes
of the House, which he delivered in these Words, Quod foelix faustumque sit
tibi domuique tuae, Auguste! ( sic enim nos perpetuam Reipublicae foelicitatem,
and laeta huic precari existimamus) Senatus Te ( consentiens cum Populo Romano)
consalutat Patriae Patrem. To whom Augustus with tears in his eyes thus
answered: Compos factus votorum meorum ( Patres Conscripti) quid habeo aliud
Deos immortales precari quam ut hunc consensum v^strum, ad ultimum vitae finem
mihi perferre liceat?
Prince and Father! Thou,
To whose The Original has Augustas Leges, which Epithete our Author doubtless
made use of in Allusion to the Title of Augustus given by the Senate at the
instance of Munacius Plancus to Octavianus Caesar: who after his settlement in
the Empire according to Eusebius in Chronie. (as rendered by Saint Ierom)
Romany plurimas leges statuit. To which Ovid likewise alludes ( Metam. 15)
Pace data terris, Animum ad Civilia vertet
Iura suum; Legesque feret Iustissimus Auctor.
These Laws in honor of Julius Caesar, were by Augustus called Iuliae, either
as being first enacted by Julius Caesar, or as revived and put into execution
by Augustus, according to the Advice and direction of his Uncle, left in his
Memorials, or Commentaries behind him, as he persuaded the People to believe;
which see enumerated by Donatus in Tacitum. p. 144. and Polletus de foro
Romano. l. 4. and more particularly by R^smus in Antiqu. Romans l. 8.
Imperial Laws the World does bow,
Who Our Author here seems to make a difference between the Divinity of
Augustus, and that of Julius Caesar, attributing to the Nephew Heaven as his
due and Merit; to the Uncle, as the Grace and Concession only of the Gods.
Plin. l. 7. c. 45. speaking of Augustus, says; Ille Deus, Coelumque nescio
adeptus magis an meritus. Of the other, Vitruvius in Praefat. Julius Caesar
Consilio Coelestium in Sedibus Immortalitatis dedicatus est.
merit'st, what was granted to thy Sire,
Heaven as a God! do this high Song inspire.
And now, Heaven Propter numen Caesaris jam receptum; vel Augusti jam
recipiendum, says Barthius Adversar. l. 1. c. 8. Or rather in regard of the
great Discoveries made by the Extent and Progress of the Roman Conquests in
Climates and Regions formerly unknown, by which means (to use Valerius Flaccus
his Expression, Argon. 1.) -- Tantum terrae, tantum cognoscere coeli Permissum
est. --
kinder to the Curious grows,
And courts in Verse, it is Treasure to disclose.
Fit Task alone for Peaceful Leisure! Rise
We then through yielding Air, and mount the Skies,
There live and range; Learn all the Signs, and prove
How in their That is from West to East, contrary to the Motion of the Primum
Mobile; which Motion of the Planets in the time of Democritus was not known
among the Greeks; Eudoxus being the first that discovered it to his Countrymen,
as Seneca observes Natural. Quaest. l. 7. c. 3.) having derived that knowledge
from the Egyptians, to whom he traveled in the Company of Chrysippus the
Physician and others, supported by the Bounty of his Friends, and recommended
by Agesilaus his Letters to Nectabis the King, and by him to the Priests, as
Diogenes Laertius in his life, l. 8. Yet Lucian ( de Astrolog.) assigns the
first Observation thereof to Atreus, King of the Argives, confirmed by Achilles
Tatius ( in Arati Phaenomen.) who says, that Atreus ((...)) found out the
opposite motion of the Planets. So that Gassendus (Tom. 1. l. 3. p. 591.)
conceives the more universal and exact Theory of that Motion, rather than the
Original or Primary Invention thereof, is to be ascribed to Eudoxus.
adverse Course the Planets move:
To know but which were little; we will sound
The hidden Entrails of this ample Round,
Enquire how Stars Creatures beget and sway,
Which whilst we sing, Not unlike to that of Virgil ( in Culicis Prooemio:)
Phoebus erit nostri Princeps and Carminis Author, Et recinente Lyra fautor --
The Poets usually applying that Musical Instrument to their Songs; quod dum
men's foeta parturit, ipsa ferat opem. And therefore a late triple Crowned Poet
( Urban 8. in his Ode upon St. Lewis) calls the Lyra, Sonoram Cantus
Obstetricem, as is noted by Paganinus Gaudentius in Additament. Crit. c. 9. And
for this reason Manilius here brings in Phoebus with his Lyra to bear a part
with him in confort.
Apollo's self shall play.
Justly does Scaliger condemn Lilius Giraldus for supposing our Author in this
place to profess himself to have been twice Lawreat: who means no more by these
double Sacrifices than the Invocation of double Assistance, being to treat of
the gravest subject in the most pleasing style; and therefore he erects two
Altars to the two Patrons of Astronomy and Poetry.
Two Altars bright with Flames, we raise; repair
TO a double shrine, pressed with the double Care
Of Verse and Matter; on these certain Grounds
Raising our Song, concordant Heaven surrounds
It Is Poet with deep Harmony, and Words
Scarce fit for Latian Characters affords.
Who to inferior Earth did first reveal The Original and Progress of Astronomy.

These Gifts of Gods? Who, what they hid, could steal?
All-ruling Heaven! What Mortal dared so high
As spite of Gods, himself to Deifie?
Open the highest Path, the lowest Deep?
Tell how the Stars their bounded Courses keep?
The Force, and Motions of the Signs impart?
Mercury; so called (according to Festus) Quod omnem rem sermon sine manibus
conficiat, quibus Partibus Corporis qui car^nt (...) vocantur. And therefore
the Hermetical Statues were made of a square Trunk, or Stone only. Others
(says Festus) will have him so called (not a Cyllenia via, as it is commonly
read; but as Mr. V^ssius in Melam. corrects the Text) a Cyllene Avia, from his
Grandmother Cyllene, by whom he was educated. Others will have him to be so
called from the Mountain Cyllenius in Arcadia, where he was bred. That he first
taught the Egyptians Astronomy, and indeed all other Arts and Sciences, is the
generally received Opinion; which (besides Iamblichus) is asserted by Plato in
Phaedro, (where he is styled (...)) and by Cicero, Lib. 3. Divinat. Vide etiam
Lactantium lib. 1. c. 6. But as to the first Authors of Astronomy, see more in
the History of its Original and Progress in the Appendix.
Cyllenius! Thus first taught'st this sacred Art;
Thou th'inmost Heavens, and utmost Stars made known,
That so to Natures Power, not Face alone,
Might greater Awe, and Reverence accrue;
And Nations learn what to that God was due,
Who did through Seasons, to be known, display
The Heavens, and this great Worlds Phenomenon.
Nature helped too; Her self, Her self improved,
Lucian ( de Astrolog.) makes Astrology to be (...), The study of Ancient Kings
beloved of the Gods: The Poet here particularly respects the Babylonian and
Egyptian Princes.
And Monarchs (next to Heaven in power) first moved
TO affect these Arts; who near Sol's rising Beams
Fierce Nations tamed; whose Lands One of the most celebrated Rivers of the
East, arising in Armenia Major, and watering on the left hand Mesopot^mia, on
the right hand Syria, Arabia, and Babylonia (now Caldar.) It was heretofore
according to Plutarch ( de Nominfluv. and montium) called Medus, and before
that Zarandus, of which see there the Reasons. Its Modern Name answering to its
Ancient Apherat, or Phraat, which owes its Original (as some conceive) to the
Arabic, in which Language Pharatta signifies inundare, whence Iphraton
Inundatio (this River overflowing in the same manner as Nilus) or rather from
the Hebrew Huperath, signifying frugifer, crescens, or fructificans: It was
anciently divided into five Principal streams. The first whereof passing by
Seleucia falls into Tygris. The other four loosing themselves in so many great
Lak^s. The first of these four Branches, and most Easterly, was called
Tsartsar: The second, Naar-Malcha, (by Pliny corruptly Armalchar) i. e. Regium
flumen; by the Arabs in the same sense Al Melic, in memory of some of the
Babylonian Princes, who caused that Cut to be made; and Chobar from the Name of
the Prefect or Overseer of the Work, as observed by Scaliger, l. 5. de
Emendatione Temporum. The third passing by Babylon, was that, which was
properly called Euphrates; as believed to be the Native Channel of the River,
and not made by Art as the others; called likewise Sur, from the City Sura, or
Sora, seated upon its Banks. The fourth and most Westerly was (according to
Pliny) called Narragam, by Ptolomy Baarsarem, or Maarsarem, and by some others
(...), which Bochartus ( in Phaleg. lib. 1 c. 8.) rather reads (...), which
nearlier answers to Plinie's Narragam, or Naar-Agam, i. e. fluvius stagni. By
the Greeks anciently this great River was otherwise named, being called from
its Source to the Mountain Taurus, Pixyrates; where it breaks into the Mountain
Taurus, Omyra; after its emersion from thence, Euphrates, as Pliny lib. 5. c.
24. See likewise Ptolomy lib. 5. Strabo lib. 11. and alibi. And Salmasius at
large in Plin. Exercitat. Tom. 1. page 625. and sequent.
Euphrates Streams
Divide, and The Learned Mr. Vossius (de aetate mundi and in Melam) conceives
our Poet in this place to follow the Opinion of the Ancients, who before the
discovery of the Indian Ocean, were so ignorant as to believe, that Nilus
derived its source from the utmost East, even from India it self. With which
Error (besides diverse others of the Ancients) Virgil seems to comply ( Georg.
3.) Quaque Pharetratae Vicinia Persidis u^get,
Et ^iridem Aegyptum nigra foecundat Arena;
Et diversa Ruens septem discurrit in Ora
Usque coloratis Annis devexus ab Indis.
On Quiver-bearing Persia's Hem he strains,
With black Sands marling Aegypts verdant Plains:
In seven Streams forcing his divided Course,
And from the Sun-tann'd Indians draws his Source.
But our Poet does no more than concisely mark and point out the Babylonian and
Egyptian Territories, Per flumina Urbes eorum alluentia ac foecund^tia, as
Barthius notes, l. 1. Adversar. c. 9. The several Names given by the Ancients
to this River are collected by the Learned Maussacus (in Plutarch. de Fluv. and
Mont. nominibus.) It was first of all called Oceanus, or (but as he says
barbare) Oceames: Then Ae^os seu Aquila, and Melas from its Profundity or
depth, because all deep Waters seem black, or from Melas, the Son of Neptune:
Afterward Aegyptus, either from Aegyptus, the Son of Belus, or of Vulcan and
Leucippes, who threw himself into it; or (...), a Capras pinguefaciendo. From
whence likewise the whole Country of Egypt seems to be so named. The Hebrews
call it Gebon, and Schior, the latter signifying nigrum seu turbidum; whence
happily is derived the Ethiopian Name, Siris: It was called also (...), sive
Nus and Trito; and lastly Nilus, from the Husband of Garmathones, an Egyptian
Queen so named; or from Nilus the Son of Cyclops, or Nileus, or Nilasius,
Egyptian Princes; or rather (...), i. e. a novum limum aut foecem ferendo. By
the Latins it was peculiarly called Melo, as is evident from the Testimonies
of Ennius, Festus, Servius and Ausonius. Of the Original of Nilus, and Cause of
its Inundation, in former Ages so unknown; See Kircherus in Mund. Subterran.
and Mr. Vossius in his particular Tract of that subject.
Nile inundates; where the Sun
Returning, does over Taken from Hesiod (...). -- (...)
(...) --
-- Super Nigrorum Hominum Populum, Urbemque
Vertitur --
Meaning the Aethiopians; particularly those seated beyond the Eastern Bank of
Nilus.
Negro Cities run.
Next, chosen Egyptian Priests, from whom Astronomy received its first Rise
and Increase in that Nation: Instructed therein by Hermes Trismegistus, whom
the Arabs called Adris; the Egyptians, Theut, or Thoth. These Priests in their
Supplications and Vows, as Kircher (in his Oedip. Egypt. Tom 3.) tells us,
Primo ante omnia Sapientiam and Mentis petebant illuminationem: Quam adepti, ab
omni fatorum Necessitate se absolvi and (...) effici putabant, perpetuo Numinum
Consortio beatos. Which gives some light to the following Verses.
Priests, who serve from Age to Age
At Public Altars, and with vows engage
The Indulgent God, whose awful Presence fires
Their Zealous Minds with incorrupt Desires;
He with himself possessed them, and made known
His Not unlike to this, Statius de Vindic. Hercul. Sylv. 4. -- Deus ille Deus,
seseque videndum Indu'sit Lysippe Tibi -- And Quintilian Declamat. 10. Quales
Humanis se offerunt Oculis Propitii Dii, quale laetissimum numen est, cum se
patitur videri.
unveiled Deity unto his own.
Such were the Men, who first could apprehend
That Humane Fates on wandering Stars depend;
Cicero Lib. 1. de Divinat: ascribes this to the Assyriant. The Assyrians (Ut
ab ultimis Auctoritatem repetam, says he) by reason of the plainness and large
Extent of their Country, affording on all sides a clear and open view of
Heaven, observed the Course and Motion of the Stars. Which having duly
calculated, they from thence made Predictions of future Events. Amongst whom
the Chaldeans (Non ex Artis sed ex Gentis vocabulo Nominati) arrived to that
perfection of skill, as to be able to foretell what should happen to any one,
and under what Fate they were born. Which Art the Egyptians acquired from them
many Ages since. Thus Cicero. Vitruvius ( Lib. 9. c. 7.) more particularly;
Among the Chaldeans (says he) Berosus was the first, who taught the Greeks
judiciary Astrology: After him Antipater and Achinapolus were reputed famous
Gencthliologists. Of Natural Causes and Effects, Thales Milesius, Anaxagoras
Clazomenius, Pythagoras Samius, Xenophantus Colophonius, and Democritus are
reckoned the most eminent Observers: following whose Inventions, and observing
the Rise and setting of the Stars, and the Seasons of the Year, Eudoxus,
Eudaemon, Callisthus, Melo, Philippus, (and not as Salmasius will have the Text
to be read, Phainus) Hipparchus, Aratus, and others left to Posterity their
Astrological Prognostics, in their Tables or Parapegmata. Of which see
Geminus, and Theon in Arati Phenomenon.
They to each time applied its own Events,
And by long Toil observed the Accidents
Of many Ages, Birth-days, Lives, what Power
Of Fortune governed each successive Hour,
And what great Changes the least Motions cause.
Thus when Heavens various Face, (the Stars by Laws
Of Fate returning in their ordered Course)
Was fully known; and each Signs proper Force,
Experience framed thereof an Art; the Way
Omnis enim nostrae paulatim industria vitae Fluxit ab exemplis -- Claudian de
Hystrice. But by Example here our Author means the Observations and
Prognostics, which Posterity received from the Tables or Parapegmata of the
Ancients.
Shown by Example; Which through long Essay,
And various Speculation, learned from far
The tacit Laws of every ruling Star;
Saw in alternate Course Heaven still move round,
And Fate to vary as it is Aspects, found.
For before them, rude Man no difference made
'Twixt Natures works, nor things with Reason weighed;
Astonished at Heavens new disclosed Light,
Ingeniously imitated by Statius ( Theb. 4. speaking of the Primitive
Arcadians.) Hi Lucis stupuisse vices, Noctisque feruntur
Nubila, and occiduum, long Titana secuti
Desperasse Diem --
And by D^acontius (in Hexaemer.)
Nec Lucem remeareputat terrena Propago.
Ast ubi purpureum surgentem ex aequore cernunt
Luciferum, vibrare Iubar, flammasque ciere
Et reducem super Astra Diem de sole rubentem.
Mox revocata fovent hesterna in gaudia Mentes,
Temporis and requiem noscentes Luce diurna
Coeperunt sperare Diem, ridere Tenebras.
The learned Mr. Seldom de Diis Syris, Syntagm. 2. (citing for Testimony this
Place of Manilius) conceives the Original of Adonis Festivals with the Ancients
to have sprung from no other ground. Non aliud cogitarunt, (says he) qui primum
bas Naenias instituerunt, quam Solis Accessum and Recessum. Quem ut amissum
nunc Lugebant, and renatum Laetis excipiebant Austiciis. Ita Rudiores olim, and
qui simpliciorem vitam degebant, priusquam ab Astronomis Leges siderum
didicerant.
Now mourned the Stars as lost; now at their Sight
As if newborn rejoiced: the uncertain Times
Of Day and Night, differing in different Climes,
Till then none knew; nor could the Causes clear
The Demonstration of this depends upon Gnomonick Principles: One is, That the
lower the Sun is, the longer shadow it makes upon an Horizontal Plain; the
higher and more elevated, the shorter. Hence when the Sun approaches near the
Horizon, the shadows of things become greater, according to that of Virgil (
Eclog. 1.) Majoresque cadunt altis de Montibus umbrae. But the farther he is
mounted above the Horizon till he comes to his Meridian Altitude, the shadows
are less. Ovid. Metamorph. 3.

Iamque Dies Medius rerum contraxerat umbras. So likewise when the Sun is in
the Tropic of Cancer, and in its greatest Northern Elevation; we are then (to
use the expression of Achilles Tatius in Arat.) Brachyscii, and cast the
shortest shadows. But when it is in the opposite Tropic, and consequently in
its greatest Depression as to us, we are Macroscii, and cast the longest
shadows. See, as to this subject, more particularly Iunctinus in Sacrobosc. c.
3. and Aldus Manutius in Praefat, ad scriptores Rei Rusticae. To which may be
added Beda his Poemation de Compositione Horologii.
Of shades unlike the Sun far off and near.
Yet witty Cunning no Arts are distinguished into Illiberal or Manual, and
Liberal or Ingenuous. And though of the first, the number be almost numberless,
yet both kinds vulgarly (though very imperfectly) are reduced to a Septenary
Division, and expressed in this Distich: Lingua, Tropus, Ratio, Numerus, Tonus,
Angulus, Astra.
Rus, Nemus, Arma, Faber, Vulnera, Lana, Rates.
The first Verse expressing Grammar, Rhetoric, Logic, Arithmetic, Music,
Geometry and Astronomy. The second Agriculture, Hunting, Arts Military and
Fabrile, Surgery, Spinning and Weaving, and Arts Nautical. Of whose first
Inventors see Pliny, l. 7. c. 56. Polydor Virgil, Garzoni his Piazza
universale, and Vessius de Sect. Philosoph. As to the different esteem and
practice of these Arts among the Greeks and Romans, see Aldus Manutius in
Quaesit. per Epistol. lib. 2. c. 9.
learned Arts had found;
Under rude Swains waste lay the untilled Ground:
The first that found out Gold is said to be Cadmus the Phoenician; or, as
others, Thoas, in the Mountain Pangaeus; or according to the Chronicon
Alexandrinum, Mercury the Son of Jupiter or Picus King of Italy, who quitting
his own Country, traveled into Egypt, and was there elected King after
Misraim the Grandchild of Cham, for this Invention called (...), i. e. Deus
Aureus. Aeschylus attributes the Invention both of that and all other Metals to
Prometheus. There are others who write that Aeaclis ( Hyginus calls him Caeacus
the Son of Jupiter) or Sol the Son of Oceanus was the first Inventor of Gold in
Panchaia, see Pliny, l. 7. c. 56. and Polydor Virgil. l. 2. de rer. Inventor.
c. 9.
Gold then in Desert Mountains lodged at Ease,
Our Poet here alludes to the Detection and Conquest of Great Britain by Julius
Caesar, which the Romans then called a New World, from their recent discovery
thereof. However it was long before known to others of the Ancients, as is
manifest by the Testimony of Pytheas, mentioned by Strabo, who in the time of
Ptolom. Philadelph. wrote (...). Touching which see Casaubon ( in Strabon. l.
1. and 2.) Vossius de Histor. Graec. l. 4. c. 11. and Paganinus Gaudentius
delli Peregrinatione Philosophica. And that it was some Ages before Caesar's
time known to the Phoe^icians, the learned Bochartus in his Geogr. Sacr. Tom.
2. l. 1. c. 29. evinces, who blames our Camden for saying, that this Island of
Ours non nisi sero fuisse cognitam, was not known till of late.
New Worlds lay hid in unattempted Seas,
To this purpose appositely Seneca in Medea. Audex nimi^m qui freta primus,
Rate tam f^gili perfida rupit:
Terrasque suas post Terga videns,
Animam levibus eredidit Austris, etc.
Candida nostri saecula patres
Videre, procul fra^de rem^a,
Sua quisque piger Litora tange^s,
Patrioque Senex factus in A^vo,
Parvo dives; nisi quas ^ulerat
Natale solum, non norat Opes.
Rash man was he with Ships frail Beak

Did first the treacherous Billows break:

And leaving the safe Shore behind,

Durst trust his life to trustless wind, etc.

The candid Age of Innocence

Our Fathers saw; free from all sense

Of fraud: then in secured rest
Each man on his own ground lived blessed
With length of days, with little rich;
Nor of more wealth, than that with which
His Native Soil was stored, could tell.
With which last likewise Ovid concludes, lib. Metamorph. 1.
Nullaque mortales praeter sua litora norant.
To Mortals in those days were known
No other Shoares, besides their own.

To waves and winds to trust their Lives none dared,
To know themselves and theirs, Men only cared.
But when long Time and Toil their Wits had whet,
And Theocritus, Idyll. 21. (...)
(...)
(...).
Want, Diophantus, is Arts only Spur,
The Rise and Rule of labor is from her,
For Care keeps watch in every poor man's eyes*
Hence Arnobius lib. 2. Supellectiles necessariae quas familiaris usus
exposcit, non sunt ista scientiae munera, sed pauperrimae necessitatis Inventa.
And hitherto not impertinently may be applied, what I find recorded of the
Temple of Hercules at Gades by Philostratus in vita Apollonii, (as cited by
Photius;) wherein among other Altars there was one Dedicated to Penury and Art;
Intimating, that as Penury stirred up A^t, so A^t drove away Penury; as
Hercules put to flight and subdued Monsters, the Incitements of his Val ur.
Vide Riccard. Brixian. See likewise Casaubon explicating this Verse of Perseus
in Prologo: Magister Artis Ingeniique largitor Venture.
Want an Edge on Indusiry had set,
Then thousand Cares their working Heads possessed,
Whilst to escape Need, they Sacrifice their Rest;
Conclusions tried: and whatsoever Consonant to this place is that of
Columella, l. 10. Ipsa novas Arts varia Experientia rerum
Et labor ostendit Miseris, usus que Magister
Tradidit. --

wise Use
By oft-repeated Practice did produce
Of sure Effect; the new Experiment
Unto the Common Good they gladly lent.
Then Barbarous Tongues received new As all our Actions, says Scaliger ( l. 1.
Poetices, c. 1.) so Speech is to be considered under three kinds. First, that
of Necessary; Secondly, of Useful; Thirdly, of Delightful. The first kind was
that which served as a means of necessary Intercourse between Man and Man, to
make themselves barely understood. Such may be imagined that manner of Speech,
which we find in Lactant. (de vero cultu) that Mankind according to the Opinion
of some of the Ancients used; for they believed at first that men expressed their
meanings by signs and nods. Afterward (as he says, and before him Diodor.
Sicul. Bib^. l. 1. and Horace l. 1. Satyr. 3.) They made Essays of Language by
imposing distinct nominal Notes upon several things, and so by degrees
perfected a kind of Speech. The second sort (says Scaliger) was something more
refined by apting it for use and commodiousness, and applying as it were
certain Dimensions, Prescriptions and Lineaments to the rude and inchoated
Body, whence proceeded a certain Law and Rule of Speaking. The third sort was
yet more polite; and had added to it the Ornament of Elegancy, as it were its
Dress and Apparel. Now among these Laws of Language, not in the last place is
to be reckoned the Invention of Letters, which, as Cicero ( in 1. Tuscul.)
Sonos vocis, qui infiniti videbantur, p^cis literarum notis terminavit. This
Suidas calls (...), and attributes the Invention thereof to Prometheus. But as
to the first Characterizers of Speech (besides the learned Digression of Joseph
Scaliger de liter. antiqu. in Eusebius. and Petit. in observe ^. l. 2. c. 1.) take
these ancient Anonymous Verses, as they are recorded by Crinitus and Giraldu^,
and from them transcribed by Gerard. Ioh. Vossius, l. 1. de Art Grammat.
Primus Moses Hebraieas exaravit literas.
Mente Phoenices sagaci condiderunt A^ticas.
Qu^s Latini scriptitamus, edidit Nicostrat^.
Abraham Syras and idem reperit Chaldai^as.
Isis Art non minore protulit Aegyptias.
Gulfilas prompsit Getarum quas videmus Literas.
But with more likelihood is their Original by others referred to Adam himself;
It being conceived very Improbable that he, who was to convey all Learning and
knowledge to his Posterity, should want those necessary Organs for such a Work:
for which Opinion makes the early mention of Letters, even in Seth's time, who
was his Son, and doubtless received them from him. To which purpose there is
extant in the Vatican Library at Rome, an Ancient Picture of Adam with an
Hebrew Inscription over his Head, and under his Feet, this Latin one; ADAM
DIVINITUS EDOCTUS, PRIMUS SCIENTIARUM ET LITERARUM INVENTOR. Vide Lomeier. de
Biblioth. p. 10.
Laws, the Earth
Of all Arts, Agriculture, by the Confession and Testimony of Varro ( l. 3. de
R. R.) is the most ancient. This among the Ae^yptians was first said to be
found out by Osyris or Maneros. In Greece by Ceres, so called, quasi geres, a
gerendis frugibus, (as Cicero,) or rather (as Vossius conceives) from the
Hebrew word Geres, which signifies a Green Spike of Corn. In Italy by Saturn,
the Son of Coelus and Iellus. By whom the said Vossius ( l. de Philosoph. c.
6.) not improbably supposes Adam to be meant: for who besides him was the Son
of Heaven and Earth? The name Saturn seeming likewise to be derived from the
Hebrew word Satar, which signifies to lie hid, and is applicable to Adam for
his flight and absconding himself after his Fall. Josephus yet attributes it to
Cain, ( l. 1. Antiqu. c. 3.) (...), etc. Pastorit^am vitam Abel, Agricul^sram
vero primus excogitavit Cain. Manuring of Ground by Stercoration is by Pliny,
l. 17. c. 9. ascribed to King (...), who is said first to have instructed the
Greeks therein, as Hercules the Italians, who for that reason likewise
immortal^z'd their King Stercutius, the Son of Faunus, but rather the same with
Evander, the Arcadian, who first brought the Worship of Faunus, (which is Pan,
or universal Nature) into Italy, and taught the Latins the Art of Manuring
Ground, for which he was honored as a God by the name of Stercutius; by
Tertullian. in Apologet. called Sterculus or Sterculius; by Servi^s in 8
Ae^eid. Sterquilinius, whom he will have to be Pitumnus, Brother of Pilumnus;
by Macrobius called Sterculus; (...) he makes to be one of the Attributes of
Saturn: Saturnum Romanietiam Stercutum vocant, quod primus Stercore foecundit^
Agris c^mparaverit. Vide Macrob. Saturnal. l. 1. c. 7.
Manured, to various Fruits gave timely Birth.
Bold Seamen the The Original has -- in caecum penetravit Navita Pontum. By
caecum understanding obscurum quid, incertum, vel (...), the Sea being yet
undiscovered, impervious and unknown; Lucretius,

Improba Navigii ratio tum caeca manebat, (i. e.) Ignota, as Lambin upon the
Place. So likewise Virgil, Georg. 2. more expressly to the sense of our Author.

Sollicitant alii remis freta caeca -- And Propert. l. 2. Eleg. 27. Et Maris
and terrae caeca pericla viae.

Upon which words caeca Pericla, Passeratius notes, caecum non tantum quod non
vide^, sed etiam quicquid non videtur; in which respect the Ocean may be termed
caecus, its Bounds being stretched beyond Ken, and its many dangers
undiscoverable. Of the Original of Navigation, and the first Essaies thereof,
Claudian elegantly in Praefat. Rapt. Proserp.

Inventa secuit primus qui Nave profundum
Et rudibus remis sollicitavit Aquas,
Tranquillis primum trepidus se credidit undis;
Litora securo tramite summa legens.
Mox longos tentare Sinus, and linquere Terras;
Et le^i coepit pandere vela Noto.
Ast ubi paulatim praeceps Audacia cre^it,
Cordaque languentem dedidicere metum,
Iam vagus erupit Palago, Coelumque secutus;
Aegeas Hyemes Ioniumque domat.
He who in new built Ship first Plowed the Main,
And with rude Oars furrowed the Watery Plain,
Fearful at first the Seas calm Billows tried,
Securely steering by the Shoares known side.
Straight leaving Land, through wide stretched Bays, he sails,
Spreading his Canvas unto Gentle Gales.
At length by often daring, bolder grown,
His heart by past Fears taught Fear to disown,
He takes the deep; Heaven his sole Guide; and braves
Aegean storms, and the Ionian Waves.
The Nations who are famed for this Invention, are, first, the Phoenicians,
from whence it came to the Egyptians, from them to the Greeks, and among them
in the first place to the Cretans or Candiotts. But more particularly as to the
first building and use of Ships (not to instance in that of Noah's Ark) Clemens
Alexandrinus ascribes it to Atlas the Lybian; Aeschylus to Prometheus; Diodorus
Siculus to Neptune. The Invention likewise of Sails Aeschylus ascribes to
Prometheus; Diodorus to Aeoius; Pliny and Pausanias to Daedalus and his Son
Icarus; Cassiodorus ( l. 5. Variar.) and Hyginus to Isis; who for that reason
on the Reverse of some of the Roman Coins, is figured holding in her hands a
Sail swelling with the Wind, and by the Latins she was termed Isis Pelagia, as
President of Navigation, as may appear by this Inscription in Gruterus, page
312.

DIIS MANIBUS SAC.
SER. SULPICIO AUG. L:
ALCIMO AEDITUO
AD ISIDEM PELAGIAM.

blind Ocean did invade,
To this effect our Countryman Joseph of Excester (not unpoetically,) -- Sine
remigis usu,
Non nosset Memphis Romam; non Indus Iberum,
Non Scytha Cecropidem, non nostra Britannia Gallum.
-- Without the Seaman's pain,
Memphis had never known Rome; nor* India Sp^in;
Greece Scythia, nor our Britain France.
The Original of Traffic is generally ascribed to the Phoenicians; some
particularly attribute it to Mercury, as Ph^rnutus, (o^ Cornutus) de natura
deorum, and Caesar, l. 6. de Bello Gallico; for which reason by Arnobius ( l.
3.) he is styled Nundinarum, Mercium, Commerciorumque Mutator. To whom
Merchants used to sacrifice, as to the God of Gain, and President of
Negotiation and Commerce: confirmed by Ovid, l. 5. Fast.

Te quicunque suas profitent^r vendere Mer^es,
Thure dato, tribuas ut sibi l^cra, rogant.
To this purpose likewise makes that ancient Inscription, found at Metz, Anno
1589. Recorded by Philip. Thomasinus (...) Donariis, p. 17^*

MERCURIO NEGOTIATORI SACRUM NUMISIUS ALBINUS EX VOTO.
And 'twixt strange Lands procured a mutual Trade:
Thence Arts of War and Peace in time arose,
For Art by Practice propagated, grows.
What Is yet more strange, they learnt That Birds and brute Beasts have a
Language, seems to be maintained by Sextus Empiricus (l. 1. Pyrh^n. (...).)
with whom complies Lactan. de I^a Dei, ^. 7.) where he says, No^is quidem
v^ces eorum videntur ^conditae, sicut i^is f^rtasse nostrae, s^d ipsis, qui se
in^elligunt, verba sunt. That Magicians understood them, was believed by
credulous Antiquity: Hence that Fable of Apollonius Ty^naeus expounding the
Notes of Swallows (as Porphyr.) or the Chirpings of Sparrows* (as
Philostratus*) for which s^ill likewise Tyr^s is famed. And Mopsus in Apollon.
Rhod. l. 3. is said to expound the Language of Crows and D^ws. And that Me^mpus
was taught the Interpretation of the Tongues of Birds, by a Serpent licking his
ears, we find (yet as fabulous) related by Pliny, l. 10. c. 49. And for such
reports he, what Democritus delivers; That out of the Blood of certain Birds
mixing together and corrupting, a Serpent is produced, which whoever ^ates,
Intellec^us sit Alitum Colloquia. Not to instance that Solomon (according to
some Rabinical Tales) was skilled therein, and by a certain Bird is said to
have sent a Message to the Queen of Aethiopia (who must therefore be believed
to be as knowing in this Birdish Language:) Or that in the Alcoran he is made
to say, O Homines intelligite Avium (...)! And that a Lapwing, or a Bird called
a Houp, brought to him the first News of the Queen of Sheb^. Of which in
Prolegom. in Bibl. Polygl^t. But Delrius denies that Birds or Beasts can use
Discourse, as wanting Reason; yet confesses they have certain Indications of
their affections and appetites, which men by long Observation may come to be
acquainted with; and that they are perfectly known to the Devil, and that he
may instruct Magicians therein. Which whether he ever did (says he) I know
not, Non est incredibile fecisse. Vid. illum disquis. Mag. l. 2. c. 19.
the Tongues of Birds,
Divination from the Inspection of the Entrails of sacrificed Beasts, Pliny
ascribes to the Delphians, Cicero (de divin.) to one Tage^, who appearing
suddenly out of the Ground to the H^trurians as they were plowing, is said to
have instructed them therein. (...) yet re^ers the Invention thereof to
Prometheus. The Divination was made from the Site, Color, and Marks of the
Entrails. The Parts inspected were the Heart, Lungs, Liver and Gall. That of
the Heart, not practiced by the Romans, until the 123 Olympiad. That of the
Liver, most ancient and usual. The Parts of this Inspected, were the Fi^rae,
Fissum, and Caput. Of which see particularly Brissonius de formulis, l. 1. Yet
this kind of Divination seems by the Romans themselves in the time of their
Greatness to have been despised, as may appear by Tacitus, and Quintus Curtius;
The later of whom condemns Alexander the Great, for being addicted to those
Superstitions, which he terms, Humanarum Mentium Ludibri^, etc.
Entrails t'inspect, The Charming of Serpents even from the Testimony of
Scripture it self ( Psalm 58. ver. 5. Ierem. 8. ver. 17. Eccles. 10. ^er. 11.)
appears to have been frequent with the Ancients: To which we may add the
farther Testimony of Virgil. ( Eclog. 8.) Frigidus in Pratis cantando rumpitur
Anguis. And Ovid, ( l. Metam. 7.) in whom Mede^ boasts of her self, Vipereas
rumpo and verbis and carmine fauce^. As likewise Nemesianus, ( Eclog. 4.)
Cantavit quod Luna timet, quo rumpitur anguis. See Pliny, ( l. 8. c. 16. and l.
28. c. 2.) where treating of the power of Enchantments, he writes, Figlinarum
opera multi credunt rumpi tali m^do. N^n pauci etiam Serpents. Upon which
place Turnebus notes, That Serpents, if aware of the Charmer, have the faculty
recanere, i. e. retorquere and dissolvere Incantationem, to dissolve the
Charm. Pliny ( loco citato) asserting hunc unum esse illis intellectum. The
people most notorious for these kind of Incantations, were the Psylli, a people
of Africa, and the Marsi, a People of Italy, of which later thus Lucilius in
Satyr. Iam disrumpetur medius, jam ut Marsus Colubras
Disrumpit cantu, venas cum extenderit omnes.
Horace likewise in Ca^id. Caputque Marsae dissilire Naenia. And Ovid de
Medicamine faci^i. Et mediae Marsis findantur cantibus Angues. The Egyptians
were likewise of old famous for the charming of Serpents, as at this Day the
Indians, Negros, and those of Peru; Vide B^art. in Praefat. ad Hieroz.
burst Snakes with powerful words;
In this many of the Ancients vainly gloried. So Empedocles in Laertius ( l.
8.) boasts he could teach the Art by which, (...). Extinctumque Hominem nigra
revocabis ab Orco. So Canidia in Horace, ( Epod. ult.) Possum crematos excitare
mortuos. And Tibullus of a certain Witch, Haec cantu finditque solum, Manesque
Sepulchri^ Elicit. -- So the Nurse in Seneca his Hercul. Oct. -- Mea jussi
prece M^nes loquuntur. And Alecto in Claudian. in Ruffin. -- Condita funera
traxi. Carminibus victura meir. See Delrius Disquis. Magic. l. 8. quaest. 26.
and particularly Leo Allatius refuting this Diabolical Vanity in his Learned
Syntagma de Engastrimytho.
Called up pale Ghosts, moved Hell it self, the So, in Seneca, Medea boasts she
had Heavens Laws invert^d, shown the World the Light
Of Sun and Stars, at once. --
Mundus Lege confusa Aetheris
Et Solemn and Astra vidit. --
But this is more than M^gick can perform; Divine Providence not permitting the
Devil or his Agents to interrupt or disturb the Course and Motion of the
Heavens or Stars, or confound the Order of the Universe, however by Poetical
License it is allowed. Hence the Tragoedian Seneca in Hercule furente, Nox media
Solemn vidit and Noctem Dies. And Petronius -- Trepidusque furentes Fl^ctere
Phoe^us Equos revoluto cogitur Orb: Tantum dicta valent. -- So likewise A^eius
( l. 2. de Au^. Asin.) speaking of a certain Witch, Omnem istam Lucem Mundi
siderali^ imis Tartari and in V^tustum Cha^s submergere no^it.
Light
Turned into Darkness, into Day the Night.
Ingenious Industry made All things bend;
Nor put they to their curious Search an End,
Till Reason had scaled Heaven, thence viewed this round,
And Nature latent in its Causes found;
Why Anaximander and Metrodorus supposed Thunder to be a Wind conceived and
enclosed within a thick Cloud, which breaking forth with violence makes a
crack: the Lightning being caused by the breaking of the Cloud; as is
illustrated by Anaximenes his Comparison of the Sea, which being broken with
Oars, sparkles and shines. Anaxagoras held it to be a portion of ardent matter
quenched in a moist Cloud, which makes a noise, as red hot Iron dipped in water.
The Stoics believed it to be a Noise occasioned by the Collision of two hollow
Clouds, Lightning proceeding from their attrition. Descartes (not much
differing from them) conceives Thunder to be occasioned when diverse ^at Clouds
( Tabulatorum instar) like so many Floores or Scaffolds) are driven with
violence the higher upon the lower, and clatter one upon another; the Lightning
proceeding from the Nature of the Exhalations included in the Interstiti^ or
spaces between the Clouds, which by them falling one upon another, is violently
crushed out. Our Countryman Mr. Hobbs will have it to be the breaking of a
Cloud congealed to Ice, by the struggling of enclosed Air, which he borrowed
from Lucretius, l. 6. Denique saepe geli multus fragor, atque Ruina
Grandinis, in magnis sonitum dat nubibus ^lte.
But much more consonant to Truth is the Opinion of those, who hold Thunder to
be an Exhalation hot and dry, of a Sulph^reous and Nitrous matter contracted
within a cold and moist Cloud, from which striving to get out, it kindles by
Agitation, and violently breaks through its Prison.
Thunder does the suffering Clouds assail;
Why Winters Pliny, l. 17. c. 2. calls Snow the Foam of Celestial Waters.
Aristotle, and from him most Modern Philosophers, describe it to be begotten of
a moist but rare and thin Cloud, which being condensed by a sharp cold falling
down, parts (that it may the easilier divide the Air) into Flakes like Fleeces
of Wool, to which the Psalmist alludes, Qui dat Nivem sicut Lanam; Though Bodin
( in Theatro Naturae) conceives the Psalmist resembles Snow to Wool, for the
warmth it affords to Plants and Vegetables in the cold time of Winter, (as
Woollen Vestments do to men) rather than for its Fleece-like Similitude. Its
whiteness (though Anaxagoras maintained it to be black, and in Armenia it is
found of a ruddy color, by reason the Terrestrial Particles or Atoms of that
soil, which abounds in Minium, mixing with those of the Air, tinge it, and give
it that hue, as Eustath. in Iliad. 2.) is derived from its Efficient cause,
Cold; and the copious mixture of Aerial Spirits: Of the Admirable Contexture
and Figure of its Parts, which are said to be always Sexangular; See Kepler in
his particular Tract upon that Subject.
Snow's more soft than Summers Hail is nothing else but Rain congealed in its
fall; and this Concretion or Congelation happens not far from the Earth, as is
Manifest by high Mountains; on which Snow is often found, but never Hail. The
nearer to the Earth it has its fall, the more Triangular or Pyramidal is its
Figure, the higher its fall, the rounder. Those Angles or Inequalities being
worn away and rounded by the length of its passage through the Air. The cause
of its congealed hardness, is the Ant peristasis of the lower Region of the Air,
which is the Reason likewise why it falls more frequently in Summer, than in
Winter, and seldom in the Night, unless the Night be warm. Vide Fromond.
Meteorolog. l. 5. c. 9.
Hail;
Whence Thales and Democritus ascribe the Cause of Earthquakes, to
Subterranean Waters breaking out and undermining the Bowels of the Earth. The
Stoics, to Moisture rarefied into Air; which seeking for room to break ^orth,
when it meets (as Anaxagoras likewise held) with the thick and tough Body of
the Earth, by its struggling for vent it shakes it. Others conceive it proceeds
from enclosed Air, or Spirits arising from combustible matter (such as Sulphur,
Nitre, Allom, Sal Armoniack, or Bitumen) set on fire, and consequently
rarefied, causing the like effect, as Gunpowder in Mines. See Fromond.
Meteorolog. l. 4. c. 1, 2, 3. and Kircher in his Mund. Subterran. l. 4. c. 2.
The several kinds of Earthquakes are thus reckoned up by Apuleius, l. de
Mundo; The first is termed Epiclintes seu Inclinator, that is, when it strikes
at oblique Angles, turning things sideward. The second is called Brastes, or
^ffervescens, from the similitude of boiling Water, bearing up all above it in
a direct Line. The third is termed Chasmatias, whose Violence makes a Breach or
Hiatus, in which the place forced, is swallowed up. The fourth is called
Rhectes, from forcing its way by a Rupture, but not making such a Chasma, as
the former. The fifth Ostes, which at once shakes and overturns. The sixth,
Palmatias, which shakes but overturns not. The last, Mycematias, from the
bellowing Noise it makes. Ammianus Marcellinus, l. 16. and Coelius Rhodiginus
from him reckon but four kinds.
Earthquakes come, and Subterranean That there are Subterranean Fires, and
those great and many, appears by the Vulcanian Islands; by the Mountains Aetna,
Vesuvius, Hecla, and others, ejecting Flames, and by hot Baths and Fountains
breaking out of the Earth, which as Vitru^i^us; l. 2. instances could not be,
Si non in imo haberent aut de Sulphur, aut de Alumine, aut Bitumine ardentes
Maximos Ignes. In which words he briefly declares their Causes. To which, as a
further Proof, (to omit diverse others) may be added Earthquakes, deriving (as
but now alleged) their Original from these Subterranean Fires, and therefore
by our Author not unproperly joined together in this Verse. Who would be
further satisfied touching this matter, may consult Pliny, l. 2. c. 106.
Gassendus his Epicurean Animadversions* and particularly Kircher in his Mund.
Subterran. l. 4. where the Natures of these Fires, their Necessity,
Diffusiveness, Fo^d and Prodigious Effects are exactly described. See likewise
I^tigius expressly upon this Subject in his Tract de Montium Incend. and the
Curious Disquisition of Alphonsus Borellus in Historia and Meteorologia
Incendi^ (...), Anno 1669.
fires,
Why Rain is defined by Aristotle a Cloud converted into Water, and distilling
in drops. Epicurus makes two ways or means of generating Rain; One by
Transmutation, when the parts of a Cloud, either by absence of Heat, or
accession of Cold, are so transposed and varied, as render them more apt to
flow and fall, as is exemplified by Vapo^ in a Limbeck, gathering together, and
then falling in drops. The other by Compression; when by wind or cold the Cloud
is comprest, and the vaporous Corpuscula within the hollows thereof are crowded
together, and by accession get weight and fall. Whence it appears that the
drops of Rain are formed by Coalition, rather than Division; And that Rain is
not (as vulgarly conceived) a watery Mass effus'd from a Cloud, like water from
a watring-Pot, (or as ^repsiades jestingly in Aristophanes, declared it to be
caused when Jupiter, urin'd through a sive) For if there were any such
stagnation of Water in a Cloud, it would fall from thence like a Torrent or
Spout, rather than in Drops. Of Rain there are reckoned three kinds,
S^illicidium, Imber, and Nimbus. The first is a small Misty Rain. The second is
more intense, and composed of greater Drops. The last is yet more violent, and
falls more thick, and as Fromondus says, Decumanis Gu^tis. Apuleius de Mundo
sums up the Matter when he sa^es, Tot Diversitatibus pluviae cadunt, quot modis
Aer Nubium conditionibus cogitur.
showers descend, what force the The Original of Wind is reckoned among the
Abscondita of Nature; But I find it reduced chiefly to three Heads or Causes,
Viz. the Earth, the Water, the Air. The first is maintained by Aristotle, who
makes it a dry Earthy Exhalation. The second is maintained by Metrodorus, and
partly by Anaximander, chiefly by Vitruvius, l. 1. c. 6. Where he says, Ventus
est Aeris fluens unda, cum incerta motus redundantia: Nasciturque cum fervor
offendit Humorem, and Impe^us fervoris exprimit vim Spiritus flantis. Which he
illustrates by your Aeolipilae, or Wind-balls, so demonstrated likewise by
Descartes, l. 4 Metear. c. 4. and asserted by Salmasius (l. de Ann. Climacter.
p. 811.) in Vitruvius his own words. The third seems to be most ancient, which
makes Wind to be nothing else but Air moved. Apuleius de Mundo is of the same
Opinion; Nec enim aliud est ventus, nisi multum and vehemens in unum coacti
Aeris flumen. But this not assigning the first Cause of that Motion, leaves the
matter undetermined. The most probable Opinion is, that Wind is an Earthy or
Watery Exhalation mixed with saline Spirits, and other Vapors, drawn or forced
out of the Earth or Sea, by the power of the Sun or Subterranean Fires; which
being rarefied by Heat, or condensed by Cold, and impelled for the most part by
a transverse, sometimes by a direct Motion, ex^gitates the Earth, Air, and Sea.
But of this Subject, see particularly the Lord Verulam, in his Book de ventis,
Descartes (loc. cit.) Gassend. Animadvers. in Epicur. Fromond* Meteor.
Kircherus in Mund. Subterran. and Mr. Isaac Vossius de Motu Marium and ventorum.
wind inspires.
From Error thus she wondering Minds uncharm'd;
See Lucretius, l. 6. arguing to this effect, against the pretended and
fabulous Power of Thundering Jupiter. But far better and with more Analogy to
Truth, Seneca in Natural. Quaest. l. 2. Interim hoc dico, Fulmina non mi^i a
Jove; sed sic omnia disposita, ut etiam ea, quae ab illo non ^ant, sine ratione
non fiunt, quae illius est. Vis eorum illius permissio est. Nam etsi Jupiter
illa nunc non facit, fecit ut fierent: singulis non adest, sed signum and Vim
and Causam dedit omnibus; Thus far Seneca. In which there only wants the true
Name of the first Divine Cause. Why Jupiter is said to be the Author of Thunder
and Lightning, Pliny ( l. 2. c. 20.) gives this Physical reason. That the Fires
of the three uppermost Planets falling to the Earth, carry the name of
Lightning, but that especially which is seated in the midst, that is to say,
Jupiter; because participating of the excessive Cold and Moisture from the
upper Circle of Saturn, and the immoderate Heat of Mars that is next under, be
by this means discharges the superfluity of either; whereupon it is commonly
said, that Jupiter darts Lightning, etc. Of the Superstitious Opinions of the
Ancients touching Thunder and Lightning, see Nardius in his 27. accurate
Animadversion on the 6. Book of Lucretius de rerum Natura.
Unsceptred Jove; the Thunderer disarmed;
Of Name and Power dispoyl'd him, and assigned
Fire to the Laboring Clouds, Noise to the Wind.
These to their proper Causes having brought,
Next on the whole Worlds Mass she casts her Thought,
Of which the Of the several Mundane Systems, Ancient and Modern, see the
Appendix.
System in her self she frames,
Dispensing to the Signs both Who first reduced the Stars into Asterisms, or
Constellations, is not easily to be found out: As hard a Task it is to
reconcile the different Morphoses or Figures in the several Spheres of the
Chaldaeans, Persians, Egyptians, Greeks, Arabibians, Indians, Chinese and
Tartars, whose various differences may appear partly by the Description of Abu
Masher, commonly called, Albumazar, partly by Aben Ezra de Decanis Signorum,
published by Scaliger in his Notes upon our Author: Of all which Salmatius (
in Praefat. ad Diatrib. de Antiqu. Astrolog.) conceives those of the Greeks
(most vulgarly used amongst us) to be the newest and latest. As to the Names of
the Stars, it is not to be doubted, but that they were first imposed by Adam,
Though those (except some few preserved in Scripture) be long since utterly
lost. Yet the Names we now use are most of them above two thousand years
standing, as is manifest by Hesiod and Homer. It is not yet to be imagined,
that they were all imposed about one and the same time; some being of much
later Denomination, as particularly Coma Berenices (so called by Conon)
Antinous, and others. Some report Astraeus to be the first, who gave Names to
the Stars; whom for that reason -- Fama Parentem Tradidit Astrorum -- As
Germanicus makes Aratus speak, concerning which see Theon. Others ascribe this
to Mercury. But as to the several Denominations of the Signs and
Constellations, see after in the following Notes.
Forms and Names;
Their The Aspects or mutual Radiations of the Signs and Stars, are the
Habitudes of one unto another in a determinate distance, in which they are apt
to Cooperate; and these commonly are reckoned five in number, and are
attributed peculiarly to the Stars and Signs within the Zodiac, but extended
likewise to the rest. These Censorinus de die Natal. c. 8. calls Conspectus,
the Ancient Greeks (...) and (...), the later (...). The Arabs, Almantar. Their
Characteristick Notes, Names, and Distances, thus expressed: Conjunctio, (...) --
Gr. 0 Sextilis, (...) -- Gr. 60 Quadratus (...) -- Gr. 90 Trinus, (...) -- Gr.
120 Oppositio, (...) -- Gr. 180
To which Kepler and Mestlinus add several others: But the most eminent Aspects
are the great Conjunctions of the three Superior Planets, and their distances
in Trine Aspects of the Zodiacal Signs, called therefore Triplicities. The
first fiery, whose Angles answer to the fiery Signs, Aries, Leo, and Sagittary.
The second aerie, answering to the aerie Signs, Gemini, Libra, Aquarius. The
third watery, pointing to the watery Signs, Cancer; Scorpio, and Pisces. The last
Earthy, whose Angles are terminated in the Earthy Signs, Taurus, Virgo, and
Capricorn.
Aspects and their Order notes, and saw
Heavens changing Face gave fatal changes Law.
This is our Muses Theme, as yet Others of the Romans, says Scaliger, (...)
tentarunt, essayed to write of this Subject in Prose, as Varro and Nigidius,
who both wrote of the Sphere, (as well the Barbarick as the Greek) Cassiodorus
( in Astronom.) mentioning the first, Servius ( in Georg.) the other. And among
the Greeks, Eratosthenes, Aratus, Heg^syanax, and Hermippus wrote of the
Celestial Phenomenon; and Ovid, after Marcus Tullius, and Germanicus after
him, translated Aratus into Latin Verse; But not any amongst the Romans before
our Author (for ought appears) ever wrote an Astronomical or Astrological Poem
of their own Invention. Nor of the later sort any among the Greeks, save only
Dorotheus Sidonius, who wrote an Apotelesmatick Poem, though now lost. And
therefore not unjustly does our Author assume the Glory of this to himself
from all the Latins.
displayed
In Verse by None: Propitious Fortune aid
The bold Attempt; with Ease my Life befriend,
And to a long and cheerful Age extend,
That so I sink not with my Subjects weight,
But with like care, great Things, and small relate.
Now since from Heaven it self our Verse descends,
And down to Earth Fates settled Order tends,
We first must Natures General State rehearse,
And draw the Picture of the Universe.
Which, whether it from Nothing were derived; The Original of the World
according to the various Opinions of the Ancients.

Or (of Beginning both, and End deprived)
Has The Opinion of Xenophanes, who held the World to be eternal, ungenerated,
uncreated and incorruptible; with whom agree Parmenides, Melissus and
Aristotle, to whose Opinion likewise Xenocrates subscribes, and with them Pliny
( l. 2. c. 1.) thus concludes. Numen esse Mundum credi par est, aeternum
immensum, neque genitum neque interiturum unquam. Vide etiam Censorin. de die
Natal. c. 4. And as to this and the several other Opinions of the Ancients
touching the Efficient Cause, Matter and Principles of the Universe, (besides
Plutareb de Placit. Philosoph. and Stobaeus in Eclog. Physic.) see Paul. Merula
his Learned Dissertation in Q. Ennii Annal. p. 119. upon these Verses. Corpore
Tartarino prognata Paluda Virago,
Quoi par Imber and Ignis, Spiritus and Gravi' Terra.

ever been, and ever shall endure;
Or Our Author here makes Chaos to disclose and separate the mixed Principles
of things, and to bring forth the World. Claudian more conform and agreeable to
the Ancient Theology of the Ethnicks, makes Clemency or Love to effect this
Work, l. 2. de La^d. Stilicon. -- Prima Chaos Clementia solvit,
Congeriem miserata rudem, vultuque sereno
Discussis Tenebris in Lucem Saecula fudit.
Hesiod (as Plutarch delivers his Opinion l. de Iside and Osyride) makes the
Principles of all things to be Chaos, Earth, Tartarus, and Love; By Earth
understanding Isis; by Love Osyris; by Tartarus Typho; by Chaos (...). The
Place* Region or receptacle of universal matter; to which its name answers:
Chaos signifying no other than Hiatus seu vistitas quaedam. Philo Biblius from
the Writings of Sancuniathou, as cited by Eusebius in prima Praeparat. writes
thus: (...), etc. (i. e.) The Theology of the Phoenicians makes the Principles
of the Universe^ dark Spiritual Air, or a Spirit of dark Air, and confused
Chaos involved in Obscurity; These were infinite, and for some time without
Bound or Term: But when the Spirit was touched with the love of his own
Principles, and a Mixtion was made, there was given to that Ne^re the name of
Love. This was the beginning of the production of all things; But the Spirit it
self had no Generation: And from this Connection of the Spirit was begotten M^T;
which some call slime, etc. From which Theology of the Phoenicians, Hesiod,
Ovid, and others deriy'd their Fables of Chaos, as the Phoenicians theirs from
their Neighbors, the Jews, and the Writings of Moses not clearly understood.
See Grotius in his Notes upon his Book deveritat. Relig. Christ. l. 1. Of the
several acceptions of the word, Chaos, according to the different Notions of
the Poets, Philosopher^ and Divines; See Ri^ciolus on that Subject in Almagest.
Nov. Tom. 2. lib. 9.
Chaos severing from the Mass obscure
The mixed Principles of things, this bright
World teemed, whilst Darkness took to Hell its Flight;
Or that made up of The Opinion of Democritus, Leucippus, and Epicurus, and
before them of M^schus, or rather M^chus, the Sidonian, who as Strabo ( l. 16.)
from the Authority of P^sidonius, affirms, was the first Author or Introducer
of these Indivisible Principles, and lived before the time of the Trojan War.
By Atoms is to be understood what the Latins call Insectile, that is, a Body
incapable of Division both by reason of its solidity, ob vacui care^iam, and
the Minuteness of its Body, whence it is properly said to be quid minimum, or
as our Author terms it pene Nihilum. But see these explained in Lucretius de
Rerum Natura, and the Ingenious Interpreter of his first Book Mr. Evelyn; more
especially Gassendus in his incomparable Epicurean Animadversions.
Atoms Nature's Frame
Exists, and shall resolve into the same
Some thousand Ages hence, and almost brought
From Nothing, fall again to almost Naught;
Or that the Heavenly Spheres and Globe of Earth,
From This was asserted by Hyppasus the Metapontine, and from him by Heraclitus
the Ephesian; The Opinion thus delivered by Laertius; All things consist of
Fire, and into that are resolved: for since all things are made by Condensation
and Rar^faction, and flow for the most part in manner of a River; Fire when it
is condensed, bumectates and becomes Air; Air when comprest, becomes Water;
Water contracting and growing concrete becomes Earth: this is the way down. On
the contrary, the Earth being diffused, thereof Water is made, of Water the
rest after like manner: this is the way up. To this effect likewise Plutarch de
Placit. Philosoph. l. 1. and Stobaeus Eclog. Physic. l. 1.
Fire, not such blind Matter, drew their Birth,
Whose flames in all things dwell, kindled Heavens Meaning the Stars, according
to the Stoics; who make the World to be a Corporeal Deity, and the Stars its
Eyes. See Plutarch de facie in Orb Lunae, and Lips. Physiol. Stoic. l. 2.
Dissert. 10.
Eyes,
And form the glittering Lightning of the Skies;
Or sprung from Of this Opinion was Thales the Milesian, and Pherecydes of
Scyrus; who held Water to be the first principle of all natural Bodies, whereof
they consist, and into which they resolve. The Reasons or Grounds for which
Opinion are these. First, because the Seminal and generating principle of all
living Creatures is humid. Secondly, because all kinds of Plants are nourished
by moisture, wanting which they wither and decay. Thirdly, because Fire, even
the Sun it self and the Stars are maintained by Vapors proceeding from Water,
and consequently the whole World consists thereof. See Plutarch de Placit.
Philosoph. and particularly (to omit diverse others) my learned Dear Friend Mr.
Stanley in his History of Philosophy, Part. I.
Water, which dry Matter soaks,
And Not improperly is that Epithet given to Fire; it being by some of the
Ancients believed to be a devouring Animal: And for that reason the Egyptians
refused to burn their dead, imagining fire to be (...), Animata Bellua, as
Herodot. l. 3. informs us.
ravenous Fire, that would devour it, choaks;
Or unbegot were Earth, Air, Water, Fire,
And these Asserted by Empedocles, who held the Principles of all things to be
the four Elements; to which he added two Powers, Amity and Discord, the one
Unitive, the other Discretive: See Plutarch de Placit. Philosoph. Laertius in
Vit. Empedocl. Achilles Tatius in Arat. Phaen^men* and Lactantius lib. 2. Which
last conceives he derived this Opinion from Hermes Trismegistus. These Elements
he called after this manner. Fire he termed Jupiter: the Air Juno, or (as
Laertius says, but not with so good reason) Pluto. The Water Nestis (...), i.
e. fluere. The Earth Pluto, or (according to Laertius) Juno, i. e. Vesta.
Consonant to this Opinion of Empedocles, thus Ovid Metam. l. 1. Quatuor
aeternus genitalia Corpora Mundus Continet. -- and again, l. 15. -- Omnia fiunt
Ex ipsis, and in ipsa Cadunt -- Lipsius Philosoph. Stoic. lib. 1. conceives our
Author in these Verses to touch at the Opinion of Strato the Peripatetick, who
h^ld this Mundane Deity to be formed of these four Elemental Limbs, Sine Mente
gubernante. Of which thus S^neca (in a fragment of his, cited by St. Augustine,
l. 6. de Civitat. dei) Egone feram Platonem, aut Peripateticum Stratonem,
quorum alter (scil. Plato) Deum sine Corpore fecit, alter sine Anima?
four Limbs make up the God entire,
And form this World; nor will that ought be found
Beyond themselves, since All things they compound,
Applying Hot to Cold, to Humid Dry,
To Heavy Light, which kind To this purpose Lactantius; l. 2. Philosophi quidam
and P^e taedis^ordi Concordia Mundum constare dixerunt, i. e. some Philosophers
and l^oets report the World to consist ^f discording Concord: So likew^se
Cassiodorus ( lib. 2. Variarum) Merito dicunt Philosophi Elementa sibi Mutuis
complexi^us illigari and mirabili conjungi foederatione, quae inter se
contraria intelliguntur varietate pugnare. This dis^onant Harmony of Nature
being represented by Orpheus in his Tetrachord; In which, as there were four
strings; from the mixture of whose different Tones resulted a sweet Harmony; so
by concourse and mixture of the four Elements, all things are generated. And as
in the Tetrachord the (...) rendered the gravest sound, (...) the most acute,
and the nearest in gravity of sound to the first came the (...), to the second
in acuteness the (...) So among the Elements, there is one the heaviest, Earth,
and one the lightest, Fire, answering to the two first Notes; Water and Air
answering to the two intermediate Tones. This admirable Consent of the contrary
Elements is here not unaptly called The Matrimonial Band of Nature. And for
this reason, says Lactantius ( loco citato) The Marriages of the Ancients were
confirmed and plighted by the Sacrament of two contrary Elements, Fire and
Water. In regard that Heat and Moisture are the Parents of all Generation, as
Ovid ( l. 1. Metam.) has likewise expressed it. Quippe ubi Temperiem sumpsere
Humorque Calorque,
Concipiunt, and ab his oriuntur ^uncta duobus,
Cumque sit Ignis Aquae Pugnax, vapor humidus omnes
Res Creat; and Discors Concordia foetibus apta est.

Discordancy
The Matrimonial Bands of Nature knits,
And Principles for all Production fits;
We can but guess its Birth: obscured it lies
Beyond the reach of Men and Deities.
Yet though its Birth be hid, its Form's disclosed, Disposition and Order of
its Parts.

And in due Order all its Parts disposed;
Our Author here Confines not the Element of Fire within the Unequal of the
Lunary Sphere, as Aristotle, and his followers; but with the Stoics transmits
it to the Ethereal Region, which they will have so called, (...), i. e. ab
Ardore, as consisting of Fire, and to be Heaven it self, embracing all things,
as Cleanthes in Cicero, (i. e. de Natura Deorum) describes it. Ultimum, and
altissimum, atque undique circumfusum, and extremum omnia cingentem atque
complexum Ardorem, qui Aeaher nominatur. To this purpose likewise Macrobius (in
Somnio Scipionis) Quicquid ex omni Materia, de qua facta sunt omnia; purissimum
ac liquidissimum fuit, id tenuit summitatem; and Ether vocatus est.
Fire up to the Ethereal Confines flew, Fire.

And a round Wall of Flame 'bout Nature drew,
The subtle Air possessed the second Place Air.

Diffused throughout the vast Globes middle space,
Whence its hot Neighbor draws cool Nourishment:
The third Lot levelled the wide Seas Extent, Water.

And in a liquid Plain the Waters spread,
Whence hungry Air is by thin Vapors fed;
Pressed down b' its So Ovid, -- Tellus Elementaque grandia traxit, Et pressa est
gravitate sua -- Upon which Words Iacobus Cruceus; Per Elementa grandia nos
materialem intelligimus All^vionem, etc. By the heavy Elements we understand
that Material Conflux, which the Greeks call (...), being the settling and
Dregs of all the Elements; To the same sense likewise Lucretius,

-- Terrae concreto corpore pondus
Constitit, atque omnis Mundi quasi Limus in Imum
Confluxit, gravis and subsedit funditus ut *faex.
So the Scholiast of Apollonius Rhodius, in l. 1. -- (...), etc. Zeno affirmed
The Chaos, whereof all things, according to Hesiod, were made, was water; which
settling became slime; the slime condensed into solid Earth*
Sediment, Earth lowest fell, Earth.

Whilst sand-mixt slime contracting did expel
The subtler moisture; which to flight constrained
Rose by degrees 'till it the surface gained,
And the more that into pure Water went,
The more the Virgil, Eclog. 6. Tum durare solum, atque excludere Nerea Ponto
Coeperit -- Our Author perhaps in this place hints at Anaximander, who said of
the Sea, that it was (...) The remainder of Primitive Moisture, after this
Exclusion and Separation. Plutarch. l. 1. c. 4. de placit. Philosoph. thus
expresses the sense of our Author: Of those Bodies which settled below, was
made the Earth; and that part thereof which was m^re subtle and of a thinner
form and consistence, gathered round together, and engendered the Element of
Water, which being of a liquid and fl^wing nature, ran downward to hollow
place^ lying low, which were able to receive and hold it.
squeezed out Seas the drained Earth pent,
Settling in hollow Vales; whilst Hills thrust out
Their Heads from Waves circling the Globe about:
This lowest, in the midst is still confined,
On all parts equally from Heaven disjoined,
Secured from further falling by its fall, The Earth in the midst of the World.

The Middle both and Bottom of this All,
In whose To this purpose Cicero, l. 2. de Natura Deorum. Si Mundus Glob^sus
est, Omnesque ejus parts undique aequabiles, etc. If the World be round and of
a Globose Figure, and all its Parts contained in like proportion, by and among
themselves; It must happen to the Earth by necessary Conse^uence, seeing all
its parts press and tend to the middle, (now the middle in a Sphere is that
which is lowest) that nothing can p^ssibly interpose, which may be able to
weaken or hinder so great a Convention of Gravity.
concentring Parts, on every side
Bodies Encountering, are to sink denied.
And did not Earth by its self-Poize suspend,
Phoebus, the Stars approaching, could not bend
His Course to set, nor set, e're rise again,
Nor Phoebe drive through the Aereal plain
Her Wave-drench'd Homer and O^id make the Moon to be drawn in a Chariot by two
Horses; whereof the one is said to be white, the other black, in regard (as
Bassus in Germanicum gives the reason) she is sometimes apparent by Day, as
well as by Night. Others will have her to be drawn by Oxen, and therefore by
N^nus in Dionys. l. 12. she is called -- (...). -- Boum Agitatrix Luna. Of both
which we have express representations in the Roman Coyns, and particularly in
those of the Empress Iulia Domna, touching which, see Tristan in his Historic.
Commentar. Tom. 2. p. 129, 130. She is said likewise to be drawn by Mules, in
regard, (as Festus in v^ce Mulus observes) that as Mules are not generated ex
suo genere, sed Equi; So the Moon is said to shine not by her own, but as
Catullus expresses it, -- Notho Lumine, which she derives from the Sun.
Claudian l. 3. de laudibus Stiliconis, makes her to be drawn by Stags, in
regard of the swiftness of her Motion, and c. and so we have her likewise
represented in diverse Consular and Imperial Coyns, in Ursinus, Golzius and
Gorlaeus.
Steeds; nor The Star or Planet Venus, called likewise Lucifer, (as Cicero in
2. de Natura Deorum, and Pliny, l. 2. c. 8.) when it precedes the rising Sun,
as being the Harbinger of Light, (and not as Julius Scaliger Exercit. 75.
conceives, for being the brightest of all the Stars, and from its splendor so
named.) It is likewise called Hesperus, Vesper, and Vesperugo, when it rises in
the Evening and ushers the Night. Of this, thus Seneca in Hypolit. Qualis est
Primas r^ferens Tenebras
Nuncius noctis, modo lotus undis
Hesperus, pulsis Iterum Tenebris
Lucifer idem.
Such the bright Usher of dark Night
Rises from Seas with new-bath'd Light,
Hesper: The same, Night chased away,
Phosphor, the Herald of the Day.
We shall only add as a further Illustration to this, and the foregoing Note,
what Cassiodorus has ( l. Variarum 3.) in Explanation of the Circensian Games.
Big a quas^ Lunae, quadriga Solis Imitatione reper^a est. Equi Desultorii, per
quos Circensium Ministri miss^s denuntian^ Exitu^os, Luciferi Praecursori^s
velocit^tes imitantur.
Phosphorus the Light
E're usher more, if Hesperus to Night
Now in the Middle Earth suspending thus,
Not sunk to th Bottom, All is Pervious:
For We nor can the rising Stars conceive
A He points at the ridiculous Opinion of Xenophanes the Colop^onian, who held
that the Moon and Stars were certain Clouds set on Fire, extinguished every
Day, and re-kindled at Night; as on the contrary, the Sun extinguished every
Night, and re-kindled every Morning; or, to express it in Minucius Foelix his
Words, Congregatis ignium Seminibus Soles alios atque alios semper splendere.
For the Rising and Setting of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, according to this
Tenet, is nothing else but their kindling and extinguishing. Of the same
Opinion like wise was Heraclitus, whence the Proverb in Plato, Heracliteo Sole
ci ius extingui. From them Epicurus received by Succession, Haereditatem
^tultitiae (as Lactantius terms it) This Inheritance of Folly, which he left
improved by himself, and Lucretius, who thus asserts it, l. 5. -- conveniu^
Ignes, and semina multa
C^fluere Ardoris consuerunt tempore certo,
Quae faciunt Solis n^ semper Lumina gigni,
Quod genus Idaeis fam^ est e montibus al^is
Dispersos ignes ori^i Lumine cerni, Inde c^ire Globum quasi in u^um, and
conficere Orbem.

By which instance of Lucretius i^ may appear, that Epicurus did not hold so
much the Quotidian Creation of a new Sun, as the daily Renovation of the Old;
To which Horace in Carmine Saecular. seems to allude,

Alme Sol Curr^ nitid^ di^m Qui promis and celas, aliusque Et idem nasceris --
And to this purpose I find his Opinion expressed by Gassendus. Seeing the Ocean
compasses the Earth, the Sun may be extinguished by it in the West, and return
all along it by the North into the East, and thence rise re-kindled, which yet
little mends the matter.
casual Production; nor believe
Of the changed Heavens, the oft-renascent State,
Sol's frequent Births, and his Quotidian Fate;
Since the Signs always show the self-same Face,
Heaven keeps one Course, the Sun one constant Race,
The Moon in certain, although various, ways,
The changes of her Light, and Orb displays.
Nature, the Tract which first she made, observes;
Nor e're like an unskilful Novice swerves.
Day with eternal Light is carried round,
This the times show, in several Regions found
Successively the same; and we may see
Eastward its Rise, its Setting West to be
(The further unto either as we run)
Continued with Heavens Motion, and the Sun.
Nor need the Pendent Earth wonder beget,
Since the whole World suspends as well as it,
Whose To this may be applied that of Plato (in Timaeo) (...), etc. Thus
interpreted by Cicero in his Fragment of Timaeus, seu de universe. Nec Maenus
ei Deus affixit, quia nec capiendum quicquam erat, nec repellendum, necpedes,
nec alia membra quibus Ingressu corpus sustineret, etc. i. e. God affixed to
the World no hands, because it was neither to take nor repel any thing; nor
Feet, nor other Members, whereby it might sustain its body by walking or going*
But gave it a Motion, which is most suitable to its Figure; wherefore by one and
the same Conversion, it is whirled and turned about it self.
Foot upon no certain Bottom rests,
As its swift Course and Circular attests.
The radiant Sun suspended runs its Rounds,
Never transgressing his Ethereal Bounds.
The Moon and Stars in Skies Aristotle, Anaximander, and their followers at
this day, hold the Heavens to be solid, and the Stars fixed therein, as Nails
in a Wheel, or Jewels in a Ring; the contrary to which Opinion is here asserted
by our Author, with whom concur among the Ancients, Homer, Virgil, Cicero,
Lucretius, Seneca, Ptolemy, Pliny, Metrodorus, and others: And of the Moderns,
the most Eminent Astronomers from Tycho, to this present, who all maintain the
Heavens to be fluid, and the Stars to move therein, as Fishes in the Water, or
Birds in the Air. Between these there is a middle Opinion, which maintains the
Heaven of the fixed Stars to be solid, but that of the Planets to be fluid. The
first Author of which distinction, is conceived to be Empedocles; Of which see
Plutarch, l. 2. de Placit. Philosoph. c. 13. and upon the whole subject matter,
Ricciolus in Almagest. Nov. l. 9. c. 7.
suspended stray,
And Earth by Imitation This Libration, or Suspension of the Earth, Achilles
Tatius in Arat. Phaenomen. thus illustrates, If any one should put a
Millet-Seed, or other small Grain into a Bladder, and by blowing into it fill
it with Air, the Seed or Grain will be carried up, and remain in the middle of
the Bladder. After the same manner, the Earth being on all sides forced by the
Air, suspends poised in she midst thereof. To which Aristophanes in Nubibus,
alludes; (...)* Great Lord and King, Thou Immense Air!
Which do the Earth suspended bear.
See Turnebus, l. Adversar* 4. c. 17* explaining these Verses of Ovid, (l. 1.
Metam.)

Et circumfuso pendebat in Aere Tellus
Ponderibus Librata suis --

hangs as they,
Poised in the middle of circumfluent Air: The Earth of a Spherical Form.

Not flatly stretched, but swelled into a Sphere,
Rising alike, and falling every where.
This is the Face of Nature; thus the Heavens rolled
Swiftly about, into He alludes perhaps to the Opinion of Leucippus (...),
which see more particularly expressed in Hesych. (...) in voce (...).
round Figures mould
The Sun and Stars; round is the Moon to sight,
And with a swelling Body bars the Light;
Hence never wholly Lucid is her Ball,
When the Sun's Beams on it obliquely fall.
A Form eternal, like the Gods alone,
In which, Beginning there or End is none;
But like throughout, and every where the same.
Such are the Stars, such is the whole Worlds Frame.
Hence it is We see not in all Lands all Signs,
This is a Noted Star of the first Magnitude, in the Southern Rudder of the
Ship, Argo; so called, from Canopus, Pilot to Osyris, (according to the
Egyptians) or to Menelaus, (according to the Greeks) who landing in Egypt,
was by the biting of a Serpent slain, and buried near one of the Out-lets of
Nilus, from him called Ostium Canopicum; the place of his burial receiving
likewise his Name, and growing to a City, in which he had his Temple, being
honored with Divine Rites, and worshipped in the form of a Pitcher or
Watring-Pot, with a large round Belly, as the Deity presiding over Nilus, and
the watery Element: Of whose Contest with the God of the Chaldeans (Fire,) and
Victory thereupon; see the Story in Suidas in verb. Canop. and from him in
Kircher. in Oedip. Egypt. Tom. 1. p. 209.
Canopus not till you reach To this purpose Vitruvius, l. 9. c 7. U^i
Septentriones circum Axis Cardinem versantes non occidunt, neque sub Terra
subeunt: Sic and circa Meridianum Cardinem, qui est propter inclinationem Mundi
subjectus terrae, Sydera versabunda la^entiaque non habent egressus orientes,
etc. i. e. As the seven Stars, or the Bears turning about the Northern Axis of
the World never set; so the Stars near the Southern Pole, which (by reason of
the Worlds Inclination, being deprest under the Earth,) make occult and hidden
Revolutions, never rise, nor can be observed or known by us in regard of the
Earths Interposition. Of which the Star Canopus is proof, which in these
Regions is unknown, as those Merchants which travail to the uttermost Parts of
Egypt inform us.
Egypt shines,
And they To the same effect Pliny. Septentriones non cernit Trogloditice, and
Confinis Aegyptus; nec Canopum Italia. i. e. The Land of the Troglodites, and
its Neighboring Egypt sees not Helice, nor Italy Canopus. Scaliger yet
condemns both Pliny and our Author, as mistaken in the first particular; for
at Alexandria the Sun being about five Degrees of Pisces under the Horizon,
both Helice and Canopus are in the Evening seen to rise in the East; and were
so to be seen in the time of Manilius, the Sun setting in the twenty third
Degree of Aquarius. What is said of Canopus, as not appearing in Italy, is true.
lack Helice, who see his Light,
Earth's Tumor hind'ring th'intercepted Sight.
The Truth of this Thou Cynthia may attest,
When dark'ning Shadows thy bright Looks invest,
Gassendus in Append. Animadvers. in Epicur. noting upon this place, thus
advises. Caute esse interpretandum quod ad ha^c rem Manilius habet. For those
Words, Pariter, prius, and post, (says he) are not to be taken as to diverse
Moments of time, for the Moon at one and the same instant is beheld to be
Eclipsed by all those, to whom she appears above the Horizon; but to be meant
of the diversity of Hours by reason of the several Meridians; by which means it
happens that at the same instant of time that the Moon is seen to be Eclipsed,
above our Horizon, They Eastward of us may reckon the Eclipse at one, two, or
three in the Morning; They Westward at nine, ten, or eleven at Night, after the
preceding Noon. Vide etiam Baltoreum in l. 1. Cleomedis Meteor.
At once thou do not all the World amaze,
But first the Eastern Nations miss thy Rays;
Then those which under the Mid-heaven are placed;
Next, towered Hesperia fly'st thou, cloudy-fac'd;
Then those who yet more distant have their Seat,
Later (to aid thee) So Ovid, ( l. 4. Metamorph.) -- resonant era auxiliaria
Lunae. And Statius, l. 6. Theb.

-- Procul auxiliaria Gentes Era crepant -- That Custom springing from the
foolish belief of the Ancients, that the Moon at the time of her Eclipse, was
endeavored by the Charms of Witches to be drawn from her Sphere. And therefore
they made that Noise that she might not hear their Incantations; Practiced by
the Ignorant People, even in St. Ambrose his time, as we find by his
reprehension of that Piece of Paganism, cited by Turnebus in Adversar. And what
is more affirmed by B^nincontrius (who first within less than two Centuries of
Years, Commented upon our Author) to have by himself been seen acted upon the
like Occasion, by his own Contrymen, the Italians. The Turks continue it to
this Day, as Scaliger affirms. Plutarch in Ae-milio reports that the Romans,
besides their beating of Brazen Vessels, and sounding of Trumpets, used to
reach up flaming Links and Torches toward Heaven, to re-supply the Light of
the Moon, which they believed by Charms to be extinguished. Delrius in Senec.
Tragoed. says, he has read that the Indians used with Tears and Lamentations
to prosecute this defect, or Deliquium of the Moon, as believing she was then
by the Sun whipped till she bled, to which they attributed her dark and sanguine
color. Vide Delrium in Commentar. ad Hippolyt. p. 195. See likewise Turnebus
in Adversar. l. 22. c. 23 and 24. And Pincierus in Parerg. Otii Marpurg. l. 2.
c. 37.
brazen Vessels beat.
If then the Earth were flat, this sad Defect
Of Light, the whole World might at once detect,
But since it is Round, to These first, then to Those,
Her Rising self, or setting Delia shows;
For carried Circular, she first attains
The Ascending Parts, then the Descending gains;
Now climbs this Arch, anon leaves that behind,
Whence that the Earth is Round, we clearly find.
This is by Men, and Beasts, and Whether Birds, which are generally called
Genus Aereum; and by the sacred Text it self, volatilia Coeli, may be properly
reckoned among Terrestial Animals, is by some questioned. Ovid ( Metam. l. 1.)
seems not to allow thereof in his Distribution of Animals, Astra tenent
Coeleste solum, Formaeque Deorum,
Cesserunt nitidis habitandae Piscibus undae,
Terra feras cepit, Vol^cres agitabilis Aer.
The like Division is made by Cicero, l. 2. de Not. Deor. and in Timaeo, and by
Aristotle, as he is cited by Plutarch. in 5. de Placit. Philos. To which may be
added that belief of the Ancient Greeks (derived to them from the Egyptians)
that Birds were produced before ever the Earth was formed, whereunto
Aristophanes in Avibus, alludes. But Apuleius sides with our Author, and ends
the Controversy in these words: Si sedulo animadvertas, ipsae quoque Aves,
Terrestre Animal non Aereum rectius perhibeantur; Semper enim illis victus
omnis in Terra, ibidem Pabulum, ibidem Cubile, tantumque Era proximum Terrae
volando verberant; Iterum cum illis fessa sunt Remigia Alarm, Terra seu Portus
est. i. e. If you seriously consider, Birds may be more truly reckoned a
Terrestrial Animal, than Aereal; For all their living is upon the Earth, there
is their Food, there their Nests. They only in their flight beat the Air; But
when their Oars and Sails, their Wings, begin to fail them, the Earth is their
Harbor. But as to this Question, (not much unlike that which troubled the
heads of Aristotle, Theophrastus, and most of the Ancient Peripateticks, as
Censorinus de die Natal. c. 14. delivers it, which was, Avesne ante, an Ova
generata sint, cum and Ovum sine Ave, and Avis sine Ovo gigni non possit?) See
Hieron. Magius, l. 1. Miscellan. c. ult. Iacobus Cruceus Syllog. 3. and
Kircher. in his Iter. Extatic. 2. Dialog. 2. c. 5.
Birds possessed,
The North Parts Eminent, the South deprest
Beneath our Feet; whose surface seems to be
(It Is Breadth deceiving its Declivitie)
Stretched to a lengthful Plain; the large Extent
Composed of equal Rising and Descent.
Hence when Sol's Beams in the West our Orient Face
There rising Day does sleep from Mortals chase,
And when the Light to Labor summons Those,
It Is Night with Us, and Time for our Repose.
The watery Homer (says Geminus) and almost all the Ancient Poets, make the Sea
to round the Earth, as an Horizon, dividing the upper from the lower
Hemisphere; whence the Horizon it self is by them called the Ocean, according
to this Verse of Neoptolemus Parianus, and Euph^rion cited by Achilles Tatius
in A^at. Ph^nom. (...). The Ocean girdling the surrounded Earth. To the same
purpose Agatharchides, as cited by Ph^ius ( in Bibli^th.) asserts, (...), etc.
Quod Orbem t^tum O^anus ct^umluet and ambi^t; Custodiens eum fluxib^s suis and
continens. Hence H^mer gives to Neptune the title of (...), i. e. Terram
continens, sive ambitu su^ c^mplectens; and by Secundus ((...)) the Sea is
styled, (...), i. e. Mundi amplexus, Corona Maritima, salsu^ vinculum, Cingulum
A^lanticum, totius naturae Ambitus, Orbis fascia; Being of old likewise among
the Greeks called (...), probably derived from the Phoenician Ogg. i. e.
Circulus, sive Ambitus (for so they called the Ocean) as first observed by
Vossius Idol. l. 2. from H^sychius* And from him by Bochartus ( in Geograph.
sacra, l. 1. c. 35.) Vide etiam Casaubon. Animadvers. in Strabon. l. 1. p. 4.
Girdle of the Ambient Main,
Does either Hemisphere divide, and chain.
This Worlds huge Mass framed into One Entire The Divine Spirit or Soul of the
World.

Of different Parts, as Earth, Air, Water, Fire,
A Power Plato, Trismegistus, Pythagoras, and many other of the Ancient
Philosophers, conceive the World to be endued with a Rational Soul, persuaded
thereunto by the admirable Order and Connection of its Parts, which they
conceived, could not be sustained, but by a soul intrinsically informing,
ordering, disposing and connecting them. Hence that of Virgil, imitated by our
Author, Spiritus intus alit, Totosque infusa per Artus
Men's agitat Molem, and Magnose Corpore miscet.
This Soul, Thales imagines to be God himself; thus explained by the Hermetick
Philosophers. The Divine Spirit which produced this World out of the first
Water, being infused as it were by a continual Inspiration into the Works of
Nature, and diffused largely through, by a certain secret and continual Act,
moving the whole and every particular according to its kind, is the Soul of the
World. See Mr. Stanley in the Life of Thales. Plato, and the old Academists,
(as Cicero in Acad. Quaest. l. 1. delivers their Opinion,) say thus of it: The
Parts of the World and all things therein, are kept together by a sensitive
Nature, wherein is likewise perfect Reason; It is also Sempiternal, for there
is nothing more strong, whereby it may be dissolved. This Power is called the
Soul of the World. Heraclitus asfirm'd the Soul of the World to be an
Exhalation of the humid Parts thereof, as Plutarch in 4. de placit. Philos^ph.
c. 1. Varro, fire, of which Tertul* ad Not. l. 2. perhaps meaning the same with
Chalcidius in Timaeum, who calls Vesta* animum Corporis universi ^ or with
Pliny, who asserts the Sun to be this Soul of the World. Hunc Mundi esse ^otius
Animum ^c plane Mentem, Hunc principale Naturae Regimen ac Numen credere decet,
says he, l. 2. c. 6. Of the same Opinion is Julius Firmi^us. But as to this,
see more particularly Caelius Rhodigin. Antiqu. Lect. l. 1. c. 14. l. 6. c. 11.
and alibi. As likewise K^pler, in Harmon. Mundi, l. 4. Kircher. O^dip. Egypt.
Tom. 2. Part. 2. p. 526. Gassendus. And Ieronymus Vitalis in Lex. Mathem^t. p
305. etc.
Divine, whose sacred Influence glides
Through all its Limbs, with tacit Reason guides,
And mutual Leagues inclines them to contract,
That some may To the same sense Crito Pythagoricus in Stob. Sermon. 2. --
(...) etc. In the Universe the Conjunction of either Nature, viz. of that which
is always Active, and the other which is always Passive, make this World, which
otherwise could not subsist. Consonant to which a Modern Italian Poet, Ianus
Pannonius ( in obitum Guarini Veronensis) as cited by Barthius Adversar. l. 54.
c. 25. Iunge etiam semper Patientis, semper Agentis
Materiae Fluxus, and Fata regentia Mundum.

suffer, what the Others act,
And the whole Frame (although diversified
By various Figures) be throughout allied.
Now we the radiant Signs in Order sing; The Twelve Signs of the Zodiac.

First those which guirt Heaven with an Oblique Ring,
And Phoebus by alternate Courses bear
Through the successive Seasons of the Year.
Then those whose Course to Heaven is Opposite,
All which may numbered be in a clear Night;
The Laws of Fate depending on their Power.
First then of Heavens chief Part, its Starry That is the Zodiac. The
Aeeyptians held, that in every Asterism or Sign in the Zodiac, or rather in
each Dodecatem^rion thereof, a peculiar Deity resided; and in every Star
belonging to one of those Constellations a peculiar Genius, as the inferior
Ministers of each Deity; whose virtue they believed to flow by an Influx in
form of a Pyramide, whose Basis contained the whole Extent of the Asterism, or
rather D^decatemorion, and whose Vertex or Top was terminated in the Center of
the Earth; and these they termed (...), seu Arces Deorum; and from them the
Arabians called the Signs Bu^ugi, signifying Towers, Castles or Forts; and in
the singular Burgi, believing the Signs to reside in so many Castles or
Palaces, by the Persian^ called K^shk, or as we usually term them Houses. And
therefore our Author elsewhere calls the twelve Signs or Houses in the
Zodiac, Castra; and the Zodiac it self in this place, Arcem Mundi, or the
Tower, or Citadel of Heaven* consisting of so many Bulwarks. See Kircher. in
Oedip. Egypt. Tem. 2. and Mr. Hyde the Learned Commentator upon Ulugh B^gh,
his Tables, p. 30.
Tower.
The I have chosen so to English Princeps Aries, rather than the Leading Ram,
persuaded thereunto by the Authority of our Poet, who, l. 2. gives him that
Title, -- Aries Caput est ante omnia Princeps Sortitus -- And again, l. 4.

Consilium ipse suum est Aries, ut Principe dignum est. And by that of
Germanicus, in Aratum; where he is styled

Princeps Aries -- And of Columella, ( l. 10.) who gives him the Title of

Signorum and Pecorum Princeps -- So likewise Varro, l. 5. de Lingua Latin.
speaking of the Original and Etymology of the Agonalian Festivals, (in which,
anciently the Kings of the Romans used in their Palace to sacrifice a Ram)
tells us, they were so called from the Question of the Sacrificer, Ago ne? Eo
quod Interrogatur Princeps Civitatis, and Princeps Gregis immolatur. This
Principality being given to this Sign above the rest, in regard that at the
Worlds Nativity, according to the Astronomical Computation of the Ancients, he
was found seated as in a Throne, in Medio Coeli, i. e. the Tenth House; of
which Macrobius in Somnio Scip. and Salmasius Diatrib. de Antiq. Astrolog. p.
180. And for this reason (perhaps) it was, that the Ram among the Romans was
taken for the Symbol of Principality: To which effect, we find among the Coyns
of Domitian, some, on whose Reverse is stamped a Ram with this Motto, PRINCEPS
JUVENTUTIS. And with the Greeks, the Word (...), which signifies a Ram, is
taken for a Prince or Potentate. See Magius Miscellan. l. 2. and Tristan. in
his Historical Commentar. Tom. 1. p. 323.
Princely This Sign is by the Greeks called (...), Chrysomallus, Jupiter Ammon;
by the Egyptians or Copties, Tametouro Amnou, i. e. Regnum Ammonis; in Hebrew,
Tele; in the Syriack, Emro; by the Arabians, Al Hamal; by the Persians, Berri,
or Bear; by the Turks, Kuzi. All signifying a Lamb full grown, as I find in the
Learned Commentator upon Ulugh Beigh his Tables; whom in the Nomenclature of
these Signs, and the other Constellations I most particularly follow, as being
in that more exact and copious than either Scaliger, in Sphaer. Barbar.
Schickardus, Bayerus, Hues de Globis, Grotius in Arat. Ricciol^s, or (whom he
follows,) Kircher, whose several assistances I yet make use of upon occasion;
and only premise this to avoid (for brevity sake) the trouble of future
Citations. In this Constellation are reckoned according to Ptolomies
Computation, seventeen Stars, whereof four inform (which sort of Stars,
reckoned either in this, or any other Constellation, are by the Greeks called
(...), i. e. Informs; and by the Arabs, particularly by Ulugh Beigh, Charigi
Surat. i. e. extra figuram positae.) Bayerus reckons nineteen, whereof three
are of the third Magnitude, two in the Western, and one in the Eastern Horn,
called by the Arabs, Alsheratein, or Alsheratan; in Hebrew, Sartai, and
Mezarthim; the third in his Head, in Arabic, Al Ashra; all from the singular
Sherat, i. e. Signum seu Indicium, a Sign or Mark; the seventh, eighth, and
eleventh Stars are called in Arabic, Min Botein, from their Situation near the
Belly of the Ram. This according to the Tradition of the Egyptians, was made a
Constellation in Honor of Cham. But as Nigidius (cited by the Scholiast of
Germanicus) reports, for discovering to Bacchus, and his thirsty Army in the
Deserts of Africa, a Fountain of Water; or, according to Pherecides, for
transporting of Phryxus, and Hell over the Sea, flying from the fury of their
Stepmother Ino. It is under the Tutelage of Jupiter and Minerva, according to
the Doctrine of the Pythagoreans, derived from the Chaldaeans, who held the
Principal Gods to be twelve; To each of whom they attributed a Month in the
Year; and one of the twelve Signs in the Zodiac, as is observed by Diodorus
Siculus, l. 1. Bibliothec. This Sign was first discovered by Cleostratus the
Tenedian, as Pliny witnesses, l. 2. c. 8. and comes to the Meridian at
Midnight, about the end of October, and beginning of November.
Ram glittering in Golden Wool, Aries.

Wonders to see the backward-rising This Sign is called Io, Isis, Apis, and
Orias, i. e. Statio Hori, by the Egyptians; by the Greeks and Latins (...),
and Taurus; in Hebrew, Shor; by the Arabs, Al Thaur; by the Syrians, Thauro; by
the Persians, Ghau; and by the Turks, Ughuz, i. e. Bos. It consists according
to Ptolomy, of 44 Stars, whereof 11 shapeless; or as Bayerus counts, of 48, as
Kepler, of 52; among which there is one of the first Magnitude, by the Greeks
called (...); by Ptolomy, (...); by the Arabs Aldebaran, i. e. Stella
Dominatrix, and Ain Al Thaur, i. e. Oculus Tauri; by the Egyptians, Piorion,
i. e. Statio, seu Dominium Hori, in regard of the power of the Sun in
Conjunction with that Star; by the Romans, Palilicium, because heretofore it
rose at Rome on the Feast Day of Pales, translated into Heaven in Memory of the
Rape of Europa by Jupiter in that shape; or in Honor of Io, or Isis,
transformed by Juno into a Cow, and Constellated by Jupiter. Hence Ovid. Vacca
sit an Taurus non est cognoscere promptum,
Pars prior apparet, Posteriora latent.
Seu tamen est Taurus, sive est haec foemina Signu^
Iunone invita Munus Amoris habet.
If Bull or Heifer hard it is to descry
Seen are its fore*parts, hid its hinder lie.
But be it a Masculine or Female Sign,
It spite of Juno, as Loves Mark does shine.
Others will have it to be the Symbol of Osyris or Mesoris, or Mizraim, the Son
of Cham, who first taught the Egyptians Tillage; or rather of the Patriarch
Joseph, for his preserving Egypt in the time of Famine; to which the Learned
Grotius, in his Tragedy of Sophomphania, alludes. To confirm which Opinion,
Ger. Io. Vossius in his most accurate Work de Orig. and Progress. Idololatr.
shows that Apis was the same with Joseph (de quo etiam vide Tertull. l. 2. ad
nationes) and that under the Symbol of an Ox, he was honored by the
Egyptians, as the most proper to express the Benefit conferred by him upon
that People; as among the Romans, we find L. Minucius, Prefect of the
Corn-stores, Bove aurato extra Portam Trigeminam est donatus, because in a time
of scarcity he supplied the Roman People with Corn at a Cheap Rate. Venus is
Patroness of this Sign; which about the end of November, and beginning of
December, is at midnight seen in the Meridian.
Bull Taurus.

With submiss Looks beckon the These are called (...), Tindaridae, and Dioscuri
by the Greeks and Litine^; In the Coptick, Clusos, (i. e.) Claustrum Hori; in
the Hebrew, Te^min; in Syriack, Tom^; in Arabic, Taw' aman, i. e. Gemelli.
They are likewise by the Arabs called Giauza, as it were by a Me^athesis, or
Transposition of the Word from Zaugi, i. e. Bini, (...). Others derive it from
Giauz, signifying a Nut; and therefore the Turks call this Sign, Kus Siphetlu
Burgi, i. e. Nucem, vel Nuces referens Signum; by the Persians, Ghi^degan, to
the same sense. But with more probability, (says my Author) they are called
Giauza, because placed i^ Giauz al Sama, i. e. in Medio Coeli. There are
reckoned in this Constellation, according to Ptolomy, twenty five Stars,
whereof seven are inform; Repler makes them thirty, Bayerus thirty three;
whereof that in the Head of the Western Twin, which first rises, is by the
Arabs called Ras al Tawum A^mukeddem, i. e. Caput p^ioris geminorum; the other,
Ras al Tawum Muaccher, i. e. Caput posterioris Geminorum. The Star reckoned the
fourteenth in number in this Constellation, is by Higynus and Bassus, called
Prop^s, by Ptolomy (...), quia praecedit Pedes Geminorum; and by the Persians,
Pish-pai. The seventeenth and eighteenth opposite to one another in the feet of
the said Gemini, are by the Arabs called al Hen'a, (i. e.) quaevis res quae
aliam immediate sequitur. These Twins Varro and Servius (in 11 Virgil. Aen.)
will have to be Apollo and Hercules, called by the Arabs, Ap^ellan, and
Hie^aclus, and commonly, but most corruptly, Aphellar, Anhelar, and
Abrachileus. Others will have them to be Triptolemus and Jason; some Amphion,
and Zethus; or Dii Samothraces; Plutarob, according to the Tradition of the
Egyptians, makes them to be Helitomenius and Harpocration, the Sons of Isis,
and Osyris. But with more probability they are conceived to be Castor, and
Pollux. For as the same Plutarch ( l. de Amore fraterno) affirms, the Spartans
of old used to call the Statues of Castor, and Pollux, (...), i. e. Trabalia,
being no other than two Wooden Pests set parallel one to another, and joined
together at each end by two other traverse Beams. Hence (says the Learned
Palmeriu^ upon that place of Plutarch) Astrologers make use of the like Figure
or Character to denote this Twin Sign, which they derived from the
Lacedaemonians. It comes to the Mid-heaven at Midnight, in the end of December,
and beginning of January, and has Phoebus for its Superintendent.
Twins; next whom Gemini.
Cancer.

Cancer is in the Greek called (...), and (...), i. e. Octipes; It is likewise
called Nepa Astacus, Camarus; In Arabic, Assert^n; in Hebrew, Sartan; in
Syriack, Sartono; in Persian, Chercjengh; by the Turks, Lenkutch, or Lenki^ch,
and Yenkutch, or Yenkitch, and Yilenkutch, or Yilenkitch, i. e. Cancer; In the
Coptick it is called Klaria, i. e. Besti^, seu stati^ Typhonis. The whole
Constellation made up of thirteen Stars, whereof four shapeless, according to
(...) my; Kepler reckons seventeen, and Bayerus thirty five. Among which, the
first Star in this Constellation is called in A^bick, Malaph, i. e. Praesepe,
or the Manger; in Greek, (...): It is likewise by the Arabs called Al Net^ra;
in Chaldi^, Pesebre; and is a Cloudy Star, by Galilaeo discovered to consist of
thirty six smaller ones. The fourth and fifth Stars are by the Arabs called Al
Himarein, or Al Him^ran, i. e. du^ Asini; Our Author elsewhere calls them
Iugulas. The Crab was made a Constellation at the Entreaty of Juno, being
killed by Hercules, for biting him by the Foot, when he encountered Hydra: The
Asinegoes, with their Manger, were constellated, because in the Fight with the
Giants, Bacchus and Vulcan charged upon Asses, who with their Brayings,
frighted, and so put to flight their Enemies; see Higyn. and Bassus in
Germani^. (or rather Eratosthenes, for that Comment is no other than
Eratosthenes translated.) This Sign is appropriate to Mercury, and is famous
according to the Chaldaick and Platonic Philosophy, for being supposed the
Gate by which Souls descended into Humane Bodies; touching which, see Mecrobius
in Somn. Sc^p. Coel. Rhodig. antiq. Lect. l. 15. c. 23. and Kircher in Oedip.
Egypt. Tom. 2. p. 535. It illustrates the Mid-heaven about Midnight, from a
little after the beginning, until the end of January.
Cancer, who after him sees This Sign by the Greeks is called (...); in Hebrew,
Ar'ye; by the Arabs, al Asad* in Syriack, Ar'yo; in the Persian, Shir; the
Turk^ call it (...), or As^in, i. e. Leo; the Egyptian Cop^ies call it
Pimentekeon, i. e. Cubitus Nili. It consists of thirty nine Stars, whereof
eight inform, according to Ptolomy, of forty according to Kepler; to which
number Bayerus adds three more. The first Star in this Constellation, is by the
Arabs called Minchir al Asad, i. e. Nares Leonis. The third, Ras al Asad, al
Schemali, i. e. Caput Leonis Boreale. The fourth, Ras al Asad, al Gienubi, i.
e. Capu^ Leonis Australe. The fifth sixth, and seventh Stars are called by them
al Gieb'ha, i. e. Frons. The eighth they call Mesichi, to which the Greek
(...), and the Latin, Regulus, answers; they give it likewise the name of Kal^
al Asad, i. e. Cor Leonis, being a Star of the first Magnitude. The twentieth
Star is in Arabic called Duhr al Asad, i. e. Dorsum Leonis, and is also with
the twenty second called Min al Zub'ra, i. e. de Crine Dorsi. The twenty
seventh Star they call S^rpha, i. e. Mutatrix, from the Change it brings of
Heat from Cold; and Danab al Asad, i. e. Cauda Leonis; and is likewise of the
first Magnitude. The Lion was made a Celestial Sign by Juno, to spite
Her^ules, by whom he was slain; and is said to have been bred in the Moon, and
from thence to have fallen near the Nemaeean Grove in Arcadia, from whence
called Nemaeeu^; as likewise, Claeoneus, and Herculeus; to which, besides
Achilles Tatius in Arat. Seneca alludes in He^cul. furente, in these Words,
Sublimis alias Luna concipiat feras. And again

-- Leo Flammiferis aestihu^ ardens,
Iterum e Coelo cadet Herculeus.
The Poets, (as is observed by Scaliger. not. in Ceirim) feigning Animals,
exceeding the ordinary ^ize, to be bred in, and to come from the Moon; Hence
Claudi^, or some one more Ancient than him, in the Poem of the Praises of
Hercules, speaking of the Marathoni^n Bull, subdued by that Hero,

-- Taurus med^ nam Sydere Lunae
Progenitus, Dictaea Iovis possederat arv^.
This Sign, -- Jupiter (and cum Matre Deum) regit, -- says our Author, l. 2.
It appears in the Meridian at Midnight, in the Month of February.
Leo come; Leo.

Him This Constellation in Greek bears the name of (...); to which the Latin
Virgo answers. In Hebrew it is called Bethula; in Syriack, B^thulto; in
Arabic; Adra, and Adrenedepha; and in the Persian, D^shiza Pakiza, all to the
same sense with the former; in the Egyptian or Coptick, it is called Aspholia,
i. e. Statio Am^ris; It is likewise in respect of the chief Star by which it is
signalized, being one of the first Magnitude in her left hand (though Vitruvius
and Hyginus erroneously place it on her right,) called by the Hebrews,
Shibboleth; by the Syrians, Shev^lto; by the Arabs, Sumbela; by the Persians,
Chushe; and by the Turks, Salkim; All signifying a Spike, or Ear of Corn. In
this Sign; Ptolomy reckons thirty two Stars, six whereof inform; Kepler thirty
nine, and Bayerus forty two, of which the sixth and seventh Stars are by the
Arabs called Min al Auwa, i. e. de latratore; and so likewise the tenth. The
seventh is by them called Zawija al Auwa, i. e. Angulus Latratoris. The
thirteenth, which is also one of the first Magnitude in her right wing, called
by Proclus (...), i. e. Praevindemiator, is by the Arabs in the same
signification called Mukdim al Ketaph. The fourteenth, which is the Spica, is
by them likewise called Simak al A'zal, i. e. Efferens Inermem, scil. Virginem;
to distinguish it from another Star, in Boots, called Simak al Ramih, i. e.
Efferens Hastiferum, vulgarly, but corruptly called Azimeth and Huzimeth, and
by S^aliger, (but amiss) Huzmet al Hisal, i. e. Fasciculus frumenti vel
segetis. The twenty second, twenty third, twenty fourth and twenty fifth Stars
are called Min al Gaph'r, i. e. Ex al Gaphr, which signifies Velamen, Ventrem
and Tect^ram, Quod Stellae ejus obtectae sint. This Sign according to the
Vulgar Opinion, is taken for Astraea, o^ Justice, by others, for Erigone,
Daughter of Icarius, (so Servius.) Others suppose her to be Ceres, quod s^icas
teneat, (says Bassus.) Others call her Atergatis, the Goddess of the Ass^rians.
Some will have her to be Fortune, pro eo quod sine Capite Astris infer^ur, says
the same Bassus. Avienus makes her to be Isis; and others again will have her
to be Concord, or Peace; for which Opinion (says Vossius l. 2. Idol.) makes the
Figure in Commelins Ancient Manuscript of Hyginus, and that of Grotius in
Germanic. Arat. ubi manu dextra Olivam, sinistra Caduceum tenet, as commonly
the Ancients represent Peace. Ceres is Lady of this Sign, which visits the
Meridian at Midnight about the end of March, and beginning of April.
Virgo follows; then the This Asterisme by the Greeks is called (...); to which
the Latin Libra answers; by Cicero it is called Iugum, particularly answering
to the last of the Greek names. In Hebrew it is called Mozenaim; in Syri^ck,
Masath^, in Arabic, al Mizan; by the Persians, Terazu: All signifying Libram,
Stateram, seu Bilancem. The Turks commonly use the Arabic name Mizan, which by
them in their Language is explained Tartagick alati, i. e. Ponderandi
Instrumentum. In the C^ptick it is called Lamb^dia, i. e. Statio
Propitiationi^. The Constellation is made up of seventeen Stars, according to
Prolomy, whereof nine inform; Bayerus reckons but fifteen, Kepler eighteen.
Among which the first Star in Account, by the Greeks called (...), is by the
Arabs, in the same signification, called Zubana Gjenubi, i. e. Chela australis,
and Al Kiffa, Al Gienubija, i. e. Lanx australis; the third, called by the
Greeks (...), is accordingly by the Arabs called Zubana Shemali, i. e. Chela
Borealis, and al Kiffa al Shemalija, i. e. Lanx Borealis. This Sign owns Vulcan
for its Patron, and is famous for being ascendant in the Horoscope of Rome, at
its Foundation, according to the Calculation of Lucius Tarruncius Firmanus, as
Cicero witnesses ( l. 2. de Divin.) There is no distinct Fable of this Sign, it
being part of Scorpius, whose Chelae or Claws (by the Arabs called Zubana)
make* the Scales; Hence our Author, lib. 2. Scorpius in Libra Consumit
Brac^hia. -- It mounts the Meridian at Midnight in the beginning of May.
Scales, that weigh Virgo.

In even Balance equal Night and Day, Libra.

Draw on the The Hebrews call this Sign Akrab, pro Akatzrab, a magno aculeo
(media vocis litera per compendium elisa) according to Bochart his
Interpretation. The Syrians call it Akr^vo; the Arabs, Al Akrab; the Persians,
Ghezdum; the Turks, K^irughi, quasi (...), Caudatus, or Uzun Koirughi, i. e.
longa Cauda praeditus. By Cicero it is called Nepa* which Festus says is an
African Word, happily a Phoenician says Bochartus, Neb or Nebba ( b changed
into p) a Caudae Internodii's; by the Greeks; (...); and by the Egyptian
Copties, Isias, i. e. Statio Isidis. There are counted therein by Ptolomy
twenty four Stars; whereof three shapeless; by Kepler* twenty eight; by Bayerus
twenty nine; of which the six first are by the Arabs called I^lil al Gieb'ha,
i. e. Corona Fro^tis, and simply I^lil* Corona. The sixth is particularly
called Gieb'ha al Akrab, i. e. Frons Scorpii. The eighth is by them called
Kalb' al Akrab, i. e. Cor Scorpii, etc. In Greek (...) or (...), i. e.
Tyrannus. On each side of which Star there are two others, by the Arabs called
al Niyat, i. e. Praecordia. The twentieth and twenty first they call al Shaula,
which properly signifies the Tail of a Scorpion, and not of any other Creature.
From which name al Shaula, not rightly read or written, have proceeded the
corrupt names of Shomleck, Moshleck, and alasha, commonly found in most
Authors. The Scorpion is fabled to have been made a Constellation, for having
slain Orion, who boasted he would in Hunting destroy all the Wild Beasts in the
Forests; or according to Nigidius, for that hunting with Diana in the Mountain
Chelippius in the Island Chios, he contemned and derided her, as inferior to
him in Skill; or according to Palaephatus and Ni^ander in Theriac. for daring
to have violated her Chastity; for which in Revenge, she is said to have sent
this Scorpion to sting him to death (though Horace says he was -- Virginea
domitus sagitta) being for that, at her request, by Jupiter made an Asterism in
Heaven; owning Mars for his Deity; and is seen to crawl toward the Meridian at
Midnight, about the end of May and beginning of June.
Scorpion with the fiery Sting, Scorpio.

At which the This Constellation is in Hebrew called Kesheth; in Syriack,
Keshto; in Arabic, Al Kaus; in the Persian Tongue Kaman; in the Turkish, Yai.
All signifying an Arrow. In Greek (...) and (...) and (...), i. e. Sagittarius;
according to which signification it is likewise by the Arabs called al Rami; by
the Egyptians, Pimaere, i. e. St^tio Amoenitatis* It consists of 31 Stars, as
Ptolomy reckons; of 32, as Bayerus; of 34, as Kepler. Of which the first is by
some among the Arabians called Zugi al Nushaba, i. e. Cuspis, vel Ferramentum
Spiculi. But both that and the second in Ulugh Beighs Tables; Min al Naaim, al
Warida, i. e. E pecoribus ad^untibus (scil. ad aquam*) The 6th and 7th
according to those Tables, Min al Naim, al Sadira; i. e. E pecoribus
redcuntibus (scil. ab aquatione.) The 8th Star in this Constellation, is by the
Arabs called Ain al Rami, i. e. Oculus Sagittarii. The 23d Urkub al Rami, i. e.
Suffrago; the Hough or Pastern. The 24th Rukb^ al Rami, i. e. Genu, the Knee of
Sagittarius. Hyginus, from the Authority of Sositheus, will have this to be
Crotus, the Son of Euphemis, or Eu^hemis, the Nurse of the Muses, at their
instance by Jupiter placed in the Zodiac. Others will have him to be Chiron.
This Sign is under the Tutelage of Diana, and of Apollo likewise, to whom it is
sacred; as Tristan, in his Com^entar. Tom. 3. evinces, from the Coyns of
Gallienus, on some of whose Reverses is stamped the Figure of Sagittarius, with
this Inscription, APOLLINI CONSERV. AUG. This Sign at Midnight aims at the
Meridian, about the end of June, and beginning of July.
Centaur his Shaft levelling Sagittar.

Seems ready to let f^y: To these comes on
The The Greeks give to this Sign the Name (...), and (...); The Latins,
Hircus Aequ^ris (so Asclepiadius and Vomanus) and Pelagi Procella (so Vitalis)
by Horace being styled, -- Tyrannus Hesperiae Capricornus undae.

In Hebrew, it is called G^di; in Syria^, G^dio; in Arabic, Al Gjedi; in the
Persian, Buzegh^le; in Turkish, Uglack; all signifying a Kid or Goat. In the
Coptick or Egyptian Tongue it is called Hopeutus, i. e. Brachium Sacrificii.
It is made up, by the joint Account of Ptolomy, Kepler and Bayerus, of 29
Stars; of which the first and third are by the Arabs called Min Sad Al D^ih, i.
e. Ex fortuna Mactantis; and simply, D^bigh, i. e. Mactans. The 23d and 24th
Stars are called by them, Sad N^shira, i. e. Fortuna averruncantis, vel
divulgantis Nuncium. But the 24th by a particular Name, from its situation, is
called Da^ab Al Gjedi, i. e. Ca^da Capricorni. This was made a Constellation in
honor of Aegip in the Son of Jupiter, by the Olenian Goat, or rather his
Foster Brother, Son of Aega the Wife of Pan, whence his Name* who as Bassus in
Germani^. from the Authority of Epimenides, writes, assisted Jupiter in his
Wars against the Titans, and armed the God; and for that reason honored with
this Celestial Dignity. The reason of his being figured half Goat half Fish,
Theon the Scoliast of A^atus reports, was, for that he finding on the Seashore
an empty Murex or purple shell, is said to have wound it like a Horn, thereby
striking a Panick ^ear into the Titans, and therefore they represented him with
a Tail like a Sea-Mons^er. Celebrated it is according to the Doctrine of the
Pythagoreans, and Platonists, for being the Gate, by which Souls ascend into
Heaven; and therefore styled Porta Deorum: Nor less Famous, to use our Authors
Words,

-- In Augusti foelix quod fulserit Ortum. Of which see Suetonius in August.
Scaliger in Manil. ^ct. Sam. Petit. in Observa^. l. 1. c. 5. Vindelinus and
Albertus Rubeniu^ upon that subject; Ricciolus in Chronolog. reformo (...).
T^m. 1. l. 4. p. 104. and Spanhemius in Dissertat. de Numismat. Vesta is the
Goddess appropriate to this Sign. It climbs the Mid-heaven at Midnight, about
the end of July, and beginning of August.
Goats contracted Constellation. Caprico:

This Sign is by the Greeks called (...); by Appian, Hydridurus, and in the
same signification by the Arabs, Sakib Al M^, i. e. Effus^r A^uae. It is by
them likewise called Al Delu, and in H^brew, Deli; in Syriac, Daulo; in the
Persian Tongue, D^l; in the Turkish, K^gha; all signifying a^ Urn, or
Watring-pot. The Egyptians or Copties, call it Hup^utherian, i. e. Brachium
Beneficii. There are reckoned therein according to Ptolomy and Kepler, 45
Stars, whereof three inform. Bayerus yet reckons but 41. Of which the 2d and 3d
are in Arabic called Sa'd Al Melick, or Sa'd Al Mulck; the first signifying
fortuna Regis, the later, fortuna Opum and Substantiae. The 4th and 5th are
called Sa'd Al Suud, i. e. fortuna fortunarum; under which are some other Stars
of less note called Al An^. The 6th and 7th are called Sa'd Bula and Al Bul^an,
i. e. fortuna Deglutientis, or D^glutientium. The 9th, 10th and 11th Stars are
called Sa'd Al Ahbija, i. e. fortuna Tentoriorum. The 14th Star in this
Constellation, being one of the first Magnitude, is in Arabic called Diphd^ al
Auwal, i. e. Rana Prima; It is likewise called Phom al H^ut al Gje^bi, i. e. Os
Piscis Australis, commonly, but corruptly, Phomahant. This Asterism is by some
fabl'd to be Ganym^de the Cup Bearer of Jupiter, by some Deucalion; (whence by
Vomanus this Sign is entitled Deucalionis Aquae;) by others, Aristaeus; of
which, see the Scholiast of Germanicus. It is seen in the Meridian at Midnight,
about the end of August, and beginning of September* Juno is its Lady Regent.
Aquarius next pours from his Urn a Flood, Aquar.

Whilst the glad This Sign in the Greek is called (...), and by the Jews
accordingly Dagaim, i. e. Duo Pisces. But the Arabs call it Al H^ut, and Al
S^maca; the Syrians, Nano; the Persians, M^hi; the Turks, Balick, which
signifies a Fish in the singular number; so likewise in the C^ptick, it is
called Pikotorion, i. e. Piscis Hori. The Northern of these Fishes is in the
Arabic called Haut Ash^li, i. e. Piscis B^realis, and is known by the peculiar
Name of (...), as being represented by the C^ns with the Head of a Swallow; the
reason as Scaliger conceives, because when the Sun is in that Sign, the Swallow
begins to appear in those Regions. The Southern is called Haut al Gjenubi, i.
e. Piscis Australis. The whole Constellation consists, according to Ptolomy, of
38 Stars, (whereof four inform,) according to Bayerus of 39. But Kepler reckons
therein 59. The Stream, or Tenuis fusio Stellarum utris^ue Piscibus disposita,
Vitruvius, l. 9. c. 7. calls (...), i. e. Mercuri^ Donum s^u Delici^s, which
Scaliger conceives ought to be read (...), i. e. Laqueum; or as Pliny terms it,
Commissuram Piscium. The Compiler of the Vitruvi^n Lexicon seems to come nearer
to the truer Reading, and will have it to be (...), i. e. Nodum, or to use the
Words of the said Lexicon, Coaptatimem qua Piscis Pisci seu vinculo al^gatur;
by Proclus called (...), by Aratus, (...), which Cicero renders Coelestem
Nodum. The Arabians call it Ch^it, vel Ch^ Kettani, i. e. Filum Linteum. These
are fabled to be the Syrian Deities according to Germanicus, Syriae du^ Numi^a
Pisces, by which are understood Venus and Cupid, as Hyginus (from the Authority
of Diognetus Erythraeus) writes. For Venus and her Son Cupid coming to the
River Euphrates, and frighted with the sudden appearance of the Giant Typ^n,
cast themselves into the River, and assumed the shapes of Fishes, by which
means they escaped from danger. For this reason the Syrians abstain from eating
of Fish, lest they might happen to devour their Deities. But the Scholiast of
Germanicus (from Nigidius) writes, that these were the Fishes, which turned or
rolled up upon the Bank of Euphrates a great Egg, upon which a Dove sitting,
hatched Venus, the Syrian Goddess. The Exposition whereof, see in Beyerus in
Additamen* in Seldeni System* de Diis Syriis, p. 290. This Sign is under the
Patronage of Neptune, and is seen in the Meridian at Midnight, almost
throughout the whole Months of September and October.
Fish to the loved Waters scud, Pis^es.

By Aries touched, and make the closing Sign.
Now in the Skies near where the bright Bears shine
(Which from Heavens Top on all the Stars look down,
Nor know to se^; but placed on the World's Crown,
Though differently, whirle round the Stars and Skies)
Stretched through thin Air the The Axis of the World (so called ab (...),
v^lvo) is an Imaginary right Line, passing through the Center of the Mundane
Sphere from North to South, whose extremities are terminated in the superficies
thereof; the two points term^ating the said A^is being called the Poles of the
World: About which immovable Line the Sphere it self is turned. By this
Description it may appear that the Axi^ of the Sphere is likewise the Diameter
thereof; but on the contrary every Diameter thereof is not its Axis; because
the Sphere is not turned about every Diameter, but only about that, which is
extended from North to South. Vid. Cl^v. in Sacrobosc.
subtle Axis lies, The Axis of the World, and the Poles.

Whose distant Poles the Balanced Fabric hold;
Round this the Star-imbellish'd Orbs are rolled:
Whilst yet it self unmoved through empty Air,
And the Earths Globe extends to either Bear.
Nor is it a To this purpose Achilles Tatius in A^at. Phaenom. (...), etc. Of
the M^teriality of this Axis, (though some Philos^phers have conceived i^ a
Spirit passing through the interjected Mundane space) Aratus (says he) has
taught us n^thing. For if any shall conceive it to consist of a fiery
substance, when it passes through the Sphere ^f the Water, it would be
extinguished, or consumed by the Sphere of the fiery Element; or should it be
supposed to consist of any other of the Elements, as of Air or Water, it would
not mix with the others, but would be destroyed by its contraries: Wherefore
Mathematicians have defined it (...), i. e. Li^eam quandam subtilem, seu
tenuem, and is here by our Author excellently described.
solid Substance, or oppressed
With Weight, though the Worlds Homer and most of the Ancient Poets seem to
attribute to the Sphere of the World a kind of Gravity or tendency downward,
and for this Reason they describe it to be supported by A^las. But this Fancy
Aristotle eludes in his Book De Communi Animalium Mo^u, by applying (not
unappositely) the Fable of A^las to the Axis of the World, upon which it is
imagined to be supported and turned about.
weight upon it rest.
But as the Air moved in a Circle goes,
And on it self, whence first it flowed, reflows,
What e're that is which still the midst does hold,
'Bout which, (it self unmoved) All else is rolled,
So subtle it can no way be inclined,
That by the Name of Axis is designed.
Upon whose Top (to Mariners distressed The Constellations of the Northern
Hemisphere.

Well known, their Guides through Seas) two bright signs rest.
Great So named by the Greeks, quod (...), i. e. volvitur ( Circa Polum
A^ticum:) It is likewise called (...), and (...), i. e. Ursa Major and
Plaustrum Majus. In Arabic (according to Ulugh Beigh) Dub Ackber, i. e. Ursus
Major in the Masculine Gender; as likewise Agala, i. e. Plaustrum seu
v^hiculum* from whence by the change of one only Letter, is that corrupt Name
of Aganna, mentioned by Scaliger from Hesychius. It is likewise by the Arabs
called Benat Al Nash Al Cubra, i. e. Filiae feretri Majoris, in regard the four
Stars that make the Body of the Bear resemble a Bier, and the three in the
Tail, the Virgins or Maids that attend the Corpse. And for this reason says
Kircher the Christian Arabs call the four Stars in this Constellation, Nash
L^azar, i. e. Feretrum Lazari; and the three in the Tail, Mary Magdalen, Martha
and their Maid. By the Persians it is called Haphturengh Mihin, i. e.
Septentrio Major; and by the Turks, Yidigher Yilduz, i. e. Septenae stel^ae;
and (...) Yidigher, i. e. Septenae; as by the Latins, Septem Triones, quasi
Teriones, a terendo semitam circa Polum. The whole Constellation consists
according to Ptolomy of thirty five Stars, whereof eight inform; according to
Bayerus, of thirty two; Kepler yet reckons fifty six; among which the twelfth
and thirteenth Stars are in Arabic called Al Nekra Al Th^litha, i. e. Cotyle,
Scrobs seu Cavitas ossis Tali. The sixteenth D^br Al Dub Al Ackber, i. e.
Dorsum ursi Majoris: The seventeenth Merak Al Dub Al Ackber, i. e. Epigastrium
ursi Majoris. The eighteenth Meg'res Al Dub Al Ackber, i. e. Uropygium ursi
Majoris. The nineteenth is called Phaid Al Dub Al Ackber, i. e. F^mur ursi
Majoris; and these four last named, make up Al Na'sh Al Cubra, Feretrum Majus.
The twentieth and twenty first Stars are called Al Phikra, or rather Al Nekra,
Al Thanija, i. e. Vertebra seu Cotyle secunda. The twenty third and twenty
fourth Al Phikra, or rather Al Nekra, Al Ula, i. e. Vertebra seu Cotyle prima,
as the Commentator upon Ulugh Beigh his Tables would rather have it read in
both Places. The three Stars, that make the Tail, are called Al Benat, i. e.
Filiae: Whereof the first is called by some Al Haun, or Al Gjaun, signifying
albam Nubeculam; by others, Al H^er or Al Haur (commonly but corruptly, Alcor)
i. e. Albedo oculi, or Populu^ Alba. The second is called Al In^k, or Al An^k,
i. e. Capella. The third Alkaid, i. e. Gubernator. This Constellation was first
found out by N^uplius, as Theon, the Scholiast of Aratus, affirms, and was
anciently the Greek Sea-mans Guide, as the lesser, the Phoe^icians: The Reason;
because to the Greeks, who sailed the Mediterranean, Pontick and Euxine Seas,
this Constellation was still apparent, but to the Sidonians, Phoenicians and
Carthaginians, who were more Southerly, part of the greater Bear was either by
the Position of Sphere, or some other Accident, sometimes deprest and obscured;
but Cynosura always apparent to them; whence that of Valerius Flaccus in
Argonaut. -- Certior in Tyrias Cynosura Carinas. And therefore these last chose
the lesser, as the Greeks the Greater Bear for their Directress. Vide Ricciol.
in Almagest. Nov.
Helice moves in a La Cerda explicating this Verse of Virgil's ( in Georg. 1.)
[Maximus hic flexu sinuoso elabitur Anguis] Cites these Verses; and conceives
by the greater Bend and lesser Orb, our Poet means the greater and the lesser
flexure of the Serpent; that is to say, that of the Tail (being the larger)
about Helice, that of the head (being the more contracted) about Cynosure. But
this is far from the meaning of Manilius, whose sense is this, that Helice
being more removed from the Pole, makes by its Circumgyration a larger Circle
than Cynosura, which being nearer to it, must consequently make breviorem
(...), as Grotius (in Arat. Phaenom.) terms it: This Interpretation is
confirmed by these Verses of Aratus, to which doubtless ou^ Author had
respect. (...)
(...)
(...)
Multa lucens Helice prima a Nocte:
Altera vero parva, s^d N^utis Melior;
Minori enim Tota convertitur Orb^.
To which purpose see likewise Theon, the Scholiast of Aratus.
greater Bend Helice.

Marked with seven fair Stars, the Greek Pilot's Friend,
Small So called by the Greeks, quasi Canis Cauda, or as V^ssius ( l. de
Scient. Mathemat. c. 32.) derives it from the Hebrew*, Ura, i. e. Lumen,
flamma, Ignis; and Nghus, i. e. coligere, ut sit Cynosura quasi Collectio
luminis seu Ignis, or from the Chaldae^n, Kinush, i. e. Umbilicus; for by its
Conversion is made a small Circle, as it were Umbilicus Igneus. The Hebrews
call it Genash, i. e. Gallinam cum filiis suis, as Kircher expounds it. By the
Arabs it is called Dub Asgher, i. e. U^sus Minor, and Benat al Mash al Sughra,
i. e. Filiae Feretri Minoris; by some of them it is called Agiala, i. e.
Plaustrum, and by Scaliger and Schickardus Al Rueba, vel Arrucba, which yet Mr.
Hyde says is not to be sound in any Arabic writer, unless happily they derive
it from the Chaldaick Recuba or Recuva, which signifies Currum, vel V^hiculum.
By the Persians it is called Haphturengh (...) i. e. S^entrio Minor. The Star
in the Extremity of the Tail is by the (...) called Caucab Shem^i, i. e. Stella
Borealis; by the Turks, Yilduz Shemali, and absolutely Yilduz, i. e. Stella;
and by a peculiar Name in Arabic it is called Gjedi, i. e. Hoedus. The
Italians call it Tramontana; and we the Pole, or North Star. The two last and
brightest in the Feretrum or square, are by the Arabs called Al Phercadan or Al
Phercadein, i. e. Duo vituli. The whole Constellation consisting according to
P^olomy and Bayerus of eight Stars, whereof one inform; as Kepler reckons, of
twenty. Of the Fabulous Anastr^sis of this and the former Constellation,
Diodorus Siculus Biblio^b. Histor. l. 4. reports, that these were the Nurses of
Jupiter, and privately kept him from the search of Saturn; for which they were
by him in Gratitude placed in the Heavens, and called by the Name of the two
Bears, being worshipped with Divine Rites, by the Cretans and Sicilians; by
whom they were styled (...), i. e. Deae Matres. Others refer it to the Fable of
Callisto and her Son Arcas, of which see Hesiod and Ovid. This Constellation
was (among the Greeks) first discovered by Thales the Milesian, as (besides
Theon and Laertius from the Testimony of Callimachus) Hyginus, l. 2. Astronom.
Poet. affirms, for which reason it was called likewise Phoenice, from Thales
its Inventor being by descent a Phoenician, who first gave it the Name of
Arctos, or the Bear. But trulier so denominated, from the whole Nation of the
Phoenicians, who in their Navigations (and that long before the time of Thales)
observed her, as their Directress: See Palmerius his Learned Exercitations, p.
445, and 446.
Cynosure, less both in Light and size, (...)

A less Orb holds; whom yet the Tyrians prize
More than the Great; by This the Of the frequent Voyages of the Phoenicians
and Carthaginians into the Atlantic Ocean, and their Discoveries of the
Western Coasts of Africa, and a large and wealthy Island in that vast Ocean;
See Diodorus Siculus Biblioth, l. 5. and Aristotle ( in Admirand. Audition.)
which forementioned Island Turnebus ( l. Adversar. 20. c. 11.) conjectures to
have been some part of America not fully discovered; of which Opinion likewise
is Cluverius ( in Sicilia Antiqu. l. 2.) And for further proof of the Punick
Navigations, we have the Periplus of Hanno yet extant; though by many as well
of the Ancients, as Moderns, supposed a Fiction (whence the Proverb, applicable
to a credulous Person, Dignus est quem oblectent Lybici libri de Erroribus
Hannonis, as Casaubon notes in his Animadversions on Athenaeus) yet is the
truth thereof asserted by the learned B^chartus in Geograph. Sacra; and by Mr.
Vossius ( in Melam) commended as a signal Monument not only of Historical
Verity, but of Antiquity likewise, beyond any Extant Remains of Grecian
Learning.
Poeni steer
Through vast Seas to the Western Hemisphere.
These join not Fronts, but eithers Head turns to
The others Tail; pursued, as they pursue.
Between both which, his large unfolded Spires
A This Constellation the Poets feign to have been the Dragon that kept the
Hesperides slain by Hercules, and made an Asterism by Juno. Others (says
Stoefler) will have the Dragon to be brought by the Giants in their fight with
the Gods to oppose Minerva, and by her to have been strangled and thrown up to
Heaven, and there fixed as a Trophy of her Victory. This by the Greeks is called
(...); by the Latins, Draco; in Hebrew, Tannin, i. e. Draco; by the Arabs,
Tinnin and Tannin, as the Hebrew: it is by them likewise called (according to
Kircher) Taaban, or rather Thuban, and in the same sense by the Persians,
Ashdeha, which is interpreted Serpens, qui Homines ac Bestias devorat. Some
among the Arabians give it likewise the Name of Al Haija, which is also
appropriate to the Southern Constellation of the same kind. It is made up (as
Ptolomy reckons) of 31 Stars; as Kepler, of 32; as Bayerus, of 33. Of which the
first Star in the Tongue is by the Arabs called Al R^kis, or Arrakis, i. e.
Saltator, seu Tripudiator, the three next Al Awaid, i. e. Pulsatores
Testudinis. The fifth in the Head is called Ras Al Tinn^n, i. e. Caput
Draconis. The 14th, 15th and 16th Stars are called Al Thaphi, i. e. (...), from
their Posture, representing a Skillet with Feet Tripod or Brandiron. The 20th
and 21th are called Adphar Al Dib, i. e. Ungula Lupi. The 27th is called
Aldibe^, i. e. Victima, as being placed before that in the Horn of Capricorn,
called Sa'd Al Da^, i. e. F^rtuna Mactantis. This is seen in the Meridian at
Midnight about the end of June.
Serpent stretches; and with winding fires
Embracing them, one from the other parts,
And from their Macrobius (in Somn. Scip. l. 1. c. 18.) Septentrionum quoque
Compago non solvitur; Anguis qui inter eos labitur semel circumfusum non mutat
amplexum.
Stations sees that neither starts.
'Twixt this, and Heavens Mid-Circle, where the Sun,
And six Lights more against the bright Zodiac run,
Rise Stars of different Magnitude and Power,
Some near the Pole, some near Heavens radiant Tower.
Which From the Philosophy of the Egyptians, of which thus Diogenes Laertius in
Prooem. (...), i e. That the Stars are of a fiery Nature, and that by their
Contemperation all Things are produced on the Earth. To this Effect is that
Caballistick Maxim, Non est Herba inferius, quae non habeat S^ellam superius,
qu^ dicat ei Cresce; of which Kircher in Magnet. Nature. Regn. Sect. 2. c. 3.
tempered by the disagreeing Air
The fruitful Earth for humane use prepare.
Next the cold Bears, (the Cause to himself best known)
Shines forth a This Asterism in Greek bears the Name (...) and (...), i. e.
Ingeniculus; It is likewise called (...) and (...), i. e. Clavator s^ Claviger,
and by some of the Latins, Nisus vel Nixus, quia Laboranti similis. By the
Arabs Giathi ala Rucbatei^i, i. e. Incumbens Genubus, (from which corrupted may
come those commonly mistaken Names of Elgiaziale and Rulxba^ei) by the Persians
interpreted Bersanu Nisheste, i. e. genubus insidens, from whence the
Commentator upon U^ugh Beigh conceives the corrupt Persian Name, Ternevelles
Sands, may be derived; which he supposes ought to be read Zurnai, vel Zernai
Zan; implying as much as fistulator, sive vir aureo canens calamo. The number
of Stars in this Constellation are by Ptolomy reckoned to be 29; by Bayerus,
48; by Kepler but 28; of which the first is called Ras Al Gi^hi, i. e. Caput
Ingeniculi, and commonly, but falsely, Ras Al Aben. That in his Elbow from its
situation is called Marphak; that in his Wrist Mi' sam, i. e. Carpus, and by
mistake commonly Maasym. This Constellation some will have to represent
Theseus, or Ixion; others, Orpheus or Prometheus; others, Thamyris or Thamyras
a Thracian Poet, who contending with the Muses for Skill, and by them overcome,
was punished with the loss of his Eyes, and in the Memorial of their Victory
placed in the Heavens in a supplicating posture, as deprecating his punishment.
But Panyases ( in Heraclid.) will have this Asterism to represent Hercules; so
likewise Hyginus from the Authority of Aeschylus, with whom agrees the
Scholiast of Germanicus. This comes to the Meridian at Midnight in the Month
of June.
kneeling Constellation. Engonasi.

Behind whose Back Arctophylax and Boots are one and the same Constellation;
the first signifying Custos Ursarum; the later so called (...), i. e. Bovis,
and (...), i. e. pellere, quasi Boum Agitator, to which Name our Author
alludes; but in the Eastern Tongues the same seems to be derived (...), i. e. a
Clamando, whence by the Arabs called Al Auwa, i. e. V^ferator, and Al Neckar,
i. e. Fossor seu Pastinator. It consists according to Ptolomy of 23 Stars,
Kepler counts 28, and Bayerus 34. This some Fable to be Lycaon; Others Arcas,
the Son of Callisto his Daughter by Jupiter. The Scholiast of Germanicus makes
it to be the Constellation of I^arus, and accordingly Propertius styles the
Septentriones, I^arus his Oxen, in this Verse; Flectant Icarii Sidera tarda
B^ves. This is seen in the Meridian at Midnight about the beginning of May.
Arctophylax appears, Arctophylax or Boots.

The same Boots called, because yoked Steers
He seeming drives; who through the rapid Skies
(Bearing Some will have this Star so called, quasi ab (...), i. e. a Cauda
Ursae, but trulier ab (...), i. e. Custos Ursae, in the same sense as
Arctophylax. This the Arabs call al Simak al Ramih, i. e. efferens H^stiferum;
in the common Globes falsely Huzme: Tzetzes says it is likewise called by the
Greeks (...), and in Chrysococea's Persian Tables (published by E^lialdus at
the end of his Astronom. Philolaic.) it is called (...), i. e. Hastili aut
Conto armatus. It is a Star of the first Magnitude, by Vitruvius placed Media
Genuorum Custodis Arcti, but according to others in the knot of Arctophylax his
Girdle; so Germanicus in Ara^is; Arcturum dicunt sidus qua vincula nodant:
Arcturus in his Bosom) hies. Arcturus.

On the other side see the rich This by the Greeks is called (...), and (...),
i. e. Corona Borealis, and Prima; And accordingly by the Arabs, Al I^lil
Shemali, i. e. Corona Borealis, and simply Al I^lil, i. e. Corona; it is by
them likewise called Al Phecca, i. e. Apertio; in Hebrew Kir Schetali, i. e.
Corona Sinistra, and in Chaldee Malphelcarti, i. e. Sertum Pupillae. The
Constellation is in form of a Circle, not completed, and therefore by the
Vulgar Arabs called Kase Shekeste, i. e. Scutella fracta, and Kas^hi Dervishan,
i. e. Scutella pauperum, and in the same sense, by some of them Kasa Al
Masakin, or Alsa^lik. In (...)'s Tables (...), i. e. Discus fractus. The
brightest in this Circle being of the second Magnitude, is called Lucida
Coronae, and by the Arabs, Nair Phecca, i. e. Lucida Pheccae, and Mumir, i. e.
Pupillae. It consists according to Ptolomy and Kepler of eight Stars, yet
Bayerus reckons twenty. This Crown some fable to have been of Gold: Athenaeus
l. 15. from the Authority of Timachides, says it was made of a Flower or Herb,
called Theseus; others will have it to be of Laurel or Myrtle: Bayerus from
some Ancient Greek Coyns describes it to have been composed of Elder Leaves,
mixed with Berries. Ph^tius in Bibliotheca (out of P^olomaeus Ephaestionis his
fifth Book Nov. Histor.) gives this Fable thereof. They report (says he) that
a certain Nymph named Psalacantha in the Island Icaria being in love with
Bacchus, endeavored to procure Ariadne to his Bed, on condition, he would
likewise be kind to her: Which Bacchus refusing, she plotted to do Ariadne a
Mischief: This the God discovering, he in Passion transformed her to an Herb
bearing her Name: But afterward repenting the Fact, by way of Recompense and
Honor he caused the Flower to be entwined about Ariadnes Crown, which he had
already fixed in the (...). As to the Fable of Ariadne deserted by Theseus in
the Island Naxos, and relieved by Bacchus, the same is sufficiently known. And
though most make only her Crown to be constellated, yet others place Ariadne
her self in Heaven; as Sca^iger has observed in his Notes upon Catullus his
Poem de Coma Berenices, of which Opinion likewise is Propertius in these
Verses; Te quoque enim non esse rudem testantur, in Astris
Lyncibus in coelum vecta Ariadna tuis.
To which as a further Proof we shall add the Testimony of one of Nero's and
another of Trajan his silver Coyns, having on their Reverse, the Figure of
Ariadne, carried up to Heaven in the same manner, as is represented by
Propertius; touching which see Monsieur du Choul, de la Religion des Anciens
Romans; and Occo in Nu^ismat. p. 199. Videsis etian^ Tertullian. in Sc^rpiace,
and Pascalium de Coronis.
Crown display Ariadnes Crown.

Its Luminous Gems, bright with a different Ray:
(...) Whom the swift This Constellation is called Pegasus, by the Greeks
(...). It is called likewise Equus Major, Medusaeus, Gorg^nius, Beller ph^maeus
and Me^ppe, or rather Melanippe; by the Arabs, Al Pharas Adam, i. e. E^uus
Major, and Alpharas Al Th^ni, i. e. Equus Secundus, to distinguish it from the
Equus Mi^r, omitted by our Poet. In Hebrew it is called Ha Sus chail Kernim, i.
e. Equus (...). It consists according to P^olomy of twenty Stars; according to
B^yerus and Kepler, of twenty three. Among which the Chief (being in Umbilico
Equi) is promiscuously reckoned as appertaining to the Head of Andromeda, as
well as to Part of this Constellation, and therefore by the Arabs called as
well Ras Al Mara Al M^salsala, i. e. Caput Mulieris Catenatae, as Sir Al
Pharas, i. e. Umbilicus Equi. That in the joining of the Wing is called (...),
i. e. Equitandi vel vehendi locus, Sagma, Ephippium. The third Star is called
by them Menkib Al Pharas, i. e. Hu^erus Equi. The fourth they call Mat'n Al
Pharas, i. e. Lumbus Equi, vel Dorsum. The fifth and sixth Stars are called
Alkerb, vel Alkereb, i. e. Funis. The seventh and eighth Sa'd Matar, i. e.
Fortuna Pluviae. The ninth and tenth Sa'd Bari, i. e. Fortuna praecellentis.
The eleventh and twelfth Sa'd Al Homam, i. e. Fortuna Herois, vel Sad Al
Hamm^m, i. e. Fortuna Obtrectatrieis. The fifteenth and sixteenth are called
Sa'd Al Bahaim, i. e. Fortuna Besti^rum. In the Common Globes for Sa'd is
mistakenly put Sheat. The sevent^enth Star is called Phom Al Pharas, i. e. Os
Equi, and Gjahphela Al Pharas, i. e. Labrum Equi; by others Enph or Emph Al
Pharas, i. e. Nasus Equi; this some will have to be Bellerophons; others
Perseus his Horse: Callimachus and Catullus call him Unigenam Memnonis, Brother
of Memnon and Son of Aurora. The Greek Commentators make him to have been
presented by Aurora to Jupiter; but Lycophron describes him to be the winged
Steed of the Morning, upon which she is said to ride. Palaephatus and
Artemidorus yet make Pegosus to be a Ship and not a Horse; so Sch^ffer de
Mi^it. N^vali, l. 1. c. 4. and according to Vossius, ( l. 3. de Idololatr.) The
Name Pegasus seems to be derived a (...), sive (...), i. e. compingo, quia
Navis e multis componitur lignis. It is seen in the Meridian at Midnight about
the middle of August, and beginning of September.
Courser strives to oretake, his Breast Pegasus.

With a refulgent Signature impressed,
Which closes in the fair This Asterism is by the Arabs called Al Mara Al
M^salsala, i. e. Mulier Catenata. In Hebrew Isha Shalahajala B^al, i. e.
Foemina c^rens viro. It consists of twenty three Stars according to Ptolomy and
Kepler; according to Bayerus, of twenty seven. Among which the twelfth is by
the Arabs called Gjemb Al Mosalsala, i. e. Latus Catenatae, and Bet'n Al Hut,
i. e. Venture Piscis. That in her Zone or Girdle is for that reason by them
called Izar and Mizar, whence come the corrupt Names of Mirach, Mirar, Mirath,
and Miraz. The twenty first Star being in the Hem or Border of her Vest is
therefore by the Arabs called Al Deil, vel Addeil, i. e. Syrma seu Lacinia
Vestis. The fifteenth is called Rigil Al Mosalsala, i. e. Pes Catenatae; by
Ulugh Beigh, Anak Al Ard; which Scaliger and others will have to be read Al
Amach or Almak, i. e. Cothurnus; which Error Mr. Hyde from good Authority
consutes, and thews that Anak is a little Beast, by the Persians called Siyah
Gush, i. e. Nigra Au^icula, (the Epithete of Al Ard, i. e. Terrestris being
added) from its Ears which are black; Its whole Body besides being of a Brown
or Ruddy Color; and is Usher to the Lion, when he hunts for his Prey. We call
it a Jack-call, for by his barking he calls the Lion to the Place, where his
Prey lies. It comes to the Meridian at Midnight about the middle of October. As
to the Fable of Andromeda; see after in the Notes upon the Whale, and in the
Appendix or Comment.
Andromeda: Andromeda.

Kind Was the Grandchild of Acrisius, King of the Argives, begotten by Jupiter
on his Daughter, Danae, placed in the Heavens by favor of Minerva for having
slain Medusa or the Gorgon, and freed Andromeda from the devouring Sea Monster.
This Constellation is by the Arabs called Cheleub or Chelub, i. e. Deceptor; or
(happily) Kellub, i. e. H^rpago, seu aduncum quodvis, (says Mr. Hyde;) and from
the Greek Name Perseus, Bershaush and Bersheush. It is likewise called by them
H^mil Ras Al Ghul, i. e. Portans caput Larvae. It consists of twenty nine Stars
according to Ptolomy, whereof three inform; Bayerus reckons thirty eight;
Kepler thirty three; whereof the first is called Misam Al Thuraiya, i. e.
Carpus Plei^dum, and Al Gjemb Bershaush, i. e. Latus Persei. The twelfth is
called Ras Al Ghul, i. e. Caput Larvae. By the Jews, R^sh ha Satan, i. e.
Caput Diaboli. The twenty fourth Star is in Arabic called Menkib Al Thuraiya,
i. e. Interscapilium Pleiadum. This Constellation is seen in the Meridian at
Midnight in the Month of November.
Perseus Shoulder lends her Feet a Stay, Perseus.

And joins to himself; but a large Space divides Deltoton or the Triang^.

Called likewise Trigones, and Delta, by the Latins Triangulum, and Nili
Donum; by the Arabs, Mothallath, i. e. Triangulum; In Hebrew, Hammosciush, i.
e. Tripartitus. It consists of four Stars according to Ptolomy and Kepler;
Bayerus reckons five, whereof that in the top of the Triangle is called in
Arabic, Ras Almothallath, i. e. Caput Trianguli. This is said to have been
placed in Heaven by Mercury in Memorial of the first Letter of Jupiters Name
(...), of which Grotius in Not. ad Arat. Bassus in Germanicum, and Hyginus
write that Mercury at the Command of Jupiter placed it over the Head of Aries,
as a Mark the better to discern that sign, of it self, -- Obscuro lumine
labens: As Ci^ro in Arataeis. Others will have it to be the Figure of that part
of Egypt constellated, which Nilus after that manner encompasses. Vide Bassum
in Germ^nic. This at Midnight comes to the Meridian in the Month of (...).
Deltoton brighter in its Base than sides,
So called from its Resemblance; The Name of this Ast^rism by the Arabs (to use
Scaliger's Words) ridicule exearnificatum est: For sometimes they call it
Kikaus or Kekeus; sometimes Cancaus, and often Phicares. Which Erroneous Names
proceed from the mistake of the Letter (...) Kaph for (...) Phe. Whence instead
of Keiphus, which is the true Arabic Name, derived from the Greek; it is
commonly written Keikaus or Kekeus. In Hebrew it is called Baalath Halab, i. e.
Domina Flammae, and in Arabic, Multahab, i. e. Inflammatus. It consists of 13
Stars according to Ptolomy, whereof two inform. Bayerus reckons 17. Among which
there is one in his Foot, called Al Rai, i. e. Pastor; and between his Feet
another, called AlKelb, i. e. Canis, and upon his Hands certain others called
Al Agh'nam, i. e. Pecudes. The 3d, 4th and 5th Stars in this Constellation are
by Ulugh Beigh called Cawakib Al Phirk, i. e. Stella Gregis. This Cepheus was
Son of Belus by Anchinoe the Daughter of Nilus, from whom the Persians were
heretofore called (...), over whom he was King, as likewise of Phoenieia, and
reigned both in Babylon and Ioppa, reckoned among the Royal Fautors of
Astronomy. It is beheld in the Meridian at Midnight about the end of August and
beginning of September.
Cepheus Cepheus.

And It is likewise by the Greeks called (...), i. e. Mulier sedis, sive
Throni. By the Arabs, Dat Al Cursa, i. e. Inthronata. It is also known by the
Latin Names of Cathedra, Thronus and Seeds Regia. It consists of 13 Stars
according to Ptolomy; Bayerus counts therein 25. And Tycho Brahe has observed
therein no less than 45; besides the New Star which appeared in the Year 1573.
and vanished the Year following: It is resembled by Aratus to the form of a
Laconian or a Carian Key, as his Paraphrast Avienus expresses it. -- Sic qualem
Caria quondam
Noveratintrantem per Claustra Tena^ia Clavens
Formatur Stellis distantibus. --
The first Star in this Constellation is by the Arabs called Caph Al Chadib, i.
e. Manus tincta. Whence in Chrysoc^cea's Tables (...), i. e. Manus tincta, in
the same sense with the Arabic. The 2d Star is (...) called by the Name of the
whole Constellation Dat Al Cursa. The 5th is called Rueba Dat Al Cursa, i. e.
Genu Inthronatae. The Bright one in its Breast is called Sad'r, i. e. Pectus.
This Cassiopea was the Wife of Cepheus, and Mother of Andromeda, who contending
for Beauty with the Neveides, was as a Punishment, and in Memorial of her
Arrogance, placed in Heaven with her heels upward. But Tycho gives us a better
ground of the Fable, who writes, That Cepheus was a great Astronomer, or at
least a Favourer of the Professors of that Science, who in a grateful
acknowledgment of his Encouragement of their Studies, gave to several
Constellations the Name of himself, Wife, Daughter, and Son in Law; which he
received from Cicero, where he says, Nec Stellatus Cepheus cum uxore, genero,
filia, traderetur, nisi Coelestium Divina cognitio Nomen eorum ad Errorem
Fabulae traduxisset. He likewise reports that in the time of Cepheus those
Stars, which make the Constellation of Cassiopea, did rise with the first
Degrees of Aries: And that under that Constellation the Aethiopians did
solemnize the Inauguration of their succeeding Kings in Memorial of their first
Mother, Cassiopea, whom he supposes more probably to have been called
Cussiepea. Vide Tychon. Brahaeu^ in Progymnasm. l. 1. p. 233. This Asterism is
discovered in the Meridian partly in the end of March and beginning of May;
partly at the end of September and beginning of October.
Cassiopea made conspicuous Cassiopea.

Even to her Punishment, seems to deplore
Andromeda chained to the rocky shore,
Fearing the gaping Monster of the Deep;
But Perseus still does his old kindness keep,
Comes to her Aid, and of the Gorgon slain Caput Algol, or Medusa's head.

Shows the feared Head, his Spoil The Latin Text of Scaliger's Edition has --
Testemque videnti. Testem being interpreted by Scaliger, idem quod praesentem.
We have rather chosen according to the conjecture of Lannoius, as noted by
Iunius, and with Gevartius ( Elector. l. 2. e. 5.) to read, Pestemque videnti,
i. e. Exitium and mortem; expressing the sense of the Fable, which makes all
such as beheld the Gorgons Head to be thereby converted into Stone. Gevartius
confirms this reading by that Exclamation of the Giant Pallas, converted into
Stone by Minerva, as Claudian in Gigantomachia expresses it, -- Quis Torpor
inertem
Marmorea me Peste ligat.
Pestis being taken (as Meursius in Auctar. Philolog. c. 28. observes) for any
kind of Death, as Febris for any kind of Disease.
the Seers Bane.
Close running by the kneeling Bull, behold Auriga or the Charrioteer.

This by the Greeks is called (...). By the Jews Ha Roah schobid Ha resan, i.
e. Pastor tenens fraenum; and in the same sense by the Arabs, Masik Al Inan, i.
e. Tenens Habenam; or Mumsik Al Ainna, i. e; Tenens Habenas, to which the Greek
Name Heniochus answers, i. e. Habenifer. It is by some of the Arabs likewise
called Roha, i. e. Auriga, and Memesciath, i. e. Mulus Clitellatus. It consists
according to Ptolomy of 14 Stars; according to Bayerus of 32, Kepler reckons
27. Among which the 4th (...) called Menkib Dil Inan, i. e. Humerus Heniochi.
The 11th, Ca'b Dil Inan, i. e. Talus Heni^chi. This Constellation the Scholiast
of Germanicus will have to be Mirti^us; The Trezenians are for Hippolytus,
others for Ericthonius, whom Pliny makes the first that joined four Horses in a
Chariot, as before him Virgil in these Verses in 3 Georg. Primus Ericthonius
Cu^us, and quattuor ausus
Iungere Equos, rapidisque Rotis insistere Victor.
Eus^bius in Chronic. makes Trochilus the Argive, who was Son of Callithea, the
Priestess of Juno, the first Inventor thereof* of whom likewise Tertullian de
Spectac. He is mistakenly by Hyginus called Orsilochus. In which Error he is
followed by Corippus in Panegyr. 1. in these Verses, as cited by Scaliger in
Eusebium:

Orsilochum referunt primas junxisse Quadrigas
Et Currus armasse (...), Pelopemq^e Secundum
In Soceri venisse Necem --
Dempster yet in his Edition of Corippus instead of Orsilochum reads
Cecropidem, thereby meaning Ericthonius the 4th King of Athens, from Cecrops;
others will have him to be Oenomaus. But Theon the Scholiast of Aratus says
plainly, That the Constellation of Heniochus is (...); The Representation
either of Bellerophon or Trochilus, the first Inventor of the Quadrigae. This
Sign attains the Meridian at Midnight about the middle of December.
Heniochus, who gained by skill of old
Heaven and his Name; as first In the manner of joining these 4 Horses to a
Chariot, the Ancients as they differed from us, so they differed among
themselves; for some made 2 Poles to a Chariot, one between each two Horses,
for they went aequata front, all a breast; so that all the Horses were (...),
i. e. Iugales, yoked, or coller'd to the Poles, Afterward Clisthenes the
Sicyonian changed that manner and made only one Pole to a Chariot; so that the
two middle Horses were only Iugales; the other two outmost on either hand, had
only Reins and Harness, and therefore called (...), i. e. Funales, and were at
more liberty than the Iugales: Of these We have in Suetonius in Tiberio an
eminent Example, where he says, Tiberius pubescens Actiaco Triumpho currum
Augusti comitatus est sinisteriore funali Equo, cum Marcellus Octaviae filius
dexteriore veheretur; which Place by Alexander ab Alex. (who undertakes to
explain it) is not clearly understood; he conceiving the Equi funales to be so
called a funalibus, i. e. Facibus Triumphalibus, etc. from the Triumphal
Lights, or Torches born by their Riders: But not having opportunity to say more
hereof in this Place, I refer the Reader to Salmasius, who particularly and at
large handles this subject in his Plinian Exercitations, Tom. 2. p. 899. to the
Figures of the Currus Quadrijuges in the Consular and Imperial Coins in
Ursinus, Goltzius, and Panvinius de ludis Circensibus; more particularly to
Scheffer, who has expressly written upon this Subject in a late Treatise de Re
vehiculari veterum. Romulus is said to have first showed the Quadriga to the
Romans, as Tertullian l. de spectaculis witnesses: Of the Currus Sejuges,
Chariots drawn by six Horses, Pliny mentions the first among the Romans to have
been in the time of Augustus, to whom the Senate decreed it as a Triumphal
Honor, but by the modest Prince refused.
four Steeds he drove
On flying Wheels, seen, and installed by Jove.
The These are 2 Stars in the left Arm of Heniochus, called by the Arabs
(according to Scaliger in Sphaer. Barbar.) Saclateni, or trulier Sadateni, i.
e. Brac^ium sequentes; they are likewise called Giedyan, and in the Common
Globes instead thereof Maazein, i. e. duo Capri. These Cleostratus the Tenedian
(according to Hyginus) is said first to have discovered. They are observed both
at their rising and setting to cause Storms and Tempests, and therefore by the
Poets called horrida and insana Sydera; and by Germanicus -- Nautis inimicum
sydus in undis. By our Poet they are said to close or bar up the Sea; So
Vegetius l. 5. c. 9. Circa Nonas Octobris, Hoedi Pluviales, etc. Ex die igitur
tertio Novembris usque in Diem sext. Id. Mart. Maria Clauduntur; and as the
first of those days did shut up the Seas; so the later (to use Plinies Words)
did aperire Navigantibus Maria; which not unaptly by Vegetius is styled Natalis
Navigationis, and was celebrated among the Ancients Solemni Certamine,
publicoque Spectaculo, by the Greeks in their Panathenaean, by the Romans in
their Quinquatrian Games: See Turneb. Adversar. l. 18. c. 24. and Steweeb. in
Veget. l. 5. c. 9.
Kids next, the Seas barring till the Spring, Hoedi^r* the (...) The A(...)an
(...).

Then the This is a bright Star in the shoulder of Heniochus of the first
Magnitude, called by the Arabs Aiynk, and commonly instead thereof Atud. In
Hebrew, Ash, or Aish; in Syriack, Iyutho. All signifying Capellam. This the
Poets fable to have been Mother of the two Kids, and Nurse to Jupiter; though
others (from the Authority of Agathocles Babylonius) report him to have been
suckled by a Sow; the Cretans for that Cause honoring that Creature, as
sacred: Of which see Casaubon in Animadvers. in Athenaeum, p. 649. But the more
general Opinion is, that he was suckled by a Goat, and from thence he derived
the Title of Ae^iochus, or the Goat-nurst. And to this effect in some Medails
of the Emperor Valerianus he is represented in the Figure of a Child, mounted
on the back of a Goat, with this Inscription, JOVI CRESCENTI: Touching which
see Choulius de la Religion des Anciens Romans, etc. I shall hereto only apply
an Ingenious Epigram of Crinagoras in the Greek Anthologie, l. 1. c. 33. upon a
Goat, whose Milk Augustus Caesar used to drink. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
When Caesar did our full Bags Nectar taste,
Whose Spring the exhausting Pale could never waste:
Me, that he might not want that Milky store,
To Sea with him in his own Ship he bore.
Straight among the Stars shall I be made to shine,
For he I serve, than Jove's no less divine.

Goat, Nurse to the Worlds Infant King,
Who from her Teats scaled Heaven, her Milk, did grow
To brandish Lightning, and feared Thunder throw,
By her own Jove a Constellation made,
And for the Heaven she gave, with Heaven repaid.
Last view the Seven Stars on the Back of the Ball, by the Latins from the
time of their rising called Vergiliae, by the Greeks ((...), quod ortu suo
Tempus navigandi ostendant, or from their Plurality) (...). By the Arabs for
the last Reason Al Thuraiya, from the singular Therwa, i. e. Multus seu
Copi^sus. They are likewise by them called ((...)) Al Negim, i. e. Astrum. By
the Egyptian Coptic (...). By the Syrians they are called Chima; by the
Persians Peru, and (...); by the Turks, Ulgher; by the Jews they are
distinguished by two several Names; the first is Chima, answering to the
Arabic Al Thuraiya* the other is Succoth Benoth, which is interpreted commonly
Tabernacula filiarum, and represented after the similitude of a Hen, brooding
over her Chickens. According to which Interpretation this Asterism is by the
Italians called La Gallinella. These are said to have been the Daughters of
Atlas and Pleione, whom Maero Poetria Bysantina (as cited by Athenaeus l. 11.)
makes the Nurses of Jupiter, who sed him with Ambrosia; But commonly they are
reputed the Nurses of Bacchus, and for that constellated. Their Names Maia,
Sterope, Taygeta, Celeno, Electra, Merope; or according to the Scholiast of
Theocr. ( in Idyll. 13.) Coacymo, Glaucia, Protis, Parthenia, Maia, Stonychia,
Lampado. Michael Florentius Langrenus (who as Ricciolus writes was an exact
observer of them) adds to them two other Stars, which he calls Atlas and
Pleione. Galilaeo has observed in this Constellation above 40 Stars, and
Ricciolus no less than 50.
Pleiad's and the Seven Stars in the Head of the Bull, called, (...), by the
Greeks, (...) pluere, because when they arise Cosmically they cause Rain and
Showers, or from (...), for that they resemble the gaping Jaws of a Swine,
whence by the Latins called Suculae, or (according to Theon and Bassus in
Germanic.) from the Greek Letter Y. Upsilon, which they resemble, or from their
Mother Hya, Daughter of Oceanus, and Wife of Atlas: by Ulugh Beigh they are
called Al Debaran, from their Position, the word signifying quicquid pone, vel
posterius est. However that Name is peculiarly applied to the brightest of
them, commonly called Oculus Tauri. They are sometimes by the Arabs called Al
Najmon, or Negim, i. e. Stella, and Althu^aiya; for the same reason as the
Pleiades. In Hebrew they are likewise called Chima, from the Number of Stars of
which they consist. These excessively lamenting the Death of their Brother
Hyas, slain in hunting by a Lion, were by the commiserating Gods converted into
Stars: their Names, Ambrosia, Eudora (or Eudoxa) Ph^sile (or Pasithae) Coronis,
Prolixo (or Plexauris) Phileto (or Pytho) and Thyene (or Tuke.)
Hyades, The Pleiades and Hyades.

Both Parts of the Bull; The In the Catalogue of these Northern Stars our Poet
has omitted Coma Berenices, Ganymed or Antinous, and Equicul^s or the lesser
Horse; touching which see the Appendix.
Northern Signs are These.
Now see the Stars which 'bove the scorcht Earth run
Rising beneath the Pathway of the Sun, The Southern Constellations.

And those which 'twixt the Tropic are confined
Of Capricorn, and Pole that is declined.
Near to the Twins behold This Constellation was first by the Boeotians called
Candaon, as Lycophron testifies, afterward (...), called by the Latins
Hyriades and Hyrides, from his Father Hyreus, of which see the Fable in Ovid
Fasto^m l. 5. It is by Plautus, Festus, and Varro called Iugula, eo quod
armatus sit ut Gladius, says Bassus in Germanic. By the Jews it is called
Gibbor, i. e. Gigas, and Kelb Ha Giebbor, i. e. Canis fortis, and Bellator
fortis; by the Arabs, Al Giauza, and that for the same reason as is before
alleged in the Constellation of the Twins; as likewise Al Giebbar, i. e. Gigas
fortis. In which sense it is in the Syriack called Gavoro; in Chaldee, Niphla,
answering to the Hebrew Chesil, or Kesil. It consists according to Ptolomy of
38 Stars; according to Bayerus of 49; as Repler reckons of 62. Among which the
first Star is by Ulugh Beigh called H^^ka, which signifies a white Circle or
Mark. By which Name likewise the three Stars in his Head are denominated. The
second is called Menkib Al Giauza, i. e. Humerus Orionis, and Ied Al Giauza Al
Iumma, i. e. Manus dextra Orionis, vulgarly, but erroneously being read Bet or
Beit Al Giauz, i. e. Brachium Orionis. The third Star is called Mirzam Al
Nagjid, i. e. Leo Strenuus. The 17th and 25th are in the Arabic called Al
Tagis and Al Dawaib, the first signifying Tiara, the other Antiae seu Lemnisci.
The 26th, 27th, and 28th are called Mintaka al Giauza, and Nitak Al Giauza, i.
e. Cingulum seu Baltheus Orionis. By our English Mariners, the Golden Yard; as
likewise Al Nid^m vel Al Nedin, i. e. Series, seu quicquid ordine disponitur;
also Phikar Al Giauza, i. e. Vertebra Dorsi Orionis. The 29th, 30th, 31th and
32th Stars are called Saiph Al Giebbar, i. e. Ensis Gigantis. The 35th is
called Rigil Al Giauza Al Iusra, i. e. Pes Gigamis Sinister; and Rai Al Giauza,
i. e. Pastor Orionis. The 38th is called Rigil Al Iumma, i. e. Pes dexter. The
Fable of this Constellation (to omit others) is by some thus related. Orim
being a great Companion of Diana's in her hunting Diversions, Apollo grew
jealous of his too much samiliarity with his Sister, and to be revenged, seeing
Orion one day swimming in the Sea, his Head appearing above the Waters like a
black Mark, he showed it to his Sister, and told her she could not hit it:
Whereupon she presently drawing her Bow let fly, and killed him, not knowing
who he was, till the Sea had cast him on the Shore; which perceiving and much
troubled, to make amends she placed him in Heaven near the Dog and the Hare,
where he seems still to hunt. The Persians will have this Asterism to represent
Nimrod. It is seen in the Meridian at Midnight in the Month of December*
Orion rise Orion.

With stretched Arms almost fathoming the Skies:
Nor marching with a less extended Pace.
Bright shining Stars his either shoulder grace.
Three Lights his Pendant Sword obliquely sign,
In his advanced Head three others shine
Deep in the Skies immerst; nor yet less bright,
Though such they seem 'cause more removed from Sight.
Him, as through Heaven he marches, follow All
The The Southern Constellations are here said to follow Orion, as Soldiers,
their General: and Scripture it self has reduced the Stars into a Military
Order, and called them (...), Militiam Coeli, the Host of Heaven. Vide Petr.
Fabri. Semestr. l 3. c. 1.
starry Legions as their General.
Next after whom with rapid Motion bent,
(No Star than that against Earth more violent)
The fierce This is fabled to have been Orion's Dog, named Laelaps; others make
it Isis her Dog; some again Caephalus his. By Ovid it is called Canis Icarius
and Erigonius. By the Greeks (...), i. e. Canis Asterismus, and (...), which
Timosthenes cited by the Scholiast of Apollonius reports to have been (...)*
the Dog's name. By the Latins it is called Canicula. Why it is called the Dog
Star, Artemidorus in On^irocrit. l. 2. c. 2. gives this Reason: The Star Syrius
(says he) is the Cause of Fevers, and therefore by some called the Dog, which
is a Creature fierce, and yet fawning, and for that reason (...), resembled to
a* Fever. The ancient Egyptians (as Plutarch testifies) believed this
Constellation to be the Soul of Isis; but more properly (according to the
relation of Diodorus Siculus, l. 1.) that Star in Ore Canis, called (...). From
which Greek name the Arabic Shiri or Shira seems to be derived. As (...) from
the Greek word (...), which signifies to gape, or a (...), which is to make
dry, because at its rising the Earth becomes dry, Agente Terra per Caniculam
Rimas, (as Vi^gil in Catalect.) and Dogs gape with heat; or ab (...), i. e.
aestum, whence (...) or (...), or a (...), i. e. exi^anio, quia sudore fluxo
nos exinaniat, says the Scholiast of Apollonius, l. 2. Or from Siris, which
Name (as Dionysius in Perieges. witnesses) the Aethiopians gave to Nilus, as if
it were Sydus Niloticum, by reason of the great Affinity between Nilus and that
Star, for in the Dog days that River has its greatest Inundation. Germanicus
and Hyginus give it the Name of Maera; and by the Greeks it is called (...). By
the Arabs, Kelb Acbur, i. e. Canis Major. By the Syrians, Kelbo Gavoro, i. e.
Canis Gigantis. By the Egyptians it was called Sothis, perhaps in Memory of
the King of that Name (Father of Rhameses) who was a great Erector of Obelisks,
and Restorer of the Egyptian Learning, de quo vide Kircherum in Obelisc.
Pamphil. and alibi. The Constellation consists according to Ptolomy and Kepler
of 29 Stars, whereof 11 inform. Bayerus reckons but 19. It is seen in the
Meridian at Midnight about the end of December.
Dog runs; not one for Heat does rise, Sirius or the Dog Star.

Not one for Cold more grievous quits the Skies,
The World afflicting with a different Fate:
Nor ever fails upon the Sun to wait.
Who this from Of the time of the Dog-Stars rising there is much difference
among the Ancients; (touching which see Ricciolus Almagest. Nov. Tom. 1. p.
471. Petavius Uranol^g. l. 2. c. 10. and Kepler Epitom. Astronom. l. 3.) That
difference arising from the Ancients confounding the true and Cosmical rising
with the Heliacal, or from their different Computation of the Suns Ingress into
the Cardinal Points, or their misapplying the Astronomical Fasti of one Climate
to another; but the greater part of the Ancients assign it to the time of the
Sun's first entering into Leo, or as Pliny writes, 23 days after the Summer
Solstice, as Varro 29, as Columella 30. See besides the forecited Authors
Salmas. in Plinian. Exercitat. Tom. 1. p. 430. At this day with us according to
Vulgar computation, the rising and setting of the said Star is in a manner
coincident with the Feasts of St. Margaret, (which is about the 13th of our
July) and St. Lawrence (which falls upon the 10th of August) as this common
Verse expresses it, Margaris Os Canis est, Caudam Laurentius affert. Vide
Bambrigium in Canicular. c. 3. and Weighel Sphaer. l. 1. 2. c. 2.
Taurus Crown first rising see
What our Author here applies to the Observation of the Cilicians ( which
Scaliger conceives is done in respect to the Memory of Aratus) Cicero (l. 1. de
Divinat.) attributes to the Ceans. Ceos accepimus Ortum Caniculae diligenter
quotannis solere servare, Conjecturamque capere, ut scribit Ponticlus
Heraclides, Salubrisne an Pestilens Annus futurus sit; Nam si obscurior, quasi
caliginosa, stella extiterit, Pingue atque Concretum esse Coelum, ut ejus
Aspiratio gravis, ac Pestilens futura sit; Sin illustris and perlucida Stella
apparuit, significari Coelum esse Tenue purumqu^, and propterea salubre. So
likewise Horus Apollo, l. 1. c. 3. speaking of this Star, by the Egyptians
called Sothis, In exortu hujus Syderis, Ea signis quibusdam observamus, quae
toto Anno peragenda sunt. For this reason was it honored, as the chief of all
the fixed Stars. Hence Pliny, l. 2. Non est Minor ei veneratio quam descriptis
in Deos stellis: And Apollonius Rhod. l. 2. Argonaut. affirms -- (...). --
Hodie Saderdotes in Co Ante Caniculae Exortum operantur in Sacris. So among the
Romans, as Ovid in quinto Fastorum testifies,

Pro Cane Sidereo Canis hic imponitur Aris. And Festus. Rutilae Canes, ut ait
Atteius Capito, canario sacrificio immolantur pro frugibus, deprecandae
saevitiae causa Syderis Caniculae.
Ghess thence of Fruits what the The Growth or product of Fruit the Romans
expressed by the peculiar Term of Eventus. Among whom there was the Deity, called
Bonus Eventus, principally worshipped by Husbandmen, as Varro de Re Rustica, l.
1. testifies. Uti fruges, frumenta virgultaque grandire and been evenire sinat:
(to use Cato's words.) Festus likewise writes that they sacrificed also to Pan,
ob frugum Eventum; which propriety of Term is here observed by Manilius, and is
noted by the Learned Valesius ( in Annotat. in Ammian. Marcellin. l. 29)
Event may be:
What Health, what Quiet may the Year befall:
Here War it makes, there Peace does reinstal;
And as it variously returns, does awe
The inferior World; It Is Aspect is their Law.
It Is strongly credited this owns a Light
And runs a Course not than the Hence the Name (...) applicable as well to the
Sun as to this Star, propter splendorem (...), signifying as much as lucere
Solis and Siderum in morem. So Hyginus ( in fabul. speaking of this Star)
Syrion appellatur propter flammae Candorem; quod ejusmodi sit, ut praeter
caeteras lucere videatur. (...) being by some held to be another Sun, and to
illuminate the more remote Stars, within the Aetherial* Recess, as our Sun
illuminates the Moon and the Planetary System. Vide Kircher. Itinerar. Exstat.
Dialog. 1. c. 9. inque illum Schot^um Schol. 3. nec non Gassend. Tom. 1. part.
2. p. 138.
Sun's less bright,
But that removed from Sight so great a Way
It seems to cast a dim and weaker Ray:
All other Stars it foyls, none in the Main
Is drenched, or brighter thence ascends again.
Next, with the nimble This Constellation is by the Greeks called (...) and
(...); by the Latins, Lepus. The Arabs call it Arneb, and the Jews Arnebeth,
i. e. Lepus. It consists of 12 Stars according to Ptolomy, as Bayerus and
Kepler reckon of 13; whereof the 7th, 8th, 9th and 10th are called in Arabic;
Arsh Al Giauza, i. e. Solium Orionis. Some will have this to be placed in
Heaven in Memorial of the Chase affected by Diana and Orion; others make
Mercury the Author of this Constellation in Testimony of the fruitfulness and
pregnancy of this Creature; of which Aristotle speaks in Histor. Animal.
Hyginus and Bassies write, that anciently in the Island Hiero there were no
Hares, until one of the Islanders brought thither from beyond the Seas a female
Hare big with young; and that from thence in a short time (every one being
desirous by his example to breed up some) they increast and grew so numerous,
as wanting sufficient food, they destroyed all the Crop of the Island, and
brought a famine upon the Place. In Memorial of which this Asterism was figured
in the Heavens, ut Homines Meminissent Nihil his exoptandum in vit^, si
insol^ter utantur laetitia, quin dolorem capere posterius cogantur; says the
same Mythologist. There is an Ingenious Epigram of Caesar Germanicus in the
Greek Anthology, imitated by Ausonius, which may not improperly be hitherto
applied. Trinacrii quo^dam currentem in litoris Ora,
Anticanis leporem Caeruleus rapuit.
At lepus; in me omnis Terrae Pelagique ruina est,
Forsitan and Coeli, si Canis Astra tenet.
A Hare by Hounds pursued, them having escaped
Met on the shore a Dog-fish, and was snapt.
Then cries; us Earth and Seas are bent to undo.
Heaven's only left; yet there is a Dog too.
This is to be seen in her form near the Meridian at Midnight in the Month of
December.
Hare see Called likewise Canis Minor, Procynis, and Praecanis; by Cicero and
Ausonius, Anticanis. Pliny says, the Romans had no Name for it, unless (says
he) we should call it Caniculam. By the Arabs it is called Kelb Asgher, i. e.
Canis Minor. It is likewise by them called Shira Al Shamiya, i. e. Syrius
Shamensi^ ( eo quod Occultatio ejus sit in plaga Al Sham, i. e. Syriae) and
Shira Al Ghomeisa, vel Al Ghomuz; i. e. Syrius Oculi fluxu laborans, of which
we find this Arabic Fable in the Commentator upon Ulugh Beigh his Tables.
Shira Al Ghomoisa sic dicunt, quod soror ejus Shira Al Abur, i. e. Canis Major,
(for the Arabs make the greater and the lesser Dog to be the sisters of
Canopus) transierit Galaxiam ad assequendum Can^pum; Illa vero manens in tractu
boreali, propter Canopum, ita plorat, ut oculi sui lippitudine capti sint. This
Constellation according to Ptolomy consists only of two Stars: Bayerus reckons
eight, Kepler five. Among which that in his shoulder is by the Arabs called Al
Mirzam, and Al Dira Al Mesbuta, i. e. Brachium expansum. The other ( ad Radicem
Caudae) is called Al Shira Al Shamiya, i. e. Syrius Shamensis, and Al Ghomeisa,
as before. This Dog the Poets Fable to have been Erigone's, which mourned to
death for the loss of his Mistress, who hanged her self for grief that her
Father Icarus was slain by his drunken Paysants. It is seen at Midnight in the
Meridian in the Month of January.
Procyon rise, Procyon and the Hare. Argo.

And then the noble This Constellation is by Ptolomy called (...), and by some
simply (...), i. e. Navis. By the Arabs, Mercab, i. e. Currus, seu vehiculum;
for so by the Poets the Ship Argo, which this Asterism represents, is called
(...), and Currus volitans. It is likewise in Arabic called Al Sephina, i. e.
Navis. It consists as Ptolomy counts of 45 Stars; according to the Computation
of Bayerus, of 63; as Kepler reckons of 53. In which the 3d, 6th, 7th and 22th
Stars are by some Arabs called Tur'yeish, and in the Plural Tur'yeishat, which
Mr. Hyde conceives ought to be read Tur'eis, and in the Plural Tur'eisat, which
answers to Ptolomies (...), i. e. Scutulus, a little shield. The 44th Star,
which is in the extremity of the Southern Rudder of the ship (for every ship
anciently had two Rudders) is by the Greeks called Canopus, and in honor of
Ptolomaeus Lagus, one of the Egyptian Princes, (...); by the Egyptians,
Sampilos; by the Persians in Chrysococca's Tables, Soail Iamane; and by the
Arabs, Soheil Al Iemin, i. e. Canopus Iemanensis* ( Ieman signifying Arabia
foelix.) Some make Soheil or Suhel to signify Ponderosum, in the same sense
perhaps with Bassus, by whom it is called Stella Terrestris, because to us
Europaeans it seems to sink low, and as it were stringere Horizontem, or as
Salmasius (in his Plin. Exercitat. and in Diatrib. de Antiqu. Astrolog.) from
the meaning of the name Canopus, which in the Coptick or Egyptian Language is
(...) or (...), i. e. Aurum, that being the heaviest Metal the Earth produces.
There are several stars of the second Magnitude not far from it, viz. the 17th,
31th and 35th, which by the Arabs are called Soheil Telkin vel Belkin, or as
Mr. Hide reads it Belkis (that being the name of the Queen of Sheba that came
to visit Solomon) and Soheil Hadar, Soheil Rekas or Rekash; Soheil Al Wez'n,
and Soheil Al Muh^iph. The Fable of Argo (which Bochartus in Geograph. sacra
will have so called, not from Argos its Builder, nor from the Son of Phryxus so
named, nor for that it was built near Argos, nor from the Argives which Manned
her, but from the Figure of her Built, her length, and therefore in the
Phoenician Tongue, called Arco, i. e. Navis l^nga, or as Hoelelin notes in
Appollon. Argon. l. 1. from the Hebrew, Areg, i. e. Textura, a Pineis Textis)
is sufficiently known. By the Poets generally reputed the first ship, that ever
sailed the seas. But Diodorus Siculus l. 4. plainly affirms the contrary; for
speaking of Jason he says that he first under the Mountain Pelius, built a ship
of far greater bulk than any that were then used, for at that time (says he)
Men only sailed in small Barques or Skiffs. So that Argo seems not to have been
the first ship, but rather the first of its kind. Touching which Argument see
(besides Fournier and Baiffius) Scheffer. de Militia Navali. This sails by the
Meridian at Midnight about the end of January.
Argo; to the Skies
From Seas translated which she first did plow;
Once tossed with mighty storms, in Heaven fixed now,
And deify'd for saving Deities.
Close boarding her a glittering This Serpent is by Ptolomy called (...), i. e.
Hydri Asterismus; (of which see the Fable in the next Note) by the Greeks
likewise called (...); and by the Arabs with little alteration from that,
Alshugia, i. e. Serpens tenuis; or as Scaliger reads it, Asvia f^rtis seu
Audax. Ricciolus says it is in Arabic called El Hawick and Kirker Aphaak; in
Hebrew, Hajah, i. e. Serpens. There is reckoned in this Constellation by
Ptolomy 32 Stars, whereof seven Sporades or inform; by Bayerus. 29; by Kepler
33. Whereof the first star is called Minchir Al Shugja, and the others from
that to the seventh inclusive Min Al A'zal, i. e. ex (...), as if appertaining
to the sign Virgo. The twelfth star, which by the Latins is called Cor Hyd^ae,
is in the Persian Tables called (...), and accordingly in Ulugh Beigh, Unuk Al
Shugja, Collum Serpentis; and Pherd Al Shugja, i. e. Solitaria Hydri; and
simply Pherd, solitaria; quianullae in Circuitu stellae adjacent. The head of
this Constellation is seen in the Meridian at Midnight about the beginning of
February; its middle parts about mid March, and its tail in the beginning of
April.
Serpent lies, Drace.

And by so ordered Lights, seems to present
His speckled Bodies scaly Ornament. The Crow. The Cup. The Centaur.

This by the Greeks is called (...) and (...), i. e. Corvus and Corvi
Asterismus: in the same sense by the Jews it is called Orev; and from thence by
the Arabs, Al Gorab, Corvus. It is likewise by them called Al Chiba, i. e.
Tentorium, and A^sh Al Simak, i. e. Solium efferentis (scil. inermem vel
Virginem) and Agiar Al Asad, i. e. Clunes Lemis, and Al Ag^mal, i. e. Cameli.
It is seated upon the Tail of the Serpent, and consists of seven (...),
according to the joint Account of Ptolomy, Bayerus and Kepler; whereof the
first in Arabic called Minkar Al Gorab, i. e. Rostrum Corvi. The fourth Gienah
Al Gorab Al Aiman, i. e. Ala dextra Corvi: The Fable of this Constellation is
thus; The Crow being by Apollo sent to fetch Water for a Libation, seeing a
Fig Tree full of Fruit, but not ripe, made stay there until the Figs were come
to Maturity (which Fable, says the learned Bochart in Hierozoic. l. 2. c. 13.
seems to be derived from N^ab's sending the Crow out of the Ark) and having
satisfied his longing went to the Fountain to fetch Water; but coming there,
meets with the Serpent before mentioned, whereat (...), he returns back with
the empty pitcher, telling Apollo there was no Water in the Fountain. This
untruth being discovered by Apollo, he prohibited the Crow from ever drinking
at that time of the Year, and in Memorial of the Fact, placed the Crow, Snake,
and Pitcher in the Heavens; see Hyginus and Bassus in Germanicum. The Crow is
sacred to Apollo, the President of Divination; forasmuch as this Fowl by its
different Notes is said to foretell fair and sowl weather; or. for that Apollo,
fearing the pursuit of Typhon, is said to have assumed the Figure of that Fowl;
or in Allusion to the Suns departure, causing darkness and night, of the same
color with the Crow, as his Return does the Day or Light resembling the
whiteness of the Swan, which is likewise sacred to that God. See Ricciard
Brixian. Commentar. Symbolic. in voce Corvus. This Asterism at Midnight is seen
in the Meridian about the middle of March.
Sols Bird, the Our Poet here appropriates this Cup to Bacchus; Aratus, Hyginus
and Bassus to Apollo, according to the Fable before mentioned: But Pontanus in
Urania seems to give it, with our Poet, to the first, where he says, by that is
denoted to such in whose Horoscope it is ascendant -- Meri Genialis Amor
studiumque bibendi. It is called by Ptolomy (...); by others, Hydria, Calpe,
Cratera, Patera, Urna, and Vas. By the Arabs, Batiya; from the Persian, Badiya,
i. e. Poculum Magnum. By some it is called Alkis, instead of Alkas, i. e.
Cyathus, from the Hebrew, Kus, or Kos, signifying the same. Kircher says it is
by the Arabs likewise called Alphun. It consists as Ptolomy reckons of seven,
as Bayerus, of eleven, as Kepler, of eight Stars, which by the Arabs are called
Al Ma^laph, i. e. Praesepe. It is apparent in the Meridian at Midnight about
the middle of March.
Cup dear to the God of Wine,
And Some will have this to be the Minotaur; others, Ch^ron the Son of Saturn
and Phi^yra, the Daughter of Oceanus, who taught Aesculapius Physic, Achilles
Music, and Hercules Astronomy; with one of whose poisonous Arrows casually
falling out of his Quiver he was wounded in the Foot, and of that wound died,
and by commiserating Jupiter was made a sign in Heaven; called by Ptolomy
(...): The Arabs making use of the Greek Name, by whom yet according to
Ricciolus it is called Albeze and Asmeat; by the Greeks, (...), and in
barbarous Greek, Taraopoz. It consists according to Ptolomy of 37 Stars,
according to Bayerus of 40, as Kepler reckons o^ 56. All which, together with
those that make up the Fera Centauri, are by the Arabs called promiscuously
(...), i. e. Spadices, bright dappled, propter multitudinem ac densitudinem
collectionis earum. The 35th and 36th are by the Arabs called Al Hadur, i. e.
solum, and Al Wez'n, i. e. Pondus, and Muhtalaphein, i. e. Iuratas, and (...),
i. e. Pejuratas, as being by some Observer mistaken for Canopus, and averred
upon Oath to be it, by at other sworn to the contrary, whence the Original of
those Arabic Names. The 35th Star is yet by Ulugh Beigh called Rigil
Kentaurus, i. e. Pes Centauri. Our Poet here omits his Hasta; by Proclus and
Bassus called Thyrsi^s, and Thirsolochus; as likewise the Bestia Centauri, by
the Greeks called (...), i. e. fera, and (...) a rapacitate, scil. Lupus. In
Arabic it is called Sebu', i. e. Fera, and Pheh'd, i. e. Those, Pardus. This
Constellation gallops by the Meridian at Midnight in the end of April.
Centaure next in a mixed shape does shine,
Half Man, half Horse; then Heavens bright Temple see,
And Called by the Greeks (...) and (...). By the Latins, Thuribulum, (...),
Bathilus, Sacrarium, (...), Templum, Lar, Ac^rra, A^a, and (...). By the Arabs
(according to Ricciolus) Almegrameth or Al Mugamrah. It consists of 7 Stars
according to Ptolomy and Kepler; as Bayerus reckons of 8. This was the first
Altar (according to the Poets) that ever was erected, In qua devoti quondam
cecidere Gigan^es;
Nec prius armavit violento sulmine dextram
Jupiter, ante Deos quam constitit ipse Sacerdos.
(As our Poet l. 5.) It was framed by the Cyclops, and in memorial of the fact
constellated. Lactantius yet, l. 1. de falsa Relig. reports that the first
Altar that Jupiter erected was in honor to Caelus. Deinde (says he) Pan cum
deducit in montem, (...) catur Caeli Stela; Postquam eo ascendit contemplatus
est late Terras, ibique in eo Monte Aram creat Caelo, primusque in ea Ara
Jupiter Sacrificavit. The Deities, to whom Jupiter sacrificed upon this
Expedition against the Giants, we find from (...) Sioulus Bibliothec. l. 5. to
have been the Sun, Heaven and the Earth. This Constellation about the end of
June passes the Meridian at Midnight under our Horizon.
Altar consecrate to Victory, The Altar.

What time the enraged Earth a Giant Race
Against Heaven produced, then Gods besought the Grace
Of the These were by the Greeks called (...) and (...); by the Latins, Dii
Majores, Dii Valentes and Potentes., and Dii Samothraces, of whom see Dionys.
Halicarnass. Antiq. lib. 1. and Macrob. Sa^urnal. l. 3. c. 4. They are likewise
by the Greeks called (...), which Scaliger ( in Varron. de Lingua Lat.)
conceives to be derived from a Phaenician or Syrian Original, Cabir in that
Language signifying Potens; which Gods were so called in Opposition to and
Distinction from the Dii Casmilli, Camilli, or Camiri, i. e. Dii Ministri sive
Minores, as observed by Heinsius ( in Aristarcho sacro*) These some will have
to be Castor and Pollux, confirmed by this Ancient Latin Inscription, CASTORI
ET POLLUCI DIS MAGNIS SULPICIAE. Q. SULPIC* F. VOTUM. etc. And this Greek one,
cited by Argolus in l. 2. Panvinii de Lud. Circens. extant at Venice in Aed.
Episc. Torcell. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) i. e.
CAIUS CAII
ACHARNENSIS SACERDOS
FACTUS DEORUM MAGNORUM
DIOSCURORUM CABEIRORUM.
These yet the Scholiast of Apollonius (l. 1.) says were Jupiter and Bacchus;
or, according to Athenian, Iasion and (...) Varro conceives them rather to be
Ops and Saturn. Nigidius and Cornelius Labeo (as cited by Macrobius) will have
them to be Neptune and Apollo. They are reputed likewise to be Cybele and
Attys, as by two Ancient Monuments erected to their Honor, with this
Inscription DIS MAGNIS, in Gruterus may appear, of which more particularly
Pign^rius de Magna Deum Matre and A^tide. Others make them to be the Dii
Penates: against which Opinion thus Turneb. Adversar. l. 15. c. 21. Magnos Deos
a Penatibus diversos facit Maro; Penates enim Dii Penetrales videntur fuisse,
Diique familiae: Dii magni, illi qui maximum Imperium and Numen habent,
publiceque coluntur, etc. or according to Antonius Goveanus (in Terrent.) Dii
Magni quos majorum Gentium Cicero vocat, qui a Terris in Coelum non pervenere.
These by Diodorus Siculus, l. 1. c. 8. are said to be five in number, i. e.
(...) seu Spiritus, (...) seu Ignis, (...) seu Siccum, (...) seu Humidum, and
(...) seu Aer. By the first, meaning Jupiter; by the second, Vulcan; by the
third, Tellus seu Ceres; by the fourth, Neptune, sive Oceanus; by the last,
Minerva. Theon Smyrnaeus (in Mathemat. Plat.) reckons them to be eight; (...),
i. e. aiunt octo esse Deos omnium Dominos: Thus enumerated in an Ancient
Inscription upon an Egyptian Pillar, as cited by the said Theon from the
Testimony of Evander.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...), For so we read that Inscription according to the ingenious Emendation
of the Excellent Msr. de Fermat, in his Epistle (to Msr. de Pellisson) annexed
to the last Edition of Diepha^tus Alex.
(...) etc. i. e.
ANTIQUISSIMUS OMNIUM REX OSIRIS
DIS IMMORTALIBUS, SPIRITUI, ET COELO,
SOLI, ET LUNAE, ET TERRAE, ET
NOCTI, ET DIEI, ET PATRI
EORUM QUAE SUNT, QUAEQUE FUTURA
SUNT, AMORI. etc.
And from hence the Proverb (...), i. e. omnia octo; which see explained in the
learned Notes of Bulial^us upon that Author. Others make them to be twelve in
Number, reckoning them according to this Distich of Ennius.

Juno, Vesta, Ceres, Diana, Minerva, Venus, Mars,
Mercurius, Iovi', Neptunus, Vulcanus, Apollo.
Whose several Interests or Concerns are thus described and distinguished by
Sallustius ((...)) mundum eff^ciunt Jupiter, Neptunus, Vulcanus; animant Ceres,
Juno, Diana; adaptant Apollo, Venus, Mercurius; (...) Vesta, Palias, Mars. Yet
these Great Gods, though in degree above the rest, were not invested with
absolute Rule, that being only reserved for Jupiter, according to Aeschylus in
Prometh. vinct.

(...),
(...)
Omnia sunt Diis concessa praeter imperare,
Nam nullus est Liber nisi Jupiter.
Who was (as Apuleius Met. l. 1. says of Osyris) Deus Deum, Magnorum Potior,
and Majorum Summus, and Summerus Maximus, and Maximorum Regnator.
great Gods; and Jove himself So Claudian de Bello Getico, -- Ipsumque Iovem,
turbante Typhoeo, Sifas est, timuisse ferunt --
feared too
He wanted Power to do, what he could do.
When he amazed the rising Earth beheld,
How even against Natures self, Nature rebelled,
Saw Mountains heaped on Mountains to aspire,
And Stars from the approaching Hills retire,
Charged with dire Arms by a Applicable to this Place may seem this not common
and not unelegant Description of Sidorius Ap^llinar. in Carm. 9. ad Foeli^em.
N^n hic Terrigenam loquor Cohortem
Admixto mage ^ividam veneno,
Cui praeter Speciem (...) c^rentem
A^gues Corporibus voluminosis,
A^te squammea Cru^a porrigentes,
In a estigia fauce desinebant.
Sic ^ormae triplicis Procax Iuventus,
(...) Pedem proterens voraci
Curs ^at Capitum stupenda gressu;
Et cum Classica Numinum sonabant,
Mex c^ntra Tonitrus resibilante
And h^t Superos ciere planta.
Nec Ph^egrae legis ampliata rura,
Missi dum ^olitant per Astra M^ntes,
Pindus, Pelion, Ossa, Olympus, Othry^,
Cumsilvis, gregibus f^ris, Pruinis,
S^xis, fontibus, Oppidis, levati
Vi^rantium spati^siorum dextra.
Of the Earth-born Race is not our Song
Who by mixed Poisons grew more strong;
Their Limbs immeasurably vast;
About whose legs wreathed Serpents cast,
With gaping Jaws which downwards bend,
Did like to cloven feet extend.
Three-form'd srupendious Race! that treads
Not upon heels, but runs on heads.
These when the Gods did sound to fight,
Mocked at their Thunder; and in spite
Kicked against the Skies with hissing feet.
Nor tell we here how they did meet
On P^legro's Plains, and Mountains hurled
Against the Bright Lamps of the World;
How Pindus, Pelio^, Ossa flew
Tossed by their Hands, Olympus too
And Othrys with their Woods and Flocks,
Wild Beasts, Towns, Fountains, Snows, and Rocks.

deformed Birth
Issuing from Ruptures of the teeming Earth.
No The Latin has H^stiferum quemquam; by Barthius (Adversar. l. 24. c. 10)
interpreted Hostias ferentem. Servius in prim. Aeneid. Hostiae dicuntur
sacrificia quae ab his fiun^ qui in Hostem pergunt. We have therefore chosen to
follow Barthius his Interpretation; Scaliger being here at a loss, who
conceives some error to be in the word H^stiferum, and would instead thereof
read Pestiferum.
Victime-Bearers yet the Gods had known,
Or that there were Powers Greater than their own;
Then did Heavens King this Starry Altar raise,
Whose fires even yet with brightest Luster blaze.
Near which the This Asterism is by the Greeks called (...) and (...), by the
Latins accordingly Cete and Cetus, Balaena, (...), Leo, or U^sus Marinus; by
the Arabs (from the Greek) Alk^tus. Ptolomy reckons therein 22 Stars, Bayerus
27. Kepler 25. Of which the bright one in the snout of the Whale is called
Menkar Alketus, i. e. Rostrum Ceti. That in the Tail, Dan^ Alke^us, i e. Cauda
Ceti, and both these are likewise called by the Arabs, Al Diphdaan, i. e. duo
Ranae. There are two also in his hands, (for this Fish is conceived to be the
same with Dagon or Dercet^, the Syrian Idol; which was represented in the upper
part after a humane shape, in the lower, after that of a Fish, and by the Jews
named Adir Dag, i. e. Piseis Magnus; de quo Seld^nus de Diis Syris Syntagm. 2.)
and are by the Arabs called Al Naaman, or according to Mr. Hyde, Al Naamat, i.
e. (...) Cameli. The second Star in this Constellation is called Caph Al
Giedma, i. e. Manus truncata. The 21th Star is called Danab Al Ketus Shem^li,
i. e. Ceti Cauda Borealis. The 22th, Danab Al Gienubi, i. e. Cauda Australis,
and Al (...) Al Th^ni, i. e. Rana Secunda. It is seen in the Meridian at
Midnight from the beginning of Octo^ to the end of December.
Whale raising his scaley Limbs The Whale.

In large Wreaths, wallowing on his Belly swims,
And gapes as ready just to seize his Prey:
As when the same the Of the exposure of And^omeda to this Sea Monster, and the
Combat betwixt that and Perseus, see the Appendix. The Ground of which Fable
may happily arise; for that the Ship in which she was carried away had for its
Ensign, the Whale; the Story of which see in Photius his Bibliotheca from the
Narrations of Conon; or in regard the Person by whom she was first demanded in
Marriage was some Insulary Prince, and exercised Piracy, and for that reason
compared to a Whale or Sea Monster, of which see Vossius l. 1. de Idololatr.
and Scheffer. de Militia Navali. l. 1. c. ^. But not to insist longer upon the
Fable; Diverse admit of the exposure of Andromeda to this Sea Monster as a (...)
Story; see the same defended by Bartholom. Barrientus, in Sylv. Annotat. c. 1.
from the Testimonies of Stra^, (...), St. Jerome, Aegesyppus and Pliny; the
last of whom speaking of Ioppa, thus writes: Ioppe Phoenicum, (...) In^datione
ut ferunt, insidet Collem, praejacente Saxo, in quo Vinculorum Andromedae
vestigia ostendum. And elsewhere reports that the Bones of this Monster were
brought from Ioppe to Rome, and among other (...) sights were by Marcus Scaurus
in his Aedile-Ship shown to the People, in length forty feet, his Ribs in (...)
exceeding the tallest Indian Elephants, the thickness of his Backbone being a
foot and half over. Vide Plin. i. 5. ^. 13. and l. 9. c. 5.
exposed Andromeda
To her sad Fate approaching once beheld,
Who the forced Waves beyond their Shore impelled.
In Heaven's South Part, the The Poets fabled this to have been the Fish, which
saved Phacetis (or rather Aphacitis) the Daughter of Venus, fallen into the
Lake Boeth, and for that reason constellated; by the Arabs called Al Hau^ Al
Gienubi, i. e. Piscis Australis; by Higynus, Piscis solitarius, and by Bassus
in Germanicum, Piscis Magnus; and is said to have spawned the other two in the
Zodiac. It is made up, according to Ptolemy and Bayerus, of 12 Stars, among
which the Bright one in his Mouth is called Al Diphda Al Auwal, i. e. Rana
prima; and Al Dalim, i. e. Agger; and Phom Al Hant, i. e. Os Piscis, commonly
but erroneously Phomahant. This glides by the Meridian at Midnight about the
middle of August.
Fish then from the Wind, The Southern Fish.

Called Southern, rises; close to which conjoined
In mighty flexures This Stream is by Scaliger called (...), i. e. fusio Aquae,
and is different from that which by Vitruvius is called fusio Stellarum, (of
which already in the sign Pisces, called likewise (...)) and is distinct also
from that other starry stream called Eridanus, or (...), i. e. Fluvius Orionis.
Manilius here gives to this stream as it were a double Head, making it to flow
as well from the Mouth of the Southern Fish, as from the Urn of Aquarius, and
to unite in the middle, as is likewise observed by Gassendus upon this Place,
Tom. 1. l. 2. p. 543. Of the other Southern Constellations, unknown to the
Ancients, see in the Appendix.
starry Rivers run.
One of their Heads flows from Aquarius Tun,
Whose Waters by communicated Streams
Meet in the midst, and mix Sidereal Beams.
'Twixt the Ecliptic and the That is the Antartick or Southern Pole, to us
invisible, which our Poet imagines to be adorned with the like Constellations
as the Northern; and therefore he calls them the latent Bears.
latent Bears,
Which 'bout the creaking Axis turn the Spears,
Heaven's In respect to us, inhabiting the Northern Hemisphere. Not unaptly
Sidonius Apollinaris calls the Stars on either side the Zodiac, Exotica
Sydera, strange or foreign; quasi (...), Extra Zodiacum; as is noted by
Sirmondus.
stranger Orb with these Stars painted shines,
Which Ancient Poets called the Southern Signs.
The rest of the World lies under That is that part of the Southern Hemisphere
to us inconspicuous, being terminated by our Horizon; for the Ancients, as is
before noted, (...) vocabant, says Scaliger upon this Place. For this Reason by
the Eastern People these Southern Constellations are called Chadre Teman, i. e.
Penetralia Austri, quasi sint in loco Occulto; as Aben Ezra cited by Mr. Hyde.
Water hid,
Where unknown Realms, Lands to our Sight forbid,
Take from one Sun with us a common Light, The Constellations of the Southern
Hemisphere to us inconspicuous.

But As being to us (...). They having Dextros Ortus and Sinistram Umbram: We
Sinistros Ortus and Dextram Umbram. And as Macrobius in Somn. Scip. l. 2.
notes, Idem Sol illis and obire dicetur nostro Ortu, and orietur cum nobis
occidet.
several Shadows, and a different Night.
Where Stars sinistral set, and dextral rise,
Their Heaven as ample, nor less bright their Skies,
Their Stars as numerous, only thus outvy'd,
In that to them Augustus Star's denied,
Which does our World with Rays propitious bless;
Earths present, and Heavens future Happiness.
That the Extremes which 'bout the nether Pole The Constellations about the
Southern Pole (supposed) like those about the Northern.

Decked with bright Stars, though inconspicuous, roll,
The upper Pole's resemble, with Our Author here argues (...), that about the
Southern Pole there are, or ought to be the same Constellations, as about the
Northern; which Error is to be attributed to the Ignorance of the Times
wherein he lived, in which that part of the World was altogether unknown to the
Romans. But Modern Experience evinces, that there are not only no such
Asterisms as the greater and lesser Bear and Dragon; but also no Stars within
many Degrees of that Pole. The nearest to it being a Star in the Tail of the
Hydrus, called by the Dutch, the Water Schlang. Vide Ri^ciol. Tom 1. l. 6. p.
410. Hence Herigon in his Cursus Mathemat. Tom. 1. p. 37. Nulla Coeli pars
minoribus and paucioribus Stellis (...) quam Austrin^ Circumpolaris, for which
Reason it may be styled (as by Seneca in He^cul. Fure^e, it is) De^ior Polu^.
Signs graced
Like that; where Bears with Fronts averse are placed,
And by one Dragon parted; we suppose,
Induced to credit what Example shows,
For Reason urges from Analogy,
The Parts unseen are like to those we see.
These several Stations, by large Skies disjoined;
To all the Constellations are assigned, The Forms and ^gines of the several
Constellations not corporeal.

Yet think not they corporeal Figures are,
Or all their Members equal Luster share;
To the same purpose likewise our Poet in the end of his 5th Book, Ipse suas
Ether Flammas sufferre nequiret,
Totus and accenso Mundus flagraret Olymp^.
Yet this Reason of our Author Picus Mirandula ( l. 1. in Astrolog. p. 255.)
thinks only worthy of laughter. Mallium (so he calls Manilius) nisi esset
Poeta, Bone Deus! quo risu prosequeremur, qui Coelestes illas quas fingit
Imagines paucis stellis i^choatas potius dicit, quam absolutas, Ne pluribus ^bi
ignibus accensis Incendia Mundus flagraret? But with the leave of that Prince
of Learning, our Author is herein (as to the fiery nature of the Stars)
defended by most of the Ancients: Hence in Orpheus, the Sun, Moon and Stars are
said to be (...), membra Vulcani: And Cicero in secundo de Natura Deorum, gives
this Reason why the Stars are said to be nourished by moisture, ut nihil fere
in^reat aut admodum paululum, quod A^rorum Ignis aut Aetheris Flamma c^umat.
Nor wants he the suffrage of diverse of the Fathers, Schoolmen and Moderns: In
proof of which it may suffice to instance only what the Learned G. V^ssius has
to this purpose, l 2. Idololatr. c. 39. Unless (says he) the Stars be of a
fiery Nature, I see no Reason why the Waters should be placed above the
Heavens, as we are told both by the Writings of Moses and others, they are: But
now the Reason is plain, to wit, that by them the exaestuating Fire of the
Stars might be repressed and tempered, lest by their heat and fervor the whole
Heavens should be dissolved: The same Reason being rendered by St. Basil, St.
Ambrose, Theodoret, Procopius, Damascen, Beda and others. Thus He. Vide etiam
Gassendum, Tom. 1. l. 1. p. 502.
Heaven could not suffer so intense a Heat,
Were no Part void, but all with Fire repleat.
Some therefore cautious Nature kept from Flame,
Lest it should hazard the Celestial Frame,
Only to mark their Figures out content,
And Signs by certain Stars to represent,
Whose Lights design their shapes; fire answers fire,
Mean to Extreme, the Lower to the Higher,
It is enough they are not hidden quite.
Some Stars the Moon half full show greatest Light,
But all the nameless Commons of the Sky
Obscured by her completed Splendor, fly:
The brighter Signs yet nor their Number change, Their rising and setting
constant and regular.

Nor with less Stars in mixed Motion range,
But the same Course (the better to be known)
And Order, in their Rise and Setting, own.
Nor in this World may Ought more wonder raise
Than that the Whole Reason, and Laws, obeys,
Where Nothing's crowded, Nothing loosely roves,
Or cross to its determined Order, moves;
What more confused in show? yet what in Course
More certain? a clear Reason to enforce Hence the Government of the World by
divine Providence is asserted.

That this World's Clean^hes in Cicero de Natura Deorum l. 2. urging reasons to
evince the Belief of a Deity, among others gives this for the last and
weight^st, Aequa^ilitatem motus, etc. The Aequability of the Moti^n and
Conversion of the Heavens, Sun, Moon and Stars, their Distinction, Variety,
Beauty, Order. The very view of which (says he) sufficiently declares them not
to be fortuitous or (...): And again, Quid potest esse ^am ap^rtum, tamque
pe^spicuum cum C^um suspexinius, etc. What can be more evident or perspicuous,
when we behold the Heavens and contemplate the Celestial Bodies, than that
there is a Deity, by whose Excellent Providence they are governed? Thus far
Cicero, (with our Author) from the bare suggestion of Nature, truly. What
follows, where the World it self is said to be a God, is from the mistaken
Principles of the Platonists and Stoics, who (as before is noted) make the
World to be a God, but a Secondary one; for that Power which they primarily
call God, is by them termed Ratio and Men's; by whom they affirmed the World to
be created: So Cicero in Timaeo; Deus ille Aeternus ( scil. Men's) hunc perfect
beatum Deum ( scil. Mundum) procreavit. The World being in their sense the
universal Fusion of the first Divine Mind; for so Chrysippus in Cicero in primo
de Natura Deorum describes it: Vim Divinam in Ratione esse positam, and
univ^rsae Naturae Anima atque Mente. Ipsumque Mundum Deum dici and ejus Animae
fusionem universam. The Divine Power is seated in Reason, and in the Mind of
universal Nature. And this World is said to be a God, and the universal Fusion
or Extension of that Mind. Vide etiam Lips* Philosoph. Stoic. l. ^. Dissert. 8.
governed by a Deity
And is it self a God; nor casually
Together met, as he would once persuade,
Who first the VValls of this wide System made
Democritus, whose follower was Epicurus, as is before noted. There is in
Derision of this Opinion an Epigram of Lucilius in the Greek Anthology, l. 2.
wherein there is a jocular Comparison between Diophantus, a very little Dwarf,
and Epicurus his Atoms, (...)

Of Atoms Epicurus did compose
This World, 'cause nothing he thought less than those.
Had Diophantus lived then, he this All.
Had brought from him, for he is yet more small.
Or though he held Atoms All else contrived,
From Him yet sure he Atoms had derived.

Of Atoms, and to those resolves again;
Of which, the solid Earth, the floating Main,
The fiery Stars, and Ether that creates
Infinite Orbs, and others dissipates,
Consist: All which revert unto their Springs,
And transmutate the various Forms of things.
But who can think this World educ'd should be
From such blind Grounds without a Deity?
If Chance did give, Chance rules this All; Whence are
The Signs then in their Course so regular?
Rising by Turns, as if by Laws enjoined,
None posting on, whilst others stay behind?
The same Stars Summer, the same Winter grace,
Day takes, and leaves to Heaven one certain Face.
What time Troy's State was by the Greeks undon,
Respecting this Place in Homer, Iliad. 6. (...)

Ursamque quam and Plaustrum cognomine vocant,
Quae ibidem vertitur and Oriona observat.
Where (...), answers to Manilius his -- Adversis frontibus ibant. These two
Constellations being placed (...), in a direct line against one another, as two
jealous Princes marking each others Motion, according to Mr. Seldom his
Observation in his Titles of Honor ( c. 1.) for the Bear being Princess of the
Northern Constellations, observes and looks at Orion Prince of the Southern.
Which (...) or Position of these Constellations Casaubon ( in Strabon. l. 1.)
conceives Manilius to have collected from the only Authority of Homer before
cited.
Opposed did Arctos and Orion run.
She the World's Top to circle still content,
He facing her, to round the whole Firmament.
The times of obscure Night, were then The observation of the time of Night
from the rising or position of the Stars was usual among the Ancients in the
time of the Trojan War, by which they ordered their Watches, as by those they
divided the Night. Instances whereof we have in Euripides his Iphigen. in
Aulid. and Rhesus. From the later of which take this: (...), etc.

Cujus est vigilia? Quis per vices
Succedit mihi primum?
Iam occidunt signa, and septemgrad^
Pleiades Aetheriae (oriuntur)
Volat autem Aquila in Medio Cali, etc.
The Manner and Method of their Observation is thus delivered by Attalus, an
Ancient Scholiast upon Aratus, as cited by Hipparchus. Since Sunset is the
beginning of Night, and that the Sun is in always one of the 12 Signs; It is
manifest, that knowing in what sign the Sun is, and in what degree thereof, it
may be easily told, what sign and what degree will arise in the beginning of
Night. For the part of the Zodiac which is Diametrically opposite to that
which the Sun is in at his setting, will at the beginning of Night be seen to
rise: which being observed and known, for as much as every Night six signs
arise from the East, it may be told what part of Night answers to their rising,
and how much is remaining between that and the rising of the Sun. But the
Errors of this* rude observation Hipparchus refutes from the inequality of
Time in the Ascensions of the several signs, some of them being less than their
Dodecatemoria, others extending beyond; as for Example: Cancer is much less
than the 12th part or division of the Zodiac allotted to it. Virgo takes up
some part of Leo and Scorpio. The Southern Fish is almost wholly in the
Dodecatemorion of Aquarius: So that their unequal and different rising must
needs beget an Error in the Computation of Time, and consequently the hour of
Night cannot thereby be truly determined. Vide Hipparch. in Arat. Ph^nomen. l.
2. and Marcianum Capellam l. 8. c. 24.
devin'd
From the bright Stars; Heaven hadits The hours as they are now distinguished
are by some conceived not to have been in use with the Ancients; for certain it
is, says Casaubon, (Animadvers. in Athenaeum, l. 1. c. 1.) that neither in the
time of Plato or Aristotle, nor many years after them, was the Word (...) in
use among the Greeks, as we n^w take it: And therefore Pollux reckoning up the
Parts, by which the Day and Night were distinguished by the Ancients, makes no
mention thereof* Of this Opinion likewise is Salmasius in Plin. Exercitat. Tom.
1. p. 650. with whom Menagius seems to comply in Observat. ad Laertium. l. 1.
p. 44. The contrary, yet, ( viz. that the Day was then by the Greeks divided
into Parts Analogical to the hours in use with us,) with clearer Arguments
being defended by Petavius in Uranolog. Dissertat. l. 7. c. 8. And the learned
Leo Allatius de Mensura Temporum Antiquorum, c. 4. And that among the Jews and
other Eastern Nations the division of the day into hours was very ancient, if
not Coaeval with the first division of Time into Days, Weeks, Months or Years,
Kircher (in Oedip. Egypt. Tom. 2. part. 2. p. 225.) endeavors to demonstrate.
Indeed as to the Romans, Censorinus de Die Natal. c. 23. plainly affirms that
the Word Hora was not known among them until 300 Years after the Building of
Rome: They dividing the day into two parts only, which they called Ortum and
Occasum. Afterward, as Pliny ( l. 7. c. 60.) witnesses, the Noonstead was
added, called Meridies, qued Parts Diei, bifariam tum divisi, discernebat,
says Censorinus. These Parts of the Day they called Tempestates; so in the 12
Tables* SOL OCCASUS SUPREMA TEMPESTAS ESTO. The Manner of signifying the time
of day was by a Beadle or Crier at the Command of the Praetor or Consul. Pliny
describes it thus: The Consuls Beadle or Crier standing in the Court, when he
beheld the Sun between the Rostra and the Graegostasis pronounced it was Noon.
But when the Sun inclined downward from the Column named Moenia, to the Common
Gaolor Prison, then he gave warning of the last Quarter of the Day, and so
pronounced. Nor had they any other means to know how the Day went, until after
the time of the first Punick War. Afterward they divided the Day (and so the
Night likewise) into 12 Parts, which they called hours, not equal, but varying
according to the length or shortness of the Day in Summer or Winter, and
therefore called (...) seu Temporales. Which Division or Distinction of Time
they received from the Greeks, who derived it from the Egyptians, as they from
the Babylonians, or Chaldaeans according to Herodotus; The Egyptians giving to
the several hours of the day these particular Names. To the first, Lamp; to
the second, Alexidi; to the third, Terpsithi; to the fourth, Phenon; to the
fifth, Erebe; to the sixth, Diauges; to the seventh, Proka; to the eighth,
Panphe; to the ninth, Loitia; to the tenth, Porphure; to the eleventh,
Panphout; to the twelfth, Truphe. Those of the Night had likewise their
distinct Denominations; But Salmasius, who ( in Diatrib. de Antiq. Astrolog.)
gives us these, says, he could never meet with the other. The Chinese
anciently, and from them the Turkish Astronomers, divide the (...), or natural
day into 12 equal parts, each part they call Iagg, answering to our Bihoria,
and to every Iagg they apply a particular name from some Creature; As, to the
Chin. Turk. 1. Zeh Cescu. Mus. 2. Iiu. Tut. Bos. 3. Yem. Pars. Pardus. 4. Mau.
Tuskan. Lepus. 5. Iin. Lui. Crocodilus. 6. Siz. Yilang. Serpens. 7. Vou. Iunad.
Equus. 8. Vi. Kui. Ovis. 9. Shin. Pijin. Simia. 10. You. Daki^k. Gallina. 11.
Su. Eit. Canis. 12. Chai. Tungus. Porcus. Every one of these Iaggs they divide
into eight Parts which they call Geh, and may be termed Scrupula horaria.
Again, they divide every day into 10000 Particles, calling each Particle Fenac,
which may be interpreted Scrupula Diaria. Vid. Epoch. Celebr. Ulugh Beigh Edit.
per Gravium. p. 6. Of the Oeconomical Distribution of the 12 hours of the day
among the Romans; see Martial. lib. 4. Epigr. 8. and the particular explication
thereof in Stuckius de Antiqu. Conviv. ( l. 1. c. 11.) and in Galluccius in
Virgilian. Vindicat. (Aeneid. l. 9. loc. 2.) The Invention of Sun-Dyals for
distinguishing the hours was not known in Rome until the Time of the Tarentine
War; of which see Pliny and Censorinus, as before cited. Among the Greeks it
was earlier, being attributed by some to Anaximenes; by others, to Pherecydes
of Syrus, of which Laertius in his life. B^ebartus in Geogr. Sacr. l. 1. c. 14.
makes the Invention much antienter from the Testimony of Homer (Odyss. o.) With
the Jews it was 200 Years before the time of Pherecydes, as appears by King
Achaz his Dyal. The use of the Clepsydra or water-hour-glass was first invented
by Cresibius of Alexandria, who flourished in the time of Ptolomaeus Evergetes;
first brought into use among the Romans by Scipio Nasica, as Vitruvius l. 9. c.
9. The use of Clocks or Watches seems not to be very ancient; there not
appearing any mention thereof earlier than in these Verses of Bato the Comic
Poet, cited in Atbenaeus, l. 4. -- (...). -- ut aliquis putet Non Ampuliam Te
circumgestare, sed Horologium. Which Bato, Casaubon reckons inter (...) Poetas,
(though his Conjecture be severely reprehended by Allatius in his Work before
cited) and believes that Citation to be the only instance that is to be found
in any Monument of Antiquity touching that Subject.
Hours designed:
Since when how many Kingdoms waste are laid?
How many Nations have been Captive made?
To this Purpose, Ennius, l. 8. Mortalem summum Fortunarepente Reddidit e summo
regno ut famul' infimus esset. Apposite likewise is that of Iuvenal, Satyr. 7.

Servis Regna dabant, Captivis Fata Triumphos. And of Seneca (Controvers. l. 1.
e. 1.) Mutabilis est Casus; dederunt victis Terga Victores; and quos provexerat
fortuna, destituit. Quid referam Marium Sexto Consulatis Carthagine
Mendicantem, Septimo Imperantem?
Empire and Servitude how often dissolved
By Fortunes Power? and differently revolved?
Meaning the Roman State and People, which rose from the Ruins and Ashes of
subverted Troy; which may be illustrated by this of Cyprian de Idol. vanitat.
Regna non merito accidunt, sed sorts variantur. Imperium ante tenuerunt and
Assyrii and Medi and Persae; E^ Graecos and Aegyptios regn^sse c^gnoviinus. Ita
vicibus petestatum Romany quoque ut and caeteris imperandi tempus obvenit.
Troy's Ashes now to what a glorious State
She reinspires? The Romans bringing upon Greece the same Desolation, which
that once brought upon Troy, one of the most flourishing Cities of Asia; To
this place may not impertinently be applied that Epigram of the Emperor Adrion
in the Greek Anthology, l. 1. (...). Hector thou Blood of Mars* if Words thine
Ear
Now in the Grave may reach, rise and appear!
See thy famed Troy's by a new Race possessed,
Though not so stout as Thee, valiant at least;
Foiled are the Myrmidons; tell Achilles, These,
Thessaly now stoopes to the Aene^des.

Greece suffers Asia's Fate.
'Twere tedious to recount the Ages past,
How often the Sun has seen the World new cast.
All Things by humane Laws created, change:
Lands to each other known, in time grow strange:
Nations in course of many Years, put on
A various Face; but Heaven wears always one;
Grows not by length of Days, nor wastes with Age,
Always in Course, yet faints not in its Stage,
The Opinion of Xenophane^ (as before noted) and of Aristotle; defended by
Averroes, borrowed from Ocellus Lucanus (...).
Will ever be the same, since such 'twas ever;
Other than it is our Not unlike to this is that Argument in St. Peter, Epistol.
2. taken up by the Libertines of that Age, Ex quo Patres dormi^runt, Omnia sic
permanent ab Initio Cre^nis. But against this unchangeable Durability of the
Heavens Seneca declares. Quid Mutationis Periculo exceplum? Non Terra, non
Coelum, etc. What is ex^pe from the danger of Change? Not the Earth, not
Heaven, not the universal Context of all things guided by the Conduct of God
himself; It shall not always bold this Order; A Day will come that shall throw
it quite out of its Course. Senec. Epistol. 71.
Fathers saw it never,
Nor shall our Nephews: it is a God, and knows,
Nothing of Change, which Age and Time impose.
That the Sun never starts to the North aside,
Nor changing Course back to the East does ride,
And to strange Lands a newborn Day disclose;
That the Moon always the same Appositely Macrobius in Somn. Scip. l. 1. c. 6.
Similibus Dispensationibus Hebdomadum, Luna sutluminis vices sempiternd lege
variando disponit, and Statius ( Sylv. l. 3.) Servit and Astrorum velox Chorus,
and vaga servit
Luna, nec injussae t^ties redit Orbita Lucis.
These Changes of the Moon the Ancient Greeks called (...), and from them the
Latins, Phases, sive Apparitiones. The Names of the said Phases or
Appearances, especially of the four most notable, are these. The first,
(reckoning her increasing Changes) (...), i. e. Cornicula^a, about 60 Degrees
distant from the Sun. This Phasis is by the Turks and Arabs called Nalka,
because it resembles the Figure of a Horse-shoe. The second, (...), i. e.
Bis^cta, siu Dimidiata, at 90 Degrees distance. The third, (...), i. e.
Gibbosa, sive Dimidio Orb Major, when distant 120 Degrees. And lastly, (...),
i. e. Toti-lunis, when full and in Opposition to the Sun, or 180 Degrees
distant, from whence in a contrary Order are reckoned her decreasing Changes.
Vide Cleomed. l. 2. c. 3. Vitruvium, l. 9. c. 4 ibidemque Philandrum; Geminum
c. 7. Amian. M^rcellin. l. 20. Plin. l. 2. c. 14. Ricciolum Tom. 1. l. 4. c. 3.
changes shows,
The Laws observed of her Increase and Wain,
That Stars themselves from Hence the Stars receive their Denomination. Stellae
a stand. Servius ad 1. Georg. from the Authority of Varro. Stelle cadere non
possunt, quarum natura est ut stent semper unde and Stellae vocantur: and from
him Isidor. l. 3. c. 70. Stellae dictae a stando, quiae fixae stant in Coelo,
nec cadunt. And Martianus Capella l. 8. Stellae a stando, Sidera a Considendo.
Vide etiam Cassiodorum de Astronomia.
falling still sustain,
And run in measured Courses, seems to Sense
No Work of Chance, but Act of Providence.
These Signs divided thus by equal space
Heavens azure Caelum (says Pliny, from the Testimony of Varro) haud dubie a
Coelati Argumento diximus, from the Variety and Ornament of the several
Constellations, ( in varias Coelum laqueantia formas, as Manilius expresses it)
imbellishing the same, as Carving or Fret-work, some curious Roof or Cieling.
Hence Turnebus, Coelum ita vocatum alii censent, quod sit coelatum impressumque
variis signis. Vide Turneb. in Varron. de L. L. and in Adversar. l. 20. c. 29.
Celing with Gold fret-work Grace,
Bove which is So says Aristotle in primo de ^ (...), c. 9. (...), (...),
(...), (...), i. e. neque Corpus, neque Locus, neque Vacuum, neque Tempus. But
the Stoics determine otherwise, who though they allow not of any thing
corporeal, yet admit of a certain vacuity. In which separate Inanity, or
imaginary space (as both Modern Philosophers and Divines call it) they fancy
the World to suspend. Peremptorily asserted by Lipsius: Cogit^nti cuicunque
(says he) aliquid vacui extra Mundum vel invito occurrit: quodetiam Philo
Iudaeus palam adstruit, and in Scripturis Abyssum dici contendit. Vid. Lips.
Physiolog. Stoic. l. 2. Dissertation. 9. Et Io. Baptist. Port. in Pneumatic. l.
1. c. 3. Nec non Gassendum, Tom. 1. part. 2. p. 186. Vides^ etiam Cleomed.
Mete^r. l. 1. c. 1. Inque illum Balforeum. Et Quonem de Guericke de vacuo
spatio, etc. l. 1. c. 35. and l. 2. c. 5, 6* etc.
Nothing; there the Worlds height ends,
Nor further Natures Public In Allusion to that of Varro: Mundus Domus est
Maxima Omnium; and of Cicero (in secundo de (...) Deorum) Est enim Mundus quasi
communis Deorum atque Hominum Domus. Consonant to which is that of Tertullian:
Totus hic Mundus una omnium Domus est; and of Minucius Foelix (in Octav.) Una
Domus est Mundus hic Totus. See likewise Lipsius, as before cited, Dissertat. 7.
House extends,
Which Seas embraces and the Earths round Ball.
All These in mutual Courses rise and fall,
As the revolving Skies, here downward bend
Beneath the Horizon, and there reascend.
Now to what Compass Heaven's extremest Round The Dimensions of the Universe.

Is stretched; what Limits the bright Zodiac bound,
Reason will teach; to whom there is nothing hard,
From whom by space or Bulk nothing's debarred;
To her all stoop; She sounds the Depths of Night,
And Heaven it self is pervious to her Sight.
How far the Stars are 'bove the Earth and Main,
So great the space is, which two Signs contain,
And if the Worlds Known is that Demonstration of Archimedes in (...). That the
Circumference of every Circle is greater than three times the Diameter thereof
by a part less than 1 / 7th and greater than 10 / 70. Hence Manilius cautiously
advises of this small difference that is to be made in computing the
proportions betwixt the Diameter and Perimeter of the Sphere. See the same
Argument in Pliny, l. 2. c. 23. and in Macrobius in Somn. Scip. l. 1. c. 19.
Diameter you take,
That, with small Difference, will a third Part make
Of its Circumference; Four Signs then, (so far)
Heavens Zenith and its Nadir distant are;
And twice four added its whole Round complete.
But since in the midst Earth has its Pendant Seat,
It Is two Signs distant from Heaven's Depth or Height.
Thus All which 'bove the Earth is reached by Sight,
Or underneath, by that unseen, extends,
Each way the space of two Signs comprehends:
And six times that measures the Circle, where
Twelve Constellations equal Mansions share.
Nor wonder that the self same Signs create
Uncertain Births mixed with much different Fate;
Since Each six rising with their Lights entire,
So great a space, and so long time require.
It rests, We now the Aetherial Having described the Celestial Phenomenon and
the Dimension of the Universe, Manilius proceeds to the Description of the
Celestial Circles; differing therein from the Method of Aratus; who places the
Mundane Dimension in the last Place. But this Disposition (as Scaliger
observes) is only Arbitrary. However he prefers the Method of our Author
before the other.
Bounds design, Of the Heavenly Circles.

The Circles which the parted Heavens confine,
And of the Stars the splendid Order steer. The Artick Polar Circle.

Whence called the Artick Circle (...) -- i. e. ab ursa, (one of the
Constellations so named) being totally comprised within it.) It is likewise
called Septentrionalis and Borealis, from its Situation, and contains within it
the Northern Frigid Zone, and terminates the Temperate. It is doubly to be
considered, either according to the Modern, or Ancient Hypothesis; According to
the Moderns, It is a lesser Circle Parallel to the Equator, passing about the
Axis of the World by the Northern Pole of the Ecliptic: According to the
Ancient it is described a Circle passing about the Axis of the World, by the
Intersection of the Horizon and Meridian, of an Indefinite Magnitude, in
respect to the several Situations of diverse Regions more or less Northerly
posited, of which Chalcidius (in Timaeum Platonis) Circuli vicini Polis, i. e.
Septentrionalis and huic diversus Antarticus neque Magnitudine neque Positione
solidati sunt; sed pro differentia Regionum Aquilom^ae itemque Australis, apud
quosdam Majores, apud alios Minores putantur. See Scaliger upon this Place,
Geminus, and upon him Petavius in Uranolog. Gassendus, Tom. 1. l. 3. p. 591.
Pincierus in Parerg. Otii Marp. l. 2. c. 13. and Grotius in Arati Phaenomen.
One towered the North sustains the shining Bear,
And from the Pole The Ancient Greeks divided the Sphere into sixty Parts
(whereof one was equal to six of the Common Division of 360* Degrees) This
manner of Division our Author (as following Eudoxus and Hipparchus) here makes
use of, though hereafter in describing the Zodiac he takes up the Common way
of dividing a Sphere or Circle into 360 Parts or Degrees; which shows the same
to have been also usual with the Ancients at least about his Time. According to
the first Division our Author here makes the Artick Polar Circle to be distant
from the Pole six of those sixty Parts, making thirty six Degrees according to
the later Division; which yet cannot be understood of the Roman Horizon,
wherein Manilius then wrote; but is to be applied to that of Cnidus or Rhodes,
according to the Doctrine of Eudoxus and Hipparchus, whom Manilius here
follows, as is rightly observed by Scaliger upon this Place, and Gassendus, as
before cited. And generally the rest of the Greeks gave the like Situation of
this Circle in the Athenian Horizon, and by a Catachresis, universally in any
other Part of Greece. This being here premised and observed, the Reader will
the better understand the following Measures and Descriptions which our Author
uses in the position of the Celestial Circles.
six Parts of Heaven retires,
The other touching That is the Tropic of Cancer. The Tropicks being so called
from the Word (...), which signifies Conversion or turning; because the Sun,
when it comes at those Circles, turns back to the Equator again, nor ever goes
beyond those Bounds either to the North or South. Hence the Egyptians, as is
noted by Clemens Alexandrinus (l. 5. Stromat.) Hieroglyphically decyphered the
Tropicks under the Figure of two Dogs, as if they were Guards deputed by Nature
to keep in and restrain the Sun from running beyond his Bounds. The first among
the Greeks, who found out these Tropicks, is said to be Thales, the Milesian,
of which he wrote a particular Treatise according to the Testimony of Eudemus,
cited by Laertius.
Cancer's utmost Fires, The Summer Tropic, or Tropic of Cancer.

(Where Phoebus consummates his Light and stay,
Bearing through Not unlike is that of Nemesianus, -- Postquam Phoebus
candentem fervidus Axem Contigerit; tardasque vias, Cancrique Morantis Sidus
inest -- Where Ulitius gives the Reason of that Epithete Morantis, quia
Incrementa Dierum tarde adeo consummantur and (...), ut vix percipi possit, and
quasi sistatur Sol* whence the Solstice. The Explication whereof cannot be
better given than in the Words of Julius Scaliger in Problemat. Gellian. Is
Circulus quem Sol quotidie signat, non est Circulus* sed mag^s quaedam Spira.
Neque enim Revolutionis finis, eode^m committitur, unde initium habuerat: Major
enim Distantiae est a puncto, unde digressus est, ad punctum ad quem Horae 24
eum perduxere, ubi propior fit iis signis quae propius ad Aequinoctium
accedunt, propter obliquitatem. Itaque cum tendit ad Solstitia propter lineae
prope rectitudinem, vix vari^, ideo Solstitia dicta. That Circle which the Sun
by its daily Motion describes, is not a Circle, but rather a Spiral Line. For
the end of its Revolution is not terminated in the point, whence* it began. Its
Distance from that Point whence he digrest, unto that to which he is brought by
the Revolution of 24 hours, being greater when he is nearer those Signs which*
are ^ighest to the Aequinoctial by reason of the Obliquity of his Course. But
when he approaches the Solstitial Points by reason of the almost directness of
the said Line, there appears no variation of his Course, whence it is called
the Solstice.
tedious Rounds the tardy Day)
Does from the Season, and This Tropic is called (...), i. e. Tropicus
Aestivus, from the Heat of Summer, which We in the Northern Hemisphere enjoy,
when the Sun is near that Circle. It is described a l^sser Circle Parallel to
the Equator, whose distance from thence i^ equal to the Sun's greatest
Declination or the Obliquity of the Zodiac, which it touches in the first
point of Cancer. Its Office is on one side to terminate the Torrid Zone, on the
other, the Northern Temperate one, and to make the Summer Solstice and longest
day Northward, and the Winter Solstice, or shortest Day Southward.
Mid-Summers heat
Derive its Name; and to the Sun's Race set
The Extremest Bound: which That is 30 Degrees according to the usual and
received Division; see the like Distribution, as to the Distances of these
Parallel Circles, in Ge^inus conform to this of Manilius, (...). p. 19.
five Parts of the whole
Declines the Circle of the Northern Pole.
The This Circle is called by the Greeks (...), by the Latins, Aequidialis,
Aequinoctialis, Equator and Cingulum Mundi; Mariners commonly call it the
Line: It is one of the greater Circles of the Sphere, whose Poles are the same
with the Poles of the World, from either of which it is equally distant,
dividing the Calestial Globe into the Northern and Southern Hemisphere. It is
described, according to Clavins (in Sacrobose.) by an Imaginary Line draewn
from the Center of the World and extended to the first Point either of Aries or
Libra, and thence carried about by the Diurnal Revolution of the Primum Mobile.
In this the Sun being posited (which happens twice every Year, when he enters
the first Degrees of Aries and Libra) it makes the Days and Nights even.
Third, which the Worlds middle Region holds, The Equator or Aequinoct^at
Circle.

Olympus with a mighty Bend infolds,
On either Hand viewing the Pole; the Way,
In which the Sun makes even Night and Day.
When by the Springs and Autumn's Points he glides,
And Heaven in the midst by equal Parts divides.
This from the Solstice That is four Parts of 60, according to the Ancient
Division, or 24 of 360 according to the later and commonly received.
four Degrees retreits; The Winter Tropic, or Tropic of Capricorn.

The next beyond named from the This is called the Trospick of Capricorn, and
is decrib'd a smaller Circle Parallel to the Equator, whose Distance from
thence is equal to the Sun's greatest Declination, and touches the Ecliptic in
the first Point of Capricorn; on one side bounding the Torrid Southern Zone; on
the other, the Southern Temperate one; making the Winter Solstice or shortest
Day Northward, and the Summer Solstice and longest Day Southward.
Winter, sets
The utmost Bound to the Sun's backward flight,
Obliquely rend'ring us his For this reason says Macrobius ( Saturnal. l. 1. c.
21.) the Egyptians represented the Statue of the Sun with his Head shaven on
one side, and long Hair on the other. By the first intimating the time of the
Winter Solstice, cum velut abrasis Incrementis, angusta manente Exstantia, ad
Minimum Diei Sol pervenerit Spatium. By the later, the Summer Solstice, or his
full grown Splendor, to which he arrives by Degrees, emerging from those
straits of Light in his abode in this Winter Tropic: or to express it in
Macrobius his own Words, Ex quibus latebris vel Angustiis, rursus emergens, ad
aestivum Hemisphaerium enascens, in Augmenta porrigitur.
niggard Light
By a short Course; but long over Those He stays,
Whose Lands are warmed by his directer Rays;
The Of this We have given the reason and explication, in the Note upon the
Tropic of Cancer, and shall here only add, that the Ancient Egyptians when
they would express the Course of the Sun in his Solstice, signified the same by
the Hieroglyphick of two feet fasined together; (as represented by Pierius, l.
5. c. 41. and Casalius de Veter. Egypt. rit. c. 20.) Intimating thereby the
slowness of his Motion, or rather Stationary Condition, to which I know not
whether our Author in this place may allude, when he says, Vixque dies transit
-- As if the feet of the Day were fettered.
slow-paced Day there hardly passing round.
This from the Equator four Degrees is found.
One Circle more yet rests, whose The Antartick Polas Circle.
Site inclines
Towered the South Pole, and Southern Bears confines,
Ranged from the Winter Tropic five Degrees,
And near its Pole, as the North's far from his.
Thus Heaven in two divided, Pole from Pole,
Does by that double Sum measure the Whole, ( f) The Antartick or Southern
Polar Circle; which is described a smaller Circle, Parallel to the Equator,
passing about the Axis of the World by the Southern Pole of the Ecliptic,
comprehending the frigid Southern Zone, and terminating the temperate; and is
called the Antartick Polar Circle, in opposition to the Artick, before
described, to which it is equal.

And by The four Parallel lesser Circles before described, that is to say, the
two Tropicks, and two Polar Circles, mark out the Heavens into five Zones,
which by the Latins are called Fasciae, Cinguli, Plagae; and by Cicero,
Maculae and Orae. That included between the two Tropicks, is called the Torrid
Zone, which Polybius divided into two, parted by the Equator; but he is not
followed therein by any. The two included between the Tropicks and the Polar
Circles, are called the temperate; the other two included within the Polar
Circles, are called the Frigid Zones. Of these Thales is said to have been the
Inventor, though Posidonius cited by Strabo without ground ascribes it to
Parmenides.
five Bounds distinguished into The Distinction of the Zones not sufficing the
Ancients to mark out the various Position and Situation of several Regions on
either side of the Equator; They added diverse other Parallel Circles, which
they called Climates. A Climate being a little Zone included between two
Circles, parallel to the Equator, or between the Equator and one Circle
parallel thereunto, mutually distant from one another by the Arch of a
Meridian, answerable to an half hours difference, by which the longest day of
the Year under one Parallel varies from the longest Day of the Year under
another. They are called Climata, quasi Inclinamenta, as it were deflexious
from a right Position of Sphere, or so many st^ps and degrees, mounting from
the Equator toward the Poles. The Ancients reckoned only seven, which they
distinguished by the Names of the Places over o^ through which they passed:
Viz. (...), etc. i. e. Per Meroen^per Syenen^per Alexandriam, per Rhodum, per
Romam, per Pontum, per Boristhenem. But Modern Astronomers and Geographers
reckon 48. that is to say; from the Equator on each side, to either of the
Polar Circles 24. At which the Climates end; the longest day there exceeding
the ordinary Horary Measure, unless by a kind of Analogy We reckon Months and
half Months for hours and half hours. Those Climates are again by the Moderns
subdivided by drawing in the Middle of each Climate another Parallel Line,
dividing the same into two smaller Zones, which by a Peculiar name are termed
Parallels: Of which, the more remote from the Equator has the longest Day of
the Year differing from that nearer to it by the space of of an hour. These are
in number double to the Climates. Vide Weigel. Method. Sphaeric. l. 1. Sect. 1.
Cap. 3.
Climes,
Marks out the Difference of Place and Times.
Which (Parallels) One Course with Heaven partake,
And equal Rise with that and Setting make,
Since in the Ethereal Texture they observe
Their stated Distance, and thence never swerve.
Passing across by either Pole These are the Coluri, which are two great
Circles, cutting each other at right Angles in the Poles of the World. Whereof
one passes by the Aequinoctial, the other by the Solstitial Points of the
Zodiac. They are called (...), i. e. Mutili, because in our oblique Position
of Sphere, they never entirely appear above the Horizon, either at once or by
Successive Conversion.
two more
There are, which intersect all Those before,
And themselves too; concurring in the Extremes
Of the Worlds Axis at right-angled Scheams,
Which mark the Seasons out, and Heaven beside
Into four Quarters equally divide.
Of these, through highest Heaven its Course The Colurus Aequinoctiorum is
described a great Circle of the Sphere, passing by the Poles of the World, and
cutting the Equator at right Angles in the two Equinoctial Points or first
Degrees of Aries and Libra, whose Poles are in the first Points of Cancer and
Capricorn, or otherwise whose Poles are 90 Degrees distant from the first
Points of Aries and Libra.
one steers Colurus Aequinoctiorum.

Parting the Serpents Tail and undrench'd Bears,
And Tips of Scorpio's Claws, born through Mid-skies,
Of Hydra cutting the Extremities
And Middle of the Southern Centaur, then
Concurring in the Adverse Pole, again
Returns by the huge Whale: whose Scaly Chine,
Bright Trigon, and the Bounds the Ram confine
It marks; then by Cepheis Waste does run,
Her Mothers Head, and ends where it begun.
By the midst of this, the Worlds Extremity,
And the Fore-feet and Neck of Helice, Colurus Solstitiocum.

(Which first of all when Sol withdraws his Light
With seven fair Stars illuminates the Night)
The The Colurus (...) is a great Circle, passing by the Poles of the World and
Poles of the Zodiac, cutting both the Equator and Ecliptic at right Angles
in the So^al Points or first Degrees of Cancer and Capricorn, and has its
proper Poles in the first Degrees of Aries and Libra. To these two Circles are
to be applied this Vulgar Dis^ch: Haec duo Solstitium faciunt Cancer,
Capricornus,
Sed N^ies ae^uant Aries and Libra Diebus.

other runs; the Crab and Twins divides,
By the fierce Dog and Argo's steerage glides;
Then cross the formers traversed Signs is born
By the South Pole; Thee touching Capricorn!
Parting the Eagle from its Starry Fires
By the Lyre running, and the Dragons Spires;
Then cuts the less Bears Tail and hinder Feet,
And makes its End with its Beginning meet.
The Seasons thus have fixed within these Rounds,
Their Everlasting Seats and changeless Bounds.
These two are moveable: Whereof one Bend The Meridian.

Does through Mid-heaven from The Meridian Circle, by the Greeks called (...),
by the Latins, Meridianus, and by Astronomers Li^a M^dii Coeli, and M^ii D^i,
Cus^is Re^alis, Cardo R^ius, and M^aium Coeli. It is described a great Circle,
passing by the Poles of the World, and the Zenith and N^dir Points, and has
its proper Poles in the Aequinoctial Points of East and West, though Scaliger
upon this place (defended therein by the Learned Mr. Isaac Vossius Not. in
Me^am.) will have the Poles of every Meridian to be the Poles of the World. It
is called Meridian, because when the Center of the Sun reaches it, it is Noon
or Midday, to all such as are directly under that Circle, when the Sun is
above the Horizon.
Helice ascend,
The Day distinguishes, the sixth Hour tries,
And at just distance East and West descries,
Changing the Signs by turns, still as we run,
Or towered the rising or the setting Sun,
Cutting Heavens hightith' midst; and with Earth's Place,
Varies the Skies Position, and Times Race.
The Reason thus rendered by Macrobius in Some. Scip. l. I. c. 15. Quia Globosuas
Terrae Habitationes omnium aequales sibi esse non patitur; non eadem Pa^s Coeli
omnium verticem despicit. Et ideo unus omnibus Meridianus esse non poterit: sed
singulis Gentibus super verticem suum pr^prius Meridianus eff^citur: and
therefore the Meridian is distinguished into the General and Particular; the
General being one and always the same; the Particular, on the contrary, mutable
and diverse, according to the change and diversity of Place, either Eastward or
Westward, and may be imagined as numerous as there are vertical Points. Vide
Bartschium in Planisphaer. Stellat. c. 2.
All have not one Meridian; the Hours fly round:
When first we see Sol rise from the Eastern Sound,
It Is their sixth Hour by his St^ler in his Commentary upon Proclus, conceives
that Manilius here by the Golden Orb, means the Meridian Circle, and imagines
it to deserve that Title, because the Island Taprobana, being as he says, in
Meridiem exposita, is famous for its plenty of Gold and Silver. A ridiculous
Interpretation; for aureus Orbis is not to be understood of the Meridian
Circle; but of the Globe of the Sun, coming to and pressing upon the Meridian.
gold Orb then pressed;
Such theirs, when he to us sets in the West.
These two This Place has exercised and foiled the Wits of the greatest
Critics; the Verse in the Latin is this, Nos primam, and summam sextam
numeramus utramque.

S^aliger interpreting Primam and summam for one and the same hour; quia summa
hora Noctis (i. e. duodecima says he) confecta, incipit (...), as the Athenians
used to term the last day of the Month (...), The Old and the New. But this is
far from the (...) of Manilius. Gassendus endeavoring to mend the matter,
instead of primam and summam, conceives it ought to be read Im^m and Summam, ab
(...) inter Imam and Summam Antithesin (says he,) by Im^m understanding the
Hour of Midnight, by Summam that of Midday; but this is yet wide from the
Mark. Salmasius undertaking to put a better sense upon the words than the
former, is himself grav^l'd; for thus he expounds this and the 3 foregoing
Verses. Cum Sol oritur Romany, etc. when the Sun (says he) rises at Rome, it
is their first Hour of the Day, but to the Indians their sixth, or Noon; and
again when it is Noon to the Romans, it is Sun set to the Indians or their last
Hour of the Day; so either of these Hours, viz. the first and the (...) says
he) by reason of the Diversity of Meridians is reckoned for the sixth hour;
which Interpretation reaches not the meaning of (...); being justly reproved by
Pe^avius, in Vranol^g. l. 7. who thus expounds both this and the three
foregoing Ver^s. (...) est says he) Manilium, Tractum illum terrarum and (...),
ubi tum degebat, in medio ponere, and quae utrinque distant (...) longitu^ 90,
cum Habitatione sua confer. Qui ad Ortum siti sunt Eoos appellare, qui ad
Oc^asum, Hesperi^s, etc. Hence he infers, when the Sun seems to rise at Rome,
it is in the Meridian of those that are posited 90 Degrees Eastward from
thence; and again, when the Sun at Rome seems to set, it makes the like sixth
Hour or Noon to those so posited Westward: Either of which sixth (...) ^r
N^ontides to those Eastward or Westward, they at Rome count not their sixth
Hour, but name the one, the first, the (...), the last Hour of their Day. This
Exposition of Petavius (whereunto our Interpretation is consonant) speaks the
(...) of the words, which I held my self obliged thus to clear, lest the
Authority of the other great Persons might be objected against us, or impo^e
upon the Reader.
sixth Hours we count our first, and last,
When from the Extremes of Light By Reason of the obliquity and depression of
the Suns light at Morning and Evening, the Air likewise being then coolest in
regard of the chill Briezes usually stirring. Hence the Evening in Genesis 3.
ver. 8. is called Ru^h, i. e. spiritus seu ventus Diei; and what by the (...)
is there rendered (...), or the Evening, is by others rendered (...), and (...),
i. e. adspiritum seuventum Diei. Vide Salmas. in Epictet. et Simplic. p. 125.
chill Beams are cast.
The This Circle is called Horizon, from the Greek (...). coming from the Verb
(...), which signifies to bound, or terminate, for which reason it is by the
Latins called Finiens and Fini^or, because it bounds the sight. It is divided
into the Rational (which is likewise called the Natural and Astronomical) and
the Sensible (which is likewise called the Physical, Apparent and Artificial:)
the Rational Horizon is described a great Circle of the Sphere, whose Poles are
the Zenith and Nadir Points, (though Scaliger with the approbation of Mr. Isaac
Vossius makes the Poles of every Horizon to be as well the Ae-quinoctial Points
of East and West) dividing the Globe equally into the upper and lower
Hemisphere. The Sensible Horizon is described a smaller Circle, parallel to the
Rational, dividing the Sphere into two unequal Segments, of which the uppermost
is the least. This though in respect to any one particular place, it be
immovable, yet generally it is to be conceived mutable, forasmuch as when we
change any Place upon the Earth, we likewise change the Horizon.
others Bound if thou desir'st to know, The Horizon.

Look round about far as thy sight will go,
What e're Earths Surface with Heavens Verge does close,
And the divided Hemispheres compose;
Couches in Seas the Stars and thence does send;
Rounding the traversed Earth with a slight Bend;
That, shifting Place about the World still flies,
Now more and more unto the South applies,
Now to the North again as much inclines,
Now runs against, now with the The Latin has -- Mota sub Astra. Which
Salmasius (in Plin. Exercitat. p. 661) Criticizing upon this Place, will needs
read muta sub Astra. Interpreting muta Astra (...), i. e. not apparent; and by
those words conceives our Author implies the Antartick Pole, to us invisible.
But as Petavius says, mutum esse praestat, quam talia dicere; for M^nilius by
-- Mota sub Astra, means only the shifting of the Horizon East or West, either
against or with the Course of the Stars, as Petavius rightly expounds those
Words. Per Mota Astra (says he) Orientem atque Occidentem breviter eleganterque
designat Manilius. Vide illum, Uranolog. l. 7. c. 14.
moved Signs.
But wheresoever its wandering Course it steers,
As now to this, then to that Part it bears,
It changes still; a new Arch always making;
For leaving now this Heaven, then that forsaking,
One half 'twill still disclose, or hide, and sign
With varying Limits which the Sight confine.
This is terrestrial, 'cause the Earth it rounds,
And called Horizon, 'cause the sight it bounds.
To these two others add, obliquely born,
Whereof the That is the Zodiac; by Ptolomy called (...), i. e. Circulus
Animalium; because parted into 12. Signs, resembling men and other living
Creatures. The Jewish Astronomers give it several other Denominations, as
Galgal Hammazzaloth, i. e. Orbis Signorum, and Ighul Hammatzaloth, i. e.
Circulus Signorum, and Ophun Hammazzaloth, i. e. Rota Signorum; and Ezor
Hammazzaloth, ie. Zona Signorum. The Syrians call it Chudronutho de Malushe, i.
e. Circulus Signorum, and the Arabs Phelek Al Burugi, i. e. Orbis Signorum. By
the Latins it is called Signifer, and by the Greeks (...), and is described ^
Circle or rather a Fascia or Zone obliquely passing from East to West by the
Aequinoctial and Solstitial Points, parted in the midst by the Ecliptic, which
divides it into two Parts, the one Northern the other Southern, which are
terminated by the Circumferences of two imaginary Circles less than one of the
great Ones, distant so far from the Ecliptic, as is the greatest Latitude of
any Planet from then^e; The Invention of this Circle is by some ascribed to
Pythagoras, by others, to Oenopides the Chian, by some again, to Anaximander
the Milesian. Vide Plutarch. de Placit. Philosoph. and Plin. l. 2. c. 8.
one twelve radiant Signs adorn, The Zodi^k.

Through which the Sun runs his Career of Light,
And the Moon follows in her Coach of Night,
And five Stars more against Heavens swift Course advance
Their Meaning the Primary and proper Motion of the Planets from the West to
East; for their Secundary or Diurnal Motion from East to West is not their own,
but that of the Primum Mobile, by which they are violently carried about
contrary to their own Course. Which double Motion of the Planets is elegantly
thus described by Germanicus in Arataeis: Omnibus his gemini Motus, quorum
alter ab ipsis
N^scitur, and proprios ostendit sydere Nisus,
(Tunc Mundum subeunt lentopede) concitus Alter
Invi^os rapit, and Coeli circumrotat Orbem.
All these have double Motions; one their own,
By which their proper Tendency is shown,
That Is a slow March; the other's swift, and bears
Them running Counter, back with the rapt Spheres.

oppositely Nature-guided Dance.
On whose Top Cancer, Base the Goat resides,
Twice through the Equator runs it, twice divides
At Libra and the Ram; whose sloping Bend
Obliquely by three Circles does extend;
Not hid; nor, as the rest (discerned alone
By mental view) Though our Author here speaking Poetically, make the Zodrack
a visible Circle, because the 12 Signs moving in it are visible; yet properly
speaking as it is taken for a Fascia or Zone, it is but (...), perceivable only
by Reason. And therefore Geminus in Isagog. says rightly, that of all the
Circles in the Heavens, only the via Lactea is perceivable by sense, the rest
being no otherwise discernible than by the Eye of Reason.
to mental view is shown;
But shines a glittering Hence by the Arabs called Al Mintaca and Nitac, i. e.
Baltheus, and by the Jewish Astrologers, Ch^hebh Ephadath Haggalgal, i. e. Opus
Phrygionarium, or Limbus Textilis, according to Scaliger. Why this Circle above
any of the rest is called Baltheus seu Cingulum (from the like denomination of
(...) and (...) given to it by the Greeks) take from Ulitius in Nemes. p. 341.
Ideo veteres Zodiacum Baltheum dixerunt Astrologi, quia obliquus Meridianum
secat. And before him Balforeus (in Libr. 1. Cleomed.) Zodiacus Appellationem
Bal^hei, (quem etiamnum b^die transversum gestamus) apud Manilium meruit. Et
omnino haec forma Balthei, a dextro humero ad latus sinistrum per medium Corpus
oblique ducti, Zodiaci Situm optime exprimit.
Belt with bright Stars graced,
And girdles with its golden Fires Heavens Waste.
Degrees three hundred and thrice twenty counts
Its Circles Round; its Breadth to Sacroboscus (says Rieciolus Tom. 1. l. 1. p.
19. in Schol.) and Clavius upon him, give to the Zodiac 12 Degrees of
Latitude, because for the most part the Planets recede not from the Ecliptic
above 6 Degrees on either side. But Regiomontanus extends the Latitude thereof
to 16. others otherwise. For Kepler gives 7 Degrees of Northern Latitude to
Mars; to Venus in her greatest Evagation 10, or according to Argol ( Pandos.
Sphaer. c. 29) 9degr. -- 3. So that the Total Latitude of the Zodiac according
to Modern Observation is extended to no less than 20 Degrees.
twelve amounts:
Within which measured Limits is confined
The Planet's Motion, variously inclined.
The The Galaxie, or Milky way, by the Greeks called (...) and (...), by the
Latins Circulus lacteus, and Orbis lacteus. By the Arabs according to
Scaliger, Tarick Al lubbana, i. e. Via lactea; according to Kirker, Almegiret
or rather Magierra, i. e. Tractatrix, and Tarick Al Tibn, i. e. Via straminis;
and to the same sense by the Aethiopians, Chasara 'tsamangadu. ( Isis according
to the Egyptian Fable in her flight from Typhon scattering bundles of fired
straw to retard his pursuit, whence the Original of that Name) In Syriack it is
called Shevil Tevno; by the Persians, Rah Kahkeshan, i. e. Via Paleamtrahens;
the Turks call it Saman Ughrisi, i. e. Pal^am rapiens. In the Coptick Tongue it
is called Pinoiten Tepitoc, i. e. Via straminis; others call it Viam Romae, and
Viam Sancti Iacobi. The Turks, Hagjiler Yuli, i. e. Via festum Agentium, or the
way of Pilgrims to Mecha; by the Egyptian Astrologers called Porta Mansionum
Lunae. It is a great Circle having for Center the Center of the World, or
rather an oblique Conspicuous Zone, of a different Breadth or Latitude, being
no where broader than 10 Degrees, and in some places not exceeding 6 or 7. in
some stretching to 8 or 9. Where its Course is not divided. From this Circle,
as Pliny ( l. 18. ^. 29.) reports, the Ancients believed all Plants received
their Milky Juice or Nourishment; and hence perhaps is that Arabic Name of Um
Al Sama, i. e. Matter Coeli, (quasi ejus lactatrix) Nor less famous for the
strange Productions, which Modern Eperience has observed therein; it being
found the Storehouse from whence have issued all the new Phaenomena's that
have happened either in this or the precedent Age.
other, carried towered the opposed Bears Galaxia or the Milkie Way.

Its Course close by the Artick Circle steers,
And by inverted Cassiopea tends;
Thence by the Swan obliquely it descends
The Summer Tropic, and Jove's Bird divides,
Then cross the Equator and the Zodiac glides
'Twixt Scorpio's burning Tail, and the left Part
Of Sagittarius, near the fiery Dart;
Then by the other Centaure's Legs and Feet
Winding, remounts the Skies (again to meet)
By Argo's Topsail and Heaven's middle Sphere,
Passing the Twins to overtake the Charioteer;
Thence Cassiopea seeking Thee does run,
Over Perseus Head, and ends where it begun.
Three middle Circles and the Zodiac too
Twice passing, and by that as often past through.
Nor needs it to be sought; its obvious Course
It self illustrates, and the sight does force;
For in the azure skies its candid Way
Shines like the dawning Morn, or closing Day;
And as by often passing over some Green,
An even Path, parting the Mead, is seen;
Or as a Ship plowing the Seas smooth Plain,
Of foaming Bubbles leaves a silver Train:
So shines its milky Path in the dark Night,
Parting the blew Skies with its numerous Light.
And as through Clouds the Rainbow does extend,
So on Olympus Height shows its white Bend,
And Mortals fills with Wonder, whilst they spy
New Lights unknown Flames darting through the sky.
The sacred Causes humane Breasts enquire,
Whether the Heavenly The Opinion of Diodorus, who conceived the via lactea to
be a Celestial fire, of a dense and compacted Nature, showing it self through
the Clefts of the starting and dividing Hemispheres, as Macrobius in Somn.
Scip. ( l. 1. c. 15.) expresses it, Ignem densatae concretaeque naturae, in
unam curvi Limitis Semitam Discretione Mundanae fabricae coacervante concretum.
Hence says Gassendus we may observe Genium Stoicae Providentiae. They
calculating the Destruction of the World to commence from the Breach or
loosening of the Commissures of the closed Globe. To which doubtless Manilius
here alludes. Vide Gassend. Tom. 1. l. 1. p. 506, 507.
Segments there retire Various Opinions concerning the Galaxie.

(The whole Mass shrinking) and the parting Frame
Through cleaving Chinks admits the stranger flame?
Astonishment must sure their Senses reach
To see the Worlds wounds, and Heavens gaping breach!
Or meets Heaven here? and this white cloud appears
The fancy of Theophrastus, that great Philosopher, who declared the Galaxie to
be no other than the soldering and knitting together of the Hemispheres. So
Macrobius delivers it, Lacteum dixit esse Compagem, qua de duobus Hemisphaeriis
Coeli Sphaera solidata est; and ubi O^ae convenerint notabilem Claritatem
videri. Vide illum loco ^oitat.
The Cement of the close-wedg'd Hemispheres?
Or seems that old Opinion of more sway
That the Sun's Oen^pides Chius (according to Achilles Tatius in Arat.
Phaenomen.) affirmed that this Circle was anciently the Course of the Sun; till
frighted from that Tract by Thyestes his bloody Banquet, he chose this he now
holds in the Zodiac, but left behind him the Impression of his former Course.
Of which ridiculous Opinion was likewise Metrodorus, and some other
Pythagoreans, whereof Plutarch in Placit. Philosoph. l. 3. c. 1.
Horses here once ran astray,
And a new Path marked in their straggling flight
Of scorched Skies, and Stars adusted Light,
Changing to paler white Heavens azure Face,
And with the burnt Worlds Ashes strewn the Place?
Fame likewise from old Time to us succeeds
How See Ovid Metamorphos. l. 2. and Plutarch loco citat.
Phaeton driving his Fathers Steeds
Through radiant Signs, and with a wounding Eye
Viewing the approached Beauties of the Sky,
(Whilst in his Chariot proud he childlike plays,
And things yet greater than his Sire essays)
Left the known Path, and a rough Tract impressed
In the smooth Skies, whilst wandering Flames infest
The affrighted Signs, not brooking the loose Course
Of the erring Chariot and ill-guided Horse.
Hence the whole World became a fiery spoil,
And burning Cities made Earths funeral Pile;
When from the hurried Chariot Lightning fled,
And scattered Blazes all the Skies o'respred;
By whose approach new Stars enkindled were,
Which still as Marks of that sad Chance appear.
Nor must that gentler Rumor be suppressed,
How Eratosthenes as cited by Ac^iller Tatius in Arati Phaenomen. is reputed
the Father of this Fable, in his Book entitled (...), i. e. Partitio (or
rather (...), i. e. Asterismi) which is by Achilles Tatius thus related. (...),
etc. Hercules being an Infant sucking at Juno's breast, and too hardly pressing
the Nipple, she suddenly withdrew it, and spilt the milk, which formed this
Circle in the Heavens. The like (says he) is reported by the same Eratosthenes
of Mercury's sucking Juno.
Milk once flowing from fair Juno's Breast,
Stained the Celestial Pavement; from whence came
This Milky Path, its Cause shown in its Name.
Or is it a This is the true Cause of the G^laxie; which long since by
Conjecture and probable Reason was asserted by Democritus, as Plutarch ( in
Placitis Philosoph.) attests. But since the Invention of the Telescope, clearly
demonstrated by Galilaeo, Kepler, and others.
Crowd of Stars crowning the Night?
A candid Diadem of condensed Light?
Or The ancient Ethnicks believed the condensed light of the Milky way to
proceed from the Crowd and multitude of valiant, wise, and Pious Souls
inhabiting that Circle. Hence Macrobius in Somn. Scipionis. Rursus filium
Pater, ut in Deos Piu^, nt in homines Iustus esset, hortatus Praemium adjecit,
Ostendens Lacteum Circulum, virtutibus debitum, and Beatorum Coetu r^fertum.
Believed no less even by Christians, (as is manifest by that Prayer of Ausonius
in Ephemeride: Pande viam qua me post vincula Corporis aegri,
In sublime feram; puri qua lactea Coeli
Semita ventesae superat vag a lumina Lunae:
Qua Proceres abiere Pii. --)
Of the Original of which Error La Cerda (in Virgil. Bucolic. Eclog. 5.) from
the Authority of Philo ((...)) gives this Reason. In the highest Heavens (says
Philo) are most pure Souls, which the Greek Philosophers call Heroes; Moses
from their Office, Angels. Whence it may appear that the Heathens having some
dark Notion of the Angels, called them by the Names o^ their Heroes, and fixed
them here. Vide etiam Turneb. Adversar. l. 13. c. 2.
valiant Souls freed from corporeal Gives Believed anciently the Sea^ of
Heroic Souls.

Thither repair and lead Aetherial Lives?
There the Agamem^on and (...) the Sons of Atreus, Kings of Mycenae and Sparta,
and Generals of the Grecian Forces against the Trojans.
Atrides, there the Aeacides,
Fierce Son of Tydeus and Deiphile, King of Ae^olia, one of the most valiant
Commanders of the Greeks against the Tr^jans.
Diomede; He, who through Lands and Seas ( e) (...) The Grandchild of Ae^cus
by Pel^us and The^is, the most signal of the Greeks in the Trojan War, and
Pyr^bus or (...) his Son.

His Triumphs over conquered Nature reared,
That Epithete being peculiar to him, who is likewise called (...) and (...),
ob mu^tiformem prudentiae varietatem, says Coelius Rhodigin. l. 14. c. 18. and
Polyeides a perspicaci solertia rerumque prudentia, as Ianus Parrhasius Syllog.
4. Epistol. 39. The Mythology of Ulysses (by which is chiefly denoted Wisdom,
quae invicta per omnia pericula intrepide pertransit) See in Natalis Comes l.
9. c. 1.
Subtle Ulysses, We believe inspher'd.
There Nestor's throned among the Grecian Peers,
Crowned with -- Senecta Ins^gnem Triplici -- Says the Original in an
indefinite sense, by Senecta expressing what Homer ( Ili^d. 1.) calls (...), i.
e. aetatem. seu aevum. Hence Nevius in Alceste (as cited by Aulus Gellius)
calls Nestor Trisech-senem, and by Horace he is styled Senex^ter Aevo functus.
But there is much difference among the Ancients about the extent of this (...)
or Aetas; the same being diversely interpreted by diverse. Herodicus, as cited by
Censorinus de Die Natal. c. 171. stretches it no further than to 25 years.
Zenon and Heraclitus to 30, with whom consents Artemidorus Oneirocrit. l. 2. c.
75 according to which Computation Porphyrius ( in libro de Homericis
Quaestionibus) and Eustathius determine of the longevity of Nestor. Others
enlarge it, making 3 (...) equal to 100 years. So Herodotus l. 2. and Clemens
Alexandrinus Stromat. l. 1. p. 335. But taken in its greatest extent, a (...)
or Aetas amounts to no less than 100 years, as appears by Genes. c. 15. v. 13
and 16. and according to this Computation most of the Latins sum up the Age of
Nestor. So Ovid in the person of Nestor:

-- Vixi Annos bis Centum, nune tertia vivitur aetas. In which sense Tibullus,
Propertius and Iuvenal are to be taken, when they say of Nestor that he lived
terna and tri^ Saecul^, and so we have adventured to interpret (...) Senect^m.
Vide Francisc. Floridum Sabinum. Lect. sub^isiv. l. 2. c. 3.
a triple Century of years.
M^mnon the Son of Aurora by Tithon, who came to the succor of Troy with 20
Thousand Foot, and 200 Chariots, being sent (according to Diod^rus Siculus, l.
2.) by Teutamo, King of the Assyrians, slain by Achilles, or rather by the
Treachery of the (...), famous for the yearly combat performed at his Monument
by the Fowls called Aves Memnoniae, raised from his Ashes, as it were in an
Annual Parentation to his Memory. Of which see Ovid Metamorphos. l. 13. Pliny
l. 10. c. 26. Solinus, and his Exercitator Salmasius Tom. 2 p. 870. and 871.
Nor less signal for his Statue at Thebes in Egypt after the fashion of a man
sitting, of an entire black Marble, the upper part being broken off from the
seat by some Earthquake, as both Strabo and Pausanius, eyewitnesses, report;
which every day at the Sun rising, or as Phil^stratus says, when touched by the
Sunbeams, rendered a sound not unlike that of a Harp or Lute. Cheerful at the
Suns approach, at his deparure or setting, sad. Strabo yet doubting whether the
Musical sound proceeded from that Cause, or from some Artif^ce, within the
Basis of the Statue, or from some of the Company or bystanders. Vide Strab^nem
l. 17: The Satyrist Iuvenal ( Satyr. 1.) ascribes it to Magic. Dimidio Magicae
resonant ubi Memnone chordae. See likewise Coelius Rhodiginus Antiqu. lect.
libr. 22. c. 5. and Scho^tus in Ortel. Tabul.
Aurora's Black Son, He who Sarpedon King of Lycia, Son of Jupiter and Europa,
according to Herod^tus and (...) Sicu^us; but as Homer will, of Jupiter and
Laodamia; slain in the defense of the Trojans against the Greeks by Patroclus,
of whom Jupiter in Virgil, -- Occidit una Sarpedon mea Progenies -- Who is said
to have mourned his loss with tears of blood, as Homer Iliad 16. Ausonius
bestowing upon him this Epitaph.

Sarpedon Lycius, geni^us Jove, Numine Patris
Sperabam Coelum, sed teg or hoc tumulo,
Sanguineis fletus lachrymis, beu ferrea fata!
E^ (...) luctum qui probibere potest?
I Lycia's King, Jove's Son, who thought to gain
Heaven by my Birth, Sarpedon, here lie slain:
Wept for with bloody Tears; dire fate! must he
Know grief, who souls from grief can only free?

Lycia swayed
Jove's Royal Issue; and Thou (...). Daughter of Mars, according to Diodorus
Siculus ( l. 2.) whence by our Poet, styled M^vortia Virgo; and by Calaber, l.
I. (...), Empress of the Amazons^, signal for her valor against the Greeks in
the defense of Ili^m, falling at length by the destroying hand of Achilles,
which see in Calaber. (...).
Martial Maid!
The Kings whom Asia did or Greece beget,
Or To the same purpose Mela. l. 2. c. 3. Macedonum Populi centum quinquaginta
u^bes inhabitant, quarum Pella and Maxima and Illustris. Alumni efficient;
Philippus Graeciae Domitor, Alexander eti^m Asiae. It was seated upon a Lake,
not far from the Sea, into which run the two Rivers, Axius, now called Bardari
or Vardari, and by some Vistrizz^, and Ludias, now Castoro. The Greeks at this
day call it (...), i. e. Paru^ Palatia, where are daily dig'd up Marbles with
Ancient Inscriptions, and the foundations of Princely Buildings, in the Place,
where the Inhabitants believe the Palace of Philip and Alexander stood, as the
learned Lucas (...) ( in Annotat. in Or^elium) from the Authority of Critopulus
reports. By the Romans it was called Colonia Iulia Augusta, being made a Colony
either by Augustus Caesar, or some other of the Roman Emperors, as the
curiously diligent Spanhemius proves from the Testimony of Ancient Medails, in
Dissertat. de Prae^t. and usu Numism Dissert. 9. Vide etiam Pa^in in Number.
Imper. Romans p. 195 and 370. By the Turks it is at this day called Ieniza, or
Ienizza, which in their Language signifies a New Town.
Pella justly greatest in the Great.
There those whom Wisdom has exalted, shine;
Just The Athenian Law g^r, who deserved that Epithete, ^is (...) M^deramine
Legibus; for the Justice and Equity of his Laws; as Ammianus Marcellinus ( l.
22.) attest^* who further adds that the Model of his Laws, Romano quoque Iu^i
maximum addidit Firmamentum, added also to the Roman State the greatest
Foundation. For the Rom^s as Li^y ( l. 3.) writes, agreeing concerning Laws in
General, but differing about the Lawgiver, sent Ambassadors to Athens, Sp.
(...) A^bus, A. Manlius, and P. Sulpitius Camerinus, commanding them to
transcribe the renowned Laws of Solon: which transferred out of the Books of
Solon, the Decemviri expounded in the 12 Tables, as Aurel. Victor. de Viris
Illustr.
Solon, stout The famous Spartan Legislator; who to ennoble his Laws pretended
he received them from Apollo, as Cicero ( de Divi^. l. 1.) or according to
Lucian ( in Astrolog.) (...), derived from his skill in Astronomy; He
contemperating his Laws according to the Course and Influence of the Celestial
Bodies. Hence one of his Laws was, that the Spartans should never go forth to
War before the full of the Moon. But rather according to the Scholiast of
Thucydides (in l. 2.) really comp^l'd out of the Laws of the Cretans and
Egyptians. See besides Plutarch ( in vita Lycurgi) the learned Io. Meu^sius
Miscellan. Lacenic. l. 2. c. 5.
Lycurgus, the That Epithete being given him for the excellency of his Style,
Manners, and Philosophy; of which Cicero in Tusculan. l. 9. Credamus Panaetio
(speaking of Plato) quem omnibus l^cis Divinum, quem Sapientissimum, quem
Homerum Philosophorum appellat; nay he sticks not elsewhere to call him
Philosophorum Deum. By Numenius in Clemens Alexandrinus ( Stromat. l. 1.) he is
styled (...). Moses Articissans. Vide etiam Suidam in voce (...).
Divine
Plato, and Socrates the Instructor of Plato.
He who made him such; whose Doom
Justlier The unjust Condemnation of Socrates brought a General Calumny upon
Athens. Hear Socrates in defense of himself in Xenophons Apology (...), etc.
That I die unjustly will not trouble me. It is not a reproach to me, but i^
th^se that condemned me. Nor brought it only a Calumny, but a Calamity
likewise; for as Eunaplus ( in Aedesio) observes, from thence forward the
Athenians did nothing considerable, but the City by degrees decayed, and with
it all Greece.
condemns his Athens: He Scaliger by Persidis Victor (in the Original)
understands Xerxes the Persian Monarch; so likewise Tanaquil Faber ( not. in
Lucret.) who instead of Victor would read Rector. We rather conceive
Themistocles to be here meant, Author of that signal Defeat given to Xerxes
his Naval Forces, before Salamis, wherein was the strength of all Persia, (of
which in Herodotus, l. 8.) For what had timorous Xerxes to do among the valiant
Heroes? The Verse in the Latin is thus commonly read, Persidis and Victor
strarat qui Classibus aequor. Gronovius ( in Di^trib. ad S^atii Sylv.) instead
of qui, reads quae, which gives us clearly the sense of the Verse according to
our Interpretation.
by whom
Persia was foiled, which strow'd with Fleets the Main,
And Roman Worthies, the more numerous Train.
There Is all their Festus ( in breviari^) Regnaverunt Romae per annos 243.
Reges numero septem, etc. Romulus the first, who Reigned 37 years, (then the
Senate for one year) Numa P^mpilus 43. Tullus Hostilius 32. Ancus Marcus 24.
Priscus Tarquinius 38. Servius Tullius 44* and Tarquinius Superbus 25. in the
last of which years he was expelled by Brutus and his Faction.
Kings but the Proud Tarquin; there
The Story of the 3 Curiatii and the 3 Horatii Brethren, the first Albans, the
other Romans, (who when the two Armies under the Command of Metius Suffetius,
General of the Albans, and Tullus Hostilius King of the Romans were ready to
join, upon Parl^y, were chosen out on both sides to end the quarrel by Combat)
is sufficiently known, recorded by Livius, l. 1. Dionys. Halicarnass. l. 3.
Lucius Florus l. 1. c. 3. Aurel. Victor de viris Illustr. and others. One of
the Horatii only surviving the Duel, to which Manilius elsewhere alludes. l. 2.
Nulla Acies tantum vicit; pendebat ab uno
Roma viro --
No Battle ever was so fought; Rome's state
Depended upon one man's single Fate.

The Horatii, who their Sides sole Army were;
So Sidenius Apollinaris in Carmine de Narbone, -- Trunco Mutius eminet
lacerto. Than whom none is more celebrious in the Roman Stories; his daring
Attempt comprised in this Epigram in Catalect. Veter. P^t.

Lictor^m p^o Regen^eans nunc Mutius ultro
Sacrific^ propriam c^ncremat igne Manum.
Miratur Porsenna virum, poenamque relaxans
Maxim cum obs^ssis soedera Victor in^.
Plus flammis P^triae confert quam for tibus Armis,
Una d^mans Bellum funere dextra suo.
Stead of the King his Lictor Mutius slew,
Then makes his Hand in Flames its Error rue.
Porsenna wonders; does his Pains release,
And Victor with the even vanquished makes a Peace.
More to his Country, than stout Arms and Swords,
By its self Ruin one Brave Hand affords.
Rewarded* by the Senate with the Ground where Porsenna pitched his Pavilion
and Camp; called from thence Mutia Prata; and honored with a Statue; which
seems too great a Reward for an Act of Desperate Assasination, (for it is
censured no other by Tertullian in Apologet.) and derogatory from the Roman
Magnanimity to encourage or recompense such an Attempt against a free Prince,
waging a fair and lawful War. But Paganinus Gaudentius excuses the Roman
Senate, as rewarding the (...), not Intention of his Act. Vide ^um de 'Fatti
del Grand. Alessandro. See likewise Alberic. Gentilis arguing upon this Act of
Scaevola's Pr^ and C^n. l. 1. and 2. de Armis Roman.
Scaevola glorying in his Arms stump; then,
A Roman Virgin, one of the Hostages (amongst others of her Sex) in Porsenna's
Camp, who one Night deceiving her Keepers lead her Fellows within the shot and
darts of the Enemies to take the Tiber and swim to Rome for their Liberty: For
which Fact admired even by Porsenna, who extolled Rome as happy not only in
breeding Men of Valor, but Virgins of like Bravery; The Romans perpetuating
her Memory by a Brazen Equestral Statue at the Head of the via sacra: under
which, as Aldus Manutius ( in Cicer. Offic. l. ^.) affirms, were these Verses
engraven* VOS ETENIM JUVENES ANIMUM GERITIS MULIEBRE ILLA VIRAGO VIRI -- Paul
Merula conceiving Ennius to be the Author of those Verses in 4 Annal. and to
be the very Encomium which Porsenna gave of her daring spirit. This Statue
Dionys. Halicarnass. l. 5. reports to have been destroyed by the firing of the
Neighboring Houses before his Time. See likewise Livy l. 1. Plutarch in Vita
Poplicolae Valor. Max. l. 3. c. 2. and Pliny l. 34. c. 6. who yet from the
Authority of Annius Faecialis reports it was not Claelia but Valeria, the
Daughter of Publicola that was so honored. But it were Injury to deprive this
Lady of her Ancient Merit, whose Story affords such Romantique Divertisement to
our Modern Ladies.
Claelia although a Maid more Brave than Men.
Horatius Cocles, so called for having formerly lost one of his eyes in a
Combat; renowned* (...) his Valor in singly defending the Sublician Bridge
against a whole Troop of the Thuscans, until the Bridge (as he direct^) was cut
down behind him, who then, armed as he was, threw himself into the Tiber,
crying out, Veniat si quis vult sic euntem sequi; and swam safe
(notwithstanding a multitude of Darts and Javelins thrown after him) to Rome:
yet Polybius ( l. 6.) expressly affirms him to have perished in the Attempt.
However it was, he is said for this eminent piece of service to have been by
the Romans rewarded with as much ground, as could be ploughed in one day, and
honored with a Statue in the Comitium with a Civick Wreath or Mural Crown.
Which Statue of his coming after to be stricken with Thunder; The Romans
consulting the Etrurian South-sayers about the Omen, were by them (out of
Malice to such a Monument of exemplary valor performed against them) persuaded
to take the Statue from the Place, where it stood, and to set it in some
obscure low ground, where the Sun might not shine upon it. This being
performed, and the People understanding at whose instance it was done; the
South-sayers were called before them and examined; who confessing their
perfidious intent, were condemned and executed, and the Statue planted in a
higher Place, in the Area of Vulcan's Temple, which proved happy and successful
to the Commonwealth. Upon this Occasion grew that Common Proverb (expressing
the sense of that Greek Verse in Hesiod (...). Malum Consilium Consultori
Pessimum*). To be taken up and sung by the Young People and Children of Rome,
as Aulus Gellius, from the Authority of the Annals Maximi and Verrius Flaccus
his memorable Stories, relates. l. 4. c. 5.
Cocles with Romes Walls crowned which he maintained,
And He who by a Crows Assistance gained
Both Spoils and Name, Marcus Valerius, who when Camillus, the younger, pursued
the Relics of the Galli Senones, being then a Tribune o^ Colonel, undertook
the Combat with the Giant-like General of the Gauls, who dared the stoutest of
all the Roman Army to a single Encounter. In the Conflict a Crow is said to
have pearched upon Marcus Valerius his Helmet, and to have assaulted the face
of his Enemy, wounding him with his Beak and Tallons, and buffeting him with
his wings, by which Assistance he vanquished and slew the Gaul, and from thence
gained the Surname of Corvinus; rewarded beside with a Donative^ of ten Oxen,
and a Crown of Gold; as Livy l. 7. c. 36. reports. Which Story of the Crow the
learned Vossius ( Idololatr. l. 1. c. 27.) conceives to be fabulous, and will
have it to be only a Figure of a Crow upon his Crest or Helmet, according to
the Custom of the Ancients who adorned their Casques with the Effigies of
several Birds and Beasts. Against which his Conjecture we shall only oppose
these Words of Aulus Gellius l. 9. c. 11. de M. Valerio, qui Corvinus
appellatus est, ob Auxilium Propugnationemque Corvi Alitis, haud Quisquam est
Nobilium Scriptorum qui secus dixerit. Augustus Caesar erecting a Statue to
Corvinus in the Portico of his Forum, as the said Gellius affirms Rei Pugnaeque
Monumentum. Nor seems it more incredible than what is reported of Alexander the
Great, while he fought in the Battle at Arbela against Darius, that an Eagle
all the while hovered over his Helmet, nor left him, till he had obtained the
Victory; touching which see Quintus Curtius l. 4. c. 15. Of this Corvinus*
Plutarch ( in Mario) reports, that like him there was none, upon whom the Roman
People conferred so many Magistracies, nor any, whose Suits or Petitions they
answered with such readiness. He was six times Consul, as often Praetor, and as
many times Aedile, once Censor, and twice Dictator. Vide Pighii Annal. Romans
Corvinus! on whose Crest
Phoebus does in his black-plum'd Emblem rest.
A most signal Example of Loyal Magnanimity, who being by L. Apuleius Tribune
of the People, accused as though he had unjustly divided the Veientine Spoils,
and a day appointed for him to answer; not brooking such an Affront, before the
day of hearing came, betook himself to a voluntary Exile; upon whom in his
absence the enraged People imposed a heavy Fine. In the interim the Gauls
besieging the Capitol and ravaging the Country about, as far as Ardea, whither
Camillus had retired himself; He (notwithstanding the Injury done him by his
ungrateful Country men) persuades the Ardeates to take up Arms against the
Gauls, fights and defeats them; whereupon by the remainder* of the Roman Army,
which after the Overthrow at Allia were escaped to Veii, he was chosen General,
and by a Decree of the Senate called home from Banishment, and though absent
made Dictator; yet would he not return, till all Acts touching his Magistracy
and Restitution were solemnly past by the People. Seven Months had the Capitol
been besieged, and at last, capitulated to give the Gauls a vast sum of Gold
to quit the siege; at which instant Camillus arrives with his Army, commands
the money not to be paid, saying his Country was to be freed by Steel, not Gold;
and thereupon charges the Gauls within the Ruins of the City, defeats them,
pursues them in their flight in the Gabine way, and makes so general a
slaughter of them, that hardly any escaped to carry home news of their
Overthrow. For this and other his eminent services to his Country (among which
that of hindering the People from quitting Rome for Veii, is to be reckoned,
whereby, as Victor says, and Oppidum Civibus and Cives Oppido reddidit) he was
thought worthy to be styled the second Founder of Rome, and called by the name
of Romulus: Of which see Li^y. l. c. Cassiodorus in Chronic. Eutropius libr. 1.
and Aurel. Victor. de Vir. Illust. c. 23. He was 6 times Tribune, 4 times
triumphed, was once Censor, 5 times Dictator, and thrice Interregent.
Camillus too, who Heaven with Jove may claim,
Whom saving Rome, We may Rome's Founder name.
The Generous Lucius Iunius, Son of Marcus Iunius by Tarquinia; the Sister of
Tarquinius Superbus, to avoid the Tyranny of the King his Uncle, who had put to
death his Brother Marcus, seigned himself to be a Fool, and thereby gained the
Surname of B^utus; notorious for expelling the Regal Power, and the whole
Family of the Tarquins out of Rome, and introducing the Government of Consuls;
of which he was the first, and for a time the sole, notwithstanding his
Colleague Collatinus; to which Virgil alludes Consulis Imperium hic primus,
saevasque secures Accipiet: -- He was honored by the Romans with a Brazen
Statue, placed in the Capitol among those of their Kings with his sword drawn
as Plutarch in his life, being s^ain by Aruns, Son of Tarquinius (as he by
Brutus singly encountering one another) for whom the Roman Ladies and Matrons
kept a solemn mourning, during the space of one whole year, as for their
Public Father and Avenger of the violated Chastity of their Sex. See Livy l.
2.
Brutus her Infranchiser,
The Papyrii Father and Son were signalized by their Triumphs over the
Samuites, Lucanians, Tarentines and Brutians, who all joined with Pyrrhus
against the Romans. The Father was twice Dictator, five times Consul, and
thrice triumphed over the Samnites; whom Livy doubts not to compare with
Alexander the Great, and reckons him the fittest General to have opposed him,
had he after the Conquest of Asia turned his Arms upon the Romans: Of which
Livy l. 9. c. 16. But the Papyrius here meant, is the Son; who with Sp.
Carvilius triumphed over the Samnites, Lucanians, Tarentines and Brutians;
having compelled Milo, the Prefect of King Pyrrbus, to deliver up Tarentum;
which he dismantled and spoiled of all its strength by Sea and Land: by which
Victory he put an end to the most desperate War, which (till then) the Roman
People had ever been engaged in. The Memory of this Victory and Triumph is
preserved in some silver Coins; On one side of which is the armed head of Rome,
with the Rostrum or Beak of a Ship, thereby signifying the increase of Naval
Power to the Romans by the Conquest of Tarentum* On the Reverse the Figure of
Victory in a Chariot drawn by four Horses, implying the Advantage and
Superiority, which (...) Victory gave them by Land. The Inscription this. L.
PAPYRI. L. F. SP. N. CURSOR. See Vinand. Pighii Annal. Romans Tom. 1. p. 447.
Papyrius, who revenged the Pyrrhick War;
Stayed Manius Curious Dentatus; so called for that he was born with teeth: by
Valerius Maximus styled, the most exact Rule of Roman Frugality and perfect
Pattern of Fortitude, famous for his exemplary Abstinence, and his refusal of a
vast sum of Gold presented him by the Ambassadors of the Samnites, saying he
held it more honorable to command over those that were rich, than to be rich
himself; nor less ennobled by his many Victories and Triumphs over the
Samnites, Sabins, Brutians, Appulians, Lucanians, and the defeat and expulsion
of King Pyrrbus out of Italy, making good the Character he gave of himself,
that he was neither to be corrupted by money, nor vanquished by Arms. See more
of him in Cicero, (in Cato. M.) Valerius Maximus l. 4. c. 3. and Aurel. Vict.
de Vir. Illustr. c. 35.
Curious, and C. Fabricius Luscinus, of whom Valerius Maximus says, that in
Honor and Authority he was greater than any Roman Citizen of his time; but in
estate as mean as the poorest; who yet when solicited by Pyrrhus with the
offer of the fourth part of his Kingdom to become his Friend, refused with
scorn so great a Bribe. No less exemplary for his Justice; for when Pyrrhus his
Physician offered him in hopes of reward to poison his Prince; Fabricius was so
far from accepting the Offer, that he discovered the treachery to Pyrrhus, and
sent back the Traitor, bound, to receive the just recompense of his villainy:
whereupon Pyrrhus is said to break out into this expression, That it was harder
to draw Fabricius from Honesty, than the Sun from his Course. See (besides
Seneca Epist. 120.) Valerius Maximus, l. 4. c. 3. Aurel. Victor. de Vir.
Illustr. c. 39. and Eutropius in Brev. Histor. R^m. To which I shall only add
what I find mentioned by Seguinus in select. Numismat. touching an ancient
silver Meddaile, having on one side the head of Juno, with this title, MONETA;
on the Reverse the several instruments of Coining, with this Inscription,
SALUTARIS; which Coin the said Seguinus conceives was stamped in honor, and as
a Memorial of this great General. The occasion this; When the Romans (as Suidas
in voce (...) reports) were in the War against Pyrrhus impoverished, they were
by Juno, whom they consulted by sacrifice, told, That if they waged War with
the Arms of Justice, they should not want money: which Admonition Fabricius
observing, gained to himself the honor of Equity and Justice, as well as
Valor and Conduct, and by those means obtained a glorious Victory, which
brought with it a vast Treasure to the Roman People, and so rendered MONETAM
taken in which sense you will, SALUTAREM to the Commonwealth.
Fabricius, a stern Pair!
Marcus Claudius Marcellus, of whom thus briefly the Triumphal Tables. M.
CLAUDIUS. M. F. M. N. MARCELLUS. ANNO. P. R. C. D XXXI. COS. DE. GALLIS.
INSUBRIBUS. ET. GERMANIS. K. MART. ISQUE. OPIMA. SPOLIA. RETULIT. DUCE.
HOSTIUM. VIRDOMARO. AD. CLASTIDIUM. INTERFECTO.

M. CLAUDIUS (M. F. M. N.) MARCELLUS CONSUL IN THE D XXXI. YEAR AFTER THE
BUILDING OF ROME, TRIUMPHED OVER THE GALLI INSUBRES, AND GERMANS IN THE KALENDS
OF MARCH, AND BARE RICH SPOILS FROM VIRDOMARUS, GENERAL OF THE GAULS, WHOM HE
SLEW AT CLASTIDIUM.

To this Ausonius alludes (in Monosyllab.)

Tertia ^pima dedit spoliatus Aremoricus Lars.

Lars being there no proper Name, but Title, signifying as much as Prince. See
Scaliger in Propert. p. 237. Aurelius Victor de (...). adds, that he first
taught the Roman Soldiers how to make a Retreat, without turning their Backs,
and at Nola made it appear that Hannibal was vincible; he took the City of
Syracuse after a 3 years siege; and when denied by the Senate through the
calumny of his Enemies a Triumph at Rome, he of his own accord and at his own
expense triumphed at Mount Alb^nus: being the fifth time Consul, he was slam,
over-reached by the treachery, rather than valor of Hannibal: See more of him
in Virgil lib Ae^neid. 6. Propertius l. 4. Eleg. 11. Livy l. 27. c. 16* and
Plutarch in his life, called by Hannibal, the sword of Rome.
Marcellus, who the third These the Romans called ^pima (...), quasi optima,
ampla, magnifica vel honorifica, in which sense by Plutarch (in vita Mar^)
called TIMIA, according to whom the conditions requisite to those spoils were;
First, that they were to be taken by the General of one Army from that of
another; Secondly, that they were to be taken in Battle; Thirdly, in Prima
Aci^, in the first Part o^ Front of the Battle, to which Livy adds a fourth,
That they were to be born or carried to Jupiter Feretrius by the Victor
General, whence Jupiter according to Propertius ( l. 4. Eleg. 11.) had that
Title of Feretrius. See this noted by La Cerda in 6. (...). Aeneid. by
Alexander ab Alex. Genial. D^erum l. 1. c. 14. and Ianus Rutgersius Var. Lect.
l. 4. c. 7. The first that ever won the^e Spoils and Triumphed was Romulus,
having slain Acron, General of the Ceninenses.
rich Trophies bare
And Of him thus Livy, l. 4. C^rn* Cossus eximi^ pulchritudin^ corporis, Animo
and viribus Par. And the Triumphal Tables, AULUS. CORNELIUS. (M. F. SER. N.)
COSSUS. ANNO. POST. R. C. CCCXXV. COS. DE. VEIENTIBUS. IS QUE. SPOLIA. OPIMA.
RETULIT. DUCE. HOSTIUM. LARTE. TOLUMNIO. AD. FIDENAS. INTERFECTO.

AULUS CORNELIUS (M. F. SER. N.) COSSUS BEING CONSUL IN THE YEAR CCCXXV. AFTER
THE BUILDING OF ROME, TRIUMPHED OVER THE VEIENTINES, AND BARE RICH SPOILS FROM
PRINCE TOLUMNIUS GENERAL OF THE ENEMIES, SLAIN BY HIM AT FIDENAE.

Of which Ovid briefly in this Pentameter, as cited by Priscian,

Larte ferox caeso Cossus opima tulit, etc. See likewise Propertius l. 4. Eleg.
11. Livy l. 4. Valor. Max. l. 3. c. 2. Aurel. Victor. de Viris Illustr. and
Servins in Octav Virgil. Aereid.
Cossus Second, from Kings spoiled of Life.
The Of the Decii (Father and Son) devoting themselves to a voluntary death for
the Good of their Country, the Roman Stories are full: See Livy more
particularly, l. 8. and l. 10. Hence Lucan l. 6. calls them Lustrales bellis
Animae -- As if they had been propitiatory sacrifices for the welfare of the
Roman Legions in time of hazard, concerning which Valerius Maximus, l. 5. c. 6.
Dignosci arduum est utrum Romana Civitas utilius habuerit Decios vivos, an
amiserit: quoniam vita little ne vinceretur obstitit, mors fecit ut vinceret. I
shall only add what is not commonly taken notice of, that there were not two
only, but three of this Name and Family, who devoted themselves as sacrifices
for the good of their Country; of which thus Cicero in Tusculan.. Quaestion. l.
1. Simors timere^ur, non cum Latinis decertans Pater Decius, cum E^ruscis
filius, cum Pyrrho Nepos, se hostium telis obtulissent.
Decii in their Vows at noble strife,
In Honors equal; Quintus Fabius Maximus Verrucosus called the Buckler and
Shield of Rome, as Marcellus the Sword; who as Ennius says, cunctando Romanam
restituit Rem; or as L. Florus more nearly to the sense of our Author: Novam
de Hannibale Victoriam commentus est non velle pugnare. Hence the Proverb,
Romanus sedendo vincit. Propertius likewise, l. 3. Eleg. 3. stiling his wary
and delatory prosecution of the War Victrices Moras: Of whose Actions (so
generally noted in the Roman Stories) we cannot give a better Summary than what
is contained in this following Ancient Inscription on a Marble found long since
at Aretium, as Marlianus reports, and extant at Florence in the House of Petrus
Victorius, as Panvinius in his Fasti affirms. Q. F. MAXIMUS.

DICTATOR. BIS. COS. V. CENSOR. INTERREX: II. AED. CUR. Q. II. TRIBUN. MIL. II.
PONTIFEX. AUGUR. PRIMO. CONSULATU. LIGURES. SUBEGIT. EX. IIS. TRIUMPHAVIT.
TERTIO. ET. QUARTO. ANNIBALEM. COMPLURIBUS. VICTORIIS. FEROCEM. SUBSEQUENDO.
COERCUIT. DICTATOR. MAGISTRO. EQUITUM. MINUCIO. QUOIUS. POPULUS. IMPERIUM. CUM.
DICTATORIS. IMPERIO. AEQUAVERAT. ET. EXERCITUI. PROFLIGATO. SUBVENIT. ET. EO.
NOMINE. AB. EXERCITU. MINUCI. ANO. PATER. APPELLATUS. EST. CONSUL. QUINTUM.
TARENTUM. CEPIT. TRIUMPHAVIT. DUX. AETATIS. SUAE. CAUTISSIMUS. ET. REI.
MILITARIS. PERITISSIMUS. HABITUS. EST. PRINCEPS. IN. SENATUM. DUOBUS. LUSTRIS.
LECTUS. EST.

QUINTUS FABIUS MAXIMUS

TWICE DICTATOR, FIVE TIMES CONSUL, TWICE CENSOR, AND INTERREX, AND TWICE
AEDILE OF THE CHAIR; TRIBUNE OF THE SOLDIERS, HIGH PRIEST AND AUGUR. IN HIS
FIRST CONSULATE HE SUBDUED THE LIGURIANS AND TRIUMPHED OVER THEM. IN HIS THIRD
AND FOURTH HE REPREST AND RESTRAINED HANNIBAL RAGING WITH MANY VICTORIES BY
CLOSELY FOLLOWING HIM: BEING DICTATOR, HE RELIEVED MINUCIUS MASTER OF THE
CAVALRY (WHOSE COMMAND THE PEOPLE HAD EQUALED WITH THAT OF THE DICTATOR) AND
HIS DISCOMFITED ARMY. AND FOR THAT CAUSE WAS BY THE MINUCIAN. ARMY CALLED
FATHER. IN HIS FIFTH CONSULATE HE TOOK TARENTUM AND TRIUMPHED, ACCOUNTED THE
MOST WARY CAPTAIN OF HIS AGE, AND THE MOST EXPERT IN ALL MILITARY AFFAIRS,
ELECTED PRINCE OF THE SENATE FOR TWO LUSTRES.

See likewise Antonius Augustinus, Dialog. 10th, and Pighii Annal. Roman. Tom.
2. p. 132. and Paul Merula in Commentar* ad Ennii Annal. l. 8. p. 467.
Fabius, Romes Defense,
In War unconquered, by the War's suspense.
M^rcus Livius Salinator, Consul with Claudius Ne^o in the 546th year after the
building of Rome, triumphed for the overthrow of Asdrubal the Brother of
Annibal, who came into Italy with a great Army intending to join with that of
his Brothers, which (if effected) had proved the Ruin of the Roman State. But
Nero, who attended the motion of Annibal in Apulia, secretly upon notice of
Asdrubal's Arrival, not far from Sena or Senogallia, (where Livius was
encamped) taking with him 7000 Foot and 1000 Horse of the choicest of his Camp,
left the rest to face Hannibal, and marching with incredible speed, joined his
Forces with those of his Fellow Consul, who together defeated the whole Army of
Asdrubal and slew him in the Battle. Nero returning to his Camp before Hannibal
understood any thing of his departure, or heard news of his Brothers defeat:
The first notice whereof Nero himself gave him by causing Asdrubal's head
(which he had brought with him) to be cast before the Camp of Hannibal; which
he seeing cried out, That the Fortune of Carthage was overthrown. Of this
Meritorious Act of Nero's, thus Horace, Carm. l. 4. Od. 4. Quid debeas a Roma
Neronibus
Testis Metaurum Flumen, and Asdrubal
Devictus, and pulcher fugatis
Ille dies Latio tenebris.
What Rome thou ow'st to Nero's Name
Metaurus and slain Asdrubal proclaim,
And that bright Day,
Which chased from Latium Night away.

Livius the Victor of slain Asdruball,
With Nero the joint Author of his Fall.
Of these Scipio's the one was Publius Cornelius Scipio, who being Pro-Consul
of Africa in the second Punick War drew Hannibal from Italy to the Defense of
his own Country, whom he defeated and brought the Carthaginians to sue for
Peace and acknowledge themselves tributary to the State of Rome; for which he
triumphed, being called Scipio Africanus Major: The other, the Son of Aemilius
Paulus Macedonicus, adopted into the Cornelian Family by the Son of Afri^anus
Major, and called Publius Cornelius Scipio Aemilianus, who took and utterly
destroyed Carthage in the third and last Punick War, and reduced Africa into
the Form of a Roman Province, for which he triumphed and gained the Surname of
Africanus Minor, samed for his Justice and Military Science; whence is that
Adagial Encomium, Scipione Iustior, and Militarior: in Tertull. (...). c. 2.
These Virgil in 6 Aeneid. calls -- Geminos duo Fulmina belli Scipiadas, Cladem
Lybiae -- Of whom likewise Lucius Florus says, Fatale Africae Nomen Scipionum
videbatur. See more of them in Livy, Velleius Paterculus, Orosius, Appian. de
Bello Civil. Lucius Florus, Aurelius Victor, and Eutropius.
The Scipio's unto Carthage both one Fate:
Vel^eius Paterculus, l. 2. speaking of Pompey designed General in the War
against the Pirates, says, it was voted by Decree of the People and Senate,
that Cn. Pompeius ad eos opprimendos mitteretur, essetque ei Imperium aequum in
omnibus Provinciis cum Proconsulibus usque ad Quinquagesimum Miliarium a Mari.
Quo. S. C. paene totius Terrarum Orbis Imperium uni viro deferebatur: Confirmed
by Plutarch in Pomp. and further asserted by some Ancient Coins, stamped in
honor of the said Pompey, with this Inscription: MAGNUS. IMPERATOR. And on the
Reverse of some others (in token of his Dominion by Sea and Land) a Scepter
figured erect between a Dolphin and an Eagle. See Fulv. Ursin. in famil. Pomp.
p. 204.
Pompey, before Caesar Prince of Rome's great State,
And the awed World, which Commemorated by Albinus the Poet (not the Historian)
in his Poem of the Gests of Pompey the Great, out of which Priscian l. 7. cites
these Verses. Ille cui ternis Capitolia celsa Triumphis
Sponte Deum patuere, cui freta nulla repostos
Abscondere Sinus, non tutae Moenibus Urbes.
In which Verses are celebrated the three Triumphs of Pompey; the first from
Africa over King Iarbas; the second from Spain over Sertorius; the last from
Asia over Mithridates and the Pirates. See Popma in Schol. in Fragment.
History. But what is to be chiefly noted, these Triumphs were permitted to
Pompey contrary to the Express Decrees of the Roman State, before he had
undergone any Magistracy, being only a private Knight; which Privilege none
before him ever enjoyed. But it was in a Time quo silebant inter A^ma Leges. Of
the stupendous Splendor and Luxury of these Triumphs, especially of the last,
see particularly Pliny l. 37. c. 2.
thrice his Triumphs sung,
And Marcus Tullius Cice^o; of whom it were lost Labor to speak, save in a
Language equal to his own. And therefore I shall only salute him, as Pliny does
l. 7. c. 30. Salve Primus omnium Pater Patriae appellate. Primus in Toga
Triumphum, Linguaeque L^uream merit; and facundiae Lati^rumque literarum
Parens; atque (ut Dictator Caesar Hostis quondam Tuus de ie s^ipsit) Omnium
Triumphorum L^uream ad^pte Majorem, quanto plus est Ingenii Romani Terminos in
tantum promovisse, quam Imperii. (i. e.) Hail Thou who of all Men were first
saluted Father of thy Country, who first deservedst a Triumph in thy long Robe,
and a Laurel Garland for thy Language. The only Father of Eloquence, and Latian
Learning; and (as Caesar Dictator sometimes thine Enemy has written of thee)
honored with a Crown so much more glorious than those of other Tri^mphs, by
how much nobler it is to have enlarged the Bounds of Roman Wit than those of
its Empire.
Tullius worthy Heaven for his sweet Tongue.
There the great Of the Claudian Name there were two Families, one Patrician
the other Plebeian. Of the first, were the several Surnames of the Pulchri,
Centhones, N^rones, Regillenses Crassini, Cae^i, Crassi, Caudices, Hortatores,
Rufi, Sabini, C^nini. Of the latter, which yet was more signal than the first,
were those of the Marcelli, Aesernini, Aselli, Cliti^, Flaminii. All descended
from Regillus a Town of the Sabines, whose Chief was Atta Tatius Clausus, who
about the sixth year after the Expulsion of Tarquinius Superbus came to Rome,
and was admitted into the Patrician Order; changing his Name into Appius
Claudius. Of the Original of which Family thus Virgil ( Aeneid. 7.) more
Poetically, than truly (for he alludes to this very Appius Claudius) Ecce
Sabinorum prisco de sanguine, Magnum
Agmen agens Clausus, Magnique ipse Agminis instar,
Claudia nunc a Quo diffunditur and Tribus, and Gens
Per Latium --
See Clausus of old Sabine blood, who brings
A Mighty Troop, himself as Great; whence springs
The Claudiam Tribe, and Family, now spread
Through Latium --
Plutarch derives them from Sparta, and makes them to have been part of a
Lacedaemonian Colony planted in Italy: This Family in the Time of Tiberius (who
was of the same Race, and whom perhaps the Poet in this Place flatters, as
being the designed Heir to Augustus) was signalized with 28 Consulates, 5
Dictatorships, 7 Censorships, as many Triumphs, and 2 Ovations; as Suetonius in
Tiberio witnesses. See more in Antonius Augustinus de Familiis Roman. and
Andreas Schottus in his Idaea Romans Histor. ad Pighii Annal.
Claudian Progeny does shine,
And all the Worthies of the The Aemilian Family some derive from Mamercus the
Son of Pythagoras the Philosopher called '(...) from his Affability and
singular Humanity, as Plutarch in Numa, and in the life of Paulus Aemilius, and
Festus in voce Aemil. attest. Others, as the same Festus notes, deduce it from
Ascanius who had two Sons Iulus and Aemylus, the later of whom is supposed to
have given the Origin to that Name and Family. It was one of the most
celebrious in all Rome, and honored even from the first times of the Roman
Liberty until the Empire of Augustus, with the most signal Magistracies of that
State. It was of Patrician Degree, and distinguished into 5 Principal Surnames,
of the Barbulae, Lepidi, Mamercini, Papi, and Pauli: To these Onuphrius adds
the Buae, Liviani, Marci, Porcini, and Privernates; to whom likewise are to be
added the Regilli and Scauri. See all these with their several Honors and
Performances enumerated by Antonius Augustinus de Fami^. Romans and Pighius in
Annal.
Aemilian Line;
The Metelli were the Noblest Branch of the Caecilian Family; which though it
were Originally Plebeian, rose yet to the greatest Honors which the Roman
Commonwealth could afford: Nineteen of which Name in the space of 280 years
were signalized with 4 Chief Priesthoods, 2 Dictatorships, 3 Presidentships of
the Senate, 7 Censorships, 9 Triumphs, 20 Consulships, and 2 Masterships of the
Cavalry. The most famous of the Metelli, were Metellus Maced^nicus, so called
from his Conquest of Macedonia, whose saying it was That he would burn his
shirt if he thought it could know his Designs or Counsels. Metellus Numidicus
so called from his Triumph over Iugurth King of Numidia, and Metellus Pius who
gained that Surname by his assiduous Supplication and Intercession for the
recalling of his Father from Banishment, which at last he effected: See Aurel.
Victor de Viris Illustr. and Valor. Maximus. The Name (notwithstanding its
great Nobility) seems to be derived from some servile Military Employment,
touching which thus Festus in voce Metell. Metelli dicuntur in re Militari
quasi Mercenarii. Attius Annal. 17. Calones, Famulique, Metellique, Caculaeque.
A quo Genere Hominum Caeciliae Familiae Cognomen putatur dictum. See more of
this Family in Antonius Augustinus, and Schottus ad Pighii Annal. as likewise
Ursinus in Numism. Gentis Caecil. Vide etiam de Origin hujus Nominis Meurs.
Exercit. Critie. part. 2. p. 108.
Metelli, signal for their Noble Name;
Marcus Porcius Cato called Uticensis from Utica the Place of his Death, and
Minor, to distinguish him from Cato Major or Censorinus, thus charactered in
Velleius Paterculus. Per omnia Ingenio Diis quam Hominibus propior: Omnibus
humanis vitiis immunis, semper fortunam in sua Potestate habuit. The great
Assertor of the Roman Liberty in time of the Civil wars between Pompey and
Caesar; chosing rather to die in freedom by his own Hand, than to fall a Captive
into those of the Conqueror. Of whose resolute and Heroic Death, see Seneca l.
de Providentia, and almost every where else. And particularly Dion Cassius l.
43. This is further observable of him, that though he himself chose rather to
die, than to submit to Caesar, yet at his Death he persuaded his Son to do so,
giving for it this Reason; That he having always lived in Liberty and a free
State, could not in his old Age be brought to change that manner of life, and
subject himself to a servile condition; but for his Son, he being born and
having lived in other Times, he advised him to comply with the Fortune that
should be offered him. See Dion Cassius loco citato: Which Reason is likewise
hinted at by Cicero in primo de Offi^. Caeteris forsitan vitio datum esset, si
se interemisse^t, propterea quod eorum vita lenior, and mores fuerunt
faciliores: Catoni autem cum incredibilem tribuisset Natura Gravitatem, eamque
ipse perpetua Constantia corroboravisset, semperque in proposito, suscept^que
consilio permansisse^; moriendum potius, quam Tyranni vultus aspiciendus fuit.
Manilius elsewhere ( l. 4.) calls him -- Invictum devicta Morte Catonem.
Cato, who Fortune even in Death o'rcame;
Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa though of a mean Family, by his Merits and Valor
attained to that eminent Degree, as to be Second in the Empire under Augustus,
and to become his Son in Law: Of which thus Taci^us in primo Annal* Marcum
Agrippam ignobilem loco, bonum Militiae and Victoriae S^cium geminatis
Consulatibus extulit; mox defuncto Marcello, Generum sumpsit. Vell^ius
Paterculus giving this further Elogy of him, That he was Virtutis Nobilissimae,
Labor, Vigilia, periculo invictus, parendique, sed uni, scientissimus, aliis
sane imperandi cupidus; and per omnia extra dilationes posi^us, consultisque
facta conjungens. To whom Augustus may justly be said to owe the Establishment
of his Throne and Empire by those 2 Memorable Victories gained by his Conduct
and Valor, over Sextus Pompeius near Sicily, and Marcus Antonius near Actium,
for which he merited a Naval Crown. Yet this great Statesman, and Soldier, the
latter of which he was even born as Manilius here intimates, (for we read with
Scaliger upon his last and better thoughts -- Matrisque sub Armis, not Martis,
by Armis understanding Armos, i. e. Ulnas, not Arma; as if sub ipsa Matre cum
lacte imbibisset Militarem Scientiam: Though we cannot but here acknowledge the
Interpretation of Spanhemius ( in Dissertat. de Numism.) to be very ingenious,
who understands by Matris, Patriae, seu Romae belligerantis, that Title of
Matter being often by the Ancients applied to Rome) was of that equal and
moderate Temper, that he never advised Augustus to any Actions but those of
Humanity, Honor, and Public Utility; the Glory whereof he never arrogated to
himself nor made of the great Honors and high Charges conferred upon him, any
Advantages to his own private Gain and Pleasure, but converted and applied them
wholly to the profit of his Prince and Country. Indelible Characters of an
excellent Subject and Patriot*
Agrippa, Soldier from his Mothers Breast;
( Meaning Julius Caesar, of whom (...) P^rculus ( l. 2.) Nobilissima Iuliorum
genitus Familia, and qu^d inter omnes Antiqu^ssimos constabat, ab Anchise ac
Venere duceus Genus. The Julian Family taking its Name from ^lus the Son of
Aeneas, and Grandchild of Venus; whence Virgil ( Aeneid. l. 1.) Niscetur
pul^ra Trojanus Origin Caesar
Iu^ius, a Magno demissum Nomen Iulo.
Confirmed by Livy l. 1. Strabo l. 19. Appian de belio Civil. l. 2. and the
Testimony of Caesar himself, in his Funeral Oration upon Iulia the Wife of
Caius Marius, his Aunt; as recorded by Sue^onius, where he thus speaks. Amitae
Meae Iuliae Maternum Genus ab Regibus orium, Paternum cum Diis Immortalibus
conjunctum est. Nam ab Anco Marcio sunt Reges, quo Nomine fuit Ma^er. A Venere
Iulii, cujus Gentis Familia est Nostra. Hence the Title of VENUS GENETRIX on
the Roman Coyns stamped in Honor of Julius and Augustus; and this Inscription
mentioned in Gruterus:

VENERI GENETRICI D. JULI. IN MEMORIAM GENTIS JULIAE etc. See more to this
purpose in Ursinus in Famil. Iul. And as to the Pretense of its Original see
the same discussed by the (...) B chartus in his Particular Tract entitled,
Number Aeneas unquam fuerit in Italia.
) Venus her Julian Offspring, repossest
Of Heaven, whence first descended; which now proves
The Rule of great ( (...) here questions Manilius for giving to Augustus, a
share in the Government of Heaven before he (...) thither. Quare dicit Coelum
regi ab Augusto quod nondum tenebat? Hoc mortuo melius conveniebat (says (...)
that Illustrious Critic might have remembered, That Augustus was even in his
life time (such was the (...) Adulation of those Times) reputed and honored as
a God, and had his Priests, Altars, Sacrifices, and (...) as is manifest by
those Altars with their Inscriptions erected to him at Lions and Narbon: To
which (...) ^udes ( Epist. l. 2.) where he says that Augustus had that
Praeeminence above either Romulus, Bacchus, (...) or Pollux, who were not
honored as Deities till after their Deaths. For this Reason Manilius while yet
(...) gives him a share in the Celestial Government, as another Jupiter. And
hence Philippus in that flattering but (...) Epigram of his (in Antholog. l.
1.) upon occasion of a Laurel springing out of an Altar dedicated to Au^ at
Arragon in Spain, calls him (...), JOVEM AENEADEM. Nor did Augustus' think
(...) himself, as may appear by his facetious and yet tar^ Answer to the
Arragonians who told him of that Pro^y of the Laurel, or rather Palm, as
Quintilian relates it: Apparet (inquit) quam s^pe accendatis. It is a sign
(...) he) how often you kindle fire there; taxing them thereby of Negligence in
his Worship: For if they had fre^ntly sacrificed, the Laurel or Palm could not
have grown there. And that he had equal share with Jove him^ in the Vows and
Addresses of Suppliants appears by this Ancient Inscription found near Nismes
in France: SANCTITATI JOVIS ET AUGUSTI SACRUM LUCILIUS CESTTI FILL. etc. (...)
which Gruterus (in Inscript.) and Guiranus (in Explicat. Number. Nemaus.) But of
the servile and Idolatrous Adula^ of the Ancients, and particularly of the
Athenians and Romans toward their living Kings and Emperors; see ^aeus
Deipn^soph. l. 6. c. 14 and 15. and the learned Casaubon thereupon.
) Augustus joined with Jove's;
Who'mong the Deathless Deities enrolled,
His Father and Quirinus does behold.
More high the Immortal Gods have fixed their Seat,
Next whom, is This, with Godlike Men repleat.
But of the Stars e're we the Laws rehearse,
And fatal Changes, We the Universe
Must first complete; and show what does dispense
Throughout the Whole, or Light, or Influence.
( Having finished the Description of the fixed Stars and their several
Asterisms, together with the Doctrine of (...) ^stial Circles: The Poet to
complete his Work, adds a brief mention of the several Planets according to
their (...) and Position; and then subjoyns (as a Close to the Whole) a short
Enumeration of Comets, and other fie^ (...). Of the Planets the first is
) Some Stars there are which against the World's Course bend, The Seven Planets.

And wandering 'twixt the Earth and Heaven suspend.
As ( Saturn; by the Greeks called (...) from the slow time of his motion; by
Plato in Timae^ (...), i. e. Apparens; as being of all the Planets the least
obscured under the Sun's Beams; by others (...); and by Plutarch (in facie
Lunae) (...), i. e. N^ctis Custos. In a fragment of an Ancient Astronomical
Poem (cited by Scaliger in Ausonian. Lect.) styled Pollucis Pr^les; which by
Fulgentius is thus explained. Saturn (says he) is called the Son of Pollux,
sive a pollendo, sive a pollucibilitate, i. e. humanitate. In Hebrew this
Planet is called Schabtai, i. e. Saturatio seu Quies. The Arabs call it Zohalo
from Zahala, which signifies abscedere, recedere, vel discedere, quod multum
retrogradus sit, says the Learned Doctor Pocock (Not. in Carm. Tograi.) By the
Chaldeans it is called Caun, by the Egyptians Rephan, i. e. Deus Temporis, and
(according to Achilles Tatius) (...), Nemesis Stella; by Astrologers termed
Infortuna Major.
) Saturn, ( This Planet is in Hebrew called Cochab Tzedeck, i. e. Stella
Iustitiae and Aequitatis; by the Greeks, (...); by Plato in Timaeo, Phaeton
from its brightness; by the Latins, Jupiter, i. e. Iuvans Pater; by the
Egyptians, Picheus, i. e. Deus vitae, answering to the Greek, (...); by
Achilles Tatius (in Isagog.) (...), Osiridis Stella; by Hesychius, Molobobar,
or rather (as Vossius Idololatr. l. 2. conceives the word ought to be read)
(...). In the Phrygian Tongue Mazeus, (si fides Hesychio, says Mr. Seldom.) In
the Chaldee, Taus; in Arabic, El Mes^icri. The Ancient Germans called this
Planet T^ranis, or Taran. Astrologers entitle him by that of Fortuna Major:
Which they have from the Jews who call this Planet by the Name of Mazal Tob, i.
e. Sidus bonum, seu fortuna bona. And therefore among them it was usual in the
Marriage Ceremony for the Bridegroom to deliver to the Bride a Ring in which
was inscribed MAZAL TOB. This Star in their Opinion conducing much to
Fertility, and the Propagation of Children. As Mr. Seldom (from the Authority
of Munster) de Diis Syris, Synt^gm. primo.
) Jove, ( Mars, called likewise by the Latins, Gradivus, seems to be derived
from the Hebrew, Maratz, which signifies strong and powerful; or from Mechares,
destroying, (as the often cited G. Vossius de Idololatr. l. 2.) called also in
Hebrew, Ma^dim, from his Color resembling Blood. In Greek (...), and (...)
from his fiery light, as also (...) or Thuras, quasi Thra^um Deus, according to
Bochartus his Interpretation ( Phaleg. l. 3. c. 2.) By the Egyptians called
Mel^ch, i. e. Deus Destructionis, and (according to Vet^ius Valens, as cited by
Mr. Seldom de Diis Syris Syntagm. primo) Arts, (...), as being the Destroyer
of Life; and according to Pliny and Achilles Tatius (...), Herculis Stella; by
the Emissaeans, and those of Edessa styled Azizus, whom they believed to be
(...) Assessor Solis (as Julian the Apostate in his Encomiastick Oration upon
the Sun;) by the Chaldeans called Ari^z, i. e. praevalidus; by the Arabs, El
Marigh, i. e. Sanguinolentus. Astrologers style him Infortuna Minor.
) Mars, ( This glorious Luminary is in Hebrew called Cham^h, or Schemash from
his Heat, or Adon Schemez, i. e. Dominus Sol; by the Phoenicians, Baal
Schemaim, i. e. Dominus Coeli; in Chaldee, Schemso; in Arabic, El Schems; by
the Greeks, (...) and (...) quasi (...), i. e. Lux vitae; whence the Latin,
Phoebus; called likewise Titan and Apollo, Cor Coeli, Oculus Iovis, and (...),
i. e. Oculus Aetheris. By the Egyptians styled Potiris, i. e. Deus Sanctus,
and Osyris from his vital and kindly Heat, as on the contrary Typhon and Seth
from his violent and destructive fervor, called by them likewise Horus; by the
Persians called Mi^hra, i. e. Dominus sive Dynasta; by the Arabs anciently
Urotalt, i. e. Lucis Deus, and Dusares, or Dai Us^r, i. e. Deus perlustrans, as
S^bedius de Diis German. interprets those Names; by the Syrians according to
Macrobius called Adad, or as Scaliger and Mr. Seldom would rather have it,
Ahad, or Elhad, i. e. Unus, or as Pontanus (Not. in Macrob.) Badad, i. e.
Solus, Unicus.
) Phoebus, ( Mercury is in Hebrew called Cochau, or Cochab, i. e. Stella
fulgens, and Choteb, i. e. Scriba seu literatus, and Margim^, i. e. Negotiator,
and Merkolis, whence some derive the Name Mercury, though Arnobius l. 3. says
he is so called by the Latins, quasi Medicurrius, from his Office as Messenger
between the Gods and Men. In the Astronomical Fragment before cited he is
called Semo, quia ferein infimis collocatus (says Scaliger in Auson. Lect.) as
those Deities were likewise called S^mmes, qui infimi censebantur, being
Majores Hominibus, Minores Diis, as Fulgentius expounds the Word; by the
Phoenicians called Sumes, i. e. Minister says Bochar^us (Phaleg. l. 1. c. 2.)
called by them likewise Adared. By the Chaldeans, N^bu; and as Hesychius says,
S^ehez; which some make the same with Sesach. He is likewise by the Emissaeans
and Edessaeans called M^mimus, They Holding him to be one of the Suns (...) or
Assessors, as Azizus or Mars was another, according to the Testimony of Julian
before cited. By Astrologers he is styled Fortuna per Aspectum, or (according
to Apulcius de Mundo) Communis Stella, as participating of the Nature of the
Star, with which he is in Conjunction, good with the good, bad with the bad.
Hence the Author of the Fragment after Censorinus de Die Natal. Stella
Mercurii fit similis illi quam videt.
) Maia's Son,
Placed under these 'twixt ( Venus in Hebrew is called Nogah, i. e. Lux. The
Name Venus coming from the Hebrew Word Benot, by the change of the first and
last Letters; as Mr. Seldom de Diis Syris Syntagm. 2. c. 7. and Vossius
Idololatr. l. 2. c. 22. derive it. By the Greeks called (...), and (...), i. e.
Phosphorus, seu Lucifer, when she is the Morning Star, as (...), i. e.
Hesperus, Vesper, and Vesperugo, when she is the Evening Star; by Timaeus
Locrus called (...), i. e. Iunonis Astrum. The Egyptians call her Suroth; the
Chaldeans, Spharphara, and Astaroth; by the Arabs named Elzahareth and Chabar,
i. e. Magna.
) Venus and the ( This Planet or Luminary is in Hebrew called Lebanah or Laneah
from its white Color; by the Greeks (...), from the renewing of its Light. She
is by them likewise honored with the Title of (...), and (...), as Gaulmin.
notis in Psellum ((...).) By the Latins, Luna, quasi Lucuna or Lucina, the
middle Syllable being cast away, as Isidor. (Origin. l. 8.) and before him
Cicero (de Nature. Deorum l. 2.) Luna a Lucendo, eadem enim Lucina. Or as
V^ssius (Idololatr. l. 2.) derives it from an Oriental Original, Luna potius a
Lon, i. e. pernoctavit, and Metaleptically, quie^it: In regard as the Sun is
President of the Days Labor, so the Moon is Surintendent of the Nights Rest
and Quiet: By the Egyptian Copies called Isis Pcochos Act^phcom, i. e. Domina
Maris and humidorum; by the Chaldeans, Scha^ro; by the Persians, Anai^is; by
the Arabs, Alkamer, and Abilat, and Alitta; by the Indians adored under the
Name of Schendra.
) Moon.
Others there are too of less usual kind;
For Sudden Flames streaming through Skies We find,
And Times more rare have Comets seen to blaze Comets and ^iery M^teors.

( According to the Vulgar Belief, who conceive Comets to be forerunners of
great Troubles and Commotions; by which Manilius here signalizes their
Exstinction.
) And loose midst mighty stirs their threatening Rays.
Whither as Alluding to the opinion of those who hold Comets to be generated of
Elementary Matter, that is of Exhalation and Vapor; the first from the Earth
hot and dry; the other from the Water, hot, moist and unctuous, carried by
their Lightness above the Aerie Region, where compacted they are by Motion of
the superior Orbs set on fire. Of which Opinion is Aristotle and his
followers, and (differing only as to place) Galilaeo (...), Guiduceius, and
some others. See Gassendus Tom. 1. part. 2. p. 702. and Ricciolus in Almagest.
Nov. Tom. 1. l. 8. and Fromond. Meteorolog. l. 3.
Earth transpires its Native fumes,
Those humid Spirits the hot Air consumes, Their Original.

When a long Drouth from Clouds has cleared the Sky
And Heaven by the Sun's scorching Beams grows dry;
Whence fitting Aliment is snatched by Fire,
And Matter like to Tinder flames acquire.
And since the Principles which Air compose
Are not gross Bodies, but like Smoke that flows,
The fiery Substance is not permanent,
But with the Comet, Touching the Duration of Comets, Pliny ( l. 2. c. 25.)
makes the shortest to be Septem Dierum, the longest Oct^ginta, or rather (as
Muretus conceives the Text of Pliny ought to be read) C. and Oct^ginta, a 180
Days; which Emendation Tycho Brahe Progymn. l. 1. p. 273 (though Scaliger seem
to disallow it) approves of. And so long Seneca ( Natural. quaest. l. 7.)
affirms the duration of one seen in the beginning of Nero's Reign. Josephus de
Bello Iudaico l. 7. reports one to have continued a wh^le year a little before
the Destruction of Jerusalem in the form of that which is called Xiphias, or
the Sword Comet. But this Tycho conceives to have been supernatural and
extraordinary; so that the longest Duration of Comets (their ordinary not
extending to half that space) seems not to be above six Months: Of which
continuance we find in History only three. The first that of Nero's
beforementioned in the year of Christ 64. the second in the year 603. not long
before the appearrance of the Impostor Mahomet; and the last in the year 1240.
observed by Albertus Magnus.
soon as kindled, spent.
Else, if its Rise and Fall were not so nigh,
We should another Day in Night descry,
And the couched Sun, when from the watery Deep
Returned, would the whole World surprise in sleep.
Then since the arid Vapor is not used
To be alike attracted, or diffused;
Hence The Word Comet though when strictly taken it signifies Stellam Crinitam,
and Sidus Cincinnatum; yet in a larger sense it is used as a common and general
Name for all sorts of fiery Meteors: Of which Pliny ( l. 2. c. 25.) reckons
twelve several Spec^es: Viz. Cometa, Pogonias, Acontias, Xiphias, Disceus,
Pithetes, Ceratias, Lampas, Hippeus, Argenticomus, Hircus, Longchites, seu
Hast^. Diverse of which are by our Poet here enumerated; whose Explanation we
shall give in the following Notes; and shall only add the Distinction which is
made by a Reverend and Learned Author upon this Subject, who will have such
Meteors to be peculiarly called Comets, as are super-Lunary, and have (as he
says). proprium Aetherium, Geometricum motum, qualis esse solet Planetarum; to
the others he gives the Name (...), as having some Resemblance with, but
differing as to their Motion, Place, and other Affections, from Comets properly
so called; their Birth and existence being within the sublunary Sphere. Vide D.
Setb. Wardi Praelect. de Cometis.
several Shapes to Meteors are assigned, Their several kinds.

As in dark Nights their sudden Births they find.
For now (like long hairs flowing from some head)
The Flame is in dishevelled These kind of Meteors are by the Greeks properly
called (...), (...), (...), i. e. Stellae Crinitae, seu Cincinnatae, as is
before noted; whose blaze rises upward, above the Head or Body of the Comet,
whence Pliny calls them (...) modo in vertice Hispidas: But when the Cheveleure
is round about equally diffused, then the Comet is called Rosa.
Tresses spread; Cometa or Stella Cincinnata.

Then what a fiery Peruke first appeared,
Assumes the Figure of a blazing Thence called (...), i. e. Barbata, from the
Greek (...), i. e. Barba, which the Vulgar distinguish not from that which is
called Caudata, as Fromondus observes, l. 3. c. 4. That difference being caused
only by its Respect to the Sun, for if it appear in the Morning before the
Sunrise it seems bearded, the Blaze tending in Anteriora, before the Sun,
Westward; but if it appear in the Evening the Sun being set, then it seems
Caudata, the Train flowing from behind the Sun, Eastward: But it is more
properly said to be Barbata, when the Head or Body of the Comet is above, and
the Train or Stream underneath flow^ng downward (...) More Barbae, in
opposition to that which is called Crinita, whose Hair or Bash is above the
Head of the Comet. See Stobaeus Eclog Physic. l. 1. And Suidas in voce (...).
Beard. Pogonias or Stella Barbata.

Sometimes 'twixt equal-bounded Sides it flows,
And a square This Com^ or Meteor is called in English a Beam or Post; in
Latin, Trabs; in Greek, (...), i. e. Igni^a Trabs. When extended to an
extraordinary length, it was by the Greeks likewise called (...), i. e. Via* as
A^istotle Meteorolog. l. 1. c. 6. affi^ms. Pliny ( l. 2. c. 26*) reports such a
one to have appeared at what time the Lacedaemonians (vanqu^shed in Fight at
Sea) lost the Empire of Greece; and Charimand^r in his Book of Comets, as cited
by Seneca ( Nature. Quaest. l. 7.) rela^s the like Meteor of unusual Brightness
and Greatness to have been observed by Anaxagoras, for many days continuance.
Callisthenes likewise affirms such a one to have appeared a little before Buris
and Helice were swallowed up in the Sea: The difference between a Trabs and
Columna is this: The first is of an oblong Form in a down lying Posture, the
latter appears in an erected Figure. Vide Fromond. Meteor. l. 2. c. 5.
Post, or a round Pillar shows, Doki^ or Trabs.

Like a big-bellied Called therefore by the Greeks (...), (...), and (...) from
(...) Dolium, and thence by the Latins, Pithetes, thus described by Pliny ( l.
2. c. 25.) Pithetes Doliorum cernitur Figura^ in C^ncavo fumidae Lucis, i. e.
Pithetes is seen in the form of a Barrel or Tun, within the Concave of a fumid
or smoaky Light; which according to Seneca ( Natural. Quaest. l. 7.) vel
fertur, vel in uno loco flagrat. And to this kind is to be reduced the Meteor
called Tenaculum, sub ciner^o fumo Luridum, says Ricciolus Almag. Nov. Tom. 1.
l. 8.
Tun now its swollen Beams Pithetes*

Dilate, and then contract to narrower Streams,
Like little Known by the Name of (...), from the Resemblance it bears to a
small Lock or Curle of Hair, which in Greek is (...); in Latin, Cincinnulus.
Locks which in small Curles are ti'd, Bostruchias.

Now like fired Manilius here describes these kind of Meteors by the
Periphrasis of Hirta M^ssis: They are commonly called Stipulae Ardentes,
resembling the firing of Straw or Stubble in the Fields. Which appear (as
Aristotle says) when the Exhalation that causes them is extended to a
considerable breadth and length.
sheafs, now like branched Called therefore Lampadias, imitating burning Lamps
or Torches, which Manilius here divides into ^issus Ram^sos, branched sprayes,
and are not seen but in their Fall. Of these kinds Pliny ( l. 2. c. 26.)
reports one to have appeared at Noon in sight of all the Roman People, at what
time Caesar Germanicus exhibited a Prize or Spectacle of Fencers. He makes of
them a double difference; the first called Lampades, Lamps or Torches, which
burn only at the Tops, though they draw a long fuming Train after them. The
other called Bolides (commonly englished Lances) burning through the whole
Extent or Length of their Train: Of which last sort (says he) there were some
seen in the Calamity o^ (...) when that City was sacked.
lamps descri'd, Stipulae Ardentes.

Now falling Anaxagoras would have these kind of Meteors to be sparkles falling
from the fiery Region. By Eunapius in Ae^es. they are called (...), Effluentiae
seu Trajectiones quaedam Stellarum; by Aristotle (...) and (...), discursus,
seu Stellae fluxus; By the Arabs called Shihab: which (as I find in the
Commentator upon Ulugh ^eight Tables) is expounded, Stella quae nocte incedit
sicu^ Ignis; and Stella Daemones pellens; for the Ancient Arabs and Ea^ern
People fancied falling Stars to be fiery Darts lanc'd from Heaven against the
Devils or evil Spirits of the Air, as is likewise observed by the Learned
Golius ( notis in Alferganum. p. 65.) But Fromondus ( Meteor. l. 2. c. 3.)
according to the Doctrine of Aristotle describes them to be a fiery Exhalation
expulsed out of a Cloud, having the Resemblance of a true Star falling. They
are conceived to come from the same Cause and Origin as Lightning, though they
are not attended by Thunder, at least as to us perceivable; Bearing the same
Proportion to Lightning, as the firing of a Musket does to that of a Canon.
For as at a great distance we may see the Fire of a Musket, but scarce hear
its Noise; but of a Canon within the same distance we may both see the Fire and
hear the Noise: So by reason of the Exility of the Exhalation we hear not the
Noise when these falling Stars break from a Cloud, as we do Thunder when
ushered by Lightning. Fromondus compares these Meteors to ou^ kind of Fireworks
called Rockets (though their Motions be different, the one being forced upward
the other downward) which run in a Train and fall in the manner of Stars. And
therefore Pliny calls them Scintillas and Discursus Stellarum; Ptolomy,
Trajectiones; both which our Poet expresses when he says they shoot and sparkle.
Stars seem to shoot every where, Lampadias.
Stella Cadens.

When wandering Lights do sparkle in the Air.
And darted Flames swift Called in Greek *(...), and from thence in the Latin
Acontiae, which as Pliny says Iaculi m^do vibrantur (...) significatu. Of which
the Emperor Titus, or (as some will) Tiberius, is said to have written an
excellent Poem. This Meteor when it appears in a shorter form is called (...),
i. e. Ensis Gladius, seu Pugio, the Head or Body of the Comet representing the
Hilt, the Ray or Iubar, the Blade of a Sword, and appears of all others the
most Pale.
Arrows imitate, Acontiae.

When the dry Train runs in a narrow Strait,
For every Thing does mixed Fire infold;
That dwells in pregnant Clouds which Thunder mold,
Pierces Earths Veins; Heavens Terrors counterfeits
From Aetna's Caves; in Springs cold Water heats;
Lurks in hard Flints, and in green Bark finds Room,
When Woods by their ( To this Accident Vitruvius ( l 2. c. 1.) ascribes the
Original of our Culmary Fire; where he says, Ab Tempest^ and ventis densae
crebri^ibus A^bores agitatae, and inter se (...) Ramos, Ignem ex^itaverunt.
Which being observed by the Ancients, they from thence derived their (...), by
rubbing one stick against another, until being heated they catched Fire, which
they fed by dry Leaves, and such like combu^ible Fuel. This Part says Turnebus
( no^is in Theophrast, de Igne) was by them called (...), i. e. F^cus, or
according to the Scholiast of Apollonius (...), i. e. Strator. Which we may
compare with our Tindar. The other parts which were the sticks the^ called
(...), i. e. Terebrum* and served instead of our Flint and Steel. The Trees
most subject to this manner of taking Fire, are reckoned the Fig Tree, Laurel,
Oak and Ilex, the Tile-Tree, Ivy and Vine, but especially the Laurel.
Coneparius de Atramentis c. 13. reckons up these several ways of generating and
kindling Fire. Propagatione, Putredine, Coitione, Antispasi, Frictione, and
Percussione. Which he reduces to these three kinds, Propagation, Coition, and
Motion. In which the rest are included; for Putredo, and Antispasis kindle fire
by compelling the dispersed Heat to unite together, and therefore fall under
the head of Coition, as Friction and Percussion under that of Motion.
) Collision flames assume;
So fertile every Matter is in fire.
Nor sudden Flames breaking through Skies admire,
Nor frequent Coruscations by Earths hot
Exhaling Vapors in the Air begot,
Which the swift-feeding Flame pursues or flies;
Since trembling Lightning darted through the Skies,
Thou may behold in midst of falling Rain,
And Thunder through forced Clouds its way constrain:
Whether from ( He resumes his former Arguments touching the Original of
Comets, and begins with that of the Peripateticks, asserting (as is before
noted) Comets to come from a sulphurous unctuous ignescent matter exhaling
from the Earth and Sea, etc. Vide Aristotel. Meteor. l. 1. c. 7. and 10.
) fiery Seeds enclosed in Earth, Their Causes farther enquired into.

And thence emitted, Comets draw their Birth,
Or Nature did those fading Lights design
As ( The Opinion of Anaxagoras and Democritus; who held Comets to be the
Coapparition of wandering Stars or Planets, which when they approach near each
other seem mutually to touch, and to become as it were all one; or as Plutarch
expresses it, A Conjunction of diverse Stars meeting with their Lights together;
or according to Laertius, a Concourse of Planets emitting Flames. O^ which
Opinion likewise was Zeno in Seneca Natural. Quaest. l. 7. c. 19. Our Zeno
(says he) was of the Opinion of these who judged the Stars to concur, and
intermingle their Rays, and by that Society of Light to beget the Image of a
long Star; which Coll^cency from the Conjunction of the Rays of diverse Stars or
Planets Manilius here calls Subjuncta Sidera.
) sub-united Stars in Heaven to shine,
Or the ( The Chaldeans (as Stobaeus Eclog. Physic. c. 3. delivers their
Opinion) held that there were other Planets besides those ordinarily observed,
which are sometimes inconspicuous, in regard they move at a great distance
above us. But now and then appear when they come nearer to the Earth, and run a
lower Course; at which time by those who know them not to be Stars, they are
called Comets. Again, they seem to disappear and vanish, when they retire back
into the Depth or Profundity of the Aetherial Region: As Fishes cease to be
discerned when they sink down into the Bottom of the Sea. Of which Opinion
likewise Seneca reckons Apollonius Mindius; who held these to be aeterna
Naturae Opera; Or, to use Pli^y's Words, esse Sydera Perpetua, suoque ambitu
ire, sed non nisi relicta a sole cerni. Whence by Manilius they are said
sometimes to be involved, sometimes dismissed by the Sun. See Ricciolus in
Almagest. Nov. Tom. ^. l. 8. and Gassendus Tom. 1. l. 5. c. 1.
) Sun's rapid Course these Meteors rears
And draws to himself, his flames involving theirs,
And now dismisses; Like ( Mercury; who because he makes a^ almost equal Course
with the Sun, and ascends not (as Aristotle says) to any great Height above the
Horizon, is therefore seldom seen.
) Cyllenius Light,
Or fair ( Venus; so called from her Mother Dione; Daughter of Tethys and
Oceanus: Whence that of Theocritus ( Eidyll. 15.) (...) Dionaea Cypris: And of
Virgil. Aeneid. 3. Sacra Dionaea Matri --
) Dione's Star, Usher to Night;
Which often shine, as often the sight delude,
(Hiding themselves) and then again are viewed:
Or God in Pity to our humane State,
Sends these as ( The Belief of the Illiterate; asserted lik^wise by the
Learned of diverse Ages. Several of the Ancient Fathers maintaining the Opinion,
That Comets are made by the immediate Act and Power of God, and designed for
the Terror, D^ruction, or (...) at ^ast, of the offending World, especially of
Princes. (...) of which Opinion are ^koned Tertullian, Nicephorus, D^scen; and
Saint A^. Vide ^lum A^st. N^v. Tem. 2. l. 8. Petit Disser^ac. sur les C^es,
where he discourses against that Opinion; and L'escaloperius in Ciceron. de
N^tur. Deorum, moderating the Assertion of Damascen* who (...) Comets to be
sent by God as the p^culiar ^orerunning Signs of the Death of Kings and
Potentates.
) Nuncio's of ensuing Fate,
Never did Heaven with these fires vainly burn;
Deluded Swains their blasted Labors mourn, Their Cala^ Effects.

And the tired Husbandman to fruitless Toil
Compels his Oxen in a barren Soil:
Or the lethiferous Fire their Bodies kills,
Wasting their Marrows out with lingering Ills,
People consumes, whole Towns depopulates,
Whilst flaming ( By burning of the Dead, which was customary with most Nations
amongst the Ancients; especially with the Athenians, and the Greeks in general,
for so says the Scholiast of Thucydides ( l. 2.) (...). It was established by
Law among the Athenians, and all the Greeks. The Ground (...) Reason thereof
proceeding from their Opinion, that what was Divine and Immortal in Man, was by
that hery V^iculum carried up to Heaven, and what ever was Terrestrial and
Mortal, subsided in the Ashes. They did by that Means likewise as they
conceived (according to the Testimony of Psiny l. 7. c. 54.) avoid the (...) of
the Air by the Putrefaction of buried Carcasses; but especially the Injury or
Ignominy which might be do^e to the Bodies of the Dead, by taking them out of
the Grave ere consumed. For which reason the Tyrant Sylla ordered his Corpse to
be burned, lest he might be served in the same kind as he before had served his
Enemy ^ius Marius; whose Body he caused to be dug up and thrown into the
River Aniene, (now Teverone) as Cacero in secundo de Legibus, and Plutarch in
his Life testifies. This Custom of burning the Dead ceasing among the Romans
about the Time of Maximinus the Tyrant, or not long before: It being hard to
point out the Precise Time: Seeming to be abolished by the contrary Custom of
the Jews and Christians, especially by the Prevalence of the lat^er. Vide
Kirkmanum de funere Romans l. 1. c. 2. and Meursium de sunere, necnon Vales. Not.
in Eusebius. Histor. Ecclesi^st* l. 9. c. 8.
) Piles conclude the public Fates.
Through ( The Athenian Territories: so called either from Erectheus the Son of
Vulcan and Minerva, Daughter of (...), or Cranaus, or from Erectheus Son of
Pandion. Diodorus Siculus ( Bibliothec. l. 1.) makes him to have b^ by Birth an
Egyptian, and that in time of a general Famine, he brought great store of Corn
from Egypt to Athens, and for that signal Benefit, was by the Athenians made
their King. Herodotus ^ l. 8.) calls him Earth-born, (...) he says that in the
Castle of Athens there was the Temple (...), of Erectheus the Earthborn;
alluding perhaps to the fabulous occasion of his Birth (of which Apoliodorus
Bibliothec. l. 3.) Or in regard of the incertainty of his Parentage; whence
those whose Original was not known were by the Ancients reputed (...) filii.
Vide Casaubon. in 6. Satyr. Persii upon these Words Terrae est jam (...) --
Eusebius in Chronic. makes him Brother to Perseus, but erroneously: Vide
Scalig^r. Animadvers. in Eusebius. and (...) de regno Attico l. 2. c. 1. and 7.
) Erecthean Lands as that ( He alludes to that Memorable Plague at Athens,
which happened in the beginning of the Peloponnesi^n War* of which Lucretius l.
6. -- Mortifer Aestus Finibus in Cecropis funestos reddidit Agros, Vastavitque
Vias, ex^ausit Civibus Urben^. Accurately described by Thucydides ( l. 2.) and
thence paraphrased in English Verse after the Pindarick Way, by (...) excellent
Pen of Doctor Spratt; who for that Reason merits with Thucydides himself ( in
(...). (...).) to be styled -- Tyrannus Atticae Febris --
) Plague strayed,
I^. (...) in his particular Treause de Fo^tuna (...), c. ^o conceives the
Epithete Antiquae to be here given to Athens by (...) for distinction sake,
because (as he would have it) that C^ty in Man^ius his Time (whom he ^iles as
falsely as incons^lerately (...) Scriptorem) was called N^vae A^henae. This he
would seem to make out from the Authority of this following In^ in Gruter^,
extant at Millan; cited likewise by Scaliger in 5. de Emendatione Tempor. and
in Animadvers. in Eusebius. ad Numer. MMCXLVII. IMP. CAESAR. T. AELIUS HADRIANUS
ANTONINUS AUG. PIUS. COS. III. TRIB. POT. II. P. P. AQUAEDUCTUM IN NOVIS
ATHENIS COEPTUM A DIVO HADRIANO PATRE SUO, CONSUMMAVIT. DEDICAVITQ. But against
this his Opinion we oppose the better Judgment of Salmasius; who ( in Not. in
Aelium Spartianum) makes it (...) that the Grecian Athens was never called
N^vae Athenae. But that that Part of it which was re-edified by Hadrian, was
expressly called (...); as is clear from the Testimony of Spartianus. Besides,
Quis credat Inscriptionem Latinam in Urbe Grae^ suisse posi^am, says Salmas^us?
Or what Relation had the Works or Structures at Athens in Greece, to Millan in
(...)? Quid (...) cum Athenis? Says S^aliger Animadvers. in Eusebius. With fairer
Probability therefore conclude we (as Salm^sius does) that the Novae Athenae
mentioned in the foregoing Inscription was a Town so called in Liguria a Region
of Italy (which comprizes part of the Duchy of Millan) whereof Stephanus de
Urbibus; and that Manisius by that Epithere means no more than to set out a
Matter of fact of great Antiquity without any reference to the Novel Conceit,
or Nominal Dis^inction, which (...) fancies.
Old Athens waste by Tan^quil Fa^er in his Notes upon the sixth Book of (...)
by way of Collation cites these two Verses of Manilius, thus read in the
Original. Qualis Erect^eos Pestis populata Colonos
Extulit Antiquas per sunera Pacis Athenas.
Which Verses he undertakes to correct or amend, but trul^er to corrupt after
this manner.

Qualis Ereth^os olim populata Col^nos
Extulit Antiquas per funera, Pestis Athenas.
He confessing that he made that Alteration for this Reason, Because he never
yet saw any that could understand the meaning of (...) P^is. But that nimble
Critic might have forborne the exposing of his own or others Ignorance in that
Point, and have left M^nilius his Elegancies unbl^mished by so rude an
Interpolation; who ingeniously uses the expression of funera P^eis, or Peaceful
funerals in Opposition to ( cruen^a funera, or funera Belli) those occasioned
by the Sword. For as Thu^ydides observes, the Athenians were at once doubly
afflicted, (...), H^minibus inter (...) m^rientibus, Terrque extra vastata.
Which Place his Scholiast illustrates by applying this Verse of H^mers. (...)
Siquidem simul Bellumque domat and Pestis Achivos. Now the Mortality occasioned
by the Plague, Manilius here describes by the Periphrasis of funera Pacis;
which had brought upon Athens, unconflicted by any Enemy within, a greater
Destruction than the bloody Effects of War had done upon its Territories
without.
peaceful Funerals laid,
When each contracted others Death; whilst Art
No Cure could find, nor Prayers no help impart;
Care to the Sick, and Funerals to the Dead,
Even Tears were a main part of Funeral Exequies, whence that of Servius in
Virgil. Sine fle^u non est Sepultura. The want of them being reckoned as
unfortunate as the Deprivation of Funeral it self. Virgil (in 11. Aeneid.)
joins them as alike (...). N^ Animae viles, inhuma^a, infletaque Turba. And
O^id ( Metamorph. 11.) brings in the drowned C^yx appearing, and thus speaking
to his Hal^yone:

Surge, age, d^ Lacrym^s, Lugu^riaque indue, nec Me
(...) sub inania (...).
Rise, weep, and put on black, nor undeplor'd,
For pity, send Me to the S^ygian Ford. G. S.
The Ancients believing the Dead to be comforted and delighted with the Tears
of their surviving Friends. And upon this Ground it is that We meet so
frequently in the Ancient Epitaphs with LACRIMAS POSUIT, and CUM LACRIMIS
POSUIT, and LACRIMIS ET OPOBALSAMO UDUM CONDIDIT, and TUMULUM LACRIMIS, PLENUM
DEDIT. Of which Gutherius ( l. 1. de Iure Manium) affords the Examples.
Wherefore not unfitly does Manilius here, by the Defect of so mean and ordinary
an Obsequie, aggravate the Miseries of a (...) Mortality, by which Mankind is
deprived of all the Resentments and Benefits of commiserating Humanity.
Tears were wanting: Those no Mourners shed.
The wearied Flame did from its Office cease,
And Heaps of Thuryliles delivers the same historically. Some (says he) when
one Body was burning, brought another, and casting it upon it went their Way.
Leaving the Relics of one fired Carcass to burn another. For as Dr. Sp^at
ingeniously paraphrases upon that part of the Story, The Woods gave Funeral
Piles no more,
The Dead the very ^ire dev^ur.
A sadder kind of Funeral than that which Virgil ( Ae^eid. 11.) gives to the
slaughtered Latins, for they had yet Wood to burn them.

Caetera confusaeque ingentem Caedis Acervum Nec Numero, nec Honor cremant --
Upon which last Words Gutherius observes, Nec Numero nec Honor cembusti
dicuntur, qui confuso Lignorum Acervo, lento dabantur Igni, multis Corporibus
simul congestis. And this by Macrobius, is called Tumultuarium funus, only used
in calamitous Accidents. In which kind of promiscuous Funeral it is noted by
Macrobius that it was usual to every ten Men's Bodies to add one Woman's to make
them burn the better. He gives the Reason likewise; Quod Muliebre Corpus
juvabat ardentes Viros, non Caloris erat, sed Pinguis Carnis and Oleo similis.
Vide Macrob. Saturn. l. 7. c. 7.
fired Bones burnt dead Carcasses;
Whilst to so great a People scarce an Heir
Remained. Such Woes dire Comets often declare.
They bring with them the Worlds Manilius here will have Comets to be the
Ushers of the Worlds general Conflagration. Which Opinion seems to be grounded
upon this supposition, That the Ether by reason of the long Consumption of its
humid Aliment shall be then fitted for such fiery Productions; at which time
likewise the Sun and Stars having wasted all the Elementary Supplies, shall
reduce the World into Flames. Being the Opinion of the Stoics, especially of
Zeno, Cleanthes, Chrysippus, and (but doubtingly) of Panaetius; of which Cicero
in secundo de Natura Deorum: Though the Doctrine be as ancient as Heraclitus,
Empedocles, and Hyppasus the Metapontine. Yet was it not by them believed that
this Conflagration should bring with it a total, substantial Destruction, but
rather a purifying Renovation of the World: For so Cicero delivers their
Opinion where he says, Ad extremum Omnis Mundus ignescet. Ita relinqui nihil
praeter Ignem; a quo rursum animante ac Deo Renovatio Mundi fie^, atque idem
Ornatus orietur. Christian Philosophy likewise declaring not only the Worlds
(...) or Conflagration; but its (...) or Res^itution. See Lipsius in Stoic.
Phil. Dissertac. 22, and 23. Delrius in Commentar. ad Octav. Senec. p. 533.
Gassendus Tom. 1. Syntagm. Philosoph. part. 2. p. 178. and L'escaloperius in
Ciceron. de Nature. Deorum. l. 2. Sect. 118.
last Funeral Fire,
In which sick Nature one Day must expire. Supposed to occasion the Worlds
General Conflagration.

Wars they proclaim too, Tumults to arise,
And open Arms from secret Treacheries.
So when the Nations late from Faith withdrew,
When the fierce Germans our great Diverse, and some eminently learned (among
whom is Sleydan de 4. Imper. Stadius in L. Florum, and the excellent Gassendus
in vitae Epicuri) conceive the Quintilius Varus here mentioned to be the same
with that Quintilius Varus, of whose Death Horace in that consolatory Ode of
his to Virgil ( Carm. l. 1. Od. 24.) But since it is evident that Quintilius
Varus who was General of the Roman Legions in Germany was not slain till twenty
eight years after the Death of Virgil (to whom that Ode is directed) Virgil
dying in the DCCXXXIV year of Rome, and Varus not till DCCLXII year of the same
(at which time neither Virgil nor Horace were living) It must be against all
Reason and Chronology to imagine him the same with that Quintilius Varus whom
Horace there bewails. He being justlier conceived to be the same with him
mentioned by Eusebius in Chronic. in these Words. Olymp. CLXXXIX. Quintilius
Cremonensis Virgilii and Horatii familiaris, moritur. Servius likewise stiling
him (...) Vir^ gilii, and therefore Horace makes this Particular Application of
his Loss to Virgil. Multis ille quidem flebilis occidit, Nulli flebilior quam
Tibi Virgili. See Torrentius in his Notes upon that Ode, and Tanaquil Faber
expressly discussing this Point. ( Epistol. 46. l. 2.) But the Quintilius Varus
here meant, was the Son of Sextus Quintilius Varus, who (together with A^ius
Varus) warred against Iul. Caesar, as we find in his Commentaries de bello
Civili l. 2. and was flain afterward in the Battle with Brutus and Cassius
against Augustus by the Hand of his Freeman, Quem id facere ^egerat cum se
Insignibus Honorum velasset, as Velleius Paterculus l. 2. c. 71. relates. Whose
Fate his Son followed though in a different Cause, Quippe, (to use Paterculus
his Words) Paterni, Avitique Exempli Successor, se ipse transfixit. He was
before the Generalship of the Army in Germany, Prefect of Syria; Quam, Pauper,
Divitem ingressus, Dive^, Pauperem reliquit, as the same Velleius Paterculus
testifies l. 2. c. 117.
Varus slew,
And Fields in Of this s^d defeat of Quinti^ Varus, and the Roman Legions by
the Germans under the Conduct of Arminius, (occasioned by Varus his overweening
confidence, who in the midst of an Em^my Country, undertook to rule by the bare
Formalities of Law, a fierce and warlike People whom the Power of the Sword
could not ter^ or subdue.) See Strabo l. 7. (...) Paterculus l. 2. Lucius
Florus l. 4. c. 12. Tacitus Annal. l. 1. (...) in August.) and Dion Cassius l.
56. A Disaster so resented by A^uius that it brought him almost to despair; who
often in Passion knocking his Head against the wall would cry out, Quintili
Vari, read Legiones. Quintilius Varus, restore M^ my Leg^ons! The Place of
this defeat Cluverius ( in Antiqu. German. l. 3.) will have to be near the Town
of Dietmel, anciently Th^utoburgium; for thus (from the forenamed Authorities)
he describes Varus his March as he was trained by the subtlety of Armini^s from
his Camp at Alizon, now Esen, toward the Borders of the Cherusci. First
p^ssing through the utm^st Bounds of the Marsi toward a Town which now is
called Teuten Meyer, he came to the Woody Hills, where is the Castle at this
Day called Falkenberg: In the Valleys beneath which runs the River vulgarly
called Beerlebeker Be^k so named from the Town Beerlebek'; then entering the
confines of the Cherusci, he was there between the said Mountains, and the Town
of Theutmel or Dietmel, set upon, and his whole Army defeated and slain. Otho
Frisingensis l. 3. reports this Defeat to have been given within the
Territories of Ausburg near a Place where there is a Hill by some said to be
raised by the heaped up Bones of the slaughtered Romans, and therefore called
Perleich, quod ibi Legiones perierint: But that gross Error is refuted by
Velserus l. 1. Rerum August. Vindel. Ber^ in Sueton. affirms the Place where
this Defeat was given, to be at this Day by the Germans in Memory of their
Victory called (...), near the Town Horn in Westphalia, not far from Dietmel
aforesaid. But one Place or Time was not sufficient to comprize so signal a
Disaster, for the Fight (or slaughter rather) was continued for three days. The
first Days Conflict was near the Head of Luppia, now called Lips-spring; the
second Days Discomfiture was carried more remote from thence toward the Castle
of Falkenberg; the third and final Defeat was in the Fields (from their Victory
by the Germans called (...)) between Horn and Dietmel before mentioned. Vide
Monument. Paderbornens. p. 35.
Blood of three whole Legions drowned,
Through all the Skies such Ominous Lights were found;
As if with Those warred Nature; and against Ours,
Threatening an End to All; opposed her Powers.
Nor wonder Men and States such Mischiefs grieve,
The fault's at Home; We will not Heaven believe.
Often Civil Wars, and Kindred Arms they raise,
Nor more did Heaven with such fires ever blaze,
Than when fierce Leaders joining bloody hands
Ranged on He refers to the Civil Wars raised by Brutus and Cossius, who on
th^se Plains fought a desperate Battle against Augustus Caesar, wherein they
both perished together with the Roman Liberty: Of which see Livy Epitom. l.
124. Plutarch (in the Lives of Marcus Antonius and Brutus) Lucius Florus, l. 4.
c. 6. and Appian de Bellis Civilibus l. 4. These Plains were so called from the
Town Philippi, heretofore called Bunomos or Bunomia, Datus and Crenides; the
last name being given it from the many Springs there rising, but afterward
renamed from Philip the Father of Alexander its Reedifier, particularly
described by Appian ( loco citato) a Place fatal to the Roman Common Wealth; by
most conceived the same with the Pharsalian Plains where Pompey received his
last and fatal overthrow; but erroneously. For those were in Thessaly near the
River Pharsalus; these in Thrace or the utmost Limits of Macedonia not far from
the River Strimon. Vide Bunonem in Cluver. Introduct. Geograph. l. 4. c. 8.
However the Poets generally, and Virgil himself, with our Manilius confounds
them with the Pharsalian Plains; as in this Verse in 1. Georgic. Romanas Acies
iterum videre Philippi: And in compliance with that Vulgar Opinion Cabellavius
in this following Epigram upon the present Subject.

Pharsa^s Ausonias frangit rursum Hasta Secures,
(...) rursum Aemathio Pulvere Roma cadit.
Cred^ suum Macetum Tellus imitatu^ Alumnum:
Hic Orbem, (...) Vrbem vici^ and Orbis Heram.
Once more Pharsalia routs Ausonian Bands,
And Rome once more falls on Aemathian Sands.
The Land sure imitates her great Son; He
The whole world vanquished; the worlds Empress she.

Philippick Plains confederate Bands.
The Roman Soldiers on Sands yet scarce dry,
Trampled fresh Relics of Mortality.
Empire, It self with its own Strength assayl'd,
But Great Augustus ( Iulius-like) The Memory of this Victory, which seems
chiefly to be attributed to the Valor of the Praetorian Cohorts, is preserved
in some an^nt Medails, on one side whereof is the Figure of Victory standing
upon a Globe, holding forth in her right Hand a Laurel Wreath with this
Inscription, VICT. AUG. On the Reverse three Military Ensigns with this
Inscription, COHOR. PRAET. PHIL. See Goltzius, Occo, and Patin in Numism. Imp.
Romans
prevailed.
Yet ends not there: the The Battle of Actium was one of the most signal that
ever was fought at Sea; upon whose Success depended no less than the Empire of
the whole World. The Chiefs interessed were Augustus Caesar, and Mark Anthony,
abetted with all the Strength of the East and West. Plutarch reckons on Mark
Antonies side no less than eleven Kings engaged, whereof six were personally
present in the Action. The Battle being denominated from the Town of Actium in
Epirus seated upon a Promontory of the same Name, at present called Capo Figalo
at the Mouth of the (...) Golf, known at this Day by the Name of Golfo de
Larta; near to which on the third of September in the 723. year after the
building of Rome, (as Brietius computes it) the Engagement happened. Augustus his
Fle^ consisting of 400 stout Men of War, Mark Antonies being double that
Number, and of much greater Burden. But by the Valor and Conduct of Agrippa
the Victory after a long and dubious Dispute rested on Augustus his side;
Cleopatra first flying, and after her Antony shamefully following. See Virgil,
Aeneid. l. 8. Horace Od. 37. l. 1. and Epod. 9. Plutarch in the life of Mark
Antony, and particularly Fournie^ in the fifth Book of his Hydrographie, where
he treats de la Puissance Navale des Anciens. p. 217, and 218.
Actian Battle's fought;
When Armies as a fatal So by Sidonius Apolinaris ( in Panegyr. ad Majorian.)
the Army which Mark Anthony and Cleopatra brought against Augustus is called
Dotalis Turba in this Verse, Dum venit a Phario dotalis Turba Canopo. For
Anthony had promised to Cleopatra, by the help of that Army to give her the
Roman Empire for her Dowry; consirm'd by Propertius l. 3. Eleg. 11.

Conjugis obscoeni Pretium Romana poposcit Moenia -- And Lucius Florus l. 4. c.
11. Mulier Aegyptiaca ab ebrio Imperatore Pretium Libidinis, Romanum Imperium
pe^is, and promis^ Antonius, to which Albinovanus (speaking of M^aenas) alludes.

Hic modo Miles erat, ne posset Foemina Romam Dotalem stupri, turpis, habere
sui. And the Author of this Epigram ( in Catalect. Veter. Poet.)

Venerat Eoum quatiens Antonius Orbem
Et conjuncta suis Parthlea Belia gerens,
Dotalemque petens Romam Cleopatra Canopo, etc.

Dowry brought,
Once more engaged for the Worlds glorious Prize,
And sought at Sea, a Ruler of the Skies;
When Fleets did on a Woman's Sway depend:
Manilius here calls them Isiaca Sistra, the Sistrum being a kind of Musical
Instrument or Crepitaculum used in the Sacrifices of Isis to whom it was
sacred; reputed to have been her Invention, and thence so named according to
Isidor, or from the Greek Word, (...), i. e. quatio, because it was shaken
(when played on) crispante Bracchio, as Apuleius ( l. 1. Metamorph.) describes
it. It was made in form of a Racquet, of Iron, Brass, Silver, and, sometimes,
of Gold; through the Rim, Webb, or Border thereof was put several small Rods,
of the same Metal with the Sistrum, on which were hung diverse Rings, which,
when shaken by the Handle, made a kind of gingling Noise. The Greek Poet
Hedylus in an Epigram of his cited by Athenaeus, seems to derive the Invention
of the Sistrum from the murmuring Sound which Milus makes passing through the
Clifts and rocky Places; touching which, see Casaubon, Animadvers. in
Athenaeum, l. 11. c. 13. It is by Scaliger ( in C pam Virgil.) and Salmasius (
in Flav. Vopisc) confounded with the Crotalum, but erroneously, as observed by
Pignorius ( de (...), p. 8^.) where the Differences are clearly stated from
their contrary Figures. It was the peculiar Instrument of Egypt: That Land
being by the Prophet Esaias ( c. 8. v. 1.) according to the Interpretation of
(...) ( in G^ogr. Sacr. l. 4. c. 2.) called Terra C^mbali O^arum, i. e. Cymbali
Marginati The Land of Timbrels with Rims or Borders (to distinguish them from
the Timbrels of other Countries) and not as our English Translation reads it,
the Land shadowing with Wings. Isidore yet affirms the Amazons to have used
this sort of Timbrel in their Wars instead of Trumpets, as well as the
Egyptians; and gives the Reason, (...) ejus erat Mulier (namely Isis.) Kirker
likewise ( in Art Magna Conson. and Disson. l. 2.) reports the Jewish Timbrel
(...) call Thoph, to have been of the same Fashion with, and made in Imitation
of the Egyptian Sistrum; And that (...) Virgins used it in their Solemn
Dances, as he proves by the Examples of Moses his Sister, and I^phte's
Daughter: (...) thereof being yet continued in Palestine as he affirms from the
Testimony of credible Witnesses, the Figure whereof (...) us correspondent to
that of the Egyptian Sistrum; of which see more in Plutarch, ( l. de Iside and
Osyride) (...) his particular Tract entitled Isiacus seu de Sistro, Dempster in
Paralipom. ad Rosin. l. 2. Pierius Hieroglyp^. l. 4. c. 6, and 7. (...) ^da in
8. Aeneid. ad Verse. 696. and Kirker in Oedip. Egypt. Tom. 1. and alibi.
Nile's Timbrels against Rome's Tristan in his Historical Commentaries ( Tom.
1. p. 82.) conceives by the Thunder here mentioned, some Tempest of Thunder,
which he observes to have been always favorable and auspicious to Augustus,
and instances particularly (from Appian) in the Conflict against Sextus
Pompeius; imagining the like propitious Accident to have happened in this
against Mark Anthony and Cleopatra. But his Conjecture is without Ground: for
the Poet intends no more in this Place than to set forth the Engagement between
the Forces of Augustus under the Protection of Iupite^ Capitolinus or Tonans,
the Roman Deity; and those of Anthony and Cleopatra under the Protection of
Isis, the Egyptian Goddess. Hence that in Catalect. Vet. Poet. -- Capitolino
Sistra minata Iovi. And Propertius speaking of Cleopatra Lady General in the
Battle of Actium,

Ausa Iovi nostro latrantem opponere Anubim. Consonant to which is that of
Lucan. l. 10.

Terruit Illa suo, si fas, Capitolia S^stro.
Thunder durst contend.
There yet remained the He calls it the Servile War, because the Forces of
Sextus Pompeius were composed of Slaves and Prisoners which he had picked up to
manage his Py^atick War. ^o this Lucan alludes l. 1. Accedant fatis, and quas
premit aspera, Classes,
Le^cas, and a^denti Servilia Bella sub Aetna.
See Laurentius Abstemius Sylloge 4. V^r. Annotat..
servile War behind;
When with his Countries Foes young Pompey joined,
Harrass'd those Seas his Father did defend.
But this suffice the Fates; now let Wars end;
And Adamantine Fetters Discord bind,
To close Restraint eternally confined.
Whilst Father of his Country Manilius (as is well observed by Spanhemius ( in
Dissertat. de Numism.) alludes in this Place not unappositely to the Title of
INVICTUS usually given to the Roman Emperors. Of whom perhaps Augustus was the
first that enjoyed it. In after Times we find it frequent. Hence in the Coyns
of Septimius Severus INVICTO IMPERATORI, and of Geta SEVERI INVICTI AUG. P.
FILL. and of Alexander Severus INVICTUS AUG. So likewise in these Ancient
Inscriptions within the Territories of Verona collected by Panvinius: IMP.
CAES. M. AUR. CLAUDIO P. F. INVICTO AUG. and IMP. CAES. M. AUR. MAXENTIO P. F.
INVICTO AUG. Rome likewise being frequently honored with the same Attribute,
as in the Coyns of Constantinus, Priscus Attalus, Alexander the Tyrant, and
Athalaricus, where we find the Inscriptions of ROMA INVICTA, and ROMA INVICTA
^TERNA. Of which in Goltzius, Occo, Tristan, and Patin.
never overcome,
Augustus lives; such too beneath him, Rome.
And when a God she to a Heavenly Throne
Resigns Him up; else in the World seek None.
FINIS.
APPENDIX.
INtending the subsequent Appendix as a further Illustration of the Precedent
Poem, I find my self obliged to follow the same Method which our Author himself
has laid down, and to trace him in his own steps, through the main Design of
his Work; in the very Front whereof appears, as it were lightly delineated,

The ORIGINAL and PROGRESS of ASTRONOMY.
Of which ere we begin to speak, it will berequisite to give some Account of
its NAME. It is derived (...)* because it teaches the Laws and Rules whereby
the Motions of the Stars are regulated and determined* being anciently, by a
Promiscuous Community of Denomination, called also Astrology: For what is, by
Plato, called ASTRONOMY, is, by Aristotle and others, termed ASTROLOGY. Thus a
Salmas. in Pli^. Ex^rcitat. Tom. 1. p; 6;
Thales is said first among the Greeks (...), to Astrologize, who never treated
of the Judiciary Art: So to Pherecydes they gave the Title of Astrologer,
though he was absolutely an Astronomer; and the Astronomical Treatise of Phocus
the Samian, which some have ascribed to Thales, bears the Inscription of
Nautical Astrology. On the contrary, our Manilius inscribes his Poem, which
treats (all but the First Book) of Judiciary Astrology, ASTRONOMICON. But this
Synonymy in aftertimes ceased: For this Celestial Science, known anciently in
Greece by that Part of it only, which was properly called Meteorologick, as
considering the Motions of the Stars with the Reasons thereof, came, in
succeeding Ages, to receive the Addition of another Part, called
Apotelesmatick, which teaches to divine and prognosticate from the Site and
Aspects of the fixed Stars and Planets, their Influence as to the Production of
future Events. And when this last became transplanted into Greece, and had
there taken Root, there was given to it (as a peculiar and distinctive
Appellation) the Name of Astrology, there being reserved to the former only
that of Astronomy; which is properly understood, and so described to be, That
Science which contemplates the Motion, Distance, Color, Light, Order, Place,
Magnitude, and the like Adjuncts of the fixed Stars and Planets, without any
respect to the Judiciary Part.

As Astronomy, so its Professors were doubly distinguished. Plato, in
Epinomide, differences them by the Titles of (...), and (...). By the first, he
means those who observe the Rising and Setting of the Stars, in Order to the
Prognostication of the Seasons of the Year, and Temperature of the Air; these
he calls Astronomers, according to Hesiod: by the later, he understands those,
whose study is particularly confined to the Theory of the Planets.

As to its ORIGINAL, we cannot reasonably refer it to a better Parent than
Admiration. So says (...). Astron.
Gassendus, Originem ipsi fecit Admiratio. For our Forefathers admiring the
Splendor, Variety, Multitude and Magnitude of the Stars, together with their
constant and regular Motion, transferred their Admiration into Observation, and
that in process of time into Tables, or Parapegmata, for the Information of
Posterity. And upon this Ground we may, with ^rasat. in Tom. ^. ^lmagest. ^ov.
Ricciolus, affirm Astronomy to be as ancient almost as the Stars themselves,
and that it was first (with other divinely infused Arts) reduced to Experiment
and Practice by Adam himself, and by his Posterity perpetuated, as we find by
L. 11. Autiq. Iud. c. 3 and 8.
Josephus, who writes that Seth, having been instructed therein by Adam, and
understanding that the World was twice to perish, once by Deluge, afterward by
a general Conflagration, reduced this Art to an Epitome, and inscribed it on
two Pillars; the one of Brick, against the Violence of Fire; the other of
Stone, against the Inundation of Waters: One of which (that is the Pillar of
Stone) he affirms to have been extant in his Time, in a Place called Syrias or
Seirath M^. Is. Voss. l. de ^tate Mundi, p. 271.
conceived to be the Land bordering upon Mount Ephraim, not far from Jericho.

Astronomy being thus brought into the World, was cultivated and improved by
the following Patriarchs, who, by reason of their long lives, had the
Opportunity of observing and noting many Astral Revolutions. To which end
chiefly (according to the Opinion of some of the Jewish R^bbi Isa^. (...),
(...). de lon ^vitate prim. Patr.
Doctors) the Prolongation of their Lives was by divine Providence in a manner
miraculously extended. Among whom, in this Science the most celebrated is
Enoch, whose Books upon this Subject are said to be extant at this Day; whence
Tertullian and Origin produce several Citations.

But to what Extent of Improvement this Science was brought before the Flood is
uncertain.

This only from the Testimony of Origin, citing the Books of Enoch before
mentioned, appears, That the Stars were then reduced into Asterisms, under
peculiar and distinct Denominations: Touching which Names the said Enoch wrote
many secret and mysterious things. And Scripture makes it manifest, that the
Year then, as now it is, was computed by (...) Revolutions of the Moon, to one
of the Sun's through the Zodiac. For in Genesis, it is said, that Noah entered
into the Ark the 17. Day of the 2. Month; there is likewise express mention of
the 7. and the 10. Month; and that on the 27. Day of the 2. Month of the Year
following, Noah went out of the Ark. Whence we may infer, that the Patriarchs
had then the knowledge, as well of the Sun's Course as of the Moons, with their
Periods, and in probability of the other Planets. And that the Opinion of
those, who conceive the Year, before the Flood, to have been only Menstrual,
deserves to be exploded, as most absurd and ridiculous.

After the Flood, and the Dispersion of Mankind over the face of the Earth, the
Study of Astronomy began to be improved by several Nations, who doubtless had
derived the Knowledge thereof from Noah and his Posterity. So that it may seem
no wonder, if at one and the same Time diverse Persons in diverse Regions applied
themselves to the Observation and Study of this Astral Science. Hence arises
among several Nations the Contest for the Glory and Honor of its Invention.
But seeing it is clear beyond all Controversy, that Mankind issued and
dispersed themselves out of Asia into Africa, Europe, and other parts of the
World, the Glory thereof ought in the first Place to be attributed to the
Asiaticks; and among them chiefly to the Babylonians, Chaldeans and Bactrians.
Among whom are principally celebrated Evahdnes, Belus, Zoroaster, and his
Successor Otanes; as likewise Cidenas, Naburian, Sudinus and Seleucus the
Chaldean; before whom yet is to be reckoned the Patriarch Abraham, and his
Father Their, as great Improvers of those Inventions, which had been handed
down to them from their Forefathers, and the Sons of Noah.

From the Assyrians and Chaldeans it came in the next Place to the Egyptians,
brought thither by the Patriarch Abraham, as L. 9. Pr^par, Evan^* c. 16, 17,
18, etc.
Eusebius proves, from the Authority of Josephus, Eupolemus, Artapanus, Melo
and others, as cited by Alexander Polyhistor; though Eupolemus seem to infer,
that Abraham first taught the same to the Phenicians, before his Descent into
Egypt.

There are others yet who attribute the Honor of its Invention to the
Egyptians, before the Chaldeans, conceiving that Tradition of Abraham's
instructing the Egyptian Priests to be inconsistent with Reason; since
Abraham's Vid. (...), in Praefa^. ad Vit. T^ch. Brahae^non Dom. Io. (...), p.
^1.
Stay in Egypt (however Artapanus report it to have been 20 years) seems not to
have been above 3 Months; most of which time was spent in Fears, Jealousies,
and Dangers, which in all Probability would not permit him to communicate, at
leisure and with freedom, the Mysteries of that sublime Science.

They add further, that the Egyptians were so far from receiving the Knowledge
of Astronomy from the Chaldeans, that on the Contrary, they affirm the
Chaldeans to have been first instructed therein by the Egyptians. To prove
which they produce the Testimonies of (...) l. ^
Diodorus Siculus, and Fabul. 271.
Hyginus; The former writing that Babylon was a Colony of the Egyptians,
founded by Belus, Son of Libya, who therein instituted a College of Priests,
who were to contemplate the S^ars in the same manner as those in Egypt: The
later reporting, that one Evahdnes is said to have come from beyond the Seas
into Chaldea, and there to have taught Astronomy.

But it seems strange, if this Science were known to the Egyptians, before the
Babylonians and Chaldeans, that yet the Egyptian Observations should be so much
later than those of the Babylonians; for we find scarce any of the Egyptians to
precede the Time of Alexander the Great his Death, than which even those of the
Greeks are earlier; whereas the Observations of the Babylonians appear to have
been made almost 2000 years before that Time.

Others there are who would rob both the Chaldeans and Egyptians of this
Honor, and assign the Invention thereof to the Ethiopians; of which Opinion is
Lucian, (...). But this Assertion seems to want much of Validity, as being
opposed by the general Stream of Tradition, and that long before Lucian's Time.

Nor wants Africa, besides the Egyptians, and Ethiopians, other Pretenders to
the Invention of Astronomy; particularly the Mauritanians, who are said to have
been instructed therein, by Atlas (the Son of Libya) their King.

From the several Nations before mentioned Astronomy seems to have been divided
anciently into Three Principal Sects, that is to say, the Assyrian,
comprehending the Babylonian and Chaldaick, the Egyptian, and the Atlantic: of
which last yet the Greeks and Romans made no reckoning, for among them were
only enumerated these 3 Sects, the Chaldaick, Egyptian and Grecian; the
Original and Progress of which last comes next to be described.

To pass by the fabulous Age, touching which there is nothing certain, we shall
only confine our Discourse to the Historical, which began with the Olympiads.
Nor do any Monuments of this Later inform us, that the Greeks had made any
considerable Advance in Astronomy, before the Death of Alexander the Great.
For, excepting some few Observations of Eclipses, made by Thales and
Anaxagoras, the rest of the Greeks employed their Studies no further, than in
nothing the Rising and Setting of the fixed Stars, and accommodating the Cycles
of the Sun and Moon to the Constitution of the Civil Year; to which end they
observed the Solstices and Equinoxes: Oenopides, Cleostratus, Harpalus,
Democritus, Meton, Euctemon, or Eudoxus, having not delivered to us any thing
of the proper Motion of the fixed Stars, or their certain Distances from one
another, nor yet (says Ricciolus) of the Revolutions of the Planets, or the
Periods determining the Apocatastasis of the Moons Anomaly and Latitude.

And yet such was their Self-conceit and Presumption, as confidently to affirm,
that Astronomy owed its Invention to them, and particularly to the Rhodians,
from whom they will have the Egyptians to have received it, as Diodorus Siculus
reports in the story of the Heliadae. Others of them ascribe its Original to
their Poet Orpheus. But these assertions savouring too much of the Fable,
persuade us rather to conclude with the Opinion of those, who maintain
Astronomy to have been first brought into Greece by Thales the Milesian, who
derived it from the Egyptians.

From him it was improved by Anaximander, Anaximenes, Anaxagoras, Democritus,
Empedocles, Euctemon, Meton, Eudoxus, and others of the Athenian School, till
the Time of Alexander the Great his founding the City of Alexandria in Egypt.
After which the Ptolemies, his Successors, erecting there an Academy for all
manner of Studies, the Grecian Astronomy made its Retreat thither, and under
those Princes flourished in equal Glory with the Egyptian. From thence we hear
of the famous Names of Autolychus, Calippus, Timochares, Aristyllus,
Eratosthenes, Conon, Hipparchus, Sosigenes, Theon Senior, Ptolemy, Paulus
Alexandrinus, Theon Alexandrinus, and his Daughter, the Excellent, but
Unfortunate, Hypatia.

Among the Romans it was long before it gained Acquaintance, or Professors. For
though Orat. ^9.
Dion Prusieus affirm the Italians to have been instructed by the Pythagoreans,
and that in Probability the Doctrine of Philolaus, Timaeus, Archytas and others
(the fame of whose Learning invited even Plato himself to make a voyage into
Italy) could not be concealed from the curious and ingenious Spirits of Rome:
Yet that Martial City being more addicted to Arms than Arts, slowly
entertained, these kind of speculative Studies. And therefore (to pass by the
rude Essays of Numa Pompilius) we find in the Roman Stories no Mention of any
Persons considerably knowing therein, before Cains Sulpicius Gallus, who was
Legate to Aemilius Paulus in the War against Perses King of Macedon, who first
among them published a Discourse of Eclipses. After him we hear of Lucius
Taruntius, Nigidius Figulus, Varro, and Cicero, who applied themselves to the
Study of Astronomy; But to none of the Latins is that Science so much indebted
as to their Great Dictator C. Julius Caesar, who

-- media inter Praelia semper (...).
Stellarum, Coelique Plagis, Superisque vacabat. He with the assistance of
Sosigenes, the Egyptian, reduced the Roman Year to the Course of the Sun, which
we yet retain, and wrote, in Greek, of the Stars. From him Mathematical Arts,
and particularly Astronomy, began to flourish among them; his Nephew and
Successor Augustus, by his Example encouraging the same. In whose Reign our
Manilius wrote this his Astronomical Poem.

And thus having clearly and concisely, to Manilius his Time, deduced the
History of Astronomy from its Original, I conceive it may serve as a competent
Illustration of his Proemial, but brief Indication of the first Rise, Authors,
and Promoters thereof.

To continue the Progress thereof down to these Times in the same Series of
Discourse would perhaps be both tedious and unsatisfactory. I have therefore
chosen for the better Information (and it may be Delectation) of the more
Inquisitive and Ingenious Lovers of these Studies, to collect a Catalogue of
the most Eminent Astronomers, as well Ancient as Modern, their Works and
Writings, according to the Succession of Time from the first Birth of Astronomy
to this present, whereby the Curious Reader may perceive, when, how, and by
whom it has been improved to that Degree of Perfection wherein it now stands.

A CATALOGUE Of the most Eminent ASTRONOMERS, Ancient and Modern.
ASTRONOMERS before our Savior's Nativity. ANNI ANTE CHRISTUM juxta LXX.

ADAM, the first Author of Astronomy, as of all 5600.
other Arts and Sciences, according to Suidas; (...), Hujus sunt omnia inventa
omnesque Doctrinae. That he particularly instructed Seth in this Astral
Science, and that by writing, is the opinion of the Jewish and Arabian
Doctors, and, among them, expressly of Gelaldinus Arabs, cited by Kircher in
Obelisc. Pamphil. page 5. the Book which goes under the title of Liber
Creationis, being owned for his, and commented upon, as such, by Rabbi Abraham,
and Rabbi Joseph Ben Uziel; but how far to be credited, see Bangus, Exercit.
Literar. page 4.

SETH, the son of Adam, inscribed on two Pillars, one of Brick, the other of
5200.
Stone, the Theory of this Celestial Science, received from his Father, and
afterward by that means perpetuated by Cainan, Mahaliel, Iared, etc. unto
Enoch.

ENOCH, the seventh from Adam, wrote of Astronomy, and particularly of 4400.
the Number and Names of the Stars, and their secret Virtues; the Book reported
to be yet extant in the Territories of the Queen of Sheba, as Vossius, De
Scientiis Mathemat. affirms.

CHAM, the son of Noah, by some conceived the same with the first Zoroaster,
3400.
by others taken for Menes, or Osyris the first King of Egypt, is famed for his
skill in Astronomy, which yet he is said to have contaminated by the addition
of diverse ANNI ANTE CHRISTUM.
Magical arts.

NEBROCH, or NEMBROTH, or NIMROD, the son of Ch^, the 2847.
son of Cham, and the first King of Babylon, is reported to have writ some
things in Astronomy and Astrology, as Simler affirms in Biblioth. Gesner.

BELUS the Assyrian, King of Babylon, by Pliny ( l. 6. c. 26.) styled The
Inventor 2346.
of the Science of the Stars, to whom Semiramis his Daughter erected a Temple
in the middle of Babylon, of an exceeding Height, by the Help whereof the
Chaldeans, who addicted themselves there to Contemplation of the Stars, did
exactly observe their risings and settings: of which Diodor. Sicul. l. 2.

ABRAHAM the Patriarch, instructed by the Posterity of Noah, (from whom 2069.
he was the tenth, as Noah was from Adam) taught this Knowledge to the
Phoenicians and Egyptians, as Eusebius attests. He is said to have inscribed on
two Pillars (as Seth before had done) whatever related to the Astronomical
Science, as Ranzovius from the Authority of Marianus Scotus affirms in Catalog.
Astronom.

ZOROASTER, called PERSO-MEDUS, the first of the Magi, and a 1990.
most knowing Astrologer, besides four Books, De Natura, left five others of
Predictions, Ex inspectione Stellarum, as Suidas testifies in Voce (...), which
yet by G. Vossius are supposed not to be authentic, De Scient. Mathemat. p.
371.

COELUS, the most ancient of the Ethnic Gods, by the Greeks called (...), 1800.
which name he acquired by his continual Observations of the Heavenly Bodies.
His sons were Saturn, Hyperion, Iapetus, etc.

HYPERION, the son of Coelus, is said to have demonstrated the Course of the
1750.
Sun and Moon, and thence the people took occasion to call his Son, Helius, and
his Daughter, Selene, as Diod. Sicul. l. 3. affirms.

MOSES, by Extraction a Chaldean, by Birth and Education an Egyptian, the 1593.
Great Legislator of the Jews, and first truly Divine Philosopher, is not to be
omitted in this Catalogue of Astronomers; for Philo Iudaeus, in his life ( l.
1.) affirms, That he received from the Assyrians the Chaldaick Learning of the
Stars, and Knowledge of the Heavens; In which likewise he improved himself from
the Doctrines of the Egyptians, chiefly addicted to Mathematical Studies.

ATLAS, King of Mauritania, inventor of the Sphere, and therefore by the 1590.
Poets feigned to have supported Heaven.

PROMETHEUS, Brother to Atlas, instructed the Assyrians in Astronomy, 1590.
making his Observations on Mount Caucasus, with that assiduous care and
sollicitous study, as gave occasion to the Fable of his being tortured by a
Vultur feeding on his Liver.

HERMES, called likewise THEUT or THOTH, and MERCURIUS 1480.
TRISMEGISTUS, a great Propagator of Astronomy among the Egyptians. Something
bearing his name was printed at Norimberg 1532. His Books called (...) did
treat (...), as we find in Eusebius; and Iamblicus, (out of Chaeremon) speaks
of other his Writings upon the same subject.

ENDYMION, a curious Observer of the Moon's motion: which on Mount 1445.
Latmus he used to contemplate, and for that cause was fabled to have been her
Paramour. ANNI ANTE CHRIST^.


BELLEROPHON, Son of Glaucus, Prince of Corinth, who is fabled to 1360.
have backed Pegasus the winged Horse, and soared up to Heaven, is by Lucian,
(...), reputed a great Astronomer; for thus he writes of him. I believe not at
all (says he) the Story of his winged Horse. But this I conceive of him, that
he being much addicted to Astronomical Contemplations, and conversant in the
Observation of the Stars ((...)) was carried up to Heaven not by a Horse, but
by his Mind.

CEPHEUS, King of Ethiopia, a Royal Promoter, and Advancer of Astronomical 1345.
Studies, of whom we have already made mention in our Notes upon the
Constellations.

HERCULES, called (...), or Musarum ductor, to distinguish him from 1238.
the other Hercules, was so well learned in the Doctrine of the Sphere, that he
is therefore feigned to have eased Atlas of his burden; whence Ovid, Hercule
supposito Sydera fulsit Atlas.

ATREUS, Brother to Thyestes, King of the Argives was, according to the 1205.
testimomy of Lucian, ((...)) an excellent Astronomer. For when the Argives by
public consent had decreed, That the Kingdom should be given to him of the two
who should manifest himself the most learned in the knowledge of the Heavens;
Thyestes is thereupon said to have made known to them the Constellation in the
Zodiac called Aries. But Atreus discovered to them the course of the Sun, with
his various rising and setting, demonstrating his Motion to be contrary to that
of the Heavens; Whereupon they elected him to be their King.

PALAMEDES found out many Observables concerning the Stars, their 1200.
Measures, Distances, and Motions, as we find expressed in Sophocles.

SOLOMON, King of Israel, besides his other divinely infused knowledge, 1012.
was excellently skilled in the course of the Heavens, and order of the Stars,
as it is said of him, Wisdom, chap. 7. v. 19.

NUMA POMPILIUS, second King of the Romans, first Author of the 716.
Roman year, which he so disposed (to the end the Lunar might agree with the
Solar year that every four years there was an Intercalation of 45 Days, which
he divided and adjusted after this manner, adding to the first 2 years 22 Days,
and inserting in the latter 2 years 23 Days. Vid. G. Voss. de Scient. Math.

NECEPSO, though but a petty Prince of some part of the lower Egypt, was 660.
one of the greatest Instauratours of Astronomy in that Nation, and brought
into practice and public use, whatever Thoth, or the first Mercury had
invented, or Siphoas, Son of Vulcan, the second Mercury had deposited in
writing in the private Archives of their Temples. In which Writings of Mercury
were contained (besides Hieroglyphics and other sacred Ceremonies)
Cosmography, Geography, the course of the Sun and Moon, and of the other five
Planets; as Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 6. testifies.

PETOSYRIS, an Egyptian Priest, and Philosopher, wrote, according to the 660.
testimony of Suidas, of Astrology, collected out of the Sacred Books of the
Egyptians, which he dedicated to Necepso, one of the Egyptian Kings immediately
ANNI ANTE CHRISTV^
before mentioned, yet extant (as Simler, in Biblioth. Gesneriana, affirms) in
Biblioth. Carpensi and Sancti Angeli.

PHOCUS SAMIUS wrote de Astrologia Nautica, as Diog. Laertius testifies. 600.
This Phocus is conceived to be the same to whom Solon inscribed a Poem, as
Plutarch writes.

THALES, the Milesian, one of the Greek Sages, first Introducer of Astronomy
590.
among the Greeks. He first observed the apparent Diameter of the Sun to be the
7^0th part of the Orb in which he moves; first found out, or at least
denominated the Constellation of the Lesser Bear, and first foretold Eclipses,
particularly that memorable one, happening in the time of the Battle between
Halyaties King of Lydia, and Astyages King of Media, recorded by Herodotus. He
first divided the Celestial Sphere into five Zones, and composed two Treatises,
the one of the Trepicks, the other of the Aequinoctials, therein asserting the
obliquity of the Zodiac, and distinguishing the Seasons of the year; and
measured the height of the Egyptian Pyramids by their shadows.

OENOPIDES, the Chian, is highly commended by Plato, Proclus, and Theon 560.
Smyrnaeus, for his eminent Knowledge in Astronomy; Eudemus asserting him to
have first found out the Obliquity of the Zodiac. Aelian, in his Various
Histories ( lib. 10. c. 7.) reports, that he set up a Brass-Table at the
Olympicks, having written thereon the Astronomy of LIX. years; within which
Term or space he comprised the Great Year, or the Annus magnus vertens.

ANAXIMANDER, Country man, Companion, Kinsman, and Disciple to 544.
Thales, first asserted the Moon to receive light from the Sun, yet withal
affirming that she has a light of her own, but very thin. He first erected a
Gnomon at Sparta, to discover by the shadow of the Sun the times of the
Solstices and Equinoxes. The invention of the Zodiack's Obliquity, is likewise
attributed to him.

HYSTASPES Son of Arsames, or Arsa^es, King of Persia, and Father of 540.
Darius; of whom thus, Ammianus Marcellinus; ( l. 24.) Hystaspes was a most
Wise Person, who boldly penetrating into the Inner Parts of upper India, came
to a woody Desert, whose calm Silence was possessed by those high (...) the Brach
(...). Of these he learnt the Discordant Concord of the Motions of the St^rs,
and ^f Heaven* and of pure Rites of Sacrifice, which, returning into Persia, he
contributed as (...) Addition and complement to Magic.

CLEOSTRATUS, the Tenedian, is said first to have studied the Parts, or 540.
Division of the Zodiac, and noted the Commencement of the Sign Aries and
Sagittary. He invented a Luni-Solar Cycle, consisting of eight Solar years,
thence called Octaeteris, in lieu of the Tetraeteris, which the Greeks before
used, touching which see Ricciolus Almagest. l. 4. c. 19.

ANAXIMENES of Miletus, Friend, Disciple, and Successor to Anaximander, 530.
first demonstrated the Eclipse of the Moon to be by the Earth's Interposition
between Her and the Sun, and maintained the Stars to move, not only above, but
about the Earth.

HARPALUS corrected the Octaeteris of Cleostratus, according to whose opinion,
520.
at the expiration of every ninth year, the New Moon returned again at the same
hour, unto the same point of the Heavens, in which it was nine years before*
But this Cycle, proving erroneous, was afterward corrected by Me^on. (...).


PYTHAGORAS, the Samian, traveled into Egypt and Chaldaea, to improve 5^9.
himself in the study of Philosophy and Astronomy. He first discovered, that
Lucifer and Hesperus (believed before to be two several Stars) were but one and
the same, being the Planet Venus. The invention of the Zodiack's Obliquity is
likewise ascribed to him. He first gave to the World the name (...), from the
order and beauty of all things comprehended in it; asserting the same to be
made according to musical proportion; and the seven Planets to have an
harmonious motion and Intervals correspondent to musical Diastemes. He held the
Sun (by him and his followers termed the fiery Globe of Unity) to be seated in
the midst of the Universe, and the Earth to move about it.

ALCMAEON, of Crotona, son of Perithus, Disciple to Pythagoras, a Physician 490.
and Physiologist, asserted that the Planets held an opposite course to that of
the fixed Stars, as Plutarch affirms, Plac. Philosoph. l. 2. c. 16.

ANAXAGORAS CLAZOMENIUS, Disciple to Anaximenes, held 480.
the Moon to be a dark Body enlightened by the Sun, and to be habitable, having
Plains, Hills, and Waters, as the Earth has.

DEMOCRITUS, of Abdera, Disciple to Anaxagoras and Leucippus, wrote 470.
of the Sun and the Moon and the other Planets, of the Annus Magnus, and
Astronomical Prognostics. Of which Pliny, Hist. Not. lib. 18. cap. 35. and the
Scholiast upon Apollonii Argon. lib. 2. cites him (...). Laertius mentions his
(...), sive (...), his (...), and (...).

EMPEDOCLES, who studied under Parmenides, Pythagoras, and Anaxagoras, 470.
wrote (besides his other Pieces of Philosophy) of the Sphere, in Verse, yet
extant; though the same, by some, be ascribed, not to him, but to Demetrius
Triclinius.

TIMAEUS LOCRUS, a Pythagorean Philosopher, wrote de Natura Mun^* 450.
from which Piece Plato borrowed the greatest part of his Dialogue entitled
(...), in the beginning whereof he commends Timaeus, as most knowing and (...)
Astronomy.

METON, an Athenian Astronomer, observed, with Euctemon, the Solstices, 432.
and instead of Cleostratus's Octaeteris, introduced a Novendecennial Cycle,
called Meton's Cycle, or the Golden Number.

HIPPOCRATES wrote of judging of Diseases by the Rules of Astronomy, 432.
which by Gesner is said to have been published by Ioannes Ganivettus, at
Lions, in the year 1508. an imperfect MS. Copy whereof is now extant in Gonvil
and Caius College in Cambridge.

EUCTEMON observed, at Athens, the Solstices 108 years before the death 432.
of* Alexander the Great; see more of him in Pliny, Hist. lib. 18.

PHILOLAUS, of Croton, a Pythagorean Philosopher, maintained the opinion 430.
of the Earth's motion about the Sun. Of which sentiment was likewise Seleucus,
Cleanthes Samius, Leucippus, and Ecphantus, as also

HERACLIDES PONTICUS; who wrote (as we find it cited by 430.
Chalcidius, in Timaeum) of the Planetary Spheres, or Circles, conceived by
M^ursius, ANNI ANTE CHRISTUM.
to be that Piece of his, which bears the Title (...), which he inscribed to
Democritus, as Laertius affirms in his Life. There is also another (...)
mentioned by the same Laertius, who writ De Astrologia.

PLATO, the Divine Athenian Philosopher, traveled into Egypt, under pr^tence
420.
of selling Oil, but indeed to fetch from thence a far more noble Merchandise,
Astronomy; informing himself by their Priests of the Celestial motions; and
has, in his Timaeus, Epinomis, and other his Dialogues, left sufficient
testimonies of his improved knowledge, treating therein of several Parts of
Astronomy, and particularly of the Celestial System.

THEAETETUS ATHENIENSIS, Disciple to Socrates, and a familiar 410.
Friend of Plato's, a Philosopher and Astrologer, as Suidas affirms, who yet
gives us no account of any Writings of his in Astronomy.

HERMES AEGYPTIUS, Disciple to Plato, writ De Sole; De Imaginibus 410.
Martis; De Imaginibus Iovis; De Imaginibus Saturni; De Septem Annulis
Planetarum; De Medicinis and Conjunctionibus Planetarum. To him likewise is
attributed the Book, De duodecim Herbis duodecim Signis attributis, and aliis
her^is septem Stellis dicatis; as Simler. in Biblioth. Gesner.

ARCHYTAS TARENTINUS, a noble Pythagorean Philosopher, Mathematician, 405.
and Cosmographer, whom Horace calls

-- Maris ac Terrae, numeroque carentis Arenae Mensorem. -- He wrote several
Works (though none of them have been so happy as to escape the injury of Time)
both Physical, Moral, and Mathematical; particularly (to instance only what is
pertinent to our subject) a Tractate, (...), De Universo, cited by Simplicius
in Aristot. Categ. as noted by Meursius, in Hesych. De viris illustribus.

HELICON CYZICENUS, a familiar Friend of Plato's, and an eminent 404.
Astronomer, who having foretold to Dionysius the Tyrant an Eclipse of the Sun
(which happened at Athens 30 Sept. feria 6ta hora 9. post mediam Noctem) was, for
that, rewarded by him with a Talent of Silver.

PHILOSOPHUS, one of Plato's Disciples, so called by his proper name, 390.
wrote of Eclipses, of the distance and magnitude of the Sun, Moon, the Earth,
and the other Planets, as also of Lightnings, and several other Pieces,
mentioned by Suidas. Gesner is of opinion, his name might be corrupted, and
that it ought to be read Philippus Opuntius.

EUDOXUS CNIDIUS, the Son of Aeschines, instructed by Archytas, in 368.
Geometry; in Physic, by Philistio, the Sicilian; in Philosophy, by Plato;
traveled into Egypt, and of the Priests there learned the proper motions of
the Planets, which he first communicated to his Countrymen the Greeks. He wrote
De Mundo, De Coelestibus, De Phaenomenis, Astrological Fasti, with
Prognostics. He reformed the Octa^teris of Harpalus, and introduced a new one
of his own; of which yet others make Dositheus the Author. He wrote likewise
an Astronomical Poem, as Suidas affirms. But his two most celebrated Pieces
were his (...) seu Speculum, and (...), sive Apparentium, as Hipparchus ( in
Arataeis*) witnessess. He is reported to have been so greatly enflamed with the
love of Astronomy, ^NI ANTE CHRISTUM.
that he usually professed he would willingly (as the Poets fable of Phaeton)
perish by the scorching beams of the Sun, provided he might first approach so
near it, as clearly to discern its Figure and Magnitude. G. Voss.

XENOCRATES CHALCEDONIUS, a Platonic Philosopher, writ, 366.
among diverse other Works, one Book, (...), De Intervallis, and six Books,
(...), De his quae circa Astrologiam versantur, as Laertius in his Life. There
is likewise a Piece under h is Name, De Influentia Planetarum in Corpora;
mentioned by Iac. Phil. Thomasinus among the MS. of Io. Rhodius (in Bibliothec.
Patavin.)

DEMOPHILUS, son of Ephorus, according to Gesner, writ certain Pieces, 360.
called Astronomica; And his Apotelesmata, as Labbee reports, are in the French
King's Library.

CALIPPUS CYZICENUS, an eminent Philosopher, of whose Systeme 350.
of the Celestial Sphere Aristotle makes mention, in his Metaphysics. He was
Author of a Luni-Solar Cycle of LXXVI. years, consisting of four Metonick
Cycles reformed.

ARISTOTLE, besides his other learned Works in Philosophy, has left 340.
several testimonies of his study in Astronomy, particularly in his Book De
Coelo. He left likewise a Book entitled (...), as Diog. Laertius testifies in
his life. There is likewise a Treatise under his Name, De Astrologia Navali,
extant in MS. in Bibliothec. Sancti Ioannis in Viridario Patav. as Thomasinus
in Bibliothec. Patavin. attests.

THEOPHRASTUS, of Evessus in Lesbos, a great Philosopher, Disciple 322.
and Successor to Aristotle in the Lycaeum, wrote six Books of Astrological
History, and particularly of Democritus's Astrology.

EUDEMUS of Rhodes, one of Aristotle's Disciples, in emulation of Theophrastus,
322.
wrote likewise some Astrological Histories, in which he described the Lives
and Inventions of diverse Astrologers and Astronomers, together with the
Original and Progress of Astronomy, as Clemens Alexandrinus, and Laertius
affirm; and from them Ionsius, lib. 1. cap. 15. De Script. Histor. Philosoph.

ARISTYLLUS was Contemporary with Calippus, and, together with Timochares, 300.
observed the Declinations of the Fixed Stars mentioned by Ptolemy in Magn.
Construct. as also in the Greek Prolegomena to Aratus, where we find several
others of the name famous for Astronomy.

AUTOLYCHUS PRYTANAEUS, Tutour to Arcesilaus, left two 300.
Books, yet extant; the one, De Sphaera Mobili, the other, Of the Rising and
Setting of the Fixed Stars, some parts whereof are translated by G. Valla. The
former published by Mersennus according to the Translation of Maurolycus, and
the Propositions illustrated, in Synops. Mathemat.

TIMOCHARES the Astronomer, (as may be collected out of Ptolemy's 294.
Almagest. lib. 7. c. 2, and 3.) observed the Fixed Stars, and particularly,
one of the eight Stars in the Constellation of Lyra; mentioned by Theon upon
Aratus.

MANETHO, an Egyptian Priest at Heliopolis, and Notarius Sacrorum Penetralium
282.
per Aegyptum, writ Physiologica Apotelesmatica, in Verse, and other
Astronomical Pieces, as Suidas attests, and may be proved from this Verse of
(...). ANNI ANTE CHRISTUM.


-- Arati numeros, and picta Manethonis Astra. His Apotelesmaticks are reported
to be yet extant in the Florentine Library, by Simler. in Biblioth. Gesner.

ERACUS ASTRONOMUS is said to have written something in 280.
Astronomy, about the time of Ptolemaeus Philadelphus, as Gesner testifies.

ARISTARCHUS SAMIUS, following the Opinion of Pythagoras and 280.
Philolaus, maintained the Earth to move about the Sun. He wrote a particular
Treatise of the Distances and Magnitudes of the Sun and Moon, yet extant,
translated and commented upon by Commandinus, with some Explications of Pappus
Alexandrinus, and animadverted by Mr. Forster, in his Miscellanies. There is
another Piece which goes under his Name, of the Mundane Systeme, its parts, and
motions, published in Latin by Robervalle, and Mersennus in his Mathematical
Synopsis. But the same, by Menagius, (in Diog. Laert.) and Descartes, in his
Epistles, is censured as a supposititious Piece of Robervalle's, and not the
genuine Work of Aristarchus.

ARATUS SOLENSIS, at the Command of Antigonus Gonatas, turned 280.
into a Greek Poem the Phenomenon of Eudoxus, translated into Latin Verse by
Cicero, Germanicus Caesar, and Avienus, and commented upon, by the several
Commentatours hereafter mentioned, as they are cited at the end of the
Prolegomena in the Edition of Iunta, in folio.

AGESIANAX, ALEXANDER AETOLUS, by Strabo likewise reckoned, inter Homeri
Interpretes. ALEXANDER EPHESIUS, (of whom hereafter more particularly.)
ANTIGONUS GRAMMATICUS, APOLLONIUS GRAMMATICUS, APOLLONIUS GEOMETRA, ARISTARCUS
GRAMMATICUS, ARISTARCHUS SAMIUS, ARISTOPHANES, ARISTYLLUS GEOMETRA Major,
ARISTYLLUS GEOMETRA Minor, ATTALUS RHODIUS, BOETHUS, CALLIMACHUS CYRENAEUS,
CALLISTRATUS TENEDIUS, CRATES, DIDYMUS GNIDIUS, DIDYMUS PONEROS, five
Laboriosus. DIODOTUS, perhaps the same with him mentioned by Alexander
Aphrodisaeus in the first Book of his Commentaries in Meteor. Aristot. by whom
he is styled a most learned Astrologer. EVAENETUS, HELIODORUS STOICUS,
HERMIPPUS, NUMENIUS GRAMMATICUS, PARMENIDES, PARMENISCUS GRAMMATICUS, mentioned
by Hyginus and Pliny. PYRRHUS MAGNESIUS, SMINTHES, THALES, TIMOTHEUS, ZENO.

There are some few others who have likewise commented upon Aratus, the Mention
of whom the Reader will find elsewhere in this Catalogue.

ERATOSTHENES, a Native of Cyrene, succeeded DEMETRIUS 270.
PHALEREUS in the charge of the Alexandrian Library. He wrote (...), being a
Comment on the several Asterisms of Aratus, lately printed; (perhaps the same
with that Piece which is cited under the Title of Astronomica, by Suidas,
Plutarch. de Placit. Philosoph. Hipparchus, Ptolemy, and Proclus in Timaeum) Of
the Zones, and of the measure of the Terrestrial Globe. He caused likewise
several Armillae, and other Mathematical Instruments to be placed in a public
Portico, at Alexandria, for observation of the Celestial Motions. He was a most
skilful (...)
Geometer, and writ a Treatise de Medietatibus, mentioned by Pappus in his
Mathematical Collections, not now extant.

BEROSUS, the Chalaean, of whom Josephus (l. 1. Antiqu. Iudaic. c. 8. and 270.
in l. 1. contra Appian.) writes, that he was, (...), etc. Most celebrious
among those conversant in the study of Astronomy, and the Philosophy of the
Chaldeans, of which he published Books among the Grecians. He flourished in the
time of Antiochus Soter, and has left it recorded, that, among the Chaldeans,
he observed Astronomical Ephemerides of 480. years, inscribed on baked Bricks
or Tyles. He is said likewise to have invented diverse kinds of Sun-Dyals, and,
for the certainty of his Predictions, to have been rewarded by the Athenians
with a Statue, having a golden Tongue in its mouth.

APOLLONIUS MYNDIUS, by Seneca (Nature. Quaest. lib. 7.) styled 270.
peritissimus inspiciendorum naturalium, traveled into Chaldea, to be
instructed in Astronomy, and wrote particularly, De Cometis.

EPIGENES BYZANTINUS, Contemporary and Partner in Study and 270.
Travels with Apollonius, by Pliny (lib. 7. c. 56.) joined with Berosus and
Critodemus, and reputed to have been an Author of equal credit with the best,
has left it recorded, that, among the Babylonians, there were found
Ephemerides, containing the Observation of the Stars, for the space of 780.
years, inscribed in Brick and Tiles. He wrote likewise, as Seneca affirms, Of
Comets.

ARCHIMEDES of Syracuse, famous, besides his other Mathematical Works, 270.
for his admirable artificial Sphere of Glass, wherein the Motions of the Sun,
Moon, and the other Planets were represented, to the astonishment of the
Beholders, celebrated by Claudian in a particular Epigram. In his Book
entitled (...) ( sen Arenarius) he examines diverse Astronomical Hypotheses as
to the Distances of the fixed Stars, of the Diameters of the Earth, Sun, Moon,
and other Planets, according to the opinions of Aristarchus Samius, Eudoxus,
and others of the Ancient Astronomers, being commented upon by Paschasius
Hammel, Rivaltus, and Mersennus. The Lemmata of Archimedes recovered out of the
Rubbidge of Antiquity were published in Mr. Forster's Miscellanies, as likewise
by Borellius at the end of the three latter Books of Apollonius.

CONON, an excellent Geometrician and Astronomer collected diverse Observations
26^.
made by the Chaldeans, of the Solar and Lunar Eclipses, wrote six Books of
Astrology, (not now extant) and invented the Constellation called Coma
Berenices. Celebrated he is by Pliny and Hyginus:

C. SULPITIUS GALLUS, a Roman Tribune, by his skill in Astronomy, 168.
much encouraged the Roman Army in the War against Perses. For when the
Soldiers were terrified with the Eclipse of the Moon, by his Oration to them
he made it appear, that what they apprehended as a Prodigy, was only the effect
of a natural Cause, describing to them the Reasons of the Eclipse; and so
animated the drooping Army with fresh courage, to the attaining of a glorious
Victory.

HIPPARCHUS, (by the Arabs and Eastern Writers called Abrachys) whom 140.
some make a Native of Nice, a City in Bithynia; others, a Rhodian, Prince of
Astronomers in his time. He wrote a Catalogue of the fixed Stars, several
Observations of the Aequinoxes, mentioned by Ptolemy; of the Moon's monthly
motion, according to Latitude; A Collection of diverse Observations of the
Chaldeans, touching Eclipses, by him examined and compared. Chalcidius, in
Timaeum, cites ANNI ANTE CHRISTUM.
a Book of his, De Secessibus atque Intervall is Solis and (...); which
Me^rsius (Not. in Chalcid.) conceives to be the same mentioned by Poppus (in 5.
Syntax. Ptol^.) under the title (...), i. e. De Magnitudinibus and Distantiis.
He has left likewise (yet extant) three Books, by way of Comment upon Aratus,
in which he shows Aratus to have taken all from Eudoxus, and to have followed
him even in his Errors; first published from a Manuscript in the Medicaean
Library by Petrus Victorius, and since in Greek and Latin, by Dionysius
Petavius in Uranolog.

NIGIDIUS FIGULUS wrote a Comment, De Sphaera Graecanica and Barbarica, 86.
mentioned by Servius, in Georg. Virgil, whence the Commentatour in Germanici
Arat. cites diverse particulars.

L. TARUNTIUS FIRMANUS a familiar Friend of Varro's, and a 86.
great Astronomer. He calculated the Nativity of Romulus, and the Horoscope of
Rome's foundation, and wrote, in Greek, of the Stars. He is mentioned by Cicero
and Plutarch, though with some small variety in the writing of his name.

MARCUS VARRO, the most learned of his time among the Romans, 86.
wrote of Astronomy, of which Cassiodorus makes mention, in Mathem. Discipl.

GEMINUS, a Native of Rhodes, wrote an Isagoge in Meteora, and in Arati 83.
Phenomenon; out of which Proclus's Sphere is for the most part compiled,
published by Petavius, in Uranolog.

POSIDONIUS APAMENSIS SYRUS, a Stoical Philosopher, 60.
Disciple, and Successor to Panaetius, observed, at Rhodes, the Star Canopus.
He is commended by Cicero, for an Artificial Sphere, by him made, representing
the motions of all the Planets. Laertius mentions a Book of his (...), De
Meteoris; and another (...). And Labbee, in his Catalogue of Manuscripts,
mentions another Piece of his, Of the Original of Comets, and (...), extant in
the French King's Library.

M. TULLIUS CICERO translated the Phenomenon of Aratus into Latin 80.
Verse.

THEODOSIUS TRIPOLITA signalized his name by his three Books 52.
Sphaericorum, and his twelve Propositions, De Habitationibus, both published
by Mersennus, in his Synopsis Mathemat. He wrote likewise De Diebus and
Noctibus: and Sceptica capita Astrologica, as cited by Laertius.

JULIUS CAESAR, first of the Roman Emperors, according to the testimony 45.
of Pliny, wrote of Astronomy in Greek; Macrobius affirming likewise, that he
left several not unlearned Books of the motions of the Stars, which he derived
from the Doctrine of the Egyptians.

SOSIGENES, a famous Astronomer of Alexandria, whose assistance Julius 45.
Caesar made use of, in reforming the Roman year, and reducing it to the course
of the Sun, which we yet retain. Of this Argument he writ three Discourses, as
Pliny witnesses, lib. 18. c. 25.

DIONYSIUS AFER, called (...) Geographus, wrote a Greek Poem* 30.
De situ Orbis. He was sent, by Augustus, before his adopted son Caius, into
the East, the better to describe to him those Regions and Provinces.

ALEXANDER EPHESIUS, surnamed LYCHNUS, wrore besides (...).
his Historical Pieces, an Astronomical Poem of the Heavens, and another of the
30.
Description of the Parts of the Earth. He is mentioned by Strabo, lib. 14. and
therefore cannot be less ancient than these times. He wrote likewise a Comment,
in Arati Phenomenon.

P. OVIDIUS NASO, the most Ingenious of the Latin Poets, besides that 20.
he translated Aratus his Phenomenon into Verse, which is lost; has leftfix
Books, De Fastis Romanorum, yet extant, being a Calendar, describing their
Year, Months, Festival Days; together with the rising, and setting of the
several Constellations, and the most noted of the fixed Stars; dedicated by him
first to Augustus, afterward revised in his Exile, and addressed to Germanicus
Caesar.

STRABO, the Geographer, has left us the Description of the World in 20.
seventeen Books, wherein there are diverse Astronomical Disquisitions.

ARTEMIDORUS COSMOGRAPHUS was Contempora^y (...) 20.
Strabo, and wrote upon the same Subject.

MARCUS MANILIUS wrote five Books of Astronomicks, ((...) 15.
Heroicis non contemnendis, says Ricciolus, in Chron. Astronom.) which he
dedicated to Augustus Caesar, wherein he comprehended as well the Astronomy, as
the Astrology, of the Ancients, according to the Doctrine of the Chaldaeans and
Egyptians; the first of which five Books, treating of the Sphere, is the
Subject of our present Undertaking.

The few following Authors, not being reducible to the certain time wherein
they flourished, either before or after our Savior's Nativity, are, for want
of authentic Testimony, in this place, ambiguously inserted.

BOLUS MENDESIUS, a Pythagorean Philosopher, wrote (among other things) de
Signis ex Sole and Luna, and Ursa, and Lucerna, and Arcu Coelesti, as Suidas
testifies in voce (...).

LASBAS BABYLONIUS wrote of Astronomy, in a Book entitled Selech, cited by
Johannes Camaterus, in Opere Astrologico, especially in the Chapter De
Canonibus Astrorum, and Sort Fortunae; extant in Manuscript, in the hands of
my worthy Friend, Mr. Thomas Gale.

ZEUCHRUS, or TEUCHRUS, or TEUCER BABYLONIUS, by Scaliger, in Manilium, and
Salmasius, De Annis Climactericis, styled an ancient Author, wrote, De Decanis
Signorum; some Fragments of his, according to Labbee, being extant in the
French King's Library.

ALBU-BATUR is, by Iunctinus, placed in the Catalogue of Astronomers about the
500. year before Christ; he writ De Nativitatibus, Printed at Noremberg by
Johannes Petreius, in the Year 1540, but wanting good Authority to confirm the
Time wherein he flourished, We have rather inserted him in this Place.

PAPYRIUS FABIANUS, is mentioned by Pliny in several places of his Natural
History, out of whose Works he has made frequent Citations, upon several
arguments and occasions, being by him styled Astrologus and Physicus, upon
which score we have given him a place in this Catalogue.

DOROTHEUS SIDONIUS wrote an Apotelesmatick Poem, as ci^ed ANNI ANTE CHRISTUM.
by Athen^us, of which little or nothing is now extant, except what is pre^ed
in the Excerpta, mentioned in Labbee's Bibliotheca. Simler (in Biblioth. Ges^)
will have Manilius to have followed and imitated him, in his Astronomical Poem;
S^aliger, (in Manilium) and Vossius, affirming the like to have been done by
Omar, Messalah, and Alchabitius in their Astrological Tractates. Julius
Firmicus gives this Character of him, that he was Vir prudentissimus qui
Apotelesmata veri^ and disertissimis versibus scripsit. I find likewise in
James's Eclog. Oxon. Cant. a P^ce under the name of Dorotheus, De esse Solis in
Domibus Planetarum. But whether that Author be the same with this Dorotheus,
is altogether uncertain.

CRITON NAXIUS writ an Octaeteris, which some (says Suidas) will have to be
that of Eudoxus. Gesner writes thus of him; Ha^a dubio est Criton Astronomus,
cujus Plinius meminit, lib. 18. c. 31.

ANTIMACHUS HELIOPOLITANUS Aegyptius is by Suidas said to have written (...),
Mundi fabricationem, in a Poem of 3780. Verses.

SPORUS NICENUS wrote a Comment upon Aratus's Phenomenon. He is mentioned in
the Isagoge of Leontius Mechanicus.

LEONTIUS MECHANICUS wrote (...), Printed, inter Astronomica Veterum Scripta
Isagogica Graeca and Latina, Ex Officina St. Andraeana, 1589.

DIONYSIUS CORINTHIUS writ a Treatise of Meteorologicks, (...) Suidas affirms.

LASUS MAGNES, in the Life of Aratus, MONOPHANTUS, by Theon, upon Aratus, and
PHILIPPUS, by Hipparchus, in his Exegesis, are mentioned for Astronomers; as is
likewise MNESISTRATUS, by Censorinus.

ANTIOCHUS wrote in Greek Thesauri Apotelesmatum, distinguished into 107.
Chapters, extant at Rome in the Vaticane Library, as Simler, in Bibl. Gesner*
affirms. He is mentioned more than once by Firmicus.

DOSITHEUS ASTROLOGUS is mentioned by Pliny, lib. 18. c. 31. to have written Of
the Rising and Setting of the Stars.

JULIANUS LAODICENSIS PHILOSOPHUS, wrote (...), as Gesner affirms.

BELINUS, a Greek Author, seems to have written on this Argument, as the
Title of his Book, De judiciis Futurorum, and De Imaginibus, imply. See Gesner,
and something of him now extant in his Majesty's Library at St. James's.

GEZ, perhaps GESSIUS, a Greek Author, wrote Libros Imaginum, Et De
Stationibus, Et De Imaginibus Veneris, as Gesner testifies; if yet those
Treatise^ may not be Philological, rather than Astrological.

APOMASARIS Apotelesmata, with some other Authors of that kind, are extant in
the Vaticane Library, and in that of Ausburg, as Simler affirms, in Biblioth*
Gesner.

HELICONIUS, according to the testimony of Suidas, writ (...). (...)
i. e. De Syderum and Tempestatum Effectis, Et De Aeris Signis.

DEMETRIUS TRICLINIUS writ De Schematismis Lunae, and Macula in ejus facie,
extant in the French King's Library; to whom is likewise ascribed that Greek
Poem, De Sphaera, attributed to Empedocles, and for such translated into
Latin, and published by Q. Sept. Florens Christianus. Simler in Bibl. Gesner.
asc^ibes to him another Work, under the Title of Inventum Astronomicum, written
in Greek.

POLEMON ATHENIENSIS, supposed the same with Him who was Disciple to
Xeno^rates, writ a Book de Interpretatione Naturae Signorum, translated into
^atine by Nicholaus Petreius Cor^yraeus, and Printed at Venice, apud Gryphium
1552. cum al^is quibusdam, as Simler, in Epitome Bibl. Gesner. testifies.

EUTHYMIUS writ, in Greek, a Synopsis of Astronomy, or as Simler entitles it,
De Sphaera, extant in the French King's Library.

DION NICAENUS writ De Septem Planetis.

GIAPHAR ASTROLOGUS wrote a Book which he entitled Major Introductorius. He
wrote likewise a Book of Commentaries, and another, of Experiments, mentioned
by Gesner.

CAUDAS ASTROLOGUS wrote Nine Books de Annulis Astronomicis, a Book de Tribus
figuris Spirituum, and another de figura Almandal. as Simler, from the
Authority of Guil. Pastregicus, de Originibus Rerum, affirms.

ASTRONOMERS after our Savior's Nativity.
ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
MODERATUS COLUMELLA, De Re Rustica, has left an Astrological 10.
Calendar; with Prognostics.

THRASYLLUS, Native of Mendes, a City of Egypt, multarum Artium scientiam 14.
professus (says the old Scholiast of Iuvenal) prostremo se dedit Platonicae
Sectae, ac deinde Mathesi, qua praecipue viguit apud Tiberium. By Mathesi, is
to be understood chiefly Astronomy, or rather Astrology, according to the
Doctrine of the Chald^ns, in which he instructed Tiberius. He wrote likewise Of
Music; out of which Porphyry, upon Ptolemy's Harmonica, and Theon Smyrnaeus
cite some Pieces. See more of him in Paganinus Gaudentius, De Philosophia apud
Romanos, cap. 54. and V^ssius de Histor. Graec. l 4. c. 16.

TIBERIUS CAESAR, the Emperor, was skilful in Astronomy and 14.
Astrology, instructed therein by Thrasyllus, quem ut Sapientiae Professorem
contubernio adm^verat, says Suetenius, especially during his recess or exile
at Rhodes. He had the luck to predict many future Events, particularly to
foretell, by inspecting Galba's Nativity, that he should one day be Emperor;
which he declared ( Galba being then but a Youth) in these words, Et tu, Galba,
quandoque degustabis Imperium, as Tacitus relates it, though Suetonius and
others apply it to Augustus. He is also reported to have had always by him the
Genitures of all his Nobility, and that according as he found his own or the
Kingdom's Horoscope to be well or ill looked upon by theirs, so he let them
stand, or cut them off by Legislative Astrology; to use the expression of the
famous Mr. Gregory.

GERMANICUS CAESAR, that excellent Prince, translated (...) h^ ANNI POST
CHRISTUM.
Phenomenon into Latin Verse yet extant. 15.


CHAEREMON, a Philosopher of the Stoical Sect, by birth an Egypti^. 25.
Master to Dionysius Alexandrinus; wrote of the Egyptian Astrology, as we find
by the mention made of him in Iamblichus, De Mysteriis, Egypt. although both
the Latin Translatours mistook his Name. He wrote also De Cometis, as Origin
and Seneca testify, the latter of whom calls him Charimander, and not
Chaeremon, which G. Vossius conceives to be a mistake in the Text. He is
mentioned by Strabo ( ^ib. 17.) to have attended Aelius Gallus in a Voyage from
Alexandria up into Egypt, whence we may conclude him to have flourished, about
the latter end of Augustus, or beginning of Tiberius's Reign.

DIONYSIUS AREOPAGITA may justly be admitted into the number 34.
of Astronomers, since it is reported of him, that, at Helipolis in Egypt,
together with Apollophanes, he observed that miraculous Defection of the Sun,
at the time of our Savior's Passion: Whereupon he broke out into this
Exclamation, Aut Deus Naturae patitur, aut Mundi machina dissolvitur. He was
afterward converted to the Christian Faith, for which he died a Venerable
Martyr, being aged above one hundred years.

JULIUS HYGINUS, whom some would have to be the Freed-man of 34.
Augustus, others, with more probability, of Severus and Antoninus, or of Iulia
Severa the Empress, wrote the Astronomicum Poeticum, De Mundi and Sphaerae
partibus, and the Fables of the several Asterisms, yet extant.

SENECA, the Philosopher, occasionally intermingles in diverse of his Writings
50.
several Astronomical Dissertations, and, in the seventh Book of his Natural
Questions, has expressly written of Comets.

ANDROMACHUS CRETENSIS was Physician to Nero, and about 60.
the latter end of his Reign wrote (as it is affirmed by Lucas Gauricus, and
Clavius, in Sacroboscum) the first of any touching the Theory of the Planets;
His Writing^ are much commended by Galen.

PLINY the Elder, in the second Book of his Natural History, has written many
80.
things touching the Celestial Bodies.

JARCHAS Prince of the Brachmannes was a famous Astronomer according 90.
to the Testimony of St. Jerome ad Paulinum, whose Words are These, Apoll^ (
whether the Magician as vulgarly reputed, or the Philosopher according to the
Tr^dition of the Pythagoreans) went to the Brachmannes that he might hear
Jarchas fitting on a Throne of Gold, and discoursing of the daily Revolution
and Motion of the Stars. Damis likewise reports that the said Iarchas gave to
Apollonius seven Rings inscribed with the Names of the seven Planets, which he
was to wear successively every Day One. See Rantzov. in Catalog. Astrol.

APOLLONIUS TYANAEUS wrote four Books, de Divinatione Astrologica, 90.
as Philostratus relates in his Life, though none of them be now extant.

PLUTARCHUS CHAERONENSIS, in his Book, De facie in Or^e 90.
Lunae, and in his Work, De Placitis Philosophorum, has shown himself studious
and skilful in Astronomy.

MENELAUS, a most eminent Mathematician and Astronomer, was an Observer ANNI
POST CHRISTUM.
of the Stars for a long time, both at Rhodes and at Rome. He has left Three
91.
Books Sphaericorum, published by Mersennus, in his Synopsis Mathemat.

AGRIPPA, the Mathematician, observed (as it is reported by Ptolemy (...).) 92.
the Conjunction of the Moon with the Pleiades, happening Anno Nabonassar. 840.
Nov. 29.

ASCLETARION was an Astrologer in the time of Domitian, whose 95.
fate he had predicted; for which being questioned and avowing the Prediction,
he was asked by the Emperor what his own fate would be? To which he
confidently replied, that he should be torn in pieces by Dogs. Whereupon
Domitian commanded that he should be immediately slain, and carefully buried,
that the vanity of his Art might appear: But a sudden and violent tempest
happening at the enterment of him, his body was deserted, and the Dogs came and
tore it in pieces. See Sueton. in Domit.

HADRIANUS the Emperor was singularly well skilled in Astronomy, and 120.
particularly in Judiciary Astrology, according to the Testimony of Aelius
Spartianus in his Life, who affirms that he used yearly in the Evening of the
Calends of January to calculate what ever should happen to him for the whole
year following. And in the Life of Verus, His Successor, he gives us this
further Testimony, which take in his own Words: Fuisse Adrianum peritum
Matheseos, Marius Maximus usque adeo demonstrat, ut eum dicat cuncta de se
scisse, sic, ut omnium dierum usque ad horam mortis futuros actus ante
perscripserit.

AQUILA PONTICUS was a learned Mathematician of Synope, first a 130.
Christian, but afterward, by the Church, for his too great adherence to
Judiciary Astrology, excommunicated; whereupon he became a Jewish Proselyte,
and translated the Old Testament (though not very sincerely) into Greek.

THEON ALEXANDRINUS Senior (whom some would have to be 132.
the same with that Theon Smyrnaeus, who wrote in Mathematica Platonis,
published by Bulialdus) made several Observations of the Planet Venus in the
sixteenth year of the Emperor Hadrian, mentioned by Ptolemy cap. 10. Almagest.
In the Library at Ausbourg, there is extant a Tractate of his (...), (...).

PHLEGON TRALLIANUS, the Freed-man of Hadrian the Emperor, 134.
among other his Works, wrote De Olympiadibus, in which, according to the
testimonies of Origin and Eusebius, he made a Chronological remark on the
obscuration of the Sun, which happened at the time of our Savior's Passion.

CLAUDIUS PTOLEMAEUS a Native of Pelusium, descended as some 135.
would have it of the Royal Race of the Ptolemies Kings of Egypt; The Prince in
his Time of Astronomers, Geographers, and Astrologers; His Principal Works
being eight Books of Geography, thirteen Books, (...) (...), commonly called
Almagestum; (...), seu Quadripartita Syntaxis de judiciis Astrorum; And
Parapegma de Apparentiis and Significationibus Inerrantium Stellarum, de
Analemmate, etc. there are likewise ascribed to him (...) (...), i. e. faciles
and expediti, upon which Theon Alexandrinus Iun. is reported to have commented,
or rather (as Golius in Alferganum from the Authority of Keusian Gilaeus notes)
to have composed himself, and to have given them the Title of Canones
Ptolemaici, because computed according to the Hypotheses of Ptolemy.

SEXTUS EMPIRICUS, Nephew to Plutarch the Philosopher, in his ANNI POST
CHRISTUM.
Hypotyp. Pyrrhon. writes sharply against Judiciary Astrology. 135.


HEPHAESTION THEBANUS wrote de Configurationibus Stellarum, 140.
as cited by Salmasius, De Annis Climactericis, and others. Of whom diverse
Excerpta, De duodecim Zodiaci Signis and eorum Effectibus, are published by
Camerarius, in Greek and Latin, amongst his Astrological Collections Printed
at Norimberg. Of this Author also three Books (...) are, by Simler, affirmed
to be yet extant, in Bibliotheca Strozzae.

CLAUDIUS GALENUS Native of Pergamus in Asia, the most famous 140.
Physician of his time, in which Function he served three Roman Emperors,
Adrianus, Lucius Verus, and Antoninus Pius. That he was learned in Astronomy
and Astrology appears by his Books, de Diebus Decretoriis, his Epid. and his
Mathemat. His Father likewise being well skilled therein, for thus (according
to the Testimony of Antonius Fumanellus cited by Rantzovius in Catalog.
Astronom.) he writes of Him. Pater Meus Optimus fuit Mathematicus, Exercitatus
quandoque in Geometria, Arithmetica, Architectura, and Astronomia.

APULEIUS (if the Piece bearing his name be genuine) wrote De Sphaera, 160.
now extant, with other Astronomical Tractates, amongst the Manuscripts in the
Library at Westminster, and in that of Nicholaus Trivisanus of Padua, as cited
by Thomasinus in Bibliothec. Patavin. under this Title, Sphaera Apuleii
Platonici.

LUCIAN the Philosopher, a Native of Samosata (at this Day Scempsat) a 171.
City in Syria, in the Province of Comagene, the facete Author of the
Ingenious Dialogues, wrote a Particular Treatise of Astrology, or Astronomy,
setting forth it is Original, Antiquity, and Excellency. In which Dissertation,
and in his Saturnalia, Bourdelotius affirms he has inserted many things taken
from our Manilius.

ANDRUZAGAR, an Arabian Astrologer, is said to have flourished about 230.
this time, by Iunctinus, in his Catalogue.

CENSORINUS, in his Book de Die Natali, has written diverse things 238.
touching the Harmonical Systeme of the Heavens.

ANATOLIUS ALEXANDRINUS, Bishop of Laodicea, in Syria, is 283.
mentioned by St. Hierome in his Book De Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis, to have
been well skilled in Astronomy.

RABBI ADDA, about the end of Dioclesian's, or beginning of Constantius's 298.
Reign, composed an Hebrew Calendar, and Rules for finding out the Tekupha's,
or revolution of the Equinoxes.

JULIUS MATERNUS FIRMICUS, a Sicilian, about this time 314.
wrote eight Books Astronomicon, containing Astrological Precepts, which, like
an ungrateful Plagiary, he transcribed for the most part out of Manilius,
without making the least mention of his name.

VETTIUS VALENS, of Antioch, by some called Vestius Valens, a famous 320.
Astronomer, or rather Astrologer of the same time, who calculated, for
Constantine the Great, the fate of New Rome's Foundation, as L. Taruntius had
done that of Old Rome; by G. Vossius conceived to be the same with him, of
whose Works some Pieces are published by Ioachimus Camerarius, In Astrologicis
Veterum opusculis, Edit. Norimberg. Anno 1532. His Anthologia is now intended
for the Press, at (...)
Paris, by the care, as I am informed, of Mons. Huetius.

PORPHYRIUS, a famous Platonist, but bitter Enemy to Christianity, wrote 325.
an Isagoge of Astronomy in three Books, as Suidas testifies. His Isagoge to
Ptolemy's Apotelesmatice, is also here to be mentioned; Printed at Basil.

MARIUS VICTORINUS AFER, Master to St. Jerome, among many 340.
other Works translated Porphyrius his Astronomical Isagoge, into Latin, yet
extant with the Comment of Boethius thereupon, as Gesner affirms.

THEON ALEXANDRINUS Junior, a Philosopher, contemporary to 36^.
Pappus, and an excellent Mathematician. He observed an Eclipse of the Sun in
the year of Nabonassar 1112. and besides other Mathematical Tractates, wrote
(according to Suidas) De ortu Caniculae, Canonem expeditum in Ptolemaeum, a
Commentary in parvum Astrolabium, and upon Ptolemy's Almagest, in eleven Books
first published at Basile, by Ioachimus Camerarius, according to the Greek
Manuscript, brought into Italy by Cardinal Bessarion, and from thence into
Germany, by Regiomontanus; as also upon Aratus's Phenomenon, this last lately
Printed at the Theater in Oxford; but upon no account so famous, as that of
being Father to the excellent HYPATIA.

ABYDAS ASTRONOMUS is mentioned by Epiphanius; against whom 375.
Bardesanes the Syrian (in his Book de fato) writ, who flourished in the time
of Antoninus Verus.

PAULUS ALEXANDRINUS wrote an Astronomical Isagoge, or Introduction; 378.
perhaps the same whom G. Vossius calls Paulus the Philosopher, who wrote
likewise Apotelesmatica, sive, de Effectibus Syderum, Published by Rantzovius.

MACROBIUS-AMBROSIUS-AURELIUS-THEODOSIUS, 390.
Consul of Rome, born at Parma, contemporary with Symmachus, wrote two Books,
De Somnio Scipion^s, wherein he handles diverse Astronomical Arguments, as he
does likewise in his Saturnalia.

CLEOMEDES, a learned Astronomer and Philosopher of the Stoical Sect, 390.
wrote two Books (...), i. e. De Contemplatione Orbium Coelestium, first
published, in Greek, by Conradus Neobarius, afterward translated into Latin,
by (...) Valla, and commented upon by Robertus Balforeus, Printed at Bourde^
^05.4o.

SEXTUS AVIENUS RUFUS, an elegant Poet, by birth a Spaniard, 395.
(...) the Phenomenon of Aratus into Latin Heroic Verse, and likewise
paraphrased Dionysius Afer, De Situ Orbis, and wrote, in Iambicks, De Oris
Maritimis.

FLAVIUS MANLIUS, or MANLIUS THEODORUS, Consul ^99.
of Rome is celebrated for his great Erudition, having written several Pieces
both in Philosophy and Mathematics, particularly in Astronomy, as may appear
by that elegant Panegyric Poem written in praise of him, by Claudian; whence
we have taken these following Verses to show his Endeavors on that Subject.

-- Elementa doces, semperque fluentis
Materiae causas; quae vis animaverit Astra,
Impleritque choros: quo vivit Machina Motu.
Sidera cur septem retro nitantur in Ortus ANNI POST CHRISTUM.

Obluctata Polo, variisque meatibus idem
Arbiter, an geminae convertant Aethera Mentes.
But the Injury of Time has not left us any Remains of these his curious and
learned Labors.

PAPPUS ALEXANDRINUS, besides other his Mathematical 400.
Works, wrote a Comment upon Ptolemy's Almagest, and in his sixth Book of
Mathematical Collections has left some Explications, In Aristarchum Samium, De
Magnitudinibus and Distantiis Solis and Lunae, yet extant, and translated by
Commandinus; published at Pesaro, 1572. and likewise to be found in Mr.
Foster's Miscellanies.

HYPATIA, Daughter to Theon Alexandrinus Junior, and Wife to Isidorus 400.
the Philosopher, which name she her self more justly merited, as being
eminently learned in the Mathematics and Philosophy, which she publicly
professed and taught, till by the barbarous Christians, or Monsters rather, of
Alexandria, out of mere envy for her admirable skill in Astronomy, and other
Mathematical Learning, she was most inhumanely murdered and torn to pieces, in
the very Cathedral Church. She wrote (besides a Comment upon Diophantus, and
another upon Apollonius's Conicks) an Astronomical Canon, as both Hesychius and
Suidas affirm.

About this Time flourished two Egyptian Monks; ANIANUS, who, after 400.
the Example of Eusebius, writ a Chronological Work; and PANODORUS, who to his
skill in Chronology added the Knowledge of Astronomy. Out of the Fragments of
which last Syncellus has excerpted many things, as Scaliger likewise, in his
Eusebian Animadversions.

SYNESIUS, first a Heathen Philosopher, afterward a Christian, and Bishop of
410.
Cyrene, writ, among other his Works, De Instrumentis Astronomicis, being a
Discourse occasioned by his presenting Paeonius with an Astrolabe, and is
extant in his Majesty's Library at St. James's. There are also extant diverse
Epistles of his to the before mentioned Hypatia, with this direction, (...).

AETIUS AMIDENUS ( Comes and Medicus, says Ricciolus) wrote Hemerologium, 434.
De Significationibus Stellarum, translated first out of Greek into Latin, by
Cornarius, and since published by Petavius, Uranolog. page 421.

S. CYRILLUS, Bishop of Alexandria; besides other Works of his, wrote 437.
De Cyclo Paschali, mentioned by Sigebertus Gemblacensis, in Chron.

BACHARIUS MACCAEUS, a Britain, Disciple of St. Patrick, Published 460.
a Book, De Prognosticis Nativitatum, according to Balaeus.

S. PROSPER AQUITANUS, Bishop of Rhegium, composed a Paschal 466.
Cycle, consisting of 532. years.

VICTORINUS AQUITANUS, whom G. Vossius conceives to be more 467.
truly called Victorius, composed a Paschal Cycle, being by Pope Hilarious, for
his eminent skill in Astronomy, invited to Rome, to undertake the correction of
the Calendar. Yet his Paschal Cycle seems to have been not long after reformed
by Victor, Bishop of Capua, who likewise wrote on the same Subject.

THEODORET, Bishop of Cyrus, is by Iunctinus, in his Catalogue, put ANNI POS^
CHRISTUM.
into the number of Astronomers, as also by Ricciolus, in Chron. part. 2. 469.


MAUGANTIUS, a Britain by extraction, a famous Philosopher, and Mathematician,
470.
in the time of Vortigerne, to whom he was principal Physician, as Geoffry of
Monmouth reports. He studied in the City of Chester, in which at that time
Astronomy, and all other Arts flourished, and, from the diligent observation of
the course of the Stars, and Planets, became more eminently learned in
Astrology, than any of his time. He calculated the prodigious conception of
Merlin, and wrote De Magia Naturali.

AMBROSIUS MERLINUS, a Britain, in the time of King Vortigern, 480.
was famous for his admirable skill in Astronomy and Astrology, of whom Balaeus
thus writes; Merlinus in Urbe Legionum (Caerlleon) studiis diligenter in^ubuit,
and eruditis Artibus and literis operam dedit, Magiae potissimum Naturali. Unde
Astronomiae tandem peritissimus futura praedixit multa, quibus sequenti saeculo
mirabilem se praebuit. He wrote a particular Treatise of a certain Comet, which
appeared in his time, as Balaeus testifies, and a Book of obscure Predictions
translated into Latin by Geoffry Monmouth, as Gesner affirms.

CARPUS ANTIOCHENUS wrote (...), i. e. Rei Astronomicae 490.
libros; of which Proclus, in primum Euclidis, mak^s mention. To him Mr. Seldom
ascribes the Books commonly entitled Ptolemaei Centiloqutum. Vid. Seldom. de
Diis Sir. Syntagm. 1. seu de Teraphim.

CASSIODORUS, a Person of Consular dignity, and honored with the 490.
most eminent Charges of State in the time of Anastasius the Emperor and
Theodoricus King of the Goths, afterward a Recluse in the Monastery of
Cassina, wrote, amongst other things, Of Astronomy, and De Computo
Ecclesiastico.

SIMPLICIUS, a Native of Phrygia, an eminent Platonic Philosopher, and 500.
excellent Commentator upon Aristotle, De Coelo, merits to be here mentioned.

MARIANUS, Marci Causidici F. wrote a Metaphrasis of Aratus, in MCCCXL. 500.
Iambicks. He lived in the time of Anastasius the Emperor. See Simler in Bibl.
Gesner.

THIUS ATHENIENSIS wrote seven Books of Observations of the 500.
mean Motions of the Stars, so much the more acceptable (says G. Vossius de
Scient. Mathem.) in regard that from Ptolemy's time unto that of Albategnius,
there are not any Observations of the Celestial motions extant. These,
transcribed from a Manuscript in the King of France's Library, were first
published by Bulialdus, at Paris, Anno 1645.

PROCLUS LYCIUS, a Platonic Philosopher, surnamed DIADOCHUS, 500.
Disciple to Magnus Syrianus, taught for a long time at Athens, and writ a
Comment upon the first Book of Euclid; Of the Sphere, (being for the most part
an Epitome of Geminus;) Of the Astrolabe and Astronomical Hypotheses, (being a
Compendium of Ptolemy's Almagest.) There was another Proclus surnamed
Siccensis, who was Master, or Tutor, to M. Antoninus the Emperor, confounded
by some with this Proclus Diadochus; but without all reason. For Diadochus
flourished not till the Reign of Anastasius, being 300. years after Siccensis.
Ricciolus conceives this Proclus Diadochus to be the same with Proclus the
famous Mathematician, who as Zonaras (part. 3. Annal.) reports, made, in
imitation of Archimedes, Burning-Glasses, with which he fired Vitalianus his
Fleet, at the Siege of Constantinople, and ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
was employed by Anastasius the Emperor, as Interpreter of his Dreams.

MARINUS NEAPOLITANUS, Disciple to Proclus Diadochus, wrote, 500.
Praevia ad Phenomenon, and Phenomenon Librum singularem, says Voss. de
Scient. Math. p 166. who yet doubts whether this be not another Marinus, who
writ (...), ad Euclidem.

JOANNNES LAURENTIUS PHILADELPHENSIS LYDUS, 500.
wrote in the time of Justinian the Emperor, (...), de Mensibus, with other
Mathematical Tractates, mentioned by Photius, and Suidas, yet extant in MS. in
the Library of my honored and most learned Friend, Mr. Isaac Vossius.

DIODORUS MONACHUS, Bishop of Tarsus in Cilicia, wrote (according 520.
to Suidas) contra Astrologos and Fatum; he put forth likewise a Book de
Sphaera, and septem Zonis, of the Annual Progress of the Stars, and of the
Sphere of Hipparchus.

DIONYSIUS EXIGUUS, by birth a Scythian, but a Roman Abbot, 526.
wrote a Paschal Cycle, or rather corrected that of Victorinus, or Victorius,
as Victorius had done that of Theophilus, and he, that of Cyrillus. This
Computus, or Cycle was observed by the Latin Church, until the correction of
the Calendar by Pope Gregory XIII. From this Dionysius, the Christians first
learnt to reckon their years, from the Nativity of our Savior, thence called
Era Dionysiana; whereas before, they reckoned, from the Persecution of
Dioclesian.

TRIBONIANUS SIDETES, a Civil Lawyer in the time of Justinian 550.
the Emperor, wrote a Comment upon Ptolemy's Canon, in Verse. He published
likewise Concentum Mundanae and Harmonicae Dispositionis; and another Book, de
Planetarum domiciliis, as likewise de Mensium Permutatione, and some other
Pieces; of which Suidas.

PHILIPPUS MEDMAEUS, so called from Medme, a Town of Italy, by 550.
Stephanus, in Voce Medme, styled (...), which G. Vossius conceives ought to be
read, (...). for he wrote de Ventis, as they are foreseen or predicted, from
the Position of the Stars, or Constitution of the Heavens. He also flourished
in the time of Justinian the Emperor.

PHILOPONUS, surnamed Grammaticus, deserves here to be recorded for his 574.
Comment in Astrolabium planum, sive de usu Astrolabii, written in Greek, yet
extant in New College, Oxford, and (as Simler in Bibl. Gesner. adds) in the
French King's Library.

BUZUR-GIUMHUR, an ancient Persian Author, being one of the Counselors 580.
and Courtiers of Nushirvan King of Persia (in the 42. year of whose Reign
Mahomet the false Prophet was born) wrote De Quaestionibus Astrologicis.

MARTIANUS FELIX MINAEUS CAPELLA, in his Work, 600.
entitled, De Nuptiis Mercurii cum Philologia, wrote of Geometry, Arithmetic,
Music, and Astronomy.

ISIDORUS, Bishop of Hispalis, or Sevit, in Spain, Son to Severianus, Duke 636.
of Carthage, in his Book, De Originibus, has inserted a Compendium, or
Epitome of all the Mathematics; and in his Book, De Mundo; with the like
brevity treated of the Sphere. The Astronomical Poem, (of which the Fragment is
published by Pythaeus ANNI POST CHRISTUM
among the Ancient Latin Poets by him set forth) under the Name of Fulgentius,
is by Pythaeus conceived to belong to Isidore, at the End of whose Works it is
commonly inserted without any other Name to it; if yet (as Pythaeus adds from
the Conjecture of a certain Learned Person) it may not rather be ascribed to
Varro Atacinus.

HEMOALDUS, an English man, surnamed PROVIDUS, between 640.
whom and Venerable Bede there was great familiarity, to whom he addressed his
Book De Rebus Mathematicis, yet extant, as Bede, on the other side, did an
Epistle to him, De Ratione Quadrantis Anni, sive, de Bissexto.

THEODORUS MELITENIOTAS, Magnus Sacellarius Magnae 680.
Ecclesiae Constantinopolitanae, wrote of Astronomy, and particularly upon
Ptolemy's Astronomical Syntaxis, or Almagest; the Proem of which Work from a
MS. out of the Library of Mr. Isaac Vossius, Bulialdus lately published, at the
end of his learned Comment, upon Ptolemy's (...).

BEDA, commonly called Venerable Bede, was renouned for his knowledge and 700.
study of Astronomy, amongst whose Works there is yet extant, De Argumentis
Lunae, De Ephemeride, De Embolismis, De Circulo Decennovennuali, De Cyclo
Paschali, De Circulis Sphaerae and Polis, De Planetis and Signis Coelestibus,
De Astrolabio, and De Aequinoctio Vernali.

ADELMUS DUROTELLUS, seu BLADUNIUS ( i. e. MALMESBURIENSIS) 709.
Son of Kenred, and Grandchild of Ina, King of the West Saxons. Bishop of
Sherburne, (now translated to Salisbury) wrote De Cyclo Paschali, contra
Britannos, and De Astrologia, as Balaeus affirms.

FLACCUS ALBINUS, sive ALCUINUS, an Englishman, born in 770.
York shire, Scholar to Venerable Bede, and Tutour to Charlemaigne, to whom he
was sent upon an Embassy by Off a King of the Mercians, and, for his exquisite
Learning, invited by Charlemaigne, to continue with him in France; which he
did; persuading that Prince to erect the University of Paris. He was
excellently well skilled in all the Parts of the Mathematics, which he
publicly taught; and wrote De Septem Artibus Liberalibus, and De Astrologia,
as Vossius, De Scient. Mathemat. testifies.

CHARLEMAIGNE, King of France, and Emperor, instructed by Alcuinus 770.
aforesaid, became excellently well skilled in the Mathematics, particularly
in Astronomy, insomuch that he wrote Ephemerides, and was extremely delighted
in making observations of the Stars. He gave names to the Months of the Year,
and to the Winds, in High Dutch, which continue to this Day. He was, by a King
of Persia his Contemporary, upon the knowledge he had of his affection to
Astronomical Studies, presented with a Piece of Clock-work, showing the motion
of ^he Planets; which the Emperor being then at Paderborne, in Westphalia,
received with no less admiration than pleasure. Vid. Voss. De Scient. Mathem.
c. 35.

JOHANNES CAMATERUS, Chamberlain to the Emperor Porphyrogeneta, 790.
writ De Genethliis, and Syderum positione, and Astrologiam Chaldaicam, in
Verse, now in the Possession of my Learned Friend Mr. Tho. Gale.

ALMAEON, whom some call ALMAMON, the deservedly renouned 827.
Califfe of Babylon, (as Mr. Graves styles him in his Pyramidograph.) fifty
years before the time of Albategnius, observed the greatest Declination of the
Sun to have ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
been 23. (according to Elancanus and Herigone) or 23. and 35. (according to
Ricciolus, from the authority of Alfraganus.) He first commanded Ptolemy's
(...) to be translated into Arabic; which Translation gave that Work the
corrupt, but now common name of Almagest. He found by observation and measuring
in the Plains of Singar, that one Degree of a great Circle on the Earth is
equal to 56. miles. His Astronomical Designs were so acceptable to the Genius
of that Nation, that in the Times succeeding, no less than Thirty Kings are
said to have emulated his Example; as is observed by Golius (notis in Alfergan.)

EGMUNDUS, surnamed ASTROLOGUS, is by Ricciolus put also into 446.
the Catalogue of Astronomers about this Time.

MESSHALA ARABS, sive MESSAHULACH, signalized his Name 860.
by his Book De Receptionibus, and De Conjunctionibus Planetarum, and De
Revolutionibus Annorum Mundi. He wrote likewise, De Elementis and Orbibus
Coelestibus; a third Book, De Ratione Circuli and Stellarum Operationibus; and
another, De Compositione and Utilitate Astrolabii: The first Printed at Venice,
Anno 1493. with P^olemy's Quadripartitum; The second, at Norimberg, by Montanus
and Neuberus; The third, at Basil, by Hervagius, Anno 1533. And the fourth and
last, by Henricus Petri, in Appendice Margaritae Philosophicae.

LEO PHILOSOPHUS writ something in Astrology, yet extant in the 879.
French King's Library, as Labbee testifies, in Catal. MS.

ALBATEGNIUS or trulier ALBATTANIUS ARACENSIS, 880.
called likewise MAHUMETES TINEU, vel MAHUMETES ARACENSIS, or (but mistakenly)
ARACTENSIS, from the City of Arrac, commonly, but corruptly, called Aracta, in
Syria, Son of Geber Auchan, Son of Cruen, Prince of Syria, made diligent
observations of the Stars, both at Arrac and Antioch: And finding that
Ptolemy's Canons in his time dissented much from the course of the Heavens, he
made new Tables of his own. He wrote a Book De Scientia Stellarum, first
translated out of Arabic into Latin, by Plato Tiburtinus, and illustrated
with Annotations, by Io. Regiomontanus. He observed the Sun's greatest
Declination to be 23. 35. and the first Star of Aries to be 18. 2. in Longitude
from the Equinoctial Point. His Observations were Printed at Norimberg. His
Book De Numeris and Scientia Stellarum, according to a Transcript thereof,
taken by Lucas Valerius (Public Professor of Mathematics at Rome) out of the
Vati^an Library, was reprinted more correctly in Latin at Bologna in the year
1645. and dedicated by Bernardinus Ugulottus to Ferdinand the second Grand Duke
of Tuscany.

ACHILLES TATIUS wrote a Book De Sphaera, as Suidas affirms, part of 890.
which G. Vossius conceives to be his Commentary in Aratum, Published in Greek
and Latin, by Petavius, in Uranolog.

MOHAMMED IBN ZACHARIAE AL RAZI wrote many 930.
Books in several Sciences, and among the rest, a Particular Astronomical
Treatise, as I find it mentioned in the Catalogue of Golius his Manuscripts. He
died in the year of the Hegira 320. of Christ 932.

ABDORRAHMAN AL-SUPHI, commonly (but corruptly) called 936.
AZOPHI, or ELZUPHI, or EBENNOZOPHIM, an Arabian Astronomer, Author of the
Persian Tables, in which, says ricciolus, Stellarum Schemata and loca ordinata
sunt. The Work transcribed by his Son, with the Delineation of the Celestial
Signs in Miniature by the same hand, is extant among the ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
Manuscripts of Iacobus Golius.

ALFRAGANUS MAHUMEDES, or AMETUS, or AHEMED, 950.
or MUHAMED, the Son of Amet, called Alfraganus, or rather Alferganus, from the
City Fergana, in the Province of Sogdiana. He wrote Elementa Astronomica,
compiled chiefly out of Ptolemy, which by Rabbi Jacob Antolius were turned into
Hebrew, and by Johannes Hispalensis, in the year 1142 translated out of Arabic
into Latin, but lately published in Arabic and Latin, by the famous Iacobus
Golius, with learned Notes, which yet he lived not to complete. He writ
likewise de Astrolabii Descriptione and Usu, and a Book of Dialing, as Golius
in his Notes asserts. G. Pastregicus mentions another Treatise of Alfraganus,
entitled De Aggregationibus Stellarum. V. Simler. Bibl. Gesner.

HALI BEN RAGEL is about this time, by Ricciolus, inserted into the 956.
number of Astronomers.

ARZAHEL ALA BEN writ Tables and Canons of the Motions of the 970.
Celestial Bodies, preserved in MS. in the Library of Merton College in
Oxford, and in that of Caius and Gonvil in Cambridge, according to Iamesius
Eclog. Oxon. Cant. Whether the same with Arzahel Hispanus (of whom in the next
Century) we leave to be considered.

ALI IBNO'L HOZEIN, a Persian, wrote of the Theory of the Planets, 980.
as Abul Pharagius in Hist. Dynast. witnesses, and De Demonstratione
Planisphaerii, as Hottinger, in Smegm. Orient.

ALFARABIUS Arabs, styled by Blancanus, Astronomus celebris, called likewise
980.
ABUNASR, according to Abul Pharagius, in Histor. Dynast. under whose Name
Simler, in Bibl. Gesner. affirms, there is extant a Piece entitled de
Compositione Astrolabii.

ETHEL WOLDUS WENTANUS, of the Race of the West Saxon 984.
Kings, sometime Abbot of Abington, afterward Bishop of Winchester, wrote,
among other Works of different Subjects, a Treatise de Planetis, and de
Climatibus Mundi, as Balaeus affirms.

MUHAMMED IB'N AHMED ALBIROUNI, a Persian Astronomer, 995.
wrote De modo mensurandi Altitudinem Stellarum; as also an Explication of the
use of the Astrolabe, extant amongst the Manuscripts of Iacobus Golius.

IB'N JUNES, or JOUNIS, an Egyptian, wrote Astronomical Tables, together 996.
with a History of Various Observations, and the reason of Calculating the
Celestial Motions; which he dedicated to Hakein, perhaps Elhacain King of
Egypt, who flourished about the year 373. of the Hegira, of Christ, 996.

ABBO FLORIACENSIS, so called as being Abbot of the Monastery 1004.
of Fleury, in Burgundy, a French man, Native of Orleans, among other Works,
wrote De Motibus Stellarum, De Planetarum cursu, and Demonstrationes
Astronomicae.

CAMPANUS NOVARIENSIS, an eminent Astrologer and Astronomer. 1030.
He found a peculiar way of erecting a Celestial Scheme, by division of the
prime vertical Circle, which way Gazulus followed. He wrote, besides Theoricas
Planetarum, De Sphaera, and De Computo; Another Piece, de Compositione
Astrolabii; and a Calendar. Simler mentions another Piece of his entitled
Breviloquium duodecim ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
Signorum Zodiaci, which he says in his Time was extant, apud M. Dresserum in
MS.

ABU-ALI-IBN SINA, commonly called AVICENNA, a famous Physician, 1032.
whose life is exactly written and prefixed to Plempius's Translation of the
second Books of Avicen's Canon Medicinae, and of whom an excellent account is
given in Abul Pharagius his History of the Dynasties. He writ De Astronomia and
Chronologia, mentioned amongst the Manuscripts of Iacobus Golius. He was born
in the year of the Hegira 370. and died in the year 428. which are the years of
Christ, 980. and 1036.

IB'N HAITEM wrote touching the motion of the Center of the Moon's 1035.
Epicycle; Of the difference of the Solar and Lunar Year; Of the Dimensions of
the Earth, Sun, and Moon; And De Motu Circulari: As also touching the exact
method of taking the Elevation of the Pole. He died at Grand-Cairo about the
Year of Christ, 1038.

HERMANNUS CONTRACTUS a Monk, but of noble Extraction, 1050.
as being Son of Wolferad, Earl of Varinge in Suaben, (which Surname of
Contractus he gained a membrorum contractione, as G. Vossius affirms) wrote
three Books De Compositione Astrolabii, and one De Utilitate Astrolabii. He
wrote likewise another De Eclipsibus, and translated the Works of several
Arabian Astronomers into Latin.

ISAACIUS ARGYRUS MONACHUS wrote de Cyclis Solis and 1050.
Lunae, and de Computo Ecclesiastico; which last Petavius has published in
Greek and Latin, in Uranolog. His Astronomical Tractates are said to be kept
in MS. in the Library at Auspurg; and what other Mathematical Pieces he wrote,
will appear in Simler's Epitome of Gesner's Bibliotheca.

OLIVERIUS MALMESBURIENSIS, by some called ELMERUS, 1060.
wrote Astrologorum Dogmata quaedam, and another Book, De Signis Planetarum; as
Balaeus testifies.

GULIELMUS, Abbas Coenobii Hirsaugiensis, in the Diocese of Spires, composed
1070.
Three Books Rerum Philosophicarum, and Astronomicarum; Printed at Basile, 1431.

ARZACHEL HISPANUS, an Arabian by extraction, 190. years after 1070.
Albategnius, observed the greatest Declination of the Sun to be 23. 34. Some
make him a Native of Toledo, being called likewise Abraham Elzara Keel.
Georgius Ioachimus Rheticus, in the Preface to his Ephemerides, makes him to be
the Author Toletanarum Tabularum, and that he left 402. Observations, touching
the Sun's Apogaeum. Vid. Ricciol. in Chronol. Astron.

ROBERTUS LORRAINE, so called by the English, by reason he was 1071.
Originally a Lorrainer, Professed and taught both in the Schools of France and
Belgia, Philosophy, Rhetoric, and Mathematics, for which Reason he was well
esteemed by William the Conqueror, and advanced to the Bishopric of Hereford;
He wrote de Stellarum Motibus, Tabulae Mathematicae, and de Lunari Computo. See
Balaeus.

ALHAZEN ARABS, wrote, besides seven Books of Optics, one De Crepusculis, 1072.
in which, says Blancanus, Aeris suprema maltitudinem acutissime rimatur.
Fredericus Risner published and illustrated his Works with a Comment and
Sculps, A^I (...) CHRISTUM.
and makes mention of three other Signal Arabians of the same name, as
Ricciolus (Chronic. Astron.) affirms.

GEBER HISPALENSIS ARABS, explained Ptolemy's Almagest, in 1090.
nine Books, first Printed at Norimberg by Petreius, Anno 1533. together with
Petrus Apianus, his Scheme or Instrument of the Primum mobile. In the beginning
of which Work he treats of Spherical Triangles, as far as requisite to
Astronomical Calculations; from whence, (says Mersennus, in Synops. Mathemat.)
Purbacchius and Regiomontanus excerpted many things in their Epitome of
Ptolemy's Almagest. His chief study was to amend what he found defective in
Ptolemy. However Copernicus styles him Ptolemaei Calumniatorem.

ALKINDUS, a Philosopher and Astrologer, wrote, much about this time, a 1100.
Piece entitled, De Temporum mutationibus: And about the Year 1235. Iacobus
Alkindus wrote, among other things, De Radiis Stellarum, yet extant in France.
See Labbee's Bibliotheca.

RABBI ABRAHAM wrote de Sphaera, says Blancanus, from the Authority 1115.
of Christmannus in Alfraganum.

ATHELARDUS, Bathoniensis Coenobii Monachus, Philosophus, Astronomus, 1130.
Rhetor, ac Poeta non vulgariter eruditus (says Balaeus Cent. 2.) leaving
England, out of a desire to enrich himself by the Acquisition of Foreign
(especially the Eastern) Learning, traveled into the Oriental Parts, and
having made a Peregrination through Egypt and Arabia, and in a great measure
satisfied his curious and learned Appetite, he returned into his own Country,
and published, among other Works of his, a Treatise of Ezychiafarim, of the
seven Planets, by him translated out of Arabic; he wrote likewise a Book de
septem Artibus Liberalibus, and another, de Astrolabio.

RICHARDUS, Monachus Eboracensis, wrote upon Arzahel's Tables, now 1132.
extant in the Public Library at Oxford.

ALMAEON ALMANSORIUS, in the year 1140. observed the greatest 1140.
Declination of the Sun to be 23. 33. His Aphorisms, Propositions, or
Astrological Sentences, Hervagius published in the year 1530. together with
Julius Firmicus. This Almaeon, Vossius conceives to be different from Almaeon
King of the Arabs, of whom before.

JOANNES HISPALENSIS first translated into Latin, Alfraganus, as 1142.
Blancanus, from Christmannus, and from them both Vossius, de Scient. Mathem.
c. 35. affirm. He likewise translated Alcabicius his Isagoge ad Magisterium
Iudiciorum Astron. He writ likewise Epitome totius Astrologiae, first Printed
at Norimberg 1548. with Ioachimus Hellerus his Preface, contra Astrologiae
Adversarios, as Simler. Bibl. Gesner. has noted.

RODOLPHUS BRUGENSIS, a Mathematician of Tholouze, translated 1144.
into Latin, and Published Ptolemy's Planisphere, which he dedicated to his
Master, Theodoricus Platonicus, (as Gesner testifies) Printed together with
Aratus, by Valderus, at Bafile, 1536.

ALPETRAGIUS, an Astronomer of Marocco, as Ricciolus affirms. He 1149.
wrote Theorica Physica, translated out of Latin by Calo Calonymus
Parthenopaeus, and likewise, De Astrologia, says Vossius, who conceives him to
be the same with ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
him mentioned in Summa Alberti Magni. He observed the Declination of the Sun
to be the same with that of Almaeon.

ABRAHAM ABEN-EZRA, or, according to others, AVEN-HESRE, 1150.
a great Astronomer and Philosopher, wrote a Book entitled Mispatho
Hamazzaloth, i. e. De Iudiciis Signorum; and another, called Ta^min, i. e.
Rationum Astronomicarum; and a third, De Luminaribus and Diebus Criticis, says
Ricciolus. This last was revised and published at Rome by Angelus Blondus, as
Vossius, in Addend ad L. de Scient. Mathemat. affirms. There is likewise extant
under his name, a Book, amongst the Manuscripts of Iacobus Golius, entitled, De
Anni magnitudine, and Indorum Astronomia.

MANUEL COMNENUS, Emperor of Constantinople, wrote several 1150.
Astronomical Tractates, yet preserved in the Vatican Library; as Simler. in
Bibl. Gesner. testifies.

JOHANNES DE HEXHAM, so called from the place of his Nativity; 1160.
a Town in-the Bishopric of Durham, a Benedictine Monk, wrote, among other
things, De Signis. and Cometis.

RABBI MOSES BEN-MAIMON, commonly, from the initial Letters 1160.
of his Name, called Rambam, among many other Works, writ De Astrologia, sive
Siderum Viribus and Effectis, first published in Hebrew, afterward translated
into Latin, by Ioannes Isaac Levita Germanus, Professor of the Hebrew Tongue
in the University of Colen, and there Printed by Maternus Cholinus, in the Year
1555.

AVERROES, an Arabian Physician of Corduba, for his diligence in commenting
1160.
upon all the Works of Aristotle, called Commentator Magnus, and simply
Commentator, reduced Ptolemy's Almagest into an Epitome.

SIMEON, Monk of Durham, wrote De Cometa, and Combustione London, and 1164.
aliis injuriis, as I find it cited by James's Eclog. Oxon. Cant. who affirms
the same to be extant in Benet*Colledge Library in Cambridge. Balaeus says of
him, that he was Vir suo saeculo in multis Scientiis eleganter instructus,
praesertim Mathematicis.

ALBUMAZAR, otherwise called ABU-ASSAR, and JAPHAR, wrote 1166.
Eight Books De Magnis Conjunctionibus, and Annorum Revolutionibus, and is
reported to have observed a Comet, in his time, to have been above the Orb of
Venus. He wrote likewise Introductio in Astronomiam, Printed in the Year 1489.

ROGERUS HEREFORDIENSIS, of whom Balaeus says, That he 1170.
was, Astrorum Peritus, and Metallorum Indagator Maximus, wrote In Artem
Iudiciariam; Theoricam Planetarum; De Ortu and Occasu Signorum, and
Collectaneum Annorum Planet.

CLEMENS LANTHONIENSIS, so called from the Town of Lanthony 1170.
near Gloucester, an Augustine Friar, wrote, among other things, De Orbibus
Astrologicis, and flourished about the same time.

HUMENIUS AEGYPTIUS, about this time, wrote Astronomical Tables, 1170.
which Christmannus, in Alferganum, affirms to be yet extant in the Palatine
(now the Vaticane) Library, as also in the Public Library at Oxford.

DANIEL MORLEY, so named from the place of his birth, a Town in ANNI POST
CH^ISTUM.
Norfolk, out of his great inclination to promote and advance Mathematical
Learning, 1190.
having sometime studied in the University of Oxon, traveled to Toledo, in
Spain, to instruct himself in the Language and Learning of the Arabians, which
there chiefly flourished, and, after his return home, wrote De Inferiori Mundo,
One Book; Another, De Superiori Mundo; and a Third, entitled, Principia
Mathematices.

OMAR ASTROLOGUS, or HOAMAR or HOMAR, Son of 1199.
Belnal Fargardian, a Native of Tyberias, wrote Three Books Of Nativities,
published by Hervagius, together with Firmicus, 1532.

HALY ABEN RODOHAM, an Arabian, or according to G. Vossius, 1200.
an Egyptian, wrote a Commentary upon Ptolemy's Centiloquium and
Quadripartitum, Published by Octavianus Scotus, at Venice, together with other
Arabian Astrologers. He wrote likewise De Radiorum Projectionibus, and Three
Nativities, whereof one his own, annexed to his other Works. This very Year he
observed a Comet in the fifteenth Degree of Scorpio; of which more in the
History of Comets.

LEOPOLDUS DE AUSTRIA, Son of the Duke of Austria, Episcopus 1200.
Frisingensis, writ Ten Tracts, De Astrorum Scientia, Printed at Augsbourg,
1489.

GILBERTUS LEGLEY, Philosophus and Mathematicus suae Aetatis non 1210.
vulgaris (says Balaeus) wrote Compendium in Astronomia, and in Prognostica
Hippocratis. He was Physician in Ordinary to Hubert, Archbishop of Canterbury.

JOANNES AEGIDIUS, vel de SANCTO AEGIDIO, born at St. 1224.
Albans, Philosophus Summus, Physician to Philip King of France, Professor of
Physic and Philosophy, both in the University of Paris and Montpelier; He
wrote Prognostica Futurorum, and another Book, de Materia Coeli. Balaeus, de
Scriptor Brit.

ALEXANDER DE VILLLA DEI, Dolensis, wrote of the Sphere. 1240.
He published likewise a Book of Arithmetic, and Computum Ecclesiasticum; as
G. Vossius, De Scient Math. affirms.

GEORGIUS MEDICUS CHRYSOCOCCA, writ De Inventione 1240.
Feriae, and an Exposition Syntaxeos Persarum, with several Tables Mediorum
Motuum, published by Bulialdus, at the end of his Astronomia Philolaica.

RABBI IASAAC HAZAN, i. e. Cantor, as being Chaunter to the Jewish 1252.
Synagogue at Toledo, was one of the Principal Compilers of the Alphonsine
Tables.

ALBERTUS MAGNUS, Bishop of Ratisbon, one of the most learned 1252.
Persons of his Age, among other the various Monuments of his Wit and Learning,
wrote De Sphaera, De Astris, De Astronomia, and Speculum Astronomicum; as
Simler. in Bibl. Gesner.

ROBERTUS LINCOLNIENSIS, Bishop of Lincoln, commonly 1253.
called Grossa Testa, in English, Grouthead, writ a Compendium of the Sphere,
Published first by Lucas Gauricus, 1531. He wrote likewise De Coelo and Mundo,
De Sphaera Coelesti, Theoricam Planetarum, and In Astrologiam, as Balaeus
affirms.

ROGERUS BACON, a Franciscan Friar of Oxford, a most acute Philosopher 1255.
and admirable Mathematician, insomuch that he was reputed, but falsely, a ANNI
POST CHRISTUM.
Necromancer. Out of whose vast number of Books written upon several subjects,
by which he has eternized his name, we shall select only what is proper to our
purpose, as they are enumerated by Balaeus. He wrote a particular Treatise, De
Utilitate Astronomiae; Introductio in Astrologiam; De Coelo and Mundo; De
Cosmographia; De Radiis Solaribus; De Locis Stellarum; De Aspectibus Lunae; Et
Prognostica ex Siderum cursu, with other Pieces of Optics very considerable in
that Age.

ALBUASSIN, or ALBOAZEN HALY, Son of Aben Ragel, wrote 1255.
De Stellarum Fixarum motu ac locis (according to Ricciolus, Chron. Astron.) as
also De Iudiciis and Fatis Astrorum, translated at the command of Alphonsus
King of Castile, out of Arabic into Spanish, by Judas Ben Musce, and out of
Spanish into Latin, by Aegidius de Thebaldis, of Parma, Printed at Basile
1550. He writ likewise another Book Signalium Astronomiae, as Simler. in Bibl.
Gesner. affirms.

JOHANNES DE SACRO BOSCO, an English man, born at Hallifax, 1256.
anciently called Holy-wood, from which he took his name. After some time of
study at Oxford, he became a Doctor of the University of Paris, and compiled,
out of Ptolemy, Albategnius, Alfraganus, and others of the Ancients; his Four
Books De Sphaera, commented upon by Vinetus, Iunctinus, Clavius, Barocius, and
diverse others. And though Barocius has detected and published no less than 84.
Errors in that Work of Sacroboscus, yet it still keeps up its credit in the
Schools, as a Classick Piece.

ALPHONSUS x. King of Castile and Leon, having sent for the most learned 1256.
among the Moors, Arabs, and Jews, began the Instauration of Astronomical
Tables, which in the Year 1252. he first published, having, in Books,
Instruments, and other Necessaries, relating to that Work, expended no less
than four hundred thousand Crowns. These Tables, from his Name called
Alphonsine, being defective, grounded partly upon Cabalistick Figments, he
afterward ( viz. Anno 1256.) Published more correct. He observed in the Year
1250. the first Star of Aries, to have been distant from the Equinoctial Point
23. 40. as Blancanus reports. Ricciolus affirms, that Egnatius Dantes, in the
fourth Part of his Astrolabe, reports, that he saw a Book of all the Alphonsine
Instruments, translated out of Arabic into Spanish, and thence into Latin.

PROFATIUS, a Jew, about this time, applied his study to the Observation 1260.
of the Stars. He writ Tables of the Motion of the Eighth Sphere, as Balaeus
affirms, and found the Sun's greatest Declination to be 23. 32. His Almanac
Perpetuum is now extant in several of our Libraries.

JOHANNES PECKHAM, a Franciscan Friar, and Archbishop of Canterbury, 1260.
wrote among other learned Works of his, De Sphaera, and Theoricam Planetarum.

VITELLIO THURINGO-POLONUS, an excellent Mathematician, 1269.
wrote Ten Books (...), i. e. of the nature, reason, and projection of Visual
rays, etc. commonly called Perspective; Printed first at Norimberg by
Petreius, Anno 1535. and afterward reprinted, and adorned with Figures, by
Frederick Risner, at Basile, 1572. a Work subservient to Astronomy.

-- ODINTON, a Benedictine Monk in the Abbey of Evesham, and 1270.
an English man, Scholar to Profatius the Jew and of Jewish Extraction,
endeavored to vindicate his Name from Oblivion by his Book, De Motibus
Planetarum, and De Mutatione Aeris; as Balaeus affirms.

COGIA* NASIR EDDIN. TUSAEUS, wrote Astronomical Tables, ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
which he dedicated to Ile-Chan, Prince of the Tartars, and a Treatise of the
Astrolabe, 1272.
in twenty Chapters, as I find mentioned in the Catalogue of Golius's
Manuscripts. He died in the year of the Hegira 675. of Christ, 1276.

KOTBODDINUS SHIRAZITA, wrote a Book entitled Donum Regium 1272.
seu Universae Astronomiae Syntagma. He was contemporary with Nasir Eddin
Tusaeus.

THEBIT BEN CHORA, i. e. the Son of Chora, by Profession a Jew, and 1275.
according to ^eland, born in England, though others make him a Native of
Spain, first introduced the motion of Trepidation in the Eighth Sphere (by some
called Motus Accessus and Recessus) from North to South; and observed the Sun's
greatest Declination to be 23. 33. He wrote likewise De significationibus
Planetarum; De Capite and Cauda Draconis; Demonstrationes in Almagestum, and
Additiones in Sphaerica Menelai, as they are particularized by Balaeus. There
are mentioned likewise other Treatises of his Writing, as Practica Planetarum;
Ganones Astronomici, and De Prognosticatione Temporum, said to be extant in his
Majesty's Library at St. James's.

GUIDO BONATUS FORO-JULIENSIS, wrote Theoricae Planetarum, 1282.
Published at Venice, 1506. He wrote likewise, De Astrologia Iudiciaria.

HENRICUS BATEN of Mechlin, Dr. in Theology, Chancellor of the 1290.
University of Paris, and Chaunter and Canon of Liege, Published a Book, De
Erroribus Tabularum Alphonsinarum, as Ricciolus affirms, in Catal. Astronom.

MICHAEL SCOTUS, surnamed Mathematicus, for his eminent skill in 1290.
that kind of Learning, by Balaeus styled, Eximius Physicorum Motuum, Cursusque
Siderei Indagator, Published a Comment, super Authorem Sphaerae; Four Books, De
Constitutione Mundi; Two Books, De Coelo and Mundo; Imagines Astronomicae; And
Dogmata Astrologorum; De Signis Planetarum, l. 1. De Natura Solis and Lunae, l.
1. Printed at Venice 1546. He wrote likewise other Opera Astrologica, of which
the MS. is extant in the Bodleian Library. 1293.


GULIELMUS DE SANCTO GODIALDO gained about this time the honor and repute of
an able Astronomer, that is, as G. Vossius notes, twenty years and more after
the Publication of the Alphonsine Tables. 1300.


PETRUS DACIUS, or DE DACIA, as G. Vossius, from the Authority of Trithemius,
calls him, Published Astronomical Tables, extant in MS. in the Library of
Benet-Colledge in Cambridge. He wrote likewise, De Calculo, sive Computo; and
set forth a Calendar. 1310.


ISAAC ISRAELITA, wrote a Book entitled Iessod Holam, i. e. De Fundamento
Mundi; in which he often takes occasion to treat of the Motion of the Eighth
Sphere. 1320.


PETRUS* DE APONO, called likewise CONCILIATOR, Ob Librum, quo Veterum
Medicorum Scripta conciliat, (says G. Vossius, de Scient. Mathemat.) wrote De
Astrolabio Plano, Published at Venice, 1502. 1320.


NICHOLAUS TRIVET, a Dominican Friar, Son of Sir Thomas Trivet Knight, one of
the Judges of the Courts of Common Law in Edward the Third's time, among other
learned Works, wrote De Astronomia. ANNI POST CHRISTUM.


JOHANNES BACONTHORP, a Carmel^e Friar in the Monastery 1320.
of Blackney, in Norfolk, reputed one of the most learned of his time, styled
Doctor Resolutus, wrote four Books, De Coelo and Mundo; One, De Sphaera
Iudiciali; and another, De Astrorum Scientiis.

NICHOLAUS OCKHAM, a Franciscan Friar, in Coenobia Oxoniensi, 1320.
Praelector Publicus (says Balaeus) wrote, De Latitudine Oppositionum, and
another Book, entitled, Astrologi Iudicium.

ISMAEL ABULFEDA, Sultan of Syria, Assyria, and Persia, an illustrious 1322.
Cosmographer, and Geographer, whose Tables the learned Mr. Graves published in
the year 1650. in Arabic and Latin.

CICHUS ASCULANUS, Dr. of Physic, Philosopher, and Public 1322.
Professor of Astronomy at Bologna, was accused for a Necromancer, and burnt
at Florence (being LXX. years of age) Anno 1328.

RICHARDUS WALLINGFORD, so called from the Town of 1326.
Wallingford, where he was born; Son of a Blacksmith; after some time of Study
in Oxford, betook himself to a Monastic life, in the Abbey of St. Alban,
whereof he had the Honor to be Abbot. He was excellently well skilled in
Arithmetic, Astronomy, and Geometry. He caused to be made a famous Clock or
Horologe, for the use of the Monastery, being (according to the Words of
Leland) a miraculous Fabric, sive quis Cursum Solis seu Lunae, seu fixa Sidera
notet, sive iterum Maris Incrementa and Decrementa, seu Lineas una cum figuris
ac Demonstrationibus, ad infinitum pene variis, consideret. For the better
Explanation of which Curious Piece, and the orderly regulating thereof; he
published Canons or Rules, in a particular Treatise, which he entitled Albion.
Alluding something to the Name of the Monastery; But thereby chiefly expressing
this sense or meaning, in English, All by One, i. e. Omnia per Unum, as Balaeus
reports. He wrote besides his forementioned Canones in Albionem; a Book; De
Iudiciis Astronomicis; and another, De Rebus Astronomicis.

JOHANNES DANK, a Native of Saxony, writ Canones Eclipsales, Canones 1330.
Tabularum, and De Astrolabio, as Gesner testifies.

GUALTERUS CATTON, an English Friar in the Convent of Cordeliers 1330.
at Norwich, a learned Theologue and Philosopher, published a Treatise Adversus
Astrologos.

RABBI LEVI, eminent in all kind of Learning, and particularly in Astronomy,
1335.
wrote a Book called Milhamot-Hessem, i. e. Defensionem Dei.

JOHANNES BARWICK, by some (but corruptly) called 1340.
BRENLANTIUS, surnamed likewise BRITANNUS, a learned English Franciscan Friar,
published several Books, De Astrologorum Praenotionibus; in which he impugnes
Judiciary Astrology.

ROBERTUS HOLCOTH, a Dominican Friar, of Northampton, of 1340.
whom Balaeus says, that he was pene infinitae lectionis Homo, atque ingenii
solidissimi, wrote De Effectibus Stellarum; and another Treatise, De Motibus
Stellarum, as G. Vossius affirms, out of Possevinus.

GAUFREDUS DE MELDIS, published a Treatise, entitled Iudicium (...) POST
CH^ISTUM.
Stellae Comatae Anno Dom. 1330. and of two other Comets, which appeared in
1340.
the years 1337. and 1338. preserved yet in Manuscripts in the Library of
Pembroke College in Cambridge. See James, Eclog. Oxon. Cant.

RABBI DAVID ABUDERKEM, writ a Treatise, entitled, Ordo Intercalationis. 1341.


JOHANNES MANDOVICH, sometime Fellow of Merton College 1342.
in Oxford, a learned Physician and Astronomer, published Astronomical Tables.

JOANNES ESTWOOD, or ESTWED, or ESCHU^D of 1347.
Ashenden, sometimes Fellow of Merton College in Oxford, highly commended by
Io. Picus Count of Mirandula, wrote a Book, which he entitled Iudiciale
Astronomicum, sive Summa Iudicialis. He published likewise Elucidarium
Planetarum, Tabulae Planetarum, and Canons of their Utility and Practice; of
the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars in Cancer 1357. and of the Conjunction of
Saturn and Jupiter, and de Signis Conjunctionum. His Iudiciale Astronomicum
sive Summa Anglicana, or Iudicialis, vel de Accidentibus Mundi (for those
several Titles it bears) was Printed at Venice in the year 1442. and is yet
extant in MS. in the Public Library at Oxford, and in that of Oriel College.
It was afterward Printed at Venice in the year 1489. and elegantly for that
Age, at the Charge of a Patrician, for the Honor of whose Name (because
Noblemen in those Days would be at the charge of Printing of good Books) I
will subscribe what follows, as I received it from my very deserving and
ingenious Friend, Mr. Francis Bernard, in whose Possession the said Book (among
other curious ones with which he is stored) now is. Summa Anglicana Iohannis
Eschuid, Opus factum est tum Diligentia, tum Impensa Francisci Bolani Patritii
Veneti, Viri certe bonarum Artium studiosi, Clarissimi quondam Oratoris
Candiani; Nec defuit Impressoris Iohannis Lucilii Santritter Herbronensis
Germani maxima Lucubratio, maximus Labor, and Diligentia.

NICHOLAUS CABASILAS, a Grecian, Archbishop of Thessalonica, 1350.
wrote a Comment upon Ptolemy's Almagest.

JOANNES ELIGERUS of Gondersleven, a German, writ de Compositione 1350.
Astrolabii; de Utilitate Astrolabii; de Utilitate Quadrantis; Two Books de
Magnete, and One de Astrogemetro; and several other Pieces, as Simler in Bibl.
Gesner. affirms.

JOHANNES DE SAXONIA, and JOHANNES DE LIGNERIIS, 1350.
both Germane Astronomers, and Contemporaries. The latter put forth Canones
Primi Mobilis, together with Tables, and a Book De Sphaera. He is reckoned by
Petrus Cirvellus Daiocensis, in his Preface in Sphaeram Mundi, to have been one
of the four most celebrious Astronomers, that had flourished between the times
of Alphonsus and Purbacchius; as cited by Vossius in Addend. ad Scient.
Mathemat.

GUILELMUS GRIZAUNT, an English man, Fellow of Merton College 1350.
in Oxford, and Dr. of Physic, leaving England, settled at Marseilles in
France, where he dyed in much Esteem for his Knowledge and Practice in Physic,
leaving behind him a Son of his own Name; who was first Abbot of the Canons
Regular at Marseilles, afterward Pope of Rome, by the Name of Urban the Fifth:
Of the Issue of his Brain, I find these following, mentioned by Balaeus,
relating to our Purpose. Speculum Astrologiae; De Magnitudine Solis; De
Qualitatibus Astrorum; ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
De Significationibus Eorundem.

JOHANNES KILLINGWORTH, Fellow of Merton College in 1360.
Oxford; wrote De Iudicio Astronomiae; Canones and Tabulae Astronomicae; De
Crepusculis; and De Nubium Ascensionibus.

NICEPHORUS GREGORAS writ De Astrolabio, extant in the King's 1360.
Library at St. James's. Gesner mentions another Piece of his, De
Calumniatoribus Astronomi^, and De Astronomia. Andreas Cellarius, in Praeloquio
Harmon. Macrocosm. reports that in the 27th year of his Age he applied himself
to Andronicus Palaeologus, Emperor of Constantinople, offering to him Reasons
for the Emendation of the Roman Calendar.

LUDOVICUS CAERLION, so called from the Town of Caerlion in 1360.
Wales, where he was born, a learned Theologue and Physician, wrote De Eclipsi
Solis and Lunae; Tabulae Eclipsium Solis and Lunae, secundum Diametros Richardi
Wallingfordi, now extant in his Majesty's Library at St. James's; Canones
Eclipsium; De Tabulis Umbrarum; and Fragmenta Astronomica.

IB'N SHATER DAMASCENUS, styled by Mr. Graves, Sedulus Coeli 1363.
Siderumque Inspector, by many Observations made at Damascus, found the
Obliquity of the Zodiac to be 23. 31. He wrote likewise Canons, and universal
Precepts of Astronomy, and Of Astronomical Instruments, and their use; as
likewise De extruendis Coeli Thematibus, as cited by Hottinger, Smegm. Orient.
His Tables are extant in the Public Library, at Oxford.

JOHANNES BOCCACIUS is about this time numbered among Astronomers 1370.
by Gualterus, in Chronico, as cited by Ricciolus, in Catalog. Astron.

THEOPHRASTUS PARACELSUS, besides his many other Works 1370.
in Physic and Chemistry, has left some Astronomical and Astrological
Fragments, published by Gerardus Dornus, together with his Book, De Meteoris
and Tribus Principiis: He writ De Astronomia Magna, and Astronomiae Magnae
Compendium, Printed in the year 1584.

RICHARDUS LAVINGHAM, of Suffolk, Professor of Mathematics, 1370.
Philosophy, and Theology in the University of Oxford, composed a Book, De
Planetarum Distantia; Compendium Meteororum, in four Books, and two Books, De
Coelo and Mundo. He was killed in that Popular Tumult; wherein Simon Sudbury,
Archbishop of Canterbury, was murdered.

SIMON BREDON, or BRIDON, alias BIRIDANIUS, born at 1370.
Winchcomb in Gloucester-shire; Fellow of Merton College in Oxford, Dr. of
Physic, and Professor of Astronomy, wrote, according to Balaeus, Two Books In
Demonstrationes Almagesti; One, In quaedam Capita Ptolemaei; De Rebus
Astronomicis; Aequationes Planetarum; De Latitudine Planetarum; Super
Introductorio Alcabitii; Astronomia Calculatoria; and Astronomia Iudiciaria.
His Book De Aequationibus Planetarum, is yet extant in Manuscript, in the
Library of Peter-House in Cambridge.

NICHOLAUS DE LYNN, so named from the Town where he was 1370.
born, in Norfolk, a Carmelite Friar, Astrologorum sui Temporis in Anglia
celeberrimus ac maximus, says Balaeus: He wrote Canones Tabularum; De Natura
Zodiaci; De Planetarum Domibus; De Sphaera Iudiciali; Astrologorum Dogmata; De
Figuris ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
and Signis; De Mundi Revolutione; De Usu Astrolabii, De Eclipsi Solis; De
Astrorum Iudiciis; and de Variis Genituris.

BLASIUS PELACANIS, or (as the Italians write him) BIAGIO 1378.
PELACANO, of Parma, by Alberto Leandro (in Descript. Ital.) styled an
Excellent Philosopher and Astronomer; left (says Simler from the Authority of
Iovius) Quaestiones Subtilissimae, in Astronomia and Optica. He taught at Pavy
under Io. Galeazzo first Duke of Millain; His Book being yet extant in MS* in
the Medicean Library.

LEO Emperor of Constantinople, Son of Basilius Macedo was very learned in
1385.
Mathematics. His Tactica, sive de Acie ordinanda, are yet extant, Printed at
Basile, 1554. And some MSS. of his are in the French King's Library, entitled
Logarica (an Obsolete Word instead of Logistica) and are supposed to contain
some Astronomical Computations, and an Exercise upon Diophantus.

HENRICUS DE HASSIA, a Germane, Professor of Theology and 1390.
Astronomy at Vienna, having shown his Knowledge in the latter, in his Comment
upon Genesis, lib. 1. and in Theoricis Planetarum, as Ricciolus affirms.

JOHANNES CHYLMARK, Fellow of Merton College in Oxford, 1390.
Mathematicus insigniter doctus, as Balaeus characters him, published a small
Treatise, De Accidentiis Planetarum.

JOHANNES SOMER, a Franciscan Friar, in the Convent of that Order 1390.
at Bridgewater, wrote Calendarii Castigationes; Tertium Calendarii; Astrorum
Canones; and De Quantitate Anni.

RICHARD the Second, King of England, wrote something in Astronomy 1390.
or Astrology, now extant in his Majesty's Library at St. James's.

JOANNES DE LINERIIS, or DE LINARIIS, Siculus, wrote 1396.
Canones primi Mobilis, of which mention is made by Zacutus in his Tables. He
wrote likewise Canones Quadrantis compositivi and operativi; which Pieces of
his are extant in MS. in the Library of Nicholaus Trivisanus of Padua, as I
find in Thomasinus his Bibliothec. Patavin.

GERARDUS CREMONENSIS translated Geber, out of Arabic into 1400.
Latin, and put forth Theoricae Planetarum; but such as are severely censured
by Io. Regiomontanus.

JOHANNES DE EGMUNDA, Professor of Astronomy at Vienna, 1400.
Published Tables, De Motibus Planetarum, and de Luminarium Eclipsibus,
calculated for the Meridian of Vienna. He wrote likewise De Astrolabio,
together with other Works, which are said to be yet extant in the Library at
Vienna.

GALFRIDUS CHAUCER, a learned Knight, and Prince of English 1402.
Poets, Cui Veneres debet Patria lingua suas, to use Leland's Encomium of him,
merits a place in this Catalogue, for his Book of the Astrolabe, which he
composed for the use and instruction of his Son.

JOHANNES WALTERUS, Scholar, at first, in the College of Winchester, 1410.
afterward, Fellow of New-Colledge in Oxford, where he chiefly applied himself
to Mathematical Studies, and published Tabulae Aequationis Domorum, and ANNI
POST CHRISTUM.
Tabulae Ascensionum Universalium, as they are cited by Balaeus.

GULIELMUS BATECUMB, alias BADECON, Professor of 1410.
Mathematics in the University of Oxford, wrote De Sphaera Concava; De fabrica
and usu ejusdem; De operatione Astrolabit, and D^ Sphaera Solida. He is said to
have flourished in the Reign of King Henry V. by G. Vossius; and by Balaeus he
is ranged among the Authors of this time.

PETRUS ALIACENSIS, Cardinal and Bishop of Cambray, and Chancellor 1410.
of the University of Paris, wrote, besides his other Theological Works,
Quaestiones in Sphaeram Sacrobosci; De Reformatione Calendarii; and another
Tractate, entitled, Concordia Theologiae and Astronomiae.

JOHANNES GERSON, Chancellor of the University of Paris, put 1419.
forth at Lions, Trilogium Astrologiae Theologizatae; or as G. Vossius mends
the Title, Trilogium Astrologiae ad Theologiae Trutinam expensae.

PROSDOCIMUS DE BELDEMANDO of Padua, some time before 1434.
Io. Baptista Capuanus, Published a Comment in Sphaeram Sacrobosci, which Lucas
Gauricus caused to be Printed in the year 1531. He writ likewise Canones
Operativi and Compositivi Astrolabii, and Canones de Motibus corporum
Coelestium, written in the year 1434. Whereof a MS. transcribed by Candus
Master of Arts and Doctor of Physic, Nephew to the said Beldemandus, is
extant in Bibliotheca Candorum, as Thomasinus affirms in Bibliothe^. Patavin.

GEORGIUS TRAPEZUNTIUS, born in Creet, but taking his name 1436.
from Trapezond, a City in Cappadocia, translated into Latin, Ptolemy's
Almagest; to which he added, of his own, an Isagoge, together with a Comment.
He commented likewise upon Ptolemy's Centiloquium, and wrote a Book, De
Antisciis; and another with this Title, Cur Astrologorum judicia plerunque
fallant? as Voss. de Scient. Mathemat. affirms.

ULUGH BEIG, Nephew to the Great Tamerlane, put forth most exact 1437.
Astronomical Tables in Arabic, of the Longitude, and Latitude of the Fixed
Stars, calculated for the Meridian of Samarcand. To which were added the
Commentary of Ali*Cushgi. But the said Tables, collated with Three Persian
Manuscripts in the Bodleian Library, about the year 1665. were translated into
Latin, and Printed with the Arabic at Oxford, by Doctor Hyde, Keeper of the
said Library, to which he added his own most learned Commentary, together with
Mohammedes Tizinus his Tables, of the Declination and Ascension of the Fixed
Stars, in Arabic and Latin.

ALI CUSHGI wrote Astronomica, extant among the Manuscripts of Iacobus 1437.
Golius: He flourished in the time of Ulugh Beig, to whom he was assistant in
composing his Tables.

KADI ZADA, or as the Persians pronounce it, KAZI ZADE, whose 1437.
name more fully expressed is MULANA SALAH EDDIN MUSA, surnamed Cadi-Zadi
Rumaeus, was one of the Assistants to Ulugh Beig, in calculating his
Astronomical Tables.

MULANA GIJATH EDDIN GIEMSHID Published a Piece, 1437.
by him entitled Scala Coeli; or Of the Distances and Magnitudes of the
Celestia^ Bodies. He was likewise an Assistant to Ulugh Beig. ANNI POST
CHRISTUM.


JOHANNES GAZULUS, of Ragusa, a great Astronomer and Astrologer, 1438.
flourished about this time; of him Simler writes, that Nescio quid
Astronomicum scripsit; He is named by Ioannes Regiomontanus, in his Tables of
Directions; and what he writ was a Method of the erecting a Celestial Figure or
Scheme, which is now called the Way of Campanus and Gazulus.

HUMPHREY, Duke of Gloucester, surnamed The Good, Son of Henry the 1440.
Fourth, King of England, Nobilitatis omnis, atque Eruditionis Phoenix plane
Unicus, as he is styled by Balaeus, was a great Lover of Astronomical and
Astrological Learning, and set forth Tables of Directions, of his own Composing.

GEORGIUS THEMISTUS PLETHO CONSTANTINOPOLITANUS 1440.
composed a Book, entitled, De Mensium ac Annorum Ordine^ Dierumque Recensione.

NICHOLAUS CUSANUS, born at Cusa, a Town seated upon the 1440.
Moselle, in the Diocese of Treves, known by the title of Cardinal of St.
Peter's ad Vincula, a most subtle Divine, Philosopher and Mathematician, wrote
(besides other his Works, not relating to our Subject) De emendatione
Calendarii; and De Stellarum Fixarum Canone.

GEORGIUS PURBACCHIUS, so called from the Town of Peurbach 1450.
(the Place of his birth) in the Confines of Bavaria and Austria, was public
Professor of Mathematics both at Ferrara and Vienna, and a great Instauratour
of Astronomy. His first Essays were several Tractates of Dyalling, with Tables
fitted for the variety of Climates; a Small Piece, with a Table thereto, of the
Sun's Altitude; Astrolabial Canons (as Gassendus terms them) with a Table of
Parallels, proportioned to every Degree of the Equinoctial. The making and use
of Solid Spheres, or Globes, especially the Celestial, to which he added a New
Table of all the Fixed Stars* with their augmentation of Longitude, from
Ptolemy's time, to his own. But his chiefest Work (after his Theory of the
Planets, and Tables of Eclipses) by which he intended to signalize his Name,
was the Reducing of Ptolemy's Almagest into a correct Epitome, or Compendium,
being chiefly encouraged thereunto by Cardinal Bessarion, which he lived not to
complete, but left the same, by Testament, to be fulfilled by his Scholar
Johannes Regiomontanus.

JOHANNES FUSOR, or FUSORIUS, contemporary with Purbacchius, 1450.
published Tables of Sines and Chords; and by command of Charles VII. King of
France, made Observations for the better composing of new Tables of the
Celestial Motions, as Gassendus, in the Life of Purbacchius, testifies, extant
in MS. in the Library of Nicholaus Trivisanus of Padua, as Thomasinus in
Bibliothec. Patavin. affirms.

GUILELMUS BOTONER, an English Knight, noble by Extraction, 1460.
but much more ennobled by his Learning, as well in History, Physic, as
Mathematics, Published with other Works, upon several Subjects, a Book, De
Astrologiae Valor.

JOHANNES JOVIANUS PONTANUS, a Neapolitane, acquired 1460.
no little honor and esteem, by his Astronomical Studies and Writings. He
translated into Latin, Ptolemy's Centiloquium, and published it with an
Exposition or Comment thereupon, and wrote XIV. Books, De Rebus Coelestibus,
and Five others, in elegant Latin Verse, entitled, Urania, sive, De Stellis;
and One other, in ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
Verse, De Meteoris.

MICHAEL SCOTUS, a diligent Observer of the Stars, at the desire of 1460.
the Emperor Frederick the Third, put forth, (about this Time) Quaestiones in
Sphaeram Ioh. de Sacro Bosco, as Ricciolus, Chronol. Astronom. affirms; which
certainly is a great mistake: for Frederick the Third came to the Empire much
earlier, and was deposed in the year 1323. Scotus flourishing according to
Balaeus in the year 1290. about which time the Reader will find him already
inserted in this Catalogue.

JOHANNES MULLERUS, commonly called JOHANNES REGIOMONTANUS, 1460.
or DE MONTE REGIO; from Cunisberg a Town in Franconia, where he was born,
Disciple to Purbacchius, finished the Epitome (begun by his Master) of
Ptolemy's Almagest. He published likewise Tables of Directions and Eclipses,
and first of all in that Age set forth Astronomical Ephemerides, of many years
duration, Printed at Augsburg 1488. He wrote likewise De Theoricis Planetarum,
and De Cometis, and published a Treatise De Triangulis, Printed at Basile in
folio, by Daniel Santbech, and is still a Book of good account, as containing
in it diverse extraordinary Cases about plain Triangles. He assisted Sixtus IV.
(by whom he was honorably to that end invited) in the emendation of the Julian
Calendar, though he lived not to perfect what he had begun. He dedicated his
Tables of the Primum Mobile, to Matthias Corvinus, King of Hungary, who not
only rewarded him with 800. Hungarian Crowns, but also made him his daily
Guest, for some time, at his Table, justly deserving to be honored by
Posterity, as the great Advancer of all Mathematical Learning, especially of
Astronomy, as well by his own Labors, as the publishing in Print, at
Norimberg, the most eminent Authors among the Ancients in that Science;
particularly our Manilius, Ptolemy, Theon, Proclus, Menelaus, Theodorus,
Firmicus, Hyginus, and others, to the number of Thirty at least. He observed
the Sun's greatest Declination to be 23. 30. He died, as some write, at the
33d. or, as others, at the 40th. year of his Age, not without the suspicion of
being poisoned by the Sons of Georgius Trapezuntius, the envious opposers of
his merits, and lies buried at Rome, in the Pantheon. See more of him in
Gassendus, who writ his Life.

JOHANNES BLANCHINUS, was, as Blancanus affirms, of Ferrara, 1462.
but more truly, as Ricciolus, of Bologna, and composed Astronomical Tables,
which he dedicated to the Emperor Frederick the Third, to whom he was both
well known and acceptable. These Tables, with new ones of his own, and more
correct Canons, and several Additions, were by Lucas Gauricus published at
Venice, 1526.

EBERHARDUS SCHLUSINGERUS of Gasmanstorfe in Franconia, 1470.
Doctor of Physic at Zurick, writ a Treatise of Comets, and of their
Significations; particularly of a Comet which appeared at Zurick in the year
1472. He writ likewise an Introduction to Astrology, chiefly relating to
Medical Elections.

BESSARION, by birth a Grecian, Cardinal of the Roman Church, and Patriarck
1473.
of Constantinople, a great Favourer of Astronomical Studies: He left (among
other his various and learned Works) a small Tractate, whereof the Manuscript
is extant in the Emperor's Library at Vienna, entitled Methodus cognoscendi
quot horis, singulis Noctibus Luna fulgeat; as the same is cited by Simler in
Biblioth, Gesner.

ABRAHAM ZAGUT, or ZACUTI, was first public Professor of 1474.
Astronomy at Carthage, afterward at Salamanca, of whom Ricciolus affirms,
that (...)
he was Astronomiae consultissimus. Vossius says he was Astrologer to Emanuel
King of Portugal. He wrote Fasti, sive Almanach perpetuum omnium coeli Motuum,
Printed at Venice 1502. In the Preface of which Work he makes mention of
Abenverga, a Jew, his Astronomical Tables, but without giving any account of
the Time wherein he flourished. In the year 1474. he observed the Star called
Spica Virginis to be in the 17. 10. of Libra, as Ricciolus from the Authority
of Augustinus Riccius affirms. His Almanach Perpetuum sive Ephemerides were
calculated for Salamanca, the Radix they began from was the year 1472. but the
Places of the Planets were taken from Regiomontanus his Ephemerides; his first
part (which whether ever Printed is uncertain) beginning from that year. He
writ the Preface to the Bishop of Salamanca, (who he was does not appear)
Ioannes Michael Germanus made the Problems before it, Alphonsus de Corduba
Hispalensis made a Canon of the Equation of Venus, and discourses a little of
the Errors of Zacutus. In the same Book one Octavius Sfortiades Episcopus
Aretinus, says, that Marcus Antonius Grimanus Patricius Venetus, Iuntae
Calcographiae imprimendam tradidit Novam Tabellam, utpote Supplementum
Aequationis Veneris in 30 Revolutionibus, quam suae Celsitudini Abraham Zacutus
ex Damasco destinaverat paululum antequam Diem clauderet Novissimum. Gauricus
(being but a young Man) corrected and put out the Book at Venice Anno 1515.

JOANNES ODDI, of Padua, by Ia. Phil. Thomasinus (in Bibl. Patav.) 1475.
styled Physicus, and Astronomus (upon the Score of which last, We give him
place in this Catalogue) wrote a Book which he dedicated to Frederick Duke of
Urbine, de Impressionibus Elementorum, de Copia rerum, and Pretio, de Bello, de
Religione, de Principibus, de Civitatibus; which I conceive to be some
Astrological Discourse, or Prognostic, extant in MS. in the Library of
Hippolytus Oddi of Padua Knight of St. Mark.

JOHANNES BAPTISTA CAPUANUS SIPONTINUS, De 1475.
Manfredonia, and as Ricciolus affirms, Canon Regular of the Church of Lateran,
while he was a secular Person* his name was Franciscus Capuanus, and he was
public Professor of Astronomy at Padua, at which time he wrote an Exposition,
In Sphaeram Sacrobosci. Being afterward made a Bishop he revised it, and
dedicated it to his Fellow-Canons, sometime his Auditors. He wrote likewise In
Theoricas Purbacchii, Computus Ecclesiasticus, and a Book, De Compositione
Quadrantis.

ANDALO of Genua, a most excellent Mathematician, wrote of the Astrolabe, 1475.
Printed at Ferrara 1475.

THEODORUS GAZA wrote in Greek, De Mensibus, and De Anno, in 1478.
which says Ricciolus, Astronomiae non inscium se ostendit; Published by
Petavius, in Uranolog.

CHRISTIANUS MOLITOR, of Clagenfurt, was, as Ricciolus affirms, 1480.
Astronomus insignis, and wrote, at Vienna, Opuscula Astrologica, which,
according to the testimony of Vossius, apud Doctos in magno pretio habentur.

NICHOLAUS ORESMIUS wrote a particular Treatise, by way of 1480.
Commentary, against the Superstition of Judiciary Astrology. He is cited by
Johannes Picus Mirandula, by the name of Nicholaus Orem, to have written a
Book, De Proportionibus Proportionum, as Simler in Biblioth. Gesner attests.

ALEXANDER ACHILLINUS, of Bologna, Professor of Philosophy, 1480.
wrote De Orbibus Coelestibus.

ALCHABITIUS, or ALCABITIUS, called likewise ABDILAZUS, ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
an Arabian, composed an Isagoge, or Introduction, Ad scrutanda Astrorum 1480.
judicia, and writ De Planetarum Conjunctionibus. Ricciolus affirms he wrote
four Tractates, in which he comprised the Elements of Astrology, commented upon
by Naiboda. Johannes Hispalensis first translated him into Latin, Printed at
Venice in the year 1491. and 1521. together with the exposition of Ioannes de
Saxonia, and the Emendations of Antonius de Fantis, Doctor of Physic at
Trevigi in Italy. He wrote likewise of Optics, of which see Vossius, De
Scient. Mathemat. There is a MS. Treatise in the Bodleian Library, entitled
Introductio ad Iudicia Astronom. under the Name of Algabicus; I know not
whether mistaken for Alchabitius.

MARCILIUS FICINUS, an eminent Florentine Physician, Philosopher, 1480.
and Astronomer, who both in his Notes In Timaeum Platonis, and other his
Dialogues, discourses learnedly, as occasion requires, upon several
Astronomical Subjects, having likewise put forth an Apology, De Medicina
Astrologiae* jungenda; a Disputation Contra Iudicia Astrologorum; and a Book,
De Sole and Lumine. In his Book, De vita coelitus comparanda, he shows himself
very Learned in Astrology, though he writ against the Astrologasters.

JOHANNES KENT, alias KAYLEG, Native of Caermarden in South Wales, 1482.
a Great Philosopher, Botanist, and Mathematician, of which Studies he was
Professor in the University of Cambridge, put forth Astronomical Tables.

JOANNES ANGELUS put forth Opus Astrolabii Plani cum Tabulis, 1488.
Printed August. Vindel. 1488.

JOHANNES ERGHOM, of York, an Augustine Friar, having, at Oxford, 1490.
professed Logic, Natural Philosophy and Theology, gained to himself the
repute of an eminent Scholar, and put forth a Book of Astrological Calculations.

JOHANNES PICUS, Count of Mirandula, Ingeniorum Phoenix, as some 1490.
have styled him, besides other Works of exquisite and profound Learning, wrote
Twelve Books Against Judiciary Astrology.

NICHOLAUS COMES DE COMITIBUS, a Noble Italian, 1490.
wrote a Tractate, De Motu and Recessu Octavae Sphaerae, extant in MS. among
those of Nicholaus Trivisanus of Padua, recorded by Iac. Phil. Thomasinus in
Bibliothec. Patavin.

PONTICUS VIRMIUS, alias VIRUNNIUS, Native of Trevigi 1490.
in Italy, Professor of Philosophy, writ, besides many other Works upon
different Subjects, a Commentary In Sphaeram Iohannis Sacrobosci.

JACOBUS SCHONHEINTZ, Professor of Mathematics and Philosophy, 1490.
in Academia Herbipoli, writ an Apology in vindication of Astrology, against
Io. Picus Count of Mirandula.

DOMINICUS MARIA NOVARAS FERRARIENSIS, Professor 1490.
of Astronomy in Bologna, and Master to Copernicus, is said to have observed
the Sun's greatest Declination to have been 23. 29. He was a great Promoter of
Astronomical Observations, both by his teaching and practice.

BERNARDUS WALTHERUS, of Norimberg, Disciple to Regiomontanus, 1491.
and a Continuatour of his Observations, which with his own were published,
first at Norimberg; afterward together with the Hassian and Tychonick, by
Willebrodus ANNI POST. CHRISTUM
Snellius. He was a great Observer of the Stars, and partly from the Authority
of Alhazen and Vitellio, partly by his own experience, made it appear of how
great moment the Doctrine of Refractions is, in relation to the Stars, when
near the Horizon.

HERMOLAUS BARBARUS, a Noble Patrician of Venice, and Patriarch 1492.
of Aquileia, besides his other eminent Works, both in Historical and Critical
Learning, writ a Book, De convenientia Astronomiae and Medicinae.

CHRISTOPHORUS COLUMBUS, a Native of Genua, by Blancanus 1493.
styled Argonautarum Princeps, trusting to his skill in Astronomy and
Geography, by a high and daring, yet a happy and successful undertaking,
discovered, to the Old, a New World.

JOHANNES ABIOSUS, of Naples, Doctor of Physic, and Professor 1494.
of Mathematics, writ Dialogues in defense of Judiciary Astrology, in which he
predicts many Schisms and future Changes to happen in the Church. He dedicated
his Books to Alphonsus King of Sicily.

JOANNES LUCILIUS SANTRITTER HEILBRONNENSIS, 1494.
reduced the Alphonsine Tables into a most easy Order and Method, to which he
added Tables of his own, with Rules or Canons* thereunto. He writ likewise a
Book of the Judgments of Nativities, Printed at his own Shop in Venice, 1494.

JOANNES ANGELUS BAVARUS, of Aichen, put forth a Correction 1494.
of the Roman Calendar, a Plain Astrolabe, a Treatise of Nativities, and of
unequal Hours in each Climate of the World, as also Ephemerides, and various
Prognostics, Printed at Venice in the year 1494. He died in the year 1512. at
which time he was about finishing Purbacchius's Table, of the Equations of the
Planets Motions.

LAURENTIUS BONINCONTRIUS MINIATENSIS, writ 1494.
Three Books, De Rebus Coelestibus, in Heroic Verse, Printed by Robert Winter,
at Basile, in the year 1540. with the accession of diverse Observations of the
Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, made by Philippus Melancthon, Johannes Stigelius,
M. Acontius, Ioachimus Camerarius, and Georgius Aemilius. He was the first that
wrote a Comment upon Manilius's Astronomica, Printed both at Bologna, and at
Basile.

JACOBUS FABER, besides his Arithmetical Epitome of Boethius, and 1495.
his Comment upon Iordanus Nemorarius, wrote also a Commentary, In Sphaeram
Sacrobosci.

RAPHAEL VOLATERRANUS, a Chronologer and Cosmographer, 1495.
who in the third Tome of his XXXVIII. Books Urbanorum Commentariorum,
collected (as himself affirms) out of more than a thousand Greek and Latin
Authors, has written, De Philologia, sive Artium Rudimentis, in which those
of Astronomy are included.

LUCIUS BELLANTIUS, of Siena, wrote Twenty Questions touching 1495.
the truth of Astrology, and Twelve Books in defense of Astrology, against
Picus Mirandula, Printed at Florence and Basile. To which are annexed the
Dialogues of Gabriel Pirovanus, De Veritate Astrologiae.

CONRADUS COCUS WIMPINAE DE BUCHONIA, Professor ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
of Theology at Francfort, and Leipsick, writ, among diverse other Tractates,
1497.
six Books De Corporibus Coelestibus, as Simler testifies.

STEPHANUS ROSINUS of Ausbourg, Professor of Philosophy, 1500.
Batchelour of Divinity, and Canon, at Vienna, taught Astronomy there, and
published Tables of the Declinations of the fixed Stars, with Prognostics.

JOHANNES MANTZ, of Plabeim, a famous Theologue, and Astronomer, 1500.
in his time, wrote Prognostica ex Stellis.

ANDREAS STIBORIUS, a Bohemian, Canon and Professor of Mathematics 1500.
at Vienna, a most acute Astronomer. He composed an Epitome of Ptolomy's
Almagest, Albategnius, and Geber; wrote five Books touching Shadows; a Book of
Astronomical Instruments, of the first and second Mobile, with his own Canons,
and those of the Ancients; an Introduction in sensilem Astronomiam; a Book of
Mathematical Authors; and of the Primum Mobile divided into four parts, and
handled Geometrice, Arithmetice, Exemplariter, and Instrumentaliter. See more
of him in Vossius, de Scient. Mathemat.

MARCUS BENEVENTANUS, a Celestine-Monk, wrote upon Thebit, 1507.
De Octava Sphaera. He likewise corrected Ptolemy's Planisphere, and together
with Johannes Cota of Verona, Scipio Carteromachus, of Pistoia, and Cornelius
Benig^us, of Viterbo, sedulam navavit operam in Geographia Ptolemaei
corrigenda, says G. Voss. De Scient. Mathemat.

BARTHOLOMAEUS VESPUCIUS, a Florentine, public Professor 1507.
of Astronomy in the University of Padua, where he drew many into admiration of
his Learning. He commented in Sphaeram Sacrobosci, and put forth an Oration, in
Laudem Quadrivii, sive, Quatuor Disciplinarum Mathematicarum, chiefly of
Astrology.

JOHANNES GANIVETUS, of the Order of Minime Friars at Vienna, 1508.
put forth a small Astronomical Treatise, beginning with these words, Quod
Coeli enarrant, etc. To which he added an Abbreviation of Aben-Ezra, De
Luminaribus and Diebus Criticis, with the Astrology of Hippocrates, as Gesner
affirms, Printed at Lions, in the year 1508.

JOHANNES EZLER, of Mentz, published a Piece entitled Speculum 1509.
Astronomicum, in which he treats of the Causes of the Errors in Astrology
proceeding from the neglect of the Equation of Time. He put forth likewise the
Theory of the Planets, and of the Eighth Sphere; Printed at Basil, by Henricus
Petri, 1509. Una cum Theoricis Purbacchii.

JACOBUS LOCHER, PHILOMUSUS GERMANUS, wrote 1510.
among other things, a Treatise De Cometa, mentioned by Simler. in Bibl. Gesner.

AUGUSTINUS RICCIUS, of Casal, wrote a learned Treatise, Of the 1513.
Motion of the Eighth Sphere, in which he professes to have learnt Astronomy of
Abraham Zaguti, at Carthage and Salamanca. He wrote likewise an Epistle
touching the Authors of Astronomy, wherein he shows the same to have come
originally from the Hebrews. In which Work of his (says Simler. in Bibl.
Gesner.) are contained Platonica quaedam and antiqua Magiae Dogmata.

JOHANNES VERNERUS, of Norimberg, Successor to Ioh. Regiomontanus, ANNI POST
CHRISTUM.
and Bernardus Walterus, commented upon Ptolemy's Geography, wrote 1514.
De motu Octavae Sphaerae, and published Astronomical Tables. In the year 1514.
he observed the Sun's greatest Declination to have been 23. 28. and the
distance of the first Star in Aries, from the Equinoctial Point, 26.

LUDOVICUS VITALIS, a Bolognian Astronomer, flourished about 1514.
this time, as Ricciolus (Chronolog. Astronom.) affirms, though without any
mention of his Works.

JOHANNES HEREMITA, of Ferrara, is by Ricciolus in Chronic. 1515.
Astronom. styled Geometra and Astronomus non vulgaris, but he gives no
particular account of his Works or Writings.

PAULUS MIDDLEBURGENSIS, Bishop of Fossombrone, or Forum 1515.
Sempronii, wrote XIV. Books of the Emendation of the Calendar and Observation
of Easter, in which Work he not only treats of the Roman Account, but also of
the Jewish, Egyptian, and Arabian Years, having therein designed the exact
Doctrine of all Times. He wrote likewise XIX. Books of the Year and Day of our
Savior's Nativity and Passion, and other Pieces of like Argument, Voss. de
Scient. Mathemat. He writ Prognosticon ostendens Anno Dom. 1524. Nullum neque
Universale neque Particulare Diluvium futurum. Forum Sempronii 1523.

JOANNES STOEFLERUS JUSTINGENSIS, Professor of 1516.
Mathematics at Tubingue, wrote a Treatise De fabrica and usu Astrolabii. He
likewise composed Ephemerides, Calendarium Romanum Magnum, dedicated to
Maximilian the Emperor, and Astronomical Tables, and wrote a large Commentary
in Sphaeram Procli. His Death, or the occasion thereof at least, was very
remarkable (if the Story be true.) Having found by calculation, that upon a
certain Day his life was like to be endangered by some ruinous accident, and
the day being come, to divert his thoughts from the apprehension of the danger
threatening him, he invites some Friends of his into his Study, where, after
discourse, entering into some dispute, he, to decide the controversy reaches
for a Book, but the Shelf on which it stood being loose came down with all the
Books upon him, and with its fall so bruised him, that he died soon after of
the hurt, Voss. in Addend. ad Scient. Mathemat. But the whole Story of his
Death, of which some make Calvisius the Author, is false by the Testimony of
Io. Rudolphus Camerarius Genitur. 69. Centur. 2. who had it from Andreas
Ruttellius his Auditour; for he died of the Plague at Blabira Febr. 16. 1531.
in the 78th year of his Age, happening (according to Calculation if you will
believe it) from the Direction of to.

ALBERTUS PIGHIUS, besides his other learned Historical Works, 1518.
wrote of the Observation of the Solstices and Equinoxes; Of the Restitution,
or Emendation of the Calendar, and a Defense of Astrology, against some
Prognosticatours of his Time, particularly an Apology against the New Astronomy
of Marcus Beneventanus, a Celestine-Monk, traducing the Opinions of all Modern
Astronomers, touching the motion of the Eighth Sphere.

JOHANNES HASFURT VIRDUNGUS, a Germane Astronomer, 1521.
set forth Tables, (by him entitled Tabulae Resolutae) for supputation of the
Celestial Motions, Printed at Norimberg by Johannes Petreius, in the year 1542.
He published likewise in the year 1521. Prognosticon, upon the stupendous
Conjunction of the Planets, which was to happen in the year 1524. following;
with some other Prognostics of his, written in High Dutch, as Gesner. affirms.
He writ likewise Novam Medicinae Methodum qua ex Mathematica ratione curandi
rationem ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
ostendit, Printed Helingae and Hagenoae 1532. and set out afterward with a
Commentary by Ioannes Paulus Galluccius Venet. 1580:

GEORGIUS COLLIMITIUS TANNESLETTERUS was 1522.
Scholar to Andreas Stiborius, as Gesner affirms. He writ De Applicatione
Astrologiae ad Medicinam; De Natura and Proprietatibus Planetarum, out of Haly,
Firmicus, and Alchabitius, and some other Tracts upon those Arguments, Printed
at Basil, 1524.

MOHAMMED IBNO'L ATTAR, published Astronomical Tables 1523.
of the Motions of the Planets, calculated for the Longitude of Damascus;
written in the year of the Hegira 930. and of Christ 1523. and preserved in
Manuscript in the Public Library at Oxford.

ALBERTUS BRUDZEVIUS, Professor of Mathematics in the 1524.
University of Cracovia, was the first Master and Instructour of Copernicus in
Astronomy, as we find it mentioned by Gassendus, in the life of Copernicus.

PETRUS APPIANUS, of Leipsick, called in the Germane Tongue, Binewilt, 1524.
Professor of Mathematics at Ingolstadt, (in intimate favor with the
Emperor Charles the Fifth, who not only invited him to his Court, but also
honored him with Knighthood) wrote a Book of Cosmography, revised and
augmented by Gemma Frisius, together with Observations of several Eclipses. He
put forth likewise an Instrument, or Table of the Primum Mobile, with 100
Problems thereupon; and another Piece entitled Opus Caesareum, in which, to
use Ricciolus's Expression, Rotulis and Automatis ingeniosissimis docet
expedire omnia fere Problemata Astronomica. Of his several other Works, not
proper to this place, see Vossius, De Scient. Mathemat.

FRANCISCUS SARZOSUS of Xelsa in Arragon, wrote two Books 1525.
in Aequator^m Planetarum Alphonsinae Hypothesi superstructum, as Ricciol.
affirms, Chron. Astronom. Part. 2.

JOHANNES VOGELLINUS was Disciple to Ioh. Regiomontanus, 1527.
and made Observations on the Comets appearing in the years 1527. and 1532.

PETRUS CIRVELLUS, besides his Cursus Mathem. Artium, Published 1528.
a Treatise De Correctione Calendarii, Printed Compl. 1528.

HENRICUS BAERSIUS, alias, VEKENSTYL, a Mathematician 1528.
and Printer to the University of Lovaine, put forth, but not under his own
Name, Tabulae perpetuae Longitudinum and Latitudinum Planetarum, calculated for
the Meridian of Lovaine. And under his own name he likewise set forth a Book,
De Compositione and Usu Decretorii Planetarum; and another, De Compositione and
Usu Quadrantis.

OTHO BRUNFELSIUS, Doctor of Physic at Mentz, totius (...), 1528.
cultor, a great Student likewise in Divinity and the Sacred Scriptures, out of
which he endeavored to refute Judiciary Astrology. He prefixed likewise to the
Edition of Firmicus, Printed by Hervagius, and dedicated to him by Nicholaus
Prucnerus, a small Treatise not unuseful to young Beginners, De Definitionibus
and Terminis Astrologiae.

JOANNES FERNELIUS of Ambois, a famous French Physician, and ANNI POST, CHRISTUM
as eminent a Geometrician and Astronomer, wrote besides other his Learned 1528.
Works, a particular Treatise, entitled, Cosmotheoria, in which he explains
the Motions, Site, Magnitude and Theory of the Celestial Bodies; and another
Piece, called Monalosphaerium.

JOHANNES CARIO, besides his Chronological Work, left, as Vossius 1530.
terms them, Practicas Astrologicas, nec non Ephemerides, beginning with the
year 1536, and ending in the year 1550.

JACOBUS MILICHIUS, Professor of Mathematics at Wittemberg, 1530.
and Tutour to Erasmus Reinholdus, wrote a Commentary upon the Second Book of
Plinius Secundus, the Subject whereof is chiefly Astronomical.

ORONTIUS FINAEUS, of Dauphine, Regius Professor of Mathematics 1530.
at Paris, wrote De Sphaera; Of Cosmography; Of the Theory of the Planets;
Astronomical Canons, or Problems of the Primum Mobile; Of the difference of
Longitude, to be found by the Moon; and several other Pieces; which (as
Blancanus advises) ought to be read cum Antidoto Petri Nonnii de Erroribus
Orontii.

HIERONYMUS FRACASTORIUS, a Native of Verona, an excellent 1530.
Poet, Physician, Philosopher, and Astronomer, Published a Book De Orbibus
Excentricis and Homocentricis, which he dedicated to Pope Paul III.

SEBASTIANUS MUNSTERUS was famous for two things, as Vossius 1530.
affirms, to wit, Hebraeis Literis, and Mathesi. As to what concerns our
purpose, he wrote Notes, In Geographiam Ptolemaei, and Universalem
Cosmographiam, and of Dyalling; as also Organum Uranicum, wherein the Theories
of the Planets, and their Motions were computed for an hundred years and more.
He was also Author of the Canones super novo Luminarium Instrumento.

JOACHIMUS FORTIUS RINGELBERGIUS of Antwerp, writ 1530.
De Horoscopo, De Tempore, De Cosmographia, and Three Books of Astrological
Institutions.

JOHANNES ROBINUS, in English, Robins, was a great Astrologer, and 1530.
put forth a Book, De Portentosis Cometis, dedicated by him to King Henry VIII.
which Balaeus calls, Opus valde Lucidum, now extant in Manuscript, in the hands
of Mr. Thomas Gale.

SIMON GRYNAEUS, Native of Viring, a Town in Suevia, or Suaben, 1530.
merited eminently in all kind of Learning, particularly by publishing, in
Greek, the (...) of Ptolemy, to which he added a Preface of his own touching
the use thereof, Dedicated to King Henry the Eighth of England, Printed at
Basil, 1538.

HENRICUS GLAREANUS, a Geographer, Chronologer, Musician, 1531.
and Physician, Native of Glarona, commonly called Glarys, a Town in
Swisserland, put forth a Book De Geographia, induced chiefly thereunto, as he
pretends in his Preface, because he found the Sphere of Proclus to be too
concise, and only fitted to the Horizon of Greece, and erroneous, as to the
Description of some Circles; and Sacroboscus in his Parallels and Climates,
mutilous and defective. He published likewise other Pieces, both in Astrology
and Cosmography, being (according to the testimony of G. Vossius) Vir
undequaque doctissimus.

ACHILLES P. GASSARUS of Lindaw, by Gesner styled Medicus and ANNI POST
CHRISTUM.
Mathematicus praestantissimus, put forth a Chronology from the beginning of
the 1532.
World to the year of Christ 1532. He published likewise a Mathematical Table,
entitled, Sciaterion Pedarium, Printed at Zurick.

JODOCUS CLITCHTHOVEUS NEOPORTICENSIS, 1533.
writ a Comment upon Iacobus Faber his Theory of the Planets.

GEORGIUS PRUCNER, of Ruspach, left behind him (says Simler in 1533.
Bibl. Gesner.) very fair and exquisite Astronomical Instruments, and several
Books collected by him, in Astrorum Scientia, yet preserved at Vienna, in
Bibliotheca Facultatis Artium.

JACOBUS CEPORINUS of Zurick, eminently learned in the Hebrew, 1534.
Greek, and Latin Languages, put forth a Commentary upon Dionysius his
Periegesis, and Aratus his Astronomicon, Printed at Basil, by Wolphius, in the
year before mentioned, as Gesner testifies.

LUDOVICUS DE RIGIIS, published Astrological Aphorisms, addressed 1535.
to the Patriarch of Constantinople, Printed at Norimberg, in the year 1535.
together with Ptolemy's Tetrabiblos.

JOHANNES STIGELIUS, Native of Gota, a City in the Province of 1535.
Thuringen, in Germany, an ingenious Poet and Mathematician, Professor at
Wittemberg and Iena, put forth Prognostics upon the Eclipse of the Moon
happening in the year 1536, as likewise others upon one of the Sun in the year
following, and upon one of the Moon, and another of the Sun, in the year 1551.

JACOBUS KAEBELIUS, besides an Arithmetical Treatise, Published 1536.
another of the Astrolabe, in High Dutch, which was Printed afterward in
Latin, at Paris.

JACOBUS ZIGLERUS, of Landaw, a City in the Province of Vasgow, 1536.
in the lower Alsatia, set forth Constructionem Solidae Sphaerae, Printed at
Basil, by Valderus, together with Aratus and his Scholiast, in the year 1536.
He wrote likewise Scholia in Procli Lycii Sphaeram; and De Canonica per
Sphaeram operatione; and De Hemicyclio Berosi, mentioned by Vitruvius, l. 9. c.
9. He published likewise a Comment upon the Second Book of Pliny's Natural
History; in which he explains the most obscure, especially Astronomical, Places
therein.

NICHOLAUS COPERNICUS, by Bulialdus, not without reason, 1536.
styled Vir absolutae subtilitatis, a Native of Thorn in Prussia, and Canon of
the Church of Frawenburg, the Cathedral of Warmerlandt, Scholar to Dominicus
Maria, of Ferrara, to whom he was Assistant in making his Astronomical
Observations at Bologna; and Professor of the Mathematics at Rome, honored
at his Public Lectures with the Assembly of the most Illustrious Persons in
that City, whence returning into his own Country, he wholly applied himself to
the study and instauration of Astronomy, finding the Sun's greatest Declination
to be 23. 28. The year before his Death, at the instance of the Cardinals,
Schomberg, and Ghisi, he published his Noble Work, De Revolutionibus Orbium
Coelestium, in Six Books, in which he not only revived, but most happily
united, and formed into an Hypothesis of his own, the several Opinions of
Philolaus, Heraclides Ponticus, and Ecphantus Pythagoreus. For according to the
opinion of Philolaus, he made the Earth to move about the Sun, as the Center,
whence its Annual Motion.; And with Heraclides and Ecphantus, he likewise gave
it a Motion like that of a Wheel about ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
its own Axis, whence its Diurnal Motion; an Hypothesis so near the Truth, that
like that when persecuted, maugre all Opposition,

Per damna, per caedes, ab ipso
Sumit opes animumque ferro;
As Ricciolus (though a Dissenter from it) observes.

ANDREAS OSIANDER took not only care in publishing the first Edition 1536.
of Copernicus his Book De Revolutionibus, but condescended to be Overseer of
the Press, while it was Printing, to which he added a brief Preface of his own,
therein chiefly endeavoring, because of the seeming Novelty of the Opinion, to
persuade the Reader, to look upon it as an assumed Hypothesis, rather than an
asserted Tenet. To which purpose, about that time was published this Distich,

Quid tum si mihi Terra movetur, Solque quiescit
Et Coelum? Constat Calculus inde Mihi.
Of which Gassendus, in Vita Copernici.

JOHANNES SCHONERUS, a Native of Carolostadt, Professor of Mathematics 1536.
at Norimberg, put forth Astronomical Tables for their perspicuity called
Resolutae, and a Book De usu Globi Stelliferi, De Compositione Clobi Coelestis,
De Usu Globi Terrestris and de Compositione Ejusdem; as also another Piece,
called Aequatorium Astronomicum; Libellus de Distantiis Locorum per
Instrumentum and numeros investigandis; De Compositione Torqueti; In
Constructionem and Usum Rectanguli sive Radii Astronomici Annotationes; Horarii
Cylindri Canones; Planisphaerium seu Meteoroscopium; Organum Uranicum;
Instrumentum Impedimentorum Lunae. All Printed at Norimberg in fol. 1551.

GEORGIUS VALLA, an Italian, Native of Piacenza; among other his 1536.
Learned Works, wrote a Treatise in four Books De tota Astrologia, In which,
Fabrica Ususque Astrolabii exaratur, and quae Signorum in exhibendis
Medicaminibus sit habenda Observatio. He writ likewise a Commentary in
Almagestum and Quadripartitum Ptolemaei, and translated out of Greek into
Latin, Proclus Diadochus his Hypotyposes Astronomicarum Positionum, and
Cleomedes de Contemplatione Orbium Coelestium. V. Simler. in Biblioth. Gesner.

JOHANNES BAPTISTA AMICUS COSENTINUS, wrote 1537.
De motu Coelestium, juxta Principia Peripatetica, Published in the year 1532.

PETRUS PITATUS, of Verona, wrote Isagogen ad Ephemerides, and De 1537.
novo Calendario instituendo, which he addressed to Pope Paul III. He wrote
likewise an Explication of the Rising and Setting, of the Fixed Stars, Printed
at Basil, 1568.

JOHANNES LUCIDUS SAMOSATHEUS, about this time 1537.
put forth his learned Chronological Labors, non sine Eruditae Caveae
Applausu, says G. Vossius; in which are contained Emendationes Temporum ab
Orb condito, with Canons in perpetuam Temporum Tabulam; Of the true Day of our
Savior's Passion; And an Epitome of the Emendation of the Roman Calendar,
Printed at Venice by Iunta, 1537.

BONETTUS a Jew, put forth a small Treatise De Annulo sive Instrumento ANNI
POST CHRISTUM.
Astronomico, Printed at Marpurg 1537. 1537.


SYMPHORIANUS CAMPEGIUS ( alias CHAMPERIUS) 1537.
Eques Auratus Lugdunensis, a Frenchman, among other Learned Works of his in
Physic and Philosophy, put forth several Mathematical Treatises, and
particularly One of Astronomy, Printed by Henricus Petrus, at Basil 1537.

JOHANNES GIGAS STAINFORTENSIS, Published Enchiridion 1538.
Sphaericum, seu Systema Cosmographicum compendiosum. He wrote likewise,
according to the Testimony of Simler in Bibl. Gesner, an Elegy upon two notable
Eclipses of the Moon, which happened in the year 1538. Whereof the former was
on the fourteenth of May, the latter on the sixth of November. His Enchiridion
Sphaericum was Printed at Oxford in the year 1664.

MAURUS FLORENTINUS, first, a Monk, of the Order of the Humiliati, 1538.
afterward, of the Fraternity of the Servants of the Blessed Virgin, of whom
Gerardus Vossius says, That he was most learned in the Latin, Greek, and
Hebrew Tongues, and excellently well skilled in Cosmography, and other
Sciences, Published in his own Language (the Italian) diverse Pieces, as his
Annotations in Sphaeram Sacrobosci; and (besides his Sphaera Theologica and
Christiana) Sphaera Platonica, which he dedicated to Cosmo de Medicis. He wrote
likewise De Art Navigatoria; and an Epitome of Music.

GASPAR BORNERUS, Professor of Philosophy at Leipsick, among 1539.
other Tractates, put forth a Book, De Stellis.

JOHANNES PENA, a Frenchman, Regius Professor of Mathematics in 1540.
the University of Paris, translated Euclid's Optics into Latin; to which he
prefixed an Encomium of Optics, wherein (to use Gesner's Words) there are
Iucundissimae Disceptationes and imprimis arduae, touching the Epicycles,
Excentricks, Apsides, Apogaeums, and Perigaeum's of the Planets, as likewise of
their Parallaxes; together with ingenious Arguments concerning the Earths Rest
or Motion, drawn from the Principles of that Art. He first maintained the
Heavens to consist of no other Substance than that diffused through the Aerie
Region, and discovered some Comets to have been above the Moon; as Gassendus,
in the life of Tycho, observes.

JOHANNES PIERIUS VALERIANUS, the noble Author of 1540.
Hieroglyphics, wrote and dedicated to Cardinal Alexander Farneze, being but
yet young and much addicted to Astronomical Studies, an elegant Compendium Of
the Sphere.

PETRUS CATENA a Venetian, Doctor in Theology and Professor of 1540.
Mathematics at Padua, about the same time with Pierius, wrote upon the same
Subject of the Sphere; and other Mathematical Pieces.

JULIANUS RISTORIUS DE PRATO, a Carmelite Friar, Doctor 1540.
in Theology, and an eminent Astronomer, Tutour to Iunctinus, by whom, in his
Preface to his Tabulae Resolutae, he is reported to have observed the Planets
for several years, viz. from the year 1536. to 1542.

PAULUS CRUSIUS published a Treatise, wherein he sets forth the 1540.
Doctrine of the Sun's Revolutions, and Tables of the mean Conversions of ^ime,
and of the Sun's motion, in Annis Tropicis and Sideriis. (...)


ANGELUS FORTIUS Doctor of Physic, is by Gesner, in Biblioth. 1540.
reckoned as an eminent Astrologer.

ANTONIUS DE MONTULMO, Doctor of Arts and Physic, 1540.
published a Book De judiciis Nativitatum, illustrated with the additions of
Io. Monteregi^s; Printed at Norimberg, 1540.

JOHANNES MASSAEUS, put forth twenty Books of Chronology, from 1540.
the beginning of the World to the year now mentioned, to which he prefixed a
fourfold Calendar, to wit, the Egyptian, Hebrew, Macedonick, and Roman. Voss.
De Scient. Mathemat.

FRANCISCUS MAUROLYCUS, Abbot of Messena in Sicily, whom 1540.
Ricciolus calls Siciliae Lumen clarissimum, wrote three Books of Cosmography,
intended as a Comment upon Ptolemy's Almagest. To him we are beholding for
Theodosius's Sphaerica, and those of Menelaus, which he first of all published.
He put forth a Piece, De Lineis Horariis, Fabricam Astrolabii, and diverse other
Works, mentioned in the beginning of his Cosmography. He was the first that
wrote of Secant Lines, as Blancanus affirms. He left likewise behind him a
Posthume Work, entitled, De Lumine and Umbra, and many Treatises unprinted, as
appears at the End of his Opus^ula, and though it be beside our Argument, yet
in regard it is not well known, we think fit to mention that Alphonsus
Borellius published in Sicily about 1656. the Comment of Maurolycus on the
first four Books of Apollonius his Conicks, with two more of the said Authors,
of which if there were Copies they would be grateful to Students, and more
acceptable than that of Commandinus, in which the Text and Comment lie
dispersed, which Inconvenience is avoided in that of Maurolycus; the said
Borellius is likewise now about publishing Maurolycus his Archimedes at Rome.

JOHANNES ANTONIUS DELPHINUS, of Casal, Provincial 1540.
of the Franciscan Order, wrote, and dedicated to Camillus Palaeottus, a
Senator of Bologna; a Book, De Caelestibus Globis, and Motibus, full of
Erudition, as Ricciolus affirms.

PHILIPPUS MELANCTHON, among other the numerous Volumes 1540.
by him published, set forth Tabula de Mensibus Graecorum, and Descriptiones
Eclipsium Solis and Lunae, annis jam aliquot visarum, usque ad Annum 1540. and
translated out of Greek into Latin, Ptolemy's four Books, De Syderum
effectionibus. V. Simler.

AUGUSTINUS NIPHUS PHILOTHEUS SUESSANUS, 1540.
who by his great Learning gained to himself the Title of Philosophus Magnus,
among other the various Works by him published, writ (as to our purpose) a
particular Treatise, De figuris Stellarum Helionoricis, in two Books; Another,
De Diebus Criticis, seu Decretoriis; a third, De falsa Diluvii Prognosticatione
quae ex conventu omnium Planetarum (qui in Piscibus contingeret anno 1524.)
divulgata est, in three Books, addressed to the Emperor Charles the Fifth. He
wrote likewise Eruditiones in Apotelesmata Ptolemaei, and Annotationes in
Librum secundum Ejusdem Quadripartiti, mentioned, wi^h the rest, by Simler, in
Bibl. Gesner.

JACOBUS PELETARIUS, a French man, besides his Geometrical 1540.
Works, wrote De Constitutione Horoscopi. He published likewise Astronomical
Tables, ^and a Compendium of Astronomical Fractions; as also of the Sun's
place, and* ANXI POST CHRISTUM*
that of the Moon, in the Zodiac.

ERASMUS OSWALDUS SKREKENFUSIUS, of Austria, Disciple, 1541.
according to Ricciolus, to Henricus Glareanus, according to Vossius, to
Se^stianus Munsterus, Professor, at Freiburg in Brisgaw, of the Hebrew Tongue
and Mathematics, wrote a Comment in Sphaeram Sacrobosci, Annotations on (...)
Almagest, put forth a Book De Primo Mobili, and of the Theory of the Plan^*
Another De Gentium Calendariis, and translated, out of Hebrew into Latin, the
Sphere of Rabbi Abraham Cai.

JOACHINUS CAMERARIUS, of Bamberg, a Town in Franconia, 1541..
put forth, at Norimberg, in the year 1532. several Greek Astrological
Authors, by him translated into Latin, as (...), sive, Rationem Orbis
Solaris; likewise, Excerpta ex Hephaestione Thebano, De Duodecim Signis and
eorum effectis, also (...), i. e. Quid Stellae Erraticae, sive Quinque
Planetae, in unoquoque Zodiaci Signo significent. These Pieces he set forth in
Greek and Latin. And in Latin only, he published a Fragment of the first Book
of Vettius Valens, his Florida; and in Greek only Mercurius Irismegistus his
(...), i. e. Medicationes rationibus Astrologicis convenientes. In the year
1535* he set forth, at Norimberg, in Verse, Tum Phenomenon, sive Siderum ac
Stellarum Historiolam, tum Prognostica. And in the year 1541. he published the
two first Books of Ptolemy, De Iudiciis Astrologicis, by him translated into
Latin, and illustrated with Annotations. We are obliged to him likewise, for
the first publication of Theon Alexandrinus, his eleven Books of Commentaries
upon Ptolemy's Almagest, which he caused to be Printed at Basil, by Walderus,
from a MS. of Cardinal Bessarion's, brought into Germany by Regiomontanus. See
more of this eminently learned Person, in G. Vossius, L. de Scient. Mathemat.

RAINERUS GEMMA FRIZIUS, Physician and Professor of Mathematics 1542.
at Lovaine, put forth a Book of the use of the Globe, and the Astronomical
Ring; De Principiis Astronomiae and Cosmographiae; De Astrolabio Catholico,
etc* He left his Son Cornelius Gemma, his Successor in the Professor's Place.

JOANNES GUIDO wrote, De Observat. Temporis Astrorum, Printed at 1543.
Paris 1543.

CLAUDIUS MARIUS ARETIUS a Patrician of Syracuse, and 1544.
Historiographer to the King of Spain, wrote a Comment, by way of Dialogue,
upon this Verse of Virgil's. Defectus Lunae varios, Solisque labores.

BUCHARDUS MITHOBIUS, wrote a Piece entitled Compositi^ ^li 1544.
Astronomici, Printed together with the Treatise of Johannes Driander, De
Annul^ Astronomicis; as Simler affirms.

MICHAEL ANGELUS BLONDUS, Doctor of Physic, w^ote 1544.
and dedicated to Pope Paul III. a Book De Diebus Criticis; and to Rudolphus
Cardinal of Carpegna another, De Anticipatione Stellarum fixarum cu^ (...)
significationibus.

COELIUS CALCAGNINUS, among the various Works by him published, 1544.
set forth a Paraphrase on the three Books of Aristotle's Meteors; A
Commentation, Quod Coelum stet, Terra moveatur; De Mensibus, and De Re Nautica*
ANNI POST (...)
See more of him in Simler. Bibl. Gesner.

GEORGIUS PILANDER published a Book De Annulo Astronomico, 1544.
aut Sphaerico.

POMPILIUS AZALUS writ De omnibus Rebus naturalibus quae continentur 1544.
in Mundo, viz. De Coelestibus, de Terrestribus, and Mathematicis, Printed at
Venice in Folio; as Simler in Bibl. Gesner. testifies.

JOHANNES STADIUS, Professor of the Mathematics and History, 1545.
first, at Paris, afterward at Lovaine, put forth among other his Mathematical
Works, Ephemerides, which he entitled Tabulae Bergenses, in honor of Robertus
a Bergis, Bishop of Liege. He put forth likewise other Ephemerides, from the
year 1654. to the year 1606. with an Isagoge in Astronomiam and Astrologiam. He
left Tabulas aequabilis and apparentis Motus Coelestium Corporum, as G. Vossius
styles them, and Prognostica Stellarum fixarum, cum Tabulis, in the beginning
whereof he has prefixed the History of Astronomy.

NICHOLAUS SOPHIANUS CORCYRAEUS, wrote in Greek 1548.
of the Astrolabe, and by Gesner is said to have flourished about this Time.

VICTORINUS STRIGELIUS of Kaufbeurn, a Town in Suaben, 1548.
published, at Wittemberg, an Epitome of the Doctrine of the Primum Mobile,
illustrated with Demonstrations. He was Scholar to Melancthon.

AUGERIUS FERRERIUS of Toulouse, Doctor of Physic, whom 1548.
Scaliger the Father entirely loved and consulted in all his learned Designs,
writ, as I find mentioned in Gesner Castigationes Practicae, and De Diebus
Decretoriis secundum Pithagoricam Observationem.

JOHANNES MERCURIUS MORSHEIMERUS, put forth at 1548.
Heidelberg, a Dissertation of the Name of Astronomy, it is Division and Causes;
to which he adjoined a Table of the Species of ^ontinued Quantity, serving only
for the use of young Beginners. He professes himself to have been Scholar to
Melancthon.

JOACHIMUS HELLERUS corrected and published several Astrological 1548.
Authors, before which he prefixed Prefaces of his own, at Norimberg.

ANDREAS GERARDUS HYPERIUS, Professor of Divinity in 1548.
the University of Marpurg, writ, besides other various Tractates, Geometrica,
Optica, Cosmographica quaedam, as Simler affirms, in Bibl. Gesner.

ERASMUS REYNOLDUS, Native of Salfieldt, a Town in Thuringe, a 1549.
Province in the Upper Saxony, Son to Johannes Reynoldus, and Scholar to
Iacobus Milichius, was Professor of Mathematics in the University at
Wittemberg, and wrote a most learned Commentary on Purbacchius's Theory of the
Planets. He composed likewise, and dedicated to Albert, Marquess of Brandeburg,
and Duke of Prussia, Astronomical Tables, according to the Hypothesis of
Copernicus, which he called Prutenick Tables, in honor of the said Prince, as
also Tables of Directions. He endeavored likewise to illustrate and establish
Chronology from the Eclipses of the Luminaries, and the great Conjunctions of
the Planets; but his Death prevented the finishing of that Work. He had also a
Son, called after his own Name, an eminent Mathematician and Physician, who
wrote upon the new Star in Cassiopaea, (...)
as Tycho Brahe testifies; Progymnasm. Tom. 1.

ARIEL BICHARDUS put forth a Collection of Questions, In Sphaeram 1549.
Iohannis De Sacro Bosco, which he dedicated to his Godfather, Antonius
Mullerus, says Ricciolus, in Part. 2. Chronic. Astronom.

JOHANNES ROIAS wrote, and dedicated to the Emperor Charles the 1550.
Fifth, certain Commentaries upon the Astrolabe or Planisphere.

JOHANNES MARIA TOLOSAS, of the Order of the Predicants, 1550.
wrote something of the Sun's greatest Declination. He published likewise a
short Correction of the Roman Calendar, touching the due celebration of Easter.

JOHANNES BAVARUS, Medicus and Mathematicus, put forth Ephemerides, 1550.
beginning in the year 1551. and ending in the year 1560. This Bavarus, is
different from Johannes Angelus Bavarus, mentioned in the year 1494.

GEORGIUS JOACHIMUS RHETICUS, Disciple to Copernicus, 1550.
and Professor of Mathematics in the University of Wittemberg, where he
interpreted and explained Alfraganus. But hearing of the new Hypothesis of
Copernicus, he quitted his Professor's place, and went to Copernicus, whom he
ceased not to exhort to perfect his Work, De Revolutionibus, which after his
death he made public, illustrating his Hypothesis by a particular narration,
which he dedicated to Johannes Schonerus, published by Maestlinus, and annexed
to Kepler his Mysterium Cosmographicum, in the year 1621. He likewise set forth
Ephemerides, according to the Doctrine of Copernicus, until the year 1551. What
other Astronomical or Astrological Works he had either perfected or designed,
will appear by his Epistle written to Petrus Ramus.

LUCAS GAURICUS, a Neopolitan, first, Professor of Mathematics at 1550.
Ferrara, afterward Bishop of Civita Reale, corrected the* Alphonsine Tables,
as also those of Regiomontanus, and Blanchinus, and published Tables of his own
of the Primum Mobile, commonly called Tables of Directions, and Laurentius
Bonincontriu*s his Book, De Rebus Coelestibus, and Zacutus his Tables, together
with Astrological Precepts and Problems. He illustrated with Annotations
Ptolemy's Almagest, put forth a learned Dissertation touching the miraculous
Defect of the Sun at the time of our Savior's Passion, and composed a new
Ecclesiastical Calendar, compiled out of the Sacred Scriptures, and Ancient
Synods, which last was Printed at Venice 1552. at which time like wise he
published at Venice a Book called Tractatus Astrologicus, wherein are many
Astrological Judgments on the Nativities of the most eminent Persons of his
Time. V. Simler. Bibl. Gesner.

TOBIAS MARMORARIUS, a Florentine, and Monk of the Cistertian 1550.
Order, Vir Mathesios studiis egregie excultus, as Vossius says of him, wrote
yearly Prognostics, of the Seasons of the year, and future Events.

ANTONIUS MYZALDUS writ Phenomenon, sive, Tempestatum Signa, 1550.
quatuor Aphorismorum Sectiunculis Methodice concinnata; Cometographia;
Aesculapii and Uraniae Conjugium; Planetologia; Three Books of the Sphere,
illustrated with Figures and Demonstrations; Zodi^cus, sive duodecim Signorum
Coeli Hortulus, Libris tribus concinnatus; Planetarum Collegium, and some other
Tractates of like Argument, as Simler, in Bibl* Gesner.

JACOBUS HOMELIUS is, about this time, reckoned, by Ricciolus, (...) POST
CHRISTUM
in the Catalogue of Astronomers, but without any mention of his Works. There
1550.
was also one Johannes Homelius, who wrote concerning the New Star in
Cassiopea, and is mentioned by Ticho Brahe, in Progymn. Tom. 1.

JOANNES STABIUS, of Austria, Poet Laureat, Cosmographer, and 1550.
Historiographer, to the Emperor Maximilian the First, Professor of
Mathematics at Vienna, wrote a Piece entitled Horoscopicum Universale; and
several other Works, mentioned by his Scholar Georgius Collimitius, in Gesner's
Bibliotheca, Tom. 1.

PAULUS EBERUS KYTZINGENSIS, put forth Calendarium Historicum, 1550.
in the Preface to which he treats, De ejus Utilitate, and de Mensium apud
diversas Gentes varietate. See more of him in Gesner's Bibliotheca.

GASPAR PEUCERUS, Son-in-Law to Philip Melancthon, wrote of the 1551.
Doctrine of the Celestial Circles, and the Primum Mobile, and De praecipuis
Divinationum generibus, and among them, De Praedictionibus Astronomicis, as it
is affirmed by Vossius, De Scient. Mathemat. He wrote also Hypotheses
Astronomicas, seu Theorias Planetarum, ex Ptolem^i and aliorum Veterum
Doctrina, ad Observationes Copernici, and Canones Motuum ab eo conditos,
accommodatas, Printed, as Draudius affirms, at Wittemberg, 1572.

JOHANNES SCHRAETERUS VINARIENSIS, published, at 1551.
Vienna in Austria, Astrological Tables, designing to gain himself, a repute by
his predictions; of whom see Gesner's Biblioth.

HIEREMIAS BROTHEIEL, put forth various Prognostics mentioned 1551.
by Simler. in Addit. Bibl. Gesner.

ANDREAS PERLACHIUS of Stiria, Doctor of Physic and Professor 1551.
of Mathematics in the University at Vienna, set forth, as Gesner styles them,
G^mentaria Ephemeridum, ita conscripta, ut quisque absque Praeceptore, ex sola
Lectione integram inde Artem consequi possit, Printed by Aegidius Aquila at
Vienna 1551.

FRANCISCUS RAPALDUS, Doctor of Physic at Bruges in Flanders, 1552.
wrote against Astrology as altogether useless to a Physician, to whom Petrus
Haschardus, of Lisle, a Surgeon, replied in a Discourse by him entitled,
Clipeum Astrologicum.

ROBERTUS RECORD, a Learned Doctor of Physic, and an excellent 1552.
Mathematician, descended of a generous Family in Wales, illustrated by his
learned Labors, Cosmography, Geometry, Music and Astronomy. He published
Cosmographiae Isagogen, wrote a Book, De Art faciendi Horologium; and another,
De usu Globorum, and de statu Temporum. All which with several others he writ
in the English Tongue.

PETRUS NONIUS, a Portuguez, Professor of Mathematics in the College 1552.
at Conimbra, wrote 'De Crepusculis; De Erratis Orontii; Astronomical Problems,
and Rules for Observation, together with Annotations in Theoricas Purbacchii,
commendable, says Vossius, not only for their Acumen and Perspicuity, but for
discovering diverse things omitted, and detecting several Errors committed by
others.

HIERONYMUS CARDANUS, a Native of Milan, Professor of Physic 1553.
and Mathematics at Bologna, commented upon Ptolemy's Quadripartitum, De ANNI
POST CHRISTUM
Iudiciis Astrorum, and put forth several other Tracts, as 1. De Supplimento
Almanach. 2. De Restitutione Temporum, and Motuum Coelestium. 3. De Iudiciis
Geniturarum. 4. De Revolutionibus. 5. De Exemplis Centum Geniturarum. Aphorismi
Astronomici: Not to mention his many other Works, not relating to our purpose.

LEVINUS LEMNIUS, Medicus Zirizaeus, writ three elegant Tractates, 1554.
in the first whereof he treats of Astrology, showing the verity or falsity of
that Art, in which, says Gesner, multae amoenissimaeque causae explicantur,
and particularly the Original of the Proverb, Quarta Lunanati.

MICHAEL NOSTRADAMUS, Physician to Henry II. Francis II. and 1555.
Charles IX. Kings of France, is famous for the several Centuries of
Prophetical Prognostications extant under his Name (lately Englished with large
Annotations) which in his Epistle Dedicatory of some part of them to Henry II.
he affirms to have calculated by Astronomical Doctrine. But whether he were a
greater Trifler or Astronomer, is by some questioned; but especially by Iodele
an ingenious French Poet, who has bestowed on him this Distich; NOSTRA DAMUS
cum falsa damus, nam fallere nostrum est, Et cum falsa damus, nil nisi NOSTRA
DAMUS.

NICHOLAUS SIMUS, Professor of Mathematics in the Univertsiy of 1555.
Bologna, set forth the Theories of the Planets, reduced to a Compendium,
illustrated with diverse Sculps and Figures. He put forth likewise Ephemerides
for 15. years, calculated for the Meridian of Bologna, with Canons expounding
the use of the said Ephemerides.

MARCUS FRITSCHIUS LAUBANUS HEXAPOLENSIS, 1555.
wrote a Book De Meteoris, with a Catalogue of Prodigies and Ostents; Printed
at Norimberg, 1555. as Gesner attests.

ANDREAS SCHONERUS, Son of Johannes Schonerus of Carolostadt, 1556.
published Tables of the Primum Mobile, according to the Fundamentals of
Regiomontanus.

HADRIANUS JUNIUS HORNANUS, for his Learning merited 1556.
to be styled, Alterum ab Erasmo Hollandiae Lumen. He published a Commentary,
De Anno and Mensibus, likewise Fastorum Liber sive (...), rerum Memorabilium
qualibet Anni die actarum apud Hebraeos, Graecos, Romanos, gentesque exteras,
also Calendarium Syllabicum, so called, because the days of the year,
Vocabulorum Syllabis respondeant; besides these he put forth Fasti Caesariani
and Calendarium. These as he writ them were from hand to hand presented to
Edward the Sixth King of England, afterward being enlarged and corrected,
dedicated to his Sister Queen Mary. See more of him in Meursius in Athen.
Batav. and G. Vossius de Scient. Mathemat. p. 398.

JOANNES GARCAEUS, a Brandeburgher wrote a Piece entitled Methodus 1556.
Astrologiae, illustrated with 400. Genitures, as Ricciolus affirms. To which
Vossius adds, that he put forth, at Wittemberg, a Commentary consisting of
XXII. Propositions, in which he comprizes the Doctrine of erecting a Celestial
Scheme, and computing the Motions of the Planets. Draudius says, he put forth
a small Treatise, De Tempore, sive De Ortu and Occasu Stellarum, and De usu
Globi Coelestis, Printed at Wittemberg 1565. He was Scholar to Gaspar Peucerus.

JOSEPHUS ZARLINUS, a Native of Fossa Clodia (commonly called ANNI POST
CHRISTUM.
da Chioggia) an excellent Musician, who in his Institutioni Harmoniche,
published 1557.
in Italian, treats likewise of the Harmonick System of the Spheres.

RODOLPHUS BATTINGIUS, a Friezlander, published Methodum 1557.
Astrolabii, according to Vossius, De Scient. Math.

CORNELIUS VALERIUS VETERAQUINAS, Successor to 1557.
Petrus Nonnius at Lovaine, in Collegio Trilingui, put forth an Encyclopaedia,
in which he treats of the Sphere, and the Elements of Astronomy, and Geography,
succinctly and elegantly.

JEAN PIERRE DE MESMES, a French Gentleman, writ in his own 1557.
Language, Astronomical Institutions, Printed at Paris, in folio, 1557.

CONRADUS DASYPODIUS, Professor of Mathematics at Strasbourg, 1557.
put forth Astronomical Precepts, and wrote a brief Treatise of Comets and
their Effects, famous for being Author of the Astronomical Horologe set up in
the Great Church at Strasbourg, the Description whereof he published in the
year 1578.

GULIELMUS XYLANDER, Successor to Iacobus Mycillus in the 1558.
Greek Professor's place at Heidelberg, a Person of good repute for his
Philosophical and Mathematical Studies, among other Tractates of the later
kind, put forth a small Treatise, De usu Globi and Planisperii, Printed at
Heidelberg.

DANIEL BARBARUS, a noble Venetian, and Patriarch of Aquileia, 1559.
has sufficiently manifested his excellent knowledge in all Parts of the
Mathematics, and particularly in Astronomy, by his learned Commentary upon
Vitruvius his ninth and tenth Books.

JOHANNES TEMPORARIUS wrote an Astronomical Treatise, 1560.
which he entitled Organum Astronomicum, grounded upon the Prutenick Tables,
in which the whole Work of Astronomical Calculation is contracted to two
Operations, to wit, only Addition and Substraction. All Proportional Scruples
are laid aside, in the search after which much time is fruitlesly spent. The
true Precession of the Equinox, which by the Alphonsine Astronomers is called
the Motion of the Auges of the fixed Stars, is exposed to view for some Ages to
come. The places as well of the Planets as the fixed Stars are with little or
no trouble found for any time given. The Conjunctions and Defects of the
Luminaries, with their Quantities and Durations, are most exquisitely defined,
not only ^n one Climate, but in any Parallel whatsoever. The Parallaxes, whose
invention gives trouble to the most experienced Artists, are by a wonderful
compendious way found out and cleared, as to Latitude and Longitude, without
the trouble of Calculation. Whence any one may frame to himself Ephemerides
without any pains or labor. The Original Manuscript of which Work is at
present in the possession of my worthy Friend, George Wharton Esquire.

PHILIPPUS FANTONIUS, a Florentine Monk, afterward Abbot of 1560.
Camaldolat, published a Book in Italian, of the reason of reducing the Year,
to its true Form and Measure; of whom G. Vossius says, that he was Matheseos
Scientia egregius, which he publicly professed in the Academy at Pisa. See
more of him in Simler. Bibl. Gesner.

CYPRIANUS LEOVITIUS, of the Leonitian Family in Bohemia, 1^60.
Mathematician to Otho-Henry, Prince Palatine of the Rhine, put forth
Astronomical ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
Observations, with Astrological Prognostics, upon the new Star in Cassiopaea.
He likewise accurately described (to render Vossius's words) several Eclipses
from the year 1556. to the year 1606. and published Ephemerides, and several
other Works, mentioned by Simlerus, in his Bibliotheca Gesneriana, among the
rest, Brevis and perspicua Ratio judicandi Genituras ex Physicis Causis and
vera Experientia extracta, etc. to which is prefixed Admonitio de vero and
licito Astrologiae usu per Hieronymum Wolphium, Printed at London 1558. Of Him
Tycho Brahe (in Progymnasm. l. 1.) writes at large, adding withal, that,
Pleraque ipsius Manuscripta opera, ad supputationes Astronomicas, praesertim
primi Mobilis Tabulas copiosiores and faciliores reddendas facientia; Augustae
in Fuggeorum Bibliotheca non sine harum A^ium promovendarum Incommodo,
detinentur.

JOHANNES DRIANDER, Doctor of Physic, and Professor of Mathematics, 1560.
which he illustrated by his learned Writings, particularly by his Book of the
various Composition of Sun-Dyals; by his Description of a nocturnal Instrument,
for taking the hour of the Night from the inspection of the Stars; Astrolabial
Canons, and the Explication of the Quadrant; with several other Astronomical
Inventions; as it is testified by the excellent Thuanus, and Draudius in Bibl*
Classica.

GEORGIUS BUCHANANUS, that learned Scotch-man, has written 1560.
Five Books of the Sphere, in a Latin Poem; to which Johannes Pincierus has
added a Supplement of the fourth and fifth Books, and Arguments to them all.

RABBI ORI, filius Simeonis, a Jew of Palaestine, put forth Calendarium 1560.
Palaestinorum, and omnium Iudaeorum, computed for forty years, first Printed
at Venice, in Hebrew, afterward translated into Latin, and illustrated with
Annotations by Iacobus Christmannus; and published at Francfort, 1594.

FEDERICUS COMMANDINUS of Urbino, optime meritus, si quisquam 1560.
alius, de Mathematicis, says Blancanus. For besides the many other excellent
Monuments of Greek Learning, which we owe to his happy Traduction, we are
beholding to him for Aristarchus Samius, De Magnitudinibus and Distantiis Solis
a^ Lunae, which he illustrated by a Comment of his own. He put forth likewise
Ptolemy's Analemma, and wrote De Lineis Horariis.

MICHAEL BEUTHERUS, Native of Carolostadt in Westphalia, not 1560.
far distant from Wurstburgh, Scholar to Erasmus Reinholdus, afterward
Professor of Poetry, History, and Mathematics; in the University of
Gripswaldt, in the Dukedom of Pomerania, read at Paris public Lectures, De
Annorum Supputatione. He wrote De Globo Astronomico; De Circulis; Of the
Correction of the Gregorian Calendar; Of the seventy weeks in Daniel; Of the
time of the World's Creation, and the day of our Savior's Passion. He was
Library Keeper to Otho-Henry, Prince Palatine of the Rhine, and of his Council
in Ecclesiastical Affairs, and restored to the same Charges afterward by
Frederick the Third.

ELIAS VINETUS, Professor at Bourdeaux, besides his Notes on Pomponius 1560.
Mela, De situ Orbis, wrote a Commentary in Sphaeram Sacrobosci; for which he
justly merits a room in this Astronomical Catalogue.

JOHANNES HONTERUS CORONENSIS, of Cronstadt (in 1560.
Transylvania) anciently called Zarmigethusa, writ Four Books, in Verse, De
Rudimentis Cosmographiae, which he adorned with several Land-Tables or Maps. To
which he adjoined, in Prose, a Treatise of the Principles of Astronomy and
Geography. ANNI POST. CHRISTUM


PETRUS RAMUS, first Disciple to Orontius Finaeus, afterward Regius 1560.
Professor of Mathematics in the University of Paris, besides his Two Books of
Arithmetic, and XXVII. of Geometry, put forth XXXII. Scholarum Mathematicarum,
in the first of which he treats of many things relating to the Rise and
Advancement of Astronomy.

MICHAEL NEANDER, e valle Ioachimica, put forth Elementa Doctrinae 1561.
Sphaericae, and Materiam Computi Astronomici, as Ricciolus affirms in
Chronolog. Astron.

DANIEL SANTBECH, of Nimmeghen, put forth, according to Ricciolus, 1561.
Praeclara Problemata Astronomica and Geometrica, in VII. Sectiones distributa:
In the first whereof he treats of several Observations of the Phenomenon of the
Sun, Moon, and fixed Stars; In the second, he exhibits Canons of the Primum
Mobile, extracted from the Tables of Regiomontanus; The third is of the Reasons
of Gnomons and Shadows. The other Four are upon Geometrical Subjects.

JOSEPHUS MOLETIUS Professor of Mathematics at Padua, besides 1562.
his Comment upon Ptolemy's Geography, composed out of the Prutenick Tables,
others, which he called Tabulae Gregorianae; for which by the Senate of Venice,
he was rewarded with 200. Ducats, and promised by Pope Gregory XIII. for the
continuation of them 300. Crowns more. He published likewise Introductio ad
Ephemerides, Printed together with the Ephemerides of Josephus Scala, of
Sicily, in the year 1589.

LUCILLUS PHILALTHAEUS, Doctor of Physic, wrote as Ricciolus 1563.
terms them, Luculentos Commentarios, upon Aristotle, De Coelo.

LEONARDUS DIGGES, of a generous Family in Kent, besides his 1564.
Stratiotices, and his Mathematical Discourse of Geometrical Solids, wrote an
Astronomical Prognostication, then Printed.

ALEXANDER PICOLOMINAEUS, of Siena, wrote Four Books, 1565.
De Sphaera Mundi; as also a Treatise of the Fixed Stars in Italian, in which
Language he likewise published another, of the Theory of the Planets, and
dedicated the same to Cosmus de Medicis; and farther another, De Magnitudine
Terrae and Aquae; all rendered into Latin by Nicholaus Stupanus, and Printed at
Basil, 1568.

SAMUEL SYDEROCRATES wrote De usu Partium Coeli, in Commendationem 1567.
Astronomiae, Printed at Strasbourg, as Draudius affirms, 1567.

TITUS a POPMA, a Friezlander, wrote Tabellas in Sphaeram, and Elementa 1568.
Astronomiae.

EDO HILDERICUS writ a small Treatise entitled Logistice Astronomica, 1568.
Printed at Wittenberg 1568. mentioned by Simler, in Bibl. Gesner.

CHRISTIANUS VURSTISIUS, of Basil, Professor of Mathematics 1568.
in the University of Zurich, wrote learned Questions in Theoricas Purbacchii;
whereto he prefixed an Introduction of his own, Printed at Basil, by Henricus
Petri, 1586.

ABRAHAMUS ORTELIUS, of Antwerp, Geographer to Philip II* ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
King of Spain, most deservedly challenges a place in this Catalogue,
especially for 1570.
that great Work of his, Theatrum Orbis Terrarum, with it is Parergon, and his
Thesaurus Geographicus.

GERARDUS MERCATOR, a Native of Rupelmonde in Flanders, 1570.
made several Mathematical Instruments for the Emperor Charles the Fifth,
particularly a Globe, in which was comprised the Constitution of the Planets,
and the Celestial Signs and Constellations. He likewise made for the said
Emperor two other Globes; the one Celestial of Crystal, the other
Terrestrial, of Wood. He put forth a Cronology from the beginning of the World
to the year 1568. exactly composed and calculated, as well from Eclipses, and
other Astronomical Observations of all Times, as from the Sacred Scriptures,
and other Authentic Authors, highly commended by Onuphrius Panvinius. Not to
mention his other Geographical Works.

HUGO, sive HUO HELTILIUS, of Groeningen, in Friezland, wrote 1570.
in Spanish of the Planisphere.

HENRICUS BRUCAEUS of Alost in Flanders, Doctor of Physic and 1570.
Professor of Mathematics at Rome and Rostoch, put forth Three Books of the
Primum Mobile, and the Institutions of the Sphere, of whom Vossius, De Scient.
Math. gives an ample Account.

FRANCISCUS BAROCCIUS, a Patrician of Venice, wrote (besides 1570.
his other Works in Mechanics and Geometry) Four Books of Cosmography, in the
Preface to which he detects no less than LXXXIV. Errors of Io. de Sacrobosco,
and his Followers.

JOANNES LALAMANTIUS, of Antun in Burgundy, a Physician published 1571.
a Tractate entitled, Collatio Rationis Anni exterarum fere Omnium and
Praecipuarum Gentium cum Romano Anno, Printed at Geneva apud Crispinum 1571. 8o.

ADAMUS URSINUS, of Norimberg, wrote Prognostics upon the new 1572.
Star in Cassiopaea, touching which, see Tycho, Progymn. Tom. 1.

ANDREAS NOLTHIUS, of Embeck, wrote concerning the Star in 1572.
Cassiopaea about the same time as the Landtgrave of Hesse, as is likewise
noted by Tycho, Progymnas. Tom. 1.

BARTHOLOMAEUS RASACHERUS, Professor of Mathematics 1572.
at Vienna, wrote also touching the Star in Cassiopaea.

CORNELIUS GEMMA, of Lovaine, wrote likewise upon the same 1572.
Subject: So also did

CORNELIUS FRANGIPANUS, whose Censure see in Tycho Brahe, 1572.
Progymnas. Tom. 1.

HIERONYMUS MUNOSIUS, Professor of the Hebrew Tongue and 1572.
Mathematics in the University of Valentia, and Physician to the Emperor
Maximilian the Second, put forth his Observations upon the New Star in
Cassiopaea.

ELIAS CAMERARIUS, Professor of Mathematics at Francfort, upon 1572.
Oder, wrote De Nova Stella Cassiopaeae.

GUL^ELMUS POSTELLUS, Native of Barenton, a Town in Normandy, ANNI POST
CHRISTUM*
about this time put forth his Cosmography, sive, De Universitate, and wrote,
1572.
De Nova Stella Cassiopaeae.

JOHANNES DEE, Doctor of Physic and an excellent Mathematician 1572.
(besides other his learned Works, whereby he has honored our Nation, not
pertinent to our present purpose) wrote, upon occasion of the New Star in
Cassiopaea, a small Treatise, by him entitled Parallacticae Commentationis and
Praxeos nucleus, highly commended by Tycho Brahe, in Progymnasm. Tom. 1. He
published in the year 1558. a Treatise entitled, De Praestantioribus quibusdam
Naturae Virtutibus, (...), containing several curious Astronomical and
Astrological Aphorisms; In the Preface to which Piece, he makes mention of the
several Astronomical Tractates following, by him intended for the Public, but
whether ever yet Printed is uncertain; as first, De Planetarum, inerrantium
Stellarum, Nubiumque a Centro Terrae Distantiis, and Stellarum omnium veris
inveniendis Magnitudinibus in two Books, De praecipua Perspectivae Part, quae
de Radiorum Fractione tractat, in three Books, De Caelestis Globi amplissimis
Commoditatibus, in two Books, De Nova Navigationum Ratione, in two Books, and
one Book, De Annuli Astronomici multiplici usu, divided into a hundred
Chapters, besides some other Mathematical Pieces, among which, his Apology for
Friar Bacon. A farther Account of the Works and Writings of this Stupendous
Person the Reader may happily e're long meet with in his Life; intended to be
written (if Providence second his Design) by my worthy Friend Elias Ashmole
Esquire, whose singular Affection to Astronomical and Astrological Studies may
justly entitle him to a Place in this Catalogue.

PAULUS HAINZELIUS, Consul of Ausbourg, diligently observed, at 1572.
Gegginge, near the City of Ausbourg aforesaid, the motions of the Stars and
Planets, using in his Observations a Quadrant of fourteen Cubits, as Ricciolus,
in Chronol. Astron. affirms. His Praises and Commendations may be seen in Tycho
Brahe, Progymn. Tom. 1.

PAULUS FABRITIUS, a Mathematician and Physician to the Emperor 1572.
of Germany, wrote De Nova Stella Cassiopaeae 1572.

THEODORUS GRAMINEUS, Professor of Mathematics at Colen, 1572.
published a Prolix and tedious Commentary, or (as Tycho more truly terms it)
Commentum, upon the New Star in Cassiopaea.

MICHAEL MAESTLINUS GOEPINGENSIS, at first Parish Priest, 1572.
or Curate of a little Town called Bachnang, afterward Professor of
Mathematics in the Universities of Heidelberg, and Tubinge, and Master or
Tutor to Kepler, wrote De Stella Nova Cassiopaeae, and of the Comet which
appeared in the year 1576. as also Ephemerides according to the Prutenick
Tables, and Additions to the first Narration of Rheticus, with an Appendix; De
Dimensionibus Orbium Coelestium, according to the Opinion of Copernicus. He
published likewise Theses De Eclipsibus, and an Epitome of Astronomy, and wrote
against the Gregorian Calendar, in which he was opposed by Clavius; yet happy
in this, that he was not only Master to the learned Kepler, but first Motor to
the famous Galilaeo (addicted before that time entirely to Aristotle and
Ptolemy) of his embracing the Copernican Hypothesis, persuaded thereunto by the
force of his Arguments, which in a Public Lecture upon that Subject he used at
the time of his being in Italy.

GELLIUS SASSERIDES, a Dane, of Copenhagen, was one of those 1572.
who assisted the noble Tycho Brahe in his Celestial Observations; some of
whose Epistles are extant in Maginus, De Directionibus.

JOHANNES HECKIUS, of Daventer, Doctor of Physic, wrote a small ANNI POST
CHRISTUM.
Treatise upon the New Star in Cassiopaea, termed by Ricciolus, Opus non
inelegans. 1572.


TYCHO BRAHE, descended of an illustrious Family among the Danes, 1572.
as being eldest Son to Otto Brahe, Lord of Knudsthorp, in the Island Schonen,
not far from Elzinbourg, who was Son of another Tycho, Son of Axilius Brahe,
Lord of the said Place; the Hipparchus of his Age, who even from his Childhood
being addicted to Astronomical Studies, though diverted from them by the Advice
of his Friends and morose humor of his Tutour, grew by his own Ingenuity and
Industry without any Instructor, so great a Proficient therein, that in the
time of his Minority, and without the help of other Instruments, than a small
Globe little bigger than a Man's Fist, and a large pair of Compasses, with
which by applying his Eye to the Head of the Compasses, and opening the shanks
thereof, he used by stealth to take the Distances of the Stars, he made a shift
to detect diverse considerable Errors, both in the Alphonsine and Prutenick
Tables. At length by his Studies and Travels, having consummated his Knowledge
in Astronomy. He was by Frederick the Second King of Denmark (at what time he
resolved to make his Retreat into Switzerland, the better to apply himself
entirely to the Contemplation of the Stars) invited to fix his Studies at Home,
and to honor his own Country with his Learned Labors and Observations. To
which end the King gave him the Island Huena, commonly called Ween, between
Scania and Zeland, in the Baltic Sound, as a Place for his Retirement and
Studies. Where causing to be built a Stately Palace, to which he gave the Name
of Uranoburgum, procuring most costly and exquisite Instruments for observing,
and calling to his Assistance the most learned Astronomers of that Age, he
happily began and made his glorious Progress in the Instauration of Astronomy.
In which Work he is said to have expended no less than two hundred thousand
Crowns. And as Copernicus had corrected many things in Ptolemy, so did Tycho no
less in Copernicus. So that from thence the Learned World began to look upon
only three chief Sects of Astronomers, whereof the Tychonick was the mean and
middle between the Pythagorean or Copernican, and the Aristolean or Ptolemaick.
Of his Works there are published Astronomiae Instauratae Progymnasmata, in
three Parts; whereof the first treats of the Restitution of the Sun's Motion,
as also of the Moon's, and the fixed Stars; chiefly of the new Star which
appeared in the Constellation of Cassiopaea, 1572. The second of several new
Phaenomena's of the Aetherial World, more particularly of the Comet which
appeared in the year 1577. The third and last contains his Astronomical
Epistles to diverse Persons. There is extant likewise a Book of his entitled
Astronomiae Instauratae Mechanica, dedicated by him to the Emperor Rudolphus
the Second, describing the several stupendous and costly Instruments, by him
used in his Astronomical Instauration. To these is to be added his Historia
Coelestis, being a Collection of twenty years Observations preserved in MS. by
three mighty Emperors, Rudolph the Second, Ferdinand the Second, and Ferdinand
the Third, and lately by Command of his Imperial Majesty Leopold, made public
at Ausburg. Which said Observations are ushered by a Liber Prolegomen^,
compendiously representing the Observations made from the time of the Infancy
of Astronomy unto that of it is Restoration by the Illustrous Tycho, reduced
into 7. Class. containing the Babylonian Observations, the Grecian, the
Alexandrian, the Syro-Persian, the Norimbergian, the Borussian, and mixed
Observations from the year 1529. to the year 1582. After which begin the
Tychonick Observations in twenty Books, containing as many Annual Observations
ending in the year 1601. which was the last of Tycho's life: A correct Copy of
these Observations (transcribed from the Original, by Erasmus Bartholinus)
being now likewise in the Press at Paris. See more of him, in his life, written
by the excellent Gassendus, in six Books.

PETRUS BEAUSARDUS, Doctor of Physic, and Regius Professor of 1573.
Mathematics in the University of Lovain, wrote of the Astronomical Ring, or
the ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
Armilla.

THADDAEUS HAGGECIUS of Haic, Disciple to Ioachimus Camerarius, 1573.
and Physician to the Emperor Maximilian the Second, put forth a Piece,
entitled Dialexis, touching the New Star in Cassiopaea, whose several
Arguments see reported and examined by Tycho, Progymn. Tom. 1.

JOHANNES RASEH, at Munichen, wrote De Cometarum Significationibus, 1573.
about the year 1573. About the same time

GEORGIUS BUSCHIUS, Pictor and Astronomus Erfordiensis, as Ricciolus 1573.
styles him, wrote of the Star which appeared in Cassiopaea. And

ANTONIUS SANTUTIUS, Professor of Mathematics at Pisa, wrote 1573.
De Cometis, in which he treats of the same Star.

WOLFANGUS SCHULERUS, Professor of Mathematics in the University 1573.
of Wittemberg, wrote upon the same Subject, in answer to Caspar Peucerus, the
Younger, his Proposals touching the said New Star.

FRANCISCUS BORDINUS, of Correggio, Doctor of Arts and Physic, 1573.
and Public Professor of Mathematics in the University of Bologna, published
Chilias Quaestionum and Responsorum Mathematicorum ad cognitionem Universi
pertinentium, divided into three Parts; the first treating of Geometry, the
second of Geography, and the last in a more ample manner of Astronomy, Printed
at Bologna.

JACOBUS SCHOL, of Strasbourg, Doctor of Physic, set forth a Book, 1573.
wherein he reduces Theses aliquot rei Medicae simplicioris, Integritati
Astronomicae. He published likewise a Book, De brevi applicatione Astrologiae
ad Medicinam; with Canons of their convenience and agreement; Extant in the
King's Library at St. James's.

JOHANNES FRANCISCUS OFFUSIUS, wrote De Divina Astrorum 1574.
Facultate, in Larvatam Astrologiam, Printed at Paris, in the year 1574.

HERMANNUS WITTEKINDUS, Professor of Mathematics at 1574.
Heidelberg, published a small Tractate, De Sphera Mundi, and Temporis Ratione
apud Christianos, Printed at Newstadt, in the year 1590. He put forth also a
Piece entitled, Conformatio Horologiorum in superficiebus planis utcunque
sitis; with a Horological Quadrant, Printed at Heidelberg.

ADAMUS a BODENSTEIN, Son of Andreas, Doctor of Physic, at 1574.
Basil, writ De Herbis duodecim Zodiaci signis dicatis, as Simler affirms, in
Bibl. Gesner.

LUDOVICUS LAVATERUS, of Zurich, besides his Book, De Spectris, 1574.
Lemuribus, and magnis atque insolitis fragoribus, variisque Praesagitionibus,
quae plerunque Hominum magnas clades, mutationesque Imperiorum praecedunt,
wrote a large Catalogue of Comets, published at Zurich, by Gesner.

ANDREAS ROSA SINGFURDENSIS MEDICUS, in his 1574.
Prognostic, published 1574. made some Observations upon the Star in
Cassiopaea.

JOSIAS SIMLERUS, Author of the Epitome of Gesner's Bibliotheca, ANNI POST
CHRISTUM.
put forth two Books, De Principiis Astronomiae. 1574.


FRANCISCUS JUNCTINUS, a Florentine, Doctor in Theology, Professor 1574.
of Philosophy and Astronomy, put forth Speculum Astrologicum, Tabulis
Astronomicis, and multiplici eruditione refertum, according to the Judgment of
Ricciolus; and wrote accurate Commentaries in Sphaeram Sacrobosci, as Vossius
calls them. He left likewise two Treatises, Ad judicandum De Revolutionibus
Astrorum; and a large Commentary upon Ptolemy's Quadripartite, with a Catalogue
of the most famous Persons of his Time, and some Ages before him, Printed
together in folio.

GODESCALCUS EBERBACHIUS, wrote of the Eclipse of the 1576.
Moon, which happened in December 1573. with a brief Prognostic thereupon
according to the Doctrine of Ptolemy. He published likewise the Reason of
another Eclipse of the Moon, which happened in the year 1576. demonstrated
Geometrically, and Printed at Erford, as Draudius affirms.

SIXTUS SENENSIS, of the Order of Preaching Friars, put forth, by 1576.
way of Comment, upon the Scripture, one Book of Geographical; another of
Astronomical Questions.

EGNATIUS DANTES, of Perugio, a Dominican, and public Professor 1576.
of Mathematics in the University of Bologna, wrote of the use of the
Astrolabe, and the making of Astronomical Instruments, and reduced Astronomy,
with other Mathematical Sciences, into a Compendium. He erected a Gnomon, in
the Church of St. Petronio at Bologna, for observing the Sun's Declination, and
Equinoctial Armillae in the Church-wall of St. Maria Novella at Florence, for
the observation of the Equinox. He first published the Optic Fragments of
Heliodorus Larissaeus in Italian, in which there is something Astronomical; of
which, another Edition has been published in Greek and Latin, at Paris in
1657. by Erasmus Bartholinus in 4o. and lately at Cambridge another in 8o.
Greek and Latin, ad Hetrus^i Codicis fidem, ex Bibliotheca Fr. Lindenbrogii,
Printed at the end of the Opucsula Mythologica Ethica and Physica, set forth by
Mr. Tho. Gale, 1670.

THOMAS BLEBELIUS, wrote of the Sphere, and of the first Rudiments 1576.
of Astronomy, Printed at Wittemberg in the year 1576.

BARTHOLOMAEUS SCULTETUS GORLICIENSIS, wrote 1577.
of the Comet which appeared in the year 1557. Astronomice and Astrologice; of
which see Tycho's censure, lib. 2. p. 175.

JOHANNES MARIA FIORNOVELLUS, of Ferrara, upon occasion 1577.
of the Comet appearing in the year 1577. Published a small, but learned
Treatise, De Cometis.

GUID' UBALDUS, or GUIDUS UBALDUS, a Noble Italian 1577.
Marquess, of the Family DE MONTE, besides other Signal Monuments of his great
Skill in Mathematics, especially in Mechanics, set forth a Treatise of the
Astrolabe and Perspective, and left behind him (being a Posthume Work) diverse
Astronomical Problems, as Ricciolus in Catalog. Astron. and Vossius, De Scient.
Mathemat. testify.

NICHOLAUS WINKLERUS of Hall, or Hala, in Suabe, commonly 1577.
called Schwabishe Hall, to distinguish it from a Town of the same Name in
Saxony, ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
wrote a small Piece, wherein he proposes to demonstrate the Parallax and
distance of the former Comet from the Center of the Earth; but censured by
Tycho, to be a work full of enormous absurdities.

JOHANNES PRAETORIUS JOACHIMICUS, wrote likewise 1577.
upon the Comet appearing 1577. and occasionally upon the New Star in
Cassiopaea happening not long before; of which Tycho, in Progymnas. Tom. 1.

HELIZAEUS ROESLINUS, Published a Treatise entitled Theoria Coelestium 1578.
(...), in which (says Draudius in Bibl. Classica) from the Phenomenon of
diverse Comets, (...), quaedam afferuntur de Novis cujusdam Miraculi Tertiae
Sphaerae Circulis, Polis, and Axi; Printed at Strasbourg 1578. He assumed to
himself, as Raimarus Dithmarsus had done, the Invention of the Tychonick
System, to which he added the (exploded) Solidity of the Celestial Orbs, as
Gassendus, in vita Tychon. testifies.

PAULUS CRUSIUS COBURGENSIS, put forth a Treatise, De 1578.
Doctrina Revolutionum Solis, cum Tabulis Mediarum Conversionum Temporis, and
Motuum Solis in Annis Tropicis and Sidereis, Printed at Iena 1567. and another,
De Epochis seu Aeris, Printed at Basil in 8o. 1578.

GEORGIUS CAESIUS, put forth a Catalogue, according to the Series of 1579.
Time, of all the Comets which appeared from the Flood, until the year 1579.
Printed at Norimberg the same year.

ANDREAS DUDITIUS, wrote a small Comment, De Cometarum significationibus; 1579.
to which is adjoined the Opinion of Thomas Erastus, Printed at Basil 1579.

ALKAS CURIACUS, in the year of Hegira 950. and of Christ 1580. 1580.
writ Tables, or Computus Astronomicus, now extant in the Public Library at
Oxford.

VALENTINUS NAIBODA, Professor of Mathematics at Colen and 1580.
Padua, wrote Three Books of Astronomical Institutions, and put forth an
enarration of the Elements of Astrology, collected out of Alchabitius, and
other Authors. He was found dead in his House, at Padua transfixed with many
wounds, having predicted that he should die by the Sword. Vide Ricciol. in
Append. ad Tom. prim. Almagest. Nov. and Campanellae Astrolog.

MARCUS ALBERTUS LONICERUS, wrote of the Theory of 1580.
the Celestial Motions, according to the Hypothesis of Copernicus, Printed at
Colen, 1583.

JOHANNES BAPTISTA CARELLUS, of Piacenza, wrote Ephemerides, 1580.
together with a Treatise or Introduction to Astrology; as Ricciol. in Astron.
Chron. affirms.

MAURITIUS BRESSIUS, put forth Four Books, Metrices Astronomicae, 1581.
Printed at Paris, 1581.

MATTHAEUS RICCIUS, Native of Macerata, a Town in Italy, a Jesuit, 1532.
famous as well for his Travels into the East- Indies and China, as for his
eminent Skill in the Mathematics. To ingratiate himself with the Chinese, he
is said to have Composed a Cosmographical Map, of an Oval Form, in which he
ordered ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
the Kingdom of China to be placed at large in the midst, and the other
Kingdoms and Territories about the skirts thereof in little, the better to
humor that proud conceited Nation. He wrote likewise, in the Chinese Tongue, a
Cosmographical Table, which he illustrated with a Comment, together with
Cosmographical and Astrological Rules, and diverse other things for the benefit
of that Nation.

ALOYSIUS LILIUS; of Verona, Doctor of Physic, by Blancanus styled, 1582.
Alter nostri aevi Sosigenes, whose assistance Gregory XIII. made use of in
correcting and reforming the Julian Calendar. He invented a perpetual Cycle of
the Moon, and established the immutable and fixed seats of the Aequinoxes.

THOMAS ERASTUS, an eminent Philosopher and Physician, writ some 1583.
thing upon the Subject of Astrology, or rather against the Judiciary Part,
Quam validis Argumentis confutavit, says the excellent Thuanus, in Histor. ad
Ann. 1583.*

SIXTUS ab HEMINGA, called likewise by Vossius, Simon ab Heminga, a 1583.
Native of Friezland, of a Noble Family, Doctor of Physic, and an excellent
Astronomer, in his Youth much addicted to Judiciary Astrology, but afterward
having detected the falsity of that vain Study by his inspection into the
Genitures of thirty most eminent Persons, he put forth a Book in confutation
thereof; wherein he chiefly oppugns Cyprianus Leovitius, Hieronymus Cardanus,
and Lucas Gauricus.

JOHANNES PADUANUS, wrote of the various Composition and use 1583.
of Sun-Dials, together with a Method, or Tables for supputation of the Hours,
according to the several Regions of the World, and distinguishing the Places of
the Stars; Printed at Venice and Verona, in the years 1582. and 1583. as
Draudius affirms.

ALBERTUS LEONINUS, sive LEUWIUS, a Groenwood, Native of 1583.
Utrecht, of a generous Family, Doctor of the Civil Law, and eminently learned
in the Mathematics, put forth the Theory of the Celestial Motions, according
to the Doctrine of Copernicus. In which he likewise treats of the true Quantity
of the Tropical year, and of the Reason of the Reformation, or Restitution of
the Civil year. In the same Work likewise he gives an Introduction to
Astronomy, Geography, and Horography. He wrote also against Judiciary Astrology.

REMBERTUS DODONAEUS, Published a Cosmographical Institution 1584.
of the Sphere, comprehending the Principles of Astronomy and Geography;
Printed at Antwerp, 1584.

JOANNES BAPTISTA BENEDICTUS, a Noble Venetian, invited 1585.
from Parma to Turin, by the Duke of Savoy, in the year 1566. to answer several
Questions proposed in Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy, Optics, and Music, to
which he endeavored to give satisfaction and solution, by his learned
Epistles, published in the year 1585. He was an Excellent Geometer and* Tutor
to Clavius.

NICHODEMUS FRISCHLINUS, wrote Five Books, De Astronomicae 1586.
Artis cum Doctrina Coelesti, and Naturali Philosophia congruentia, Printed at
Francfori, in the year 1586.

SOLOMON PLEPPIUS, wrote a new Explication of the Motion of the 1587.
utmost Heaven, called the Prime Mover, Printed in the year 1587.

HENRICUS DECIMATOR, put forth a small Treatise, as well of the ANNI POST
CHRISTUM.
Fixed Stars as Planets, serving not only for the use of Astronomers, but also
Poets; 1587.
Printed at Magdeburg, 1587.

JOSEPHUS SCALA, a Sicilian, composed Ephemerides, continuing from 1589.
the year of Christ, 1589. to the year 1600.

JOSEPHUS AURIA, a Neopolitane, whom Blancanus commends, as if he 1590.
were another Commandinus, for his learned Labors, in translating diverse of
the Ancient Greek Mathematicians, in particular (and to our purpose) Autolycus
De Sphaera Mobili, Euclidis Phenomenon, and Theodosius Tripolita, De
Habitationibus, and De Diebus and Noctibus.

CHRISTOPHORUS ROTHMANNUS, was Mathematician to the 1590.
Illustrious William, Landtgrave of Hesse. He made his Celestial Observations
at Cassels, at the same time, as Tycho did his at Uranoburg; and besides his
accurate Piece upon the Comet which appeared in the year 1585. There are extant
in the first Tome of Tycho Brahe's Epistles, diverse Letters of his to Tycho,
with Tycho Brahe's Answers to him, touching several Controversies in Astronomy.

SIMON STEVINUS, of Bruges, Mathematician to Maurice* Prince of 1590.
Aurange, put forth, among other Works of his, Theories of the Planets, and
Tables of the Celestial Motions, in Three Books.

DAVID WOLKENSTEIN VRATISLAVIENSIS, a Silesian, 1590.
writ an accurate Description of the Astronomical Horologe at Strasbourg, where
he was Professor of Mathematics, extant in Manuscript in the hands of my
worthy Friend, Mr. Thomas Gale,

JACOBUS CHRISTMANNUS, Public Professor of Mathematics, 1590.
and the learned Languages at Heidelberg, translated into Latin, out of a
Manuscript in the Elector Palatine's Library, Alfraganus's Chronological and
Astronomical Elements, which he supplied and illustrated with various Scholia;
to which he annexed a Comment, wherein he explained the Roman, Egyptian,
Arabian, Persian, Syriac, and Hebrew Calendar. He put forth likewise diverse
Solar Observations, therein explicating the true Motion of the Sun in the
Zodiac, accommodating the Doctrine of Triangles to the apparent motion of the
Heavens. He wrote likewise of the Theory of the Moon, grounded upon a new
Hypothesis, for finding out the Moon's true place in the Zodiac; and several
other Pieces, as well in Astronomy and Chronology, as in Geometry.

JOHANNES BAPTISTA PORTA, a Noble Neapolitane, published 1590.
an Interpretation of the first Book of Ptolemy's Almagest with the Commentary
of Theon thereupon; not to mention his twenty Books of Natural Magic, Printed
in most of the Europaean Languages. He writ also an Excellent Book of Optics,
and of Celestial Physiognomy.

FRANCISCUS VIETA, a Frenchman, Native of Fontenay, whom Ricciolus 1590.
entitles Gallicanae Matheseos insigne decus, besides his many other excellent
Works in Geometry, and other Parts of the Mathematics. He exhibited to Pope
Clement VIII. a new form of the Gregorian Calendar, to which he added perpetual
Canons, and an Explication thereof against Clavius, whom he accused to have
Deformed the true Lilian Reformation, by not rightly understanding the Reason
of it; touching which Controversy Thuanus, in the 129th Book of his History,
writes more particularly. But the Work of his chiefly pertinent to our Subject,
ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
and whose Loss cannot be sufficiently deplored, was his Harmonicon Coeleste,
which being communicated to Mersennus, was, by some perfidious Acquaintance of
that honest-minded Person, surreptitiously taken from him, and irrecoverably
lost or suppressed, to the unspeakable detriment of the Lettered World. Vide
Buliald. Prolegom. in Astron. Phil. The learned Golius had it, and Sir
Alexander Hume from hence imparted another Copy; both which, it is feared, are
lost, there being no Impression made thereof, and Golius being since dead, his
Collections (whereof he had many in Arabic) are said to be dispersed, and
(which is to be pitied) carried back by a Jew into Turkey.

JANUS DOUZA, the Learned Son of as Learned a Father, sometim^ Tutor 1590.
to Henry Frederick, Prince of Orange, and the first Keeper of the Public
Library in the University of Leyden. Published among other his Writings, Rerum
Coelestium Libri, and De Umbra, sive Umbrae Encomium, Printed at Leiden apud
Raphelengium 1590. 8o.

JOHANNES BUSAEUS NOVIOMA GENSIS, of the Society of 1590.
Jesus, wrote an Apologetical Disputation in behalf of the Gregorian Calendar,
against Iacobus Herbrandus, a Divine of Tubingue; of whom more in Ribadeneira,
lib. De Scriptor. Soc. Jesus.

GULIELMUS ADOLPHUS SCRIBONIUS, wrote a Spherical Institution, 1591.
published together with Zacharias Parthenius his Notes, at Francfort, 1591.

PETRUS RYFF, wrote concerning the Sphere, as also touching the Principles 1591.
of Astronomy and Geography, Published in the year 1591.

THOMAS DIGGES, Son of Leonard Digges, before mentioned, of 1591.
whom Tycho Brahe (Progymnasm. l. 1.) gives this Elogy, that he was ( ^nerosi
Stemmatis Vir, and Eximius Mathematicus; wrote a Book entitled, Alae and
S^alae Mathematicae, being a Treatise about calculating Parallaxes, Printed
1573. He published likewise his Pantometria, and some other Mathematical
Tractates in the year 1591.

ANTONIUS LUPICINUS, an Italian, writ (in that Language) D^lle 1591.
Verghe Astronomiche, Printed at Florence 1591.

GEORGIUS BACHMANNUS, put forth an Epitome of the Doctrine 1592.
of the Primum Mobile; comprehending a brief exposition of all the Celestial
Circles and Appearances; to which is added a small Treatise, De Doctrina
Sphaerica, Printed at Wittemberg, 1591.

HENRICUS RANTZOVIUS, a Noble Dane, and Viceroy in the 1593.
Duchy of Schleswick, Holsatia, and Ditmars, put forth Calendarium, Romanum,
Oeconomicum, Ecclesiasticum, Astronomicum, and fere perpetuum; and an
Astrological Treatise, collected out of the most ancient and best Authors of
Judiciary Astrology; Printed at Francfort, by Wechelius; also Locorum
Hylegi^lium ad quodvis Tempus datum Directiones. He writ also a Catalogue of
Emperors, Princes, and other Illustrious Persons, who had either affected,
promoted, or studied Astrology; A Treatise, De Veritate Astrologica, and
another, De Annis Climactericis, etc. Printed at Leipsick 1584.

JOANNES PAULUS GALLUCIUS, Published Theatrum Mundi ANNI POST. CHRISTUM.
and Temporis, Printed at Venice 1589. Likewise Speculum Uranicum, there
Printed in 1593.
the year 1593. And Della Fabrica and Uso di diversi Stromenti di Astronomia
and Cosmographia, Printed in the year 1597. Also, De Figura Coelesti erigenda,
with some other Tractates of like Nature.

FEDERICUS BONAVENTURA, wrote, De Affectionibus Meteorologicis; 1594.
De vero Ortu and Occasu Siderum; De Stellarum significationibus, etc. Printed
at Venice, 1594. He has written also upon Theophrastus De Ventis, and upon
Ptolemy De Siderum Ortu and Occasu, and in his Book, De Octomestri Partu, shows
himself not ill affected to Astrology.

GULIELMUS HARTGILL, an Englishman put forth Tabulae Astronomicae 1594.
Universales, Printed at London 1594 and Reprinted 16 with Additions by John
Gadbury of London.

BERNARDINUS BALDUS, Disciple to Federicus Commandinus, of 1595.
whom Vossius gives this Charecter, that he was Vir non solum Mathesios
universae peritissimus, sed etiam, (ut Germanicam, Gallicam, and Slavonicam
Linguam omittam) Latin, Graece, Hebraice, Chaldaice, and Arabice Doctissimus.
Not to mention his many curious Works in other Parts of the Mathematics, well
known to the Learned; We shall only insist on what more nearly relates to our
present Subject; as his five Books, Novae Gnomonices, Horologium universale,
and de Firmamento. He writ likewise upon the Phenomenon of Aratus; and has
composed a History of the Lives of all the famous Mathematicians from Thales
Milesius to Commandinus, with a Chronology of the Times wherein they
flourished, and their several Eulogies. Of which, if we may judge (as of
Hercules by his Foot) by that Life he has written of Hero, already published
with his Belopoica. We cannot but conclude them worthy of that Honor which
they yet want, that is, a speedy Publication to the view of the Learned World.
And if the Manuscript now in possession of some of his Family, or a Copy
thereof may be obtained; we may have then hopes that er'e long the Work will be
communicated to the Curious of this Nation.

GERARDUS RUPELMUND ANUS, set forth a Book, which he 1595.
entitled Atlas, or Cosmographical Meditations, De fabrica Mundi, and
fabricati figura; Printed at Duisberg, in the year 1595. according to Draudius,
whom I conceive to be the same with Mercator.

JOSEPHUS ACOSTA, in the year 1597. published the use of an Instrument, 1597.
called a Cylinder, together with Astronomical Tables; Printed at Colen.

GULIELMUS, Landtgrave of Hassia, merits an Elogium beyond what can 1597.
be here given, for his assiduous Observations for many years of the Celestial
Bodies; to which end, at Cassells, he erected an Observatory, with excellent
Instruments, calling to his assistance two eminent Artists, Christophorus
Rothmannus, and Iustus Byrgius. His Observations were published at Leyden, in
the year 1618. by Willebrodus Snellius, and are in part mentioned by Tycho, as
well in his Epistles, as in the second Tome of his Progymnasm. A signal example
to all Princely and Heroic Minds, to undertake the promoting and advancing of
this truly Noble and Celestial Science.

NICHOLAUS RAIMARUS DITHMARSUS URSUS, one 1597.
of Tycho Brahe's Scholars, published a Piece under the Title of Astronomical
Hypotheses, with a Defense thereof, Printed at Prague, 1597. In which he
endeavors to prove himself Author, or at least first Reviver of the pretended
Brahean Hypothesis, ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
which he will have to be ancient, ascribing the same to Apollonius Pergaeus,
as its first Inventor, ingratefully seeking to deprive Tycho of the due honor
thereof. But he is answered by Tycho, who has vindicated and asserted his own
right.

JOSEPHUS SCALIGER, the Great Prince or Monarch of Universal 1598.
Learning. As to what concerns our present Subject, his elaborate Work, De
Emendatione Temporum, his exquisite Animadversions on Eusebius, with his Canon
Isagogicus Chronologiae, and his accurate Comment upon Manilius's Astronomicks,
sufficiently evidence his admirable knowledge, as well in Astronomy, as in
other the Mathematical Learning of the Ancients; whom, if we may trust the
Judgment of the incomparable Vieta, he alone, above all others, perfectly
understood, as the same is reported by the Learned Casaubon, Epist. 586. He
wrote likewise Cyclometrica, Et Diatriba De Aequinoctiorum Anticipatione.

FEDERICUS SAMINIATUS, published Astronomical Tables, at Anwerp, 1599.
in the year 1599. 4o.

CHRISTOPHORUS FEMILLUS, put forth Synoptical Tables, for 1599.
finding out the true place of the Planets, derived from the Prutenick Tables;
together with the Investigation of the Festival Days of either Calendar,
Printed at Wittemberg, 1599.

MELCHIOR JOESTELIUS, published Observations of an Eclipse 1599.
of the Moon, happening in the year 1599. for his Skill in Astronomy well
esteemed by Tycho Brahe, with whom he lived sometime a Domestic, and to whom
he was an Assistant in his Astronomical Observations.

SIBRANDUS a SICCAMA, wrote, De Veteri Anno Romano Antitheses, 1599.
and Fasti Calendar.

Having Successively deduced this Astronomical Catalogue thus far; I hold it
fit, before I proceed to the next Century, to insert in this Place the Names of
diverse Jewish, Persian, Arabian, and some other Astronomers, whose Times are
Dubious, and uncertain (at least to me) of whom yet Mention is made in Simler;
Hottinger's Smegm. Orient. Abul-Pharagius his Dynasties; James his Eclog.
Oxon-Cant. Labbee, and the Catalogue of Golius his Manuscripts, etc.

DANIEL surnamed SAPIENS, wrote an Astronomical Tractate in Syriack, extant in
the public Library at Oxford.

RABBI JACOB BEN-MACHIR, wrote De Quadrante Astrolabii, Vestimentum Lucis, and
Iter Stellarum.

R. JEHUDA BAR BARZILEI, wrote a Book, teaching the supputation of Times,
according to the Celestial motions.

R. ISAAC BEN LATAPH, an eminent Philosopher, wrote of the Figure of the World.

R. ABRAZARTH, a learned Astrologer, mentioned by Gesner, from the authority of
Pastregicus, lib. De rerum Inventoribus.

R. AB RUSAK, a great Astronomer, mentioned by Gesner.

R. ABRAHAM, an eminent Astronomer wrote a Treatise entitled, Liber
Intercalationis; as also another, called Intercalatio Annorum; De Solstitiis
and Aequinoctiis; De Lunae motu, and Mensibus, and totius Calendarii ratione.
Quaere whether the same with R. Abraham, who wrote De Sphaera, mentioned by
Christmannus in Alfraganum, of whom already, ad annum 1115.

R. ISAASCHAR BEN SUSAN, writ a Treatise entitled, Correctio vel Ordinatio
Calendarii.

R. ISAAC ALCHADEB, published a Work entitled, Via Strata, De Calendario, De
Festis, etc.

R. SOLOMON, writ a Treatise, entitled Sex Alae; as also another, under the
title of Talmid. Ephemerides, comprehended in six Tables, as Hottinger, in
Smeg^. Orient. There is likewise a Treatise under his Name, called Tabula
Lunae, extant in MS. in the Library of Marcus Mantua Benavidius of Padua,
mentioned by Thomasinus in Bibl. Patav.

ALGAZEL ABUHAMAD, a Jewish Philosopher and Astronomer, writ in Hebrew, a Book,
De Luminibus, entitled Haoroth, as the same is cited by Ricciolus, in Catalog.
Astron.

JOSEPHUS CHALDAEUS, wrote De Planetis, as testifies Habede-Iesu in his
Catalogue of Chaldee Ecclesiastic Writers, Printed at Rome.

R. SIMCHA, Disciple to R. Solomon, put forth an Astronomical Treatise.

KUSIANUS or KEUXIAN GILAEUS, composed Universal Astronomical Tables, with
Demonstrations of their Canons. He is cited by Golius in Alferganum.

ABU-SEHEL, published a Treatise touching the Demonstration of the Planisphere.

ABDORRACHMAN of Damascus, wrote Tabulae (...), sive Resolutiones ex Tabulis
Ulug Beigi, brought by the learned Golius from Constantinople. He wrote
likewise, De Astrothesia, Imaginum formis variisque Nominibus.

IBN-JAHIA ABBASIDES AFER, published a Treatise, of the Doubts and Errors of
Astronomers, and of the Astrolabe.

IBN-OMAR SOPHY, wrote of Horology, or Dialling.

ABU-SHUKER AFRICANUS, wrote of the Theory of the Planets, demonstrated and
amended, according to the newest and latest Observations.

MAHUMEDES CHARIKAEUS, put forth a System of the Doctrine of the Sphere.

GEORGIANUS, wrote a Treatise of the Orb or Circle called Aequans, and of the
Obliquity, Inclination, or Reflection of Epicycles.

ABI ZELTUS DANITA, an Andaluzian, put forth an Astrological Treatise.

ABU MESUD, wrote De Corporum Coelestium Contemplatione, mentioned in Golius
his Catalogue MS.

IB'N SINA, wrote touching the best Instruments, for making of Celestial
Observations, perhaps the same with Avicenna.

ALKASRANUS; MAHMOUD IB'N MESAUD ASSIJTARI; IBRAHIM IB'N ALI ALABASHI ALGJMDE;
OMMAR ALFARESKOURI; ALI IB'N ALHAZEN IB'N IBRAHIM IB'N MAHAMMED IB'N ALHUMAM;
HAKIM ALMUGJAREITI; CHALIN ALFAKI; IB'N SARCALI; SJAHAB ADDIN; ALI ALHAZEN IB'N
ALI IB'N MUHAMMED IB'N IBRAHIM ALMERWAZI; all Arabian and Persian Authors,
wrote upon the Subject of Astronomy, and are mentioned in Iacobus Golius his
Catalogue of Manuscripts, to which may be added HELVENOR Astrologus, and
GERGIRO De Significatione Planetarum, mentioned by Simler.

ABI'L ASSAKER ABDOL AZIZ IB'N KOBERSI, wrote an Astronomical Introduction,
mentioned in the foresaid Catalogue of Golius.

OMAD EDDIN ALBOCHARI, an Arabian, wrote a Treatise of the Figure and Motion of
the Moon and Mercury.

ABU'L ALI ALMARASKOSJI, wrote a most accurate Treatise of the use of the
Astrolabe.

ALCAJIM put forth very exquisite Astronomical Tables.

MUHAMMED IB'N ALI CHAR ARMIOUNI, put forth an Astronomical Institution,
touching the supputation of Time and the motion of the Sun.

There is also among the same Manuscripts of Golius an anonymous Treatise, in
the Persian Language, Of the Figures and Motion of the Stars, together with a
Latin Version thereof by JUSTUS RAPHELENGIUS.

ABEN MERGIOUR, wrote Virtutes Oppositionum and Conjunctionum Saturni and Iovis
juxta Sententias Antiquorum, mentioned in the Catalogue of Golius his
Manuscripts.

NEDAMENIN, wrote a Treatise, De variis Annorum formis, and Rebus Coelestibus.

TEILESANUS published Astronomical Canons.

SIDIN SHERIFFUS, wrote Elementa Astronomica, perhaps the same with Ali
Escheriff, who put forth likewise Tabulae expeditae Motuum Coelestium, extant
among Golius his MS.

JOHANNES LEBDEBENHAZER, writ De Iudiciis Astrorum, said to be in his Majesty's
Library at St. James's.

JARDAGIRD ALEXANDRINUS, otherwise called CHILVENUZ, wrote De Scientia Annorum
Arabum, the Manuscript whereof is extant in Caius College at Cambridge.

THOMAS, De Iudiciis Astrorum, a Manuscript extant in the Library of Merton
College at Oxford, and in that of Gonvil and Caius College in Cambridge.

HELIODORUS LARISSAEUS, writ Optica, and De Septem Planetis, his Optics lately
Printed at Cambridge.

HERACLIDES his Apotelesmata, are by Labbee said to be in Bibliotheca Cardinal
Carpens. and that of the French King.

AEGIDIUS ROMANUS, wrote a Treatise De essentia, motu, and significatione
Cometarum; extant in MS. in the Public Library, as also in that of
Pembroke-Hall, at Cambridge.

PETRUS LEMONIENSIS, a Canon of the Cathedral of York, wrote a Piece entitled,
Iudicium De Stella Cometa, extant in MS. in the Public Library at Cambridge.

CHRISTIANUS ROLIANUS, put forth totius Orbis Generalis Descriptio, and
Sphaera, extant in the French King's Library.

BERNARDUS SYLVESTRIS, wrote a Treatise entitled Megacosmus, seu De Majori
Mundo; as also of Cosmography, a MS. whereof is extant in Benet-Colledge in
Cambridge.

JACOBUS ZALESE; wrote De Dierum Aequationibus contra Propositiones
Bartholomaei De Valentia, extant in MS. in the Library of Nicolaus Trevisanus
of Padua, and mentioned by Thomasinus in Bibl. Patavin.

JOHANNES DE INERIIS, a Picard, of the Dlocese of Amiens, wrote a Treatise,
entitled Canones super magnum Almanach omnium Planetarum, calculated for the
Meridian of Paris, of which a Manuscript is in Caius and Gonvil. Coll.

ARCANDAM, or ARCANDUM, and ALCANDRINUS, (as some name him) writa Book. De
Veritatibus and Praedictionibus Astrologiae, Printed at Paris in the year 1542.
8o. Published by Richard Roussat Canon of Lingon.

HABASH MERWAZENSIS, wrote three Books of Astronomical Tables; the first
composed according to the Rules Send Hend; the second called Montahen, i. e.
approved by experience; the last, Tabularum minorum, entitled Alshah, as
Abulpharagius, in Histor. Dynast.

ABDALLA EB'N SAHEL EB'N NUBACHT, wrote likewise upon the same Subject.

ALEXANDER, an Astronomer, wrote De Influentia Planetarum in Herbas, extant in
MS. in the Library of Io. Rhodius of Padua, of which Thomasinus in Bibliothec.
Patavin.

MAHOMED AL-BUZIANI, besides several Books, which he set forth in Arithmetic,
composed a Treatise which he entitled Almagestum, sive Systema Astronomicum;
as Abulpharagius attests.

MOSES EB'N MAIMON of Corduba, a Jew, together with Yuseph Eb'n Yahya,
corrected the Astronomy of Eb'n Aphla Hispanus; as the same Abulpharagius
affirms.

ANDALIUS DE NIGRIS, wrote De Sphaera, in Theorias Planetarum, Planisphaerium
Ptolemei, and Astrolabium, mentioned by Thomasinus in Bibliothec. Patavin. yet
extant among the MS. of Nicolaus Trivisanus.

GHAMINAEUS, an Arabian Astrologer, wrote in Arabic, of Astrology, with a
twofold Prolix Commentary in the Moorish Character, a Book commended by
Scaliger, and remaining in the Library at Leyden, among the Manuscripts by him
bequeathed to that University; as Hottinger affirms in Append. Smegmat. Orient.

ABENHAM writ De Astronomia, now extant in MS. in the Cottonian Library.

JOANNES LAURATIUS, or LAURENTIUS DE FUNDIS, wrote De Sphaera, and Theorica
Planetarum, extant in MS. in the Library of Io. Rhodius of Padua, of which
Thomasinus in Bibliothec. Patavin.

AVIENUS, or as others, ABIENUS wrote a Tract, De Cometis, as Simler in Bibl.
Gesner. affirms.

MICHAEL HAVEMAN put forth a Treatise entitled Astraea; in qua de Hypothesibus
Astrosophorum disseritur.

AMBROSIUS LACHER, according to the Testimony of Ge^ner, writ quaedam De
Astronomia, who makes no mention of the Time wherein he flourished, nor of the
particular Subject he wrote upon.

HENRICUS DOPELSTIN, or TOPELSTEIN, Doctor of Physic wrote a Book, De Iudiciis
Astrorum, mentioned by Simler in Bibl. Gesner.

JOHANNES ZINERIS, is mentioned by Gesner among the Astronomers, and he farther
affirms, that his Astronomical Tables are extant, but assigns not the time
wherein he flourished.

ALACENUS, a Mathematician, an ancient English Author, of whom Balaeus writes,
that he deserved Astrologi Peritissimi nomen, wrote Of Perspective, and De
Ascensione Nubium Of the time wherein he flourished no Author, we can meet
withal, gives any account.

ARNOLDUS DE VILLA NOVA, wrote Compendium Astrologiae ad Utilitatem Medicorum;
extant in MS. in the Library of the Canons of St. Io. Lateran of Padua. See
Thomasinus in Bibliothec. Patavin.

ALDILAZITH ASTROLOGUS, writ a Book entitled Archibia, as Gesner, from the
authority of Gulielmus Pastregicus (L. De Inventoribus rerum) assirms; Printed
at Venice, in the year 1547. by Nicholaus Bascorinus.

MASLEM, an Astronomer, translated Ptolemy's Planispaerium out of the Greek,
into the Arabian Tongue, as Rudolphus Brugensis relates in the Preface of his
Latin Translation of the same Work.

MORIENTES, a certain Greek Author, writ De Zonis and Climatibus Mundi, extant,
as the Author Luminis Animae affirms, in his Preface, adding that it was by him
translated out of Greek into Latin. See Simler. in Bibl. Gesner.

RAYMYRUS GADITANUS, wrote a Treatise, which he entitled, Divinatio Sideralis,
mentioned by Gesner.

STANTONIUS, an expert English Mathematician, wrote In Canones Tabularum
Arzahelis, as Leland and Gesner affirm.

TRECHINDUS, an Astronomer and Astrologer, is often mentioned by Haly
Aben-Ragel, as Simler testifies in Bibl. Gesner.

ZAHEL, sive ZAEL, or ZEEL BEBIS, an Arabian Astrologer, writ De
Interrogationibus; De Electionibus; De Temporum Significationibus in Iudiciis;
Printed at Venice 1493. together with Ptolemy's Quadripartitum; vid. Gesner's
Biblioth. There is also under his name a Treatise, entitled De Revolutionibus
Annorum Mundi, extant in Manuscript, in the Public Library at Cambridge, and
in that of Pembroke-Hall.

MAHUMED BEN MALUD, wrote learned Commentaries on the Book of Tap Phatis
Scihajah de Astronomia, extant in the Vatican Library, of which mention is made
by Labbee in Bibliothec. MS.

NECTARIUS, Bishop of Hydrusa, turned the Book called Laxeuterion (treating of
Astrological Predictions according to the Chaldaick Doctrine) into Greek, now
extant in the Library of Trinity College in Cambridge, and in that of the
French King. Scaliger (L. 1. Epist. 67.) gives to that Piece likewise the Name
of Raboulion, and the Publisher of the Florentine Library makes an Author of
it; citing him by the Name of Laxeuterius Pythagoricus, sive Rabolius.

GULIELMUS READ, sometime Fellow of Merton-Colledge in Oxford, (to the Library
whereof he liberally contributed) afterward Bishop of Chichester, writ Tables
of the mean motions of the Planets, and Canons of those Tables, extant in the
Public Library at Oxford.

HALPERICUS, wrote a Treatise De Art calculatoria, extant in Manuscript in
Caius-Colledge in Cambridge.

JACOBUS ZALES, wrote De Dierum Aequationibus contra Propositiones Bartholomaei
de Valentia, as cited by Ia. Phil. Thomasinus, inter MS. Nicolai Trivisani,
biblioth. Patav.

BERNARDUS DE TRYLLIA, a Dominican Friar, and a Spaniard wrote Quaestiones
super Totam Astrologiam; as cited by Simler in Bibl. Gesner.

There is a Book entitled, NOVEM IUDICUM IN ASTRONOMIA, said to be sent by the
Sultan of Babylon to Frederick the German Emperor; Printed in the year 1509.
and extant in his Majesty's Library at St. James's, and in the Bodleian at
Oxford.

Proceed we now in our former Order and Method to the ASTRONOMERS flourishing
in the Seventeenth Century, in which the first Author appearing is ANNI POST
CHRISTUM.


CHRISTOPHORUS CLAVIUS, of Bamberg, a Jesuit, Scholar to 1600.
Io. Baptista Benedictus, and Master to Blancanus, and Griembergerus, a most
profound Mathematician and Astronomer. The Works whereby he has signalized his
Name upon the Subject of Astronomy, are these: His Commentary in Sphaeram
Sacrobosci, and in Sphaerica Theodosii; De Forma and Usu Astrolabii; His
Apology for the Gregorian Calendar, against the two Oppugners thereof, Michael
Maestlinus, and Joseph Scaliger, and his Problemata Astronomica, Printed at
Rome 1599.

HUGO GROTIUS, the great Ornament of Learning, and of his Country, 1600.
put forth Aratus his Phenomenon, and Diosemeia, in Greek, with Cicero,
Germanicus Caesar, and Avienus their Translations thereof, with Cuts of the
several Constellations; to which he added his own learned Notes, and the names
of the Stars, in Hebrew, Arabic, Greek, and Latin, Printed in the year 1600.

THEODOSIUS RUBEUS Published Diarum Universale perpetuum, 1600.
for finding out the Quantity of the Day or Night in any Part of the World,
together with the Rising and Setting of the Sun, according to the Italick,
Babylonian, and Astronomical Hours.

CHERUBINUS SAND^LINUS, is likewise numbered amongst the 1600.
Astronomers of this Time, as having written something upon the same Subject
with the former.

HENRICUS SAMERIUS, of Luxemburg, a Jesuit, styled by Ricciolus, 1600.
Egregius Temporum Supputator, Published a Chronology from the beginning of the
World to the time of our Savior's Nativity, and is by Ricciolus inserted in
his Catalogue of Astronomers.

JOHN CHAMBER, Prebendary of Windsor, and Fellow of Eaton-Colledge, 1601.
put forth a Treatise against Judicial Astrology, together with the Encomium or
Praise of Astronomy, made by him some years before, upon Occasion of his
Public Lectures on Ptolemy's Almagest in the University of Oxford, Printed in
Latin and English 1601. 4o. London.

ABRAHAMUS ROCHENBACKIUS, at Wittenberg, wrote De Cometis, 1602.
of which he published a Catalogue.

NATHANIEL TORPORLEY, an English man born in Shropshire, 1602.
set forth a Treatise, entitled Diclides Coelo-Metricae, seu Valvae
Astronomicae Universales, in two Books, Printed at London. The first showing
the Composition of Astronomical Tables, with their Application, as to
Directions; comprised in a new Universal and most easy Method. The second
teaching to calculate the Prostaphaereses of the Planets Motions, without the
Subdititious Aid of Proportional Scruples; and setting forth the Doctrine of
Spherical Triangles most fully and easily; the whole Artifice being reduced to
Six Words in a Tractable Order, represented in the Form or Figure of a Mitre.
He was sometime Amanuensis to the famous Vieta, and merits commendation for the
Legacy he bequeathed of many choice Books toward furnishing the Library at
Sion*Colledge London.

ANTONIUS GREVENSTEIN put forth a Supputation of all the ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
Eclipses which happened from the year of Christ 1593. to this year 1601.
together 1603.
with the Tract of Proclus Diadochus, touching the signification of Eclipses,
Printed at Breme, by Bernardus Petri.

JOHANNES BAYERUS RHEINANUS, Doctor of the Civil 1603.
Law, and an eminent Astronomer, exhibited elegant Schemes of all the Stars and
Celestial Constellations, with their several Situations, according to the
Descriptions of Hipparchus, Ptolemy, Alphonsus, and Copernicus, reduced to the
Scale of Truth by Tycho Brahe, together with their distinct Denominations in
Latin, Greek, Arabic, Chaldee, Persian.

Sir CHRISTOPHER HEYDON Knight, a Person of great Worth 1603.
and Learning, wrote a Defense of Judicial Astrology, in Answer to the Treatise
of Chambers published against it, a Work full of no common Reading, and carried
on with no mean Arguments, Printed at Cambridge 1603. 4o.

THOMAS LYDYAT, an English man, in the year 1605. Published a 1605.
Book entitled Praelectio Astronomica, De Natura Coeli and Elementorum; and
the same year another Piece, De variis Annorum formis, etc. cum refutatione
Anni Novitii Gregoriani. In the year 1607. he writ Defensio Tractatus de variis
Annorum Formis, praesertim Antiquissima and Optima, contra Iosephi Scaligeri
Obtrectationem, Una cum Examine Ejus Canonum Chronologiae Isagogicorum. Another
Book called Solis and Lunae Periodus Eruditae Antiquitati Appellatus ANNUS
MAGNUS constans Octodesexcentis Annis vertentibus, Printed at London 1620.
Epistola Astronomica ad D. H. Savilium Equit. Auratum de Anni Solaris Mensura
pro Confirmatione Periodi Octodesexcentenariae Solis and Lunae, 8o. Land. 1621.

BALTHAZAR CAPRA Published at Padua, a Book entitled Tyrocinia 1606.
Astronomica.

ADRIANUS ROMANUS Published in the year 1591. a Book entitled 1606.
Ouranographia, sive de Coelorum Numero and Ordine, Printed at Antwerp. He set
forth likewise in the year 1595. Theoria Calendariorum in five Parts, Printed
at Wirteberg. 4o. And in the year 1602. Universae Mathesis Idaea, Printed
Herbipol. In the year 1606. he published Speculum Astronomicum, wherein he
represented the Motions of the Primum Mobile, Printed at Lovaine, 4o. See more
of him in Andreas Desselius his Bibliotheca Belgica.

JOANNES RUDOLPHUS CAMERARIUS, a learned Physician, 1607.
and descended from the Great Ioachimus, a good Astronomer, though he chiefly
applied himself to Astrological Studies, Published a Century of Genitures,
wherein he spoke of the violent Death of Henry the Fourth King of France, and
in 1610. published another Century with Judgments thereupon.

JOHANNES TALENTONIUS, besides his Thesaurus Rerum Reconditarum, 1608.
published a Treatise, of which Draudius gives this Character, that it was, De
Supremae Sphaerae loco Disceptatio gravissima.

HENRICUS LINDOUGHT, of Brussels, Doctor of Physic, and Professor 1608.
of Philosophy, set forth a Book which he called, Speculum Astrologiae, being
an Introduction in Scientiam Genethliacam, sive Physicam Iudiciariam; in which
he endeavors to distinguish between the vanity and the verity of Astrology;
Printed at Francfort, with a Preface of Gothardus Arthurus of Dantzick, De
Astrologiae praestantia and utilitate, in the year 1608.

BERNARDINUS SALINUS, a Jesuit, wrote among other things, De ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
variis Problematibus Astronomicis; which with other his Works are preserved in
1608.
the Jesuits Library at Genua.

GEORGIUS HENISCHIUS, Doctor of Physic, and Professor of 1609.
Mathematics at Ausbourg, put forth Proclus De Sphaera, in Greek and Latin,
which he illustrated, (to use Ricciolus's expression) with an egregious
Commentary.

JOHANNES BASSANTINUS, a Scotch-man, published a Treatise 1609.
of Astronomy, in French, though he scarce understood that Language, much less
Latin or Greek, and yet, In Astronomia ita excelluit, ut inter primos Aetatis
suae habitus sit, says Ioannes Tornaesius, who translated that Work of his
into Latin, and published the same at Geneva.

DAVID ORIGANUS, born at Glatz, a Town in Silesia, Professor of 1609.
Mathematics at Francfort upon Oder, set forth New Ephemerides, in Three
Tomes, continuing from the year 1595. to the year 1654. with a most ample
Preliminary Introduction, in which are explained the Grounds or Principles of
Chronology, Astronomy, and Astrology.

JOANNES ANTONIUS MAGINUS, of Padua, Professor of Mathematics 1610.
in that University; as also at Bologna, was Author of the several Works
hereafter mentioned: Ephemerides, according to the Prutenick Tables for fifty
years. Tables Secundorum Mobilium Coelestium. New Theories of the Planets,
according to the Copernican Hypothesis. Tables of the Primum Mobile, or of
Directions. De Astrologica ratione and usu Dierum Criticorum; as also (though
he was a severe Impugner of the common Judiciary Astrology) De legitimo
Astrologiae in Medicina usu. He commented upon Galen De Diebus Decretoriis, in
the Astrological Part, Printed at Venice 1607. He wrote likewise a Book against
Scaliger's Diatriba, De Aequinoctiorum Processione, and several other Pieces in
Cosmography, and Geography, being styled by Ricciolus, Insignis Astronomus and
Cosmographus.

BARTHOLOMAEUS KECKERMANNUS wrote among other 1610.
things Systemata Astronomiae, and Problemata Nautica, Printed at Hannov. 1610.

JOHANNES FABRICIUS put forth a Treatise entitled, De Maculis 1611.
in Sole, and Modo Eductionis Specierum Visibilium, Dubitatio, Printed at
Witteberg. 4o. 1611.

NICHOLAUS MULLERUS, of Bruges, Doctor of Physic, and 1611.
chief Moderator of the School at Leovard, afterward Public Professor of
Mathematics in the University at Groningen, put forth hi^ Tabulae Frisicae
Lunae-Solares Quadruplices, Printed at Alcmaire; which Title he gave them,
because composed in Friezland, and fitted to the Meridian of Leovard,
containing the Calculation of the Conjunctions and Eclipses of the Sun and
Moon, in Four Parts, according to the Ptolemaick, Alphonsine, Copernican, and
Brahaean Astronomy; together with an Introduction and Appendix thereunto;
represented by Vossius to be Opus omnino eruditum atque accuratum. He published
likewise Solis totidem Tabulae, wherein he proves the Jewish year to be
Luni-Solaris, that of the Turks mere Lunaris, Printed at Groaning. 1630. He set
forth also Calendarium vetus Romanum cum Methodo Paschali emendata.

JOSEPHUS LANGIUS, Professor of the Greek Tongue and Mathematics 1612.
in the Arch-Duke's Academy at Friburg in Brisgaw, put forth a Work entitled,
Elementale Mathematicum, in which, besides Vulgar Arithmetic, Geometry ANNI
POST CHRISTUM.
and Geography, he treats De Logistice-Astronomica, Astronomica Sphaerica, and
Theorica Planetarum. Which Work Isaac Habrechtus not only enlarged, but also
explained with Annotations, and illustrated with Figures, causing the same to
be Printed at Strasbourg.

CHRISTOPHORUS GRIEMBERGERUS, a Jesuit, native of 1612.
Hale in Tiroll, at first Scholar to Clavius, afterward his Successor in the
Mathematical Chair in the Roman College, put forth a Catalogue of the
Longitudes and Latitudes of the Fixed Stars according to the Ancients, compared
with the Modern; together with a new Perspective of the Heavens. He wrote
likewise a Book, De Speculo Ustorio Elliptico, and a new Invention of
delineating all sorts of hours; as also a Treatise for the describing of all
manner of Astrolabes, in which Argument Clavius acknowledged the assistance of
this his Scholar. What is found Geometrical in Villalpandus of Solomon's
Temple, Claudius Rickardus, and others ascribe to Griembergerus, of whose worth
and commendation Bettinus, in Aerario, has made a Digression, Philip Alegambe,
in his Catalogue of Iesuit-Writers affirming, that he left Elementa Conica, and
other Geometrical Pieces, not proper for this place.

JOANNES PAULUS RESENIUS put forth Initia Geometrica, Arithmetica, 1612.
Astronomica, Printed at Wittemberg 1612. 8o.

JULIUS CAESAR LA GALLA Published a Discourse touching the 1612.
New Phenomenon discovered in the Moon by the help of the Telescope.

OCTAVIUS PISANUS Published in a very large but thin foli^, a T^atise 1613.
entitled Astrologia, seu Motus and Loca Syderum. In which Astrology, or
^ather Astronomy is reduced to Method, and Ocular Demonstration by the Means of
a Planisphere, and an Instrument which he calls Sphaera Materialis and
Instrumentalis. Whose ^se is expressed by several Chartaceous Instruments
exquisitely cut and printed; the whole grounded upon the Ptolemaick Hypotheses;
the Industry, Labor and Pains of which costly Design (if you will take his own
Word for it) he conceives may be reputed Archimedis Laboribus non Dissimiles.
He dedicated his Works to Cosmus the Second Duke of Florence, being printed at
Antwerp ex Officina Roberti Brunea^.

JOHANNES NEPERUS, Lord of Merkinstone in Scotland, Inventor of 1614.
Logarithms, or Artificial Numbers, which, by bare Substraction or Addition,
perform the Rule of Three, and by a wonderful facility of operation, resolve as
well Plain, as Spherical Triangles, an incredible help to Astronomical
Calculations, and for that respect alone, meriting a place in this Catalogue,
and eternal Commendations.

PETRUS LAURENBERGIUS is mentioned by G. Vossius, to have 1615.
published at Hamborough a Book, entitled Amphilychus, being a Dissertation of
the Nature of Twilights.

JOSEPHUS BLANCANUS, of Bologna, a Jesuit, Professor of Mathematics 1615.
at Parma, wrote (besides his Book, In Loca Mathematica Aristotelis, and De
Natura Mathematicarum, and his Chronology of Mathematicians) a Book De Sphaera
Mundi, according to the (...) and most recent Observations, with an
Introduction to Geography, and an Apparatus ad Mathematicas Arts. He wrote
likew^e De Echometria, and another (...), entitled, Instrumentum Horologiorum,
first published by Ricciolus* (his Scholar.)

GALILAEUS GALILAEI, the most excellent Philosopher and Mathematician ANNI POST
CHRISTUM.
of his Time, was Son of Vincentius Galilaeus, a Gentleman of Florence, whose
1615.
Ancestors for many Descents had the Honor to be reckoned among the Patricii
of that City; to which Name of Galilaeus Authors usually add that of Linceus,
from a famous Academy of Noble and Ingenuous Persons, calling themselves the
Lyncei (instituted by the Illustrious Prince, and Generous Maecenas Angelo
Caesi, Duke of Aqua Sparta) of which he was a Member and singular Ornament. The
Works and Writings, by which he has eternized his Name are many, both in
Philosophy and Mathematics; of which, such as are Pertinent to our Purpose, we
shall briefly enumerate. He first applied the Belgic Perspective Glass, by him
meliorated, to Celestial Objects, by which he discovered that Jupiter was
environed with four smaller Stars or Planets, commonly called his Guards or
Satellites; to whom in Honor of his Prince and Patron, the Grand Duke of
Thuscany, he gave the Names of Sidera Medicaea. By that he likewise discovered
the different Phases of Saturn appearing now round, now in an oblong form, with
two Handles or Ansae: That Venus, like the Moon, had her waining, and
increasing; and that the Moon's Supersicies was like that of the Earth rising
with Mountains, and deprest into Valleys and Seas; that the Fountain of Light
the Sun had its Spots, by which likewise he evinced that the Sun had a Circular
Motion about its own Axis. That the Via Lactea was a Congeries of numberless
Lights or small Stars; and that the nebulous Stars, as that in the Head of
Orion, and that in the Praesepe, or Manger of the Aselli, are composed of such.
For which admirable Inventions, and many more, altogether unknown to the
Ancients, he merits eternal Honor, especially for having communicated them to
Posterity, and so excellently and clearly demonstrated them by his learned
Writings; particularly by his Nuncius Sidereus, and its Continuation, by his
History and Demonstration of the Solar Spots, in three Letters to Marcus
Velserus, by his Letters to Signore Alfonso Antonini, touching La Titubatione
Lunare. To which is to be added his Systema Cosmicum, asserting the Copernican
Hypothesis, with his Defense thereof in Answer to the Objections brought from
Scriptures, Fathers, and Schoolmen, written first in Italian, and addressed to
Katherine of Lorrain, Grand Duchess of Thuscany, and since published in Latin
and Italian together. Not to mention his many other exquisite Tractates in
Philosophy, Geometry, and other the most abstruse Parts of Mathematics, as not
immediately relating to our Subject. A farther Account of his Inventions or
Discoveries is to be had in his life, published, by his Scholar Signore
Viviani, which we have not yet seen.

RUDOLPHUS GOCLENIUS, Doctor of Physic, and Professor in 1615.
the University of Marpurg, published in the present year 1615. his Urania,
with her two Daughters, Astronomy and Astrology. He likewise put forth a
Cosmographical Treatise, seu Sphaerae Mundi Descriptionis Rudimenta, Printed at
Cologne 1605.

JOHANNES MICRAELLIUS Published a Manuduction to the use of 1616.
the Celestial and Terrestrial Globe, etc. as Vossius affirms.

DAVID FABRICIUS, a Friezlander, Professor of Astronomy, wrote 1617.
Prognostics of the years 1615, 1616, and 1617. mentioned by Kepler in his
Ephemerides.

DOMINIQUE JAQUINOT, a Frenchman, writ in his own Language 1617.
of the Use of the Astrolabe, together with a small Treatise of the Sphere,
Printed at Paris.

FRANCISCUS AGUILONIUS, a Jesuit of Brussels, was Professor ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
of Philosophy at Doway, and of Theology at Antwerp, and one of the first that
introduced 1617.
Mathematical Studies into Flanders. How far (though not directly and ex
professo) he contributed to Astronomy, may appear by his six Books of Optics,
and his Excellent Treatise of Projections of the Sphere.

REDEMPTUS BARANZANUS, of Serravalle, Professor, at Annesium, 1617.
in Savoy, of Natural Philosophy and Astronomy. He wrote a Book entitled,
Uranoscopia, sive Universa Coelorum Doctrina.

EMANUEL DIAZ, a Jesuit, at Cochine in India, observed the Comet, 1618.
which appeared in the year 1618. and set forth a Treatise against the Opinion
of those, who conceive Comets to be sublunary and elementary Bodies.

JOHANNES LEUTECHOMIUS, a Lorrainer, of the Society of Jesus, 1618.
wrote Hilaria Mathematica, De Horologiis, and De Cometa.

CAROLUS PISO, a French man, wrote in his own Language, Speculum 1618.
Cometae, Anno 1618.

WILLEBRODUS SNELLIUS, a Royen, Son of Radolphus Snellius, 1618.
published, besides diverse other Mathematical Treatises, Eratosthenes Batavus,
sive De mensura Terrae; and Tiphys Batavus, sive Histiodromice. He wrote
likewise of the Comet which appeared in the year 1618. and published the
Hessian and Bohemian Observations, with his own Notes thereupon; together with
the Observations of Regiomontanus and Waltherus.

HORATIUS GRASSUS, a Jesuit, Native of Savona, sometime Professor 1619.
of Mathematics in the Jesuits College at Rome, put forth an Astronomical
Disputation, touching Three Comets in the year 1618. And a Book, entitled
Libra Astronomica and Philosophica, wherein he undertakes to weigh and censure
the Opinion of Galileo, concerning Comets.

CAMILLUS GLORIOSUS, Professor of Mathematics at Padua, wrote 1619.
learnedly in a Treatise entitled Dissertatio Astronomico-Physica de Cometis,
and in another Piece, entitled, Responsio ad Controversias de Cometis
Peripateticas, and in some other things written against Claramontius and
Licetus.

BENJAMIN URSINUS, Mathematician to the Elector of Brandenburg, 1619.
put forth a new Canon of Logarithms and Trigonometry; of which Work Crugerus
gives this Character, that it is Opus aestimationis immensae.

JOANNES DEKERIUS, a Jesuit, Native of Haesbruch, in Flanders, 1619.
Professor of Philosophy sometime at Doway, and of Divinity at Lovaine, and
Chancellor of Gratz, wrote Theorems, touching the year of our Savior's Birth
and Passion; and Chronological Tables from the taking of Jerusalem by Pompey,
to its final eversion by Titus; and several other Chronological Works not
published.

ALEXANDER DE ANGELIS, of Spoleto, a Jesuit, Professor of 1619.
Theology, and Prefect. of the Schools in the Roman College, wrote Five Books,
In Astrologos Conjectores.

LIBERTUS FROIDMONT, sive FROMONDUS, vindicated his 1619.
Name from Oblivion, by his Dissertation upon the Comet which appeared in the
year 1618. He writ likewise a Book entitled Anti-Aristarchus, sive De Orb
Terrae ANNI POST CHRI^TUM
immobili, against Philippus Lansbergius; as also a Reply, entitled Vesta,
sive Anti-Aristarchi Vindex, in answer to Lansbergius.

DAVID HERLICIUS, lately Doctor of Physic at Stetin in Pomerania, 1619.
has published many things relating to Astronomy and Astrology in the German
Tongue. In the Latin there is nothing of his come to my Notice more than his
Prognosticon Astrologicum for the year 1619. which is done with so much Skill
and Pains, that it shows ^e does not write like one of your Common
Prognosticators.

JOHANNES BAPTISTA CYSATUS, a Jesuit of Lucerne in Switzerland, 1619.
and Professor of Mathematics in the University of Ingolstadt, published
Mathematica Astronomica, upon the occasion of the Comet which appeared in the
year 1618.

VINCISLAUS PANTALEO, a Jesuit of Austria, traveled into China, 1620.
and put forth the several Observations made by those of that Society in the
East Indies, upon the Comets appearing in the year 1618.

SIMON MARIUS wrote a Book, of the Satellites of Jupiter, to which he 1620.
gave the title of Mundus Iovialis, as Ricciolus affirms, in Chronic. Astronom.

JOHANNES TARDE, Canon of the Cathedral Church of Sarlat, in 1620.
Aquitaine, wrote a Treatise, by him entitled Bourbonia Sidera, in which he
endeavors to prove, that the Solar Spots are Planets, moving by a proper and
regular Motion about the Sun, and not inherent in the Body thereof, as the
Telescopes represent. To which Work are subjoyned Optical Demonstrations
teaching the way of making those Instruments fit to discover Objects more
distinctly at a great distance. He wrote another Treatise of the Use of the
Magnetical Quadrant, by which he resolves diverse Astronomical Problems.

MICHAEL ZANARDUS put forth a Tractate containing Universum 1620.
Coeleste; wherein he disputes and concludes, De omnibus and singulis, quae ad
Naturam Coelestium Sphaerarum, ab Empyraeousque ad Sphaeram Elementorum
faciunt, Printed at Colen.

CHRISTOPHORUS LONGOMONTANUS, Son of Severinus 1620.
Longomontanus, a Dane, Assistant to Tycho Brahe in his Celestial Observations,
for the space of eight years together; afterward Professor of Mathematics in
the University of Copenhagen. The Work, by which he signalized his Name, was
his Astrologia Danica; the first part whereof treats, in Two Books, of the
Doctrine of the Sphere; and the latter, in as many of the Theory of the
Planets, according to the threefold Hypotheses of Ptolemy, Copernicus, and
Tycho Brahe, together with an Appendix of Adscititious Phenomenon, as New
Stars, and Comets.

JOANNES KEPLERUS WITTEMBER GICUS, Disciple to (...).
Maestlinus, and Principal Mathematician to three Emperors, Matthias,
Rudolphus, and Ferdinand the Second, styled by Ricciolus, Sagacissimi and
ardentissimi Vir Ingenii, and Astronomicarum Subtilitatum scrutator
acutissimus. In the year 1596. he put forth his Prodromus Dissertationum
Cosmographicarum, seu Mysterium Cosmographicum: In the year 1604. Paralipomena
ad Vitellionem, seu Astronomiae Pars Optica. In which he gives Directions for
using of Instruments in making of Observations. In the year 1605. De Nova
Stella Serpentarii. In the year 1609. he published Astronomica Nova, seu
Physica Coelestis, cum Commentariis Stellae Martis, ex Observationibus
Tychonis; in which, according to the Judgment of the knowing ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
Mr. Flamstead, he has so well considered the Motions of that Star, and
ordered his Numbers so well, that though his method of Calculation be
troublesome, no Tables answer his Appearances and Transits by Fixed Stars half
so well as his. In the year 1610. he set forth Dissertatio cum Nuncio Sydereo
Galilaei. In the year 1616. he published Ephemerides Nova, cum Fundamentis
earum, from the year 1617. to the year 1620. In the year 1618. he set forth the
three first Books of his Epitome Astronomiae Copernicanae; and in the year
1619. Five Books De Harmonia Mundi, and three Books De Cometis. In the year
1621. he reprinted his Mysterium Cosmographicum, illustrated with Annotations;
and the year following, he published the IV. V. and VI. Books of his Epitome
Astronomiae Copernicanae. In the year 1625. he set forth, in vindication of
Tycho Brahe, against Scipio Claramontius, a Treatise, entitled, Hyperaspistes,
cum Appendice ex Trutinatore Galilaei, and in the year 1627. Tabulae
Rudolphinae Tychonicis Observationibus superstructae. In which Work he had
spent no less than 26. years study. The Appendix which is added to the first
Tome of Tycho's Progymnasmata, is likewise his. He writ also Eclogae
Chronologicae, a Book, De vero nati Christi Anno, Stereometria and
Trigonometria Logarithmetica. The first in somethings censured by Guldinus in
Centrobaricis. There is extant a Posthume Piece of his, called Somnium, sive
Lunaris Astronomia, which whilst he endeavored to publish at Zeigan in
Silesia, he died, as did also his Sonin-Law Iacobus Bartschius, prosecuting, at
the same place, the same Design. But it was afterward happily compassed, by
his own Son Ludovicus Kepler, and we could have wished he had done the like by
other the Learned Remains of his incomparable Parent. But it is hoped that
Defect will be now supplied, and made good by the Care and Industry of the
Learned Hevelius, into whose Hands all the Remains of that Admirable Person are
at last happily fallen. And among them all his Epistles written (upon the
Subject of Astronomy, and other Mathematical Arguments) to diverse Eminent and
Learned Persons, together with their Answers; more Particularly his Book
entitled Hipparchus, containing (according to the Testimony of Hevelius,
Praefat. Machin. Coelest.) plurimum Laboris, ac Ingenii Acuminis; though
wanting in many Places the finishing Hand of the Author, upon which yet, in his
other Works he seems to set a very valuable esteem. The Publication whereof,
the studious in Astronomy earnestly expect.

THOMAS CAMPANELLA, a Calabrian; of the Order of Preaching 1620.
Friars, put forth seven Books Astrologicorum, in which Astrology, separated
from Jewish and Arabian Superstitions, is Physiologically handled. He set forth
likewise four Books De sensu Rerum, and Magia, in the third of which. he treats
of the Heavens, and the Celestial Bodies.

GEORGIUS SCHOMBERGERUS, Professor of Mathematics in 1622.
the University of Freiburg in Brisgaw, a Jesuit, put forth a Book, entitled
Sol illustratus, wherein he treats of the several Accidents of the Sun, of the
Solar Stars, and of the liquidity of the Heavens. He published likewise a
Century of Optical Problems, and a new way of Dialling, as well by direct,
refracted, as reflected Rays.

SIMEON PARTLICIUS put forth Astronomici Apologetici Pars prior, 1623.
Printed in 8o. 1623. as I find in James his Appendix to the Catalogue of the
Bodleian Library.

JOHANNES ADAMUS, a German, of the Society of the Jesuits, traveled 1624.
into China, and in the Language of that Country wrote a Table of all the
Stars. He put forth likewise a Treatise, De Calculo Eclipsis Lunae, in the year
1624.

HENRICUS BRIGGIUS, Savilian Professor of Geometry in the University ^NNI ^OST
CHRISTUM.
of Oxford, pursuing what Nepier had invented and begun, put forth two Books
1624.
of Logarithms, after a more commodious Method; the first, entitled
Arithmetica Logarithmetica; the other Trigonometria Britannica; the former
showing the Construction of Logarithmetical Tables; the latter, the
Construction of the Tables of Sines, Tangents and Secants, and the Doctrine of
Triangles, to the great advantage of Astronomy, and Astronomical Operations.

Mr. EDWARD WRIGHT, Contemporary with Mr. Briggs before mentioned, 1624.
having spent sometime in Cambridge, and being naturally addicted to
Mathematical Studies, was persuaded to accompany, and went along with the Right
Honorable George Earl of Cumberland, in his Expedition to the Azores, in the
year 1589. on purpose to add the Practice of Navigation to the Theory; and in
the year 1599. he published his Book called the Errors in Navigation. A most
excellent Work for the true describing a Sea-Chart; which Invention of his,
Gerardus Mercator published without owning the Author. Before the Publication
of this Work, in the year 1594, 1595, and 1596. He, by a large Quadrant of six
foot Radius, made Observation of the Sun's Meridian Altitude, and thereby not
only left the best Theory of the Sun's Motion at that Time, but new made
exquisite Tables, for the Sun's Declination. He held Intelligence with the most
Able Artists abroad, and being chosen Tutor in the Mathematics to Prince
Henry, he, by the help of some German Workmen, caused to be made for that
hopeful Prince, a large Sphere with curious Movements, which by the help of
Spring-Work, not only represented the Motion of the whole Celestial Sphere, but
showed likewise the Particular Systems of the Sun and Moon, and their Circular
Motions, together with their Places, and possibilities of eclipsing each other.
There is in it a Work by Wheel and Pinion for a Motion of 17100 years,
certainly effected, if the Sphere should be so long kept in Motion. This
Sphere, though thus made at a great Expense of Money and ingenious Industry, was
in the late Times of Devastation, cast aside among other Rubbidge, and had been
utterly lost and destroyed, had it not in the year 1646. been found out by Sir
Jonas Moore Knight, my worthy Friend, and at his great cost and charge restored
to its Pristine Perfection, remaining now at his House in the Tower, among
other Mathematical Instruments and Curiosities in his Possession. Besides the
Book of the Errors in Navigation before mentioned, the said Mr. Wright writ a
Book of the Use of the Sphere; a Piece of Dialling, and a Book of Navigation,
called the Haven finding Art; in all which he has shown himself not only a
Sedulous, but a Knowing Astronomer.

MARTINUS HORTENSIUS, of Delpht in Holland, Professor of Mathematics 1624.
at Amsterdam, Companion and Adjutor to Philippus Lansbergius, in his
Astronomical Studies, and no mean Observator of the Stars, undertook to answer
something which Kepler had inserted in the Preface to his Ephemerides, and put
forth a Dissertation, De Mercurio sub Sole viso, and Venere invisa; which he
addressed to Gassendus, who had written upon the same Subject.

ROBERTUS HUGHES Professor of Mathematics in Gresham-Colledge 1624.
London, set forth a Treatise of the Use of the Celestial and Terrestial
Globes, illustrated with Figures and Annotations, by Johannes Isaac Pontanus,
Professor of Philosophy at Harderwick in Gelderland.

ANDREAS ZERGOL, Native of Sancta Cruce in Carniola, a Jesuit, 1625.
Professor of Mathematics and Theology at Gratz in Styria, put forth
Chronological Theorems, of the year of our Savior's Nativity and Passion.

CAROLUS ANTONIUS MANZINUS, Professor of Philosophy ^NNI POST CHRISTUM.
at Bologna, a learned Mathematician, put forth Tables of the Primum Mobile,
cum 1626.
nova Art dirigendi, with a compendious Method of Directions. He writ likewise
of the Theory of the Planets; and was, at the time Ricciolus published his
Almagest; a diligent Observer of the Celestial Motions.

D. HENRION, Professor of Mathematics at Paris, put forth in French the 1626.
Problems of Regiomontanus touching the Use and Practice of his Tables of
Directions, to which he added large Annotations and Explications of his own,
together with Regiomontanus his Tables, by him corrected and augmented. In the
Preface to which Work he has laid down the Doctrine of Spherical Triangles: He
set forth in French Theodosius his Sphericks, published a Treatise of the Use
of the Globes, and Compass of Proportion, of Cosmography, and a Canon Manuel
des Sinus, etc. besides his Mathematical Collections, and Euclid's Elements.

JULIUS SCHILLERIUS, of Ausburg, Dr. of the Laws, put forth Coelum 1627.
Stellatum Christianum, reducing the fabulous Morphoses of the several
Constellations, and changing their Profane Names into those of Christian Saints
and Martyrs; Bayerus adding thereto a new and more accurate Uranometria.

ALBERTUS CURTIUS, a Jesuit, Native of Munichen in Bavaria, proposed 1627.
in the year 1627. a New System of Heaven to be disputed on at Dining; whose
ingenuity in the Theory of the Moon, his Aemulator Kepler not only admired, but
commended, in his Rudolphine Tables, c. 25.

ADRIANUS ULACK, of Gouda, challenges a place in this Catalogue, 1628.
for his Chiliads of Logarithms, resolving, by an admirable Compendium,
Astronomical, Geometrical, and Arithmetical Problems.

JACOBUS ROSIUS BIBERACENSIS put forth Ephemerides, 1628.
or a General Calendar Astronomical and Astrological, in which the rising and
setting of the Stars, with their several Effects for every Day of the Month
are set forth; A Work collected out of Ancient and Modern Authors, with no mean
Industry, as G. Vossius says of it. He styles himself Mathematician, and
Public Imperial Notary, which Office he executed at Biennae, or Biel, a Town
in Switzerland.

GULIELMUS JANSONSIUS CAESIUS, alias BLAEU, of 1628.
Amsterdam, an Excellent Artist, as well for his Geographical Tables, as his
Celestial Globes and Spheres, whereof he was the first Composer, according to
the Copernican System; of which G. Vossius affirms the World not to have seen
the like since Archimedes's. time. He likewise put forth a twofold Astronomical
Institution, according to the Ptolemaick and Copernican Hypothesis, which being
written in his own Language, was translated into Latin by Martinus Horten^ius.

JACOBUS BARTSCHIUS of Lauban, a City in the upper Lusa^ia o^ 1629.
Lausnitz, a Province adjoining to Bohemia, now under the Dominion of the Duke
of Saxe, Doctor of Physic, and Son-in-Law to the famous Kepler, set forth
Uran^burgum Strasburgicum sive Motuum Coelestium Ephemeris, Printed at ^
eipsick in the year 1629. He published likewise Planisphaerium Stellatum seu
vice-globus Coelestis in Plano Delineatus. He wrote also another Treatise, De
Indice Astronomico cum se^tem Rotulis Planetarum aliisque figuris, imprimis
Phases Lunares, Eclipses, and apparentes Planetarum Magnitud^es adumbrantes,
Printed at Norimberg in 4o, 1661.

CAROLUS MALAPERTIUS, a Flemming of Montz, and a Jesuit, ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
Professor of Mathematics at Doway, among other his Mathematical Works, put
1630.
forth a small Piece, De Maculis Solaribus, which he styled Sidera Austriaca.

LE SIEUR BOULENGER, a Frenchman, Reader in Ordinary to the 1630.
late King of France, has written a Treatise, in his own Language, of the
Sphere, in four Books, to which he has added a fifth, touching the use
thereof; the third Edition whereof was Printed at Paris, 1648.

CHRISTOPHORUS SCHEINERUS, of the Society of Jesus, a 1630.
Native of Mundeilhen in Swaben, Professor, sometime of the Hebrew Tongue and
Mathematics at Fribourg and Ingolstadt, afterward Rector of the College of
Nisse or Nissa in Silesia, observed, about the same time with Galilaeo, the
Spots in the Sun. The most Eminent Pieces by which he has signalized his Name,
are these; Oculus, seu Fundamentum Opticum; Sol Ellipticus, Disquisitiones
Mathematicae, De Controversiis and Novitatibus Astronomicis, Apelles post
Tabulam; and lastly Rosa Ursina, in which he has so excellently and learnedly
written of the Solar Spots, that, according to the Judgment of Des Carts and
Hevelius, nothing can be expected in that kind more satisfactory.

DIONYSIUS PETAVIUS, Native of Orleans in France, of the Society 1630.
of Jesus, the Varro of our Age, as Ricciolus styles him, has not only merited
much by his Studies in Theology, but in Chronology likewise, and the Reason of
Times, and particularly in Astronomy; as his two Volumes, the one, De Doctrina
Temporum, the other Rationarium Temporum, and his Uranologium sufficiently
evidence.

JOANNES BAPTISTA MORINUS, Regius Professor of Mathematics 1630.
at Paris, put forth several Astronomical Tractates; as first, Nova Mundi
Sublunaris Anatomia; Another with this Title, Famosi Problematis De Telluris
Motu vel Quiet, hactenus optata Solutio. A third was entitled, Arae Telluris
fractae, written in opposition to Gassendus's Book, De Motu impresso a Motore
Translato. Three Books of the Doctrine of the Sphere. Tabulae Rudolphinae ad
accuratum and facile Compendium redactae, to which is annexed a Compendium of
Trigonometry, Plain and Spherical. Constructio Figurae Coelestis; Nova
Dirigendi Methodus; Et de Planetarum Revolutionibus tam Mundanis, quam
Genethliacis. He published a Book in French called Remarques Astrologiques,
being a Commentary on Ptolemy's Centiloquium. He put forth likewise Nine Books
of Longitude, under the title of Astronomia a Fundamentis integre and exact
restituta. To which is to be added his long-studied Work, entitled, Astrologia
Gallica, published after his death.

HENRICUS PHILIPPI, a Jesuit, Professor of Philosophy and Theology 1630.
at Gratz, Vienna and Prague, of whom Ricciolus reports, that Plurimis
Operibus, Chronologiam Universam, praesertim sacram, illustravit. The Works by
him put forth are, first, Chronological Questions, for reconciling the Julian
years of our Lord, and those of Nabonassar, with the Jewish Era: Likewise
Chronological Questions, touching the year of our Savior's Birth and Passion;
in the first of which is explained the Roman Calendar, with the Epacts,
Calends, Ides, Nones, and Beginnings of the Months, as well of the Greeks,
Syro-Chaldeans, and Egyptians; as also of the Feriae, Cycles of the Sun and
Moon, and of Indictions, etc. G. Voss. 1632.


ADAMUS TANNERUS, a Jesuit of Inspruck, Professor of Mathematics at Munichen,
Ingolstadt, and Vienna, wrote a most learned dissertation De Caelo; as also
another Piece, entitled Astrologia Sacra.

PHILIPPUS LANSBERGIUS, of Gaunt, put forth at Middleburgh, ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
Tables of the Celestial Motions, fitted to the Meridian of Goese; together
with 1632.
a Thesaurus of Observations, and the Theory of the Planets. He put forth also
Progymnasmata* Astronomiae restitutae, and three Books Uranometriae. Whereto
may be added his Commentationes in Motum Diurnum and Annuum, grounded partly on
his own, partly upon Martinus Hortensius's Observations.

JACOBUS LANSBERGIUS, Doctor of Physic, wrote an Apology 1633.
for Philippus Lansbergius his Commentary In Motum Diurnum and Annuum Terrae,
against Fromondus.

MELCHIOR INCHOFER, a Jesuit, sometime Professor of Mathematics, 1633.
Philosophy, and Theology, at Messina in Sicily, wrote a Treatise entitled,
Tractatus Syllepticus De Statione Terrae, and Motu Solis, secundum Sacram
Scripturam, and SS. Patres: And an Examen Thematum Coelestium variorum
Astronomorum usque ad Tychonem; the Reason of calculating Eclipses, and of the
Theory of the Planets; these three last published not under his own Name, but
that of Academicus Vertumnius.

EVERARDUS WELPERUS, of Strasbourgh, put forth a Compendium 1634.
of Astronomy, as well Spherical as Theorical, collected out of various
Authors, from whom (says G. Voss.) much more might have been expected, had he
not been oppressed by a low and necessitous Fortune.

PETRUS CRUGERUS, Professor of Mathematics at Dantzick, and 1634.
Master to Hevelius, besides his Logarithmical Tables, undertook to write
Astronomia Dantiscana, which yet he lived not to finish, as his Scholar
Hevelius testifies. He wrote likewise another Piece, entitled Uranodromus
Cometicus.

ANDREAS ARZET, a Jesuit of Constance, put forth a Mathematical Clavis, 1634.
and diligently observed the Stars, as Ricciolus affirms, as long as either his
Occasions or the Gout would permit; many of whose Observations, especially
about Eclipses, he freely communicated to Ricciolus.

BONA VENTURA CAVALLERIUS, Iesuatus Mediolanensis, Disciple 1635.
to the Excellent Galilaeo, and Primary-Professor of Mathematics in the
University of Bologna, put forth Directorium Generale Uranometricum, Practica
Astrologia, and a Century of Mathematical (and among them Astronomical)
Problem^ a Person of an acute Wit and Judgment, and by Ricciolus acknowledged
to have been no mean Assistant and Promotor of his Astronomical Studies. He w^
Trigonometria, wherein are some Astronomical Problems more exquisitly
demonstrated than are else where to be met with.

PAULUS GULDINUS, Native of S. Gal, of the Society of Jesus, 1635.
taught Philosophy and Mathematics at Rome, Gratz and Vienna. He wrote in
defense of the Roman Calendar, against Sethus Calvisius; in which Work he also
opposes Scaliger's Diatriba, De Aequinoctiorum Praecessione. He also published
a Geographical Problem, touching the difference in numbering the days, between
those that sail hence to the New World, and those that inhabit there. Not to
mention his Centrobarica, and other Geometrical Pieces, of which Ricciolus in
Chronolog^ Astronom.

HUGO SEMPILIUS, by Birth a Scotch-man, by Profession a Jesuit in the 1635.
College at Madrid, writ twelve Books De Mathematicis Disciplinis. In the
three* last of which he treats distinctly, De Astronomia, De Astrologia, and De
Calendario, ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
Printed at Antwerp in folio in the year 1635. and dedicated to Philip the
Fourth King of Spain. In the End of which Work he has annexed several
Catalogues of Mathematical Authors, and among them of Astronomers and
Astrologers, but giving no more of them than their bare Names.

NATHANIEL CARPENTER, sometimes Fellow of Exeter-Colledge 1635.
in Oxford, put forth Geography Delineated-in two Books; in the first of which
(containing the Spherical Part) among other things, he treats of the Magnetical
Affections and Motion of the Earth, of its Site and Proportion in respect of
the Heavens; of the Longitudes and Latitudes of Places, and their several Ways
of Invention. In the second (containing the Topical Part) he treats likewise
among other things of the Adjuncts of Place in relation to the Heavens, either
Northward, Southward, Eastward, Westward, with the Differences of the
respective Hemispheres.; and several other things worthy the Knowledge of a
young Student in Astronomy, Printed at Oxford 1635.4o. Upon the same Account
may be here inserted Varinius his Geography, being much after the same Method,
and a very useful Piece, especially since lately reprinted at Cambridge, with
the Addition of the several Schemes wanting in the former Edition..

JOHANNES PHOCYLLIDES HOLWARDA wrote an Epitome 1635.
Astronomiae Reformatae, and a succinct Examen of Lanbergius's Astronomy.

ABDIAS TRUE, Professor of Mathematics at Nuremberg, Astronomiae 1637.
partem Sphaericam accurata ibidem Methodo consignabat, says G. Vossius, L. De
Scient. Mathemat. to which is to be added his Nucleus Astrologiae correctae,
written in High Dutch, and Printed at Norimberg 1651.4o. and his Tota Mathesis
there likewise Printed in the year 1657.4o.

JACOBUS HUMIUS, a Scotch-man, Professor of Mathematics at Paris, 1637.
liath published, besides diverse other Mathematical Pieces, a Treatise of the
Sphere, according to the Hypotheses of Ptolemy and Copernicus; and another, of
the Theory of the Planets, according to the Doctrine of Ptolemy, both written
in French.

ANDREAS ARGOLUS; Professor of Mathematics in the University of 1638.
Padua, put forth Ephemerides, continuing from the year 1630. to the year 1700.
and another Work, entitled Pandosium Sphaericum. He writ likewise De Diebus
Criticis, De Decubitu Aegrorum, with above a hundred Genitures of Popes,
Cardinals and Princes. Also a Piece of Genethliacal Astrology called Ptolemaeus
Parvus Arabibus junctus. Tables of oblique Ascensions, and the whole Art of
Direction, he calls it Tabulae Primi Mobilis; some Astrologick Aphorisms, and
others, under the Title of Astrologia Aphoristica.

FORTUNIUS LICETUS, of Genua, an eminent Philosopher, among 1640.
other his learned Works, put forth a Treatise De Novis Astris and De Cometis.
Item, Controversiae. De Cometis, De Motu and Parallaxi Cometarum; of the Comet
seen in the years 1642. and 1643. De Lucidis in Sublimi; De Regulari Motu
Planetarum; De Lunae subobscuura luce, prope Conjunctiones, and in Eclipsibus
observata; De Terrae unico Centro Motus, etc.

CAROLUS GONTRANUS, Doctor of Sorbonne, and General of the 1640.
Oratorian Order, put forth a small Piece, Pro Astrologia, sed sana, as
Ricciol. in Chronol. Astron. affirms.

BALTHAZAR GONRADUS, a Jesuit, born at Nisse, Professor of ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
Philosophy and Mathematics at Olmutz, the Metropolis of Moravia, published a
1640.
New Reason of Cosmographical Tables, Described in a right Angled Cone, whose
Basis is the Equator; and made some Observations of Eclipses, which he
communicated to Ricciolus.

HADRIANUS METIUS, of Alcmaire, wrote learnedly of the Use of the 1640.
Globe, says Ricciolus, and in the first Book of his Geometry resolves diverse
Astronomical Problems, Geometrically and Arithmetically. He published likewise
his Primum Mobile, wherein he treats De Sphaera, Planisphaerio, sive
Astrolabio, etc. His Brother Iacobus Metius being one of the first Inventors of
the Telescope. G. Voss.

Doctor JOHN WILKINS, sometimes Warden of Wadham College in 1640.
Oxford, afterward Bishop of Chester, wrote about the year 1638. Two Tractates,
in one endeavoring to prove the Moon a World, in the other the Earth a Planet,
without putting his Name to either of them; yet they were so well known to be
his, that Langrenus in his Map of the Moon (dedicated to the King of Spain)
names one of the Spots of his Selenographick Map after his Name. He highly
promoted the Study and Perfecting of Astronomy both at Oxford, whilst he was
Warden, and at London whilst he was Bishop, and Fellow of the Royal Society; he
died in November 1672.

NICOLAUS CABAEUS, a Native of Ferrara, of the Society of Jesus, 1640.
Professor of Philosophy at Parma, besides his Magnetic Philosophy, wrote a
Comment In Aristotelis Meteora, and other Pieces of abstruse Learning, wherein
he treats of many things well deserving the Knowledge of an Astronomer or
Cosmographer, especially touching Comets, the Galaxie, etc. He died at Genua,
where also with great applause he had publicly taught and professed
Mathematics.

NICHOLAUS CAUSSINUS, a Jesuit, Native of Troyes in France, 1640.
wrote a particular Treatise De Domo Dei, that is, of the Heavens, and the
Celestial Bodies, wherein he learnedly and acutely argues against the
Professors of Judiciary Astrology.

JOHANNES ANTONIUS ROFFENUS, of Bologna, Disciple to 1640.
Maginus, and an eminent Astronomer and Astrologer, whom Ricciolus affirms to
have published many Astrological Discourses, but gives not the particulars
thereof.

GULIELMUS SCHICKARDUS, Professor of the Oriental Languages 1640.
and Astronomy at Tubinge, put forth a little Piece, entitled Astroscopium,
with a Synoptical Table, for the easier investigation of the Places of the
Planets. He published likewise a Dissertation, addressed to Gassendus, De
Mercurio sub Sole viso, with other Celestial Observations, and particularly
touching Eclipses. His Astroscopium was published by Johannes Ruffius, at
Nordling in the year 1655.

WILLIAM MILBOURN Master of Arts, Curate at Brancespeth near 1640.
Dunham, aged about forty years, was very knowing in Arithmetic, particularly
in Algebra (having in the year 1628. extracted the Root of this Equation, 1,000
= aaaaa - aaaa - 4aaa + 3aa + 3a. before he had seen Hariott's Praxis) and in
Geometry. But his greatest Labors were in Astronomy, and in his Observation of
the Stars, he used a good Cross Staff, and a Sextans of five foot Radius, he
discovered the weakness of Lansbergius his Astronomy, and verified Kepler's
Tables, which he turned into Decimals, and made Tables after Kepler's
subsidiary way ( page 97. Tab. Rudolph.) which were sent to his Brother Mr.
Milbourn a Stationer in ANNI POST CHRISTUM
London, to be Printed; but never passed the Press, being yet preserved in MS.
in the hands of Sir Jonas Moore Knight. All his Observations and other Papers,
etc. were most unhappily lost, by the coming in of the Scots, in the year 1639.

HIEREMIAS HORROX, born at Toxteth, a small Village near Liverpoole 1640.
in ^ancashire, after some time of Study at Emanuel College in Cambridge,
about the year 1633. first applied himself to Astronomical Observations, having
by his industry considerably advanced that Science; as first by his excellent
Tractate of Venus discovered in the Sun, an Observation which never had been
made by any before, published by the famous Hevelius, together with his own
Mercurius in Sole visus, and illustrated with his accurate Annotations. His
other Posthume Works, or rather his imperfect Papers were lately digested and
published, by the great care and labor of that learned Mathematician, Doctor
John Wallis, Savilian Professor of Geometry in the University of Oxford.
Wherein he first asserts and promotes the Keplerian Astronomy, against the
Hypotheses of Lansbergius, which he proves to be inconsistent among themselves;
not agreeable with former Observations exactly made; nor the Precepts of them
well demonstrated. He likewise disputes of the Celestial Bodies and their
Motions, and answers the Cavils of Hortensius against Ty^ho; gives a new Theory
of the Moon, to which are added the Lunar Numbers of Mr. Flamstead. There are
also Extracts of several Letters of his to his Friend and Associate in Study
Mr. Crabtree, upon diverse Astronomical Subjects, with a Catalogue of
Astronomical Observations made by the said Horrox, without allowance of the
Excentricity of the Eye, which he afterward castigated by a correction fairly
written with his own hand.

WILLIAM CRABTREE, a Clothier of Broughton near Manchester, in 1640.
Lancashire, was a diligent Observer of the Stars, as appears by his
Observations printed by Doctor Wallis 1673. in the Edition of Mr Horrox his
Works, which amount not to the tenth part of what he had made. He converted
Kepler's Rudolphine Tables into Decimals, for his own use whereof there is now
a MS. Copy remaining with the said Sir Jonas Moore. Mr. Horrox and this Mr.
Crabtree died in the year 1641. having about a year before had the happy
accquaintance of the most incomparable and ingenious Gentleman,

WILLIAM GASCOYGNE of Middleton in the County of York Esquire, 1640.
who for some years before, had taken much pains in Astronomical Observations,
and invented ways to grind Glasses. He was the first that used two unequal
Glasses; had at that time a Tube that drew out fifteen foot in length, of his
own working. The Object-glass was a Meniscus. He invented ways to measure
small Angles by the Prospect-Glass to a second; and had he lived, he had
certainly brought great perfection to Telescopes. Mr. Crabtree taking a Journey
into York shire in the year 1639. writ thence to Mr. Horrox, as follows. The
first thing Mr. Gascoygne showed me was a large Telescope amplified and adorned
with new Inventions of his own, whereby he can take the Diameters of the Sun or
Moon, or any small Angle in the Heavens, or upon the Earth most exactly through
the Glass to a second. A device much desired, but little expected, etc. In the
year 1641. Mr. Gascoygne writ to Mr. Crabtree, that he questioned not to
provide an Instrument to take at once the Distances of three Points in the
Periphery of the Earth's shade of the Moon, the Diameters of the Planets, etc.
But he and all his excellent Inventions and Labors were lost by his Death,
which was in his late Majesty's Service, in the Fight at Marston Moore.

These Four, were Lights of the first Magnitude, in the Northern Hemisphere,
who were happily brought to the Acquaintance of one another by the means of
Christopher Townley of Carr in Lancoshire Esquire, who stuck not for any cost
o^ ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
labor to promote as well Astronomical as other Mathematical Studies by a
diligent Correspondence kept and maintained with the learned Professors in
those Sciences,; upon which Account he was very dear to All the Four; and for
which Reason, as for the Particular respect I owe him, he merits to be named in
thi^ Catalogue. The others that follow, though they were not so conspicuous as
the former, were yet of considerable Luster, and afforded no mean Influence
toward carrying on the Work of Astronomy in those Parts.

In the first Place, Sir JONAS MOORE Knight, Surveyor General of His 1640.
Majesty's Ordnance, my Worthy Friend and Colleague, born at Whitebee, in
Lancashire, by his diligent endeavors, contributed not a little to the
advancement of the Astronomical Design, so well begun and prosecuted by the
much deserving Persons before mentioned. He turned Bulialdus his Tables into
Decimals, after Mr. Milbourn's Method, and writ of the Sphere, and its several
Projections; which Work he has now by him, though it were to be wished, he
would rather, by the publication thereof, afford the ingenious Lovers of these
Studies an opportunity at once of witnessing, and receiving the benefit of his
Labors.

GEORGE WHARTON Esquire, born at Kirby-Kendal in the County 1640.
of Westmerland, my ancient kind Friend, and now Treasurer and Play Master to
the Office of His Majesty's Ordnance, complying with the incitements of the
said Mr. William Milbourn, addicted himself very assiduously to the Calculation
and Observation of the Celestial Motions; till the late Rebellious Times,
deprived him of his Liberty; and since that, the frequent Accesses of the Gout,
have taken from him, the opportunity of prosecuting those Studies with that
Assiduity as formerly.

Mr. JEREMIAH SHACKERLEY a great Pains-taker in calculating 1640.
and comparing several Observations, he writ Tabulae Britannicae grounded
chiefly upon the Theories and Observations of Mr. Horrox, which were Printed in
8o. about the year 1647. he dyed in the East Indies.

Mr. NATHAN PIGHELLS, a very diligent Observer, etc. to whom may 1640.
be added some others, which for Brevities sake I here omit. All which Examples
may serve as very inducive Arguments to persuade the learned Doctor Wallis to
be of another Opinion than that, which (I presume through want of due
Information) he declared in his Preface to Mr. Horrox his Works, where he
says; ^atendum est paucissimos tunc Dierum in Anglia, partibus saltem
Borealibus, Studiis illis Animum sedulo applicuisse; when as it is more than
probable, that if some of the Persons before mentioned had not been overtaken
by too untimely Death, others of them by the fatal Calamities of the late
horrid Rebellion, Astronomy had by their Labors been most considerably
advanced. And I question whether so many Able Artists were to be met with again
at the same time, in any one Province in England, beside.

FRANCISCUS MONTEBRUNUS, a Noble Genouese, and Doctor 1641.
of the Civil and Canon Laws, composed out of Lansbergius's Tables,
Ephemerides, calculated for the Meridian of Bologna, commencing in the year
1641. and ending in the year 1660.

JOHANNES GEORGIUS HERVARTUS, of Howenburgh, 1642.
Doctor in the Laws, set forth a new kind of Chronology, grounded upon the
Calculation of Eclipses; which yet both Petavius and Ricciolus have undertaken
to refute.

EMANUEL PORTUS set forth a Treatise, entitled Dipluranologia, ANNI POST
CHRISTUM.
giving an account of the going back of the Sun in the time of Hezekias, and of
1643.
the standing still of the Luminaries in the time of Joshua; Printed at Padua
in the year 1642.

ANTONIUS DEUSINGIUS writ a Dissertation De vero Systemate 1643.
Mundi, Printed at Amsterdam in the year 1643. In which the Copernican System
is reformed; and those numberless Orbs in that of Ptolemy, by which human
Apprehension is so distracted, are quite taken away.

GEORGIUS FOURNERIUS, a Jesuit, Professor of Mathematics at 1643.
Paris, published about this time his famed Piece of Hydrography; out of which
says Ricciolus, Doctrina profundior hauritur, quam Mare ipsum, quod Monumento
adeo nobili illustravit. Of his skill in observing the Celestial Phoenomena,
especially Eclipses, Ricciolus gives ample testimony.

PETRUS HERIGONUS, Professor of Mathematics at Paris, wrote a 1644.
Cursus Mathematicus, in several Tomes; in the Fourth of which he treats De
Sphaera Mundi, and De usu Mappae Geographic^; and in the Fifth, of the Theory
of the Planets.

JOHANNES SELDENUS sometime the Great Dictator of Learning 1644.
in this Nation, besides his other Works of admirable value, has gained no
mean Esteem by his Dissertation De Anno Civili, and Calendario Veteris
Ecclesiae seu Reipublicae Iudaicae, Printed at London by Richard Bishop 1644.
4o.

MICHAEL FLORENTIUS LANGRENUS, Cosmographer and 1644.
Mathematician to Philip IV. King of Spain, wrote a Treatise of the Observation
of the Longitude by Sea and Land, from the Obscuration, or Illumination of the
Spots of the Moon. To which end he designed a New Selenography, under the Title
of Selenographia Langreniana, sive Lumina Austriaca Philippica; of whom see
more in Ricciolus, Chron. Astronom.

JOHANNES GREGORY, Native of Amersham in Buckinghamshire, 1644.
and sometime Chaplain of Christ-Church in Oxford, merits a place in this
Catalogue, for his learned Tractates De Aeris and Epochis, and his Description
and Use of the Terrestial Globe, and of Charts and Mapps, published in his
Posthume Works, among other Pieces of exquisite erudition, and some
Astronomical and Astrological Discourses in his Annotations upon the Scripture,
in which he shows no Vulgar Learning.

GEORGIUS POLACCUS, a Venetian, set forth Anticopernicum Catholicum, 1644.
in which he maintains the Stability of the Earth, and the Sun's motion.

ALBERTUS LINEMANUS of Prussia, Professor of Mathematics in 1644.
the Academy of Konningsberg, put forth a small Tract of Astronomical
Observations, especially of Eclipses, to which he gave the Title of Memoria
Saecularis, as Ricciolus affirms.

JACOBUS GRANDAMICUS, a Jesuit, put forth a Treatise, entitled 1645.
Nova Demonstratio Immobilitatis Terrae petita ex virtute Magnetica, Printed at
La Fleche in France 4o. He writ likewise a Treatise of the Nature, Motion, and
Effects of the Comet, which appeared in the year 1665. mentioned in the Iournal
des Seavants.

EMANUEL MAIGNANUS, a Friar of the Order of St. Francis de ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
Paula, put forth an excellent Piece, under the Title of Perspectivae (...); in
1645.
the First and Fourth Book whereof, he treats of many things touching
Refractions, Scitu digna and Astronomis Utilia, says Ricciolus.

LAURENTIUS EICHSTADIUS, Doctor of Physic, Native of Stetin, 1645.
in Pomerania, and Professor of Mathematics at Dantzick, reckoned by
Bulialdus, (in Prologo Astro Philol.) among the most eminent Astronomers of his
Time, put forth among other his Works Paedia Astrologica, and Ephemerides of
thirty years, ending in the year 1665. to which he added a Compendious Canon of
Logarithms and Mesologarithms; together with Tables of the Primum Mobile,
Calculation of Eclipses, and the like. He likewise published Tabulae Harmonicae
Coelestium Motuum, tum Primi, tum Secundorum, chiefly grounded upon the
Observations and Hypotheses of Tycho Brahe. Likewise a Century of Astrologick
Aphorisms.

MARINUS MERSENNUS, a Frenchman, a Minime Friar, of the Order 1645.
of St. Francis de Paula, has, in his learned Comment upon Genesis, added many
curious Astronomical Observations; and in his Mathematical Synopsis, not only
by his own Industry, but also by the publication of others learned Labors,
has much contributed to the advancement of Astronomy.

PETRUS GASSENDUS, Dean of the Cathedral Church of Digne in 1645.
Provence, and Regius Professor of Mathematics in the University of Paris, the
learned Restorer and Vindicator of the Epicurean Philosophy, among other the
eternal Monuments of his Erudition, has left diverse Astronomical Tractates; as
first, four Epistles, De apparente Magnitudine Solis humilis and sublimis;
three, De Motu impresso a Motore translato, wherein he defends the Copernican*
Hypothesis, of the Earth's motion; another De ^arheliis, seu Solibus quatuor
spuriis Romae circa verum visis, Anno 1629. He put forth also, about the time
of his admission into the Mathematical Chair at Paris, an Astronomical
Institution, Printed lately at London, with the addition of Kepler's
Dioptricks; and has left, among other his Works, a Volume of Celestial
Observations, which from the year 1621. to the year 1655. he made with
assiduous care and accurate speculation. A Treatise also entitled, Mercurius
in Sole visus and Venus invisa, Printed at Paris in the year 1631. His Judgment
about nine pretended Satellites of Jupiter, in Answer to Rheita. Solstitialis
Altitudo Massiliensis, seu Proportio Gnomonis ad Solstitialem Umbram observata
Massiliae, 1636. in an Epistle to Vendelinus. The Lives of Purbacchius and
Regiomontanus, as likewise those of Copernicus and Tycho Brahe, the most
illustrious Astronomers of their Times; and a Compendious Exposition of the
Roman Calendar. Besides the Life of the incomparable Peireskius; and his
Epistles to diverse eminent and learned Persons, wherein he frequently treats,
upon occasion given, of Astronomical Subjects.

RENATUS DES CARTS, Native of La Hay en Touraine, a Town on 1645.
the Confines of Poicton in France, of a Generous Extraction (his Father having
been President of the Parliament at Rennes in Britanny) one of the most Signal
Philosophers and Mathematicians, which this last, or (happily) former Ages have
produced. Who having given new Life and Light to Philosophy; added likewise no
mean Luster to Mathematical Arts, and particularly to that of Astronomy. For in
the third Part of his Principles of Philosophy, (the Subject whereof is De Mun^
Aspectabili.) He treats of the Distances and Magnitudes of the Sun, Moon, and
the other Planets; examins the several Hypotheses of Ptolemy, Copernicus, and
Ty^ Brahe, Discourses of the Maculae and faculae Solares, of Comets, and their
several Phenomenon, of the Moon, her various Phases, and different Motions,
with diverse other Particulars relating to Astronomy; to which likewise he
contributed in his ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
Dioptricks by his curious Inventions for the more exact polishing of Glasses,
and bringing Telescopes to a greater Perfection, for the Contemplation and
Observation of the Celestial Bodies. Of which Subject likewise he sometimes
treats in his Epistles, particularly in the 67th Epistle of his Second Tome (to
Mersennus) the Argument whereof is, De Astrorum Observatione, and utilitate
quae inde capi potest. See more of this Excellent Person in the brief Summary
of his Life drawn by the accurate Pen of Lipstorpius in his Specim. Philosoph.
Carts; and in that written by Petrus Borellius, wherein he gives a particular
Catalogue of all his Works and Writings.

ANTONIUS MARIA SCHYRLAEUS DE REITHA, a Capucine 1645.
Friar, and Astronomus non ignobilis, according to Ricciolus, wrote an
Astronomical Treatise, entitled Oculus Enoch and Eliae, seu Radius
Sydereomysticus, Printed in the year 1645.

ISMAEL BULIALDUS, Son of Ismael Bulialdus, and Native of Loudun, 1645.
a Town in the Province of Poictou in France, by Ricciolus styled, Astronomus
profundae indaginis, has highly merited, as well by his publication of several
ancient Mathematical and Astronomical Authors (some of whom we have already
mentioned) as by his own most learned Labors, having first published his
Dissertation, entitled Philolaus, sive De vero Systemate Mundi. Afterward in
the year 1645. he set forth his Astronomia Philolaica, grounded upon the
Hypothesis of the Earth's motion, and the Elliptical Orbit described by the
Planets motion about a Cone; illustrated with solid Demonstrations, to which he
has added Tables, by him entitled Tabulae Philolaicae, in which the motions
of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mercury are more accurately represented than in the
Rudolphine Tables, being for the most part much easier than those, a Work,
says Ricciolus, Omnibus Astronomiae studiosis, sed non sine attentione,
legendum. He likewise published about the year 1666. Monita duo ad Astronomos;
the first, touching a New Star, in the Neck of the Whale, appearing at some
times, at others, disappearing; the other, touching a cloudy Star in the
Northern part of Andromeda's Girdle, not discovered by any of the Ancients,
sometimes appearing, and sometimes not. Which Phenomenon he recommends to the
Observation of all curious Astronomers.

FRANCISCO GENERINI set forth in Italian the Design of a 1645.
Moving Globe, composed by him, to demonstrate the diurnal and annual motion of
the Moon, together with the inequality of days; to which is annexed a
Discourse of Natural and Artificial Hours, declaring the meaning of the said
Author touching the said Invention, and an account of many other Operations to
be wrought by the said Globe, besides those before mentioned, Printed at
Florence, in 4o. 1645.

JOHANNES BAINBRIDGE, sometime Savilian Professor of Astronomy 1645.
in the University of Oxford, writ a Treatise, of the Dog Star, and of the
Canicular days, (published by Mr. Graves, together with a Demonstration of the
Heliacal Rising of Sirius, or the Dog Star, for the Parallel of the Lower
Egypt) Printed at Oxford in the year, 1648. He writ likewise of the Comet in
1618. and published Procli Sphaera, with Ptolemy's Chronological Canon.

ATHANASIUS KIRCHERUS, a Jesuit, Native of Buchon, within 1645.
the Territories of the Abbot of Fulda, in Germany, sometime Professor of the
Oriental Languages (in which, by Ricciolus, he is said to be ad stuporem usque
peritus) as also of Mathematics at Wirtsberg, and Avignon, afterward Ordinary
Professor of Mathematics in the Jesuits College at Rome, has in most of his
Works treated largely upon the Subject of Astronomy; as in his Oedipus
Aegyptiacus, where ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
he displayes Systematica Mundorum, sive de Mundo, Mundorumque varietate ex
mente Aegyptiorum; De Astrologia Aegyptiorum and Chaldaeorum Hieroglyphica; and
more particularly in his Musurgia, where he treats De Coelorum Symphonismo; De
admiranda Mundanorum Corporum ad invicem proportione; De particulari
Symphonismo Planetarum; De Choro Ioviali; De Choro Solari and Martio; De
Harmonia Stellarum Fixarum; In his Book De Magnete, where he fully handles the
Subject of Magnetic Astronomy, under the several Heads of Sphaera Magnetica,
Uranographia Sciotherico-Magnetica, and Horologiographia Magnetica; In his Book
entitled Ars magna Lucis and Umbrae; wherein besides his various Horography he
treats De Astrolabiographia, and Geographia Gnomonica, Gnomonica
Physico-Astrologica; De Art Anacamptica, sive Astronomia Reflexa; De Art
Anaclastica, sive Astronomia Refracta, and De Cosmometria Gnomonica, hoc est,
De Mundi Lucumbris Dimensione, etc. as also in his Itinerarium Ecstaticum
Coeleste, in which to express him in his own words, Mundi Opificium, i. e.
Caelestis Expansi, Siderumque tam errantium quam fixorum natura, vires,
proprietates, singulorumque compositio and structura, ab infimo Telluris Globo
usque ad ultima Mundi confinia perfecti Raptus Integumentum explorata nova
Hypothesi exponitur ad veritatem, Printed at Rome 1656.

JOHANNES DE EPIERES, Doctor of Divinity and Grand Prior of 1645.
the Monastery of Aquicintinum, put forth an Universal Calendar, wherein he
proposes an easy Method for finding out the Golden Number, Epact, Dominical
Letter, Moveable Feasts, and Indictions, for any year proposed, and promises a
larger Work under the Title of Astronomia Aquicinctina, which whether ever
published, does not yet appear to me.

DIRK REMBRANTZ, in his Netherlandish Astronomy, treats of Planet-Wisers, 1646.
and gives the Reader an Eclipsigraphia, showing when an Eclipse of the Sun
happens, what and how great a part of the Earth will be obscured thereby.

ROBERTUS DUDLEY, an Englishman, known abroad, especially in 1646.
Italy, by the pretended Title of Duke of Northumberland, published three
Volumes in folio, entitled Arcano del Mare, in which are Sea-Charts,
Directions for the building of Galleys, and a Description of many Planetary
Instruments.

SAMUEL FOSTER, a learned Professor of Astronomy in Gresham-Colledge, 1646.
contrived several ingenious Planetary Instruments, published afterward in his
Posthumous Miscellanies.

SILVIO PHILOMANTIO, an Italian, under that feigned Name, and 1646.
in that Language put forth Ruota Planetaria, which Ricciolus ascribes to
Bonaventura Cavallerio.

PHILIPPUS LABBEE, a learned French Jesuit, Native of Bourges en 1647.
Berry, put forth, in his own Language, L'Abbrege de la Sphere, being a
compendious Treatise of the Sphere, reduced by an easy and short Method into
XII. Chapters, with some important Advertisements thereupon, Printed in the
year 1647.

JACOBUS USSERIUS, the late most learned and Reverend Archbishop 1648.
of Armagh, published a Dissertation of the Macedonian and Asiatick Solar year,
together with a Parapegma of Greek Astronomers, accommodated to the Reasons of
the Macedonian and Julian years; Vide Voss. L. De Scient. Mathemat.

GOTHOFREDUS WENDELINUS, Canon of the Collegiate 1648.
Church of Conde in Flanders, published Idaea Atlanticarum Tabularum, grounded
ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
upon the Observations of diverse Eclipses. He set forth likewise Lampas
Arcanorum Coelestium, and wrote upon several other Astronomical Subjects, as
may appear by his Epistles to Gassendus, and those of Gassendus to him,
published in his Works.

AEGIDIUS MATROPTUS composed something of the Sphere, and 1648.
Machinationem conversionibus Secundorum Mobilium repraesentandis, commended by
Gassendus, in his Epistles.

CLAUDIUS SALMASIUS having signalized his Name by diverse 1648.
learned Works, has also endeavored to give honor thereto by his Diatribes
De Annis Climactericis, and De Antiqua Astrologia, Printed at Leiden 1648. He
has interspersed likewise in his Plinian Exercitations sundry Astronomical
Arguments, and some Critical Observations upon Manilius, but such as are now
and then severely met with by Petavius in Uranolog.

Mr. WILLIAM OUGHTRED, a learned Divine, and most eminent 1648.
Mathematician; famous for his Clavis Mathematicae; at the End whereof is a
Treatise of Dialling, which is an Astronomical Subject. He was likewise the
Author of the Circles of Proportion, where (not to mention the Double
Horizontal Dial) there is a Treatise of Navigation, besides diverse Astronomical
Propositions. He likewise published a Treatise of Trigonometry, being the first
Author that demonstrated two Proportions for finding both the Angles, at the
Base of an oblique Spherical Triangle, at two Operations, when two Sides with
the Angle are given.

PHILIPPUS FINELLA wrote in Italian Planetaria Physionomia, Printed 1649.
at Naples 1649. 4o.

SCIPIO CLARAMONTIUS, of Caesena, a Knight, and formerly Professor 1650.
of Philosophy in the University of Pisa, a most expert Mathematician, put
forth many learned Pieces, among which the chief are these; Anti-Tycho, in
defense of the Sublunary Place of Comets, with its Apology, and Supplement; but
answered by Kepler, in his Hyperaspistes. Of three New Stars, against the
Opinion of Tycho Brahe, which is yet defended by Galilaeo, in his Mundane
System; And XVI. Books De Universo Anno, published in the year 1644 as also a
particular Treatise, De Phasibus Lunae, Geometrically demonstrated; and another
entitled Anti-Philolaus. He wrote also against the truth of Telescopes,
asserting that the Earth cannot reflect a Light to the Moon; but is answered by
Zucchius, in his Optics.

MARIUS BETTINUS, a Native of Bologna, of the Society of Jesus, 1650.
Professor of Moral Philosophy and Mathematics at Parma, among other his
Works, published Apiarium, seu Paradoxa universae Philosophiae Mathematicae, in
the Eighth Book whereof he treats chiefly touching matters Astronomical; which
Subject he also handles in his Aerarium Mathematicum. He writ likewise in
Vindication of himself, being accused by Ricciolus, of committing many Errors
in Astronomy, a thin folio Book published in Latin.

JOHANNES MARCUS MARCI, Counselor and Physician to the 1650.
Emperor Ferdinand the Third, and primary Professor of Physic in the
University of Prague, wrote, among other Physico-Mathematical Tractates, a
Particular Treatise, De Longitudine, seu Differentia inter duos Meridianos, una
cum Motu vero Lunae. inveniendo ad tempus datae Observationis, Printed at
Prague in the year 1650. 8o.

JOHANNES GRAVES sometime Savilian Professor of Astronomy in the ANNI POST
CHRISTUM.
University of Oxford; A Person who as well by his Foreign Travels, as his
learned 1650.
Labors, has gained to himself an unperishing Reputation; as his
Pyramidegraphia, and de Pede and Denario Romano sufficiently testify, and as
to our present Subject, his Discourse or Demonstration of the Heliacal rising
of Sirius, or the Dog Star for the Parallel of the Lower Egypt, published
together with Doctor Bambridge his Canicularia likewise evinces; to which is
subjoyned out of Ulugh Beigh the Longitudes and Latitudes of the chiefest of
the fixed Stars. He published likewise in Arabic and Latin, Epochae
Celebriores Astronomis, Historicis, Chronologis Chataiorum, Syro-Graecorum,
Arabum, Persarum, Chorasmiorum Usitatae, ex Traditione Ulugh Beigh, together
with Abul Feda's Geographical Tables, both which Pieces he illustrated with his
learned Notes. In like manner he set forth Astronomica Shah Cholgii Persae una
cum Hypothesibus Planetarum, to which likewise he subjoyned the Geographical
Tables of Nassir Eddinus the Persian, and of Ulugh Beigh. And from whom the
learned World might justly have expected yet greater things, had not Death by a
too hasty End of his Life, put a stop to the Course of his Ingenious Studies.

LEO ALLATIUS, a Grecian, of the Isle of of Chios, lately Keeper of 1650.
the Vatican Library at Rome, a Person most eminently learned, has published
(among other his various Works of most profound and diffusive Reading) an
Exercitation, proper to our present Subject, entitled, Mensura Temporum
Antiquorum, and praecipue Graecorum. He likewise designed another Treatise,
under the Title of Historia Astrologica, and Three Books De Magnete, as I find
in the Catalogue of his Works, as well already Printed, as to be Published, set
forth by Bartoldus Nihusius; but whether the two last have yet passed the
Press, is to me uncertain. He translated the Paraphrase of Proclus Diadochus
upon Ptolemie's Quadripartite, and caused it to be elegantly Printed.

JOHANNES BECHET put forth a new Theory of the Planets Geometrically 1650.
demonstrated, by Concentrick and Excentrick Circles, Printed at Paris.

MARIA CUNITIA, Daughter to Henricus Cunitius Doctor of Physic, 1650.
by Birth a Silesian, highly meriting for her excellent Skill in Languages, and
History, more especially for her admirable Knowledge (like another Hypatia) in
Mathematical Learning, particularly in Astronomy and Astrology; of which she
has given Signal Testimony by her Exquisite and curious Work, entitled Urania
Propitia, wherein she has set forth Astronomical Tables, of wonderful facility
and exactness, grounded upon Kepler's Hypotheses, and satisfying the Celestial
Phaenomenae by a most easy and Compendious way of Calculation; expressing and
performing by explicit Numbers, what the Rudolphine Tables contain implicitly
in Logarithmical Numbers, and thence require to be effected. Dedicated by her
Self and Husband, Elias a Leonibus, to Ferdinand the Third Emperor of Germany,
and Printed in fol. (Bicini Silesiorum) 1650. in Latin and High Dutch.

JOHANNES GARIBUS writ De Phaenomenis Ostentis, from the year 1650.
1641. to the year 1650.

VINCENTIUS MUTUS, of Majorca, a most expert Astronomer, and 1651.
sedulous Observer of the Stars, has added honor to his Name by his signal
Work, De Sole Alphonsino.

JOHANNES DRIENES, of Dieppe, a Jesuit, and Professor of Mathematics 1651.
at Paris, wrote Tabulae Canorienses, seu Doctrina Luminarium.

NICOLAUS ZUCCHIUS, Native of Parma, of the Society of Jesus, ANNI POST CHRISTUM
was an eminent Philosopher and Divine. He, at Rome, assisted Scheinerus in his
Observations 1651.
of the Solar Spots; having published his Philosophia Optica, in which he
treats of Refractions, and Celestial appearances by the Telescope.

JOANNES BAPTISTA RICCIOLUS, of Ferrara, a Learned 1651.
Jesuit, sometime Professor of Rhetoric and Poetry, then of Philosophy and
School Divinity, partly at Parma, partly at Bologna; but being chiefly
addicticted to Geographical, Chronological, and Astronomical Studies, has
ennobled his Name by his excellent Work, entitled Almagestum Novum, divided
into three Tomes; in the first whereof he treats of the Sphere, of the Sun and
Moon, and their Eclipses, of the fixed Stars, of the lesser Planets; of Comets
and New Stars, of the several Mundane Systems, etc. In the second, he handles
Trigonometry, or the Doctrine of Plain and Spherical Triangles, promises a
Treatise of Astronomical Instruments, and the Optical part of Astronomy; (which
yet he never published) of Latitude and Longitude, and Hydrography, the Reason
of Times, with a Chronological Epitome confirmed by Astronomical Characters. In
the third he comprehends Observations of the Sun, Moon, Eclipses, of the fixed
Stars and lesser Planets, with Precepts and Tables, Primi and Secundorum
Mobilium, and other Astronomical Tables. He put forth likewise another Work,
entitled Astronomia Reformata; the design of which is (considering the various
Hypotheses of several Astronomers, and the difficulty thence arising of
concluding any thing certain) by comparing together all the best Observations,
and examining what they have most certain in them, to reform upon that measure
the Principles of Astronomy. Not to mention his Chronology, Published likewise
by him, in folio.

FRANCISCUS MARIA GRIMALDI of an Illustrious Family, 1651.
a Jesuit of Bologna, partly by his joint Endeavors and Observations with
Ricciolus, partly by his own Inventions and Discoveries, has greatly
illustrated and improved Astronomy. The chiefest of his joint Observations are
these, De Quantitate Crepusculi, De Dimensione Ambitus Terrae, De Solis
Distantia per Dichotomiam Lunae, De Solis Diametro apparenti, De Obliquitate
Eclipticae seu maxima Solis Declinatione, De Altitudine Lunarium Montium, De
Parallaxibus Lunae, De Diametro Apparenti Lunae, De Fixarum Distantiis inter
se, De earum Ascensione recta and Declinatione, De Venere falcata, De Iovis
Fasciis ac earum Parallelismo cum Aequatore, De Diametris apparentibus
Planetarum Minorum; and Fixarum. Those of his proper Invention are these; his
Problema aemulum Aristarchi pro Distantia Solis; Opinio de Lunae Maculis; Modus
observandi Parallaxes. His Selenographia, his Industrious and Select
Observations of the Motions of the Moons Spots, and his Detection of Hevelius
his double Error touching the Moon's Libration: All which with several others,
are mentioned in the first Tome of Ricciolus his Almagest: He writ likewise a
Treatise, De Lumine, Coloribus and Iride, mentioned in the Iournal des Scavans,
Tom. 3. p. 175.

JOHANNES WENDELINUS writ De Hora Passionis and Triduo Mortis 1651.
Christi, Printed at Leipick in the year 1651.

HONORATUS DE MEYNIER, a Frenchman, besides his Paradoxes 1652.
(wherein he maintains, that Experience ought to precede Science, and Theorical
Learning to be acquired by Practice) put forth a small Treatise of the Sphere.

PETRUS COURCIER, a French Jesuit, put forth a Treatise, entitled 1653.
Astronomia Practica, containing Practical Observations of the Celestial
Motions by certain Astrolabes; by which the Places and Motions of any Star may
easily, at any time be known.

DANIEL LIPSTORPIUS, Professor of Philosophy, and the Liberal ANNI POST
CHRISTUM.
Sciences at Lubeck, put forth a Treatise, entitled Copernicus Redivivus seu
de vero 1653.
Systemate Mundi, wherein his Design is, not by new Astronomical Calculations,
or Geometrical Demonstrations to confirm and establish the Copernican
Hypothesis, but by rational, explanatory, and Physico-Astronomical Arguments to
lead the Lovers of Truth to an easy and clear understanding of what is
delivered by Copernicus, Galilaeo, Longomontanus, Kepler, Bulialdus, in their
more diffusive Writings; answering all the Objections of the Adversary Party,
and clearing what ever may seem difficult in the Doctrine proposed by the
Assertors of that Hypothesis, and that chiefly to this End, (to use his own
Words) Ut Stabilita and supposita Nova hac Mundi Dispositione Copernicana,
Verissima and Solidissima, Omnes promiscue ad veram Philosophandi Rationem and
Nobilissima Cartesiana Monumenta legenda invitentur. Of which he gives the
Specimina in a particular Tractate explained (...) Philosophandi Ratione;
whereunto is annexed an Appendix, in which there are diverse Arguments relating
to Astronomical Hypotheses of no vulgar strain.

MONSIEUR P. PETIT, Surintendant of the Fortifications of his most 1654.
Christian Majesty Lewis XIV. published, in his own Language, a Dissertation
touching Comets, and particular Observations of the Comets appearing in the
year 1654. etc. And upon the Eclipse of the Sun, which happened in the same
year, 1654. Of the Exact Method of taking the Diameters of the Planets in a
Letter to Monsieur Auzout mentioned in the Iournal des Scavants.

The Reverend Doctor SETH WARD, sometime Savilian Professor of 1654.
Astronomy in the University of Oxford, afterward Bishop of Excester, and at
present Lord Bishop of Salisbury, and Chancellor of the most noble Order of
the Garter, has honored and illustrated Astronomy by his learned Labors,
having published first, his Prelection De Cometis, wherein the Nature of Comets
is discoursed of, a new Theory of them proposed, and the History of a late
Comet, which appeared between the 19th. and the 30th. of December, 1652.
declared. He put forth likewise a brief Inquision into the Grounds of Bulialdus
his Philolaical Astronomy, wherein is detected Bulialdus's Error, in the Method
of the Calculating the double Inequality of the Planets Motion, Geometrically
evinced. But the Work, by which he has chiefly (on this Subject) signalized
his Name, is his Astronomia Geometrica, wherein a Method is proposed of
Geometrically resolving the Astronomy of the Primary Planets, either Elliptical
or Circular.

And having mentioned this learned Prelate, we cannot but here subjoyn his
worthy Friend,

Sir PAUL NEILE Knight, one of the Gentlemen Ushers of His Majesty's 1654.
Privy Chamber; who, by his Liberal Expenses, great Ingenuity, vigilant
Observations, excellent Erudition, and Indefatigable Study (for I cannot speak
him better than by repeating this Signal Character already given him) has
exceedingly contributed toward the Advancement of Astronomy. To which may be
added his exquisite Skill in fitting and ordering of Glasses for Telescopes,
thereby discovering many new Phenomenon hitherto unknown to others; his not
contenting himself with the exact Knowledge of the ancient Systems and
Hypotheses, but endeavoring a Plus ultrae by moulding and framing New Ones of
his own for the future Benefit (as is hoped) and Improvement of Astronomy; if
at least he shall be pleased by the Publication of these and other his worthy
Endeavors in this kind, to do himself that Honor, which cannot be given him
by this Imperfect Commemoration.

LEONARDUS DU LIRIS, a Frenchman, and a Recollect-Fryar, put 1655.
forth in the year 1655. in his own Language, a Treatise entitled Ephemeride
Maritime, ANNI ^OST CHRISTUM.
calculated for the Observation of the Latitude and Longitude at Sea, with a
new Method of perpetuating the Ephemeris of the Sun, by which, at all times,
his Declination may be exactly found. To which is added the Invention of an
Instrument, termed La Spire Solaire, for finding out, at any hour of the day,
by the Sunbeams, the Height of the Equator, and the Elevation of the Pole.

Doctor JOHN PELL, sometime Professor of Mathematics in the College at 1655.
Breda, and before that, in the College at Amsterdam, where his learned
Colleague Ger. Io. Vossius (as he testifies, De Scientiis Matthew. c. 10.) heard
him with Admiration read his Public Lectures upon Diophantus; by whom likewise
he is styled a Person of various Erudition, and a most acute Mathematician;
published his Refutation of Longomontanus his Quadratures of the Circle, in
which he has a Digression or Exercise, showing the Errors or Failings of the
greatest Part of Astronomers for want of better Knowledge in Geometry. He
published likewise a little Anonymous Exercitation concerning Easter. And he
would further extremely oblige the Learned World, by making good what he
propounds in his Idea of Mathematics, viz. by laying down such a Method, as by
that, in an orderly way to deduce not only all that ever is to be found in our
Antecessors Writings, and whatsoever they may seem to have thought on, but also
all the Mathematical Inventions, Theorems, Problems or Precepts, that it is
possible for the working Wits of our Successors to light upon; and that in one
certain unchanged Order from the first Seeds of Mathematics to their highest
and noblest Applications, as well as to the meanest and most Ordinary. See his
Idea of Mathematics, Printed at the end of Durie's and Hartlib's Reformed
School, in 12o.

JOHANNES CARAMUEL LOBKOWITZ, Bishop of Campagna 1655.
and Satrianum, in the Kingdom of Naples, has written largely through the
whole course of the Mathematics, particularly, as to our purpose, the several
Tractates following; Pandoxium Physico-Ethicum, in three Tomes, in the second
whereof, besides Philosophy, Physic, and the Law, he treats of Astronomy.
Solis and Artis Adulteria, in which he treats of Dialling. Coelestes
Metamorphoses, wherein he resolves the Circular Theories of the Planets into
other Forms. Mathesis Biceps, Vetus, and Nova, in two Volumes, fol. wherein
among other various Mathematical Subjects, he handles Astronomical
Trigonometry, and gives a particular Treatise, which he entitles
Interim-Astronomicum, comprizing the Theory of the Planets in three Parts; the
first describing the same by Circles; the second, by Perpendicular
Oscillations; the third, by right Lines. To which, by way of Appendix are added
three Tractates; the first exhibiting most easy Tables of the Celestial
Motions, as well of the Planets as of the fixed Stars; the next, teaching the
composing of Ephemerides, and demonstrating that an Astronomer may attain to
the exact knowledge of the Planets Places, both as to Longitude and Latitude,
without Calculation; the last showing to delineate upon a Plane, by a pair of
Compasses only, the Eclipses of either the Sun or Moon; thereby (at least as
pretended) freeing Astronomers from the tedious trouble of Supputation.

GEORGIUS HILARIOUS, a Dane, published Praecepta Doctrinae Sphaericae, 1656.
Printed at Copenhagen, 1656.

JOHANNES BAPTISTA HODIERNA, a Sicilian, and Mathematician 1656.
to the Duke of Palma, first of any, published Theories of the Satellites of
Jupiter. He writ likewise De admirandis Phasibus in Sole and Luna visis
ponderationes Opticae, Physicae, and Astronomicae; Protei Coelestis vertigines,
seu Saturni Systema; Il Microcosmo del Sole; Rerum Coelestium peculiares
Observationes; De Magnitudinibus Stellarum inerrantium Visis; Il Coelo Stellato
distinto in cento Map, O Tavole, dove con facilta si insegna a conoscer tutte
le Costellationi stellificati nel Firmamento. ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
He published some other pretty Tractates in Italian, among which some thing
erroneous in a Treatise of his, wherein he makes the Earth bigger than all the
other Planets, the Sun only excepted.

JOHANNES NEWTON D. D. and at present one of His Majesty's 1657.
Chaplains, set forth a Treatise entitled Astronomia Britannica, exhibiting
the Doctrine of the Sphere, and Theory of the Planets decimally by
Trigonometry, and by Tables according to the Copernican System, as it is
illustrated by Bullialdus. He published likewise a Mathematical Institution,
showing the Construction and Use of the Natural and Artificial Sines, Tangents,
and Secants, in Decimal Numbers, and also of the Table of Logarithms, in the
general Solution of any Triangle, whether Plain or Spherical; with their
particular Application in Astronomy, Dialling, and Navigation.

BLASIUS FRANCISCUS COMES PAGANUS writ, among 1657.
other Mathematical Tractates (as his Fortifications and Geometrical Theorems.)
Of the Theory of the Planets, with very neat Tables upon the Foundation of the
Rudolphine, in which all the Motions of the Celestial Bodies (to use his own
terms) are ranged within the limits of pure Geometry; Printed at Paris, in the
year 1657. He published likewise a Book of Spherical Triangles, as also
Astrology Naturelle; all in French; he writ likewise a little Discourse of the
Longitude, and promises Geographical Tables.

ERHARDUS WEIGELIUS Professor of Philosophy and Mathematics 1657.
in the University of Iena, put forth Astronomia Sphaerica, digested into the
Method of Euclid, and Astronomical Exercitations, De Motu and Tempore. He wrote
likewise Cosmologia, a Treatise succinctly handling the Principles of
Astronomy, Geography, the Use of the Globe. And is Author of diverse Mechanical
Engines and Instruments, serving to the Use and Advancement of Astronomy, as
his Pancosmus, being a large Engine or Machine, capable to receive a Man on
Horseback, representing the whole Mundane System, together with the Motions of
the Celestial Spheres, Stars, and Planets; Astrodicticum Majus, being another
great Machine, able to receive at once 200 Observers, and so fitted with
Dioptrick Instruments, that the several Observers may at one instant take the
view of one and the same Star. Astrodicticum Minus, a Rule to be applied to the
Celestial Globe for the pointing out of any Star aimed at, as likewise
Goniometrum, Horographum, Topometrum, Globus Hydrostaticus, and Astrocosmus,
being the Names of several Engines and Instruments (among others) by him
invented for Astronomical Uses, which for Brevities sake we forbear to explain,
particular mention and description of them being made at the end of the third
Volume of the Miscellanea Medico-Physica Academiae Naturae Curiosorum German.
Printed 1673.

GABRIEL DULLENDIUS put forth Astronomical Tables, to which 1658.
he gave the title of Tabulae Ambianenses, seu, Theoriae Planetarum, tam in
forma Tychonica quam-Copernicana, per unicam cujusque Ellipsim ex proprio
Centro Descriptam, Plano-Geometrica Delineatio; Printed at Paris in 4o. 1658.

CHRISTIANUS HUGENIUS (Son of Constantinus Hugenius of 1659.
Zulichem) a Gentleman of great Worth and Reputation for his singular Knowledge
in all manner of polite Literature, especially in the Mathematics, as not only
his excellent Book of Pendulums, and some Essays in Dioptricks, but what
relates more nearly to our present Subject, his Systema Saturnium sive de
Causis mirandorum Saturni Phenomenon, and Comite ejus Planeta novo,
sufficiently declare. In which Work are detected the various Phases of that
Celestial Proteus, showing that ANNI POST CHRISTUM
his Brachia or Ansae are no other than a Luminous Annulus or Ring about the
Body of that Planet, every way alike distant from it, whose Plane^ keeps in a
certain and constant inclination to the Ecliptic, appearing (according to its
diversity of Aspect) now like a large Ellipsis, now like a more contracted one,
at other times like a straight Line; discovering likewise a Lunula or small
Planet to move about Saturn, and to finish its Course in sixteen days, and
that Saturn in a less space of Time turns about his own Axis, carrying about
with him the whole Aetherial Body or Matter interjected between him and the
said Satellite or Planet, together with the said Annulus, in a Motion not much
slower than his own. Printed by Adrian Ulacq at the Hague 1659. To which is to
be added his Brevis ejusdem Systematis Assertio, Printed at the Hague 1660.

Mr. VINCENT WING born at North Luffenham in the County of Rutland, 1660.
a very Industrious Mathematician and Astronomer; as the several Works, by him
published, declare, of which we shall mention only such as relate to our
present Design, as his Urania Practica, or Practical Astronomy, published by
Him, and Mr. William Leiburn, about the year 1649. wherein (contrary to his
Later Sentiments) is asserted the Earth's Stability: Against which Mr. Jeremy
Shakerley writ; to which Mr. Wing replied in a small Treatise entitled Ens
fictum Shakerlaei. About the year 1652. He published his Harmonicon Coeleste,
therein asserting, contrary to his former Opinion, The Earth's Mobility. He put
forth likewise Astronomia Instaurata in four Parts; and Ephemerides of the
Celestial Motions, for twenty years, with an Introduction to the Knowledge of
all Mundane Alterations; also Examen Astronomiae Carolinae. Having likewise
left two Posthume Works, viz. Astronomia Britannica, Printed in fol. in Latin,
and Computatio Catholica, published about a year after his Death, which was in
September 1668. See more of him in the Remarks on his Life and Death, published
by Mr. Gadbury.

GASPAR SCHOTTUS REGISCURIANUS, a Jesuit, sometime 1661.
Professor of Mathematics in the Jesuits College at Palermo, in Sicily,
afterward at Wirtsberg in Franconia, set forth Cursus Mathematicus, sive
absolut a omnium Mathematicarum Disciplinarum Encyclopaedia, in 28 Books. In
the seventh, eighth and ninth of which Books he treats of Astronomy; the first
comprizing Astronomia Elementaris, or the Description of the Sphere, the
Celestial Circles, etc. the next handling Astronomia Theorica, the Theory of
the Planets; the third Astronomia Practica, resolving diverse Astronomical
Problems, as well Organically as Geometrically. The whole Work Printed in
folio, at Wirtsberg 1661. He published likewise Kircher's Iter Ecstaticum
Coeleste, adorned and augmented with several Prelusions, Scholia's and Schemes,
and promises the Edition of a greater Work by him entitled Mundus Mirabilis,
which whether it were ever finished or published I know not.

THOMAS STREET Student in Astronomy and Mathematics, put forth 1661.
a New easy Geometrical and Harmonious Theory of the Celestial Motions, under
the Title of ASTRONOMIA CAROLINA, with Astronomical Tables, and their Uses,
exhibiting most plain and easy Examples of finding the true Places, of the
fixed Stars and Planets, and the Eclipes of the Luminaries at all times; the
several Calculations therein being compared with all the best and most certain
Observations both Ancient and Modern. In which likewise more particularly is
asserted the Verity of the Equation of Time for the inequality of Natural
Days, and the near Agreement of the Lunar Theory (therein proposed) to the
Phenomenon, whence the Science of the Longitude, or Difference of Meridians as
well at Sea as Land, may be far more truly obtained than formerly it has been,
Printed at London 1661. 4o. To which he added an Appendix in the year 1664. and
in 1667. put forth ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
Memorial Verses on the Ecclesiastical and Civil Calendar, with an Epitome of
the Heavenly Motions. He is now about publishing Planetary Instruments.

PLACIDUS DE TITIS of Perugio, Professor of Astronomy in the 1661.
University of Pavy, in Italy, put forth Ephemerides of the Celestial Motions,
beginning in the year 1661. and continued to the end of the year 1675.
calculated according to the Lansbergian Hypotheses, for the Longitude of 35.
together with a Treatise of the Efficient, Proximate, and Remote Causes of the
Transmutation of the Elements, with a Method of erecting a Celestial Scheme or
Figure, and some Observations upon Earthquakes, Printed at Pavy 1661.

Mr. LAURENCE ROOK, first Astronomy and then Geometry Professor 1661.
of Gresham College, and Fellow of the Royal Society; had begun to make exact
Observations of the Immersions and Emersions of the Satellites of Iapiter,
besides many others of other Celestial Bodies, but was snatched away from his
Studies and Labors in the year 1662. shortly after the Establishment of the
Royal Society, whose Institution he had zealously promoted, and it was a
Deplorable Accident in his Death (as is noted by the ingenious Author of the
History of the Royal Society) that he deceased the very Night, which he had for
some years expected, wherein to finish his accurate Observations on the said
Satellites. His Loss was regretted by all that knew his Extraordinary Worth
both for Knowledge, and Probity; deservedly celebrated by that excellent
Prelate the now Lord Bishop of Sarum, Doctor Seth Ward, (at the Time of Mr
Rook's Decease Lord Bishop of Exon) by this Sepulcral Monument.

M. S.
Hic subtus sive dormit, sive contemplatur,
Qui jamdiu Animo metitus est
Quicquid aut Vita aut Mors habet,
Vir Cl. LAURENTIUS ROOK e Cantio Oriundus,
In Collegio Greshamensi
Astronomiae primo, dein Geometriae Professor,
Utriusque Ornamentum, and Spes Maxima,
Quem altissima Indoles, Artesque Omnifariae,
Mores pellucidi, and ad amussim probi,
Consuetudo facilis and accommoda,
Bonis, Doctisque Omnibus fecere Commendatissimum.
Vir totus Teres, and sui Plenus,
Cui Virtus and Pietas, and summa Ratio
Desideria Metusque omnes sub pedibus dabant.
Ne se penitus seculo subducere mortuus possit
Qui iniquissima Modestia vixerat,
SETHUS WARD Episcopus Exoniensis
Sodalis, and Symmystae desideratissimi
Longas suavesque Amicitias,
Hoc Saxo prosecutus est.
Obiit Iunii 27o. A. D. MDCLXII Aetat. XL. There is extant in the Philosophical
Transactions No. 22. p. 388. his Method for observing the Eclipses of the Moon
free from the common Inconveniences. His Astronomical Papers are (if I am not
misinformed) in the Hands of the above mentioned ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
Lord Bishop of Sarum, who will doubtless take care of seeing them digested and
published.

ANDREAS CELLARIUS PALATINUS, Scholae Hornanae in 1661.
Hollandia Boreali Rector, set forth a large Work in folio with this Title,
Harmonia Macrocosmica, seu Atlas Universalis, and Novus, totius Universi Creati
Cosmographiam Generalem exhibens. In qua Omnium totius Mundi Orbium Harmonica
Constructio secundum diversas Diversorum Authorum Opiniones; Ut and
Uranometria, seu totius Orbis Coelestis, ac Planetarum Theoriae, etc. ob oculos
ponuntur; Printed at Amsterdam, with curious Sculps, and dedicated to his
present Majesty Charles the Second.

JOHANNES HECKERUS, of Dantzick, set forth Ephemerides of the 1662.
Celestial Motions, beginning in the year 1666. and continued to the year 1680.
calculated for the Meridian of Uranoburgum, from the correct Observations of
the Noble Tycho Brahe, the Physical Hypotheses of Kepler, and the Rudolphine
Tables. To which he prefixed an Introduction, Printed at Dantzick, 1662. Having
gained good Repute among the most nice and skilful Astronomers.

CORNELIUS MALVASIA, Marquess of Bismantua, and General of 1662.
the Artillery to the Duke of Modena, set forth Ephemerides of the Celestial
Motions, by him styled Ephemerides Novissimae, calculated according to the
Hypothesis of Philippus Lansbergius, for the Longitude of Modena, being 34. 5.
beginning in the year 1661. and ending with the year 1666. together with the
Author's own Observations of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, the Sun and Moon for
the year 1662. reduced to Calculation, wherein he shows the Excess or Defects
of the Lansbergian Tables. To which are added Ephemerides of the Sun, and
Tables of Refractions, according to the latest Hypotheses of the famous
Cassini, at present Regius Professor of Mathematics at Paris.

JACOBUS GREGORY, a Scotch-man, Professor of Mathematics in the 1663.
University of St. Andrew's in Scotland, put forth his Optica Promota, Printed
at London, in the year 1663. in which Work there are diverse difficult useful
Problems relating to Astronomy. The same Author has prepared a Treatise of
Dioptricks and Astronomy, which may supply and doubtless much exceed a second
Edition of the forementioned Optica Promota.

NICHOLAUS MERCATOR published a Piece entitled Hypothesis 1663.
Astronomica nova; Printed at London, in a thin folio, in the year 1664. And
two Diatribes De Emendatione Annua; and has prepared for the Press a Treatise
of Astronomy, in which his design is to render Astronomy Geometrical. He has
likewise prepared for the Press, at Cambridge, an Astronomical Institution or
Introduction resembling that of Gassendus, but much more to the Purpose, as not
only discovering the several Theories of the Planets, but leading a Tyro to the
Calculation of their Places, upon the Principal Hypotheses both Ancient and
Modern.

FRANCISCUS LEVERA a Roman, put forth Prodromus Universae 1663.
Astronomiae Restitutae de Anni Solaris and Siderei ac Dierum Magnitudine in
Omni Aevo, and de reliquis Periodis, Motibus and Circulationibus Solaribus
admirandis adhuc incognitis, ac etiam Sideriis, ab Authore exploratis, and
inventis, ac plene dilucidatis, per Demonstrationes Arithmeticas, aliasque
plures Probationes; with the Radixes, and diverse Tables of the said Motions,
calculated for the Longitude of Rome, with a new Method of Supputation. He put
forth likewise a Treatise, De Inerrantium Stellarum Viribus and Excellentia,
with a Table of their Declinations and right Ascensions, etc. Printed At Rome
by Angelo Bernabo. ANNI POST CHRISTUM.


SAVINIUS MUTUS put forth a Treatise by way of Dialogue, in which 1664.
he replies to two Letters, the one of Ricciolus, the other of Cassini, written
against the aforesaid Prodromus of Levera; wherein the Doctrine and Use of the
said Prodromus is asserted, Printed at Rome, Typis Angeli Bernabo 1664.

PETRUS PALATIUS BRIXIENSIS published Novae Ephemerides 1664.
Motuum Solis ab Anno 1664. usque ad Annum 1670. calculated for the Longitude
of Rome according to Levera's Tables, Printed at Rome in fol. 1664. Typis
Angeli Bernabo.

SAMUEL DANTFORTH, Master of Arts, set forth an Astronomical 1657.
Description of the Comet in 1664. as it appeared in New England; Printed at
Cambridge there.

PIETRO MARIA MUTOLO, published at Pisa a small Tractate of 1665.
the Motion and Place of the Comet which appeared in December 1664. showing
that the said Comet was above the Moon, it having been found without a sensible
Parallax. For the observing of which he shows an easy way, which needs no
Quadrants or Sextants curiously made; nor a precise taking of the Meridian
Altitudes, nor the Situation of the Comet in the Zodiac; nor the noting of the
Precise Time of the Observation; nor lastly, needs to fear to be prejudiced by
the Consideration of the various refractions; for as much as he works not by
the way of taking several Altitudes from the Horizon; but by observing the
Position of the Comet among some neighboring fixed Stars; for the doing of
which, he employed only a Simple Thread stretched out by an Arch, to make it
Evident whether this Comet had a sensible Parallax or no. See Philos. Transact.
No. 53. p. 1070.

ANTONIUS FRANCISCUS PAYEN, an eminent Mathematician 1666.
and Astronomer, has published all or most of the several Treatises ensuing.
Paradoxon Astronomicon, De Tabularum Omnium a Coelo dissensu; Aenigma
Astronomicum, Adulterium Solis and Lunae; Emblema Astronomicum, Sol Larvatus;
Monopolion Coeleste, Conjunctio Saturni and Iovis 1663. Et alia Conjunctio
Saturni and Martis 1666. Tabulas omnes enormiter fallens; Selenelion, ou
Apparition Luni Solaire observee en l' Isle de Gorgonne, le 16. Iuin 1666.
Eclipse du Soleil, observee a Paris, l^ 1. Iuillet, 1666. Specula Parisiensis
Astronomica; De Tabularum Motibus ad Observationum trutinam observandis; Nova
Dissertatio adversus Astrologiam Gallicam, cum Mantissa Astronomica, De Plagio
Morini circa Doctrinam Longitudinum Indicata unica Possibili Methodo
Universali. He writ likewise these following Treatises, by him intended for the
Press, viz. Sportula Ecliptica Compendiaria, cum Appendice Praeceptorum
supputandi Selenelii Phases, Durationem and Digitos Lunae deficientis in ortu
visibili; Paradoxa Physico-Astronomica Spiralis Systematis Prodroma, circa
naturam Atmosphaerae and causarum Physicarum Astronomica Phenomenon
alterantium; Catacrisis Cometica, statuens Cometoidas inter Meteora sublunaria,
Cometas vero inter superlunaria, viamque non Linealem vel Circularem, aut
Conicam, sed spiralem and flexuosam Meteoris Coelestibus propriam, variis
Observationibus comprobatam; Ecloge Prostaphaeretica, De Quadruplice Aequatione
Astronomica temporis Meridianorum Centri and Orbis Planetarum, cum novis ad
Calculum Locorum Planetarum and Eclipsium tabulis, exulata cruciformi part
proportionali. Upon the occasion of an Eclipse of the Moon happening near
Sunset, in July 1666. both Luminaries appearing visibly above the Horizon,
elevated by Refractions, the Author published his Treatise entitled
Selenelion, from whence this account was taken, which being about six or seven
years since, and diverse of these Tractats then extant, as appears by the
Iournal S^avans, it is probable the rest, or most of them are since published.
ANNI POST (...).


The Right Honorable the Late EARL OF SANDWICH, even in the 1666.
midst of his weighty State Negotiations was pleased sometime to employ himself
in making considerable Observations both Astronomical and Physiological, and to
communicate the same to the Royal Society; as his Observation of an E^lipse of
the Sun, June 22. 1666. at Madrid; the Sun's Height in the Solstice; also the
Latitude of Madrid; esteeming by the Sun's Altitude in the Solstice, and by
other Meridian Altitudes; the Latitude of Madrid to be 40 Degrees, 10 Minutes,
which differs considerably from that assigned by others; the General Chart of
Europe, giving to it 41. 30. the General Map of Spain 40. 27. A large
Provincial Map of Castile 40. 38. He likewise made some Observations of the
Immersions of the Satellites of Jupiter, and on December 25th. old style 1666.
observed at Madrid a great Halo about the Moon, the Semidiameter whereof was
about 23. 30. Aldebaran being just in the North-East Part of the Circle, and
the two Horns of Aries just enclosed by the South-West of the Circle, the Moon
being in the Center: and about five or six years before, viz. Nov. 21. old
style 1661. an hour after Sunset, he observed a great Halo about the Moon, of
the same Semidiameter, at Tangier, the Moon being very near the same Place. See
Phil. Transact. No. 21. p. 390.

ERASMIUS BARTHOLINUS, a Dane writ on the Comets which appeared 1666.
in the years 1664. and 1665. He put forth like wise Astronomical
Considerations of the great Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, happening in the
year 1663. Printed at Copenhagen. He published likewise Heliodorus Larissaeus
his Optical Fragments in Greek and Latin, with his Learned Animad versions
thereupon, Printed at Paris by Cramoisy 1657. 4o.

JOHANNES ALPHONSUS BORELLIUS, published a Treatise 1666.
of the Satellites of Jupiter, about fitting Theories to their Motions, and
some Contestations, about the nature of that curve Line, that is described by
the falling of a Stone from the Earth's surface to its Center, supposing the
Earth's motion.

PETRUS GALTRUCHIUS, of Orleans, a Jesuit, put forth (to use 1668.
his own Terms) Clara, Brevis, and Accurata Institutio Mathematicae totius, in
gratiam studiosae Iuventutis adornata. In which among the rest he treats De
Sphaera Mundi, De Astronomia and De Principiis cognitionum Caelestium, De
Chronologia, and Cnomonica, Printed lately at Cambridge.

HIERONYMUS VITALIS, of the Order of the Regulars commonly 1668.
called Theatins of Capua, put forth Lexicon Mathematicum, Astronomicum,
Geometricum, containing a Collection, and Explication of all Things relating to
either of those Parts of the Mathematics, more especially as to Astronomy,
with a brief Consideration, and Declaration of diverse new Theorems, and a
Dilucidation of several exotic Terms therein used. Printed at Paris 1668.

ANDREAS TACQUET, a Jesuit, sometime Professor of Mathematics 1669.
in the Roman College, put forth, in his Works, entitled Opera Mathematica,
Eight Books of Astronomy, in which he explains the whole Doctrine of that
Science, in such a gradual Scientifick Order, that a Student, without the aid
of a Master, may learn the whole by his own Study, not formerly attained by the
best Instructions. He therein likewise argues against Ricciolus his Opinion,
touching the Farth's rest, from the Descent of heavy Bodies; and shows that the
Eclipses of the Sun may be calculated without the aid of Parallax, and that the
Sun's Parallax, as to the determination of Celestial Motions, may be safely
neglected. He rejects also the sensible inequality of the Solar or Tropical
Years, and the irregularity of the ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
Obliquity of the Ecliptic, of the Procession of the Equinoxes and
Excentricity. To the end of which Eight Books are annexed Propositions for
twenty eight Cases of Sphaerical Trigonometry.

PIETRO M. CAVINA of Fienza, in Italy, published in the Language 1669.
of that Country, Congietture Physico-Astronomiche della Natura dell Universo,
Printed at Faenza 1669. in 4o. Which Conjectures were raised by the Author upon
some Observations made about the fixed Stars at Faenza; the whole Tractate
consisting of three Parts, Considerations, Observations, and Reflections. In
the first, he considers the unreasonableness of the Aristotelean Opinon,
touching the Ingenera^ility, and Incorruptibility of the Celestial Bodies;
whence he proceeds to the second Part containing the Observations themselves;
whereby he affirms to have found considerable Changes in diverse of the fixed
Stars, from what Baye^s, and others have remarked of them as to Magnitude and
Number, instancing in Ursa Major and Minor, in the Dragon, Cepheus, Boots,
Corona Septentrionalis, Hercules, Lyra, Cygnus, Cassiopaea, Perseus, and the
Via Lactea. From which he deduceth these Conjectures; First, that the Heaven of
the sixed Stars is liquid; Secondly, that it is generable and corruptible;
Thirdly, that the Motion of the Earth is (as he fancies) improbable; Fourthly,
that the Changes and Variations of the fixed Stars, are Effects of the Sun,
from which (he conceives) they are but moderately distant; Fifthly, that those
Stars are of a Matter easily Dissipable and like unto Lamps which for want of
Aliment are extinguished, and by Accession of Aliment are magnified; Sixthly,
that all the fixed Stars are in the Concave Superficies of their Heavens; with
some other (such like) Conjectures: Of which see further in Phil. Transact. No.
65. p. 2112 and p. 2113.

FRANCISCUS TRAVAGINI, an eminent Venetian Philosopher put 1669.
forth a Tractate entitled Physica Disquisitio super Observationibus a Se
factis Tempore ultimorum Terrae Motuum, seu Gyri Terrae Diurni Indicium. In
which (from the Observations by him made in some late Earthquakes, especially
in the last about Ragusa) he affirms, that he noted, besides a Subsulting
Perpendicular Motion, a Concomitant Lateral Vibration of the Earth from West to
East, whence he conceive^ it may validly be inferred that the Earth has a
progressive Motion from West to East. See Phil. Transactions No. 6. p. 1084.
and 1085. The Tractate itself was Printed at Leyden in Holland 1669. in 4o.

AEGIDIUS STRAUCH, Public Professor of History and Philosophy 1669.
in the University of Wittemberg, besides his Breviarium Chronologicum, set
forth a small Treatise entitled, Astrognosia, Synoptice and Methodice, in usum
Academi^um adornata. To which are added Schemes of the several Asterisms cut in
Brass, Printed at Wittemberg, in the year 1669.

JOHANNES OTT, of Schafhuysen, an Helvetian, in a small Treatise of 1670.
Vision, Printed at Heidelberg, in the year 1670. asserts this Thesis; Motus
Medius Siderum Astronomorum est figmentum, in rei natura non existens, neque in
Hypothes^ Elliptica super altero focorum peragitur; Quocirca computi
Astronomica Geometrica accuratio, in Problemate adhuc nondum determinato sita
est; viz. Datum Circulum ex Puncto extra Centrum dato, in data ratione secare;
and quamvis open Cycloidis construi suo modo possit, attamen cum Punctum, per
quod Perpendicularis ad Axes ducitur, indeterminatum sit, etiam ipsa Sectio
indeterminata manet, ejus tamen Problematis Solutionem ex supposito
Tetragonismo tam accurate D. Stephanus Spleissius Gymnasii Scaph Rector, and
Astronomus Subtilssimus expediit, quam certae sunt Sinu^ Tabulae, quarum
accuratio ad Astronomicum Calculum abunde sufficit. But if Spleissius solve the
Problem no otherwise than by tentative work, by aid of a Table of Sines ANNI
POST CHRISTUM.
(and Arks) he has done no more than what was well known here. But however,
without the use of any Tables, the Problem is solved by Mr. James Gregory,
Professor of Mathematics in the University of St. Andrews in Scotland; as I am
informed by the Ingenious and Industrious Promoter of Mathematical Studies, Mr.
John Collins.

GABRIEL MOUTONUS published Observations of the apparent Diameters 1670.
of the Sun and Moon, and of the Meridian Altitudes of the Sun, and some few of
the fixed Stars; together with a Table of the Sun's Declinations, calculated to
each prime scruple of a Degree. To which is annexed a brief Dissertation of the
Inequality of Natural Days, and of the Equation of Time, with a new Idaea of
Geometrical Measures; and a new Method of communicating and preserving them,
for the future, without any alteration.

JOHANNES CHRISTOPHORUS STURMIUS, Professor of 1670.
Mathematics and Natural Philosophy in the University of Altdorf in Franconia,
published a brief Treatise in folio, entitled, Scientia Cosmica, sive
Astronomia tam Theorica quam Sphaerica, paucis Tabulis in usum Incipientium
comprehensa, Printed at Altdorf in the year 1670.

JOHANNES HEVELIUS, Consul of Dantzick, an Excellent Mathematician 1670.
and Astronomer, has ennobled his Name by several curious and learned Works;
as his Selenographia, or Description of the Moon, containing an accurate
Delineation of the several Spots therein visible, and of the various Motions,
Changes, and Appearances discovered by the Telescope, as well in that as in the
Sun, and other Planets. His Cometographia, representing the whole Nature of
Comets, their Situation, Parallaxes, Distances, diverse Appearances, and
admirable Motions; with a History of all the Comets, from the beginning of the
World to this present, either noted by Historians, or observed by Philosophers
or Astronomers; both the said Works being enriched with exquisite Sculps of his
own Graving. To these is to be added his Treatise of Mercury discovered in the
Sun at Dantzick in the year 1661. May 3. stilo novo, with the History of a New
Star appearing in the Neck of Cetus, and another in the Beak of Cycnus, and his
Illustration of our Countryman Horrox his Tractate upon Venus seen in the Sun,
in the year 1639. on the 24th of November, old style; being the Noblest, and
since the beginning of the World till then, unpractised Observation; with a
Discourse of some rare Paraselenae, and Parhelii, by him discovered at
Dantzick; as likewise two Epistles to Ricciolus, De Lunae motu Libratorio in
certas Tabulas redacto, and other Astronomical Pieces, whereof mention is made
in the Philosophical Transactions. He put forth this present year 1673. The
first Part of his Machina Coelestis, containing an accurate Delineation and
Description of all the Astronomical Instruments by him used in his Celestial
Observations fairly cut in Brass; the Construction of Telescopes, and Direction
for the most commodious Way of managing those of Extraordinary Length; with the
Reason of grinding Glasses of an Hyperbolical Form. He promises likewise
Prodromus Astronomiae cum Integro fixarum Catalago, atque Globis Coelestibus
reformatis; As likewise the latter Part of his Machina Coelestis (of which that
published is but the first Book) containing the second, third, and fourth
Books; the second comprizing all his Celestial Observations, as well of
Eclipses, as of the Occultations of the Planets and fixed Stars from the Year
1630. to this Present; the third showing his Observations of the Meridian
Altitudes of the Sun, and of the Equinoxes and Solstices from the year 1632.
hitherto; as likewise special Observations of every Planet; the fourth and last
exhibiting a Catalogue or Index of the Distances of the fixed Stars taken by
his great Brass Sextants and Octants; together with those noted by the
Landt-Grave of Hesse, Tycho, Gassendus, and Ricciolus. All which are now ANNI
POST CHRISTUM.
in the Press, and will e're long ('it is hoped) come to Public View.

PIETRO MENGOLI an Italian; Prior of Sancta Maddalena, and 1670.
Reader of Mechanics, in the Bolognan Academy; published among other ingenious
Pieces in the Mathematics, a small Quarto Treatise in Italian, entitled
Refra^tioni, and Parallasse del Sole. In which, besides his Observations and
Tables of the said Refractions, Parallaxes, Declinations of the several Points
of the Ecliptic, and right Ascensions; these several following Conclusions,
are by him undertaken to be demonstrated, viz. First, The Sun's Horizontal
Refraction to be 1. 58. 6. Secondly, The Estival Horizontal Parallax thereof
38. 49. Thirdly, It Is Hibernal Horizontal Parallax 40. 4. Fourthly, The Height
of the Pole at Santo Petronio in Bologna in the beginning of the year 1656. to
have been 44. 28. 56. Fifthly, The Height of the Pole at Uraniburgh in the
beginning of the year 1582, to have been 55. 53. 27. Lastly, The Obliquity of
the Ecliptic, or the Sun's greatest Declination to be 23. 28. 24.

LE PERE CHERUBIN a Capuchin Friar in the Convent of that Order 1671.
in Orleans, put forth a large and elegant Volume in French, entitled La
Dioptrique Oculaire; the Ocular Dioptrick, concerning the Theory, Use, and
Mechanism of Telescopes, divided into three Principal Parts; the first contai^
(...) Doctrine of Optics, and Dioptricks, or of simple Vision Direct, and that
(...) made by Rays refracted; the second delivering the Theory of the Telescope
in (...) kinds, which is ushered in by a History of the Invention, and
Antiquity of Telescopes, and by a Discourse concerning the Difference of the
Ancient Glasses from the Modern. The third and last Part, being doubly divided
into the Positive and Mechanical: The Positive teaching the actual Construction
of Telescopes, and their Uses in the Observations of Celestial Objects: The
Mechanical showing the way of polishing and forming all sorts of Glasses that
serve for Telescopes; giving likewise an Account of many excellent Discoveries
that by their means have been made by Modern Astronomers. The Work adorned with
most curious and elegant Cuts, and Printed in an answerable Letter in folio at
Paris 1671.

OTTO DE GUERRICK, Councellor to the Elector of Brandenburg, 1672.
and Consul of the City of Magdeburg, or Meydburg, put forth Experimenta nova
Magdeburgica, De vacuo spatio, in which he occasionally treats of the several
Mundane Systems, of the Planets, and of the Fixed Stars, their Magnitudes and
Distances, Printed at Amsterdam in folio 1672.

Doctor JOHN WALLIS Savilian Professor of Geometry in Oxford, Fellow 1672.
of the Royal Society, and Chaplain to His Majesty, famous for his many learned
Mathematical Works, as his two Volumes of Arithmetic, the latter whereof is
entitled Arithmetica Infinitorum, his Commercium Epistolicum, his Tract De
Cycloide, his Treatises of Mechanics, and De Calculo Centri Gravitatis, at the
latter end of Arithmetica Infinitorum, is a Scheme and a Narrative concerning
an Eclipse of the Sun 2. August 1654 by him observed at Oxford; to whom
likewise we are beholding for his Care in digesting and publishing Mr. Horrox
and Crabtrec's Astronomical Remains. He has likewise a learned desirable
Treatise of Angular Sections ready for the Press, a due Knowledge of which
Doctrine cannot but conduce much to the facilitating of difficult Sphaerical
Problems, and consequently to the Advancement of Astronomy.

AEGIDIUS DE GOTTIGNIES the Scholar of the eminent Geometer 1672.
Gregory of St. Vincent; is the Author of a Treatise of Dioptricks concerning
the Foundation, Construction, and Use of Telescopes in order to Astronomical
Observations, ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
as also of Microscopes. The Treatise (written in Latin) is common in MS. in
Italy: whereof a Copy came over lately into England, and here meets with the
Applause of the learned, which we hope will e're long be translated and
published in English.

Sir CHRISTOPHER WRENN Knight, sometime Astronomy Professor 1673.
in Gresham College, afterward Savilian Professor of Astronomy in the
University of Oxford, and now Surveyor General of His Majesty's Works and
Buildings, is here deservedly to be remembered; whose learned Labors, and
curious Discoveries both in Philosophy and Mathematics, being already recorded
by the excellent Pen of the Ingenious Author of the History of the Royal
Society, I shall from thence collect such Particulars as are pertinent to our
present purpose, and whose mention may give Honor to this Catologue. He has
invented many Ways to make Astronomical Observations more accurate and easy,
has fitted and hung Quadrants, Sextants, and Radii more commodiously than
formerly, has made two Telescopes to open with a joint like a Sector, by which
observers may infallibly take Distances to half a Minute, has added many Sorts
of Retes skrews, and other Devices to Telescopes for taking small Distances,
and apparent Diameters to Seconds. He has added much to the Theory of
Dioptricks; much to the Manufacture it self of grinding good Glasses: He has
made constant Observations on Saturn, and a Theory of that Planet truly
answering all Observations, and that before the Printed Discourse of Mr.
Hugenius on that Subject appeared He has essayed to make a true Selenography
by Measure; the World having nothing yet but Pictures, rather than Surveys or
Maps of the Moon. He has stated the Theory of the Moon's Libration as far as
Observations could carry him. Has composed a Lunar Globe, representing not
only the Spots and various degrees of Whiteness upon the Surface, but the Hills
Eminencies and Cavities molded in solid Work; the Globe thus fashioned into a
true model of the Moon, as you turn it to the Light, represents all the
menstrual Phases with the variety of Appearances that happen from the Shadows
of the Mountains and Valleys. Has made Maps of the Pleiades and other
Telescopical Stars, and proposed Methods to determine the great Doubt of the
Earth's motion or rest, by the small Stars about the Pole to be seen in large
Telescopes; which few Instances may serve in part (at present) to show his
exquisite Skill and Endeavors in Astronomy, until such Time as he shall please
on that Score further to oblige the World by other excellent Productions of his
great Industry and Learning.

Doctor ISAAC BARROW, formerly Geometry Professor in Gresham College, 1673.
afterward Lucasian Professor of Mathematics in the University of Cambridge,
and now Master of Trinity College there; has lately published eighteen Optic
Lectures; Theodosius his Sphericks, and has other Lectures concerning the
Projections of the Sphere, ready for the Press. All which conduce much to the
Advancement of Astronomy, as his Geometrical Lectures already published,
together with his Apollonius, and Archimedes ready to come forth, besides
others which we hope may follow, do to the Advancement of Geometry; which not
to mention (though somewhat beside our Purpose) were very Injurious to a Person
that has so much enriched the Commonwealth of Learning.

Mr. ROBERT HOOK the Learned and Ingenious Curator of the Royal 1673.
Society, and Professor of Geometry in Gresham College, exceedingly well
versed, as in all Mathematical and Mechanical, so particularly in Astronomical
Knowledge. He was the first that discovered in the year 1664. ( May the ninth)
a permanent Spot in the biggest of the three obscurer Belts of Jupiter, and by
observing it for some Hours together, found that within two hours after, the
said Spot hadmoved from East to West, about half the length of the Diameter of
Jupiter. See Philosophical ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
Transactions, No. 1. p. 3. and No. 8. p. 143. which Discovery of a Permanent
Spot in Jupiter was since confirmed by that famous Astronomer Cassini, of which
see Phil. Trans. No. 8. p. 143. and No. 10. p. 171.

The same Mr. Hook discovered in the Month of February and March, Anno (1665 /
6) in the face of Mars several Maculae or spotted Parts changing their Place,
and not returning to the same Position 'till the next ensuing Night, near about
the same time: See Ph. Transact. No. 11. p. 198. and No. 14. p. 239.

He also made diverse considerable Observations concerning the Planet Jupiter,
his apparent Diameter, the various Degrees of Light in the Parts of his Phasis,
his several Belts, etc. See Phil. Transact. No. 14. p. 245. 246. where also are
to be found his Observations of the Body of Saturn, his Shape, Ring of a
brighter Light than that of his Body, and some black Lines crossing the Ring
and others crossing the Body.

The same was the Proposer of that Method (inserted in No. 9. p. 151. of the
Phil. Transactions) directing how a Correspondency may be settled for the
finding out the true Distance of the Sun and Moon from the Earth by the
Parallaxes observed under or near the same Meridian.

Nor is to be passed by what contrivances he has made of measuring the
Diameters of the Planets to the exactness of a Second by the help of a
Telescope, as also of taking the Position and Distance of the small fixed Stars
one from another, or from any of the less bright Planets, if the Distance be
not above two or three Degrees. See No. 25. of the Phil. Transact. p. 459.

He published his Micrographia in the year 1664. wherein amongst other
Astronomical Matters, he has explained the Reason of the Redness, Oval Figure,
and Undulation of the Sun and and Moon, and the twinkling of the Stars by a
new Property of the Air called by him Inflection, differing from Refraction and
Reflection. He has mentioned several ways of improving Telescopes; he has
given two Specimina of the Discovery of a fifteen Foot Glass among the smaller
Stars; one, by a Description of the Pleiades, and the second by a Declination
of one small spot in the Moon described by Hevelius and Ricciolus. He has made
many Astronomical Instruments, by which an Angle may be taken to the Exactness
of 1 / 10 part of a Minute. He in the year 1670. detected the Parallax of the
Orb of the Earth amongst the fixed Stars by observing the Transits of several
Stars near our Zenith, and comparing the Measures so found. He first observed
the Stars with a Telescope at the the same time that the Sun shone above the
Horizon and into the Room where the Observation was made; of which see more in
his Excellent Attempt to prove the Motion of the Earth lately published.

Doctor WALTER POPE Professor of Astronomy in Gresham College* 1673.
the Successor of Sir Christopher Wrenn and Mr. Rook; with whom he has spent
much Time in observing the Motions and Appearances of the Heavens; the Result
of which he has delivered in his Astronomical Lectures there read, which it is
hoped he may be prevailed with to make public hereafter.

Mr. JOHN GOAD, late of St. John's in Oxford, has an Elaborate Treatise 1673.
now in the Press, entitled Astro-Meteorologica, i. e. Aphorisms Physical and
Astrological in two Parts: The first whereof inquires into the Natures of the
Planets, Sun, Moon, etc. The second observes the Nature also of the fixed Stars
in their several Asterisms, as they are clearly found to be joint Producers of
the Meteors ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
below, Storms, Tempests, etc. The whole Discourse founded on sacred Authority,
Reason, and the Experience of twenty years last past.

RICHARD TOWNLEY of Townley in Lancashire Esquire (whom for 1673.
Honors sake I here mention) Nephew to the before named Christopher Townley;
has, among other his much commendable Endeavors in the Mathematics,
perfected the Instrument of Mr. Gascoyns beforementioned*, now called a
Micrometer, and fitted it that any small Angle may be taken by his Tube to a
Second. Having for some years past been a diligent Observer of the Satellites
about Jupiter, whose Motions he has reduced to Exactness of Rule and Order. He
is an Excellent Arithmetician and Geometer, and from whom great Things may
justly be expected.

MONSIEUR ADRIAN AUZOUR, a very ingenious and candid 1673.
Philosopher and Astronomer of Paris, Fellow of the Royal Society of London,
published his Ephemerides concerning the Motion of the two Comets which
appeared Anno 1664 / 5) and of which he predicted the Places, through which
they should pass, and where they should cease to appear, after he had seen them
but four or five times.

The same Person entertains hopes that a Motion of Comets exactly observed may
in time clear that grand Question, whether the Earth moves or not. He also has
taken Notice, by making Reflections upon former Comets, that more of them enter
into our System by the Sign of Libra, and about the Spica Virginis, than by all
the other Parts of the Heavens: See the Phil. Transact. No. 1. p. 3. No. 2. p.
18, 19. No. 3. p. 36, 39. And being very well versed in Optics and Dioptricks,
he has given us the Proportions of the Apertures of Telescopes, and reduced
them to Tables ibid. No. 4. p. 55. as he has also delivered a Means to
illuminate an Object in what Proportion one pleases ibid. No. 4. p. 68. And we
doubt not, but he will upon his Return out of Italy where he has spent some
years of late, impart to the World as well the Astronomical as other the
learned Observations, he-hath there made.

SIGNOR GIOVANNI DOMINICO CASSINI a deservedly 1673.
Famous Astronomer of Italy; now entertained by His most Christian Majesty in
the Royal Observatory at Paris, and withal a Member of the Royal Society of
London; does continually oblige the learned World by his excellent and most
important Astronomical Observations, of which there are recorded in the Phil.
Transact. First, that of the permanent Spot in Jupiter arguing the Rotation of
that Planet about it is Axis; Secondly, those of the Shadows cast by the
Satellites of Jupiter upon his Disque, and Ephemerides of their Motions.
Thirdly, those of the Spots in Mars arguing the Conversion of that Planet also
about it is Axis. Fourthly, those of the Spots in Venus evincing the Revolution
of that Body likewise about it is Axis, as well as that of Jupiter and Mars.
Fifthly, those of the Spots in the Sun. Sixthly, those of the change of Saturns
Figure. Seventhly, those of some new Stars discovered by him, and especially of
the two new Planets about Saturn. Of all which, see the Phil. Transact. No. 4.
p. 75. No. 8. p. 143. No. 10. p. 171. No. 12. p. 209. No. 14. p. 242. No. 32.
p. 615. No. 78. p. 2201. No. 78. p. 2250. No. 78. p. 3020, 3024. No. 102. p.
4039. No. 92. p. 5175. To which add his Calculations for the Eclipses of the
Satellites of Jupiter for Anno 1671. in No. 74. p. 2238. Neither ought we to
pass by his three excellent Letters concerning the Hypothesis of the Sun's
Motions and his Doctrine of Refraction, of which an Account is given in No. 84.
p. 5001. What other Observations and Discoveries he has made concerning the
Heavens, we hope he will in due time likewise publish. ANNI POST CHRISTUM.


SIGNOR GEMINIANO MONTANARI the learned Professor of 1673.
Mathematics at Bologna has taken particular Care and Pains in acquainting us
with the Total Disappearance of diverse Stars that appeared formerly* and
intends to write upon this Argument a Book to be entitled Firmamentum
Instabile. See Philosoph. Transact. No, 73. p. 2202. and No. 89. p. 5125. Where
it is intimated that this Author doubts not but to make it out to the Assertors
of the Incorruptibility of the Visible Heavens, that even in the Stars
anciently described there are observed such Changes as would be sufficient to
make Aristotle himself, if alive, change his Opinion in this Point.

Mr. JO. FLAMSTED of Derby, an Industrious and accurate Astronomer, 1673.
and Observer of the Heavens; has of late endeavored to advance Astronomy, by
publishing yearly his Calculations of the more notable Celestial Appearances
conspicuous in these Parts; of which see the Phil. Transactions No. 55. p.
1099. No. 66. p. 2029. No. 77. p. 2297. No. 79. p. 3061. No. 89. p. 5118. To
which may be added his Observations of the Transits of Jupiter and Mars near
certain fixed Stars, No. 82. p. 4036. No. 86. p. 5034. As also those for
determining the Inclination of Jupiter to the Ecliptic, No. 94. p. 6033.
together with those lately described in a Letter of his to Signor Cassini, that
were made by Him after a New and exquisite Way, about the farthest Elongations
of the Medicean Stars from the Center of Jupiter, and others concerning the
Diameters of the Planets and their Distances from the fixed Stars, as also the
Parallax of Mars, No. 96. p. 6094. which Communications were with much Applause
received by the said Signor Cassini, Witness his Answer, which we hope will
also be published e're long, together with the sequel of more Letters lately
exchanged between these two eminent Astronomers.

Mr. EDWARD BERNARD Successor to Sir Christopher Wrenn, in the 1673.
Savilian Professor's Place of Astronomy in the University of Oxford, merits
here a due Remembrance; from whom, besides those future Improvements Astronomy
is like to receive by his learned Lectures, and Observations; we are encouraged
to expect the Publication of the (...), or (as Pappus terms it) (...), of the
Alexandrian School, restored to it is Pristine Splendour, being a Book so called
by way of Distinction from Ptolemy's Almagest, commonly by the Alexandrians
called (...), which two Books were the only or at least the chief Astronomical
Pieces usually read in that University. The first whereof consists of nine
Books, containing

Theodosii Sphaerica, ( with Euclids Optics and Phenomenon) in three Books.
Theodosius de Habitationibus, and de Diebus and Noctibus in two Books.
Autolycus de Sphaera Mota, and de Ortu and Occasu siderum inerrantium in two
Books, Aristarchus Samius de Magnitudinibus and Distantiis Solis and Lunae, and
Hypsicles* his (...) sive de Ascensionibus.
Which nine Books collected into one Volume, and remaining in several Libraries
in Italy and France, were by Sir Henry Savile, partly in Print, partly in MS.
given to the University of Oxford, and now hope for New Life from this learned
Persons Hand, who intends (as I am informed) further to oblige the learned
World by publishing the three remaining Books of Apollonius Pergaeus from the
MS. Copies of Beni Musa, and Aldelmelech, with the Annotations of Eutocius upon
one of them, whereas the Copy used in the Version of Abraham Ecchellensis, and
illustrated with the learned Annotations of Alphonsus Borellius seems to be a
Stream from a more impure Fountain: and this Supplement is to be subjoyned to
the first ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
four Books put forth, or ready to be put forth by the most Learned and
Reverend Doctor Isaac Barrow.

Mr. ISAAC NEWTON Lucasian Professor of Mathematics in the University 1673.
of Cambridge, and Fellow of Trinity College, has lately published his
reflecting Telescope; New Theories of Light and Colors; has ^ready for the
Press a Treatise of Dioptricks, and diverse Astronomical Exercises, which are to
be subjoyned to Mr. Nicholas Mercator's Epitome of Astronomy, and to be Printed
at Cambridge. From him besides is to be expected a New General Analytical
Method by infinite Series for the Quadrature of Curvilinear Figures, the
finding of their Centers of Gravity, their Round Solids, and the Surfaces
thereof, the straitning of curved Lines; so that giving an Ordinate in any
Figure as well such as Des Carts calls Geometrical, as others, to find, the
Length of the Arch Line, and the Converse; Such an Invention, to wit, but in
one particular Figure the Circle, the Learned Snellius thinks transcendent to
any thing yet published; and how much conducing to the Benefit of Astronomy,
and the Mathematical Sciences in General, such an Universal Method is, I leave
others, together with my self to admire, and earnectly expect.

Mr. JOHN COLLINS Accomptant, and a Member of the Royal Society, 1673.
published in the year 1658. his Treatise entitled The Sector on a Quadrant,
in which there are very curious Prints of two great Quadrants, and of two small
Quadrants with particular Projections on them, serving for the Latitude of
London; Albeit by Aid of other Lines each of those Quadrants is rendered
Universal for Astronomical Use, as, finding the Hour and Azimuth, and all other
Spherical Proportions; The Author's chief Design in publishing such Prints, was
to show the World that the said Prints might be pasted on Copper or Brass, and
so varnished, as to be rendered preservable from Dirt, or sullying, and sold at
a cheap Rate, as now they are.

In 1659. he published his Treatise of Navigation, entitled the Mariners Plain
Scale new Plained. In which, besides Projections of the Sphere, there are
Constructions for many Astronomical Problems, and Spherical Proportions. The
Book has found good Acceptance, and is now like to become a Common Theme to
the Scholars of Christ's Hospital London, whereof forty (by His Majesty's
Bounty, and to His Immortal Renown in Establishing a Lecturer to instruct them)
are constantly to be taught Navigation, and e're long it is to be hoped the
Author will reprint the same with considerable Additions.

The same year he published a Treatise of Geometrical Dyalling, of good Esteem,
both for the Newness and easiness of Method in situating the Requisites, and
drawing the Hour Lines. In which there being Spherical Proportions, and some
Astronomical Problems, it deserves to be remembered in this Catalogue.

In the year 1667. he published in the Philosophical Transactions the Solution
of a Problem concerning Time, to wit, about the Julian Period, with diverse
Perpetual Almanacks in single Verses; a Chronological Problem, and diverse other
Things since, in the said Transactions, which we mention not, as being
irrelative to the Sphere or Astronomy (viz. concerning Merchants Accounts,
compound Interest, and Annuities, etc.)

We should be injurious to him, if we did not farther enlarge, by telling the
World how much it is obliged for his Pains in exciting the Learned to publish
their Works, and in acting the Part of an Ingenious Obstetrix at the Press, in
correcting and in drawing of Schemes; So that he has been Instrumental in
furnishing the World with the many learned Mathematical Books here lately
published ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
(for which, his chief Reward hitherto has been to obtain from the Learned the
Title of Mersennus Anglicanus) and many more may be expected, if moderate
Encouragements toward Printing such Works, and Leisure for such an Affair be
not impeded through the necessary Avocations for a livelihood, and though it be
besides my Design, yet I cannot but digress in giving him and others like
minded (which are very rare to be found) their due commendations, in promoting
the laudable Design of getting Learned Men to impart their Labors to be
Printed; and exciting others to encourage the same, as being of singular Use
and advantage to the Republic of Learning; through the want whereof many
Learned Men's Works of much worth have been lost, suppressed or long delayed. As
those of Maurolycus, Abbot of Messina, a large Catalogue whereof is to be seen
at the End of his Opuscula, but by the Care of the learned Mathematician
Alphonsus Borellius some of them have been published in this Age, ninety years
after the Author's Death; as his Apollonius at Messina in 1656. containing the
substance of the four first Books of the Apollonius of Commandinus, and two
more Additional Books of Maurolycus, and all in less Room, and at a much
cheaper price. And now by the like Diligence the said Borellius is publishing
Maurolycus his Archimedes in Latin, reputed a Good one, after we have been long
tired with the Common Latin bad one.

Through want of such care the many learned Works of Vernalion of Naples,
Master to Josephus Auria, have not hitherto come to light, as his Commentaries
upon all Archimedes, Apollonius, Serenus, Euclid, Ptolemaeus, and diverse others
of the Ancients; which is much to be lamented; seeing he was, according to the
Testimony of the said Auria, Vir, Divinitate quadam Ingenii Ornatus.

Nor those of the learned Bernardinus Baldus, Abbot of Guastalla, mentioned at
the End of his Comment on Aristotle's Mechanics, amongst which are two Volums
of the Lives of Mathematicians, whereof Bartholinus in his Preface to the
Edition of the Optic Fragments of Heliodorus Larissaeus, Printed at Paris
1657. gives an honorable Elogium.

Varenius could find no Stationer or Printer in Holland to undertake his
Treatise of Conicks and curved Lines. See the Preface to his History of Iapan.

If Sir Charles Cavendish deceased, Brother to the present Duke of Newcastle,
had not (as it is credibly reported) given liberally toward the Printing of
Mydorgius his four first Books of Conicks, they had never come to public view;
the four last, as likewise those of Paschal the Younger, yet remaining
unprinted upon the same Account, of whom Mersennus gives this Censure, quod
Unica Propositione Universalissima, quadringentis Corrolariis armata^, totum
Apollonium complexus est. The Manuscript as yet remaining unprinted (as I am
informed) in the Hands, or at the Disposal of Monsieur Du Prez a Bookseller in
Paris; the want whereof is the most considerable in regard the Author (besides
the ordinary method) treats of the Conick Sections, as projected from lesser
Circles of the Sphere-

Erasmius Bartholinus well known by his Additions to the second Volume of Des
Carts, as it is commonly termed; could find none to undertake the Printing of
De Beaunes Treatise De Angulo solido, and other Treatises both of that Authors,
and his own.

Iungius his Phoranomicks, and Treatise De locis Planis, etc. and other
Algebraical Tractates; have remained at Hamborough above ten years since the
Author's Death unprinted, for want of due Encouragement: Albeit a Jesuit, who
writes his Life, makes him, although a Physician, equal in Mathematical
Knowledge to ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
Des Carts.

On the like Reasons we may conceive we want the many learned Algebraical Works
of our famous Countryman Mr. Thomas Harriot, (and of Mr. Warner, into whose
Hands they fell) who is esteemed by some of the most knowing Persons alive to
have been much Superior to all that ever writ; and, that equivalent to what of
his might have been forty or fifty years since known, is not readily to be
expected.

For want of the like Encouragement, we have lost that most excellent Piece of
the incomparable Vieta, his Harmonicon Coeleste; as likewise the Remains of
Alexander Anderson the Scot, as his Conicks, Stereometria Solidorum, and
Triangul. Sphaerie. the want whereof Guldinus much bewails and excites the
ingenious to enquire after them.

On the same Account the Remains of Griembergerus, as his Conicks, Dialling,
and Projections of the Sphere have not come to light; and for the very same
Reason the second Tome of Galilaeus in English does, and is like to remain,
unprinted.

With the like Remora in France, have met the Works of the Excellent Monsieur
Fermat, viz. Euclidis Porismata restituta; his Treatise De Locis Planis Solidis
Linearibus and ad Superficiem, and his Treatise De Contactibus Sphaericis.

As also the Remains of the much knowing Lalovera, as his Geometrical
Dictionary* sive Explieatio vocum Geometricarum, four Books Problematum
Illustrium, four Books Problematum Physico-Mathematicorum, and a Collection of
Letters between him and the learned, containing the Solution of many Problems
of great Curiosity and Difficulty, which seeing they are not like to get
Printed there, they have written over to know if they would be undertaken here;
promising to send the MS. Copies. And having hinted thus much at the Instance
of this Ingenious and Industrious Person, to the Curious, and Generously
learned; I come now again further to acquaint the Reader, that we have more
particularly obtained from him an Account of two of his own Designs, relative
to the Sphere and Astronomy.

The one of Geometrical Dialling, whereby reflex Dyalling is rendered
Geometrical, and reduced to a Method of Calculation; so that if a Glass were
placed at Random, and ^ines drawn on the Plain by chance, by either Method,
Points might be found in the said Lines which joined should be the Hour Lines;
and the like when the Gl^ss is so placed, that the Hour Lines may be drawn in
that Part of the Room which is most capable of them; and as a Corollary of this
Doctrine a Dial for any Latitude may be suddenly divided from a Line of
Tangents parallel to any Line proposed, and that without any Calculation for
the Horary Divisions.

The other a Treatise of Projections of the Sphere, and concerning Spherical
Trigonometry; in which many extraordinary Cases will be solved; those
Proportions mentioned before in the Narrative concerning Mr. William Oughtred,
several ways more easily demonstrated, and all Spherical Triangles measured by
a new Method (not by him formerly insisted on) after the manner of Plain
Triangles; all which perchance may be handled in some little Tractates
concerning the Use of Prints of several other Instruments designed to be cut,
pasted, and varnished, as before mentioned; viz. the Analemma, the double
Horizontal Dial, the Logarithmical Serpentine Line, Prints of Logarithmical
Rulers; whereof if there be three, they may be so placed as to lie still all
Day, and as fast as the Hight of the Sun is given, shall find either the Hour
or Azimuth universally by bare Inspection.

The hasty Collection, and uncorrect transcribing of the foregoing CATALOGUE,
has occasioned the omission of some considerable Persons, and Authors, which
should therein have been inserted in their Proper Times, and Places, The Reader
therefore is desired to take Notice of them as We have here set Anni Ante
Christum secundum vulgatam Epocham.
them down (according to Order of Time) in the following SUPPLEMENT.

FOHIUS the first Emperor of China, was greatly addicted to the Study of 2952.
Astronomy, and first (of all the Chinese) reduced the Motions of the
Celestial Bodies into Tables, as Martinius in his History of China affirms.

TANAUS chief Minister of State to Hoantgius the third Emperor of China, 2697.
contemporary with Methusalem (as Martinius in his History of China reports)
composed a Solar Cycle of sixty years, which the Chinese use at this Day.

YUMCHINIUS another chief Minister of State to the former Emperor 2513.
about the 28th year of his Reign, first of all observed the Pole and the Stars
about it, and composed a Sphere or Globe representing that of the Heavens.

CHUENHIOUS the Fifth Emperor of the Chinese was the first who 2513.
published a Calendar for the common Use of his Subjects. He wrote likewise
Ephemerides of the five Planets, which he saw at one time all in Conjunction,
upon the same Day that he observed a Conjunction of the Sun and Moon (which Day
he ordered to be observed as the first Day of the Year) in the Sign or
Constellation Xe, which is now reckoned from the eighteenth Degree of Pisces to
the fourth of Aries. This Admirable Conjunction of the Planets, is perhaps the
same with that which the European Chronologers affirm to have happened in the
Time of Noah says Martinius in his History of China, p. 33.

ANDUBARIUS a certain Indian of the Race of Arphaxad is said to have 2400.
flourished near the Time of the Building of the Tower of Babel, and to have
been very knowing in Astronomy, and first of all to have taught the same to the
Indians, as the Chronicon Alexandrinum attests.

JAUS the seventh Emperor of China, whom Kepler (in Commentatiune. in 2357.
Epistolium R. Patr. Terrentii ex Sinar. Regn. Miss.) supposes the same with
Ion, or Iavan, or Iaon Son of Iaphet, is reported to have been extremely
addicted to Astronomical Observations, and to have corrected the Chinese
Calendar; to have caused diverse Instruments to be made for observing the
Motions of the Celestial Bodies, and to have exactly noted the Winter Solstice,
which the Chinese Writers affirm to have then been in the first Degree of the
Sign or Constellation Hiu, which at present is about the first Degree of
Aquarius. V. Martin. Histor. Sinic. p. 25.

XUNUS the Eighth Emperor of China, caused to be made out of the Gold and 2258.
Jewels of his Imperial Treasury a Sphere of Admirable Workmanship, showing the
Motion of the seven Planets, each of which were represented by a precious Stone
resembling their respective Natures, in the midst of which was a large Jewel
placed representing the Earth. See Martinius Histor. Sinic.

CHUMKANG the Fourth Emperor of China, of the Family of Hia, about a 2158.
year after Noah's Death, observed a Memorable Eclipse of the Sun to have
happened in the Sign or Constellation called Fang, which now (says Martinius) is
about the 28th Degree of Scorpio; he put to Death the Astronomers of that Time
for their ANNI ANTE CHRISTUM.
Negligence in not observing the same.

CHEUCUNGUS a great Astronomer and Mathematician among the Chinese 1120.
caused to be made an Ample Instrument or Rule erected perpendicularly upon a
large Plain of Brass, and divided into certain Parts, upon the Superficies of
which Plain was likewise a Line drawn divided into several Parts, by which
Instrument he used to take the Meridian Altitude of the Sun, as likewise the
Elevation of the Pole, and made other such kind of Observations. The said
Instrument being still preserved in the City Tengfang, where likewise is yet
standing a Tower, on which he used to make his Observations, called Quensing
Tai, or the Starry Specula, as Martinius in his Atlas attests.

By which several Instances it may appear, that the Chinese of all the
Asiaticks, have seemingly the most Reason to claim Precedence and Priority in
Point of Antiquity as to the Study of Astronomy and Celestial Observations,
even before the Egyptians and Chaldeans themselves: If any Credit may be given
to the Histories and Chronologies of that Nation.

GERYON a famous Trojan Augur, Companion to Brutus or Britus at his first 1100.
Entrance into this Island, as Pitsaeus (from the Authority of Ponticus
Virunnius) affirms, wrote, among other things De Astronmia.

PERDIX a Britain, surnamed PRAESAGUS, by Pitsaeus styled Mathematicus 960.
Insignis, atque Observatione Stellarum ac Coelestium Corporum supra quam dici
potest Curiosus. Of his Writings I find no other mention than of one Book of
Predictions.

HESIODUS ASCRAEUS a Poet supposed contemporary with Homer, 760.
by Joseph Scaliger styled the most Ancient Astrologer, and Theologue of the
Greeks. (A Specimen of his Astrology, yet remaining in his Poem entitled
(...), of his Theology, in that entitled (...)) merits a Place in this
Catalogue; and therefore, being omitted by the oversight of the Transcriber in
his due Place; we have inserted him in this Supplement.

DEMOCRITUS besides what we have already mentioned, is said to have 470.
written the several Works following relative to our present Subject, although
no Remains of them be now left; as his Magnus Diacosmus, and Parvus Diacosmus,
in which he not only treated of the Fabric of this Visible World; but of other
Worlds, which he held to be innumerable; De Sideribus Vagis seu Planetis, which
he asserted to be more than the Seven commonly observed and taken notice of;
which Assertion of his, Modern Experience has since confirmed Phanae Causae,
i. e. De Sole vel Apparentiis, wherein he took Cognizance of the Solar Maculae,
or Spots, as Magnenus (in his life) affirms; for Phana or Phanes is the same
with the Sun, so called quod maxim appareat; of which Macrobius. Certamen
C^epsydrae, which Magne^ styles a most subtle Piece, because he thereby
examined the Motion of the Hea^ns, and made as it were a commensuration, or
Comparison of Motion and Time, (...), sive Poli Descriptio, qua voce nihil
aliud intelligitur, says Salmasius Exercit. Plin. p. 740) quam (...)
Descriptio; for these Ancient Sorts of ^ials, if we may rely upon Salmasius
his Authority, were called (...), a rotunda Poli Forma, cujus Medio Gnomon
infigebatur.

ORONIUS a Britain, surnamed MODESTUS is by Pitsaeus from the Authority of
Ponticus Virunnius about this time affirmed to have flourished; of whom he thus
writes; Dicunt eum in Astronomia and in Poesi Plenidium superasse. ANNI ANTE
CHRISTUM.
( Plenidius was a learned British Philosopher, of the same time) He writ both
in Greek and Latin several Works, among them diverse Poems, not now extant.

PROTAGORAS ASTROLOGUS (not the same with Protagor^ 224.
the Philosopher of Adbera) is celebrated by Euphorion Chaleidensis (who was
Keeper of the famous Library of Antiochus Magnus King of Syria, and a great
Historian and Poet) in an Epicedium which he wrote upon his Death, mentioned by
Diogenes Laertius in the Life of Protagoras Abderit. ANNI POST CHRISTUM.


HYPSICLES of Alexandria in Egypt, Disciple to the great Isidorus, flourished
140.
in the Reign of Ptolemaeus Physion. He writ De Dodecaedri and Icosaedri in
eadem Sphaera Descriptorum comparatione atque inter se Proportione, as likewise
a Treatise entitled (...), sive de Ascensionibus, or as some MS. entitle it,
(...) this last published in Greek and Latin, by Iacobus Mentelius, Printed at
Paris by Cramoisy, together with Heliodorus Larissaeus his Optics, 1657. in 4o.

ATHELSTAN King of England was learned in Astronomy, and among other 930.
Writings, of which he was Author, wrote one Book De Rebus Astrologicis, as
Pitsaeus testifies.

MICHAEL PSELLUS of Constantinople, is by some conceived to be Author 1100.
of those Astronomical Pieces ascribed to Enthymius, of whom before among the
Authors of uncertain Times (who perhaps is the same with Euthymius Zygabenus
Monachus, who was in a manner Contemporary with Psellus) viz. Synopsis
Astronomiae. De Sphaera; and Quod Rotunda sit Terra.

AVERROES, besides what he wrote upon Ptolemy's Almagest already mentioned;
1160.
writ likewise Astrologica translated into Hebrew by R. Jacob Ben Samson extant
in the French King's Library. See Labbee Bibliothec. MS.

NICHOLAS TREVET, already mentioned in the Catalogue at this 1320.
year, wrote besides what is there expressed) Canones de Conjunctionibus,
Oppositionibus and Eclipsibus Solis and Lunae; as they are cited by Pitsaeus.

GEORGIUS MEDICUS CHRYSOCOCCA, is by us already 1346.
mentioned in the year 1240. But Scaliger ( l. 1. Epist. 80.) places him in the
year 1346. at which time he published his (...), sive (...), at Tibena
Chasariae, quae Regio erat in finibus Imperii Trapezuntici in the longitude of
72. according to the said Scaliger, whose Authority we willingly submit to.

ROGERUS SWINSETTUS, or rather Swineshead, vulgarly (but erroneously) 1350.
Suisset; surnamed for his Eminent Skill in Algebra, Calculator, Fellow of
Merton College in Oxford, afterward, Monk of the Cistertian Order, a most
subtle Mathematician; of whom the great Master of Subtlety, Iul. Caesar
Scaliger ( Exercitat. 324.) thus wrtes, pene Modum excessit Ingenii humani. And
( Exercitat. 340.) gives this further Elogy of him, Dignus profecto quem neque
Senium Senem faceret, neque Naturae Lex vita privaret, nisi meliorem Vitam
apparasset. He wrote two Books De Coelo and Mundo, one Book entitled
Descriptiones Motuum Coel. stium, said to be extant in MS. in the Library of
Caius and Gonvile College in Cambridge. He put forth likewise Ephemerides and
Calculationes Astronomieae, this last said to have been Printed by Johannes de
Cypro at Padua. Vide Pitsaeum.

GUALTERUS BRITHUS, or BRITTE, an Englishman, Fellow 1390.
of Merton College Oxon; of whom Leland says, Celebre sibi Nomen acquisivit
ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
maxim quod Astrorum Motus and Corporum Coelestium Naturas, Proprietates,
Affectiones, curi^sissima Sedulitate scrutatus fuerit. He writ Theoremata
Planetarum, and de Rebus Mathematicis, etc. Vide Pitsaeum.

JOANNES DE SACRO FONT; Anglice HOLYBROOK, 14^.
an English man born in Surrey, reduced Alphonsus his Astronomical Tables into
a clear and easy Method, and published Tabulae Novae Mediorum Motuum and
Aequationis Dierum; according to the Testimony of Leland very accurately
computed. He put forth likewise Canones Astronomici, said by Pitsaeus to be
extant in the Public Library at Oxford.

ALBERTUS DE PRUSA POLONUS writ a Book of Commentaries 1494.
upon Peurbachius his Theory of the Planets, and another upon Regiomontanus his
Ephemerides, and some other Pieces, as Simler in Epitom. Gesner. attests.

JOANNES PENA, besides what is already mentioned of him, published 1558.
Theodosius his Sphaerica in Greek and Latin, with Explanations and Notes,
Printed at Paris 1558. in 8o.

FRANCISCUS SANCTIUS BROCENSIS, a Spaniard, Professor 1583.
of Rhet^ck and the Learned Languages in the University of Salamanca, pu^ forth
(among other Works) a Treatise De Sphaera Mundi, collected out of various
Authors, of which mention is made by Peregrinus in his Bibliotheca Hispaniae p.
578.

JOANNES MENA CORDUBENSIS, a learned Spanish Poet is about thi^ time (by the
said Author Bibliothecae Hispan.) reported to have written in Latin, De
Planetis, which Ferdinandus Pintianus, the worthy Commentator upon Pliny, in
his younger days translated into Spanish.

JOANNES BENEDICTUS, besides what we have already mentioned 1585.
wrote De Gnomonum, Umbrarumque Solarium Usu, Printed Augustae Taurin. 1574.

SEBASTIANUS VERRO HELVETIUS wrote ten Books Physicorum, 1590.
in the second whereof he treats particularly of Astronomy, Printed at London
1590. in 8o.

JOSEPHUS AURIA over and above the Works by him published, and 1590.
of which we have already spoken; promises the publication of the two Books of
Autolycus de Ortu and Occasu Siderum Inerrantium, which, whether he ever
performed I yet know not.

To PETRUS RYFFE his Elementa Sphaerae Mundi sive Cosmographiae, is 1598.
added a Treatise De Structura and Usu Planisperii, by Ludovicus Lucius of
Bafile; and there Printed 1598. in 8o.

NICHOLAUS RAIMARUS published in the year 1588. before he put forth his
Astronomical Hypotheses (already mentioned) a Treatise entitled Fundamentum
Astronomicum, i. e. Nova Doctrina Sinuum and Triangulorum; to which among other
things is adjoined Hypotheses Novae ac Verae Motuum Corporum Mundanorum.

ASCANIUS MARTINENGUS Brixianus, Canonicorum Lateranensium 1600.
Generalis Abbas, is by Ricciolus about this Time inserted in the Catalogue of
Astronomers; of whom he thus writes; Praeter Ea quae in Glossa Magna de Coelo
and ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
Sideribus a Deo conditis, eruditissime vulgavit Anno circiter 1600. scripsit
etiam Geographiam Terrae Sanctae, and Chronologiam insignem adornavit.

Doctor HOOD Public Professor of Astronomy and Mathematics in London,
published two Celestial Hemispheres projected upon the Poles of the Ecliptic,
and laid down in two large Schemes; together with a Treatise annexed of the
Uses of the said Hemispheres, touching the Longitude and Latitude of the Stars;
and a Table of their right Ascensions, Declinations, Culminations, coming to
the Meridian, Horary Distance, etc. He writ likewise of the Cross Staff.

GUILLAUME DE NAUTONIER, a Frenchman, wrote a Treatise 1603.
entitled La Mecometrie de l' Aimant, ou la Maniere de mesurer les Longitudes
par le Moyen de l' Aimant, Printed at Vence. 1603.

ANTHONY LINTON, sometime Parson of Worth in Sussex, set forth 1609.
a small Treatise, by him entitled, News of the Complement of the Art of
Navigation, etc. In which among other things; he offers in 26 Propositions, by
means of the Magnet to discover the secret of perfecting the said Art of
Navigation; and particularly for finding out of Longitudes, which according to
his Project depends upon the Poles of the Magnetical Globe, for the finding out
the Places of which Poles he pretends to have devised a Way, how any Man having
some Knowledge and Practice in the Mathematics, may by his own Observations
exactly find-out the true Longitude and Latitude of the said Poles, and may
also fit the same most Commodiously unto the Art of Navigation, and it unto
them; as likewise (besides the Magnetical Globe and Chard by him proposed) how
all other the Instruments commonly used in the Art of Navigation, as the
Compass, the Astrolabe, the Quadrant, the Cross Staff, and the Traverse Board
may be excellently well amended and perfected. But these his Commendable
Designs dying with him left Posterity deprived of the Benefit intended by them,
which yet in these Days seems to be revived, and is promised with advantage to
be made good, by

HENRY BOND Senior, an Ancient and Industrious Professor of the Mathematics in
this City, who undertakes to show the Cause of the Varietating of the Variation
of the Magnetical Needle or Compass by the Motion of two Magnetical Poles, how
these Poles are found, and what their distance is from the Poles of the Earth.

What their Annual Motion is, and from whence it proceeds.

By Calculation he finds all the Variations that have been observed at or near
London for above Ninety years past, and so by Consequence it may be found at
London to the End of the World.

He has calculated a Table to every five Minutes of the Inclination of the
Inclinatory Needle; so that by the Needles Inclination, that Table, and the
Latitude of the Place he can find the Longitude of any Place in the World.

Also by that Table he finds Mr. Robert Normans Inclination that he found in
the year 1576. And can show what will be the greatest and least Inclination of
the Inclinatory Needle in any Latitude in the World.

He has four Examples of finding the Longitude by the help of the Inclinatory
Needle; One at Balsore, in East India in the year 1657. Another at Cape
Charles, on the Coast of Virginia, before that Time; another at the Cape of
Good Hope; another at the Straits of Magellan. This is the Conclusion of thirty
eight years Magnetic Study spent with much Pains in Supputations grounded on
the Observations of himself, and of others (not easily procured) and the Author
is willing and ready (as we are credibly informed) to impart the Result of
these his many years Thoughts on this Subject, upon moderate and reasonable
Encouragement for the ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
same.

SETHUS CALVISIUS published Elenchus Calendarii Gregoriani in quo 1612.
Errores qui passim in Anni Quantitate and Epactis committuntur, manifest
demonstrantur, Printed Francofurti Marchionum 1612.

JOANNES TERRENTIUS a Jesuit, wrote from the City of Changtscheu 1623.
in China in the year 1623. an Epistle to the Mathematicians of Ingolstadt in
Germany, wherein he gives an Account of some Astronomical Designs of the
Chinese, more particularly touching the Emendation of their Calendar,
Praediction of Eclipses, and Procession of the Equinoxes, desiring the
Assistance of the European Astronomers in promoting the Progress of that
Science among those People. Which Epistle Kepler published in Print in the year
1630. with his own brief, but learned Comment thereupon, Printed at Sagan in
Silesia in 4o.

SAMUEL PETIT a learned Frenchman, among other Works by him 1632.
published, set forth Eclogae Chronologicae, in quibus de variis Annorum
Iudaeorum, Samaritanorum, Graecorum, Macedonum, Romanorum Typis, Cyclisque
Veterum Christianorum Paschalibus, disputatur, Printed at Paris 1632.

OCTAVIANUS MARINIUS put forth a Treatise entitled Statera 1633.
Temporum, sive de Praestantia Kalendarii Gregoriani, and ejus facili Usu,
Printed at Bologna, 1633.

DAVID GOUBARD put forth Perpetual Tables of the Celestial Motions, 1634.
in French, Printed at Middleburgh, 1634.

NATALIS DURET a Frenchman, published New Ephemerides of the 1637.
Celestial Motions, to which he gave the Title of Tabulae Richelianae, Printed
at Paris, 1637.

ERICUS OLAUS TORMIUS Public Professor of Mathematics 1648.
at Copenhagen, published a small Treatise with this Specious Title, (...).
Sive Disquisitio Mechanica, wherein he Disputes of, and asserts the Necessity,
and Possibility of Instruments, their Number, and Amplitude, requisite in
Astronomical Observations, Printed Hafniae, 1643. in 4o.

JACOB RAVENSPERG Professor of Mathematics in the University 1643.
of Utretch, published about the years 1640. and 1643. diverse small Latin
Astronomical and Meteorological Disputations of the Spots of the Sun, Moon, and
Planets, as likewise several Theses about Light, Lightning, Thunder, and some
concerning Optical Problems, and Telescopes.

BENEDICTUS HEDRAEUS a Swede, put forth Nova and accurata 1643.
Astrolabii Geometrici Structura, ubi Gradus horumque singula Minuta prima, nec
non Quadrantis Astronomici Azimuthalis, quo non solum prima, sed and singula
minuta secunda distinct observari possunt; together with a Treatise of the Use
of the same illustrated with clear and perspicuous Examples, Printed at Leyden,
1643. in 8o.

GEORGIUS FROMMIUS set forth a Dissertation Astronomical De 1645.
mediis quibusdam ad Astronomiam restituendam necessariis, Printed at
Copenhagen, 1642. in 4o. He published likewise an Answer to Io. Baptista
Morinus his Defense of his Astronomia restituta, Printed at the same Place
1645. in 4o.

JOANNES BECHETT Professor of Mathematics in the University of ANNI POST
CHRISTUM.
Paris, to his Theory of the Planets before mentioned, has added Tables of the
mean 1650.
Motions, and a Parecbasis explaining the Doctrine of Directions according to
the Rational Way; as also an Appendix for finding out and computing the Lunary
Periods.

JOHANNES JACOBUS HAINLINIUS Superintendant General 1653.
of the Diocese of Aldeberg in Saxony; put forth a Mathematical Synopsis,
wherein the chief Parts of the whole Mathematics, both abstract and Concrete,
that is to say, Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy, Geography, Optics, etc. are
methodically proposed by Definitions, Axioms, Postulates, Theorems, Problems,
etc. very useful not only for young beginners, but for those also who have
already made some Progress in those Sciences. In the Astronomical Part he
treats particularly and distinctly De Astronomia Sphaerica, Theorica, and
Chronologica, adding withal the Praxis and Use of those Parts Problematically
laid down, and briefly and clearly explained, Printed at Tubinge 1653. in 8o.

JACOBUS DU BOIS, published by Way of Dialogue, a Theological-Astronomical 1653.
Treatise, Printed at Leiden, 1653. in 4o. wherein he opposes Copernicus his
Hypothesis, and Des Carts his Philosophy. Against which

AN ANONYMUS Author put forth a Reply under this following Tide, Demonstratio
Mathematica Ineptiarum and Ignorantiae Iacobi du Bois Ecclesiastae, Leidensis,
in Oppugnanda Hypothesi Copernicana, and Philosophia Cartesiana, Printed at
Roterdam 1656. in 4o.

JOANNES HERBINIUS a Silesian, Master of Arts, and Professor of Philosophy 1655.
at Utrecht, undertook the like Controversy as Du Bois, and published a
Treatise thereupon entitled, Famosae de Solis vel Telluris Motu Controversiae
Examen, Theologico-Philosophicum, ad S. Sanctam Normam institutum, to which he
has annexed the Grounds of his said undertaking, in an Epistle addressed to
the Excellently learned Maria Cunitia.

GEORGIUS HILARIOUS, besides what we have already mentioned, 1656.
put forth Enchiridion Progymnasmatum Mathematicorum, containing, first,
Apospasmation Primi Elementi Euclidaei Gr. Lat. Secondly, Praecepta Sphaerica.
Thirdly, Globi Coelestis and Terrestris Explicatio and Usus. Fourthly,
Geographiae Rudimonta. Fifthly, Computi Ecclesiastici Epitome, Printed at
Copenhagen 1656. in 12o.

PETRUS BORELLUS, Counselor and Physician to the King of France, 1656.
put forth a Treatise De vero Telescopii Inventore, wherein he treats of the
History of Telescopes, and other Optic Glasses, their Matter, Fashion,
Working, several Kinds or Species, and Uses; as also of several Discoveries
made by the said Author, as well with Telescopes as Microscopes; (of the later
of which, he gives a Century of Observations) and treats of what may yet be
further found out by the means of Telescopes, where occasionally he speaks of
the finding out of Longitudes, Printed at the Hague 1655. and 1656. in 4o.

EUSTACHIO DIVINI, an Excellent Worker of Telescopical Glasses 1660.
at Rome, put forth something against Monsieur Hugens his Systema Saturnium,
Printed at the Hague in Holland in 4o.

The Reverend and Learned Mr. WILLIAM BEVEREGE, late of St. 1669.
John's College in Cambridge, is to be added to the number of those whose
mention gives Honor to this Catalogue, for his excellent Piece of
Chronological Institutions in two Books. In the first whereof he treats of the
Nature of Chronology, and its ANNI POST CHRISTUM.
Parts, of Time, and its various Distributions into Scruples, Hours, Days,
Weeks, Months, Years; in the second, of the Syzygies, and Eclipses of the
Luminaries, of the Equinoxes and Solstices, Cycles of the Sun and Moon,
Indictions, Epacts, and of the several Periods, Aera's and Epocha's of the
Ancients, to which he has likewise added two Books of Chronological
Arithmetic; all which are of great Use and Advantage to the Students in
Astronomy, Printed at London 1669. in 4o.

AN ANONIMOUS Frenchman about this Time published in his own 1671.
Language a Treatise entitled Discourse sur les Influences des Astres selon les
Principes de Monsieur des Carts, Printed at Paris in 12o.

GUARINUS GUARINUS, of the Order of Clerks regular (commonly 1671.
called Theatins) of Mutina; Professor of Philosophy and Divinity, and
Mathematician to the Duke of Savoy, published and Dedicated to the said Prince
a large Mathematical Treatise in folio, entitled Euclides adauctus, and
Methodicus, Mathematicaque Universalis: In which with great Perspicuity, and
exactness of Method, he treats of all things falling under the Notion of
Quantity, as well Discrete, continuous, as abstracted; divided into 35.
Tractates. In the 23th whereof he handles the Doctrine of the Sphere, in two
Parts; the first, treating De Sphaerae Contactibus and Sectionibus in Genere;
the second, De Sectionibus Maximorum Circulorum Invicem, which being of great
Use in Astronomical Operations, we have for that Reason in this Place made
mention thereof.

Mr. PATRICK MATHEWS Arch-Beadle to the Universiry of St. Andrews, 1672.
published a small Treatise in 12o. (lately come up from Scotland) under the
Title of the Great and New Art of weighing Vanity, written against a Book
entitled, Ars Magna and Nova Gravitatis and Levitatis. To which are annexed
some Tentamina de Motu Penduli and Projectorum; In which there being some
Ingenious Debates about Astronomical Affairs, and the Theory of Pendulums for
the exact measuring of Time, and Analytical Series's or Equations of great
Ingenuity suited to the Motion thereof, and of Projects; We thought the same
worthy to be mentioned in this Catalogue, the said Treatise was Printed at
Glasco 1670.

JOHN GADBURY of London, Student in Physic and Astronomy, put 1673.
forth Ephemerides of the Celestial Motions for ten years, beginning Anno 1672.
and ending Anno 1681. compared with the most correct Observations of Tycho,
Kepler, Mr. Wright, and other approved Astronomers, with an Introduction to the
Use thereof, Printed 1673. in 4o.

By late Letters from Paris Information is given that the SIEURS AVOCATE and DE
ROYER intend to write fully of Astronomy, and of the Theories of the Planets.

And here, for a Close, we cannot but acquaint the learned World with the most
praiseworthy Design of the BISHOPS, NOBLEMEN, and GENTRY of Scotland, who have
nobly and liberally contributed toward the erecting an Astronomical Observatory
in the University of St. Andrews, and furnishing the same with Books and
Instruments for Observation to the value of above 500 l. Sterling, which
Heroic Example we hope may animate those of like Condition and Abilities in
this Nation to encourage the promoting of the same Laudable Design amongst us.

And thus much of the Original and Progress of Astronomy, and of Astronomers.

OF THE COSMICAL SYSTEM.
THe next thing, according to the Method of our Author, to be considered, is
the Cosmical or Mundane System, which is nothing else but the Coordination of
the Parts of the World; whose Matter is the Number of the Elements and Heavenly
Orbs; its Form, the Order and Disposition of them among themselves, and
relatively, as to the Center of the Universe. Of this Manilius gives but a
short hint. For having told, how humane Reason had scaled Heaven, and
contemplated the various Phoenomena within the Elementary Region, and Those to
their proper Causes having brought, He adds next,

That on the whole Worlds Mass she cast her thought,
Of which the System in her self she framed.
But not giving any particular Description thereof, either as to its Matter or
Form, we conceive it requisite, for the Reader's greater satisfaction, to
explain and illustrate this Subject, by representing the several Opinions, as
well of the Ancients as Moderns, touching the same.

And seeing the Matter of this System, which is the Number of the Heavens, is
variously and with much confusion discoursed of by the Learned; some
diminishing, others increasing them; it will not be amiss, in the first place,
to exhibit this short following Synopsis of the Number and Distribution of the
Heavens, with the several Authors or Assertors thereof; as the same is
represented by Ricciolus, Almagest, Nov. Lib. 9. Sect. 3.

A SYNOPSIS of the Number of the HEAVENS, according to several AUTHORS.
I.
One Heaven, that is, one World, according to Aristotle. NUMBER OF THE HEAVENS.
One Heaven, and that Sydereal and Fluid, according to S. Chrysostom,
Tertullian, S. Bonaventure, Tycho Brahe, Longomontanus, Kepler, Bulialdus, and
Tellez. One Heaven, and that Sydereal, but Solid, according to Aegidius,
Hurtadus, Cisalpinus, and Aversa.
II.
Two Heavens, that is, the Empyraeum created the first Day, and the Firmament
created NUMBER OF THE HEAVENS.
the second Day; according to Clemens, Acacius, Theodoret, Anastasius Synaita,
Procopius, Suidas, S. Bruno, and Claudianus Mamertus. Two Heavens, that is the
Sydereal and Aereal, according to Justin Martyr. Two Heavens, that is, one of
the Fixed Stars, the other of the Planets, according to S. Gregory Nyssene. Two
Heavens, that is, the Primum Mobile, and the Sydereal, according to Mastrius,
and Bellutus.
III.
Three Heavens, to wit, the Empyraeum, Sydereal, and Aereal, according to S.
Basil, S. Ambrose, Damascene, Cassiodorus, Genebrardus, Suarez, Tannerus,
Hurtadus, Oviedus, Tellez, Borrus. Three Heavens, that is, one of the Fixed
Stars, one of the Planets, and the other Aereal, according to S. Gregory
Nyssene. Three Heavens, the Empyraeum, Watery, and Sydereal according to Thomas
Aquinas. Three Heavens, that is, the Watery, Sydereal and Aereal, according to
Cajetan.
IV.
Four Heavens, that is, the Empyraeum; that of the Fixed Stars; that of the
Planets; and the Aereal, according to S. Athanasis.
V.
Five Heavens, and all Sydereal and Solid, viz. of the Fixed Stars, of Saturn,
Jupiter, and the Sun (with Mars, Venus, and Mercury included) and of the Moon,
according to Oviedus. Five Heavens, that is, the Empyraeum, the Watery, that of
the Fixed Stars, that of the Planets, and the Aereal; according to Ricciolus.
VII.
Seven Heavens, but confusedly reckoned by Philastrius. Seven Heavens, that is,
the Aer, the Ether, Olympus, the fiery Heaven, the Firmament, the Angelical
Heaven, and the Heaven of the Trinity, are reckoned by Beda. Seven Heavens,
that is, the lower Region of the Air; the upper Region thereof; the lower
Region of the Fire; the upper Region thereof; the Sydereal Heaven; the
Chrystalline; and Empyraeum; according to Rabanus.
VIII.
Eight Heavens, and all Sydereal, that is, the Heaven, or Sphere of the Fixed
Stars, and the several Spheres of the Seven Planets, according to the
Babylonians, Egyptians, Eudoxus, Plato, Calippus, Aristotle, Cicero, Philo, S.
Basil, S. Ambrose, Damascene, Bonaventure, Remigius, Thomas Aquinas, Aben-Ezra,
Carthusianus, Lyranus, Tostatus, Brugensis, Riccius, Crontius, Cremoninus,
Philalthaeus, Amicus, Ruvius.
IX.
Nine Heavens, that is, the Empyraeum, and eight Sydereal solid Heavens,
according to Arriaga. Nine Heavens, that is, the Primum Mobile, the eight
Sydereal Heavens, according to Macrobius, Haly, Alpetragius, Rabbi Iosue, Rabbi
Moses, Scotus, Abraham Zagutus, Sacroboscus, Claromontius, and, as some (but
falsely) conjecture Hipparchus, and Ptolemy.
X.
Ten Heavens, that is, the Primum Mobile; the Sphere for the Motion of the
Fixed Stars; the Eighth Sphere, for the Motion of Trepidation in Longitude; and
that of the Seven Planets; according to Alphonsus and his followers, Fernelius,
Purbachius Regiomontanus, Amicus, Appianus, Maurolycus, and Langius. Ten
Heavens, that is, the Primum Mobile; the Sphere of the Motion of Trepidation in
Longitude; that of the Fixed Stars; and the Spheres of the Seven Planets;
according to Arzahel, Thebit, and Isaac Israelita. Ten Heavens, that is, the
Empyraeum; the Primum Mobile; and Eight Sydereal Heavens; according to
Gulielmus Parisiensis, and Johannes Antonius Delphiuus.
XI.
Eleven Heavens, that is, the Empyraeum, and the ten moveable Spheres of
Alphonsus and NUMBER OF THE HEAVENS.
his Followers, before mentioned, according to Petrus Alliacensis, the College
of Conimbra* Martinengus, and (sometime) Clavius. Eleven Heavens, to wit, the
Primum Mobile; the Sphere of the first Libration in Latitude; the Sphere of the
second Libration in Longitude; the Sphere of the Fixed Stars; and those of the
Seven Planets; according to Johannes Vernerus, Leopoldus de Austria* Johannes
Antonius Maginus, and (in his latter days) Clavius.
XII.
To these foregoing, if you add the Empyraeum, there will be XII. Heavens.
XIV.
Johannes Baptista Turrianus, and Fracastorius make XIV Heavens, that is Seven
Spheres, or Orbs, counting from the Primum Mobile, to the Aplane, or Sphere of
the Fixed Stars; and Seven of the Planets.
Having, by the foregoing Synopsis, sufficiently explained the Number of the
Heavens, which is the Matter of the Mundane System; we are in the next place to
give an account of their Order and Disposition, which is the Form thereof.

According to it is Form, the Mundane System is considered under a double
Hypothesis; either as having the Earth seated in the Center of the Universe,
immovable, and the Sun and Heavens moving about it; or having the Sun in the
Center, exempt from any Motion of Lation, and the Earth moving about it in the
Solar Orb.

And it is worthy Observation (as Ricciolus notes) that the Two Sects of
Philosophers and Mathematicians, the one maintaining the Earth's Mobility, the
other, its Immobility, have had in the Schools, through several Ages, like
Castor and Pollux, alternately their Rise and their Fall. For first,
Pythagoras, with some others of his Sect, placing the Earth in the Center of
the World, making use of Excentricks and Epicycles, seated the Sun in the
midst of the Planets. But others of the Pythagoreans, retaining Epicycles and
Excentricks, placed the Sun in the Center of the World, and the Earth in the
midst of the Seven Planets.

Afterward Plato, placing the Earth in the Center of the World, seated the Sun
in the midst of the Planets, yet so as for the most part he supposed Venus and
Mercury to be carried above him; whom Eudoxus, Calippus, and Aristotle
followed, endeavoring to explain the Motion of the Planets, by Concentrick
Circles. So that they conceived neither Venus nor Mercury moved in Epicycles,
above and beneath the Sun; but either always above, or always beneath the Sun.

After this, Others again, reducing Excentricks and Epicycles, placed the Earth
in the midst of the World, as Archimedes, Hipparchus, Sosigenes, Cicero,
Vitruvius, Pliny, Macrobius, and Capella; but differed among themselves, as to
the various Order and Disposition of the Planets. Others again, as Aristarchus,
Philolaus, and some Pythagoreans, removed the Earth out of its Central
Position, and made it move about the Sun, by them placed in the midst of the
World: But what their Opinion was touching Excentricks and Epicycles, they have
not explained or delivered to Posterity.

In process of time, Ptolemy, reviving the first and ancient Pythagorean
System, re-established Excentricks and Epicycles, placing the Earth in the
midst of the World, and the Sun in the midst of the Planets. Which Opinion
continued, and was embraced by the greatest part of Astronomers, until the XIV.
Century after Christ; though the Order of the Planets were changed by
Alpetragius and Geber. On the other side, Turrianus and Fracastorius, retaining
the Ptolemaick Order, brought in again Concentrick Circles, and those more in
number by many, than either Aristotle or Eudoxus had introduced. About which
time, Copernicus, raising, as it were from the Grave, the Hypothesis of
Philolaus and Aristarchus, touching the Earth's annual Motion about the Sun, in
the Center of the Universe, set forth and illustrated the same with such fair
and probable Arguments, that it has prevailed with most Astronomers at this
Day. He made Venus and Mercury, with Plato, Vitruvius, Macrobius, Capella, and
Bid, to move, now above, now beneath the Sun* Hence Tycho Brahe; and with him
Longomontanus, took occasion of introducing another System; wherein not only
Venus and Mercury, but also Mars, Jupiter and Saturn are supposed to move about
the Sun; and the Sun and Moon, with the Fixed Stars about the Earth, immovable
in the Center of the Universe, retaining the Excentricks, but rejecting the
Epicycles of Ptolemy. At length Argolus, altering the Tychonick System, makes
the three Superior Planets to move about the Earth; Venus and Mercury about
the Sun; seating the Earth in the midst of the World. From whom yet Ricciolus
dissents, making Saturn, Jupiter, the Sun, Moon, and Fixed Stars, to move about
the Earth, and Venus, Mercury, and Mars about the Sun. These various Sentiments
of the Learned, touching the Order and Disposition of the several Parts of the
Mundane System, (as they have been in Diverse Ages successively asserted) being
thus briefly enumerated, we shall next give somewhat a more ample Description
and Illustration of the several Hypotheses, and exhibit withal to the Reader's
view the Schemes of each particular System; beginning with the most Ancient,
that of Pythagoras, which is this.

SYSTEMA ANTIQVISSIMVM COMMVNE PYTHAGORAE PTOLEMAEI ET PLVRIMORVM.
1


In this System the Terraqueous Globe is seated in the midst or Center; about
it, the Elementary Region; next above that, the Moon; then Mercury; next above
him, Venus; the Sun, as Moderator of all, being placed, as in a Throne in the
midst of the Planets, environed not only by the three foregoing, called the
Inferior, but by Mars likewise, Jupiter, and Saturn, called the Superior
Planets. Above Saturn is the Sphere of the Fixed Stars, called (...), i. e.
Aplane, or Unerring; by some, the Firmament. The reason of this System is thus
explained by Pliny, Lib. 2. c. 22. Pythagoras ex Musica ratione appellat Tonum
quantum absit a Terra Luna, etc. i. e. Pythagoras from Musical Reason, calls
the space between the Earth and the Moon, a Tone; the space from the Moon to
Mercury, he will have to be half a Tone; as much in a manner from him, to
Venus; from Venus to the Sun, as much and half again; but from the Sun to Mars,
as much as from the Earth to the Moon, that is a Tone; from him to Jupiter,
half a Tone; from Jupiter to Saturn, another half Tone; and from thence to the
fixed Stars, as much and a half again. Thus are composed Seven Tones, which
Harmony they call Diapason, that is, the generality or whole state of Consent
or Concord. Now a Tone is by some interpreted the same as an Unite or Integer,
and contains in Measure according to the Opinion of Pythagoras 125000 Stadia;
according to which Measure; not only the foregoing space, but extent of the
whole System, may be computed. And this was the first Pythagorean System,
embraced by Archimedes, the Chaldeans, Aristotle, Cicero, Livy, Ptolemy,
Alphonsus, Purbachius, and the greatest part of Astronomers, until the time of
Maginus and Clavius.

The next System is that which is called the Platonic. Touching which, thus
Ricciolus, Lib. 9. c. 3. As Discord oftentimes produces Concord; so on the
other side Concord often begets Discord. For between Pythagoras and Plato,
there was thus far a wonderful Concordancy, that they both conceived the
Intervals and Order of the Planets ought to be constituted according to the
Laws of Music. But from their agreement sprung their dissent; by reason the
Platonists and Pythagoreans differed in their Opinions about the Harmonical
Diastem. And as Plato differed from Pythagoras, so some of his own followers
differed from him, as (among others) Porphyrius, Apuleius, and Mareilius
Ficinus. Whose^ difference will appear in the following Scheme.

SYSTEMA PLATONICVM.
2


In which, in the first place, according to Plato, the Earth with the
Elementary Region is placed; above that, the Moon, and immediately above that,
the Sun; above him Mercury, then, Venus; above Her, Mars; then Jupiter; lastly
Saturn. In the second place is that of Porphyrius, and some other Platonists
before mentioned, agreeing in all but this, That whereas Plato immediately
above the Sun, placed Mercury, and then Venus, they immediately, above the Sun,
placed Venus, and then Mercury above her. Of which last, Macrobius lib. 1. in
Somn. Scip. c. 3. gives this account. The late Platonists (says he) repudiated
the Dintensions of Archimedes, as not observing double and triple Intervals.
For, they held, that what was the Distance, or Interval, from the Earth to the
Moon, the same was double from the Earth to the Sun; and the Distance from the
Earth to Venus, was triple. to that from the Earth to the Sun; and from the
Earth to Mercury four times that from the Earth to Venus; and how far the
Distance was from the Earth to Mercury, nine times that was the Distance from
the Earth to Mars; and the Distance from the Earth to Jupiter, eight times that
from the Earth to Mars; and the Distance from the Earth to Saturn, seven and
twenty times that from the Earth to Jupiter. The same Order is likewise
asserted by the Author of the Book De Mundo. These three foregoing Systems are
composed all of Concentrick Orbs. The next, which is the Egyptian, followed by
Vitruvius, Martianus Capella, Macrobius, Beda, and Argol, is composed partly of
Concentrick Orbs, partly of Excentrick, as may appear by the subsequent Scheme.

SYSTEMA AEGPTIVM.
3


Wherein we may perceive the Earth seated in the midst of the World, with the
Elements, and immediately above them the Moon, then the Sun, about whom, as
their Center, first Mercury, then Venus are supposed to move in Epicycles;
above these Mars, next Jupiter, and then Saturn. Of this System, thus
Macrobius, in Somn. Scipion. l. 1. c. 19. The Egyptian subtlety is not without
reason, which is this; the Circle wherein the Sun runs his course is surrounded
with the Circle of Mercury, as Interior, and by that of Venus as Exterior. And
hence it is that these two Stars, when they are in the upper part of their
Circles, are understood to be above the Sun; but when they are in the inferior
part of their Orbs, or Circles, the Sun is held to be above them. Those
therefore who affirm the Spheres of these Planets to be under the Sun, are
persuaded to believe it, from this Appearance of their Course, when they run in
the Inferior part of their Orbits, which is more remarkable and more clearly
discernible, for when they are in the upper part of their Circles, they are
more concealed. And therefore this persuasion of theirs has prevailed, and
accordingly the Order of those Planets has been received almost by all
Persons; but more perspicacious Observation discovered this better Order. And
justly does he style it a perspicacious Observation, which so many Ages since
by the only Sagacity of Wit so clearly discovered, what we find now really
detected by the help of the Telescope. And therefore Ricciolus says of this
System, that it is Pulcherrimum, ac pro hac quidem part, Verissimum Systema.

We come now to the most celebrious, and at this day most generally received
Mundane System, from it is Reviver, called the Copernican, but owing it is
original to the Samian and Italick School, as being proposed and asserted, in
the one, by Philolaus, of Crotona, in the other, by Aristarchus Samius, both
Pythagoreans, whence it is called the second Pythagorick System, as differing
from the former before described; That, fixing the Earth immovable in the
midst of the World; This, on the contrary giving to the Earth, not only a
Diurnal Motion about its Axis, but also an Annual, about the Sun, as the Center
of the Universe. An Hypothesis not unknown to the Romans; and therefore Seneca,
in his Natural Questions ( Lib. 7.) proposes it as a thing necessary to be
discussed; To know whether the Earth standing still, the Heavens be moved about
it; or the Heavens standing still, the Earth be carried round. And again, It is
a thing worthy contemplation to be assured, says he, in what condition We are;
whether in a Seat of all others most slow, or the most swift? Whether God turns
all things about us, or we our selves are turned about? This System, about two
Ages since, was resuscitated from Oblivion and the Grave, by Cardinal Cusanus,
but imperfectly, until Copernicus came and gave it a perfect consummation,
followed by the greatest Wits of this and the foregoing Age, to wit, Georgius
Ioachimus Rheticus, Moestlinus, Rothmannus, Stevinus, Kepler, Galilaeo,
Schickardus, Iordanus Brunus, Coelius Calcagninus, Didacus Astunica,
Foscarinus, Herigonus, Renatus Des Carts, Lansbergius, Bullialdus, Antonius
Laurentius Politianus, Wendelinus and Gassendus; Lansbergius and Bullialdus,
only differing in this from Copernicus, that they allow to the Fixed Stars a
proper Motion, which Copernicus denies. Take the same represented in the
following Scheme.

SYSTEMA PHILOLAI ET COPERNICI.
4


In this System, we may perceive the Sun placed in the Center of the World;
next above him, Mercury, finishing his Course in the space of eighty days, or
thereabouts; then Venus, making her Revolution in nine Months time; above her,
the Earth, with the Elementary Sphere, in the Annual Orb, which it runs through
in 365. days and half, by a Motion from West to East; that is in the same
Circle, wherein the Egyptian and Ptolemaick System place the Sun. Besides which
Annual Motion, Copernicus assigns to the Earth a Diurnal Revolution, in which
it turns about its own Center and Axis, inclined in the Plane of the Ecliptic,
in the space of 24. hours, from West to East: The Moon by a Menstrual
Revolution being carried about the Earth, as in an Epicicle; Mars running about
the Sun, as the Center of the Universe in two years; Jupiter above him in
twelve; and Saturn in thirty. The Sphere of the Fixed Stars being distant by so
vast an Interval from the Sphere of Saturn, that the Annual Orb, in which the
Earth moves, appears, in respect to it, no other than a Point.

This System, though, in appearance, of all others, the most rationally
grounded, could not yet give so general a satisfaction to the Curious, but that
some of them conceived it might admit of Alteration, or Emendation. And thence
the illustrious Tycho took occasion to introduce the following System of his,
which is no other than a certain Transfiguration of the Copernican, after this
manner.

SYSTEMA TYCHONICVM.
5


First, the Earth is supposed fixed without Motion in the Center of the
Universe, Concentrick to which is, first the Sphere or Circle of the Moon's
Motion; next, that of the Sun's Annual Course; then the Sphere of the Fixed
Stars. The Sun being placed as the Center of the other Planets, in whose Orb
(as it were two Epycicles) are drawn the Circles of Mercury and Venus. At a
greater Distance is that of Mars, intersecting, when in Opposition to the Sun,
part of the Solar Sphere, and therefore being Achronical is nearer to the Earth
than the Sun. Above Mars is the Sphere of Jupiter; above Jupiter, that of
Saturn; above that, the Fixed Stars. So that, in this System, the Sun is the
Center of five Planets; that is, not only of Mercury and Venus, according to
the Egyptian System, but also of Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, according to the
Copernican; which likewise it resembles, as supposing fewer Conversions, and
rejecting the Solidity of the Ptolemaick or Purbachian Orbs. But the
Copernican, even in the Opinion of Ricciolus, seems to carry with it a greater
simplicity and concinnity. Nicholaus Raimarus Ursus seemed to challenge this
System, as first introduced by him, ascribing the Original of the Hypothesis,
to Apollonius Pergaeus. But Tycho, in his Epistles, has vindicated and
asserted his own Right, and has gained for his Followers Longomontanus (who
yet gives to the Earth a Motion about its Axis) Scheinerus, Blancanus, and
generally the Astronomers of the Iesuitical School. And the Reason of their
adherence to this System, rather than to the Ptolemaick or Copernican, is given
by Caramuel, in his Interim-Astronomicum; which is, that Demonstration condemns
the Ptolemaick, showing it to be impossible and inconsistent with Modern
Observations; and as for the Copernican, that it stands condemned by a
congregation of Cardinals, who have (if you will believe them) defined the same
to be repugnant to the Sacred Scriptures.

Among the several Systems either of the Ancients or Moderns which are grounded
upon the Earth's Immobility, there are two (besides the Tychonick) which seem
to Ricciolus the most probable; the One is Semi-Ptolemaick, the other
Semi-Tychonick.

The Form of the first, admits the Center of the Earth as the Term from whence
the Excentricity of the several Orbs are measured, supposing Venus and Mercury
to be carried about the Sun in Epicycles and the Excentricities of the other
five Planets, as also their Epicycles, not to be always of the same Quantity,
which may be apprehended by the Figure of the Egyptian System already
described, supposing only that Mars in Opposition to the Sun, be made to
approach nearer to the Earth, than the Sun does.

The Form of the second is represented in the following Scheme, and ows its
Invention to Ricciolus, wherein the Sun is supposed to be the Center of the
Sphere of Mercury, Venus and Mars; And the Earth, the Center of the Circle of
the Moon's Motion, and of the Fixed Stars, as also of those of Saturn and
Jupiter. The Reasons impelling him to embrace this Hypothesis, being these.

First, he observed that Saturn and Jupiter had Secundary Planets moving about
them, but Mars, Venus, and Mercury none; whence he conceived it probable that
Saturn and Jupiter exercised as it were their proper Monarchies in the Heavens;
and were no Attendants or Satellites of the Sun; but moving about the Earth as
their Center. That Mars was one of the Sun's greatest or utmost Satellites,
including within his Sphere that of the Earth; but Venus and Mercury his nearer
and more interior Gaurds.

Secondly, Because in the Variation of the Excentricities of the Planets, he
observed a greater Connection of Mars, Venus, and Mercury with the Sun, then of
Saturn and Jupiter.

Thirdly, Because he conceived Saturn and Jupiter, being more slow and
ponderous Planets, to have a greater Affinity to the slow Sphere of the Fixed
Stars; and to respect (as do the Fixed Stars) the Earth rather than the Sun as
the Center of their Motions.

Fourthly, Seeing that Mars, Venus, and Mercury in their Courses or
Circumgyrations enter into the Solar Heaven, he conceived it more probable that
those Planets should have the Sun for the Center of their Motions, and not to
have any Distinct Ethereal Regions assigned them, but to move All in one
common Region. But Saturn and Jupiter to have their Distinct Dominions and
Regions allotted them.

Fifthly, Because it seems very probable that among the Planets there should be
one as it were a Mean or Middle, between the Superior and the Inferior, and
which in his Motions should have some things common with Saturn and Jupiter,
and some with Venus and Mercury; to wit Mars. But see the Scheme it self.

SYSTEMA SEMITYCHONICV^ RICCIOLI.
6


In which is to be noted that the Intervals of the several Orbs are so ordered,
that the lowest of the Concave Heaven of Saturn, does not touch the upper part
of the Unequal of Jupiter, or the lowest of Jupiters, the uppermost of Mars, as
in the P^olemaick, but there is a void Interval between the Fixed Stars, and
the uppermost Unequal of Saturn's Orb, of 9824 Semidiameters of the Earth, and
between the Concave of Saturn and the Unequal of Jupiter, an Interval of 10045
of the like Semidiameters, and between the Concave of Jupiter and Unequal of
Mars, an Interval of 5310 such Semidiameters, and between the Concave of Venus
and Unequal of the Moon's Orb 1850 Semidiameters. Besides, the Thickness of the
whole Heaven of Saturn computed together with his Satellites is supposed 32454
Semidiameters, and that of Jupiter with his Satellites 21361 Semidiameters;
That of the Sun, Mars, Venus and Mercury; being but as one Heaven, is supposed
to contain 19091 of the Earth's Semidiameters.

These three last Systems suppose the Heavens, or the Aetherial Region to be
pervious, fluid, and of a thin, liquid, and transparent Substance like the Air,
but more pure, and not consisting of Solid Orbs, as the Peripateticks, and
those of the Ptolemaick School affirm. This Fluidity of the Heavens being
manifested, by the Maculae Solares, whether they be considered as Planets
moving tumultuously about the Sun, or as Clouds, Vapors, and Fumosities
issuing from the Solar Body; Likewise by the Librating Motion of the Firmament
it self, in which the Sun moves, as also by the Libration of the Moon; and by
the Satellites of Jupiter, not long since discovered to move about that Planet,
as also those about Saturn, and the Extravagant Motion of Mars, as also that of
Venus and Mercury running now above, now beneath the Sun. No less evidenced by
the Production of Comets, and their diverse Motions, which beginning in One,
make their Progress through several Aetherial Regions; which they could not do
if the Celestial Orbs through which they pass were solid; from which
supposition several other Inconveniences would likewise ensue by reason their
Convexities and Concavities, as also those of so many Epi^ycles and Excentricks
would necessarily produce a Multiplicity of various Refractions of the several
Rays of the Sun, of the other Planets, and of the Fixed Stars. Lastly, it
seems as incongruous that the Stars and Planets should be carried about in such
vast solid Orbs, (to which they bear no other proportion than a drop of Water
to the Ocean) as it is for the Earth to be imagined to move only to carry about
a Fly or a Pissmire. Neither do those Celestial Bodies gravitate or need any
Support, but move regularly within their several Sphericities, as having no
Appetency of Motion beyond those Bounds. See Tycho Brahe, Progymnasm. Tom. 1.
and Ricciolus repeating the several Arguments to this Purpose (of Kepler,
Lansbergius, Maginus, Galilaeo, Gassendus and Bulialdus) Almag. Nov. Tom. 2. p.
24^. and 243.

Of the Constellations, We have in our Notes treated so particularly and so
fully, that We shall not need to add any thing (by way of further Illustration)
thereunto. Only whereas Manilius has omitted among the Northern Constellations
Coma Berenices, Ganymed or Antinous, and Equuleus or the lesser Horse, and in
the Southern Hemisphere, Eridanus or Fluvius Orionis, and Corona Australis,
besides those, which having been but lately detected by Modern Discoveries,
could not therefore be known to the Ancients. We are obliged, according to the
References given in our Notes, to satisfy the Readers Curiosity, by making a
Particular Description of them in the same manner as we have done of the others.

COMA BERENICES; is by Bayerus called (...), i. e. Coma, Spicarum Manipulus,
and (...) seu Crines, called likewise by the Greeks (...), and (...), i. e.
Colus; as being fashioned like to a Distaff of Flax; by the Arab's it is called
Alhaud, i. e. Lacus seu Cisterna, says Doctor Hyde in his Notes upon Ulugh
Beigh's Table. It consists according to Proclus and Stoester of seven Stars,
according to Kepler of fifteen. The Original of this Constellation was from
Berenice the Wife of Ptolemaeus Euergetes, who vowed if her Husband returned
Victorious from his Asian Expedition, she would shave her Head and offer her
Hair (one of her most beauteous Ornaments) to Venus to be hung up in her
Temple; which having accordingly performed, it was the next Day after the
offering thereof found missing, whereupon Conon to flatter King Ptolemy,
discovered to him that the Head of Hair was translated to Heaven, and made a
Celestial Constellation, celebrated by Callimachus in a particular Greek Poem;
turned into Latin Verse by Catullus. Pliny l. 2. c. 27. seems to make this a
Southern Constellation, but Ptolemy places it to the North of the Sign Leo, not
far from the Tail thereof, whose Situation likewise is thus represented by
Catullus in the forementioned Poem.

Saevi contingens namque Leonis
Lumina, Callisto juxta Lycaonida,
Vertor in Occasum tardum dux ante Booten,
Qui vix sero alto mergitur Oceano.
ANTINOUS and GANYMED are one and the same Constellation for the Asterism which
by the Greeks is feigned to represent Ganymed raped by the Eagle and carried up
to Heaven to serve Jupiter as a Cup Bearer; the Romans in Honor of Antinous
(the beloved Favorite of Hadrian the Emperor) will have to be the
Representation of that beautiful Bithynian, who dying a voluntary Death for the
Welfare of the Emperor, was by him honored with Statues, Temples, Priests, and
a Place among the Celestial Constellations; between the Eagle and Sagittary. It
consists according to Kepler of seven Stars, according to Baierus of eleven,
and comes to the Meridian at Midnight about the Middle of July.

EQUULEUS, or the Lesser Horse is by Ptolemy called (...), by others (...)
(...) (...), i. e. Sectio Equi, in Chrysococca's Tables (...) (...), i. e.
Caput Equi. By Ulugh Beigh Kit'a Al Pharas, i. e. Sectio, Praecisio, vel
Segmentum Equi, by others of the Arabs called Al Pharas al Auwal, i. e. Equus
Primus, consisting of four Stars in Form of a Horses Head and Neck; it comes to
the Meridian at Midnight about the Beginning of August.

To these Northern Constellations some late Astronomers have added several
other Asterisms composed out of the Inform Stars or Sporades. As of those
between the greater Bear and the Sign Leo, they have formed the River Jordan.
Of those between the North Pole, Perseus and Auriga an Asterism called Camelo
Pardalis and Gyraffa. Of the four Stars interposed between the Triangle and the
Tail of the Ram, another called Vespa, by some Apes, i. e. the Wasp or the
Bees. Of the Tract of Stars running between the Swan and the Eagle, as far as
Serpentarius, they have formed the River Tigris or Euphrates, and to a single
Star of the second Magnitude, placed in the midst between Charles his Wain, and
Coma Berenices (from which if a right Line be drawn through the first Star in
the Tail of Ursa Major, toward the Pole, it will point directly to the Pole
Star) they have given, in Memory of the most Glorious Prince and Martyr,
Charles the First, King of England, the Name of Cor Caroli. The Primary
Invention and Denomination thereof being owing to the most Loyal and truly
Learned, Sir Charles Scarborough Knight, Physician to His Majesty, and my
Honored Friend.

ERIDANUS or PADUS is a Southern Asterism, which some will have to be made a
Constellation in Memory of Phaeton, who was drowned therein; the Egyptians
challenge it for their Nilus. It is called by the Greeks (...), i. e. Fluvius,
and (...) (...), i. e. Fluvius Orionis, because it springs from the left foot
of Orion, and runs from thence in a flexuous Course Southward: Lycophron calls
it Aetuse. It is called likewise Gyhon, and by those of Fetz (says Ricciolus)
Vardi, i. e. Fluvius, by the Moors Guad, and by the Arabs Nah'r in the same
sense. The Thuscans call it Botignon, the Ligurians Botigum, seu Bodintum, as
Bayerus in Uranometr. Schilleriana affirms. It consists according to Ptolemy of
34 Stars, according to Baierus of 43. Kepler reckons therein 39. In which the
34th Star (of the first Magnitude) is by the Arabs called Al Dalim, i. e.
Agger, or as Doctor Hyde from the Authority of Golius Interprets it. Terra
fossi primitus Putei, or Agger in Aquae Extremitate; Hence in Chrysococca's
Persian Tables; it is called (...), i. e. Sulcus. Porca. It is likewise called
in Arabic Acher Nah'r, i. e. Ultima Fluminis, whence the common Name Acarnar.
It passes by the Meridian at Midnight in November.

CORONA AUSTRALIS sive Notia, called by the Greeks (...) (...) (...), i. e.
Coronae Australis Asterismus; and (...) (...), i. e. Corona Secunda, likewise
(...), i. e. Parvum Coelum, and (...), i. e. Caduceum. It is called by the
Greek Poets, (...) (...), i. e. Rota Ixionis. The Arabs give it different
Denominations, as Al Kubba, i. e. Testitudo vel Tabernaculum, propter
circularem formam, and Az'ha Al Naam, i. e. Nidus Struthionis, as being near
two Stars in the Leg of Sagittarius called Al Naaim, whereof one is called Al
Naam al Sadir, i. e. Struthio adiens aquam, the other Al Naam Al Warid, i. e.
Struthio rediens ab Aqua. Ulugh Beigh calls them in the Plural Number Al Naaim,
which Doctor Hyde translates Pecora, because in Tizinus his Tables he finds
them pourtrayed with a Shepherd near them, as reposing under the Al Kubba or
Testudo. The Constellation confists, according to the joint Computation of
Ptolemy, Bayerus and Kepler, of thirteen Stars. It is fabled to have been made
a Constellation by Bacchus in Honor and Remembrance of his Mother Semele. It
comes to the Meridian at Midnight, (but not visible in our Hemisphere) in the
beginning of July.

Besides these Southern Constellations omitted by our Poet, but known to the
Ancients; there are several other Southern Asterisms lately invented by Modern
Astronomers; whereof some were composed out of diverse inform Stars heretofore
known: Others out of such as have been newly discovered, and were never known
in any former Ages: Of the first kind are the three following.

First, Monoceros or Unicornus, placed between Orion the greater Dog and Hydra.

Secondly, Alect^r, i. e. Gallus, or the Cock, between the greater Dog and the
Ship Argo; which Stars yet Bayerus, and others reckon as belonging ad Scutulum
Navis.

Thirdly, Columba, or the Dove of Noah, with an Olive Branch in her Beak, not
far from the greater Dog, which appears not above though it run near our
Horizon.

Of the other kind are these twelve Constellations following, first found out
and denominated by some eminent Navigators sailing beyond the Line, as
particularly by Americus Vespucius, Andreas Corsalius, Petrus Medina, but
principally by Fredericus Houthman, who during his Abode in the Island Sumatra,
made exact Observation of them, being by Petrus Theodorus, and Iacobus
Bartschius reduced into Order, and by Iansonius, Hondius, and Iacobus
Florentinus inserted in the Celestial Globes by them made and published.

1. GRUS or the Crane consisting of thirtteen Stars according to Kepler and
Bayerus, whereof three of the second Magnitude, one in the Head, one in the
Tail or Train, and another in the Southern Wing. It is called likewise
Phaenicopterus and Geranos, but (as Schillerus observes) noviter, and affectate
cum notum sit Graecos, animalia haec circa Polum Meridionalem nunquam
somniasse; it is seated under the Southern Fish. 2. PHOENIX. on her Spicy Pyre,
consisting of fifteen Stars, among which one of the Second Magnitude in the
Neck thereof, and two Nebulous. It is placed between the Southern Fish, and
Eridanus, sub Cauda Ceti. 3. TOUCAN or the American Goose called likewise, Pica
Brasilica seu Indica, and Ramphestes, consisting of eight Stars, whereof four
of the Second Magnitude; according to Bayerus, though Kepler allow them to be
but of the third. It is placed in the midst between the Phoenix and Indus. 4.
INDUS, or the Indian, in the Figure of an Indian, holding in either Hand a
Dart, and therefore likewise called Sagittifer, consisting of twelve Stars,
seated between Toucan, and the Constellation called Pavo. 5. PAVO, or the
Peacock, to which some have given the Greek Name (...), consisting according to
Bayerus of sixteen Stars, as Kepler reckons of 23. Whereof one in the Head
thereof is of the Second Magnitude, and two Nebulous. It is placed near to
Indus, under Sagittarius. 6. APOUS, or Apis (...) Avis Indica, Avis Paradisi,
and Manu codiata, consisting of twelve Stars according to Bayerus, according to
Kepler but of eleven, following after the Peacock with its Tail toward the
Antartick Pole. 7. APIS, Musca, or Muia, called likewise Crabro Indicus,
consisting of four Stars placed under the Feet of the Centaur. 8. TRIANGULUM
AUSTRALE, Trigonum Notius sive Deltoton, to whom some likewise have given the
affected Arabic Name of Almutabet Algenubi, consisting of five Stars, in each
Angle one of the Second Magnitude, and two others. It is seated sub fera
Centauri and Ara, called by Schillerus Signum Tau, sive Imago crucis, by the
Spaniards el Cruziero. 9. CHAMAELEON placed directly in Opposition to the
Lesser Bear, and whose Form, (according to the Disposition of the Stars that
compose it) it represents; consisting according to Kepler's Account of ten
Stars, according to Bayerus but of nine. It is placed directly under the
Constellation Musca or the Fly, in quam (as Bartschius describs it) Linguam
vibrat. 10. PISCIS VOLANS, Volucris, and Volatilis, called likewise Passer
Marinus, and Hirundo Marina, in which last sense it is noted by a new Greek
Name, Chelidon Thalassia, consisting of seven Stars, seated under the Ship
Argo, next to Dorado, or the Sword Fish. 11. DORADO, (as the Spaniards call it)
Piscis auratus, Chrysophris, or the Golden Fish, called likewise Xiphias seu
Gladius, or the Sword Fish, consisting of six Stars, or as Bartschius reckons
of five, with which it describes and circumscribes the Pole of the Ecliptic.
12. HYDRUS, by the Dutch called the Wasser Schlange, consisting of fifteen
Stars according to Bayerus, Kepler yet reckoning twenty, the Last Star in the
Tail whereof, was in the year 1600 distant two Degrees 30. from the Southern
Pole, but at present as Ricciolus notes at a nearer Distance.
To these are to be added the two NUBECULAE; the Greater and the Lesser, and
between them both,

RHOMBUS, which Habrechtus has formed in his Globe out of four Stars
constituting each Angle thereof.

And thus much touching the several Constellations Ancient and Modern. But
since some have endeavored to abrogate, the Ancient Ethnic Names and Figures
of the several Asterisms, and to introduce a new Uranography, by representing
the Celestial Constellations under Sacred and Christian Figures and
Denominations, as Schillerus in his Coelum Stellatum Christianum, and
Bartschius in his Celestial Globe; We shall here for the Satisfaction of such
as have not yet seen the same, add the following Synopsis of that Christian
Astronomical Design, showing first the new Morphoses of the Zodiacal Signs,
next Those of the Northern Constellations, then of the Southern; Lastly of the
Planets.

Zodiacal Signs.
Old Names. New Names. Aries, Saint Petre, according to Schillerus; according
(...) Schickardus, Abraham's Ram offered in the Room of Isaac. Taurus, Saint
Andrew, or according to Harsdorfius, the offering or Burnt-Sacrifice commanded,
Leviticus 1. 3. Gemini, Saint James the Elder, as Schillerus; as Schickardus,
Jacob and Esau. Cancer, Saint John the Evangelist. Leo, Saint Thomas, or
according to Schickardus, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah. Virgo, Saint James the
Younger, according to Schillerus; or as Schickardus will have it the Virgin
Mary. Libra, Saint Philip, or according to Hartsdorfius, the Tekel or Balance
of Belshasar, Daniel 5. 27. Scorpius, Saint Bartholomew. Sagittarius, Saint
Matthew; or as some will, Ismael, Genes. 21. 20. Capricornus, Saint Simon.
Aquarius, Saint Jude, or Naaman, 1 Kings 25. 14. Pisces. Saint Mathias, or
according to Schikardus the two Fishes in the Gospel, John 6. 9. Northern
Constellations.
Old Names. New Names. Ursa Minor, Saint Michael, or according to Hartsdorfius,
one of Elisa's Bears, 2 Kings 2. 24. or the Wagon of Jacob, or Chariot of
Joseph, Genesis 45. 27. and 46. 29. Ursa Major, Saint Petres Fisher Boat, or
according to Hartsdorfius, the other of Elisa's Bears, or the Chariot of Elias,
2 Kings 2. 11. Draco, The Innocents, according to Schillerus, according to
Schickardus Draco Infernus. Boots, Saint Sylvester as Schillerus; as
Schickardus Nimrod. Coma Berenices. The Scourge wherewith our Savior was
whipped, or according to Harsdorfius, Absolon's Head of Hair; or Samson's
according to Schichardus. Corona Septentrionalis sive Ariadne, Our Savior's
Crown of Thorns; or according to Harsdorfius, Queen Hester's Crown, Hester 2.
17. Hercules seu Engonast, The three Kings or Wise men that came to worship, at
our Savior's Birth according to Schillerus, or according to Schickardus,
Samson. Lyra, The Manger wherein our Savior was laid according to Schillerus;
or as Harsdorfius has fancied it, David's Harp, 1 Samuel 16. 23. Cygnus, The
Cross of Christ according to Schickardus, to which Schillerus adds Saint Helena
its* Repertrix. Cassiopea, Saint Mary Magdalen, as Schillerus, as Harsdorfius
Bathsheba. Cepheus, Saint Stephen, as fancied by Schillerus, or Solomon
according to Harsdorfius* Perseus cum Capite Medusae. David with the head of
Goliath, according to Schickardus, according to Schillerus Saint Paul.
Andromeda, The Sepulcher of Christ according to Schillerus; Harsdorfius will
have it to be Abigal, 1 Samuel 30. 5. Auriga sive Heniochus. Jacob the Patriark
according to Harsdorfius, Schillerus transforms it into Saint Jerome. Ophiuchus
sive Serpentarius. Sanctus Benedictus inter spinas, according to Schillerus, or
Saint Paul and the Viper, Acts 28. 7. Sagitta, The Nails, and Lance that
wounded our Savior, according to Schillerus, Schickardus makes it the Arrow of
Jonathan. Aquila, Saint Katherine Martyr, or according to Schickardus, the
Ensign or Standard of the Roman Empire. Ganimides seu Antinous, Part of Saint
Katherine. Delphinus, The Pitcher of the Canaanitish Woman according to
Schillerius; Harsdorfius makes it the Leviathan mentioned, Psalm 104. 26.
Equuleus, Mystica Rosa; Schiller. Pegasus, Saint Gabriel according to
Schillerus; Harsdorfius makes of it the King of Babylon mentioned, Ierem. 4.
13. Triangulum seu Delta, The Mitre of Saint Peter (Schiller.) or Emblem of the
blessed Trinity ( Schickard.) Southern Constellations Ancient.
Old Names. New Names. Cetus, Saint Ioachim and Anna (Schiller.) or Jonas his
Whale according to Schickardus. Eridanus, The Passage of the Israelites through
the Red Sea ( Schiller.) or the Brook Cedron (Schickard.) Orion, Saint Joseph
(Schiller.) or Joshua, (Schickard.) Lepus, Gideon's Fleece, Schillerus. Canis
Major, Tobias his Dog (Schikard.) or Saint David (Schiller.) Canicula seu Canis
Minor, The Paschal Lamb. (Schiller.) Argo Navis, Noah's Ark (Schiller.) Hydra,
The River Jordan (Schiller.) Crater, The Ark of the Covenant according to
Schillerus; or Ioseph's Cup, or that of Saul according to Schickardus. Corvus,
Part of the Ark of the Covenant (Schillerus) or the Crow sent out by Noah, or
that of Elias (Schickard.) Centaurus, Abraham and Isaac (Schiller.) Lupus sive
fera Centauri, Jacob the Patriark (Schiller.) Ara, The Altar of Incense. Corona
Australis, David's Crown according to Harsdorfius, 2 Samuel 11. 30. or Solomon's
Crown according to Schillerus. Piscis Notius. The Barrel of Meal of the Widow
of Sarephtha, or according to Schikardus the Fish taken by St. Peter with a
Piece of Money in its Mouth, Matthew. 17. 27. Southern Constellations lately
discovered.
The Names first given them. The New Names. Grus, Aaron the High Priest.
Phoenix, Indus, Job. Pavo, Apus, Camaeleon, and. Eve. Schillerus. Piscis
volans, Triangulum, Christ's Cross. Dorado cum Nube; Toucan and Hydrus cum
Nube. Saint Raphael. The Planets.
Old Names. New Names. Saturnus, Adam, Jupiter, Moses, Mars, Joshua, Sol, Christ
the Sun of Righteousness, according to Schillerus. Venus, Saint John Baptist,
Mercurius, Elias, Luna, The Virgin Mary,

We shall only add the Number of the Stars in the several Signs and
Constellations observed by the bare Eye without the help of a Telescope,
according to

Order of the Signs and Constellations. Ptolemy, Alphonsus, Copernicus, and
Clavius. Griembergerus from Clavius, Tycho and Pifferus. Bayerus from diverse
others. Keplerus and Bulialdus. The Northern Signs of the Zodiac. Aries 18 22
29 23 Taurus 44 52 48 52 Gemini 25 30 31 30 Cancer 13 16 35 17 Leo 35 40 43 40
Virgo. 32 41 42 43 The Southern Signs of the Zodiac. Libra 17 20 15 20
Scorpius 24 24 29 27 Sagittarius 31 31 31 31 Capricornus 28 28 29 28 Aquarius
45 45 41 45 Pisces 34 40 37 42 The Northern Constellations. Ursa Minor 7 21 8
20 Ursa Major 35 57 32 56 Draco 31 30 33 32 Cepheus 13 13 17 12 Boots 23 29 34
29 Corona 8 8 20 8 Hercules 28 31 48 31 Lyra 10 11 13 11 Cygnus 19 20 35 28
Cassiopea 13 26 25 45 Perseus 29 35 38 34 Auriga 14 27 32 27 Ophiuchus 29 24 30
56 Serpens 18 13 37 26 Sagitta 5 8 8 8 Aquila 15 12 32 12 Antinous 0 7 0 7
Delphin 10 10 10 10 Equiculus 4 4 4 4 Pegasus 20 23 20 24 Andromeda 23 26 26 26
Triangulum 4 4 5 4 Coma Berenices 0 14 0 15 The Southern Constellations. Cetus
22 25 27 25 Orion 38 62 49 62 Eridanus 34 39 42 39 Lepus 12 13 13 13 Canis
Major 29 29 19 29 Canis Minor 2 5 8 5 Argo Navis 45 50 63 53 Centaurus 37 37 40
37 Lupus 19 19 20 19 Hydra 27 34 29 33 Crater 7 8 11 8 Corvus 7 7 7 7 Ara 7 7 8
7 Corona Austr. 13 13 13 13 Pisis Notius 18 17 12 17 Grus -- -- 13 13 Phoenix
-- -- 14 15 Indus -- -- 12 12 Pavo -- -- 16 23 Apus -- -- 12 11 Apis -- -- 4 4
Camaeleon -- -- 8 10 Triangulum Austr. -- -- 5 5 Piscis volans -- -- 7 7 Dorado
-- -- 7 7 Toucan -- -- 8 8 Hydrus -- -- 15 21 Sum Total of the Number of the
Fixed Stars of
Magnitude Ptol. Griemb. Bayer. Kepler. 1 15 15 17 15 2 45 55 63 58 3 208 201
196 218 4 474 456 415 494 5 217 304 348 354 6 49 186 341 240 Obscure and
Nebulous 14 08 03 13 Inform or Sporades In the Zodiac 45 Northern 200 Southern
81 In All 1022 1225 1709 1392

See more of the Number of the Fixed Stars hereafter under that particular Head.

The Celestial Circles come next to be treated of; for the fuller Understanding
whereof, besides what is already delivered in the Annotations, take the
following Cosmographical-Astronomical Synopsis, for the most Part according to
Mersennus.

A Cosmographical-Astronomical SYNOPSIS.
PROP. I.
THe Equinoctial Circle, parting both the Celestial and Terrestrial The
Equinoctial Circle.
Globes, into two equal Portions is, divided into 360 Degrees, as every other
Circle greater or lesser, by reason of the facile Division of this Number into
a Moiety, a third, fourth, fifth, sixth, or eighth; its sixth part being sixty,
which admits of many more Divisions, without any Fractions.

II.
The Equinoctial, when the Sun is therein posited, makes the Days and Nights
eaven, and divides the Sphere into the Northern and Southern Hemispheres, whose
Poles are the Poles of the World; fifteen Degrees of this Circle hourly rise on
one part, and as many on the other hourly set; so that one Degree thereof rises
every four minutes of an Hour. Wherefore the Equinoctial is said to be the
measure of the Primum Mobile.

III.
This Circle shows the Equinoctial Points, which happen twice in a year, at the
Sun's entrance into Aries and Libra. It divides the Zodiac into two Moyeties,
the Southern and the Northern; and thence the Signs are distinguished into
Southern and Northern. It is the Measure of Time, and shows what Declination
the Stars, or the Parts of the Ecliptic have, either Northern, or Southern.
Moreover in this Circle are observed the Ascensions and Descensions of the
Zodiacal Signs.

IV.
A Line perpendicular to the Meridian Line represents the Equator, and so on
the contrary: Which yet may be described without the Meridian Line, if a Right
Line be drawn from a Style or Gnomon by the Points of the Shadows Extremity, on
the Day of the Vernal or Autumnal Equinox. For the Altitude of the Pole being
given, the Altitude of the Equinox is likewise given, as being the Complement
of the Quadrant of a Circle. As for example; The Altitude of the Pole at
London, is 51.32. Therefore the Altitude of the Equinoctial, and consequently
of the Sun in the first degree of Aries or Libra, is, 38.28. And contrary wise,
the Altitude of the Equinoctial being given, the Elevation of the Pole is
likewise given. Moreover, the State of the whole Heaven and Earth, from the
given Elevation of any one of these Circles may be known, provided the
Longitude of the Place be known.

V.
The Equator in a right Sphere passes by the Zenith or Pole of the Horizon; in
a Parallel Sphere The Equator considered as to the several Positions of the
Sphere.
it is coincident with the Horizon, and is the Horizon it self. In an oblique
Sphere it makes acute Angles with the Horizon, and in a right Sphere it makes
Rectangles; in which Position of the Sphere, all the Points of the Heaven daily
rise and set, excepting the Poles of the World. Wherefore to the Inhabitants in
a right Sphere, there is perpetual Equinox, a double Summer and double Winter,
and different Meridian Shadows, to wit, sometimes Northern, sometimes Southern.
Hence they are called Amphiscii, or Amphiumbrae; which happens likewise to
those in an oblique Sphere, whose Vertex is between the Equator, and one of the
Tropicks.

VI.
In an oblique Sphere, whose Vertex is in one of the Tropicks, the Equator is
raised 66. and ^. and consequently the Pole 23. and. and the Polar Circles
constitutes the greatest Circle of the alwayes-apparent, and the
alwayes-latent. The Inhabitants of this Sphere have one Summer and one Winter,
and one and the same Meridian Shadow, that is to say, always to the North
under the Northern, always to the South under the Southern Tropic; thence
called Heteroscii, or Alteriumbrae. These three Spheres, that is to say, the
Right, and the two last Oblique, are in the torrid Zone, which is terminated by
either Tropic, and which the Equator cuts in the middle, as the Ecliptic does
the Zodiac.

VII.
In an Oblique Sphere, whose Vertex is in the midst, between the Tropic and
the Polar Circle, the Equator and the Pole have both equal Elevations of 45.
Hence the heat of the Summer is as great as is the cold of the Winter; the
higher the Equator is, the greater being the heat, and the cold more intense,
by how much the Pole is more elevated. But in an Oblique Sphere, whose Vertex
is in the Polar Circle, the Equator is elevated 23. and. and the Pole 66. and.
and the length of the greatest Day there is 24 hours, by which the temperate
Zone is terminated toward the Pole, as it is toward the Equator by the
Tropic.

VIII.
The frigid Zone begins from the Polar Circle, in which the greatest Nights and
Days are made so much greater, by how much the Vertex of the several
Habitations therein approaches nearer to the Pole, until such time as it
becomes a Parallel-Sphere. In which they in the Northern Parts have this
privilege, that their longest day is seven days, and more, longer than the
greatest day, which they in the South enjoy, by reason of the Sun's longer stay
in the Septentrional Signs, wherein he moves more slowly to the place of his
Apogaeum in Cancer. To which if we add the Twilight (which is made by the Sun
eighteen Degrees depressed beneath the Horizon) as also the Refractions, the
Artificial Day with the Inhabitants of such a Parallel-Sphere will be nine
Months and twelve Days. But on the contrary, they in the South have their
Night seven days longer than they in the North. These are called Periscii, or
Circumumbrae.

IX.
The Zodiac cuts the Equator in two opposite Points at (...) Angles, whose
Latitude extends The Zodiac.
to near 20. through the midst whereof runs the Ecliptic; so called because
the two great Luminaries, the Sun and Moon, when in Conjunction, diametrically
opposed to one another, directly under the said Line, are then eclipsed.

X.
The Ecliptic indivisible as to Latitude, obliquely intersects the Equator in
two Points; which The Ecliptic.
two Points of Intersection are called the Equinoctial Points. Of which that
(in the first Degree of Aries) which gives beginning to the Northern
Semicircle of the Ecliptic, is called the Vernal; The other (in the first
Degree of Libra) whence the Southern Semicircle of the Ecliptic begins, is
called the Autumnal. Equinoctial Point; The two Points of its greatest
Declination from the Equator are called the Solstitial Points, whereof the
Northern (in the first Degree of Cancer) is called the Summer Solstice; the
Southern (in the first Degree of Capricorn) is called the Winter Solstice. In
regard of which the Signs in the Zodiac are said to be Descendant from Cancer
to Capricorn, and Ascendant from Capricorn to Cancer, because the Sun ascends
in these, and descends in those Signs.

XI.
The twelve Natural Signs, into which the Zodiac is divided, begin from the
common Section of the Equator, the Equinoctial Colure, and the Ecliptic,
proceeding Eastward; the first of which is Aries, the second Taurus, etc. which
order they call the Succession or Sequence of the Signs; as the contrary Order
the Precedence of the Signs: The Zodiac and the Ecliptic measure the
Secondary Motions of the Planets, as the Equator does the First. The Longitude
of the Stars is numbered in the Ecliptic, from the beginning of Aries,
according to the sequence of the Signs, unto a greater Circle, passing by the
Poles of the Ecliptic, and place of the Star; as the Longitude of a Place on
the Earth is reckoned in the Equator, from the first Western Meridian unto the
Meridian passing by the Place proposed.

XII.
From the Ecliptic to the Poles are reckoned the Latitudes of the Stars. Which
Latitude is an Arch of a great Circle passing by the Poles of the Ecliptic and
Center of the Star, intercepted between the Ecliptic and the Star. Those
Arches are called the Circles of Latitude. The Points between the Equator and
the Ecliptic, in respect of the Equator, are Northern; in respect of the
Ecliptic, Southern, or contrariwise.

XIII.
The Ecliptic contains the Place of all the Stars. For a Star is said to be in
that Degree of the Ecliptic, through which the Circle of Latitude of the said
Star passes: So the Star^ being in the Solstitial Colures are said to be in the
first Degree of Cancer or Capricorn. By which reason, all the Stars in the
Firmament are referred to some one of the twelve Signs.

XIV.
The Colures, passing by the Poles of the World, and the four Cardinal Points
of the Zodiac, The Colures*
intersect each other at Spherical right Angles in the Poles of the World. They
are so called, because in an oblique Sphere they seem mutilate and defective,
since one part of them is always depressed beneath, whilst the other is
elevated above the Horizon. One of th^se is called the Equinoctial Colure,
which passing by the Points of the Intersection of the Equator and Ecliptic,
constitutes the Equinoctial Points of Aries and Libra. The other being the
Colur^ of the Solstices, dividing the Equator at right Angles in the Points
wherein the Sun commences Winter and Summer, that is to say, in the first
Degrees of Cancer and Capricorn, measures the Sun's greatest Declinations, has
in it the Poles of the Zodiac, and shows the Distance of th^se Poles from the
Poles of the World. There may be likewise infinite Colures supposed, for the
better demonstrating the particular Declinations of the Stars from the Equator.

XV.
The Meridian, in any Position of Sphere whatsoever, makes Midday and
Midnight, and has The Meridian.
in it the Zenith and Nadir Points, directly opposite to one another. The first
Meridian is vulgarly placed in the Fortunate Islands, or the Canaries, by
others in the Islands called the Azores. There are reckoned 36. Meridians, or
rather 18. since the same Meridians of one Hemisphere, may serve the other
Hemisphere likewise, each being distant ten Degrees from one another. But
Geometrically speaking, there are as many Meridians as there are Vertical
Points; as there are on Earth so many Horizons, as there are diverse Points upon
the Terrestrial Globe. They who assign a Meridian to every Degree, make of them
180.

XVI.
The Meridian to those that travel directly North and South is still the same,
as to Latitude. It shows likewise the greatest Altitude of the Sun and Stars,
their distance from the Equator, the Elevation of the Pole, and measures the
Latitude of all Places upon Earth. Of which in the two following Propositions.

XVII.
The Latitude of a Place is numbered in the Meridian from the Equator toward
either of the Poles, and shows how much every Point is distant from the
Equator, one Pole being elevated the other depressed. The Latitude of any Place
being the Arch of a Meridian, intercepted between the Zenith of the said Place
and the Equator, equal to the Elevation of the Pole above the Horizon. Which
Elevation is an Arch of a Meridian, drawn from the Horizon to the Pole of the
World,

XVIII.
As the Latitude of the Earth is numbered in the prime Meridian, or any other
more oriental; so the Declination of the Stars may be numbered in those
Meridians, which are therefore called the Circles of Declination, because they
show how far the Fixed Stars, or Planets are distant from the Equator, or
decline from it to either of the Poles. They are likewise called Vertical,
inasmuch as passing by the Vertex of any Place, and descending perpendicularly
by each Point of the Horizon, they measure the Altitude of the Stars above, or
their Depression beneath the same; and in Arabic they are called Azimuths,
because they show in what part of the World any Star rises or sets. The
beginning likewise of the Astronomical Day is computed from the Meridian Circle.

XIX.
The Astronomical, or true Horizon divides the Sphere of the World into two
equal Parts, that The Horizon.
is to say, the upper, or the visible, and the lower or invisible Hemisphere,
whose Center is the same with the Center of the World, and its Poles, the
Zenith and Nadir Points. The Physical or sensible and visible Horizon,
equidistant from the Astronomical, is that Part of the Earth as far as can be
discerned by Sight, whose Semidiameter in an even Plane (the Eye being placed
at six foot height above the Level) is about a League; but if the Eye be
elevated a League high, then the Semidiameter of the sensible Horizon will be
51. Leagues.

XX.
The Horizon concurs to the stating of all the forenamed Spheres, that is to
say, either Right, Oblique, or Parallel; whence it is denominated and
distinguished into Right, Oblique and Parallel. It determines the rising and
setting of the Stars, the Ortive and Occasive Amplitudes, beginning from the
Eastern and Western Equinoctial Points, shows the Quantity of Day and Night,
and the four Cardinal Points, East, West, North and South; as likewise the
Quantity of the two Circles parallel to the Equator and Tropicks, described
from the Poles of the World, touching the Horizon in a Point; of which that
drawn from the Pole, to us conspicuous, is termed the greatest of the
all-wayes-apparent, the other, opposite to it, the greatest of the
not-apparent, that is to say, the Artick and Antartick Circles.

XXI.
The Circles parallel to the Horizon, which show the Altitudes and Depressions
of the Stars, are in the Astrolabe called Almicantarah, or Circles of
Progression; among which is numbered the Crepuscular Circle, or Circle of
Twilight, which is Parallel to the Horizon, and depressed beneath it eighteen
Degrees.

Thus much of the Great Circles; the Lesser follow. XXII.
The Tropicks are lesser Circles Parallel to the Equator; from whence they are
in this present The Tropicks.
Age distant 23. Degrees and, which Distance, according to the diversity of
Times is diversely computed; the variation hitherto being reckoned 24. These two
Tropicks show the Sun's or the Ecliptick's greatest Declination from the
Equator; the Tropic of Cancer it is Northern, the Tropic of Capricorn its
Southern; the former showing the Sun's greatest, the latter its least
Meridional Altitude; this, the longest Day and shortest Night in the Summer
Solstice; the other, the longest Night and shortest Day in the Winter Solstice.
Which said Quantities of Day and Night are not shown by the Tropicks in a
Right, or an Oblique Sphere beyond 66. and, of the Pole's Elevation. For in the
first the Diurnal and Nocturnal Arches are always equal; in the latter, the
said Quantities are shown by the Ecliptic, and in the Altitude of 66. and. One
of the Tropicks is raised wholly above the Horizon; the other is wholly
depressed beneath it.

XXIII.
The Polar Circles are made by the Diurnal Conversion of the Poles of the
Ecliptic about those The P^lar Circles.
of the Equator, from which they are distant 23. and, being the same with the
distance of the Solsticial Points, or the Tropicks from the Equator. From which
the five Zones may easily be apprehended, as being contained within four
Circles, Parallel to the Equator. That which is called the Zones.
Torrid Zone is between the two Tropicks; the two Temperate Zones are between
the Tropicks and the Polar Circles; the two Frigid are comprehended within the
two Polar Circles.

XXIV.
The Parallels are Circles on either side the Equator, Parallel thereto; being
seated at such a Parallels.
Distance from One Another, that the greatest Day of one differs from the
greatest Day of another Parallel by the Quantity of one Quarter of an Hour,
they are reckoned on either side of the Equator to the Polar Circles, or the
66th Degree of the Poles Elevation 24. In All 48.

XXV.
The Climates are Spaces Parallel to the Equator, containing three Parallels,
the Middlemost dividing Climates.
the same into two Parts: The Latitude of each Climate from its Southern to its
Northern Limit, is of that Extent, that the longest Day increases half an Hour.

The Climates are denominated from the chief Cities and Places by or through
which they pass, as the first by Meroe, the second by Alexandria, the third by
Rhodus and Babylon, the fourth by Rome, Corsica and the Hellespont, the fifth
by Venice, the sixth by Podel^a, the seventh by W^teberg, the eighth by
Rostoch, the ninth by Ireland, the tenth by Bohuse in Norway, the eleventh by
Gothland, the twelfth by Wyburgh in Finland, the thirteenth by Arotia in
Sweden, the fou^eenth by the Mouth or Outlet of the River Darecally in Sweden,
and the rest by other places of Norway, Sweden, Alba Russia, and the Adjacent
Islands. And these are the Northern Climates; the Southern are distinguished by
the Title of Anti, as Anti-Meroes, Anti-Alexandrias, etc. in regard of their
Opposite Position to the Northern Climates. But for the better understanding of
the Climates, and what appertains to them see the following Tables divided into
five Columns, the first showing the Number of the Parallels, the second of the
Climates, the third the longest Day in every Parallel, the fourth the
Elevations of the Pole, or Latitudes of the respective Regions, the fifth the
Amplitude of the Climates.

Parall. Climates Longest Day in each Par. Altitude of the Pole Amplitude of
each Cli. Hor. Min. Degr. Min. Degr. Min. 1 I 12 15 4 18 0 0 2 12 30 8 34 3 II
12 45 12 43 7 50 4 13 00 16 43 5 III 13 15 20 33 7 3 6 13 30 23 11 7 IV 13 45
27 36 6 9 8 14 0 30 47 9 V 14 15 33 45 5 17 10 14 30 36 30 11 VI 14 45 39 20 4
30 12 15 00 41 12 13 VII 15 15 43 32 3 48 14 15 30 44 29 15 VIII 15 45 47 20 3
13 16 16 0 49 1 17 IX 16 15 50 53 2 44 18 16 30 51 58 19 X 16 45 53 17 2 17 20
17 0 54 29 21 XI 17 15 55 34 2 0 22 17 30 56 37 23 XII 17 45 57 34 1 40 24 18
00 58 26 25 XIII 18 15 59 14 1 16 26 18 30 59 59 27 XIV 18 45 60 40 1 13 28 19
0 61 18 29 XV 19 15 61 53 1 1 30 19 30 62 25 31 XVI 19 45 62 54 0 52 32 20 0 63
22 33 XVII 20 15 63 46 0 44 34 20 30 64 6 35 XVIII 20 45 64 30 0 36 36 21 0 64
49 37 XIX 21 15 65 9 0 29 38 21 30 65 21 39 XX 21 45 65 35 0 22 40 22 0 65 47
41 XXI 22 15 65 57 0 16 42 22 30 66 6 43 XXII 22 45 66 14 0 11 44 23 0 66 20 45
23 15 66 25 0 6 46 23 30 66 28 47 XXIII 23 45 66 30 0 0 48 24 0 66 31

And here it is to be noted, that the Parallel Circles grow lesser and lesser,
and the Climates narrower and more Contracted, by how much they recede from the
Equator toward the Poles; for one Degree, which in the Equator contains 51
German miles, contains but 14 of those Miles in the Latitude of 21 Degrees, and
but 13 in the Latitude of 30. 12. in 37. 11 in 48 and, and 6 in 66 Degrees of
Latitude. Whence it is easy to compute how many German Miles is contained in
every Parallel Circle; For the Number of Degrees in any Parallel, viz. 360.
being multiplied by the Miles comprised in every Degree, will give the number
of Miles sought.

It rests that something be said of the several Terrestrial Inhabitants, as
they are differenced and distinguished by reason of their Situation and their
Shadows. As to their Situation they are distinguished into Perioeci, Antoeci
and Antipodes.

The Perioeci are those which inhabit under one and the same Parallel and
Meridian, but in Points directly opposite.

These have the same Elevation of the Pole; Equal Arches both Diurnal and
Nocturnal; the same Appearance of the Stars and Constellations, the same
Occultations rising, and setting, Night and Day, but at contrary times, have
Winter and Summer alike; the same Meridian Shadows*

The Antoeci are those who inhabit under equal and opposite Parallels; that is
equally distant from the Equator Southward and Northward under a Portion of the
same Meridian, to these the Elevation of the different Poles is equal, as the
opposite Diurnal and Nocturnal Arches; the same Appearance of the Stars and
Signs, but opposite; the same Occultation, rising, and setting: When it is
Summer to These, it is Winter to Those, and Spring to the one, when it is
Autumn to the others; they have likewise equal Meridian Shadows, but diversely
and oppositely projected.

The Antipodes are those who dwell not only under equal but opposite Parallels,
and in places diametrically opposed the one to the other; the Feet of the one
being directly against the Feet of the other. Insomuch that a right Line drawn
from the one to the other must necessarily pass through the Center of the
Earth. therefore the same Accidents which happen to the Antoeci, happen
likewise to the Antipodes. Only this is proper to the Antipodes, that they have
one Common Horizon, and different Hemispheres; have likewise different and
opposite Zeniths: What rises to the one sets to the other; what is apparent to
these is hidden to those. The Noon of one is Midnight to the other.

As to their Shadows they are distinguished into Amphiscii, Periscii, and
Heteroscii. The Amphiscii are those who inhabit the Torrid Zone within the
Tropicks, especially near or under the Equator.

These have their Meridian shadows at different times of the year diversely
projected; now to the North, now to the South, according to the Course of the
Sun on this, or that side of the Equator: when the Sun is in their Zenith they
have no Noon Shadow at All. They have two Summers and two Winters.

The Periscii are they which inhabit the Frigid Zones, especially near the
Poles of the World, whose Shadows are carried round about them upon the Plain
of their Horizon.

The Heteroscii are they which inhabit the Temperate Zones; they in the
Northern temperate Zone having their Meridian Shadows always projected toward
the North Pole, those in the Southern, always to the South.

And this may suffice to complete this Cosmographical-Astronomical Synopsis; to
which yet for the further Satisfaction of the more Curious Reader, we have
thought fit to add the Twelve Propositions of Theodosius, de Habitationibus, in
English.

THEODOSIUS De Habitationibus.
PROPOS. I.
TO those that inhabit under the North Pole, one and the same Hemisphere of the
World is always apparent, but the other Hemisphere is always hidden: Nor do
any Stars either rise or set to them; but those which are in the apparent
Hemisphere are always conspicuous, and contrarily those in that, which is
hidden, never appear.

Prop. II.
To those that inhabit under the Equinoctial Circle, all the Stars both arise
and set: And are moved in equal time [of twelve hours] above the Horizon, and
beneath it.

Prop. III.
In every place within the middle Zone, the Zodiac Circle is at some certain
time of the Day at right Angles to the Horizon of the place.

For the Circle parallel to the Equator, drawn through the Vertex or Zenith of
the Place, cuts the Zodiac Circle in two Points. When therefore the Point of
either Intersection is co-united with the Zenith, then the Zodiac Circle
passes through the Poles of the Horizon, and therefore, by the XV of the first
of Theodosius Sphaerics, cuts the Horizon at right Angles, and this is done
twice in one Diurnal Revolution. But to those inhabiting under either Tropic,
only once in a day, that is, when the Solstitial Points in which the Zodiac
Circle touches both the Tropicks come to the Zenith of that Place.

Prop. IV.
To those whose Zenith is as far distant from the Pole, as the Tropic from the
Equator, six Signs shall at once happen to rise and six to set, in one Diurnal
Revolution.

That is, to those whose Zenith is in the Arctick or Antartick Circle. For
whereas the Poles of the Zodiac are carried in the Peripheries of those
Circles, therefore in one Diurnal Revolution the Pole is once co-united with
the Zenith, that is, the Pole of the Zodiac with the Pole of the Horizon: And
therefore the Zodiac also is co-united with the Horizon. Which Co-union is
made in an instant, and after that instant the Zodiac is forthwith divided
into two parts by the Horizon; so that in an instant one Semicircle of the
Zodiac rises, and the other Semicircle sets.

Prop. V.
To those Inhabiting under the Equinoctial Circle, the Meridian shall cut above
the Horizon the Semicircle of the Zodiac into two equal Parts, when the Points
of Contact of the Tropicks and Zodiac come to be in the Horizon, and then also
the Zodiac shall be at right Angles to the Horizon.

For, the Horizon passing then through the Poles of the Tropicks, and the
Points of the Contact of the Tropicks and Zodiac shall (by the VI. of the
Second of Theodosius his Sphericks) pass likewise through the Poles of the
Zodiac, and therefore (by tbe XV. of the First) ^all cut the same at right
Angles. And so likewise the Zodiac shall passby the Poles of the Horizon, by
which the Meridian also passes. From whence the Arches as well of the Meridian
as of the Zodiac, Intercepted between the Pole of the Horizon, and the
Horizon, are Quadrants.

Prop. VI.
To those inhabiting under the Equinoctial, all Semicircles of the Zodiac
arise in equal time, as likewise do their opposite Peripheries.

For there, every Semicircle of the Zodiac arises with the Diurnal Arch of its
beginning; (but by the second of this Present) all the Diurnal Arches are
Semicircles, by which is manifest the first part of this Proposition: the other
part is clear, seeing not only the opposite Peripheries of the Zodiac, but
those likewise equally distant from the Equinoctial Point ascend, with equal
Arches of the Equinoctial.

Prop. VII.
To those whose Horizons differ by a more Easterly Position; the Stars neither
arise together, nor set together, but by how much sooner they arise to those
who live more Easterly, by so much sooner do they set.

For the Horizons of such Places, by reason of the equal Altitudes of the Pole,
touch the same Parallels of the Equator, wherefore (by the XIII. of the Second
of Theodosius's Sphericks) the Arch from any Parallel of the Semicircle of the
Horizons interjected, as well between the Places Eastward, as those Westward,
are the same. Therefore every Star in a place Eastward by the same Arch,
anticipates its rising, and thence its setting, and consequently in the same
interval of time.

Prop. VIII.
To those inhabiting under the same Meridian, whatever Stars are between the
greatest of the always apparent Parallels and the Equinoctial, appear longer
above the Horizon to those inhabiting Northward, then they do to those
inhabiting Southward. And how much sooner they arise to those inhabiting
Northward, so much later they set. But those Stars which are between the
greatest of the Parallels always latent, and the Equinoctial, appear longer
above the Horizon, to those inhabiting Southward, then they do to those
inhabiting Northward; And how much sooner they rise to those inhabiting
Southward, so much later they set.

For to one traveling toward the apparent Pole, the Diurnal Arch of a Star
declining that way from the Equator, increases; and to one going toward the
Pole that is depressed and unapparent, the Diurnal Arch of a Star, declining
thitherward increases likewise: But by collating the Arches increasing on
either side, that is to say, toward the East, or toward the West, the rest of
the Proposition is manifest.

Prop. IX.
But if the Horizon's be neither under one Parallel, nor under the same
Meridian, there will follow only an Inequallity of the Arches raised above the
Horizon, after the manner as before expressed, but no Anticipation of risings
or settings.

This, as the premised, is manifest, by reason of the greater or lesser
inclination of the Horizon.

Prop. X.
To those inhabiting under either Pole, the Sun is carried constantly for six
Months above the Horizon, and as long underneath it.

This appears by the first Propos. of this present Treatise. Since one half of
the Zodiac is always apparent, and the other always latent, either of which
by the Sun in near about six Months time is run through; neither does the
difference of the Sun's Motion, occasioned by his Excentricity, here come to be
considered, for the Motion of the Sun is always supposed equal in reference to
the Arks of his first Motion.

Prop. XI.
To those going from the Pole toward the Artick or Antartick Circles, this
constant stay of the Sun either above or under the Horizon, for six Months,
grows lesser and lesser, until it be reduced to the space of twenty four hours
either under the Artick or Antartick Circles.

For, the Horizon of those Habitations, touches two Parallels of the Equator
greater than the Tropicks, which on either side cut from the Zodiac two equal
Peripheries; And that Periphery which the Parallel always apparent cuts off,
never sets, and that which the always latent abscinds, never rises.

Prop. XII.
To those inhabiting under the Artick or Antartick Circles, the longest Day is
24 hours, and the Night but an instant; and on the contrary, the longest Night
24 hours, and the Day but an instant. The other Arks increase and decrease
until they come to the equality of the Equinox.

The Order of the Poem, leads us in the next place, after having treated of the
several Mundane Systems, the Additional Constellations, the Celestial Circles,
and the Appendages thereunto (delivered, and explained in the former
Discourses, and the foregoing Synopsis) to consider with our Manilius, what yet
remaens to complete the Universe, and with Him,

-- To show what does dispense Throughout the Whole, or Light, or Influence.
And these by our Poet are reckoned to be, besides the fixed Stars; the
Luminaries, and the other Planets, fiery Meteors and Comets.

OF THE Fixed STARS.
HAving already treated sufficiently both in our Notes, and in this Appendix of
the Fixed Stars, as reduced into Signs and Constellations; We shall now
consider them distinctly, and apart, as they are several Mundane Bodies
disseminated and dispersed through the Immense Space of the Etherial Region,
which We call Heaven.

They are said to be fixed, because they always keep (at least seemingly) the
same invariable Distance from one another, and from the Ecliptic, as if they
were so many Studs of Gold fixed in the Crystal Firmament, as Empedocles and
Anaximenes (according to the Testimony of Plutarch De Placit. Philosoph. l. ^.
c. 13.) held. Hence the Sphere wherein they are conceived to be ranged, is
called (...), i. e. inerrans in regard of the unalterable Order observed in
their Intervals or Interstitia. And for this Reason chiefly, Ricciolus
conceives the Multitude of the Fixed Stars (as it were an Army drawn up in
Battle Array) might be called the Militia of Heaven.

The Particulars to which We shall confine our Enquiries, touching these
Glorious and splendid Bodies, shall be These following:

First, Their Substance. Secondly, Their Light, Color, and Scintillation.
Thirdly, Their Number. Fourthly, Their Figure. Fifthly, Their Magnitude.
Sixthly, Their Place and Distance from the Earth, or rather the Sun.
As to their Substance, the Opinions of the Ancients are various, Zoroaster
maintained the Stars to be of a fiery Nature; Thales held them to be Earthly,
yet withal fiery: Empedocles maintained them to be siery, and to consist of
that Fire which the Ether containing in it self, struck forth in its first
Secretion. Anaxagoras affirmed (but very extravagantly) that the Ambient Ether
being of a fiery Nature, by the Swiftness of its Motion snatcheth up Stones
from the Earth, which being set on Fire become Stars, and are carried from East
to West. Diogenes conceived them to be of the Substance of Pumice Stones set on
Fire, and to be the Spiracula or breathing Holes of the World. Plato with more
Reason held them to be for the most Part of a fiery Nature, yet to admit of the
mixture of other Elements, as it were Cement, to knit and consolidate them.
Xenophanes supposed them to be Clouds, set on Fire in the manner of Coals,
quenched in the Day Time, and in the Night rekindled. Heraclides and the
Pythagoreans held every Star, to be a World by it self, existing in the
Infinite Etherial Space, and containing an Earth, an Air and a Sky; which
Opinion is found in the Works of Orpheus, for his Followers affirmed the Stars
to be so many Worlds. Aristotle and his Followers maintain them to be of the
same Substance as the Heavens, but only more condensed; and to be simple Bodies
without the Mixture of any Elements. The Stoics, and with them our Manilius,
make them to be of a fiery Substance. Others conceive them to be composed of
the same Matter as Exhalations and Vapors, and consequently to consist of a
Substance partly Aqueous, partly Aerial, of which see Pliny l. 2. c. 9. Petrus
Comestor, Hugo Victorinus, and Eugubinus.

Of all These the most celebrated, and most probable Opinion, is, that the
Stars are fiery Bodies. An Opinion which wants not the Authority of the Ancient
Christian Church to back it, which ( in Hymn, seria secunda ad Vesper. of which
Saint Ambrose is held to be the Composer) sings after this Manner.

Immense Caeli Conditor
Qui mixta ne confunderent
Aquae fluenta dividens
Coelum dedisti Limitem
Firmans Locum Coelestibus
Simulque Terrae Rivulis
Ut unda flammas temperet.
Terrae solum nec dissipent, etc.
Where we find the Reason why the Waters are placed above the Heavens, viz. to
restrain and temper the excessive fervor of the Sun and Stars. Again in Hymn.
fer. quarta ad Vesper. the same Church thus sings.

Coeli Deus sanctissime
Qui Lucidum Centrum Poli
Candore pingis igneo.
Of the same Sentiment are most of the Fathers, not only of the Latin, but the
Greek Church, as Cyrillus Hierosolimitanus and Caesarius, who speaking of the
Firmament, says, recepturum erat Subjectorum Luminarium Splendorem, Solemn
inquam, (and Lunam) and reliquum Astrorum Caetum, ex Igne Naturam habentem.
Theodoretus likewise to the same Purpose; Bifariam Deus Omnium divisit Aquarum
Naturam, and quasdam sursum collocavit, quae suo liquore* ac frigiditate non
sinerent corrumpi Firmamentum ab Igne Luminarium. St. Chrysostom is positive
for the fiery Nature of the Stars, with whom concur Gregory Nissen. Procopius,
and Anastasius Sinaita; Conform to whose Opinions is that of Tertullian, St.
Ambrose, St. Augustine, Arnobius, Lactantius, Anselmus, Alcuinus, Beda. Conclude
we therefore, induced as well by the Authority of these Ancient Fathers, as
persuaded by the concordant Sentiments of diverse eminent Modern Philosophers,
and Astronomers, that the Stars are compound, and not simple Bodies, made up of
Elementary Matter, formed into fiery Globes, and consisting ex Solido and
liquido, as this Terraqueous Globe of ours, and consequently Subject to
Corruption and Alteration. See Franciscus Patricius l. 15. Pancosmias;
Ricciolus Almagest Nov. l. 9. Sect. 1. Scheinerus in Rosa Ursina l. 4. Part. 2.
c. 22, 23, and 24. Kircherus in Itinerar. Extatic. and Schottus upon Him. From
whom the more Curious Reader may receive further Satisfaction in his Enquiry
touching the Igneous Nature and Substance of

Those tremulous Tapers of the Skies
Which burn at the Days Obsequies.
Resplendent Sparks of the first Fire!
In which the Beauty We admire
And Light of those eternal Rays,
The uncreated Mind displayes.
Visible Prints by which We trace
Time in it is Invisible Race!
Pure bright Idaea's that direct
To the first Cause our Intellect.
Jewels that deck with their rich Light
The Sable Garment of the Night,
Mirrors* in whose clear polish^d Faces,
Nature sees hers: The World's Looking-Glasses.
To express them in some of those Poetical Characters, which the Ingenious
Marino has given of them. The next thing We are to take Notice of is

Their Light.
As to their Light, that which is chiefly to be considered, is, whether it be
innate, given them by God at their Creation, or Mutuatitious, borrowed from the
Sun? The latter is maintained by Metrodorus in Plutarch de Placit. Philosoph.
l. 2. c. 17. with whom concur Albategnius and Vitellio, and diverse others both
Philosophers and Astronomers at this Day.

But the first Opinion seems to carry more of Truth in it, and is by Macrobius
asserted in Somn. Scip. l. 1. c. 17. where he affirms Omnes Stellas (i. e.
fixas) Lumine lucere suo, quod illae supra Solemn locatae in ipso purissimo
Aethere sunt; in quo Omne quicquid est, Lux Naturalis and sua est. And this
seems consequent to what has already been declared touching their Igneous
Nature; for Fire cannot be without Light; and indeed it appears altogether
improbable that the Sun should illuminate the Fixed Stars, seeing as Bulialdus
( in Astronom. Philolaic. l. 1. c. 11.) observes, the Sun's Diameter if beheld
from Saturn would not appear greater than 3. 24. and therefore must needs
afford too weak and extenuated a Light sufficiently to illustrate even that
Planet, much less is it able to give Light to the Fixed Stars removed to so
great a Distance beyond Saturn. Wherefore with Aristarchus Samius de Systemate
Mundi (if at least that Piece revived by Roberval, and published by Mersennus
in Observat. Physico-Mathemat. be genuine) We may reasonably imagine each of
the Fixed Stars to be the Head and chief Part of a distinct Mundane System; as
the Sun is the Head and chief Part of our Visible System, and as the Sun has
several Planets constituted and carried about him; so likewise every one of the
Fixed Stars has other Mundane Bodies like Planets disposed and moving about
them, though not to be discerned by us by reason of their great Distance from
our Earthly Habitation. And accordingly Galilaeo (Dialog. 3. System. Cosmic.)
doubts not to assert that the fixed Stars are so many Suns, conform and like
unto this Sun of ours; serving to illuminate the innumerable other Planetary
and Lunary Bodies within their respective Systems; and there fore endued with
innate and Original Light. Of the same Opinion is Antonius Maria de Reitha (in
suo Radio Sydereomystico p. 177.) with whom Ricciolus ( Almagest Nov. l. 6. c.
2.) concurrs, where he says, Mihi long Probabilior horum Opinio videtur
(Bruni Galilaei Renati Des Carts and Reithaei) quia magis congruit Opisicis
Numinis Majestati, ut non unicam Stellarum a se ipsa Lucentem, sed plures
instar Solis accenderit; Nec alium sui Luminis fontem agnoscerent quam omnium
Luminum Patrem, Deum. See to this Effect more fully, Gassendus Syntagmat.
Physic. part. 2. l. 4. c. 4. Kircherus Itinerar. Extatica Dialog. 1. c. 9.
Hevelius in Cometograph. l. 7. and Otto de Gueriek l. 7. De vacuo spatio, where
he treats, De Stellis Fixis. As to

Their Color.
It is visibly various according to the Difference of their Light, attempered
by the diverse Constitution of their Matter or Substance; some appearing of a
ruddy, others of a gold color; some of a silver white, some pallid, others of
a leaden hue; whence some have made an Estimate of their Natures, and ranged
them under the several Planets, of whose qualities they conceived them to be
participant, according to the proportion they carry of Resemblance in their
Colors, as for Example; of the Nature of, they reckon Propus, and that in the
Belly of the Southern Fish, and in the Belly and Tail of Cetus; of the Nature
partly of, partly of, they reckon that in the right shoulder of Cepheus, and in
his left Foot, and those in the Girdle of Orion, Of the Nature of and, the
first Star in Anes, that in the Beak of the Crow, and in the Head of Ophiu^hus.
Of and the Pole Star, those in the Head of the Dragon and Medusa, those in the
Breast of Cassiopaea and Hydra, in the Side of Perseus, that in the Wing of
Virgo, called Praevindemiarix, and in the Back and Tail of Leo. of and, those
in the left shoulder of Boots, in the Belly of the Hare, and in the Northern
Scale of Libra. Of the Nature of, they count those in the Nodus or Commissura
Piscium, of the Nature partly of, partly of. Arcturus, the Eagle and the Thigh
of Pegasus, Regulus or Cor Leonis, Syrius and Cor Scorpii. Of the Nature of
and, that in the Head of Andromeda, in the Thigh of Aquarius, and Achar Nahr
sive ultima fluminis Orionis. Of the Nature of and, that in the Mouth and
Shoulder of Pegasus, and the Southern Scale of Libra. Of the Nature of, the
three in the Tail, and the four in the side of the greater Bear, Aldebaran, the
Hyades, and Pollux (one of the Twins.) Of the Nature of and, the Aselli, and
Oculus Sagittarii. Of the Nature of and, Spica Virginis. Of the Nature of and,
the Head of Hercules, the Goat with the Kid, and those in either Shoulder of
Orion. Of and, the Pleiades, and those in the Praesepe or Manger. Of, that in
the Navel of Andromeda. Of and; that in the shoulder Blade of Andromeda, those
in the Lyra, in Corona Guossia in the Beak and Tail of the Swan, the Cup, and
Fomalhaut. Of the Nature of, Procyon or the lesser Dog, as by Schikardus ( in
Astroscopio) we find them ranged and distinguished.

Their Scintillation.
Is that Pathos by which they are particularly distiguished from the Planets,
for the Planets have no such Vibration, twinkling or glimering of Light; but
generally all the Fixed Stars, more or less; and at sometimes more than at
others, especially ( flante Euro) while the wind blows ^asterly, as Schickardus
( in Astroscop) observes. The Cause of this their Scintillation is variously
discoursed of, both by Philosophers and Astronomers. Aristotle among the
Ancients ( l. 1. poster. c. 13.) assigns the cause thereof to their Remoteness
from our sight, by which they are weakly, and as it were by a trembling
weariness reached, which Opinion Pontanus following, thus asserts the same in
his Urania l. 2.

Scilicet alta illis Regio, sedesque repostae,
Quo postquam advenit de fesso Lumine Visus,
Defessus tremit ipse, tamen tremere ipsa videntur.
But this Reason is not at all convincing, for then Jupiter and Saturn, by
reason of their great Distance should in some Proportion affect our Sight with
such a kind of Tremor or Scintillation; which yet we find they do not in their
greatest Altitude. Blancanus ( in Sphaera Mundi) ascribes the Cause thereof
only to Refraction; and therefore (says he) Syrius and Procyon twinckle or
glimmer more than any of the rest, because they never ascend beyond 45. above
the Horizon: But then why does not Jupiter which is nearer to us, (especially
when within the Limits of Refraction) do the like? Schikardus is much of the
same Opinion, and conceives this Phenomenon to arise from the unequal
Superficies of the fluctuating Air or Medium, as Stones in the Bottom of a
River by the rapid Course of the Water, seem to have a kind of tremulous
Motion, which is only in the crisped and uneven Undulation of the Stream. But
if this Reason were true, not only the Fixed Stars, but the Planets, nay the
Moon it self would be liable to the like Scintillation. Gassendus more probably
conceives this Scintillation of the Fixed Stars to proceed from that Native and
Primigenial Light they are endued with, like that of the Sun, sparkling, and
casting forth ^uch quick darted Rays, as our Weaker Sight cannot behold
without that trembling (...). To which likewise may be added the most swift and
quick Motion of theirs about their own Axes, by that means making a more
sudden and nimble variation in those radiant Objects than the Eye can pursue.
From which Opinion yet the learned Scheinerus in his Mathematical Disquisitions
clearly dissents. The Scintillation of the Stars (says he) is not their proper
Revolution or C^nvolution not any intern exestuating Commotion: No tremulous
revibrating of the Sun beams proceeding (...) their first or second Motions; no
unquiet or unequal Ejaculation of their Proper Rad^i; no ^remor of the wearied
Sight; not any of These, nor all of These; but the only and sole Intercision of
their several Species falling upon the Eye, occasioned by the unquiet
Intercursation of Vapors variously affected. But this Reason of his will not
satisfy the more Curious Hevelius, who yet allows that of their Circumgyration
about their proper Axes, instanced by Gassendus, yet only as an adjuvant not
the sole Cause of their Scintillation, he imputing it rather to a constant
Evibration of Lucid Matter, or a continual Exspiration of fiery Vapors and
Effluvia from those Celestial bodies, in the same manner as we perceive those
fulgurations and Ebullitions in the Body of the Sun, which by how much the
grosser, and in greater plenty they are ejaculated, by so much the greater and
more signal Scintillation is caused by them. And with this Reason, and that of
Gassendus we may reasonably rest satisfied, until further Observation and
Inquisition shall produce one more convincing. As to

Their Number.
If we look to those only which are most notable and visible, as being reduced
to the six Vulgar Degrees of Magnitude, we shall find them according to
Ptolemic's Computation to amount to but 1022. Pliny yet ( l. 2. c. 4.) reckons
them to be 1600. But if we reflect upon the absolute Number of all the Stars in
the Firmament, we may conclude them (though not with Iordanus Brunus to be
infinite yet) to be innumerable, at least by humane Calculation, either as
looked upon by the bare Eye only, or by the Help of a Telescope; by the means
of which last Galilaeo ( in Nuncio Sidereo) reports, that he discovered in the
Cloudy Star in Orion, no less than 21. others; in the Nebulous Star in the
Praesepe, or Manger 36. In the Asterism of the Pleiades above 40. In the space
between the Girdle and Sword of Orion, no fewer than 80, and within little more
than one Degrees Space in the Constellation of Orion above 500 Stars, by which
numerous Discovery he was deterred from making out and describing that
Constellation, which he had particularly intended to have done. Reitha likewise
( in suo Radio Sydereomystic. p. 197.) affirms that he observed in the same
Constellation above 2000. Stars. Whereupon Ricciolus thus argues, that if the
Constellation of Orion take up in the Heavens the space of 500 square Degrees,
as it is found to do, and that every square space whose side is but two
Degrees, shall contain no less than 500 Stars, according to the observation of
Galilaeo before mentioned, there will be found in the whole Constellation of
Orion, at least 62500 Stars, whereas looked upon by the Bare Eye only there
appear not therein above 63 Stars. According to which Proportion if the rest of
the Constellations were examined and the Difference computed of the number of
the Stars appearing by the Telescope over and above those discerned by the bare
Eye; there might be reckoned above Ten hundred thousand Stars, besides those in
the Via Lactea. Nay, if one should reckon them above twenty hundred thousand,
Mihi quidem nihil inopinabile finxerit (says Ricciol. Almagest. Nov. Tom. 1.
l. 6. p. 413.)

Some of the Jewish Doctors reckon not above 12000 Stars in all, but those of
the Cabala, no less than 29000 Myriads, which Number Schickardus conceives to
be too transcendent; and believes that the whole Area of the Heavens would not
receive above 26712 Myriads, though they were placed contiguous to one another,
and but 1. of a minute allowed for the space that every one should take up. But
as to this Particular conclude we rather with Schottus in Praelus. in
Firmament. Itiner. Exstatic. Kircheri. in Schol. 1. Punctum est Terra quam
incolimus, etc. This Globe of the Earth which We inhabit, which We harrass with
so many Armies, so many Warlike Fleets, and which We divide with such
Insatiable Avarice, is but a Point, and yet We have not overrun every Kingdom,
nor penetrated every Region thereof, although enriched with the Accession of
America. There are greater Tracts from the Straits of Magellan to the Southern
Pole which be yet undiscovered. What think We then remains undetected in the
Vast Immensity of the Heavens, in that great Kingdom of the Almighty Creator
hardly to be approached by our Weak Eyes. It is intolerable Arrogance therefore
to Imagine that our Sight though never so strengthened by the help of
Tellescopes can discover all the Stars in the Celestial Expansum, and extreme
folly to go about to range them within the Limits of any definit Number; That
being the Work of God alone, who Numbers the Multitude of the Stars, and calls
them by their Names.

Their Figures.
As to their Figure, it is apparently Spherical or round; maintained to be such
by the Stoics, and with them by our Manilius, Plutarch yet ( De Placit.
Plilisoph. l. 2. c. 14.) gives us the different opinions of some of the
Ancients, for Cleanthes held them to be Pyramidal or pointed; Anaximenes
conceived them to be like Studs or Nails fixed in the Chrystalline Firmament;
others imagined them to be fiery or lucid Plates or Laminae, like so many flat
Pictures, not of any thickness or Profundity; Scheinerus, and Antonius Maria de
Reitha, will have them to be of diverse Figures or Faces, of a Poly-angular
shape, and such the larger sort of Telescopes represent them, or as Kepler in
Epitom. Astron. ( p. 498.) describes them, like so many Lucid Points or Sparks
casting forth every way their Rays, of Light; so that we are to apprehend
their Figure to be only Physically Spherical, not Mathematically such; for in
the first Acceptance they may be said to be round Bodies, however according to
the later, their superficies may be found to be uneven, and to consist of many
Angles and Sides.

Their Magnitudes
Before We undertake to say any thing as to the Magnitudes of the Stars, it
will not be amiss in the first place, which Schickardus ingeniously to
acknowledge, that Veras illorum Magnitudines vere ignoramus.

But that we may in some measure satisfy the Readers Expectation. We shall in
the following Tables, give some Account thereof, according to the diverse
Calculations made by several Eminent Astronomers; the first of which Tables
shows how many Minutes or Seconds their Apparent Diameters contain; the second
how many Diameters of the Earth their true Diameters contain; the third, what
is the Solidity of their Bodies to that of the Earth. In which Tables may be
observed a great Diversity; arising partly, from the various Distances assigned
to them by several Authors from the Earth, the supposed Mundane Center; partly,
from the diverse Estimate of their Apparent Diameters, made by the bare Eye, by
Tycho and others more Ancient, and by Telescopes by Modern Astronomers.

I. Table of the Apparent Diameters of the Fixed Stars.
Their several Magnitudes. 1 2 3 4 5 6 According to Maginus 10 0 5 30 4 0 3 0 2
0 1 0 Tycho, Longom. Blanc. 2 0 1 30 1 5 0 45 0 30 0 20 Lansbergius 1 0 0 40 0
30 0 20 0 10 0 5 Hortensius 0 8 0 6 0 5 0 4 0 3 0 2 Kepler 3 0 2 0 II. Table of
the true Diameters of the Fixed Stars, and how many Diameters of the Earth each
contains.
Their several Magnitudes. 1 2 3 4 5 6 According to Maurolicus and Clavi^s 4 4
20 / 90 4 1 / ^.3 3 11 / 3^ 2 5 / 8 Fernelius 4 3 / 6 4 4 7 / 60 3 3 2 7 / ^2
Tycho 4 1 3 1 / 1^ 2 1 19 / 30 1 1 / 49 0 Lansbergius 40712 27132 20356 13580
6776 3388 III. Table of the Solidity of the Fixed Stars to that of the Earth.
Their several Magnitudes 1 2 3 4 5 6 According to As to As to As to As to As
to As to Alfraganus 100 1 90 1 72 1 54 1 36 1 18 1 Fernel. Maurolyc. Clav. 107
1 90 1 72 1 55 1 36 1 18 1 Tycho, Boyer. Blancan. 68 1 28 1 11 1 4 1 1 1 / 1^ 1
0 1 / ^ 1

To these we shall add.

IV. Table from the Observations of Ricciolus showing as well their Apparent
Magnitudes, as their true Magnitudes, deduced from their undermentioned
supposed Distances from the Earth.
Degrees of Magnitude Names of the Stars of the several Degrees of Magnitude
Apparent Diameter The greatest Distance according to Ricciolus of 210000
Semidiameters of the Earth The least Distance according to Ricciolus of 100000
Semidiameters of the Earth The greatest Distance according to the Ptolemaick
40000 Semidiameters of the Earth The greatest Distance according to Tycho 14000
Semi-Diameters The true Diameter contains the Earths Diameter The Body contains
the Earths Body The true Diameter contains the Earths Diameter The Body
contains the Earths Body The true Diameter contains the Earths Diameter The
Body contains the Earths Body The true Diameter contains the Earths Diameter
The Body contains the Earths Body 1 Sirius 18 0 17 45 / 100 5355 8 7 / 10 815 3
42 0 61 / 100 0 1 / 7 1 Arcturus 16 42 16 3932 8 0 512 3 32 0 46 / 100 0 1 / 9
1 Aldebaran 15 24 14 2810 7 402 3 0 27 0 57 / 100 0 1 Spica 15 5 13 9 / 10 2660
7 374 2 7 / 10 18 0 47 / 100 0 1 / 10 1 Regulus 14 5 13 3 / 5 2202 6 249 2 6 /
10 16 0 43 / 100 0 1 / 1^ 1 Rigil 13 40 13 0 2197 6 220 2 15 0 1 / 2 0 41 / 100
2 Procyon 12 20 12 0 1728 6 0 216 2 3 / 10 12 0 39 / 100 0 1 / 1^ 2 Aquila 11 0
10 1120 5 7 / 25 137 2 1 / 10 8 0 37 / 100 0 1 / 20 2 Polaris 7 53 7 402 3 9 /
10 62 1 55 / 100 3 0 27 / 100 0 1 / 50 3 Algol 7 3 6 260 3 2 / 5 34 1 35 / 100
2 0 24 / 100 0 7 / 500 4 Propus 6 10 6 0 216 2 9 / 10 26 1 15 / 100 1 0 20 /
100 0 4 / 500 5 Pleias 4 4 92 2 7 / 10 18 1 8 / 100 1 0 18 / 100 0 3 / 500 6
Alcor 4 0 4 0 64 2 15 / 100 9 0 86 / 100 0 7 / 10 0 15 / 100 0 3 / 1000

But seeing the Astronomers of the Copernican Opinion, maintain the Magnitudes
of the Fixed Stars to be far greater than the former Tables show them to be: It
will not be amiss to annex the following One.

V. Table showing the true Magnitude of the Fixed Stars, that is of One of the
Greatest, and One of the Least, viz. Sirius and Alcor; supposing the Apparent
Diameter of Sirius to be 18. of Alcor, 4. according to the Distance in the
Copernican Hypothesis, maintaining the Parallax of the Fixed Stars made by the
Earths Motion, not to exceed 10. and imagining the Diameter of the Annual Orb,
to be such as upon those Principles it is stated to be.
According to The Distances to be asserted in The true Magnitude of Sirius The
true Magnitude of Alcor Semidiameters of the Earth The Diameters of Sirius
contains Diameters of the Earth The Body of Sirius contains the Earths Body The
Diameter of Alcor contains Diameters of the Earth Its Body contains the Earths
Body Copernicus 47, 439, 800 4170 71, 6771, 713, 000 1992 4, 378, 454, 048
Herigonius 49, 502, 400 4350 82, 312, 875, 000 2068 8, 844, 058, 432 Galilaeus
49, 832, 416 4380 8, 427, 672, 000 2092 9, 155, 362, 688 Bulialdus 60, 227, 920
5300 148, 877, 000, 000 2530 15, 941, 277, 000 Lansbergius 61, 616, 122 5424
159, 371, 956, 024 2588 17, 333, 761, 472 Keplerus 142, 746, 428 12550 1, 967,
656, 371, 000 6000 216, 000, 000, 000 Vendelinus 604, 589, 312 53200 15, 056,
882, 800, 000 25380 1, 767, 384, 872, 000

These Magnitudes may to some (happily) seem Exorbitant; but in the Judgment of
the Intelligent Schikardus, Eorum Speculationes qui Coelum Stellatum longissime
a Nobis removent, and consequenter Astra plurimum amplificant, Veritati sunt
propiores quoniam Minora neutiquam admittit concessa Orbis Annui Parallaxis.
(Astrocop. p. 14*)

Of their Place and Distance from the Earth (or rather the Sun.)
This seems a Question of that Difficulty, that Pliny pronounced the
Investigation thereof to be no less than a Piece of Madness. And therefore
Ricciolus ( Almagest. Nov. l. 6. c. 7.) treating upon this Subject, thought fit
in the Front of his Discourse to prefix this Theorem, as a most certain Truth,
that, Parallaxis and Distantia fixarum non potest certa and evidenti
Observatione humanitus comprehendi.

For we know not whether the Stars are all in the same Spherical Superficies
equally distant from the Center of the World, or whether they be placed at
unequal Distances, some higher, some lower. This latter yet was the Sentiment
of the Ancient Stoical Philosophers, who conceived the difference of their
Luster and Apparent Magnitudes, to proceed from their diversity of Situation,
as more or less removed from our Sight. And this Opinion our Manilius long
since declared, where speaking of some Stars in Orion, appearing more obscure
than the rest, he gives the reason of that Phoenomenon to be

Non quod clara minus, sed quod magis alta recedunt. An Hypothesis so seemingly
rational, that the Famous Tycho, Galileo, and Kepler have readily embraced the
same; and therefore we may reasonably suppose, that their Distances are as
diverse as those of the Planets, how ever our weak sight unable to distinguish
their diverse Intervals, judges them to be all inherent in the same Concave
Spherical Superficies. Ricciolus in Almagest. Nov. l. 6. c. 7. reckons up five
manner of ways of attaining in some Probability to the Knowledge of their
Immense and hitherto incomprehensible Distances, which I shall only reckon up;
referring the Reader to be further satisfied from the more Ample Discourse of
that Author: The first is from the Supposition of their least sensible
Parallax: The second is from the Proportion of the Periodical Motion, and
Distance of some of the more certainly known Celestial Lights. The third, from
the difference of Refractions of the Sun, Moon, or other of the Planets, and
that of the Fixed Stars. The fourth, from the Computation of the bare Distance
of Saturn from the Earth, without any regard to his shadow: The fifth, from
the Distance of Saturn joined with the length of its shadow, which Method
Ricciolus supposes the most probable. As for example; The shadow of Saturn is
supposed (according to Ricciolus) to extend to 118680 Semidiameters of the
Earth, which joined with the greatest Distance of Saturn, being according to
the said Author 90155 Semidiameters of the Earth. The Distance of the Fixed
Stars can be computed no less than 200000. of those Semidiameters, or rather
208835. that they may be clearly exempt from the Reach of Saturns shadow, and
although there is no fear of their being obscured by the same, in regard they
are not illuminated by the Sun, but shine by their own innate Light; yet it is
supposed they are seated beyond it, by the wise and great Architect of Nature;
and (if you will take the Opinion of Des Carts) for this Reason; that there
might be a convenient space between the Planetary Heaven, and that of the Fixed
Stars, for the Production and Ascent of Comets and New Stars. Wherefore
(according to the computation of Ricciolus) the least Distance that may be
assigned to the Fixed Stars, to raise them beyond the shadow of Saturn and its
Satellites, will be found to amount to 210000. Semidiameters of the Earth. The
greatest being altogether uncertain, by reason the Crassitude or Profundity of
their Heaven is not to be determined; and that they are as well by their
Extreme Parts, as by their Centers, unequally removed from us. But let the
Reader for his more particular Satisfaction, look upon the following Tables.

Table of the Distance of the Fixed Stars from the Earth (or rather the Sun.)
According to the several Authors following. Semidiameters of the Earth.
Horizontal Parallax of the Fixed Stars. Least Distance Greatest Distance
Albategnius, Iunctinus 19000 Uncertain 10 58 Alfraganus, Barocius 20220 40440
10 14 Maurolycus 20077 20086 10 16 Fernelius, Clavius 22612 45225 9 08 Maginus
20110 40220 10 15 Tycho 13000 14000 15 6 Marius Bettinus 2290 90 0 Ant. Mar.
Rheita. 20000000 00 1 Ricciolus according to the fourth Method 100000 Uncertain
2 0 To the fifth Method 210000 1 fere

The Parallaxes placed in the last Column answer to their least Distances, for
according to their greatest Distances assigned by Alfraganus, Maginus,
Fernelius, and Clavius, 5. or 6. would be sufficient.

DISTANCE of the Fixed Stars asserted by the followers of Copernicus in
Semidiameters of the Earth The greatest Parallax of the Fixed Stars made from
the Annual Motion of the Earth Authors The Half from the Semidiameter The
whole from the Diameter of the Annual Orb Copernicus Indefinite * * * *
Galilaeus 13,046,400 0 20 0 40 Kepler formerly 34,077,067 0 9 0 17 Kepler
afterward 60,000,000 0 12 0 24 Lansbergius formerly 10,312,227 0 30 1 00
Lansbergius later days 41,958,000 0 07 0 15 Hortensius 10,312,227 0 30 1 00
Herigon 144,0000 3 0 6 00 Distance of the Fixed Stars, supposing the Earth's
Annual Motion about the Sun, and the Copernican Distance of the Earth from the
Sun.
According to the Calculation of Semidiameters of the Earth Total Parallax of
the Fixed Stars Tycho and Maginus 7850,000 1 00 Longomontanus 7906,818 1 00
Scheinerus 13,133,376 0 40 10,320,000 0 48 Distance of the Fixed Stars from the
Earth, supposing the Earths Motion, and the greatest Parallax of the Fixed
Stars to be 10. and the Distances of the Sun and Earth, as underwritten.
According to the several Authors following. Distance of * and Earth in
Semidiameters of the Earth Distance of the Fixed Stars in Semidiameters of the
Earth Copernicus 1150 47,439,800 Maestlinus, Galilaeus 1208 49,832,416 Keplerus
3469 142,746,428 Lansbergius 1498 61,616,122 Bullialdus 1460 60,227,920
Herigonius 1200 49,502,400 Vendelinus 14656 604,589,312

It rests that something be said of the Proper Motion of the Fixed Stars, which
is double.

The first is their Circumrotation about their own Centers, termed Motus
Vertiginis; in which they are carried about with extraordinary Celerity; whence
the Reason in part (as already hinted) of their Scintillation.

The second is their Motion of Revolution from West to East, Secundum Ductum
Eclipticae, in which they are observed to move, but very slowly. Touching this,
it will not be amiss to insert the three following Conclusions of Ricciolus in
his Astronom. Reformat. p. 259.

The first is, that the Motion of the Fixed Stars is equal and uniform.

Secondly, That their Annual Motion is not less than 49. nor greater than 51.

Third, That it seems most Probable that their Annual Motion is 50. 40. though
the Opinion of those who compute it to be within 50. or 51. wants not fair
Probability.

From the Supposition of their Annual Motion of 50. 40. It follows that they
complete not one Degree in the Ecliptic sooner than in 71 years and 16 / 304,
or 19 days and 12 Hours in a manner; but the whole Circle of 360 Degrees they
run not through save in 25579 years, which is the Annus Magnus Platonicus
(though by the Ancients computed to extend to no less than 36000 years) which
25579 Sidereal years, are equal to 25580 Equinoctial years. But this will be
clearlier manifested by the following Table.

Table of the Motion of the Fixed Stars in Longitude.
Years Years Years Gr. 1 0 50 40 43 36 18 40 83 1 10 5 20 2 1 41 20 44 37 9 20
84 1 10 56 0 3 2 22 00 45 38 0 0 85 1 11 46 40 4 3 22 40 46 38 50 40 86 1 12 37
20 5 4 13 20 47 39 41 20 87 1 13 28 0 6 5 4 0 48 40 32 0 88 1 14 18 40 7 5 54
40 49 41 22 40 89 1 15 09 20 8 6 45 20 50 42 13 20 90 1 16 0 0 9 7 36 00 51 43
04 0 91 1 16 50 40 10 8 26 40 52 43 54 40 92 1 17 41 20 11 9 17 20 53 44 45 20
93 1 18 32 0 12 10 8 0 54 45 36 0 94 1 19 22 40 13 10 58 40 55 46 26 40 95 1 20
13 20 14 11 49 20 56 47 17 20 96 1 21 4 0 15 12 40 0 57 48 8 0 97 1 21 54 40 16
13 30 40 58 48 58 40 98 1 22 45 20 17 14 21 20 59 49 49 20 99 1 23 36 0 18 15
12 0 60 50 40 0 100 1 24 26 40 19 16 2 40 200 2 48 53 20 20 16 53 20 Gr. 300 4
13 20 0 21 17 44 0 61 0 51 30 40 400 5 37 46 40 22 18 34 40 62 0 52 21 20 500 7
2 13 20 23 19 25 20 63 0 53 12 0 600 8 26 40 0 24 20 16 0 64 0 54 2 40 700 9 51
6 40 25 21 6 40 65 0 54 53 20 800 11 15 33 20 26 21 57 20 66 0 55 44 0 900 12
40 0 0 27 22 48 0 67 0 56 34 40 1000 14 4 26 40 28 23 38 40 68 0 57 25 20 2000
28 8 53 20 29 24 29 20 69 0 58 16 0 3000 42 13 20 0 30 25 20 0 70 0 59 6 40
4000 56 17 46 40 31 26 10 40 71 0 59 57 20 5000 70 22 13 20 32 27 1 20 72 1 0
48 0 6000 84 26 40 0 33 27 52 0 73 1 1 38 40 7000 98 31 6 40 34 28 42 40 74 1 2
29 20 8000 112 35 33 20 35 29 33 20 75 1 3 20 0 9000 126 46 0 0 36 30 24 00 76
1 4 10 40 10000 140 44 26 40 37 31 14 40 77 1 5 01 20 20000 281 28 13 20 38 32
5 20 78 1 5 52 0 25579 360 0 0 0 39 32 56 0 79 1 6 42 40 40 33 46 40 80 1 7 33
20 41 34 37 20 81 1 8 24 0 42 35 28 0 82 1 9 14 40 Table of the Right Ascension
and Declination of 100 of the Fixed Stars for the year of Christ 1700
completed: according to Ricciolus in Astronom. Reformat.
Names of the fixed Stars. Right Ascension for the year 1700. Declination for
the year 1700. Difference of Ascension in 100 years Declination in 100 years
Gr. Gr. Gr. Head of Andromeda 358 14 8 27 27 26 B 1 17 34 A Girdle of Andromeda
13 11 20 34 2 40 1 23 33 A Southern Foot of Andromeda 26 21 51 40 52 30 1 29 30
A Fomalhaut of 340 11 0 31 8 10 A 1 25 31 S Right Shoulder of 327 36 55 1 43 44
1 20 29 S Left Shoulder of 318 55 54 6 48 46 1 21 26 S Left Hand of 307 45 54
10 33 44 1 26 19 S Bright one in the Eagle 294 2 47 8 6 32 B 1 27 13 A First in
Horn 24 17 2 17 48 24 B 1 23 31 A Second in Horn 24 30 3 19 19 24 1 22 31 A
Bright one in Aries 27 35 58 22 1 30 1 25 30 A Goat of Auriga 73 35 56 45 40 0
1 49 10 A Right Shoulder of Auriga 84 29 42 44 51 30 1 58 4 A Arcturus in
Boots 210 33 2 20 48 2 B 1 11 29 S Left Shoulder of Boots 215 2 33 39 35 12 1
2 27 S Praesepe in S 125 46 2 20 43 4 B 1 28 19 S Northern Asinego in S 126 26
0 22 3 0 1 30 20 S Southern Asinego in S 126 54 3 19 15 0 1 27 20 S Great Dog,
Sirius 97 57 6 16 18 6 A 1 7 4 A Little Dog, Procyon 110 54 33 5 59 12 B 1 20
12 S Upper Horn of 300 24 34 13 22 6 A 1 25 16 S Lower Horn of 301 7 29 15 38 2
1 27 17 S First in the Tail of 320 56 29 17 54 21 1 26 26 S Second in the Tail
of 322 43 30 17 22 22 1 25 27 S Bright one in Cassiopea's Chair 358 14 33 57 32
16 B 1 15 34 A Scheder or the Breast of Cassiopea 5 56 0 54 55 16 1 22 34 A In
the flexure of Cassiopea 9 45 58 59 7 36 1 27 34 A In Cassiopea's Knee 16 36 0
58 40 22 1 35 33 A Cepheus his Girdle 321 6 20 69 17 10 0 22 26 A Bright one in
the Whales Jaw 41 38 7 2 53 50 B 1 15 25 A Northern Whales Belly 24 12 0 11 44
50 A 1 15 31 S Southern in the Whales Tail 7 5 8 19 35 40 1 18 34 S Northern in
Whales Tail 1 4 12 10 24 54 1 17 34 S Bright one in the Northern Crown 230 39 0
27 45 20 B 1 5 21 S In the Beak of the Swan 289 39 48 27 22 40 1 1 11 A In the
Swans Breast 302 55 52 39 20 5 0 53 18 A In the Swans Tail 307 47 17 44 14 51 0
51 20 A Upper Wing of the Swan 293 56 2 44 26 21 0 48 14 A Lower Wing of the
Swan 308 29 10 32 51 24 0 0 21 A Bright one of the Dragon 267 25 20 51 35 2 0
35 2 S In the Head of Castor 108 50 46 32 30 26 B 1 44 11 S In the Head of
Pollux 111 43 36 28 43 2 1 34 12 S Bright one Foot of the Twins 95 3 32 16 37
32 1 28 2 S Head of Hercules 255 21 37 14 46 48 B 1 8 8 S Right Shoulder
Hercules 244 19 35 22 11 40 1 5 15 S Left Shoulder Hercules 255 31 33 25 15 48
0 52 8 S Heart of Hydra 138 12 22 7 21 30 A 1 15 25 A Lions Heart Regulus 148 4
15 13 25 16 B 1 22 28 S Lions Tail 175 25 34 16 14 4 1 19 34 S Bright one in
Iuba Leonis 150 48 47 21 21 0 1 25 29 S Bright one in Lumbis Leonis 164 32 20
22 7 44 1 27 34 S Uppermost in the Neck 149 58 52 24 53 54 1 28 29 S Lowest in
the Neck 147 47 52 18 13 33 1 28 28 S Thigh of the Hare 78 51 30 20 59 0 A 1 5
7 S Northern Scale of Libra 225 15 26 8 14 46 1 21 24 A The rest of the Table
of the Right Ascension, etc.
Names of the fixed Stars. Right Ascension for the year 1700. Declination for
the year 1700. Difference of Ascension in 100 years Declination in 100 years
Gr. Gr. Gr. Southern Scale of Libra 218 38 12 14 45 18 1 25 27 A Bright one in
Lyra 276 39 32 38 32 16 B 0 50 4 A Head of Ophiuchus 260 15 38 12 49 22 B 1 11
7 S Left Hand of Ophiuchus 239 47 37 2 52 2 A 1 23 18 A Right Knee of Ophiuchus
252 39 40 9 53 30 0 50 10 A Left Knee of Ophiuchus 245 11 37 15 16 30 1 23 15 A
Right Shoulder of Ophiuchus 162 8 38 4 44 40 B 1 13 5 S Uppermost in the Head
of Orion 79 41 10 9 34 38 B 1 22 7 A Right Shoulder of Orion 84 43 4 7 18 20 1
22 4 A Left Shoulder of Orion 97 16 40 6 3 2 1 19 8 A Foot of Orion Rigel* 75 2
50 8 33 42 A 1 15 9 S 1. in the Belt of Orion 79 9 48 0 32 50 1 17 7 S 2. in
the Belt of Orion 80 12 54 1 25 46 1 17 6 S 3. in the Belt of Orion 81 18 25 2
8 20 1 16 5 S Mouth of Pegasus 322 27 36 8 32 14 B 1 18 26 A Sa'd Alpharas in
the Leg 342 20 36 26 28 38 1 12 32 A Markab in the joining of the Wing 342 28
10 13 35 58 1 15 32 A End of Pegasus Wing 359 27 25 13 32 56 1 16 34 A Bright
one in the side of Perseus 45 32 18 48 44 54 1 28 12 A Ras Al Gol of Perseus 42
12 42 39 46 30 1 37 25 A The Hindermost in the Head of the Southern Fish 345 24
5 1 40 2 1 17 33 A In the Knot in the Line of 26 38 5 1 19 0 1 18 30 A Bright
one in the Head of 283 1 5 21 22 48 A 1 31 8 S Antares, Heart of Scorpius 242
47 28 25 39 54 1 32 16 A Northern Front of Scorpius 236 58 15 18 53 36 1 28 19
A Middlemost 236 14 34 21 41 40 1 30 20 A Southern Front of Scorpius 235 18 0
25 9 54 1 37 21 A Bright one in the Neck of the Serp. 232 24 0 7 24 36 B 1 15
21 S Aldebaran, or Southern Eye 64 41 35 15 52 10 B 1 26 15 A In the Northern
Horn of 76 51 18 28 19 2 1 37 8 A Southern Horn of 79 55 20 20 55 58 1 31 7 A
Northern Eye of 62 43 36 18 30 28 1 24 17 A Lowest of the Hyades 60 39 35 14 55
38 1 25 17 A Bright one of Pleiades 52 27 35 23 9 24 1 29 21 A Spica Virginis
197 22 55 9 33 30 1 19 32 A Girdle of Virgo 190 10 22 5 2 54 B 1 18 34 S
Vindemiatrix in Virgo 191 52 20 12 34 58 1 17 33 S The bright one in the
Shoulder of the greater Bear 161 17 5 63 22 2 B 1 41 32 S The bright one in its
Side 160 52 20 57 59 2 1 37 32 S The bright one in the hindermost Thigh 174 23
34 55 23 42 1 23 34 S On the Back near the Tail 180 8 2 58 41 42 1 20 34 S 1.
in the Tail 190 7 56 57 36 58 1 9 33 S The 2. in the Tail 197 55 2 56 30 52 1 3
32 S Last in the Tail 203 53 50 50 50 56 1 2 31 S The last in the Tail of the
lesser Bear now the Pole Star 9 52 10 87 42 51 3 10 34 A The bright one in the
Shoulder heretofore called Cynosura 222 39 20 75 37 30 1 15 2 A The right
Ascension of this still decreases.

To what we have already said of the Fixed Stars, it will not be amiss to add
something touching those, which in regard they are now and then visible at
other times disappear, are called New Stars, as that in Cassiopea observed by
Tycho; and three others in the same Constellation lately discovered by Signeur
Cassini, that in Serpentarius by Kepler and others; two more in the beginning
of the Constellation Eridanus detected by Cassini. That in the Whale's Neck,
and in the Northern Part of Andromeda's Girdle, by Bullialdus; that in the
Swan's Breast, and another near its Beak, by Hevelius and Don Anthelm a
Carthusian of Dijon; and four others near the Artick Pole lately taken Notice
of by Cassini. The Nature, Substance and Generation of which Stars are diversely
discoursed of both by Philosophers and Astronomers* Some conceiving them to be
generated of Sublunary Matter, and to be Comets wanting their Bush or Train;
others conceive them to be generated of Celestial Matter by Condensation, as
the other of the Fixed Stars at the first Creation; but not so compact and
solid as those other Fixed Stars are, and therefore by degrees come to lose
their Consistence, and with the Dissipation of their Substance, their Light.
Some imagine them to be of the same Nature, Substance, and of equal continuance
with other of the Fixed Stars, but assign to them a different Motion; by which
Motion of theirs they sometime approach nearer to, sometimes recede further
from the Earth; by means of their first Motion becoming visible and solving the
different Appearances of their Light and Magnitude; by the latter, showing the
Reason of their Disappearance. But this Motion is by others denied; but because
they find even in the Fixed Stars themselves, the like Alteration of their
Lights and Magnitudes, which sometimes appear so small, as if they were Stars
of the last, at other Times so bright, as if they were of the first Degree;
they allow of some Alteration to be made in the very Bodies of these Stars; and
as the Sun appears sometimes over-cast with Spots; so they conceive these Stars
to be sometimes ore-clouded with such kind of Spots at what time they
disappear; at other times to recover their Light, and become visible; others
are of Opinion, that the Globes of these kind of Stars are so made, that but
one side of them, shines, the other being altogether obscure (the first Author
of which Opinion seems to be Ricciolus, as he affirms of himself, Almagest.
Nov. Tom. 2. l. 8. c. 17.) and that they move and have a Circumrotation about
their own proper Axes, now turning their bright sides to us, at another time
their dark; And for this Reason they are by Le Pere Cherubin termed Stellae
Versatiles. The Periods of their several Motions not being yet clearly
determined; but by the Observations hitherto made, it appears, that, that in
the Whales Neck makes its Revolution in Eleven Months; that in the Swans
Breast is supposed not to finish the Period of its Revolution sooner then in
fourteen Years, that near the Beak of the Swan completing hers in about ten
Months Time; the Periods of the others Revolutions not being yet certainly
known.

Of the SUN.
What seemed requisite to be added touching the Fixed Stars being dispatched;
Something is to be said concerning those which are commonly termed Erratick or
Planets; and among them in the first Place of the most glorious Luminary the
Sun.

Whose Nature or Substance, with Anaxagoras, Democritus, Metrodorus, Epicurus,
Pythagoras Its Nature and Substance.
and Plato of old, and with Kepler, Scheinerus, Rheita, Bullialdus, Kircher,
Ricciolus, and others of late, We cannot with fairer probability conjecture to
be other than a formal fiery Body, consisting of true proper Elementary Fire,
partly liquid, partly solid. The liquid, being an Ocean of Light, and moving
with fiery Billows, and flaming Ebullitions, as is manifest to those that look
upon it through a Telescope. The solid Parts, being like the Land in our
Terraqueous Globe, divided into Continents, Islands, Mountains, Rocks, that
thereby the Vehement Motion of the exestuating Solar Ocean, might be
restrained, and by frequent Allisions, repulsed, dissipated, and broken, to the
end it might more efficaciously communicate its Panspermatick Virtue to all
those Bodies, to which it is to afford Light and Influence. We may likewise
probably conceive, that the Solar Globe, is, as this Earth of ours, hollowed
with vast Subterraneous Caverns and Receptacles of Fire, which break forth out
of the Solar Ignivomous Mountains, in the same manner as we find our
Subterranean Fires to break out of Etna, Hecla, and Vesuvius. And it is in all
Appearance as probable, that the solid Parts of the Sun within which the fluid
and liquid Fire is contained, as Metal in a Furnace, are thoroughly ignified
in the same manner as we find the Bricks in the Roofs and sides of Furnaces,
are made red hot, and look of the same color as the fiery Mass of melted
matter within them. We may further probably infer, that the earthly or solid
Parts of the Sun are of an Asbestinous and incombustible Nature, and far better
able to resist the Voracity of the Fire then this Earth of ours; And though it
should be supposed that some Parts here and there should be consumed, and
perhaps whole Mountains be levelled and wasted; yet it follows not that the
Globe of the Sun should therefore be totally destroyed, more than this Earth of
ours is, by the frequent Accidents of such kind of partial Ruins and Decays.
It is also evident that the Splendour as well of the fluid, as the solid Fire of
the Solar Globe, is far more bright than our Earthly Fire or Flame. The End for
which it was made necessarily requiring the same, as being intended for the
Fountain of Light, and Lamp, if not of the whole World, at least, of the
Planetary System.

This fire, as well the Liquid, or Solar Sea, as that which breaks out of the
Caverns and Mountains, exhales constantly fuliginous Vapors, not black and
sooty, like the Smoke of our Fire; but bright and pure, which collected
together and condensed in the Circumambient Ether, do in a manner overcast the
Sun, as Clouds overshadow the Earth. But all this will be clearlier represented
in the annexed Scheme, taken from the joint Observations of Scheinerus and
Kircherus.

From what has been said, and the Evidence of frequent Observations lately
made by help of the Telescope, it is manifest, that the Sun is not (as
Aristotle and his Followers fancy it to be) of an unalterable Substance, but
Subject to diverse Changes and Alterations, as not only the Generation and
Production, but the Dissolution and Corruption of several strange Phenomenon,
in the Body thereof (altogether unknown to the Ancients) clearly demonstrate.
Among which the most Eminent are those by later Astronomers termed the

Maculae, and Faculae Solares.
The Maculae or Spots, are certain Cloudy Obscurities appearing upon the Disque
of the Sun; Maculae, or Spots.
supposed by some Astronomers, to be a fuliginous obscure Matter or Vapor,
sometime closely compacted into one; sometimes dispersed and dissipated into
several Parcels issuing from its fervent fiery Body, by force of its extreme
Heat. And though it cannot be certainly determined (by reason of the Want of
Parallax) whether they be in the Sun it self, or distant from it some space;
yet if one consider, their first Appearance or Birth, their Decay or
Disappearance, their Shape or Figure, Increase, Diminution, Separation,
Conjunction, Motion, and other like Accidents; It is credible, and (by what
Observation makes out) most probable, that they are in the very Body of the
Sun, at least not far from the Superficies thereof; in regard that when they
are observed near the Border or Edge of the Sun's Disque going off from its
visible Hemisphere, and turning about to the other (at what time they begin to
disappear) they cannot be perceived to be raised above the Superficies of the
Sun, or to show any apparent Space or Distance between them and the Edge of the
Sun's Globe, as in reason they would, and indeed (if it were so) they ought to
do.

Their Shapes and Figures, are of unequal Form and Grandeur, and most
irregular, which argues Their Shapes and Figures.
them not to be Stars or Planets moving about the Body of the Sun, as Tarde and
Malapertius have supposed; the one entituling them Sidera Borbonia, the other
Sidera Austriaca. Some of these are more durable and lasting than others, and
those are conceived to be the solid Parts of the Sun, showing themselves
variously figured, and of different Magnitudes, by reason of the vertiginous
Motion of the Sun about its own Axis representing them to our Sight diversely
situated, which diversity of their Appearance arises likewise from the Manner
of the Sun's Circumgyration, which is such, that its Axis does not always keep
the same Inclination to the Plane of the Ecliptic.

They have a Motion from the Oriental Part of the Sun's Disque, to the
Occidental, which Their Motion.
Course they ordinarily finish within the space of thirteen Days more or less,
according to their greater or lesser Latitude, for they make by their Motion as
it it were a Zodiac of about sixty Degrees broad, that is, about thirty
Degrees on each side of the Sun's Ecliptic.

The Faculae Solares
Are conceived to be partly Massy fiery Globes bursting forth out of the
Ignivomous Solar Mountains; and by reason of their Brightness shining amidst
the Fuliginous Cloudy Vapors, or Maculae, at sometimes suddenly disappearing,
at others, making a long continuance or Duration. Partly Effervencies of the
exestuating Solar Ocean: Which by reason of the excessive innate Fervor of the
Sun's Globe, boyls up into mighty Waves like Mountains of Light, scattering and
dispersing the darker Maculae, and discovering as it were a fiery Ocean
fluctuating and agitated with Flaming Billows and unusual Splendor; or as
Scheinerus (in Disquisit. Mathem.) defines them. Faculae, sunt Areolae in Sole
Lucidiores reliquo ejusdem Corpore, i. e. they are certain small Plats or
Spaces in the Sun, brighter than the rest of its Body, thus described by
Galilaeo (in Letter. 3. Delle Macchie Solar.) In the face of the Sun their
appear certain Marks, brighter than the rest, in which is observed the same
Motion as in the Maculae, which that they are inherent in the very Body of the
Sun, cannot be doubted, in regard it is not credible there can be any other
Substance beside brighter than that of the Sun; In which few Words he has
comprised much.

Of the Sun's Vertiginous Motion.
The Observation of the Motion of the Sun's Spots and Lights, has given
Occasion to Astronomers to remark that the Sun has a Motion about its own
Axis, from East to West, which Conversion is finished in the space of twenty
seven Days, or thereabouts, though there be some who will have it to move much
faster, Kepler.
making its Period of Circumrotation to be completed in twenty four Hours.
Others assigning to it a much more wonderful Celerity, and affirming its
Vertiginous Schema corporis SOLARIS* prout a P. P. Kirchero et Scheinero. Romae
Anno 1635 observatum fuit.
Course to be finished in a Otto de Guerick.
Moments space. Of its Motion of Revolution Diurnal and Annual according to the
Hypothesis of the Earth's Immobility, We shall here say nothing. Leaving
likewise the Reader to be further satisfied as to what We have already briefly
indicated touching this glorious Luminary from the larger Arguments of
Galilaeo, Scheinerus in Rosa. Ursina. Kepler, Gassendus, Hevelius, Bullialdus.
Kircherus in his Iter. Extatic. and Schottus upon him Ricciol. Almagest. Nov.
l. 3. Hodierna in Ponderation. De Admirandis Phasibus in Sole and Luna Visis,
etc. Otto de Guerick in Experiment. Magdeburg. and Le Pere Cherubin in his
Dioptricks. Only adding something touching

The Sun's Magnitude, and Distance from the Earth.
The true Magnitude of the Sun (says Ricciolus Almagest. l. 3. c. 11.) is to
be had from its true Semidiameter; for that being doubled gives its true
Diameter, whence its other Species of Magnitudes are derived, according to the
Rule of Proportion. Of which take the following Table.

The true Magnitude of the Sun compared with the Earth.
The Suns True Diameter contains Its Circumference contains The Area of its
greatest Circle contains Its unequal superficies contains Its solidity contains
According to the following Authors Simple Diameters of the Earth Simple
Diameters of the Earth Square Diameters of the Earth Square Diameters of the
Earth The Solidity of the Earth Ptolemy, Maurolycus Clavius and Barocius 5 17 2
/ 7 24 0 134 0 166 3 / 2 Aristarchus more than 6 1 / 3 20 1 / 7 30 127 0 254 1
/ 17 Aristarchus less than 7 22 3 / 7 38 0 155 0 368 1 / 11 Albategnius 5 7 /
10 18 5 / 7 26 0 108 0 186 0 Copernicus 5 27 / 60 16 22 0 91 0 161 ^ Tycho and
Blancanus 5 ^ 16 2 / 7 22 0 85 0 140 0 Longomontanus 5 807 / 1000 18 1 / 15 26
0 95 0 196 0 Keplerus 15 0 47 1 / 10 176 0 706 0 3375 0 Lansbergius 7 17 / 30
24 0 46 0 176 0 434 0 Bullialdus 7 0 22 2 / 7 39 0 156 0 343 0 Wendelinus 64 0
200 96 / 100 3216 0 12864 0 262144 0 Kircherus 5 16 0 21 0 83 0 140 0 Rheita 10
0 31 4 / 10 78 0 314 0 1000 0 Ricciolus 33 5 / 6 106 15 / 100 885 0 30056 0
38600 0

Times

The Distance of the Sun from the Earth is such, that, if you will believe
Pliny, to search after it, pene dementis otii est. Ricciolus likewise
acknowledging its Sublimity to exceed the Subtlety of all Astronomers hitherto.
Who yet proposes three several Methods or Ways of finding it out. The first by
means of the Horizontal or any other Parallax of the Sun; the second by the
Eclipses of the Sun and Moon; the third by the Moon's Dichotomy, and its
Distance from the Earth. But however the Investigation thereof be made, this is
to be considered, that the Sun is sometimes in Apogaeo, or its furthest
Distance from the Earth, sometimes in Perigaeo, or its nearest Proximity to the
Earth; by the half of the Difference of which two Distances, the mean Distance
of the Sun is determined. But it will be worth the while to represent to the
Readers view in the following Table, the several Opinions as well of the
Ancient as Modern Astronomers touching this matter.

Table of the Sun's Distance from the Center of the Earth in Semidiameters of
the same.
AUTHORS Greatest Distance of the Sun in Apogaeo Mean Distance Least Distance
in Perigaeo According to Hipparchus his Data 1586 1472 1357 Or 1429 1379 1231
Posidonius 13141 Ptolemaeus and Maurolycus 1210 1168 1126 Clavius and Barocius
1216 1168 1126 Albategnius and Alphonsus 1146 1107 1068 From the Data of
Albategnius as Lansberg. 7936 Alfraganus 1220 1215 1210 Fernelius 1309 1256
1204 Copernicus and Maginus 1179 1142 1105 From the Data of Copernicus
Lansberg. 0942 Michael Neander 1197 1160 1122 Maestlinus in Max. Excentr. 1208
1160 1111 Maestlinus in Min. Excentr. 1197 1160 1122 Io. Offusius 1152 Tycho
and Blancanus 1182 1150 1117 Longomontanus 1334 1288 1242 Kepler in Ephemer.
1800 1768 1736 Kepler in Coment. Martis -- -- -- Kepler in Stella Nova -- 1432
-- Kepler in Epitome Astronom. 3469 -- -- Kepler ex Parallax. in Tabul.
Rudolphin. 3438 3381 3327 Lansberg. in Min. Excentr. 1550 52 / 60 1498 3^ / 60
1446 1^ / 60 Ismael Bullialdus 1485 56 / 60 1460 1433 ^ / 60 Athanas. Kircherus
1940 1906 1872 (...) Anton. Maria de Rheita 2073 2000 1927 Godefridus
Vendelinus 14905 14656 14407 Galilaeus 1208 Marius Bettinus 1145 Langrenus 3420
Ricciolus 7580 7327 7074 Or 7600 7300 7000

Of the MOON.
THE MOON the nearest Neighbor of all the Planets to this our Elementary
Sphere comes next to be considered; whose Nature, Composition, and
Constitution, may best be judged of by its Opacity, Asperity, and Heterogeneity
of Parts.

The first shows it to be altogether deprived of any innate or proper Light,
evidenced in its Total Eclipses, wherein She altogether looses her Luster,
which contrarily (if She had any of her own) would rather in the greatest
darkness become more conspicuous. Hence it may be inferred the Light She has
is from the Sun, and that the Moon as She is an opacous, so She is a dense
Body, apt to receive and reflect the Sun's Light.

The second argues the Globe of the Moon to be full of Eminencies, and
Depressions, like our Hills and Valleys, estimated to be such by the
Conjectures of the Ancients, (mentioned by Plutarch l. de facie in Orb Lunae)
but at present manifest to sight by help of the Telescope, and ascertained to
reason by those lesser Spots, which are called New ones, varying their
Situation and Magnitude, according to the diverse Access and Recess of the Sun,
to which their Site is always opposite, thence evidencing them to be the
Shadows of the more eminent Parts of the Moons Globe, emulating our Alps,
Hills, and Mountains, and here and there surpassing them for Height.

The third, viz. The Heterogeneity of its Parts was long since believed by the
Ancients, as may appear by Plutarch (l. 2. De Placit. Philosoph. c. 25.) but at
this day certainly demonstrated by the various Reflections of its Light; whence
We may conclude the brighter and more splendid Parts of the Moon, to be those
which are more dense, solid, and opacous, like our Earth, in regard they
reflect a greater Portion of Light; but the obscurer Parts commonly called the
Ancient Spots, for as much as they reflect a less, and absorbe a greater
Quantity of Light, to be therefore Pellucid and Diaphanous, and Analogous to
our Ocean, Seas, Lakes, and Rivers.

From what has been already said, We may probably infer that the Moon is
composed of Solid and Liquid Parts, as this our Terraqueous Globe which we
inhabit; above which it is placed in such a ^itting Degree of Neighborhood,
that thereby the Light and Influence of the Celestial Bodies, especially of the
Sun's fervent Rays, might by the Celerity of its Motion be so tempered, and by
the Asperity and Inequality of its Superficies so received, and thence
reflected, that they might be transmitted to us with less Incommodity than
otherwise they would, if they were directly projected without that temperating
Medium.

We are not yet to imagine, though most Astronomers as well Ancient as Modern
conceive the Moon to be as it were another Earth, that it is composed of the
same Sand, Clay, Stones, as this Terrestrial Globe, or that the Lunary Seas,
Lakes, Pools, etc. are of the same Water with our Seas, Lakes, or Pools; but
happily of a quite different Matter, and to us incomprehensible. And therefore
as to its Nature and Substance, We shall forbear with Anaximander to determine
that its Concave Orb is full of Fire, breathing out at one Part as out of a
Tunnel; or with Xenophanes, that it is a Constipated Cloud, or with Pythagoras,
that it is a stony Body, or with the Stoics, that it is composed of Fire and
Air, or as Plato will of a terrene Composition, or as Anaxagoras pretends of a
mixture cold and earthly, darkness being mixed with her fiery Nature, whence
She is called a Star of false Light; or with Heraclitus that it is another
Earth inveloped within a misty dim Cloud; or with Pliny and some of the
Moderns, that it is of a Watery Substance, or as Experiment. Magdeburg l. ^* c.
1. and 6.
Otto de Guerrick conjectures, that it is a Globe of Ice. But shall leave these
Opinions as being dubious and uncertain to the further Disquisition of the
learned, and give the Reader a view of its Figure and several Phases in the
Annexed Scheme, according to the Observations of Ricciolus and Grimaldus.

And seeing mention has been made of the Maculae, or Spots appearing in the
Face or Body of the Moon; as well those obvious to the Bare Eye, as the others
discernable by help of the Telescope; We hold it necessary to make a more
particular Description of them.

They are distinguished into the ANCIENT and the NEW.
The Ancient Spots, are those greater and larger Spots at all Times discernable
without the Help of a Telescope, resembling, large Seas, Lakes and Bays;
Heretofore known and taken Notice of by the Ancients, of which Plutarch has
written a Particular Treatise under the Title, (...), etc. i. e. De facie in
Orb Lunae, translated and commented upon by Kepler, and annexed to his Somnium
Lunare.

The New Ones, are those Lesser Spots, which are not discernable but by the
help of a Telescope, which are various; differing in Magnitude, Figure,
Situation, Color, etc. observed and with exactness described by sundry
eminent Modern Astronomers: Some of whom have imposed, as well upon the Old as
New, distinct Names and Appellations for the better Knowledge of them. Among
whom Langrenus in his Selenographia, has noted them by the Names of several
Persons eminent either for their Skill in the Mathematics, or their Dignity
and Honors, or their Particular Friendship and Favor to him and his Studies.
Hevelius, as if the Moon were another Earth, has described and distinguished
them by Geographical Marks and Denominations, transferring to them the Names
proper to our Terrestrial Continents, Promontories, Mountains, Islands, Seas,
Lakes, etc. Grimaldus has signalized them by the Names (for the most Part) of
Persons peculiarly addicted to, and eminent in the Study of Astronomy. The
Scheme and Tables of the two last (that of Langrenus not yet come to my hand)
the Reader may here take notice of, as being of great Use and Advantage to all
Students in Astronomy, and very Necessary not only for making their own, but
better Understanding others Observations.

The first Scheme is that of Hevelius, whereof the Alphabetical Table follows.

The Names of HEVELIUS his Selenographical TABLE.
A.
ABarim, a Mountain, called likewise Nebo and Phasga where Moses died. Acabe, a
Mountain of Egypt, near the Arabian Gulf. Aconitus, a Hill, where likewise is
the Acherusian Cave. Adriaticum Mare, at this day called Golfo di Venetia, by
Vitruvius Gallicae Paludes; the Inmost Recess of the Adriatic Sea, where
Venice is seated, at this Day called Lagume di Venetia. Aea, an Island, at this
day called Satabella. Aegyptus a famous Region of Africa, heretofore known by
the Names of Aeria, Aetia, Ogygia, Hephaestia and Chemia, according to
Herodotus, by the Jews called Chus, by the Turks Elchebitz, in the Egyptian
Tongue Came. Aegyptiacum Mare, the Egyptian Sea. Africae Pars, Part of Africa.
Aemus or Haemus, a Mountain of Thrace called by some Catena Mundi, by the
Italians Monte Argentario, by the Turks Balkan. Aerii Montes, Mountains of
Sicily anciently so called. Aetna, a Mountain of Sicily, called by Pindar the
Celestial Pillar, by Silius Italicus the Tiphaean Mountain; at present
Mongibello, anciently called Inesia. Aethusa, an Island not far from Sicily
otherwise called Aegusa, Limoza, Aegates. Ajax, a Mountain of Egypt. Agarum, a
Promontory of Sarmatia Europaea. Alabastrinus Mons, a Mountain of Africa. Alani
Montes, sive Roxolani, Mountains near the River Tanais, and the Lake Maeotis.
Alopecia, an Island in the Lake Maeotis; called likewise Tanais, and Calarus,
at present L'Isle des Renards. A^aunus, a Mountain of Sarmatia. Alps, a long
Tract of Mountains dividing Italy from Germany and France. Amarae Paludes,
about Arsinoe not far from the the Arabian Gulf. Amari Fontes, in Egypt.
Amadoca, Palus, in Sarmatia Europaea. Amanus Mons, a Mountain of Syria, which
it divides from Cilicia, called likewise Cedrenus and Monte Nero^, and Monte di
Scanderona, from the City Scanderoon seated at the Foot of the said Mountain.
Ambenus Mons, a Mountain near the Outlet of Ister in Sarmatia Europaea,
otherwise called Ambolus and Embolus. Animusa, an Island lying between
Leopadusa and Aethusa, which in the African Tables are called the Pelagian and
Taricinian Islands. Anna, a Mountain in Arabia Deserta. Antilibanus, a Mountain
in Syria, or Phaenicia, between which and Libanus stretches along and fertile
Valley well peopled and called by the Inhabitants Abellinas. Antitaurus, a
Mountain in the Lesser Armenia, called according to Thevet, Roham Thoura.
Apenninus Mons, a Ridge of mighty Hills, running through the midst of Italy
from the Maritime Alps as far as the Brutii. Apollinis Promontorium, a
Promontory of Mauritania Caesariensis, called at this Day Cabo de Tenes, or
Cabo de tres Forcas. Apollonia, an Island called likewise Thynias. Apollonia
Minor, an Island in the Euxine Sea. Arabia, at this Day called Aden, by some
Aiman, by the Saracens Mamotta. Arabiae Paludes, the Moors or Fens of Arabia.
Archerusia Palus, or Anthemois is not far from the Euxine Sea. Archerusia
Promontorium, a Promontory not far from Apollo's Island in the Euxine Sea.
Areesa Palus, or Arsina, or Arethusa in Armenia Major. Argentarius Mons, a
Peninsula or Promontory of Thuscany; at this day called Monte Argentaro, where
once was the Town or Harbor, called Portus Herculis. Arietis frons seu
Promontorium, a Promontory in the Taurick Chersonesus, of old called Brixaba,
or Acroma, now Fanar, or Famar. Armeniae Montes, the Armenian, or Gordiaean
Mountains. Arrhentias, an Island about the Cappadocian Sea. Asiae Pars, Part of
Asia, by Sacred Writers called Semia, by the Asiaticks Siana. Atheniensis
Sinus, the Bay of Athens in Cappadocia, not that of Greece; called otherwise
Themis, and Syrium, at this Day Cacari. Athos Mons, a Mountain of Greece; now
called Monte Santo; by the Turks Monastir. Atlas Minor, a Mountain of Africa,
Part of Atlas Major. Atlas Major, one of the greatest Mountains of Africa.
Audus Mons, a Mountain of Africa, upon the Confines of Mauritania Caesariensis,
by the Moors called Aurais. Aureus Mons, a Mountain in Maesia; of which Name
are several others in diverse Regions.
B.
BAronisus, a Mountain within the Kingdom of Fesse and Marocco in Africa.
Besbicus, an Island in the Propontick Sea, at this Day called Calomio, or
Calolino, and Izola del Principe. Berosus, a Mountain of Scythia, where Pliny
writes there were three Fountains, which if drunk of, killed without Pain or
Remedy. Bontas Mons, or Tabas, seated about the Serrian Mountains. Borysthenes,
a Lake near the Euxine Sea, into which the River Borysthenes discharges it
self. Byces Palus, a Lake and River flowing into the Lake Maeotis, which is
Part of the Euxine Sea, otherwise called Buges, and Suza Morsi. Byzantium, or
Constantinople.
TABVLA SELENOGRAPHICA Seu Vera adminiculo tubi Orthographica delineato Marium
Sinuum Insularu^ Continent Promont. Lacuu^ Paludu^ Montium Planit Vallium in
visibilis Lunae hemispherio existent(...) Autore Iohanno Helvelio. Ao. 1645.


C.
CAdmus, a Mountain of Lydia, not far from Laodicea, whence the River Lycus
springs. Calabraria, or rather Colubraria, at this day called Mont Colibre, and
as some will, Dragonera, an Island in the Mediterranean Sea, under the Spanish
Dominion, not far from Majorca. Calathe, an Island in the African Sea; by some
conceived to be the same with Goletta not far from Tunis. Calchistan, anciently
Paropamissus, a Mountain of Persia. Capraria, an Island in the Tyrrhen Sea, now
called Cabraia. Carpates, a mighty Mountain, or Ridge of Hills, dividing
Moravia, Polonia, and Russia from Hungary and Transylvania, at this day called
Crapack. Carpathus, an Island between Creet and Rhodes, one of the Sporades,
known likewise by the Names of Porphyris and Tetrapolis, at present by that of
Scarpanto. Caput de Tornese, a Promontory of Peloponesus, happily Promontorium
Taenaria, or Taenarus, at present called Capo Matapan, and Capo Maina.
Carcinites Sinus, a Bay between the Outlet of Borysthenes, and the Bosphorus
Cymmerius; known likewise by the Name of Tamyraces, at this day called Golfo di
Nigropoli. Cassiotis, a Region in Egypt or Syria. Casius Mons, a Mountain on
the Coast of Egypt, at this day Larissa; where was the Sepulcher or Monument of
Pompey the Great. Caspium Mare; the Caspian Sea; called likewise the Hyrcanian,
Albanian, and Tartarian Sea, at present Abachu, Sala, Cunsar. Cataractes, a
Mountain of Egypt; not far from Nilus. Caucasius Sinus, a Bay of the Euxine
Sea. Caucasus, or Caucasii Montes, Part of Mount Taurus, between the Euxine and
the Caspian Sea, otherwise called Marpesia Cautes, at this day Cochias.
Celenorum Tumulus, Mountains of Pamphilia, not far from Apamia. Cercinna, an
Island in the African Sea, at this Day called Gamelaria, and Querquenes, by the
Italians Chercara. Chadisia Promontorium, a Promontory otherwise called
Phadisana on the Coast of the Euxine Sea. Cha^idici Montes, Mountains of
Sicily, at this day vulgarly called S. Riti, or S. Rici, Part of the N^ptunian
Mountain or Pelorus. Cilicum, an Island in the Euxine Sea. Cimmerius Mons, a
Mountain or Promontory of the Taurick Chersonesus. Cimmeriae Paludes, the Moors
or Fens of the Cimmerii. Cimaeus, a Mountain of Asia, near Troas. Circaeum
Promontorium, a Promontory of Campania in Italy, now called Monte Circello.
Cirna, a Mountain of Africa, Climax, a Mountain on the South of the Lower
Egypt, as also of Phaenicia, not far from the City Biblus, called Passo di
Cane; there is another of the same Name in Arabia Felix. Coibacarani Montes,
Mountains of Persia; known likewise by the name of Bagous Mons, seated in the
Region Aria, now Chorazan. Colchis, a Region of Asia, bordering on the Euxine
Sea, now called Mengrelia, and by the Turks Caracomulu. Corax, a Mountain of
Sarmatia Asiatica. Corocondametis Lacus, a Lake so called from the City
Corocondame, situate near the Euxine Sea, into which the said Lake falls.
Corsica, an Island in the Tyrrhene Sea, anciently called Cyrnus, Corsis and
Cerneatis, lying against Italy, not far from Sardinia; at present by the
Italians called Corsica, by the French La Corse. Cossyra, or Cossura, an Island
in the Mediterranean, reckoned among the African Islands, called likewise
Pantalerea. Cratas Mons, or Craton, a Mountain of Sicily, called likewise
Nebrodes, at present Madonia. Crathis, or Chelidoreus Mons, a Mountain of
Peloponesus, whence springs a River of the same Name. Cragus, a Mountain of
Cilicia, or as others will of Lycia, now called Monte di Gorante, and Li Set
Cavi. Creta Insula, the Island of Creet or Candy, heretofore Aeria, Curetis,
Macaros, and Macaronesus. Creticum Mare, the Cretan Sea; that Part of the
Aegean and Ionian Seas which surrounds Creet. Cydises, a Mountain about
Armenia. Cyprus, an Island in the Mediterranean Sea; heretofore known by the
diverse Names of Acamantis, Cerastis, Aspelia, Macaria, Cryptus, Colinia,
Spechia, Mejonis, Erosa, Paphus, Chetima, Citica, etc. Cyanea Europaea, an
Island near the Thracian Bosphorus.
D.
DElanguer, a Mountain of Scythia, rising from the Foot of Taurus, by Ptolomy
called Chemantini Montes, anciently Imaus, running as far as India, which it
divides from Scythia, called by several Names; In Tartary, Moreghar, Belgyan
and Althai; by the Indians Dalanguer, and Naugracut. Didymae, small Islands in
the Mediterranean Sea so called. Didymus, or Dindimus, a Mountain of the lesser
Asia, of which Name likewise there are several others.
E.
EBissus, an Island in the Balearick Sea, now Yvica. Echinades, Islands in the
Ionian Sea, at present called Cozzulari. Eos, a Mountain of Egypt. Eoum Mare,
the Eastern or Indian Sea. Ericht ini Scopuli, Rocks in the Euxine Sea. Erroris
Insula, an Island in the Mediterranean Sea, called likewise Albusama, and at
this Day Alboran. Eryx Mons, a Mountain in Sicily, at this Day Monte S.
Iuliano. Evila, a Desert in Palaestina.
F.
FIcaria, an Island not far from Sardinia, at this Day Serpentaria. Fontes
Amari, Fountains so called near Nilus in Egypt, already mentioned. Fretum
Ponticum, the Pontick Straits, the same with the Bosphorus Cimmerius. Fortis
Mons.
G.
GAllicus Sinus, the Gallick Bay; that Part of the Mediterranean Sea into which
Rhodanus or the Rhosne discharges it self; called likewise Angulus Gallicus and
Salsus. Germanicianus, a Mountain of Africa, otherwise called Mons Iovis:
H.
HAjalon, a Valley in Palaestine, otherwise called Vallis Lunae, at present Val
di Luna. Herculeus Lacus, a Lake in Sicily not far from Aetna, in the Leontine
Region, at this Day Lago di Leontini. Herculis Mons, a Mountain near the
Heraclean Promontory. Hereus Mons, a Mountain of Sicily, otherwise called
Artisino and Tavis. Herculeum Promontorium, stretching into the Palus Maeotis.
Heracleum Promontorium, a Promontory of the Euxine Sea. Hermo Mons, the Hill
Hermon in Palaestina, called likewise Gal^ad. Hier^, an Island near Sicily,
called likewise Maritima, at this Day Maretamo, not far from the Lylibaean
Promontory. Hippici Montes, Mountains of Asia, near Tartary, at this Day
Mazarisci. Hippolai Promontorium, in Europaean S^ythia, near Borysthenes.
Hipponiates Sinus, a Bay on the Calabrian Coast, at this Day Golfo di Taranto.
Hor, a Mountain in Palaestine on the Borders of Edom, where Aaron dyed and was
buried. Horminius Mons, or Ormenius, a Mountain in Asia near Pontus. Horeb, a
Mountain in the Desert of Madian, and contiguous to Mount Sinai. Hiblaei
Montes, Mountains of Sicily, of which Name Stephanus reckons three. Hyperboreum
Mare, the Northern Frozen Sea. Hyperborei Montes, the Riphaean Mountains to the
North of Russia Alba, or Muscovia, called at this Day Camenopoias, whose Summit
or Top is called Stolp, they are known likewise by the Names of Doffrini, and
Doffrafiel. Hyperboreus Lacus Superior, the upper Hyperborean Fenns.
Hyperboreus Lacus Inferior, the lower Hyperborean Fenns. Hyperborei Scopuli,
the Hyperborean Rocks. Hyperborea Regio, the Hyperborean Region.
I.
IDa Mons, a Mountain of Phrygia in the lesser Asia. Insula Orientalior, the
Eastern Island in the Carpathian Sea. Insula Occidentalior, the Western Island
in the same Sea. Insula, an Island near the Promontory of Aries in the Pontick
Sea. Insula Major, the greater Island in the Caspian Sea. Insula Minor, the
lesser Island in the Caspian Sea. Italia, heretofore called Ausonia, Hesperia,
O^notria, Saturnia, etc.
L.
LAcus Major Occidentalis, the greater Western Lake near the Palus Maeotis;
known more particularly by the Name of Odojum, and Iwanow. Lacus Minor
Occidentalis, the lesser Western Lake; more particularly called Ploto. Lacus
Meridionalis, the Southern Lake. Lacus Niger Major, the greater black Lake.
Lacus Niger Minor, the lesser black Lake. Lathmus Mons, a Mountain of Caria,
famous for the Loves of Luna and Endymion, at this Day called Monte di Palatia.
Lea, an Island on the Coast of Barbary. Lemnos, an Island in the Aegaean Sea,
at this Day Stalimene. Lesbos, an Island in the Aegaean Sea, at this Day
Metellino. Letoa, an Island in the Mediterranean not far from Creet, otherwise
called Christiana. Leucopetra Promontorium, a Promontory of Italy on the
Southern Coast of Calabria, called Capo Dell' Armi, which yet Brietius
conceives to be that called Punta Della Saetta. Libanus Mons, a Mountain of
Syria, at this Day Libano. Ligustinus Mons, a Mountain of Italy, perhaps the
Ligustick Alps called Montagna di Tenda. Lion sive Leonum Mons, a Mountain of
Africa so called, near the Sea Coast of Guinne, heretofore by the Greeks called
(...), i. e. the Chariot of the Gods, by the Portugals Sierra Liona, from the
continual Noise of Thunder there heard, resembling the roaring of Lions; by the
Natives it is called Boulombel. Lipulus Mons. Loca Paludosa, the Moors or
Fenns in the Island Cercinna, in whose midst in an eminent Hill. Lunae
Promontorium, a Promontory on the Coast of Thuscany so called. Lybicum Mare,
the Libian or Egyptian Sea. Lychnitis, a Moore or Fenn in A^menia Major,
called Exsechia. Lybiae Pars, Part of Africa heretofore known by the Names of
Olympia, Oceania, Hesperia, and Cepheni^.
M.
MAcra Insula, called likewise Achillis, and Leuce, seated in the Bay of
Carcinites. Macrocemnii Montes, Mountains so called, in Sarmatia Europaea, not
far from the Rivers Ister and Tyras. Malta, or Melita, an Island in the African
Sea between Sicily and Africa, famous for the Order of Knights of St. John's of
Jerusalem there residing. Majorca, an Island in the Balearick Sea. Mampsarus, a
Mountain of Africa so called. Mantiana Palus, a large Mere or Pool, in Media
on the Confines of Armenia, called by some Actamar, Van, and Vastan, by others
Abaunias, and as Paulus Venetus affirms, Geluchalat. Marinus Lacus, a Lake in
Thuscany, not far from Porto Ercole, at this Day called Lago d' Orbitello.
Masicytus, a Mountain of the lesser Asia, by Strabo called Clymax. Mauritania,
a Region of Africa, in Hebrew Phut; at this Day called Regno d' Algier, and
Regno di Tremessin, and by a more peculiar Name Barbary. Mediterraneum Mare,
the Mediterranean Sea; by the Italians and Spaniards called Mare di Levanto, by
the Turks Actenitz, i. e. the White Sea, by the Arabs, Bohar Rumi, i. e. the
Grecian Sea. Melos Insula, an Island in the Aegaean Sea, now Milo. Menyx
Insula, an Island in the African Sea, known likewise heretofore by the Names of
Lotophagitis, and Cyra. Mercurii Promontorium, a Promontory on the African
Coast, over against Sicily, now called Capo Bon. Mesogys, a Mountain of Lydia.
Mycale, a Mountain of Ionia. Mimas, a Mountain and Promontory of Ionia; now
Capo Stillari. Mingui, the same with Carmania Deserta, a Region of Asia.
Minorca, an Island in the Balearick Sea. Miris, vel Maeris, a great Lake in
Egypt, famous for King Maeris his Sepulcher. Mons Meridionalis. Montana Pharan,
in Palaestina. Montana Seir, in Palaestina, or Idumaea, now Sardinay.
Montuniates, a Mountain of Thuscany. Mortuum Mare, the dead Sea in Palaestina,
called by the Greek and Latin Writers Asphaltites Lacus. Myconius Mons, a
Mountain of Sicily, not far from Messana. Moesia, a Region of Europe, otherwise
called, Servia, Bosnia, and Moldavia. Mysius Mons, a Mountain of Asia,
heretofore called Collis Saturni; by the Turks at this Day Geschisdage.
N.
NEptunius Mons, a Mountain of Sicily not far from Messana; now Monte di
Namari, heretofore Pelorus. Nerossus, a Mountain of Tartary. Nilus, or the
River Triton. Nitria, a Mountain of Egypt.
O.
OLympus, here taken for a Mountain of Asia in the Province of Mysia; known to
the Turks at present by the several Names of Anatolaidag, Emerdag, or Emiodag,
and Keschisdag. Ophiusa, an Island in the Balearick Sea, under the Dominion of
Spain, now Formentera.
P.
PPaludes circa Mare Mortuum, the Moors or Fenns about the Dead Sea. Paludes
Palaestinae, the Moors or Fenns of Palaestina. Paludes Superiores Ponti Euxini,
the upper Moors or Fenns of the Euxine Sea. Paludes Inferiores Ponti Euxini,
the lower Moors or Fenns of the Euxine Sea. Palus Maraeotis, the Lake, Moor, or
Fenn Maraeotis in Egypt, now Lago di Buchiara. Palus Maeotis, the Lake, Moor,
or Fenn Maeotis, at this Day called Mar Della Sabacche, Mar Della Tana, and Mar
Bianco. Pamphylium Mare seu Phaselicum, the Pamphylian Sea, at this Day Mar di
Carmania. Pangaeus Mons, a Mountain of Thrace, now called Malacca, and
Castagna. Paestanus Sinus, sive Posidoniates, a Bay of the Mediterranean, at
this Day Golfo Agropolitano, and Golfo di Salerno. Paropamisus Mons, Part of
Mount Taurus, where it rises to the greatest Height; by Aristotle called
Parnassus, at present Pamer, by some Calchistan. Parthenius Mons, a Mountain of
Peloponesus in Arcadia. Poloponesus, a Grecian Peninsula, at this Day Morea.
Pentadactylus, a Mountain of Egypt, near the Red Sea. Peronticus Sinus, a Bay
of the Euxine Sea, now Cabo de Manco. Persia a Region of Asia, at this Day
Farsi, Azamia, and Curazan. S. Petro, an Island near Sardinia, heretofore
called Herculis Insula. Petra Pyramidalis, seu Pyramid, sive Mons Faronianus,
perhaps the same with Petra Santa in Tuscany, heretofore Fanum Feroniae. Petra
Sogdiana, near the Hyrcanian Sea. Peuce, a Mountain in Sarmatia Europaea.
Phasianus Sinus, a Bay* so called in the Euxine Sea. Pherme, a Mountain of
Egypt. Philyra, an Island of the Euxine Sea. Phaenix, a Mountain of Caria on
the Coast over against Rhodes. Pontia, an Island of the Mediterranean Sea;
under the Dominion of Naples, at this Day Ponza. Pontus Euxinus, the Euxine
Sea; at this Day Mar de Marmora, Mar Majore, Caradenis, and Mauro-thalassa.
Porphyrites Mons, a Mountain so called from its Color, which tincture
according to Agatharchides it receives from the Minium with which it abounds,
of which Color likewise is this of the Moon. Promontorium freti Pontici, a
Promontory of the Pontick Straits. Propontis Sinus, a Bay between the
Hellespont and the Euxine Sea; heretofore known by the Names of Mare Bebricium,
and Mare Thracium. Prophetarum Mons, a Mountain so called in Palaestine.
R.
RAphidim, a Desert in Palestine, not far from Mount Horeb. Rhodus, an Island
in the Carpathian Sea, famous heretofore for the Colossus of the Sun. Riphaei
Montes. Rupes in Sinu Atheniensi.
S.
SAcer Mons, a Mountain of Egypt so called. Sagaricus Sinus, a Bay of Scythia
Europaea, into which the Rivers Sagaris and Tyras discharge themselves.
Salmidessus Sinus, a Bay of the Euxine Sea, so called from the Town
Salmidessus, at this Day Stagnara; others make it Philia, a Promontory of
Thrace, at the Mouth of the Pontick Sea. Sanctus Mon*s, a Mountain near the
Palus Maeotis. Sardinia Insula, an Island in the Tyrrhene Sea, under the
Dominion of Spain, by the Italians called Sardegna, by the Spaniards Zerdegna.
Sarmatiae Europaeae Pars, Part of Sarmatia Europaea. Sarmatici Montes,
Mountains of Sarmatia Europaea, at this Day called Montes Scepusienses.
Sarmatiae Asiaticae Pars, Part of Sarmatia Asiatica. Scithiae Pars, Part of
Scythia at this Day Tartary. Sepher Mons, a Mountain of Palaestine; but there
is another so called in India, of an exceeding Height, as this likewise of the
Moon is. S^rrorum Mons, a Mountain of Sarmatia Europaea. Sicilia, the greatest
Island in all the Mediterranean, heretofore called Sicania, Trinacria,
Triquetra. Sinai Mons, Mount Sinai in Arabia Petraea, at this Day called S.
Catharina, by the Turks Turla, and Gibel Thor, and Gibel Mousa; that is, the
Mountain of Moses. Sinopium Mons, a Mountain of Egypt, otherwise called
Memphidis Mons, or the Mountain of Memphis. Sinus Orientalis Maris Hyperborei,
the Eastern Bay of the Hyperborean Sea. Sinus Inferior Maris Caspii, the
Inferior Bay of the Caspian Sea, in which there is seen a signal Rock. Sinus
extremus Ponti Euxini, the utmost Bay of the Euxine Sea. Sinus ad Bosphorum
Thracium Propontidis, the Bay of Propontis at the Thracian Bosphorus. Sinus ad
Hellespontum Propontidis, the Bay of Propontis at the Hellespont. Sipylus, a
Mountain of the lesser Asia; of which Name likewise there are diverse others.
Sirbonidis Eruptio, the Sirbonick Straits. Sirbonis Sinus, a great Lake in
Palaestina, upon the Confines of Egypt; called at this Day by the several Names
of Stagnone, Golfo di Tenesse, Golfo di Damiata, Camet Esturnel, and
Baranguerlis. Sogdiani Montes, the Sogdian Mountains, the Boundaries of Media,
and Assyria, at this Day Cabusco. Strobilus Mons, a Mountain so called, Part of
Caucasus. Strophades, two small Islands in the Ionian Sea, at this Day
Strivali. Strimonicus Sinus, the Bay of Strymon in the Aegaean Sea, or
Archipelago, now Golfo di Contessa, from an adjacent Town of that Name.
Syrticus Sinus Minor, the Bay of the lesser Syrtis in the Mediterranean, upon
the Coast of Africa, at this Day Golfo de Capes. Syrticum Mare, the Bay of the
great Syrtis in the Mediterranean extended between the Regions of Cyrene and
Tripolis, now by the French called Les Seiches de Barbary* by the Spaniards
Baxos de Barbaria, by the Italians, Golfo di Sidra.
T.
TAbor Mons, Mount Tabor in Iudaea, famous for the Transfiguration of our
Savior, at this day retaining its old Name. Taygetus, a Mountain of Laconia
near Sparta; now Ports. Tancon Mons, a Mountain so called near the Caspian
Sea. Tarantinus Sinus, a Bay in the Mediterranean Sea, at this day Golfo di
Taranto. Taurus Mons; Mount Taurus the greatest of the whole Earth, as this of
the Moon. Taurica Chersonesus, the Taurick Chersonesus; at this Day Chrimski,
Precopska, and Gazaria. Taraciniae Insulae. Techisandum Mons, a Mountain of
Persia. Thambes Mons, a Mountain of Africa. FIGURA PRO NOMENCLATURA, ET
LIBRATIONE LUNARI
Tenarium Promontorium, the. Promontory of Taenarus in Peloponesus, now Capo
Matapan. Thospitis Lacus, a great Lake or Mere in Armenia on the Borders of
Mesopotamia, now Gabacu. Tmolus Mons, or Timolus, a Mountain of Phrygia, at
this Day Tomalitze. Trapezus Mons, a Mountain in the Taurick Chersonesus, at
this Day called Lustra, and Trebizonde, by the Turks Tarabossan. Trasimenus
Lacus, a famous Lake of Italy, at this Day Lago di Perugia. Troicus Mons, a
Mountain whence the Egyptian Pyramids were hewn.
U.
VUlcania Insula, an Island in the Mediterranean Sea, near Lipara, on the right
hand of Sicily not far from Italy, now Vulcano. Uxii Montes, Mountains so
called in Armenia Major, whence Tygris has its Source.
Z.
ZAcynthus, an Island near Peloponesus, at this Day Zante.
And thus much as to the Explanation of the several Names of the Lunary Spots,
according to the Design of HEVELIUS in his Selenographick Scheme or Mapp.

To the Scheme of Hevelius, We shall add that of Grimaldi, as the same is
represented by Ricciolus in his Almagest. l. 4. p. 204. divided into Eight
Parts or Octants, and describing the several Parts, or Spots of the Moon, not
according to the Geographical Design of Hevelius; but by the Names of the most
Eminent Philosophers, and Astronomers, as well Ancient as Modern, as may appear
by the following Nomenclature, wherein the Synonyma of such Spots, or Parts as
are added from the Selenography of Langrenus, and Hevelius, are respectively
marked with the first Letters of their Names, L. and H.

Nomenclature of the Parts of the Moon for the Selenography of P. Maria
Grimaldi.
1. OCTANS.
Anaximander Aristarchus
L. Balthassar Cleostratus Ecphantus Eratosthenes
L. Gassendus L. Haro Harpalus Helicon Cyzicenus Heraclides Ponticus Oenopides
Pitheas Massil.
L. Pythagoras Timocharis Xenophanes.

2. OCTANS.
Anaxagoras Aratus Archimedes
L. Roma H. Corsica Archytas Aristillus Aristoteles
L. Brahe Autolycus Calippus Conon Democritus Epigenes Euctemon Eudoxus
L. Pozzo Meton
L. Amalsi Philolaus Plato
L. Panciroli Lacus H. Lacus Niger Thales
L. Xenophanes Theaetetus Timaeus.

3. OCTANS.
Atlas Berosus Cepheus Endymion Geminus Hercules Hermes Hyginus Manilius
L. Isabella R. Hisp: H. Insula Besbicus Menelaus
L. Maria Imperatrix Mercurius Messala Arabs Osymandiez Posidonius
L. Lafailli Sulpicius Gallus Zoroaster

4. OCTANS.
Agrippa Alcuinus Ariadaeus Beda Cleomedes Dionysius Exiguus Firmicus Goclenius
Iul. Caesar Langrenus Macrobius Plinius Plutarchus Proclus
L. Puteanus Seneca Sosigenes Taruntius Vitruvius.

5. OCTANS.
Aben Ezra Abulfeda Alfraganus Almaeon Azophi S. Catharina
L. Picolomini S. Cyrillus Alex. S. Dionysius Areop. Fabricius Fracastorius
Fournerius S. I. Geber Hypparchus Hypatia S. Isidorus Hisp. Rab. Levi Mart.
Capella Metius Mulerius Neander Petavius S. I. Pontanus Picolomineus Reitha
Riccius Sacroboscus Santbechius Snellius Stevinus Stiborius Tatius Achill.
Theon Sen. Theon. Iun. S. Theophilus Alex. Vendelinus Zagutus

6. OCTANS.
Albategnius
L. Ferdinandus Imp. Aliacensis Alpetragius Alfonsus Rex
L. Ludovicus 14. Apianus Arzachel Arzet S. I. Barocius Bettin^s S. I.
Blancanus S. I. Blanchinus Cabaeus S. I. Clavius S. I.
L. Maximilianus Curtius S. I. Cysatus S. I. Daniel Bartolus S. I. Fernelius
Gauricus Gemma Frisius Griembergerus S. I. Gulielm. Hassiae Princ. Hagecius
Homelius Kircherus S. I. Licetus Lilii Fratres Longomontanus Maginus
L. Visilii Manzinus Malapertius S. I. Maurolycus
H. Estensis Dux Moretus S. I. Mutus Nonius Orontius Pitatus Pitiscus Ptolemaeus
L. Innocentius X. H. Mons Sypilus Purbachius Regiomontanus Sasserides
Scheinerus S. I. Schomberger S. I. Simpelius S. I. Stoeflerus Tannerus
Waltherus Vernerus Zucchius S. I.

7. OCTANS.
Bayerus Bullialdus
L. Medicaei Byrgius Campanus Capuanus Cichus Asculanus Crugerus Dersennis S.
I. Eichstadius Fontana Gassendus
L. Annullus Neptuni Hainzelius Herigonus Iunctinus Kristmannus Mersennus
Morinus Munosius Origanus Phocylides Profacius Rothmannus Schikardus Schillerus
Vieta Zupus S. I.

8. OCTANS.
Anton. Rocca Bessarion Billy S. I. Cardanus Cavallerius Copernicus
L. Philippus 4. H. Mons Aetna Cusanus Dominicus Maria Egnatius Dantes
Eustachius Galilaeus Grimaldus S. I.
L. Lacus Posidonii H. Lacus Maeotis Hortensius Hevelius Keplerus Lansbergius
Linemannus Milichius Moletius Reinerus Reinholdus Rheticus Ricciolus S. I.
Seleucus Simon Marius Sirsalis S. I. Stadius.


Nomenclature of the Lunary Regions, whereto is added the Number of the
respective Octants to which they appertain.
Insula Ventorum, 8. Lacus Mortis, 3. Lacus Somniorum, 3.
L. Lacus Scientiae H. Palus Hyperborea Littus Eclipticum, 1, and 8.
L. Littus Philippicum Mare Crisium, 4.
L. Mare Caspium H. Palus Maeotis Mare faeeunditatis, 4, 5.
L. Mare Langreni Mare Frigoris, 2.
L. Mare Astronomicum Mare Humorum, 7.
L. Mare Venetum Mare Imbrium, 1, 2.
L. Mare Austriacum Mare Nubium, 7.
L. Mare Borbonicum Mare Nectaris, 5.
L. Sinus Batavicus Mare Serenitatis, 3*
L. Mare Eugenianum H. Mare Euxinum Mare Tranquillitatis, 4.
L. Mare Belgicum H. Euxinus Mare Vaporum, 3. Oceanus Procellarum, 1, 8.
L. Oceanus Philippicus H. Mare Eoum Palus Nebularum, 2.
L. Terra Virtutis Palus Nimborum, 7. Palus Putredinis, 2. Palus Somni, 4.
L. Aestuaria Bamelr. Peninsula Deliriorum, 7. Peninsula Fulgurum, 7. Peninsula
fulminum, 7. Sinus Aestuum, 7.
L. Sinus Medius H. Mare Hadriaticum Sinus Epidemiarum* 7
L. Mare Populorum Sinus Iridum, 1.
L. Sinus Geometricus H. Sinus Apollinis Sinus Roris, 1.
L. Sinus Principis Stagnum Glaciei, 2. Terra Caloris, 7. Terra Iustitiae Terra
Fertilitatis, 5, 6.
L. Terra Dignitatis H. Asia Terra Grandinis, 2. Terra Mannae, 4, 5.
L. Terra Temperantiae. H. Cholchis Terra Nivium, 2.
L. Montes Austriaci H. Ital. Apenninus Terra P^uinae, 1.
L. Terra Laboris H. Mauritania Terrra Sanitatis, 5.
L. Terra Dignitatis H. Asiae Pars Terra Siccitatis, 1, 2.
L. Terra Honoris Terra Sterilitatis, 7. Terra Vitae, 3, 4.
L. Terra Sapientiae H. Sarmatia Terra Vigoris, 4, 5.
L. Terra Pacis.
Of its motion either of Revolution or Libration, We shall not here say any
thing, it being beside our present Design. But as to its Distance, Apparent
Diameter and Magnitude, We have thought fit to add the following Tables.

Table of the Moons Distance from the Center of the Earth in Semidiameters of
the same, and its Horizontal Parallax.
In Opposition, or Conjunction Distance from the Center of the Earth Horizontal
Parallax According to the following Authors Apog. Med. Perig. Apog. Med. Perig.
Semid. Semid. Semid. Ptolemaeus 64 10 59 0 53 50 53 34 58 16 63 51 Copernicus
65 30 60 19 55 8 52 56 57 0 62 54 Tycho 58 8 56 30 54 52 59 9 60 51 62 39
Longomontanus 57 38 56 0 54 23 59 37 61 26 63 14 Lansbergius 64 10 59 5 54 0 53
34 58 8 63 39 Bulialdus 61 40 59 5 56 30 55 56 58 16 60 52 Ricciolus 64 15 59 0
53 45 53 30 58 16 63 55 Kepler. in Ephemerid. 62 52 59 0 55 8 54 41 58 16 62 20
Kepler. in Epit. Astr. and Tab. Rudolph. 59 0 56 28 54 0 58 22 60 53 63 41
Hipparchus for sometime 83 0 77 0 71 0 41 30 45 0 48 30 Afterward 72 30 67 30
62 30 47 30 51 30 55 30 Alphonsus 61 8 57 45 54 23 53 19 59 21 63 17 Argolus 60
4 56 0 51 57 56 45 61 17 65 36 Vendelinus 63 56 60 0 56 4 53 46 57 18 61 18
Kircherus. 67 50 62 37 57 24 -- -- -- -- -- -- In its Quadratures.
Distance from the Center of the Earth Horizontal Parallax Authors Apog. Med.
Perig. Apog. Med. Perig. Semid. Semid. Semid. Ptolemaeus 43 53 38 43 33 33 60
19 89 0 103 0 Copernicus 68 21 60 19 52 17 50 19 57 0 65 48 Tycho 60 36 56 30
52 24 56 44 60 51 65 36 Longomontanus 60 4 56 0 51 57 57 15 61 26 66 9
Lansbergius 66 58 56 5 51 12 51 20 58 8 67 6 Bulialdus 64 15 59 5 53 55 53 30
58 8 63 43 Ricciolus 66 42 59 0 51 20 51 32 58 16 66 56 Kepler. in Ephemerid.
61 36 59 0 56 24 55 26 58 16 60 58 Kepler. in Epit. Astr. and Tab. Rudolph. 59
0 56 28 54 0 58 22 60 53 63 41

As to the Apparent Diameter of the Moon (not saying any thing of the several
Methods of attaining the same from the Observation of Eclipses, of which
Ricciolus l. 4. Almagest. N. c. 16.) the following Table (taken from the said
Ricciolus) will show the several Opinions of the Ancient and Modern Astronomers.

Synopsis of the Apparent Diameters of the Moon In Opposition, Conjunction, and
square Aspects Apparent Diameter of the Moon Apog. Perig. Authors Ptolemaeus
in and 31 20 35 20 in 42 8 55 0 Albategnius in and 29 30 35 20 Alphonsus and
Purbacchius in and 29 0 36 8 Copernicus, Reinholdus, and sometime Maginus in
and 30 0 35 38 in 28 45 36 44 Maginus in Suppl. Ephemer. in conjunction; and 30
30 34 40 Clavius and Herigonius in and 30 0 36 8 Tycho, Origanus, and Mulerius
in 25 36 28 48 in 32 0 36 0 in 32 32 36 0 Longomontanus Physice in and 32 0 34
0 Keplerus in Ephemer. in and 30 0 34 10 In Epit. and Tab. Rudolph in and 30 0
32 44 Lansbergius in and 30 0 35 38 Petr. Gassendus in and 26 36 31 06 Ism.
Bulialdus in and 31 10 34 0 in 29 56 36 4 Got. Vendelinus in and 28 40 32 42
Sed in Vertice in and 29 10 33 18 Kircherus in and 29 22 34 40 Ricciolus in and
28 0 33 30 in 27 0 35 6

From the Distances of the Moon, and apparent Diameters already given, the true
Magnitude thereof may methodically be deduced; which (without the trouble of
calculating) the Reader may see plainly exhibited, in the following Table,
according to the Opinions of the several Authors therein mentioned.

The true Magnitude of the Moon compared with that of the Earth and Sun.
According to The true Diameters of the Moon and Sun unto that of the Earth
supposed to be 100. The Solidity of the Moon to the Earth Sun Moon Earth Sun as
to as to Aristarchus more than 31 2 / 4 100 633 1 16 1 5832 Aristarchus less
than 39 4 / 5 100 716 1 32 1 8000 Ptolemaeus 29 2 / 6 100 550 1 40 1 6648
Copernicus 28 4 / 7 100 545 1 42 ^ 1 6999 1 / 60 Moestlinus 28 ^ 100 546 1 44 1
7300 Tycho 29 1 / 6 100 520 1 41 11 / 12 1 5848 Longomontanus 26 5 / 6 100 580
1 51 1 / 49 1 10000 Keplerus 25 7 / 10 100 1500 1 59 1 204671 Lansbergius 28
100 757 1 45 11 / 20 1 19770 Bullinldus 27 11 / 12 100 700 1 45 29 / 30 1 15765
1 / 3 Vendelinus 26 5 / 8 100 6400 1 53 1 13833632 Kircherus 29 7 / 17 100 520
1 40 1 5600 Schyrlaeus 28 3 / 7 100 1000 1 42 19 / 20 1 42875 Ricciolus in Alm.
26 1 / 5 100 3383 1 55 1 2123000 Ricciolus Astr. Ref. 27 1 / 2

Whether the MOON be Habitable.
That the Moon is inhabited, is by diverse as well Philosophers as Astronomers
at this Day maintained and asserted; from the Appearance of Mountains, Valleys,
Woods, Lakes, Seas and Rivers discovered therein by help of the Telescope,
which Opinion was long since embraced by the Ancients, as Cicero testifies, (
Academ. Quaest. l. 4.) where he cites the Authority of Xenophanes. Habitari ait
Xenophanes in Luna, Eamque esse Terram multarum Urbium and Montium. Plutarch
likewise De Placit. Philosophicis l. 2. c. 30. reports that the Pythagoreans
affirm, the Moon to be an other Earth, and that she is inhabited round about
like this Earth of ours, and peopled with Living Creatures fifteen times larger
than those with us. These Inhabitants were by the Ancients called Antichtones,
in regard they dwelt in an Earth opposite to ours. And in that noted Piece of
his, De facie in Orb Lunae. He says that there are Caverns in the Moon which
are called Penetralia Hecates, and that the Upper Parts of the Moon which
always respect the Heavens are the Elysian Fields; that it is likewise
inhabited by Genii, which dwell not always there, but sometime descend to the
Earth to the Assistance or Punishment of Mankind, etc. Macrobius likewise in
Somn. Scipionis l. 1. and Achilles Tatius in Isagog. report the like of the
Moon's being habitable. The Words of Macrobius are these, Lunam, Aetheream
Terram Physici vocaverunt, and Habitatores Ejus Lunares populos nuncuparunt;
quod ita esse plurimis Argumentis, quae nunc longum est enumerare, docuerunt.
See to this Purpose more in Kepler in his Astronomia Optica, and particularly
in that marvellously ingenious Posthume Piece of his called Somnium, sive de
Lunari Astronomia; and in his Learned Annotations thereupon, and on Plutarch
his Book, De facie in Orb Lunae, thereto annexed: Nor will this seem an
extravagant Opinion to those who shall upon due consideration, be persuaded to
admit that the Moon enjoys as favorable an Aspect from the Sun as this Earth
of ours; though their Days and Nights be answerable to our half Months, in
regard it is skreened with Hills and Mountains, under which lie deep and shady
Valleys, with Hollow Caves and Recesses, equally advantageous against the
Extremities of Heat and Cold, watered likewise with great Lakes and Rivers, and
consequently by Nature furnished with all things requisite for sustentation of
life, and therefore it cannot reasonably be thought, that these Advantages and
Benefits should be conferred by Nature for no Use or End; or that the Moon
should only be made to reflect the Sun's Light to us. See the Learned Dr. Isaac
Vossius in his Treatise De Natura and Propriet. Lucis. c. 19.

But what kind of Creatures these Lunary Inhabitants are, is not agreed upon,
though Kepler be something Positive, Concludendum videtur (says he, in Not. ad
Appendic. Selenograph.) in Luna Creaturas esse Viventes, Rationis, ad Ordinata
facienda, Capaces. The like is affirmed by him as to the other Planets, nay the
Sun it self, touching which last, in the Epilogue to his Fifth Book,* De Mundi
Harmonia, he breaks out into this Expression, Vel Sensus ipsi exclamant, ignea
hic habitare corpora, Mentium Simplic^um Capacia, Vereque Solemn esse (...), Si
non Regem, at saltem Regiam.

This cannot perhaps seem more strange to some, than the following Assertion to
Others, which maintains the Moon to be the Paradise wherein Our first Parents
were created, and from whence for their Transgression they were thrust down to
this Earth of ours; and yet this from Reason and the Authority of Fathers and
Schoolmen, is endeavored to be proved by Hieronymus Vitalis in Lexic.
Mathemat. in Voce Paradisus; where he says, fateor id novum, Singular and
hactenus inauditum; at non per hoc temerarium, atque intolerabile dixeris; for,
as he urges, modo parta tanta rerum Notitia, Lunae facie Telescopio penitissime
observata, Veterum dictis Expensis, Locis (super hanc Terram) investigatis,
Paradisum in Lunae superficie collocare, Ratio ipsa compellit. To whose large
Discourse upon that Subject we refer the Reader.

MERCURY.
The next Planet in order is Mercury; of whose Place, Figure, Nature, and
Substance something, according to our Method is briefly to be added.

It is carried in an Epicycle about the Sun, as the Center of its Motion and
Orb: Now running above, now beneath the Sun; Sometimes higher than Venus,
sometimes lower: For when these two Planets ( Venus and Mercury) are in their
Apogaea, and above the Sun, then Mercury is beneath Venus; when in their
Perigaea and beneath the Sun, then Mercury is above Venus: So when Venus is in
her Apogaeum, and Mercury in his Perigaeum, then is he beneath Venus; when
Venus is in her Perigaeum, and Mercury in his Apogaeum, then is he above Venus,
as may appear by the Egyptian and Tychonick Systems.

Its Figure is orbicular or round, not Mathematically but Physically such,
rising here and there with extuberating Hills and Mountains, in the same manner
as this Earthly Globe of ours; being, like that, an opacous Body, and receiving
its Illumination from the Sun; whence at several times it is seen under several
Phases or Appearances; for in it is greatest Digression from the Sun, (which is
never above 28.) it appears Dichotomous; but when he is retrograde, and
approaching to an Opposition with the Sun, he appears in a Figure like that of
the New Moon, when distant about 60. Degrees from the Sun; though this Phasis
be very rarely discerned by reason of his small Digression from the Sun, and
the quick Vibration of his Rays, (whence by the Greeks he is called (...),)
the Vivacity of his Light exceeding that of Venus and Jupiter, and thence
impeding the Sight from rightly beholding that Phenomenon, unless fortified by
an excellent Telescope, as likewise in regard of the great Refractions made by
Vapors near the Horizon, especially in Climates more obliquely posited, as is
noted by Regiomontanus and Copernicus, who for that Reason could never be so
happy as duly to observe these Mercurial Phases. Riccciolus (in Astr. Reform.
l. 10.) reports that he, together with Franciscus Maria Grimaldi in the year
1643. the fifth of March, when Mercury was in the Upper Part of his Epicycle,
and Vespertine at 15. of Elongation from the Sun, beheld him in a Gibbous
Figure, like the Moon when more than half full; the like in the year 1656.
December 16th. In the year 1643. August 25th. the same Persons, beheld him
being Matutine, and 19. distant from the Sun, in a Figure like that of a Sickle
or Sy^he; so likewise in the year 1644. August the 6th. being distant from the
Sun 20. But in the year 1647. April 30th. being Vespertine, and distant from
the Sun 20. they beheld him in a like Sythe-like Figure, but more approaching
toward a Dichotomy, in the same Figure likewise they beheld him in the year
1650. when Vespertine and distant 18. from the Sun. There are observed in him
likewise several Spots successively following one another, some light, some
duskish; which light Spots are by Kircherus (in Itiner. Exstatic. Dial. 1. c.
4.) conceived to be the said Terrestrial and Mountanous Parts of the Mercurial
Globe illuminated by the Sun, the dusky ones to be the liquid or watery Parts
thereof, which by their Successive Motion likewise evince that he has a
Vertiginous Rotation about its own Axis, determined within the space of six
Hours, or thereabouts, as Rheita affirms.

As to its Distance from the Earth, the same is by Tycho computed to be in its
greatest Distance 1660. Semidiameters of the Earth, in its mean Distance 1150.
in its least 630. but according to the Calculation of Ricciolus, in its
greatest Distance 10868. Semidiameters, in its mean 8057. in its least 5246.

Its Apparent Diameter in its mean Distance is by Tycho computed to be 2. 10.
by Ricciolus in its greatest Distance to be only 9 in its least Distance 25.

Its true Magnitude, according to Ricciolus (supposing its mean Distance to be
as before expressed, and its Diameter to contain part of the Earth's Diameter) is
concluded to be less than the Earth's Body by 1 / 256 part. Which being reduced
to the Measures of Kepler, its Diameter may be reckoned to contain 377 Italian
Miles, the Solidity of its Body 21253933 Cubical Italian Miles, or thereabout.

VENUS.
The most illustrious of all the lesser Planets, has been observed by the
curious from all Antiquity: The chief Remarks made by the Ancients are these:
First, they observed her sometime to precede the Sun, rising in the Morning
before him, sometime to follow the Sun, setting in the Evening after him, now
to be in Conjunction with the Sun, that is in the same right Line drawn from
the Observers Eye to the Center of the Sun, at other times receeding from him,
to the Distance of 48 Degrees, and this was the first and most obvious
Phenomenon.

They observed her likewise to differ in Magnitude, appearing sometimes
greater, sometimes less, sometime of a mean or middle Size, whence they
concluded her to approach sometime nearer to the Earth, and to be in Perigaeo,
at other times to recede further from it, and to be in Apogaeo, and this was
the second Phenomenon; but not commonly observed or obvious to All.

As to her rising and setting they observed that she was never so remote from
the Sun, as that she ever set Cosmically, or rose Acronychally; that is, that
she (the Sun rising in the Eastern Horizon) never set at the same time in the
West, or (the Sun setting in the West) never rose at the same time in the East;
for Venus cannot be opposed Diametrically to the Sun, in regard she never
digresses from him above 48. or thereabout: Whence, Venus rising in the Morning
Heliacally, that is emerging out of the Sun's Beams, under which she lay hid,
digresses more and more from him, and (he rising) appears higher and higher
above the Horizon, until she comes to the Terms of her greatest Digression
aforesaid; thence reapproaching the Sun, is hidden in the Morning Heliacally,
that is, is obscured under the Sun's Beams, until such time as emerging
Heliacally in the Evening, she rises (the Sun setting) higher and higher above
the Horizon, until she comes to the aforesaid Terms of her greatest Elongation;
which past, she again approaches toward the Sun until such time as in the
Evening she sets Heliacally. And this is the third Phoenomenon, observable by
All, but noted only by the curious, says Schottus (in Praelus. in Vener. in
Itiner. Exstat. Kircheri.)

Besides these Observations of the Ancients, Modern Astronomers by the help of
the Telescope have noted several other signal Phenomenon, as that she is liable
to the same variety of Changes as the Moon, sometimes almost full, at other
Times gibbous, and now and then horned, as well when she is Vespertine as
Matutine, manifested by the various Observations of Galilaeo, Scheinerus,
Fontana, Hortensius, Keplerus, Rheita, Gassendus, and Hevelius. She is sometime
likewise seen by Day, at which time according to Galilaeus and Hevelius, her
true Figure is best to be discerned in regard she is despoyled of those
Adventitious Rays, with which in the Night time she is invested. Ricciolus and
Grimaldus in the year 1649. on the first of April beheld her of a Gibbous
Figure; and on the twentieth of the same Month bisected or dichotomised; and
on the first of May, and first of September the same year, horned, and so
continued until the fourth Day, two Hours after Noon, and so to the eighth Day
of the same Month from the Sun's rising 'till Noon. On the eighteenth she was
exactly Bisected or Dichotomised; on the twenty sixth growing toward a Gibbous
Figure. But the rarest and most Signal Phenomenon of Venus (says Ricciolus)
is when she has greatest Latitude, near her Lowest Conjunction with the Sun:
For being then seen by a good Telescope she appears horned, as big as the New
Moon to the bare Eye.

Of the Structure, Nature and Substance of this Planet from the Phenomenon
already recited, it may be concluded that it is an opacous Body, and has its
Light from the Sun; that it is spherical, because it is spherically
illuminated; that it is of a solid and consistent Substance in regard, though
carried in a rapid Course through the liquid Ether it is not dissolved or
dissipated: It is of a rough and uneven Superficies, in regard it is
represented to be such by the Telescope, and otherwise, could not in such
abundance reflect the Sun's Light upon the Earth, which it is observed
sometimes to do to such an eminent Degree, that Bodies objected to its Rays
are seen to cast a shadow, it is made up of solid and liquid Matter, as our
Terraqueous Globe, and is found to have a Vertiginous Motion about its own Axis
and Center, which it compleats within the space of fourteen Hours, according to
Rheita.

As to its Apparent and true Diameter, its Solidity and Proportion to the Body
of the Earth, as likewise its Distance from thence, Authors extremely vary.
Ricciolus in the Seventh Book of his Almagest, Sect. Sixth, has collected
their several Opinions into one Table, to which for Brevities sake We refer the
Reader; contenting our selves only to note that according to the said Ricciolus.

The Apparent Diameter of Venus in its greatest Distance from the Earth, is, 0.
33. 30. in its mean Distance 1. 44. 12. in its least 4. 8. 0.

Its true Diameter contains of the Earth's Diameters 1. 15 / 1000. Its
Circumference three Diameters of the Earth and. the Area of its greatest
Circle, square Diameters of the Earth 1. 4 / 1000. Its unequal Superficies
square Diameters 4. 15 / 1000. The Body of Venus that of the Earth 1..

Its Distance from the Earth he makes to be when greatest 12919 Semidiameters
of the Earth; Its mean Distance 7580, its least 2241 of the same Semidiameters.

MARS.
Though of all the rest the most inobservable Planet (as both Pliny and Kepler
affirm) has not yet been able to lie hid from the subtle Discoveries of
Astronomical Spies; who have observed that he moves in a large Orbit about the
Sun, as the Center of its Motion, in which Circle or Orbit he includes the
Earth with the Moon, Mercury and Venus, and takes up a great Part of the Solar
Region, and when in his Perigaeum, becomes nearer to the Earth than the Sun, as
may appear by his Parallax, at that time greater than the Suns; and the notable
increase of his Light, by reason of which he is sometimes taken for a Comet or
New Star.

As to his Figure, it is without doubt (as the other Planets) Spherical; and is
observed by Kepler (l. 6. Epit. Astr.) when in with the Sun, to be almost
bisected or Dichotomous, at other times between and to the Sun to be gibbous,
and rarely perfectly round as Rheita affirms. Hevelius denies that it can ever
be seen horned. Fontana in his Observations represents it, as by him viewed in
the year 1636. in a round Figure with a black Spot in the Middle, which he
conceives to be a Cavity, and not a rising or swelling. Nicholaus Zucchius, as
Ricciolus ( in Astronom. Reform.) reports, beheld him in the year 1640. between
and with the Sun to be gibbous or bossed without any such Spot, perhaps by
reason of his vertiginous Motion or Libration about his own Center changing its
Position. Daniel Bartolus in the year 1644. (as he writes to Ricciolus)
affirms, that Father Sirsalis the Jesuit at Naples beheld him with an
excellent Telescope to be almost round with two Spots a little beneath the
Middle of his Globe. Ricciolus likewise together which Grimaldus in the year
1651. on the fourth, fifth, and sixth of April beheld that black spot in him;
which appeared to them as if composed of diverse smaller ones; the same
Phoenomenon being by them afterward often observed in the years 1653, 1655,
and 1657. which black or ruddy Macula or Spot Kircherus (in Itiner. Exstat.)
conceives to be a great Vorago or Gulf, of no less Extent than all Africa; the
ingenuous Mounsieur Hugens in the year 1656. observed a broad obscure Zone or
Belt, to shadow or obfuscate half the Disque of the said Planet. From the
several Phases before mentioned of his Dichotomy and Gibbosity, Astronomers
argue his light to be derived from the Sun, as that of the Moon; and Ricciolus
is of opinion that if he could be seen in with the Sun, We might discern him to
be horned.

As to the Structure and Nature of his Globe, it is as the rest of the Planets,
composed ex Solido and Liquido. The Solid Parts by Kircherus (in Itiner.
Exstatic.) supposed to consist of a fuliginous Substance like that of Sulphur,
Arsenick or Orpiment, hard, and incombustible, evapourating malignant and
destructive Qualities, and sweating out in great plenty a kind of bituminous
Matter, not unlike to Naphtha. Its liquid Parts he imagines to consist of a
soft and clammy Substance, like to our melted Pitch mixed with Sulphur. He has
a Vertiginous Motion about its own Center, which is completed according to
Rheita in the space of forty five Hours, six Minutes.

Its apparent Diameter according to Ricciolus, being in its greatest Distance
from the Earth 10. 6. in its mean Distance 22. in its least 1. 32.

Its true Diameter contains of the Earth's Diameter 0. 12 / 1000. Parts, the
solidity of his Body, the Earth's Body 0. 14 / 1000.

Its greatest Distance from the Center of the Earth, being by the said
Ricciolus computed to be 21005 Semidiameters of the Earth, its Mean Distance
11000, and its least 2373 of the said Semidiameters.

JUPITER.
One of the most noted and Beneficent Planets, is carried in an Orbit above
Mars, as is manifest in the mutual Conjunctions of those Planets, at which time
he is obscured and hidden from our Sight by the Interposition of Mars, as the
Sun is by that of the Moon's Body.

Rheita affirms that he observed Jupiter to be invested round with a vapid
Atmosphere. And Leander Bandtius Abbot of Duisburgh (as Ricciolus in Astron.
Reform.) reports in the year 1643. observed the Edges or Margins of his Globe
to be very rough and uneven, rising with Tumors like Hills and Mountains, and
discovered in his Body by the help of an excellent Telescope, two small Maculae
or Spots, and two great Ones, like hollow Caverns, one Round, the other Oval,
equalling in Longitude the seventh Part of his Diameter, as the Scheme thereof
transmitted by the said Bandtius from Flanders to Ricciolus is said to have
represented the same. Hevelius likewise in his Selenography ( p. 44) affirms,
that the Face of Jupiter is variegated with Spots in a manner like that of the
Moon, and rugged with uneven Swellings and Asperities as that is. But leaving
these to further Discovery; We shall only take Notice of the more Ordinary
Phenomenon, manifested by frequent Observations. And those are:

First, Certain Fasciae, or Belts, girdling as it were the Disque of Jupiter,
whether eminent Parts of his Body like Ridges, or rather hollow Furrows or
Trenches, is uncertain. But they are said first to have been discovered at
Naples by Io. Baptista Zuppus, and Daniel Bartolus Jesuits; since by Fontana,
Grimaldi, Ricciolus, and others frequently discerned and distinguished. They
appear sometimes three, sometimes two, at other times single, and bordered with
two other smaller Welts like a Bend Cottize (as the Heralds term it) sometimes
only with one of those small Welts. They are now and then beheld in the Middle
of its Disque, now above it, at other Times below it, not always strait, but
sometimes crooked and bending; their Convexities appearing turned sometimes
upward, sometimes downward; Evident Marks of the Vertiginous Motion or Rotation
of that Planet about its Center. These sometimes cease to appear, and therefore
being at such times observed by Gassendus, no marvail if in his Astronomical
Institutions ( l. 3.) he seems to suspect those Phenomenon, as denying that
they ever could be discerned by him, though he made use of a very good
Telescope, and one of Galilaeo's making.

Secondly, His Satellites, being four Stars so called moving about the Body of
Jupiter, as his Guards; discovered first in Italy by Galilaeo in the year 1610.
In Germany by Simon Marius by means of the Telescope; without which by Reason
of Jupiter's Splendour, and their small Distance from him (None of them receding
above twelve Degrees from the Body of Jupiter) they are not to be discerned;
and therefore altogether unknown to the Ancients. The Number of these have by
some Astronomers been questioned, Rheita maintaining them to be no less than
nine. Io. Baptista Zuppus affirming he observed in the year 1644. no less than
twelve smaller Stars moving about Jupiter, whereof he verily believed eight to
be Jovial Guards. But the Number of four only is by Gassendus, Hevelius, and
Vincentius Reinerus, who for ten years together most diligently observed them,
as also by Vendelinus, Io. Phocylides Olwarda, Ricciolus, and Grimaldus upon
surer Grounds defended and asserted. These by Galilaeus their first discoverer
were called Sidera Medicaea. The first or inmost next to Jupiter he called
Cosmus Minor; the next or Penintimous Cosmus Major; the third or Penextimus
Maria Medicaea; the fourth or outermost Katherina Medicaea; Simon Marius giving
yet to the Inmost the Name of Jovial Mercury, to the next Venus; to the Third
Jupiter; to the Fourth Saturn: But Io. Baptista Hodierna, who lately first of
all published Ephemerides of the Motions of the said Stars, names the first or
inmost (from the Young Prince of Tuscany) Principharus; the Second (from
Victoria Duchess to the Grand Duke) Victripharus; the Third (from Cosmus the
first Duke of Florence) Cosmipharus; the Last (from Ferdinand the late Duke)
Fernandipharus.

Of these the greatest Digressions from the Body of Jupiter computed in
Semidiameters of the same, are as follows.
Satellties 1 2 3 4 Authors Sem. Sem. Sem. Sem. Galilaeus 3 0 5 0 8 0 12 0
Sim. Marius 3 0 5 0 8 0 13 0 Rheita 3 0 4 0 6 0 10 0 Vendelinus 3 0 5 0 8 0 14
0 Hodierna 3 30 5 30 9 0 14 30 Their Periodical Revolutions in their several
Orbits.
Of the According to Days Hours 1 Galilaeus 1 18 30 fere Marius 1 18 28 30
Rheita 1 18 30 0 Hevelius 1 18 28 0 Hodierna 1 18 28 44 Vendelinus 1 769 / 1000
-- 2 Galilaeus 3 13 20 circiter Marius 3 13 18 0 Rheita 3 13 20 0 Hevelius 3 13
18 0 Hodierna 3 13 18 15 Vendelinus 3 554 / 1000 -- 3 Galilaeus 7 4 0 fere
Marius 7 3 56 34 Rheita 7 4 0 0 Hevelius 7 3 57 0 Hodierna 7 4 1 26 Vendelinus
7 164 / 1000 -- 4 Galilaeus 16 18 0 fere Marius 16 18 9 15 Rheita 16 18 0 0
Hevelius 16 18 9 0 Hodierna 16 18 14 33 Vendelinus 16 756 / 1000 -- Their
Diurnal and Horary Motion in their respective Orbits each divided into 360.
Of the According to Diurnal Horary 1 Gr. Gr. Galilaeus -- -- -- 8 29 circiter
Marius 203 25 0 8 28 30 Hodierna 203 23 44 8 28 29 2 Galilaeus -- -- -- 4 13
fere Marius 101 17 22 4 13 0 Hodierna 101 17 21 4 13 13 3 Galilaeus -- -- -- 2
6 circiter Marius 50 14 57 2 6 30 Hodierna 50 13 32 2 5 34 4 Galilaeus -- -- --
0 54 30 Marius 21 29 3 0 53 30 Hodierna 21 28 48 0 53 42

As to Jupiter's Distance from the Center of the Earth, the same is computed by
Ricciolus, in its greatest Distance to be removed from thence 47552 Terrestrial
Semidiameters; in its Mean Distance 36500, and in its least 26441 of the said
Semidiameters.

Its Apparent Diameter according to the said Ricciolus, being when least, in
Apogaeo, 0. 38. ^8. when mean, in its mean Distance from the Earth, 0. 49. 46.
when greatest, in his Perigaeum, 1. 08. 46.

Its true Diameter contains of the Earth's Diameters Eight and 4 / 5. Its
Circumference 27, 63 / 100 of the said Diameters. The Area of his greatest
Circle 64 square Diameters of the Earth: Its Unequal Superficies 242 of the said
square Diameters. The Solidity of its Body, contains that of the Earths 685
Times.

As to the structure of its Globe, We may conclude it with the rest of the
Planets, to be composed of Solid and Liquid Parts, and by what has been
already said, that it is of a Body though Physically Round, full of uneven
Asperities, invested with a vapid Atmosphere, carried about its own Center by a
Vertiginous Motion, finished according to Rheita in 11 Days, 20 Hours, 1
Minute 15. and that its Zones or Belts are solid Parts less capable of Light
than the rest of its solid or liquid Parts are.

SATURN.
The Highest, and of all the Primary Planets (hitherto known) the most remote
from the Earth, runs his Course above all the rest, and beneath the Fixed
Stars; as is collected from his Parallax, (of all the Planets) the least, and
in a manner none at all. Nor are there any either of the Fixed or Erratick
Stars that afford to the observing Eye, by means of the Telescope such strange
and admirable Phenomenon:

The chiefest and most worthy of Note are Three.

First, That he appears girdled about, with a certain Fascia or Zone, or rather
encompassed about with an Armilla or Ring of Light.

Second, That he has several Lunulae, or lesser Planets, like the Jovial
Satellites moving about his Body.

Third, That his Figure appears variously and incredibly diversified, being
sometimes beheld solitary in a round Form, at other Times represented with two
Rundles adhering to each side, which again alter their Figure, and appear like
certain Ansae or Handles.

As to the first Phenomenon, the ingenious Mounsieur Hugens (in his System.
Saturn. p. 46.) has noted that the said Ring about the Body of Saturn is every
way alike distant from it, the Plane whereof always keeps in a certain and
constant Inclination to the Ecliptic, appearing (according to its diversity of
Aspect) now like a large Ellipsis, now like a more contracted one; at other
times like a strait Line, and now and then like two Brachia or Ansae, as it
were on each side the Body of the said Planet. This Hypothesis of his he laid
down in the following Proposition by him published in the year 1656.

Annulo cingitur, tenui, plano, nusquam cohaerente, ad Eclipticam inclinato.
But Ricciolus conceives the said Saturnian Phenomenon may be as well salved, if
instead of Monsieur Hugens his Annulus or Ring distant from the Body of Saturn,
there were an Elliptical Armilla supposed coherent to it at the Extremities of
the Lesser Diameter of the Ellipsis, which his Hypothesis he delivers in this
Proposition.

Armilla cingitur tenui, plana, Elliptica, duobus locis cohaerente; sive
Parallela Aequatori; sive in se circumvolubili, aut Libratili, Versus Mundi
Polos. But of this let the learned Judge.

As to the second Phenomenon; the forementioned Monsieur Hugens in the year
1655. on the 25th of March, discovered a small Star or Planet moving about the
Body of Saturn; which Star Hevelius likewise observed at Danzick, and Sir Paul
Neal, together with Sir Christopher Wrenn here in England, much about the same
time; but took it not to be a Planet, 'till ascertained of its being such by
the Information of the said Monsieur Hugens.

This Saturnian Companion, after several Months Observation, he found to
finish his Periodical Revolution it its Orbit about the Body of Saturn, in the
space of sixteen days.

Since which the excellent Signiour Cassini has lately made in the Royal
Parisian Observatory, a Discovery of two other Planets moving about Saturn, the
one nearer to the Body thereof than the Hugenian, the other farther removed
from him than that. The Revolution of which interior Planet he found to be
completed in four Days and an half, or rather four Days thirteen Hours. The
Exterior in something more than eighty Days.

Touching the last and various Phenomenon; Hevelius in a Particular Treatise,
De Nativa Saturni facie, has endeavored to give the Reason. He conceiving
that diversity of Appearance to proceed from the Diversity of Aspect, as he is
more directly or more obliquely b^ld by Us: For seeing according to the Rules
of Optics, a Cylinder and an Ellipsis being beheld at a Distance or obliquely,
seem to be circular; Hence he inferrs, that Saturn as well when in the Apogaeum
as Perigaeum of his Excentrick appears, as he terms it, Elliptico Ansatus, but
in his mean Distance either from the Earth or Sun, he appears Monosphaericus,
solitary and round, in other positions he appears Sphaerico-Ansatus, but
diversely figured according to his diverse Latitude and Situation in his
Epicycle. And seeing at this Time Saturn's Apogaeum is in the 27th Degree of
his Perigaeum in the 27th of, and his Mean Distance in 27th Degrees of and, he
has accordingly distributed the various Phases, and different Appearances of
that Planet quite through his Excentrick. Of which see the following Table
taken from Ricciolus in Paralip* Astronom* Reformat* something differing from
that of Hevelius inserted in his forementioned Treatise.

Table of the diverse Phases of Saturn according to the Opinion of HEVELIUS.
Sign. Gr. Denominations of the Figures Apog. 27 Elliptico-ansatus plenus
Decreasing. 12 27 12 Sphaerico-cuspidatus Major 27 Sphaerico-cuspidatus Minor
12 Trisphaericus Mean Distance 27 Mono-sphaericus Increasing. 12 Trisphaericus
27 Sphaerico-cuspidatus Minor 12 Sphaerico-cuspidatus Major 27
Sphaerico-ansatus 12 Elliptico-ansatus Diminutus Perig. 27 Elliptico-ansatus
Plenus Decreasing. 12 Elliptico-ansatus Diminutus 27 Sphaerico-ansatus 12
Sphaerico-cuspidatus Major 27 Sphaerico-cuspidatus Minor 12 Trisphaericus Mean
Distance 27 Mono-sphaericus Phases increasing. 12 Trisphaericus 27
Sphaerico-cuspidatus Minor 12 Sphaerico-cuspidatus Major 27 Sphaerico-ansatus
12 Elliptico-ansatus Diminutus

By the help of the foregoing Table and Ephemerides, the true Place of Saturn
being given, it may be known (says Hevelius) what the Phases of Saturn will be
for any Year to come, of which, for the greater Ease of such as would avoid the
trouble of Calculation, he has composed the following Ephemerid ending in the
Year 1701.

EPHEMERIS PHASIUM SATURNI.
Year Month Phases of Saturn 1674 Tricorpor 1677 Ansatus 1678 1679 1680 1682
From November to July Tricorpor 1683 1684 1685 From September To October
Rotundus perfect 1686 1687 Tricorpor 1688 1690 Ansatus 1691 1692 1693 1694
1695 1696 1699 Tricorpor 1700 1701 Rotundus.

But whether these Phases may exactly answer the Hypothesis, We leave to the
Discovery of the Curious, and shall only add what we find reported by Ricciolus
(in Paralipom. ad Astronom. R^mat.) touching some Mechanical Trials, made by
Signior Campani for the better discovering the various Face of this Celestial
Proteus, being as follows. He caused a round white Ball or Globe to be inserted
within an Armilla of the same color, a Wire being made to pass through the
Armilla, and the said Globe as a Diameter, so that the Armilla could be raised
or deprest at Pleasure. This being placed in a convenient Light, and at a
fitting Distance looked upon through a small Telescope, gave to him according
to the diverse Elevation or Depression of the said Armilla, all the Phases that
were not only then ( viz. 1664.) by him really observed in Saturn, but what
likewise for the future might hereafter be observable. The same Trial is also
affirmed to have been made by Ricciolus by inserting a Globe as aforesaid,
within an Armilla of an Elliptical Form.

Touching the Structure, Nature, and Substance of this Planet, it may be
probably concluded: First, That it is composed ex solido and liquido, of a
plumbeous or leaden temper and color; that it is Spherical, but withal full
of uneven Asperities. Secondly, That it is an Opacous Body, and illuminated ab
extra, and although the Sun's Light may approach it, yet it is not sufficient
to give a requisite Luster to so great and so distant a Body, and therefore
must needs receive its Light from some other Fountain. Thirdly, That his
Companions or Satellites, have their proper light, and thereby administer
Supplies to that of their Prince: Fourthly, that he has a gyration about its
own Center and Axis, completed according to Rheita in 29 Days, 10 Hours, 1.
16.

His Distance from the Earth is by diverse Astronomers diversely computed, but
according to Ricciolus, in his greatest Distance he is found to be distant from
the Center of the Earth 90155 Semidiameters thereof, in his Mean Distance
73000, in his least 57743 of the said Semidiameters.

His apparent Diameter, according to Ricciolus, when least in his Apogaeo cum
Comitib* is reckoned to be 46. when in his Mean Distance from the Earth 57.
when greatest in his Perigaeo 1. 12.

His true Diameter cum Comitibus, contains of the Earth's Diameters 20. 1 / 6.
His Body that of the Earth 891 Times.

We are now come to the Conclusion of the Poem, wherein Manilius for the more
perfect Consummation of this Work, by way of Corollary, has inserted a brief
but not unelegant Description

Of Fiery Meteors and Comets.
Touching the first of These, it will be needless to say much; We shall only
reckon them up. The several sorts of fiery Meteors.
Those whose Place and Generation is in the Lower Region of the Air, are Draco
volans, Ignis Fatuus, Ignis Lambens, Sidus Helenae, Castor and Pollux: Those
whose Birth is in the middle Region, are, Stella cadens, Lancea ardens, Fulmen,
etc. In the Upper Region of the Air are reckoned, Fax, Ignis Perpendicularis,
Bolis, Capra Saltans, Scintillae Volantes, Trabs etc. All which arise from
Vapors and Exhalations which the Earth continually exspires, and diffuses
round about through its ambient Atmosphere.

Of the second Sort something more is to be said; but with that Brevity as may
suit with our Method; it being not our Design to amass together what ever might
be collected upon this Subject, but only to hint so much as may serve either to
explain what our Author has written thereon, or to supply in some measure what
he has omitted, referring the more Inquisitive Reader to what among the
Ancients, Aristotle, Seneca, Pliny, Plutarch and Ptolemy have written; among
the Modern, to what Tycho, Blancanus, Cabaeus, Fortunius Licetus, Camillus
Gloriosus, Longomontanus, Keplerus, Galilaeo, Fromondus, and diverse others have
largely and learnedly discoursed of; more especially to what the Learned and
Reverend Prelate, Seth Lord Bishop of Sarum, has published in his Dissertation
De Cometis, to what Monsieur Petit has discoursed in his Piece of the Nature
of Comets, as likewise Lubieniecius in his Theatrum Cometicum; Hevelius in his
accurate Cometographia, and Ricciolus in Almagest* Nov. Tom. 2. de Cometis.

Touching the Matter, Place, and efficient Cause of Comets, both the Ancient
and Modern Of the Matter, Place, and eff^cient Cause of Comets.
Philosophers and Astronomers differ much; We shall here give the Reader their
several Opinions, collected from diverse of the forementioned Authors, which
may be reduced to Twelve distinct Heads.

The first will have Comets not to be any thing real, or distinct from other
pre-existent Celestial Bodies, but rather a mere Emphasis or Appearance made by
the Reflection or Refraction of the Sun's Beams, or those of the Moon, in the
same manner almost as is the Halo, Parelii, Paraselene and Rainbow. Of this
Opinion was Panaetius, and some others mentioned by Seneca ( Natural. Quaest.)
and Plutarch ( De Pl^it. Philosoph.)

The second likewise denies Comets to be any thing De Novo, existing in the
Heavens; but to be a (...) Sympha^s or Coappearance of diverse Stars already
known, joined together in corporal Conjunction* as Astrologers use to speak,
and so making a kind of a long Star, as if it were (as Sen^ expresses it)
duaru^ (vel plurium) Stellarum Ignis extensus, which Opinion is by some
ascribed to Democritus, Anaxago^as and Z^no; this is touched at by Manilius,
where he says,

Nature did those fading Lights design
As subunited Stars in Heaven to shine.
Which see already explained in our Notes.

The third Opinion makes Comets to be some New and extraordinary Planets
differing from the seven commonly known, being seldom seen, by reason either of
their nearness to the Sun, or their too great Distance from the Earth, which
after some space of time, emerging out of the Sun's Beams under which they lay
hid, or approaching nearer to the Earth, become visible. This was the Opinion
of the Pythagorean Italick Philosophers, Hippocrates, Diogenes, and generally
of the Chaldaean Astronomers, and is likewise taken notice of by our Manilius.

The fourth Opinion maintains Comets to be an Aggregate of many small but
ancient Stars composed into one Body, which afterward parting asunder vanish
and disappear; which Opinion Ricciolus conceives ought more properly to be
ascribed to Democritus, Anaxagoras and Zeno, than that already under the second
Head attributed to them.

The fifth Opinion is that of Aristotle, and diverse of his Interpreters,
asserting Com^ts to be Fiery Meteors, generated anew of copious Exhalations
from the Earth and Sea, and elevated to the supreme Region of the Air; which
being closely compacted together, and hurried about by the swift Motion of the
primum Mobile, take fire, and last as long, as the Sulphur^, Unc^uous, Fat,
Oleaginous, or Nitrous Matter of which they consist, affords them Fuel to burn
and shine; nor is this omitted by our Author.

The sixth Opinion allows Comets to be formed of Sublunary Vapors and
Exhalations, but not to be set on fire; only to be illustrated by the Sun, by
reason of the Diaphaneity of their Matter, like Phials of Glass full of Water
of a red or yellow Color; or as Scaliger ( Exercit. 79.) Opines: That Comets
are composed of a subtle Vapor raised by its own Levity, or attracted by the
Stars, into the Upper Region of the Air, and so attenuated, that it not only
receives but transmits the Sun Beams, like those thin Clouds which in the time
of twilight are discerned not far above the Horizon; which Opinion seems to be
derived from Heraclides Ponticus and Metrodorus.

The seventh maintains Comets to be formed of Elementary Matter, that is to say
of thin and subtle Exhalations, mounting by their Levity above the Orb of the
Moon, and by reason of their Diaphaneity drinking up the Rays of the Planets,
chiefly of the Sun; and afterward transmitting them into a long Train, Bush,
or Beard. Authors of this Opinion among the Moderns, are Guiduccius,
Galilaeus, and Rothmannus.

The eighth Opinion, affirms Comets to be made anew of Celestial Matter; not by
Generation of a new substantial Form, but by Condensation, with a Mixture of
Darkness and Diaphaneity, aptly receiving the Light of the Sun, and
transmitting it again, of which Opinion are Libavius, Licetus, Camillus
gloriosus, Tannerus and Resta.

The ninth Opinion conceives Comets to be generated a new of Celestial Matter,
which after a Time corrupts and is dissolved. Of this Opinion are most of the
Eminent Astronomers from Tycho to this present: Differing yet among themselves
as to the Manner of this Generation; Some conceiving the Generation of Comets
to be made of that Celestial Matter, which is in the Via Lactea; as being of
all the other Parts of the Heavens more nearly prepared and disposed for such
Productions. And that Comets are not Flagrant, but rather pespicuous, and
tralucent Bodies. Kepler yet and with him Hevelius, and some others will have
the Aetherial Region to be full of gross Fumes or Fuliginous Effluvia from the
Bodies of the Stars, and Planets (and more particularly of the Sun congregated
as it were into one Aposthem) and that their Origin and Matter is in a manner
the same with that of the Solar Maculae and Faculae.

The tenth Opinion is (as Ricciolus notes) peculiar only to Kepler; which
asserts Comets to be formed anew of Celestial Matter, but that some of them are
abased and thrust down below the Orb of the Moon; as on the contrary, the
seventh Opinion (before mentioned) maintained them to be formed of Elementary
Matter, yet notwithstanding to be carried up above the Orb of the Moon; and
certainly (says the same Ricciolus) I see no reason why Comets, being composed
of the Effluvia of the Planets in their Perigaea's, may not sometimes be
carried beneath the Moon.

The eleventh Opinion supposes that Comets, if not All, yet the most Part, are
created by God of Nothing, or at least formed of such Matter as best pleases
him, whether Celestial or Elementary, and of such Shape and Figure, as may
serve to terrify, or admonish mankind and presignifie Calamities to ensue,
which Opinion is likewise delivered by Manilius in these Verses

Or God in pity to our humane state,
Sends these as Nuncio's of ensuing Fate.
Touching which enough is already said in our Notes.

The twelfth Opinion is not distinct from all the former, but rather
distinctive of the Matter and Place of Comets. Of which it admits some to be
composed of Terrestrial Exhalations beneath the Orb of the Moon, whether
inflamed or set on fire, or only enlightened. Others to be generated of
Celestial Matter after the manner already delivered in the tenth Opinion.

And seeing mention has been made in the ninth Head or Opinion, that the
Origin and Matter of Comets is in a manner the same with the Solar Maculae. It
will not be amiss here to add the Particulars in which they agree; as by
Hevelius in the seventh Book of his Cometographia, they are compendiously
exhibited in the following Aphorisms.

1. Comets (as the Maculae) have both a Physical and Astronomical Rising; but
few of them Cometical Aphorisms*
have both Astronomical rising and setting, in regard they last not long, but
are dissolved before they attain the Western Horizon. Others have neither
Astronomical rising nor setting, but Physical only, as being produced and
dissipated above the Horizon. 2. As the Maculae are composed, of the grosser
Solar Matter, or more dense Effluvia, so Comets are formed of the Evaporations
of diverse Planetary Bodies. 3. Comets have a threefold Age; their green and
growing Age, their full grown or ripe Age, and their declining or decaying Age;
that is to say their time of Augmentation, Duration, and Decay. 4. Comets have
their Augmentation and Decrement, as well Physical as Optical, not in a certain
Part of the Heavens, but in any Part thereof; and that without Intermission,
successively, sensibly, and unequally. Hence it happens sometimes, that a Comet
increasing slowly and more durably, is on a sudden extinguished, and on the
contrary, another that suddenly shows it self, lasts a long time, and is
slowly dissolved. 5. Comets (as the Maculae) are generated, and increase by the
Accession of similar Matter, through Condensation, Adgeneration, substantial
Generation, and Aggregation of Minute Bodies, and by contrary Means are
dissipated, and decay. 6. Comets (as the Maculae) are by no means spherical
Bodies, but Plane, and of different thickness; sometimes represented to our
view like round or regular Figures, at other times appearing in irregular
Forms, and differ in Magnitude, Crassitude, Color, Obscurity, Density, and
Rarity, and have their Nuclei (Kernels or Knots of Light) of diverse Magnitudes,
Crassitudes, Density and Color. 7. The Nuclei, Kernels, or Knots of Comets
sensibly increase and decrease. And those which suddenly increase are of
shortest Duration, and are soonest dissolved; Those which by Degrees augment,
are of longest Continuance. 8. These Nuclei are composed of Dense and rare
Parts; That is, are generated of the most dilute Planetary Vapors and
Exhalations, and of certain smallest Particles; and sometimes grow together
from many into one; and not seldom from one are divided into two or three, or
more. 9. Comets as they seldom and very rarely consist of one single Nucleus;
so the greater of these Nuclei is seldom seen, precisely placed in the middle
of the Cometical Body, but declines toward the sides, drawing along with it the
thinner Mass. 10. The Nuclei, as their rarer Parts by a Flux of Matter and
Condensation, increase and become more splendid; so by difflux of Matter and
rarefaction they become more pale, wan, and dull. 11. Every Comet, as each
Solar Macula, is circumvested with an other kind of Body, less obscure and more
rare, as it were a peculiar Atmosphere, in which the Sun's Rays are lodged,
whence its Tail or Bush is produced. 12. It seems likewise consonant to Reason,
that the rarer Parts are procreated before the Nuclei or Kernels, and that in
the Dissolution of a Comet, the Nuclei sensibly first decay; so that the solid
and more Dense Parts are sooner dissolved than the more rare. 13. The Nuclei of
Comets (as of the Solar Maculae) have not their Generation or Corruption in one
Part of the Heavens only, but every where indifferently. And of these some are
more lasting than others, by reason of their more Unctuous and Dense Matter;
some of them likewise are formed about the beginning or Birth of the Comet;
others about the middle, and some toward the End. Yet sometime the same Nucleus
lasts from the beginning to the End of the Comet now increasing, at other times
decreasing. But in this, both Comets and their Nuclei altogether differ from
the Solar Maculae, for that Comets, by reason of their Proper Motion in their
Orbits never return again, and a second time ascend above our Horizon, that is
to say rise again Astronomically (except in their Diurnal Motion, which is not
here considered) insomuch as a Comet being once extinguished, cannot be again
produced or continued. 14. Oftentimes diverse Comets which seem at the same time
to begin, and to be almost equal as to their Density and Magnitude; have not
yet the same Dissolution, but differ both as to the Time and Place; the same is
to be understood of their Nuclei. 15. Every Comet, as each Solar Macula,
consists of an opacous, dense, and (of it self) obscure Matter, drawing all its
Light wholly from the Sun. 16. Comets are always greater than they seem to be;
be their Apparent Diameter greater or less than the Apparent Diameter of the
Sun, which is the Body that illuminates them. 17. No Comet whatsoever either as
to its Whole or Parts, or Nuclei, has a Gyration about its Axis; but always
turns the same face to the Earth and Sun, unless happily it may be carried in
an equal librating or reciprocal Motion, according as it is more or less
distant from the Earth. 18. The Nuclei of Comets (as of the Solar Maculae) have
a peculiar Motion, but always Irregular or Anomalous. Hence those Corpuscula
or Nuclei, of which the Comet is composed, have Motions among themselves, as to
their Accession, Conjunction, or separation, quite different from that proper
Motion of the Comet in its Orbit, and thence proceed the sudden Coalitions,
Digressions, and inordinate Deviations, as also the various Transformations of
the Figures of the said Nuclei. 19. Comets: although sometime, as to their
Diameter or Disque, or the Area of their greater Circle, they exceed in
Magnitude the Moon and Earth; yet do they not for all that exhaust the Planets,
nor do those Bodies suffer any Detriment or Diminution, no more than the Sun
does by Generation of his Maculae: for every Celestial Body calls back unto it
self that Matter which by Dissolution or Attenuation issues from it. 20. Comets
are never at one and the same equal Distance removed from the Earth or Sun; but
are sometimes higher, sometimes lower, as is evident; in regard they are
sometimes found to have a sensible Parallax, at other times to have none at
All. 21. As the Sun does not constantly, but at certain times produce his
Maculae; So neither does the Ether at all times by reason of the defect of
Matter, produce Comets. Since that tenuous Matter of which they are composed,
being diffused beyond the Atmosphere of the several Planetary Bodies, whence it
flows through the vast Ether, and most distant Parts of the Heavens; it is not
likely that those thin Exspirations can find so easy a Congress; but that they
concur and are aggregated as it were by chance; whence it comes to pass that
Comets are so seldom seen.
Of the Tail, Train, or Bush of Comets, and the Causes thereof something is
likewise to be Of the Tail, Train, or Bush of Comets.
said, touching which there are as many different Opinions produced by
Ricciolus and Hevelius, as those already mentioned touching Comets.

The first is that of Aristotle and his followers, asserting the Bush or Train
of a Comet to be an Exhalation set on fire, in a more rare and less constipated
Matter than that of its Head, and diversified, according to the diverse
Disposition of the Matter that feeds its Flame.

The second is that of Seneca; who conceives the Cauda or Bush to be no part of
the Comet, nor a Flame, but the Rays or Light which the Comet by its Native
Vigor sends forth.

The third is that of Gemma Frisius, who will have it to be a Fire of a simple
Celestial Body, kindled by the Sun in the Head of the Comet, and by the Violent
Action thereof thrust forth and expelled into the Opposite Part.

The fourth is that of Petrus Apianus, who makes the Bush of a Comet to be
nothing else, but the Rays of the Sun, transmitted through the Semidiaphanous
Head thereof, as it were through a Globe of Glass.

The fifth is Tycho Brahe's, who conceives it to be nothing else but the Beams
of the Sun penetrating the Head of the Comet, and terminated in some Matter not
altogether Perspicuous, and reflected toward us; for he supposes the Substance
of the Ether not to be thoroughly Diaphanous.

The sixth is that of Kepler; who endeavors to give a double reason of this
Phenomenon; for he supposes, First, that the Tail or Bush may be enlightened by
the Sunbeams passing through the Body of the Comet, which he imagines to be
purely pellucid, yet withal Dense, in such manner as the Sun's Beams are
thereby conduplicated and colored. In the second he makes the Comet to expire
a certain Lucid Matter from its Head, toward that Part where the Sun's Beams
break forth. With him in a manner Gassendus consents, who conceives the Tail or
Bush to be of the same Matter with the Head, only to differ in rarity, which
rare and tenuous matter is by the force of the Sun's Beams expelled into the
Part directly turned from the Sun; and this Opinion is likewise embraced by
Camillus Gloriosus, and Franciscus Reita.

The seventh is that of Galilaeo; viz. that the Tail of a Comet is of its own
Nature straight; as being produced by the Sunbeams, but appears to us to be
crooked when near the Horizon, and inclined thereunto by reason of the
Refraction of the Species, or of the Visual Rays, made in the Spherical
Superficies of the Air, which near the Earth is filled with gross Vapors.
This he illustrates by the Example of an Oar, which though straight, seems in
the Water by the force of Refraction to be crooked.

The eighth is that of Io. Baptista Cysatus, who conceives the Tail of a Comet
not to be a Flame, but a radious Cone or Pyramid, made by the Sun's Beams,
transmitted through the Head of the Comet, in the same manner as the Sun's
Light passing through a Hole, or Unequal Glass, illustrates a Room or Chamber,
which he says is done partly by Refraction, partly by Reflection from the
Polyangular Sides of the Corpuscula, that form the Head of the Comet.

The ninth is of Nichol. Cabaeus, who makes the Tail of the Comet to be the
Sunbeams shineing through the Head of the Comet and refracted; but since all
Beams however refracted are propagated by right Lines, he affirms the Tail of a
Comet cannot possibly be really crooked, but only apparently such; and the
Cause of this apparent Crookedness he refers to the diverse Site or Plane of the
Eye, and of the Tail or Bush of the Comet.

The tenth is that of Fromondus Meteor. l. 3. c. 4. where he affirms the Tail
of a Comet to be the Sunbeams transverberated per Cerebrum Capitis Cometae, as
he terms it; and at the beginning not to be of any Length, nor directly to tend
toward the Part turned from the Sun, in regard of the various Diversion it
meets with, by reason of the Profundity and Opacity of the Head of the Comet;
but after that Opacity is a little cleared, and the Matter better digested,
then the Sunbeams issue forth directly, and stream into a long Bush or Train.

The eleventh is that of Fortunius Licetus, who conceives that to the Body of
the Comet there is a certain Matter that adheres, by some Extrinsecal Appulse,
and has its coagmentation and generation near the Body of the Comet, from the
same Cause that formed the Comet; and either by the innate or proper Light of
its Head, or by the Sun Beams is illuminated, and becomes visible in the shadow
of the Comet, that is in that part of it which is directly turned from the Sun.

The twelfth is that of Ricciolus, who first conceives it not improbable, that
the Tail or Train of a Comet is of the same Substance with the Comet, and to
shine by its own Light propagated from its Head. The Face of which is always
converted to the Sun like a Heliotrope, or as a Magnet to the Pole; and by a
slow Vertiginous Motion about the Center of its Head to be so moved, that the
more perfect part of the Comet always respects the Sun, the other part to be
turned from the Sun; and to have diverse Shapes and Figures, according to the
several Species of Comets, and the diversity of its Matter and Configuration.
Secondly, he holds it very probable, that the Train or Bush of a Comet, is a
Multitude of most subtle Corpuscula in the Air or Ether, flying about the Head
of the Comet, not such as We see through a Chink dancing in the Sunbeams, nor
like those Exhalations which make the Crepusculum or Twilight, but much more
subtle and higher, nor apt by reason of their smallness, their little opacity
and great distance from the Sun, to be discerned by us through the Reflection of
the Sun's Beams, unless very strongly illuminated; that, that strong
Illumination is made by the Collection of the Sun's Beams by the Power of
Refraction into one, though not precisely after the same Manner as they unite
after their trajection through a Sphere of Glass. He likewise conceives the
Head of the Comet to consist of diverse minute Bodies Homogenial, partly
Polyangular, partly Spherical, partly Spheroeidal. Hence by the Benefit of
these various Superficies, the Sun Beams passing after a diverse Manner through
the Head of the Comet, according to the Rules as well of Refraction as
Reflection, come forth much more multiplied and collected together than
otherwise they would do, if they passed not through the Head of the Comet, or
were not refracted.

To these We might add the different Opinions of the Excellent Des Carts, and
the much knowing Doctor Isaac Vossius, but that We are obliged to keep within
the Bounds of our prescribed Brevity, and therefore shall referr the curious
Reader to receive further satisfaction in this particular from their own better
Pens; as delivered by the first in Princip. Philosoph. Part. 3. by the other in
his Learned Treatise De Natura and Propriet. Lucis. c. 32. and in his Appendix
thereunto, c. 8.

From the diverse Figures and Appearances of these Trains or Bushes, Comets are
distinguished Of the several Kinds of Comets.
into several Kinds or Species; reducible to two chief Heads, that is to say,
Criniti seu Comati, and Barbati; to the first Head or Classis, relate these
following, viz. (...), and (...), seu Hircus; to the latter (...), Veru, seu
Pertica, and (...).

1. Disceus, sive Disci-formis Cometa, is a Comet resembling in Shape or Form a
round Dish or Platter, among these kind the chief is that which is called Rosa,
sive Chryseus; bright shining, and of a Silver Color, mixed with Gold or Amber
Color. Those of this sort which are not absolutely round, resemble the Figure
of a Shield, and are accordingly called Clypei-Formes. 2. Pitheus sive
Doli-formis, resembles the Form or Shape of a Tun, of which there are diverse
Kinds; some of an Oval Figure; some like a Tun or Barrel erect or set on End;
some like one inclining, and cut short off; others have a Bush or Train
annexed. 3. Hippeus seu Equinus, resembles a Horses Main, not always of the
same Shape or Figure; for now it spreads its Syrma or Train from the Forepart
or Front; now from the hinder Part; now of an Oval Figure; now like a
Rhomboides, and therefore it is distinguished into Equinus Barbatus, Equinus
Angularis, sive Quadrangularis, and Equinus Ellipticus. Of this Pliny says, it
is very swift in Motion, and turns round about it self. 4. Argyrocomus, sive
Argenticomus, is not much different from that which is called Solaris sive
Rosa, but that it is of a whiter Color, and shines with such a dazzling silver
haired Light, as it can scarce be looked upon. 5. Hircus, or the Goat is
environed with a kind of Main, seemingly rough and hairy by the slender Fibrae
of its Beams or Rays; it is sometimes of a round Figure without any Train or
Bush. 6. Lampadias, sive Lampadi-formis, is a Comet resembling burning Lamps or
Torches, and is of several Shapes, for sometimes it has its Flame or Blaze
carried upward like a Sword, sometimes double and treble pointed; which
Phenomenon is yet very rare. 7. Ceratia, or the horned Comet, sometimes
appears Bearded, sometimes with a Tail or Train. Some have the Figure of a New
Moon; those that are tayled have sometimes a crooked Tail bending upward,
sometimes downward; others have the Tail of an unequal Breadth and thickness
every Way; some have their Hare or Bush pointed, others like a Horn or Trumpet.
8. Acontiae, are Comets formed like a Dart, or Javelin, with an oblong and
close compressed Head, and prolix extenuated Tail or Train. 9. Xiphias, sive
Ensi-formis, is a Comet resembling a Sword; the Head being fashioned like to a
Hilt, the Tail being long, straight, and pointed; yet sometimes bending like a
Cimitar; when it is of a lesser and more contracted Form, it resembles a Dagger
or Knife. 10. Lonchites seu hasti-formis, is a Comet resembling a Lance, its
Head being of an Elliptical Figure, its stream of Light, or Tail, being very
long, thin and pointed. 11. Veru seu Pertica, is almost of the same Species
with the Former, save that its Head is rounder, and its Train of Light longer
and sharper pointed. 12. Tetragonias, seu Quadratus, is a Comet whose Head is
for the most Part Quadrangular. It has a long Train very thick and uniform,
and is not unlike that Meteor called Trabs, or a fiery Beam. But all these will
better appear by the several Schemes hereunto annexed, to which We referr the
Reader, and shall forbear to add those Distinctions which some have given them
in reference to the Planets; making some Solar, others Lunar, Mercurial,
Venerial, Martial, Jovial, and Saturnine, or of their Magnitudes, Duration,
Motion, Prognostics, or final Causes, of which Authors are full; but give the
Reader an Historical Abstract of the Times of the several Appearances of THESE
SPLENDID AENIGMA'S, PROPOSED BY GOD, BUT NEVER TO BE RESOLVED BY HUMANE WIT; as
Ricciolus ingeniously says of them.
Table exhibiting (according to the Series of Time) the several Comets that
have appeared, together with their Principal Phenomenon; Collected for the most
from Hevelius and Lubieniecius*
Anni ante Christ. The time of first Appearing The time of Duration and
Disappearance The time of Day or Night The Place or Region of the World The
Motion, Direct or Retrograde, swift or slow The Nature, Magnitude, Figure and
color of the Head The length, shape, and situation of the Bush or Tail 2292
About three days before the Death of Methusaiem a Comet appeared Visible by
the space of one Month, and disappearing the sixteenth of April Rochen^ch In
Pisces under Jupiter. Passed through the twelve Signs of the Zodiac Jovial
2191 A little before the Confusion of Tongues at Balel La^ed sixty five Days
In Capricorn visible in Egypt Passed three Signs in the Zodiac Saturnine 1920
in the 80* year of Abraham's life 5 years after his Departure from Ha^an Shined
for the space of twenty two days In Aries visible in Chaldaea Martial 182^ In
the fifth year after Abraham's Death Lasted nine days Under Leo in Egypt The
Head like an Imperfect Circle or Globe very fiery 1718 According to (...)
(though (...) will have ^t to be in the year 1^32.) not long before the seven
years scarcity in the time of Joseph In Sagittary under Jupiter visible all
over Arabia Of a dreadful Aspect, called Typhon, by an Egyptian King then
reigning, and resembling a Wheel. 1495 A little before the Children of Israel
departed out of E^ypt for the Land of Promise Under Capricorn seen in Syria,
Babyloniae; and India Like a Wheel 1200 In the Month of August, not long after
which followed the Death of the impious Amenem^ King of Egypt, the Trojan War,
and a great Sedition among the Israelites wherein 42000 of the Tribe of Ephraim
were destroyed In Cemint visible in Assyria Of a dreadful Aspect 1100 In the
Reign of ^eutamus King of Assyria, contemporary with Samps^n Lasted forty three
Nights Under Aries visible all over Greece 479 At which time according to
Calvisius there happened an extraordinary Eclipse of the Sun, and Nerves marched
from Sardis against the Greeks, or rather (according to Pliny) incountred them
in the Sea Fight at Salamis Lasted twenty two days Like that called Ceratias,
being crooked like a Horn (...) Seventy five days After San-set Fiery, and
Martial, of a great and unusual Splendour, like a huge Beam 411 In the Month of
January Toward the North 371 In the Winter about the Time of the great
Earthquake, and Inundation in Achaia, Aristaus being Archon at Athens In the
Evening after Sunset It ascended as high as the Girdle of Orion, and there
vanished, and consequently its Motion was direct At the beginning it was like a
Beam, and extended its Rays to the third Part of the Heavens, and was
therefore, as Aristotle (l. 1. Met. c. 6.) affirms, called the Way* in the End
it parted into two Stars At the first Day of its Appearance, it* Tail was seen
and not the Head 354 About the time of Alexander the Great his Birth, and the
burning of the Temple of Diana at Ephesus In Leo At first Bushy, or as some
affirm, representing a kind of Beard, afterward turned into the Figure of a
Spear 339 About the beginning of Alexander's Reign, Nich^machus being Archon at
Athens Lasted 19 days Never rose in the Evening Appeared near the Equinoctial
Circle about the 19 of Sagittary 220 Lasted twenty two days In Aries 196 Two
Comets; first The second Lasted but few days nineteen days In Capricorn In
Cancer Of a stupendous Magnitude 194 About the Birth of Mithridates King of
Pontus Lasted eighty days Of an extraordinary Bigness 183 A little before the
Death of Scipio, Africanus Lasted eighty eight days In Pisces Exceeding the
Sun in Brightness Taking up near the fourth part of the Heavens 174 Lasted
thirty two Nights In Aries 172 Lasted fifty five Weeks 166 September fourth In
Taurus Of the Nature of that called Hircus 154 Lasted nine days 144 Lasted
twenty two days In Capricorn Not less in appearance than the Sun, fiery red,
bright shining, and dispelling the darkness of the Night; but by degrees
diminishing 134 Lasted eighty three days In Gemini seen at Praneste in Italy
At first small, but in few days spread so, as to reach the Equinoctial Circle,
and to be equal to that Part of the Heavens called the Via Lactea* 122 Lasted
eighty days It was so bright, that the Heavens seemed to be on Fire, and of
that Magnitude as to take up the fourth Part of the Heavens, was more
conspicuous than the Sun, and four Hours in rising and setting 111 Lasted
fifteen days Appeared in the Evening In Cancer Shedding a very conspicuous
Train of Light. 65 Lasted ninety five days In Virgo A terrible and mighty
Comet 60 Lasted nine days The Sun totally losing its Light, it was seen;
whereas before it lay hid under its Beams 41 Lasted seven days Rising before
Sunset In Scorpio toward the North Of a dreadful Magnitude Xiphias, with a long
and sharp pointed Blade 29 Lasted ninety five days In Libra 27 Lasted seven
days Appeared about 11 of the Clock In the North Clear and most Conspicuous 23
Lasted a few days In Taurus Anni post N. Christ. 1 Lasted three Nights In Leo
Like to a flaming Torch or Firebrand 10 Lasted 32 Nights In Aries 14 Lasted
twenty days In Aries 40 In Gemini 54 Lasted four Months In Cancer Rose from the
North toward the Heaven Eastward Every Day obscurer and obscurer 60 Lasted six
Months In the North Tending from the North, Westward, inclining toward the
South; and run through half the Heavens Growing every day more obscure 64 A
hairy Comet 66 In Gemini 71 On Easter Day the eighth of April Lasted a whole
year In Virgo over the City of Jerusalem Xiphias, or Ensiformis 76 in Taurus
toward the East Rockenbach Acontias, sive Iaculi-formis, of which the Emperor
Titus wrote an excellent Poem, it is mentioned by Sextus Aurelius Victor in
Vespas. 79 Lasted 180 days In Scorpio 128 Lasted 39 Nights In Aquarius and
Capricorn 145 Lasted six Nights In Aquarius 188 Of the Nature of that which
from its Figure is termed Pogonias, or a B^ard 204 Lasted many days Seen at
Rome 218 Lasted 18 days In Pisces Moving from West to East, as Lycosthenes and
Eichstormius out of Xiphilinus affirm 323 In Virgo 335 Lasted six Months three
days In Aries Of an Immense and terrible Grandeur 367 Of many days
continuance seen in the day time 370 Lasted 11 Weeks In Aries 380 Appeared in
the beginning of May Lasted four Months In Libra Of a round Figure bigger than
the Planet Venus, and illuminating the whole Horizon 384 Like that which
appeared over Jerusalem 389 Lasted twenty days Rose about Cockcrowing In
Gemini toward the North Shining like Lucifer, or the Morning Star 390 Lasted
thirty days Hanging like a Pigeon or Dove of Light hovering in the Sky 392
Lasted forty days Rose about Midnight Near Venus, about the Zodiac Ascending
sensibly from the Place of Venus toward Ursa Major, in the midst of which it
disappeared Large and shining as bright as Venus, unto which diverse other Stars
assembling, compposed the Form or Figure of a Sword, whose Hilt was made of the
former bright Star 396 The Figure not described by Aretius who affirms its
Appearance 409 or 402 A Sword Comet, of extraordinary brightness, and of that
Grandeur that it reached from Heaven down to the Earth 408 A little before the
Death of Arcadius, Lubieneci. Lasted from Midsummer to the end of Autumn. In
Capricorn, Rockenboch 409 or 413 About the time when the Sun was totally
Eclipsed Lasted four Months and more In Virgo Moved from the Eastern
Equinoctial Point by the Tail of Ursa Major toward the West Its Light seemed to
present the Figure of a Cone, not like a Star, but rather like a great
Lanthorn, or Lamp, the Top of its Flame running into a great length, and
pointed; so that sometimes it varied from the proportion of a Cone, at other
times again contracted it self into a Conick Figure 418 August the fourteenth
Lasted till Septemtember In Libra 423 A horrible Comet Of the Nature of those
called Criniti 442 Lasted many days At Night the Moon being eclipsed 448
Lasted many days In the East in Leo 454 or 457 Of a wonderful Magnitude, to
whose Beam or Train of Light, adhered a Fiery Dragon, from whose Mouth issued
two Rays, the one extending beyond France, the other stretched toward Ireland,
ending in seven other lesser Rays 459 or 488 Of an unusual Figure and
Magnitude surrounded with a dark cloud, but casting forth a bright Ray 504
Lasted many Nights The Tail very long crowned with the Figure of a fiery Dragon
519 Lasted twenty nine days In the East Of the Figure of a Beard, or Pogonias,
the Rays streaming Westward 531 Lasted twenty days Its Beams ascending upward
like that called Lampadias 539 In December In Sagittary Running against the
Course of the Moon 541 Upon Easter Day A dreadful Comet 555 or 556 Seen at
Constantinople Moving from North to South In Form of a Lance 570 The Figure is
not described by Ricciolus, who makes mention of it 589 Lasted a Month Seen at
Constantinople Surrounded with a Duskish Cloud, and casting forth a single Ray
594 or 597 In January Lasted a Month Seen Morning and Evening Of a Terrible
Aspect 599 Its Figure not described either by Aimonius or Calvi^s who mention
its Appearance 601 In September Lasted many days Of an extraordinary Magnitude
Like a bright Sword without any Rays 604 April and May, November and December
Lasted many days Very bright, its Figure not described 613 Lasted a Month
Martial 633 Lasted thirty days Toward the South Xiphias, or Ens^formis 676 In
August Lasted 3 Months Seen from Cockcrowing to Sunrising In the East Casting
forth a great Flame like a fiery Trabs or Pillar 684 Between Christmas* Day and
Twelftide Lasted 3 Months Seen as well by Day as Night In the East near the
Pleiades Moved from South to North Of a Duskish Color like the Moon appearing
through a Cloud 729 In January Lasted 14 days* Seen in the Mornning before
Sunrising, and in the Evening after Sunset Like to a flaming Torch, or
Firebrand streaming Northward 745 About the End of the Year Seen in Syria 761
Appeared 10 days And 21 days In the East In the West 763 In the East Terrible
to behold Like to a Beam 800 A little before the the time, the Empire of Rome
was transferred to Charlemain The Figure not described 814 In November
immediately before the Death of Charlemain A singular and terrible Comet, of a
wonderful Figure, resembling two half Moons, now sensibly joining together,
anon parting asunder, and between them both exhibiting the Figure of a Man
without a Head 830 In Aries 837 At Easter Lasted twenty five days In Virgo, in
that Part where her feet touch the Tail of the Serpent and the Crow Ran through
Leo, Cancer, and Gemini in a Retrograde Motion, and in the Head of Taurus
vanished 838 In Autumn Seen in the Morning before Sunrising In Libra Dreadful
to behold 839 In the Spring Lasted but a few days In the Evening after
Sunsetting In Aries 842 In Aquarius 844 Above Venus, as observed by Albumazar
868 Its Figure not described by Lavaterus and Rockinbach 874 In the beginning
of April Lasted a Month Preceding the Moon Dreadfully red and fiery, and
projecting a long Train of Light 875 On the sixth of June Lasted a few nights
Shining by Day as well as Night Preceding the Moon Extraordinary sparkling, and
more than usually red* and flaring with long hairy. Beams 882 In the eighteenth
of January Its Bush or Tail of a great length 902 Lasted forty days Its Tail
projected toward the East 904 In the Month of May Its Duration not mentioned
Nor its Figure described by any 908 More than ordinary bright and glistring 930
In Cancer 942 On the seventeenth of November Lasted 14 Nights Seen about
Constance a City in upper Germany 945 Of a wonderful Magnitude and Procerity,
scattering about fiery Rays or Beams 962 In Italy Of an unusual Grandeur 975
In August Lasted 8 Months 979 In Virgo 983 Its Duration not mentioned Nor
Figure described 999 or 1000 In the beginning of December Seen about nine of
the Clock in the Evening Of a most stupendous Magnitude 1005 or 1009 About the
end of May In the South Of a terrible Aspect 1017 Lasted four Months In Leo
More strange than usual Like a mighty Beam 1027 Their Duration not mentioned
Nor Figures described 1031 1038 1042 On the sixth of October Lasted a Month
Seen in the Mornning Moving retrograde from East to West With long flaming
Hairs 1058 In Easter Week Lasted the whole Week Seen in Polonia Casting forth a
long Train of Fire 1066 In Easter Week Lasted forty days Following the setting
Sun At first equal in appearance to the Moon, afterward as its Tail or Bush
increased it diminished 1067 or 1068 Extremely fiery 1071 Lasted twenty five
days Seen in the Morning In the East Its hair long and flaming 1096 or 1097
About the beginning of October Lasted a Week In the West in Capricorn Duskish
Casting forth a single Ray or Beam 1098 or 1099 About the Nones of October
Lasted 15 Days In the Southern Part of the Heavens. Like a Sword, but
obliquely waved, casting forth long Hairs toward the East, and shorter toward
the South 1101 Soon after Sunsetting In the West Of a wonderful greatness 1102
or 1103 February the twenty second In the East Changing its Place by Leaps, and
long Interstitia's Broad spread and bright flaming 1104 Like burning Torches or
fiery Darts 1106 In the first Week of Lent Lasted until Good-Fryday after,
being twenty five days Seen in the Evening first Afterward in the Morning
South west Eastward Great and horrible to sight A Splendour issuing from it very
clear, like a great Beam 1109 Lasted some few days 1110 On the sixth of June,
as Calvisius, or of July, as Myzaldus Lasted six Months Its Motion Retrograde
Its Rays directed to the South 1113 In the Month of May A huge Comet 1132 or
1133 On the eighth of the Ides of October Of a stupendous Greatness 1141 1145
In the Month of May 1146 Lasted a whole Month In the West Illuminating with
its bright Rays the circumambient Air 1165 Two Cem^ts at the same time Seen
before Sunrising In Libra, One in the South, the other in the North Two
together, or one with two long projected Rays 1168 Two Comets together On the
twenty fourth of December Disappeared after being separated at a great
Distance. Seen in the West One great, the other small, of a fiery color 1180
Lasted only the remainder of the day of its first Appearance, and the Night
following 1200 In the fifteenth of Scorpio Moving contrary to the Course of the
Celestial Signs Appearing thrice bigger than Venus, of a round Figure, Casting
as great a Light, as the Moon in her Quarter 1211 In the Month of May Lasted
eighteen days Near the North Pole Its Tail or Train directed in the Evening to
the East, in the Morning to the West 1214 Two Comets In March One appearing
before Sunrising; the other after Sunsetting Of a terrible Aspect 1217 In
Autunme In the South a little declining toward the West over against Ariadne's
Crown A Ray issuing from it like a Beam which seemed to ascend up to the
Mid-heaven 1219 Seen in England Of a vast Grandeur 1223 Conspicuous all over
France Of a dreadful Appearance, and of a bloody Color 1238 Lasted some days
Seen before Sunrising Of a vast Magnitude Sending forth Fire before it, and
smoke behind it 1240 In February observed by Albertu* Magnus Lasted six Months
the last of any Conet, as noted by Lubieniecius, which ^ad so long a dura ion
Seen in the Evening Westward near the North Pole Duskish A long Train casting
its Rays between East and South 1241 In January Lasted thirty days Terrible
to behold 1245 About the Feast of the Ascension, which according to Calvisius
was the twenty fifth of May In Capricorn toward the South Of a great Magnitude,
clear but reddish like Mars, without a Tail, perhaps mistaken (as Hevelius
supposes) for that Planet 1254 or 1255 Lasted for some Months Seen in Germany
and in England Of an Immense Grandeur 1264 In July, much about the time of Pope
Urban the fourth, his Decumbiture: observed by Palaeologus Lasted 3 Months and
disappeared the very Night that Pope Urban the fourth dyed Rose in the Morning
In Taurus behind Venus, or the Morning Star Moving from East to West, and at
length preceding the Morning Star Of a most signal Magnitude Its Tail long and
broad appeared before the Head, and extended its Rays from the East unto the
Mid-heaven 1267 On the eighteenth of July Lasted not long A little before
Sunrising Near the Moon Running from the Moon by a swift Course Eastward to the
Mid-heavens Of great brightness Leaving a white and fiery hairiness behind it
1268 Lasted many days Seen about Noon Of a wonderful greatness 1284 Of a
signal Magnitude Projecting its hairy Blaze to the West 1298 In Summer 1300 A
dreadful Comet 1301 In the Kalends of December, or as some will at Michaelmas
Lasted 15 Nights* Rose after Sunset, and set after Midnight In Aquarius and
Pisces Moved from the East Northward Its Blaze directed toward the East 1304
Lasted 3 Months Toward the North 1305 About the Holy Week as some, as others
about Easter 1307 Its Appearance Duration Or Figure not described 1312 Lasted
14 days Running its Course from North to South Of a stupendous greatness 1313
Moving from North to South, according to the Motion of Mars 1314 In Autumn in
the Month of October Lasted as some will three Months, as others but six
Weeks Toward the North, in the last degrees of Virgo Of a terrible As pect Its
Flaming Train directed to the North 1315 In December Lasted 'till February In
Cancer Taking its Course the Pole Terrible to Sight Casting forth Rays
resembling a Broom one while Eastward, another Westward, and sometime Northward
1318 In Cancer, as Lubieniecius from the Authority of Herlicius 1337 Two Comets
The first in April, The second in May Together with the first continuing, May,
June, and July The first seen in Taurus 1338 In June In the Evening About the
Feet of Pegasus Moving toward the North, and ascending every day three degrees,
by the lesser Bear, right Foot of Hercules, and left Hand of Ophiuchus Barbed
After the Figure of a Sword, extended Eastward 1339 or 1340 or 1341 In March
Near Spica Virg. Moving every Day a degree, and coming to the Sign Leo
disappeared Xiphias or Ensiformis 1347 In August Lasted 2 Months In Taurus
toward the North 1351 or 1352 In December say some In September others Far
North Like a fiery Beam 1353 Mentioned, but not described by Praetorius, and
out of him by Alstedius and Ricciolus 1362 On the eleventh of March Lasted five
Weeks Seen all Night In the End of Aquarius, with signal North Latitude Its
Tail spread in the Evening toward the East 1375 In Aquarius Of the Nature of
those Comets called Criniti 1380 Lasted 3 Months 1382 In August Lasted 14
days 1394 Seen in the Evening In the West Passing toward the North Having the
Resemblance of that called Veru or Pertica, very remarkable with its Rays
standing upwards, and the Head hanging down below them 1399 Three Comets at
once The Heads not visible But three great fiery Tayls appearing 1400 In the
time of Lent Seen toward the North in the Oriental Angle Moving with great
swiftness toward the East A most fiery and dreadful Comet Its Tail long and
projected toward the West 1401 In the End of February In the West A great,
terrible, and most splendid Comet. Its Tail expanded and stretched out like
that of a Peacock, casting its Rays like a Dart or Jayelin from West to East,
and after Sunset shining so bright, that hardly any Part of the World was not
enlightened by its Beams; which were of that brightness as hindered the Stars
from shining, and quite expelled the darkness of the Night 1402 A little before
Car nival Time Lasted many days Seen after Sunset Toward the Northwest Its
Tail erected like a Lance, about the thickness of three feet, sometimes more,
sometimes less 1403 About the latter end of March, o^ beginning of April Seen
North-east Its Tail pointing toward the North 1407 or 1408 In June Several
Comets, of which we have no particular description 1426 On the ninth of June
Continued near a Week Seen directly over the City of Liege Its Tail pointing
toward the Marketplace, as if it threatened that City 1432 In February, about
the beginning of the Month A very small one Its Tail or Train projected to the
North 1433 Lasted 3 Months Seen from Evening till Morning glistering bright
and very great 1435 In Autumn 1439 or 1444 In the Summer Sell stice In the West
in Leo Its Tail extended toward the South 1450 In the Summer time Seen
immediately after Sunsetting Moved from West to East, and passing under the
Moon eclipsed the same Like a two-handed Sword 1456 Two Comets In June Lasted a
Month In Cancer and Leo, one toward the West, the other toward the East Their
Tayls extending beyond sixty degrees 1457 In June* Lasted 30 days In the
twentieth degree of Pisces Black and dusky 1458 In July In Tauru^ 1460 A most
bright, shinning and dreadful Comet 1463 The day before the Death of James the
Second King of Scotland Very clear and bright 1467 After Michaelmas Seldom seen
by reason of rainy Weather In Pisces oc Cancer perhaps, instead of Cancer
should be put Capricorn It cast its Rays toward the East, the Sun being in the
midst of Libra 1468 Two Comets Lasted fifteen days each The latter brighter
than the first 1472 About the End of December, or beginning of January,
observed by Regiomontanus Lasted eighty days At the beginning it appeared in
the Morning, about the End in the Evening, at the middle shining all Night It
past from Virgo, by Boots, the Dragon, Ursa Major, feet of Cepheus, Breast of
Cassiopaea, Belly of Andromeda, the Northern Fish, and came to the Whale; where
setting hellacally it disappeared: At first, and at its End moving slowly, in
the middle extremely swift, in so much as it ran through in one day forty
Degrees of the Circle it moved in At the beginning its Head was small and thin,
afterward grew to a wonderful greatness, and then less and less; sometime pale
and white, sometime of a flame color Its Tail at the beginning short, about
the middle stretching about fifty degrees in length resembling a Pertica, or
Javelin, and directed at diverse times to diverse Quarters of the World 1473
January the seventeenth Lasted till the eighteenth of February following Toward
the South in Cancer 1475 In Libra, as Herlicicius, Rockenbach and Alstedius Its
Tail always directed toward Gemini, as Lubieniecius, citing Gassendus 1476 In
June, as Lubieniecius from Schulerus in Disquis. Phi^soph, De Comet. 1477 Of a
pale Caerulean Color inclining to Black. 1479 Seen in Arabia In Form of a
sharp Beam or Pillar* wherein diverse Points might be observed 1491 About the
Feast of the Epiphany Seen in the Evening. In the third Face or Decanate of
Pisce* or beginning of Aries with South Latitude Its Head not great Its Tail
long but thin, casting but a small Light directed to the East 1492 In December
Lasted two Months Seen after Sunset 1500 Two Comets One in April The other in
January Lasted four Months Lasted ten Days Seen as well by Day as Night In the
North in Pisces, as also in Sagittarius and Aquarius 1505 About the Feast of
St. Michael Lasted until Shrovetide following Seen from four in the Morning
until eight before Sunrising, or from four before Sunrising until eight after
Sunset Moving from the South toward the West Very large and shining, almost as
bright as the Moon 1506 Two Comets One on the twelfth of April The other in the
beginning of August The first lasted twenty five days. Continued 'till* the
fifteenth of August The latter seen at first near the Pole above Ursa Major,
the next day among the Stars of the Wain, till at length it came to touch the
Horizon and disappeared The first passed from West to East. The other ran
through the Signs Cancer, Leo and Virgo Of a hideous dark color Its Tail
bright and splendid, and spread like that of a Peacock, whence it was so called
1510 From it fell certain small Sulphurious Stones of an ill Scent, as Cardan
relates, says Lubieniecius citing Kecherman. System. Phys. l. 6. c. 5. 1511 or
1512 May the eleventh March and April Lasted till the third of July In Leo Of a
sanguine Color 1513 In December Lasted from the End of December, to the
nineteenth of (...) * following Shined all Night Moved from the End of Cancer
to the End of Virgo Variously colored Its Tail long 1515 or 1516 Seen in
Italy, Roch. and Myzald. Ran in a short space through the twelve Signs Of the
Nature of the Moon 1521 In April In the End of Cancer Clear, and like the Moon
in its Dichotomy Having short Rays or Hair 1522 Toward the West Of the Nature
of Saturn. 1523 In November Seen in the Kingdom of Naples 1526 August the
twenty third Lasted until the twenty third of September Like to a flaming Sword
1528 January the eighteenth In Pisces in Opposition with Saturn 1529 Four
Comets at ou^ Mutually opposed to each other Hevelius doubts whether they were
genuine Comets Their Tayls pointed directly toward the four Quarters of the
World 1530 In June 1531 August the sixth observed by P. Apianus Lasted till the
third of September At first seen in the Morning before Sunrising, at last in
the Evening after Sunset Seen all over Germany, Italy, and France Ran from the
beginning of Leo, to the beginning of Libra in North Latitude Of a ruddy or
rather yellow Color 1532 September the twenty fifth observed by P. Apianus
Lasted 'till the twentieth of November Seen in the Morning before Sunrising Ran
from the beginning of Virgo to the beginning of Scorpio, at first in South, at
last in North Latitude Thrice bigger than Jupiter, but of a pale obscure color
Its Tail very long and radiant, stretching Southwest 1533 In the beginning of
June observed by P. Apianus It appeared first in Gemini near Perseus Thence
moved retrograde unto Taurus increasing daily Bigger than Jupiter Its Tail
extending fifteen Degrees in length, like to a Military Spear; by others
resembled to a two-handed Sword 1538 In January observed by P. Apianus Lasted
three Weeks Seen in the Evening In the West in the beginning of Pisces in
seventeen Degrees of Northern Latitude Of a fiery Color, some yet make it
obscure and pale Its Tail extending thirty Degrees in length toward the East
1539 On May the sixth Lasted till May the seventeenth In Leo in North Latitude
at first, at last in South Latitude Moved according to the Course of the Signs
direct; but from North to South Its Head small and obscure Its Tail short 1541
August the twenty first Resembling the shape of a Dragon With a fiery Tail 1542
Lasted forty days Seen over Constantinople Dreadful to behold 1545 Lasted a
few days In the West Of a sanguine Color 1554 Lasted some few days Of the
color of Fire Its Tail pointing to the West 1556 The fifth of March From the
left Wing of Virgo it passed by Boots, and ascended to the Northern Pole of
the Eclip tick, thence by Andromeda it came to the Northern Fish, where it was
extinguished. In its middle Course most swift, running through fifteen Degrees
daily; at first its Motion was retrograde, at last direct. Its Rays and Color
changed It seemed like a bright Globe of Flame, equal to the Half Moon Its Tail
rare and thin, casting forth rather a pale than ruddy Light, straiter near the
Head, and extending Westward 1557 In the Month of October Seen in the West in
Sagittarie In the Form of a Dagger, of a pale Color, and its light thin and
weak 1558 In August Lasted till the Nones of September Seen in the Evening
Under Coma Berenices, above Leo in the East Moved Eastward Of a pallid Color
1559 About the End of May Lasted to the second of June 1560 December the twenty
eight Lasted twenty eight days Seen over most Parts of France 1564 On the
twenty fifth of July Its. Duration not mentioned Its Figure not described 1569
About the beginning of November Lasted to the End of the Month Seen in the
Evening In 5. of Capricorn near the bright Star of Sagittary; but Ricciolus
affirms it appeared in Serpentar^s, and in the Signs Sagittarie and Capricorn
It passed from Cancer, and declining from its right Course, went aside to the
4. of Virgo, where it became Stationary Of a very bright Color Streaming with
fiery Rays, directed to the East 1577 On the ninth of November says Hevelius,
on the twelfth Rockenbach, on the tenth Ecstorm. Lasted 3 Months Appearing
about five of the Clock in the Evening About the beginning of Capricorn, in the
highest Heavens; for its Parallax at the beginning was 19. 12. at the End 2. So
that its Distance from the Earth at first was 173. at last 1733. Seinidiameters
of the Earth It moved from the beginning of Capricorn by the Contact of the
Equator, and the Meridian Line, passing the Pole of the Zodiac between
Equiculus and the Dolphin, unto the Breast of Pegasus, its Motion continually
decreasing. It ran through Capricorn and Aquarius to the middle of Pisces Its
Color was like the purest Silver, a little glittering, its apparent Magnitude
exceeding that of Venus or Jupiter Its Tail was of the color of Blood,
projected to a great length toward that part of the Heavens opposite to the
Sun, in the mid^ crooked, the convexity thereof respecting the Zenith. Its
concavity the Horizon, Its length extended to thirty Degrees, its Breadth to
five 1578 On the sixteenth of May Appeared about nine hours after Sunset, at
which time Jupiter and the Moon were in Conjunction in Libra Toward Southwest
Its Tail long and directed to the North 1580 October the second says He^l.
eighth at Nortmberg. tenth at Gorlic. says Bucol^rus I asted above three
Months In the Evening about seven of the Clock, until the fourteenth of
November, and then matutine till the sixth of December, whence only seen in the
Morning Between the Zodiac and the Equator, about the fifth degree of Pisces,
distant from the Earth 157 S. D. thereof: So that (as Hevelius notes,) it was
in the Orb of Mercury or Confines of that of Venus At first moving in a slow
and retrograde Motion, afterward in a swifter Course it ran through Aquarius,
Capricorn, and Sagittary. At the End its Motion was more remiss, and almost
Stationary, at length direct, creeping forward from Aries, by the Equator
behind the Stars in the left hand of Aquarius to the Head of Pegasus, by
Equiculus and the Dolphin, 'till in the Constellation of Serpentarius it
disappeared Its looks sad, mournful, obscure, wan, and dull, exceeding in
Magnitude (as to appearance) the Stars of the first Magnitude for its apparent
Diameter on the fifteenth of October was found to be 16. 30. At first it wanted
a Tail, but afterward about the ninth of October it acquired a Tail, but rare
and thin, and always extending precisely against that part of the Heaven
opposed to the Sun 1582 On May the fourteenth Lasted to May the eighteenth In
the Evening after Sunset Between West and North Its Motion retrograde and
swift, ascending toward the North Of a vast Magnitude, and dreadful to behold
Its Tail extended between the right and left shoulder of Auriga, ascending
toward the Sun 1585 October the eighth Lasted 'till the fifth of November In
the Evening about nine of the Clock In the 23. 9. of Pisces, and in 13. 52 of
Southern Latitude It moved continually in direct Motion, but something slow
from Pisces to Aries, 'till toward the middle of Taurus, where about the
eighteenth degree of that Sign it disappeared Its light obscure, rare, and
cloudy, formed like a Crab; Its apparent Magnitude, equalling that of
Jupiter's. In the middle part of its Body shone a more compact Light, about the
extremities thereof thin, and less appearing It had no Tail or Beard, unless
about the twentieth and twenty second of October, at which time there appeared
some slight Marks thereof 1590 February the twenty third Lasted 'till the sixth
of March Seen in the Evening Between the Constellations of Andromeda, and the
Ram, near the Northern Fish. Its Place being in the highest Heavens, and not
nearer to the Earth than the Sun It described by its Motion an Arch of a
greater Circle, and measured in its Course a fourth part of the Hemisphere Its
head small, shining with a pale and obscure light; at the first biggest, but
then not exceeding 3. in Diameter, and successively diminishing both in
Magnitude and Light It cast forth some small Rays, but thin and rare, and
extended toward that part of the Heavens, opposite to the Sun 1593 July the
tenth Lasted 'till the twenty first of August Conspicuous before Sunrising In
the Cardinal Solstitial Signs By its Motion, it went from the Tropic of
Cancer, to the Artick Circle, contrary to the Series of the Signs, that is from
Cancer through Gemini and Taurus, and in Cepheus disappeared 1596 On the ninth
of July In the Evening about the Prime of Night In the North among the Stars of
Ursa Major By its Motion going forward a little toward the hinder Parts of the
greater Bear, so that it ran through Cancer, Leo and Virgo, and at last became
Stationary as to longitude, declining its course to the fourth Degree of Virgo
Of the Color of Saturn Its Tail stretching to the Part opposed to the Sun
toward the Pole of the Ecliptic, yet with some little deviatiation 1597 About
the sixteenth of July Lasted 'till the ninth of August 1607 On the twenty fifth
on twenty sixth of September Lasted 'till the fifth of November Seen in the
Evening about seven of the Clock, and from thence all Night Under the greater
Bear a little higher than that Star which is toward the Square, in the 30. of
Leo, and 36. of Northern Latitude; its Parallax being found, not to exceed 3.
and consequently its Place in the Highest Heaven or Ether It moved in direct
Motion from the foremost foot of the greater Bear under its Belly, passing by
the midst of Boots, and struck through the Serpent, coming under the Hand of
Ophiuchus arrived at his foremost foot and stayed in his Leg. The Orbit in which
it was carried seemed to be a greater Circle; at last extremely bent or bowed
toward the Ecliptic. On the thirtieth of September, its Diurnal Motion was
thirteen Degrees; but both before anc after, its Motion was slower; at length
Retrograd* and Stationary, a to longitude Its Head was not of ^n even or equal
roundness, but here and there extuberating. Its apparent Magnitude greater than
any of the Fixed Stars; o^ than that of Jupiter. Its Light weak, p^le and
waterish, like that of the Moon when near the shadow of the Earth, toward its
End diminishing more and more Its Tail was something long and thick, projected
with some little Deviation against that part of the Heavens opposite to the
Sun. Vend^nus saw it like a flameing Lance o^ Sword, seven Degrees in length
1618 The first Comet August the twenty fifth Lasted 'till the twenty fifth of
September Appearing about three of the Clock before Sunrising A little beneath
the left fore-foot of Ursa Major inclining toward the Head of Leo, in the tenth
Degree of the said Sign, and in the twenty second Degree of Northern Latitude
The second of September it proceeded in Motion retrograde in Antecedence of the
Signs* one Degree afterward in its Course more remi^s It ^ppeared (as observed
by a Telescope) to be hairy; Its Light not clear, shining, but cloudy and
duskish Its Tail short and broad, spreading toward the West 1618 The second
Comet On the tenth of November Lasted to the eighteenth or twenty third of the
same Month Appearing two hours before Sunrising Between the Autumnal Section,
and the eighteenth Degree of Libra Declining from the Ecliptic Southward 15.
Its Motion retrograde Its Head was not distinctly observed by the Europaeans,
by reason of its vicinity to the Sun. But in Persia its color was found to be
like the Vapor of Flower of Brimstone set on fire Its Tail was like that of an
Estrid^bowed; In length forty five Degree^ In Persia it was observed to be
like: Cymit^r, or rathe^ like a young Palmtree who^e top Bows bend but little
1618 The third Comet November the twenty second or twenty third Lasted to the
thirteenth of December Seen in the Morning It took its Rise from the
Equinoctial Eastern Point Its Motion wa^ Northward Its Color was like that of
Ve^us, whose Magnitude it equalled if not exceeded It had a long Mai^ or
Tresses 1618 The 4th* and last Comet On the twenty fourth of November Lasted
sixty days, viz. until the twenty fourth of Ianury next following Seen in the
Morning before Sunrising On the twenty ninth of November it was seen between
the Scales of Libra, more Eastward than a Line drawn directly between the said
Scales, and more approaching to the Northern Scale. Its true place being in the
Ether, for at first it was distant from the Earth, seventy one of its
Semidiameters. At last it was higher than the Sun it self, for its Parallax was
found to be less than that of the Sun Its Motion was to the North, with some
Inclination Westward; for it passed by the middle of Libra and by Boots, and
when it had advanced as far as his Head, it shined all Night, thence proceeded
above his Wrist, and over Ursa Major. Its Motion becoming every day flower and
flower. As to its progress in the Ecliptic, it ran from the End of Scorpio to
the middle of Cae^er above one third part of the Heavens. At first Southern, at
last Northern Its color was palish, the lower part of its Head was perfectly
round; ^e upper part whence the Tail issued was uneven, and as it were
indented; Its light languid, whitish and cloudy, yet sometimes a little
twinkling. In the midst of the Head at first was one single Kernel or Nucleus,
afterward separated into three or more, and at length parting into more lesser
and lesser, was dissolved. Its apparent as well as true Magnitude being
various, and unconstant Its Tail toward the Head was very narrow, about the
Middle, and its Extremity, prett^ large; it was extended with some Incurvation,
now to the (...), now to the (...), but not precisely in oppo^ion to the Sun,
through its middle, according to Longitude ran a clear Line like the Pith of a
Tree, not seldom the whole Bush or Train* seemed to have a kind of
Scintillation an^ Fluctuation; its Head likewise darting forth Ra^es, and
suddenly withdrawing them. It length was sometimes extended to 45, 60, 75* n^y
to 104 Degrees its Breadth to (...) Degrees. Its C^lour near the Head (...) and
fiery, toward the End pale and whitith 1647 On the twenty ninth of November
Lasted but two days Seen in the Evening at half an hour past Eight In the
Constellation of Berenice's hair, not so far as five Degrees from the left Leg
of Boots, about 10* from Arcturus, in the eighth degree of Libra, and in the
twenty sixth Degree of Northern Latitude Its Motion was contrary to the Series
of the Signs, viz. from the Head of Boots toward the Ecliptic, and Spica
Virginis It was something less in Appearance than Arcturus, but sufficiently
bright and splendid Its Tail was erected upwards toward the Zenith; in length
twelve Degrees, like to a Broom, conspicuous and splendid enough where it
issued from the Head, toward its Extremity, more thin and dilute 1652 On the
twentieth of December Lasted 'till January the tenth Appearing about six of the
Clock in the Evening In 9 of Gemini, and 31 of Southern Latitude, not far from
Rigel, in the left foot of Orion. So that by its Situation with the said Star,
and another above the foot of Orion in Eridanus, it made in a manner an
equilateral Triangle. Its true place was in the Ether or highest Heaven: for
when it was nearest the Earth, its Distance thence was 110 Semidiameters
thereof. Its Parallax at first being found to be 31. 15. but about the twelfth
of January, it was distant from the Earth 22509 of the Earths Semidiameters;
its Parallax not above 9. and consequently it was as high as the Orb of
Jupiter. Its Motion was constantly retrograde, from South to North, by the
Hare, Foot of Orion, Taurus, to the Pleiades, and from thence as far as
Perseus; not directly but obliquely from East South East to North Northwest, in
a great Circle inclined to the Ecliptic, and Equator: At first by its Diurnal
Motion completing 11. 16. at last 30. it ran through in the Time of its
Duration 65. 51. passing beyond and beside the Course of the Annual Orb. At
first, distant from the Earth, ninety four S. D. thereof, at last seventy two
of the said Semidiameters Its Head was round, and little less than the Moon at
full. Its Light pale and dull, like that of the Moon, o'recast by a thin cloud
In it were observed by the Telescope several Nuclei or Kernels every day
varying their Situation. Its apparent Magnitude was not always the same, being
found at first to be 30. afterward but 3. 30. Its Tail at the beginning
extended Eastward toward the Part of Heaven opposed to the Sun, (yet with some
small Deviation) as far as to the handle of Orion's Sword, like to a sharp
pointed Cone, in length 7. of a whitish, but something obscure Color, casting
forth thin small Hairs or Rays, which about the seventh of January it quite
lost. Its Tail still increast in Length, being at first only 3440. at last
163000 German Miles* 1661 On the third of February Lasted fifty three days
Seen in the Morning 47. after five of the Clock Eastward, beneath the Dolphin,
between the Eagles Head, and that of the lesser Horse in 10* of Aquarius, and
22. of Northern Latitude. In the very Ether or highest Heaven; at first two
thousand, at last nine thousand Semidiameters of the Earth distant from it, and
consequently (according to the Opinion of Hevelius) higher than the Sun it self
Its Course was from the East, Westward, by the Head, Neck, and nether Wing of
Aquila, in a line almost parallel to the Ecliptic and Equator but retrograde,
and not in a greater Circle Its Head was round, and of a yellowish Color,
clear and conspicuous, in the middle whereof at first was a ruddy Nucleus or
Kernel, equal almost to Jupiter, encompassed with a certain thin, and more
dilute Matter Its Tail extended above six Degrees in Length toward the Dolphin,
narrower where it joined to the Head, than in its Extremity, and pointing to
that part of the Heaven, opposite to the Sun, but with some kind of Deflection.
1664 On the fourteenth of December Lasted almost three Months Seen at first in
the Morning about five of the Clock afterward in the Evening Near the Beak of
the Crow, in 8. of Libra and 22. of Southern Latitude, in the highest Ether.
Its Parallax at the beginning 59. in the Middle 4. and in the End 16. So that
at first it was three thousand five hundred, then a thousand, and lastly one
hundred twenty thousand Semidiameters of the Earth distant from the terrestial
Globe, and higher than Mars Its Motion was Retrograde from Corvus by Hydra,
Argus, the great Dog, the Hare, Eridanus, and Whales Head, unto Aries* yet was
not the Line of its Course carried altogether under that of a great Circle, it
deflecting notably Northward. It ran through more than five Signs of the
Zodiac, viz. Libra, Virgo, Leo, Cancer, Gemini, Taurus even unto Aries; and in
respect of its Orbit made a Progress of one hundred fifty four Degrees Its Head
was very conspicuous: It^ Color somewhat yellow: In the midst whereof was
discerned a clea^ Light, surrounded with another more obscure, composed of
sundry corpuscu la interspersed with other more subtle Matter of a diverse
Density, mixing at first with the Nuclei, after separating and dividing As to
its apparent Magnitude, it exceeded six times the Diameter of the Earth Its
Tail extended fourteen Degrees in length Southwest; sometimes* longer,
sometimes shorter* On the eighth of December, it spread its Rays upward in
manner of a Peacocks Tail; from which time after it was directed toward the
East All the time of its Duration extending it as far as the Sign Gemini,
toward that Part of the Heavens opposed to the Sun, yet with some Deviation*
now Northward, now Southward; toward its End it was sometimes quite lost, and
then again recovered 1665 April the sixth Lasted fourteen Days Seen in the
Morning half an hour after one In the Breast of Pegasus, in fifteen Degrees of
Pisces, and 27. of Northern Latitude. Its Parallax at the beginning having been
found to be 69* which decreased successively to 41. whence its Distance from
the Earth at first could not be less than three thousand Semidiameters of the
Earth, toward the End five thousand of the said S, D. distant from it and
consequently sixty times higher than the Moon at first, and at last equal in
height with the Sun it self Its Progress was by Pegasus under the Head of
Andromeda, by the Northern Fish, as far as unto Aries; in a Motion continually
direct, at the beginning it ran through in one Day four Degrees and six
Minutes, at last two Degrees twenthree Minutes Its Head was round of a
yellowish Color. Its Light quick and bright. In the very middle whereof was a
single* Nucleus of a conspicuous Magnitude, of a Gold Color encompassed
equally about with another thinner kind of Matter. the apparent Diameter of the
Head was six Minutes Its Tail at the beginning extended almost 17. in length
projected between the Mouth and the foremost Foot of Pegasus Westward; where it
issued from the Head, it was thick and lucid, and of the same dense Matter with
that of the Head; but toward the End or Cuspi^, it was more thin and dilute. It
stretched sometimes in length to 25. streaming toward the Part opposed to the
Sun, yet with some little Deviation Southward 1668 Fifth and tenth of March
observed by Signior Cassini at Bologna About the first hour of the Night after
the Italian way of counting The Head or Body was not seen, being hid under the
Horizon The Tail was of a stupendous length, being extended (as it appeared at
Lisbon in Portugal) over almost the fourth Part of the Visible Heaven, from
West to East, from the Whale through Eridanus to the Star which precedes the
Ear of Lepus, as observed at Bologna in Italy by Signior Cassini 1672 Second
of March Lasted till about the End of April, as Signior Cassini has computed
Seen both Mornings and Evenings At first between the Head of Medusa and the
Pleiades, afterward having continued his Course toward the Root of the
Southern Horn of Taurus, and having passed the Ecliptic, went on above the Top
of Orion's Head, to the Milky Way Its Motion falling into a Line little
differing from an Arch of a great Circle, cutting the Ecliptic in the tenth
Degree 45. of Gemini, its greatest Latitude in the tenth Degree 45. of Pisces,
that is between 39. and 40. Northward, the same Circle cut the Equator at 101.
of the Vernal Section Eastward, and its greatest Declination from the Equator
Northward was 38.. He made about 2. 32, a day in the great Circle of his
apparent Motion His Head seen with a Telescope of seventeen, foot appeared
almost round, but well distinguished from the Mistiness which formed a kind of
Chevelure wherewith it was encompassed; and even the Middle was a little
confused, and seemed to have inequalities, as are seen in Clouds The Tail was
almost imperceptible; yet by the Telescope it was seen turned opposite to the
Sun, and appeared of the length of two Diameters of the Head, or thereabout;
for it was not easy to measure it precisely, because being thinner according
as it was farther from the Head, its Extremity was insensibly lost, and so the
whole Comet Tail, and Chevelure taken altogether, took up no more than three or
four Minutes of a Degree

fig: G.
Cometae Discei seu Chrisei.
1. Solaris sive Rosa.


2. Disciformis.


3. Clypeiformis.


4. Clypeus ardens.




Cometae Pithei
5. Doliiformis erectus.


6. Doliiformis truncatus.


7. Doliiformis caudatus.




Hippei sive Equini
8. Equinus barbatus.


9. Equinus quadrangularis.


10. Equinus Ellipticus.




Lampadiae
11. Lampadiformis.


12. Lampadiformis.


13. Lampadiformis.


14. Hircus.


15. Fusca nube circumdatus


16. Barbatus.




fig. H.
Ceratiae seu Cometae Cornuti.
17 Corniformis Lunatus


18. Corniformis.


19. Cornutus biscuspidatus.


20. Curvatus Divaricatus.


21. Tubiformis.




Acontiae.
22. Jaculiformis Lunatus.


23. Jaculi-formis Ellipticus.


24. Iaculi-formis rotundus.






fig. I.
Xiphiae.
25. Ensiformis 1.


26. Ensiformis. 2.


27. Ensiformis. 3.


28. Ensiformis incurvatus.




Longites.
30. Hastiformis. 1.


29. Ensiformis. 4.


31. Hastiformis. 2.






fig K.
Acontiae
32. Veru.


33. Pertica bifurcata


34. Cometa quadratus.


35. Coniformis.


36. Cometa Pyramidatus.


37. Cometa Monstriferus. 1.


38. Cometa Monstriferus. 2.


39. Cometa Monstriferus. 3.




fig. L.
40. Cometa 1577. Die 17 Nov. a Tychone observe.


41. Cometa 1577. Die 28 nov. et 3 dec. a Cornel. Gemma. observe.


42. Cometa 1590.


43. Cometa 1607.


46. Cometa 1647.


44. Cometa 1618 Die 1. Dec. a Cysato observe.


45. Cometa 1618. Die 17. 18. et 20 Dec. observatus.


47. Cometa 1652. ab Autore observe.






ADDITIONS and AMENDMENTS to be inserted, as follows, VIZ.
PAge 11. In the Annotat. Line 36. after Capricorn, add. But as to the Aspects
as well the Ancient, as those added by later Astronomers. See Bartschius his
Usus Astronomicus Indicis Aspectuum, etc. Printed at Norimberg, 1661.

Ibidem Line 43. after now lost; add. except what is preserved in the Excerpta
mentioned in Labbes Bibliotheca; and what Ioannes Camaterus has left on the
same Subject, collected out of the Babylonian Writers.

Page 12. Line 4. Annot. after Mochus the Sidonian, add. as Iamblicus in the
Life of Pythagoras, and Damascius out of Eudemus call him.

Ibidem Line 39. after resolve, add. Damascius allotted three Principles,
(...), i. e. Ignis, Aer, and Aqua.

Page 15. Annot. Line 13. after idem nasceris, add. And for this Reason the Sun
is called (...), and (...), quia Sol quotidie renovat sese. Hence that of
Virgil ( Georg. l. 3.) Mane Novum, vide Macrobium Saturnal. l. 1. and Festum in
Voce Manare.

Page 17. Annot. Line 41. add, the Chinese hold it Piacular not to relieve the
Sun and Moon when eclipsed, (at which time they believe them to be ready to be
devoured by some Dog or Dragon) by offering Solemn Sacrifices, and making a
great Noise. See Martinius Histor. Sinic. p. 58.

Page 18. Line ultim. add, The Chinese divide the Zodiac into 28
Constellations, according to the Arabs, who call them the Mansions of the Moon;
which Number Kepler ( in Comment atiuncula in P. Terrentii S. I. Epistolium)
conceives to arise from the Periodical Motion of the Moon, which is completed
in so many Days.

Page 24. Line 36. Annot. after North Star, add. By the Chinese it is called
REX, or the Kingly Star, quia olim (according to their Imagination and Belief)
erat prope polum immobilis, quam Reliquae Omnes Stellae venerabantur, as
Terrentius the Jesuit in his Epistle from China, anno 1623. affirms.

Ibidem Line ultim. add. See likewise Io. Francisc. Grandis, in Dissertat.
Philosoph. and Critic. p. 112. where he cites this Maxim from the Authority of
Rambam, in More Nevochim.

Page 31. Line 42. Annot, after Oculus Tauri, add, by Theon in his Treatise De
Geodaesia, called Lambauras, i. e. fax ardens, as Barocius renders it in the
Translation of that Piece.

Page 33. Line 39. Annot. after Ulugh Beighs Table, add, and in Doctor Pocock's
Notes in Specim. Histor. Arab. p. 132.

Page 39. post Line 32. Annot. after derived, add. But it will be requisite
further to explain this Place. The Ancient Philosophers, especially those of
Democritus his School, and most of the Mathematicians of those Times, asserted
the Universe to be Infinite, and to be divided into two chief Portions; whereof
the One they held to be the World, or rather Worlds, finite as to Bulk and
Dimension, but infinite as to Number. The other Part or Portion, they extended
beyond the Worlds, which they fancied to be a Congeries of infinite Atoms. Out
of which not only the Worlds already made received their Sustenance, but new
Ones also were produced. And therefore the Cosmical System according to them
was, or may be imagined to be as follows. First, the Place of the Planets and
the Earth; then the Starry Firmament marked A. B. C. D. embracing within its
Circumference the Planetary and Elementary System; beyond which, a certain
infinite Chaos of Atoms, in which this World of ours is supposed to float, and
of which it was composed, and into which in time it is to be resolved. But see
the Scheme as taken from Scheinerus his Disquisit. Mathemat. p. 17.

SYSTEMA ANTIQVORVM.
Planetarium Terraeque locus

Coellum Stellatum.

CHAOS INFINITVM EX ATOMIS.



Page 43. Line 29. Annot. after Ancients, add. See Hypsicles his (...). seu De
Ascension. who lived in the Time of Ptolemaeus Physcon. Propos. 4. where he
divides the Zodiac into 360 Parts.

Page 50. Line 17. Annot. after Juno. add. But see this in Eratosthenes at the
End of Aratus, lately Printed at Oxford.

Page 54. Line 68. Annot. after Sword of Rome, add. The Honor of which Title
is still preserved in an Ancient Marble erected to his Memory at Nola, at this
Day affixed to the Outer Wall of the House of Signior Marco Mastrilli, having
therein this following Inscription transcribed by Gualterus in his Tabul.
Antiqu.

M. CL. MARCELLO ROMANORUM ENSI FUGATO HANNIBALE V. CONS. S. P. Q. NOLANUS.
Page 55. Line 35. Annot. After the Chair, add, AS OFTEN QUESTOR.

Page 59. Line 15. Annot. after Quies, add, by Proclus (in his Paraphrase on
Ptolemies Tetrabibl.) said to be called (...).

Ibidem Line 30. Annot. after powerful, add. See the Notes upon Cornutus,
lately Printed at Cambridge p. 59.

Ibidem Line 44. Annot. after Names; add. See Doctor Pocock's Notes in Specim.
Histor. Arab. p. 103.

Ibidem Line 48. after Negotiator, add. In which Sense by the Arabs he is
called Otared (monente Almakrizio says Doctor Pocock.)

Ibidem Line 55. after cited, add. He is also called (...) from the bright and
quick Vibration of his Rays.

Ibidem Line 58. after videt, add; for which Reason by the Arabian Astrologers
he is called Menapheck, i. e. Hypocrita, vel Simulator; test Alkaswini. vid.
D. Pocock: ut supra.

Page 62. Line 40. Annot. after Motion, add; the Learned Doctor Isaac Vossius
in his Book De Natura Lucis, reduces them to the only means of Constipation and
Attrition of solid Matter, for that of Propagation or kindling Fire by Fire, or
by contraction of Radii in Burning-Glasses, is not properly generating of Fire,
but multiplying and propagating it already actually existing.

In the APPENDIX.
Page 10. Line 3. after Astronomy, add. In which he was more particularly
instructed by Sonches, chief Prophet of the Egyptians, as Clem. Alex. (Stromat.
l. 1.) testifies.

Page 11. Line 7. after Priests, add, especially Senchnouphis the Heliopolitan.

Ibidem Line 38* after there; add; particularly of Konouphis, as Clem.
Alexandr. (Stromat. l. 1.) attests.

Page 12. Line 42. after Aratus, add, and found that Spica Virginis then
preceded the Autumnal Equinoctial Point eight Degrees.

Page 23. Line 8. after Explications, add. In Theodosii Sphaerica, etc.

Page 29. Line 4. after Avicenna, add: whom some will have to be a Spaniard,
descended of the Race of the Moors; but others make him to be a Native of
Bucara, a Town in Persia, upon the Confines of Tartary, and Son of a Chinese,
as his Name imports. vide Perronian. p. 23.

Page 29. Line 20. after into, add, very good Latin, as appears from the
Astronomical Pieces extant in the Bodleian Library under his Name.

Page 30. Line 15. after in France; add, and at Oxford. Erasmius Bartholinus in
his Learned Animadversions upon Heliodorus Larissaeus his Optics, reports that
he saw in Bulialdus his Library a MS. of Alkindus De Aspectibus; which I
conceive to be the same with that De Radiis Stellarum.

Ibidem Line 17. after Alfraganum; add; and of the Disposition of the Celestial
Orbs, and Motion of the Stars, conceived to be the same with Aben Ezra, of whom
hereafter

Page 31. Line 11. after Astronomia, add; which is likewise to be found in
Latin in the Bodleian Library.

Page 33. Line 7. after that Age, add, many of his Works are preserved in the
Bodleian and other the Oxonian Libraries, and also (as I am informed) in that
of Mr. Theyer of Gloucestershire.

Page 34. Line 4. after Manuscripts, add. As also an Institution of Astronomy
extant in the Oxonian Libraries both in Persian and Arabic.

Page 35. Line 1. after De Astronomia, add, and Canones de Conjunctionibus,
Oppositionibus and Eclipsibus Solis and Lunae, as they are cited by Pitsaeus.

Ibidem Line 10. after Geographer, add, a Specimen of etc.

Ibidem Line 11. after Latin, add. The whole Work has been essayed, or
promised by many Learned Men, as, Schikardus, Erpinnius, Hornius, the learned
Mr. Clerk of Oxford, and the ingenious Monsieur Thevenote.

Ibidem Line 29. after Astronomicis, add. His Tables and Astronomical Pieces
are yet preserved in the Libraries of Oxford.

Ibidem Line 35. after Defensionem Dei, add. In the fifth Tractate of which
Book, he affirms the Stars Spica Virginis and Regulus, to have been in the same
Places in the Heavens in his Time, as they ought to have been in, according to
Albategnius, as Riccius reports in his Treatise De Octava Sphaera.

Page 36. Line 28. after Diligentia, add. His Observations of the change of the
Weather at Oxford for several years together, are in MS. in the Bodleian
Library.

Page 37. Line 40. after Iudiciaria, add. Part whereof are in Print, and etc.

Page 39. Line 29. and 33. for Arabic, read Persian.

Page 46. after Line 42. add. 1520. NICHOLAUS KRATZERUS Native of Munichen in
Bavaria, and Fellow of Corpus Christi College in Oxford, read there by Command
of Henry the Eighth, Lectures upon the Sphere of Io. Sacroboscus; and wrote De
Compositione Astrolabii, and in Geograph. Ptolemaei, likewise Canones horopti.

Page 48. Line 29. after Robinus, add, sometime Fellow of All Souls College in
Oxford, add likewise ibidem, Line 32. he wrote likewise De Culminatione fixarum
Stellarum, and De Ortu and Occasu fixarum Stellarum, as also Annotationes
Astrologicae in three Books; All which are yet extant in MS. in the Bodleian
Library, as I find in the Oxford Antiquities, l. 2. p. 178.

Page 50. Line 38. after 1568. add; He writ also a Treatise, De Anno and Die
Passionis Christi, as Onuphrius Panvinius l. 6. Antiqu* Veronens. affirms.

Page 51. Line 32. after observes, add; He put forth likewise Theodosius his
Sphaerica in Greek and Latin, with Explanations and Notes, Printed at Paris
1558. 4o.

Page 56. Line 34. after Wales, add, and sometimes Fellow of All Souls College
in Oxford.

Ibidem Line 39. after Portuguez, add, an Eminent Professor, and Line 40. after
Conimbra, add, who besides his Algebra.

Page 57. post Line ult. add. 1556. JOANNES MARTINUS POBLACION, put forth a
small Treatise entitled Compendium de Usu Astrolabii Schematibus commodissimis
illustratum, Printed at Paris in the year 1556. 8o.

Page 60. Line 27. after Astronomical, add; perpetual; and after Printed, add,
afterward corrected and augmented, with an accurate Description of the
Copernican System, and reprinted in the Year, 1592.

Page 66. Line 28. after Authors, add; he wrote a very large Comment upon
Ptolemie's Quadripartite in Latin, which remains in a fair MS. in St. John's
Library Oxford; together with the Scheme of his Nativity, and a remarkable
Narration concerning his Death.

Page 74. Line 23. after Cambridge; add: and published at Paris in Greek and
Latin by Erasmius Bartholinus, with his Learned Animadversions thereon, 1657.
4o.

Page 76. Line 18. after Work; add, and also Commandinus in his Excellent
Edition of the Ptolemaick Planisphere.

Page 77. Line 4. after Oxford, add: He died in the year 1385* as I since find
in the Author of the Oxford Antiquities, l. 2. p. 87.

Page 78. add. 1600. THOMAS ALLEN sometime of Trinity College in Oxford,
afterward of Glocester-Hall in the same University, a Learned Antiquary,
Philosopher, Mythologist and Mathematician; In which last Concern he was by
some conceived to be Equal to the Famous Roger Bacon, being styled not only
Princops and Coryphaeus, sed ipsa Anima, and Sol, omnium sui Aevi
Mathematicorum, as Burton, sometimes his Fellow-Collegiate, in his Funeral
Sermon says of him. Whose Learned Collections, and Observations Astronomical
(besides his other Mathematical and Philosophical Labors) at this Day enrich
the private Libraries of several Curious Persons; The greatest Part falling to
the share of the Noble Sir Kenelm Digby: His Exposition on the second and third
Book of Ptolemy, De Astrorum Iudiciis, being at this Day preserved in MS. in
the Hands of my worthy Friend, Elias Ashmole Esquire: See more in the Author of
the Oxford Antiquities, l. 2. p. 382.

Page 78. Line 19. after Hours; add; he wrote likewise, De Anni Crrrectione,
ejusque Necessitate, de Kalendario Gregoriano, which is commonly Printed at the
End of the Breviary set forth by the Authority of Urban the Eighth: Also 'De
Novo' Quadrante, ejusque Usu, nec non de Horologiis Solaribus peregrinis in
Cylindro stabili concavo, and in Globo Descripto cum stilo fixo ad Solis Motum
mobili. Horologii etiam Hydraulici Fabricam, in quo per Tabulam Refractionis
Universalem ab ipso nunc primum laboriose supputatam, Horariae Lineae,
artificio in Depressiori part Hemispherii concavi Descriptae Aquae Beneficio
elevatae, a Solis Radio refracto per Gnomonem indicantur, as Leo Allatius
describes the same in his Apes Urban. p. 240.

Ibid em Line 30. after Oxford, add, many of which are yet preserved in MS.

Page 79. Line 24. after 1621. add, and a Treatise published at Geneva, 1613.
De Annis Nativitatis, Baptismi, and Passionis Christi, contra Scaligerum,
Baronium, Deckerum, Susligam, and Keplerum. He wrote also diverse other Pieces
Astronomical and Chronological, which (as I am informed by my Learned Friend
Mr. Bernard Savilian, Professor of Astronomy in Oxford) are yet preserved in
several Volumes in the Hands of Doctor Camphire, History Professor in the said
University; and do well merit the Public view. He was a Person that deserved
the Esteem which the Famous Peirese bare him, and the Character which his good
Colleagues of New College have bestowed on Him in a fair Monument.

Page 81. After Line 21. add. FRANCISCUS SITIUS a Florentine, published a
Tractate entitled Dianoia Astronomica, Optica, Physica; wherein he endeavors
to refute the Nuncius Sidereus of Galilaeo; touching the four Satellites of
Jupiter, Printed at Venice, 4o. 1611.

Page 82. Line 35. after Scholar, add the Excellent.

Ibidem Line 44. after mentioned, add, and taxed.

Page 83. Line 26. after Padua, add, besides his Geometrical, and Algebraical
Exercitations.

Page 85. Line 38. after Celestial Bodies, add; His Works are divided by some
into ten Tomes: In the seventh whereof he treats De Astronomia, cum Examine
Tychonis, Copernici, and Ptolemaei; there is likewise attributed to Him among
other his Opuscula, a small Treatise entitled Apologia pro Galilaeo de Motu
Terrae, Printed at Franck fort apud Tambachium in 4o. the year I find not. Vide
Leon, Allatii Apes Urban. p. 242.

Page 90. Line 19. after Holwarda, add, a very acute and Learned Person.

Ibidem Line 37. after Aphoristica, add: besides these he put forth
Astronomicorum Libri Tres, Printed at Rome 1629. and before that Problemata
Astronomica; likewise Catholicae and Probatae Astronomiae Epitome, treating of
the Sphere, and Theory of the Planets, according to the Observations and
Hypotheses of Tycho Brahe and Ephemerides Coperniceae and Tychonicae from the
year 1640. to 1660. also Commentaries in Tetrabibl. Ptolemaei, with the Greek
Text, and Latin Version, a Treatise De Novis Stellis nostro Aevo genitis,
aliisque Phaenomen: Of which, with others, particular mention is made by Leo
Allatius in his Apes Urban.

Page 89. after Line 34. add. OSWALDUS KRUGER, by Birth a Prusian, by
Profession a Jesuit, Doctor of Theology, and Reader of the Hebrew Tongue and
Mathematics at Vilna, put forth Theoremata and Problemata Mathematica ex
Opticis, Geometria, Astromomia, Sphaera Elementari, Computo Ecclesiastico,
Printed 1633. likewise Calendarium Romanum, published 1637. also Centuria
Astronomica, and Horographia Practica; with some other Mathematical Pieces
mentioned by Alegambe in his Catalogue.

Page 91. Line 35. after Tubinge, add: a most learned and ingenious Person, as
by his Epistles to Gassendus, and his Celestial Observations, Printed by
Curtius to supply Tycho's in the late Volume published in Germany, sufficiently
appears: not to mention his Version of Abulfeda, and other Pieces yet preserved
at Tubinge, nor his excellent Oriental Tractates.

Page 92. Line 28. after made, add: He was a Person very expert and accurate at
Calculations.

Ibidem Line 37. after Meniscus, add: He made several good Observations to be
found in his Letters now in the Hands of Richard Townley of Townley in
Lancashire Esquire, or in their extracts by Mr. Io. Flamsteed; and was
questionless the first that ever exactly observed the Moon's Diameter in a
Telescope by the help of Skrews, which were not before thought of.

Page 93. Line 30. after omit, add, only I think fit to add, that among the
Letters of the Lancashire Correspondents, there are found some of one Tillitson
to this Mr. Pighels, and mention of some others, who seem to have been very
able Astronomers by their Papers.

Page 96. Line 45. after Ptolemy, add: his Hypothesis of the Planets. And after
Canon, add: in Greek and Latin.

Page 99. Line 17. after Studies, add: His Pyramidography and Roman Foot, will
shortly be Printed at Oxford in Latin, together with his Life.

Page 100. Line 41. after 175. add: and Printed in a large 4o. at Bologna, ex
Typograph. Hered. Victor. Benatii.

Page 106. Line 16. after Astronomers, add. He published likewise in the Year
1672. Admonitio ad Astronomos, Geographos, rerumque caelestium curiosos, de
Incursu Mercurii in Discum solis observando, Anno Christi, 1674. sexto Maii
Still. Nov.

Ibidem Line 34. after Annua, add; In which the Cycles of the Sun and Moon from
the hitherto best known Principles of Astronomy are most accurately
demonstrated.

Page 115. Line 22. after Mars, add, by Observations of the Distances of Mars
from three contiguous fixed Stars in the Water of Aquarius taken within his
Tube September 1672. he discovered the Parallax of Mars at that Time, and
thence the Sun's Parallax 9^. which gives his Distance 22 thousand S. D. T.

Page 123. Line 9. after Cross-Staff, add: and the making and Use of the
Geometrical Instrument called a S^ctor, Printed in the year 1598. in 4o. London.

Page 124. Line 18. after Marinius, add: Native of Terni in Italy; and after
Line 20. add; penes se habet Globum sine Globo, in quo fere omnes Operationes
Mathematicae facillime perficiuntur, tam Geometrice auxilio Circini, quam per
Supputationem Linearum medio Sinuum Tangentium ac Secantium. Sphaericorum
Triangulorum Dimensionem ex paucis Regulis facillime Memoria retinendis ita ut
Operationibus non sint requirendae tot Formae. De Ephemeridum facili usu absque
Auxilio aliarum Tabularum. Vide Leonem Allatium in Apibus Urban. p. 206.

CHRISTOPHORUS BORRUS of Millan at first a Jesuit, after a Monk of the
Cistertian Order; Published a Piece entitled, Doctrina de tribus Coelis,
Aereo, Sydereo, Empyraeo; which Leo Allatius in Apes Urban. describes to be
Opus Astronomis, Philosophis and Theologis favens, Printed at Lisbon by Alvarus
Ferrera his Scholar in 4o. 1632.

DID A CUS PERESIUS MENSA, a Spaniard, published among diverse other Works a
Book De Cosmographia, seu Sphaera Mundi cum Omnibus suis Conclusionibus, and
Demonstrationibus ex primis veris and immediatis. Also Ars Navigandi cum
omnibus Demonstrationibus Geometricis: Likewise a Tractate De Incertitudine
Iudiciorum Astrolog. See Leo Allatius his Apes Urban.

FEDERICUS CAESIUS Duke of Aqua Sparta, and the Noble Founder of the Lyncean
Academy; wrote among other Curious and Learned Pieces, a Treatise De Coelo;
wherein he proves the Heavens to be fluid and not solid, published at the End
of Scheinerus his Rosa Ursina. He likewise writ another Piece entitled
Coelestis Natura exposita, in several Books; whereof Leo Allatius in Ap. Urban.

FLAMINIUS FIGLIUCCIUS the Familiar Friend of Cardinal Pietro Aldobrandini,
published in Italian Stanze sopra le Stelle, and Macchie Solari scoverte co'l
Nuovo Occhiale, Printed at Rome in 4o. 1615.

Dr. WASMUTH Professor of the Oriental Languages at Kiel in Holsace; promises
(as Mr. Hevelius intimates in his Letter to the Ingenious Author of the
Philosophical Transactions published No. 104. p. 74.) to give the Learned World
a new Astronomico-Chronological Work now by him preparing for the Press under
the following Title, viz. Annals Coeli and Temporum Perpetui, sive Mysteria
Astronomo-Chronologica, a Seculo abscondita, nunc per Dei Gratiam detecta, and
evidenter Asserta, libris tribus. Of which the Learned Hevelius gives this
Censure. Number res ipsa Promissis responsura sit, est quod valde dubitem.
Profecto si praestare ea posset, Omnes Astronomos maxima cura and Molestia,
multoque labor qui nos diu Noctuque torquet liberaret; nec foret opus
imposterum Coelos tanto studio contemplari. But see the whole Design
particularized in the Account before mentioned.

Page 139. Line 27. after Signum Crucis, add; not that by the Spaniards called
Elcruziero; for that is placed near the hinder Feet of Centaurus, the Stars
that compose it being not unknown to Ptolemy, as our Countryman Mr. Hues (who
had seen and observed them) in his Book De Globis affirms: However Corsalius
make of it a wonderful and late discovered Phenomenon.

The Fable of ANDROMEDA and PERSEUS, Paraphrased; to be referred to the
Annotations, Page 28. after Line 45.
MANILIUS L. 5. WHen the swollen Sea did with a Deluge Sack
Phoenicia's Coast, and the Land feared a Wrack:
Andromeda to appease the incensed Flood
To a Sea Monster destined was for Food.
These were her Nuptials; and for Children, She
Is only graced by Punishment to be
A Weeping Victime for the public Woes;
Decked in a Vest, prepared for other Vows.
Haled to her Death's sad Pomp, e're her Life's Fall,
A Funeral without a Optimis linguae Latiae Conditoribus, funus non saepius
ipsam Sepulturam aut ejus Pompam significat, quam Cadaver, sic accipitur a
Virgilio, and enarratur a Servio, in 3. Aeneid. Funus proprie est incensum
Cadaver. vide. Barthii Adversar. l. 6. ^. 9.
Funeral.
Soon as the angry Seas rough Shore they reach,
Against the Rocks, her tender Arms they stretch,
And her soft Feet with galling Fetters tie;
So leave the crucifixed Maid to die.
Amid'st her Pains yet, her sweet Looks still shined,
Her Sufferings more became her; She inclined
Gently her Snowy Neck, as if 't had been
To keep a Guard on what she could not skreen.
Her Mantle from her Sides and Shoulders fled,
And against the Rocks were her loose Tresses spread.
The pitying Halcyons hovering near the Shore,
Did in sad Notes thy wretched Fate deplore,
And with joined Wings a plumed Umbrella made:
At Sight of Thee, his Waves the Ocean stayed,
And ceased his wonted Banks to overflow.
The Sea Nymphs rising from their Beds below,
Their Faces and the Waves with Tears bedew.
The Wind which to refresh thee gently blew,
In mournful murmurs made the Rocks complain.
But lo! from Conquest of the Gorgon slain
That Day returning Perseus brought to Land.
Seeing the Virgin fettered on the Strand,
Pale grew He, whom no Foe could e're affright,
His Hand scarce held his Spoil; and at first Sight,
Medusa's Victor by Andromeda
Is vanquished; now the Rocks he envies; They,
They and her Fetters, happy are, he cries,
That hold such Limbs; then of her Miseries
Hearing from her the Cause; he vows to gain
Her Bed by Combat, nor to quit the Main,
Though thence another Gorgon should arise.
Gliding through Air to her sad Friends he flies,
And chears them with the Promise of her Life,
On terms, when saved, to have her for his Wife.
Then to the Shore returns; where now he spies
The Sea, by the huge Monster pressed, to rise.
The frighted Waves in heaps before him run,
And strive, the Weight of what they bear, to shun.
Above the Waters his feared Head appears,
As he to Shore through foming Billows steers.
Dashed against his rocky Teeth, the Waves resound,
And in his Gulphy Jaws the Sea is drowned.
In mighty Rolls he coyls his Lengthful Train,
Whilst his Back swells above the scanty Main.
The Sea turns Whirle-pool, roars on every side,
The Mountains dread his coming to abide,
Rocks as he rushes by, shrink as afraid.
Ah then what Heart had Thou distressed Maid!
Though such a Champion by thee; how then fled
Thy frighted Blood, and left thy Limbs half dead?
When from the hollow Cliffs, thy Destiny,
And floating Death, thou saw through Seas draw nigh,
For the vast Ocean ('las!) how small a Prey?
But Nimble Perseus without longer stay
Mounts up into the Skies on soaring Wings,
Whence, dipped in Gorgon's blood, his Darts he flings.
The Monster struck, raises his Head, and raves,
And lifting his vast Body 'bove the Waves,
Rests on his Sterns wreathed Folds; but the more still
He rises up, the more with Nimble Skill
Perseus gives back, and round about him plays,
Whilst cleaving Blows on his hard Skull he lays.
Yet yields he not, but the Air, raging, snapps,
And makes vain wounds with his deluded chapps.
Seas high as Heaven he spouts, which falling pour
Upon his winged Foe a blood-stained shower:
The Fight, the Cause of it, the Virgin views,
And now her self forgetting, only rues
Her Champions Fate, for him alone now fears;
And more in Mind than Body racked appears.
Transfixed with Shafts, at length, the Monster slain,
Sinks down, and through his Wounds drinks in the Main;
Then rising up, floats on the Waves quite dead,
Whose stretch'd-out Bulk does the wide Seas o'respread;
Even then to Andromeda too feared a Sight.
His Limbs the conquering Hero soyl'd in Fight,
In the Seas liquid Crystal plunging, Laves;
Straight re-ascending greater from the Waves,
Flies to his Mistress; looses her rude Bands,
And then, in those of Hymen, links her Hands.
FINIS.
THE TABLE Of AUTHORS mentioned in the CATALOGUE.
A.
Names Page ABbasides Ibn' Jahia 73 Abdalla Ebn' Sahel, etc. 75 Abdorrachman 73
Abdorrachman Al-Suphi 27 Abenham 75 Abi L Assaker Abdoll, etc. 73 Abiosus
Johannes 44 Abraham 7 Abraham Aben-Ezra, or Aven-Hesre 31 Abu-Sheliel 73
Abu-Shuker Affricanus 73 Abu-alli Ibn' Sina 29 Abydas Astronomus 22 Achilles
Tatius 27 Achillinus Alexander 42 Acosta Josephus 70 Adam 6 Adamus Johannes 85
Adda Rabbi 21 Addin Sjaheb 73 Aetius Amidenus 23 Agesianax, Alexander Aetolus
13 Agrippa 20 Aguilonius Franciscus 83 Alacenus 76 Albu-batur 16 Albategnius,
or Albattanius Aracensis 27 Albumazar 31 Albertus Magnus 32 Albuassen, or
Alboazen Haly 33 Albochary Omad Eedin 73 Alcmaeon 10 Alchabitius 43 Aldilazith
Astrologus 76 Alexander Ephesius 16 Alexandrinus Jardagrid 74 Alexander 75
Alfraganus Mahumides 28 Alfarabius 28 Alfarr^skonzi Ommaz 73 Alfaki Chalin 73
Algazel Abuhamad 72 Algimde Ibrahaim Ibn' Ali-Alabashi 73 Alhazen Arabs 29 Ali
Ibno'l Hozein 28 Aliacensis Petrus 39 Ali Cushgi 39 Ali Ibn' Alhazen, etc. 73
Ali Alhazen Ib'n Ali, etc. 73 Alkindus 30 Alkasranus 73 Allatius Leo 99
Almaeon, or Almamon 26 Almeon Almansorius 30 Almugjareiti Harim 73 Almaraskolii
73 Al^ajim 73 Alpetragius 30 Alphonsus 33 Amicus Cozentinus Johannes Baptista
50 Anaximander 9 Anaximenes 9 Anaxagoras Claromenius 10 Anatolius Alexandrinus
21 Andromachus Cretensis 19 Andruzagar 21 Andalo 42 Andubarius 119 Angelus
Johannes 43 De Angelis Alexander 83 Anianus 23 Anonymus 125; 126 Antiochus 17
Antonius Delphinus Johannes 52 Apollonius Tyanaeus 19 Appianus Petrus 47
Apomasaris 17 De Apono Petrus 34 Apuleius 21 Aquila Ponticus 20 Aratus Solensis
13 Arcandam, or Arcandum, and Alcandrinus 75 Architas Tarentinus 11 Archimedes
14 Argyrus Isaacius Monachus 29 Argolus Andreas 90 Ariel Richardus 55 Aristotle
12 Aristyllus 12 Aristarchus Samius 13 Artemidorus Cosmographus 16 Arza^l Ala
Ben 28 Arzachel Hispanus 29 Arzet Andreas 89 Ascletarion 20 Asculanus Cichus 35
Ass^itari Mahmond Ib'n Mesand 73 Athelardus 30 Athelstan R. Angl. 121 Atlas 7
Atreus 8 Aubderkem Rabbi David 36 Averroes 31, 121 Avienus 75 Sieur. Avocate 26
Auria Josephus 68, 122 Auzout Adrian 114 Azalus Pompilius 54 B.
Names Page BAccarius Macceus 23 Bacon Rogerus 32 Baconthorp Johannes: 35
Bachmannus Georgius 69 Baersius alias Vekenstyl Henricus 47 Bainbridge Johannes
96 Baldus Bernardinus 70 Barwick Johannes 35 Barbarus Hermolaus 44 Barbarus
Daniel 58 Baroccius Franciscus 61 Baranzanus Redemptus 83 Bartschius Jacobus 87
Bartholinus Erasmius 108 Barrow Isaac Doctor 112 Bassantinus Johannes 80 Baten
Henricus 34 Batecumb alias Badecon 39 Battingius Rodolphus 58 Bavarus Angelus
Joannes 44 Bavarus Johannes 55 Bayerus Johannes Rheinanus 79 Beausardus Petrus
63 Bechet Johannes 99, 125 Beda 26 Belus 7 Bellerophon 8 Belinus 17 Bellantius
Lucius 44 Ben-Maimon Rabbi Moses 31 Beneventanus Marcus 45 Bentherus Michael 59
Benedictus Johannes Baptista 67, 122 Berosus 14 Bernard Edward 115 Bessarion 41
Bettinus Marius 98 Beverege William 125 Blanchinus Johannes 41 Blancanus
Josephus 81 Blaeu vide Gul* Jan Caesius 8^ Blebelius Thomas 65 Blondus Michael
Angelus 53 Boccasius Johannes 37 Bodeinstein Adamus 64 Bolus Mendesius 16
Bonatus Guido Foro Juliensis 34 Bonincontrius Laurentius Hellbronensis 44
Bonettus 51 Bonaventura Fredricus. 70 Bond Henry 123 Bordinus Franciscus 64
Borellius Johannes 108 Borellus Petrus 125 Bornerus Gasper 51 Botener Gulielmus
40 Boulenger 88 Du Boys Jacobus 125 Brahe Tycho 63 Bredon, or Bridon Simon 37
Bressius Mauritius 66 Briggius Henricus 86 Brithus Gualterus 121 Brotheiel
Hieremias 56 Brundzevius Albertus 47 Brunfelsius Otho 47 Brucaeus Henricus 61
Buchananus Georgius 59 Bulialdus Ismael 96 Buschius Georgius 64 Busaeus
Johannes 69 Buzur Giumhur 25 C.
Names Page CAbasilas Nicolaus 36 Cabaeus Nicolaus 91 Caerlion Ludovicus 37
Calippus Cyzicenus 12 Calvisius Sethus 124 Camaterus Johannes 26 Campanus
Novariensis 28 Campegius Symphorianus 51 Camerarius Joachimus 53 Camerarius
Elias 61 Camerarius Johannes Rudolphus 79 Campanella Thomas 85 Capuanus
Johannes Baptista Sipontinus 42 Capra Balthazar 79 Carpus Antiochenus 24 Cario
Johannes 48 Cardanus Hieronymus 56 Carellius Johannes Baptista 66 Carpenter
Nathanael 90 Des Carts Renatus 95 Cassiodorus 24 Cassini Giovan Dominico 114
Catton Gualterus 35 Catena Petrus 51 Caudas Astrologus 18 Caussinus Nicolaus 91
Cavallerius Bonaventura 89 Cavina Pietro M. 109 Caelus 7 Caelius Calcagninus 53
Caesius Georgius 66 Caesius Gulielmus Jansonius vide Blaen 87 Cellarius Andreas
106 Censorinus 21 Cepheus 8 Ceporinus Jacobus 49 Cham 6 Charlemaigne 26 Chaucer
Galfridus 38 Charikaeus Mahumides 73 Chamber John 78 Chaeremon 19 Cherubin 111
Cheucungus 120 Chilvenuz vide Jardagird Alexandrinus 74 Ben Chora Thebit 34
Christmannus Jacobus 68 Chrysococca Georgius 121 Chuenhious 119 Chumcang 119
Chylmark Johannes 38 Cirvellus Petrus 47 Claramontius Scipio 98 Clavius
Christopherus 78 Claudius Ptolomaeus 20 Claudius Galenus 21 Clemens
Lanthoniensis 31 Cleomedes 22 Cleostratus 9 Clitchthoveus Jodocus
Neoporticensis 49 Collins John 116 Columbus Christophorus 44 Colinitius
Tannesletterus Georgius 47 Comnenus Manuel 31 Comes de Comitibus Nicolaus 43
Commandinus Fredericus 59 Conon 14 Conradus Cocus Wimpinae de Buchonia 45
Conradus Balthazar 91 Copernicus Nicolaus 49 Courcier Petrus 100 Crabtree
William 92 Cremonensis Gerardus 38 Criton Naxius 17 Crusius Paulus 51, 66
Crugerus Petrus 89 Cunitia Maria 99 Curiacus Alkas 66 Curtius Albertus 87
Cusanus Nicolaus 40 S. Cyrillus 23 Cysatus Johannes Baptista 84 D.
Names Page DAcius Petrus 34 Damascenus Ib'n Shater 37 Daniel Surnamed Sapiens
72 Dank Johannes 35 Dantes Egnasius 65 Dantforth Samuel 107 Dasypodius Conradus
58 Dee Johannes 62 Decimator Henricus 68 Dekerius Johannes 83 Democritus 10,
120 Demophilus 12 Demetrius Triclinius 18 Deusingius Antonius 94 Diaz Emanuel
83 Digges Leonardus 60 Digges Thomas 69 Dion Nicaenus 18 Diodorus Monachus 25
Divini Eustachio 125 Dodonaeus Rembertus 67 Dopelstein Henricus 75 Dorotheus
Sidonius 17 Dositheus Astrologus 17 Douza Janus 69 Driander Johannes 59 Drienes
Johannes 99 Duditius Andreas 66 Dudley Robertus 97 Dullendius Gabriel 103
Duretellus Adelmus 26 Duret Natalis 124 Dyonisius Afer 15 Dyonisius Corinthius
17 Dyonisius Areopagita 19 Dyonisius Exiguus 25 E.
Names Page EBerus Paulus Kytzingensis 56 Eberbachius Godescalcus 65 De Egmunda
Johannes 38 Egmundus Astrologus 27 Egydius Johannes 32 Eichstadius Laurentius
95 Eligerus Johannes 36 Empedocles 10 Endymion 7 Enoch 6 De Epieres Johannes 97
Epigenes Byzantinus 14 Eracus Astronomus 13 Erastus Thomas 67 Eratosthenes 13
Ergom Johannes 43 Ethelwoldus Wentanus 28 Euctemon 10 Eudemus 12 Eudoxus
Cnidius 11 Euthymius. 18 Ezler Johannes 45 F.
Names Page FAber Jacobus 44 Fabritius Paulus 62 Fabricius Johannes 80
Fabricius David 82 Fantonius Philippus 58 Femillus Christophorus 71 Fernelius
Johannes 48 Ferrerius Augerius 54 Ficinus Marsillius 43 Fineus Orontius 48
Finella Philippus 98 Fiornovellus Johannes Maria 65 Flaccus Albinus, or
Alcuinus 26 Flavius Manlius, vide Manlius Theodorus 22 Flamsted John 115
Florentinus Maurus 51 Floriacensis Abbo 28 Foius Imp. Chin 119 Fortius
Joachimus Ringelbergius 48 Fortius Angelus 52 Foster Samuel 97 Fournerius
Georgius 94 Fracastorius Hieronymus 48 Frangipanus Cornelius 61 Frischlinus
Nicodemus 67 Fritschius Marcus 57 Froidmont Libertus 83 Frommius Georgius 124
Fusor, or Fusorius Johannes 40 G.
Names Page GAdbury John 126 Gadytanus Raymyrus 76 Galilaeus Galilaei 82
Galtruchius Petrus 108 Gallucius Johannes Paulus 70 Ganivetus Johannes 45
Garcaeus Johannes 57 Garibus Johannes 99 P, Gassarus Achilles 49 Gascoygn
William 92 Gassendus Petrus 95 Gauricus Lucas 55 Gaza Theodorus 42 Gazulus
Johannes 40 Geber Hispalensis Arabs 30 Geminus 15 Gemma Rainerus Frisius 53
Gemma Cornelius 61 Generini Francisco 96 Georgianus 73 Gerardus Rupelmundanus
70 Germanicus Caesar 19 Gerson Joannes 39 Gergiro 73 Geryon 120 Gez, or Gessius
17 Ghaminaeus 75 Giaphar Astrologus 18 Gigas Johannes Stainfortensis 51
Glareanus Henricus 48 Gloriosus Camillus 83 Goad John 113 Goclenius Rudolphus
82 Gontranus Carolus 90 De Gottignies Aegydius 111 Goubard David 124 Gramineus
Theodorus 62 Grassus Horatius 83 Grandamicus Jacobus 94 Graves Johannes 99
Grevenstein Antonius 79 Gregory Johannes 94 Gregory Jaeobus 106 Griembergerus
Cristopho^us 81 Grimaldi Franciscus Maria 100 Grizaunt Gulielmus 36 Grotius
Hugo 78 Grynaeus Simon 48 Guarinus, Guarinus 126 Guido Johannes 53 Guldinus
Paulus 89 Gulielmus, Abbas Caenobii Hirsaugiensis 29 Gulielmus de Sancto
Godialdo 34 Gulielmus Landtgrave of Hassia 70 H.
Names Page HAbash Mcrwazensis 75 Hadrianus 20 Haggesius Thaddaeus 64
Hainlinius Jo. Jacobus 125 Hainzelius Paulus 62 Haly Ben Ragel 28 Halpericus 77
Haly Aben Rodoham 32 Harpalus 9 Hasfurt Johannes Virgundus 46 Haveman Michael.
75 Hazan Rabbi Isaac 32 Heckerus Johannes 106 Heckius Johannes 63 Hedraeus
Benedictus 124 Helicon Cyzicenus 11 Heliconius 18 Hellerus Joachimus 54 Helvino
73 Henricus de Hassia 38 Henischius Georgius 80 Henrion Doctor 87 Hephaestion
Thebanus 21 Heraclides 74 Haraclides Ponticus 10 Herbinius Johannes 125
Hercules 8 Heremita Johannes 46 Herigonius Petrus 94 Herlicius David 84 Hermes
7 Hermes Aegyptius 11 Hermanus Contractus 29 Hervartus Johannes Georgius 93
Hesiod 120 Hevelius Johannes 110 Heydon Sir Christopher 79 De Hexam Johannes 31
Hilarious Georgius 102, 125 Hildericus Edo 60 Hipparchus 14 Hippocrates 10
Hodierna Johannes Baptista 102 Holcoth Robertus 35 Holwarda Johannes Phocylides
90 Homelius Jacobus 56 Honterus Johannes 59 H^d Doctor Thomas 123 Hook Robert
112 Horma^us Hadrianus 57 Horrox Hieremias 92 Hortensius Martinus 86 Hugenius
Christianus 103 Hughes Robertus 86 Hugo sive Huo Heltilius 61 Humenius
Aegyptius 31 Humius Jacobus 90 Humphrey Duke of Gloucester 40 Hypatia 23
Hyperion 7 Hyperius Andreas Gerardus 54 Hypsicles 121 Hystaspes 9 I.
Names Page JAquinot Dominique 82 Jarchas 19 Jaus 119 De Ineriis Johannes 75
Ib'n Junes, or Jounis 28 Ib'n Haitem 29 Ib'n Sina 73 Ib'n Sarcali 73 Inchofer
Melchior 89 Joachimicus Johannes praetorius 66 Johannes Hispalensis 30
Joestelius Melchior 71 Josephus Chaldaeus 72 Isaac Israelita 34 Isidorus 25
Julius Caesar 15 Julianus Laodicensis Philosophus 17 Julius Hyginus 19 Julius
Maternus Firmicus 21 Julius Caesar La Galla 81 Junctinus Franciscus 65 K.
Names Page KAdi Zada 39 Kaebelius Jacobus 49 Keckermannus Bartholomaeus 80
Kent alias Kayleg Johannes 43 Keplerus Johannes 84 Killingworth Johannes 37
Kircherus Athanasius 96 Knitl. Balthazar Kratzerus Nicolaus Kusianus, or
Keuxian Gilaeus 73 L.
Names Page LAbbee Philippus 97 Lacher Ambrosius 75 Lalamantius Johannes 61
Langius Josephus 80 Langrenus Michael Florentius 94 Lansbergius Philippus 89
Lansbergius Jacobus 89 Larissaeus Heliodorus 74 Lasbas Babilonius 16 Lasus
Magnes 17 Lavingham Richardus 37 Laurentius Joannes Philadelphensis Lydus 25
Laurenbergius Petrus 81 Lebdebenhazer Johannes 74 Legley Gilbertus 32
Lemoniensis Petrus 74 Leo 38 Leo Philosophus 27 Leoninus sive Leuwius Albertus
67 Leontius Mechanicus 17 Leopoldus de Austria 32 Leovitius Cyprianus 58
Levinus Lemnius 57 Leuterchomius Johannes 83 Levy Rabbi 35 Levera Franciscus
106 Licetus Fortunius 90 De Ligneriis Joannes 36 Lilius Aloysius 67 Lindought
Henricus 79 De Lineriis Joannes 38 Linemanus Albertus 94 Linton* Anthony 123
Lipstorpius Daniel 101 Du Liris Leonardus 101 Lobkowitz Johannes Caramuel 102
Locher Jacobus Philo-Musus Germ. 45 Longomontanus Chistopherus 84 Lonicerus
Marcus Albertus 66 Lucian 21 Lucilius Santritter Heilbronensis 44 Lucidus
Johannes Samosatheus 50 Ludovicus Lavaterus 64 Lupicinus Antonius 69 Lydiat
Thomas 79 De Lynn Nicolaus 37 M.
Names Page MAcrobius Ambrosius Aurelius Theodosius 22 Maginus Johannes
Antonius 80 Mahommed Al-buziani 75 Mahumed Ben Malud 76 Maignanus Emanuel 95
Malapertus Carolus 88 Malvasia Cornelius 106 Manetho 12 Manilius Marcus 16
Manlius Theodorus vide Flav. Manlius 22 Mandovich Johannes 36 Mantz Johannes 45
Manzinus Carolus Antonius 87 Marius Victorinus Afer 22 Marianus 24 Marinus
Neapolitanus 25 Martianus Foelix Minaeus Capella 25 Marius Aretius 53
Marmorarius Tobias 55 Marius Simon 84 Marinus Mersennus 95 Marcus Marci
Johannes 98 Martinengus Ascanius 122 Marin^ius Octavianus 124 Maslem 76 Massius
Johannes 52 Mathers Patrick 126 Matroptus Aegidius 98 Maugantius 24 Maurolycus
Franciscus 52 Medicus Georgius Chrysococca 32 Medmaeus Philippus 25
Meliteniotas Theodorus 26 De Meldis Gaufridus 36 Melancthon Philippus 52
Menelaus 20 Mengoli Pietro 111 Mena Joannes 122 Mercurius Trismegistus vid.
Hermes 7 Merlinus Ambrosius 24 Mercurius Morsheimerus Johannes 54 Mercator
Gerardus 61 Mergiouz Aben 74 Mercator Nicolaus 106 Messhala Arabs, or
Messahulach 27 Mestlinus Goepingensis Michael 62 Mesud 73 Meton 10 Metius
Hadrianus 91 De Meynier Honoratus 100 Milbourn William 91 Milichius Jacobus 48
Mercaellius Johannes 82 Mithobius Buchardus 53. Moderatus Columella 18 Mohammed
Ibno'l Attar 47 Mohammed Ib'n Zachariae Alkazzi 27 Moletius Josephus 60 Molitor
Christianus 42 Montanari Geminiano 115 Montebrunus Franciscus 93 De Montulmo
Antonius 52 Moore Sir Jonas 93 Morientes 76 Morinus Johannes Baptista 88 Morley
Daniel 32 Moses 7 Moses Eb'n Maimon 75 Moutonus Gabriel 110 Muhammed Ib'n Ahmed
Aliberouni 28 Muhammed Ib'n Ali Chaz, etc. 74 Mulana Gijath Eddin Giemshed 39
Mullerus Johannes 41 Mullerus Nicolaus 80 Munsterus Sebastianus 48 Munosius
Hieronymus 61 Mutolo Pietro Maria 107 Mutus Vincentius 99 Mutus Savinius 107
Myndius Apollonius 14 Myzaldus Antonius 55 N.
Names Pages NAiboda Valentinus 66 Nasir Eddin Tusaeus 34 De Nautonier
Guillaume 123 Neander Michael 60 Nebroch, or Nembroth, or Nimrod 7 Necepso 8
Nectarius 76 Nedaminen 74 Neil Sir Paul 101 Neperus Johannes 81 Newton Johannes
103 Newton Isaac 116 Nigidius Figulus 15 De Nigris Andalius 75 Niphus
Augustinus Philotheus Suessanus 52 Nolthius Andreas 61 Nonius Petrus 56
Nostradamus Michael 57 Novaras Ferrariensis 43 Numa Pompilius 8 O.
Names Pages OCkham Nicolaus 35 Oddi Johannes. 42 Odinton 33 Oenopides 9
Offusius Johannes Franciscus 64 Oliverius Malmsburiensis 29 Omar Astrologus, or
Hoamar 32 Oresmius Nicolaus 42 Ori Rabbi 59 Origanus David 80 Oronius 120
Ortelius Abrahamus 61 Osiander Andreas 50 Oswaldus Shr^kenfufius Erasmus 53 Ott
Johannes 109 Otto de Guerrick 111 Oughtred William 98 P. Ovidius Nafo 16 P.
Names Pages PAduanus Johannes 67 Paganus Comes 103 Palamedes 8 Palatius Petrus
Brixiensis 107 Panodorus 23 Pantaleo Vincislaus 84 Pappus Alexandrinus 23
Papyrius Fabianus 16 Paracelsus Theophrastus 37 Partlicius Simeon 85 Paulus
Alexandrinus 22 Paulus Middleburgensis 46 Payen Antonius Franciscus 107 Peckham
Johannes 33 Pelacanis Blasius 38 Peletarius Jacobus 52 Doctor Pell 102 Pena
Johannes 51, 122 Perdix 120 Perlachius Andreas 56 Perso-Medus vide Zoroaster 7
Petavius Dionysius 88 P. Petit 101 Petit Samuel 124 Petosyris 8 Peucerus Gasper
56 Philalthaeus Lucillus 60 Philippi Henricus 88 Philolaus 10 Philomantio 97
Philoponus 25 Philosophus 11 Phlegon Trallianus 20 Phocus Samius 9 Picolomineus
Alexander 60 Picus Johannes 43 Pierius Valerianus Johannes 51 Pierre Jean de
Mesmes 58 Pighels Nathan 93 Pighius Albertus 46 Pilander Georgius 54 Pilatus
Petrus 50 Pisanus Octavius 81 Piso Carolus 83 Plato 11 Pleppius Solomon 67
Pliny 19 Plutarchus Chaeronensis 19 Polaccus Georgius 94 Polemon Atheniensis 18
Pontanus Joannes Jovianus 40 Pope Walter Doctor 113 A Popma Titus 60 Porphyrius
22 Porta Johannes Baptista 68 Portus Emanuel 94 Possidonius Apamensis Syrus 15
Postellus Gulielmus 62 Proclus Lycius 24 Profatius 33 Prometheus 7 Prosdocimus
De Beldemando 39 Protagoras 121 Providus Hemoaldus 26 Prucner Georgius 49 De
Prusa Albertus 122 Prytaneus Autolychus 12 Psellus Michael 121 Purbacchius
Georgius 40 Pythagoras 10 R.
Names Pages RAbbi Jacob Ben-Machir 72 Rabbi Jehuda Bar Barzilei 72 Rabbi Isaac
Ben Lataph 72 Rabbi Abrazarth 72 Rabbi ab Rusack 72 Rabbi Abraham 72 Rabbi
Isaachar Ben Susan 72 Rabbi Isaac Alchadeb 72 Rabbi Solomon 72 Rabbi Simcha 72
Raimarus Nicolaus 70, 122 Ramus Petrus 60 Rantzovius Henricus 69 Rapaldus
Franciscus 56 Raphelengius Justus 74 Rasacherus Bartholomaeus 61 Raseh Johannes
64 Ravenspurg Jacob 124 Read Gulielmus 77 Record Robertus 56 Rembrantz Dirk 97
Resenius Johannes Paulus 81 Reynoldus Erasmus 54 Rhetius Georgius Joachimus 55
Richardus Monachus Eboracensis 30 Richard the Second King of England 38
Ricciolus 100 Riccius Augustinus 45 Riccius Matthaeus 66 De Rigiis Ludovicus 49
Ristorius Julianus de Prato 51 Robertus Lorrain 29 Robertus Lincolniensis 32
Robinus Johannes 48 Rochenbackius Abrahamus 78 Rodulphus Brugensis 30 Roeslinus
Helizaeus 66 Roffenus Johannes. Antonius 91 Rogerus Herefordiensis 31 Roias
Johannes 55 Rolianus Christianus 74 Romanus Adrianus 79 Romanus Aegidius 74
Rook Laurence 105 Rosa Andreas 64 Rosinus Stephanus 45 Rosius Jacobus
Biberacensis 87 Rothmannus Christopherus 68 De Royer 126 Rubeus Theodosius 78
Ryff Petrus 69, 122 S.
Names Pages SAcroboscus Johannes 33 De Sacro Font Johannes 122 Salinus
Bernardinus 80 Salmatius Claudius 98 Saminiatus Federicus 71 Samerius Henricus
78 Sanctius Brocensis Franciscus 122 Sandelinus Cherubinus 78 Sandwich Earl
108 Santbeck Daniel 60 Santutius Antonius 64 Sarzosus Franciscus 47 Sassarides
Gellius 62 De Saxonia Johannes 36 Scala Josephus 68 Scaliger Josephus 71
Scheinerus Christophorus 88 Schickardus Gulielmus 91 Schillerius Julius 87
Schonheintz Jacobus 43 Schonerus Johannes 50 Schonerus Andreas 57 Schol Jacobus
64 Schombergerus Georgius 85 Schottus Regis Curianus Gaspar 104 Schraeterus
Johannes Vinariensis 56 Schlusingerus Everhardus 41 Schulerus Wolfangus 64
Schyrlaeus De Reitha 96 Scribonius Gulielmus Adolphus 69 Scotus Michael 34, 41
Scultetus Bartholomaeus. 65 Seldenus Johannes 94 Sempilius Hugo ^9 Seneca 19
Seth 6 Sextus Empiricus 21 Sextus Avienus Rufus 22 Shackerley Jeremiah 93
Shirazita Kotboddinus 34 Sibrandus a Siccama 71 Sidin Sheriffus 74 Simeon 31
Simlerus Josias 65 Simplicius 24 Simus Nicolaus 57 Sixtus Senensis 65 Sixtus ab
Heminga 67 Snellius Willebrodus 83 Solomon 8 Somer Johannes 38 Sophianus
Nicolaus 54 Sosigenes 15 Stabius Johannes 56 Stadius Johannes 54 S^antonius 76
Stevinus Simon 68 Stiborius Andreas 45 Stigellius Johannes 49 Stoeflerus
Johannes Justingensis 46 S^rabo 16 Strauch Aegidius 109 Street Thomas 104
Strigellius Victorinus 54 Sturmius Johannes Christopherus 110 Sulpitius Gallus
14 Swinsett, or Suissett George 121 Syderocrates Samuel 60 Synesius 23 T.
Names Page TAlentonius Johannes 79 Tanaus 117 Tannerus Adamus 88 Tarde
Johannes 84 Tacquet Andreas 108 Taruntius Firmanus 15 Teilesanus 74 Temporarius
Johannes 58 Teucer Babilonius vide Zeucrus 16 Thales 9 Theaetetus Atheniensis
11 Themistus Pletho Constantinopolitanus 40 Theodoret 23 Theodosius Tripolita
15 Th^on Alexandrinus Senior 20 Theon Alexandrinus Junior 22 Theophrastus 12
Theut, or Thoth, vide Hermes 7 Thius Atheniensis 24 Thomas 74 Thrasyllus 18
Tiberius Caesar 18 Timeus 10 Timochares 12 De Titis Placidus 105 Tolosas
Johannes Maria 55 Tormius Ericus Olaus 124 Torperley Nathanael 78 Townley
Christopher Esquire 93 Townley Richard Esquire 114 Trapezuntius Georgius 39
Travagini Franciscus 109 Trechindus 76 True Abdias 9^ Tribonianus Sidetes 25
Trivett Nicolaus 34, 121 De Tryllia Bernardus 77 Tullius Cicero 15 V.
Names Page VAlerius Cornelius Veteraquinas 58 Valla Georgius 49 Varro Marcus
15 Ubaldus Guid', or Guidus 65 Vernerus Johannes 46 Verro Sebastianus 122
Vesputius Bartholomaeus 45 Vettius Valens 21 Victorinus Acquitanus 23 Vieta
Franciscus 68 De Villa Nova Arnoldus 7^ De Villa Dei Alexander 32 Vinetus Elias
59 Virmius alias Virunnius Ponticus 43 Vitalis Ludovicus 46 Vitalis Hieronymus
108 Vitellio Thuringo-Polonus 33 Ulack Adrianus 87 Ulugh Beig 39 Vogellinus
Johannes 47 Volaterranus Raphael 44 Uisinus Adamus 61 Ursinus Benjamin 83
Usserus Jacobus 97 Vuestisius Christianus 60 W.
Names Page WAllingford Richard 35 Wallis Doctor John 111 Walterus Johannes 38
Waltherus Barnardus 43 Ward Seth L. Bishop Sarum 101 Weigellius Erhardus 103
Welperus Everardus 89 Wendelinus Gothofredus 97 Wendelinus Johannes 100 Wharton
George Esquire 93 Wilkins John late Lord Bishop of Chester 91 Wing Vincent 104
Winkerus Nicolaus 65 Wittekindus Hermannus 64 Wolkenstein David 68 Wrenn Sir
Christopher 112 Wright Edward 86 X.
Names Page XEnocrates Calcedonius 12 Xunus 119 Xylander Gulielmus 58 Y.
Names Page YUmchinius 119 Z.
Names Page ZAgut, or Zacuti Abraham 41 Zahel sive Zael, or Zeel Bebis 76
Zalese Jacobus 74 Zanardus Michael 84 Zarlinus Josephus 58 Zeltus Danita 73
Zergol Andreas 86 Zeuchrus, or Teuchrus 16 Ziglerus Jacobus 49 Zineris Johannes
75 Zoroafter vide Perso-Medus 7 Zucchius Nicolaus 100

INDEX or TABLE of the Principal Matters contained in the ANNOTATIONS and
APPENDIX.
A.
Annot. Page Append. Page ABraham the Patriarch erected Astronomical Pillars,
as Seth ^ad done: Said to have taught Astronomy to the Egyptians, etc. 7
Acontiae, Comtes so called 61 193 Actian, Fight described 67 Adonysia, whence
their Original 5 Egyptian Priests, great Promoters of Astronomy 4 Their
Hierogliphical Statue of the Sun 44 Aequinoctial Circle, its description 44 145
Aemilia Familia 57 Agriculture, by whom invented 7 Agrippa, his Character 57
Altar, the Asterism so called 35 One dedicated to Penury and Art in the Temple
of Hercules at Gades 6 Amalthaean Goat, the Constellation 30 Andromeda,
Constellation 28, 36 The Fable of her Exposure and Rescue Antarctick Circle 44
Aquarius, the Constellation 22 Aquila, or the Eagle Constellation 27 Artick
Circle 43 Arcturus 25 Argo Constellatio 33 Ariadnes Crown 25 Aries, the
Constellation 19 Arrow, Constellation 27 Arts, their Kinds 5 Astrology, its
Authors 4, 5 Astronomy, its first Authors 3 2, 3, 4, 5 Studied by Princes 3
Authors that have written therein, vide Catalog. Asterismes, by whom first
found out 10 Those of the Chaldeans, Persians, Egyptians, Arabians, Indians,
Chinese and Tartars, differing from the Greek, which are conceived the newest
and latest Ibidem Christian Asterismes 140 Atoms 12, 39 Athenae Antiquae and
Novae 64 Augury 8 Auriga Constellatio 29 Axis of the World 22, 23 B.
Annot. Page Append. Page BIrds and Beasts reputed to have Language 8 Believed
by credulous Antiquity to have been understood by Magicians Ibidem Bird, called
a Hoop, said to be sent by Solomon with a Message to the Queen of Ethiopia
Ibidem Birds, whether Terrestrial, or Aereal Creatures 17 Boots Constellation
25 Britain, known to the Ancients long before the Romans 5 Burning the dead 12,
63, 65 When given over Ibidem C.
Annot. Page Append. Page Cabiri Dii, by way of Distinction from the Dii
Casmilli, Camilli, or Camiri; who they were 35 Camillus, his Elogium 53 Cancer,
the Constellation 20 Supposed by the Chaldaick and Platonic Philosophers to
have been the Gate. by which Souls descended into humane Bodies Ibidem Canis
Sirius, or the Dog Star 32, 33 Canopus, a noted Star in the Rudder of the Ship
Argo 16 Not seen to rise in Italy, the reason Ibidem Capricornus 22 Ascendant
in the Horoscope of Augustus, reputed, by the Pythagoreans and Platonists, the
Gate by which Souls entered into Heaven, and therefore styled Porta Deorum
Ibidem Cassiopea, Constellation 29 Cato Uticensis, his Character 57 Cepheus
Constellation 34 La Creda his Mistake in interpreting the greater Bend of
Helice and lesser of Cynosura 23 Cete Constellation 36 Chaos, the Place,
Region, or Receptacle of Universal Matter: The Fable thereof whence derived 11
Chariots drawn by four Horses, by whom first invented; the manner of joining
the Horses, etc. 29, 30 Chariot of the Moon how drawn 14 Cicero his Encomium 56
Cincinnulus Cometa 61 Cleopatra 67 Claudia Familia 57 Cloelia 53 Climates 45
149 Coluri Aequinoctialis 45 147 Coluri Solstitiorum 46 Comets, their Original
60 189 Duration 60 Presignification 63 Names 60 Kinds 60 192, 193 History 194
Constellations 10 137 Northern omitted 31 Described 137, 138 Southern how
imagined by the Ancients 37 Those near the Southern Pole lately discovered 138
Christian, v. Asterisms Corvus, or the Crow Constellation 34 Cossus 55 Crater,
or the Cup, Constellation 34 Curious Dentatus ^4 Cy^nus, or the Swan
Constellation 27 Cyllenius, vide Mercury Cynosura, or the lesser Bear 24 D.
Annot. Page Append. Page DEcii, not two only but three are said to have
devoted themselves for the good of their Country 55 Deifying of Julius Caesar 2
Of Augustus 2,58 Delphinus Constellation 27 Deltoton, or the Triangle
Constellation 28 Dials, their Invention 40 Dii Majores 35 Divination, from the
Inspection of the Entrails of sacrificed Beasts 8 The Parts inspected Ibidem
Despised by the Romans in time of their Greatness Ibidem Draco, Constellation
24,34 E.
Annot. Page Append. Page EArth, Element 13 Its Place 14 Suspended in the Air
15 Earthquakes, the several kinds 9 Engonasi sive Ingeniculus Constell. 25
Erectheus King of Athens 63 Eventus, the proper Term among the Romans, by which
they expressed the Product of Fruit, for which they sacrificed to the Deity
called Bonus Eventus 32 Euphrates, its Description 3 Exotica Sidera, why so
called 37 Exstispicium, vide Divination, etc. F.
Annot. Page Append. Page FAbius Maximus, his Elogy 55 Fabricius, Exemplary for
his Justice, Valor, and Conduct 54 Fire, Element, not confined within the
Unequal of the Lunary Sphere according to Aristotle and his Followers, but with
the Stoics transmitted to the Etherial Region 13 Culinary, its Original 62
Several ways of generating fire Ibidem Subterranean 9 Fish, the Southern, a
Constellation 37 Funera Pacis, interpreted contrary to the conjecture of
Tanaquil Faber 64 Fusio Aquae, a Starry Stream running from the Urn of
Aquarius, and Mouth of the Southern Fish 37 G.
Annot. Page Append. Page GAlaxie 48 Supposed by the Ancients to afford to all
Plants their Milkie Juice and Nourishment Ibidem The Storehouse of most of the
New Phaenomena's in these later Ages Ibidem Gemini, Constellation 20 Goat, the
Amalthaean, a bright Star in the Shoulder of Heniochus 30 Gods; those called
the great Gods, or Dii Majores 35 Gold, by whom invented 5 Giants, the Fable 36
H.
Annot. Page Append. Page HAil 9 Hare, the Constellation 33 Heavens, their Name
41 Their Substance 15 Number 157, 158, 159 Fluid, and not solid 136, 137 Helice
Constellation 23 Helicon 1 Hesper 14 Hoedi Constellatio 30 Horatii and Curiatii
52 Horatius Cocles 53 Horizon 47 148 Horologes, Clocks, and Watches, how
ancient 40 Hostifer, how interpreted 36 Hours, whether taken for the twelve
Parts of the Day among the Ancients 40 Not used so among the Romans 'till 300
years post R. C. Ibidem Derived from the Babylonians, and Egyptians Ibidem
Names of the Egyptian hours Ibidem Chinese and Turkish Astronomers, their
Division of the Natural Day Ibidem Hyades Constellation 31 I.
Annot. Page Append. Page INvictus, a Title given to the Roman Emperor, and to
Rome 68 Jupiter Tonans 10 The Planet 59 182 His Satellites 183 Julia Familia 38
Junius Brutus 54 K,
Annot. Page Append. Page KIngdoms, their Vicissitudes 40, 41 L.
Annot. Page Append. Page LAmpadias, a fiery Meteor so called 61 Laws of
Augustus 2 Leo, Constellation 20 Lepus Constellation, vide Hare Letters, by
whom invented 6 Libra Constellation 21 Livius Salinator 56 Lucifer, or the
Morning Star 14 Lycurgus 52 Lyra Constellation 26 M.
Annot. Page Append. Page Magic 8 Marcellus 54 The Sword of Rome 214 Mars, the
Planet 59 182 Medusae Caput, Constellation 29 Memnon 51 Mercury 3 Planet 59, 62
180 Meridian 46 Metelli 57 Moon, her Chariot 14 When Eclipsed, believed by the
Ancients to be drawn from her Sphere by Charms; by the Indians supposed to be
whipped till she bleed; by the Chinese to be in danger of being devoured by a
Dragon or great Dog. Brazen Vessels beaten in her Relief, practiced by the
Turks and Chinese Ibidem Her Spots Old 169 Her Spots New Selenography,
according to Hevelius 170 according to Grimaldi, and Ricciolus 175 Whether
inhabited 179 Conceived by some the Paradise of our first Parents 180 Mota
Astra, misinterpreted by Salmasius 47 Mutius Scaevola 52 N.
Annot. Page Append. Page NAvigation, by whom invented 7,33 Nestor 51 Nilus,
its several Denominations 4 O.
Annot. Page Append. Page OPhiuchus Constellation 26 Orion Constellation 31
Orpheus his Lyra, Constellation 26 P.
Annot. Page Append. Page PApyrii 54 Parallel Circles 45 148, 149 Pegasus
Constellation 28 Penthesilea 51 Perseus Constellation 28 Persidis Victor; of
whom meant 52 Phases, of the Moon 41 Phaenicians, their Voyages into the
Atlantic Ocean 24 Their Discovery of the Western Coasts of Africa, and a large
Island supposed some Part of America Ibidem Piscis Notius 37 Pisces
Constellation 22 Pithetes, a kind of Comet so named 61 193 Philippick Plains
confounded with Pharsalian 66 The Battle of Philippi Ibidem Planets 47 Their
Particular Descriptions 165 and deinceps* Plato 52 Pleiades Constellation 31
Pogonias, a kind of Comet 60 193 Pompeius Magnus 56 His Triumphs Ibidem
Princeps Aries, the reason of that Title 19 Principles Natural, first Chaos 11
Atoms 12, 39 Fire 12 Water Ibidem Elements Ibidem Their Discordant Concord
Ibidem Procyon Constellation 33 Q.
Annot. Page Append. Page QUadriga, by whom invented 29 Quintilius Varus, his
Defeat 65, 66 R.
Annot. Page Append. Page RAin 10 Ram, the Constellation, vide Aries S.
Annot. Page Append. Page SAgitta Constellation 27 Sagittarius, Zodiacal Sign
21 Sarpedon 51 Saturn 59 185 His various Phenomenon 186 His Satellites Ibidem
Scipio' s, Fatal to Africa 56 Scorpius, Zodiacal Sign 21 Sea, held by
Anaximander to be the Remainder of Primitive Moisture, after its Exclusion from
the Earth 13 Supposed to round the Earth like a Girdle 17 Called by the
Phaenicians Ogg Ibidem Serpents, said to be burst by the Power of Incantations
8 Their faculty to dissolve the Charm, if aware of the Charmer Ibidem Servile
Bellum; why so called? 68 Sexta Hora, how called the first and last 46 Shadows,
their Increase and Decrease whence? 5, 7 Sirius, or the Dog Star 32 Held to be
another Sun 33 Sistra Isiaca, their Description 67 Sphere, how divided by the
Ancients 43, 44 Socrates 52 Solon Ibidem Solstices 43 Sow, honored by the
Cretans as sacred 30 Snow, its Original Cause 9 Why compared to Wool Ibidem By
Anaxagoras maintained to be black. In Armenia of a ruddy color Ibidem
Contexture and Figure of its Parts Sexangular Ibidem Spirits evocated 8
Spiritus Diei, what? 47 Spolia Opima 54 By whom won Ibidem Stars, whence named
41 Their Prescience 1 Influence 24 Names 10 Aspects 11 Rising and setting 14
Motion 15 Nourishment 38 Fixed Stars, their Substance, Light, Color,
Scintillation, Number, Figure, Magnitude, Place, and Distance from the Earth,
or rather the Sun 155 Stars falling 61 Stipulae Ardentes, fiery Meteors so
called Ibidem Sun, by Xenophanes supposed to be extinguished every Night, and
rekindled every Morning 14 His several Denominations 59 His Maculae and Faculae
166 Substance 165 Magnitude and Distance 166 T.
Annot. Page Append. Page TAu Signum, sive Triangulum Australe 139 Taurus,
Zodiacal Sign 19 Trabs, a Meteor and Comet so called 61 Traffic, its Original
7 Themistocles 52 Thunder 9 Triangulum, seu Deltoton 28 Tropicks of Cancer 43
Tropicks of Capricorn 44 Hieroglyphically deciphered by the Ancient Egyptians
under the Figure of two Dogs Ibidem V.
Annot. Page Append. Page VAlerius Corvinus 53 His Story Ibidem Venus 59, 62
181 Vigiliae Constellation 39 Virgo, Zodiacal Sign 21 Ulisses 51 Universe,
according to the Pythagoreans subsists by the Conjunction of two Natures, the
one always Active, the other always Passive 18 W.
Annot. Page Append. Page WAter, the first Principle of all Natural Bodies
according to Thales and Pherecydes 12 Weeping in Exequies 64 The dead supposed
by the Ancients to be delighted with the Tears of their living Friends Ibidem
Whale, the Constellation 36 Wind, its Original reckoned among the Abscondita of
Nature 10 Its Causes reduced to several Heads Ibidem World, a Rational Creature
according to the Stoics 1 Eternal 11 Disproved to be such 41 Its Soul 1, 18
Its Eyes 12 A Secondary God 38 The Fusion or Extent of the Divine Mind Ibidem
Above it nothing either of Body, Place, Vacuum or Time according to Aristotle
42 The Stoics yet allowing a certain Vacuity or Imaginary Space, in which it
is by them said to suspend Ibidem Called Nature's Public House Ibidem Z.
Annot. Page Append. Page Zodiac 18, 47, 48 147 Zones 45

ERRATA.
PReface. Page 2. line 17. for have read has.

Annotations.
Page 3. line ult. for Ptolomy r. Ptolemy* and so else where. p. 4. l. 64. for
X^ophantus r. X^ophantes. p. 5. l. (...) for saying that this r. saying this.
p. 10. l. 22. for (...) r. (...). p. 12. l. 33. for Scyrus r. Syr^. p. 21. l.
39. for Ta^uncius r. Taruntiu^. p. 28. l. 48. for was the Grandchild ^. the
Grandchild. p. 29. l. 61. for Mir^ilus r. Myrtilus. ibidem l. 73. for (...)
ibid. for (...). p. 30. l. 60. for (...) ibid. l. 61. for (...). ibid. l. 63.
for (...) ibid. for (...). p. 31. l. 34. for Co^ymo r. Co^ymo. ibid. l. 52. for
(...). p. 34. l. 53. for Chyron r. Chiron. ibid. for Phellyra r. Ph^lyra. p.
35. l. 4. for Ba^hilus r. Batilus. p. 39. for (...). ibid. l. 54. for (...). p.
41. l. 23. for (...). p. 51. l. 3. for (...).

Appendix.
Page 9. lin^ 28. for Ars^s r. Ars^. p. 23. l. 2. for Oblectata r. Obluctata.
p. 38. l. 10. L^o Emperor of Constantinople is misplaced* to be inserted
before in p. 27. at No. 879. (which ought rather to be 886.) under the Title of
L^o Philosophus. p. 39. l. 29, 33. for Arabic r. P^rsian. p. 5^. l. 26. for
Civit^ (...) r. Civita Castellana. p 56. l. 35. del^atur in. p. 77. l. 7.
del^atur Iacobus Zales, etc. p, 93. l. 10. for White Be^ r. White Le^. p. 104.
l. 3. for Planet r. Plane. p. 116. l. 6. for already r. ready. p. 126. l. 12.
for Mathews r. Mathers p. 139. l. 27. for by the Spaniards r. not that by the
Spaniards, etc. p. 146. l. 28. for right Angles ^. Oblique Angles. p. 158. l.
16. for which r. with. p. 193. l. 38. for no^ r. or.

FINIS.

