MANES PRESBYTERIANI: OR THE MONUMENTS OF THE KIRK. THE COVENANTS CONFESSION.
ARGYLE's RELICS. Guthrey and Giffan's PASSIONS. AND Gillespy's RECANTATION.
All compiled and laid together.

Ducitur iratis plaudendum Funus Amicis. Juv. Sic erit Aeternum Pontiliane
Vale. Mar. London, Printed for the Reverend CLasses, in the year 1661.

To the READER
WHo can now deny, but that there is a Jus Divinum stamped upon Presbytery, when
we have seen such signal Vindiciae of it in the Fate and Death of the most
Eminent and stontest Assertors of it? We will therefore give it leave to take
praecedency of any Schism of which Blood was never yet drawn. But whether
Sanguis Draconis or Sanguis Ecclesiae Scoticae be the better Drug, and which
will grow fastest, we leave to Dr. Trig and Time.

We have made a Confection or Miscellany out of it at a Venture, and compounded
the bitter Ingredients of its Death, and prescribe them you in a Dose of Mirth.

The first place, as that which operated most, we give deservedly to the
Covenant, of a Griping purging quality; most of the Town complain of its
Physic; with groanings and strainings; and they say it never worked kindly
since the Time that Alderman Atkins bewrayed the Militia, for now it works
upwardly in vomits altogether: It is lately torn up by the roots, and has
fetched such deep sighs, as a Mandrake at its Revulsion; a relation whereof you
have in the next pages.

The next Place the Marquess of Arguile challenges; this was a Great Doctor
and administerer of the Covenant; we present him to you like a Mountebank on
his Scaffold, where he uttered a whole promptuary of Kirk venom and readily
swallowed it, wherefore we have next sent this Zany with an Antidote after him.

If you say it is too late, we can assure you from the mouth of a Presbyterian
Patriarch, that Death has no power over a Covenanter, no more then one Gasp
can kill a Cat.

Room for St. Guthrey, a name conformable and consonant to the Legend, the
precise moderns will make miraeles of him, and save us the labor to tell you
how he was hanged.

As for Giffan he was but his Sancho Panca; his story is bound up in this
Quixots; and so they go together.

The other Appendix of Gillespy, (being like to bear a great influence on
these worst and last Times of Presbytery, wherein Scandals and Offenses are
like to be given by revolts and desertions,) we have subjoyned by way of
Parallel betwixt the case of him and Mr. Jenkins, it being like to be of
exceeding use to the unstable remnant of giddy Zealots.

These are the only Remains of Presbytery, and it cannot but Comfort your
Hearts to hear such a word. Root and Branch of it are hewn down, and in the
dead Trunks of these Furioso's, it lies still and quiet, and though you laugh
never so loud at it, it will never wake and baul again. If there be any
whiffling curs that grin and snarle (such of whom it may be said, -- Non quies,
non tumultus, quale magni metus, vel magnae irae silentium est,) they know what
Hawks-meat is, at least the worming iron of Pulpit silence will surely cure
them.

To the Honest and Loyal be this a Gratulation, for the Ultion and Revenge the
Laws and these Happy Times have taken on that Accursed Thing, and so let it go.

FAREVVELL.
Hominem Malignum forsan esse ru credas Ego esse Miserum credo cui Placet Nemo.
The Groans and last Breathings of THE COVENANT TO Its DEAR PARENT PRESBYTERY.
MY Lamp is almost spent, and nothing but a stinking snuff left to light me to
Ashes; I am all over seized with a sudden Epilepsie, Death is upon me, O
speedily call hither some Presbyter.


Presb. Dear Child, thou shall lack nothing, that lies within the power of Art
to preserve thee. I am here at hand.


Cov. O sick, sick. I have not one sound Article in my whole Frame and
Constitution; the whole systeme of Diseases lodge within me. It Is Promethean
Fire consumes me, that which threw plagues, and all sorts of death throughout
the world, when the Author had boldly invaded Heaven, and pretended it was a
Dose of Reformation and Cure from thence.


Presb. Do not rave dear child, this is a sad distemper I must consesse, where
does the pain lie most:


Cov. Oh it lies all over, but most especially and grievously in my HEAD.


Presb. I imagined so, that makes you talk so lightly.


Cov. No Mother, it is Heavily, O my Head, my Head; I know not what to do with
it, I would I were fairly rid on it. Certainly Mother you can tell me a way how
to be without it, 'twas a praeternatural (if not monstrous) excrescency you
begot and brought me forth with, I have been troubled with it from the day of
my birth to this instant, I had some ease for a while by the bleeding me in the
jugular vein, but another Head repullulated, and my pains increased.


Presb. Dear Child, you must know, that you were begot in the night of
Confusion, when another Chaos was inverting the Order and Course of Things; the
Head was not intended to be the chief member, but subordinate to the shoulders
of Presbytery, which came into the world with its heels forward: and
accordingly, though the Head resisted, we maintained our Authority, and laid
that aside as useless and dangerous. Good Child be Comforted, this is but
another Bustle, your appetite is not so fierce, nor your stomach so dogged as
before, and fumes rise up and trouble you.


Cov. There is no Fume without Fire; but I must confess my digestion is
vicious, and I cannot swallow as well as I did formerly, I am subject to vomit,
and up come my Bishops, Deans, and Chapters Lands in whole Manors and Houses:
I have still a sickish longing after those dainties, but they will not stay
with me, and therefore I can impute my languishing not to any thing within me,
but to this troublesome Head, whose gust and Palate will not relish those sweet
meats, nor let them down into my Abyss of Sacrilege.


Presb. I know not what to do, He Will take no Scotch Physic any more, besides
what is good for you is naught for him, and we want power to sever you, you must
endure it as the case stands.


Cov. Is that all the Comfort you afford me? well, I shall not endure it long
then. Oh, now another fainting fit, a Jenkinish Qualme is upon me, O for a dram
of Parliament mercy!


Presb. What think you of a Cordial of London gold:


Cov. I have drunk it all up already, I have left but a scruple or 2 in some
men's Consciences, and they will never part with or be rid of it, besides it
would come too late, some warm clothes presently, I cannot continue.


Presb. What shall I do for my dear child, I Will wrap thee up softly, and pray
try if you can slumber a while.


Cov. What good will that do me? Oliver laid me in a sound sleep for seven
years together, as long as the seven Champions of Christendom; but when I
wak't, I was as mad as them, raved worse then ever; then, I had a short nap
when the the Rump awoke last, and when I started out of that, I was in such a
maze with my rising glories, mere Dreams and Phantasms, as I became Phrantick,
and have Continued so ever since.


Presb. I, dear Child, we thought then to have espoused thee, and wedded the
Kings interest to thine, to which purpose, we new apparelled thee, reprinted
thee, and thou thy self were read in the Church instead of the Baines; thy
sweet picture placed by his Majesty's Arms in sign of Embracing, How did I then
rejoice, with the Comaedian? Omnes omnes bona dicere, and laudare fortunam
meam, quae Filiam haberem tali Forma and ingenio praeditam! but now thy beauty
is withered, and thou look like an ore-ridden whore, and I like a careful
undone Baud, a Shrove-Tuesday Baud.


Cov. Mother now you rave, pray lay your Head upon sweet Mr. Croftons Cushion,
that and a little while Ellebore will speedily cure you: Oh me, oh me, what
strange Convulsion do I suffer, now my under parts begin to torment me


Presb. Inded Child I must confess, that Cardinal Richlieu had your maiden
head, when you were tender, and it may be he left you the French kindness; I
did as a Bawd should do, I withstood not my Market.


Cov. Did he never stand in the stool of repentance?


Presb. No Daughter, he left that for you and me.


Cov. Well what ever it is, it afflicts me most acutely, when shall I be eased
of these pains; from top to toe, nothing but griefs and malanders! certainly I
have been the prostitute of every interest, for I have a whole Hospital of
Aches about me.


Presb. As I said before you have been over-ridden, but I never made but 2
bargains of you, that was with the Cardinal, and Mr. Pym: since that time
Oliver with his Sectaries, like boisterous Hectors made what use they would of
you, without contenting me for their pleasure, and you took it all in good part.


Cov. What should I poor thing do! I was made of such a Compliant temper, that
I could serve any man's lust any design against Church and State; to day I wore
this Fucus, to morrow that dress, then another paint, I pleased all parties,
what mode they liked for their Turn that I was in; the shy close Independent,
the debaucht Atheist, made much of me, till I began to grow out of date, and
then my Lovers forsook me, and said I was a dissembling paltry baggage; so I
was forced to pack up my movables, and with the spoils I had got march after
my Comrade Blewcaps under Leshley back aga^n to my nawn Country of Scotland.
There I continued a good while in some outward esteem, but that did me no
good, I had no profit by it; then as I said I was lullaby'd by Cromwell there
for a long time, afterward I dreamt I came to England again with General Monk,
but it was but a Dream.


Tresb. I staid here in England and truckt under the Sects my very ill
neighbors on one side, and the Royalists on the other, they made me live a
rigid mortified life, still expecting of you; but when the General came hither
as you say, I dreamt we met him and you together my dear Child, but he left you
behind him, though he promised to send for you with all speed, but no such
matter.


Cov. I am sick of the dangerousest disease, a relapse; I have gone to and fro
backward and forward so many times, and now at last I am quite tired. I sink
and fall, and it will be the greater by reason of my advanced hopes in the
beginnings of the last change. I was clearly on the Devils pinnacle, had a
prospect of Three Kingdoms and no more. O lament Mother my sore and grievous
Fall.


Presb. From that height I broke my neck, I have been up and down in the world,
like a Meteor in the Air, and like a wandering fire end in a blaze.


Cov. That's my Comet Fate.


Presb. Mine is involved in yours Child, the soul of Presbytery is the
Covenant, that is the ratio Formalis of our Kirk, Synods, Elders. Thou art my
Daughter as Pallas was to Jupiter, when my brains akt with mischief, Out thou
came from thence, with plots and designs, ready armed, as she with wisdom;
I could have done nothing without thy help, thou were the Excellency of my
strength; and must I now be robbed of thee? I see all Superlative births are
short lived: I may cry out with my dear child Guthrey, Ichabod, Ichabod.


Cov. Nay I depart (or rather am snatched) from you, with all the inglorious
circumcumstances that could set me out; O burst your hearts with sorrow, my
dear friends, rid your selves out of the way, any way, rather then endure the
Triumphs and insultings of your Enemies.


Presb. My Neck is broke already I told you, my head lops like a gibleted
Goose, and I droop and disconsolately mourn, while the wicked taunt and say,
thou have the number of the Beast inscribed on thee, being 666.


Cov. That Is three times over, sick, sick, sick, I am quite spent.


Presb. I am sure when thou were young and pretty thou had dainty lineaments
and features, not a line was drawn in thee but had such a strain of zeal and
religion, that to the devout Puritan, and to others not so curiously nice or
deep sighted, thou seemedst an Angel: now they make a Beast of you indeed, a
burnt offering as they term it, making me the Idol to which it is sacrificed.


Cov. I have endured as much persecution almost as I caused, if bitter words
could weigh with money; pray Mother do you persecute me no longer at second
hand, let me be quiet.


Presb. How can I do so? I have no Authority, Antiquity, Fathers, or Councils
to allege for me; I must make a noise with something that is equivalent. I
silenced almost all the Orthodox Ministers in England with but citing you, no
body durst dispute you, you were inviolable.


Cov. Yes, yes the Oxford reasons hit me in the Heel, that wound was
incurable, you never knew how to heal it to this day; I went limping ever
since, and ever since my Parliaments Crutches failed me, have been fain to set
still, no body being willing or able to reply.


Presb. Yes, yes they were sufficiently refuted, the reasoners were all turned
out, and I sat in Cuerpo there, and see the sneaking Conformists baiser vostres
Mains and adore you.


Cov. Those compliances or submissions were like the late Addresses; and the
repute and Honor I had by them, was as much as the usurpers got by those; but
trouble me not now dying and expiring with such vain things.


Presb. Well I must and am bound to keep you, however I will now let you alone.


Cov. I am troubled at one thing, I am afraid I shall be served like the
Butcher, I shall be alive when I am buried, the faction and sedition I caused
in the minds of men will not so soon be deaded, and I shall revive in the dark
vaults of plots and contrivances against Monarchy, though the more stir they
keep, the more they will bruise themselves, and the more ghastly Spectacles, and
stinking sights will they lie.


Presb. Pray do not trouble your Head with these things; you will very much
weaken your self.


Cov. Nay I shall never be well or at Ease, pray let me speak my mind freely,
you had the conceiving of me or licking me into what fashion of words you
pleased, and now let me utter my self (according to your injunction, when
people swallowed me) without any mental reservation or evasion whatsoever.


Presb. Good Daughter forbear, it will much accelerate your End, and do not
foul your nest; I have been at a great deal of care and trouble of bringing you
up, and do not so ill requite me.


Cov. You Will have the happiness, which better folks have wished for, to see me
fairly buried before you. It Is not I requite you unkindly: is it not the
general Gallows complaint, I may thank my friends for this? I have the scandal
and the injury.


Presb. Well, I am not long lived, but do not you shorten my days with such
undutiful Expressions, will you lay all the Fault upon me?


Cov. Alas I can never expiate them my self, you know better how to defend your
Enormous Actions your self; have you not the magic to raise another
Smectymnuus?


Presb. No Child, I am past disputing, my best Argument was the two edged
Dilemma of the sword, Bishops are Bishops again, now the armed rage and
madness of my possessed multitudes is quelled; otherwise I would have buried
thee in a military posture, as I have brought thee up, and the whole Nation
should again be in Arms for thee.


Covenant. I, and such a deplorable war begin again, if (Fury as you are) you
could any way contrive it.


Presb. See then with what constant Affection I prosecute your beloved interest.


Cov. Well pray you cease from any further Conspiracies, I like my end better
then my beginning, I am resolved to unravel all.


Presb. Pray Daughter forbear.


Cov. I must discharge my self, I was white paper, wherein you might have as
well written Allegiance as Rebellion. I detest my name, and my Parents
baseness, what am I obliged to you, but for an ill fame throughout the
Universe? you have satisfied your self in the illegitimate generation of me,
and then Expose me to the shame of the world, to be branded to posterity; but
lo, this Declaration of mine shall acquit me, and leave the guilt of all (Good
Beldam) upon you, in this my last Speech and Confession.


THE SPEECH and CONFESSION OF The Covenant, At its Burning by the EXECUTIONER.
I Come hither to suffer by the general Consent and Vote of Both Houses; I am
utterly a stranger to their Legislative power: I will not question their
Authority, they that had power to give life and being, have doubtless the same
to condemn and annihilate. Howere I thank them they have sent me to a Death
worthy of my Parentage, it is Roman like to be burned; and it is suitable also to
my crimes; Paricide and Witchery are punishable thus by our Laws, and besides
I have Northern chillness and coldness enough to endure it.

I shall not speak much here, too much has already been said for, and against
me; would this bright flame were the darkest Cloud of Oblivion, that ere
covered foul guiltiness, or that I might expire in a DARK LANTERN.

But I know you expect I should say something of my Religion, truly I shall I
fear very much disappoint you therein, I have not had time enough to be settled
in it, nor have I any foundation whereon to bottom it. The Roman Catholics
have the Popes Infallibility; The Protestants the 39. Articles, the highest I
can derive my self from, is from a provincial Synod, and they have made me a
Religion of my self, made up like the Alchoran, of Paganism, Scotti Schism,
and some Christianity, and at the best but like Olivers Instrument, or Harry
Martins Descant on the Rumps Act of Oblivion, which pretended to SAVE all at
the beginning, but some in the middle, and none at all in the Conclusion, as
woefully appears this day.

I know there is a claim laid by my faction to the Geneva Discipline and
Doctrine, I profess I do not own it. Our Presbytery and that is very
different, they had no Kings to make experiments on, or to try Jurisdiction and
Power with; ours is a Tyrannical Presbytery, theirs a more sober Political
Church Government; we are but a ranting Schism from them: and therefore dying I
speak it, I do not arrogate to my self their (though not justified, or so much
as approved) Religion.

For the Cause of my Death, I can here assign many.

The first is Natural -- Nullum violentum est perpetuum, Nothing can be
permanent that is violent, my fury soon wasted and consumed those spirits which
might have protracted and prolonged my Fate; no abatement, no respiration
allowed in my have to the ruin of Three Kingdoms, till I had outrun my self
and the Constable: though the ingenious justice of that Gentleman, who would
have me whipped from Tything man to Tything man, till I came to the place of my
Birth, would have delivered me into his hands.

The second is Divine. I was first shown to the World as a Copy of Gods will to
be done and obeyed in the new Ordering of the World; I was styled the second
Covenant of Grace. A Ray of the Divinity; what not? whereas another Herostratus
was my parent. I frighted the first light that looked on me, till I had driven
it into a Gloomy dismal Night, that overcast three Kingdoms; and is it not
just with Heaven, I should expiate those false Fires, and that imprecation be
heard on me, Let fire come down from Heaven and consume me?

The third is Political. Laws and Government have made an universal League
between Mankind, other compacts are but enclosures of the peaceably enjoyed
Common: what a Deluge of Blood did the French Catholic League draw from that
Kingdom, that it might have been said to have been a League with Death,
wherever was any potent Rebellion maintained without some such Confederation?
And the Evils I have done, and the misery I have been the cause of, are little
less then the most prevailing of them can boast of. It Is both security and
satisfaction therefore to the Laws, and established Magistracy, solemnly to
extinguish these Flames of Sedition by their Justice in lighting me.

Other Extrinsical causes there were, but being but subservient to these I
shall pass them, lest I touch upon some jarring Strings, in the late
Revolution.

For this Death I forgive all the World, though I expect not to be forgiven. I
shall leave such a deep impression in the Ruins of many Families, that it will
exceed their Charity, or Times oblivion to blot it out. I am not able to make
Restitution, The Crown and the Mitre will be I hope content with the
Reversions: Private men must lick the Dishes.

I carry nothing out of the World with me, and yet must leave something behind
me. A stinking name to posterity.

That justice that condemned me to this punishment, might have been pleased to
order a bonefire of all the Presbyterian Books, printed from the beginning of
the Troubles, and its first origin, for the Booksellers could have afforded
them for wast paper; but since they saw it not good, I am content with this
small rogus.

I leave all my proselytes and adherers in a sad plight. I owe much to them for
their ardent affection to me; but they have a recompense in their bosom, in
their very conscience, and therefore I am not very solicitous for them. If they
will still pine and murmur at my usage, and do as Children for a play thing or
bawble, let the Fools even do so.

I shall not trouble you much longer, Mr. Executioner, (I have been better
attended formerly) I see none but Boys and Prentices (as malicious Persecutors
of me, as once of Dr. Lamb) whom I cheated of their Holidays, and therefore I
must address my self to them. Beware I advise you of keeping your Indentures,
that's a sort of Covenant, which taken and observed in the strict rigid sense,
will cause much Tribulation to you. You cannot but observe how your Masters are
a^flicted by me, though taken voluntarily by them; pray therefore restrain not
any Liberty you can give your selves; vow and promise any thing to a Girl, but
beware of Covenants and Contracts, as long as you can be your Masters
Oxiliaries.

One word more to the Public Faith men, I warn them not to trust to any solemn
Juramental Engagement, it is all one as to credit a Damme Cavalier; It was
clearly putting of their money to Interest, or the lottery of the Holy Cheat,
when they advanced such wonderful sums for my Account. Nothing was ever less
meant in this my whole conscientious business then repayment, and with this I
should wish them to be satisfied.

I have just done, for I have no prayers to say, the Spirit fails me, this is
an Extempore punishment; I doubt not of nor need I to ask your Curses, I
believe you are all ready to mount me upwards -- Executioner stay while I give
the sign.


Dun. I have stayed long enough already, I never got any of you within my
Clutches, I take you for a good handsell; h'a done now.


Cov. So I will, let me say these words first, Dubium vixi, anxium morior,
nescio quo vadam.


Dun. You Conjure; The sign:


Cov. When the Presbyterians hold up their right hand again to the most High
--, etc. Executioner do your Office.


The Marquess of ARGYLES Last WILL and TESTAMENT.
IN the Name of Smectymnnus and Hocus Pocus, so be it; I Archibald Marquess of
Argyle, the Devils Viceroy in the Highlands, and the most Sacred Covenants
Protomartyr in the Low, now a Prisoner in the Toll Booth at Edingborough;
calling to my mind, that my prefixed bargained term of years is even expired,
and knowing that all the Town cannot save me: Having recollected all my
unparalleld Rebellions, Treasons, Murders, Rapine, Plunderings, Witchcraft,
Perjury, Covetousness and Sacrilege; for which I do expect to receive good
Wages at the Hands of my Master, do make and Ordain this my last Will and
Testament in manner and form following.

First, because it is of Form to begin so, I believe with Pythagoras that Souls
do transmigrate, I my self being that very Matchiavil that lived in Florence
some Two hundred years since; and therefore I will, that mine do forthwith
after my Dissolution pass into one of his Wild-soule, thence into a Soland
Goose, thence into a Scotch Pedlar, thence into a Man whom Lilly by the Stars
prognosticated (some ages to come) to be made a Notorious Cuckold, so that by
that means, it may be be sure at last to come to Heaven.

Secondly, for my Body (since the Parliament so detest that horrid Babarisme
committed on the Marquess of Montrose, that they think it not fit to retaliate
it upon me the prime Author thereof) it being at my own disposal, I request my
Executors hereafter named, to see it solemnly interred with the spells of the
Directory, and laid so shallow, that at the next Trump of Sedition, it may by
the same raise-Devil Directory be conjured up again, and meet my exalted Head,
that Bound mark of Presbytery, its ne plus Ultra, Hitherto shall you go and no
further: But I forbid then any such superstitious procession, as to my scandal
and great offense of the Brethren, was used to the gathered relics of that
late loyal Martyr.

As for my worldly Goods and Estate with which the Covenant that Goddess Diana
has blessed me, I say to it Presto Jupiter, lightly come, lightly go, the wicked
Cavaleirs will divide the spoil; what was got by oppression, will be booned
way by the Kings liberality, had mine been a mean fortune, it had not probably
met with such Extremes. Nevertheless my dear Brethren in affliction, I have
also a Portion for you; as I had Time and Opportunity of getting, so I had the
wisdom of hiding and concealing, and what I thus preserved, I give and
bequeath in manner following.

Inprimis, for that great Reverence and Religion I owe to the solemn League and
Covenant, I give a Thousand pounds to the Pastors and Ministers of the Church
of Geneva toward the Erecting a Shrine or building a Sanctuary for the
Covenant, now persecuted and driven out of these three Kingdoms; whose sacred
ashes (if they can be found) I will also to be there deposited in a golden Urne
to be provided at the charge of my Executors. Straightly requiring that no
Tapors, Lamps, Torches, Links, or other ligh^s, be used near the said shrine or
in the said Sanctuary, it being Popish, Haeretical and impious, and most
abominable. And I do hereby lovingly request the said Church (since our Kirk
has lost its Keys) immediately to excommunicate the London Hangman, and all
other persons whatsoever who have had any hand in burning, or otherwise
profaning that most Holy Thing.

Item, I give 2000 l. more for founding a College or Fraternity there, to be
Christened by the name of the Society of the Covenant, and for founding a
Covenant Reader in that University; hoping that well disposed Presby(...) ^ill
so add to this foundation, that in a short (...) may rival for villainy with
that of the Jesuists.

Item, whereas the sad case of Dr. Burges has mightily affected the tender
bowels of the Sisters, who complain there is not a stone by a stone of all his
late Purchases, particularly the great loss he has had by the fire of the
Covenant in his Deanery of Wells, to his utter undoing, and for which he is
never likely to have a Brief; I bequeath to him the sum of Five hundred pounds,
it being a good competency to keep him in Bedlam all the remainder of his life.

Item, I give to that little David of the Covenant that Champion of Presbytery
Mr. Zachary Crofton an augmentation of an 100 l. per annum, as long St. Peter's
Bonds abide; and that through any discouragement or restraint he may not faint
and fall away, I add a Noble a day for Caudles and Cordials, charging him to
stand manfully for the cause, he being the chief Standerd bearer, in which this
Impress is written, Tu Patronus, si Tu deseris nos Perimus.

Item, as next in order I give to Mr. Jenkins not out of respect to his love of
the Covenant, for Satan that buffeted him knows how weak he is in that point,
but for his seditious preachments, for his turbulency of Spirit, and
restlesseness against the Kings Government Five hundred pound; I know that's too
much, for I detest a Recanter with all my Heart, and it is not according to our
strict Discipline to revoke a Tittle: but seeing how near the brink Presbytery
is brought, all things must be done to support it, and therefore we must make
use of Renega^ (...) -- Hang him he shall have it, but the Devil do him good
with it if he recants again.

Item, I Will give Ten thousand pound for erecting a Seminary of such Rogues in
Eutopia, for I cannot persuade my self there will Ever be the like in any of
these three Kingdom^s.

Item, not to forget Dr. Wilkinson, I give him Twenty shillings to mend the
Bellows of his Mouth and Nose, against the next opportunity of blowing up the
flames of a Civil War; and for his Subdeanary of Christ-Church Oxen, a Fart.

Item, to Mr. Poole with the red Head (I like him the better for that) I give
Three hundrad mark to buy him some Manners, and Five hundred mark to buy him
more Wit, else Presbytery will soon lose a prating nonsensical Cacafuego, and
his Parish a troublesome Tythmonger.

Item, To all those old Presbyterian Serpents that have slipped their skins, and
are winding themselves into favor, in the A la mode Cassock, and in a submisse
compliance lick the dust of the Bishops foot, and yet keep their Venom within
their teeth, I bequeath to each a Scotch Thirteen pence halfpenny for the use
of Squire Dun, who shall show them slip for slip.

Item, I give Four hundred pound for the building of an Almshouse for the
entertaining of all Antiquated Exauthorated Elders, who cannot sufficiently or
quietly live in their own Parishes.

Item, I give one One thousand Mark for the building of an Hospital or Pest
House, for all such as are or shall be infected with the Scotch Plague, that is
such as want Clothes, Money and Friends.

Item, To the several Sects of Anabaptists, Fifth Monarchy men, Quakers, etc. I
give respectively Ten Groats to redeem their Meeting Houses; in condition they
do not jeer that Covenant in which they voluntarily perjured themselves.

Item, All my Offices and Preferments whatsoever, I give freely to those who
are disabled to bear any in England.

Item, For perpetual memory of Presbytery, I give a Hundred pound for the
casting the figure of the dog in Brass that lay with the Elders Maid; to be
placed where the last Provincial Classis was held in London, as a desk for the
Directory.

Item, To any that can, or shall prove Presbytery to be jure Divine, I Will give
him Three Kingdoms; for then they will not be worth the Having, and the Devils
proffer, and my Legacy, will be all one.

Item, I give to the Wife of Oliver Cromwell, for his keeping the Covenant in
the right sense by murdering the King, a Groat a day.

Item, I give to the late Secretary Thurloe, my debt due to me from his Master
and the Rump for moneys expended by me for their use in Scotland, which was to
be repayed me out of the Commission for Discoveries, when I was last in London,
by Olivers Direction. I understand, and I thank him he has made so large a
progress in discovering, that he can pay it now to himself -- The De'l was in
me to suffer such a pitiful fellow to whiddle before me.

Item, I give my Debentures to Captain George Withers Esquire to purchase more
Bishops Lands in lieu of those he sacrilegiously kept before: and that he may
never cease scribbling of Rhymes, I Will not leave him a farthing.

Item, I give to the Independent Gathered Churches under the cure and teachings
of Cockain, Brooks, etc. all the ill qualities of our gasping Kirk, that by the
impudence and deceit of their Pastors, their ruin also may be expedited.

Item, I give to the Clerk of Mr. Calamies Church a Ring to wear for my sake,
for his great Superlative zeal yet manifested to the Covenant --

Item, To all the Sons and Daughters of Presbytery, who now mourn and lament, I
give a Medal (with my squint Eyes in it leering after other times, and a better
day) to dry up their tears.

All these Legacies and Bequests, I will and order my Executors to perform and
pay the morrow of the next Puritan Reformation in England, or at St. Tibs Eve
at farthest, without any Covin or delay.

As for mine own Country, Relations, and Friends; I do also dispose of my
Estate to them, as follows.

I will therefore first that the whole Scotch Nation be put into mourning in
remembrance of those ruins, dishonor, conquest, and slavery, which my
Covenanting covetous designs have brought upon it; though I would not have my
Brethren of the Presbytery lay that so much to heart, as that they are like to
do so no more.

As to my Sept so famous heretofore in this Kingdom, as I never did them good
in my life so they cannot expect otherwise at my Death, they have a Scotch
Privilege now to beg or steal where they please, without any frustraneous
dependence or expectance on my greatness; if my name will do them any service
they may make use of it and stern, since they are I fear rejected of God and
Man.

Item, To my dear Lady I give and bequeath her full and entire Jointure, which
was setleed firm enough by Law before thanking her for all the kindness and
benevolence I had from her, when my keeper was out of the way.

Item, To my hopeful Son the Lord Lorne I give the inheritance of my qualities,
leaving him an equal portion and share of Estate and Honor; the first I
forfeited from him, and the last he never had from me, nor is like to be
capable of, since he must continue and preserve my hated nature: I give him my
unnecessary blessing, as it is prescribed in that most exact sorm in the
Directory.

Item, To the rest of my Sons and Daughters, since I cannot be too indulgent a
Father, I advise them for their great Consolation to read the Spanish Curate,
and take what portions they please.

Item, To all my Servants and Retainers, who I doubt not have learnt from me
their Master to carve for themselves without bidding; all they can cheat and
purloyne from mine Estate as well as from others, besides my pronsim of
Oat-meale for their lives, and Hemp for their Deaths.

Item, To my Vassals of my Seignory, I give their long desired Freedom.

Item, To the Poor of my Parish, for every Curse they give me, the sum of 000.

And I do make and ordain my loving and intimate friends, Archibald Johnson,
Lard Wareston, and William Dundasse, sometime Governor of Edinborough Castle
Executors of this my last Will, to whom I freely give all the rest and residue
of my whole Estate not hereby disposed, requesting them by all the obligations
of Conscience and Honesty, to compeere suddenly in this Kingdom, and take upon
them the Execution of the Premises, no way doubting or mistrusting but that
they shall be well rewarded.

All this I ratify and confirm by the mysteries of the stool of Repentance, on
which I devoutly set my breech, and having done sealed it with a --

And I do hereby revoke all former Wills by me made, as not being framed
according to that Holy Pattern of the Covenant, from which under Damnation no
man may recede a Tittle; and which I will further to be cut in brass and laid
upon my Tombstone

Subscribed ARGUILE. Done in the presence of Sir JOHN CHERSLY. DAVID LESLEY.

THE CHARACTER OF The late MARQUIS of ARGUILE.
SO many remarkable accidents, such alterations of Government, Affairs of such
moment and intrigues of State, do fall in with this Marquesses memoires, that
it will rather seem a History then a Character to speak him out. His Birth
rendered him very Noble, and his Education proffered him the advantage of making
it Nobler, though for that he was beholding to the first Tempest of the Times,
being by his late Majesty to oblige him from the Rebellion then on foot,
created a Marquess. He was of Stature something exceeding the mean, like his
own Countrymen the Highlanders, with a biggness proportionable to it, his Face
somewhat long, his Cheeks wide, the hair of his Beard red, his Eyes very much
a squint, so that he was Nicknamed in Scotland Gleed Arguile, which remembers
me of that Proverb -- Quem Deus in oculo notavit hunc caveto. There will no
more need to be said of h^s person, which the Hands of the Executioner have so
lately profaned; nor was there any thing in him that was good so remarkable, as
to invite you to be curious, and it will be best for him that he sleep
forgotten, lest the remarques of his face should fright fancifull people like a
spectium. He was one of that wicked Triumvirate, who began continued and lived
to the End of our Troubles. A most Dexterous Artist in that prime quality of a
Scot, Dissimulation, which was the ground work of all the Exploits he did
after. If ever he seemed what he was (though that be not to be over-believed)
'twas in the matter of the Covenant, which he entered into so eager and
resolutely, and left it and the world together so confidently and avowedly; and
yet the middle agreed with neither, when in the Crisis of the sincerity,
Honesty, and Loyalty of that Libel which it so highly boasted of, as to the
maintenance of the Kings Person Dignity and Authority; by this Marquesses
Counsel, his late Majesty was delivered into the Hands of the English at
Newcastle. But it is most Evident, that the right spelling of Covenant is
Covetousness, and according to that he very well kept it, having shared a good
part of that 200000 l. given the Scotch Army for their departure. He was as
versatile as a Die, and like that sometimes, was played always with very lucky
hands (as those times were) and was every way as square, stood firm on his own
interest, and could oppose a broadside to every emergency of fortune (then
adored by the name of Providence) He was in with all the several Usurpers, and
that not by a servile subjection, but as a Petty Princes interest, that could
help them as well by informing and discovering as supplies and stores, though
the latter to Cromwell was a mere Braga^ocio, and beyond the High mightiness of
his Highland Sovereignty, where his baseness had lost him all respect and
obedience. Certainly he was the Proteus of the Age, and had not the sudden
surprisal of our most happy resolution seized him sup^nely careless and at a
great distance (though he hurried up to London to wait on His Majesty) and then
bound him fast, that he could have no liberty to assume any other shape then
what he was then found in (being denied access or audience at Court) he might
have been a riddle still, whereas now Death has resolved Him. All that ever he
did handsomely was then, and yet that too was but a mere disguise, since so
dissonant to the whole course of his life, a mere imitation, though so well
personated that we may well let it pass for a bravery, and allow it to him as
he was a Gentleman. He was a great Fomenter of war, yet cared not at all to
endanger himself, like the Monkey that took the Cats foot to pull the Chestnut
out of the fire, nor was he much to be blamed, having been by the Marquess of
Montrosse so often put to shift (and that narrowly too) for his life: what he
wanted of the generosity of a War^ier, he supplied with the malice of a Witch,
being the most implacable revengeful Enemy, Loyalty ever met with in Scotland.
Learned he was, and that not as a Gentleman enough to set off and polish but to
accomplish him; and a most exellent way of speech he had (if it be possible any
thing can sound handsome in Scotch) very fluent and Rhetorical. His Speeches at
his Trial (which were said to have been spoken ex tempore, because they would
not allow him his delays, but compelled him to present answer) are very grave
and sententious, yet polite and very cunning. He was a deep Lawyer and was
formerly Lord Chief Justice, I think not much taxed for bribery (for I take all
their Lands, Estates, and whatever Scotland is worth not to be worth a Suite,
much less the overplus of a Greazing) yet all this while a bad nature
predominated, like stinking Oil upon generous Wine; his potentiality to virtue
never exerted it self, while his vices were most notorious and boyant. It is a
truth undeniable that he died unpitied of all men, and the reason was this, the
universality and complication of his vices could miss no man's eyes, and for one
fault or other so many single observations hit him, as drew a general Odium
upon him; Excepting only the Presbyterian Clergy, who always had a particular
respect for him, not from any other inducement but the necessity of dependence,
the Kirk rides while the Lords hold the reins, and keep that people under the
Tyranny of that worse then Turkish Government. He was the first Promoter of the
Discipline, and that with an Earnestness extraordinary, wherein no doubt he
served himself principally, and the large demeasnes he died possessed of, will
evidence, what religion he was of, and how beneficial a thing Reformation is to
the first Projectors. He was at feud with all his Superiors in Scotland as
well as his Peers; of four Marquesses he procured the execution of three; viz.
Hamilton, Huntley, Montrosse; the other, Douglasse, through his his impotency
and infirmity escaped him, so that he was Lord Paramount there No doubt his
abilities prompted him to cope with the greatness and Authority of those
Noblemen, whose great and Honorable Families would soon have smothered and
suppressed an ordinary Envy, while his burned and flamed at their Grave. He was
a profound Politician of a fine Mercurial spirit, of whom it may be said
dis-junctively, what his late Majesty said of the Earl of Strafford. He was
such a Minister of State, that he might well be ashamed of himself; and his
Prince as rightly fear him. There was nothing wanting in him but Loyalty and
Honesty, two such dispensable things with Presbytery, that they could hardly be
afforded room in their Morals for one whole age together; but it had been
direct Blaspemy to blend and incorporate them into their religion, however, for
specious pretense sake they crept into the Covenant He was a most indefatigable
carrier on of his Designs, and that with very great expedition, though his
motions were eccentrick, but all turbulent, and violent efforts are usually
very sudden: He thrice repaired, and recruited his broken Forces by the
Marquess of Montrosse, before there could be any thought of an Enemy from him.
He was never discouraged with any disappointment, but he would set the Kirk to
thunder out Anathema's, and himself made Proscriptions and levies together,
fight with the Pen and the Sword at one and the same time: but his Escripts
were not Julius Caesar's Commentaries, but C. Marius his publications and
Sentencings, betwixt whom there is in many things a near Parallel.

To take a nearer view of him and put him altogether, he was absolutely Master
of all the Arts of State; it were no injury to him to say it was his religion,
since the great successes of rebellion led him to a firm belief that there was
nothing but what was manageable by, and feasible to Policy. But he so mixed them
both in his affairs that it was not easily discernable to which he owed most;
by the first he secured his Interest, and had not the excesses of the English
usurpation outrun him, probably advanced his designs to that which Hamilton
was suspected of; by the other he procured an awe and reverence to himself,
being vogued up by the Clergy, and rendered to the Vulgar as a Pattern of Piety
and zealous promoter of Godliness, till such time as the vizor of the specious
Reformation was laid aside, and bold faced Interest outstared the impudency of
the Kirk, and made them veil to, and worship the Devil they had raised.

In a word he was the right Antithesis to that Glorious Marquis of Montrosse,
so that whoever read or has heard of his Excellencies, may by opposition know
the vileness of this. Such is the order of the world, though there be no
standing mean, yet that the Extremes should balance one another: otherwise it
had been a most hard fate for Scotland (who can impute her dishonor and total
Conquest to name originally but Arguile) to have produced no Renowned Person
his Contemporary, such as was Montrosse, whose Glories and Fame may fill up his
Chasmes in their History.

FINIS.
A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Mr. GUTHREY and Mr. GIFFAN.
Guthrey. BRother the Time is Come that we must glorify Presbytery in, and
therefore I would have you to cloth your self with resolution like as in a
plad, that our Ends may be like Heroic to the righteous Royalists, whom we
sent before us in this way.


Giffan. I doubt we are not so well appointed, but sure we that durst do any
thing, may dare to die, and therefore, good Father Confessor, give me your
blessing that I may be armed with all the Kirk Ammunition and store necessary
for this Expedition.


Gut. I am to seek my self, the perplexities of my cause, and the treachery of
a revolting party have begot the staggers; but I will muster up and summon all
the confidence of my life past to bear up with at my Exit.


Giff. My crimes are complicated and of a larger Extent then yours, and yet I
doubt not but by the dram of the bottle and your good Example, to face it out
rarely.


Gut. Well said, for who would pule, and sneak now; that ought to have been
done before, when some favor might have been expected from it. The Kirk will
Canonize us.


Giff. Besides what Presbyterian is he that would desire life longer then he
may have his will? we should die of the sullens, if we were not offered this
brave advantage; but you must tell me what I must say, when I come to it, in
honor of the Cause, and by what Epithete I shall style it.


Gut. Our Case is novel, and there was never any thing said before by any in
our Condition upon this subject, save what was lately held forth by Arguile,
most cunningly: now it is not requisite for you and me to be so modest or mealy
mouthed, but we will bounce up the Covenant.


Giff. Sir I am pretty well armed already, but if you teach me not now, when
you have had so much time to digest it into a method, I shall shame you, and
that will be little for your credit.


Gut. Presbytery in a method! I tell you you must rave at random, never speak
any thing appositely but what is direct treason, that you may be plainly
understood, it is for our Brethren of England who yet are troubled with little
learning and great benefices, to speak indifferently.


Giff. Sir I say still tell me the form, I Will be hanged in the Presbyterian way.


Gut. I Will assure you that's the comfortablest, and I have studied for it; as you
live a rogue so you die a rogue, or contrariwise, and the Hangman himself shall
not dare to quarrel with you; O the fear and terror of Excommunication!


Giff. Sir pray do not spare it, thunder it out, damn the whole Town, leave
nothing within a mile of a tree out of the Devils reach, it is as soon done by
the Kirk as by a Witch.


Gu. That will not advantage me or you, there is a consecrated place in the
Market within the lines of Communication where we must expire, and I Will trouble
the Devil no longer, I wont go a foot further, here we began and here we will
end.


Giff. O Edinborough! O Glascow! and all the renowned places of our Principal
Assemblies, thither shall the Precise ones go a Pilgrimage yearly, and devoutly
worship.


Gu. Well leave that to time, I shall now briefly instruct you what you are to
do in this your last Act.


Gif. I assure you I will not vary one Jota, I know you have the infallibility
of the Kirk.


Gut. Well then, first you must look as grim, and sour as Varges, speak not a
pleasing word to any of the Officers about you; when you have thus composed
your self, then you must with some vehement indignation declare and declaime
against the licentiousness and loose living of the Times, where you must by no
means take any notice of the Kings restoration, and his return to his
Kingdoms and Government, unless a thing offer it self, wherein you may have an
occasion to reflect an imputation upon him, there you may gird a little, but be
sure you laugh but at one side of your mouth, else you spoil all.


Gif. I think there is no necessity of laughter on any side, but I am sure there
will be grinning on both; but I shall never know how to bring a story in so
artificially.


Gut. If you know but any Common places of raillery, Envy, Calumnations, lies,
forgeries or other, stick not to lay them on soundly, you know the Presbyterian
rule -- Calumniare fortiter, aliquid haerebit with such loud reproachful
Accusations the Puritans first began their designs against Church and State.


Gif. Well Sir proceed.


Guthrey. Then you must set forth the Excellency of our Way, by showing what a
blessed change was wrought upon the people of the Nation since the Covenant was
taken, and what signal tokens there were of approbation of it.


Giffan. You do not reckon this for one sure, do you?


Gut. O yes, that's the cream of the jest, you must own this as the greatest
indulgence of Providence in the world, it being an Evident proof of the grouth
of Presbytery; now it comes to be watered by the blood of its Martyrs; 'twas
before a dry Plant, and cannot reckon one drop spilt before on it.


Gif. Would it had been planted in Africa, where better vegetables grow
without aid of any moisture: Sir, I am sure mine will do it no good, it is not
sound and wholesome, there are the Faeces of other Opinions in it, which will
rather infect then propagate.


Gut. You must understand our Modern Synods make no distinction betwixt the
Cause and the Person in Martyrdom for Presbytery, if the Covenant be objected
against you in observing any the least scruple thereof, either by sacrilege,
Rebellion, or other ways -- I can assure you, you die their Martyr.


Gif. It is all one to me, I am not so curious, nor am I solicitous of that
Honor; nor yet would I die like Hugh Peter's.


Gu. No he was manifestly and apparently besotted, or else so frighted with
Horrors and despairs within, that his after doom was begun before Execution
here.


Gif. Sir, I must clap in a word, I do not see our case to be much different
from his, and I begin to cool, my Heart blood flutters and quakes, pray tell
me what distinction the Modern Synods have made in this case.


Gu. I see you are carnal and consult with Flesh and Blood, I spoke those last
words of him, as an Independent, one whom the Kirk had cast off and rejected,
alas! we have delivered them to Satan ever since our Project failed in
England, they are no more to us then Portugal to the Papacy of Rome, or a
Protestant to a Papist.


Gif. They say they are of a nearer relation to you, your younger Brothers and
the wiser too.


Gu. I confess they did follow our pattern a long time, but it was with a
design to spoil our copy, and they supplanted us by the same artifice we used,
a greater seeming austerity of life and conversation; now I must deal
ingenuously, what ever they did else was conformable enough to what we hold
forth, but rivals and competitors were not endurable.


Gif. In short, I think you were all one, for I can guess shrewdly by my self;
after I had once taken the Covenant, (like a man who looks for no directions in
the midst of the mire) I cared not what I undertook, through thick or thin. To
swear for nothing was the next Employment to a Knight of the Post. I supposed
we did not stretch forth our hands in vain; so like other folks, I laid my
clutches on what ever I met; and to you my Confessor may I tell, I stretched out
my hand (by my consent and approbation, for you must know I aimed at
preferment) against my lawful Sovereign.


Gu. Did you cut off his head, or were you personally present on the Scaffold
when it was done?


Gif. No I was not, an advantage lay in my way, and my tongue tript over it,
and so I gave out that I was a chief instrument in that business.


Gu. Push! all your scruples are not worth a Schoolboys resolution; first you
are frighted with the President of Hugh Peter's, one whose Codpeice had wasted
his Head-peice; and the thoughts of a Butcher and his Wife running in his mind
just before the cleaver and fagots, may allow him a little despondency: but for
the other, the bringing the King to the block, that's the most impertinent case
of conscience I ever heard of, for it is as Commonly imputed to us Covenanters,
as our tautologies and wild excursions, bold and frivolous expressions in our
Prayers and Sermons have been, and as justly. Comfort thy self Dear Brother, I
tell you as long as you were not the Executioner, in oculis Diaboli, you did
nothing. I preached that Doctrine in effect some years before it was
perpetrated, I thank God my Presbyterian Conscience had never the least
Compunction in the world for it. I have got into such a train of it, that if
it had not been for that Antichristian Fashion of Archbishop Laud to make a
Sermon at my death. I would have preached a Sermon on that Subject. However now
I Will do little less.


Gif. Now your Consolations reach me, pray go on.


Gu. For the rest I refer you to our Remonstrances; I profess I wonder they do
not hang them about my neck: Our Exquisite malice served Moutrosse so, we took
all his Declarations and papers, and fastened them like a band to the collar,
his halter.


Gif. If they put the Covenant to your Remonstrances twere but due Justice, but
the law and sober men (it seems) scorn such impotent and pitiful revenges.


Gu. I profess I should glory in them, as confidently as he did in his, nobly.
I triumphed in the undeserved Fate of that Man, and my exasperating language
when those loyal souls were sacrificed to our lusts, has begot in me a
relentless heart to mine own, much more (Dear Brother) your Condition.


Gif. Can you not weep Crocodile for your self?


Gu. No, no, you shall see me observe all these things I have directed you in,
to a punctilio, without the least approaches to Humanity.


Gif. Do you mean you will be uncivil, or that you resolve to die Roman like?


Gu. I Will do both, you shall hear me defy the King and all his Parliaments,
Armies, and what ever comes within a Royal, Etc.


Gif. Gods bread Sir, you will e'ne say enough for us beeth, would your reverence
might hang for us beeth, I's never speak a word more against my Prince.


Gu. Too late to repent Brother, do you not remember of whom it was said by
Emphatical interrogation, Did not -- die like a fool?


Gif. What do you deduce and infer out of this Scripture.


Gu. That it is better to die like a Knave, and but that my time is short I
would insist upon Reasons thereof, wherefore I will conclude with the
Application only.

My Dearly beloved Brethren of the Covenant, stand fast in the persuasion to
which you have sold your selves, body and soul; and if there be any Jenkinites
among you, that can turn as often as a Shrove Tuesday Pancake (my ill boding
spirit foretells me of a great Apostasy) have no conversation with them, but
continue steadfast, that so the blessings of your Scotch Parents may be upon you
and yours henceforth and for Ever.


THE RECANTATION OF Mr. PATRICK GILLESPY, etc.
WHereas I Patrick Gillespy, Presbyter, being convened before the High Court of
Parliament and the Lord Commissioner his Grace, and there charged in due
process with several Treasonable and seditious speeches and papers against his
Majesty's Person, Family, Authority, and Government, of which I ought justly to
stand convict, the said crimes being manifestly found releivant against me; yet
through the undeserved clemency of my Judges having obtained leave to consider
and consult with my self, they desiring if by any means possible to reclaim or
dispossess a Presbyterian spirit; do in satisfaction to their Lordships, and
out of a pressing fear of Death ensuing, most humbly recant and retract (saving
to my self always a power if occasion serve to deny them again) these
following Errors, and dangerous Tenets.

First, Whereas I have Dogmatically and avowedly taught that Princes if they
will not be ruled tby he Kirk, and in all things conform themselves to their
dictates, as being his Supreme, and a power ordained over him, might by the
said Holy Kirk be bound and manacled, or more plainly, imprisoned and deposed,
and finally put to death. I do now truly and unfeignedly relinquish that fond
Opin^on, begot in me by the Excess of our Lordly Domination over his present
Majesty, (as also the necessitated condition of his glorious Father) when with
us in Scotland 1650, my eyes through the multiplied terrors of Death, seeing
as through a glass the manifold danger of that Principle: the rather for that
the good people of Scotland will dance no longer after our pipe; when we
thought the Circe^ incantations and charms of our Kirk had transfor^^^ and
alienated them into Everlasting rebellion. I do therefore heartily and
resolvedly abjure that Doctrine, which I know will never be believed again in
Scotland, under the danger of being next inslaved, whereas they escape for th^s
time, by being but conquered. And this I do informed by reason of State, not
complying altogether with it in my Conscience.

Secondly, whereas I have often declared in the Pulpit, that God had rejected
his present Majesty, together with his Family; for not owning the Hand of
Providence against him, but pers^sting in the steps of his Ancestors, who were
Enemies to Reformation: I do freely confess from my heart, that I never
thought of his restoration by any visible means abroad; and it was so far
from the intendments of this Kirk, either to advance or defend him, that we
would have made an Easier bargain of him then of his Father, had a Chapman
offered in time: and (as learned Coke, I mean the High Court of Justice
Solicitor said in the very same case, for his life also) since it was crimen
Avaritiae non malitiae, covetousness not cruelty, I pray your Lordships do not
put a greedy Presbyter to repent of that. And yet I will make bold a little
further with your patience, while I repeat in an humble and submisse reverence,
what a great Rabby of our way in England, effectually Mr. Jenkins
and advantagiously said for himself in a most curious Petition to the Rump of
the Commonwealth of England, in the same words Mutatis mutandis, about Mr.
Loves business.

I shall omit the Title as no way serving my design, having declared already
the Powers to whom it was addressed.

Shemeth,
THat your Petitioner being deeply sensible of your high displeasure into which
by some late actings he is unawares fallen, has made a greater research after
the mind of God in these late dispensations of his Providence in the great
Curns and Changes of State in this Commonwealth, and is therein wholly
convinced, that all Powers are of God, and that He both dispose of them
according to his own good will and pleasure, that he is also satisfied and
convinced, that no person may presume under Damnation to resist or withstand
the said powers.

And whereas your Petitioner, by several failures of obedience to this
Authority p'aced over him by God, is become obnorious to your Justice, and that
accordingly he is to be tried for the same, and unless your mercy mediate, and
prevent the Sentence, is like to suffer the severity of your just indignation.

Your Petitioner in all humility prostrates himself before you, beseeching you
favorably to remit his offenses, he engaging to live in all due obedience to
your Government, and to pray for the prosperity and continuance thereof

Signed W. JENKINS.


This so well succeeded, that upon the return of those rotten members by
Lamberts resurrection to their place, and possession of the power again, he was
the only man thought fit to preach the congratulatory Sermon, which he did
very gravely and heartily, thankfully remembering their bringing him from life
to Death, to see a like miracle for them in that their happy day: And why may
not I, my Lord, be such an Honest godly Convert, if you please to try me but
this once.

Thirdly, whereas it is objected and proved against me, that neither during the
Time his Majesty was in Scotland, nor since, I did ever so much as mention his
Majesty, (unless with bitter taunts and reflections) in my Prayers, nay, have
wholly discontinued praying for him after his defeat at Worcester, besides my
discontented preachments, since his return to his Kingdoms; I do freely
acknowledge, that what I did was by the major vote of my fellow Remonstrants,
and in obedience to the usurping English, whom in all Kirk policy and reason,
and the general practice of our Brethren in England (ever since 1642 when the
war began, where they prayed for the King as Gamesters for ill Dice, with
Curse ye Meroz,) we were forced to comply-with, even in our private devotions;
so feared we were that any body, nay God Alinighty himself should hear us to
speak for the King. I must indeed herein acknowledge my weakness, for I cannot
but confess, that if we did not then excommunicate him 'twas because we
thought the English Sectaries would not thank us, who were able enough to shut
him out of this Kingdom without our Keys. As for my malapertnesse since his
restitution, I humbly pray your Lordship to consider, how many inveterate
diseases are grown upon Presbytery in its declining age; Crazinesse and
Testiness are inseparable companions of it now, as madness, rashness and hot
zeal gave life and being to it. But if your Lordships suspect me incurable, deal
with me as favorably as the English have done to Philip Nigh, and I will learn
and endeavor to frame my mouth (with him) to the thanksgivings of secret
murmurs, whispers, obloquies and reproaches against the State and Kingdom.

Item, whereas I stand charged with procuring and inciting the Parliament of
this Kingdom, then sitting at Edinborough, to take away the lives of the
Marquess Montrosse, and those other Gentlemen then prisoners with him; and
that I did dispitefully, and maliciously traduce the memories of those Persons
after their death. As I cannot deny it, so I will not nor cannot make any
defense to it: if your Lord^hips be pleased to consider the Kirk, whose motto
from Tomyr^ was Satia te sanguiue, and whose inexpletible cruelties have
murdered more in one age, then all the Tyrannies in the Christian world have
done in Twenty; you will find my particular case, like to one in a Contagion, I
did that in the height of the infection; for then the Tokens were on us, and we
came to present destruction. A general malignancy and fury seized us, and we
killed and slew those persons in our rage, whose courage, conduct and Loyalty
might haved the Kingdom. My Lords, you have Confitentem reum to this
Particular. And so I say no more to it.

To all the rest of the charge exhibited against me, as refractorinesse,
rebellion, the business of the Remonstrance, etc. I appear before your
Lordships with a clear and cleansed stomach to confess them, I have vomited up
the Covenant, and have purged out the Remonstrance; I am swept clean, and if
your mercy enter not speedily, the seven deadly Devils of Presbytery will soon
return, and I shall be worse then I was at first. Therefore I say make sure of
me, lest like my Brother Crofton, I say one thing to night by way of
submission, and the next morning boggle at it again, like an old Woman's arse at
no Certainty. Just, just now I am in the humor, if you let this cold fit go
off me, and remove the Death-Head, I shall unsay all again, and then the London
Elders will boast wonderfully, and some other fools will plague you with my
Example here, as well as some there, therefore be sure you record it, that
there may be no exception against the verity of it, when ever I may have the
opportunity of reneging.

Signed and Delivered to be kept as a Monument of the Courage of Sir John
Presbyter. Patrick Gillespy.

The POSTSCRIPT.
PRay be pleased to communicate these sad Dispensations upon this our late
Flourishing Kirk to the morning Lecture; we are utterly divided here, such
skipping and leaping from Principles, such a variation and contrariety to the
received Discipline, that a Hopping diversicoloured Jack Daw may be a fitter
Emblem for the Covenant then a Phaenix. You are never like to have any other
news but of Scotland, and so good Brethren set your hearts at rest and be
quiet. Farewell.

FINIS.

