THE Voyages and Travels OF Sir John Mandevile, Knight.

Wherein is set down the Way to the Holy Land, and to Jerusalem: As also to
the Lands of the Great Caan, and of Prestor John: to Inde, and diverse other
Countries: Together with many and strange Marvels therein.



LONDON, Printed for R. Scott, T. Basset, J. Wright, and R. Chiswel, 1677.

THE PREFACE.
Here begins a short Treatise of Sir John Mandevile, Knight (who was born in
England, in the Town of Saint Albans) that speaks of the Ways to Jerusalem,
to Inde, and to the great Caan, and Prestor John's Land, and to many other
Countries, and also of many marvels that are in the Holy Land.

FOrasmuch as the Land beyond the Sea, that is, the Holy Land, which some call
the Land of Behest, or Promise, among all other Lands is most worthy. In that
Land it pleased our Lord to take flesh and blood of the Virgin Mary, and to
traverse that Land, with his own feet, and there he did many Miracles, Preach
and Teach the Faith, and the Law of Christian men, as unto his Children, and
there did suffer many reproofs and scorns for us: and he that was King of
Heaven and Earth, and of all things that are contained in them, would only be
called King of that Land, when he said, I am King of the Jews: For at that time
it was the Land of the Jews: and that Land he chose before all other Lands, as
the most worthy part of all the World. And as the Philosopher says, Virtus
rerum in medio consistet; that is, the virtue of things is in the midst. In
that Land he led his life, and suffered death of the Jews for us, to save and
deliver us from the pains of Hell, and from death without end, the which was
ordained to us for the sin of our Father Adam, and our own sins also. For he
that will do any thing, to have it known openly, will proclaim it in the middle
place of a Town or City, so that it may be known to all parties of the City: So
he that was King of Glory, and of all the World, would suffer death for us at
Jerusalem, which is the midst of the World; that it might be known to all
Nations of the World how dear he bought man. Ah dear God! what love had He to
his Subjects, that when he had done no trespass, would for his Trespassors
suffer death? Right well ought men to love, worship, and serve such a Lord, and
praise such an Holy Land that brought forth a Lord of such Fruit, through the
which each man is saved if it be not his own fault. This is that Land prepared
for in Heritage to us: and in that Land would he die as ^^^fed, to leave it to
his Children. For the which each good Christian man that may and has
wherewith, should strengthen him for to conquer his right Heritage, and
purchase it out of evil peoples hands; for we are called Christian men of
Christ our Father, and if we be the right Children of Christ, we ought to
challenge the Heritage that our Father left us, and take it out of strange men's
hands. But now Pride, Covetousness, and Envy, have so enflamed the hearts of
the Lords of the World, that they are more busy to disinherit their
Neighbors, than to challenge or conquer their right Heritage aforesaid. And
the common people that would put their bodies for to conquer this Heritage,
they may not do it without Lords: for assembling of the people without a chief
Lord, is as a Flock of Sheep without a Shepherd, the which depart asunder, and
wot not whether they do go. But would God the worldly Lords were at a good
accord, and with other of their common people would take this Holy Voyage over
Sea, I trust well, that within a little time our right Heritage beforesaid
would be recovered and put into the hands of the right Heirs of Jesus Christ.

Now forasmuch as it is a long time since there was any general Passage
thither, and that many men desire to hear the description of the Holy Land, I
will declare it.

I, John Mandevile, Knight, who was born in England in the Town of St. Albanes,
passed the Sea in the year One thousand three hundred thirty two on Saint
Michaels day; and there remained long time, and went through many Lands, and
many Provinces, Kingdoms, and Isles, and have passed through Turkey, and
through Armony the Little and Great, through Tartary, Sury, Araby, Egypt the
High and the Low, through Liby, Chalde, and a great part of AEthiope, through
Amazony, through Inde the Less and the More, and through many other Isles which
are about Inde, where many people dwell of diverse shapes. Of the men of which
Lands and Isles, I shall speak plainly, and shall declare part of the the
things I have seen.

For them that will visit the holy City of Jerusalem, and the places that are
thereabout, I will tell the right way that they shall hold thither; for I have
ridden it, and passed it with good observation.

Farewell.
THE VOYAGES and TRAVELS OF Sir John Mandevile, Knight.
CHAP. 1 A Description of the Way to Jerusalem on Horse, on Foot, or by Sea.
HE that will travel to Jerusalem, may go many ways both by Sea and Land,
after the Country that he comes from. And think not, kind Reader, that I will
tell all the Towns, Cities, and Castles that men shall pass by going, for then
should I make too long a Tale, but only the most principal Countries, Cities,
and Towns that men shall go by, and through, to go the right way.

First, if a man come from the West side of the World, as England, Ierland,
Wales, Scotland, and Norway, he may if he will go through Almain, and through
the Kingdom of Hungary, which King is a mighty Lord, and holds many Lands and
great: for he holds the Land of Hungary, Savoy, Camony, a great part of the
Kingdom of Russia, and reaches to the land of Millain, and marches on to
Cyprus. And men must pass then through the land of Hungary, and through the
City that men call Capanumy, and near the Castle of Nurburgh, and by the Isle
Torn, and so by the River of Danubi, that is a great River, and goes into
Almain under the Hills of Lumbardy, and it takes into it forty other Rivers,
and runs throughout Hungary, through Cresses and Crochie, and goes into the
Sea so strongly, and with so great might, that the water is fresh thirty miles
within the Sea. And afterward men go to Belgrave, and enter into the Land of
Bugres, and there men pass a Bridge of Stone that is over the River of Morack,
and so pass the Land of Pinseras, and come to Greece, to the City of Stermisse,
and to the City of Affinpan, that was sometime called Bradre the Noble, and so
to Constantinople, that was sometime called Byzantium, and there the Emperor of
Greece has his Court. At Constantinople is the fairest Church in the World,
and it is called St. Stevens. And before this Church is a guilt Image of
Justinian the Emperor, and it is sitting upon an Horse, and crowned, and it was
wont to hold a round Apple in his hand, and men say there, that it is a token
that the Emperor has lost a part of his Lands, for the Apple is fallen out of
the Images hand, and sure he has lost a great part of his Lordship; for he was
once sole Emperor of Rome, of Greece, and of all Asia the less, of Sury, and of
the Land of Judea, in the which Jerusalem is, and of the Land of Egypt, of
Persy and Araby, but he has lost all but Greece, and that he holds only.
They would put the Apple into the Images hand, but it will not hold it. The
other hand he lifts up against the East, to menace misdoers. This Image
stands upon a Pillar of Marble.



Likewise at Constantinople is the Cross of our Lord, and his Coat without
seam, the Sponge and the Reed, with the which the Jews gave our Lord Gall to
drink on the Cross; and there is one of the Nails that our Lord was nailed with
to the Cross. Some men think that half the Cross of Christ is in Cypress, in an
Abbey of Monks, that men call the Hill of the holy Cross: but it is not so; for
the Cross that is in Cypress is the Cross on the which Dismas the good Thief
was hanged: but all men know not that; yet for the getting of the offering they
say, that it is the Cross of our Lord. For ye shall understand, that the Cross
of our Lord Jesus Christ was made of four manner of trees, as is apparent by
the Verse following:

In Cruce fit Palma, Cedrus, Cypressus, Oliva.


For the piece that went up right from the Earth unto the head, was of Cypress,
and the piece that went overthwart, to which his hands were nailed, were Palm;
the stock that stood within the Earth, in which they made a Morteis, was of
Cedar, and the Table above his Head, on which the Title was written, was of
Olive. The Jews made this Cross of these four Woods, for they thought our Lord
should have hanged as long as the Cross would last, therefore made they the
foot of Cedar, for Cedar will not rot in the earth, nor in water: they thought
that the body of Christ would have stunk; therefore they made the piece that
went from the Earth upwards, of Cypress; so that the smell of his Body should
grieve no man that came by: and that overtwart was made of Palm, in
signification of Victory: and the Table wherein the Title was, was made of
Olive, for it betokened peace; as the Story of Noe witnesses, when the Dove
brought the Branch of Olive, it betokened peace made between God and Man.

And ye shall understand that the men that dwell beyond the Sea, say, that the
piece of the Cross that was of Cypress, was of the Tree that Adam eat the apple
of; for so they find written; They say also, that their Scripture says, that
when Adam was sick he willed his Son Seth, that he should go to Paradise, and
pray the Angel that kept Paradise, that he would send him Oil of the Tree of
Mercy, for to anoint him, that he might have health; and Seth went, but the
Angel would not let him come at the Gate, but said unto him, that he might not
have of the Oil of mercy, but he gave him three kernels of the same Tree that
his Father eat the Apple of, and bad him as soon as his Father was dead, that
he should put those kernels under his tongue, and bury him, and he did so: and
of these three kernels sprang a tree; and the Angel said, when the tree bare
fruit, then should Adam be made whole. And when Seth came again and found his
Father dead, he did with the kernels as the Angel commanded him; of which came
three trees, whereof a Cross was made that bare good Fruit, that is, our
Savior Jesus Christ, through whom Adam, and all that came of him shall be
delivered from everlasting death, if it be not their own default. This holy
Cross had the Jews hid under the Earth in the Rock of the Mount Calvary, and it
lay there two hundred years and more, as they say, unto the time that St. Elene
found it; which St. Elene was the Daughter of Coel king of England, and then
was called Britain, and after married to Constantius first Consul, and after
Emperor of Rome, who had by her, issue, Constantine the Great, born in
England, and afterward Emperor of Rome; which Constantine turned the name of
Bizantium into Constantinople: he reedified that City and made it the Monarchal
Seat of all Europe and Asia minor. Also the Cross was in length eight cubits,
and the piece that went overthwart was three cubits and a^ half.

A part of the Crown wherewith our Lord was crowned, and one of the Nails, and
the Spears head, and many other Relics, are in France at Paris, in the king's
Chapel; and the Crown lies in a Vessel of Crystal richly decked: for the
French king bought those Relics sometime of the Jews, to whom the Emperors
had laid them to pledge for a great sum of Gold. And though men say that this
Crown was of Thorns, ye shall understand that it was of Iunks of the Sea,
which be white, and prick as sharp as Thorns, for I have seen and beheld many
times that at Paris, and that at Constantinople, and they were both made of the
Iunks of the Sea. And you shall understand that our Lord in that night that he
was taken, he was led into a Garden, and there he was examined sharply, and
there the Jews crowned him with a Crown of Abbespine branches that grew in the
same Garden, and set it on his Head so fast, that the blood ran down many
places of his Visage, Neck, and Shoulders; and thereby the Abbespine has many
virtues; for he that bears a branch of it about him, no Thunder nor no manner
of Tempest may hurt him; nor in the house that it is in, may no evil spirit
come, nor in no place where it is. And in that same Garden St. Peter denied our
Lord thrice. And afterward was our Lord led before the Pharisees and Ministers
of the Law, into another Garden of Annas, and there he was examined, scourged,
and crowned often with sharp Thorns, that men call Harbarenes, that grew in the
same Garden, and that has many virtues. And afterward he was led to a Garden
of Caiphas, and there he was crowned again with Eglantine, and after that he
was led to a chamber of Pilate, and there he was crowned, and the Jews set him
in a chair, and clad him in a Mantle of Purple, and then made they a Crown of
the Iunkes of the Sea, and there they kneeled to him, and mocked him, saying:
Ave Rex Judaeorum, that is, Hail king of the Jews; and of the Crown, half is at
Paris, and the other half at Constantinople, the which our Savior Christ had
on his Head, when he was nailed on the cross. And the Spears shaft the Emperor
of Almany has; but the head which was put in his side is at Paris, they say,
in the holy Chapel: Likewise, the Emperor of Constantinople says, that he
has the Spears head, and I have seen his, but it is greater than that at
Paris. Also at Constantinople lies Saint Anne our Ladies Mother, whom Saint
Elene caused to be brought from Jerusalem, and also the Body of Saint John
Chrysostom, that was Bishop of Constantinople. There lies also St. Luke the
Evangelist, for his bones were brought from Bethany, where he was bursed; and
many other Relics are there: and there is a Vessel of Stone, as it were
Marble, which men call Hydrius, that evermore droppeth water, and fills it
self every year once. Ye shall further know that Constantinople is a fair City,
and well walled, and is three cornered, and there is an Arm of the Sea that men
call Hellespont, and some the ^unch at Constantinople, and some the Breach of
Saint George: and this water incloseth two parts of the City: and upward to the
Sea upon that water was built the great City of Troy, in a fair Plain, but that
City was derstoyed by the Greeks.

CHAP. II. Of the Islands of Greece.
ABout Greece are diverse Isles that men call Calabre, Calcas, Settico,
Thosoria, Minono, Farion, Molo, Carpate and Lampne: and in this Isle is Mount
Athoes that passes the Clouds. And there are diverse speeches, and many
Countries that are obedient to the Emperor of Constantinople; that is,
Turcoply, Pinrie, Narde, Comage, and many other: Thracie and Macedony, of which
Alexander was king. In this Country was Aristotle born, in a City that men call
Strageris, a little from the City of Tragie; and at Strageris is Aristotle
buried, and there is an Altar on his Tomb, where they make a great Feast every
year, as it were a Saint. And upon this Altar the Lords hold their great
Counsels and Assemblies; for they think that through the Inspiration of God and
him, they have the better Counsel. In this Country are very high Hills: there
is the Hill Olympus, that parts Macedony and Thracia, whose height reaches
to the Clouds. There is also the Hill Athoes, which is so high that the shadow
of it reaches to Olympus, and it is near threescore and seventeen miles
between. And above that Hill is an Air so clear, that no wind can be felt,
neither may any beast live there, the Air is so dry. Some of the Country say,
that Philosophers were wont to go up to the top of those Hills, (holding to
their Noses a Sponge wet with water, because of the dryness of the Air) and in
the dust of the Hill write letters with their fingers, which when they came
again the next year, they found without any default, even as they had written
them the year before; whereby it appears that those Hills pass the Clouds to
the pure Air.

At Constantinople is the Emperors Palace, which is fair and richly built, and
therein is a place for Iusting made about with Stages, that every man may well
see without hindering of one another. Under these Stages are vaulted Stables for
the Emperors Horses, and all the Pillars are of Marble. Within the Church of
St. Sophie, an Emperor would have laid the body of his Father when he was dead;
and as they made the Grave, they found a Body in the Earth, and upon the Body
lay a great Plate of fine Gold, and thereupon was written in Hebrew, Greek and
Latin Letters, these words, Jesus Christus nascetur de Virgin Maria, and ego
credo in eum; that is, Jesus Christ shall be born of the Virgin Mary, and I
believe in him. And the date was, that it lay in the Earth two hundred years
before our Lord Jesus Christ was born, and yet is that Plate in the Treasury of
the Church; and it is thought that Hermogenes the wise man writ it.

And although the men of that Country be Christians, yet nevertheless they vary
from our Faith: for they say, that the holy Ghost proceeds not from the Son,
but from the Father only: neither are they obedient to the Church of Rome, nor
to the Pope; but they say, that their Patriarchs have as much power there, as
the Pope has at Rome. And therefore Pope John the xxii. sent Letters to them,
how that Christians should be all one, and that they should be obedient to the
Pope; and among diverse answers, they sent him this for one. Potentiam tuam
summam circa subjectos tuos firmiter credimus. Superbitatem tuam sustinere non
possumus. Avaritiam tuam satiare non intendimus. Dominus tecum sit, quia
Dominus nobiscum est. Vale. That is, We believe well, that thy power is great
over thy Subjects. We may not suffer thy pride. We are not purposed to fulfill
thy covetousness. Our Lord be with thee, for our Lord is with us. Farewell.
Other answer might he not have of them. And also they make their Sacrament of
the Altar of tharf Bread, because our Lord made it of tharf Bread, when he made
his Maundy: and on Shrove-thursday make they their Bread, in token of the
Maundy, and they dry it in the Sun, and keep it all the year, and give it to
sick men. And they make but one Unction, when they Christen children, and they
anoint no sick men; also they say there is no purgatory, and that souls shall
have neither joy nor pain until the day of Doom.

And they say, that Fornication is no deadly sin, but a kindly thing, and that
men and women should wed but once, and whosoever weddeth more than once; their
Children are Bastards, and gotten in sin; and their Priests also are Wedded:
and they say, that Usury or Simony is no deadly sin, and they sell Benefices of
the Church, and so do men of other places; but it is great pity, for now Simony
reigns in the holy Church; God amend it when his will is: and they say, that
Laymen should not sing Mass, but on the Saturday, and on the Sunday: and they
fast on the Saturday no time in the year, unless it be Christmas or
Easter-even. And they suffer no man that is on this side the Greek sea, to sing
at their Altars; and if it fall out that one do, then they wash their Altar
without tarrying, with holy water; and they say, that there should be but one
Mass said at one Altar in a day. And they say, that our Lord did never eat
meat, but he made a show of eating. And also they say, that we sin deadly in
shaving off our Beards, for the Beard is a token of a man, and a gift of our
Lord: and they say, that we sin in eating Beasts that were forbidden in the old
Law, as Swine, Hares, and other Beasts.

And this they say, that we sin in eating of Flesh on the day before
Ashwednesday, and in eating of Flesh on the Wednesday, and when we eat Cheese
or Eggs on the Friday: and they curse all those that eat no flesh on the
Saturday.

Also the Emperor of Constantinople makes the Patriarchs, Archbishops and
Bishops, and he gives all the Dignities of Churches, and depriveth them that
are unworthy. Although it be so, that these touch not any way, nevertheless
they shall serve to show a part of the Customs, Manners, and diversities of
countries; and because this is the first Country discordant from the Faith, and
opposes the Faith on this side the sea; therefore have I set it here, that ye
may see the diversity between our Faith and theirs: for many men have great
liking to hear Report of strange things.

CHAP. III. To come again to Constantinople, for to go toward to the Holy Land.
NOw come we again for to know the way from Constantinople. He that will go
through Turkey, he goes through the City Nika; and passes through the Gate of
Chevitot, which is very high, and it is a mile and a half from Nika: and whosoever
will, may go by the Breach of Saint George, and by the Greek sea, where Saint
Nicholas lies.



First, men come to the Isle of Silo, and in that Isle grows Mastick, upon as
small^Trees as Palm Trees or Cherry-trees. Thence men go through the Isle of
Pathmos, where Saint John the Evangelist wrote the Apocalypse. You shall also
understand, that when our Lord Jesus Christ dyed, St. John the Evangelist was
of the age of thirty two years, and he lived after the Passion of Christ forty
three years, and then died. From Pathmos men go to Ephesim, which is a fair
city and near to the sea, and there died St. John, and he was buried behind the
Altar in a Tomb, and there is a fair Church: for Christians were wont to hold
that place. But in the Tomb of Saint John is nothing but Manna, for his body
was translated into Paradise: and the Turks hold now the City; and the Church,
and all Asia the less; therefore is Asia the less called Turkey: and you shall
understand that Saint John did make his Grave there in his life, and laid
himself there being alive; and therefore some say he died not, but that he
rests there until the day of Judgment: and therefore truly there is a great
marvel, for men may see there apparently the Earth of the Tomb many times stir
and move, as if there were a quick thing under. And from Ephesim men go through
many Isles near the sea, unto the city of Pa^^ran; where St. Nicholas was born,
and so to Marca, where he by the Grace of God was chosen Bishop: and there is
made right good Wine and strong, that men call wine of Marca. From thence men
go to the Isle of Creet which the Emperor gave sometime to Jonais. And then men
pass through the Isles of Cophas and Lango; of the which Isles Ipocras was
Lord; and some say, that in the Isle of Lango is Ipocras his Daughter, in the
manner of a Dragon, who is an hundred foot long, as men say, for I have not
seen her, and they of the Isles call her the Lady of the Country, and she lies
in an old Castle, and shows her self thrice in the year, and she does no man
harm, and she is thus changed from a Damsel to a Dragon, through a Goddess that
men call Dina; and some say that she shall dwell so unto the time that a Knight
come that is so hardy as to go to her and kiss her mouth; and then she shall
turn again to her own kind, and be a woman, and after that she shall not live
long. And it is not long since a Knight of the Rhodes, that was hardy and
valiant, said that he would kiss her, and when the Dragon began to lift up her
head against him, and he saw she was so hideous, he fled away, and the Dragon
in her anger bare the Knight to a Rock, and from thence cast him into the Sea.

CHAP. IV. Yet of the Dragon.


There was a young man that wift not of the Dragon; he went out of a ship, and
passed through the Isle till he came to the Castle, and entered into a Cave, and
went so long till he found a Chamber, and then he saw a Damsel combing her
Head, and looking in a glass, and she had much Treasure about her, and he
thought her to be a common Woman that dwelled there to Lodge men; and as he
stood by the Damsel, the Damsel saw the shadow of him in the glass, and she
turned toward him, and asked him what he would? and he said, He would be her
Paramour or Lemman: and she asked him, if he were a Knight? and he said, No:
and she said, then he might not be her Lemman; but she bade him go again to his
Fellows, and be made a Knight, and come again on the morrow, and she would come
out of the Cave, and then he should kiss her mouth: and she bade him have no
bread, for she would do him no harm, although she seemed hideous to him: she
said, It was done by enchantment; for she said, She was not such as he saw her
then. Moreover she said, That if he kissed her, he should have all the
Treasure, and be her Lord, and Lord of all those Isles. Then departed he from
her, and went to his Fellows to the ship, and they made him Knight, and he came
again on the morrow to kiss the Damsel: but when he saw her come out of the
Cave in form of a Dragon, he had so great dread that he flew to the ship, and
she followed him; and when she saw that he returned not again, she began to
cry, as one that had much sorrow, and returned again, and soon after the Knight
died: and since might no Knight see her but he died presently. But when a
Knight comes that is so hardy as to kiss, he shall not die, but he shall turn
that Damsel into her right shape, and shall be Lord of the Country aforesaid.

From thence men go to the Isle of Rhodes; which Isle the Hospitallers held and
governed, and that they took before time from the Emperor, and it was wont to
be called Colsos, and yet the Turks call it Collos: And saint Paul in his
Epistle writes to them of the Isle Collossenses. This Isle is near one hundred
and fourscore miles from Constantinople. And from the Isle of Rhodes men go
into Cypress; where are many Vines, that first are red, and after a year they
wax all white; and those Vines that are most white, are most pleasant: and as
men pass that way, is a place where was wont to be a great City that was called
Salathy; for all that country was lost through the folly of a young man, who
had a fair Damsel whom he loved well, and she died suddenly, and was buried in
a Tomb of Marble; and for the great love he had to her, he went in a night to
her Tomb, and opened it, and went and lay by her; and a while afterward
returned home again; and when it came to the end of nine months, a Voice came
to him and said in this manner, as in the next Chapter follows.

CHAP. V. Of a young man and his Lemman.
GO unto the Tomb of the same woman that thou have lain by, open it, and behold
well that which thou have begotten on her, and if thou let her go thou shall
have much harm: and he went and opened the Tomb, and there flew out a Monster
right hideous for to see, the which Monster flew about the city and country,
and soon after the city and country sunk down. From Rhodes to Cypress is five
hundred miles and more; but men may go to Cypress and not come to Rhodes,
Cypress is a good Isle, and a great, and there are many good cities. There is
an Archbishop at Nicholie, and four other Bishops in the Land. And at Famagost,
is one of the best Havens on the sea, that is in the World, and there dwell
both Christians and Sarazins, and men of all Nations.

In Cypress is the Hill of the holy cross, and there is the cross of the good
Thief Dismas, as I said before; and some think there is hall of the Cross of
our Lord, but it is not so, and they do wrong that make men believe so. In
Cypress lies Saint Simeon, for whom the men of the Country make great
solemnity. And in the castle of Amors lies the body of Saint Hillarion, and
they carefully keep it: and near Famagost was Saint Bernard born.

CHAP. VI. Of the manner of hunting in Cypress.


IN Cypress men hunt with Pampeons, that be like to Leopards, and they hunt
wild Beasts right well; and they are somewhat bigger than Lions, and they take
wild Beasts more quickly than Hounds. In Cypress the custom is, that Lords and
other men eat upon the Earth, for they make Ditches within the earth, all about
the Hall, deep to the knee, and they Pave them; and when they will eat, they go
thereinto, and sit there. This they do to be more fresh; for that Land is
hotter than it is here. But at great feasts and for Strangers, they set Forms
and Boards as they do in this country, yet they had rather sit on the Earth.
From Cypress men may go by land or by sea to Jerusalem; and in a day and a
night he that has a good wind may come to the haven of Tire, that now is
called Sur, for it is at the entrance of Sury. There was sometimes a fair city
of Christians, but the Sarasins have destroyed the most part thereof, and they
keep the haven very carefully, for dread that they have of Christians, Men
might go right to that haven, and not come to Cypress. but they are glad to go
to Cypress to rest them on the Land, or else to buy things needful for their
Voyage. Upon the seaside are many Rubies found; and there is the Well that holy
Writ speaks of, fons hortorum, and puteus aquarum viventium; that is, the
Well of Gardens, and Ditch of waters living. In this city of Tire the woman
said to our Lord, Beatus venture qui te portavit, and ubera quae sugisti: that
is, Blessed be the body that bare thee, and the paps which gave thee suck. And
there our Lord forgave the woman of Canaan her sins; and there also in that
place was the Stone on which our Lord sat and preached; and on the same Stone
was founded the Church of St. Savior. Upon the sea is the city of Saphen,
Sarop, or Sidon; and there was the dwelling of Jonas the Prophet; and there by
Elias the Prophet raised the Widows Son. Five miles from Saphon is the city of
Sidon, of which city Dido (that was Aeneas wife after the destruction of Troy)
was Queen: she founded the city of Carthage in Africa, which now is called
Didon^art. And in the city of Tire reigned Achilles the Father of Dido; and a
mile from Sidon is Beruth, and from Beruth to Sardena is three days journey,
and from Sardena is five miles to Damasse.

CHAP. VII. Of the Haven called Jaffe.
Whosoever will go longer en the sea, and come near to Jerusalem, he must go from
Cypress by sea to the Port called Iaffe, for that is the next Haven to
Jerusalem: for from that Haven is but one days journey and a half to
Jerusalem; and that Haven is called Iaffe, and the Town Affe, after one of
Noes Sons, that was called Japhath, who founded it: but now it is called Iopa.
And ye shall understand that it is the oldest Town of the World; for it was
made before Noah's Flood, and there be the bones of a Giants side, that be forty
foot long.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Haven of Tire.
AND who arriveth at the first Haven of Tire, or of Sury beforesaid, may go by
Land if he will to Jerusalem, and then he goes to the city of Acon in one day,
that was called Tholomada; and was before time inhabited by Christians. It
stands in the sea; and is from Venice by sea two thousand and fourscore miles
of Lumbardy, and from Calabre or Cicil is to Acon one thousand three hundred
miles of Lumbardy.

CHAP. IX. Of the Hill Carme.
AND the Isle of Creet is right in the thid-way: and beside the city of Acon
toward the sea some eight hundred furlongs on the right hand toward the South,
is the Hill Carme, where Elias the Prophet dwelt, and there was the Order of
Carmes first founded. This Hill is neither great nor high, and at the foot
thereof has formerly been a Christian city called Caiaphas, for Caiphas
founded it, but it is now wholly wasted. At the West side of the Hill is a Town
that men call Saffre, and it is built upon another Hill. There Saint James and
Saint John were born; in memory of whom is a fair Church built. And from
Tholomada now called Acon, to a great Hill that men call Ekelt de Tyrees, is an
hundred furlongs; and besides the City of Acon runs a little River that men
call Belion; and there near is the Fosse of Minor, all round, that is an
hundred cubits or shastments broad; and it is all full of Gravel clear shining;
whereof men make clear white Glass; and men come from far countries by ship,
and by land with carts, to take of the gravel: and if there be never so much
taken thereof one day, on the morrow it is as full again as ever it was, which
is as great marvel; and there is always a wind in the Iosse that stirs up the
gravel. And if a man put therein in any metal, as soon as it is therein it
wareth glass; the glass that is made of this gravel; if it be put into gravel,
turns again into gravel as it was before. Some say, it is a gulf of the sea
of gravel.

CHAP. X. How sampson slew the King and his Enemies.
ALso from Acon before-said, men go three days journey to the city of
Philistin, that now is called Gaza, which is a rich city, fair and full of
folk, and it is a little from the sea, and from that city brought the strong
Sampson the gates of the city to an high Hill, and was taken in the said City;
and there he slew the King in his seat, and many thousand more with him, for he
made an house to fall on them. From thence men go to the City of Cesarien, and
so by the Bastle of Pallerins, then to Askalon, and to Iaphet, and so to the
holy City of Jerusalem.

CHAP. XI. The way by Babylon where the Sultan dwells.


AND whosoever will go through the Land of Babylon, where the Sultan dwells, he
may go more securely through these Countries, but must go up to Mount Sinai
before he come to Jerusalem, and then return by Jerusalem, and then by
Jerusalem: and he shall go from Gaza to the Castle Dayre. And after a man
comes out of Sury, and goes on, the way is very sandy, and the Wilderness
lasts eight days journey, wherefore men must provide them of necessary
victuals: and that Wilderness is called Archellek: When a man comes out of
this Desert, he enters into Egypt, and they call Eygpt Canopat, and in another
Language men call it Mersine: and the first good Town that men come to, is
called Beleth, which is at the end of the Kingdom of Alap, and from thence men
come to Babylon, and to Kayre: and in Kayre is a fair Church of our Lady, where
she dwelt seven years, when she was out of the Land of the Jews, for dread of
King Herod. And there lies the body of Saint Babara Virgin; and there dwelt
Joseph when he was sold of his Brethren. And in Babylon Nebuchodonosor put the
Children into the Fire, because they worshipped the true God: these Children
were called Ananias, Azarias and Misael (as the Psalm of Benedicite says) but
Nebuchodonosor called them thus, Sadrak, Misak, and Abednego, that is, God
glorious and victorious, God over all Kingdoms, and that was for Miracle, that
he made God's Son, as he said, go with those Children through the Fire. There
dwells the Sultan, for there is a fair City and a strong Castle which
stands upon a Rock. In that Castle are always dwelling to keep the Castle,
and to serve the Sultan above eight thousand persons, that take all their
provision at the Soldans Court. This I well know, for I dwelt with him a great
while a Soldier in the Wars against the Bedians or Arabins, and he would have
married me unto a great Princess If I would have forsaken my Faith.

CHAP. XII. Here follows of the Sultan and of his Kingdoms that he has
Conquered, which he holds still by force.
AND ye shall understand that the Sultan is Lord of seven Kingdoms, which he
has Conquered and gotten to him by strength: and these be they, the Kingdom of
Canopat, the Kingdom of Egypt, the Kingdom of Jerusalem, whereof David and
Solomon were Kings, the Kingdom of Sury, whose chief City is Damasse or
Damascus, the Kingdom of Alape in the Land of Dameth, and the Kingdom of
Arabia, which was one of the three Kings that made Offering to our Lord when he
was born. Many other Isles he holds in his hand. He holds Calupgas, that is a
great benefit unto him, being among them of Royes Isle, and that Vale is cold.
And then men go up to the Mount of St. Katharine, and that is much higher than
the Mount of Moses.



And this St. Katharine has no Image in any Church or Castle, nor other
dwelling place, but there is a Hill of Stones gathered together about the place
where she was buried. There was wont to be a Chapel, which now is wholly cast
down, but a great part of the Stones is there left.



And under the foot of Mount Sinai is a Monastery of Monks, and there is the
Church of Saint Katharine, wherein be many Lamps burning, and they have
oyle-Olive enough to eat and to burn, and that they have by Miracle: for they
say there come certain of all manner of Birds every year once, like Pilgrims,
and each of them brings a Branch of Olive, in token of offering, whereof they
make much Oil.

CHAP. XIII. For to return from Sinai to Jerusalem.
NOw when a man has visited the holy place of St. Katharine, and he will turn
to Jerusalem, if he shall first take leave of the Monks, and recommend him
especially to their prayers, then those Monks will freely give to Pilgrims
Victuals to pass through the Wilderness to Sury, so much as shall last thirteen
days journey. And in that Wilderness dwell many Arabians that men call Bedions
and Ascopards: These are Folks that are still of all manner of ill conditions,
and they have no Houses but Tents, which they make of Beasts skins as of Camels
and other Beasts, which they eat, and thereunder they lie: and they seek to
dwell in places where they may find water, near the Red Sea, for in that
Wilderness is great want of water: and it falls out, that where a man finds
water one time, he finds it not another time. And therefore make they no
Houses in those Countries. These men that I speak of, Till not the Land, for*
they eat no bread, except it be those that dwell near a good Town, and they
roast their Fish and Flesh upon hot stones, against the Sun, and they are strong
men and warlike, but they do little but hunt wild Beasts for their sustenance,
and they set not by their lives, therefore they dread not the Sultan, nor any
Prince of the World. And they had great War* with the Sultan, at the same time
that I was with the Sultan. They bear but a Shield and a Spear to defend them
with, and they use no other Armor, but they wind their Heads with a Linen
Cloth.



CHAP. XIV. When men are passed this Wilderness, then to come again to
Jerusalem.
AND when men have passed this Wilderness, to come to Jerusalem, they pass by
Bersheba, that was sometime a fair and a rich Town of Christians, and yet is
there some of the Churches left: and in that Town dwelt Abraham the Patriarch.
This Town of Bersheba was founded by Vrias, on whose Wife David begat Solomon
the wise, that was King of Jerusalem, and of the Twelve Tribes of Israel, and
he reigned forty years: and from thence men go to the Vale of Ebron, that is
from thence near twelve miles, and some call it the Vale of Mambre, and it is
called the Vale of Tears, forasmuch as Adam in that Vale bewailed an hundred
years the Death of his Son Abel, whom Cain slew. And this Ebron was sometime
the principal City of the Philistims, and there dwelt Byants, and it was free,
so that all that had done evil in other places were there saved. In Ebron
Joshua and Caleb, and their Company came first to espy how they might win the
Land of Promise. In Ebron David reigned first seven years and a half: and in
Jerusalem he reigned two and thirty years and a half: and there be the Graves
of the Patriarchs Adam, Abraham Isaac, and Jacob, and of their Wives, Eve,
Sara, Rebekah, and Leah: and they Ise in the side of the Hill. And beside this
Hill is a right fair Church builded after the fashion and manner of a Castle,
which the Sarasins keep right well, and they have the place in great Worship
for the Holy Patriarchs sake that lie there, neither do they suffer either
Christians or Jews to come therein except they have special leave of the
Sultan, for they hold Christians and Jews but as Heunds, therefore they come
not to that Holy Place, and they call the place Spelunk or Double Cave, or
Double Grave, or one lies upon another. The Sarasins call it in they r
Language Cariatherba, that is, the place of the Patriarchs: and the Jews call
it Abboth, and in that place was Abraham's House, when he sat in his door, and
saw three persons, and Worshipped but one, as holy Writ witnesses, saying,
Tres videt, and unum adoravit, that is, He saw three, and Worshipped but one.

CHAP. XV. Here follows a little of Adam and Eve, and other things.


AND not far front that place is a Cave in a Rock, where Adam and Eve dwelt
when they were driven out of Paradise, and there got their Children. And in
that same place was Adam made as some men say, for men called that place
aforetime the field of Damasce, for it was in the Worship of Damasce, and from
thence he was translated into Paradise, as they say, and afterward he was
driven out of Paradise, and put there again: for the same day that he was put
into Paradise, the same day he was driven out, as soon as he had sinned. And
there begins the Isle of Ebron that lasts near to Jerusalem* where the
Angel hade Adam that he should dwell with his Wife, and there they begot Seth,
of which kindred Jesus Christ was born. And in that Vale is the Field where men
draw out of the Earth a thing which in that Country they call Camball, and they
eat it instead of Spice, and bear it to sell, and they say, men cannot dig
there so deep nor so wide, but it is at the years end full again up to the
sides through the Grace of God. And two miles from Ebron is the Grave of Lot,
that was Abraham's Brother.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Dry Tree.


THen a little from Ebron is the Mount of Mambre, of the which Bount the Vale
took his name, and there is an Oak Tree, that the Sarasins call Dypre,
remaining since Abraham's time. This Tree is commonly called the dry Tree, and
they say it has been from the beginning of the World, and was aforetime green,
and did bear Leaves unto the time that our Lord dyed, as did all the Trees of
that kind in the World, and yet there are many of those in the world. And some
Prophesies say. That a Lord or Prince of the West side of the World shall win
the Land of Promise, that is, the Holy Land, with the help of Christians, and
he shall worship God under that Tree, and the Tree shall war green and bear
Fruit and Leaves, through which Miracle many Sarasins and Jews shall be turned
to the Christian Faith, and therefore they do great Worship thereto, and keep
it very charily. And yet though it be dry, it has a great virtue, for
certainly he that has a little thereof about him, it heals the sickness
called the Falling Evil. It has also many other virtues, and therefore is
holden very precious.

CHAP. XVII. From Ebron to Bethlehem.
FRom Ebron men go to Bethlehem in half a day, for it is but five miles, and it
is a very fair way, and through pleasant Woods. Bethlehem is but a little City,
long and narrow, and was walled and enclosed with a great ditch: it has been
formerly called Ephrata, as holy writ says, Ecce audivimus, eum in Ephrata,
etc. that is, Lo we heard of the same at Ephrata. And near the end of the City
toward the Cast, is a very fair and goodly Church, which has many Towers and
Pinacles very strongly built. Within that Church are four and forty great
marble Pillars; and not far from this Church is a Field which flourished very
strangely, as you shall hear.

CHAP. XVIII. Of a fair Maiden that should be put to death wrongfully.
THE cause is, forasmuch as a fair Maiden, that was accused wrongfully, for
that she had done Fornication, for which cause she was doomed to die, and to be
burnt in that place, to which she was led. And as the wood began to burn about
her, she made her prayer to our Lord, as she was not guilty of that thing, that
he would help her, that it might be known to all men. And having thus prayed,
she entered the Fire, and those Branches that were burning became red Roses, and
those that were not kindled became white Roses, and these were the first Roses
that any man ever saw: and so was the Maiden saved through the Grace of God,
wherefore that field is called the Field that God flourished, for that it was
full of Roses. Near the Quire of the Church aforesaid, at the right side as men
come downward, twelve steps, is the place where our Lord was born, which is now
buil^ with Marble, and trimmed with Gold, Azure, and other Colors. A little
thence, about their paces, is the Crib of the Ex or the Ass, and near that is
the place where the Star fell that led the three Kings, Jaspar, Melchior, and
Balthasor: these three Kings offered to our Lord Incense, Gold, and Myrrh, and
they met together through the miracle of God in a City called Casake, which is
three and thirty days journey from Bethlehem, yet were they at Bethlehem the
fourth day after they had seen the Star. Under the Cloister of this Church
eighteen degrees, at the right side is a great Pit where the bones of the
Innocents lie, and by that place is the Tomb of Saint Hierome, who translated
the Bible and the Psalter out of Hebrew into Latin. And near unto that Church
is the Church of Saint Nicholas, where our Lady rested her, when she was
delivered of Child: and forasmuch as she had so much milk in her breasts that
pained her, she drew it out upon the red Stones or Marble, and people say, that
yet may the traces be seen white upon the Stones. Ye shall understand also,
that they that dwell in Bethlehem are Christians, and there are fair Vines all
about the City, and great plenty of wine: but their Book that Mahomet gave
them, which they call Alkaron, and some call it Massap, and some call it Harm,
forbids them to drink any wine: for in that Book Mahomet curses all that
drink of that wine, and all that sell it. And some men say that once he slew in
his drunkenness a good Hermit whom he much loved, and therefore he curses the
wine, and them that drink wine, but his malice is turned to himself, as holy
writ says: Et in verticem ipsius iniquitas ejus descendit: that is, His
wickedness shall descend on his own head. The Sarasins also eat neither Geese
nor Swines flesh; for they say, it is brother to a man, and was forbidden in
the Old Law. Likewise in the Land of Palestine, and in Egypt they eat little
Veal or Beef, except it be so old that it may no more travel or work: not
because it is forbidden, but they keep them for tilling their Land.

In this city of Bethlehem was King David born: he was King of the Land of the
Jews, and reigned in Herusalem, and had forty Wives, and three hundred
Concubines. And at Bethlehem toward the South side, is a Church of Saint
Markoret, that was Abbot there, for whom they had much sorrow when he died: and
it was showed there how he made lamentation when he died: and it is a pitious
thing to behold. From Bethlehem to Jerusalem is two miles: and in the way to
Jerusalem, half a mile from Bethlehem, is the Church where the Angel told the
Shepherds of the Birth of Christ. In that way is the Tomb of Rachel that was
Mother to Joseph the Patriarch, who died as soon as Benjamin was born, and
there she was buried, and Jacob her Husband set twelve great stones upon her.
In this way to Jerusalem are many Christian Churches by the which men go.

CHAP. XIX. Of the City Jerusalem.
FOR to speak of Jerusalem, ye shall understand that it stands fair among
Hills, and there is neither River nor Well, but water comes by Conduit from
Ebron. Also ye shall understand that at first it was called Jebus, and since it
was called Salem, unto the time of David, who called it Jerusalem, and so it
is called yet. And about Jerusalem, is the Kingdom of Sury, and thereby is the
land of Palestine and Askalon: but Jerusalem is in the land of Judah, and it is
called Judah, for Judas Machabeus was King of that Land: and it bordereth also
upon the Kingdom of Arabia on the South side, on the West side on the great
sea, on the North side on the Kingdom of Sury, and the sea of Cypress. About
Jerusalem are these Cities: Ebron at eight miles, Jericho at six miles,
Barsabe at eight miles, Askalon eighteen miles, Jaff at twenty and fine miles,
Ramatha at four miles.

This Land of Jerusalem has been in the hands of diverse Nations, as Jews,
Canaanites, Assyrians, Persians, Macedonians, Greeks, Romans, Christians,
Sarasins, Barbarians, Turks and many others. For Christ will not suffer lend
sinners long to possess it, be they Christians or others. And now has that
Land been holden by Infidels an hundred years and more, but God grant they may
not hold it long.

CHAP. XX. Yet of this holy City Jerusalem.
AND ye shall understand that when men first come to Jerusalem, they go first
on Pilgrimage to the Church where the holy Grave is, the which was out of the
City on the North side, but it is now closed in with the wall of the Town. And
there is a fair Church, round, all flat above, and well covered with Lead: and
on the West side is a fair and strong tower for Bells: and in the midst of the
Church is a Tabernacle, made like a little House, in manner of a half Compass,
very richly trimmed with Gold, Azure, and other colors. In the right side is
the Sepulcher of our Lord Christ: and the Tabernacle is eight foot long, five
foot wide, and eleven foot high. And it is not long since the Sepulcher was all
open, so that any man might then touch it: but because the folks that came
thither, spoiled and brake the stones all in pieces, therefore has the Sultan
made a Wall about the Sepulcher, that no man may touch it. In the left side is
a window, wherein are many Lamps lighted; and there hangs a Lamp burning
before the Sepulcher, which they say on Good Friday goes out by it self, and
lights again by it self at the hour that our Lord rose from death to life.
And within that Church upon the right side of Mount Calvary, where our Lord was
Crucified, the Cross was set in a Morteis in the Rock, that is white of color,
and mingled with a little red; and upon that Rock, dropped the blood of the
wounds of our Lord, when he was nailed on the Cross, and that is called
Golgatha; and men go up to that Golgatha upon steps: and in that Morteis was
Adams Head found after Noah's Flood; in token that the sin of Adam should be
redeemed in the same place: and upon that Rock Abraham offered sacrifice to our
Lord; and there is an Altar, and before that Altar lies Godfrey of Bouloign,
Baldwin, and others that were Christians, and Kings of Jerusalem.

Likewise where our Lord was crucified it is written, Hic Deus, Rex noster,
ante saecula operatus est salutem in medio terrae, that is, This God our King,
before Worlds, has wrought health in the midst of the Church. Upon this Rock
also where the Cross was fixed, is written within the Rock, Quod vides est
fundamenta totius mundi, and hujus fidei; that is, That theu see is the
ground of all the World, and of this Faith. Ye shall understand also, that when
our Lord died he was two and thirty years old, and three Months, yet the
prophecy of David says that he should live forty years, when he says thus,
Quadraginta annis proximis sui generationi huic, that is, Forty years was I
neighbor to this Generation: and thus it should seem that Prophecy is not
true, but it is. For in old time men counted but ten Months to a year, of
which March was the first, and D^^^mber the last: but Gaius Caesar that was
Emperor of Rome, added to these, two Months more, January and February, and
ordained the year of twelve Months, that is, three hundred sixty five days
without Leap-year, the proper course of the Sun, and therefore after the
accounting of ten Months to the Year, he died in the fortieth year, and after
our years of twelve Months it is thirty two years and three Months.

Also within Mount Calvary at the right side, there is an Altar where the
Pillar lies that our Lord was bound to when he was scourged and thereby are
three other Pillars that always drop water; and some say, that those Pillars
weep for our Lords Death. And near this Altar in a place forty steps deep was
found the very Cross, by the knowledge of St. Elene, under a Rock, where the
Jews had hid it. And they found three Crosses, one of our Lord, and two of the
Thieves. These Crosses St. Elene tried upon a dead Body, that did rise as soon
as the very Cross of our Lord was laid upon him; and thereby is the Vale of the
place where the four Nails of our Lord were hid, for he had two in his hands,
and two in his feet; and with one of those Nails the Emperor of
Constantinople did make a Bridle for his Horse to bear him in Fattel, by the
virtue whereof he overcame his Enemies, and won all the Land of Asia, Turkey,
Damasse the more and the less, Sury, Jerusalem, Arabia, Persia, and
Mesopotamia, the Kingdoms of Asape, Egypt the high and (...), with many other
Kingdoms, even almost all unto Indie the less, that then were Christened: and
there were at that time many good men and holy Hermits, of whom the Book of the
Fathers Lives make mention, but now they are inhabited by Painims and Sarasins:
yet when it pleases God, as these Lands were lost through the sin of
Christians, so through the help of God by Christians they shall be won again.
In the midst of this Church is a Tomb, in the which Joseph of Aramathea laid
the Body of our Lord when he had taken him off the Cross, and upon the same
place did he wash the feet of our Lord; and that place men say is the midst
of the world.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Church of the holy Sepulcher.
WIthin that Church by the Sepulcher, on the North side, is the place where our
Lord was Imprisoned, and there is a part of the Chain with the which he was
bound, and there he appeared first to Mary Magdalen when he was risen from
death, and she thought he had been a Gardener. In the Church of the Sepulcher
was wont to be the Canons of Saint B^nnet, and they had a Priory, and the
Patriarch was their Sovereign: and without the doors of the Church on the right
side, as men go up eighteen steps, our Lord said to his Mother, Mulier Ecce
filius tuus; that is, Woman, behold thy Son: Deinde dixit Discipulo, Ecce matter
tua; that is, Then afterward he said to his Disciple, Behold thy Mother. And
these words he said when he hanged upon the Cross. And upon these steps went
our Lord when he bare the Cross upon his Shoulder; and under these stayers is a
Chapel where the Priests sing. And near there is the stone where our Lord
rested him when he was weary with bearing of the Cross. And ye shall understand
that before the Church of the Sepulcher is a most strong city; and the great
plain that is between the city and the Church on the East side without the
Walls of the city, is the Vale of Josaphat, that comes even to the Walls.

In this Vale of Josaphat, without the city is the Church of St. Stephen where
he was stoned to death, and thereby is a gate builded that may not be opened.
Through this gate our Lord entered on Palm Sunday upon an Ass, and the gate
opened unto him, when he would go to the Temple: and in full hard stones there
are three steps like the steps of an Ass, which the people say, are the steps
of the Ass that our Lord did ride on. Before the Church of the Sepulcher, two
hundred paces, is a great Hospital of St. John, in the which Hospital are fifty
four Pillars made of Stone. And to go toward the East from the Hospital, is a
right fair Church, that men call our Lady the Great; and then is there another
Church by that, that men call our Lady of the Latin: and there it was that Mary
Cleophe and Mary Magdalen rent their Hair when our Lord was put to death.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Temple of God.
AND from the Church of the Sepulcher, toward the East at seventeen paces, is
Templum Domini; that is a fair House, and it is all round, and right high, and
covered with Lead, and it is well Paved with white Marble; but the Sarasins
will suffer no Christians nor Jews to come therein; for they say, that such
sinful men should not come into that holy place: but I was suffered to go in,
and into other places, where I would; for I had letters of the Sultan, with his
great seal, and commonly other men have but of his signet; and men bear his
letter with his seal before them, hanging on a spear, and men do great worship
thereto, and they kneel to it, and adore it, as if it were a God: also those
men to whom it is sent, before they take it, do bow thereto, and they take it
and lay it upon their heads, and afterward they kiss it, and then they read it,
all bowing with great worship, and then they prosser them to do all that the
Bringer will. And in this Templum Domini were wont to be Canons Regulars, and
they had an Abbot, to whom they were obedient. In this Temple was Charlemain
when the Angel brought him the Prepcio of our Lord when he was circumcised, and
alter King Charles brought it to Acon into our Ladies Chapel.

CHAP. XXIII. Yet of the Temple of God.
AND ye shall understand that this is not the Temple that Solomon made, for
that Temple lasted but one thousand one hundred and two years. For Titus,
Vespasian his Son, that was Emperor of Rome, laid siege against Jerusalem,
for to discomfit the Jews, because they had put Christ to death without leave
of the Emperor. When he had taken the City, he burnt the Temple, and cast it
down, and took all the Jews, and put to death eleven hundred thousand, and the
rest he imprisoned and sold thirty for a penny: for he said that they bought
Jesus Christ for thirty pence. And since Julian Aposlata gave leave to the Jews
to build the Temple of Jerusalem again, but he forsook his Law. And when the
Jews had builded again the Temple, then came the Earthquake (as God would) and
cast down all that they had made. Since that, Adrian the Emperor, who was of
Troy, made Jerusalem again, and the Temple in that same manner that Solomon
made it, and commanded that no Jew should dwell there, but Christians; for
although he himself was not a Christian, yet he loved the Christians more than
other men, save men of his own faith. This Emperor did also enclose and wall
the Church of the holy Sepulcher within the City, that before was far without
the City, and he would have changed the name of Jerusalem, and called it
Helam; but that name lasted not long. And ye shall understand that the Sarasins
do worship in that Temple; and they say, that place is holy; and when they go
in, They go barefoot; and before I and my Fellows came herein, we put off our
Harness, and came barefoot into the Temple; and thought that we ought to do as
much or more than they that were Infidels. And this Temple is threescore and
three cubits in wideness, and as much in length, and thirty two cubits in
height, and covered with lead, and it is within full of Pillars of Marble. And
in the midst of the Temple is an Altar of twenty and four steps of height.
This place the Jews called Sanctus Sanctorum; that is, Holy of Holiest: and in
that place comes none but their Prelate that makes their Sacrifice; and the
people sit all about in diverse seats, as they are in dignity: and there be four
Entrings into the Temple, and the doors are of Cypress; and within the East
door our Lord said, Here is Jerusalem. And on the North side within the door is
a Fountain, and it runs out: of the which holy Writ speaks, and says,
Vidiaquam egredientem de Templo; I saw water coming out of the Temple. And upon
the other side is a Rock that men called sometime Moryach, (but after it'was
called Belet) and there is the Ark of God, with some Relics of the Jews. This
Ark did Titus carry with him to Rome, when he had discomfitted the Jews.

In that same Ark were the Ten Commandments, and Aarons Rod, and Moses Rod,
with which he parted the Red sea, when the people of Israel passed through on
dry foot: and there was the Vessel of Hanna, the Clothing and Ornaments, and
the Tabernacle of Aaron, and a square Table of Gold, with twelve precious
Stones, and a Fox of Jasper graven with four fingers, and eight Names of our
Lord within, and seven Candlesticks of Gold, and four Censors of Gold, and an
Altar also of fine Gold, and four Lions of Gold, unto the which they had a
Cherubim of Gold twelve spans long, and a Tabernacle of Gold, and also twelve
Trumpets of Silver, and a Table of Silver, and seven Earley Loaves, and many
other Relics that were before the Nativity of Christ.

Upon the Rock slept Jacob when he saw Angels go up, and said, Vere locus iste
sanctus est, and ego ignorabam; that is, Surely this place is holy, and I wist
not. And there the Angel changed Jacobs Name, and called him Israel.

In that same place also David saw the Angel that slew the People with a Sword,
and put it all bloody into the Sheath. And on this Reck was S. Simeon, when he
received our Lord into the Temple, and on this Rock set he him when the Jews
would have stoned him, and the Rock rent in two, and in that Cleft he hid him,
and after came down and gave him Light.

And on this Rock sat our Lady and learned her Psalter. There likewise our Lord
forgave the sins of the woman that was taken and found in Adultery: And there
was our Lord Jesus Circumcised, and there the Angel denounced to Zachary the
Nativity of S. John Baptist. And there first offered Melchisedech Bread and
Wine and Water to our Lord, in token of the Sacrament that was to come: and
there David prayed to our Lord for mercy for him, and for his people, when he
saw the Angel slay his people, and our Lord anon heard his prayer, and
therefore he would have made the Temple in the place, but our Lord Jesus Christ
forbade him by an Angel, for he had committed murder in consenting to the
slaying of the good Knight Vriah, for to have his wife; therefore all that he
had prepared for the building of the Temple he left to Solomon his Son, and he
built it, and prayed to the Lord, that all those that prayed in that place
deboutly, and with good heart, that he would hear their prayer, and grant that
they servently asked; and the Lord granted it: wherefore Solomon his Son called
it the Temple of Counsel, and help of God.

Without the doors of that Temple is an Altar, where the Jews were wont to
offer Doves and Turtles; and in that Temple was Zichary slain; and on the
Pinnacle the Jews set St. James that was the first Bishop of Jerusalem. And a
little from this Temple on the right side is a Church covered with Lead, that
is called the School of Solomon. Toward the South is the Temple of Salon,
which is a great place, and they were the Founders thereof, and of their Order;
and in that Templum Domini dwell Canons.

From this Temple toward the East, six and twenty paces in a corner of the
City, is the Path of our Lord: and this Path was wont to go to Paradise: and
not far thence is our Ladies Bed, and near that is S. Simeons Tomb. Without the
Cloister of the Temple toward the North is a fair Church of St. Anne our Ladies
Mother; and there was our Lady conceived; and before that Church is a great
Tree, which began to grow that same night. And as men go down from that Church
two and twenty steps, lies Joachim our Ladies Father, in a Tomb of stone; and
there near was laid sometime St. Anne, but St. Elena did translate her to
Constantinople. In this Church is a Well in manner of a Cistern, that is called
Probatica piscina, that has five Enterings, and into that Cistern an Angel was
wont to descend and stir the water, and what man had bathed first therein,
after the stirring, was made whole, what disease soever he had. There was the
man of the Palsy made whole, who had been sick eight and thirty years: and
there beside was the House of Pilate, and a little from that the House of King
Herod, who slew the Innocents.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Herod the King.
THis King Herod was a very wicked man, and a Tyrant: for he did first and
foremost slay his Wife, whom he loved full well; and for the great love of her
he went out of his wits, and so was he a long time, and afterward he came again
to himself, And after he slew his own Children that he had gotten of the said
wife, and commanded likewise his second wife to be slain, and a son that he had
begotten of her, and after that he slew his own Mother; and he would also have
slain his own Brother, but his Brother dyed suddenly; and thus he did all the
ill that he might. And then he fell sick, and when he saw that he should die,
he sent for his Sister and all the great Lords of the Country; and when they
were there, he did put all the Lords into a Tower, and said to his Sister, he
wist well that the men of the Country would make no sorrow for him when he was
dead; and therefore he made her to swear unto him that she would smite off the
Heads of the Lords every one after his death; and then would men of the Country
make sorrow for his death, in regard of the Noble men's deaths: and then he made
his last Testament. But his Sister fulfilled it not as pertaining unto the
death of the Lords, for as soon as he was dead, she delivered the Lords out of
the Tower, and sent every one home to their houses, and told them what her
Brother commanded her to do unto them. And ye shall understand that in that
time were three Herod's of great name. This of whom I speak was called Herod
Ascolonite; and he that did smite off St. John Baptists Head, was called Herod
Antipa, and the third was called Herod Agrippa, and he did slay St. James, and
put St. Peter in Prison.

CHAP. XXV. Of Saint Salvators Church.
A Little within the City is St. Salvators Church, and therein is Saint John
Chrysostomes Arm, and the most part of Saint Stephens Head.



And on the other side, toward the South, as men go to Mount Sion, is a fair
Church of Saint James, where his Head was smitten off, and there is the Mount
Sion, and a fair Church of God and our Lady, where she was dwelling, and died,
and there was sometime an Abbey of Cannons Regulars, and from that place she
was born of the Apostles unto the Vale of Josaphat. And there is the Stone that
the Angel bare to our Lady from Mount Sinai; and it is of that color that the*
Rock of S Katharin is of: and there beside is the Gate where our Lady when she
was with Child went through to B^thlehem.

And at the entering of Mount Sion is a Chapel, and in that Chapel is that
great and large Stone, with which the Sepulcre was covered when Christ was laid
therein: the which Stone, as it is written, the three Mary's saw turned upward
when they came to the Sepulcre, and they found an Angel that told them that
Christ was Risen from Death to Life: and there is a little Pillar, to the which
our Lord was bound and scourged: and there was Annas House, that was Bishop of
the Jews at that time; and in that same place denied S. Peter our Lord thrice
before the Cock crew, and there is a part of the Table, at which Christ eat his
last Supper with his Disciples: and yet there is the Vessel with Water, out of
which the Disciples feet were washed: and near by, also is Saint Stephens
Grave: and there is the Altar where our Lord heard the Angel sing: and there
appeared Christ first to his Disciples after his Resurrection, when the Gates
were shut, and said. Pax vobis, that is, Peace be to you: and upon that Mount
appeared Christ to Saint Thomas, and had him feel his wounds; and that was
eight days after his Resurrection, and then he believed perfectly, and said.
Dominus meus and Deus meus, My Lord, and my God.

In that same Chapel behind the high Altar, were all the Apostles on
Whitsunday, when the Holy Ghost descended on them in likeness of Fire; and
there God made peace with his Disciples: and there slept S. John the Evengelist
on our Lords breast, and saw in his sleep many secret things of Heaven.

Also Mount Sion is within the city, and it is a little higher then the other
side of the City, and that City is stronger on the one side then on the other;
for in the foot of Mount Sion is a fair and strong castle, which the Sultan did
cause to be made there.

On Mount Sion was King David buried, and Solomon, and many other Kings of
Jerusalem, and there is the place where Saint Peter wept full bitterly, when
he had denied our Lord: and a stones rast from that, is another place where our
Lord was judged, for at that time was Caiaphas House there; and between the
Temple of Solomon and Mount Sion is the place where Christ raised the Maiden
from death to life. Under Mount Sion in the Vale of Josaphat, is a Well called
Natatory Silo, there was our Lord washed after he was Baptized. And thereby is
the Tree on the which Judas hanged himself for despair, when he had sold and
betrayed Christ.



And thereby is the Synagogue where the Bishops of the Jews and Pharisees came
to held their Council, and there Judas cast thirty pieces before them, and said
peccavi, tradens sanguinem justum; that is, I have sinned, in betraying the
Innecent Blood.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Field Acheldemack which was bought with the thirty pieces.
ON the other side of Mount Sion, toward the South, a stones cast, is the Field
that they bought with those thirty pieces for the which Christ was sold, that
men call Acheldemack, that is, the Field of blood; in that Field are many Tombs
of Christian men, for there be many Pilgrims buried. And also in Jerusalem
toward the West is a fair Church, where the Tree grew, of which the Cross was
made: and thereby is the Church where our Lady met with Elizabeth when they
were both with Child, and St. John stirred in his Mothers Womb, and did Worship
to our Lord his Maker: and under the Altar of this Church is the place where
St. John was born, and thereby is the Castle of Emaux.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Mount Joy.
TWo miles from Jerusalem is Mount Joy, this is a fair place, and there lies
Samuel the Prophet in a fair Tomb. It is called Mount Joy, for there these that
travel, first see Jerusalem. And in the middle of the Vale of Josaphat is a
little River that is called Torrens Cedron, over which lies the Tree for men to
pass over, of which the Cross was made. In this Vale is a Church of our Lady,
and her Sepulcher, and she was threescore and twelve years of age when she
died. And there near is the place where our Lord forgave Saint Peter his sins
and misdeeds which he had done. Near unto that, is a Chapel where Judas kissed
our Lord, that men call Gethsemain, when he was taken of the Jews, and there
left Christ his Disciples before his Passion, when he went to pray, and said,
Pater, si fieri, potest transeat a me calix ista, that is, Father, if it may be
done, let this Cup pass from me. And thereby is a Garden where our Lord sweat
both blood and water: and there is the Tomb of King Josaphat, of whom the Vale
had the Name: and on the side of that Vale is the Mount Olivet; and it is
called so, for there grow many Olive Trees, and it is higher then Jerusalem;
and therefore from that Hill men may see into the Streets of Jerusalem; and
between the Hill and the City is nothing but the Vale of Josaphat, and that is
not very large, and upon that Hill stood our Lord when he ascended into Heaven,
and yet seems there the step of his left foot in the stone: and there is an
Abbey of black Cannons, that was great sometimes, but now there is but a
Church; and a little thence eighteen paces, is a Chapel, and there is the
stone on the which our Lord God sat, when he preached and said thus: Beati
pauperes spiritus, quoniam ipsorum est regnum coelorum: that is, Blessed be
they that are poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. And there he
taught his Disciples their Paternoster. There also is a Church of that blessed
woman Mary Egyptian, and there is she buried. And upon the other side, toward
the East, three bow-shoots from thence, stands Bethphage, where our Lord
Jesus Christ sent Peter and James for to fetch the Ass on Palm Sunday.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Castle of Bethania.
THere toward the East is a castle that men call Bethania, and there dwelt
Simon the Leper that harbored our Lord, and them that were baptized of his
Disciples, and he was called: Julian, and was made Bishop, and that is he that
men call on for good Harbor. In that same place our Lord forgave Mary Magdalen
her sins; and there she washed his feet with tears, and wiped them with her
hair: and there was Lazarus raised after he had been four days dead.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Jericho and other things.
AT the returning to Mount Olivet, is the place where our Lord wept upon
Jerusalem, and thereby our Lady appeared to S. Thomas after her Assumption,
and gave him her Girdle: and thereby is a stone on which our Lord sat often
and Preached. And there is mount Galile, where the Apostles were gathered when
Mary Magdalen told them of Christ's rising. Between Mount Olivet and Mount
Galile is a Church, where the Angel told our Lady when she should die.

And from Bethany to Jericho is five miles. Jericho was sometime a little city,
but it is wasted, and now it is but a little Town: that Town took Joshua
through the Miracle of God, and bidding of the Angel, and destroyed it, and
cursed those that should build it again. Of that city was Rahab, that common
woman, that received the Messengers of Israel, and kept them from the peril of
death, therefore she had a good reward, as Holy Writ says, Quicunque accipit
prophetam in nomine meo, mercedem Prophetae, etc. that is, he that receives a
Prophet in my name, he shall receive the reward of a Prophet.

CHAP. XXX. Of the holy places between Bethany and the River Jordan, and other
things.
ALso from Bethany men go to the River of Jordan, through the Wilderness, and
it is near a days journey between. Toward the East is a great Hill, where our
Lord fasted forty days: upon this Hill was Christ tempted of the Devil, when
he said to him, Command that these stones be made Bread: and there is an
Hermitage, where dwells certain Christians, called Georgians, for S. George
converted them: and upon that Hill dwelled Abraham a great while: and as men go
to Jericho sat the sick men crying, Jesu fili David miserere nobis, that is,
Jesus the Son of David, have mercy upon us. And two miles from Jericho is the
River Jordan. And ye shall understand that the Dead Sea parts the Land of
Juda and Araby; and the water of that Sea is bitter; and it casts out a thing
that men call Aspatam, as great pieces as an Horse: and Jerusalem is two
hundred furlongs from the Sea; and it is called the Dead Sea, because it
runs not, neither may any Man or Beast live therein: and that has been
proved many times, for they have cast there in men that were judged to death:
nor no man may drink of the water: and if men cast Iron therein, it comes up
again: but if a man cast a Feather therein, it sinketh; which is against kind.



And thereabout grow Trees that bear fruit of fair color, and seem ripe; but
when a man breaks or cutteth them, he finds naught in them, but coals and
ashes, in token that through the vengeance of God those Cities were burnt with
the Fire of Hell.

And some men call that Lake the Lake of Asphaltid, and some call it the Pool
of the Devil, and some call it the stinking Pool, for the water thereof
stinketh. There sank those five Cities through the wrath of God, that is,
Sodom, Gomor, Aldema, Sabome and Segor, for the sin of Sodomy that reigned in
them; but Segor through the prayer of Lot was saved a great while, for it stood
upon a Hill, and yet appears much thereof above the water, and men may see
the walls in clear weather: and in this city of Segor Lot was made drink by his
Daughters, and lay with them; for they thought that God would have destroyed
all the World, as he did with Noes Flood; and therefore they lay by their
Father, that men might born of them into the World, and at the right side of
the sea stands Lots Wife in a Pillar of Salt, because she looked back when
the City sank down.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Abraham and his Generation.
ANd ye shall understand that Lot was Harans Son Abraham's Brother, and Sara
Abraham's Wife was Lots Sister: and Sara was ninety years old when she bare
Isaac, and Abraham had another Son named Ishmael, that he had gotten of his
Maiden Hagar, and he was fourteen years of age when Isaac was born; and when
Isaac was eight days old, he was circumcised, and his other son Ishmael was
circumcised the same day, and was fourteen years of age; therefore the Sarasins
that be: of the Generation of Ishmael, do circumcise them at fourteen years of
age, and the Jews that be of the Generation of Isaac, do circumcise them the
eighth day of their age.

And into that dead sea aforesaid, runs the River Jordan and makes there an
end; and this is within a mile of Saint John's Church: and a little beneath that
same Church westward, were the Christians wont to bathe them: and a mile thence
is the River Loath, through which Jacob went, when he came to Mesopotamia.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the River Jordan.
THis River Jordan is no great nor no deep River, but there is much good Fish
therein, and there comes from Mount Lybany two Wells, that men call Jor and
Dan, and of them it saketh the Name; and upon the one side of that River is
Mount Gelboe, and there is a fair Plain. And on the other side men go by Mount
Lybany, to the Desert of Pharaon. Those Hills part the Kingdom of Sury, and the
Country of Phenice, On that Hill grow Cedars, that bear long Apples, which are
as much as a man's head: This River Jordan divides Galile, and the land of
Idumia, and the land of Betron, and it runs into a Plain that men call
Meldam, in the Sarasins Language, and in English, Fair; because oft-imes there
be kept great Fayrs: and in that Plain is the Tomb of holy Job.



In this River Jordan our Lord was baptized, and there was the Voice of the
Father heard, saying; Hic est filius meus dilectus in quo acquiesco, ipsum
audita; that is, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him.
And the Holy Ghost descended on him, in likeness of a Dove; and so was there at
his Baptism all the Trinity. And through the River Jordan passed the Children
of Israel on dry foot, and set up stones in the midst of the water, in token of
that Miracle. And also in that River Naaman the Assyrian bathed him, who was
Leprous, and he was made whole. And a little from thence is the city of Ay, the
which Joshua assailed and took. And about the River Jordan are many Churches,
where Christians dwell. Also by the River Jordan is the Vale of Mambre, which
is a fair Vale and plenteous.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of many other Miracles.
ANd ye shall further understand, that as we go from the Red Sea, to pass
forward to the land of Promise, is a very strong Castle, that men call Carran
or Sermoyes, that is, the Kings Hill. This Castle did the King of France make,
whose name was Bawdewin, who conquered all the land, and put it into the hands
of Christians to keep; and under that Castle is a fair Town that is called
Sabbath; and thereabout dwell many Christians under Tribute.

Then men go to Nazareth, of the which our Lord had his Name; and from Nazareth
unto Jerusalem is three days journey. Also men go through the Province of
Galile, through Romatha, through Sophyn, and over the high Hill of Effrain,
where dwelt Hanna that was the Prophet Samuels Mother, and there was he born,
and after his death was buried at Mount Joy, as I have said before.

And after men come to Sybula, where the Ark of God was kept under Helie the
Prophet. And there made the people of Israel their Sacrifice unto the Lord; and
there spoke our Lord first to Samuel. There also ministered God the Sacrament.
Near thereby, at the right side is Gabaon, Rama, and Benjamin, of the which
holy Writ speaks. After that, men come to Sychem, that some men call Sychar,
and that is in the Province of the Samaritans, and sometime there was a Church,
but it is all wasted, and it is a fair Vale, and plenteous, and there is a good
City that men call Neople, and so from thence it is a days journey unto
Jerusalem; and there is the Well where our Lord spoke to the woman of Samaria:
and Sychem is ten miles from Jerusalem, and it is called Neople, that is the
new Town, and there is the Temple of Joseph, Jacobs Son that governed Egypt,
from thence were his bones brought and laid in the Tomb, and thither came Jews
often in Pilgrimage with great Devotion: and in that City was Dinah Jacobs
Daughter ravished, for whom her Brethren slew many men: and thereby is the City
of Corasin, where the Samaritans make their Sacrifice.

On this Hill would Abraham have sacrificed his Son Isaac: and there near is
the Vale of Dotany, and there is the Pit wherein Joseph was cast by his
Brethren before that they sold him; and it is two miles to Sychar; and from
thence men come to Samary, that men call Sabasten, and that is the chief City
of that Country, and in that City was the Seat of the twelve Kings of Israel,
but it is not so great as it was; and there was Saint John Baptist buried
between two Prophets, Helizeus and Abdon, but he was beheaded in the Castle of
Marketin, near the dead Sea, and was buried by his Disciples at Samaria; and
there did Julian Apostata take his bones and burn them, for he was at that time
Emperor; but folk say that Finger with the which he showed our Lord, saying,
Ecce Agnus Dei; that is, Behold the Lamb of God, would not be burnt; and Saint
Tecla the Virgin did bring it unto Alphen, that is in the Mountains, in the
which place they do it great Worship: and there was Saint John Baptists Head
closed into a Wall, but the Emperor Theodosius did take it out, for he found it
lapped in a cloth all bloody, and he bare it to Constantinople; and there is
yet the one half of the Head: and the Vessel wherein his Head was laid, when it
was smitten off, is at Gean, and they do it great Worship. Some say, that Saint
John's Head is at Amiens in Picardy; and some say it is Saint John's Head the
Bishop: I wot not, but to God it is known.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Samaritans.


FRom Sabasten or Samary to Jerusalem, is twelve miles; and among the Hills of
this country is a Well that men call Fons Jacob, that is, Jacobs Well, that
changes his color four times in a year: for sometime it is red, sometime
clear, sometime green, and sometime thick: and the men that dwell there are
called Samaritans, and they were converted by the Apostles; yet their Law
varieth from the Law of Christians, as also from Jews and Painims. They believe
well in one God that shall judge all, and believe the Bible after the Letter,
and they lay their heads in red linen cloth, that they may be known from
others; for Sarasins wrap their heads in White cloth; the Christians that dwell
there in Blew, and the Jews in Yellow: and in this country dwell many Jews,
paying Tribute as Christians do.

And if ye will know the Letters of the Jews, they are these following, and are
thus called: Aleph, beth, gimel, daleth, he, vau, zain, heth, teth, jod, caph,
lamed, mem, nun, samech, ain, pe, zade, koph, resh, schin, tau.

CHAP. XXXV. Of Galile.
FRom this Country that I have spoken of, men go to the Plain of Galile, and
leave the Hill on the one side: for Galile is a Province of the land of
Promise, and in that Province is the City of Naim, of Capernaum, and Bethsaida,
where Saint Peter and Saint Andrew were born. Some men say that Antichrist
should be born at Corasim; and nourished at Bethsaida, but he shall reign at
Corasim; therefore says holy Writ, Vae tibi Corasim, Vae tibi Bethsaida; that
is, Woe be to thee Corasim, woe be to thee Bethsaida; But others say, he shall be
born in Babylon; therefore said the Prophet, De Babylonia Coluber exit qui
totum mundum devorabit; that is, Out of Babylon shall come a Serpent that shall
devour all the World. Cana a chief City of Galile is four miles from Nazareth:
of which City was the woman of Canaan, of whom the Gospel speaks, and there
our Lord did his first Miracle, when at the Marriage of the Architri^line he
turned water into wine. From thence men go to Nazareth, which has been a great
City, but now there is but a little Town, and that unwalled: There was our Lady
born, and of this City our Lord took his Name. At Nazareth also Joseph took our
Lady to wife, when she was fourteen years of age: There the Angel saluted her,
saying, Ave, gratia plena, Dominus tecum, that is, Hail full of grace, the Lord
is with thee. And there was sometime a great Church, but now there is but a
little Room to receive the offerings of Pilgrims. There is the Well of Gabriel,
where our Lord was wont to bath him when he was little. At Nazareth was our
Lord nourished: and Nazareth is called the flower of Gardens; and it may well
be so called, for there was nourished the Flower of Life, even our Lord Jesus
Christ. About half a mile from Nazareth is the blood of our Lord, for the Jews
led him upon a high Rock, to cast him down and slay him, but Jesus escaped
them, and leapt to another Rock, where steps be yet seen, which they say are
the steps of our Lord, therefore some when they are in danger of Thieves or
Enemies, say thus: Jesus autem transiens per medium illorum ibat: and they say
these Verses of the Psalter three times, Irruat super eos formido, and pavor in
magnitudine brachii. Domine, fiant immobiles quasi lapis, donec pertranseat
populus tuus, Domine, and populus iste quem redimisti. And so when this is
said, a man may go without any letting. Ye shall understand and know that our
blessed Lady bare her Child when she was fifteen years of age, and she lived
with him thirty three years and three Months, and after his Passion she lived
two and twenty years.

CHAP. XXXVI. The way from Nazareth to the Mount or Hill of Tabor.
ANd from Nazareth the Mount Tabor is three miles, and there our Lord was
transfigured before Saint Peter, Saint John, and Saint James. And there they
saw spiritually our Lord, Moses and Elias the Prophet. For which cause Saint
Peter said, bonum est nobis hic esse, etc. that is, It is good for us to be
here, let us make three Tabernacles. And our Lord Jesus Christ bade them that
they should tell no man, until the time that he was risen from death to life.
From Mount Tabor a mile distance is Mount Hermon, and there was the City of
Naim, before the gates of this City our Lord raised the Son of the Widow, that
had no more Children.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Sea of Galile.
ANd from thence men go to a City, that is called Tiberias, that butteth on the
Sea of Galile; and though it be called the Sea of Galile, it is no Sea nor arm
of the Sea, for it is but a stream of fresh water, and it is more then a
hundred furlongs long, and fifty broad; and therein are many good Fishes; and
by that same sea stand many good Cities: therefore this Sea changes often his
name after the Cities that stand thereupon, but it is all one water or sea; and
upon this sea our Lord walked, and said to Peter when he came on the water, and
was near drowned: O exigua fide predite, quid qubitasti? that is, O thou of
little faith, why did thou doubt?

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Table whereon Christ eat after his Resurrection.
IN this City of Tiberias, is the Table that Christ eat on, with his Disciples
after his Resurrection, and they knew him by breaking of bread, as holy Writ
says, Et cognoverunt eum in fractione panis, that is, they knew him in
breaking of bread. And about the Hill of Tiberias, is a city, where our Lord
fed five thousand people, with five Barley Loaves and two Fishes: In that city
also did men cast in anger a firebrand or burning stick after our Lord, but
that same burning stick did fall on the Earth, and (people say) out of the same
stick grew presently a Tree, which is waxen a big Tree, and there grows yet,
and the seals of the Tree be all black. Ye shall understand that the Riber
Jordan begins under the Hill of Lybany, and there begins the land of
Promise, and it lasts unto Bersebe of length, and from the North part to the
South is ninescore mile, and of breadth from Jericho to Jaffe, it is forty
mile. And ye shall understand that the Land of Promise begins at the Kingdom
of Sury, and lasts unto the Wilderness of Araby.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of strange Manners and diverse.


ANd in this Country, as in many other Lands beyond the Sea, it is a custom
when they have war, that if a City or Castle be besieged so strongly that they
can send no Messengers to any Lords for succor, then they write their Letters,
and bind them about the necks of Doves, and let them fly their ways, because
the Dove is of that nature, that she will return again to the place where she
is bred; and thus they do commonly in that country. And ye shall understand
that among the Sarasins, in many places dwell Christians under Tribute, and
they are of diverse manners, and have diverse Laws, though they be all
Christians, and believe all well in our Lord God, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost; but yet they fail in the Articles of our Faith, and they are called
Jacobins: for Saint James converted them to the Faith, and Saint John Baptized
them: and they say, that men need only to confess their sins unto God, and not
unto men; for they say, that God bade not one man confess himself to another
man. And therefore said David in this manner, Confitebor tibi Domine in toto
cord meo; That is, Lord, I will confess my self unto thee with all my heart.
And in another place, he says thus, Peccatum meum cognitum tibi feci; that is,
my trespasses I have made known unto thee. And in another place, Deus meus es
tu, and confitebor tibi: that is, thou art my God, and I will confess my self
unto thee. And in another place, Quoniam cogitatio hominis confitebitur tibi;
that is, The thought of man shall be known unto thee. And they read often the
Bible and Psalter, but they say not in Latin, but in their own Language; for
they say, that David and other Prophets did so. And Saint Austin and Saint
Grogory say, Qui scelera sua cogitat, and conversus fuerit, veniam sibi credat.
That is, Whosoever knows his sin, and turns, he may believe to have
forgiveness. And Saint Gregory says thus, Dominus potius mentem quam verbum
considerat. That is, our Lord takes more heed to thought, than to word. And
Saint Hilarious says, Longorum temporum crimina ictu oculi, etc. That is, sins
that are done of old time, perish in the twinkling of an eye, if hatred of them
be in a man's heart. And therefore say they by these Authorities, that men
should confess them only to God; and this way the Apostles taught: but the
Popes that came since, have ordained that men should confess them to Priests
and men as they are; and the cause is this: For they say, that a man that has
sickness, men may give him no good medicine, except they know the kind of
sickness: also they say, a man can give no good advice, except he know the sin.



For there is a manner of sin that is grievouser to one man then it is to
another; and therefore it is needful that a man know and understand the kind
of sin.

And there be also other men that are called Surreyens, and they hold half our
Faith, and half the Faith of the Greeks, and they have long Beards, as the
Greeks have.

And there be others that men call Georgians, whom Saint George converted, and
they do worship more the Hallowes of Heaven then others do, and they have their
Crowns shaven: the Clerks have round Crowns, and the Laymen have square
Crowns, and they hold the Greeks Law. And there be others that men call
Christians of girding, because they wear Girdles underneath: some others called
Nestorians, some Arians, some Nubians, some Gregorians, and some Indians, that
are of Prester John's Land, and every one of those have some Articles of our
Belief. But each of them vary from other, and their variance were too much to
declare.

CHAP. XL. For to return again on this side Galile.
NOw seeing I have told you of many manners of men that dwell in the Countres
aforesaid, now will I return again to my way, for he that will turn from the
Land of Galile that I spoke of, to come on this side, he must go through Damas,
or Damascus, that is a fair City, and full of good Merchandises, and it is
three days journey from the Sea, and five from Jerusalem: they carry their
Merchandises upon Camels, Mules, Horses, Dromedaries, and other manner of
Beasts. This City of Damas was founded by Helizeus, Abraham's servant, who
before Isaac was born should have been his Heir: and there he named that City
Damas. And in that place Cain slew his Brother Abel: and beside Damas is the
Mount of Syer: in this City be many Physicians, and that holy man Saint Paul
was a Physician there, to heal men's bodies, before he was converted, and after
he was a Physician of Souls. And from Damas men go to a place called our Lady
of Sardmarch, that is five miles from Damas, and it is on a Rock and there is a
fair Church, and there dwell Christian Monks and Nuns in that Church, between
the City of Darky and the City of Raphano is a River called Sabatory: which
some say on the Saturday it runs fast, and all the week else it stands
still and runs not, or but a little. And there is another River that on the
night freezeth fast, and upon the day no frost is seen. And so men go by a City
that men call Berugh, and there those that will go to Cypress take Ship, and
they arrive at the Haven of Sur, or of Tire, and then go on to Cypress: also
men may go right from the Haven of Tire, and not come at Cypress, but arrive at
some Haven of Greece, and by these ways men come into the Countries before
spoken of.

CHAP. XLI. How a man may go the shortest way to Jerusalem.
NOw have I told you the furthest and longest ways by the which men go to
Jerusalem, as by Babylon in Egypt, which is also called Kayre; and Mount
Sinai, and many other places, through the which men go to the Land of Promise.
Now will I tell you the shortest way to Jerusalem, for many will go the long
way, some for want of Company, and many other reasonable causes: and therefore
I shall tell you shortly how a man may go with little cost and short time.

A man that comes from the Land of the West, he goes through France, Burgony,
Lumbardy, and to Venice, or to Gene, or some other Haven of those Marches, and
takes there Ship, and goes to the Isle Grisse, and so arriveth he in Greece,
or else in Port Myroch, or Valon, or Duras, or some other Haven of those
Marches, and arriveth to Cypress, and comes not in the Isle of Rhodes, but
arriveth at Famagust, that is the chief Haven of Cypress, or else at Lamaton:
and then taking Ship again, he passes beside the Haven of Tire, and comes not
to Land, and so passes by all the Havens to the Coast, till he come to Jaffe,
that is the next Haven to Jerusalem, for it is but twenty eight miles between.
And from Jaffe men go to the City of Ramos, and that it is but little thence,
and it is a fair City, and beside Ramos is a fair Church of our Lady, where our
Lord showed himself unto her in three shadows, betokening the Trinity; and
there near is a Church of S. George, where his Head was smitten off: and then
to the Castle of Emaus, and then to the Mount Joy, and from thence Pilgrims see
Jerusalem, and then to Mount Modin, and then to Jerusalem. At Mount Modin
lies the Prophet Malachy, and over against Ramatha is the Town of Douke,
whereof the Prophet Amos was.

CHAP. XLII. Of other ways for to go by Land to Jerusalem.
FOrasmuch as many men cannot endure the trouble of the Sea, and better it is
to go by Land, although it be more pain; then a man shall go to one of the
Havens of Lumbardy, as Venice, or another, and ye shall pass into Greece, or
Port Myroch, or another, and ye shall go to Constantinople, and shall pass the
Water that is called the Breach of Saint George, that is an arm of the Sea. And
from thence ye shall come to Pulveral, and then to the Castle of Synople, and
so to Cappadocia, which is a great Country, wherein are many great Hills: and
ye shall go through Turkey, and to the City of Nike, the which they won from the
Emperor of Constantinople: and it is a fair City, and well walled, and there
is a River that is called the Lay: and then men go by the Alps of Mormount,
and through the Vales of Malebrines, and the Vale Ernax, and so more easily to
Antioch, which stands richly on the River. And he that will go another way,
he goes by the Roman Ceast. and the Roman Sea: on that Ceast is a fair Castle
that is called Florage: and when a man has passed the Hills, he comes to the
city of Moriach, and to Artose, where is a great Bridge upon the River of
Fern, that men call Fassor; and it is a great River bearing Ships: and beside
the City of Dimas is a River that comes from the Mount of Libany, which is
called Alban: at the passage of this River, Saint Eustace lost his two Sons,
when he had lost his Wife: and it runs through the Plain of Chalcides, and
to the great Sea. Then men go to the City of Fermine, and so to the City of
Fern, and then to Antioch, and that is a fair City and well walled, and it is
two miles long, and there is a Bridge over the River, that has at each Pillar
a good Tower, and it is the best City of the Kingdom of Sury. From Antioch men
go to the City of Locuth, and so to Geble, and to Tortouse, and thereby is the
Land of Lambre, and a strong Castle that men call Mambeke. And from Tortouse,
men go to Tripoly on the Sea, and by this Sea men go to Dicres: and there is
two ways to Jerusalem: by the way on the left hand men come first unto Damas
by the River of Jordan, and on the right side men go through the Land of
Flagme, and so to the City Caiaphas, in which City Caiphas was Lord, and some
call it the Castle Pellerius, and from thence is four days journey to
Jerusalem, and they go through Cesary Philippi, Jaffe, Ramas, and Emaus, and
so to Jerusalem.

CHAP. XLIII. Yet another way by Land toward the Land of Promise.
NOw have I told you some ways by land and by water, how men may go to
Jerusalem. And there be many other ways that men go by, after the Countries
that they come from, nevertheless they come all to, one end. Yet is there a way
all by Land to Jerusalem, and pass no Sea but to France or Flanders, but that
way is very long and perilous, and of great travel, wherefore few go that way;
but he that will go that way, must go by Almaine and Pruse, and so to Tartary.
This Tartary is holden by the great Caane, of whom I shall speak afterward, for
thither reaches his Lordship, and all the Lords of Tartary yield to him
Tribute. Tartary is a barren Country, and very sandy, for there grows little
either Corn or other Fruit, but there is a great plenty of Beasts, and
therefore they eat flesh without bread, and they sup the broth, and they drink
the milk of all manner of Beasts. And because they have great scarcity of Wood,
they dry the dung of Horses and of other Beasts, and burn it for to dress their
meat by. Princes and other Lords eat but once in the day, and that is very
little: and they be foul folk, and of ill liking. In Summer there are many
great Tempests, and Thunders, that slay many men and beasts: sometime on the
sudden it is very cold, and again on the sudden it is very hot. The Prince of
the Land they call Roco, and he dwells at a City that is called Orda: but
very few Strangers do desire to dwell in that Land, for it is good to sow
Thorns and Weeds in, but other good there is none, as I heard say, for I was
not that way, but I have been in other Countries marching thereon, as in the
Land of Russia, and Nisland, and the Kingdom of Grecon, and Lectow, and the
Kingdom Grasten, and in many other places: but I never went that way to
Jerusalem, and therefore I cannot well tell it, for I have understood that men
may not well go that way but in Winter, when the waters and mires that be in
that Land be frozen and covered with Snow, so that men may pass thereon: for
were not that Snow, there might no man go in that Land but he were loss. And ye
shall understand that a man must go three days journey from Pruse to pass this
way, before he can come to the Land of Sarasins.

And if by chance any Christians pass that way, as once a year they do, they
carry their victuals with them, for they should find nothing there but a manner
of food that they call Syles, and they carry their Victuals upon the Ice on
Steds, and Chariots without Wheels; and as long as their Victuals last, they
may dwell there, but no longer. And when the Spies of the Countries see
Christians come, they run to the Towns, and Castles, and cry aloud, Kara, Kara,
Kara; and as soon as they have cried, then do the people arm them. And ye shall
understand that the Ice there is harder then it is here, and every man has a
Stove in his House, and therein they eat and do all things that them needs;
and that is at the North part of the World, where it is commonly cold, for the
Sun appears not, nor shines but little in that Country: and that Land is in
some places so cold, that there may no man dwell therein; and on the South side
of the World it is in some places so hot, that there can no man dwell, the Sun
gives so great heat in those Countries.

CHAP. XLIV. Of the Faith of the Sarasins, and of the Book of their Law, named
Alkaron.
FOrasmuch as I have told you of the Sarasins, and of otherLands, I purpose to
set down a part of their Law, and of their Belief, as their Book says that
they call Alkaron, and some call that Book Mysap, and some call it Harm, in
diverse Languages of Countries, which Book Mahomet gave them, in the which Book
he wrote among other things, as I have often read and seen, that they that are
good shall go to Paradise, and the evil folks to Hell; and so believe all
Sarasins. And if a man ask of what Paradise they mean, they say it is a place
of Delights, where a man shall find all manner of Fruits at all times, and
Waters and Rivers running with Milk and Honey, Wine and fresh water, and they
shall all have fair Houses and good, as they have deserved, and those Houses
are made of precious stones, gold and silver, and every man shall have ten
Wives and Maidens, and he shall every day once have to do with them, and yet
shall they still be maidens. And they speak often of the blessed Virgin Mary,
and tell of the Incarnation, that Mary was learned of Angels, and that Gabriel
said to her that she was chosen before all other from the Beginning of the
World, and that witnesses well their Book: and Gabriel told her the
Incarnation of Jesus Christ, and that she should conceive and bear a Child: and
they say, that Christ was a holy Prophet in word and deed, and also meek and
right wise to all men, and one not any way blameworthy: and they say that when
the Angel told her of the Incarnation, she had great dread, for she was very
young, and there was one in that Country that practiced Sorcery, who was called
Takina, that with Enchantments could make him like an Angel, and went often and
lay with Maidens, and therefore was Mary the more afraid of the Angel, and
thought in her mind that it had been Takina, who went to Maidens; and she
charged him in the Name of God to tell her if he were the same Takina, and the
Angel bade her have no dread, for he was for certain a true Messenger of Jesus
Christ.

Also their Book Alkaron says, that she had a Child under a Palm Tree: then
was she greatly ashamed, and wished her self dead, but as soon as her Child was
born, he spoke and comforted her, saying, Netimeas Maria, that is, Be not
afraid, Mary. And in many other places says their Book Alkaron, that Jesus
Christ spoke as soon as he was born: and the Book says that Jesus Christ was
sent of Almighty God, to be an ensample to all men, and that God shall Judge
all men, the good to Heaven, and the wicked to Hell, and that Jesus Christ is
the best Prophet of all other, and next to God, and that he was a holy Prophet,
for he gave the blind their sight, and healed all Diseases, he raised men that
were dead, and was taken quick into Heaven. And if they may find a Book with
Gospels, such as, Missus est Angelus, they do it great Worship: and they fast
one Month in the year, and eat only a night, and they keep them from their
Wives; but they that are sick are not constrained to it. And their Book Alkaron
speaks of Jews, and says, they are wicked people, for they will not believe
that Jesus Christ is of God. Further they say, that the Jews speak falsely of
our Lady, and her Son Jesus Christ, in saying that they did not hang him on the
Cross. Their Book Alkaron forbids Murder and Theft; and commands them to
do so to others, as they would have others do to them: for the Sarasins believe
so near our Naith, that they are easily converted when men preach the Law of
Jesus Christ. They say also that they know right well by their Prophesies, that
their Law of Mahomet shall fail, as the Jews Law does, and that the Law of
Christians shall last to the Worlds end. And if a man ask them wherein they
believe, they say that they believe in God Almighty, that is the Maker of
Heaven and Earth, and all other things, and without him is nothing done; and at
the day of Judgment every man shall be rewarded after his deserving, and that
all things are truth that God spoke by the mouth of his Prophets.

CHAP. XLV. Yet further concerning Mahomet.
ALso Mahomet had writ in his Book Alkaron, that every man should have two
Wives, or three, or four; but now they have nine, and as many Lemmans as them
likes; and it any of these Wives do wrong to their Husbands, he may drive her
out of his House, and take in another, but he must give part of his goods.
Moreover, where men speak of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, they say
that they are not three Persons, but one God: for their Book Alkaron speaks
not thereof, nor of the Trinity: but they say that God spoke, or else he was
dumb; and that God had a Ghost, or else he was not alive: They say Gods Word
has great strength, and so says their Alkaron, and they say that Abraham and
Moses were greatly in favor with God, for they spoke with him; and Mahomet was
a true Messenger of God: and they have many good Articles of our Faith, and
some understand the Scriptures, Prophets, Gospels, and the Bible, for they have
them written in their Language. In their manner they know holy Writ, but they
understand it but after the Letter, and so do the Jews, for they understand it
not Spiritually, but after their Letter: and therefore says Saint Paul, Litera
occidit, Spiritus autem vivificar, that is, the Letter kills, but the Spirit
quickneth. The Sarasins likewise say, that the Jews are wicked for they keep
not the Law of Moses which he gave them: and also Christians are evil, for they
keep not the Commandments of the Gospel, that Jesus Christ sent unto them.

And further, I shall tell you what the Sultan told me upon and day in his
Chamber, shutting out all other men, as Lords, Knights, and others, for he
would speak with me in counsel: and then he asked me how Christians governed
themselves in our Country: I answered him and said, Right well, thanks be to
God: but he said secretly, nay, for he said that our Priests made no force of
Gods Service: for they should give good example to men to do well, and they
give ill example; and therefore when the people should go on the Holy days to
Church to serve God, they go to the Tavern to sin in gluttony both day and
night, eating and drinking as Beasts that wot not when they have enough. He
said also, that there was much contention among Christians, and one would
defraud another, and they were so proud that they wist not how to clothe them;
now short, now long, now strait, now wide, and of all fashions: whereas they
should be humble and meek, giving their alms as Jesus Christ did, in whom they
believe. He said also that they were so covetous, that for a little money they
would sell their children, sisters, or wives, one man taking another man's wife,
and no man keeping his promise: Therefore said he, for their sins has God
given these Lands to our hands, and not through our strength, but all for your
sins: For we know certainly, that while ye truly serve God he will help you, so
that no man shall win of you, if that ye serve God as ye ought to do: but while
ye live so sinfully as ye do, we have no dread of you, for God will not help
you. And then I asked him how he knew the state of Christians in that manner:
and he said that he knew well the state both of Lords and of Commons, by his
Messengers which he sent through all the Countries as it were Merchants, with
precious Stones and other Merchandise, to know the manner of every Country. And
then he did call again all the Lords into his Chamber to us, and then showed he
unto me three persons that were great Lords of that Country, who showed unto me
the manner of my Country and of all Christendom, as though they had been men
born in the same parts, and they spoke French right well, and the Sultan also:
and then I had great marbel of this slander of our Faith; and so they that
should be turned by our good examples to the Faith of Jesus Christ, they are
drawn away through our evil living; and therefore it is no wonder if that they
call us evil, for they say truth; but the Sarasins are true, for they keep
truly the Commandments of their Alkaron.

CHAP. XLVI. Of the Birth of Mahomet.
ANd ye shall understand that Mahomet was born at Ithareb in Araby, and his
Father was a Painim, and his Mother a Jew; their names were Abdal and H^mna,
and they were but poor folk; and he was first a poor drudge, and kept horse:
and afterward he followed Merchandise.

And the Sarasins say, he came into Egypt with Merchandise, and Egypt was the
same time Christened, and there was a Chapel beside Araby, and there was an
Hermit; and when he came to the Chapel that was but a little low House, as
soon as he entered, it began to be as great as it were a Palace Gate; and that
was the first Miracle that the Sarasins say he did in his youth. After began
Mahomet to be wise and rich, and became a great Astronomer, and since was the
Keeper of the Land for the Prince of Carasan, and governed it full well, in
such manner that when the Prince was dead, he married the Lady named Q^adiga,
And Mahomet fell often into the falling Evil: wherefore the Lady was sorry that
she had taken him to be her Husband: and he made her believe that every time he
fell so, the Angel Gabriel spoke to him, and for the brightness of the Angel he
fell down. This Mahomet reigned in Araby, in the year of our Lord six hundred
and twenty: he was of the kindred of Ishmael that was Abraham's Son, whom he
begat on Hagar: the other are called Sarasins of Sara: but some are called
Moabites, and some Amonites, after Lots two Sons. And ye shall understand that
the Turks, Arabins, and Persians, do profess the Alkaron, but they vary one
from another in many matters. This Mahomet loved well a good man an Hermit,
that dwelt in the Wilderness, a mile from Mount Sinai, in the way as men go
from Araby to Chalde, a days journey from the Sea whence Merchants of Venice
come: and Mahomet went often to this Hermit, for he heard gladly the Hermit
preach; but his men were displeased at it, for they traveled sometime all
night; wherefore they wished the Hermit dead. So it befell on a night, that
Mahomet was sore drunk with strong Wine, so that he fell asleep; then his men
took his sword out of his sheath whiles he lay and slept, and therewith they
slew the Hermit, and when they had done, they put up the sword again all
bloody; and upon the Morrow when that he found the Hermit thus dead, he was
very angry in his mind, and right wroth, and would have put his men unto death;
but they all with one accord, and with one consent said, that he himself had
slain him, when he was drunken, and they showed him his own sword all bloody;
and then he believed that they said truth; and cursed the Wine, and all those
that drank it. And therefore Sarasins that are devout, drink no Wine openly,
lest they should be reproved, but they drink good Beverage, sweet and
nourishing, that is made of Calamels, and thereof is Sugar made.

And it befell sometime that Christians become Sarasins, either through
poverty, simpleness, or wickedness; and therefore their Archbishop when he
received them, said, Laelles ella Mahomet ros sella; that is to say, there is
no God but one, and Mahomet is his Messenger. And seeing I have told you a part
of their Law and their Customs. Now I shall tell you of their Letters, with
their Names.

First, they have for a almoy, b bethat, c cathi, d delphy, e ethoti, f thy, g
gatophin, h hecum, i iochi, k kathi, l lothum, m malach, n nahalht, o orthy, p
th^zui, q zo^hii, r ruchelat, s chotimus, t salathy, v yrichom, x m^z^r, z
z^l^phin, and johe-t^ncon; these are the names. Four Letters have they yet more
for diversity of their Language, forasmuch as they speak so in their throats,
as we have in our Language and speech in England, Two Letters more they also
have in their A. B. C. that is to say, ^, and ^, the which are called thrane
and zawx.

CHAP. LVII. Of diverse Countries, and of mavelous Beasts.
ANd sithence I have spoken before of the holy land and Countries thereabout,
and many ways thither; and to Mount Sinai, and to Babylon, and diverse other
places which I have spoken of: Now will I speak of strange Beasts, of diverse
People, Countries and Isles that are parted by the Rivers which run through
Paradise terrestre. For Mesopotamia, and the Kingdom of Chalde, and Araby, are
between two Rivers, Tigris and Euphrates, and the Kingdom of Media and Persia
are between two Rivers, Tigris, and Indus: and the Kingdom of Sury Palestine
and Femines, are between Euphrates and the Mediterranian Sea. It is of length
from Moroch on the Sea of Spain unto the great Sea: and so it lasts beyond
Constantinople three hundred and twenty miles of Lumbardy, and to the Oceon
Sea. In Inde is the Kingdom of Sichem, which is all closed among Hills, and
beside Sichem, is the Land of Amazony, wherein dwell none but Women.

And thereby is the Kingdom of Albany, which is a great Land; and it is so
called because that men are more white there than in other places. In this
Country are great Hounds and strong, so that they overcome Lions, and slay
them. And ye shall understand that in those Countries are many Isles and Lands,
of all which it were too long to tell, but of some I will speak more plainly
afterward.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of the Haven of Gene, for to go by Sea into diverse Countries.
NOw he that will go to Tartary, Persia, Chalde or Inde, he takes Ship of
Gene, or at Venice, or at any other Haven, and so he passes by the Sea, and
arriveth at Topasond, that is a good City, that sometime was called the Haven
of Briga, and thereby is the Haven of Persia, of Media, and of other Marches.
In this City lies Saint Athanasius that was Bishop of Alexandria, and made the
Psalm Quicunque vult.

This man was a great Doctor of Divinity, and of the Godhead: he was accused
unto the Pope of Rome, that he was an Heretic, and the Pope sent for him, and
put him in Prison, and while he was in that Prison he made this Psalm, and sent
it unto the Pope, and said, if that he were an Heretic then was that Heresy,
for that was his Faith and his Belief: and when the Pope saw that what he had
said therein, was all our Faith, he anon delivered him out of Prison, and
commanded that Psalm to be said every day at the beginning of Service; and so
he held Athanasius for a good Christian: but he would never after go to his
Bishopric, hecause they accused him of Heresy. Topasond was sometime holden
of the Emperor of Constantinople, but a great man that he sent to help the
Country against the Turks, did hold it to himself, and called himself Emperor
of Topasond.

And from thence men go through little Armony, and in that Country is an old
Castle, that is on a Rock, that men call the Castle of Cypress; there people
say, men find an Hawk sitting upon a Perch right well made, and a fair Lady of
Fairy that keeps it; and he that will watch the same Hawk seven days and
seven nights (some say, that it is but three days and three nights) alone
without any company, and without sleep, this fair Lady will come unto him at
the seven, or at three days and, and shall grant unto him the first thing that
he shall ask of worldly things, and that has often been proved, the folk say:
So upon a time it befell that a man who at that time was King of Armony, that
was a right daughty man, watched upon a time; and at the seven days end, the
Lady came to him and bade him ask what he would: For he had well done his duty:
and the King answered and said, that he was a great Lord, and in good peace,
and was rich; so that he would ask nothing but the continual love of the fair
Lady, or to have his will of her. Then this fair Lady answered and said unto
him, that he was a fool, for he wist not what he asked, neither might he have
her: but he should not have asked of her any worldly thing, for she was not
worldly. Then the King says he would naught else: and she said, since he would
ask naught else, she would grant him and all that came after him three things,
and said unto him: Sir King, ye shall have War without peace unto the ninth
degree; and ye shall be in subjection unto your Enemies, and ye shall have
great need of good Cattle. And since that time all the Kings of Armony have
been in War, and needy, and under tribute of the Sarasins.

Also a poor man's son who watched on a time, asked of the Lady that he might
grow rich and happy by Merchandise, and the Lady granted him: but she said to
him, that he had asked his undoing, for great pride that he should have
thereof. And this man became so great a Merchant both by Sea and Land, that he
was so rich, that he knew not the thousand part of his goods.

Also a Knight of the Templers watched likewise, and when he had done, he
desired to have a Purse full of Gold; and whatsoever he took thereof, it should
ever be full again: and she granted it him, but she told him that he had
desired his destruction; by the great mispending that he should have of the
same Purse; and so it befell. But he that shall watch has great need to keep
him from sleep: for if he sleep, he is lost, so that he shall never be seen
after. But this is not the right way, but for a marvel.

From Topasond men go to great Armony, to the City Artyron, which aforetime was
a fair City, but the Turks have so destroyed it, that there neither grows
Wine nor Fruit. From Artyron, men go to the Hill Sabissocal, and there near is
another Hill called Arah, but the Jews call it Thano; where the Ark of Noah
rested after the Deluge, and on that Hill a man may see very far in clear
weather, for the Hill is full seven miles of height; and some say, they have
been there and put their fingers in the holes where the Fiend went out, when
Noah said in this manner, Benedicite. But I judge, that for Snow that is always
upon that Hill, both Winter and Summer, no man has ever gone up since Noah was
there: but only one is said to have been there, who brought a Plank that yet is
in the Abbey at the Hills foot, for he had great desire to go up that Hill, and
when he was at the third part upward, he was so weary that he might not go
further, and he rested him and slept; and when he was awake, he was down at the
Hill foot, and then prayed he to God, devoutly, that he would suffer him to go
to the upper part of the Hill, and an Angel said, that he should have his
desire, and so he did; and since that time no man did ever come there: but a
man ought not to believe all things that are spoken of it.

And from thence men go to a City that is called Tanziro, which is a fair and a
rich City; beside that City is an Hill of Salt, and thereof every man takes
what he will: and there dwell many Christians under Tribute of the Sarasins.
From thence men go through many Cities, Towns and Villages toward Inde; and
then come to a City that is called Cassage, that is a fair City, and near that
is abundance of Corn; Vines, and all manner of Fruits; and there met the three
Kings together, that went to make their Offering to our Lord in Bethlehem. From
that City men go to another called Carrapage; and Painims, say, that Christians
may not dwell there, but they die soon, yet they know not the cause. From
thence men go through many Countries, Cities and Towns; so that it were too
long to tell all: and to the City of Carnaa, that was sometime so great, that
the Wall was five and twenty miles about, which yet may be seen, but it is not
inhabited, and at that place ends the Land of the Emperor of persia.

CHAP. XLIX. Of the Country of Job, and of the Kingdom of Chalde.
ON the other side of the City of Carnaa, men enter into the land of Job, that
is a good land, surnished with plenty of all fruits, and it is also called
Swear. In this land is the City of Thomar, This Job was a Painim, and also he
was Cofraas Son, and he held that land as the Prince thereof, and he was so
rich that he knew not the hundred part of his goods; and after his poverty God
made him richer then ever he was before, so that he was King of Idumea, after
the death of King Esau; and when he was King he was called Joab; and in that
Kingdom he lived an hundred threescore and ten years, so that when he died he
was two hundred forty and eight years old. And in the land of Job is no want of
any thing that is needful for man's body. There are Hills where men find Manna,
which Manna is called Angels Bread, it is white of color, and much sweeter*
than Sugar or Honey; and it comes of the dew of Heaven that falls on the
Herbs, and there it congealeth and waxes white, and it is used in medicines
for rich men.

This land boundeth on the land of Chalde, which is a great land, and there the
men are very fair, and well apparelled, as with Cloth of Gold beset with costly
Pearls, and many other precious Stones. The woman are but hard favored and go
barefoot, and meanly clad, with a wide and coarse Coat, but so short that it
scarce covers their knees; their sleeves are long, down to the foot they have
long black hair hanging about their shoulders, and are nothing lovely to look
upon, but I had best say no more, for I am afraid I shall get small thanks for
my praising of them. In this land of Chalde aforesaid is a City called Hur, and
in that City was Abraham the Patriarch born.



CHAP. L. Of the Kingdom of Amazony, where dwell none but Women.
NEar the land of Chalde is the land of Amazony, wherein dwell no men, but all
women, as men say, for they will suffer no man to live among them, nor to have
rule over them. For aforetime there was a King and men dwelling in that land,
and they had wives as in other Countries. Now it befell that the King had great
War with the men of Scithy: this King was called Colopius, and he was slain in
Battle, and all the Nobles of his Land. When the Queen and the other Ladies of
the Land, heard that the King and the Lords were slain, they gathered them
together and killed all the men that were left in their Land among them. And
when they will have any men to lie by them, they send for them into a country
that is near their land, and the men come and stay there eight days, or as the
woman likes, and then go they again: and if they have men-children they send
them to their Fathers when they can eat and go, if they have maid-children they
keep them: and if they be of Noble blood, they burn the left Pap away, for
bearing of a Shield; and if they be of base degree, they burn the right Pap
away, for shooting. For the women of that Country are good Warriors, and are
often in pay with other Lords; and the Queen of that Land governs well the
land* this Land is ^nvironed with Water. Beside Amazony, is the land of
Termagute, that is a good Land and profitable, and for the goodness of that
Land King Alexander did make a City there, and called it Alexandria.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Land Ethiope.
ON the other side of Chalde, toward the South, is Ethiope, which is a great
Land; and ye shall understand that the Land of Ethiope reaches Eastward to the
great Wilderness, Westward to the land of Nuby, Southward to the land Maritane,
and Northward to the Red Sea: and then is a Maretim that lasts from the Hills
of Ethiope, unto Lidy the high and the low, that lasts to the great Sea of
Spain. In this Land on the South, are the folk very black. In this land is a
Well that in the day the water is so cold that no Man may drink thereof, and in
the night it is so hot that no man may abide to put his hand in it. In this
land the Rivers and all the Waters are troubled, and some yield salt for the
great heat; and men of that land are soon drunken, and have little appetite to
meat. They have commonly the Flux of the Body, and live not long.



In Ethiope are such men as have but one foot, and they go so fast that it is a
great marvel, and that is a large foot, for the shadow thereof covers the
body from Sun or Rain, when they lie upon their backs; and when their children
are first born, they look like russet, but when they wax old, then they be all
black. In Ethiope is the land of Suba, of which one of the Kings that sought
our Lord at Bethlehem was King.

CHAP. LII. Of Inde the more and the less: of Diamonds, and of their great
virtues.
FRom Ethiope men go through many and diverse Countries before they come into
Inde: and it is parted into three parts, that is to say, Inde the more, which
is a hot Land* and Inde the less, which is a temperate Land: and the third part
is toward the North, and there it is very cold, so that with great cold, frost
and ice, the water becomes Crystal, and upon that grows the rich Diamonds
that are of a troubled color, which Diamond is so hard that no man may break
it. Other Diamonds men find in Araby, that are not so good, for they are more
soft, and there be some in Cypress. In Macedonia men find Diamonds likewise,
but the best are in Inde, and some are many times found in a mass, in the
Mines where gold is gotten, when men break the mass in pieces: sometimes men
find some as great as a Pease, and some less, and those are as hard as those of
Inde: sometime there are good Diamonds found in Inde upon the Rock of Crystal:
and also upon the Rock of Adament in the Sea. And upon other Hills are Diamonds
found that are as great as Hazel Nuts, which are square, and pointed of their
own kind, and they grow two together, male and female, and are nourished with
the Dew of Heaven, and they engender commonly and bring forth other small ones,
which increase and grow all the year. I have many times tried that if a man
keep them with a little of the Rock, and wet them often with the Dew, they will
grow every year, and the small will wax great: and if a man do bear that
Diamond on his left side then it is of more virtue, for the strength of their
growing is toward the North, that is, on the left side, as men of those
Countries say. To him that bears the Diamond with him, it gives hardiness,
it keeps the limbs of the body, it also gives a man victory over his
Enemies, if his cause be right, and it keeps him that bears it in good
temper, free from strife; riot, ill dreams, sorceries, and enchantments.
Moreover, no wild beast shall assail or any way hurt them. This Diamond should
be neither bought nor sold, but given freely, for then it is of most virtue. It
heals the Lunatic, and him that is possessed with a Devil: and as soon as
any Venom or Poison is brought near to the Diamond, it moistneth, and begins
to sweat. And men may easily pollish them, though some think they may not be
pollished, and men may assay them well in this manner: First, cut them on
prceious Stones. Saphirs, or upon Crystal, and then take a Stone that is
called Adamant, and lay a Needle before that Adamant, and if the Diamond be
good and of virtue, the Adamant draws not the Needle to it, whiles the
Diamond is there. And this is the proof that they make beyond the Sea. But it
chances sometime that the good Diamond loses the virtue through him that
bears it, and therefore it is needful for to make it recover the virtue
again or else it is of little value.

CHAP. LIII. Of diverse Kingdoms and Isles in the Land of Inde, and of people
that are of a yellow and green color, and of many strange things.
THere is in Inde many Countries and diverse Kingdoms, and it takes the name of
a River that runs through it which is called Inde also, and there are many
precious Stones in the said River and diverse other strange things, as Eales of
thirty foot long: and men that dwell near that River are of evil color yellow
and green. In that Land of Inde are more than five thousand Isles that are
inhabited, (beside diverse that are uninhabited) and in each one of those are
great plenty of Cities, and much people; for the Indians are of that condition,
that commonly they pass not out of their Land, for they dwell under the Planet
Saturn, which makes his course through the twelve Signs but once in thirty
years; yet the Moon passes through the twelve Signs in one Month, and for
that Saturn is of so little stirring, therefore men that dwell under it, and in
the Climate, have no good will to stir much abroad. But in our Country it is
contrary, for we are in a Climate that is under the Moon, and of light
stirring, and therefore it gives us will to much moving and stirring, and to
go into diverse Countries of the World, for it goes about the World more
swifter than any other Planet does.

Also men pass through Inde to many Countries by Sea, and then they come to the
Isle of Hermes, where Merchants of Venice and of Gene, and of diverse other
parts of Christendom come to buy their Merchandise. And it is so warm there in
that Isle that men's members hang down to their shanks, for the great dissolving
of the Body. But men of that Country that know better* manners do bind them
strait, and anoint them with Ointments, made therefore for to hold them up,
whereby they may live more civilly. In this Island men and women lie all naked
in the Rivers, from the beginning of the heat of the day till it be pass noon,
and they lie all in the water but the face, for the great heat that is there,
and the women be not ashamed for the men. In this Isle the Ships are without
nail or bands of Iron, lest the Rocks of Adament that are in the Sea should
draw the Ships to them. From this Isle men go by Sea to the Isle of Lana, where
is great plenty of Corn, and the King of this Isle was sometime so mighty that
he held War against King Alexander with great strength: Men of this Isle have
many manners of Beliefs and says, and have also diverse Laws: for some do
worship the Sun, some the Fire, some the Trees, and some the Serpents, or any
other thing that they first meet in the morning, and some do Worship simple
Simulacres and Idols; but between Simulacres and Idols is no difference, for
they are but Images made to what likeness soever a man may invent: for some
Image has an head like an Ox, and some have three or four Heads, one of a Man,
or an Horse, or an Ox, or any other beast that a man has seen.

And ye shall understand, that they that worship Simulacres, they worship them
for worthy men that were sometime, as Hercules and others, who did many marvels
when they lived: for they say, they know well that they are not that God which
created all things, but that they are in estemation with God for the marvels
they did, and therefore they worship them. And so say they of the Sun, for it
changes ost times, and gives sometime great heat for to nourish all things on
Earth: and because it is so great profit, they know well that it is not God,
but it is in Gods favor, and he loves it more than any other thing, and for
this cause they worship it.

Also they have their reasons for other Planets, and for Fire also, for it is
profitable and needful. And of Idols they say that the Ox is the holiest that
they may find on Earth, and more profitable than any other: for he does much
good, and none ill, and they know well that it may not be without the special
grace of God, and therefore they make their God the one half like an Ox, and
the other half like a Man, for Man is the fairest and chiefest creature in the
World. And they do worship to Serpents and other beasts that they first meet in
the morning, and namely those beasts that have good meeting, after whom they
speed well all the day after, the which they have proved of long time, and
therefore they say that this meeting comes of Gods grace, and therefore they
do make Images like unto these things, that they might worship them before they
meet any thing else.



And there are some of them that say some Beasts are better for to meet than
others; for Hares, Swine, and other Beasts are ill to meet first, as they say.
In this Isle of Lana are many wild Beasts, and Rats in that Country are as
great as Hounds here, and they take them with Mastiffs, for Cats may not take
them. From thence men go to a City that is called Sarchis, and it is a fair and
good City, and there dwell many true believing Christians, and there be men of
Religion. From thence men come to the Land of Lombe, and in that Land grows
Pepper, in a Forest that is called Tombar, and it grows in none other place
more in all the Country than in that Forest, and that Forest is fifty days
Journey; and there by the Land of Lombe is the City of Polomes, and under that
City is a Hill that men call Polombe, and thereof takes the City his name.

And so at the foot of the same Hill is a right fair and clear Well, that has
a full good and sweet savor, and it smells of all manner of sorts of Spices.
And also at each hour of the day it changes his savor diversely; and who so
drinks thrice in the day of that Well he is made whole of all manner of
sickness that he has, I have sometime drunk of that Well and me thinks yet
that I fare the better: some call it the Well of Youth for they that drink
thereof, seem to be young always and have little sickness: and they say that
this Well comes from Paradise terrestre, because it is of such virtue. In this
Land grows Ginger, and thither come many rich Merchants for Spices. In this
Country men worship an Ox, for his great simplicity and meekness, and the
profit that is in him; for they make an Ox to labor six or seven years, and
then they eat him, and the King of that Land has evermore an Ox with him, and
he that keeps him, every day takes his Fees for the keeping. And also every
day he gathers his urine, and his dung into a vessel of Gold, and bears it
to the Prelate that they call Areth porta paparon, and the Prelate bears it
to the King, and makes thereupon a great stur, and then the King puts his
hand therein, and they call it gaul, and he anointeth his Front and his Breast
therewith, and they do it great worship, and say he shall be fulfilled with the
virtue of the Ox before said, and that he is hallowed through virtue of those
holy things, as they say, And when the King has thus done, then other Lords do
it, and after them other men according to their degree, if they may have any of
the remnant.

In this Country their Idols are half Man and half Ox, as in the Figure in the
second page before is showed, and out of these Idols the wicked Spirit speaks
unto them, and gives them answer of what thing they ask him: and before these
Idols they oft-times slay their Children, and sprinkle their blood on the
Idols, and so make Sacrifices. And if any man dye in that Country, they burn
them in token of Penance, that he should suffer no penance, if he were laid in
the Earth, by eating of Worms: and if his Wife have no Children, then they burn
her with him, and they say it is good reason, that she keep him company in the
other world, as she did in this; but if she have Children she may live with
them if she please, also if he will. In this Country grows good wine, and
women drink wine, and men none, and women shave their heads, and not men*

CHAP. LIVE. Of the Kingdom of Mabaron.
FRom this Land men go many a days journey to a Country called Mabaron, and
this is a great Kingdom, there are many fair Cities and Towns. In this Land
lies St. Thomas in a fair Tomb, in the City of Calamy, and the Arm and the
Hand that he put into our Lords side after his Resurrection, when Christ said
unto him. Noli esse incredulus, sed fidelis, that is to say, Be not of vain
hope, but believe: that same hand lies yet without the Tomb bare; and with
this hand they give their dooms in that Country, to wit, who says right, and
who does not; for if any strife be between two parties, they write their names,
and put them into the hand, and then incontinently the hand casts away the
Bill of them that do wrong and holds the other still that does right, and
therefore men come from far Countries to have judgment of causes that are in
doubt.

In this Church of Saint Thomas is a great Image, that is a Simulacre, and is
richly beset with precious Stones and Pearls; to that Image men come in
Pilgrimage from far Countries with great devotion, and there come some Pilgrims
that bear sharp knives in their hands, and as they go by the way they slash
their shanks and thighs that the blood may come out for the love of that Idol,
and they say that he is holy that will die for that Idols sake. And there be
some that from that time that they go out of their Houses, at each third pace
they kneel, till that they come to this Idol; and when they come there, they
have Incense, or some other thing to offer to the Idol: And there before that
Minster or Temple of this Idol, is a River full of water, and in that River
Pilgrims cast Gold, Silver, Pearls, and other precious Stones without number,
in stead of offerings; and therefore when as the Minster has any need of
mending, then the Master of the Minster goes unto the River, and takes out
thereof as much as is needful for the mending of the Minster.

And ye shall understand that when any great Feasts of that Idol come, as the
Dedication of the Temple or of the Throning of the Idol, all the country
thereabout assemble there together: then they set the Idol with great revernce
in a chair richly beset with Gold and Tapestry, and so they carry him with
great reverence and worship roundabout the city; and before the chair goes
first in procession, all the Maidens of the country go two and two together,
and so after them go the Pilgrims that are come from far countries, of the
which Pilgrims some fall down before the chair, and so let all go over them, in
so much that some are slain, and others have their arms and legs broken: this
they do for love of the Idol, thinking that the more pain they suffer here for
their Idol, the more joy shall they have in the other world. But a man shall
find few Christians that will suffer so much penance for our Lords sake, as
they do for their Idol. And nigh before the chair go all the Minstrels of the
country, which are without number, with great melody.



And when they are come again to the Temple, they set up the Idol again in his
Throne: and for worship of the Idol two or three are willingly slain with sharp
knives; and the men in that country th^nk they have great worship, if that holy
man which is slain be of their kindred: likewise they say, that all those that
are there slain are holy Men and Saints, and they are written in their Letany;
and when they are thus slain, their friends burn their bodies, and they take
the ashes, and those are kept as Relics, and they say it is an holy thing,
and that they fear no danger while they have of those ashes.

CHAP. LV. Of a great Country called Lamory, where the people go naked: and of
other things,


FRom this country two and fifty days journey, is a country that is called
Lamory, and in that land is great heat; and it is the custom there that men
and women go naked, and they scorn all them that are clad; for they say, that
God made Adam and Eve all naked, and that men should have no shame of that God
made: and they believe in the same God that made Adam and Eve, and all the
world. And there is no woman married, but women are all common there, and they
refuse no man. And they say that God commanded Adam and Eve, and all that come
of them, saying. Crescite and multiplicamini and replete terram. Increase and
multiply, and fill the Earth. No man there may say, This is my Wife, nor no
woman may say, This is my Husband: and when they have children, they give them
to whom they will of them that have meddled with them.

Also the land is all common, for every man takes what he will; for that one
man has now this year, another man has the next year. And all the goods, as
Corn, Beasts, and all manner of things in that country are common. For there is
nothing under lock, and as rich is one man as another; but they have an evil
custom to eating of flesh, for they eat man's flesh more gladly than other.
Nevertheless, in that land is abundance of Corn, of Flesh, of Fich, of Gold, of
Silver, and of all manner of good. And thither do Merchants bring children for
to sell, and those that are fat they eat, but those that be lean they keep till
they be fat, and then are they eaten. And besides this Isle of Lamory, is
another called Somober, the which is a good Isle; and there both men and women
that are of the Nobility, are marked in the Visage with a hot Iron, that they
may be known from other, for they think themselves the worthiest of the world
and they have evermore War with those men that are naked, of whom I spoke
before. And there are many other Isles and People; of the which it where
overmuch for to speak here.

CHAP. LVI. Of the Country and Isle called Java, which is a mighty Land.
ANd there is also a great Isle that is called Iava, and the King of that
country has under him seven Kings for he is a very mighty Prince. In this Isle
grows all manner of Spices more plenteous then in any other place, as Ginger,
Cloves Nutmegs, and other. And ye shall understand that the Nutme g bears the
Mace. Also in that Isle is great plenty of all things save wine. The King of
this land has a rich Palace and the best that is in the world: for all the
Stairs of his Hall and Chambers are made, one of Gold, and another of Silver;
and all the Walls are plated with fine Gold and Silver, and in those places are
written Stories of Knights, and Battles; and the Floors of the Hall and
Chambers are of Gold and Silver; so that no man would belive the great riches
that are there, except he had seen it: and the King of this Isle is so mighty
that he has many times overcome the great Caane of Cathay, which is the
mightiest Emperor that is in the world; there is often war between them, for
the great Caane would make him hold his land Tributary of him.

CHAP. LVII. Of the Kingdom of Pathen or Salmasse, which is a goodly land
ANd for to go forth by the Sea, there is an Isle that is called Pathen, and
some call it Salmasse, for it is a great Kingdom, with many fair Cities. In
this land grow Trees that bear Meal, of which men make fair Bread and white,
and of good savor, and it seems like as it were Wheat, And there be other
Trees which bear venim, against the which* is no medicine, but only to take of
the leaves of the same Trees, and stamp them, and temper them with water, and
drink it, or else he shall die suddenly, for nothing else may help him And if
ye will know how these Trees bear Meal, I shall tell you: men hew with an
Hatchet about the root of the Tree by the Earth and they pierce it in many
places, and then comes out a Liquor, the which they take into vessels, and set
it in the Sun, and dry it, and when it is dry, they carry it unto the Mill to
grind, and thereof is fair Meal and White. Also Honey, Wine, and Venim, are
drawn out of other Trees in the same manner, and they put it into vessels to
keep. In that Isle is a dead Sea, which is a water that has no bottom; and if
any man fall therein he can never be found: beside that Sea grows great
Canes, and under their Roots men find precious Stones of a great virtue, for he
that bears one of those Stones about him, there may no Iron wound him nor
draw blood of him and therefore they that have those Stones fight full hardy,
for there may no weapon that is of Iron wound them; therefore they that know
the manner, make their weapons without Iron, and so they slay them.

CHAP. LVIII. Of the Kingdom of Talonach, the King Whereof has many Wives.
ANother Isle there is, that men call Talonach; the same is a great land, and
therein is great plenty of fish, and other goods, as you shall hereafter hear.
And the King of that Land has as many Wives as he will, a thousand and more,
and he never lies but once by any one of them: And also in that Land is a
great marvel, for all manner of Fishes of the Sea come thither once a year, one
after another, and they lie near the land: sometime on the land* and so lie
three days, and men of that land come thither and take of them what they will,
and then go those Fishes away, and another sort comes, end lies also three
days, and men take of them: and thus do all manner of Fishes, till all have
been there, and men have taken what they will. But no man can tell the cause
why it is so: But they of that country say, that those Fishes come so thither
to do worship to their King, for they say, he is the worthiest King of all the
world, for he has so many Wives, and gets so many children of them. And
that same King has fourteen thousand of Elephants, or more, which be tame, and
they be kept for his pleasure by the men of that country, so that he may have
them ready at his hand when he has any War against any King or Prince, and
then he does put upon their back Castles and men of War, as the use of that
land is, as other Kings and Princes do thereabout.

CHAP. LIX. Of the Island called Raso. Where people be hanged if they be sick
past hope of recovery.


ANd from this Isle men go to another Isle called Raso and the men of this
Isle, when their friends are sick and that they believe surely that they shall
die, they take them and hang them up quick on a tree, and say it is better that
Birds, that are Angels of God, eat them* then Worms of the earth* From thence
men go to an Isle where the men are of an ill kind, for they nourish Hounds for
to strangle men. And when their friends are sick that they think they shall
die, then do those Hounds strangle them, for they will not that they die a
kindly death, for then should they suffer too great pain, as they say: and when
they are thus dead, they eat their flesh for Venison.

CHAP. LX Of the Island of Melk, wherein dwells evil people.
FRom thence men go by sea through many Isles, into an Isle called Melk, and
there be full ill people, for they have none other delight but for to fight and
slay men, for they drink gladly mans-blood, which blood they call good, and he
that can slay most, is of most Fame among them. And if there be two men at
strife, and after be made friends, then must they drink either others blood, or
else the accord is of no value. From this Isle men go to another Isle that is
called Tarkonet, where all men are as Beasts, for they are unreasonable, and
they dwell in Caves, for they have not wit to make Houses: these men eat
Adders, and speak not, but make such noise as Beasts do one to another: and
they make no force of riches, but of a Stone that is of forty colors, and is
called Trakonet, and in that Isle they know not the virtue thereof, but they
covet it for the fairness.

CHAP. LXI. Of the Isle named Macumeran, Where the People have heads like
Hounds.


FRom this Isle men go to another that is called Macumeran, which is a great
Isle and a fair; and the men and women of that Country have Heads like Hounds*
they are reasonable, and worship an Ox for their God, they go all naked but a
little cloth before their Privy Members; they are good men to fight, and they
bear a great Target, with which they cover all their body, and a Spear in their
hand. And if they take any man in battle, they send him to their King, which is
a great Lord and devout in his Faith; for he has about his neck on a Chain,
three hundred great Pearls, and as the Papists say their Pater noster, and
other prayers, so their King says every day three hundred prayers to his God,
before he either eat or drink; and he bears also about his neck a Ruby Orient
fine and good, that is near a foot and five fingers long. For when they choose
their King, they give to him that Ruby to bear in his hand, and then they lead
him riding about the city, and then ever after they are subject to him, and
therefore he bears that Ruby always about his neck; for if he bear not the
Ruby, they would no longer hold him for their King. The great Caane of Cathay
has much coveted this Ruby: but he might never have it neither by war nor by
other means: And this King is a full true and virtuous man, for men may go
safely and surely through his land, and bear all that they will, for there is
no man so hardy to let them. And from thence men go to an Isle that is called
Silo: this Isle is more than an hundred mile about and therein be many Serpents
which are great, with yellow strikes, and they have four feet with short legs,
and great claws; some be five fadome of length, and some of eight, and some of
ten, and some more, some less, and they be called Crocodiles: and there be also
many wild Beasts and Elephants.



Also in this Isle and in many Isles thereabout, are many wild Geese with two
heads, and there are also in that country white Lions, and many other strange
beasts: but if I should tell all, it would be too long.

CHAP. LXII. Of a great Island called Dodyn, there are many men of evil
condition.
THere is there another Isle, called Dodyn, and it is a great Isle. In the same
Isle are many and diverse sorts of men, who have evil manners, for the Father
eats the Son, and the Son the Father, the Husband his Wife, and the Wife her
Husband. And if it so be that the Father be sick, or the Mother, or any Friend,
the Son goes soon to the Priest of the Law and prays him that he will ask of
the Idol, if his Father shall die of that sickness or not. And then the Priest
and the Son kneel down before the Idol devoutly, and ask him, and he answers
to them: and if he say that he shall live, then they keep him well; and if he
say that he shall die, then comes the Priest with the Son or with the Wife, or
any that is a friend unto him that is sick, and they lay their hands over his
mouth to stop his breath, and so they slay him and then they smite all the body
into pieces, and pray all his friends for to come and eat of him that is dead,
and they make a great Feast thereof, and have many Ministrils there, and eat
him with great melody.

And so when they have eaten all the flesh, then they take the bones and bury
them, all singing with great mirth; and all those of his friends that where not
there at the eating of him, have great shame and reproof, so that they shall
nevermore be taken as friends.



And the King of this Isle is a great Lord and mighty, and he has in many
Isles other Kings under him, and in one of those Isles are men that have but
one eye, and that is in the midst of their front, and they eat their Flesh
and Fish all raw. And in another Isle are men that have no Heads, and their
eyes are in their shoulders, and their mouth is in their breast. In another
Isle are men that have no head nor eyes, and their mouth is in their shoulders.
And in another Isle are men that have flat faces without noses, and without
eyes, but they have two small round holes in stead of eyes, and they have flat
mouths without lips. And in that Isle are men also that have their faces all
flat without eyes, without mouth, and without nose, but they have their eyes
and their mouth, behind on their shoulders.



And in another Isle are foul men, that have their lips about their mouth so
great, that when they sleep in the Sun they cover all their face with their
lips. And in another Isle, are little men as Dwarfs, who have no mouth but a
little round hole, and through that hole they eat their meat with a Pipe; and
they have no tongue, neither do they speak, but they blow and whistle, and so
make signs one to another. And in another Isle are men with ears hanging unto
their shoulders. And in another Isle are wild men with hanging ears, who have
feet like an horse, and they run fast, and they take wild beasts, and eat them.
And in another Isle are men that go on their hands and feet like beasts, and
are all rough, and will leap upon a Tree like Cats or Apes. And in another Isle
are men that go ever upon their knees marvellously, and have on every foot
eight toes. And in another Isle are folk that are both men and women and have
members of both, for to engender with: and when they will, they use one at one
time, and another at a another time; and they get children when they use the
mambers of a man, and they bear children when they use the members of a woman:
many other mannner of Folk be in the same Isles thereabout, of whom it were too
long to tell all.

CHAP. LXIII. Of the Kingdom of Mancie, which is a large Kingdom.
TO go from this Isle toward the East, after many days journey, a man shall come
to a kingdom called Mancy, and this is in great Inde, and it is the most
delectable and plentiful land in all the world. In this land dwell Christians
and Sarasins, for it is a great land; and therein are fair women, and therefore
some men call that land Albany, for the white Folk: and there is a city that is
called Latorim, and it is bigger than Paris: and therein are two thousand great
Cities, and many other Towns. In this land no man goes a begging, for there is
no poor man, and there men have Beards as it were Cats. In this Isle are Birds
twice greater than they be here, and there is all manner of Viduals good cheap.
In this country are white Hens; and they bear no Featters but Wool, as sheep do
in our land and woman of that country that are Wedded, bear Crowns upon their
heads, that they may be known by it. In this country they take a beast that is
called a Loyre, and they keep it to go into Waters and Rivers, and straight way
he brings forth of the Water great Fishes; and thus they take Fish as much as
them needs.

From this city men go many days journey to another city called Cassay, which
is one of the fairest in the World, for that city is near fifty mile about, and
there is in that city above xii principal gates without. From thence within
three miles is another great city, and within this city are more than ten
thousand Bridges, and upon each Bridge is a strong Tower, where the keepers
dwell, to keep it against the great Caane, for it boundeth on his land: and on
each side of the city runs a great River, and there dwell Christians and
other, for it is a good and plenteous country, and there grows very good
Wines. In this city the King of Mancie was wont to dwell, and there dwell yet
Religious men. And men go upon the River till they come to an Abbey of Monks, a
little from the city, and in that Abbey is a great Garden, and therein is
sundry sorts of Trees of diverse Fruits. In that Garden are diverse kinds of
Beasts, as Baboones, Apes, Marmozets, and other: and when the Covent have
eaten, a Monk takes the remainder and bears it into the Garden, ringeth once
with a Bell of Silver, which he holds in his hand, and anon come all those
beasts that I speak of, and many more, near two or three thousand, and he
gives them meat in fair Vessels of Silver; and when they have eaten, he
smites the Bell again, and they go away: and the Monk says that those Beasts
are souls of men that are dead, and those Beasts that are fair, are souls of
Lords, and other rich men; and those that are foul Beasts, are souls of other
Commons: and I asked them if it had not been better to give that relief to poor
men; and they said, There is no poor man in that Country; but if there were,
yet were it more Alms to give it to those souls that suffer there their
penance, and may go no farther to get their meat, then to men that have wit,
and may travel for their meat. Then men come to a City that is called Chivens,
and there was the first siege of the King of Mancie. In this City are
threescore bridges of stone as fair as may be made.

CHAP. LXIV. Of the Land of Pigme, the people whereof are but three spans long.
WHen men pass from the City of Chivens, they pass over a great River of fresh
water, and it is near four mile broad, and then men enter into the land of the
Great Caane, This River goes through the land Pigme, and there men are of
little stature, for they are but three spans long, and they are very fair both
men and women, though they be little: and they are married when they are half a
year old, and they live but eight years, for he that lives eight year, is
holden very old: these small men are the best workmen of Silk and Cotton, and
all manner of things that are in the world; and these men travel not, nor Till
land, but they have among them great men, as we are, to travel for them, and
have great scorn of those great men, as we would have of Giants, or of them if
they where among us.

CHAP. LXV. Of the City of Manke, where a great Navy is.
FRom this Land men go through many countries, cities, and Towns till they come
to a city that men call Mank. In that city is a great Navy of Ships, and they
are white as Snow, by reason of the color of the Wood they are made of, and
they are made as it where great Houses, with Halls and chambers, and other
casements,

CHAP. LXVI, Of the Land named Cathay, and of the great riches thereof.
ANd from thence men go upon a River that men call Ceremolan, and this River
goes through Cathay, and does many times harm when it waxes great, Cathay is
a fair country and rich, full of goods and merchandise: thither come Merchants
every year for to fetch Spices, and other Merchandises more commonly then they
do to other countries And ye shall understand that the Merchants that come from
Venice, or from Gene, or from other places of Lombardy, or of Italy, they go by
Sea and Land eleven months or more ere they come to Cathay.

CHAP. LXVII. Of a great City named Cadon, wherein is the great Palace and
Seige.
IN the Province Cathay toward the Cast, is an old city, and beside that City
the Tartarians have made another city that men call Cadon, that has xii,
Gates, and between each two Gates is a great mile, for those two cities the old
and the new is round about xx. miles: in this city is the Palace and Seige of
the great Caane: it is a very fair place and great, of which the Walls about be
two miles, and within that are many fair places, and in the Garden of that
Palace is a very great Hill, on the which is another Palace, and it is the
fairest that may be found in any place; and all about the Hill are many Trees
bearing vivers fruits, and about this Hill is a great Ditch, and there near are
many Rivers on each side, and in those are many wild Fowls that he may take
and not go out of the Palace. Within the Hall of that Palace are thirteen
Pillars of Gold, and all the Walls are covered with rich skins of Beasts that
men call Panthers.

These are fair Beasts and well smelling, and by the smell of those Skins, no
evil smell may come to the Palace; those Skins are as red as blood, and they
thine so against the Sun, that a man can scarcely behold them, and those Skins
are esteemed there as much as gold. In the midst of the Palace is a place made,
that they call, the Monntor for the great Caan: that is well decked with great
and precious stones hanging about: and at the four corners of the Mountor are
four Nedders of Gold, and under that Mountor, and about are Conduites of
Beverage that they drink in the Emperors Court. And the Hall of that Palace is
richly decked and well: and first at the upper end of the Hall is the Throne of
the Emperor very high, were he sits at meat, at a Table that is well
bordered with gold, and that border is full of precious stones, and great
pearls, and the greeces on which he goes up, are of Diverse precious stones
bordered with Gold.

At the left side of this Throne, is the seat of his Wife, a degree lower then
he sits, and that is of Iaspar, bordered with gold; and the seat of his
second Wife, is a degree lower than the first, and that is also of good Jasper,
bordered with gold; and the seat of the third Wife is a degree lower than the
second, for always he has three wives with him wheresoever he is: beside these
Wives, on the same side sits other Ladies of his kin, each one lower than
other, as they are of degree: and all those that are married, have a
counterfeit of a man's foot upon their Heads, near a cubit long, all made with
precious stones, and about they are made with shining Feathers of Peacocks, or
such other, in token that they are in subjection of man, and under man's feet;
and they that are not Wedded have none such. And on the right side of the
Emperor sits first his Son, the which shall be Emperor after him, and he
sits also a degree lower th^n the Emperor, in such manner of seats as the
Emperor sits, and by him sits other Lords of his kin, each on lower then
other, as they are of degree. And the Emperor has his Table by himself alone
that is made of gold and precious stones, or of white crystal, or yellow
bordered with gold, and each one of his Wives has a Table by her self.

And under the Emperors Table sits four Clarks at his feet, that write all
that the Emperor says, be it good or ill. And at great feasts about the
Emperors table, and all other tables in the Hall is a Vine made of gold, that
goes all about the Hall, and it has many branches of grapes like to grapes of
the Vine; some are white, some are yellow, some red, some green, and some
black: all the red are of Rubies, of Creams, or Allovance; the white are of
Crystal or Byral, the yellow are of Topaces, the green of Emeralds and
Chrysolites, and the black are of Dutcks and Gorands; and this Vine is made
thus of precious stones so properly, that it seems that it were a Vine
growing. And before the board of the Emperor stands great Lords, and no man
is so hardy to speak unto him, except it be Musicians to solace the Emperor.
And all the Vessels that are served in his Hall or Chambers, are of precious
Stones, and specially at the Tables where great Lords eat, that is to say of
Jasper, Crystal, Amathist, or fine Gold, and the cups are of Emeralds,
Saphirs, Topaces, and other of any manner of stones, and of Silver have they no
Vessels, for thy esteem but little of silver to make Vessels of, but they make
of Silver Greeces, Pillars, and Pavements of Halls and Chambers. And ye shall
understand that my Fellow and I were in wages with him sixteen months against
the King of Mancy, upon whom he made War, and the cause was, we had so great
desire to see the Nobility of his Court, if it were such as we heard speak of;
and truly we found it more rich, and of greater Royalty then ever we heard
speak of, and we should never have believed it, had we not seen it: but ye
shall understand the use of eating and drinking is more evil among us then in
those countries, for all the Commons eat upon skins of Beasts on their knees,
and eat the flesh of all manner of Beasts, and when they have all eat, they
wipe their hands on their Shirts: and they eat but once in the day, and eat but
little bread: but the manner of the Lords is full Noble.

CHAP. LXVIII. Wherefore the Emperor of Cathay is called the great Caane,
ANd ye shall understand why he is called the great Caane: ye know that all the
World was destroyed with Noes Flood, but Noe, his wife and children. Noe had
three sons, Sem, Cham, and Japhat: Cham, when he saw his Fathers Privities
naked when he slept, he scorned it, and therefore he was cursed, and Japhat
covered it. These three Brethren had all land. Then Cham took the best part
Eastward, that is called Asia. Sem took Africa, and J^phat took Europe. Cham
was the mightiest and richest of his brethren and of him are come the Painim
Folk, and diverse manner of men of those Isles, some headless, and other men
disfigured: for this Came the Emperor, they called him Cham and Lord of all. But
ye shall understand that the Emperor of Cathay is called Caane, and not Cham,
and for this cause: It is not long ago that all Tartary was in subjection and
thrall to other Nations about, and they were made Heardsmen to keep beasts, and
among them were vij. Linages or Kings: the first was called Tartary, that is
the best, the second Lineage is called Tamahot, the third Furace, the fourth
Vilatre, the fifth Semoth, the sixth Menchy, and the seventh Sobeth. These are
all holden of the great Caane of Cathay. Now it befell that the first Lineage was
an old man, and he was not rich, and men called him Chanius. This man lay and
slept on a night in his bed, and there came to him a Knight all white, sitting
upon a white horse and said to him, Caane, sleep thou? God that is Almighty
sent me to thee, and it his will that thou say to the vij. Linages, that thou
shall be their Emperor, for you shall conquer all the land about you, and they
shall be in your subjection, as you have been in theirs: and when the morrow
came he rose up and told it to the vij. Linages, and they scorned him, and said
he was a fool: and the next night the same Knight came to the seven Linages,
and have them in Gods behalf to make Chanius their Emperor, and they should be
out of all subjection. And on the morrow they those Chanius to be Emperor, and
did him all worship that they might do, and called him Caane as the white
Knight called him, and they said they would do as he have them. Then he made
many statutes and Laws, the which is called Isakan. The first Statute was that
they might be obedient to God Almighty, and believe that he would deliver them
out of thraldom, and that they should call on him in all their works. Another
Statute was, that all men that could bear arms should be numbered, and to each
ten should be a Master, and to a hundred a Master, and to a thousand a Master.
Then he commanded to all the greatest and principallest of the vii. Linages
that they should forsake all that they had in Heritage or Lordship, and that
they should hold them apaid of that he would give them of his Grace: and they
did so. And also he had them, that each man should bring his eldest Son before
him, and slay his own Son with is own hands, and smite off his Head; and
presently they did his bidding. And when he saw they made no letting of that he
bade them, then he bade them follow his Banner and then he put in subjection
all the Land about him.

CHAP. LXIX. How the Great Caane was hid under a Tree, and so escaped his
Enemies because of a Bird.
ANd it befell on a day, that the Caan rod with a few men to see the Land that
he had won, and he met with a great multitude of his enemies, and there he was
cast down off his Horse, and his Horse slain; and when his men saw him at the
earth, they thought he had been dead, and fled, and the Enemies followed after:
and when he saw his Enemies were far, he hid him in a Bush, for the Wood was
thick there; and when they were come again from the Chase, they went to seek
among the Wood if any were hid there, and they found many; and as they came to
the place where he was, they saw a Bird sit on a Tree, the which Bird, men call
an Owl, and then say they, that there was no man, for the Bird sat there and so
went they away, and thus was the great Caane saved from death, and so he went
away on a night to his own men, which were glad of his coming: and from that
time unto this day men of that Country have that Bird in great reverence, and
for that cause they worship that Bird above all other Birds of the World.

And incontinent he assembled all his men; and rod upon his Enemies and
destroyed them: and when he had won all the lands that where about him, he held
them in subjection; And when the Caane had led all the Lords to Mount Belyan,
the white Knight came to him in a vision again, and said unto him Caane, the
Will of God is that thou pass the Mount Belyan, and thou shall win many Lands;
and because then shall find no passage go thou to the Mount Belyan, that is,
upon the sea side, and kneel nine times thereon against the East and Worship
God, and he shall show thee a way how thou shall pass, and tho Caane did so and
anon, the Sea that touched the Hill, withdrew it self, and showed him a fair
way of nine foot broad between the Hill and the Sea, and so he passed right
well with all his men, and then he wan the land of Cathay, that is the best
land and the greatest of all the World: and for those nine kneelings, and the
nine foot of way, the Caane and the men of Tartary have the number of nine in
great worship.

CHAP. LXX. Of the great Caane's Letters, and the writing about his Seal.
ANd when he had won the land of Cathay, he died, and then reigned after
Cychoco the eldest Son of Caane, and his other Brothers went to win them lands
in other countries, and they won the land of Prusse, and of Rusie, and they
call themselves Caanes; but he of Cathay is the greatest Lord of the World, and
so he calls himself in his Letters, and says thus, Caane filius Dei excelsi,
universam terram colentium summus Imperator and Dominus Dominantium. That is to
say, Caane Gods Son, Emperor of all those that till the Land, and Lord of
Lords. And the writing about the Great Seal is, Deus in Coelo, and Caane super
terram ejus fortitudo, omnium hominum Imperatoris sigillum. That is to say, God
in Heaven, Caane upon Earth the strength, the Seal of the Emperor of all men.
And the writing about his Privy Seal is. Dei fortitudo omnium hominum
Imperatoris sigillum: That is, the strength of God the Seal of the Emperor of
all men. Although it be so that they be not Christians, yet the Emperor and
the Tartarians believe God Almighty.

CHAP. LXXI. Of the Governance of the Country of the Great Caane.
NOw have I told you why he his called the great Caane: Now shall I tell you of
the governing of his Court when they make great Feasts, and he keeps four
principal Feasts in the year; the first is of his Birth; the second when he was
carried to the Temple to be Circumcised; the third is of his Idols, when they
begin to speak; and the fourth when the Idol begins first to do Miracles,
and at those times he has men well arrayed by thousands, and by hundreds, and
each one knows what he shall do. For there is first ordained four thousand rich
Barons and mighty, for to ordain the Feast* and to serve the Emperor; and all
these Barons have Crowns of Gold well decked with precious Stones and Pearls,
and they are clad in Cloth of Gold and Camathas, as richly as they may be made:
and they may well have such clothes, for they are there of less price then
woollen cloth is here. And these four thousand Barons are parted into four
parts, and each Company is clad in diverse colors very richly; and when the
first thousand is passed, and has showed themselves, then come the second
thousand, and then the third thousand, and then the fourth; and none of them
speaks a word. And on the one side of the Emperors Table sits many
Philosophers of many Sciences, some of Astronomy, Negromancy, Geometry,
Pyromancy, and many other Sciences, and some have before them Astrolobes of
Gold or precious Stones, full of sand or of Coals burning; some have Horologies
well dight and richly, and many other Instruments after their Sciences; and at
a certain hour when they see time, they say to men that stand before them, Make
peace; and then say those men with a loud voice to all the Hall, Now he still a
while, and then says one of the Philosophers, Each man make reverence, and
incline to the Emperor, that is Gods Son, and Lord of the world, for now is
time and hour: and then all men bow to him, and kneel on the Earth, and then
the Philosopher bids them rise up again; and at another hour, another
Philosopher bids them put their finger in their Ears, and they do so; and at
another hour another Philosopher bids that all men shall lay their hands on
their Heads, and they do so; and then he bids them take them away, and they
do so: and thus from hour to hour they bid diverse things. And I asked privately
what it should mean, and one of the Masters said, that the bowing and the
kneeling on the Earth at that time has this token, that all those men that
kneeled so, shall evermore be true to the Emperor, that for no gift nor
threatening they shall never be Traitors nor false to him; and the putting of
the finger in the Ear has this token, that none of those shall hear any ill
spoken of the Emperor, or his Council. And ye shall understand that men bring
nothing, as clothes, bread, drink, nor no such things to the Emperor, but at
certain hours that the Philosophers tell; and if any man raise War against the
Emperor in what Country soever it be, these Philosophers know it soon, and tell
the Emperor, or his Council, and he sends men thither, for he has many men.
Also he has many men that keep birds as Gerfalkons, Sparhawks, Falkons
Gentles, Lavers, Sacres, Popinfayes that can speak, and many other: He has ten
thousand Elephants, Baboons, Marmozets and other, and he has ever about him
many Physicians, more then two hundred that are Christian men, and Sarafins,
but yet he trusts more in Christian men then in Sarafins, And there is in
that Country many Sarasins that are converted to the Faith, through the
preaching of good Christian men that dwell there, and there are many that will
not be known they are Christians.

CHAP. LXXII. Of the great riches of the Emperor, of his dispending.
THis Emperor is a great Lord, he may dispend what he will without number,
because he spends neither Silver nor Gold, and makes no Money but of Leather
or Skins, and this same Money goes through all his Land, and of the Silver and
Gold builds he his Palace: and he has in his Chamber a Pillar of Gold, in
the which is a Ruby, and a Carbuncle of a foot long, the which lights all his
Chamber by night: and he has many other precious Stones and Rubies, but this
is the richest.

This Emperor dwells in the Summer toward the North in a City that men call
Saydus, and there it is very cold; and in the Winter he dwells in a City that
men call Camalach, and there it is very hot; but for the most part he is at
Cadon, that is not far from thence.

CHAP. LXXIII. Of the Ordinance of the Lords of the Emperor, when he rides
from one Country to another to war.
ANd when the great Caane does ride from one Country to another, they ordain
four Hosts of peeple, of which the first goes before a days Journey, and that
Host lies at even where the Emperor shall lie on the Morrow, and there is
plenty of Victuals. And another Host comes at the right side of him, and
another at the left side, and in each Host is many men, and then comes the
fourth Host behind him a Bow draught, and there is more men in that, then in
any other. And ye shall understand that the Emperoux rides on no Horse; but
when he will go to any secret place with a small Train, where he will not be
known, then he rides in a Chariot with four Wheels, and thereupon is a
Chamber, made of a tree that men call Lignum Aloes, that comes out of Paradise
terrestre, and that chamber is covered with fine gold, and precious Stones and
Pearls, and four Elephants, and four Oxen all white go therein, and five or six
great Lords ride about him, so that none other man may come nigh him except the
Emperor call any: and in the same manner with a Chariot, and such Train, rides
the Empress by another side, and the Emperors eldest Son in that same Array;
and they have so many people, that it is a great marvel for to see.

CHAP. LXXIV. How the Empire of the great Caane is divided into twelve
Provinces, and how they do cast Incense in the fire, where the great Caane
passes through the Cities and Towns, in worship of the Emperor.
THe land of the great Caane is divided into twelve Provinces, and every
Province has more then two thousand cities and towns. And when the Emperor
rides through the country, as he passes through cities and towns, each man
makes a fire before his house, and casts therein Incense, and other things
that give good smell to the Emperor. And if any men of Religion that are
Christian men dwell near where the Emperor comes, they meet him with
Procession, with Cross and holy water, and they sing Veni Creator Spiritus,
with loud voice: and when he sees them coming, he commands the Lords to ride
near to them to make way, that the Religious men may come to him; and when he
sees the Cross, he does off his Hat that is made of precious stones, and great
Pearls, and that Hat is so rich, that it is marvel to tell, and then he
inclines to the Cross, and the Prelate of the Religious men says Orisons
before him, and gives him the blessing with the Cross, and he inclines to the
blessing full devoutly; and then the Prelate gives him some fruit, to the
number of nine Pears or Apples, or other fruit, in a Platter of Gold, and then
the Emperor takes one thereof, and the other he gives to his Lords: for the
manner is such there, that no strange man may come before the Emperor, but he
gives him somewhat, after the old Law, that says, Non accedit conspectu meo
inanis, that is to say, No man comes into my sight empty. And then the Emperor
bids those Religious men that they go forth, so that men of his Host defile
them not; and those Religious men that dwell where the Empress or the Emperors
Son comes, they do in the same manner.

CHAP. LXXV. How the Caane is the mightiest Lord of all the world.
THis great Caane is the mightiest Lord of the world, for Prester John is not
so great a Lord as he, nor the Souldan of Babylon, nor the Emperor of Persia.
In this land a man has an hundred wives, some forty, and some more, some less,
and they take of their kin to wives, all save their Sisters, their Mothers and
Daughters; and they also take their Stepmother, if their Father be dead; and
men and women have all one manner of clothing, so that they may not be known:
but the women that are married, bear a token on their heads, and they dwell not
with their Husbands, but he may lie by any as he will. They have plenty of all
manner of beasts save swine, for they will keep none: and they believe in God
that made all things, and yet have they Idols of Gold and Silver, and to those
Idols they offer their first milk of beasts.

CHAP. LXXVI. Yet of other manners of this Country.
THe Emperor the great Caane has three Wives, and the principal wife was
Prester John's Daughter, Andthe people of this country begin to do all their
things in the new Moon, and they worship much the Sun and the Moon; those men
ride commonly without Spurs, and they hold it a great sin to break one bone
with another, and to spill Milk on the ground, or any other liquor that men may
drink: and the most fault that they may do, is to piss in the Houses where they
dwell; and he that pisseth in his House shall be slain: and of that sin they
shrive them to their Priests, and for their Penance they give Silver, and the
place where they have pissed shall be hallowed, or else may no man come there.
And when they have done their Penance, they shall pass through a fire or two,
to make them clean of their sins: when they have eaten they wipe their hands
upon their skirts, for they have no Table-cloaths, except it be very great
Lords: and when they have all eaten, they put their dishes or platters not
washed, into a Pot or Cauldren with the flesh that is left when they have
eaten, until they will eat another time: and rich men drink Milk of Mares,
Asses, or other beasts, and other Beverage, that is made of Milk and Water
together, for they have neither Beer nor Wine. And when they go to War they War
full wisely, and each man of them bears two or three Bows, and many Arrows,
and a great Hatchet: Gentlemen have short Swords, and he that sleeth in Battle
they slay him, and they are ever in purpose to bring all the land in subjection
to them; for they say, it is Prophesied that they shall overcome by shot of
Archers, and that they shall turn men to their Law, but they wot not what men
they shall be: and it is great peril to pursue the Tartarians when they flee,
for they will shoot behind and slay men, as well as before: and they have small
eyes as little Birds, and they are commonly false, for they hold not their
promise. And when a man shall die among them, they strike a Spear in the earth
beside him; and when he draws to the death, they go out of the House till he
be dead, then they put him into the Earth in the Field.

CHAP. LXXVII. How the Emperor is brought unto his Grave when he is dead.
ANd when the Emperor is dead, they set him into a Cart, in the midst of his
Tent, and then set before him a Table covered with a Cloth, thereupon they set
slesh and other meat, and a Cup full of Mares Milk, and they set a Mare with a
Colt by him, and a Horse sadled and bridled, and they lay upon the Horse Gold
and Silver, and all about him they make a great Pit, and with all the things
they put him therein, as the Tent, Horse, Gold and Silver, and all that is
about him; and they say, when he comes into another world, he shall not be
without an house, nor horse, nor silver, nor gold, and the Mare shall give him
Milk, and bring forth more Horses till he be well slored in another World: and
one of his Chamberlains or servants is put with him in the earth, for to do him
service in the other World; for they believe that when he is dead, he shall go
to another World, and be a greater Lord there then here: and when he is laid in
the earth, no man may be so hardy for to speak of him before his friend.

CHAP. LXXVIII. When the Emperor is dead, how they choose and make another.
ANd when the Emperor is dead, seven of the Kindred gather them together, and
they touth his Son or the next of his blood, and they say thus, We will; and we
ordain, and we pray thee, that thou will be our Lord and Emperor: and he
enquired of them, and says, If ye will that I reign over you, then must you do
all that I bid you, And if I bid that any shall be slain, he shall be slain:
and they answer all with one loud voice, All that ye bid shall be done. Then
says the Emperor, From henceforth my word shall cut as my Sword: and then they
set him in a Chair and Crown him, and then all the good Towns thereabout send
to him presents, so much, that he shall have more then an hundred Camels laden
with Gold and Silver, beside other Jewels that he shall have of Lords, as
precious Stones and Gold without number, and Horses, and rich clothes of
Camacas and Tarius, and such other.

CHAP. LXXIX. What Countries and Kingdoms be next to the Land of Cathay, and
the Fronts thereof.
THis Land of Cathay is in Asia the deep, and this same land reaches toward
the West upon the Kingdom of Sercie, the which pertained some time to one of
the three Kings that went to seek our Lord in Bethlem, and all those that come
of this kin, are Christian men. These men of Tartary drink no Wine. In the Land
of Corosayme, that is, at the North-side of Cathay, is a very great plenty of
goods, but no Wine, the which has at the East side a great Wilderness, that
lasts more then a hundred days journey, and the best City of that land is
called Corosaym: and after the name of that City is the land called; and men of
this land are good Warriors, and hardy; and thereby is the Kingdom of Comayne,
this is the most and the greatest Kingdom of the World, but is not all
inhabited; for in one place of the land is so great cold, that no man may dwell
there for cold: and in another place is so great heat, that no man may dwell
there: and there are so many Faiths, that a man cannot tell on what side he may
turn him: and in this land are few trees bearing fruit. In this land men lie in
Tents, and they burn dung of Beasts for lack of wood. This land descends
toward Prusie and Rusie, and through this land runs the River Echel that is
one of the greatest Rivers of the World, and it is frozen so hard every year,
that men fight thereupon in great Battles on Horse, and Footmen more then a
hundred thousand at once. And a little from that River is the great Ocean, that
they call Maure; and between: this Maure and Aspy, is a very straight passage
to go toward Inde, and therefore King Alexander did make there a City that men
call Alexandry, for to keep that passage, so that no man may pass unless he
have leave, and now is that City called Port de Fear, and the principal City
of Comaine is called Sarachis, that is one of the three ways to go to Inde; but
through this way may not men go unless it be in Winter, and this passage is
called Berbent, And another way is to go from the land of Tulkescon through
Persia in this way are many days journey in Wilderness. And the third way is
that that comes from Cosmane, and goes through the great City, and through
the Kingdoms of Abachare. And ye shall understand, that all these Kingdoms and
Lordships unto Persia, are holden of the Caane, and many other, and therefore
he is a great Lord of men and of land.

CHAP. LXXX. Of other ways coming from Cathay toward the Greek Sea, and of the
Emperor of Persia.
NOw that I have showed you the land toward the North, to come from the lands
of Cathay to the lands of Prusie and Russie, where Christian men dwell; Now
shall I show unto you of other lands and Kingdoms, in coming down from Cathay
to the Greek Sea, where Christian men dwell: and for as much as next the great
Caane of Cathay, the Emperor of Persia is the greatest Lord, therefore I shall
speak of him; and ye shall understand, that he has two Kingdoms, the one
begins Eastward, and it is the Kingdom of Turkescon, and it lasts Westward
to the sea of Caspy, and Southward to the land of Inde. This land is great and
plain, and well manned with good Cities, but two most principal, the which are
called Facirida, and Sormaguant. The other is the Kingdom of Persia, and
lasts from the river of Pison unto great Armony, and Northward unto the sea
of Caspy, Southwards to the land of Inde; and this is a full plenteous country,
and a good: In this land are three principal Cities, Nassal or, Saphen, and
Sermesse.

CHAP. LXXXI. Of the Land of Armony, which is a good Land, and of the Land of
Middy.
THen is the land of Armony, in the which was sometimes three Kingdoms: that is
a good land and plenteous, and it begins at Persia, and lasts Westward to
Turkey in length, and in breadth lasts from the City of Alexander (that now is
called Pott de Fear) unto the land of Middy. In this Armony are many fair
cities, but Canrissy is most of name. Then is the land of Middy, and it is very
long and not bread, and begins Eastward to the land of Persia, and Inde the
less, and lasts Westward to the Kingdom of Chalde, and Northward to little
Armony: in this Middy are many great Hills and little Plains, and there dwell
Sarasins and other manner of men, that men call Cordiner and Kermen.

CHAP. LXXXII. Of the Kingdoms of Georgy and Abean, and many marvels.
THen next is the Kingdom of Georgy that begins Eastward at a great Hill,
that men call Abior: this land lasts from Turkey to the great sea, and to the
land or Middy, and to great Armony; And in this land are two Kingdoms, one of
Abcan, and another of Georgy; but he of Georgy is in subjection to the great
Caane, but he of Abcan has a strong country, and defends him well against
the Enemies: and in this land of Abcan is a great marvel, for there is a
country in this land that is near three days journey in length, and it is
called Hampton, and that country is all covered with darkness, so that it has
no light, that no man may see there, and no man dare go in that country for
darkness And nevertheless men of that country thereby say, that they may
sometime bear therein the voices of Men and Horses crying, and Cocks crow, and
they know well that men dwell there, but they know not what manner of men: and
they say, this darkness came through the work of God, that he did for Christian
men there. For there was a wicked Emperor that was of Poy, and was called
Saures, and he pursued sometime the Christian men to destroy them, and did make
them do sacrifice to his false gods, for in that country dwelled many Christian
men, the which left all their goods, and cattle, and riches, and went to
Greece; and when they were all in a great Plain that is called Mecon the
Emperor and his men came to slay the Christian men, and then the Christian men
kneeled down and prayed to God, and anon came a thick cloud and covered the
Emperor and all his Beasts, so that he might not go away, and so they dwelt in
darkness; and they never came out after: and the Christian men went forward as
they would; and therefore they say thus, A Domino factum est istud and est
mirabile in oculis nostris: that is to say. Of our Lord is this done, and it is
mavelous in our eyes. Out of this land comes a River whereby men may see by
good tokens that men dwell therein

CHAP. LXXXIII. Of the Land of Turkey, and diverse other Countries, and of the
Land of Mesopotamia.
THen next is the land of Turkey, that reaches to great Armony, and therein are
many countries, as Cape^doce Saure, Bryke, Nuecion, Patyn, and Geneth, in each
one of these countries are many good cities, and it is a plain land, with few
Hills and Rivers. And then is the Kingdom of Mesopotamy, that begins
westward at the River of Tiger, at the city that men call Mosel, and it lasts
Westward to the River of Euphrate, to a city that men call Rochaim, and
westward from high Armony, unto the Wilderness of Inde the less: and it is a
good land and plain, but there is few Rivers, and there is but two Hills in
that land, the one is call Siniar, and the other Lison, and it reaches unto
the land of Chalde.

CHAP. LXXXIV. Of diverse Countries, Kingdoms, and Isles, and Marvels beyond the
Land of Cathay.
NOw have I said and spoken of many things on this side of the great Kingdom of
Cathay, of whom many are obeysant to the great Caane. Now I shall tell of some
land, countries, and Isles that are beyond the land of Cathay: whosoever goes from
Cathay to Inde the High and the Low, he shall go through a Kingdom that men
call Cadissen, and it is a great land: there grows a manner of Fruit as it
were Gourds, and when it is ripe, men cut it asunder, and they find therein a
Beast as it were of flesh, bone; and blood, as it were a little Lamb without
wool, and men eat the beast and Fruit also, and sure it seems very strange.
Nevertheless, I said to them, that I held that for no marvel, for I said that
in my country are Trees that bear Fruit that become Birds flying and they are
good to eat, and that that falls on the water lives, and that that falls
on the earth dies; and they marvelled much thereat. In this land, and many
other thereabout are Trees that bear Cloves, and Nutmegs, and Mace, and many
other Spices; and there be Vines that bear so great Grapes that a strong man
shall have enough to bear a Cluster of Grapes. In that same Land are the Hills
of Caspy that men call Vber, and enclosed within these Hills are the Jews of
the. x. kinds, that men call Gog and Magog, and they may come out on no side.
There were enclosed xxii. Kings, with their Folk that dwelled between the Hills
of Syche: and King Alexander chased them thither among those Hills, for he
trusted to have enclosed them there, through the working men, but he might not;
and when he saw be might not; he prayed to God that he would fulfill that which
he had begun: God heard his Prayer, and enclosed the Hills all about them but
at one side, and there is the sea of Caspy. Here some men might ask, if there
be a sea on one side, why go they not out there? thereto answer I, That
although it be called a sea, it is not a sea, but a Pool standing among Hills,
and it is tho greatest Pool of all the world; and though they go over that
pool, yet they wot not where to arrive, for they can speak no speech but their
own: and ye shall understand that those Jews which dwell among the Hills have
no Law among them, and yet they pay tribute for these land to the Kings of
Armony: and sometime it is so, that some of those Jews go over the Hills, but
many may not pass there together, for the Hills are so great and high.
Nevertheless, men say in that country thereby, that in the time of Antichrist
they shall do much harm to Christian men, and therefore all the Jews that dwell
in diverse parts of the World learn for to speak Hebrew, for they hope that
these Jews, that dwell among the Hills aforesaid shall come out of the Hills,
and speak all Hebrew, and nothing else, and then shall these Jews speak Hebrew
to them, and lead them into Christendom for to destroy Christian men. For these
Jews say they know, by their Prophesies, that those Jews that are among those
Hills of Caspy, shall come out, and Christian men shall be in their subjection,
as they be under Christian men now. And if ye will know how they shall find the
Passage out, as I have understood I shall tell you. In the time of Antichrist,
a Fox shall make his Den in the same place where King Alexander did make his
Gates, and he shall dig in the earth so long till he pierceit through, and come
among the Jews; and when they see the Fox, thry shall have great marvels of him
for they never saw such a Beast, but other Beasts they have among them many:
and they shall chase this Fox and pursue him until that he be fled again into
his Hole that he come from, and then shall they dig after him until they come
to the Gates that Alexander did make of great Stones well laid with Mortar;
then shall they break those Gates, and they shall find the way forth.

CHAP. LXXXV. Of the land of Bactrie, and of many Griffons and other Beasts.
FRom this land men shall go unto the land of Bactrie, where are many wicked
men and cruel: In this land are Trees that bear Wool, as it were Sheep, of
which they make Cloth. In this land are Ypotains that dwell sometime on land,
and sometime on Water, and are half a man and half a Horse; and they feed on
men, when they may get them. In this land are many Griffons more than in other
places, and some say they have the body before as an Eagle, and behind as a
Lion; and it is true, for they be made so: but the Griffon has a body greater
than 8 Lions, and stronger then 100 Eagles; for certainly he will bear to his
Nest flying a Horse and a man upon his back, or two Oxen yoked together as they
go to Plough, for he has long nails on his feet, as great as it were horns of
Oxen, and of those they make Cups there to drink with, and of his ribs they
make Bows to shoot with.

CHAP. LXXXVI. Of the way to go to Prester John's land which is Emperor of Inde.
FRom this land of Badile men go in many days journey to the land of Prester
John, that is a great Emperor of Inde, and men call his land the Isle of
Pantrore. This Emperor Prester John holds a great land and many good Cities
and good Towns. In this Kingdom are many good Isles and large; for the land of
Inde is parted into Isles, because of great Rivers that come out of Paradise:
and also in the sea are many great Isles. The best City that is the Isle of
Pantrore is called Nile, that is a noble City end a rich. Prester John has
under him many Kings, and diverse Lords, and his land is good and rich: but not
so rich as the land of the great Caane, for Merchants come not so much thither
as they do into the land of the great Caane, for it is too long a journey. And
also they find in that Isle of Cathay all things that they have need of, as
Spicerie, Cloth of Gold, and other Riches: and although they might have better
cheap in the land of Prester John then in the land of Cathay, and more fine,
nevertheless they will not go thither by reason of the length of the journey,
and great perils on sea: for there are many places in the sea where are many
Rocks of a Stone that is called Adamant, the which of his own kind draws to
him all manner of Iron; and therefore there may be no Ships that have iron
nails pass, but it draws them to it, and therefore they dare not go into that
country with Ships for fear of the Adamant; I went once into that sea, and saw
as it had been a great Isle of trees, stocks, and branches growing; and ^he
Shipmen told me that those were great ships that above there through the virtue
of the Adamants: and of things that were in the ships whereof those Trees
sprung and wared; and such Rocks are there many in diverse places of the Sea;
and therefore dare there no shipmen pass that way. And another thing also is,
that they fear the long way; and therefore they go most to Cathay, and that is
nearer unto them. And yet it is not so near, but that from Venice or Gene by
sea to Cathay is xi. or xii. months journey. The land of Prester John is long,
and Merchants pass thither through the land of Persia, and come into a City
that men call Hermes, for a Philospher that was called Hermes, founded it; and
then pass an arm of the sea and come to another City that men call Saboth, and
there find they all Merchandises, and Popinjayes as great plenty as Larks in
our country: In this country is little Wheat or Barley, and therefore they eat
Rice, Milk, and Cheese, and other fruits. This Emperor Prester John wedded
commonly the Daughter of the great Caane, and the great Caane his Daughter. In
the land of Prester John is many strange things, and many precious stones so
great and so large, that they make of them Vessels, Platters, and Cups, and
many other things, of which it were too long to tell: but some what of his Law
and of his Faith I shall tell you.

CHAP. LXXXVII. Of the Faith and Belief of Prester John, but he has not all
the full Belief as we have.
THis Emperor Prester John is Christred, and a great part of his land also, but
they have not all the Articles of our Faith; but they believe well in the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and they are very devout, and true one to
another, and they make no force of Cattle. And he has under him 72 Provinces
and countries, and in each one is a King, and those Kings have other Kings
under them. And in this land are many marvels; for in this land is a gravelly
sea that is of sand and gravel, and no drop of water, and it ebbeth and fleweth
with very great waves as another sea does, and it is never standing still, and
never in rest; and no man can pass to the land beyond it. And although there be
no water in the Sea, yet men may find therein very good Fish, and of other
fashion and shape then are in any other sea, and also they are of a very good
taste, and sweet, and good to eat. And three days journey from that Sea, are
many great Hills, through which runs a great Flood that comes from
Paradise, and it is full of precious stones, and no drop of water, and it
runs with great Waves into the gravelly sea: and this flood runs three
days in the week so fast, that it carries great stones of the Rock with it
that make such noise, and as soon as they come into the gravel sea they are no
more seen: and in those three days, when it runs thus no man dare come in
it; but the other days men go therein when they will. And so beyond that flood
toward the Wilderness is a great Plain among Hills all sandy and gravelly, and
in that plain grow trees, that at the rising of the Sun each day, begin to
grow, and so grow they till-midday; and bear fruit: but no man dare eat of that
fruit, for it is a manner of Ir^n, and after midday it turns again to the
earth; so that when the Sun goes down it is nothing seen, and so does it every
day: And there is in that Wilderness many wild men with Horns on their Heads
very hideous, and they speak not, but rout as Swine: And in that country are
many Popinjays, that they call in their Language Pistak, and they speak through
their own kind, partly as a man, and those that speak well, have long Tongues
and large, and on every foot five Toes; but there are some that have three
Toes, but those speak not, or very ill.

CHAP. LXXXVIII. Of another Island, where also dwells good people therein,
and it is called Synople.
THen is there another Isle that is called Synople wherein also are good people
and true, and full of good Faith and they are much like in their living to the
men beforesaid, and they go all naked. Into that Island came King Alexander,
and when he saw their good Faith and Truth, and their good Belief, he said he
would do them no harm, and bid them ask of him Riches, or any thing else, and
they should have it. And they answered, that they had Riches enough when they
have meat and drink to sustain their bodies; and they said also, That Riches of
this world is naught worth; but if it were so that he might grant them, that
they should never die, that would they pray him. And Alexander said That might
he not do, for he was mortal, and should die as they should. Then said they,
Why art thou so proud, and would win all the world, and have it in
subjection, as it were a God, and have no term of thy life, and thou will have
all Riches of the World, the which shall forsake thee, or thou forsake them,
and thou shall bear nothing with thee, but it shall remain to others, but as
thou were born naked, so shall thou be done in Earth? And Alexander was greatly
astonished at this speech. And though it be so that they have not the Articles
of our. Faith, nevertheless I believe that God likes their service as he did
of Job, that was a Painim, the which he held for his true servant and many
other. I believe verily that God loves all those that love him, and serve him
meekly and truly, and that despise the vain glory of the World as these men do,
and Job did: and therefore said our Lord, through the mouth of the holy Prophet
Esaias, Ponam eis multiplices leges meas, that is to say, I shall put Laws to
them in many manners: And the Gospel faith thus, Alias oves habeo, quae non
sunt ex hoc ovili; that is I have other sheep that are not of this fold: and
thereto accords the Vision that S. Peter saw at Ioppa, how the Angel came
from Heaven, and brought with him all manner of Beasts, and Serpents, and
diverse Fowls, saying to S. Peter, Take and eat: and S. Peter answered, I never
eat of any unclean Beast: and the Angel said to him, Non dicas immunda quae
Deus mundavit. That is to say, Call thou not those things unclean that God has
cleansed. This was done in token, that men should not have any man in disdain
for their diverse Laws, for we wot not whom God loves, and whom God hates.

CHAP. LXXXIX. Of two other Isles, the one is called Pitan, wherein be little
men that can eat no meat: and in the other Isle the men are all full of
Feathers.
THere is another Isle that men call Pitan, the men of this land till no
ground, for they eat nothing; and they are small, but not so small as Pigmies,
These men live with the smell of wild Apples, and when they go far out of the
country they bear Apples with them, for as soon as they loose the savor of
Apples, they die: they are not reasonable, but as wild as beasts. And there is
another Isle where the people are feathered, but their Face and the Palms of
their Hands: these men go as well about the sea as on the land, and they eat
Flesh and Fish all raw: in this Isle is a River that is two mile and a half
broad, that men call Kenemar.

CHAP. XC. Of a rich man in Prester John's land, named Catolonapes, and of his
Garden.
ALso in an Isle of Prester John's land, called Miscorach, there was a man that
was called Catolonapes, he was rich, and had a fair Castle on a Hill, and
strong, and he made a Wall about the Hill, very strong, and fair; within he had
a fair Garden, wherein were many Trees bearing all manner of Fruits that he
might find, and he had planted therein all manner of Herbs of good smell, and
they bear Flowers, and there were many fair Wells; and by them was made many
Halls and Chambers, well decked with Gold and Azure, and he had made there
diverse Stories of Beasts and Birds that song and tuned by Engine or Drbage, as
they had been quick: and he had in his Garden all things that might be to man's
solace and Comfort: He had also in that Garden Maidens of the age of fifteen
years, the fairest that he might find and men-children of the same age, and
they were clothed with Cloth of Gold, and he said that they were Angels, and he
caused to be made certain Hills, and enclosed them about with precious Stones
of Jasper and Crystal, and with Gold and Pearl, and other manner of Stones;
and he made a conduit under the earth, so that when he would, the Wells ran
sometime with Milk, sometime with Wine, and sometime Honey; and this place he
called Paradise; and when any young Bachelor of the country, Knight or Squire,
comes to him for solace or sport, he leads them into his Paradise, and
shows them these things, as the Songs of Birds, and his Damsels, and Wells:
and he did strike diverse Instruments of Music in a high Tower that might be
heard, and said, they were Angels of God, and that place was Paradise, that God
had granted to those that believed, when he says thus, Dabo vobis terram
fluentem lacte and melle; that is, I will give you a land flowing with Milk and
Honey: And then this man did make these men drink a manner of drink by which
they were drunken; and he said to them, If they would die for his sake, when
they were dead, they should come to his Paradise, and they should be of the age
of those Maidens, and should dwell always with them, and he would put them in a
fairer Paradise, where they should see God in his joy, and in his Majesty: and
when they granted to do that he would, then he had them go and slay such a
Lord, or a man of the country that he was wroth with, and that they should have
no fear of any man; and if they were slain themselves for his sake, he would
put them into his Paradise, when they were dead: And so went those Batchelors
to slay great Lords of the country, and were slain themselves, in hope to have
that Paradise; and thus was he avenged of his enemies through his deceit: And
when rich men of the country perceived his cautel and malice, and the will of
this Catolonapes, they gathered themselves together, and assailed the Castle,
and slew him, and destroyed all his goods, and his fair places, and riches that
were in his Paradise; and the place of the Wells are there yet, and some other
things, but the riches are gone: and it is not long agone since it was
destroyed.

CHAP. XCI. Of a perilous Valley that is beside the River Pison,
ANd a little from this place, on the left side, beside the River of Pison, is
a great marvel: There is a Valley between two Hills, and that is four mile
long, and some men call it the Valley Enchanted, some the Valley of Devils,
some the Valley perilous: and in that Valley are many Tempests, and a great
noise very hideous both day and night, and a sound as it were a noise of
Labors and Trumpets, as it were at a great Feast. This Valley is full of
Devils, and has been always, and men say there is an entry to Hell.

In this Valley is much Gold and Silver, whereof many Christian men, and other,
go thither for desire of that Gold and Silver, but few of them come out again,
for they are anon strangled with Devils: And in the midst of that Valley, on
a Rock, is a Visage, and the head of a Fiend bodily, very hideous and dreadful
to see, and there is nothing seen but the head and the shoulders, but there is
no Christian man or other in the world so hardy, but that he would be greatly
afraid to behold it; for he beholds each man so sharply, and his eyes are so
stairing, and sparkling as fire, and he changes so often his countenance, that
no man dare come near for all the World: and out of his Nose conteth great
plenty of fire of diverse colors; and sometime is the fire so stinking, that no
man may suffer it; but always a good Christian man, and one that is steadfast in
the Faith, may go thereto without harm, if they call to God only, for
forgiveness of their sins, then shall the Devils have no power over them. And
ye shall understand that when my Fellows and I were in that Valley, we had very
great doubt if we should put our Bodies in a venture to go through it, and some
of my Fellows agreed thereunto, and some would not; and there were in our
campany two friars minours of Lumbardy, who said, If any of us would go in,
they would also: As they had said so, upon trust of them, we said that we would
go, and we did make our Prayers to God for our safeguard, and so we went in 14
men, and when we came out we were but 10; and we wist not whether those four
was lost there or whether they turned again, but we saw them no more: other of
our company who would not go in with us, went about another way for to be
before us, and so they were, but we went through the Valley, and saw there many
strange things, as Gold, Silver, precious Stones, and Jewels, great plenty as
we thought, whether they were so or no I know not, for Devils are so subtle and
false, that they make many times a thing to seem that it is not, for to deceive
men; and therefore I would touch nothing for fear of enemies that I saw there,
in many likenesses, some of dead bodies, that I saw lie in the Valley, but I
dare not say that they were all bodies, but they were bodily shapes through
making of Devils; and we were often thrown down to the earth by wind, thunder,
and tempest, but God helped us always, and so passed we through that Valley
without peril or harm, thanks be to God.

CHAP. XCII. Of an Island wherein dwell People as great as Giants, of eight and
twenty, or thirty foot of length, and of other things.
ANd beyond that Valley is a great Isle, where be people as great as Giants, of
28 foot long, and they have no clothing but Beasts Skins that hang on them, and
they eat no bread, but raw flesh, and they drink Milk, and they have no Houses,
and they gladlier eat men's flesh than other: And men told us that beyond that
Isle is another, wherein are greater Giants, of 45, or 50 foot long, some 50
cubits long, but I saw them not: And among those Giants are great Sheep, as if
it were young Oren, and they bear great Wool: these sheep have I seen many
times.

Another Isle there is Northward, where are many evil and foul Women, but they
have precious stones in their eyes, and they have such force, that if they
behold any man with wrath they slay them with beholding, as the Basilisk does.
Another Isle is there of fairer Folk and good, where the custom is such, the
first night that they are Wedded, they take a certain man, that is ordained
therefore, and let him lie by their Wives to have their Maiden-heads, and they
give him a great reward for his travel; and those men are called Gadsybrien,
for men of that country hold it a great thing to make a Women no Maiden: and if
it be so that the Husband find her a Maiden the next night after (for
peradventure he that lay by her was drunken, or for any other cause) the
Husband shall complain of him to the Lawyers, that he has not done his Devour,
and he shall be grievously punished and chastized: but after the first night
they keep their Wives well that they speak not with those men: and I asked what
was the cause why they had that custom, and they said, Heretofore men lay with
their Wives first and no other, and their Wives had Serpents in their bodies,
and stung their Husbands in the Yard or on their bodies, and so were many men
slain, and therefore they had that custom to let other men have their
Maiden-heads, for fear of death: and thus they suffer them to assay the passage
ere they adventure.

CHAP. XCIII. Of women which make great sorrow when their Children are born,
great joy when they are dead.
ANother Isle there is, where women make great sorrow when their children are
born, and when they are dead they made great joy, and cast them into a great
fire and burn them: And they that love well their Husbands, when they are dead,
they cast them in a fire and burn them; for they say that fire shall make them
clean of all filth and vices, and they shall be clean in another world: and the
cause why they weep when their children are born, and that they joy at their
death is, they say a child when he is born, comes into this World to have
travel, sorrow and heaviness, and when they are dead, they go to Paradise,
where Rivers are of Milk and Honey: And there is life, and joy, and plenty of
goods without travel or sorrow. In this Isle they Elect their Kings by voices;
and they choose him not for his riches, and nobleness, but him that is of good
conditions, and most righteous and true, that judges every man truly, little
and much, after their trespass; and the King may judge no man to death, without
counsel of his Barons and that they all assent. And if it be so that their King
do a great trespass, as slay a man, or such like, he shall die also, but he
shall not be slain, but they charge and command that no man be so hardy to keep
him company, nor to speak to him, nor give him meat nor drink; and thus he
dies: for they spare no man that has done a trespass for Love, Lordship,
Riches, or Nobleness, but they do him right after he has deserved.

CHAP. XCIV. Of an Island where men wed their own Daughters and Kinswomen.
THere is another Isle where is that great plenty of people, and they never eat
flesh of Hares, nor of Hens, nor Geese, yet is there many of them, but they eat
of all other Beasts, and they drink Milk. In this country they wed their own
daughters, and other of their kin, as them likes; and if there be 10. or 11.
men in one house, each one of their Wives shall be common to other, and at
night one have one of their Wives, and another night another: and if she have
any child, she may give it to whom she will, so that no man knows it to be his.
In this land, and many other places of Inde, are many Crocodiles, that is a
manner of long Serpent; and on nights they dwell on water, and on days they
dwell on land and Rocks, and they eat not in winter. These Serpents slay men,
and eat them weeping, and they have no tongue.

In this Country and many other, men cast seed of Cotton and sow it each year,
and it grows as it were small Trees, and they bear Cotton, In Araby is a kind
of Beast that some men call Gersants, that is a fair Beast, and he is higher
then a great Courser or Steed, but his neck is near xx. Cubits long, and his
tale like a Heart, and he may look over an high house. And there are many
Camelions, that is a little Beast, and he never eats or drinks, and he
changes his coleur often, for sometime he is of one color, and sometime of
another and he may change him into all colors that he will, save black and
red. There are many wild Swine of many colors, and as great as Oxen, and they
are spotted as it were small Fawns; and there are Lions all white, and there be
other Beasts, as great as Steeds, that men call Lamborans, and some men call
them Tonts, and their head is black, and three long horns in his front, as
cutting as sharp swords, and he chaseth and will slay Elephants. And there is
many other manner of Beasts, of whom it were too long to write all.

CHAP. XCV. Of an Isle where dwell good people and true.
THere is another Island good and great, and plenteous, where are good men and
true, and of godly life after their Faith; and though they be not Christians,
nevertheless of kind they are full of good Virtues, and they fly Vices, and
all sin and malice, for they are not envious, proud, covetous, leacherous, nor
gluttonous, and they do unto another man that they would he did to them, and
they fulfill the ten Commandments, and they take no force of riches, nor of
having; and they swear not, but they say Yea, and Nay, for they say he that
swears will deceive his Neighbor: and some men call this Isle, The Isle of
Bragamen, and some call it the land of Faith; and through it runs a great
River, that men call Thebe: and generally all men in those Isles, and other
thereby, are truer and wiser then in other countries: In this Isle are no
Thieves, Murderers nor Beggars. And forasmuch as they are so true, and so good,
there is no Tempest nor Thunder, War, Hunger, nor Tribulation: and thus it
seems well that God loves them well, and he is well pleased with their
deeds; and they believe in God that made all things, and him they worship; and
they live so temperately in meat and drink, that they live very long, and many
of them die without sickness, and their life fails them with age.

CHAP. XCVII. How King Alexander sent his men to win that land.
SOmetime Alexander sent men to win that land. And they sent him Letters that
said thus: What behooves a man to have all the World, that is not content
therewithal; Thou shall find nothing at all in us, Why should thou make War
upon us: For we have no Riches nor Treasure, and all the Cattle of our Country
are common; our Meats that we eat are our Riches, and instead of Gold and
Silver, we make our Treasure Peace and Concord, and Love; and we have naught
but a Cloth upon our Bodies: our Wives are not arrayed richly to please, for we
hold it a great folly for a man to trim up his Body with costly apparel, to
make it seem fairer then God made it. We have been evermore in peace till now
that thou will dis-inherit us. We have a King among us, not for need of the
Law, nor to judge any man, for there are no Trespassers among us; but all only,
to learn us to be obedient to him: and so may thou take from us but our good
peace. And when King Alexander saw this Letter, he thought he should do too
much harm if he troubled them, and sent to them, that they should keep well
their good manners, and have no dread of him.

CHAP. XCVII. How the Emperor Prester John, when he goes to Battle, has
three Crosses of fine Gold born before him.
THe Emperor Prester John, when he goes to Battle, has no Banner born before
him, but he has born before him three Crosses of fine Gold, large and great,
and richly set with precious Stones; and for to keep each Cross he ordains a
thousand men of Arms, in manner as men keep a Standard in other countries: and
he has men without number, when he goes to any battle against any other
Prince. And when he has no battle, but rides to take the Air; then has he
born before him but a Cross of a Tree not painted, and without Gold or precious
Stones, and all plain, in token that our Lord Jesus Christ suffered death on a
Cross of Tree. And also he has born before him a Vessel full of Jewels and
Gold, and precious Stones; in token of his present Nobleness and of his Might:
he has born before him like wise a Platter of Gold full of earth, in token
that all Lordship and Nobleness shall turn to naught, and all flesh shall turn
to earth.

CHAP. XCVIII. Of the most resident place of Prestor John, which is in a City
called Suse.
ANd he dwells commonly at the city of Suse, and there is his principal
Palace, and it is so rich that it is strange to tell: for about the principal
Tower of the Palace are two pomels of Gold all round, and each one of these
has two Carbuncles, great and large, that shine very clear in the night: and
the principal Gates of this Palace are of precious Stones that men call
Sardine, and the Borders of the Ears are Ivory, the Windows of the Hall and
Chambers are of Crystal, the Tables they eat on are some of Emeraulds, some of
Mayk, some of Gold and precious Stones, and the Pillars that bear the Table are
of such Stones also; and the Stairs on the which the Emperor goes up to his
Table where he sits at meat, one is of Mastick, another of Crystal, and
another of green Iaspy, another of Diasper, another of Sardin, another of
Cornelin, another of Senton, and that he sets his foot upon is of
Chrisolites; and all those Stairs are bordered with fine Gold, and well set
with great Pearls and other precious Stones; and the sides of his Table are
Emeraulds, bordered with Gold and with precious Stones: the Pillars in his
Chamber are of fine Gold, with many Carbuncles and other such Stones that give
great light in the night: and though the Carbuncles give great light,
nevertheless there burns xii. great Vessels of Crystal full of Balm, to
give good smell, and to drive away evil Air. The frame of his Bed is all
Sapphire, well bound with Gold, to make him sleep well, and for to destroy
Lechery, for he will not lie by his Wives but thrice a year, after the seasons,
and that only for getting of Children. And he has also a fair Palace in the
city of Nise, where he dwells when he will: but the air there is not so well
tempered as it is in the city of Tuse. And he has every day in his Court more
then thirty thousand men, beside comers and goers; but thirty thousand there,
or in the Court of the great Caane, spend not so much as twelve thousand in our
country. He has evermore eight Kings in his Court to serve him, and each one
of them serves a month, and with these Kings serve always seventy two Dukes,
and three hundred Earls; and every day are in his Court twelve Archbishops, and
twenty Bishops. The Patriark of Saint Thomas is as it were a Pope; and the
Archbishops, Bishops, and Abbots, all are Kings in that country, and some one
of the Lords is Master of the Hall, some of the Chamber, some Stewerds,
Marshall and other Officers; and thereby he is richly served. And his land
extends in breadth four Months journey, and it is of length without measure.

CHAP. XCIX. Of the Wilderness wherein grows Trees of the Sun and the Moon.
ANd beyond this place is a great Wilderness, as men that have been there say.
In the Wilderness*, as men say are the Trees of the Sun, and the Moon, that
spoke to Alexander, and told him of his death: and men say, that those that
keep those trees and eat of the fruits of them, live four or five hundred year,
through the virtue of the fruit; and we would gladly have gone thither; but I
think that an hundred thousand men of Arms could not pass that Wilderness for
the plenty of wild Beasts, as Dragons, and Serpents, that slay men when they
pass that way. In this land are many Elephants, both white and blew, without
number, and Unicorns, and Lions of many colors. Many other Isles are in the
land of Prester John that were too long to tell, and much riches, and of
precious Stones great plenty. I have heard say why this Emperor is called
Prester John, and for these that know it not I will declare, Sometime there was
an Emperor a noble Prince and a doughty, and he had many Christian Knights with
him, and the Emperor thought he would see the Service in Christian Churches,
and then was Churches of Christendom in Turkey, Sury, and Tartary, Jerusalem,
Palestine, Araby, and Alapy, and in all the land of Egypt; and this Emperor
came with a Christian Knight into a Church of Egypt, and it was on a Saturday
after Whitsunday, when the Bishop gave Orders: and he beheld the Service and
asked of the Knight what Folk those should he that stood before the Bishop, and
the Knight said, they should be Priests: and he said he would no more be called
King nor Emperor, but Priest, and he would have the name of him that came first
out of the Priests, and he was called John, and so have all the Emperors since
been called Prester John. In this land are many Christian men, of good Faith
and good Law, and they have Priests to sing Service, and they receive the
Sacrament as men of Greece do; and they say not otherwise, but as the Apostle
said, as Saint Peter, and Saint Thomas, and other Apostles, when they sung and
said Pater noster, and the words with the which the Communion is sacred: we
have many additions of Popes that have been Ordained, of which men of these
countries know not.

CHAP. C. Of the great Island and Kingdom called Taprobane.
TOward the east side of Prester John's land is an Isle that men call Taprobane,
and it is right good and fruitful; and there is a great King and a rich, and
he is obedient to Prester John, and the King is always made by Election. In this
Isle are two Winters and two Summers, they reap Corn twice in the year, and
Gardens flourish at all times in the year. There dwells good people and
reasonable; and many Christian men among them are full rich; and the water
between the side of Prester John and this Isle, is not very deep, for men may
see the ground in many places.

CHAP. CI. Of two other Isles, one is called Oriel, and the other Argete;
wherein are many Gold-mines.
THere are more eastward two other Isles, the one is called Oriel, and the
other Argete: of which, all the land is full of Mines of Gold and Silver. In
those Isles may men see no stars clear shining, but one Star that is called
Canapos; and there men see not the Moon, but in the last quarter. In that Isle
is a great Hill of Gold that Pismires keep, and they part the fine Gold from
other that is not fine, and the Pismires are as great as Hounds; so that no man
dare come there for dread of Pismires that would assay them; so that men cannot
dig for the Gold nor get thereof, but by subtilty: and therefore when it is
very hot, the Pismires hide themselves in the Earth from morn to noon of the
day; and then men of the country, take Camels and Dromedaries, and other
Beasts, and go thither, and lade them with Gold, and go fast away ere the
Pismires come out of the earth, And other times when it is not so hot, that the
Pismires hide them not, they take Mares that have Foals, and they lay upon
those Mares two long vessels as it were two long Barrels with the mouth
upwards, and drive them thither, and keep their Foals at home; and when the
Pismires see these vessels, they leap thereto, for by kind they leave no Hole
nor Pit open, and anon they fill those vessels with Gold; and when the men
think the vessels be full, they take the Foals, and bring them as near as they
dare; and then they whinny, and the Mares hear them, and anon they come to
their Foals, and so they take the Gold: for those Pismires will suffer Beasts
to come among them, but no men.

CHAP. CII. Of the dark Country, and Hills, and Rocks of Stone, nigh to
Paradise.
BEyond the Isles of the land of Prester John and his Lordship of Wilderness,
to go right East, men shall find nothing but Hills, great Rocks, and other dark
land where no man may see day or night, as men of that country say: and this
Wilderness and dark land lasts to Paradise Terrestre, where Adam and Eve was
set, but they were but a little while there, and that is toward the East, at
the beginning of the Earth; but that is not our East that we call, where the Sun
rises; for when their Sun rises there, then it is midnight in our Country,
by reason of the roundness of the Earth: for our Lord made the Earth all round
in the midst of the Firmament. Of Paradise can I not speak properly, for I
have not been there: but that I have heard, I shall tell you. Men say, that
Paradise Terrestre is the highest land of all the World, and it is so high that
it touches near to the Circle of the Moon, for it is so high that Noes flood
might not come thereto, which covered all the earth about.

CHAP. CIII. A little of Paradise Terrestre.
This Paradise Terrestre, is enclosed all about with a Wall, and that Wall is
all covered with Moss, as it seems, that men may see no stone nor nothing
else whereof it is; and in the highest place of Paradise in the midst of it
is a Well, that casts out the four Floods that run through diverse lands. The
first flood is called Pison or Ganges, and that runs through Jude; in that
River are many precious Stones, and much Lignum Aloes, and gravel of Gold.
Another is called Nilus or Giron, and that runs through Ethiope and Egypt.
The third is called Tygree, and that runs through Assyria and Armony the
great. And the fourth is called Euphrates, that runs through Armony the
less, and Persia: and men say, that the sweet and fresh waters of the World
take their springing of them. The first River is called Pison, that is to say,
gathering of many Rivers together and falling into one; and some call it
Ganges, of a king that was in Jude, that men call Gangeras, for it runs
through his land: and this River is in some places clean, in some. places
troubled; in some places hot, in some places cold. The second River is called
Nilus or Giron, for it is ever troubled; for Giron is to say, trouble. The
third River is called Tygree, that is to say fast running, for it runs
faster then any of the other, named so of a Beast that men call Tygris, for he
runs fast. The fourth River is called Euphrates, that is to say, well
bearing, for there grows many good things upon that River. And ye shall
understand that no man living may go upon that Paradise, for by land he may not
go for wild Beasts that are in the Wilderness, and for Hills and Rocks which
no man may pass: Neither by those Rivers may any man pass, for they come with
so great a course, and so great waves, that no Ship may sail against them. Many
great Lords have assayed many times to go by these Rivers into Paradise, but
they might not speed in their way; for some died for weariness in rowing, some
were blind, and some deaf with noise of the waters; so no man may pass there
but through special grace of God. I can tell you no more of that place which I
may speak of upon mine own sight.

CHAP. CIV. How Prester John's land lies foot against foot to England.
THese Isles of the land of Prester John, they are under the Earth to us, and
they lie foot against foot to England, and other Isles there are whosoever would
pursue them, for to compass the Earth having the Grace of God to help the way,
he might come right to the same countries that he were come of, and come from,
and go about the earth; but for that it, asks so long time, and also there
are so many perils to pass, that few men assay to go so, and yet it might be
done, for men come from those Isles to other Isles, coasting on the Lordship of
Prester John, which men call Cassay, and that country is near ix. days journey
long, and more than fifty of breadth; and this Cassay is the best land that is
in those countries, save Cathay: and if Merchants came thither as commonly as
they do to Cathay, it would be better than in Cathay: for it is so thick of
Cities and Towns, that when a man goes out of a city, he sees another at each
side: there is good plenty of Spices and other goods: the king of this Isle is
rich and mighty, and he holds his land of the great Caane for that is one of
the twelve Princes that the great Caane, has under him, beside his own land.

CHAP, CV. Of the Kingdom of Ryboth
FRom this Isle men go to another Kingdom, that is called Ryboth, and that is
also under the great Caane. This is a good country, and plenteous of Corn,
Wine, and other things: men of this land have no houses, but they dwell in
Tents made of Trees: and the prineipall city of the Country is all black made
of black stones, and white; and all the Streets are paved with such stones, and
in the city is no man so hardy to spill blood of man nor beast, for worship of
an Image that is worshipped there. In that city dwells the Pope of their Law,
and they call him Lopasse; he gives all Dignities and Benefices that fall to
the Image: And men of Religion, and men that have Church Livings in that
country are obedient to him, as men here to the king. They have a custom in
this country, that when a man's Father is dead, whom they will do worship unto,
they send after all his Friends, religious Priests, and many other, and they
bear the body to an Hill with great joy and mirth, and when it is there, the
greatest Prelate smites off his head, and lays it upon a great place of Gold
or Silver, and gives it to his son, and the son takes it and gives it to
other of his friends, singing and saying many Orisons; and then the Priests and
the religious men cut the flesh off the body in pieces, and say Orisons, and
the Birds of the country come thither, for they know well the custom, and they
fly about them as the Eagles and other Birds that eat flesh, and the Priests
cast the pieces unto them, and they bear it away a little from thence, and then
they eat it: and as the Priests were wont to sing for souls, Subvenite sancti
Dei, so those Priests there sing, with high voice in their Language, in this
manner wise, See and behold how good and gracious a man this was, that the
Angels of God come for to fetch him, and bear him into Paradise. And then
thinks the Son of his Father that he is greatly worshipped when birds have
eaten him: and when there are most plenty of birds there is most worship. And
then comes the son home with all his friends, and makes them a great feast;
then makes he clean his fathers Scalp, and gives them drink therein; and the
flesh of his fathers head he cutteth off, and gives it to his most special
friends, some a little, and some a little, for dainty. And in remembrance of
this holy man that the Birds have eaten, the son keeps his Scalp for a Cup,
and therein drinks he all his life, in remembrance of his father.

CHAP. CVI. Of a rich man that is neither King, Prince, Duke, nor Earl.
ANd from this place men go ten days journey through the land of the great
Caane, which is a very good Isle and a great Kingdom, and the King is very
mighty. And in this Isle is a rich man, which is neither King, Prince, Duke,
nor Earl, but he has each year four thousand Horses, charged with Rice and
Corn and he lives Nobly and richly after the manner of the country, for he
has fifty Damesels that serve him every day at his meat and bed, and do what
he will. And when he sits at the Table they bring him meat, and at each time
five Messes together; and they sing in the bringing in a Song, and they cut his
meat and put it into his mouth: and he has very long Nails on his hands, for
that is great Nobility in that country, and therefore they let their Nails grow
as long as they may: and some let them grow so long that they come about their
hands, and that is great Honor and gentry: and the gentry of a woman is to
have small feet, and therefore so soon as they are born, they bind their feet
so straight, that they cannot wax half as they should. And he has a very fair
Palace and rich, where he dwells, of which the Wall is two mile about, and
therein is many fair Gardens, and all the Pavements of the Hall and Chambers is
of Gold and Silver, and in the midest of one of his Gardens is a little Hill
whereon is a place made with Towers and Pinacles all of Gold, and there he will
sit often to take the air and disport, for it is made for nothing else. From
this Land men may go to the Land of Caane.

CHAP. CVII. How all the Lands, Isles, and Kingdoms before rehearsed, have some
Articles of our Faith.
ANd ye shall understand that all these men and folk that have reason, that I
have spoken of have some Articles of our Faith; and though they be of diverse
Laws and Beliefs yet they have some good points of our Faith, and they believe
in God as the Prophecy says, Et meruent eum omnes fines terrae; that is to
say And all the Ends of the Earth shall fear him. And in another place, Omnes
gentes servient ei: That is to say, all Nations shall serve him. But they
cannot speak perfectly, but as their natural wit teaches them, netther of the
Son nor of the holy Ghost; but they can well speak of the Bible, and especially
of Genesis, and the Books of Moses. And they say, that those Creatures which
they worship are no Gods, but they worship them for the great virtue that is in
them, which may not be without the special grace of God: and of Simulacres and
Idols, they say that all men have Simulacres, whereby they mean the papists,
who have Images of our Lady and others, but they think that they worship the
Images of Stone and of Wood, and not the Saints whom they do represent; for as
the Letter teaches Clerks how they shall believe, so Images and Pictures teach
Laymen: they say also that the Angel of God speaks to them in their Idols,
and does Miracles, and they say thus: but it is the evil Angel that does
Miracles to maintain them in their Idolatry.

CHAP. CVIII. How Sir John Mandevile leaves many marvels unwritten and the
causes wherefore.
THere are many other countries where I have not yet been nor seen, and
therefore I cannot speak properly of them. Also in countries where I have been,
are many marvels that I speak not of, for it were to long a Tale; and therefore
hold you apaid at this time with that I have said, for I will say no more of
marvels that are there, so that other men that go thither may find enough for
to say, that I have not told.

CHAP. CIX. What time Sir John Mandevile departed out of Engeland.
ANd I John Mandevile Knight, was born in England, in the Town of Saint Albans,
went out of my Country, and passed the sea, in the year of our Lord 1332 on St.
Michaels day; and have passed through many lands, Isles, and Countries, and now
come to rest. I have compiled this Book, and write it, the year of our Lord
1364, thirty two years after my departing from my Country. The rather for the
pleasure of all such as delight to read the strange and wonderful marvels of
other foreign countries, as also for a direction to all such as shall desire
to see either all or some of these countries herein specified and because some
things herein spoken of, may seem strange and scarcely credible, therefore I
have thought good to make known unto all that will see more proof hereof, in
the Book called Mappa mundi there they shall find the most part of the same
ratified and confirmed. And I pray all that shall read this Book, and look for
no further proof, to judge favorable thereof, since they shall in conceit see
as much at home without much pain, as I did after many weary and dangerous
steps passed: and I pray to God of whom all grace comes that he will fulfill
with his grace, the Readers and Hearers hereof, and save them body and soul and
bring them to his Joy that ever shall last. Amen

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
THe way toward to Jerusalem on Horse, on Foot, or by Sea. Chap. 1. Of the
Land of Greece. Chap. 2. To come again to Constantinople to go to the holy
Land. Chapter 3. Of a terrible D^agon. Chap. 4. Of a young Man and his Lemman.
Chap. 5. Of the manner of hunting in Cypres. Chap. 6. Of the Haven named Jaffe.
Chap. 7. Of the Haven Tire. Chap. 8. Of the Hill of Carme. Chap. 9. How Sampson
slew the King and his Enemies. Chap. 10. The way to Babylon, where the Souldan
dwells. Chap. 11. Yet here follows of the Souldan and Kingdoms that he has
conquered, which he holds strongly by force. Chap. 12. For to return from
Sinay to Jerusalem. Chap. 13. As men are passed the Wilderness again coming to
Jerusalem. Chap. 14. Here follows a little of Adam and Eve, and other
things. Chap. 15. Of the dry Tree Chap. 16. From Ebron to Bethlem. Chap. 17. Of
a fair Maiden that should be put to death wrongfully. Chap. 18. Of the City of
Jerusalem. Chap. 19. Yet of the holy City of Jerusalem. Chap. 20. Of the
Church, and of the old Sepulcher. Chap. 21. Of the Temple of God. Chap. 22. Yet
of the Temple of God. Chap. 23. Of King Herod. Chap. 24. Of Saint Salvator^
Church. Chap. 25. The Field of Acheldemack which was bought with the thirty
pence. Chap. 26. Of the Mount Jov. Chap. 27. Of the Castle of Bethania. Chap.
28. Of Jericho and of other things. Chap. 29. Of the holy place between
Bethania and the River Jordan, with other things. Chap. 30. Of Abraham and his
Generation. Chap. 31. Of the River Jordan. Chap. 32. Of many other marvels.
Chap. 33. Of the Samaritans. Chap. 34. Of Galile. Chap. 35. Of the way of
Nazareth to the Mount or Hill Tabor. Chap. 36. Of the Sea of Galile. Chap. 37.
Of the Table whereon Christ eat after his Resurrection. Cha. 38. Of strange
manners and diverse. Chap. 39. For to turn again on the side of Galile. Chap.
40. How a man may go the shortest Way to Jerusalem. Chap. 41. Of other ways
for to go by Land unto Jerusalem. Chap. 42. Yet of another way by Land toward
the Land of Promise. Chap. 43. Of the Faith of the Sarasins, and of the Book of
their Law named Alkaron. Chap. 44. Yet it teaches more of Mahomet. Chap. 45.
Of the Birth of Mahomet. Chap. 46. Of diverse Isles and manner of People, and of
mavelous Beasts. Chap. 47. Of the Haven of Gene, for to go by Sea into diverse
Countries. Chap. 48. Of the Country of Job and of the Kingdom of Chalde. Chap.
49. Of the Kingdom of Amazonie, where dwell none but Women. Chap. 50. Of the
Land of Ethiope. Chap. 51. Of Inde the more and less, of Diamonds, and of their
great virtues. Chap. 52. Of diverse Isles and Kingdoms, which are in the land of
Inde, of people that are of yellow and green color, and of many strange
things. Chap. 53. Of the Kingdom of Mabaron. Chap. 54. Of a great Country
called Lamory, where the people go all naked. Chap. 55. Of the Country and Isle
named Jaza, which is a mighty Land. Chap. 56. Of the Kingdom of Pathen or
Salmas, which is a goodly. Chap. 57. Of the Kingdom of Talonach, the King
whereof has many Wives. Chap. 58. Of the Island called Raso, where men are
hanged so soon as they are sick. Chap. 59. Of the Land of Melks, wherein
dwells evil people. Chap. 60. Of the Island named Macumeran, whereas the
people have heads like Hounds. Chap. 61. Of a great Island called Dodin, where
are many men of evil conditions. Chap. 62. Of the Kingdom named Mancy, the
which is one of the best Kingdoms of the World. Chap. 63. Of the Land of
Pigmes, the people whereof are but three spans long. Chap. 64. Of the City
Menk, where a great Navy is kept. Chap. 65. Of the Land named Cathay, and of
the great riches thereof. Chap. 66. Of the great City named Cadon, wherein is
the great Caanes Palace. Chap. 67. Wherefore the Emperor of Cathay is called
the great Caane. Chap. 68. How the great Caane was hid under a Tree, and so
escaped his enemies by a Bird. Chap. 69. Of the great Caanes Letters, and
writing about the Seal Chap. 70. Of the governance of the Country of the great
Caane. Chap. 71. Of the great Riches of the Emperor, and, of his Pedigree.
Chap. 72. Of the Ordinance of the Lords of the Emperor, when he rides from
one Country to another to War. Chap. 73. How the Empire of the great Caane is
divided into twelve Provinces, and how that they do cast Incense in the fire,
where the great Caane passes through the Cities and Towns, in worship of the
Emperor. Chap. 74. How the great Caane is the mightiest Lord of all the World.
Chap. 75. Yet of other manners of his Country. Chap. 76. How the Emperor is
brought into his grave when he is dead. Chap. 77. When the Emperor is dead, how
they choose and make another. Chap. 78. What Countries and Kingdoms lie next
the Land of Cathay, and the fronts thereof. Chap. 79. Of other ways coming
from Cathay toward the Greek Sea, and of the Emperor of Persia. Chap. 80. Of
the Land of Armony, which is a good Land, and of the Land of Middy. Chap. 81.
Of the Kingdom of Georgy, and Abcan, and many marvels. Chap. 82. Of the Land of
Turkey and diverse other Countries, and of the Land of Mesopotamia. Chap. 83. Of
diverse Countries, Kingdoms, Isles, and other Marvels beyond the Land of Cathay.
Chap. 84. Of the Land of Bactry, and of many Griffons, and other Beasts. Chap.
85. Of the way for to go to Prester John's Land, which is the Emperor of Inde.
Chap. 86. Of the Faith and Belief of Prester John, but he has not all the
full Belief as we have. Chap. 87. Of another Island, which is called Synople,
wherein dwells good people. Chap. 88. Of two other Isles, the one is called
Pitan, wherein be little men that can eat no meat: and in the other Isle the
men are full of Feathers. Chap. 89. Of a rich man in Prester John's land, named
Catalonapes, and of his Garden. Chap. 90. Of a Mavelous Valley that is beside
the River Pison. Chap. 91. Of an Island wherein dwell people as great as
Giants, of nine and twenty, or thirty foot of length, and of other things Chap.
92. Of Women which make great sorrow when as their Children. be born, and great
joy when they die. Chap. 93. Of an Island where men wed their own daughters and
kinswomen. Chap. 94. Of another Island wherein dwell good people, and true.
Chap 95. How King Alexander sent his men thither for to win the Land. Chap. 96.
How the Emperor Prester John, when he goes to Battle, has three Crosses of
find Gold born before him. Chap. 97. Of the most resident place of Prester
John, which is in a City called Suse. Chap. 98. Of the Wilderness wherein
grows Trees of the Sun and the Moon. Chap. 99. Of the great Island and
Kingdom called Taprobane Chap. 100. Of two other Isles, on is called Oriel, and
the other Argete, wherein are many Gold Mines. Chap. 101. Of the dark Country,
and Hills, and Rocks of Stone, nigh to Paradise. Chap. 102. A little of
Paradise Terrestre. Chap. 103. How Prester John's land lies foot against foot
to England. Chap. 104. Of the Kingdom of Ryboth. Chap. 105. Of a rich man that
is neither King, Prince, Duke, nor Earl Chap. 106. How all the Islands, Isles,
and Kingdoms before rehearsed have some of the Articles of our Faith. Chap.
107. How Sir John Mandevile leaves many marvels unwritten, and the cause
wherefore. Chap. 108. What time Sir John Mandevile departed out of England.
Chap. 109.
FINIS.

