CONCERNING PENAL LAWS: A DISCOURSE OR CHARGE at SESSIONS In the BOROUGH of
BRIDGEWATER, 12 July, 1680.

By Sir JOHN MALLET Knight. Recorder there.

Part thereof being APOLOGY for GENTLENESS to Protestant Dissenters.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Cockeril at the Three Legs in the Poultrey, over
against the Stocks-Market, 1680.

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
IF it has been a supposal of some Wise men of late, That rather than live
where all things were lawful, it were better dwell where nothing were lawful
but what is Commanded: Which shall be admitted rather than disputed; because
neither case of that supposal is ever likely to happen in any Christian
Country. It may perhaps by some be thought a happiness to be debarred (what
was used to be the last Liberty of the Unfortunate) to VVish or to Petition; by
such restraint to reduce Thoughts as well as Obedience, which is due to all the
Ten Commandments, to be confined only to the Fifth.

From the like leave of using supposals, may it be lawful to suppose, that, If
some of those whose holy Function should be to teach men all their Duties both
to God and Man, had instead of Moses been in the Mount, they would have prayed
God (what sin soever it would be to think so little of God, as to hope he would
grant their bold request) to give them only that one Command of Obeying
Magistrates, under the Name of Parents, and to leave all other Laws to their
own dictating; how they would have managed such Power by turning Religion and
the Worship of God into setting up themselves, or Adoring and Flattery of
Princes under the Name of Gods, from the Mode of some, and the many Absurdities
that would be in Civil matters, may be imagined rather than said.

But if they please to consider, the Names Father and Mother there used, seem
as well a Prophecy as a Law, that Princes should be Nursing Fathers of the
Church, as well of the tender and weak, as of the strong Children of it. As the
best Princes have always accounted it their greatest Glory to become, and be
called Fathers of their Country, for their Love, Protection, and well
Governing their People by those Laws which by ancient Usage, or prudent
Legislation are found to be agreeable and Good; thereby Government would be as
well Firm and Honorable, as also Easy and Pleasant both to Prince and People;
who would strive to excel each other, the first by Princely Condescensions of
Love, the other by returns of faithful and loving Duty.

Such certainly would be the Condition of these Kingdoms under the Government
of our King, who by his Own most Noble Goodness deserves the Character of being
the best Prince now living on the Earth; if those whose sacred Professions of
Religion, Law, and of giving Council (all which Qualities when well and justly
used may be accounted Sacred) as it is hoped some of those who are to give
Counsel, (considering Honesty therein is the true way to be Honorable) would
be so honest in their Advices to his Majesty, and their Administrations under
him, in whatsoever may concern Religion, Law, Safety, and the good both of King
and People, as to prefer the inseparable common Interest of both, before
their own or any private advantage.

All inferior Ministrations would then surely go well, or easily be set right,
if those higher Powers bestow the Influence of their care and good Example on
them.

Amongst other things, how low and small soever the ordinary course of Justice
may seem, there having been some misreports and private Censures of something
lately said in a Discourse or Charge at Sessions for a Town therein mentioned,
concerning the Ancient and yet good way of Trial by Juries; A Friend of our
English Laws having a true Copy of what was there said, gives it to you; which
the Author of that Discourse would not else yield to publish.

He in that Discourse, and the Friend who writes this Advertisement, might say
much more in Commendation of the Common Laws of England, above the Civil or any
other Celebrated Laws of Church or State, or any other place; had not the
Excellent Preface of the Learned Sir John Davys to his Reports, and the Cases
there, especially that of Praemunire in the End of his Book, saved the labor of
repeating what may be not only necessary for all our Lawyers to know, but
delightful for every Gentleman who may think himself concerned in our English
Laws, to read; there they and the Civilians, and our Clergy also if they
please, may find by what our Ancestors answered when a Course of proceeding in
Criminal Causes according to the form of the Civil Law was propounded, and in
another Case when in former Ages an Alteration of the Common Law was
endeavored, how concernedly they expressed their Love to the Laws of England.

A DISCOURSE OR CHARGE at SESSIONS In the BOROUGH of BRIDGEWATER, 12 July,
1680.
Gentlemen, my very good Friends, now Returned and Sworn of the Grand Jury for
this Borough of Bridgewater;
IT is now many years since by the desires and voluntary free choice of your
Corporation, I have been your Recorder. And according to my duty, I have been
often present at your Sessions.

And as it is the Custom of all Courts of Justice and Sessions, for one of the
Justices in the Counties, and for Recorders in their Towns, by some discourse
to the Grand Juries, to say something of the Occasion of their Meeting, and
some general Recommendation of the Laws of England, and to give in Charge the
most material Articles to be Enquired, and to Exhort the Juries to make
Presentiments with due care and regard to their Oaths, and the Laws, as the
Cases shall require; I have on these former Occasions here spoken my mind
truly and freely.

But as often as it has been my part to say any thing here or elsewhere in
public, I have very seldom used, or had the leisure to set down in Writing
what I should say.

Yet now two or three days before my coming hither, having considered some
Inconveniences which of late time have happened, and may happen to my self as
well as others, by mistakes or misreports; to prevent which in what I have to
say, I have learnt from the care of Ecclesiastical persons and our Clergy, in
their Discourses at their Visitations, as well as their Sermons, to write what
I have to say, and with your leave to read and make use of my Paper in saying
to you what I have here written. Though since the short time I have had to
think of it, other occasions have hindered me from dressing this Discourse with
any Exactness of Method or Language; but instead of being curious, it shall be
plain and true.

Gentlemen, This has always been accounted one of the most considerable good
Towns of this County, in respect of its Situation, Bigness, the good Condition
of the Inhabitants of it, and heretofore and at this present well esteemed for
Trade, being one of the best Markets in this County, to which there is a good
resort by Land; and it has also a Navigable River, which brings Traffic, not
only for the Profit of the Merchants here, and the Country hereabouts; but
paying also considerable Customs and Duties to the Kings Exchequer.

And as it has by the Grace and favor of former Kings had Charters, whereby
it has very anciently been Incorporated, with great Privileges granted to it,
so it is for the praise and commendation of those who have been and are of it,
that they have behaved themselves so well, that those favors have been
increased and not diminished: The latter Charters having still enlarged your
Bounds and Privileges, and from being limited within that part of your Town,
which was the ancient Borough, they now extend to the large compass of your
Parish, which is of great Circuit, having so many Streets and Hamlets, as
except the two Cities which give name to the Diocese, there is, I think, but
one Town in this County that has more dwelling Houses than this: Whereby may
easily be understood the Concernment, Interest, and Esteem of this good Town.

And in respect of its Situation, in a very good County, of which I would not,
because our dwellings are in it, be thought to speak partially or flatteringly;
but really, I speak my heart and my thoughts of it, and what has been observed
and said by others thereof: This County of Somerset is one of the best Counties
in England for Arable as well as Pasture, and abundantly stored with the
Noblest kind of Provision this Land has been famous for: Which the Kings
Court, the great City of London, and those who provide Victuals for the Navy,
well know.

And I may further truly say for its praise and commendation, and affirm it of
my own knowledge and observation, having lived many years in it, and being
pretty well acquainted with the Inhabitants of it; They are in their several
degrees, in respect of the goodness of their Natures, Understanding, and honest
Dispositions, as good people as in any County of England.

In Religion they are good Protestants, and so few Papists amongst them, that I
think I may say, no County in this Kingdom has fewer Papists than this.

And consequently it is a most Loyal County, for I will boldly and truly
affirm, That the Protestant Religion is a Religion of Loyalty.

My love to my King and Country, has caused me to take this occasion of
saying this in Vindication of this County from Aspersions of its Loyalty, and
also to vindicate the sincerity of the Protestant Religion.

As I have said this of the County in General, I now come more particularly to
your Town here, and our present business.

Entering into which, I must first take notice, that when we met here last,
which was shortly after Easter, we of your Corporation gave unanimous testimony
of our being good Protestants, and Loyal Subjects, by receiving the holy
Sacrament in your Church on Sunday, and the next day in this Hall openly at
your Sessions by our Oaths and Subscriptions.

And then all things were so well amongst you all, that your Grand Jury of that
Sessions by their Enquiry on their Oaths, did not know any thing amiss of any
moment to be presented, that I can remember: Whether there were any smaller
matter of private Nuisance or Trespass then presented, I know not; but if there
were, I suppose it will appear by the Records and Books of that Sessions; which
being so lately, and things well then, I hope they so continue, especially in
respect of the greatest matters.

If any thing be amiss, it will be your part to make presentment thereof as you
shall find Cause, and this Court will do right accordingly.

And as I am your Recorder, it is my part to give you some directions therein.

But here I must by your favor take leave, First, to say something of my self;
yet without Vanity, for I do not love Boasting, though now it seem somewhat
necessary for me to say, what I thank God I can most truly say: That in the
long time I have had this Relation to your Town; and the longer time whilst I
had the honor to be one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace of this County;
which was from the first time his Majesty Commissioned any (for I never would
have, nor had, or acted by any other Commission than the Kings) I always made
it my care so to behave my self therein, that no man has hitherto charged me,
or can have any cause that I know of, to charge me with doing any Injustice or
Oppression, or of taking any Bribe whatsoever, or doing any thing that would be
a Scandal or Shame to Justice. If I have done any such thing, I desire any one
to bear Witness against me openly.

I am not Ignorant, that something has been reported as a seeming Reflection:
That I have not been severe enough against those of his Majesty's Protestant
Subjects who are commonly called Dissenters in Church matters.

Of which I have this to say:

That I do not Justify any Disobedience of any persons to the Laws, neither by
my own Example or Encouragement. For it is well known, that I, and all my
Family have ever constantly resorted to the Church, and come thither at the
very beginning, and often times before the Common Prayer and Service begin
there, and continue there all the while; and this not out of a formal, but I
hope with hearty Reverence.

And I can boldly say, that in two Parishes where I am most concerned, by
having long time dwelt in a Parish in the West part of this County, and of late
years in another Parish in the East part of it; my Example in those places and
the Neighborhood, and Gentle discoursing to persuade them to come to Church,
has brought I think all of those Parishes to the Church: I am sure most of
them come more constantly thither, considering the proportionable largeness of
those Parishes, than in other places where Severities have been used.

And I will with your leave make this further Observation, which has been a
common Note: That it frequently happens that those who are for the more rigid
Compulsion of others, oftentimes fail themselves; they, or some of their
Families being commonly absent from Church.

But I am not ashamed or afraid to say; That I do own my Tenderness to others
has been not only of a Kindness, which I think is natural to most English
Gentlemen; but of a charitable belief, that most part of those who are called
Dissenters, do hold the same true Doctrine and Principles of Religion with what
is contained in the Articles of the Doctrine of the Church of England, which do
all of them agree with the Holy Scriptures, and the true Doctrine of all sound
and Orthodox Protestants.

And of the Loyalty and peaceableness of such Protestans, I think no body has
cause to doubt; but rather to pity their Tenderness, and by Gentleness seek to
win them to comply in the smaller matters of outward Conformity, and a few
indifferent Ceremonies, seeing they agree with us in the main and substantial
matters of Doctrine.

And there has been some considerable doubt, whether those Penal Statutes
which at the time of making them, were expressed and intended to be only against
Popish Recusants, shall extend to Protestant Dissenters.

One other thing I have always thought of, which I think is worthy the most
serious consideration of all English Magistrates: That the ever good and
ancient way of Trial, even from the beginning of our English Laws, having been
by Juries, whereof the Great Charter is but Declaration and Confirmation of our
common Laws therein, which also has been multitude of times confirmed by our
Statute Laws and Acts of Parliament; Justices of the. Peace and others to whom
the Ministration of our Laws belong, cannot be too careful in any matters left
wholly to their Will and Power to hear and determine without Juries; I say, I
think they cannot be too careful to avoid going beyond the Rigor of the Laws,
or hardly to the utmost Rigor of them.

For my part, I think it has been no unhappiness to me, that whilst I was in
Commission of the Peace in the County, there was seldom any considerable
Complaint made to me, wherein I might Judge according to my own Will, without a
Jury: And if there were at any time any such cause brought before me, I thought
it my best way, for fear of exceeding the Laws, if it must be thought an Error
in me, to be as gentle as may be, to err on the gentlest side.

By such means to prevent and reclaim any from Offending, rather than to watch
and take all Opportunities to make them feel the extremity of Penal Laws,
especially where the proceedings are without Jury.

Yet I acknowledge, the Execution of such Laws are very just, when the
Magistrate does not exceed the Directions and the Methods of those Laws and
Statutes in those cases.

Though I have observed, that some such Laws in King Henry the Seventh's time
were of short continuance, and soon repealed, and two of the Promoters and
busiest Executioners of them, came shortly after to unhappy ends for their
severe Exactions.

Besides, how free soever any Justice may be from having any part of the
Moneys, yet if he be very active in Levying great Sums of Money by Fines set
by himself, out of Sessions, unless in such other public manner as may make it
appear he has no share, it will be very hard to avoid being suspected thereof,
how free soever he may be of it.

I will give you some Observations more of Trials by Juries.

They are to be of the same County, indifferently chosen and returned by Sworn
Officers, and are to be Freeholders, or other honest men of good Understanding
and sufficient Estate.

It would seem as strange a thing to see a very mean Jury rerurn'd to try
Offenders of very great Quality, as for the greatest sort of Persons to be
returned and serve in the Trials of persons of the lowest degree.

In what Manner and for what Causes, the party to be Tried may except against
the Jury, or any of them, will not be needful here to mention.

For my part, I think Juries of the Gentry and Yeomandry, or men of good
Estates, with some equality and indifference mixed together, to be the best way
of Trial in the world, and most agreeable to the ancient Laws of England.

I do not find that the Clergymen, though there be about nine or ten Thousand
of them Freeholders in England (reckoning about so many Parishes, whereof they
are Parsons and Vicars, besides other Dignitaries) have for above six hundred
years been returned or served as Jurymen, I am sure in matters Criminal and
cases of Blood, they were never used as Juries in any such matters, except
perhaps, which I am not very certain of, concerning the Statute commmonly
called the Statute of six Articles made in the Thirty first Year of King Henry
the eighth: Wherein what is there mentioned and called Heresy, was thereby
made tryable by Jury.

Of which Statute an honest and worthy Clergyman, Dr. Burnet, in his History
of the Reformation, lately written by him, and 23 May 1679. allowed by the
truly honorable Secretary Coventry to be Printed, says thus:

There was but one Comfort that the poor Reformers could pick out of the whole
Act, that they were not left to the Mercy of the Clergy in their Ecclesiastical
Courts, but were to be tried by a Jury, where they might expect more candid and
gentle dealing. Yet it seems the Clergy, which were then of the Popish
Religion, did shortly after the making of that Statute leave off Juries, and
proceed in their Arbitrary way of Trial without them.

For to remedy their so doing, in the thirty fifth Year of the same King,
another Law was made; That no person shall be put to his trial upon any
Accusation of any Offenses comprised in the aforesaid Statute of Thirty one
Henry Eight, but only such as shall be made by the Oath of twelve men before
Commissioners authorized, and the presentment to be made within one year after
the Offense Committed; And that no person shall be Committed to prison for any
such Offense before he be Indicted thereof.

I forbear from hence, and from much more that might be said from our Laws, but
chiefly from the Holy Scriptures of the New Testament, wherein Christ did
refuse to be a Judge in Case of Blood and other Temporal matters, to make any
Inference or reflection upon any of our Clergy, seeing many of them are pleased
with employment of that kind.

But for Juries I have some few short Notes more to observe unto you.

That after Juries of Trial are sworn, and the Trial begun, I think they should
not at all, but I am sure they are not ordinarily to be adjourned till the
Cause be fully heard and ended.

And then, if they go from the Bar, as they may go together if they will,
before they give their verdict (for it may seem to prejudice the freedom which
belongs to them, to persuade them not to go from the Bar) and consult
together in some private place, where none may have influence over them.

And they must have time allowed them in private, till they be all and every
one of them agreed, before they give their Verdict in the Court.

For a Jury of twelve men for trial of a Cause, does differ from a Grand Jury
of Enquiry in this, that in all Juries of Trial all and every one of the Jury
must be agreed in the same point, without going to the Poll for the Major part
of Votes; whereas Juries of Enquiry may carry matters before them by the Vote
of the greatest number among themselves.

Now to close this part of this Discourse about Trials, with somewhat
concerning Witnesses.

It has ever been the good old way, warranted by the Holy Scripture, and by
the Laws and Usage of England, that the party accused should know the Witnesses
and Informers against him, and have them face to face.

Except in Cases of dangerous Conspiracies, where it may be necessary to keep
the Witnesses very secret till the matter be thoroughly examined, and the danger
prevented.

But regularly, when the Party comes or is brought to Trial, the Witnesses if
living ought to be present, unless disabled by sickness, or being beyond the
Seas; and in that case the cause of the Witnesses absence ought to be
sufficiently proved by Oath, and there must be other very clear plain and full
Evidence against him, or the Trial to be put off till some other time.

The doing otherwise, would perhaps be mistaken to be in imitation of some
Ecclesiastical or Martial Foreign Laws, whereof I forbear to say any thing; but
that I do not know by any positive Law of England, the Party when he comes to
his Trial should be denied to know the Witnesses against him, and to have them
face to face.

Now Gentlemen, to what concerns your Town and Corporation, to which I bear a
most true and unfeigned respect, and to you all: What I am about to say, is not
out of any design to Ingratiate my self amongst you, but because I think what I
speak is very true.

I think you are as happy as any People or Corporation that I know of, in the
good choice of your Majors and Aldermen, who dwell among you, and are your
Magistrates in their respective Years and times of Government, by their
behaving themselves so worthily in their Magistracy, that they preserve the
good Reputation of your Town, and the respect due unto themselves.

The Articles I shall now mention and recommend to the care and Enquiry of you
(Gentlemen of this Grand Jury) are such matters as are ordinarily to be
enquired at any of his Majesty's Sessions of the Peace; from the highest to the
lowest Offenses, though some of the matters you are to Enquire of are of so
high Nature, that they are not to be tried here, but at the Assizes and other
Courts.

Yet if you know of any such Offenses, you must acquaint us therewith, and we
will take care to transmit the Examinations and Offenders, if any be here
taken, unto those places and Courts where they may have their Trials and
Punishment.

But for things within the power of this Court to hear and determine, if you
Indict the Persons, and that they may be brought before us, we will proceed
against them according to the Law in such cases.

In the first place, our Law intends the preservation of the Life and Person of
the King.

Here I must tell you very truly; That our King Charles the Second, whose Life
I pray God long preserve, is the life and well-being of this Nation, in respect
of the Protestant Religion and our safety. And I speak sincerely and without
any base fawning flattery, that I believe, by what I have understood by some
Honorable and knowing men (for I do not frequent the Court, yet am not
altogether without having had some Opportunities to make my own Observations
there) that the King of His own self, is of an extraordinary good and Gracious
Nature, a lover of the Protestant Religion, and the welfare and happiness of
his People: And that in His own most Noble Disposition, and ingenious readiness
of Wit, his Affability and natural Goodness, he does far excel all that are
about him: And I believe he does therein excel all other Princes: And that
whatsoever he does of His own self intend or purpose, is meant by Him to be for
the good and happiness of his Subjects. And he does infinitely deserve their
Love and Duty mixed inseparably with the greatest Humility and most faithful
Loyalty that good Subjects can express to a most Gracious King.

What Treasons are, the Statute 25 Ed. 3. does declare; That
To compass or Imagine the Death of the King. To Levy War against him. To
Counterfeit his Great Seal or Privy Seal. And to Counterfeit his Money.
To Kill the Lord Chancellor, Judges or Justices of Oyer and Terminer, being in
their places doing their Office: Are by that Statute declared to be Treason,
and to be punished with Death and Forfeitures as therein mentioned.

And by a late Statute made in the Thirteenth Year of his Majesty's Reign that
now is,

It is Treason during this Kings Life, to compass, imagine, or intend his Death
or Destruction, Wounding or Imprisonment, or to deprive or depose him of his
Kingly Name and Crown.

There are also Treasons by other Statutes.

27 Eliz. If any Born within the Kings Dominions be a Jesuit, ordained a Priest
by the pretended Jurisdiction of Rome, and come and remain in any of his
Majesty's Dominions, it is Treason.

By 23 Eliz. and 3 Jac. It is Treason for any to bring Absolutions, or to
exercise power to absolve, or to withdraw any of the Kings Subjects from their
Allegiance and Obedience, etc. to reconcile them to the Sea of Rome.

The knowing of Treason and concealing it, is called Misprision of Treason, and
to be punished with Fine and Imprisonment.

Concerning Praemunire, which I think proper in the next place to acquaint you
with:
You are to know, it is no new, but a very ancient and necessary care and
watchfulness provided by our Laws, against the dangerous and encroaching
Jurisdiction of the Popes and See of Rome, which have always had designs
against England; our Laws and theirs being Incompatible.

For, from the time of King Edward the third, and the Reigns of the succeeding
Kings, there have been Laws made, That if any of the Kings Subjects obtain
provision or promotion to Benefices from the Sea of Rome; or if any Appeal from
the Kings Courts of Justice to the Court of Rome, they shall be Imprisoned
during life, and forfeit their Lands and Goods, and be out of the Kings
Protection.

This is commonly called a Praemunire, from the Words in the Laws, and in the
Process concerning it.

Of later times other Offenses have been also very justly put under the same
punishment.

Most of those Offenses so to be punished, being concerning the introducing of
the Popes pretended Jurisdiction, and denying Allegiance to the King.

The particulars of those Offenses being many and long, as also other Offenses
that are Treason by Statutes, you may best read the Statutes themselves, for
the more full knowledge of them, and for bringing the Offenders to punishment.

The like Advice I give you, of Looking upon the Statutes when there is any
occasion to make Presentment against any Statute, as well to avoid Mistakes, as
also to save me the Labor, and you the Time, of mentioning all Offenses
against our Statutes and Acts of Parliament.

Concerning Felonies.
There are Felonies by the Common Law, and also by Statutes, but I shall not be
able at this time to name them all to you, and distinguish them severally: But
tell you, that the Punishment and Sentence which the Law pronounces on Felony,
is Death. Yet in many Cases there is an ordinary Mercy allowed, which is called
Benefit of Clergy. But the greater Felonies are not capable of it.

I should, before I named Felonies, have told you of Petty Treason, which has
somewhat a higher Name put to it than other Murders:

It is when a Servant kills his Master, a Wife her Husband, or a Clergyman his
Bishop.

Other Murders are Felonies:

As where any by Malice forethought, expressed or employed, does kill any Man,
Woman or Child, this is wilful Murder, and is not capable of ordinary Mercy.

So is the killing any one by Poison or Stabbing.

The killing by sudden Fray and Assault is called Homicide or Manslaughter, and
in some cases it may be capable of Ordinary Mercy.

If one in doing a lawful Act happen to kill another, it is called
Chance-Medley, or Misadventure.

And if in his own Defense any man happen to kill another, it is by the Law
enquirable by Indictment, though there be Mercy allowed of course.

Rape, if a man by force have the Carnal Knowledge of a Woman against her will,
is a very foul Felony.

So are the foul Acts of the highest degree of Beastliness, Buggery and Sodomy.

By a late Statute, 23 Car. 2. If any person maliciously cut out the Tongue,
put out the Eyes, cut off the Nose, or disable or maim any Limb or Member of
any of his Majesty's Subjects, it is Felony without Benefit of Clergy.

These before mentioned are Felonies against the Person, I will Name to you
some Felonies that are against your Possessions and Goods.

Breaking any man's dwelling House in the Nightime, with intent to Steal, or
do any Felonious act there, is a very great Felony, for which the benefit of
Clergy is not allowed.

So is the Robbing of a Church.

And Robbery of any thing from any man's Person in the Highway.

The Stealing of Cattle or Goods from any man's possession, is also Felony, but
in some cases the benefit of Clergy is allowed.

The Stealing of Goods, though it be the Goods of a person unknown, is Felony
by the Law.

So is the malicious Burning of any man's dwelling House, or Stacks of Corn or
Hay.

The Cutting and Stealing Cloth from a Rack, is Felony, whereof the benefit of
Clergy is taken away by a late Statute.

I have been the shorter in naming these Offenses to you, because if there be
any Offenses of Treason or Felony, they are commonly so Notorious that they
will not escape your presentment, though we cannot punish them here, but
transmit the Examinations of them, and the Offenders, if any be, to other
Courts, to be proceeded against and punished.

There are, certain other Offenses against Gods Divine Laws, which our Laws
take notice of to punish with pain and shame; though the punishment of that
which I shall next tell you of, by our Laws, is less than the greatness of such
wickedness does deserve.

These are Perjury and Subornation of Perjury; sins and Offenses of so deep a
dye of guilt, that though our Laws have not appointed Capital punishment for
them, no doubt but God will severely punish them. For he that has said, He
will not hold him Guiltless that takes his Name in Vain, will much more
dreadfully punish that man who breaks both the Tables of his Commandments by a
false Oath, or by procuring another to Swear falsely. Such Perjury oftentimes
being the occasion of Murder, by false Accusations that may take away the
Life; or of Oppression and Robbery, by taking away the Liberty, Estate or
Goods, by causing heavy Fines and Punishments to be laid on their Neighbors.
And by such false Oaths and Informations Courts of Justice are abused, when it
is not possible for any Judges to discern them; And hereby unavoidably if
Perjury pass for Truth, the Law which should be for the protection is turned
into the destruction of the Subject.

I hope within this Town there are none such; if in any other part of this
County or elsewhere, anything of this kind be suspected, we have nothing here
to do with any thing done beyond the limits of your Town.

But the other Offenses of customary Swearing and Cursing are frequent in every
place, if you find any in your Town who offend therein, you may do well to
present them, that they may be punished according to the Law, which though it
inflict but a gentle punishment, by paying a little Money for so great Offense,
that, and the Admonition of Friends may reform them, and help the poor to whom
the penalty by the Law is to be given.

Our Laws do also punish other Offenses against the Divine Laws.

The Breaking of the Sabbath, by Traveling, or using Trades, or Selling
Marketable Wares, and laboring on the Sundays.

For though it be not only Lawful but Commendable, and Commanded, to follow our
Callings six days of the Week, yet it is unlawful (except Works of Piety, or
extraordinary Necessity, or Charity) to work, labor, or do our lawful
businesses on the Seventh day, the Lords day, Sabbath, or Sunday, call it by
what Name you please, so as you kep it holy.

And if on that day we may not follow our ordinary lawful Callings and Works,
it is much more unlawful on that day to do what is unlawful to be done at any
time, by spending that day, or a great part of it in Taverns or Alehouses, and
with the worst sort of Company, when we should be at Church and Divine Service;
the Omitting to be where we ought to be, and being where we ought not to be,
especially at that time, ought to be punished by the Laws in that case.

Those who go to Church ought also to behave themselves reverently there.

If any disturb the Minister in time of Divine Service or Sermon, it is a great
Offense, punishable by the Laws.

So is the depraving or speaking against the holy Sacrament.

It would require too long time for me to enumerate all Offenses which concern
Religion and Divine Worship: Some of them are of Ecclesiastical Congnisance,
some punishable at the Assizes, and many of them punishable by Justices of
Peace at home, who all know the Laws and Statutes in those cases; therefore,
especially of what Justices of the Peace may punish at home without the help of
Sessions or Jury, I forbear to say any thing here, more than what I have
already said.

That which I come next to tell you of, is certainly within the Jurisdiction of
this Court to enquire and Punish.

That is to say, The Stealing of Goods not exceeding the value of Twelve Pence;
this by the Law is called Pettit Larceny, and to be punished by whipping; which
Punishment of young Offenders may do good, in preventing their greater Thefts,
and save them from the Gallows.

There are also many other Offenses of public concernment, and some of them of
moment to be inquired and punished here.

If any number of Persons have combined together to make Quarrels and break the
Peace.

If any three or more go forward in a Turbulent way to do an unlawful Act, it
is called a Rout.

If they go on by force, and do an unlawful Act and Breach of the Peace, it is
called a Riot.

Upon presentment or Indictment thereof, if the parties be found guilty, they
are to be punished by Fine.

In any Travel unusually Armed, to the terror of others.

Or are common Night-walkers, especially if they be dangerous persons.

And any that hinder the apprehension of Malefactors, or make Rescous, or break
Prison, such Offenders are also to be inquired after, and punished according to
the Law in such cases.

I forbear to make mention of those that show strange and Monstrous sights,
because I will make no reflections on something lately in another part of this
County, whereof I will say nothing here.

There are other Offenses against the Peace, which are hurtful to particular
persons, of which if there be cause of complaint, you will hear from the
Parties grieved; yet such matters are to be enquired of by you, because the
Indictments are on the Kings behalf, the Offenses being against his Laws and
Peace.

Such are Assaults, Battery, Maims, False Imprisonments, Forcible Entries,
Unlawful Cutting and carrying away young Trees, forcible Trespasses, and
hurting the Cattle and Goods of another, Cheatings, Deceits, Menaces, Threats,
and Slanders: All these are Offenses within your Enquiry; and Punishable here,
and no doubt but many persons will be apt enough to make complaint; concerning
which, if they bring their Bills, and complain to you, Justice must be done.
But many of these Angry differences happen among Neighbors, which by Mediation
of Friends may be happily ended between them without such trouble.

There are matters also concerning Artificers, Laborers and Servants, to be
taken notice of, and to be Ordered and redressed here.

If any such do conspire together to advance their Wages beyond Law and Reason.

If Workmen depart before their work be done.

If Servants behave themselves disorderly.

If any that are fit to go to Service, and have no other visible Estate or
means of Livelihood.

All these are to be ordered according to the Law in such Cases.

But if they be truly Poor and impotent, they must be provided for and relieved.

Here I must recommend to the care of the Overseers of your poor, the binding
poor Children Apprentice, as one of the best provisions to prevent the increase
of the poor, and also thereby to prevent the ill and lewd Courses and Offenses
which by Idleness such young people would quickly learn and commit.

The Overseers of the Poor ought also to be careful in all other things
belonging to their Office, which if they neglect one Month, they are under a
Penalty for every such neglect.

Concerning Trades, which in this Town are considerable.
By the several Statutes about Trade, there are a great many Directions, which
you are pretty well acquainted with upon former Occasions, which I suppose you
have had, to take notice of them, that I may be the shorter in mentioning any
of them now.

There being particular Laws about each or very many of these and other Trades:
Braziers, Pewterers, Tanners, Curriers, Shoo-makers, Coopers, etc. That they
shall make their Wares good and saleable; and also concerning the Surveying,
Marking, Sealing, and Ordering thereof according to the several Laws in those
cases.

If you find any thing needful to be Redressed, we will look into the
particular Statutes, and read them: Else they are so long and many, that it
would take up a great deal of time. The Laws only which concern Clothiers, if
we should mention all the particulars of them, would require many hours: But
you may read those you may have occasion for; and the Statute-book shall be
ready for you.

This in short may suffice to tell you: That, as the Law hates and punishes
Force done to your Persons and Goods, it also does hate and punish Frauds,
Deceit and Cheating in any trade or dealing.

And it takes Especial care of those Trades which concern Victuals: That all
sorts thereof which may be sold, shall be good and wholesome: Whether Flesh,
Fish, Bread, Drink, or any thing else; and at reasonable Prizes.

Those which shall hinder your Plenty are also punishable.

Whether they be Forestallers, who buy in the way before coming to Market, what
should be bought there.

Regrators, who buy Victuals in the Market to sell again in the same, or in
some Market near thereunto, to advance the price.

Ingrossers, who get into their hands or custody by buying thereof, great
quantities of Corn or other dead Victuals, to withhold the same from the Market
when it is cheap, and to sell again when the same shall be dear.

The Offenders shall forfeit the value of the goods, and also have further
punishment as the Law and Statutes in that case have provided. 6 Ed. 6.

Offenses also that relate to proceedings in the Law, are punishable by the Law.

Barretters, who are common stirrers of Suits, Actions and Quarrels in Law.

Those who endeavor to corrupt Juries.

Magistrates taking Bribes.

Officers taking undue Fees.

I hope there is no cause of any thing of this kind here, for I believe you
have a worthy and honest Mayor, Aldermen and Town-Clark, and that all your
Officers are honest.

If it be otherwise, it is your part to enquire and bring them to Punishment.
And if I have taken any Bribe, make me an Example of Punishment.

The Office of Clark of the Market, I think, belongs to Mr. Mayor of your Town,
who is so worthy and just, that I suppose there is no cause, to complain of any
thing relating to that Office.

I shall close what I have said, with recommending and putting you particularly
in mind of the Customs and Duties due unto his Majesty, which all persons from
whom they are due, ought to pay without Resistance, Fraud or concealment. You
all know the several Branches of the Kings Revenue by the several Acts of
Parliament concerning them, and there are Penalties for Refusals and Frauds.
You ought to pay the Duties justly to the Collectors, and those who are
employed to gather them.

If the Officers make complaints of your Defaults therein, we must and will
give them Assistance as the Laws require us to do.

And if upon hearing of the Case, we shall find that the Officers Employed in
the Collecting, do you any wrong in any thing, by those Laws referred to us, we
will take care that Right shall be done between you and them, so far as the
Acts of Parliament empower us concerning the same.

Gentlemen, I might enlarge this tedious Discourse with a more formal
Admonition concerning your Oath; But I know you so well understand, and are so
honest, that you will keep it; and being dwellers in this Town, you are better
acquainted than I am with the Affairs of it; and whatsoever I have omitted to
give in Charge for your Enquiry within the Compass of your Town, and
Jurisdiction of this Court, you will supply with your Care, therefore I leave
what belongs to you to do therein, to your Consideration.

FINIS.

