THE MANNER Of the IMPEACHMENT Of the XII. BISHOPS Accused of High Treason, for
preferring a Petition, and making a Protestation, to the subverting the
fundamental Laws and Being of PARLIAMENTS.

Whereunto is added the said Petition and Remonstrance of the said Bishops.

London, Printed for Joseph Hunscott. 1642.

THe House of Lords was pleased, on the 30 of December, to send a Message to
the House of Commons, by Sir John Banks, and Judge Reeves, to desire a present
Conference, by a Committee of both Houses, touching matters of dangerous and
high consequence.

And at the Conference, the Lord Keeper, in the name of the house of Peers,
delivered as follows:

That this Petition and Protestation of the 12 Bishops, containing matters of
high and dangerous Consequence, and such as my Lords are very sensible of, and
such as require a speedy and sudden Resolution; it extending to the deep
entrenching upon the Fundamental Privileges and Being of Parliament.
Therefore the Lords have thought fit, that this matter, concerning the whole
Parliament, may be communicated to the house of Commons; It being a thing of so
great and so general Concernment.

This being thus communicated to the house of Commons, they came to this
Resolution, To accuse these 12 Bishops of high Treason, for endeavoring to
subvert the Fundamental Laws and Being of Parliaments.

And Master Glynne was ordered to go to the Lords, and at their Bar, in the
name of the house of Commons, and all the Commons of England, To accuse these
12 Prelates of high Treason, for endeavoring to subvert the Fundamental Laws
of the Realm, and the very Being of Parliaments, manifested by preferring that
Petition and Protestation; And to desire the Lords that they may be forthwith
sequestered from Parliament, and put into safe Custody; and that their Lordships
would appoint a speedy day for the Commons to charge them, and they to answer,
for that the Commons were ready to make good their Charge.

He was further ordered to give the Lords thanks for communicating this
Petition, with so much affection and speed, and for expressing their sense
thereof.

After Master Glyn had delivered this at the Bar, the Lords sent the Black
Rod instantly, to find out these Bishops, and apprehend them; and by 8 of the
Clock at night, they were all taken and brought upon their knees to the Bar,
and 10 of them committed to the Tower; and two (in regard of their Age, and
indeed of the worthy parts of one of them, the learned Bishop of Durham) were
committed to the Black Rod.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the Lords and Peers now assembled in
Parliament.
The humble Petition and Protestation of all the Bishops and Prelates now
called by his Majesty's Writts to attend the Parliament, and present about
London and Westminster, for that Service.

THat whereas the Petitioners are called up by several and respective Writs,
and under great penalties, to attend in Parliament, and have a clear and
undubitate Right to Vote in Bills, and other matters whatsoever, debateable in
Parliament, by the ancient Customs, Laws, and Statutes of this Realm, and
ought to be protected by your Majesty, quietly to attend and prosecute that
great Service.

They humbly remonstrate and protest before God, your Majesty, and the Noble
Lords and Peers now assembled in Parliament, That as they have an indubitate
Right to sit and Vote in the House of the Lords, so are they (if they may be
protected from force and violence) most ready and willing to perform their
Duties accordingly. And that they do abhominate all Actions or Opinions,
tending to Popery, and the maintenance thereof; as also, all propension and
inclination to any malignant party, or any other side or party whatsoever, to
the which their own Reasons and Consciences shall not move them to adhere.

But whereas they have been at several times violently Menaced, Affronted, and
Assaulted, by multitudes of people, in their coming to perform their Services
in that Honorable House; and lately chased away, and put in danger of their
lives, and can find no redress or protection, upon sundry complaints made to
both Houses in these particulars.

They likewise humbly protest before your Majesty, and the Noble House of
Peers, That saving unto themselves all their Rights and Interests of Sitting
and Voting in that House at other times, they dare not Sit or Vote in the House
of Peers, until your Majesty shall further secure them from all Affronts,
Indignities and dangers in the premises.

Lastly, Whereas their fears are not built upon Fantasies and Conceits, but
upon such Grounds and Objects, as may well terrify men of good Resolutions,
and much Constancy. They do in all duty and humility, protest before your
Majesty, and the Peers of that most Honorable House of Parliament, against all
Laws, Orders, Votes, Resolutions, and determinations, as in themselves Null,
and of none effect; which in their absence, since the 27 of this instant Month
of December, 1641. have already passed; as likewise against all such as shall
hereafter pass in that most Honorable House, during the time of this their
forced and violent absence from the said most Honorable House; not denying, but
if their absenting of themselves were wilful and voluntary, that most
Honorable House might proceed in all these premises, their absence, or this
their Protestation notwithstanding.

And humbly beseeching your most Excellent Majesty to command the Clerk of that
house of Peers, to enter this their Petition and Protestation amongst his
Records.

They will ever pray to God to bless and preserve, etc. Jo. Eborac. Thomas,
Duresme. Robt. Co. Lich. Jos. Norwich. Jo. Asaphen. Guil. Ba. and Wells. Geo.
Hereford. Rob. Oxon. Ma. Ely. Godfr. Glouc. Jo. Peterburg. Mor. Llandaff.

Vera Copia.

Jo. BrowneCleric.Parliament.




