CONSIDERATIONS UPON THE LIVES OF ALCIBIADES AND CORIALANUS. By Marquis
Virgilio Malvezzi, One of the Supreme Council of War, to His Catholic
MAJESTY. Dedicated to the King, his Master. Englished by ROBERT GENTILIS, Gent.

LONDON, Printed by William Wilson for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at
the Princes Arms in St Paul's Churchyard. 1650.

SIR,
MY pen having soared in the sublime Sphere of your glories, stoopes now and
pearches upon these branches withered through antiquity: not to abide here, but
to rest, and raise my flight again toward the Sun; on which fixing mine eyes
continually I show my self to be the true issue of mine ancestors: The sight
is Aquiline, because it looks upon the Sun; the quill is like it because it
flies with the Eagle. Of it self it would stay among hedge, and briers; under
your great wings it raises it self up toward heaven. I dedicate these rests
and reposes to whom I dedicated my travailes. I owe all to your Majesty
acknowledging all to proceed, both from the greatness of your Magnanimious
breast, and the liberality of your Royal hand, my rest, my motion, my
vocations, mine employments. The book is little; the gift nothing, but the
little makes the great to shine, and the nothing is the only basis of one of
the Creators greatest works. I beseech your Majesty to accept of it, and in
true imitation of Omnipotency, whilst with a strong hand you abate the bold
attempts of great ones, disdain not with a favorable look to raise the
humility of little ones: God preserve your Majesty for the good of Christendom.

Marquis Uirgilio Malvezzi.

TO THE TWO ILLUSTRIOUS, and Excellent Ladies Anne and Arabella Wentworths;
Daughters to that Heroic and Noble THOMAS Earl of Strafford.
IT had not been a question in Moral Philosophy whether Heroich virtue may
be in women, had you (most virtuous Sisters) lived in that age. For as in the
days of that ever renowned Queen Elizabeth, a Scholar merrily arguing upon
that theme, made this Syllogism.

Regina Elizabetha est mulier, Sed virtus heroica est in Regina Elizabetha,
Ergo virtus heroica potest esse in muliere.
The major needed no proof, and the minor he bid the respondent deny if he
durst; so now may I make the same argument:

You two most excellent Ladies are women But in each of you are Heroic
virtues. Erg. etc.
The major is manifest, the minor none that knows you can deny. Nature is
predominant in births: and great inclinations to vice or virtue come into the
world with children from their parents dispositions: How can the issue then of
such ancestors be otherwise then endowed with admirable qualities? Look on all
sides of your Genealogy in the direct, and collateral lines, both of
Consanguinity and affinity we see refined and eminent spirits. Do not great
Straffords excellencies survive his fate, and do they not daily revive in your
most honorable brother. Was not your Right Noble Mother a rare pattern of
virtue. And what Encomium shall I find worthy of that boundless Ocean of
eminently qualified Nobility the Countess Dowager of Clare your most honored
Grandmother, truly learned her self, and a Patroness of Learning, A Model of
Oeconomie to all Ladies of this age (absit dicto invidia) and whose piety makes
her already in her contemplations, a citizen of heaven. Your right honorable
Uncle the Earl of Clare; his pious and virtuous sister the Lady Elinor your
Aunt. Your most honorable cosen the Lady Clinton, whose nature, virtues, and
matron-like wisdom in her youthful age deserves admiration. I will not to
your selves relate your own, for coram laudare vituperare est: and I fear
lest those who know you not, being not able to conceive nature could produce
such perfectly mature fruits upon such tender stemms, should falsely tax me
with slattery; I will therefore conclude, with humbly beseeching you to accept
of this my small gift, and suffer my weak translation to see light under your
Patronage. It is a small token of grateful acknowledgement of the manifold
obligements wherewith I am everlastingly tied unto you. Diverse imperfections
there may be, to which I humbly desire you to give this favorable construction,
that I would have done better if I could, and presented you with a greater gift
had I had it. Live long and happy crowned with your own worth on earth, and
with glorious immortality in heaven; which shall be the continual wish, and
hearty prayers of

Your Honors most humble and obliged servant, ROBERT GENTILIS.

To the Reader.
I Have cursorily discoursed upon eight of those famous and noted men's lives
which Plutarch writ; When I had employment, they were my vacancies to rest:
when I was idle they were mine employments. Contemplation is man's greatest
repose, idleness his worst employment: for it is not idleness, but a waking
man's dream, a delirium of one that is in health, and an high way to that of the
sick. Man strives in vain to be idle, the Imaginative faculty hinders him, when
discourse employes him not, imagination drags him, he that will not bave it
wander, skip, nor fly about, let him fix and stay it. I have finished of the
Universal history of Monarchy, I print them not, by reason of the vehement
tempest which troubles Europe. A rule, let it be never so straight, if it be
laid in a stirring water, will seem crooked to them who give more credit to the
troubled means then to the real object. I will stay till the Sea is calm, and
lay open that which the tempest hides. I will in the mean time finish these
other lives, if God does not first end mine. Ancient tbings (as the Philosopher
says) are despised as fabulous, and modern are neglected as too well known.
The subjests I write of were in those days when History was not dead, neither
does it now live in all men. These discourses may peradventure come into diverse
men's hands, to whom the History is not new. The style is various, the conceits
(I hope) not common to delight thee with the one, and gain thee with the other.

CONSIDERATIONS upon the Lives of Alcibiades and Coriolanus.
DEath is equal in all men; oblivion and glory make the difference (said one)
who sought renown by temerity, Making glory and oblivion contraryes, and
judging him only to be inglorious, who was forgotten, as if oblivion were not
by some much more to be desired, then to have the memory of them to vive.

Some do so abhor the being out of the world, that to stay in it death is
horrid unto them, even then when it should be most desired and accepted, as the
only remedy and period of all their miseries and evils. And though necessity
would force him out of it, yet is he desirous to remain in it, and when
sometimes he should desire an everlasting oblivion, he seeks eternal fame
even out ofnotorious infamy. Nothing is so tormenting to him as death, and he
judges it far better to leave an abominable memory behind him, then to dye
unremembred; As it were in dispight of fate fantastically besotted with his
body, though extremely afflicted; and desirous to survive in others memories,
though with shame. And the worst remembrance is more acceptable unto him, then
none at all.

Annihilation is an enemy to man, not so much in respect of being nothing, as
of not being what he is. We shall not peradventure find a subject so
unfortunate, that would be contented to be changed into another individium, no
not to exchange his fortune; because the changing would be the annihilating of
him. Yet it seems harsh, that a man should have a recourse to wickedness to
make him remain in the world; to that which is not, and to nothing, because he
would not be so: and yet some do it, and attain to it; whether it be because
some writers willingly set down any thing that is great or notorious,
sometimes to raise their style with the relation, sometimes to attract men's
attentions with the rumor, and with the great motion, awake, please, and raise
up the understanding: they awake it, but violently; they raise it, but to
something which naturally, and directly it abhorres; they please it, but often
times corrupt it; or whether it proceed from that all men take delight in such
kind of relations; the most wicked are comforted through the similitude; the
less bad extenuate their badnesse by comparing it; the contrariety increases
the good man's merit. Great actions, though bad, do in the matter, communicate
with good ones, and with advantage, because they do not find it limited as
these last do, and so they deceive: and those who think they can give
instruction to others by laying them open and blaming them, are oftentimes
deceived: They might do some good in teaching of moral virtues, if virtue, as
it has a particular form to distinguish it from vice, had also a particular
matter to work upon. Virtues matter is open and manifest, vices is for the
most part hidden and concealed, and he is sometimes deceived in it that
operates, and he also that almost continually sees the operating. One should
not peradventure lose his labor in the teaching of moral virtues, if there
were no means to teach their contraries, and that one might learn only by
example of imitation, and not of shunning and avoiding: There being only one
rectitude, makes it a secure judge of obliquity. Its having latitude makes it a
deceitful judger of rectitude: Nature is inclined to evil, and evil actions
include a certain acritude in themselves, and if they be great, and have a
prosperous success, cause more to follow, then to beware of them, and make
more emulators then enemies.

They merit but little of posterity, that will relate evil actions causing
that to be heard, which themselves would unwillingly have seen. Many evil
things would be thought to have bin impossible to be done, did not Historians
set them down as done: and how much better were it (to avoid falling into them)
to live deceived, then warned? Simplicity is a great virtue, and ignorance is
wisdom. True it is, that if the knowledge of the will which is done be taken
away, it makes a man sometimes run into it; but if the manner of doing it be
^^ncealed, it always keeps one innocent. There are times wherein books would
be cancelled and some men who ought not to be mentioned; and seeing it is not
in our power to forget them, let us at least not mention them. The ancient
Romans did so, but to what purpose was it? if writers made mention in their
Annals, even of those men whom the Senate had cancelled out of its books:
undoing that which the Commonwealth had done, by relating that it had done it.
Is it not to be admired that those seven brave men, which affected fame and
renoune, by erecting wonders in the world, could not attain to it: and he that
impiously burned but one of them for that purpose, did get it in despite of
all Greece, which then strove with its uttermost might to have him blotted out
of all men's memories. A pestilent body leaves a contagious corpse behind, and
though men leave being wicked, yet they leave not producing of more, and a
delict when it is done, and past, serves yet for an example.

An infected body often communicates its infirmity, but never its health,
though it be never so exquisitely cured. I know not whether it be because that
nature in providence drives away the evil from it self, and thriftily
reserves that which is good; Or by reason that evil proceeds from any cause,
and that which is good from a sound and entire one only. The perfect mixed will
have what is wholesome, unwholsomnesse p^oceeds from a corrupt mixed, in the
first humility, bounded by the natural heat, is fixed, in the latter it flies
unbounded; This comes forth with its malignity, and being a fumid vapor it
takes hold, and cleaves too, the other retains what is good, and if it does
chance to come forth, being a dry exh^lation it does not fasten nor take hold.
This which befalls the body, is also practiced in the mind: A good fame and
renoune resembles rest, the bad and great is like motion, one is like a clear
and calm stream, which (though it be deep) glides smoothly in its channel:
the other like a fierce torrent, which swelled and troubled, runs violently
precipitous with much noise. Cur corrupt nature inclines to evil, violently
forces it self to any good: And seeing rest leaves no such impression as
motion, a clear smooth stream draws not with such violence, as a troubled
rough one, and nature defends it self from its contrary, and follows its
like, we need not wonder if good examples seldom cure, but evil ones do for
the most partinfect.

The renoune which remained of Alcibiades, the membrance of his Counrry,
Parents, Nurse, and Tutors, when there was not any memory left to posterity of
any of his companions, no not so much as of their names, causes Plutarch to
esteem him to be a man of eminent virtue.

Of such men (I know not whether it be because all things which belong to a
great one are esteemed great, or peradventure infamous) the Country, Parentage,
and Tutors, are much enquired after, and sometimes also what influence of the
heavens he was borne under. Or because we should conceive, that greatness is
not attained, is not the purchase of man himself, but the gift of the
influences of heaven, of the nature of such a temperature, of the assistance of
Tutors, and as accidental not to be valued in him: As if he did not in
himself include the seed of greatness; and that to become conspicuous he must
be aided by the nature of the soil, the influence of the stars, the
temperature of his Parents, and the education of his Tutors; as if he were a
plant no way excelling another, were it not planted in a better earth,
nourishing by a more industrious hand, and has a more benign influence of the
heavens. Man is prone to deprive himself of his understanding, and will, and
annihilate (I was almost going to say) his free will, unman himself, and grow
beast, leaving to emulate Angels, and making himself like to a horse or mule.
Can he then, think you, alter nature, gain a new temperature, and command
that influence, which he cannot change?

The greatman came into the world; amongst the Jews, he who indeed only
deserved the name of man; presently his Country, Parents, and Tutors, are
enquired after. His Country they know to be Nazareth, whence no good can come,
his Father they believe to be a Carpenter; they do not find he had any Masters
or Tutors; because they will not consent that man should found unto himself
this greatness, And not acknowledging it to proceed from Divinity, because
they cannot attribute it, to the nature of his Country, nor education of his
Tutors, they will have him possessed by a Devil.

What worser country was there then Bethsaida, what better countrymen then
Peter, Andrew, John, James, and Philip. There could be no better Tutors and
Mastors framed to teach virtuous actions, and give good documents, then
Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, and Seneca; nor pupills and Scholars that could
make less use of them then Alcibiades, Dionisius the Titant, Alexander the
great, and Nero. What father could be more Philosophical then Marcus Aurelius:
And more learned and eloquent then the Roman Orator; and who was a more
brutish Son then ^ommodus, or more ignorant then Tullus. Tullie forgot that
which he had by experience found to be true in his own family; and judging
nature (which for the most part erres) to be always in a certainty, pretended
the Ethics to be the work of Aristotle's son, imagining so eminent a Father
could not have a son, but of a sovereign understanding: And suffering himself
to be overcome by the force of that argument, the invaliditie of which he
himself had experimented, seemed to believe his sons case to be rather the
limitation or exception of that rule, then the confirmation of another contrary
one.

He that sets down the Problem, rests not at making learned Fathers
unfortunate in their children, but goes further yet, and affirms ignorant men
to be happy, as if engendring of evil, were the counterpoise of a good
understanding; and the comfort of ignorance, the begetting of wisdom. He
frames hereby an exception to two approved rules; Namely that no man can give
that which he himself is not owner of: And that goodness is of its own nature
communicable. One exception makes for ignorant men, if they can bestow
understanding (which they themselves want) upon their children. And the other
is adverse to learned men, if they cannot communicate unto their issue the
greatest good they possess.

He says, also that the wise man is always working with his intellect; he is
not attentive in the act of generation, nor takes no great delight therein; he
ejects seed without spirit, with a moderate pleasure, contemplation distracting
him from it. But a blunt fellow, wholly immerged in the act, casts forth
abundant vigorous stuffie seed and full of spirit.

But this proves rather the ability of the body, then the virtue of the mind,
and that the one should have children of a soft and weak constitution, and the
other of a strong and robustious; the greater abundance of seed, causes not
more plenty of brain: if the greater quantity of spirit, produces not a
larger portion of understanding. If it be a stuffie seed nature frames thereof
much bone, and a massy cranium, and these being thick hinder the intellects
contemplation, and like a soggie and dark mist hide the beauty of the images
from it: The understanding requires mild and tender organs, and there they will
be heard; subtle and clear spirits, and there they will be thick and cloudy.
The Philosopher from the robustiousnesse of the complexion, argues a weakness
of the intellect, and concludes a strong one, in a weak constitution.

How true soever the Problem be in that part which concerns ignorant Parents;
I will go another way to unfold that which belongs to learned fathers, because
many, though not peradventure most times, we see it confirmed by experience.
Amongst creatures, man has the most brain; amongst men the wisest; or he that
may be so. The matter is viscous and cold, it has need of much aid to draw
nourishment unto it, and much spirit to digest it; These are instruments of the
natural heat: The soul makes them hers, and taking them away from concocting,
raises them to contemplate; if not against, yet out of, and beyond their own
nature, and because she would have them reach unto that which they do not, she
subtilizeth them, dasheth them together and tormenteth them; they being
subtilized, evaporate, tormented do wast, and weary are corrupted. The
natural heat wanting for a time its instruments, and having gotten it again
weak, it works not being made unable, and grown feeble. Man's proper place
is the earth, raised up into the air he is disordered, in the water he
drownes, in the fire he burns; The spirits place is the body, which soaring
above the matter, afflicts, and destroys it self. The seed (according to the
most eminent Physician) for the most part proceeds from the brain, if this be
weakened it will not be powerful to beget a male, if there be one begotten it
is on the woman's side. Hyppocrates says, that those who are borne oftwo
masculine seed, prove Heroes: Those that are borne but of one, if it be the
man's, it foretokens greatness, if it be the woman's, they become effeminate. If
this solution does not please thee, say that the forming power, makes use of
the seed to make the spermaticall parts, and of the menstruous blood for the
sanguine. Of man's weakened seed it will make a very weak brain of the
vigorous blood of the woman, a strong liver and heart. The rational part will
be inferior to the irascible and concupiscible, so the man will prove
ignorant, and vicious. These documents will unfold several Problemes: This is
the reason why brute beast are not so subject to catharres as men; because they
have a lesser mass of brain: They need lesser quantity of spirits to concoct,
and preserve them better, because they employ them not in contemplation. A
Philosopher by chance was deceived in the solution of this Problem he
attributed the cause to man's upright figure, which being like a Limbeck, easily
attracts the vapors unto it. He knew not that distillation is not only by
ascent, but also by descent and in a plain. If a Limbeck be not like the
figure of a brute beast, it may be like a serpentine or winding still: and the
former distillation being more subtle, the latter grosser a beasts head will
be more aggravated, then a man's. Behold how the good son is the fathers
glory, and the bad one the mothers sorrow, either because he is born of her
seed; or because the root springs out of her blood, she predominating in the
production of the heart, and liver, fountains of all ill regulated passions.
Behold why the sons of those who have the most sublime understanding, have but
a little, and the daughters much: when the woman seed prevails, there is an
effeminate male brought forth, and when the man's, a manly female. And finally
behold why Mothers love their daughters children better then their sons, and
the Fathers the contrary. The males concur in generation with the
sperma^icall part, the females with the mass of blood. The forming power makes
use of the fathers seed to frame him, and frames her out of the menstrous
blood. The Mother acknowledges her blood in the one, and the father his seed
in the other, and every one bears most affection to that where it has the
greatest part. If thou do not acquiesce and rest satisfied with these my
reasons for the solution of the first Problem take it from the education;
either because learned Fathers, so much regard their spiritual sons that
they are careless of the other which are fleshly and carnal. Or because they
are unwilling to settle them to their studies, knowing none is taken notice of
except he be eminent and finding by experience how difficult it is to attain
to that eminency: and that if it be attained to; we thereby lose our vigor
and complexion, and if not we lose our time also, and remain unhappy, not
having so much as the comfort of having shortened our life in exchanging a few
years of it, for a long and glorious remembrance. The children look upon the
Parents as their only scope and aim, hold it a difficult thing to go beyond
them, and inglorious to come short of them: and hold it more pleasant and easy
quietly to enjoy the fruits of their labors, then to imitate them: And
desparing to arrive to their height and eminency, if it was profitable: and if
it was not profitable, not caring to endeavor, in the former case they forsake
learning to embrace case and pleasure; in the latter they contemn it as barren
and fruitless.

If thou be not satisfied by this reason of education, proceed to the
temperament; Great understandings an subject to black choler, becoming so,
rather then being borne such, and this temperature increasing, with a
mournful metamorphosis transformes a wise man into a mad man. When these men
beget children, melancholy is already in the last degree of its perfection; The
son becomes his heir as he is then, not as he was, and begins where the
Father ends; and this humor growing to its wonted pass, and wanting but
little of being mad, in a few years he wholly becomes such; hence it happens
that Socrates children, his coolness making him prudent were utterly stupid:
and Alcibiades whose heat made him rash and temerarie, his children became
frantic.

Plutarch rehearses some actions of Alcibiades when he was yet a child, I will
likewise consider them, this age being fitter then any other, to search into
the nature of subjects, which nature appears plain, when the subject is
neither capable of discourse nor operation. But this is not (you may say) the
knowing of a man's nature, well may it be the knowing of his body. It is at that
time a perfect mixed, as for its being, though not sufficiently mixed, to be
fitted for operation. Experience of it self is not that which makes aged men
prudent, neither does ignorance alone, make young men rash and inconsiderate
These have not the soul so free as to withstand the passions of the body, the
others body is not so strong as to hinder the motions of the soul. What can an
almost mere impotencie work, or how can the other withstand being utterly
impotent. In a youth one cannot know what way he will take when he is a man;
Yet it might be known had he not a rational soul, or were it not so fettered
by the temperament: The wise man acknowledged himself ignorant in the search
of what it would do, if it were freer, because it is impossible to conjecture
what that will be, which is not, nor has not bin. When thou feast it in
being, thou will be able to discourse (with the assistance of that which is) of
what it shall be; yet it is always difficult to warrant, or ascertaine any
such thing. The actions of a child are not sufficient to teach thee his nature:
there is the universal, and the particular nature; the former is proper to the
age, the latter to the individuum: thou shall know the one, by that which he
operates not according to the other; either he adds to it, or takes from it:
And though he seems with time to change it, he does not; he may sometimes
overcome it, but never change it, wandering through many universals, but always
with its own particular. The nature is the same at all times according to the
more or less, sometimes rising, sometimes fa^ling. It deceives us, because we
do not know the difference in the operation, which is caused by the
augmentation and diminution of the degrees: nor yet the various consonancie,
which the ever constant nature of the individuum, has with the differing
natures of age. It seems new to us, though it be but changed not altered.
Nature guides beasts, Reason should guide men: They do not ordinarily give it
the total and absolute command, neither do they wholly debar it from it: They
lose themselves in an exceeding bad mixture of reason ill guided, and nature
bad^y followed. It were better totally to abandon themselves to nature, at
least for those who make no further use of r^ason, then only to hinder nature.
There ^s one belonging to the Moral Philosopher, which is it that inclines,
because it is corrupt, for the most part, it inclines to evil. Another belongs
to the Physical Philosopher, and that is it which teaches, and being
provident, most times it teaches well. The third belongs to the Physician, and
that is it which heales, and because blind, sometimes also it kills. We should
resist that nature which inclines, and for the most part we^ follow it. We
should follow that which teaches, and for the most part we cross it. We
should assist that which heales, and for the most part we hinder it.

Alcibiades contending with another boy, makes use of his teeth and nails;
peradventure to shame him whom he could not hurt; and being not able to
strike, would mark him. His enemy taxes him for being womanish, he glories to
be Lion-like. Nails commonly serve men and beasts to cover the extremities of
the veins, sinnewes, and arteries, that the natural, animal, and vital
Spirits might not evaporate that way; They also serve many beasts in particular
for offensive and defensive arms. If nature does not purge the humors by
convenient ways, it is either too weak, or too much oppressed. If a man vents
his wrath with unsitting or unbeseeming weapons, either his rage swelling too
high makes him madd, or his weakness casts him down. The sh^pe of the mouth,
the situation of it, the weakness of the teeth are all evident signs that
nature did not place it there for his defense: and who will imagine the nails
to be man's arms, seeing that when he will fight, he hides them? and whereas
other creatures strike with an open paw, he only fights with a closed fist?
but what a poor weapon is a fist? They surely esteem it as nothing, who daily
complain of nature, saying it was prodigal to brute beasts, and niggardly to
man in furnishing him with food, arm^s, and raiment. The favor it has shown
in giving him understanding seems to appease him; and as if he had it given
him to counterpoise the want of other things, and not to make him noted above
others; he calls that an exchange, which is a mere gift. Can either gentility
and Christianity be forgiven such an error? truly no. Nature has bin wanting
in nothing to man: but he contrariwise has been wanting to nature. What need
had he of raiment, that did not know himself to be naked? What use for Weapons,
when every thing did voluntarily obey him, and when he had no Enemy? And as for
food, he had it given him; He sinned in eating of that also which was denied
him; And if he lost himself in that which was given him, why does he complain
for that which he has not received?

But it was not so womanish in Alcibiades to fight with such Instruments as
were not given him by Nature for that purpose; as to d^sh against the ground
those which Nature had invented to delight: he is angry with Flutes, because
playing upon them disfigures his beauty: and peradventure that happened because
he spoyle^ their harmony, playing less then was requisite, and deforming
himself more then he needed to have done. I pardon such a conceit concerning
Musical wind Instruments in a young, tender, and wanton youth, and in a Court
Philosopher, a Politician, a Peripatetick, talking with Senators and Princes;
when I see vocal Music set at naught, for the same, or peradventure no reason
at al, by a Stoic mofal Philosopher. The wind Music does not deforme the
Visage, it reformes, yea, consormes it: and the vocal, which is correspondent
to the hearing alters the proportion of the face to conform it to the e^e:
The one requires settledness to be well looked upon, and the other receives its
perfection from motion: One unfolds the beauty of the Visage, the other both
lays open, and accompanies the sweetness of the voice. Where there is a sound,
motion necessarily has proceeded, and the motion is with measure if the sound
be h^rmonious. Sometimes also it is voluntarily accompanied with the head,
eyes, and mouth and that with delight, though without necessity if it be with
proportion: That motion which offends, produces no harmonious sound or does not
accompany it proportionably. But singing does not cause a bodily motion only in
him that sings, it causes it also in him that hearkens, if he does not st^ive
against it, the Spirits will howsoever move; let them be never so much coerced
and restrained, and harmony is so linked to motion that I canno: but believe
they were so in the first Movers motions. He that will not grant such a thing
in the superior heavens, will not howsoever deny it in the lowest, in which if
he do admit of it, by what reason can he deny it in the greater. Those who
bel^eve a motion in the heavens, and confess them to be solid: that grant a
sire in the concavity of the Moon, and that it is kindled by attrition, cannot
deny a sound, and if they grant an^, what a one shall it be? of a most swift,
equal, and simple motion? ^f a sublime body, perfectly spher call, and noble
in the highest degree? and of an infinite mover? Certainly, it is harmonious,
and in so eminent a degree, that from i^ all inferior harmonies receive their
first origin* as all motions do its motion. Why does not fire contend with the
air, and how comes it that it does not consume it? Why, is it not impossible
for it to be contained within the Universe and not consume it? By the
preservation of nature? It is well said. By the virtue which the place gives to
the thing placed? Better: And it will peradventure be best of all, to say, that
being ravished by the harmony of the Celestial Spheres, attentive only to the
raising of it self toward them, it forbeares contending, because it would not
give over advancing: nor shall we in so doing attribute more power to the
heavens, then ancient fables did to Orpheus: nor appropriate any other nature
to fire then that which all Philosophers ascribe unto it, namely, of mounting
upwards, especially in its own sphere, where having no need of fuel, it has
no occasion to stoop for food. He that will not grant influences without motion
or light if he will have the heavens several and various motions to serve this
lower world for some other use besides carrying the light about; Let him not
deny them harmony; he that admits of influences, does already grant it. The
Conjunctions, Sextiles, Quadrates, Trines and Opposites will produce it, which
are unisons, thirds, fourths, fifths, and sevenths: And if here beneath a
perfect unison increase the harmony, an imperfect one spoils it; certainly
above, the conjunctions of good are excellent, and of bad ones exceeding evil.
In the heavens a quadrate, and an opposite make a dissonancy, on earth a fourth
and a seventh. Harshness are here corrected with the fifth and third; there the
Sextile and the Trine of benevolent rays, contrary to misfortunes, have force
and power to strengthen.

Alcibiades was very eloq^ent, and his lisping added a kind of grace to his
eloquence, because it was contrary to it. There is greater pleasure in hearing
Beasts speak, though they speak ill, then men though they speak better: The one
overcomes, the other do but follow Nature. Man takes great delight, and (which
I more wonder at) has a great instinct from Nature it self to oppose it. The
delight would be less, the profit greater, if he did it for profit rather than
pleasure. God commanded him to manure the Earth where it was barren, and that
where it brought forth thorns, he should cause bread to grow: The Precept was
to labor, not to take pleasure: but he where he should grow fruitful becomes
barren, and where he should receive the bread of grace, he feeds the thorns of
sin. He feels within himself that instinct of opposing nature. He knows his
happiness consists in the overcomming of it; but equivocating therein, and
either for want of understanding, or through a wilful misunderstanding,
whereas he should strive against his own inward, he opposes the outward
Nature, where he finds Hills he makes Plains, where Plains he raises Hills;
in pleasant places he seeks horrid ones, and brings pleasantness into places of
horror; he seconds that which he ought to withstand, and that which he should
follow he opposes; and when he thinks he triumphs over another nature, his own
nature triumphs over him. This is a Stratagem of the particular nature to set
us at odds with the universal; And that she may remain quiet within, she
causes us to strive abroad. Like to a cunning politic Tyrant, who having a
valiant and fierce Subject within his City, by whom he fears to have violence
or opposition offered him; if he can find no other remedy he sends him into the
field to fight with the Enemy, to the end, that venting his violence and
fantasticalness abroad, he may have plenary power to tyrannize at home at his
pleasure. God is angry with us that we should at the same time reform that
which he himself had framed; and conform our selves to that which we had
deformed. He had (as we may say suffered Solomon to run unpunished while he
gave himself in prey to women, worshipped Idols, loved a figure of flesh,
which would quickly return to dust, better then himself: but no sooner did he
put his hand to levelling of Mountains, but presently he caused rebellions to
be raised against him, and decreed the rending of his Kingdom from him: It
seeming strange to him that man should not be content to follow his own bid
nature, but he must also persecute the good, and to be a King where he should
obey, and instead of a Vassal become a Tyrant. Peradventure also that little
kind of lisping wrought the same effect in Alcihiades, as a small spot does in
a fair face; a remiss style enterlaced amidst lofty Dictates and pithy
Speeches; Not because contraries compared, and placed near one another show
their luster more plainly, but because it gives envy satisfaction, which takes
pleasure in defects; or by reason it takes away that astonishment which instead
of delighting, confounds. I do not say that imperfection can make perfect, that
a defect can increase beauty, and therewith delight. A spot in a beautiful
face, a sentence of remiss style in a flourishing speech, add not grace to a
visage, nor beauty to a dictate, they do not increase delight; they entertain
it, because they extinguish, and then renew it; The continued action of an
Agent increases the effect; he that stands nearest the ^re warmes and dries
himself most. Our natural power is limited to a certain measure. When the
continued presence of the delightful object does exceed, the delight ceases,
and coming to the extreme of what it can contribute, it delights no longer. He
that will renew his pleasure, must begin with pain, and go out of the natural
state to return into it. Let him look upon the spot; Go out into the cold; run
over the remiss and meaner style; Then return to behold the beauty of the face;
to enjoy the sweetness of the heat; admire the beauty of the speech, and
efficacy of the phrase; He that looks upon a fair piece limmed by a Master
workmans expert hand, is much delighted thereby, yet after the first violence
it fails and diminishes; because it is come to the extreme it vanishes. But he
that is admitted to see the admirable working of an excellent Pencill upon a
plain and smooth board, continues sometimes grieved at the framing of an
imperfection, then delighted with seeing it perfected; And all those
proceedings being full of reformed deformities refined, are full of relight
keeping the imagination in continual motion, through the Novelties. A Musician
cannot please better than by erring. He passes through dissonancies, and frames
Pauses, and with the one takes the hearer out of his natural state and with
the other he ends an operation. Then he begins again to sing, goes on in
consonancy, to renew the operation, to return the hearer into his natural
state by delighting him. What do fools and natural idiots in great Noblemens
Palaces? Their imperfection serves to draw the Nobleman out of the natural
state into which wise and understanding men's discourses had brought him, that
he may afterward return unto it with more delight. Finally, it is true that
man desires to find defect, even in those things which are pleasing to him, and
that he rejoices when he has found it; peradventure seeming unto him that he
has gotten command over him that has it, and that he may reap the delight of
pardoning, without f^eling the damage of being offended; Nature also, may be,
sets him in the way to seek it, to bring him through the knowledge of him who
has the defect, to the knowing of him who has none. No sooner does any
delectable object present it self to man, but he turns toward it, intending
to please himself; and finding it (though never so great) uncapeable to
satisfy him, persisting nevertheless in his desire, because he will not
believe it is impossible to be attained, he seeks the reason why he has not
attained it. If he finds the defect he rejoices, it not lying in the
unsatiabilitie of the desire, but in the deficiencie of the object. He hopes to
find one totally perfect, and that when he has found it, he shall be
satisfied. Then because of the deficiencie which he finds in all carthly
things, he raises up himself to believe, that there is a primarie cause
without defect: and finding it not to his satisfaction in this world, he thinks
he shall find it in heaven. And so behold the Creature serves for an
instrument to bring man to seek out the Creator; not only by what is perfect
in it, but also by that which wants perfection. There one may perceive there is
a God, and that the creature is not he: If the creature were totally perfect,
who would deny it Godhead? Flatterers, who have fawned upon it have even
adored it for such; and simple people, who have believed it perfect, have
offered incense to it as Celestial.

Alcibiades was playing in the street with some of his Companions, there
happens a country Fellow to come along with a Cart, which passing by would
spoil their sport. He tries (but in vain) by calling to him to make him stay;
He runs not away cowardly like the rest; He seeks not rashly to stop him by
force. Cunningly he lies down in the high way, forcing him either to stay his
Cart, or to drive it over him. The best instrument to hinder an action, is the
producing of fear; the worst to provoke wrath. If he resists the Country
F^llow, he angers him. By casting himself upon the ground, he affrights him; He
stays him with astonishment, though he cannot do it with curt^sie. Yet
n^twithstanding Alcibiades shows himself in this action rashly ambitious, as
well as cunning. For a small matter he adventures himself in a great danger.
Dangers in such cases are much desired, even as thirst, and itching desires of
the flesh are welcome to those who totally yield up themselves into Bacchus,
and Venus hands, not because they are willing to stay in the tormenting sense
of these passions, but because they will proceed in the pleasure of satisfying
them, which proves greater by the provocation. If upon great commotions depend
great delights; and if fear be the strongest passion that is in man, what
pleasure shall he not find in the passing from dangers to secureness? You will
find wrath, hatred, envy, desire of domination to be most weak passions, if
you compare them with fear. This Chimericall passion is of greater force then
those real ones, if we will believe an eminent Politician. Many and true
provocations (says he) had Otho to adventure himself to obtain the Empire.
Desire of domination, a riot even burdensome to a Prince, Poverty scarce to be
tolerated by a private man, Anger and hatred toward Galba, Envy against Piso.
He feigned but one only of these passions to make him the more to affect it and
that was Fear. What makes Tyranny so pleasing, but the love of danger. Where
it is great, he can desire no more; where it is but small, he increases it;
where there is none, he feigns it. Yet the tragic scene of these men is full
of blood unjustly spilt, sometimes of guilty, sometimes of half guilty, and
sometimes of innocent men. I should say only of innocent, for the greatest
fault that Tyrants punish, deserves the the name of the greatest innocence. But
if if this man be not yet grown so inhumane, as to feign a fear where there is
none; yet he seldom reserves so much humanity as not to grudge and bemoane
himself, because there is none. Tiberius comes into the Senate house, he finds
all the Senators to second his thoughts, and flattter his actions: No body
Contradicts him, no man provokes him, He goes forth angry, and enraged: Calls
them base men, prepared for slavery. He was troubled and molested (says the
Author) with such base servility, he was ashamed (said I) of having caused it:
He was sorry (I now say) that he had lost that fear, which was the Seminary
of his delights Plato and Tacitus also knew peradventure that to be true which
I said, though they did not explain it. They call a Tyrant unhappy; not by
reason of any outward fear, which he with pleasure and delight satisfies by
the death of sometimes one, sometimes another Citizen: But by reason of the
inward fear, which insensibly gnawing his entrails lets him neither find
rest, nor hope for remedy. If the grief and pain of this did not
counterpoise, yea go beyond the pleasure and delight of the other, we should
amongst the Pagans reckon more Tyrants than Princes. There is a Character
imprinted in man's Nature by God, which we call Conscience, to the end that even
who those may fear him who not know him. Contenting himself rather with not
being known, then not feared, to the end that the world should not be lost for
want of fear, nor men arrive to the extreme of wickedness.

Alcibiades becomes Socrates his Scholar. He addicts himself with much fervency
to the learning of Sciences, and with as much eagerness follows vices. He
studied greatness, more then goodness; to counterpoise, not to forgo his
defects; going forwards in acquiring virtue as a means to satisfy his
ambition. Which he cannot attain to by being admired by the lesser number,
namely, the wise; if at the same time he be abhorred by the greater number,
which are the ignorant. He would be like the bad, because many, and because he
would not become an enemy to many, for not being like them. He had his intent
with reproach, whereas he might have had it with commendation, if he had
outwardly habited himself with the vulgars qualities, which are not vices; and
inwardly with wise men's that are virtues. This had joined in him those two so
contrary elements, the wise, and ignorant, in the same manner as the air
linkes the elements of fire and water together. He that will gain a man let him
not be his adversary, or at the least let him not show himself to be so, for
otherwise he will fly him. If he cannot make himself semblable, let him feign
to be so, if he means to be followed. Resemblance is of great virtue, every one
celebrates it, and peradventure none understand it. The like does not attract
the like, because it is the like, but because the similitude is joined with
superiority; otherwise iron might draw iron; and if by virtue of resemblance it
should receive force from the loadstone, it also might do it. He is deceived in
Physic that thinks Rhubarb draws bilious humors, because it has a
resemblance to them. ^he resemblance causes it to find no resistance; but the
superiority draws In Music the unison, which merely resembles is disliked and
rejected as dissonant, and the eight is admitted and approved as harmonious, it
adding nothing to the resemblance but superiority. In policy to be of one and
the same Province, of the same Language, and custom, if there be no
superiority, brings forth a Republic or Commonwealth, if there be a
superiority, it produces a Principality. The Tribe of Judah sees David grown
great, they say he is their brother, and follow him: he was so before, and yet
no man stirred. He that thinks love to grow from resemblance, what reason can
he give for its being seldom enterchangeable (being it should always be so)
unless superiority added unto it persuade the enterchange. This instinct of
similitude, either of suffering ones self to be drawn, or of voluntarily
following superiority, often proceed from a desire of advancing to a greater
perfection, or of preserving that degree which one has received from it, for
which purpose the resembling eminent is held a more fit Instrument then any
other. So the coldness of the earth which is not entire, is preserved by that
of the water, which is ful^y perfect; the humidity of the water, by that of the
air; the heat of the air by that of the fire, and all these by the virtuall
qualities of the heaven, which the inferior ones eminently contain.

Alcibiades invited with other Nobles by Nicetus to sup^er, contemnes the
invitation; He makes himself drunk at home, th^n go^s to his friends house,
takes away the one half of his pla^e, and without any more ado returns to
his own horse. The guests wonder at Alcibiades insolency, and admi^e Nicetus
patience. He answers that he ought to thank him for that part which he had
left him. All troubles have their comforts and many poisons their antidotes. He
that instead of eating the vipers back, eats its head and tail, will not be
cured; he that with an ill look, looks upon trouble. when he might do it
with a good one, will not be comforted. One that were in love as Nicetus was,
with him that causes the trouble, would take an occasion to thank him for it;
and he that has been so, has done it Man does not look upon troubles with a
good countenance, because he contents not himself to come out of trouble at
even hand, by only remaining comforted: He is desirous to gain; sometimes
compassion, and with a female weakness makes moan; sometimes repute and
esteem, and with a manly courage endures it. This last though for the most part
he show a good countenance, and the other see it, yet will he not seem to
others to take notice of it: If any shows it him he is vexed; thinking that by
slighting the occasion he derogates from the greatness of his power. Of these
two ways of passing over troubles the Female is the most common, peradventure
because Pusillanimity is more easy then Fortitude. True it is, that it is a
vice; but in this case the obtaining of the reward, namely compassion, will not
let it seem so. Men had also rather compassionate then admire: with compassion
one benefits a wretched man without any loss, yea, with game, with admiration
he pays an homage due to a great worth, even to his own disgrace. The one is
the daughter of that which the catastrophe in the world uses to bestow; the
other of that which our weakness cannot attain: to the first one goes
voluntarily, to the other he is dragged. The understanding afflicts it self in
the acts of compassion; if there be any delight, it is in the sense. In that of
admiration it rejoices, and the inferior part is afflicted in it. And although
they be both oftentimes ways to take away the tormenting passion of envy: yet
the leaving of it by growing great, or by seeing ones self outgon is every
different It is man's nature to behold with an ill countenance those afflictions
which God sends him, and to make them greater then they are; And with a good
look, those which he procures to himself, and make them less, to avoid shame
and gain compassion. He knows that when they proceed merely from Gods
providence, they are tokens of affection, when from our own imprudency; of
punishment; and to show his love greater, and his wrath lesser, in the one case
he increases, and in the other he lessens it; and always to the loss and
damage of truth. Which truth we ought not to wonder that nature has placed
according to Heraclitus his opinion in a deep well or according to Democritus
in an obscure cave. She did it to employ us all our life time in searching for
it, and when we have found it, we seek after nothing more then how to corrupt
it; Man provokes God by complaining of evil fortune more then he ought, and by
not attributing to him in prosperity, so much as he should. He knows not he
had it before it is gone; and sometimes it goes away because it was not known.
And when with repentance we should call our selves ungrateful: with temerity
giving new offense, we call fortune unstable, and which is worse, we make it
so. Finally man finds such unsavourinesse in the mean and so much acrimony in
the extreme, that ordinarily he draws back most from the first when he has
not arrived unto it, and advances forward most when he is come to it, or gone
beyond it, because he will not stay at it, or because he would still go further
from it: whence comes that the young man shortens his years. the old man
increases them. His domestic and familiar figure (says Quintilian) is
hyperbole, because he is an enemy to truth. But this cannot be, for truth is
the object of man's most noble power, it is not each ones equality, it is
reserved only for the best, that which he sees in this world is sufficient to
move his desire, but because it is not so much as will satisfy it, he is
perplexed. He would have it to be so, but cannot really make it so; he does it
as much as he can with hyperbole: so that he lies, not in hatred, but in
behalf of truth corrupting that which is not his object, to make it become so.

Alcibiades has many Athenian Nobles that make love to him, and offer him
great presents; he contemnes them. A Country fellow falls in love with him,
sells all he has, and presents the money to him. Alcibiades accepts of his
love, and his gift; and with that money makes him presently gain a Talent. He
has reason to make more esteem of the Country Fellows affection, then of the
Nobles. It was greater, and sincerer: He that gives not all he has to the
beloved person, loves him not above all things; he loves that better which he
has reserved for himself. The passions of simple men are plain, those of
Nobles are mixed with ambition: The love of the one is mere love, that of the
other has pride coined with it. The one seeks only to delight himself, the
others to subject also, yea, and more then subject; hautines prevailing in them
above affection, whilst sometimes through jealousy, by the death of the
beloved, they have deprived themselves of delight, because they would not
endure a Companion. They say that love enters not an abject and degenerous
breast, but links it self only to noble hearts. It is true of that part of love
which is pride, the peculiar sin of great ones. Love is a Tyrant, not only
because he tyrannizes over him whom he conquers, but because he also imprints
in in him the Character of tyrannizing. They decline love to be a desire of
enjoying the thing beloved. But it is also a desire to captivate its body and
soul, and to take away free will from it. He that said, Lucifer sinned through
pride, said well. He that said he sinned through excess, though he did not
unfold it well, did not peradventure speak totally ill. The Angel saw God, not
as he is, for then he would have loved him of necessity, and in an ordinary
way, and had not sinned: He loved him voluntarily, and disorderly, and sinned.
For it being made manifest to him, that God would be humanated (as we may say)
and man Goddisied, changing virtue into passion: adding pride to love; to the
desire of enjoying, the desire of tyrannizing; willing to be only alone, or
suffer no equal, he forsook the love of God; Jealous, armed himself with
hatred against mankind, to hinder it, as his rival, from enjoying the clear
sight of the beatificall object.

But how stands Socrates amidst this multitude of lovers? He peradventure
believed that where there was so much beauty, there was also a great
disposition to virtues. I mean not speculative but moral: Even as amongst
Brutes, that which is the fairest, performs best its proper natural
operation; the Lion has most valor, the Greyhound most swiftness; so to the
understanding of many, the fairest man should best perform those operations
which are proper to man; who being a compound of soul and body, his said
operations belong rather to the practical, then to the speculative intellect.
The speculative goes to the knowledge of the first truth, the practick to the
well directing of the operations according to true wisdom: the one shall see
its object only at home, the other can only attain unto it in its way. And how
should Nature give us our end in this world, which though we labor for never
so hard, we cannot attain in it. But in what manner can that saying agree with
Alcibiades actions, who being exceeding beautiful, was notwithstanding
ambitious, dishonest and lascivious? They may say that the Prognostic is not
so infallible in man, who operates by election, as in beasts who work according
to nature: and that you can hardly so know beauty, as to distinguish the
Masculine from the seminine. That which proceeds from the facility which nature
finds in working with the humid* and that which it finds in operating with the
temperate. That which has its influence from Venus, and that which has it
from Sol, and Jupiter: The one is seen to incline the inferior part to
condescend to embracements. The other makes prudent, adds Majesty, and
respect, and brings up the superior part to a chaste desire of heavenly
beauty. The one belongs to the feeling, the other to the mind; The first false,
the other a true mark of a wise mind. If Socrates did consider what Alcibiades
was, he might quickly know from what fountain his beauty was derived. Some one
attributed so much to this beauty, which we term Masculine, and which being
perfect is a sign of a most exquisitely tempered body, that he affirmed, that
if any such were, and once being did endure; it would make the subject thereof
most calm and happy, its senses perfect, its understanding eminent, its
passions moderate, and, without repining, obedient to reason. I never did grant
it any superiority in Sciences, once I condescended to yield it in moral
actions: Now I deny it in all, and will grant it no superiority, but in those
virtues only which serve for the body, the appetitive, the attractive, the
concoctive, the retentive, and the expulsive. To speculation the body is a
burden, and opposes it self to the working of it: The stronger it is, the more
it withstands, and it is strongest, when it is most temperate. In a dry, lean,
withered body, which is almost no body at all, you shall find passions almost
quite extinguished; the understanding in a manner Angelical, a perfect
operation; and most excellent speculation. In brute beasts the case is
different, because the reason is likewise so. They have need of the bodies
assistance, if they will operate well; man needs none but only not to be
hindered by it. In beasts the stronger it is, the more it helps, in men when it
is weakest, it hinders least. But be it how it will* me thinks S^crates did
not deserve much commendations in this manner of arguing. For if from the
beauty of the creature, which is never perfect neither in man nor woman, but in
all frail and fading, we argue concerning the creatures beauty; we shall judge
Fidias and Apelles beauties, far to exc^ed the divine, when we set before our
eyes their statues and pictures, drawn with excellent lines and colou^s* and
of a more lasti^ng substance then our selves. You will s^y these have no soul;
Then we m^st not ascend to the contemplation of God from lineaments and
colors, but from the soul. The body you'^ say is the shadow of the mind and
soul; I deny it, and will always hold internal beauty, which consists in the
miraculous framing and organizing of this bodily fabric, equally composed by
the Almighty in all men to be a more fit, and secure ladder, for man to climb
up with his understanding toward his Creator, than the external; which
differing in each one, consists in three or four lineaments, and a few
colors. I will say that Galen took a better way then Socrates, though each of
them proceeded according to his own art. The one being a Physician, attributed
unto the use of the parts the chief praise for the knowledge of Gods
greatness. The other a Sculptor, forgetting that he was a Philosopher also,
attributed it to the lineaments. The Angel (says a wise man) is the shadow of
God, the soul, the Angels, the body, the souls. And then he wonders, that
seeing neither Go^, nor the Angel busy themselves upon the consideration of
their shadow to their own prejudice; the soul should forget and lose it self
in loving, and following its shadow. But it is not true, because this is not
the true shadow. He had argued much better, if he had gone on by degrees thus.
The Angel is God^s shadow, Man the Angel's, the Beast man's, and Plant^s the
Beasts. Those who fall in love with lineaments and colors, in relation to the
soul, where that is corrupt, frame a true case, more deplorable then the
fabulous tale of Narcissus. He was enamoured of his own shadow, they of
another man's; in one there was a true and real beauty of body* in the other a
false supposed one of the mind. Plato in a place calls Socrates a hunter, as if
he went investigating Gods beauty by means of that of Alcibiades. He knew he
had erred, if that beauty was joined with a deformity of the soul, and to
cover Socrates his defect, he feigned virtue in Alcibiades: bearing greater
affection to his Master, then to truth. He calls him bonae indolis, in whose
life there is nothing constantly to be found, but uncleanness. What then?
Shall we blame Socrates, and tax him with dishonesty? Far be it from us. He
loved Alcibiades, and Alcibiades him with a chaste and sincere love, both drawn
thereunto by the harmonious proportion of defect and superabundancy. Socrates
had a most beautiful mind, a lean, dry, squalid body, bairy, bald and
melancholy. Alcibiades a most beautiful body, a lascivious, dishonest,
intemperate, ambitious mind. The old man with his eyes enjoyed the young ones
beauty; he by the ear participated of the old man's virtue. A wonderful
exchange, more pleasing in Socrates, and more profitable in Alcibiades, and in
both equally honest.

Alcibiades gives Hipponicus a box on the ear, to make sport, and a jest
amongst his companions; yet those which write of Ridiculousnesse, exclude pain
out of it: Peradventure it ought not to be excluded, when the person is more
ridiculous than the act painful, as we daily see it practiced in Jesters: a
box on the ear is sensible in a child, in elder years it does not pain
Nature, because it will not take away the vigor of the punishment, where it
has not given a spirit sensible of resentment, has given a tender flesh to
feel it; and where an obtuse sense of the pain, an apprehensive feeling of the
disgrace. The blow of the box is not so sensible to an old man, as his person
is ridiculous to a young one; there being oftentimes an apparent deformity seen
in them without any apparent pain. Alcibiades could not have m^de a jest of the
blow, nor framed mirth out of it, had he not first drawn it from the person But
if (according to the Philosophers opinion) Compassion be the daughter of Fear,
by reason of that which may in like manner befall us, how can the young man
laugh at the old, and not rather compassionate him. And if seeing a defect in
another which we have not our selves, is a cause of comfort rather than grief
in us: whence grows our pleasure in speaking and hearing others evil spoken
of? And And how ought old men be grieved at the follies they see in young men?
Youth should grieve at the defects of old age, and old men laugh at the
ignorance of youth. But they are not sorry that a young man wants wisdom but
only that he does not know it, and esteem it; because they exceeding in this
noble virtue, the daughter, and only comfort of old Age, they are grieved to
see that Talent despised for which only they can be respected and reverenced.
Young men laugh at old men, because the deformity which they see present, being
greater than the grief, moves their imagination stronglier than the future, on
which oftentimes they do not think, and which they know not whether it will
happen or no; or hope it will be better. What a barbarous thing is a young man?
Let him that will be safe from him, shun him: he walks in unknown ways, and
(I had almost said) like a thing mixed of Man and Beast; the degree of the
mixture is unknown, what he will be, is impenetrable: sometimes they are like
Beasts, because they do not make use of reason; sometimes worse, because they
abuse it. The overmuch heat hinders wisdom in youth, too much coldness
extinguishes it in old age: sometimes it never comes, but man passes from
immaturity to rottenness; and when it does come, it is always late, and lasts
but a little. It is almost the only one amongst sublunary things, which does
not receive the proportion of Periods, a Beginning, a Being, an Increase, and
Declining. Quintilian wonders why all men being made by Nature to be good, few
are such. I (to not wonder at it) do rather consider whence it proceeds, that
the superior, part for the most part, is not so; and whereas it is made to
command, it obeyes. Peradventure the advantage of years is a great cause of
it; in which our sense does with ease tyranny over us, without meeting with any
opposition, or let from the soul, and because they are the first years, it
takes strong root, and being many, it frames a habit. Then comes Reason in, and
finds the Tyrant already in possession, fortified, and rooted: It must fight
against that which he is, and that which he has done: it must subdue the
forces of sense, overcome the resistance of habit, and destroy that Nature to
frame a new one. But why do we not at the first, as soon as we are born,
attain to reason? Peradventure because we would then presently operate without
a guide; and wanting experience, we should precipitate. Learned and wisemen
(induced by a case which happened in our days, and being singular, and almost
monstrous, makes no president) have believed, that a Subject may securely pass
over from speculation to practice without any further experience. I will here
set down my opinion therein, with all due respect and reverence to famous
Writers of great merit. If truth only were the object of our understanding,
and not that also which is like unto it, there would be no error. And if all
things could be demonstrated, there would be no opinions; the deficiency of the
one, and super-abundancy of the other, ruin the world. The understanding
despairing of demonstrating the truth, gives it self over to vanity, and goes
in quest of opinion, and not being able to acquiesce in it, he raises himself
higher, and seeks to stir up admiration through novelty, seeing he cannot
teach and direct with truth. He esteems himself to be a brave man in Sciences
that makes not the clearest, but the hardest argument, which though it does not
convince, yet it overcomes the understanding as if the ones wisdom consisted
in the others ignorance; and truth, which should be the easiest for the
understanding to find, (as the center of ponderous things) is sought out by
difficult and obscure things. How many things are there daily seen, which
because we know not how they are, nor how they are done, do astonish and breed
admiration in us, for nothing else, but only because we take the lof^iest, and
most difficult way to understand what they are, and how performed. And
afterward, if the Artificer do divulge it, we find it to be an easy and
plain way, we acknowledge the error, we cease our admiration, and remain
ashamed.

The like would happen in questions concerning Sciences: if truth were discored
to us, and that God did not hide it from man, showing him this great Fabric of
the World, keeping him still in disputes, not letting him understand it,
because he will mortify him.

The Politic truth of the future, being then ordinarily concealed, how shall
such an understanding find it, which is accustomed to elevate it self above
the matter, to seek extravagant ways, to subtilize, distinguish, invent and
imagine, that if it does not p^netrate into it, it happens because it does not
raise and elevate it self suff^ciently: Then in our case, it finds it self in a
lowly and gross matter, not hard to be attained, because the understanding does
not reach unto it, but because for the most part it goes beyond it. One going
from Sciences, where he is scholar, that follows the opinions of those that
went before him; and he a master that invents, and coming to the politic,
where Experience is Mistress, and he a Master that follows it, shall commit as
many errors, as the things are which he invents, despairing of ever warranting
or assert^ng any thing, if he does not turn from being a Master to be a
Scholar, forsaking speculation, which is an enemy to Experience.

But above all others, he shall seldom prove able in politic affairs, that
is accustomed to interpret the holy Scripture. The difficulty proceeds not
only from the difference of t^mes, God then making for the most part, the
secondary causes obedient to merit: and now letting them oftentimes run in
favor of injustice; but likewise from the difference which is between the
Divine and Humane intellect: the one infinite, the other finite; this an
accident, that a substance. The holy Ghost does not speak a word for one thing
alone, his sense may be interpreted for any thing that is pious; for he means
it all. He gives scope of altering thoughts, interpret and enlarge the old,
invent new, teach with the doctrine, and delight with the variety, without
prejudice of truth. But man does, and says one thing only for it, and and not
always for that which he should do or say.

In what case then shall that man find himself, who comes from interpreting
the Divine meaning, which is so large, and so good, and goes to interpret that
of men, which is always short, and for the most part evil; seeing that in the
one he cannot err, without he digress; and in the other men have often erred,
because they have not digressed. I do not say that discourse is not nec^ssary
for man, I exclude it in speculative Sciences, and admit it in what belongs to
practice; snow to be snow, ought to be white, and so ought a woman to be fair;
and yet notwithstanding if snow were as a woman, it would not be white; and if
a woman were of the color of snow, she would not be fair. And though a great
wise man compared a man that wanted Science, and had Experience, to an Empyrick
Physician, and the learned man to the Methodicall: yet he was deceived in the
comparison; because Sciences have nothing to do with the Policy, whereas
Theorie is necessary for Physic; And if he proves any thing, it is that in
Physic; besides Experience, Discourse is necessary, and judgment much more
than in Sciences: but in practice it is produced, and being produced, is
refined.

To these speculative men there often happens that which befalls many
Theoricall Physicians, who coming to operate, will first try experience,
rather than follow those experiments which have already been made; and
thereupon they begin with killing of patients: yet therein he differs from the
Politician: For the Physician killing many, sometimes learnes how to heal the
rest; but the Politician beginning to kill one, does always almost engage
himself to kill an infinite number, and from overthrowing one piece of State,
to oververthrow all the World: for after he is entered into a way, in which the
subtilty of discourse, always accompanied with acritude did set him, rather
then soundness of judgment, he so ingages himself in it, that he cannot turn
back sometimes without precipitating.

I conclude, that Experience is Mistress of Policy; and because she is
Mistress, the Politician must needs be her Disciple, and consider it before he
practice it: He that at the first thrusts himself upon it, may lose himself
before he gives Experience leave to teach him. In the opinion of wise men,
errors do teach more than any other thing; yet they have one difficulty, they
begin with doing harm, and do not always leave way for a remedy, many
oftentimes losing themselves in the first error which they commit. I grant that
errors do teach, and that they are profitable, but not by being put in
execution, but only thought upon: not running the danger, but gathering the
fruit.

Peradventure the silence which Pythagoras enjoined his scholars, was to this
intent, he would not have them discredit themselves in divulging their errors,
he gave them leave to think on them, but would not suffer them to come upon the
stage, until such time as by those in which they had been silent, they had
learned to not commit them. So the Physician which goes to practice with his
Master, seeing that which is done, and considering what he himself should do,
in the good and the evil which he sees, and in that which he thinks, giving as
it were, Physic in abstracto, in his own fantasy and imagination from that
which he sees others do, without any discredit to his own person; and from
that which he thinks he should do, were it his case, without any damage to
the patient. Sometimes certain, sometimes erring, learnes to be sure without
erring. This advantage have Common-weal^hs above Princes: young men enter into
Magistracies, and like the Pythagoreans they hearken and are silent, they learn
and do not operate, until the instruction and experience of old men have fully
instructed them: with art they supply the defects of Nature, which makes it
impossible for children to operate, by denying them the use of reason; and they
will not suffer young men to operate, because they should not abuse reason. The
first age is not the dangerous age, seeing that being blind, it suffers it
self to be guided, and therefore seldom stumbles: it is the second that is
dangerous, which having its eyes open, sees little, admits no guide and easily
runs headlong

This barbarous action of Alcibiades, troubled the whole City of Athens: in
the Cowardly it moved fear because the like might befall them; in rash men
wrath, as if it had already happened to them; valiant men stomach it; and wise
men were grieved at it. It bred shame in the offenders friends, and hatred in
his that was offended: in Hipponicus a desire of revenge; in Alcibiades,
repentance: He goes to his enemies house, puts himself into his hands,
confesses he has erred, bids him take satisfaction. The offense which he had
committed could not be excused, neither by wrath, for he was not provoked; nor
ignorance, because he knew him: it was folly and contempt; he purged the
contempt with the quality of the act; and the folly with the manner. The free
putting himself into his hands, was the greatest satisfaction that could be
given, being done willingly, not violented by any extrinsecall mover; nor
troubled by any intrinsecall passion of fear; it loses much of its efficacy,
when it is done by compulsion. Alcibiades went not with any fear, but boldly,
without being persuaded thereunto; more careful to regain his lost reputation,
or ambitious to increase it; than just to restore it to him from whom he had
taken it. For the particular, it had been better if he had gone with a
perturbed mind and will; by means of fear, he had showed to have esteemed him
more in the satisfaction, than contemned him with the offense. It was better
for the public that he should go of his own accord, because the repenting of
the action being of its nature evil, he secures and warrants all; but by the
fear of him that is offended, only those who may cause themselves to be feared
as much.

Alcibiades knew he had given the Citizens of Athens occasion to talk of him
in serious matters, and to divert them (says Plutarch) from those to pleasant
ones, he cuts off the tail, ears, and nostrills of a very beautiful dog
which he had. It was not diverting, but deriving, and an ill deriving. The
diversion of a thing is made while the matter flows, and is undertaken on the
contrary side. The derivation is, when it is already flowne, and another new
one succeeds into the evacuated subject. Alcibiades action is of the same
matter as the rest of his actions were, tho not of the same form. It is like,
and not contrary: The fluxion follows, and the subject threatens it self to
be greater, making it self known to be full of fantastical humors. His
intention was not to blot out the remembrance of his old actions, but to renew
it, loving to make himself be talked of, with a report and fame of being
extravagant. The doing of a semblable action, does not cause the former to be
forgotten* but rather calls it to remembrance, if not with more force, yet with
more delight then it would do, if it were the same again; because man
oftentimes shows him self a greater friend to the resemblance, then to the
thing it self, and willingly comes to the knowledge of truth by the means of
falsehood.

From hence proceeds the delight in hearing of Metaphors, seeing of Pictures,
the representations of Mymicks, and Stage Players. What terrible beast, or
displeasing carcass, or horrible Monster can there be, but the picture of it
will be delightful? What man so deformed in bodily parts, and abominable in
those of the soul, but a mymick imitation of him is pleasant* What mutilated,
rough, lisping or stammering tongue and speech, but will be applauded in him
that counterfeits it? And if any one enquire the reason of it, Quintilian would
say it were, because man is an enemy to truth. Aristotle would say it is
because he loves to learn, and when of himself he learnes the thing he has
conceived, he delights therein, as in his own birth, a thing of his own
bringing forth: this delight he attaines to, in imitation, when it is
represented unto him: because thereby he apprehends as it were by
argumentation, the truth of the imitated Idol. I confess the thought is
acute. And I question not but it is applauded. I doubt whether it be because it
is good, or for want of a better. The understanding rejoices not much at any
small thing, obtained with small labor. He intends greater for himself, and
with less delight. Peradventure he takes not so much pleasure in learning, as
in the manner how, which is by the motion passing in an instant from the false
object, to the knowledge of the true one. Hence proceeds the strength and
powerful effect, fetching its original from a knowledge attained unto by
circumstances. Hence comes the smiles at the meeting of a friend: Let Aristotle
say what he will (in mine opinion) that sudden and great change, to which
Hyppocrates ascribes so much delight, namely, from falsehood to truth, and from
the absence to the presence of the beloved object, is that which causes the
rejoicing, which may be proved by this, that if it be foreseen, the rejoicing
is not so great. But since Alcibiades his actions, which were altogether
extraordinary, and we conjecture extravagant, what his inclination was, it will
not be displeasing to search further into it. That Princes and Commonwealths
may beware of such kinds of subjects, which use to usurp the liberty of the
one, and cause the other to lose their dominions. There is great difference
between acting of an extravagancy by election, and doing of it by nature, even
as there is between a horses bound which he is taught by a Rider, and one which
he naturally makes when he is madded. Sometimes it is fitting to have a subject
of great worth come with some extravagancies upon this worlds theater, which
making a noise may draw unto him men's attentions to behold this new beauty: It
serves for a sudden crack or clap to attract men's ears and eyes to the hearing
and beholding of some great matter, which being distracted another way, they
should not peradventure see nor hear. Some actions also seem to be performed
best, when they are done extravagantly (such are the first rewards, and first
punishments) to the end that being deeply rooted in the imagination, they may
leave the love of virtue, and hat^ed of vice, for a long time imprinted
therein; which are the columns upon which stands the Fabric of the world.
Whereupon me thinks that manner of bringing criminal men to their capital
punishment, which they use in some places to be very strange, they carry them
to dye singing with flowers, as it were in triumph, taking (as much as may be)
away the fear, and horror of death from them: Doing thereby great prejudice
to two effects, which are the two maine ends and aims of malefactors
punishments, namely to punish their facts who have offended, and by their
example to terrify others from committing the like: they take almost quite
away the force of the one, and very much sweeten the other. But peradventure
this custom is not so hurtful to Civil Art, as it is favorable to the
Military.

But to return to my purpose; The extravagant action, for the most part,
finds applause, it brings novelty with it, it cheeres the mind, adds vigor to
the body, raises up the understanding with the motion, and sodainnesse, and if
it does not give their Spirits their being, yet it stirs them up to
operation, and the more vehement it is, the greater force it adds to them, as
experience daily shows us in frantic men, and that not without admiration.
How far different is this motion which novelty causes in the spirits, and
produces mirth, from that which is produced by mirth? It is more meek, and
has operation for its end, imagination for its guide, and the understanding
for its means: Whereas the other moultered being vehehement, runs and flies
without stay or guide. I know not whether it be because in grief the spirits
retire to the heart, and in great joys they dilate themselves, that those two
passions produce such effects, as some men are of opinion. Or whether by the
raising, abating, repose, motion, sometimes lost, sometimes unruly. In my
conceit all the damage proceeds from their ceasing to operate: in fear,
because they lose their motions; in joy, because they alter it; in the latter,
the imagination gives them motion, and does not set them a working; in the
former, it takes away both motion and operation. Man dies through grief,
because the motion of the spirits ceases, without which they being unable to
work, and being not fed, e^sily dissolved, by reason of their subtilenesse they
are soon corrupted, What good sind we in weeping? It does not vent our grief,
but it is a sign that the spirits begin to work, and that they have operation
enough to sustain them. A man dies for joy, because in that act, the
imagination in an instant moves all the spirits with a swist motion* and then
losing it self, forsakes them, and gives over setting them to work: whereupon
they being in a most violent motion, and having none to direct, restrain, or
curb them, finding every thing abandoned, fly out and evaporate that way which
they find open and enlarged. Nature seldom gives so strong an affliction or
grief, but that it is accompanied with some small parcel of pleasure. Or any
joy so sincere, but that it has some kind of mixture of distaste: to the end,
that in one part there may be somewhat to excite the spirits, and in the other
to sustain the imaginative faculty: that it may not quite abandon it self to
the overthrowing of the individuum. Even as the heaven works and operates in
this lower world by its motion, and light, so do the spirits in the body. The
world would perish, if it did not receive light and motion from the heavens;
and the body, if it had not the like from the spirits. Finally, extravagant
actions make so much noise amongst People, that the entering into them, though
it be with choice and election, and the prosecuting of them, though in a
fitting and convenient way, brings by the plausibleness of them eminent danger
along to engage man in the persisting in them, though they be evil: And if
this be so in him who operates by election, how will it be in him that operates
by nature. They have hot and subtle spirits, the heat causes them to rise,
and mount the subtileness to penetrate: they have acute speculation, and
surpass others in understanding: their conceits are not common, but oftentimes
monstrous. It is likewise so with the forming power, when it works upon hot and
dry matter; for being carried on by heat it grows up in height so much, that
wanting it afterward to spread abroad, it frames a long, but not great body;
because slenderness takes away the proportion which is needful for a true and
perfect greatness, Heat always puts forwards as much as it can for the
advantage of sublimeness; it never turns back to reflect whereby it endammages
Prudence, which needs some coldness to examine that which dryness has
penetrated, and in case it find it not ordered and settled, may correct,
change, or forsake it. The actions of such an understanding shall always be
great, sometimes good, and sometimes evil: Going always upward, and never
reflecting upon what is past, they will be great by nature, but good by
accident: An exquisite temperature for a speculation which is above us, unfit
for practice amongst our selves, and every way dangerous to introduce erroneous
opinions, which will be very hurtful, if they be put in practice.

Alcibiades being admitted to the government of the commonwealth, ambition
leads him to encounter with Pheaces and Nicias, who were the most powerful,
with an intent to make himself greater.

Because the world should not be idle, Nature has scattered amongst mankind
Emulation and Necessity, Gain and Glory: he that has not these last two can
hardly set forward to action, because the desire of knowing truth which is in
all men, moves them to speculation, before it employes them in operation. True
it is, that to keep the affections of both in a kind of moderation, she took
care that small gain should suffice to satisfy Necessity; and little glory to
overcome Emulation, she making her self the measure of the one, and appointing
Equality to be the measure of the other. When man thrusts on his desires to
immoderate things, he ought not to complain of that nature which made him, but
of that which he himself has made; because that having overcome the Emulator
which she had given him, and being grown up above the state in which he was
borne, he should find rest, and want an object to spur him on any further, if
he did not frame to himself a new one. A desire of little, proceeds from
nature, and from us comes the not being satisfied with much: And seeing she
could not with this Law stay the course of humane ambition, she has broken it
in such manner, that though it go on in infinitun, yet it does it by means of
small and finite objects. Those who from treading upon the dust, have raised
themselves to trample upon thrones, have by the way found many objects; in the
attaining of which they have believed that happiness to consist, which they
have not found even in the last object when they have attained unto it. Verily
it is strange that Man, who in this world, has no object (be it never so
great) which attained unto can content his desire, should think he can content
them with lesser, when he does but contemplate them. The one proceeds from the
natural anxiety of overtopping his Emulator, the other from framing a new one
to our selves in what state soever we be; thence it is, that a new happiness
gives content at the first, until we find in it somewhat to emulate or to
envy, which never failing, the desire likewise of growing greater never fails;
which commonly aiming at ones equal, or him that is next before him, comes one
way to be short, and the other way infinite. I confess, Nature sometimes
brings forth (but very seldom) such magnanimous breasts, who aiming at a
higher degree then that they were born in, do at the very first propose unto
themselves that object, which is highest and furthest from them. So a Soldier
of the meanest condition, fixes upon a Generals place for his scope: and such
motions, though they seem contrary to them which I have spoken of, yet they
are not so: The diversity consists not in the substance, but in the manner,
taking the dead and not the living for objects, and always an equal if not
him that is, yet him that was such: falling into imitation of them, who were of
a mean estate as well as they, and from thence either by valor or virtue were
raised to high degrees. He is unfortunate that is borne thus, unless he become
very happy; For either he lives despairing in a continual affliction, or
rashly casts himself into some manifest danger, being not stayed nor appeased
with that deceitful, yet profitable, hope of an approaching happiness. Heroes
are indeed framed out of such constitutions, if valor be not wanting, or
Fortune averse. There is difference in a Travelers pace, when he sees his
place of rest far off, and when he is close by it. One way must be taken to
attain to a thing, as a medium, and another way to come to it as an end. He
that has attained to it, if he will make use of it for a medium, having aimed
at it as an end, many times quite deprives himself of the use of it. Whence
comes, that many having attained to some reasonable degree of felicity,
striving to rise to an higher, have overthrown themselves quite; for of
necessity changing their end, they must change all; and in changing, it is
easy to come to ruin.

Alcibiades spurred on by ambition, no sooner is admitted to be one of the
Senate, but he strives to become great, and make himself respectfull by
contending with great ones. Power deserves this name, not only because it may
do what it pleases, but also because it may hinder others from doing the like.
The one lightens the heaviest Scepter, and the other makes heavy the lightest
chain. The forbidden thing seems best for this purpose, and it is so, seeing
that the attaining of it frees from the bond which tied the freedom of the
will. Hence it is, that the manner of introducing a law by example, is far
more excellent than the doing of it by punishment or penalty. Hence proceeds,
and has its original, the hatred which Potentates (though they be not
offended by him) bear to him that is greater; and the rage which causes them
to turn the world up-side-downe to overthrow him, under the false precence of
a lost, or endangered Liberty; as if not only the not being free, but also the
possibility of not being so, were slavery.

This n^me is ill understood, and ill used. Slavery it self does not take away
a man's freedom: the wise Servant is freer than the foolish Master. Liberty and
necessity are not inconsistent: An action done through outward violence, though
it be not of free will, seeing he has not power to do the contrary, yet it
may be a free action, seeing that both will and understanding concur therein;
and therefore those shall be free subjects who frame and level both their
understandings and wills to their Lords. From this spring proceeds the great
worth of that man in Gods eye, who endures troubles and sorrows, by reason that
oftentimes a forced and constrained act, which has no merit at all in it,
becomes free and meritorious. And this is (or I am deceived) a better grounded,
and more effectual reason then Seneca's, where he intends to prove, that a
wise man is incapable of becoming a slave; because that working along with the
current which runs with the actions of the understanding and the will, he
always freeth himself, and finds rest in all things. Socrates would not be
defended, his Reason was, because he would dye free, and not forced. But
because men of this constitution, and marked with this Noble Character, are
very rare (by an unknown motion of Nature, which in its actions is a longing
desire and anxiety to preserve the freedom of will) domination is hatred. And
thence it comes, that he who is mightiest, either in City, Senate, or Court,
wounds the eyes of him who comes newly thither with so much force, that it
imprints thereon a dolorous character. If he meets with an unadvised
harebrained man, he openly opposes him, and declares himself to be his enemy:
If with a subtle one, he makes himself his companion, and choaks him under
color of friendship. The one is like the Summer heat, which gently disperseth
the natural heat, with another semblable to it. The other like a Winter cold,
with its contrariety, oppresses it. The first way is hard to begin well, if he
presently gets not the upper hand: the second to end, if he do not attain at
all to it. The operation by way of similitude, finds less resistance, because
it seeks only free passage, and not the ruin. That by contrariety finds a
greater, because it aims only at annihilation: And therefore the water is
easily overcome by the air, and hardly destroyed by fire. Caesar had three
great enemies, Cato totally opposite; Pompey his semblable, and Brutus mixed.
Cato gave him occasion of shame, not of fear; Pompey went near to overthrow
him; Brutus killd him with being semblable to him, but could not overthrow him
by his being different. But if Sylla, Pompey, Caesar, and so many other men of
worth and valor, happily came to be great, by becoming friends to those who
were greater. How can Alcibiades his way be commended, who went about it by
opposing them? Those Romans found the great ones divided, the Athenian agreed
and united. Where there is partiality, or faction, it is best to become a
friend; and an opposite where there is no enemy. It is too hard to sight
against two, or more, if they be opposites; in Physic, Morality, or in
Policy, if two unite against him that sets upon them (which comes ordinarily
to pass) makes the issue of the undertaking impossible.

The want of the chief instrument, namely, discontented persons, makes the
beginning of the enterprise hard. And in such a state of affairs, though you
make some such, yet they do not long last such; because that he who
discontents himself with one, quickly is contented with another. The enmity of
great ones makes a man to be esteemed generous, and is the true way, either to
rise or ruin quickly. It is difficult to enter into it, without losing ones
self in the very first steps, but if thou get but a little way on, thou will
soon have a companion, and find help. Every one applauds thee, because a new
valor causes as much admiration, as a new star does gazing. Envious men
assist him, because they are ashamed to yield; the offended, because they seek
revenge; the discontented, satisfaction; and all in general, because they
unwillingly bow to that great one; and being brought under, they rejoice when
thy find one that will not bow to him. They take heart from the example, and
favor him as one that should free them from sordid slavery and abject
suffering. They are deceived in believing, that if they make him superior,
they can without any resistance, bring him again to an equality. But if they
were not deceived, and did believe they rather change, than take away their
bondage; yet they would assist him. They do not much hate, neither are there so
many discontented at this new valor, because it is more innocent. Envy is not
yet come in, and the change of domination is oftentimes judged to be a kind of
liberty.

The passing of the disease from one part to another in a sick man, gives some
hope of recovery; it shows that Nature is yet strong, and the humor not so
stubborn, or so strongly knit together, but that it may be loosened and
extirpated. For a subject to attain to be the greatest man in the World, in a
City, or in a Court, is not so hard a matter as for one to keep himself so.
He that is growing up, is helped on, he that is grown up, is abandoned, and
left to himself; and every one becomes an enemy to him that is decaying.

It is so easy a matter to cut off a rising power in its beginning, that if
man had not a natural instinct to help him that is growing up, none would
become great: And it is so hard to bring down him that is gotten up, that if
nature did not likewise incline man to destroy him, greatness would still
remain in the same place. In augmentations men are never quiet, until they
have brought the Subject to the highest pitch: when they have brought him
thither, they never rest till they see him decline: And when he is declining,
until they have ruined him. Actions which are done in favor of him that
rises, in hatred of him that is risen, in damage of him that is falling,
though they be never so well measured by understanding Politicians, yet nature
makes them exorbitant, and without measure. Let the Pilot be never so skillful,
the current of this instinct does insensibly take off his hand, and in the end
of his voyage brings him quite to another place then that whither he intended
to come ashore. The Heaven which is an universal cause; Nature which is
fruitful, Necessity which binds, Practice which teaches, Example which
persuades, men which encourage, Envy which provokes, frame a contrary to him.

If the heaven become particular, Nature barren, the bond suffer violence,
swiftness give not time to Practice, difference leave no place for example,
nor superiority for envy; either he stays, or he changes himself, or dies,
stayed, changed and killed by reserving nature. God will not have us to enjoy
so much happiness as we should if the world were all one man's: For men's
sins it is he suffers so many Princes, and Commonwealths upon earth.

It begun when one alone commanded it, and will end when it arrives again
where it begun. And therefore it necessary, that he should lose him self that
aims at an universal Monarchy; either because he cannot attain it, and so he
shall lose himself alone; or together with the world after he has attained to
it.

The Emulators, and Enviors of Alcibiades and Nicias greatness, not knowing
the hurt they did the Commonwealth, desiring by Ostracisme, to banish one of
them out of the City, which was manifestly to give it in prey to the other who
remained, made choice for the setting forward of this business of one
Hyperbolus, a man so full of infamy, that he felt it not, being so covered over
with it, that he had no sound part left him by which he might judge of it.

Such was Alcibiades his circumspectnesse and vigilance that he turned the
Ostracisme upon Hyperbolus himself. The people were ashamed that the
Ostracisme should fall upon so infamous a person: being a punishment which made
a man sufferable, and almost to be desired: its reward being to be thereby
declared the best man, and therefore after that time it was no more used, and
it was very fitting, that law which had begun with the best should end with the
worst.

Excellency or perfect goodness, seems to be an unfortunate thing. In
Physic Galen says, it is not to be found. Hyppocrates if he grant any such
thing, does presently again disallow it In policy they will not admit of it
amongst forms of state, unless it be transitorily. A Common wealth banisheth
any thing that resembles it; a Tyrant kills it. In humane actions they call it
an enemy to goodness; nature is sometimes blamed as ignorant, because it
cannot reach to the making of it up: and sometimes they accuse it as envious,
because after it has begun it, it cuts it off green. If it belonged to the
body, Arithmetically there were no place to receive it. If Geometrically, no
air whereby it might breath no food to feed upon without offending it. If it
belong to the mind, it must of necessity be excluded out of the Commonwealth.
The excellent and perfect one is not yet come upon earth; and he cannot be a
fitting Citizen of any other; therefore it must either grant him the command
over all, or kill him. When the perfect one came into the world and was borne
amongst us, he would not accept of the first, because his kingdom was not of
this world; and he came for the latter: Scarce was he borne, but the Tyrant
seeks to slay him. Scarce is he known, but the Tribes cry him up King; and
the rulers crucify him. Man is borne to iniquity, says Eliphaz, the Temanite,
and this does not proceed says he from the dust, from which spring the senses,
for then beasts also would be wicked. Not from the soul governesse and guide
of the body, say I, for then the infant, and the mad man would sin. But from
that which moves the understanding and the will, by St Paul called Spirit, by
the Philosophers Mind, and by us commonly Reason. The child because he wants
it, receives by that defect more securenesse then Man. The mad man because he
has lost it, has an advantage above the wise man. The one cannot sin, the
other can not choose but sin. To be great in heaven, we must become as the
little ones of the earth; to be wise, we must become fools; yet with this
difference, that where they do not sin through defect, we should not sin
thorough virtue: and where they do not undeserve wanting the use of reason,
we should merit in rightly using it. This food, this heavenly Nectar, if it
meets with a clear and resplendent mind, does seed, and elevate it
wonderfully, if an impure, and troubled one, it does above measure offend and
depresse it. He which is best, be it either in the species, or in the
individuum, if once he begin to be bad, becomes the worst. Angels are worse
then Men, Men worse then Beasts. Amongst Angels, he that was the greatest,
amongst men, he that is the best; the best and most excellent is only contrary
to the worst, and the best only can attain to be wor^t. This possibility was
the guilding which the inventers of the Ostracisme gave malice. They covered
the vice of envy, with the virtue of providence. But it is not a virtue when it
is overmuch, it is a vice, and the less it resembles it, the more it is such.
It shows ill in Gods sight, as if man did put his whole confidence in himself,
and none in him. Of this Tyrants are framed; For this wars arise, and with
this the world is pulled off of the hinges. How many men are dead, by
preventing future things, and by physicking themselves with prevention? How
many Cities, Provinces, and Kingdoms have lost themselves to prevent a future
thing, which was not, nor would not have been. I would liken over much
Providence, to the Judiciary, but that is more harmfull, more rash, more
uncertain: and worse; because it cannot be hindered. Thou shall indeed find
some that have bin killed by a Tyrant, by reason of what the Astrologers
advised, and the stars threatened him. Other some that have undertaken great,
and new things, persuaded thereunto by the happy influences of their births.
These are but some, but their number is infinite whom providence has caused to
be killed or spurred on to new businesses. Both go on in divining future
things. But providence is the rashest, because it draws the principal out of
it self, and the other seeks it in the stars, where he thinks the Creator
has placed it. They are both false, Astrology less false, because it makes
use of celestial things. Providence more false, because it is grounded upon
terrestrial. God is not pleased with man who remits all things to him; and is
displeased when he remits nothing at all to him. Seldom will he operate
without man, and never likes that man should operate without him. The one is
tempting of God by obliging him; The other is a provoking of him by refusing to
be obliged to him. This most vile Law was ordained, by Ignorance and Malignity,
the Nobles, the People, Ambition, Jealousy, Envy, and Fear. The People seek
after security, the Nobles after honor, and both with their private passions
overthrow the public weal. A subject of great worth is ever hateful to his
equals, but not always distrusted by his inferiors. If it were possible for
him to free himself from envy, he might easily free others from fear. The
People love him, and exalt him while they believe he may profit or at least not
endammage their security. The Noble always hates him, because he is always a
hinderance to his honor, and being ashamed to show his envy so naked and
plain, he clothes and covers it with fear, to imprint likewise in the Peoples
hearts this his dissembled and feigned character. It is not withstanding a
fear in both of them, though it be not a vice in both; in great ones it is a
fear of not losing their glory, in the mean ones their liberty. And if the
People be permitted to oppose him who takes away their liberty, why should the
Noble be denied the opposing of him that takes away his glory? Peradventure it
is because the one is assayed directly, the other reslectively. Liberty cannot
be defended, but only by directly opposing him that seeks to intrappe it;
Glory may be maintained by getting before him, who diminishes it. The way to
great actions would be lost, or they which attempt them would lose themselves
without attaning to them, if the opposing ones self to him that tramples upon
him did not not bring blame and infamy along with it, and the surmounting of
him praise and honor. Envy which reigned in us, one part of the world more
than in Greece, sometimes banishing worthy and eminent, subjects sometimes
hindering them from attaining to their aims, suffered not that noble and
excellent Country to obtain any great conquests, whereas the Roman
Commonwealth in a small time attained to the universal Monarchy. The Grecian
valor was great, but inferior to the Italian; the Italian wits were eminent,
but not equal to the Grecian. In the one the brain was greater then the
heart; in the others the heart greater then the brain. Where the understanding
surmounts valor, there is most envy, where valor outgoes the understanding,
most emulation.

The one vilified seeks by subtilty to bring down him that is grown up above
him; the other encouraged by valor seeks to overcome and surmount him. Envy
(says Aristotle) grows from the sir^ilitude; I say moreover, that it grows
like a plant from its seed, and as man from humane seed. The semblable causes
great delight, and is not parted from without much, distaste, unless it be
done willingly to inc^ease, or at least not to diminish it, which will be when
it happens to decrease, if not really, yet in conceit. The first effect that it
produces, meeting with a breast not quite opposite to virtue, is Emulation,
which pricks on the desire to go forward. Not to get away from him who is
gone beyond him that which he has gotten, but to attain himself to the
getting of the same. If he does not attain to it, he oftentimes proceeds to a
desire to have the other want it, and then the emulation becomes envy, which if
it remain in him, in a short time provokes him to wrest it from him, and
turns to rage and hatred.

And this is a vice, proper, and peculiar to man's nature; Horses and Mules to
which are likened the worst of men are not subject to it; nor the good Angels,
to whom the best and most excellent men come near, no nor the Devil himself,
who amongst all bad ones is the worst. It is much that one degree only which
distinguishes us from our equal, by reason of his, or our own advancing,
should move the passions of joy or grief with so much violence, and that many
degrees, when they carry our superior far up above us, or raise our inferior
after us, do not produce the same effect. Peradventure these, though they
increase, yet they do not go out of the latitude of the Sphere. The
difference is in the more, or less: The motion is an alteration, but an equal
cannot move to step forward, but presently and in an instant he becomes a
superior.

He makes no motion, but it is general, no difference but specificall. If
motion be the cause of joy and grief, and the greatest and most sudden
motion causes the greatest; how should the growing at distance, and advancing
from equality, seeing it must be a sudaine act for defect of latitude, and
great, by reason of the alteration of the species, but produce Joy and Grief
in an eminent degree?

This law was defective in the manner of putting it in execution, it was by the
peoples particular votes, not disgested or considered upon by conference: Every
one in particular sent Hyperbolus into exile; All joined together were ashamed
of it: It was not the whole commonalty that exiled him; yet was it they who
blamed the exiling of him. The whole, to be more then the parts, requires an
union; if that fails, it will not take effect, if it divides, it corrupts. It
loses its name, and also its virtue. The voice of this community united is
called Gods voice, of each one in particular is like the devils. Pliny
wonders that such a joined multitude should daunt an Orator, who would speak
boldly to any of those men particularly. And why does he not also marvel,
that a bundell of rods cannot be bent nor bowed, and each several rod may with
ease be broken to pieces.

Strength is a virtue of union, most manifest in the peoples unity, which
resembles the Divine; where it goes with violence to overcome, it breaks and
shivers whatsoever opposes it; when it is bent to judge, it strikes terror;
when united together, it powers forth prayers; it forces (I had almost said)
the very heavens. Man is affrighted, astonished, trembles, and loses himself
in the presence of the object which he loves, at the Kings feet to whom he
bows, at the sight of the people to whom he speaks: not for any thing that he
sees which is humane, but for that is represented to him which is Divine: he
discovers in his beloved a beam of Divine beauty, in the Assembly of the
people, Divine unity; in the Kings greatness, Divine Majesty and Ompotency.

From this manner of voting likewise proceeded that dangerous error of little
Secrecy: They showed the blow before they struck, whereas that should have
preceded swifter than a Thunderbolt, not only the noise, but even the flash.
It is too dangerous to startle and affright a subject whom we may have cause
to fear. The interessed party, be they never so wise and cautelous, stands
always vigilant and attentive to the damage which may befall him.

If too much care be the daughter of Suspicion it is the enemy of Truth: It
troubles the imagination; and this being troubled, though it does not make that
to be, which is not, yet it makes it seem to be so And what man is so
circumspect, that in the passing of months (I will not say of years) can be
so wary in his actions, as that none of them shall give an extreme watchful
man some cause to doubt or mistrust?

The next degree to watchfulness, is Suspicion and mistrust: it would be far
better if it were to trust and belief; He that trusts, is bound presently to
secure himself of the subject. And because he gives him not time to move if he
is a traitor, or to become one, if he be not so, he commonly attaines very well
and hapily to what he intends.

He that mistrusts before he can resolve himself, endeavors to find the
truth; and let him go about it as warily as he can, when he comes to use the
means, he discovers his intention, the subject that perceives it, presently
finding himself lost, if he has not a truly Christian breast, or is not a
most subtle Moral Philosopher, who to avoid the stain of finne, or note of
infamy, will rather than become guilty, expose himself to the danger of dying
innocent, will hold it a kind of pusillanimity not to die guilty. And if he be
a Traitor, he will at that very instant discover himself; if faithful, he will
become treacherous. The former has the greatest advantage, who has the means
already prepared, and presently comes to a trial, finding the other
unprovided, wavering, and doubtful, between credulity and distrust: Whereas
the other taken upon a sudden, unprovided of means, and wanting time, which he
cannot take, unless he likewise give it the other, is often oppressed before
he be prepared, in preparing himself, or at least ill prepared.

To take away and banish one only, was not not a right Cure, it rather
increased the Disease. To take away that humor out of the Body, which is not
offensive, and leave that which is offensive, is (according to understanding
Physicians) one of the chief causes of malignant Fevers. If a Subject in a
City, exalt himself above the rest, what can be done better, then to give
him an opposite? And what worse than to remove him from him? If he does not
frame himself, or Nature give him one, let Art bring him in one. The
Ostracisme banishing one only, did let the other loose, made him Lord of the
City, and gave him opportunity to become a Tyrant.

Two great disasters (according to Astrology) make one good Fortune. Physicians
do not take away the Bilis, or Choler, where they fear the Dropsy, nor the
Pituita, or Flegm^, where they fear a Plethora. Contraries mingled, do not
hurt the Body, which they overthrow being divided. Whilst Caesar and Pompey
both remained in Rome, the Commonwealth did not perish: The ones going out,
and the others remaining within, ruined it.

To take away the best, was as much as to let the worst loose. In this
Aristotle himself was puzzled, he would not likewise have him to remain in
the City, where he cannot place him but as King. He sends him into the Woods,
he compares him to Jove, he would not have man worthy to be his Companion, and
yet he makes him a companion of wild beasts. He was peradventure deceived: In
describing an excellent man, he seems to attribute unto him the worst of
vices. If he be ambitious, or foolish, he is not excellent: if he be wise
and modest, he will shun and refuse, not affect the Scepter; he will subject
himself to the Laws, as if he had need of them; to Magistrates, as inferior
to them, to obedience, as if he were not borne to command. It is contradictory
to do ill, and be excellent. The instance which Aristotle gives of a voice
exceeding the rest in a quire of Music, if he does not take away discretion
from him that has it, the voice will not take away the harmony from the rest.
That of one member bigger then another, has nothing to do with goodness, but
with Monstruosity, it is as far from Excellency in goodness, as it is near
exceeding badnesse. He that gave the humors of the body for an example, where
if one exceeds the rest, though it be a good one, yet it diseases the body; he
mistook the greatest for the best, and took the humors for the natural heat,
which be it never so great, does not burn nor consume, but foment, preserve,
and vivifie. He were but a very ignorant Physician that would expel it, and so
is he a Politician, that will banish the best out of a City. Some cannot suffer
the best, nor endure the worst. They fear one for their own sake, the oother
for the Commonwealth's; They envy the former, and are ashamed of the latter.
They seek after indifferent subjects, which may not dishonor the Public,
nor put them in danger: and this they cannot attain unto, because nature
produces but few such, and taking away the best, they raise up a worst, as out
of a mixed, if the predomin ant be taken away. The Cretans proved it, they no
sooner had banished the best, but they found themselves in the hands of the
worst. What is the driving of a great man out of the City, but adding the
adherence of strangers, to the applause which he has gained amongst the
Citizens. Caesar would not give Senators leave to travel long out of Italy,
when they were once above twenty years of age. Augustus not out of Rome:
Tyberius kept them also within the City, whom he had chosen for Governors of
Provinces.

Politic Writers have blamed the letting of a subject grow great in the City,
more than the banishing, of him when he was grown so. Aristotle desires a
remedy from the Laws, others seek it from Art. They keep them idle who have
any sign of great worth: they transplant those who have gained great
reputation in one place, into another. If riches gained it him, they cause him
to spend them; if valor in wars, they call him home to the City; if he be
reputed of great understanding, or rashly valiant, they employ the one in
affairs which may overthrow him, and expose the other to dangers, in which he
may hazard the loss of himself; If he attained thereunto by being officious,
and serviceable, they deny him those boones and favors which he asks. And
generally upon the least occasion, they punish them all most severely. But all
this has more outward show than safety. There is neither Law nor Art can
hinder the rising off him, whom Nature does, even from his birth, accompany
with such beams of happiness, that either he finds no resistance, or forces
his way through, wheresoever he meets with it; good things prove excellent to
him, and he can turn bad into good. All kind of food serves him for
nourishment, and each poison is a remedy to him. These kind of balls, the
harder they are dashed against the ground, they higher the bownd up toward
heaven. Herod the great, by Hireanus his first persecuter of him, got the
Tetrarchy; by the second, the Principality; by the third, he made himself Lord
of his own native Country, by the assistance of the Romans. Occasions
oftentimes will not permit them to be kept idle. If the tumults of Naples had
gone forward, the Spaniards had determined to send the great Captain thither
again.

The business of Portugal would not suffer the Duke of Alva to be idle, though
he were in prison. And the wars of Germany forced the Militia to be returned
in Waldestein's hands. Transplanting; and changing of place, gives way for the
gaining of new reputation, and does not diminish the old. It had not a veiled
Tiberius to have transplanted Germanicus out of the North into the East, if his
death had not helped him. By great expenses a man, for the most part, gains
applause; want of money, does not endammage a subject that is in credit, and
few great ones have lost themselves thereby. Caesar's friends were deceived
therein: for he then became Lord of the Commonwealth, when they thought his
debts would have ruined him.

To call one home from an army to the City, is as much as to add the peoples
favor to that of the Soldiers. Domitian finding he was not thereby able to
deal with Agricola, was constrained to make use of poison; and Tiberius met
with a Subject that would not part from it. To put them upon businesses in
which they may lose their credit, or endanger the losing of their lives, is a
matter full of hazard and adventure. Wise men will come off in their affairs
well enough, howsoever the businesses prosper, and valiant men for the most
part overcome dangers be they never so great; building their greatness, where
others had prepared a precipice for them: It so happened to Saul with David,
and to Seleucus with Iugurth. To deny them those boons and favors which they
crave, and oppress their friends, moves them to indignation, and does not
abate their power. The Prince of Orange, and the Duke of Ariscot, have
testified that sufficiently. Tiberius increased the peoples love to Germanicus,
more by persecuting him, than if he had cherished him. If it fell out well with
Agesilaus, touching Lysander, it was because the goodness of the Subject
helped him. To punish, and not utterly extingu^sh great ones, is a great error
in policy: small errors in them, ought to be connived at, and great faults
punished with death. There is no medium to be used toward such, between
cherishing and killing, If Astiages in stead of killing Arpagus son, had put
the father to death, he had not lost his Kingdom. And if if Craesus had taken
away Demetrius his life, when he put out his eyes, he had not lost himself. Let
it be as it will, certainly it is barbarous and inhuman in Comon-wealths and
Princes, to make laws to hinder such as undertake actions worthy of everlasting
fame, and a glorious memory, that are valorous and virtuous, both in being and
acting, when they should rather enact such, as might encourage men thereunto.
He that invented this most wicked Law of Ostracisme, was an enemy to God, Man,
and Nature, and a ruiner of all good Laws.

It a^mes not so much at destroying of tyranny* as at the exercising of it with
security, whether it be in Prince, Nobles, or People, taking away honorable and
regardfull subjects, whose valor and worth are the Sanctuary to which wronged
subjects fly, and whose presence is the only curb to make Princes and
Senators ashamed of committing wickedness. There never was any Commonwealth
more abounding in worthy men than that of Rome, while i^ slourished; nor that
made better use of them than it did while it stood uncorrupted. The people did
with extraordinary applause, honor a Citizens great virtue, and punished with
most severe justice, the defects of the same man, if he chanced to alter his
nature. When they perceived Melius to aspire to tyranny, Manlius to attempt it,
and Appius Claudius to have already attained it, it did not help Melius, hat he
had freed them from famine, Manlius, that he had vindicated them from ssavery,
nor Appius, that he had been popular: But they threw two of them down
headlong from the Tarpeian Rock, and conspired the death of the other.

In the good time of the Commonwealth, eminent virtue was much esteemed, and
not feared; because that as soon as it aimed at sinister ends, it lost
together with its name, both favor and applause. And whereas it was reverenced
whilst it was sincere, when once it came to be counterfeit, it was condemned.
The greatest dangers it ran it self into, was, not for having kept their best
Citizens amongst them, but exiled them: As when Coriolanus came to conquer
Rome, and Furius Camillus was not there to defend it.

Let Commonwealths be so framed, that all the parts thereof may be contented;
and let Princes rule their Subjects with a Fatherly affection, that no desire
of change may grow up; and in so doing, they both may cherish and prefer
subjects of great worth. They shall enjoy their virtue, while it is upright,
without fear; because it will be easy to chastise and punish it, if once it
grow corrupted.

Alcibiades, to make use of his Talent, and satisfy his unlimited ambition,
and desire of glory, hinders the Athenians peace, and goes to War with the
Laacedemonians, puts his native Country in hazard, and brings it to a
precioice. Some subjects are born in Cities, with most excellent inclinations
and endowments. Amongst those that want them, as well as amongst those that are
full of them, some know it, and some are ignorant of it. One that is good for
nothing, and knows he is so, does no hurt, because he will not adventure
himself; neither could he do any great hurt, if he did not know himself, so he
were known; for then he would not be put to any trial. Indeed, if he be not
known, there may be some danger in him, yet if he does not overthrow the
Commonwealth, or the Prince, upon his first trial, before a second they will
be undeceived, and know what he is. He that has excellent parts, and knows not
of it, is the better: and he that has them and knows it, oftentimes proves
the worst. And the later is like a medicine, which finding no excreme^ts to
expel, and break its force, joins with the humors, and finding noithng to
heal, corrupts the former. The former is like Nature, which shows not her
greatest force, but upon greatest occasions. One like flame set to wood, having
taken power by the matter, bold and confident, shows out his form. The other
unseen, like fire hidden in a stone, wants the collision of occasion, to
manifest and disclose it. The one ambitious and proud, to pass on a potentia
ad actum, hunts after occasions, many times he takes them great, and sometimes
they present themselves so, sometimes they become so although they were once
but mean, whereby he loses himself, and often times brings the ruin ofthe
State al^ng with his own. The other being humble seeks not after them, and if
they join with him, they draw forth his good parts by the power of the matter.

He is the securer by so much, as there is difference between the taking and
seeking after occasions. The one raises himself with the greatness of
affairs, the other is depressed: one endangers the State, the other draws it
out of dangers. He that does not know his own worth, dies unfortunate, if
occasions do not seek and find him out: sois he that knows it, if he does not
find them. In States that have no occasions, it were good there were no such
men; or if there be, that they would not grow ambitious. The soil which brings
forth such trees, if it have not room wherein they may spread abroad their
branches, must seek and get some: so must leave a way open for violence and
^ury to vent it self at. For if they find no way, they will make one; and
there is a great deal of difference between a way rent open by ambition, and
one framed with prudency. If a hammer works out a door, way, or passage in a
wall, it does it with design and intent. A piece of Ordnance shakes, and
oftentimes throws the Wall down, but will never make a regular overture.
Nature spoke to Scipio Nasica, obscurelv; It showed him that it was not good to
destroy Carthage; he understood the thing, but not the sense and meaning of
it: He thought Rome would have need of it, to keep Emulation and Fear alive
in the Romans breasts, that they might not lose themselves in idleness and
carelessness. But it did want it indeed, because occasions of employment should
not be wanting to the proudest and ablest Nation in the Universe, whose desire
of glory was unlimited, and had no stay for its unbridled valor. And because
these occasions were not wanting for a great while after (whatsoever Nasica
prognosticated) the Roman Comon-wealth, survives long after the ruining of
Carthage.

Spain wants not ambitious Subjects of great excellency, and of most able
valor; but it thrives by them, because it abounds in occasions, sometimes by
Sea, sometimes by Land; being by reason of the large extent of its Dominions,
always envied, feared, and assaulted.

France, while it wanted this good fortune of having occasions proffered it,
and yet abounded in such subjects, was forced to disquiet and trouble it self,
or others. But it is far better to recommend the cure of such a plague to the
Laws, which are always alive, than to divert it with occasions, which fail
either soon or late in every Dominion, be it never so great and large.

The desire of worldly glory, is wise men's madness, and the fools wisdom, and
beguiles all. It is an excrement, but beneficial; a Mercury, which laid upon
the breast, without doing any hurt, defends it from the most pestiferous
qualities with its own venomous one. The asylum, and last refuge of Reason,
which being to the uttermost weakened and tired by opposing the senses, has its
recourse thither, to avoids its utter destruction. A virtue, which leaving its
mildness and sweetness, and becoming sour, turns to vinegar, rather dead
than corrupted.

If Reason fights against it, it is in a fair combat; if it be conquered, it
saves its life, though it be taken prisoner. It troubles man, and he troubles
the world if he finds it quiet; and if he finds it troubled, he suffers it not
to perish. Nature has environed Glory with a hedge composed of most sharp
thorns of troubles, full of grief and tormenting labors, to hinder man with
the difficulty, from that which he could not persuade him to with reason. And
not content therewith, because he should not set upon it, she taught him, that
it might be obtained by slighting and contemning it. But desire of this glory
being once possessed of man, makes him seem to be no more flesh and blood, but
turned all into spirit. He encounters with heat and cold, hunger and thirst,
fire, sword, and bullets, and even death it self, to not die and live glorious
in men's memories; and still when he attains to it, he remains rather
undeceived than satisfied.

True it is, that hereby the superior part shows its odds and and advantage,
whereby it surmounts the senses: and drawing such an one out of darkness, like
a lamp of true Glory, shows how small the relish of the senses is in objects,
in comparison of that which a glorified understanding extends, and communicates
unto them. But what seeks man with this longing desire of worldly glory, but
divine glory, by an erroneous and false way? In stead of placing it in the
seeking out of Gods Truth, Goodness and Bounty, he places it in the emulation
of a great one.

This is not following him that calls us, it is treading of our enemies
footsteps; it is renouncing the being GODS true Issue, and transforming our
selves into the Devils adopted children.

It is corrupting the best desire that Nature has given us, to bring in the
worst instead of it. It was the vanity of the first ambitious Creature, who
instead of turning toward the Divine Essence, to contemplate it, turned
toward its greatness, to go beyond it; and being troubled, (as ambitious
creatures use to be) on the one side with passion, and on the other side a
little perspicuous by his knowledge; finding by the one, that he could not set
his Throne above the stars, and obtain superiority in heaven, he suffered
himself to be drawn another way, and set it on the side of the North, to
attain to it on earth. But God to turn man away from following such perverse
footsteps, abased Worldly Glory, and greatness: to make even the most humble
upon the Earth, the greatest in Heaven, and the most despised, the most
glorious.

Socrates in a Battle saved Alcibiades life: A little while after Alcibiades
saves his. Man is the most mutable of all Creatures, because being composed of
most mixts, has most things in him to change. He has virtue from Nature, but
that passes not the first brunt, nor yet comes to it, if it be preocupated.
He that blames the rendering of benefits as soon as they are received, makes
the way to Ingratitude easy.

It is temerity to delay or hinder Nature when it operates well, hoping to do
a better cure with the ignorance of Art. There would not be so many ungrateful
men, if they had not time to become ungrateful. Few are virtuous by habit, and
few but are so in a kind of Fit, and upon a sudden.

To take away from this all the praise, is not peradventure warrantable, if it
be not a habitual, it is a natural virtue, if it be not greater, yet it is
more general: it is good al^o, if not better, it is greater, more vehement
then regulated. He that does a good turn is so affectionate in the doing of
it, that he would do more, and if occasion served, he would multiply it: He
that receives it is so tender, that if he could in that instant, he would
render it greater. The heat being past, the first always increases the
account, thesecond diminishes it.

The one does not pay it wholly, the other does not cancel it, though it be
paid. He that did know these vehemencies, would also take notice of the
motions, and sometimes he does; but because discourse must pr^ceed to attain
to it, it is not attained because the motions are past. The wise man's worth
consists not so much in knowing the time, as it does in foreseeing it, because
that the passage from knowledge to operation, which requires time, puts him
beside the time.

The People construed Alcibiades vices to be virtues, sometimes the resemblance
caused them to err and believe them to be such, because they themselves were
likewise such, and did err therein. All that is done conformable to its
Genius, it applaudes, and whatsoever is contrary, be it good or evil, it
likewise abhorres. Love also on the other side did deceive them, a passion
which makes a thing seem what it is not, and much more does ignorance do it,
which makes one indeed to believe it. The People want the true measure of
virtue, which, is mediocrity, and they do not penetrate into the substance
which is to operate according to right reason: they are not informed of the
circumstances, how much, when, and how.

They make use of excess for a measure, of quantity alone for a circumstance;
of the matter, for the essence, and judge the greatest action to be best;
Hence it is, that the rash and foolehardy man is rather applauded then the
valiant, the prodigal rather then the liberal. The little difference that is
between virtue and vice has also a share in this mistake, where vice is
accompanied with ambition; because, that though the subject suffer himself to
be hurried away by the senses, to vices, ye he so carrries himself therein,
that amongst the vices now and then shines forth some act (not through virtue,
but through vehemence) sometimes of liberality, sometimes of magnanimity,
sometimes of fortitude, sometimes of affability.

And sometimes also in the midst of incontinency (a thing which seems very
strange, and yet is true) he shows signs of great continency. The root is
not really in virtue, as if it were not yet utterly extinguished; it is in the
embers of it, heated by the vice of ambition.

A great virtue is a special means to have a great vice born withal, and
pardoned, like to a glance of light which it brings along with it, and with the
splendour makes the judgment to e^re: there can be no eminent understanding
without some parcel of folly. It is set down by wise men for an infallible
axiom. The reason of it is not easily given. There be understandings which
seem to be great, and are rather unbrideled and wild ones. They draw men away
before they can follow them. They run and in a manner fly, moved by a heat,
which does not only warm, but inflame and set them on fire: the Carrier is
swift. It is a horse which runs loose, and has not wisdom sitting upon him
to govern and guide him.

This kind of understanding is peradventure one of those which Seneca calls
uncontinent, and which St Paul desires might be sober: Attributes which seem
metaphorical, and are most proper; because that manner of speculation, is a
note of the manner of operating, seeing that the same heat which let loose the
reins, to the higher part, sets the lower also at liberty. And as the
unbrideled understanding, goes where it ought not to go, so the senses set at
liberty, run whither they will.

Men who clearly see the defects of the inferior part, and in the superior can
discern nothing but what is great, they judge that subject to abound in many
virtues, and many vices, when that is also a vice in him, which seems not to
be so. Other understandings there be, which are so attentive and fixed upon
speculation, that being wholly set upon it, dividing in a manner the soul from
the body, raise themselves with the former, and grow careless os the latter;
and whilst they endeavor to show the greater part to be man, they discover
the other to be beast. To this ancient Poets had a relation, when they
represented Satyrs, their upper parts like men, and the lower like goats;
Whilst the understanding is busy in speculation, the senses run and skip
about like goats, having none to direct or rule them.

Mean understandings do not raise themselves so high as to make such a
division and whereas the other are men, and beasts, these are men-beasts: and
if they do not attain to be such eminent subjects, they do not likewise come
to be such great beasts. Behold whence proceeds the inequality of eminent
understandings, because that, according to Plato, they have a parcel of
madness in them. Alcibiades was one of the first sort, and so was almost all
the Heroes, Diogenes, and most part of the Philosophers were of the second. I
know not by what spirit Galen was moved, when instead of defending such a man's
knowledge, he defended his folly and incontinency.

Alcibiades advises the Athenians, to make war against the Sicilians: He had
no other reason to do it, but his own desire of glory, and to surpass his
emulator. He that suffers himself to be overcome by this passion, is never
quiet, nor suffers any one else to be so. The appetite of the taste already
satisfied with food, runs not to the desiring of new, though better; and if
it does run to it, it is not nature, but intemperancy that persuades it.
Having received it, into the stomach, it is satisfied; if it remains there too
long, it loathes it: if it quickly disgests, he returns to desire more.

The appetite of glory goes likewise to the object, although mistaken; Scarce
is it touched by natural heat to digest it; but poison-like it stupefies the
understanding, which scarce discovers it, but it loathes it. If one should take
it away from it when it has had it but a little while, it would again return
to desiring of it. But those things which serve for an object to humane
ambition, have volatile spirits soaring upon the superficies, and not fixed in
the substance: the understanding quickly takes them out, and suddenly consumes
them.

The thing remains, not living, but a carcass; which because it remains, is
not desired; and because a carcass does not satisfy; seeing that nature for a
short time is contented with a little, and is not for ever satisfied with an
infinite. It is a great damage, to not enjoy at all the glory one has
acquired, and worse to keep it but for an instant, the one incites to greater
things, and the other oftentimes hinders from attaining them.

Unfortunate man* that cannot be content with a little ^ unless novelty
trouble the discourse, nor with much, unless ra^e and fury take it away. All
is but madness. whereof the one is bound fast, because it lasts, the other
would be bound, if it lasted. That which the wisest man in the world cannot
do, a mad man sometimes does it.

One does not content himself with the state wherein he is, the other is
contented with that which he has not: because he is deceived by a fixed
desire which does not set the defect before him, he imagines he has it as he
desires, and has not so much free understanding left, as to reason upon it,
how it would be, if he had obtained it, and so to refell the deceits of
imagination, with arguments of reason. Nature would show, that worldly
happiness does not consist in having it, but in the manner of considering;
that he only has it, who contemplates things in their inside, and possesses
in that which he gains, the good which caused him to desire it.

They both err, the mad man with delight, the wise man with trouble; one in
believing he has obtained wherewith to content himself; the other because he
knows not that he has obtained it.

The Athenians make Alcibiades head of the enterprise, which himself had set
forward, and persuaded them to. An ordinary way of proceeding both in
Commonwealths and Principalities, because other men will not accept of that
charge, as another man's business. Or peradventure, he is judged fittest to be
employed in it, as having most interest in the good issue of it, or as better
informed of the means to attain unto it. I know not whether those influences,
which made the counsel acceptable, cause the person also which gave it to be
applauded: or whether it be, because when any one gives consent to a thing, the
understanding being rather violently drawn thereunto, then persuaded to it by
reason, he believes there is in him that persuades somewhat which is above
reason; and therefore without any further enquiry, he will recommend the issue
of that which he had voted, not knowing what it was, to him that persuaded him
to it. Yet notwithstanding, the Athenians considering Alcibiades to be rash and
violent, to restrain and mitigate these qualities in him, assigned him Nicias,
a wise and staid subject, for a companion. Because wise men presuming upon
their own wisdom, not knowing how little it availes in sublunary things, will
thereby direct those things also which they have begun through the impulsion
and violence of fate. Or because we being composed of a nature which being an
enemy of simple and unmixt things, has every thing mingled in it; cannot be
quiet our selves, until we have produced a mixed; But whatsoever be the cause,
the issue thereof which has always bin unfortunate, should make us not to
adhere to any such manner of opinion; which is either ill argued upon by the
understanding, or little favored by heaven: What can be gotten by it, but the
depriving our selves of good, forsaking that advantage which by each quality,
several, might be obtained.

The staid and prudent man, causes the rash and hare brained to lose that
fortune which assists and favors bold men: The rash man spoils the prudent
man's counsels and advices, not suffering them to come to maturity, but
preventing them with fury and violence. The primary qualities of the elements
are qualified, controuled, and corrected by themselves: man's qualities remain
entire; they are continually justling and encountering one another, but never
join nor qualify themselves. The rash man gives an onset, the prudent man
will not second him: One goes as it were with feet of lead to engage himself,
the other flies into an engagement with wings of fire: The prudent man thinks
he shall utterly lose himself, unless he forsake his companion, and sometimes
goes back, when by going on, he might have conquered. Tacitus relates the
virtues and vices of Mutian and Vespasian.

He does not say they would have made a good compound, being in two several
subjects, but if they had been both joined in one: he will have a mixed made by
Nature, and not by Art, where the parts grow near, but do not unite, or at
least not mix: each holds and keeps its inclinations to its proper ends. And
though the first virtues, from which the accidents have their original, be
sometimes dashed to pieces, yet the last remains entire, so that in operating
they frame as many characters as they are themselves, always different, and for
the most part contrary. The knowledge of the first qualities, and ignorance of
the second, loses both the Physician and the patient: if we did not want this
knowledge, the medicines which were most mixed, would be the best, for our body
is more mixed then than any other, by this means bearing the worldly
imperfection, to make a difference between it and heavenly perfection: for
there the most pure and simple are the best; and here the most mixed and
mingled are excellentest.

The Athenians not content that they had sent Nicias and Alcibiades to the
enterprise of of Sicilia, do appoint Varianus also for that service. Two
contraries had need have a third, to the end that if they cannot be united one
to another, they may be both joined in him; which he may easily attain to, if
he participate of both their qualities. So the air, by means of its heat, is
united to fire; by means of its moistness, to water: water by its coldness,
unites it self to the earth: by its moistness, to the air: From whence grows
the rawly-composed order of this great universe. But because Varianus was not
so, but was likewise full of rage and boldness, this seemed to be rather a
putting the enterprise into the hands of temerity, than securing it, unless
that were the way to secure it. A prudent man is not sitting to undertake bold
attempts, which are beyond Reason, they are to be achieved by the hands of a
daring fierce man, or not at all. Prudence has measure for is actions;
temerity is unlimited, in using it sometimes are performed extravagant and
unlookt for achievements. He that makes use of it, has an advantage to
assault by way of surprise to amaze, to disorder, to confound, binding the
understanding either to lose it self, or take a sudden resolution in a thing
which was never discoursed upon. It runs violently upon some inaccessible
way, and finds it without defense, because every one stands armed against
Wisdom, and lies open to Temerity. Therefore wise men for fear of this, make
a golden bridge for him that flies, and Conquerours make a way for them that
run. One may err (it is true) by temerity, but one shall sometimes do the
like through prudence.

The wise man casts him self into the arms of reason, the rash man puts
himself into the hands of Heaven: And because things have seldom that end
which other men judge, he erres seldomer that has not discoursed upon
affairs, then he that has judged of the events. The understanding is within
us, imprisoned in the body, and entangled amongst the senses; Nature is
without, loose, free, and not subject to erring. The Philosopher defines
Temerity to be an act without reason. He might peradventure be deceived: An
unfortunate act is out of the bounds of reason, but a fortunate one is above
it. An impulse of nature, which always aims at truth, is more available then
a motion of the understanding, which discourses upon likelihoods; and if nature
erres, it is because one making no difference between our particular nature,
and the universal, believes that impulse to be superior to reason, which is
without any, as if the senses, and the heavens did move in the same manner.
Others, confiding too much in their own understanding, hold all that to be a
defect in the inferior part, which is dissonant from the superior; as if there
were not a supreme which they sometimes do not know, and sometimes oppose
erring for the most part, by fearing not to err. It is too hard for the one to
forget that they have understanding and for the other to discern the impulses
of a not erring nature, from the provocation of a corrupt one.

Alcibiades was noted for, and accused of impiety, as if totally irreligions in
some actions, he had made a mock of the Gods, and had by night cut off the
heads of all Mercuries Statues* which were set up in diverse places of Athens. A
wise man among the Gentiles, wept at the ignorance of his times, in which they
worshipped so many, and such ridiculous Gods: And raising himself, by the
power of his understanding, to a more sublime Sphere, easily penetrated into
the knowledge of one only ^ne. A Subject raised to a high Fortune, seeing
those who were but men, dei^^ed for their worthy and eminent actions, sometimes
esteeming himself equal, and sometimes superior to them, aimed at and many
times attained to, adoration as well as they. The simple man living in the
public credulity, blindly believed whatsoever his ancesters had set before
him. But he that was not so weak, as to condescend to falsehood, nor vet so
wise as to know the truth, made use of others credulity, to believe nothing.

The Philosopher was of opinion, that such as were raised by fortune, were
endowed with piety and obsequiousness toward the Gods, above other men. And
yet Tacitus teaches the contrary, when he says, That miseries are tolerated,
and prosperity corrupts us. And if you look into Holy Writ, you will there
find sentences much differing from Aristotle's opinion. There you shall read
examples of Kings, both of the twelve, and of the ten, and of the two Tribes,
who erred in their greatest prosperities; most of them having before with much
virtue and constancy endured afflictions.

Many Subjects set worldly glory before their eyes, and many the Divine: you
shall see both of them afflict their bodies to attain to it, thinking to make
the said body to enjoy it, after they have attained it. But because the Divine
is out of this world, and the worldly in it, the one does not unchaine and let
loose his senses, but when he cannot sin; and the other sins because he has
let them loose.

Man is not unhappy only, in respect of his not finding really such an object
as may content him; but is more unfortunate in regard of that little time
during which, novelty makes him believe that he has found it. It is not so
much as to fix him in content, and yet sufficient to make him fall
inconsiderate. But if he should withstand the first assault of Novelty, he
would have much a-doe to avoid that of Greatness: For, being arrived to
highest degrees of good fortune, and finding great opposition in the advancing,
and not losing the desire of a new delight, almost despairing to attain to it
with satisfaction of the passions of the mind, glutted with the present, he
has recourse to the satisfaction of the sense, and casts himself headlong
into intemperancy. Plunged in this, because he will not cross his present
pleasures with the object of future torments; whereas before he sought the
false immortality of his name, he shakes off the true one of the soul and (as
much as in him lies) takes away the being from that God whom he before called
upon for assistance, because he would avoid the fear of him when he is
wrathful. Let him do what he will he cannot avoid the having his sweet
delights made bitter by that which is not in his power to shun, and that which
he imagined his bru^ishnesse would bring him ^o; namely, the torment of
conscience, and horror of annihilation.

I approve of Pythagoras opinion better then of Aristotle's; One said, That
fortunate men were most pious and religious, The other at ributeth the same to
unfortunate ones. These, when they feel themselves running into miseries
implore the Divine assistance to keep them from them; being fallen into them,
they pray him to remove them: and when they are come to despair of any
redress in this world, they pray him to reward them in the other.

Some presumptuous, ignorant, and brutish man, will in this case (I confess)
blaspheme God, and grow outrageous, as if he were not able to inflict any
greater punishment upon him; or call him unjust, as if he had already done more
to him, than he ought to have done; or to deny him, not knowing this to be a
warning to him; or being ashamed of being punished. But few and foolish are
those which attain to so much impiety.

There is no wretched and afflicted man, but will seek to be comforted; and
what comfort can there be in this wretched man: but that of attaining
happiness in the world to come? How then against both Reason and his own
interest, will he deny so great an assistance to himself by believing and
working evil? should not despair then rather cause him to s^eke for no ease
in this world, and cast himself wholly into the hands of God, to comfort
himself with the future hope of the beatificall vision? The spirits of a man
puffed up with happiness, are troubled like unto ones who raised high above the
earth, is astonished and giddy, and for the most part falls down precipitously.
He f^ndes his friends false, deceiving him with flattery, or with
obsequious^es corrupting him. Occasions of sin superabound, voluptuousness and
all manner of delights incline him to it, and then what marvel is it if he
falls? and for the most part irrecoverably, every thing helping him to fall,
and nothing to recover himself. Nothing comes under the unfortunate man's roof
but truth, there are none to flatter or be obsequious to him, his spirits are
cast down, and rather subject to waste of themselves, than to be corrupted: the
temperature becomes melancholy, it afflicts dries up, mortifies, and hurts
every thing but the understanding; so that the inclination to sin, failing with
the occasions makes the way easy for the maintaining of Virtue.

There can be no Reason given of an ill ordered and corrupted Commonwealths
actions, they are directed by ignorance and malice: if they hit right, it is by
chance. I acknowledge it was a manifest folly to undertake the Sicilian War,
and to send three Captains thither to manage it, and that it was malice to
call home Alcibiades after he had happily enterprized it: But whether it were
good to send him away from it accused, distasted, and not appeased, not
absolved. I know not. The commonwealth of Rome used to do so, and the
Monarchy of Spain has followed it, and both have done it wi^h prosperous
success. Nature sometimes produces Traitors, occasion often, and Princes most
commonly. Nature imprints a Character almost indeleble; No good turn, nor deed,
will serve against it; imprisonment hinders it, and the Axe cancels it. The
occasion yields facility, which powerfully accompanies the desire of
domination. The Prince either with suspicions obliges to procure safety, or
with injuries revenge: revenge is sometimes produced by wrath, sometimes by
hatred, and sometimes by man's reputation. Wrath cannot be discour^ed of,
because it is without discourse, its end is to do evil: it runs
inconsideratly through the means to attain to it, and for the most part is
sorry afterward that it has attained it. Hatred governes its actions with
understanding, though corrupted by passion. It is like wrath in the end and
aim, but different in the means to attain to it: it discourses upon the
means, and without ever repenting, joys that it has attained it. Reputation
some desire to vindicate it, and some to revenge themselves for the prejudice
done to it. The latter cannot be done without hatred and wrath; the former must
be void of both: the ones end is to endammage; the others, though it seem not,
nor indeed be not the same; and that it is many times done by way of benefits
and good turns, yet cannot be attained to without doing of damage. The one
goes against the State and the person; the other in the States behalf: and if
it be against the Person, it is no further then to discredit it. Revenging ones
self is not a recovering of reputation, but a satisfying of two most wicked
passions Wrath and Hatred. Vindicating of it recovers it with satisfaction of
the best and noblest of passions namely, Ambition. What joy and triumph, think
ye, entered into the breast of Furius Camillus, when he overthrew the Gauls,
who had besieged the Capitol, and freed from slavery those that had banished
him. And how could he more gloriously revenge and vindicate his reputation,
than by seeing sorrow and repentance written in the hearts of them who had
wronged him. That Roman spoke foolishly, who being called home from banishment,
and seeing an A^my put into his hands by those who had persecuted him, said,
that as soon as he met with the enemy, he would fight with him; because that
if he were overcome, he should work a great revenge by loving his Army; and if
he overcame, he should gain great glory. If he revenge himself of him that
took away his reputation, he does not revenge nor vindicate it. He vindicates
it when he takes no ^evenge. But this most noble seed springs up only in
magnanimous and generous breasts, and they are sell dome found but in
well-ordered Commonwealths and Kingdoms. The air, and temperament sometimes
produce rebellious men, but the quality of the form much more. It was hard to
find a bad Citizen in Rome while it was well-ordered, and a good one when it
was corrupted. The goodness of the government causes affection to the public;
the badnesse ruins it; yea, and changes it into a private. Those Princes which
have Armies, habituated to fidelity, need not fear either an offended or an
ambitious Commander. He will not hurt, if he bear a noble mind, nor cannot if
he be treacherous. If a Kingdom be not tyrannical, nor a Commonwealth
corrupted, they shall oftentimes meet with such as Furius Camillus, and the
Duke of Alva; and with ill natures exasperated with a Waldestein, and a
Colonel Henry de Berg. This latter willing to betray the King of Spain, was
forced to m^ke him lose the Busse: first to go to Velue, and there do a
g^eater service, if our men had known how to make good use of it.

Waldestein plotting to betray the Emperor, even the very first hour that he
had trusted him with his Army, after he had offended him, could never bring his
evil intent to pass, but was always constrained when he was unwilling to do
one good office, to perform another, and oftentimes a better, and at last
discovered himself without doing any hurt. But such a Prince, or Commonwealth,
is not only secure from the wrath and hatred of Commanders, but even from their
ambition, the fidelity of the Army being an obstacle to both; which thing may
be thought hindered Prospero Colonna, and the Duke of Parma, if they any way
attempted such businesses (which I will not assirme) in the State of Milan, the
Kingdom of Naples, and the Low Countries.

Alcibiades resolved to fly to the Lacedaemonians, hearing the report which was
raised against him in Athens; and would not believe he could dazell the peoples
eyes, or charm their ears, with beauty or eloquence, unprofitable weapons
against wrath and fury; as ancient Fables have sufficiently set down in the
case of the most beautiful and eloquent Orpheus, slain by the enraged
Priestesses of Bacchus.

Those, says Plutarch, who loved Alcibiades a Citizen, hated him when he was
in the Army. The object present is far different from the absent, the thought
upon, from the seen. One cannot so perfectly conceive it absent, but that it
changes when it is really seen; and being changed, it must also alter and
trouble the understanding; and this altered and troubled, will necessarily have
a different operation.

The face of man has somewhat of Divine in it: A Prince denies it his subject,
to take away that pleasure from him, for the punishment of some fault. One
enemy will not see another ^ace, to avoid that delight which is contrary to
hatred. Some things are written in a letter, which would not be spoken by word
of mouth; and some speak largely in a man's absence, who in his presence will
stand mute: and if they do persist in their former speeches, it is not by
their own absolute will, but because they are obliged to do so through shame
of being reputed malicious and pusillanimous; or are forced thereunto by a
viol^nt and fiery carreere, which reason is not able to stop in the midst of
its course.

The law of Nature, which binds a man to love his neighbor; the resemblance,
which does not, in a manner, suffer one to abhor him, does either diminish
the hatred, or increase the Synderesis and connection. Wherefore some, because
they will not lay down their rancor, or will not have their conscience
distracted, shun the sight of that face which would pacify their mind, if it
were humane, or pierce their heart though never so savage. Those qualit^es
which belong to the exterior senses, require the presence, to move the subject
effectually: for absence either much diminishes, or quite ca^cels them. The
understanding would participate of those delights, and in its contemplation of
them, finds them full of imperfections: He represents these imperfections to
the inferior part. If the object be present, for the most part he finds it
blind, or not willing to see them. But if it be remote, and gone out of the
Sphere of the senses, though not out of that of the understandings, they easily
open their eyes to receive the light of truth. But if the qualities concern the
sovereign and chief virtue, as eminency in valor, or learning, presence
abases it; where the understanding and the will turn, one to that which is
good, and the other to that which is true; that being neither true nor good,
which is not beautiful, it runnos toward the beauty: and because it considers
it in that manner as it usually receives it, it erres in the conceiving of it,
taking the features and b^auties of the body, in stead of the beauteous
endowments of the mind. The error lasts with the absence, presence undeceives;
and when it does not find the subject, (which happens so for the most part)
such, as it had conceived it, it will persuade the understanding, that the
subject is neither the most valorous, nor the most learned; that he is neither
true nor good, because he is not the greatest, nor the fairest. He that
operates being dragged along by a passion, either sigures it greater, to make
it excusable, or feignes another to away what is shameful in it. If he erres
through love, he describes, it extreme; because others should judge nature to
be oppressed, and not inclined. If he operates through envy, he cloaks it with
fear, and makes show of a faint heart, to conceal a m^licious one; and will
persuade he follows Nature, which obliges one to defend himself, when he
goes against it, in hating that which is good. But he does not hate it, before
he defames it. Envy and a worm resemble one another, they close with the best
part of a fruit, or of a man, they stop not before they have corrupted the one
really, and the other imaginarily: and whereas the worm feeds and rests in the
corruption, envy is fed and tossed up and down by that which is imagined.

Evil is hated and not envied; goodness is not hated, but envied. Rancor is
without any real object, it runs toward goodness, but toward that which is
apparent, and not the true, it sees virtue and valor in him whom it emulates.
First, an equality seemed inglorious to him; now inferiority appears
shameful; if it be in a great spirit, it still goes on in emulation; if it be
in a faint heart, it embraces envy, a vice inseparable from pusillanimity, it
looks upon the honor which the other gets, and that which himself loses. If he
imagines him to be an enemy, proud, rash, and presumptuous, he believes nothing
can give him better content, then to overcome him: desires nothing more than by
advancing his own Trophee, to abase and bring him low, and employes his virtue
and valor in nothing else. But if afterward he sees him before his eyes,
beautiful, eloquent, valiant, and affable, not boasting of his valor, but
moderating his virtue, and reassume the same posture in which he was by nature
set, and forsake that which he had fabricated to himself; It is impossible for
him to retain his hatred; because qualities, though they be natural, if they
meet with a contrary that is greater, in its presence they must receive it,
though the form drive it out altered, but not corrupted. Modesty moderates
envy, but does not extinguish it. Misery turns it into compassion, and
eminency into amazement.

That Proposition of the Master, that hatred is irreconcilable, seems directly
opposite to the other proposition, That the cause ceasing, the effect ceases;
and yet they are both true. Hatred and love peradventure cannot be framed in
us, without the help of Nature. The freedom of will reaches not thereunto, it
may overcome it, but not destroy it; bridle it, but not change it: whence
comes, that sometimes we operate with one, as though we hated him, and yet we
love him; as though we loved him, and yet we hate him. The causes of
operations are external, of passions internal. The change of qualities
changes the operating; and that of the substance, extinguishes the being. And
because it is thought that we have two Natures in us, one of Flesh, and the
other of Spirit, and both of them in the same individuum, the one may love, and
the other hate, because Love and Hatred are not contraries, if they meet with
two contraries; otherwise to love ones Neighbor, and hate sin, could not
consist together.

Alcibiades attires and clothes himself with the Lacedaemonians virtues, and
will thereby persuade, that he has disrobed himself of all manner of vices.
This Metamo^phosis, though it last not very long is not used but by great
understanding only, assaulted by vehement passions of Glory and Fear.

Rome had at one time two Emperors, Otto, who was made in the City,
Vitellius, who was set up by the Army, both of them vicious. The one presently
forsakes his old and usual course of life; the other follows it still: Otto
was wont to deny his own affections, to promote his interests, so that the
power of commanding, excited and stirred up virtue in him: and in Vitellius it
increased his defects. The former being incontinent, and ambitious; the latter,
intemperate, and simple. Otto adventured to assume the Empire, because he
could not live private: Vitellius accepted of it, because he knew not how to
refuse it; and not knowing how to seek after the delight of the understanding,
abandoned himself to that of the senses. The Roman Senate was amazed at
Otto's forsaking his vices, and at his counterfeited virtue. The same being
done by Alcibiades, might have given the Lacedaemonians cause of suspicion, if
not of fear, seeing they might be sure the vices would return greater in
bulk, and more violently, through the acrimony which they would acquire by
being so long stopped and dissembled. Even so it befalls him that thinks to
help a swift running stream which overflowes his meadows, without turning it
another way, only with making the banks up, he may stay it for a while, but on
a sudden he turns it all upon himself, and whereas before it would gently
have overflowed his land, it bears down trees by the roots, overthrowes
buildings, and beats down all that comes in its way, that opposition having
gotten together a greater heap of waters, and made them more violently sierce.
Those that restrayning their passions, retain and keep in their smallest and
meanest ones, if they did go calmely along with them, they might in part vent
out their evil genius, without expecting the last fury, and violence, which a
feigned virtue being unabled to resist, they blindly and furiously are
precipitated in it. So had Otto done, if death had not prevented him; and so
did Alcibiades, wickedly committing adultery with Agis the King of Sparta his
wife. Agis was not very circumspect, seeing he did not perceive, that some
great end must of necessity be hidden under so great a change, which he ought
to believe had taken its original from an unlimited ambition, and to mistrust
that thereby and through his luxury, he would one day get away from him (two
indivisible things) his wife, and his kingdom: and indeed he got away the one,
and in all likelihood laid a plot to gain the other, seeing he used that means
to attain thereunto, which others have happily put in practice to do the like.

First to make his valor known, then to publish the adultery, and finally to
make show that he contemned Agis, what was it else, then to endeavor to gain
his kingdom: inviting by this means discontented persons to side with him,
animating, and securing them? But I know not whether Tacitus did well
understand from whence proceeded that fear, when he ascribed it to disguised
and cloaked vices, and falsified virtues. Ottoes vices were lust, idle^nesse,
and gormandizing, which were indeed to be wished of him, yet not to be feared,
if they had returned to him: Uertues though false carry for the most part their
corruption within them, glistring and shining on the outside, as if they were
true and pure virtues, and are more pernicious to them that make use of them,
then to those for whose sakes, and against whom they are employed. And
howsoever, they do less hurt in this manner feigned, then an open, impudent
shamelessness in vices. The Senate (in mine opinion) seeing Otto thus plunged
in passions, not thinking that he could leave them, though peradventure he
might disguise and alter them, feared lest instead of idleness, he would take
delight in labor and affairs, and in stead of luxury he would be filled with
fear, and jealousy, and through one take away the Magistrates authority, and
through the other the most honorable men's lives.

There are some respects which bind m^e upon occasion of Alcibiades lust, to
speak what I think of Princes soiled with such a defect. If the good
temperature of a man consists in a perfect symmetry of the first elements,
which blended together may compose a mixed, in which neither heat nor cold; nor
moisture, nor drought be prevalent, its quality will be lukewarm a mean
between hot and cold, its operations moderate, it will cause the subject to be
of a healthful complexion, of calm senses, indifferent, moral, no eminent
Philosopher, rather void of vices, then endowed with any eminent virtues. Such
a man to be maintained in health, must still he under the Physicians hand; and
the Physician had need to be an Esculapius. I marvel at one of the ancient
Sag^s or wise men who ca^ls such a kind of man happy, yet says at the same
time, that this man must have his sleep, his rest, his motion his food, his
thoughts, his breathing, all measured and l^mited so that he shall not have so
much as a f^ee moment left to himself* as if happiness (according to Mecenas
his disorderly opinion) consisted only in living, though most unhappy. This
complexion is not to be wished to a Prince, and if he had it, it ought not to
be maintained in him, seeing that to preserve it, he ought to be wholly his
own, to become a slave to the Physician, whereas, a Prince should never be so
far his own as to make himself a slave to his subjects. If then there be no
such temperament to be found, and if there be any such, either it cannot or
ought not be maintained, we must needs consequently fall into some excess,
which may serve for nourishment, and root both to vice and virtue; because as
Jacob and Esau were borne both of one Mother, so from the self same
temperament, may proceed both a great virtue, and a great vice. He that was of
opinion, that there could be no great virtue in a man, unless there were also
some great vice, was not peradventure deceived, if he meant of a natural
inclination thereunto. And if any vice be a sign of a great understanding, it
is that of luxury, which uses to be great, where it finds the fire of the
Flava bilis or yelow choler, and the acritude of the atra or black.

We see that those brute beasts, which have most humane knowledge, and seem
almost to discourse, as Apes and the like are exceeding luxurious, and that at
all times; beyond the custom of other beasts. And to this peradventure, the
ancient inventers of fables had a relation, when they feigned all the Gods much
addicted to this defect of lust, as the Poets also did their Heroes. If I were
to frame unto my self a Prince according to mine own mind, I would have him
continent by virtue, and not by nature. For the natural continency proceeds
from coldness of the temperament, and always excludes acrimony, and coldness
without acrimony causes stupidity, and not prudency, which requires
melancholy; not the dreggs, but the flower of blood: not that which is borne
adust, and carries imprinted in the acrimony of its ashes, the character of the
efficient, as the learnedest and wisest men of the world have believed. And St
Paul continually complains of the troubles which the acrimony of the prick in
the flesh did bring him into. Lust is always bad for him that is subject to
it, but it is not always hurtful to a Commonwealth. If it does not pass
from the person to the office, it is the defect of the man, and not of the
Prince, seeing that in this case he may be a good Politician, though a bad
Moralist. There have been some in our days, that have in their youth run
themselves a little out, in amarous passions yet they have guided themselves
therein with so much prudency, that our Ancestors would have termed those
passions virtues, as they did Catoes drunkenness: And truly it is no small
matter for one that is irregular himself, to be continent, and to overcome that
passion by which he is overcome. It is in a manner a freeing the superior part
from it, and confining it, within the ignoble part of the senses, and an
absolute way to make it appear, that nature has the predominance over evil.
Then the Physician may stand idle, and administer no Physic for fear of doing
hurt. Cru^ities cannot be stirred without doing hurt, and that which is
concocted needs no cure. It is no great matter for a man that is free and loose
to overcome his enemy, but to do it when he is shackled and bound, without
unshackling or unbinding is very much. If it were lawful for me to relate some
things which have happened in our days, it would surely cause, such as have
too sharply in this point touched the reputation of a Sovereign Prince, and
his favorite, to recant and change their opinions: they would find and hear
such things, that to admit of an extraordinary virtue, they would wink at a
small vice, judging it not to be a real but a feigned vice, and rather an
affectation, then a passion.

That cannot be a good horse that has not bin a cross Colt, but all kind of
crossenesse in a Colt is not a sign that he will prove a good horse. Some
Colts will be bounding, leaping, and running, not to draw their necks out of
the collar, or to shun their labor, but to show their generous mettle, and
spirit; to be sportfull, and frollick, and not to refuse the bit. And other
some again will use the same tricks out of a resty and sloathfull spirit,
only to shun work, and labor, and though a stander by can hardly find any
difference in their motion, yet he that governes and rides them can easily
perceive it.

The land which brings forth wild plants is not always bad yet it is always
unmanured. A bad weed does sometimes betoken the goodness of the land. Let it
then be lawful for me to conclude, that great lust is oftentimes a sign of a
great understanding, and that amongst the defects of a Prince, luxury is one of
the least, if so he do in some part suppress it, by not committing therein
any violent or unjust act; and in all this, I mean of such actions only as
he commits in his youthful years; Every one has some defects which are
proper to that age, as well of the body, as of the mind.

The Physician, whose worth will not suffer any man to believe that he erred,
was wont to say, that diseases are most dangerous, when they come in
unseasonable seasons: the malignity and greatness of them showing it self in
that, that the adverse season of the year could not suppress nor control
them: And as a difease which comes in its proper season is least to be feared,
so is a defect which comes in an Age be^itting it, less to be condemned. It is
no strange thing that a young man should be given to Women, but it is to be
admired that he should therein carry himself prudently: For prudency belonging
not properly to youthful years, especially where there is lust; we must
imagine that he who can counterpoise luxury in the Age which is proper for it,
will extinguish it quite when he comes to riper years, in which he properly
becomes prudent.

And in this case it seems a chief Officer; or Favorite, ought rather to
seek to cherish prudency in his Prince, than hinder his lust. For it being
cherished and assisted, having gathered strength, will quite extingu^sh the
lust; which being contraried and opposed, will always increase. Seneca had an
in^ent to do so; but it did not take effect, neither could Agrippina do it,
and fell for want of prudency.

Every one knows the evil effects which an untimelyy correction produces. And
a great Saint set down in writing, that sometimes it endangers the increasing
of the evil: And this is true not only in those who will not be overswayed by
any, because they are incensed to anger thereby; but in them also who intend to
overcome themselves, because they disdain to be persuaded by others to that
which they intend of themselves to do. A Painter whilst he is limming,
sometimes leaves a fault in a place, and runs over the other parts with an
intent to mend that error. He that sees him work (if he be a wise man)
although he perceives the error, holds his peace, knowing the Artist to be so
skillful, that he both knows it, and will mend it. If he be a fool, he points
at it, and produces rage and disdain in the Painter, and sometimes in such
excess, that he leaves it unmended, and chooses rather to leave an error, then
to applaud an impertinency. And this is the reason why few Painters will admit
any to see them work, or judge of their works before they be perfected: there
being nothing more distasteful to a choice spirit then to have a fault showed
him, and be persuaded to amend it, when he knew it himself, and had an intent
so to do.

Alcibiades goes to the Median Court, and finds favor in the eyes of
Tisaphernes, Socrates was the most affable and courteous Gentile that was,
Tisaphernes, as Barbarous and Alcibiades gains the love of both. We will say
peradventure that he was of a temperate habit. Such a Subject (according to
Hyppocrates) of such a temper, engenders with all constitutions, be they cold,
or hot, moist or dry, because he corrects them all, if it be always true in
engendring, yet it is not continually true in loving. It is not sufficient that
he can correct, if the other does not desire to be corrected. He will hate him,
if peradventure he prefer pleasure to profit, and whereas he should abhor
that contrary which is furthest from him, he abhorres that most which is
nearest, which is the fault of an erring nature. There can be no delight where
there is no truth; he is deceived that sets it upon falsehood. The opposite
contrary, because it is likewise a vice, rather confirms then takes away the
error. Truth resides in the middle, whereupon some shun it, because they
will not lose their delight, to be undeceived.

The habit, which has its distemperature from nature, loves its semblable.
Nature cannot love its destruction, it would love it, if it loved the contrary.
She hates i^, because she is blind, because she would not dye, and yet it dies,
and which is more, with it dies the individuum, The habit, through a
distemperate accident, loves its contrary. In this case the interest of nature,
and of the individuum are the same. That which happens in the failings of the
temperature, happens also in the defects of the mind. If one be cruel
naturally, he loves its semblable; if by accident, its contrary; From the
first, proceeds he that runs along with the passions; from the second he
that does not restrain himself. The one loves vice, and hates the remedy, the
other cannot endure neither the vice nor the remedy, But to go on from the
temperament, to the influence of those stars which produce it; that which was
loue-worthy in Alcibiades, might be thought to have bin caused by his being
borne at that time, when the benign stars of Jupiter, and Venus, showed
their fortunate brightness upon the Horizon, were it not that a violent death,
admits of no fortunes in the ascendent, nor the irregulate habits, a Jove for a
significator. He had peradventure in the Eastern angle Virgo with sol, and
Mercury with Virgo, and Mercury heated by the beams of sol, and peradventure
retrograde. He was lovely, and had an impediment in his speech. He betook
himself to all manner of sciences; Prevailed in eloquence; he would learn
all things, and do any thing. He would accommodate himself to every man's
fashions. And Cameleon like take any color, He was inconstant, sometimes good,
and sometimes bad, even as he chanced to meet with good or bad men. Qualities,
which Astrologians say, Mercury inclines to, being situate in that part of the
heavens. He produces a most humid temperature, he accommodates himself to all,
like Air and Water, which having no proper shape, receive any.

The Athenians stood in great fear of Tisaphernes preparations. Alcibiades
knew of their fear; He thought he would make use of it. He writ to the
Nobility, that if they would take the Government upon them, and suppress the
Commons, he would cause Tisaphernes to alter his purpose. All embraced this
motion, Phrinicus only opposed it, knowing that it was done with an intent, to
breed discord between the Senate and the Plebeians, to return into his own
native Country. But because this advice was contrary to likelihood, and given
by one who was thought to be an enemy to Alcibiades, it was not accepted.

It is hard to go against the present, in the behalf of the future. Truth
has no greater an enemy then likelihood, and that which is, then that which
will be. We should not dispute against the senses if they could not err; and
much less against reason, if it did not err. Amongst themselves sometimes
they correct themselves, if at the same time they deceive not themselves, but
the senses guided by a great likelihood, and reason being thereby dragged
along, they both fall into error, and there is none to raise them up. In tricks
of legerdemaine, who would not be deceived, if notice given, or experience did
not hinder it? and who is not deceived, though he be warned, if the Artist be
arrived to any excellency? Sometimes we must not only feign that we do not
see, nor understand, but also believe we do not see nor understand, that which
seems to us, we both see and understand.

Who shall persuade him that is possessed of a good and healthful body,
replenished with the best humors that can be in man, not endammaged by any
action, that he has need to take Physic, if experience had not taught it
Hyppocrates, and his authority, us?

None would go about to persuade it, and questionless no man would suffer
himself to be persuaded thereunto. No more then we should be able to persuade
a Monarch, or a Commonwealth, which had obtained some great conquest, that it
were very useful for him, or it to yield up again what it had conquered.
There would be requisite for such a purpose a Politic Hippocrates, full of
knowledge, experience, and authority, and peradventure he would hardly be able
to persuade it. Scipio Nasica was of great esteem in the Commonwealth of
Rome; yet was he not able to dissuade the ruining of Carthage. Such is the
power of likely hood, it is hard to meet with an understanding that can find
out truth, a heart that will advise it, and a Prince that will follow it. Such
an advise, is for the most part unfortunate: when it is not accepted of, it
wants its effect; when it is accepted, it is not seen; and because it goes
against a thing which is seen, it is not believed. The Author comes to be
blamed for ignorance and malice. Anniball was advised (and peradventure it was
done with wisdom) to not go to Rome after the defeat of Cannas, and because
he did not go, he was taxed with ignorance. Hunno would have persuaded the
Carthaginians, (peradventure through malice) in the midst of victories, when
Rome seemed even ready to fall, to seek after peace, and because he could not
persuade it, he was esteemed wise. It is ordinary for human malice, to judge
that advice to be best, which has not bin accepted: And for its ignorance to
refuse to be cleared in matters which have likelihood in them, any way but by
the evil success.

To give counsel against likelihood requires a great understanding, or a
great passion. The one cannot persuade, unless it it be known; the other, if
it be not concealed. It is sufficient for the understanding to be reputed;
Passion must be feared, and may make it, but not persuade it, to be executed;
being known it loses its credit, and yet it is always known; being little it
is not effectual, and being great it cannot be concealed. The happy man will
not think upon the future, for fear of grieving himself, the envious will for
his comfort.

That which is, keeps him in torment; Only the hope that it will not last,
revives him. The understanding subtilizeth itself, to make it be believed, and
if there be any reason* it finds it out, if there be none, it feignes one;
whence comes, that others do not believe it, through the difficulty there is in
discerning the true birth of the understanding from the feigned and
fantastical one of the desire.

Alcibiades having intelligence in the City of Selibria, made a match to be
brought into it by a signal given by fire, suspicion that one of the
conspirators would discover the treaty, caused an anticipation. He not being
prepared, and seeing the signal given, ran thither with a few, giving order
for the rest to follow. But being come into the City, he found so much
opposition that he was not able to resist the too advantageous power.

He causes a trumpet to be sounded: Commands the Citizens to lay down their
arms, if they value their lives. When a man is in danger and has his sword in
his hand all the spirits retired to the heart, and having in a manner forsaken
the brain, it is an easy matter to be deceived; whence proceeds the danger
which is in speaking, whilst one is skirmishing, so that many times
enterprises have bin lost after they have bin in a manner attained, and won
only by a word miss-understood.

The Selibrians, hear the enemies within the walls, they imagine they are all
there: they hear a trumpet which does courteously, and friendly invite them to
yield: their brain is not apt to search out the matter, and find out the
deceit, and having their weapons in their hands to defendtheir City, and their
lives, judging it impossible to defend the one, and seeing the way opened to
secure the other, they accept of the proffer.

The commanding and resolute speech and voice did cooperate greatly in this
sanatick terror: the command causes obedience, the resolvednesse terrifies,
especially where disobedience is death.

To not believe it they must of necessity have had time to discourse upon it:
and therefore the imminent punishment giving no time to discourse, they were
forced to believe. Seeing then it was hard to avoid the danger, and canvasse
the matter, and harder to go against the senses without canvassing of it: that
was believed to secure life, which without discourse could not choose, but be
believed, and could not be discoursed without hazard of life.

When the Roman Army commanded by Germanicus at the River of Rhine mutined,
Mennius reduced that part which was most violent and insolent, with resolute
and commanding words, which separated the universal from the particular, a
thing which terrifies the more, forcing a man in his thoughts, to forsake that
union, which makes him insolent, and bold. He takes hold of the eagle, or
ensign, and boldly cries, he that does not follow me is an enemy to Caesar.
Saul being slighted by a part of the Israelites, takes two Oxen, and hewes them
in pieces, sends the pieces into all the quarters of Israel, and sends them
word, that so shall his Ox be served that does not follow him; The commanding
and resolute message which made the public cause particular, wrought in such
manner, that all Israel followed him. Alcibiades assaulted by a sudden chance,
instead of hazarding himself with those few Soldiers which followed him, and
casting himself into the midst of the danger, has recourse to deceit* And
that makes me to esteem him rather subtle, then valiant. Seeing that nature
being suddenly brought into a straight, flies presently for relief to that
part from which it hopes for most assistance.

If it be from the brain, we lay by strength, if from strength, we make no
use of wit. And if wit had bin laid aside, and not made use of in this case,
how could he have found out such a subtle device, as could hardly have bin
contrived being out of danger, and settled in mind? In a great passion we leave
art, and fly to nature.

The one needs attention when it operates; the other needs none. And because in
great passions man oftentimes abandons himself, that passion then prevails
which operates, though it be abandoned.

Nature and art taken in a straight, especially by fear, cannot help but
hinder one another. The one is not followed by discourse, and the other being
abandoned cannot make use of it. Nature has left but few void of defense, but
she seldom suffers sagacity, and valor, to be in one subject. To whom she
has given a heart to fight, she has not given swiftness to escape. Amongst
dogs, that kind which is most swift, is most cowardly.

The Fox must by an extreme necessity be forced to fight, and a Lion to run
away. Yet he will not wholly recommend his safety to flight, now and then he
will turn his claws to assist with that which nature has granted him, that
which necessity forces him to.

The dog by running away puts himself in disorder, because he does not make
use of those weapons, in which lies his defense. Wherefore nature instead of
helping hinders him, because that running with its spirits to that part wherein
his safety should consist, and fear driving them to that part in which it
should not be, he must of necessity lose himself.

The hare which is esteemed the most fearful of all creatures, seeing it
self set upon by so unequal an enemy ^aints not, but runs most swiftly when
it is hardest pursued; wherefore we must imagine, that it is the lustiness of
her heart that carries her, or confesses that the Providence of nature assists
her.

The same People which a little while since condemned Alcibiades as a traitor
receive him now as a deliverer, and ere long will drive him away again as an
enemy. They love, and have no sooner done loving, but they hate, and no sooner
done hating, but they love.

The furthest is nearest to them, for they run from one extreme to another.
They hold no mean, says Tacitus, either they fear, or makes themselves to be
feared. Either they serve humbly, or command proudly, says Livie. The People
operate according to sense, which always leads to vice.

Reason is that which leads to virtue. But as the people being acustomed to
sense, which goes from one extreme to another, runs along with counsels of
the same quality, so wise men accustomed by virtue to run on in a mean,
follow the same way in their advises, and because that neither the mean, nor
the extreme advises are always to be followed, therefore the wise man er^eth
as well when he should take the extreme, as the People, when they should
^mbrace the mean. Policy which turns the would upside down, confounds
motality. It alters sometimes its place, som^^^mes it ^^^^nce.

A Metaphysical Philosopher is not good in a Commonwealth: the Moral would
sail well in a calm, in a tempest he loses himself. Policy is an art by it
self, no man has yet rightly learned it. Many know how to do that which
should be done, none what is to be done. He that knows not the motions of
Fortune, is no good Politician; and he that knows them, will also know God: He
is not seen in the face, but only in the back; because (as I may say) there is
nothing of his operating known, but what is past. Not to make u^e of prudence,
is brutishness; trusting to it, is arrogance. A man to operate well, though he
be full of knowledge, has need of somewhat more; he can neither learn, nor
teach, nor know he has it, unless experience shows it him, nor knows not what
it is, after he has had experience of it. If this be not true, that was
frustratory, and of no availment to Socrates, (who was the wisest amongst the
Gentiles) which he believed to be a Demon, and in which he trusted, more than
in his own prudency. This is not the only unknown quality in the world, its
contrary is likewise so: And where the good serves to give the greater light,
the bad is employed to put it out. Both are ocasions of the loss of wisdom;
and he that loses it, knows not wherefore. The first works upon it, the other
against it: the one with profit, the other with damage; the one blind, the
other enlightened. The people goes on, and is not stayed by discourse, the end
of its voyage is, where it can go no further. A great understanding causes
constancy; a weak one, obstinacy; because the one suffers not it self to be
overcome by Sophistical fallacies, the other understands not the truth of
Arguments. The people is distempered, how then shall it know that which is
temperate, seeing that he who writ thereof, will have none but its semblable know
it. An obstinate person is hard to be removed, it is a great violence that must
do it; and that being great, throws all to the ground which it finds a foot,
and sometimes draws from one extreme to another. If then Mediocrity is hard to
find; found, to be known; and known, to subsist: and the extreme manifests
it self, we need not marvel, if the people do not know Mediocrity. These
Phantasmes draw mine imagination to another place of Plutarch: He declares Cato
be unapt for Sciences, by reason of his great consta^cy. If he means, that
when he had taken an opinion, he would not alter it; if it were good, he was
not unable; if bad, why should he be called constant? I do not believe it was
inability, will it might well be. He did not love virtue above constancy; and
because knowledge is nothing but opinion, and opinion gives way to instability,
he contemned that knowledge which admitted not of constancy. The not knowing
the foresaid secret, which is hidden even from many wise men, is the cause that
the people call Alcibiades traitor, because he had not taken the City of
Andria: they reputed him to be a most valiant Captain, because he could all as
he would, and would not any thing which he did not obtain. It was unknown to
them that there was a medium between working through ignorance, and working
through malice. This is produced by a mass of circumstances, from a mixture of
actives and passives, from a difference of time, which furiously assaults a
man. The people has no glory of its own, its glory depends on another, it
consists in the election; and because it is a great honor to have chosen well,
and an infamy to have chosen ill: when enterprises do not fall out well,
because they will not receive both loss and shame, they many times c^ll him
tra^tor who is either ignorant or unfortunate. They do not ascribe the ev^ll
successes of enterprises to accidents because they are incapable of knowing
them, nor ^o ignorance, when it has framed so vast a conceit and is against
their honor that have made the election: they will rather a scribe it to
treason, which being an internal quality, that cannot be known, leaves the
opinion still a foot, without endammaging their glory that made the election.
A noble person instead of receiving honor by another glory, receives disgrace
thereby, and is known with envy: and if any other great person operates amiss,
he will not attribute it to treason; nor much less to fortune, because they
both leave the reputation untouched, which is the mark that envy aims at. He
ascribes it to ignorance or cowardlinesse, to abuse that valor and wisdom
which tormented him: and from thence it proceeds, that in an Aristocracy,
errors spring for the most part from envy, and in a Democracie from suspicion.
Evil will takes the reputation from the man, not from the Artist. Ignorance
from the Artist, not from the man.

If an eminent Painter, draws a pourtraiture defectively, the Common sort say
he would not do it better, his emulator that he could not, his friend that he
was not in the humor nor right vein of working. He that loves him will rather
admit that he was drunk, then ignorant, to sustain his ability and talent; He
that hates him, will sooner say he was ignorant than drunk, seeking to overthrow
him. In nature art, and all other things belonging to understanding a fault
committed out of malice, and wilfulness, is not so bad as one committed for
want of ability, or through ignorance. But in such things as belong to manners,
and moral actions, it is quite contrary. He that will see the difference
between the judgment of Nobles that are touched with envy, and the Peoples
which are taken with admiration, let him consisider, that Plutarch speaking
thereof, says, that Alcibiades had no will to overcome, and brings forth
Nicias, a Noble man, accusing him for the same ill success to the people, and
saying, that he did it through ignorance, carelessness, folly and vanity,
attributing it not to his evil heart, but to his ill understanding, and other
things which might disparage his wisdom. A great reputation is an enemy to him
that has no merit; to him that has it not equal to his reputation, and also
to him that has it but equal. It is only favorable to him that has a
talent surpassing that great esteem. He enjoyes not only that which he has
but also that which he has not, but hopes to attain unto* And because humane
felicity does not consist in obtaining the greater things, but in the greatest
hope of obtaining them; because that a continued act in a small time, produces
a habit, from which springs satiety or insensibility, and he shall be more
happy then the other, whose merit and repute is equal. It is a great
misfortune for a man to have worth, and want repute; and far greater to have
repute, and want worth. The fear of the future disgrace, spoils his present
pleasure. He cannot ground his delight upon that which is false, if he does not
deceive himself, he expects shame from being undeceived. Although he finds
not himself faulty for having deceived, yet he would be happy in some
measure, if he could but call in that error which he cannot perpetuate in
others; because the knowledge of ones self (which is man's chief virtue) is
the Hangman which torments him. Finally, a great repute is the greatest help a
man can have that will not operate: and the greatest damage for him that is
put to the Test, and is tried; for either he proves according to expectation,
and then he gains nothing, or proves beneath the expectation, and loses all he
had gained.

Reputation is not diminished by degrees, nor cannot be broken piece-meale: if
it be not reserved entire, it quite abandoneth one. If a particular man has
gottten it, let him be content with having it; if a Prince, let him not, if he
can avoid it, put it to a trial. It is better to die ingreat repute than put
it to adventure; to leave it doubtful in the world what would have followed,
than to put ones self in danger of what will follow. Voluntarily one ought not
put it to trial, but being forced thereunto, adventure himself with it; and
upon occasion of losing it, lose himself also. Not only that victory which
Alcibiades got over the City of Selibria, but all the rest of his actions
likewise, discover him rather to have been full of cunning subtilty, than of
wisdom. From whence, in my opinion. proceeded the instability of his fortune.

Wisdom infused by the gift of grace, has somewhat in it that is Angelical,
and sets a man in the way to be rather a Citizen of heaven, than a Ruler in the
world. Cunning and subtilty has something of Diabolical in it, and is made
for hell. Acquired wisdom m^kes a man apt for all things; but he that should
always take it in a strict way, in many affairs might use it with much
disadvantage, by reason of men's malice. Hence it com^s, that it is not alwaves
one and the same, but is divided into Moral, Political, ^economicall, and
Military. In all of them is r^quired a candidnesse of heart, if the end ^e
good. But if you except the Moral, it is because the means a^e not direct,
and then becomes sagacity, which is a part and species of wisdom. For an
oblique means does not always take away the virtue, when it tends to a good
end, and that the means it self it not vicious.

A General of an Army deceives an enemy by some wile, to overcome him. The
Physician the Patient, to cure him; and yet the wisdom of these men consists
in well mixing the Actives with the Passives. All this seems to be in those
words, Be ye as wise as Serpents, and as innocent as Doves. That Serpent could
not be called wise, which in another place is said to be the most subtle Beast
of the sield. If Subtilty with candidnesse of heart, were not wisdom, inferior
indeed to moral wisdom in a moral private life; but most necessary in a
Politic, Military, and Oeconomicall Government. And this subtilty is not
peradventure so befitting a Moral man, as a Politician.

The moral man's end is the good of the individuum; which end, the more
virtuous the operations are, the larger it is. The Politic man's end is the
good of the species, which oftentimes does not admit of pure mere virtue
without adding somewhat to it, or taking somewhat from it. It changes if not the
nature, yet the circumstances, in passing from him that lives to himself, to
him that lives for others; because there is great difference between a
Governor, or Ruler, and a Tutor.

A. Prince must not make use of vice in governing, nor yet of such virtues as
ruin the people. Clemency, liberality, mercy, fortitude, and all other
virtues, are commendable in a private man. In a Prince I commend rigor above
cleme^cy, parsimony above liberality, roughness above mercy; and cautell above
fortitude. Rigor will preserve his peace at home, parsimony will defend him from
external war, without endangering the blood of his subjects, or emptying
unmeasurably his Exchequers. Roughness will preserve justice, and prevent so
many ill effects which compassion produces: to which we must imagine Aristotle
had a relation, when in his Poetic (which is also a part of his Politics) he
made so principal a business the instruction of Princes, to let them learn
Tragic Poems, as a thing that would purge their dispositions from mercy.
Finally, cautelousnesse will not suffer him to expose his life, which is of
such value, to gain a vain and unprofitable repute of being valorous. David
whilst he was a private man, did always show great signs of valor; but being
once King, he suffered himself to be persuaded by Ioab, to absent himself
from danger. And when the Lord intending to punish him, propounded three things
unto him, whether he would endure seven years famine, fly three months
before his enemies, or have three days pestilence in the land; he chose the
last, quite against the virtue of fortitude, but yet in favor of the public
good; judging (as St. Ambrose says) his absence would be more hurtful to the
people, than the pestilence. True it is, that when he saw the Angel turn his
sword upon the people, he cried out, that he should turn it against him that
was guilty, and spare the innocent. But this was not fortitude digested by
reason, it was a violence incited by a tender and valorous nature. Saint
Ambrose says, That in his choice he followed wisdom; in his grief, piety. I
will unfold this question, by saying. That the Proposition which God made to
David, was to keep him far off: that which David made to the Angel, was to
kill him. He will not accept of going far off, and desires death, because
that by his absence, the peoples light was put out, and they would be left
without a guide in the dark: whereas his death had been but a putting out of
one light, to give way to another. The former seems always to be evil, the
latter is not always so, but many times is turned to a greater good. It may
also be said, that when David made his first choice, he grounded it upon a
hope he had, that he he might appease God by Prayer; which foundation, when
he found it prove vain, he altered his desire. Nothing makes a man better than
prudency, and nothing keeps him more secure than sagacity. This sagacity would
be dangerous, if it were naturally rooted in the breast of a General, born
there, and not acquired: For those who are endowed therewith in this manner,
never go about to try either force or fortune, until the case be quite
desperate, and for the most part, the time past, either to make use of force,
or adventure ones self upon chance. A Generals sagacity is different from a
Politicians. The one is not good in the City; wherefore Military men are
little available in a Senate. The other is pernicious in the field: wherefore
they send Gown-men, and Counselors to lose and ruin enterprises. In one of
these sagacities valor should prevail; in the other, sagacity itself must
have the upper hand. The Politician ought not betake himself to force till
sagacity quite fails; and the Military man will hardly make use of sagacity,
whilst he can work with violence.

Alcibiades has recourse to Pharnabazus, favorite to Artaxerxes, King of
Persia, and presently becomes bound to him in a most strict bond of amity. He
had I know not what of attractive in him, which alluring men's minds, bewitched
them. A lively Spirit, from which proceeds activity, and abundance of means to
work by. If we seek the cel^stial causes thereof, it proceeds from the
constitution of the Planets, from the swiftness of the motions, from Mercury
set in his dignities. If we seek the elementary causes, we will say, it
proceeds from thesire, which producing its nature in the Spirits, participateeh
his motion unto them from the center to the superficies. Therefore in such
kind of people, the spirits are perceived at the circumference, by the motions
of the head and hands; and most of all, by the splendour of the eyes, out of
which they send forth sparkles. And by reason that no cause, (if we speak of
celestial ones) concurres more in this fabric, than Mercury, swift in his
dignities; therefore it proves most like him. They draw him with wings at his
feet, at his head, or his hair. The Poets do not make him loves Courcellor,
but his Messenger, and sometimes his Minister to deceive. His Mineral is
Mercury, which always moves, and is like silver, but is not silver, which
deceives the eyes of those that look upon it, with i^s splendour, and ruins
them that handle it with its poison. The Alchimists seeing it false, because it
is moveable, seek to take away its motion, and fix it. Astrologians believe not
it has any happy influence in the understanding, though it be never so
forunate. They desire not to find him in his own house and exaltation, but
rather in Saturns, or at least favored with his presence and beams, to cut
off his wings with the slowest Planets Sithe. When they give him the company of
any stars, to make him have a happy influence, it is of the lesser ones. The
overmuch motion which it gives the spirits in beginning of an action, does not
admit of a prosecution of it; and the overmuch light does puzzle and resolve
them. If Philosophers desire a temperament for a great understanding, they do
not commend that which is of fire, nor that of earth; not melancholy, no^ Bilis
alone; if any Bilis, that which is black, which is the Astrologers Mercury in
the house of Saturn: and the Quicksilver fixed by the Alchimists fire. The
Mercurials with their swiftness run over all things, with their splendour they
see them: and because they run, they cannot discourse; and because their motion
is from the center to the circumference, they spread and dilate themselves
abroad, they do not grow deeper, nor take root. And having many objects before
their eyes, they have always some new thing to propose, whereby they seem
fruitful, yet are but barren, bringing forth abortive embrioes; and if they
come to be children, they are monstrous ones. I bear with Princes, sometimes
they put themselves into such men's hands, in compain comparison of which, all
others seeeme dull and obtuse. Whilst a Mela^cholly man gives one reason, they
will give a thousand. If one answer serves not, they will give two, or three,
they confound, and delight with variety: with their engines and inventions they
gain admiration; with their words, great spirit, and effectual operation, as
it were a fury, they astonish. Rethorick, Poetry, Music, and other Arts, do
consist of, I know not what, set on the outside; the judgment whereof seems to
belong to the senses; Energie, Number, Sweetness of voice, and variety of
coloring. Although they consist of somewhat else which is more internal; to
apprehend which is required great skill in those Arts; and an eminent
understanding to judge of it. The ignorant man, presently runs to the sense,
and judges with the eye, and ear, commending according to his sight and
hearing, many times that which deserves no commendation, and never blaming that
which is blameworthy. Appearance deceives him, because he fixes himself upon
the accidents and commands them; and not penetrating to the knowledge of the
substance, he discommends it not, because he does not know it. Seneca speaks of
some Orators, whose orations pronounced by themselves seemed excellent, and at
the very first, gained applause; but being read, and examined, were of no
worth. He confesses they forced his understanding, and he commends them, not
because they deserved it, but because they bound him to it. The same thing
there is in pictures; for there are some colored in such sort, that at the
first sight, they do constrain the judgment of ignorant, and sometimes of
understanding men also, yet with this difference, that the first still continue
and persevere in their opinions, and these alter it as soon as they have
examined the business. Such kinds of qualities, which so violently attract, in
Policy, Rethorick, Poetry, Painting, and other Arts, do proceed, as I said,
from a kind of Fury, which is seen in the visage of an active man, and in the
visage and gesture of the Orator. Tacitus was not content with calling it a
River, but increases the Epithet with the name of High sounding, to express
the noise with which it violently runs. Seneca calls it Impetuous, and does not
say it inclines, but ravishes the minds of hearers. The same Fury, though it
be not seen, nor heard in Painters, yet it is seen imprinted in the works. The
works of Tintoretto, though they be inferior to Raphael's pictures, yet with
these qualities they take away their advantage. They are both good, but at the
first glance, if you do not take time, you will applaud Tintoretto's most; if
you consider them well, Raphaels. He that colors best, shall find greater
applause at the vulgars hands, than he that designs and draws best, although
he color well also. So likewise falls it out in Poetry and Rethorick, that
which prevails in that part that belongs most to the sense being highliest
applauded: For that presently represents it self to the eye of man; and the
sight straightway carries it to the understanding, and without letting it have
time to discourse upon it, obliges it to give judgment on apparances side. A
man fit for great employment, ought to be endowed with wisdom, to know what he
is to undertake; and with activenesse to go through with business when he
has deliberated upon it. If you find two subjects, one most wise and
sufficient, but not very active; the other most active, though not so wise,
activity being easier to know, than prudence, and immediately perceived in the
visage, gestures and eyes of him that is endowed therewith Prudence being
invisible, as internal and concealed virtue, which is not discovered, but
only in occasions; surely wise men will pass their verdicts on the active
man's side, and he shall be put upon all the employments. Let Princes beware of
these lively Spirits, of these beautiful tinctures, this harmony of verse,
this stream of eloquence, for fear lest it take away their judgment, to the
endangering and utter ruin of the State.

Alcibiades above all other things, was noted for inequality, he was eloquent
in a degree above man, fairer than woman, eminent in understanding, liberal
and pleasing; but unjust, lustful, and tyrannical. Those who have such a
mixture of great vices, and great virtues, sometime precipitate and fall almost
as soon as they are born; sometimes also they make a great noise in the world,
when they happen upon times which will bear with such vices, and stand in need
of such virtues. Alcibiades met with a popular Commonwealth, fitted to his
inequality, that applauded his liberality and beauty, suffered it self to be
persuaded by his eloquence admired his resolution, humorousnesse and valor,
did run along with him in his vices of luxury, surfeiting, tyranny and
injustice; which were pleasing to people, so long as they were employed against
the Nobility. Nero, who was blemished with such defects, and yet gained the
Roman peoples applause, more than any other Roman Emperor. Indeed it was by
reason that he met with times differing from Alcibiades times, the Senate then
being predominant over the people, which lived depressed, and without
authority, his ruin could not be prevented; whereas Alcibiades did not take so
much harm within the Commonwealth, in getting honors, as abroad in managing
of affairs; for although his temperament was well enough accommodated and
fitted to the state which the City was in, yet he found it otherwise in
foreign affairs, whereby he was necessitated to fall. And though he did rise
again diverse times assisted by his great and good parts, yet being at the last
overborn by his evil ones, he remained oppressed. Equality is not only
judged to be an endowment of a wise man, but also a sign that he is one,
seeing it is he that commands the stars. If a heaven variable in its motions,
moves above us, the stars always varying in their aspects, have their
influences upon us, and an air mutable every moment, does encompasse us, and
we are our selves framed of an unequal temperament, who shall be able to keep
himself continually in the same tone, in despite of heavens, stars, elements
and temperaments? Certainly a wise man shall. We are made a spectacle to God
and men, said St. Paul. And is it not a worthy spectacle, to see a wretched
man, a handful of earth, a point, a nothing, to oppose the vastness of the
heavens, the influences of the stars, the mass of the Elements, his own
nature, and conquer them all? Equality signorizes over the influences, because
it constantly goes always against them: inequality is commanded by them,
because it always follows them various.

Finally, after so many Catastrophes Alcibiades by the Lacedaemonians deceits,
and Farnabazus his treachery, ended his life by the Sword. When Nature fights
with a disease, and shows it self sometimes superior, and sometimes inferior,
it betokens and argues weakness in it, at last it remains conquered, the
disease increasing in malignity, and nature decreasing in strength, which it
loses even then when it overcomes. Relapses for the most part are deadly,
because that nature overcame not the disease at first, but only when it used
its last endeavor, and when the disease rises again above its nature wanting
a new and greater endeavor, must of necessity succumb and perish: Even so, man
wrestling with Fortune, and sometimes being superior, sometimes inferior, must
needs at last remain inferior, and be overcome, For an unfortunate man to
strive against Fortune, for the first time is ignorance, being once beaten
down, to rise again and return to the combat is obstinacy, but to
prosecute, and follow it, is mere and absolute folly. What ease would it be to
a man to know himself the very first hour to be unfortunate? he would shun
the resort of men, to make himself a Companion of wild beasts, and in stead of
Cities and Palaces, Caves, and Woods would be his habitation. And if Fortune
did seek him out, instead of giving him her hand, she would turn her back to
him. He would have his recourse to night, to not behold the light which is so
tormenting to him, the Sun, and Heavens that are so contrary, and would also
wish the night dark, that he might not see in it those star^s which threaten
him damage and ruin. Happiness shows ill in a man's eyes in the dark, and
unhappiness in the light. It had bin better for such a one to not have bin
borne, or to have dyed as soon as he was borne. But since to not be borne did
not lie in his hands, nor dying does not; let him hide himself, to make men
believe that he is not borne, and that he lives as if he were dead. Surely if
he did know his evil fortune, he would withdraw into the woods, and if it were
known to others, he would be forced to retreat thither. We can hardly make
our selves believe we have it, unless we make more then one essay, but others
may easily know that we have it, without having experimented it. Great Princes,
Kings, and Monarchs, in whose hands seems at first to lie the giving and
taking away of their subjects fortune, if they did withstand the motions which
they inwardly feel, they would know the quality of fortune by the inward
effect which moves in them. And how behove-full would it be to recule and set
by unfortunate men ere they were scarce known, and to bring fortunate men out
into the light, they having no need of any other trial, but what they feel
within themselves of instinct or loathing. Fortunate men overcome fortune with
following it, the unfortunate with yielding to it. How many times does nature
kill a man, no diseases assaulting nor engaging him, because it does assault
and engage them. There a^e (according to the opinion of learned men) certain
venomous humors, which remain a long time in a man's body without hurting it,
because nature has laid them aside in some ignoble part, far from the heart,
and has not meddled with them, nor stirred them; which humors if she once set
upon, she is lost. And unfortunate man would live secure all the days of his
life; if seeing he cannot any way move fortune, he would recule, and remove
himself, not coming to trial with her, to assault her. Man daily calls
fortune unconstant, and yet learnes not to cease his admiration when he sees
her inconstancy. If he he does not know her to be such why does he give her
that attribute? and if he does know it, why does he wonder at it when he sees
it inconstant? This always accompanies ignorance, and does not admit of
providence.

What is there firm in the world? The earth to day brings forth a plant, and
makes show as if would raise it up as high as heaven. Go by, and come again
that way within a few days, and you shall see it turned to ashes, and quite
abandoned as soon as it is perfected. Behold a Tree that has happily brought
its fruit to maturity, and has born it all the while it was imperfect, and as
soon as it is come to perfection suffers it either to wither, or rot: These
things are daily seen, and yet no man wonders at such an inconstancy. But if we
do but think of an Alexander the great, extolled and raised up to the skies,
then when he is at the height left in the hands of an unfortunate death; his
Monarchy first divided, and then destroyed; Then we cry out against fortune,
and call it inconstant. If all wordly things are subject to these kinds of
motions, and changes, why do we ascribe them to fortune more then to any thing
else; Truly because it has least part in it; and is therein more inconstant,
because it has no certainty in its inconstancy, wherefore we complain of its
good deeds, and our own ignorance is the cause of our wondering: it being not
always inconstant, but we not knowing when it will be so.

Men have to this day sought the cause why it comes to pass that subjects
raised by fortune, are by the same in an instant cast down: and that she
shows her power most adverse there, where her favors have bin most
conspicuous; and no body has yet bin able to give a just reason for it: not so
much because they could not give a resolution of the Problem, as because they
have not framed nor stated the Problem right: but have laid it fal^e. For
many, yea very many who have bin raised by fortune, have remained so all their
life time, and it has followed them to their very graves. The reason of this
diversity of effects, is that, which must be sifted out. Jupiter and Venus do
not alone influxe fortunes, but Mars and Saturn likewise have their
influences; and with them the fixed stars of the first greatness, all of
them (except Spica Virginis) defiled with the violent qualities of these
malevolent ones.

The way is different, and the manner contrary. Some do raise men, are raised
by Violence, Misfortune, Sword, Fire, Blood, Slaughters, and Battles. Some
again, by means of Sciences, Virtues, Counsels and Prudence are brought
mildly up to degrees of eminency. Out of the first are framed Tyrants, and
Generals of Armies; out of the latter, Lawgivers, Counselors, Princes,
Priests. Each have their Catastrophes according to their nature, when once the
Aspect turns from being friendly to be adverse. But the damages and harms
which are influxed by Jupiter and Venus are not Tragical; The change of State
is not sudden, and even the death it self is mild. Saturn and Mars do
every thing violently. Look but upon the seven Kings of Rome in its very first
beginning, and you shall see them all (except Numa Pompilius) die violent
deaths. In them you shall for the most part see the violence of misfortunes
involved amongst destructions and blood. In this the mildness of Jupiter, and
Venus, Council, Prudencie, and Religion. Consider many peaceful Princes;
Legislators, Counselors, and Priests, risen to the very height of happiness:
And on the other side many Princes that have bin Warriors, Tyrants, Generals
of Armies; And in these you shall find, for the most part, Tragic
Catastrophes, in the other, very seldom any violent ones. But the unfortunate
man has not only nature, and the stars adverse to him, but men also, whose
envy he stirs up against him through his pride; and even God himself moving
him to wrath with his wickedness. Yet his fortune may wither a little, and yet
not be quite corrupted, he may by his prudency oversway the stars, with
humility mitigate men, and with piety appease God. Finally, if Alcibiades had
not the delight of an unsavory and continued happiness, he had it of a
sharp, and often renewed one. The habit of a Wrestler (as the wise man said)
being arrived to the very height of goodness cannot be increased, but it will
perish, nor cannot be kept at a stay but it will change, nor change without
growing worser.

The remedy is to diminish it, that it may be increased again. Even so
happiness being arrived to the height, must descend: and if you stay till the
descent comes accidentally, it often turns to a precipice: If it comes by
wisdom and foresight, it occasions a new delight by rising again.

There is no way for one to rise when he is at highest, but first he must come
down lower; Fortune is favorable when chance carries him down gen^ly, and it
is an eminent understanding, which will disposes his will to it. There is no
great delight in being happy, it requires a motion, the pleasure is in the
becoming so, and he that oftenest and most times becomes such has received
most pleasure. Such a happiness does that man attain unto, that humbles
himself when he is come to the highest degree: he enjoyes a perpetual
delight, and yet does not forsake his stand, living in a continual motion. He
always humbles himself, and is still raised up. But even as Hippocrates was
(in mine opinion) deceived, judging it a good habit, to be full of blood, so
are they also who judge those men happy that are full of blood. If any man had
represented, and set before the eyes of Caesar, and Alexander the great, and
others who were then; or are now like unto them, the way, and means, whereby
they had attained to their happiness; hearing nothing but outcries, howlings,
and horrid lamentations, seeing nothing but slaughters, ruins of Cities,
desolation of Provinces, Inhabited places made desolate, fruitful places
barren, themselves encompassed, with fire, dead carcasses, and blood: it would
surely strike a terror into them. What happiness is that then the cause of
which affrights and terrifies even him that has attained to it?

FINIS.
MARQUIS VIRGILIO MALVEZZI, HIS CORIOLANUS, To the most Reverend Father, Sforza
Pallavicino, Of the Society of Jesus.
Most Reverend Father,
I Dedicated my Alcibiades to King Philip the fourth: I now dedicate Coriolanus
to your most reverend Fatherhood. What a happiness do I enjoy, to have the
greatest Monarch of the world to be my Master: And the greatest wit, and most
sublime understanding to my Nephew. If these two lines, which adorn my
Writings, were but graven upon my Tombstone, they would fully satisfy my
ambition, namely, HERE LIES THE SERVANT TO KING PHILIP, AND UNCLE TO FATHER
PALAVICINE. The goer by would therein read the happiness of my birth, and the
worthiness of my choice. And how can these my Writings be but secure,
protected by the greatest worldly power, and defended by the greatest learning?
I believe my affinity will not derogate from mine attestation, in witnessing
that which your works have manifested to the world. I would (I had almost
said) renounce my kindred, rather than betray my judgment; and leave being an
Uncle, rather than to not be a Trumpet of the eminency of your understanding,
and most rarely singular qualities. I would beseech your most reverend
Paternity, to esteem of that in me, which is none of mine; namely, your being
my Nephew, and I in the mean time, will glory to have added the Title of
Servant to the Character of Uncle. So, affectionately kissing your hands, I
rest,

Your most Reverend Fatherhoods most bounden Servant, and most devoted Uncle,
Virgilio Malvezzi
Bononia April 2. 1648.
READER,
I Do not profess my self so considerate, as that I could not err in mine
advertisements: neither am I so Unchristian, that I would have any man's
reputation to suffer, being any way touched by my ignorant mistakes. I have
therefore thought it good to recall two passages in a book I set forth whilst
I lived in Spain, called The Scale. Whereof the one tends somewhat to the
disparagement of the Duke of Savoy, where I related there was a report that he
complied with the King of France, in yiedling of Susa upon composition. The
other was concerning the Governor of the Bush, through whose avarice J said
the Town was lost. As for the first, though I did not report it of mine own
head, yet it is so far from truth, that I should imagine I did wrong the
sincerity Duke Charles used therein, if I did not affirm the report to be
false, raised by some malicious, and interessed persons. As for the second, I
have seen the Cardinal Infant his Letters which testified that the Governor
was wanting in nothing that belonged to him for the securing and defending of
that place. Therefore Reader if thou find any other places in any parts of
my books, where I have plainly, and unjustly touched any man's reputation, I
intend here to recall it in general, and will be ready to do it in
particular, whenever mine errors shall be made known to me. And wheresoever
the sense is dubious, I shall desire to have it favorably interpreted.

CORIOLANVS.
CORIOLANVS his eminent virtues, which mingled with some defect, made it rather
greater than equal, obliges Plutarch to attribute the cause of the one to the
goodness of his nature, and of the other to the defect of education. From the
one he inferres, that good soil may overcome bad tillage: from the other, that
let the soil be never so good, yet if it continually have bad tillage, it will
bring forth some bad plant. The soil is the Mind, the tillage, Learning,
which being of a temperate complexion, corrects all excesses, and cures all
contrarieties. It raises those that are too low, humbles them that are too
stout; where it finds any hard thing, it softens it; where any soft, it
hardens it: resembling the Sun, which with the same beams melts the Ice, and
hardens the mire. This doctrine is so delightful, that it has been able to
attract the eyes which it could not dazzle. I have a long time looked upon it
with astonishment, knowing that by consenting to it, I should betray mine
understanding; and doubting lest by opposing it, I should seem to question a
truth; and by arguing against education, which has commonly been approved of,
(and most of all by the wisest) I should be reputed rash and temerary, though
by right I should be applauded for it. But if a good Citizen ought to expose
his life to save the public, why should he not also adventure his reputation
for the common service? This will be also so much the easier, because I mean
not to direct my shafts against the thing it self, but against the manner;
commending, with others, Education: but not that Education which is commonly
practiced.

I represent unto my self two trees of the same kind but in several places;
one wild in the forest, yet in good soil: the other growing in a Garden,
amiddest the tendernesses of tillage and husbandry. I see the boughs of the
latter more beautiful and springing up, its fruit fairer and bigger; but the
boughs ready to break at every blast of wind, and the fruit rot in a short
time, and affording but a weak kind of nourishment. I see in the former,
rougher boughs, lesser fruit, and not so beautiful; but the boughs resisting
the fury of the North winds, and the fruit not easily corrupted, and strong
for nourishment. The roughness of the tree of the forest, yields I know not
what kind of stateliness, so that Majesty added to the horridness, brings
forth a kind of reverence with delight. The tenderness of the other, moves
delight with its beauty; but in such a manner, that it does in some kind make
the beholder grow tender with looking on it. The tree of the forest is like a
vigorous, sinewy, well-limbed man, with strong muscles. A garden tree resembles
a young and tender maiden. And if this be true, education being like a garden,
will make the masculine vigor grow effeminate, take aaway the horridness
which produces fear, the Majesty which causes reverence, and will change the
Sex, and metamorphose Man into Woman. Many Princes have found it so, who having
conquered fierce and stubborn nations, have not taken more pains in any thing
to keep them under the yoke of bondage, than in polishing what was rough, tame
what was wild, and effeminate by manuring and trimming in a Garden, the
masculine conditions of those wild, but robustious plants; yet I do not mean
to vilify Education but rather intend to speak in commendation of it, not
digressing from the example of Agriculture, which Plutarch sets down.

A husbandman sometimes meets with an excellent soil, to sow Corn upon: and
if he does but even as it were, break it up with the Plough, and sowes but a
little quantity of seed upon it, it will yield a fruitful and abundant
harvest: because the goodness of the soil, not oppressed by the multitude of
seed, does beyond measure increase that little, and being not softened with
overmuch tilling, it strengthens the stem, and with great fertility comes to
maturity. But if the unskilful husbandman too carefully manures and tills it,
and sowes a great deal of seed upon it, at the first coming up, he shall see
an abounding crop sprung, which being grown up with the fruit shall lie upon
the ground, and being laid will be over-growne with weeds, and shall gather
great ears, but empty and putrified.

A husbandman sometimes meets with a soil that is so barren, that he leaves
it in the hands of nature, after he has tilled it, and sown it with very good
seed, and it will bring forth grass instead of Corn, and cockle instead of
Wheat.

But if he chance to meet with an indifferent soil, there he uses all the art
and skill he has in husbandry; there he sows seed in abundance, and whereas
in excellent soil, with little art hindering as it were nature, in indifferent
soil, with great Art., assisting it, hereapes a most plentiful and abounding
Harvest. This is an instruction for men. Let not an evil nature be too much
tilled, nor fed with seed, it is offended by being fed, and too much tillage
offends it; either the seed does not fadge and take root there, or it turns to
poison. Let an indifferent nature have a great deal of education, and a good
one but a little, if you will not have it grow weak and effeminate. The ancient
Romans, whilst the excellent soil lasted, did not tenderly till it with
learning, because they would not weaken the sturdinesse of their Citizens, nor
cause their corn to lie upon the ground through too much rankness, but did
educate them rustically, in a Military way, and so they brought forth a
plentiful generation of Heroic persons. The curious dressing of a Garden is
fit for Tulips, and such kinds of Flowers, which for the most part delight the
eye, but are without savor, sent, or substance: and such are those men, who
brought up in Music, singing, and dancing, serve for ornament, but are
fruitless and vain in a Commonwealth.

The advantage which an excellent soil being but roughly tilled, has above
that which is carefully manured and fed, will more plainly appear, in passing
over two other parts, we multiply the comparison. Titianus was questionless an
admirable Painter; sometimes he was so accurate in the Draughts of his
Pensill, and so exact in his limming, that it seemed he would make the very
hairs numerable: and sometimes he would content himself with drawing of some
pictures with few and rough strokes. An understanding Spectator of such a
different proceeding in his Art, will in the one find a feminine trimnesse; in
the other, a masculine sturdinesse. He will pass over the first with praise,
the latter he will fix upon with admiration; he will have a sweet
inclination to the first, but the last will violently and forcibly draw along
his admira^ion and affection.

What was Cato (whom Antiquity was never weary of commending) but a plant
growing in an excellent soil, a Picture drawn with rough strokes? And the two
Brutes, one of which expelled the Tyrant, and the other slew him, who will not
say but they were trees of the forest? The second was inferior to the first in
fortune, because he exceeded him in knowledge. He knew the defect after he
had been hurt by it; and when he lay a dying, he styled all Sciences vain.
Lucius, hardened by the savagenesse of the forest, killed his own Children.
Marcus, softened with the delicacie of tillage suffers Caesar's frinds to live,
losing that Commonwealth with his learning, which the other had built up with
his ignorance. The people of Rome who hoped for liberty through Marcus his
valor, feared he would lose the beauty of his forestick horridness, by means
of manuring; Caesar almost assured himself that he had lost it. They were both
deceived, for with that part of savageness which remained, he could: kill
Caesar, and ruin the Commonwealth with that softness which he had acquired.

When education is contrary to nature, if it does produce a new character of
its own, yet can it hardly quite cancel that which it found, it may mitigate,
but not overcome it. One subject made basis to two contraries, so^times
operating according to nature, sometimes to educatio^, works with opposite
motions, and with that inequality loses it self. If Marcus Brutus had bin
wholly soft, he had not undertaken so cruel an act: if he had bin wholly
rough, he had happily achieved and performed it.

Plutarch confesses the truth, in denying it. This herb the more it is trodden
the sweeter in smells, this dust the more it is stamped upon, the more it rises.

He commends learning, because it softens the mind, and this is effeminating
of it, because it reduces to a mediocrity, and that is annihilating of
greatness. He also grants, that the Romans education, aimed only at the
bringing in of the virtue of fortitude.

The crown of Oak, which Coriolanus gained in his young years gives us to
understand, what plants they would have to grow in the Commonwealth, and in
what manner manured.

But why had the Oak this prerogative? Peradventure, says Plutarch, by reason
of the the Arcadians who honored it, Or of Jupiter who decked himself with
it, or because of the sturdinesse, or fruitfulness of the tree. Or
peradventure they considered the virtue of the Oak, which lying under water
does not corrupt, or soften, but grows as hard as stone, whereas if part of it
stand above water in the air, it rots in a short time; As if they would
signify thereby, that in a man of worth and valor, virtue does increase, by
his being continually plunged in employments; and contrariwise it withers and
fades away, when any part of him is exposed to sensuality.

Those who would have the reward of the Oaken crown to come again, let them
take away Meum and Tuum. Let them turn this, into a Golden age: and without
producing an Acorne age, they shall see the Oaken Crowns spring up in
abundance.

It is so consonant to reason that all crimes should be punished, and all
virtues rewarded, that it serves for an argument to know there is a heaven, and
a hell; because that good and evil things being not rewarded and punished by
God in this world, seeing it is necessary they should be rewarded, it argues
that of necessity there must be places in the other world to do it. He is
notwithstanding a pernicious and irreligious Prince that will imitate God in
this particular. He takes away (as much as in him lies) the efficacy of the
argument, because he takes away the necessity of doing it, seeing he has not
another world, to reward or punish them in, whom he has not rewarded nor
punished in this world. The happiness of worldly government consists in not
suffering any virtue to go unrewarded, nor any offense unpunished.

One of the greatest disorders that the corruption of rewards has produced,
making treasuries unable to undergo that burden, has bin the (in some sort)
obliging Princes and Commonwealths to reward virtues with an impunity of
offenses.

Unfortunate is that virtuous act, abominable that reward, if the recompense
must be, the bearing with offenses: if rewarding must be forbearance of
punishing, either virtue must go without reward, or turn to vice to attain
it.

No body makes any question, but that rewards and punishments are they which
bear up States: upon these two pillars, did God lay the foundations of the
world, promising glory to those who did well, and threatening evil doers, with
everlasting torments; and if this were not sufficient, if he met with people
that believed neither heaven nor hell, he set a reward and a punishment within
man himself, imprinting in his very entrails the law of Nature, which should
persuade him to good, and dissuade him from evil.

And because all natural operations are pleasing, and contrary ones painful;
man does in his own very acting receive his reward, and his punishment, from
whence proceeds that inward joy which comforts good men, and afflicts bad ones.

But since man through sin was divided, and withdrew from this law, the
senses imbued with another contrary one, more sharp and vehement, he was
forced, to go and assist the natural law, which borne in the soul, was
oppressed by that law which came from without in the members to counterpoise
and overcome it; assisting it with outward punishments and rewards, which
though they be needful in all nations and all sorts of people, yet are they
not required for all men, of the same kind.

The rewards of inferior people, is money, of Nobles honor, the punishment
for the one death: for the other infamy. In former times great spirits were
satisfied, with the reward of an Olive, or Oaken garland: a ring, a chain, a
feather, a scarf, and for greater matters with a triumph: and the denial of a
triumph after it was deserved was a punishment sufficient: and this was done at
such times as it was the vulgar sort of peoples reward to divide the spoil
amongst the Soldiers, and the conquered land among the people.

Such were the proceedings in Commonwealths composed of Optimacy, and
especially in that of Rome, where it may be easily known, by those that read
the histories of it, that the rewards were such, and the like of punishments by
such as exami^e the said histories: Where they shall find, that whole Armies
have bin tithed, putting each tenth man to death, for faults which have bin
committed in them: and never any Nobles put to death for losing of battles, or
ill guiding of their Armies, or any other offense, until we come to Spurius
Melus, whose crime was against the State: Whereby we must needs conclude, that
either in Rome they neglected one fundamental Pillar of Government, which is
punishment, in the Nobility or that for them infamy and disgrace was a
sufficient one.

The Rewards were altered, when desire of wealth came in: not because Noble
minds altered their object, and giving over the desire of glory, did wholly
cast themselves upon their own interests; but because the object it self was
altered; and yet not changed quite, but only communicated to another. The
Ring, the Chain, the Laurel, the Olive Garland, were not the objects of
generous minds, no more are riches now at this time; but they had the first
for honor, and these last for that which they had gained. For the honor
consisting not in him that is honored, but in the honourer; it is not in a
man's choice what to be honored with, or to be rewarded more by one thing than
by another: he must only look what thing is most honored by common applause.
Thence grows the ordinary error of subjects, who in applying themselves, do
not follow their own genius, but ambition, which calls men to that, where glory
is reputed greatest. But the same thing is not in repute in every place, nor in
the same place at all times, nor the samething, in the same manner. Roman
virtues were vices amongst the Parthians.

In Rome Eloquence was first contemned, then afterward honored: sometimes
Asiaticall, sometimes Laconicall, sometimes plain, sometimes garnished
Eloquence was applauded; sometimes that which pleased the ear, sometimes that
which best persuaded the mind: and all this comes to pass, because the true
object of the principal powers of the soul, being wanting in the world (even
like a sick man, that cannot find rest in any place) we always change our
place, because we will not despair of finding it. It was the people that
placed honor in riches, because the object of want hindering the object of
ambition, they turned to honoring of that which might relieve them.

A right effect of Nature, which not to be defective, makes that to be most
desired which is most necessary: Wherefore it was judged by wise and
understanding men, That the desire and appetite of food, was more vehement in
man, than any other passion; and therefore if he had many objects to turn to,
and many passions to satisfy, he would first look upon, and satisfy the
passion of hunger.

But because honor is expected from the vulgar, more than from the Nobility,
(who being emulators, and envious, will rather seek to disgrace than applaud)
and they being corrupt, or necessitated, honor him most that is wealthiest: it
was needful to procure to be one of the greatest among these, to be the most
honored. After applause came Trains of followers, from them sprang factions
and dissentions, and these caused the ruins of Commonwealths and kingdoms.

Many Philosophers knew riches to be the root of all evils: Wherefore when
Licurgus went about to secure his Commonwealth, the first thing he did, was
banishing Gold and Silver out of it, and causing Leather to be made use of
instead of it. Deceiving himself in this because he did not know, that he
did not change the error, but only did abase it by reducing it from a
beautiful, to a vile and abject matter: the excellency of the metals, being
not the reason why Gold and Silver are had in such esteem; but because coin
and money is made thereof, which is of greatest value: so that the way had been
to take money quite away, which could not possibly be done, unless he had
likewise taken away me^m and tuum, viz. every man's propriety. Wherefore Plato
having better considered upon it, resolved to put it quite out of his
Commonwealth, not erring in the finding of the error, but erring in that he
believed that it might be corrected. Princes did likewise co^cur in yielding
repute to riches, by honoring those that had wealth; and, many times, not so
much because they are necessary to get honor, (for it may also be gotten by
valor) but because Princes are always richest, but not always valiantest, it
was reason in State to hold wealth up in men's esteem, to not augment the
reputation of others, and fall into contempt themselves, it being also a common
desire in man, that the thing which they have most of, should be most in esteem.

Then Princes in Monarchical government are participant of this error, the
Senate in Commonwealths, and People in all kind of States: and therefore
together with the corruption of the common wealth, came the corruption of
rewards into Rome, neither suff^ces it, though the one part stands sirme, if so
be the other falls, nor is it sufficient to have an excellent Prince, if he
meet with corrupt People: So that it seems to be a very hard thing to bring in
a reformation of rewards, and being once brought in, it is impossible it should
last, without reforming the whole world, which is run on so far^e, that he that
would now return to the ancient customs, would sooner be styled avaricious
then prudent. Peradventure the Romans did ill in not changing the punishments
with the rewards: They did indeed receive some change at the discretion of
Tyrants, and that was when Cinna, Marius, Silla, Pompey, Caesar, Crassus,
Antonie, and Augustus came in, the Axe beginning then to fall upon the most
eminent and noted Citizens heads, to wreake, and vent their hatred, and secure
their fear, which, if they had born respect to civil justice only, and not
to their Despoticall interest, there could not have wanted gentler, and milder
means, and every way as effectual to save it from contempt. All that imbrue
their hands in blood for hatred, are Tyrants, and all those as do it for
fear, if they cannot be called Tyrants (the fear being grounded upon reason)
may very well be esteemed unfortunate Princes. The corruption of rewards was
then introduced by the want, and corruption of the People, and Policy of the
Sovereigns: The corruption of punishments by the Tyranny of Princes, and
treachery of the Nobles. It is easy where Princes are excellent, and the
Nobility faithful, to continue and preserve punishments, in that perfection as
they were, in the primitive times of the Roman commonwealth; and this is even
the same manner as is now used in Spain, where infamy and disgrace are
sufficient punishments for Noble men's Politic evil actions, which concern
the Prince's service; The debarring them the Prince's sight, Removing them from
the Court, leaving them in oblivion, is as much and as efficacious in that most
happy Country, as banishing, imprisoning, and beheading in other Kingdoms.

Those who blame this manner of proceeding, that the effect, which the example
should be, are peradventure deceived. For an irregulare and temerary mind it
will not be sufficient, and for a generous breast it needs not.

But because all nations do not conform themselves in giving the preheminency
and superiority of this thing which we call reputation, to one and the same
thing; Some attributing it to Wealth, some to Nobility, many to VVisdome, and
some to beauty: some extolling the great man, and some the most valiant, it
will not be amiss a little to argue and search out, to which of these it is
due. And because amongst so many different opinions we cannot have the decision
from man, we will take it from nature, and bow to that virtue, in which nature
has placed the command.

Lawyers are of opinion, that there is no natural servitude, and that all men
are borne free. And though Aristotle seem to say the contrary, yet he does not
mean to yield to any more then a character which shall show not what another
is, but what he should be; therewith setting out; not the act, but the
inclination. Ptolomie meant the same thing in the division of the signs, into
commanding and obeying ones, and no man will deny such instincts, who reading
Hostories, will consider so many Nations, which without any outward violence to
force them, or art to persuade them, have voluntarily submitted themselves to
the command of him, whom they have held in greatest repute.

But in assigning of that virtue, which naturally is commanding, I will take
leave to differ and recede from Aristotle's opinion; for whilst he seeks to
set down what men ought to command, and who to obey, making (or else I err) an
evil distinction of men; He does not resolve the question well, by saying that
some are borne with much strength, and little understanding; others with much
understanding and little strength, the one kind being fit to serve, and the
other to command, the first shall be borne to servitude, the last to command.

He leaves out one part of men who are borne with both these, and another who
have neither of them, and are incapable either of serving or commanding.

He to whom nature has given only a great understanding, was made but to
contemplate and teach, if he were made to command, it was only in a School.
He that has valor only, whom we call temerary, troubles all the world, and
is nothing but violence. To the third, namely to him that has both, the
Scepter, in my opinion is due, and to him indeed, for the most part, People
have granted it, when it has bin in their power to give it: as to Saturn,
Jupiter, Hercules, Romulus,, and so many others; The Gentiles so highly
esteeming him that has those two characters of valor and wisdom (which both
go to the framing of true Fortitude) that where they have found them both
united, they have even adored them. I do indeed find that sometimes men have
also submitted themselves to a man, who has bin only of an eminent
understanding, as to Pythagoras, Lyeurgus and N^ma Pompilius. But I hold this
dominion to be but little more natural then the other, which has only valor
appropriated to it, though one be given, the other violently taken, this latter
called Tyrannical, and the other* Kingly. Peradventure they are both
tyrannical, one offering (as I may say) no less violence with his art, to the
soul, then the other does with his force to the bodies. And if we consider
well the dominion which is obtained by understanding, it always brings along
with it, one of the attributes of the violent, namely of not being durable.
Wherefore those that are such; to keep themselves long in command, have had
their recourse to art, when the favor of nature has failed them, feigning to
have had some commerce with the Gods. So that in mine opinion we may say, that
the understandingest does command by cunning, the most rash by violence, and he
that is endowed with true Fortitude, by nature.

And indeed nature whose chief aim is to preserve the Species, inclines man
to obey him who may best preserve him: And because he that has fortitude is
such a one, he shall before others be set in this natural state, free from all
violence: and men will obey him in whom they shall see this virtue shine more
then in others.

Coriolanus, did not so much desire to be honored himself, as to be
commended to his Mother, he esteemed of honors, because they caused joy in
her. But why should others joy increase ours, whether it be that of our
Parents, and Kindreds, or our friends?

Man is so set upon the satisfying of his passions, and the passions, are so
joined and linked together, and also desirous to be satisfied, that the
perfectly pleasing of ones passion, or the being content with having pleased
it, is not ordinarily attained unto, when the rest are froward and distasted.
For satisfaction of the sense of tasting, savoury meat would be sufficient.

But he that will have it perfumed, seeks to content the smelling also. If he
desires color, handsomnesse, and shape; he seeks to have the eye also pleased
therewith; and that the hearing likewise may have its delight, he will eat his
meat where there is playing and singing. Neither there does the sensuality of
man, composed of soul and body, rest, though his body wallow in delights, the
passions of the soul must also have some food, feeding his ambition with
finenesse of Table-linnen, richness of vessels, number of attendants,
invention, disposition and singularity.

In the sense of feeling, man should be content with softness: but he will
have beauty for the eyes, he desires perfumes to please the smell, Nobility and
virtue to appay his ambition; and to content his irascicall part, could he not
also satisfy himself with the death of his enemy? No; fully to please the
passions of his mind (though he oftentimes do it with loss and danger) he
will vain-gloriously have it known that it was he that slew him; and the
greater his innocence was, the more he rejoices in his revenge. These examples
are so clear, that they put it out of all question, that man's desire is not
content with the satisfaction of the passions of the body, if he does likewise
in some sort partly satisfy his ambition. The same (as I believe) happens as
truly (though not so plainly) in the satisfying of ambition. Cold and unsavory
seem the advancements to honors and dignities, all increases of greatness
(let them be of never so great moment) seem despicable, if there be not some
content likewise given to the two chief passions of the body, Irascible, and
Concupiscible. Thereunto has regard, the desire of having at that time, both
those we love, and those we have, alive, that we may rejoice at the grief
which we see in the one, and the pleasure which we espy in the other.

That is a kind of revenge belonging to the Irascible, and this a kind of
benefit done to him who is beloved, which may be reduced to the Concupiscible.
He will think himself unfortunate, who arriving to any happiness, has not
these two spectators, a friend and an enemy. Hence proce^ds the original cause
of his excessive delight, who comes to great preferment in his fathers life
time, because that in this case both the foresaid affections are satisfied, the
son being both beloved and also emulated by the father. And though the
emulation be not so apparent, yet sometimes there is as much of it, as there
is of love, less discovered but sometimes more sharp: whereupon he did very
well, that made it the chief of his joys, that his Father and his mother had
seen him ride in triumph.

And it is no marvel, if he did desire the presence of the one more than of
the other, because in the other wants emulation: And indeed the delight is more
perfect, which we receive from the love that belongs to both, than from the
emulation which belongs particularly to the Father, it failing (unless it be
by reflection) of any desire which may produce grief.

But how can it be, that a man's joy increasing by his friends rejoicing, his
sorrows should decrease by his friends grieving at his sorrows? St. Thomas
says, that the friends grief is considered, not as a real thing, but as a
mark and sign of one: not as a dolorous passion, but as a sign of love,
whereby the comfort is received. To this learned saying might also be added,
That a friend being beloved as ones self, we desire that all his actions
should be perfect; wherefore it does trouble us to see him rejoice in our
calamities, and we are glad when with his sorrow he sympathizes with us in
them. The former being a sign of his slighting us, and the other of his
constancy in affection. Add to this finally, the delight a man takes when he
finds he has made a happy choice of a friend, and grief which oppresses him
if he proves false.

Sannieticus, King of Egypt, being taken prisoner by Cambyses, sees his
daughter in a servile habit drawing of water, his son guarded by armed men to
his death, he looks upon them both with dry eyes. Afterward he sees one of his
friends half naked, and almost starved, begging food to keep him alive, he
abandons himself to grief, weeping and lamentation. The solution of this knot
is very difficult. Cambyses desires to know the reason, and causes Sanneticus
to be examined about it: as if he that does a thing, always knew the reason
why he does it. He many times is ignorant of it, and oftentimes whereas the
action produces the effects, he makes it to be produced by the effects, either
to conceal the true cause, or to boast of a wisdom which he has not, but
only preposterous, ascribing the work of Fortune to his own prudency. The
captive King answers, That he having no grief to equal to the two first
calamities, had sacrificed it to the third, as worthy of it. Others will say,
that the two first brought him to the highest pitch of suffering; and the third
forced him to run headlong into lamentation. Neither of these solutions
satisfy me: One savours of Poetry, and the other is not altogether
Philosophical. The greater grief (according to Hippocrates doctrine) does not
suffer the lesser to be felt, then it was either greater, or of another nature:
greater only would not have been sufficient to extract tears, it would rather
have hindered the eyes from weeping: it was of another nature, namely, a
mixture of joy and grief: the first with its heat being able to make and open
that passage which the last with its cold had closed up to tears.

None that loves, but if he love vehemently, sometimes when he raves and dotes
most, will consider his friend in the midst of his troubles and dangers, with
some kind of pleasure; whereby he believes to show and manifest the sincerity
of his affection, either by taking him out of his afflictions, or bearing him
company in his miseries. If this desire being but only speculated, and
contemplated, does please one, what will it do when it is put in practice? It
will produce a grief full of delight, which rather causes a kind sweetened
tenderness, than affliction or sorrow of the heart, from which we must
confess it draws tears, but very pleasing ones. Hence proceeds, that
sometimes he that really falls into troubles and misfortunes, beholds with dry
eyes, others who participate thereof only through affection, power out Oceans
of tears. There being wanting in him that part of pleasure which opens the
cataracts of tears, kept in and sealed up, through the sharpness of grief:
whereas the other, because the grief is not properly his own, but only bred
in him through his friends affliction, being as it were produced by imitation,
has also a kind of delight almost continually mixed with it.

An excellent Actor, who on stage relates some Tragic Scene, feels a kind of
grief in himself; and if he does not, he does not exquisitely act his part;
and if he does, who can deny, but that it is with a most sweet and pleasing
grief, which has its original from a most pleasant imitation.

All these ways as being accidental, peradventure increase not the substance
of the joy: they may peradventure dilate it, but not sink, nor make it grow
deep, unless it be when our friends* joy surpasses ours, either by the
strongness of his apprehending it, or the faintness of his temperament; for
then it works in us, according to the degree which it has atttained unto. What
true-hearted man can see a friend in his t^oubles grieve more than himself,
but it must increase and augment his grief; and will rather seek to comfort
his friend, than be comforted by him: grief working in him no more as a sign,
but as a thing real; and because greater, therefore increasing. Coriolanus
therefore had reason to desire, that his famous actions should be related to
his mother, any thing that increased her joy, gihim much satisfaction; because
the feminine temperament being more apt to receive affections, he could
perceive it greater in her than in himself; and measuring the greatness of
the action, by the degrees of the content which it produced, he found the
action greater in his mothers rejoicing, than in his own.

Coriolanus desires the Consulship of the people, and when he sues for it, he
puts off his Robe, the custom of those times was such. Whether it was (says
Plutarch) to show his scarres, and cause his valor to oblige them, or to show
himself submisse, and so persuade them with a seasonable humbleness, because
in those days virtues were more prevalent with the people than wealth.

I cannot be persuaded this should be the intent of this custom. The scarres
might have been shown without putting off his his Robe, or the putting it off
would not have sufficed. A suppliant humility is good with a man's equals, not
with his inferiors, in whom it breeds a kind of loathing, to see a great man,
who should command them abase himself so much.

It seems that a man, as if he did imprint those qualities which are in
himself, in his garment, when he thinks they might be available to him, he
puts it on, and when he believes they will do him hurt, he puts it off. Those
Fathers which remained in Rome, when it became a prey to the Gauls, did put on
their Senatoriall habits, which for a while bridled the Gauls insolency. That
Fabius, who passed untouched amongst the enemies, puts on his Priestly habit,
and sacrifices. Leo the Pope put on his Pontifical habit, and appeases the
wrath of the barbarous Tyrant. Contrariwise, David's child falls sick, he rents
and lays away his garments. Job feels his sorrows increasing, and puts them
off. Neither is that enough in great afflictions, many proceed further, pulling
off their hair, and even tearing their flesh: every thing then represents it
self to them full of that quality which does at that time torment them. And
they would make themselves believe, that they could diminish it by pulling off
their garments, throwing away their hair, and pouring out their blood, as if
together with them they did put off, throw away, and power forth part of the
tormenting grief which afflicts them.

The Senatoriall dignity was hateful to the people, because they could not
divest themselves of the degree, they put off the Robe, as if in that lay the
whole hatred, if not part of it. For the showing a sudden change from a
Commander to a suppliant, from a man clothed in Robes to a divested one, did
much avail to put off hatred, and gain compassion. A Catastrophe (though
false) did violently incline the minds to a kind of tenderness; as in a
Tragedy we see sometimes circumstances almost forcibly draw tears from the
hearers eyes, though they know all is but fained and fabulous. I have seen the
King my Master on that day we celebrate the commemoration of the washing of the
Apostles feet, when he has laid away his Cloak and Rapier, to fit himhimselfe
for so pious a mystery, draw abundance of tears from the beholders eyes. The
putting off the Robe did abate a great deal of the peoples hatred; and that
which the laying away of the Robe had not done, the Catastrophe altered. And
because he that has a fellow-feeling, desires also to assist, and the
compassion being greatest where the greatest change is, and the greatest change
being in him that deserves most: the people desired to raise him that was of
greatest merit, and exalt him to the Consular dignity. They had assuredly done
it in our case; being resolved to bestow it upon Coriolanus, if he appearing
the next day with a great train of Senators at his heels, had not destroyed
his first show of humility, by this second of pride, taking away the
compassion, and giving way for them to kindle their anger a new, and therewith
their hatred, which changed those tender thoughts of raising him, into as many
sharp inclinations to oppress him.

Virtue can only be judged of naked: all kinds of accoutrements deforme it, it
is an ornament to all things, and to itself both ornament and substance. He
that will not loath her, let him behold her unarrayed; and he that will judge
of her, let him view her naked. The Trojan Shepherd had not bin deceived, had
he beheld the three Goddesses naked: He had give^ sentence on Pallas side, had
not her helmet, spear, shield, and the rest of her armor puzzled him.

Virtue is both good and fair. Goodness, and beauty are the objects through
which, will, satisfaction, and love pass to the understanding. How can you
conceive virtue to be otherwise but fair and good if ^ou consider it as
virtue: and in what other shape can you consider it, if it does not appear
naked unto you. Hate, Rage and Envy cannot touch it, they are mothes which
stick only on the garments, worms that inhabit putrefaction only; strip her
of applauses, wealth, and all other vain habiliments, if thou will have her be
secure, and enamourthee. This virtue which being once known, violently stirs
up love, takes impression in men's hearts (sometimes in the Great ones,
sometimes in the Peoples) by very different ways. Some would have it remain
within the sphere of mediocrity, some would raise it up to the concave of the
Moon. It is not always envy which desires it low, nor love that continually
desires to have it exalted. Sometimes it happens, because a Great one would
come into a strict league of friendship with it, and the People would by its
means enjoy an honorable servitude. He that is possessed of such a noble gemme
may communicate it to some by a relation of friend to friend; to others of
Master, to Servant. The one to be perfect requires equality; the other to be
pleasing, a kind of distance. The greater the Master is, the more honorable is
the servant: and the more cordial the friend is, the greater equality is
between them. But the connection which the People has with a person of eminent
virtue, is like a servant to his Lord, and he is desirous to exalt him. But the
great ones is as one friends to another, and he does not desire to have him
advanced. Aristotle though he makes equality too necessary in friendship;
sometimes attributing it to superabundancy, sometimes to want, as if he
discovered the truth out of its due distance, and with a hindered and obstructed
means; seems to contradict himself, and pretend it to proceed from a great
equality.

He either was or would be deceived, he needed to have bin neither, if he had
affirmed that both these causes united, did produce a most strict league of
friendship. Superabundancy, and want, if one of them alone be divided into two
subjects, brings forth either slavery, or its image. The poor, is the rich man's
slave, and the Scholar the Masters, and if he be not, he is like some such
thing.

Of two superabundancies and two wants, there is framed an almost indissoluble
bond of friendship. The People that find in themselves nothing but defect, go
toward virtue, and desire to have it made great, because they will serve it.
The great one who with the defect of virtue, has superabundancy of honor and
wealth, would find him out who has superabundance of what he wants, with
defect of his superabundance, and desires to have him low, because he would
make him his friend. And if this latter comes also to be exalted to honors and
wealth, the other loses his superabundancy, and remains with deefct only: He
has nothing whereon to found the harmonious equality which produces
friendship; and because he abhorres the character of being a servant, he hates
that virtue exalted, which he venerated when it was humble. If there be a great
pleasure in the world, it consists in doing a benefit, and if there be any
greater, it is in requiting it.

Therefore that must needs be exceeding great which is produced by the
harmonious interweaving, of abundance, and defect, where the benefit is at the
same time done and requited.

Plutarch calls Coriolanus proud and impatient; I agree to it. He attributes
the cause of it to want of study, I dissent from it: Because learning does not
only not hinder these passions, but according to St. Paul's saying, produces
Pride, and according to Solomon's, Impatience; I attribute it to his being born
in the Roman Commonwealth, which more desirous to increase then to preserve
itself as it was made more of valor, esteem in its Citizens thereof
Patience. Wherefore at the last keeping one still alive, it fell for want of
the other. True it is, that as it is not against the law of Patience, that one
upon occasion, when there is need, should violently oppose one that operates
ill, no more is it of the essence of valor, to repair all damages, and
revenge all offenses. But the Romans cared not for these qualifications.

That Valor was more useful to them, which operated, then that which
suffered. And because for that part of valor, which looks after revenge,
wrath was very useful, and very hurtful to that which belongs to suffering;
it is not to be wondered, that some of them had the vice of impatience coupled
with the virtue of fortitude. Seneca would not admit this doctrine of wrath: he
would have it rooted out, as if our nature were so perfect, that it wanted no
instigation, to make it operate well, nor no curb to keep it from working
evil.

He that will see how man ought to make use of wrath, which we also call
choler, let him consider what use nature makes of that choler which is called
Bilis. I meddle not with that part which is called Nutritive, which subtilizes
the blood, that it may the easilier nourish the parts, which feeds the heart,
and the musculous flesh, which tempers the cold of the Pituitous humor, with
Melancholy. I will speak only of the Excrementall Bilis; There is one
natural, and another without nature, or extra naturam: One reserved in the
Gall bag, that is to cleanse and absterge the pituitous humors together with
the ordures; because like a medicament it instigates, and provokes the
expulsive virtue, to send forth that which is not to be retained, and which
being retained would kill. The other breeds Dysenteries, Diareas, Deliriums,
Frenzies, perfect Tertians, and an infinite of such diseases: And even just so
it is with wrath. One kind of wrath is a passion which like that unbridled
Bilis running on furiously, brings one to a precipice: The other regulated by
the understanding, and set apart for some occasion, serves to instigate the
virtue of valor: and as Natures excrementall Bilis is necessary to expel the
excrements; which nature would not move to do if it were not instigated; so
likewise this wrath is necessary for man to drive that away from him which the
understanding has concocted, and judged fit to be driven out.

But nature does not make use of the Bilis only to expel excrements only,
but also of the serous matter to distribute the blood; of melancholy to excite
the appetite, to retain the food, and sustain the body; Of the sharp and
serous humor to mix with the seed to provoke to generation, and preserve the
kind. Although that serous humor be that which causes Hydropsie, though the
Atra Bilis produces Quartanes, Cancers, Hypocondries, Rage and Madness; though
that from the sharp subtle humor, the greatest part of the Cutancall diseases
have their beginning: So the mind likewise makes use of Wrath for Fortitude:
of Ambition for Magnanimity; and yet the one produces rashness, the other
pride. That straitness of mind which causes avarice, being dilated, makes up
parsimony: From that largeness of breast, from which springs Prodigality, if
it be but a little restrained, there proceeds liberality. Finally, the good or
hurt that these humors of the body, and passions of the mind do produce,
proceeds from their being regulated or not regulated; the humors by Nature,
and the passions by Reason. From the making use of the same humor, both for
virtue and for vice, though in a diverse manner, comes, that ignorance is
oftentimes deceived, and malice confounds vice and virtue, calling prodigality,
liberality; rashness, fortitude; and pride, magnanimity.

It is worthy consideration, and yet not easy to know, why Nature has made
choice of evil humors to make use of, to exercise the best and principal
parts of the body: when as it might have disposed the generative virtue, the
expulsive, the retentive, the appetitive, and the distributive, in such manner,
that they might have operated without having need of spur or instigation. And
if they had need of any, why did give it them of such imperfect matter? This
knot which by a Gentile is indissoluble, may be resolved by a mean
understanding, so that it be Christian, when it shall consider, that Natura
Naturans, did not create man in such a fashion. There was no ill humor
resident in him, every thing was good; all parts obeyed, without any
resistance; all virtues operated without any instigation. It was Adam and not
Nature that placed good and evlll in the same subject; and if it were Nature,
it was Natura Naturata, corrupted by him who disobeying his Creators commands,
broke the order of obedience, and put every thing in confusion. The evil of
the Bilis, of melancholy, and other humors, proceeds from Adams sin and
retains the character of disobedience. But if vanity made Seneca contrary to
Aristotle, truth did agree them together again. He confirms what I have said,
he says, It is good to make use of wrath as a servant, and that it is naught
to be subject to it, as to a Lady and Mistress.

Patience co^sists not in the not feeling of pain, seldom in doing as if one
felt it not, but always in feeling it as it ought to be felt. There is no such
thing as inse^sibility of pain: if there be it is not a strongness of heart but
a weakness of the mind. He that pretends to have such an insensibility,
deceives, because he has it not; and he that has it, deceives himself,
because he raves, and so does the former too, being sick with ambition* though
not of a Fever. It is bad in prosperity but in adversity monstrous: in the one
we must use violence to our selves to keep it away, and in the other we must
sorce it to come. It is contrary to the ambitious humor, and therefore a time
of misery is fitting for it.

Where that which should cure, hurts, it is a sign that the disease is long,
or mortal. Where the disease comes out of its due season either the humor is
malignant, or abounding. The comfort of the afflicted is only to be born with,
the ambitious man is only hated. Insensibility is a vain ostentation, when it
is not a hurtful madness, which makes the evil worse instead of remedying
it. His aim that offends is ordinarily to give distaste and to cause grief;
which until he has attained to, he cannot be quiet: and to overcome a feigned
non-feelingnesse of grief, attempts a greater mischief. The operation of
Virtue ought to be long, and slow, to make a difference between a habit and a
violent passion. Singularity does not become it; for either it makes it
ambitious, and it changes full of, or affectation, and it grows faint and
weak. Diogenes comes into Plato's house, he wonders that it is not a Tub: he
sees his Bed, and is scandalized and offended, because it is soft: and when he
was to go by it, not satisfied with contemning it, in a fierce, violent, and
proud rage, treads and stamps upon it. The German Legions cry up Vitellius for
Emperor, they see him necessitous of money; with the same heat and violence as
they had from a private man raised him to be a Prince, they will also of poor
make him rich, every one strives to bring him gold and silver, and whatsoever
he has, that is precious. The most wretched, that had nothing in his
possession for the present to give, gave him whatsoever he had due to him.
Tacitus considers the action, and to find out the form, he goes not to the
matter, which is capable of contrary forms, he goes in quest of the Motor; and
after he has called it sometimes Inclination sometimes Violence, at last to
show how adverse he is from esteeming it to be Liberality, he breaks out, and
calls it by the name of Avarice.

The female Sex, though endowed with a weak heart and very mean understanding,
is also subject to impatience, as well as a very valiant man: I would say it
were because the delicateness of the instruments that are subservient to the
understanding, are likewise common to them with man, the moistnes of the brain,
and the softnes of the flesh: were it not that those instruments are rather
unsinewed and weak, than delicate: the moistness rather fluid than viscous:
the softness rather watery than aereall. It will be peradventure more
warrantable, to assign the cause of it to pride, and wrath, qualities which
produce impatiency, and to which that Sex is very prone, And by means of the
one, they communicate with men of great wit; by the other, with such as have a
great heart. But if wrath be so predominant in women. how come they to want
valor? Say that it is because their choler proceeds from a pallid Bilis, which
abounds in that Sex, and being serous, and fluid, it yields no firmness nor
consistency. And likewise that their spirits are moveable, and few; because
moveable, they run swiftly to the heart, and quickly kindle the fire; because
they are few, they cannot feed nor maintain it, and it goes quickly out. From
hence does female instability take its origin, those unquiet spirits letting
go presently that which they have received, and being but few, they know not
how to retain it. This may also be a reason why they do not hit upon the
truth, unless it be on a sudden. They send those spirits suddenly to the
brain; and if they be capable of apprehending the truth, they do it in that
very instant: and if not, failing of new spirits, they want means to attempt a
stronger operation, and so they do not find it: and if they have found it,
yet they want spirits to discuss it, and so they lose it. Their brain either
does not reach to the truth, or it does not stay and fix there. Many men also
touched with such a defect, after they have found the truth, if they go about
to bolt land sift it out carefully, do lose it: they have as many spirits as
will reach to it, and not enough to follow and prosecute it. A most acute and
learned Author gives another reason; Truth, says he, is a most bright light,
it suffers it self to be looked upon, but not to be examined. He that looks
upon the Sun, sees it not at the first sight; but if he sixes his looks upon
it, he loses both Sun and sight. This reason is more fair than sound, and is
averred by an example more beautiful than fit. The thing which is too
sensible, does not appay the senses, but destroy them: their object is a mean,
and too great a one is an enemy to them. The understanding runs toward the
greatest intelligible, it does not stand upon the mean one: neither does any
other truth limit it, than that which is unlimitted. The distance which is
between the material and the immateriall, takes away the proportion: to frame
the example. The great sensible having taken possession of a sense, makes the
knowledge of a lesser impossible for it, because it is a substance. The great
intelligible makes it easy to the understanding, because it is a spirit.

The Commonwealth of Rome might have taken a healthful Antidote out of this
poison of Coriolanus, if they had kept him under a civil, not under a military
Discipline: and if they had kept him under a military one, it should have been
to obey, not to command. The City mended him, the Camp made him worse.
Mortifications taught and directed him, applauses overthrew him. One may do
amiss, through valor rooted in pride or in affection. One deserves punishment
the other reward; the first is most pernicious to the Commonwealth, the other
exceeding profitable. Time increases defect in the former; in the latter,
virtue.

Po^ponius, Tribune of the people, accuses Manlius his son, which after was
Manlius Torquatus, who though his father had d^stasted him, being advised
rather by courage than by wit, tender in years, yet more tender in love, with a
rural, yet affectionate resolution, comes out of the Country (where he dwelt
continually) to the City, goes to the Tribunes house, calls him aside, and
takes hold on him in such a manner, that he was not able to stir from him;
and drawing a dagger, forces him either to promise to desist from his
intention, and let fall his accusation, or to lose his life: The Tribune
promises him, and desists. This case was divulged in Rome.: There was neither
Plebeian, nor Patrician that blamed him. For his tememerity he had deserved
death; for his love he was rewarded: they all hope he will (being instructed)
learn to do that through the direction of virtue, which he had done by
violence of Nature, and as much for his Country, as he had for his father.
Where a man erres through valor and love, the matter deserves correction
rather than punishment; and he that did it, deserves a reward rather than a
penalty. Moses with this Character, full of divine zeal, kills an Egyptian,
Peter cuts off Malchus his ear. The one is made the head of the old Law,
conductor of the children of Israel and Pharaohs God: the other a head of the
new law, a Pastor and head of the Church. Coriolanus his valor was grounded
upon pride: for it could not be said it was grounded upon affection to his
country, coming against it armed, and putting it into such straits, that it
was very near lost.

There are some defects in young men, which (I was going to say) are
commendable, I will say, compatible; and some virtues (I will not say
blameworthy) yet are not to be desired. Where the action is not good because
it is superabundant: and the error has a kind of conformity with the years,
time does help, and it hurts where it is inconformable: and the sin is more in
the quality than the quantity: more in the form than the matter. A te^petate
liver in youth, is good for one to live healthful, to live long it is better
to have it exceed in heat. It cools continually, and according as the man grows
in years, it loses his superfluous heat, so that as the man grows old, it grows
temperate. The hurtfulnes of the excess is in the strength of age, which is
able to resist it, and does not kill. The profit of its temperatnesse is, when
Nature has most need of help, and sustains and assists it. But if the excess
were in the quality of the heat, and in those years that it should be
favorable, it should show it self nipping, whereas the one, because it
always decreases with age, ought to be left to grow old; the other, because
it always increases, must be rooted up: So those young men, who err through
quantity of heat, should grow old in the City, and those extirpated, who
p^ecipitate by reason of their evil qualities. Of the first quality was
Manlius Torquatus, and they reward him; of the second was the son of Brutus,
and they kill him. If a young man of a fiery nature, be rash, the firecools,
and before the time of operating comes, is reduced to a degree that he may
operate well; but if he be prudent, cold being required for such an effect, and
the temperament cooling with the increase of years, it may be feared, that
before he arrives to the time in which he should make use of its virtue, he will
degenerate into vice; and whereas in one case the rash man comes to attain
true fortitude, in the other the valiant man becomes pusillanimous. Quintilian
would have the Orator in his young age, rather bold than fearful: The latter
would become cold, whereas the first years favoring him, will make him
moderate. Boldness ought to overcome judgment, when it is time to learn; but
when it is time to operate, it ought to be subdued. It will be more easy for
Art to cool hardiness, than to heat judgment, because Nature is favorable to
the one, and contrary to the other. All that which is violent, is difficult;
yet with a difference between that which is against, and that which is
conformable to Nature. One may easilier throw a stone toward the the Center
than the Circumference: for it is easier to follow than to oppose an
inclination.

If patience meet with greatness, or vigor of mind, it raises to that degree
of glory toward which many with an unbridled insufferency (but in vain)
directing themselves, find nothing but precipices. Suffering best befits him
that can easiliest revenge himself, and gives most glory, where it finds
greatest reputation. Where fear cannot be ascribed to baseness of heart, nor
the not knowing, to dullness of brain; his contempt must be called magnanimity,
and his dissimulation must be termed prudency. The least offenses are not
easiest to be endured, either because they most conceal the revenge, or
because they sting more sharply, or because they are more frequently met with.
These are they which ruin Princes, and overthrow Monarchies: they grow
infallibly, and yet insensibly, and greatness coming in, gives no way to
forbearance of revenge, without loss of reputation. There is a great
difference between an offense being great at first, and its becoming such. One
finds man cold, and free, the other heated and engaged: neither can he seem
to grow careless of it, when it is grown up, that did not contemn it when it
was but small. And having already lost the name of prudent, by prosecuting of
it to that time, he will gain the name of Pusillanimous, if he then gives it
over. A disease which becomes malignant by degrees, is more mortal than that
which begun so. The Prince which will not bear with his subjects, endangers the
changing his name of Prince, into Tyrant: and he that will not bear with
strangers, endangers his kingdom to become a private man. A prince his own
patience is not sufficient for the quiet of his kingdom, if his officers also
be not endued with it, in whom it being equally requisite, it is far more
difficult: A man may easily suffer in his own interests, who is impatient in
his Lords. For the one, he hopes to reap glory and profit through his patience,
and so bears. In the other, to gain it from revenge and so he puts forward.
He that offends the Prince before his Officer, offends both the Prince and his
Officer, whereby obliging him to two patiences, he makes the sufferance almost
intolerable. These imagine that the zeal of their masters reputation moves
them to a resentment, and oftentimes it is their own arrogance, wherewith they
embroyle Princes, obliging them to wars, into which they are engaged more by
others than their own impatiences; and this happens oftenest, where the States
and Dominions are most remote. That remoteness which is most favorable to the
Prince for his suffering, is contrary to the Officers. One does not see the
injuries, the other, the Prince.

When Aristotle blames the Lacedaemonians for attributing every thing to the
virtue of fortitude, said, that one virtue was not sufficient: and if one alone
were to be chosen, Fortitude was not it. He named not that, to which he
attributed the chief honor, if he had named it, in mine opinion, it had bin
patience, because virtually it contains all other virtues in it, as the seed
does both root, fruit, and stem. If moral virtues are ordained to good, in
as much as they keep within the bounds of reason against the violence of
passions, and when these do join with any vice, patience is the only guide
of them, who can deny it to hold the first and supreme place amongst them?

As the Physician cures the diseases of the body, so patience corrects the
defects of the soul. They both work by removing the obstacles. I confess
more like isntrumental, then efficient causes. But if the Physician be said
to occasion health, though it be not he, but nature; Patience shall likewise be
called the productrix of all virtues.

So that Coriolanus his impatience (for we must call him impatient, if we will
not attribute the name of base to the Senate) put him in danger of his life;
and though his great virtue, reverenced by the People, was sufficient to free
him from death, yet by reason that was feared also, it was not able to keep
him from banishment. One of the greatest and ordinariest errors, that crosses
the good direction of Politic affairs, is that Princes and commonwealths
either know not how, or through malignity will not, in time make use of that
valor, which fortune has abundantly bestowed upon some subject of theirs.
Dominions are increased by the hand and means of a subject which is
advantagiously valorous and fortunate.

Whose valor by bringing to pass the most difficultest enterprises, finds no
obstacle able to resist it, all that he sees, he conquers: Whose fortune meets
with no chance, but it proves favorable to him, all what he does not see is
likewise assisting to him. Such a man is now and then borne in an estate of so
low a degree, and himself so poor, that without ever doing any thing, or at
least equal, or partly worthy, his fortune and valor; he dies inglorious, but
seldom without leaving at least some little model, whereby others may as with
prospective glass see what a Colossus they have neglected to build, through
want of matter.

That character which in a great statue attracts even the dimmest eyes to
behold it, in a little one, is not seen many times by the most perspicuous
sight. Sometimes also this man is borne in some conspicuous place, and of such
a fortune, that at the very first flashing of his actions, he makes that beam
shines out which lies enclosed in his breast. But those which rule Kingdoms,
or govern Commonwealths, though they have good intentions, yet looking more
upon the age then the fortune of the man, advancing him by degrees, seldom
admit him to great affairs, where he might have performed some high and
specially services, till it is too late, and he grown old, after he has
tired his fortune in actions of no moment, and his declining age has made him
good for little. To linger out fortune, of a great subject is a great error,
yet not worthy of any severe punishment. Ignorance herein may be excused,
Carelessenesse endured, but he that hinders it through envy, hatred and
malice, calls Gods wrath upon him; and sometimes sees it visibly come. Losing
himself for want of him, whom he has lost. Or to prevent his own ruin,
bowing to him whom he has despised.

Such a man is happy, and by him his dominions, if he be borne a Prince. Most
happy, if in such a time as enterprises are already set on foot, and he able to
follow them. Or that obstacles be removed in such sort that they may not oblige
him, to tire his fortune upon them before he goes about them. If Henry the
Fourth had found the Kingdom of France, entire, slourishing, peaceable within,
and at wars abroad; as he found it divided, destroyed, unquiet, plunged in
civil wars, what could he not have done with so much fortune and valor? he
did much indeed, yet did he not a whit increase his dominions: He wasted
himself in gayning his own, and when he begun to cast his mind upon other
men's, both fortune and time failed him.

If Gustavus King of Sweed could at the very first have employed all his
fortune and power in Germany, and had not bin entangled in the Muscoviters and
Polish wars, I know not who could have hindered or crossed him from attaining to
his vast and unlimited desires. If Alexander had bin to begin the wars of
Greece, and not found them, almost finished by his father, he had never come to
be the Great, because he would not have had time to settle so great a Monarchy.
By this means those King domes do much increase which successively meet with
many warlike, valorous, and fortunate subjects, and by this means grew up the
Turkish Monarchy. Assisting of confederates, is a great aid to the gaining of
conquests, the violence of the enemies fortune broken upon them, and tired out
or ended, comes in relief; And by this means grew up the Commonwealth of
Rome.

Unhappy shall this our subject be, though irradiated with so many benign
influences of the heavens, if he chance to be borne under a Tyrant. He hinders
him, expells him, kills him.

Tiberius overthrew Germanicus his fortune in Germany. Nero, Corbuloes in
Armenia, Domitian Agricolaes in England, and all of them the publicks fortune,
because they would save their own? The Tyrant cannot think himself Lord,
whilst he sees one before his eyes that should be so; and is so indeed by
right, and nature; whereas the Tyrant is so but only by fortune. Indeed he is
happy if he be borne under a Prince that has his heart free; he runs into his
familiarity, as the stone goes to the center; The Prince receives him into it,
as the defect does superabundancy; both he, the Prince, and the state become
happy. Wise and happy is that Sovereign, who knows how to join and add to
the fortune which himself was borne in, a fortune to which another was borne.

In free and sound Commonwealths it is a happiness for a man to be borne
fortunate, and valiant, but not in corrupt ones; Envy, and Malice which were
never rooted out of the Commonwealths of Greece, and particularly out of the
Athenian, would not suffer it to come to that degree of greatness, to which
the situation of the City, and valor of the Citizens did seem to promise to
raise it.

The Ostracisme was the stone at which they stumbled. It persecuted the most
eminent, and to do it with greater prejudice, whereas (if so be they feared
such a man's fortune) they should have hindered and restrained it, they did not,
but set it at liberty by banishing them, not only depriving themselves of so
great an advantage, but also, and that for the most part giving it to their
enemies; as if they had despised that fortune, and valor, when it was against
them, which had affrighted them when it was on their side.

This pestiferous worm came not into the Roman Senators minds, in a long
time; and because it was a worm, it crept in with the corruption of the
Commonwealth, wherefore finding it already great, it did not hinder the
increase, but the lastingnesse of it.

It is true that it quickly took root in the Tribunes, but because the People
was free, they were fearful to deceive them; to the end that raging, and
ignorant they should without being envious or malicious, work according to
their envy and malice. But because the rage was quickly appeased, and gave way,
that the light of truth, might of its own accord manifest it self, or that
the Senates dexterity should discover it, though it occasioned no small
damage, and that more then once, yet it came not to that degree as it would
have done, if it had bin the Peoples so properly, as it was only by
participation.

He that will in our case see the Romans fortune, pass over to the enemy, in
Coriolanus his person, let him consider the Volsci led by this man, with a more
then Roman valor, and the Romans without him, more dastardly, and abject then
the Volsci. And he that will see Envy and Malice punished, let him behold the
Romans humbly suing at the obdurat conquerors feet, making them know they were
more indebted to a woman's tears for their Countries deliverance, then to their
own valor or eloquence. How came the Gauls to conquer and take Rome, but
because they found the Cities fortune banished in the person of Furius
Camillus; And what freed it again, but the return of him, whom they had
exiled.

Frances good fortune by sea, passed over into Spain with Doria, and with
Burbon their prosperity by land. Another time it was seen adhere to the Dukes
of Guise, and Humene, if they had not sought to make it obedient to their own
particular desires.

Many have erred, because they have not in time known this fortune in their
own Citizens, to make use of it: and many also because they have not perceived
it in their enemies, to defend themselves against it. When they have seen it
come against them, instead of shunning it like prudent, they have rashly gone
to encounter it like foolehardy.

When they should have followed the current of it, to keep it with them, they
have opposed it to overthrow it. Hannibals fortune came in its prime with him
into Italy: like a fierce torrent it overthrew whatsoever withstood it. The
Romans shockt with it four times, and it still increased: if they had
persisted, they had bin lost. They happened at last to put the managing of
Martial affairs into the hands of Fabius Maximus, who thinking patience and
circumspection more available in war then celerity and fury: not a purpose,
but by chance, not knowing what he did, whilst he thought by military art to
tire out the Soldiers valor, he did wear out the Generals fortune with a
Politic document: I say by chance, because time, and occasion being changed,
he rather obstinate then constant, would still persist in his first way of
proceeding, did Prognosticate that the ruin of Rome would proceed from those
things, from which its greatest increases had her beginning.

He knew not that fortune there begun in Scipio, where it ended in Hannibal;
and that it was time now to shock with that, which he had long given way to,
and to put that fortune forward, which he meant to delay. Hannibal knew it, and
did what he could to avoid the trial, to not shock against a budding and
vigorous fortune, with his old, withered, and decayed success.

The greatest conquests that ever the Romans had, were in the beginnings of
their good fortune, while it was tender, and no way obstructed. The
Carthaginians likewise availing themselves of Hannibals fortune had notably
advanced themselves. It gave them so much time, that had they not met with such
an excessive power as they did, which was able to receive so many overthrowes,
without quite losing themselves, and overcome after so many losses first
wearying out Hannibals fortune, and then overthrowing it; they had doub^lesse
attained to the Monarchy of the world. Wherefore Alexanders fortune was much to
be admired, which being to last but a short time, happened to encounter with a
Monarch would violently oppose it, and came to trial with it, not knowing how
to give it way, to tire it, and weary it out with delays.

Coriolanus goes to Tullus, the head of the Volsci, relates his misfortunes to
him, tells him what affronts had been offered him, exaggerates the longing
desire of revenging them, desires assistance, with promise of victory. Tullus
joyfully entertaines him, put into hopes, does assist him; mollified, gives him
the command of the Army, and inconsiderate, commits the whole managing of the
business to him.

No sooner does an object present it self to a man's eyes, by whose valor he
thinks to free himself from any trouble, or obtain any great benefit, but
presently he will give him whatsoever he can: and whatsoever he is not able at
the present to give him, he promises more largely, than if he had already by
his means avoided that danger which he seared, or obtained that benefit which
he desired; because that a past evil loses its terriblenesse, and a benefit
already gotten its delightfulness. He values nothing he has, to avoid that he
would not should befall him, or to obtain that which he would have. He imagines
he shall have all things, if he has avoided the one, or gained the other, so
he does evil for the present, through deceitful hope of the future. And
unfortunately manages what he has in possession, through an erroneous opinion
of what he desires. Sometimes a man shall find himself necessitated to
suppress and bring down one, who had formerly done him service in oppressing
of his enemy, or emulator: when he raised him, he had no thought of any thing
but only of his desire. What he gave him, he weighed not but with the scale of
passion. Even as a Physician that opposes so much heat to a cold disease, as
may be sufficient to drive the disease away, neither considering nature,
whether it be able and strong, nor yet the season whether it be hot or cold,
must with in a little while to control and oppose that heat which he himself
has caused: So he that raises a man as much as he thinks will be sufficient
to oppress his enemy, making no reckoning of his worth, if it be great, or of
the peoples favor, if he chance to prove fortunate, will quickly become his
emulator* and not long after that, his enemy. All is ill for him that gives,
and sometimes also for him that receives. If the former has not obtained what
he desires, there comes repentance; if he has obtained, and has no more mind
to give, there proceeds a weariness and loathing. If the other has taken more
than was given him, there is fear in him; if the people have assisted him,
there is envy: So that a man is obliged either to leave that which he has
received, and so depart; or if he stay, to take that which was not given him.

Coriolanus, who could not attain to that as he wanted, should have forsaken
that which he had received; and rather absenting himself, leave a kind of
admiration of him to survive, than abiding there, expose himself to envy,
which to strangers is the way to precipice.

Seneca received too much from Nero; he found his error too late, and bethought
himself too late of retiring and leaving him. To conceal the fear of his
Disciples brutishness, has a recourse to Philosophy, and makes the cause of
it to be his modesty; but Nero, to hide his cruelty and avarice, rejects his
liberality, and under a pretense of justice, takes all again by cruelty. All
Art and Cunning is vain for him that is not able to withstand and resist
violence, and every thing proves successful to him that is able to use any
force, and yet make men believe that he does not commit any. He cares not for
offering violence to the body only which is subject to him, he will also
subject the mind, which is free, and to persuade he does not do it where he
can, he will endeavor to do it where he cannot.

The people will exile Coriolanus; the Senate defends him; the people
overcomes, the Senate mournes.

Coriolanus comes a Conqueror to the Walls of the City, the people repents,
and would receive him: the Senate having altered its mind, would not admit him.

A man works for some imaginary good, and oftentimes before he arrives to it,
he stumbles at some evil which he did not think upon. Upon this the operator
is at a stand dejected, thinking he was deceived also in that wherein he had
guessed right. To remedy the evil which is already past, he deprives himself
of the good which is to begin. For one, the time is past; and for the other, it
is not yet come: He will correct the error when he has already done all the
hurt: He either changes the operation, or leaves it: if he changes it, he
receives a new loss; if he leaves it, it does not countervaile that which he
has already received. Many times actions are begun when they should not, and
given over when they should be most followed. An action ought not always to be
intermitted, or left off, because it was ill done; nor always followed,
because it is well done.

He that finds prejudice in an action, runs presently to undo it. Nature
inclines, and Art teaches us how to seek remedy from the contrary. But not
every contrary is a remedy, that which is so, sometime is so concealed, that it
seems to be a semblable.

All the infirmities are not healed, and the reason is, because sometimes the
nature, and sometimes the degree of the contrary, is unknown. When one should
have recourse to the last of the forms, he flies for relief to the first of
the qualities. Rational Physicians know, one ought to cure with the contrary,
but they know not with which. They confound the diseases; they do not
distinguish that which has been brought in by the Essence from that which the
Accidents only have introduced; the ingendered from the altered. Opposed
qualities are sufficient to expel the one, and the other requires a contrary
fo^m.

The Empyrickes, which will heal with the like, are deceived; either they cure
not at all, or by a contrary. They say that one salt is a remedy for another,
and do not consider that it does not operate like salt, wherein consists the
resemblance, but as the one is volatile, and the other fixed, from whence
springs the contrariety. The Senate was the Fixed Salt, which cured the
Commonwealth of Rome from the Volatile of Coriolanus. They will not consent to
his return, whose banishment they bewailed. The people will have him recalled,
whom they themselves had banished: their love to the Commonwealth, lest it
should become a prey to the Tribunes, was the cause why the Senate defended
Coriolanus, their own interest the cause why they pitied him. The same love,
because they will not have it fall into his hands as a tyrant, makes them to
not readmit him now he is an enemy; and the same interest envies him now
victorious. The fear which possesses the people, while he was a Citizen, is
the cause they banish him. And a greater fear which they conceive of him, now
he is an enemy, causes them to recall him. The most ordinary affections that
take root in great ones, are Compassion and Envy; if they see their equal in
an unhappy condition, they pity him; if happy, they envy him: the fear they
have that the same thing may not befall them, makes them to pity him: the
shame which possesses them, because they cannot reach to what he is attained
stirs up envy in them. All is but an effect of equality. And though it may
seem, that as more the corrivall rises, the more he is to be envied: so
likewise, the more he falls, the more he should be pitied. Yet this may not be
true, seeing compassion may peradventure fail, as well as envy: which when
the corrivall is come to such a pitch of greatness, that he is quite beyond
our reach, shame ceasing, (which is only in things possible) envy ceases
likewise: So on the otherside, when the corrivall is come to so low and unhappy
a condition, that the other thinks it is impossible for him to fall so low;
because the fear ceasing (which is not in things impossible) compassion
likewise ceases. The same Coriolanus, whom the Senate compassionated in his
miseries, envied him in his prosperities. Peradventure the harshnesse of this
pranke which he had played, together with his inbred valor; his having gotten
foreign assistance, and his forgetting the love which he bare to his
Country, might give the Senate cause enough to fear, that if he returned, he
would become a tyrant, and the people who had driven him away, because he
should not become one, now recalling him, did likewise make the world think,
that being afraid of becoming a prey to the Volsci, they would accept of him.

The people, to the utmost of their powers, make choice of subjecting
themselves to their Countryman rather than to a stranger; but the Senate will
rather submit to the enemy, than to their corrivall: the different carriage of
the Senate in this business, may also proceed from another cause. Coriolanus
was valiant, free in speech, and surly; kinds of carriage which do not gain the
love of the heart, though they overcome the understanding, and in a manner
tyrannize over the will, causing themselves to be followed, like the Primum
Mobile, rather drawing along, than enticing, or alluring. This is no violent
motion proceeding from Nature; neither can it be called voluntary, because
knowledge does not precede it. Man goes along in this motion, not against, but
without his will, not knowing wherefore he goes. He delights not in being
carried away, and yet suffers it; he does not love, but admire that thing which
ravishes him, and obediently follows it, as its commanding genius. Of this
kind of metal sometimes are favorites made, who by those as do not know
this, are termed bewi^chers. Mne confess they know not the Devils cunning and
yet they will pretend to penetrate into the secrets of Nature. If they meet
with any thing they do not understand, they take away from one, to give to
another; in one place they pull down, and in the other they raise: they abase
themselves by seeking to rise: they call that Witchcraft which is a Gift; as if
Nature could not, as well as the Devil produce wonderful things by Art in
mixing actives with passives. This operation is mixed, as one should say, of
violent, and of natural, of voluntary and involuntary; and thence it comes
that it produces effects mixed of pleasure and distaste, of love and hate, with I
know not what: of fear, accompanied with respect and admiration. The thing is
beloved which ravisheth, and yet to be ravished, is hateful. We delight in him
alive, whom we could wish, had not been born. We are glad to have him near,
and yet should not be displeased to have him far from us; we can neither keep
him, nor put him away, for we are willing both to have him, and to be without
him. He that will thrive with his Lord, through his secret qualities, let him
conceal the manifest ones; if the Genius be commanding, let him make himself
obedient. How should Ebony cure the French Disease, and Triacle the pestilent
Fever, if their manifest qualities were not controlled?

They would do as much prejudice with their extrinsecall qualities, as they
would do good with their intrinsecall form, What good would it do a Lord to
see one lie at his feet, who should be seated above his head? If the getting
above him, whom fortune of birth has made equal to us, be one of the
savouriest dainties that humane ambition feeds upon, what will it be to Lord
it over them, to whom the nature of the Genius has made us inferior. Whosoever
observes this Rule, shall not need to fear any thing, but some extraordinary
great accident which may produce some extraordinary violence: but seldom can
we go against the genius: whence it comes, that some last always, and others
are suddenly overthrown. Sejanus, after he had gained Tiberius his
understanding, with commanding qualities, won his heart with obeying ones. But
whether it were his outward quality of flattering and obsequiousness, that
moved him, or the inward quality of his ambition and genius that drew him to
it, he could not constantly persevere to the last. He made Tiberius for a while
to stand in doubt, it seeming unto him that he did bu^ stagger, at last finding
no outward violence to overthrow him, he produced it in himself, going so far
with his open qualities, that he took all power from the secret ones. Neither
yet did Tiberius know how to free himself; he desired others should do it,
sometimes calling upon the Senators authority, and sometimes secretly upon
Macro his malice, as one that will and will not, or would and durst not. The
people of Rome endured the commanding Genius of Coriolanus. They loved him even
at that time also, when suing for the Consulship humble and mild, he controlled
the manifest qualities of pride, and harshnesse, so hurtful to him though
deriving from him.

And though he by and by after returned to his own nature, yet did not the
people know how to free themselves from him, being as it were bewitched to him;
if the Tribunes violence, had not opposed it self to the Semi-violence of
Coriolanus his imperious Genius.

The Senate which felt not the burden of such a kind of Character, because it
did not the prejudice of the manifest qualities which proceed from it: though
it made use of him sometimes for defense of the Commonwealth against the
enemies, sometimes for their own against the People, yet were they feign to
make use of the Tribunes violence, to be well rid of him: And* when he was
driven away, they violently opposed the Tribunes, because they should not bring
him in again.

So much did this Genius prevail when it was present, and lose when it was
absent. He that subjects himself to it, desires not to be freed, nor return
into subjection, when he is free,

I know not how truly Plutarch guessed, when he considered of the Peoples
love, and hatted, toward Coriolanus and Alcibiades: in his Judgment there
proceedings therein and usage of them was different. The ambition was the same,
yet more tolerable in the Greek, because profitable, more blame worthy in the
Roman, because Prejudicial. The former causing himself to be beloved, even
when he did hurt, and the latter, gaining ill will, and being abhorred even
when he did good.

The ends which move men to seek the highest degrees of honor in their own
Country are many times different, and for the most part contrary. Some aspire
thereunto for their own proper interests, to make themselves eminent, and
conspicuous above the rest. And some again for no other end but for the good
of their Country and to be able to do great matters in the behalf of it. The
one is always a vice, and is termed ambition, the other, when it is not a
virtue, may be called pride. The first aiming at a vicious end, it cannot seem
strange, if he proceeds toward it by such means; he flatters bows to the
People, and vili^ies himself to grow great, not refusing to do any thing, be
it never so base and servile, so it may but avail him toward the obtaining of
domination. The last raises nor his fortune by any such means, virtue will
not give way to it, nor Pride will not suffer him: Caesar, and Alcibiades were
of the first, Cato and Coriolanus may be numbered amongst the latter. And if
Plutarch looking upon Coriolanus his actions with a Greek eye, would not
attri^ute unto him the name of magnanimous, and valiant: yet he might have
termed him proud, but not ambitious.

From such different ends, proceeds a diverse manner of operating; from the
diverse operation, are produced various effects, in the people, and in those to
whom they are done.

Flattering bending, and humbling ones self, increases love in the People, and
at the same time diminishes the conceit of him that does so; it detracts from
his Majesty, and therewithal make him not so much to be admired. The people
rejoice at it, because it is for their profit: but though they desire those men
should be so, whom they make choice of to love; yet they do not desire them to
be such whom they in end to revererce. So that when they will make choice of
one to command them, they will choose him rather whom they admire, then him they
love. Doing of great actions without flattering, or bowing to the people causes
admiration in their breast, it does not suffer a tender love to take root in
their hearts, but instead thereof it oftentimes breeds an awful love in them;
for as Majesty cannot put on tenderness without abasing it self, so cannot a
man put on Majesty without altering himself.

But these loves are too different. The one resides in the concupiscible, the
other in the intelligible part. The one is toward his equal, and if he be not
so, it makes him so, and requires mildness. The other seems to be toward
one's superior, and requires majesty.

The first has the person for its aim, the second his virtue. The tender love
loses it self or diminishes, when the subject becomes Majesticall; the
awful and respectfull love, when he comes to be low. The one easily turns to
contempt, the other many times is changed into hatred. How could the name of
marriage please Messalina in Siluius, without the Empire, while she could not
enjoy him as a husband, unless he became Emperor? Peradventure she knew that
the Majesty of that degree would take away the Adulterers love, and chan^e
hers. That contempt would creep into Siluius his love, and reverence into hers;
That she should be obliged to respect, where she only loved, and change the
tenderness of affections, into obsequiousness of esteem. How could the
Tribunes suspect Coriolanus for tyranny, seeing he had quite lost the Peoples
hearts, by the harshnesse of the pranck he had played them; if they had not
feared, he would have made himself Master of their understandings by the
greatness of of operations? Who spoke more freely to the Tribes, and more
sharply rebuked them then our Savior Christ, yet knowing that by virtue of the
great miracles which he had wrought, he had bred in them an awful and
respectfull love, he goes away, because they should not proclaim him King.

Those who flatter the People, either are not at all called to command, if they
be, they do not continue in it. He that attaines to it by a tender love, let
him prepare strong force to keep himself in, lest contempt and repentance
beat him out again. He that is come to it through a respectfull love, may by
the same maintain himself in it. The people being once brought under obedience
by the commanding genius, will commit no outrage, nor use any violence, unless
it be first used to them. Alcibiades exceeding eloquent, acceptable in the
Peoples sight, being accused dares not appear to defend himself. Coriolanus
rough, and as unskilful in all good arts, as he was enemy to insinuations,
hateful to the People, appears rather vaunting, then defending himself:
resolved to make manifest the greatness of his mind and spirit rather then his
innocence.

He distrusts the love of tenderness that often uses to transform it self
into contempt, and confides in that respectfull love that admits not of
contempt. He fears not hate, which is also compatible with such a kind of
love; not that the being angry with a great virtue, totally excludes the
reverencing of it, it floating lightly over any thing that is not pestilently
produced by the grossness of ignorance or rancour of malice.

What would Coriolanus have had more? How came it that he did not know himself
in the highest point of the Epicicle, when he showed his fortune superior to
Romes, and the altering of hers at his disposal; when he had seen his
emulators at his feet and his enemies at his discretion: when he had at the
same time obtained the sweet taste of revenge; and the magnanimus honor of not
having taken it? But this not knowing how to retreat is a thing as common to
great subjects, as the desire it self of retyring.

In greatest motions they discourse of rest, and amidst most turbulent
business of a vacancy. Therein do they place their felicity, and it is in
their hands to attain to it, and yet they do not. Peradventure they would
rettire with satisfaction, and believe they shall, and put it off till that
time, and still there is something wanting, that they can never attain to that
satisfaction nor yet retiring; and being deceivers of themselves, live in
continual trouble and motion: enjoying no other rest or peace, but a vain
hope, and Chimericall imagination that they shall enjoy it.

Sometimes again it is neither deceit nor ignorance, but ought to be imputed
to generosity of heart, and constancy of mind. If fortune, though never so
great, cannot be given over with satisfaction, yet fear must at last make it
be abandoned; and if to attain unto it, is required, an enforced valor, an
undaunted mind, a breast of steel; who can forsake it cowardly, that has
valiantly attained to it? He will pretend to be master of it, and will believe
that it cannot change nor alter: He will imagine himself superior to it, and
will not be daunted at it, though it do change.

He will believe it firm, and yet will be glad to have it alter; not refusing
to avoid the disgust of a calm. to launch him self into a tempestuous sea,
choosing rather to run with hazard, than not to stir at all: and will be
willing to struggle with cont^ary winds rather than see himself abandoned by
prosperous ones. Man's life is a Warfare, take combating from him, and you take
away life; neither is that taken away, but changed, an in^ernal enemy using to
step in, when an outward one fails, and a civil war commonly succeeding a
foreign one. But grant there be a great subject of so calm a mind, as will
be content with the estate wherein he finds himself how wll the content last,
if the state does not? and how shall not the one change, if the other changes
continually? Fortune has no nail to fix it: if it does not go forward, it must
go backward. Renown has a worm in its intrails, which never leaves gnawing: it
is scarce born, but it begins to diminish: when flying it is once come to our
notice, the mouth does not speed it away, as the ear received it, we naturally
add somewhat of our own to it, to the end, that it may gain as much going, as it
loses standing still: yet inwardly it diminishes, even as a man, who be he never
so well fed in his youth, and seeming outwardly to grow, yet inwardly he every
moment dies infallibly and remediless. The glory of man remains amongstus, when
his carcass remains soul-lesse: it extends further, it is true because envy
ceases but it diminishes in it self, because compassion grows up, and
afterward contempt. A torrent which in time of rain runs most violently and
stately, bearing down trees by the roots, and tearing up stones and rocks the
sky being cleared up, is foordable by every passenger: his greatness is no more
admired, his pride is, being so extreme in him, who within a few hours was to
be reduced to so wretched a condition: So the mighty man, after he has by
valor won many battles taken Cities, overcome Nations, and filled the universe
with the report of his glory, when Atropos cuts off the thread of his life,
instead of obtaining praise, he stirs up admiration, men wondering how so much
vanity and pride should reign in a body, which would shortly become the
putrified food of stinking worms. As if the whole world could not have
contained that body, which within a small time was to be enclosed within a few
palms of the basest element.

Envy follows humane glory, it shows where it is it does not leave i^ til it
is not, it devours him that feeds it, and feeds him whom it would destroy. It
increases and diminishes not at that sweetness which should produce s^tiety,
adding acrimony to it, which revives the appe^ite.

The glory of the dead runs; but coldly. It remains in the world, but
withered, and wanting novelty, is not looked upon by reason of its oldnesse.
Death gives a great blow, but the civil death gives the greater; it does not
utterly extinguish envy as the natural does; nor does not like it
counterpoise that which it takes away, with the sense which it has taken away.
No marvel then, if others avoid retiring, because they will not strive with
it.

Death cannot stay and nail fast fortunes wheel from descending, yet it
stays it that it may not precipitate. And seeing it very seldom lasts a man's
age; happy is that man that lasts but fortunes time. And because the time of
the one is not measured, and the others life is only looked after, we
sometimes complain of death for pulling up of that green, when we should
thank it, for gathering it when it is ripe. It is favorable to him whom it
cuts off, when he is grown up into a high degree, and but newly arrived to
it. It makes him to be imagined of infinite virtue, because it has not bin
measured, nor the end of it seen. It attributes unto him the glory of that
which he has nor yet done, when peradventure he would have lost that which he
had already gotten.

Death which is one to all men, is not equally favorable to all, she cuts off
one before he is ripe, she lets the other hang till he falls off rotten; and
gathers but few in the flower of their ripeness. It is a great fortune to dye,
when fortune is at highest. One cannot long stand at a stay, it is impossible
to advance, and to decrease is of necessity. He that cannot receive this favor
from the original, let him seek it from the copy, and he that cannot die, let
him retire, for any thing is better then to precipitate.

If the Summum bonum of the body Politic were as manifest as that of the
humane, and that we did know as well what fortune requires, as we know what
nature desires; we might when we come to such a state leave for a time, and
return to take it again, but knowing neither of both, few yield, when, what
and so much, as they should yield. It seemed to a fortunate man, to be come to
the height of happiness and to such a pitch, that he was to fear a downfall

To avoid it, he throws a most precious gemme into the Sea. Ere long it was
brought to his Table again in a Fishes belly; fortune returned him that which
he had given her, because it was not that which she would have had; he
joyfully receives it again, and takes that for a favor which should have
served him for an instruction.

Coriolanus that could not leave his fortune, left his life: this happens for
the most part to strangers, that have bin called, or of themselves have crept
up to the highest eminencies of a Commonwealth. The most valiant have lost
their lives, the weakest have bin banished; If there is in a Commonwealth an
eminent Citizen, as Tullus was amongst the Volsci, when Coriolanus came in
amongst them; as Agis was in Sparta when Alcibiades came thither, as the Prince
of Orange was in Holland, when the Archduke Matthias, the Duke of Alencon,, and
the Duke of Lancaster were called in there. Either they come in of themselves,
by promising of some great mat^ers; and if they come off of their engagement
well, they are sent away with admiration, if ill, with disgrace.

Where they are brought in, they send them away too. If it were in case of
necessity, when that is past, if it were to deceive any one, after that was
performed: if to be deceived, when they were undeceived. When there is not in
the Commonwealth any one Citizen more eminent then the rest, and in respect of
domestic discords, they call in some noble man of great blood to govern them,
or in regard of foreign wars, they send for some eminent Soldier to
command them; let this man either prepare himself to be nothing at all our
Lord and Master, or an exile: and because there are none that will be nothing,
it being repugnant to an ambitious nature, and it being a hard matter to become
Lord, being men greater in repute, then power, he must expect either from
jealousy, banishment, or from fear, death. But if strangers be easily driven
away, they are also as easily called in; for the opinion which fortune frames
in absence and far off, is greater then that which one being present does
frame of himself, bearing along with it the greatness of the actions, without
the abjectnesse of the matter. Because their object is more pure conceived by
means of the ear, then by means of the eye; that which is heard, then that
which is seen. For a man's actions represented by fame all at once, leave a
kind of astonishment, whereas the other, being seen one by one, languish, the
second being scarce come forth before the other be either dead or mortisied.

Because the Citizen discovers the defects in his youthful age, which defects
leave behind them, if not a wound, yet at least a scarre; from which thing the
stranger is free, who only manifests and discovers himself in that which is
perfect; Because envy has no place in the former, nor admiration in the latter.

Finally, it is peradventure with a truer and more ordinary, though a more
concealed, and deep reason, for the natural instinct of hoping for greater
remedy in our affairs, from the greater difficulty in attaining to it,
following therein nature it self, which has most concealed, and made less
store of those things which are most precious, and given most glory to the
hardest achievements.

As for example, there grows an herb at our very foot, and a man stands close
by us, the herbs are medicinal, and the man able to heal us, and defend us:
Yet we will seek for such in remote countries, as if all our good consisted
rather in the difficulty of obtaining, then in the quality of things: nature
having imprinted in us, the genius of despising what is obvious and known, to
believe that which is most obscure, to hope for that which is most difficult,
to admire that which is furthest off, to make all that is great difficult to
us, either because it has made it so, or because we make it so to our selves.

Under a Prince it is not impossible, but it seldom happens, that a stranger
shoud arrive to a chief degree of honor, unless the Prince be a Tyrant; or
that he should continue there, unless the Prince become one. With the loss
of life he concludes his being a favorite, if he does not maintain himself in
it by multiplying of banishments, and slaughters.

But if the Prince be a Tyrant, such a one may often arrive to it, because the
Tyrant fears the Citizens, and the favorite may continue, because the other
makes him to be feared.

Finally, Tullus through Jealousy, Malice, and hatred born to Coriolanus his
virtue, under pretense that he had not prosecuted his enterprise to the
destruction of his country, caused him to be murdered by a conspiracy of some
who were his adherents.

A man's Country has in it a retentive quality for such as are borne in it, and
an attractive one, for such as are travailed out of it. This consists in the
pleasure and delight which the providence of Nature always communicates to
needful things, and also in the air, the temperament, the influences, in the
virtue, which the place affoorded to the thing which is placed in it, and
peradventure in a man's being used and accustomed thereunto, as much as in any
thing else.

The efficacy and force of this last being full of contrarieties, is hard to
understand, and unfold. Sometime you shall hear the Philosophers say, that the
understanding dejects and dulls it self in a known thing, and greedily turns
to a new one. Sometimes you shall see an opinion laid hold of, which will not
be left to turn to any other, although it be new.

The sense of tasting is tried with assuefaction, and desires change of food.
The same happiness in the sense of feeling; and likewise in the sense of
smelling. The sense of seeing will seem to be glutted with the sight of a
thing, and another which is not so beautiful, will seem fairer to it, because
it is new. Sometimes a man being accustomed to one manner of clothing, will
hardly be brought to another fashion, but it will seem ridiculous to him, and
sometimes also he will change for it, as for a better. In moral things one
shunnes (God a mercy custom) that as a vice, which another embraces as a
virtue.

It is hard to find out any thing that will make a man love his own
destruction. Hence grows the detestation of a contrary, though it have novelty
to take its part. The understanding flies toward it, because its object is not
only truth, but all truths, and as such it turns to it: if it finds it
contrary, it turns from it as false, and as from an enemy. In fashions of
Clothes, the sight will not endure a fashion much discrepant from the wonted
and accustomed one, and the fashions altering daily, the change is not very
sensible; whereby a man comes to be fatisfied and persuaded by the novelty,
without hitting upon (unless it be in a very long time) the contrary, which he
would abhor. The taste feeds upon food, which in the beginning is unlike, but
in the end semblable: the long use of it, makes the body like unto it, and
consequently diminishes the delight, seeing the appetite would have the unlike:
but yet you shall not see it for all this, run to that which is quite and
immediately contrary. Assuefaction also likewise makes a great difference in the
senses, namely, where they are merely spiritall, or any way material: for this
helps satiety, and diminishes the taste, which may manifestly be perceived in
the self-same beauty, sometimes seen, and sometimes enjoyed.

All the love Nature has put in man toward his native Country, cannot hinder
him from being drawn out of it either by necessity, interest, or ambition, or
any other powerful motive. And truly, as for a man's health, when all other
remedies fail, they use change of air; so for an averse Fortune, it is good
to change the Climate: The air nurses the spirits, and with them (I had almost
said) changes the understanding, because it alters its chief Instruments. Food
causes a new temperament, and therewith new behaviors. The Climate changes the
Influences, these the Inclinations, and all altered together, make an
alteration of Fortune. Many go without it, because they will not follow it,
and many because they cannot find it, forsaking sometimes that vocation in
which they had it, and sometimes not discerning the true place where they might
have attained to it. Most part are of opinion, that travel makes many worthy
men: I see the effect of it, but cannot as yet discern whether it be a cause,
or a figne and token of their worth. A cause, if by reason that one seeing
himself destitute of many means, is forced to make use of his own virtue,
which restrained between contraries, increases the more. A sign, if to
overcome the many allurements of ones native soil, and forsake it, is required
a great spirit, a valiant and magnanimous heart, whereby a man may come to
attain to eminent glory.

I believe there are but few so wicked, as to become enemies of their Country,
though they may be enemies to those who prevail therein, and govern it. But
seeing the Inhabitants are those who make a City, and not the Walls, he that
is an enemy to them, seems, if not directly, yet indirectly, to be an enemy
to his Country. By this deceit of believing that the hatred which one bears
to the Prince, or Magistrate that governes, or to a predominant faction, be
hating of the Country it self, or the City, many foreign Princes, and
Commonwealths have suffered themselves to be deceived; who should first
attentively have considered the causes and motives of those who have persuaded
them to commence war against their own Country; assuring them, that
whenever those men have satisfied their own passions, they will forsake them.

Many may be the causes which move a Countryman, or Citizen, to such
disturbances; whereof desire of revenge is none of the least, when he becomes
obliged thereunto by some great matters, which do breed hatred all at once as
it uses to be against the cruelty, avarice, and luxury of the Prince, when the
subjects are prejudiced in their lives, goods, and reputations. If the shame or
damage meet with a stout and valiant spirit, it will never be appeased without
revenge: And it is good fortune when he finds things in such a condition,
that he may accomplish his intention with a conspiracy, by killing or
expelling the Tyrant, which many times may prove to be rather for the good
then hurt of his Country. As when Brutus expelled the Tarquines for the rape
of Lucrece, and Lucius Virginius procured the death of Appius Claudius, for
defiling his daughter. For if these men's way be obstructed, that they cannot
come to work their revenge themselves, they study how to make use of some
others power: whence come the ruins not only of Princes, but also of whole
States and Monarchies. So passed the Medes, Monarchy to the Persians, when
Arpagus having no other means to revenge himself of Astiages, did set his
Grandchild against him. A Prince may therefore securely take their parts who
rise against their own Country, by reason of an irreconciliable hatred which
they bear him that governes.

Ambition and Interest are likewise principal causes for men to bring in
foreign forces against their own Country, differing from hatred, because
they are moved rather for some good to themselves, than for any prejudice to
others. These causes incited many persons in the revolutions of France,
sometimes to return to the places whence they had been driven, sometimes to
obtain dignities, sometime to recover those which they had lost. If the
Country also be in Arms, the conquest of it will hardly be obtained, if they
will not have strangers become Lords thereof converting the fruits of the
victory to the welfare of the discontented, changing but one enemy for another:
the Princes being so by reason of the estate which they possess, and they
become such that conquer it. The Guises whilst they thought they might adorn
their Temples with the Crown of France, never forsook the Catholic Kings
side; and as soon as they found the contrary, they forsook him. Great are the
hopes which discontented persons conceive, and their maintainers: and those
hopes being diverse, if not contrary and hard to be concealed, quickly bring
forth distastes: They go on increasing in the discontented these and by the
same degrees they abate in the enemy, who seeks to appease the discontented
with cunning and fair promises, the business serving them (if for no other end)
to cause distrusts, which bring the subjects out of their resolutions into
perplexities. Perplexity breeds suspicion, suspicion new distastes, and
distastes breaches. Where jealousies once take root, we must not hope for any
proceedings: the weakest do not so much wish for, as fear victories, and
desire rather to obstruct than promote them. It suffices not that thou promise
them that they shall have whatsoever shall be gained, if so be it must rest in
their courtesy to give it: because in matters of State, none will trust to
men's wills, if they be not obliged by force, or persuaded by some interest.

There are some cases, in which it is convenient to be content with the loss
which is received by the wars, and leave all the profit to ones friend. As
when he settles him into his Country, with change of form, seeing it may be
hoped, that his friendship is sincere in him who is so settled, because he is to
be maintained in it against those who governed formerly. True it is, that the
memory of that benefit, and therewithal the sincerity of the friendship, will
last until such time as they can find means to secure themselves, without
having need of his assistance. Then the least present interest cancels all
former obligations, it seeming to many, that even benefits suffer prescription
by the length of time; and being once grown old, do no longer bind to
gratitude. The Spanish Monarchy has more than once had experience of this
misfortune, yet such a custom ought not to be left off, whenever occasion
shall present it self: Seeing the Politician ought not to look after eternity
but many times be content with that, which profits him but for a time, and
only for the present, so it do not bring any prejudice for the future along
with it.

To divide a kingdom amongst discontented persons, whose power may afterward
be feared, seems to secure the firmness of of the side, and quietness of the
State: but if he meet with subtle and witty subjects, that will not be dallied
with, by fallacies of the present, they will know well enough, that those who
have been able to divide a kingdom when it was entire can subdue it when it is
divided. Philip the second was blamed because he did not take this course: but
the wisdom of those of the house of Guise, was not easily deceived with
slights, nor could they be appeased with a part. Those eminent and valiant
subjects knowing well enough that they could not cancel the name of disturbers
of their countries peace with any other name, but the name of King.

There are likewise sometimes such extremely turbulent brains, that without
any instigation of hatred, wrath, interest or ambition, have an irregulate
desire of troubles and innovations: Enemies to whatsoever is, always
contriving against the present government, in behalf of changes. Kingdoms
yield more such spirits then Commonwealths: for he that goes about to prejudice
liberty, thinks he goes against his own Country; and he that seeks to
ruin a kingdom imagines he goes against another Such a one was that Julian
who brought the Moors into Spain. The occasion which he pretended for the rape
of his daughter, was already past, and he did this but only out of a mere and
sudden desire of innovation which made him hasten to it on so fast. He that is
called in by such kind of men, may be sure he shall not be abandoned, nor
forsaken.

Factions are also causes of bringing in strangers into a country, whether they
strive one against another for the Government, or being both under one
government, are only at odds amongst themselves; That side which sees it self
oppressed, presently calls in the stranger, to raise it self over its
corrivall, and be revenged. They are both good occasions for thee to undertake,
one with more security, and the other with more profit, because the latter calls
thee in to make thee Lord, and the former that thou might make him Lord.

There is another kind of faction in Kingdoms, Cities, or Provinces which is
an enemy to those who are in authority, because it was obliged to those who
formerly had the government, and this uses to be, where the Government has
bin altered: as it was for a long time seen in Naples, between the Arragonian
and Angiovin faction; And in this case he that is called in, may be more
confident then in any other: especially if he have but any Chimericall
conjunction or affinity with those that were once Lords there.

To take away the privileges of a Country, gives occasion to call in
strangers, not with an intent to make them Lords, but only to have their
assistance in framing their Commonwealth, as the Low Countries did making use
of Germans, French, and English, and driving away all those whom they thought
might any way aspire to principality.

If you assist such to free them from their Lords, you need not fear that they
will forsake you, but if you should pretend to rule over them your self, you
would find a hard task of it, unless their rebellion did proceed from hatred,
to which choler being joined, there grows such a rage in the People, as
causes unadvised operations, wherein they proceed so far, before reason
steps in, that they find themselves so deeply engaged, that they cannot give
back, but are forced to follow as they begun for fear of ruining: and expose
themselves to any condition, though it be far worser then their first, so it
be not that which they had freed themselves from. With these one must be quick,
and make sure work, before they return to their right understandings.

There be also two ways to help strangers, when they are called in; the one is
with forces, and that gives way to repentance, the other no way admits of
any. Of the first we have spoken already: the second is, when the state has
some secret weakness, by means whereof it may be conquered; or when the
preservation of it consists in some strong hold: and in this case there will be
traitors found, interest may and will produce them; as also a sudden wrath or
disdain, where an evil may be done in an instant, is able to make him become
a Traitor, who never had an intent to be one, because that hurried on by a
sudden and violent passion, rather then by any premeditated will, he will past
all remedy, the attempt consisting in an action so swift, and mortal, that it
may be performed at the very first dash, and being once performed it brings
sudden ruin, which admits of no repentance.

Alcibiades provoked against the Athenians, teaches the Spartans how they
should fortify the City of Decelea with walls, and put a garrison into it, if
the ruin of his Country had consisted wholly in this, as it did in part, it
had bin ruined, and yet that first rage and violence of wrath being abated,
when Tisaphernes would have destroyed it, he would not permit it. Coriolanus in
his fury leads on the Volsci to the destruction of Rome: his fury being
allayed, he desists.

These repentings happen under Commonwealths sooner then under Kings, as well
because the Country (as we said before) is judged as alien in a princely
government, as also by reason that in a Commonwealth a subject seldom
receives disgust from a whole City. Where there be factions of Nobles and
Plebeians, the one is always in his favor, and by him affected, which will not
suffer him to run precipitously to revenge.

For this cause did peradventure Coriolanus, more then in pity of his Mothers
tears, aba^don the thoughts of ^uining his country. A stranger can repose but
little confidence in such manner of subjects, if he does not mean to give them
the command, nay (I may so say) not if he would do it, as may be seen in
Alcibiades, Themistocles, and Coriolanus.

When I attentively consider the fashions and carriage of Coriolanus, I find
them to be not much unlike Catoes, and worthy of greater glory: in as much as
this last quite overthrew the Commonwealth, when peradventure he might in part
have saved it, the other bore it up, when it lay in his hand to destroy it.
Inflexibility or peradventure cruelty; Freedom of speech, or malice; Constancy
in operating or peradventure obstinacy, Contempt of wealth and glory, or it may
be hypocrisy; Greatness of mind, in not bowing to the People, or
peradventure pride, Love of liberty, which might be hatred of the Tyrant, or
envy, these were the virtues so much commended in Cato, and I find them almost
all in Coriolanus, and valor in a more sublime degree joined to them. Cato had
an intent to defend the Commonwealth from the power of one man alone;
Coriolanus from all men's. It was just in both, and peradventure the cause
equal, but not equally beseeming.

The one would have a decrepit man grow young again; The other would not have
a young man grow decrepit. In Catoes time the Commonwealth was total
perverted, confounded, and full of discord, so far from its ancient
institution, that it was impossible to bring it to it again. In Coriolanus
days it was not far digressed from its ancient customs, and might easily
have bin reduced to them again.

In the formers time the wisest men were of opinion that the only cure of the
commonwealth was to reduce it into one man's hand. In the latters, that the
best remedy was to keep it out of the hands of the people, that it might not
perish. They both lost the Consulship, because they would not flatter; Caesar
causes hands to be laid upon Cato, to carry him to prison, and for shame will
not suffer him to be brought thither. Sicinius the Tribune takes hold of
Coriolanus with intent to cast him down headlong from the Tarpeian rock, and
repenting, surceases, Coriolanus is banished, Cato exiles himself. Cato joins
with Pompey, more for rage, and in hatred to Caesar, than being persuaded
thereunto by the love of his country, or zeal* of the Commonwealth, which he
well knew would be the Conquerours prey; and most to be lamented, if it became
his, who was the more cautelous and concealed, and peradventure the worser man.
What wonder is it then, if Coriolanus likewise enraged against the people,
seeing the Senate vilified, and finding, no Pompey to side with, joins with
Tullus? They exalt their own Citizens, the one with Romans, the other with
Volscians. Cato is overcome, Coriolanus conquers. If the other had been
victorious, it had not much strengthened the Commonwealth, neither did it lose
it self, because this overcame. If the Nobility had followed Coriolanus, as it
did Cato either he had returned into Rome victorious, and established a better
form of Government; or being conquered, had left a more lasting Government
behind him. Cato dies, because he could not make the City free. Coriolanus,
because he would not bring it under subjection.

If any man wonders that I should compare Coriolanus to Cato, let him in the
first place, and much more admire, that Plutarch should compare him to
Alcibiades, the one was altogether effeminate, the other manly. The Greek soft,
and tender with Socrates education, savoured of a School. The Roman harsh, and
hardened, brought up in the camp, was composed of nothing but war. The first
was ambitious, the last proud. One severely flattered the people, the other
free, opposed them. Alcibiades framed himself to all men's fashions, Coriolanus
intended to frame every one to his humors. One was beautiful, eloquent, and
subtle; with his beauty, allured, with his eloquence persuaded, and with his
subtilty deceived. The other stern in aspect, rough in speech, single in
heart, allured not, persuaded not, nor did not deceive. Alcibiades loses
himself like a vain man; Coriolanus like a solid. In their banishments, and
in their deaths, wherein they seemed to be most like one another, they were
contrary. They were both exiled, it is true, but one, because he would alter
the form of the Commonwealth, the other, because he would not have it
altered. They were both killed, I confess it, but Alcibiades for hatred of his
vices, Coriolanus for envy of his virtues.

A Table of the chief heads discoursed upon in the Life of ALCIBIADES.
Man's desire is to live in the memory of posterity; choosing rather to survive
infamous, then to be quire forgotten. p. 1. Men's vir^ous actions ought not to
be recorded in Histories. p. 4 Whether vice and virtue, proceeds from the
Patents inclinations, or from the influence of stars, or the temperature of the
climat in which a child is borne p. 6 Whether by a child's actions one may judge
of what his disposition will be when he comes to be a man 15 Defects many
times illustrate the perfections which are in a man 24 Fear the strongest and
most prevailing passion. 28 Alcibiades embraces learning to soment his Ambition
31 Alcibiades takes away half Nicetus his plate. 33 The cause why Nicetus
takes it patiently 33 Alcibiades contemnes the gifts of the Athenian Nobles,
and accepts a country fellows. p. 36 The reason thereof 37 Of what nature the
reciprocal love was, between Socrates and Alcibiades 38 An outward beauty
argues not inward virtue. 40 A young man cannot naturally be wise, and in an
old man wisdom decays 45 Whether one may pass immediately from speculation
to practice 46 Divines seldom good Politicians 48 Discourse unnecessary in
speculative Sciences 49 Experience Mistress of Policy 51 Great difference
between being extravagant by election, and being such naturally 56 Seldom any
grief but has some pleasure in it: Or any joy without some grief 59
Alcibiades no sooner admitted to the government of the Commonwealth, but
presently he salls at odds with Phaeaces and Nicias 61 Emulation and
Necessity, Gain and Glory, were produced by Nature, to keep men from
idleness 61 Why man's Emulation never ceases 62 The name of Liberty is commonly
misunderstood. 65 Whether manifest opposition, or supplanting insinuation will
soonest ruin a man 66 Open opposition dangerous at first only 68 Growing
powers easily kept from rising: but grown, hardly brought down 69 Alcibiades,
and Nicias being put upon the Ostracisme, it falls upon Hyperbosus, a most
vicious man 71 Inconveniences of overmuch providence 74 Both the Nobles and
the vulgar hate a great man, but for different reasons 77 Why the Commonwealth
of Athens grew not to such a height as the Roman 77 Ostracisme ill executed 79
The power and efficacy of union 80 Inconveniences of banishing one great man,
and leaving another at home 82 Aristotle mistaken in the description of an
excellent man 83 Ways to suppress greatness. 85. yet all vain 88 Powerful
Subjects must be punished with death, or not at all, 88 Ostracisine an
absolutely pernicious law. 89 Whether he that knows his own worth, he that
knows it not, or a worthless man, be most dangerous in a Commonwealth 90
Ingratefulness oftentimes springs from the delaying of gratitude 97 Vices have
sometimes appearance of virtues 98 Too much circumspectness sometimes is
hurtful. 105 A third may moderate two contraries, if he participates of both,
otherwise not 107 Whether man be most pious in prosperity, or in adversity 109
Some are naturally treacherous, some become so upon occasion given them 114
Great difference between revenging a wrong, and vindicating ones reputation 114
A man's presence continues love, and his absence causes it to be forgotten. 117
Envy and pusillanimity inseparable 121 Vices suddenly changed into virtues;
give great cause of suspicion 123 A Paradox concerning Luxury and Incontinencie
126 Faults and errors are many times better connived at, than reprehended 132
Some natures will gain the love of all sorts of men 133 An advice contrary to
likelihood, is seldom accepted of 135 Aloibiades takes Selibria by a stratagem
138 A sudden resolution works wonderful effects. 139 Nature seldom bestows
valor and sagacity upon one person 142 Policy is an Art by it self, which no
man has yet rightly learned 144 Cato unapt for Sciences, and in what manner.
145 An emulous equal carps at his corrivals skill, an inferior emulator at his
person 146 A fault committed out of malice and wilfulness, is not so shameful
as one committed through inability, or ignorance 148 Reputation is not lost by
degrees, but either remains entire, or is quite lost 149 Aloibiades cunning
and subtle rather than wise. 150 The difference between subtlety and
Wisdom. 150 Some things laudable in a private man, which are disalowed in a
pulick person. 152 A Generals subtilty different from a Politicians. 154
Aloibiades flies to Farnabazus 54 Why he gained the love of all men Ibid In
Arts some things are judged by the Senses and some by the understanding 187
Aloibiades had many virtues and many vices. 160 He met with a Common wealth
which admired his virtues, and followed his vices. Ibid. His vices overthrew
him in his foreign employments 161 Aloibiades his death 162 Man wrestling with
Fortune, at last is overcome. 162 Nothing firm in the world. 165 Why some men
continue fortunate, some not. 166 Alcibiades often, though not continually
forrunate 158 Some cannot suffer the best, nor endure the worst. 84 Too much
care is the daughter of suspicion, and enemy of truth 81 Compassion is the
daughter of Fear 44 Envy takes pleasure in defects. 24 Perfect excellency is
hated by most men 72 The forbidden thing seems best 64 No man can give that
which he is not owner of. 9 The desire of worldly glory is wise men's madness,
and fools wisdom, but beguiles all. 93 Modesty moderates envy, extinguisheth
it not. 121 Prudence has measure for its actions, but remerity is unlimited.
The free putting a man's life into that man's hands whom he has wronged, is the
greatest satisfaction that can be given 108 Temerity is an act without reason
108 There can be no eminent understanding without some parcel of folly 99 A
great understanding causes constancy, a weak one obstinacy 145 He that is
best, if once he begin to be bad, become^ the worst. 73 It is a great
misfortune for a man to have worth, and want repute, and a far greater to have
repute and want wo^th. 149 Peauty and eloquence are unprofitable weapons
against wrath or fury 117 Youth should grieve at the defects of old age, and
old men laugh at the ignorance of youth 44
The Table of the chief heads discoursed upon in the Life of CORIOLANVS.
Coriolanus his defects attributed to want of education p 175 Whether education
to Learning, and Sciences be good for all sorts of men? p 176 Why the Romans
honored their Citizens for some brave acts with Oaken Crowns 182 All vices
ought to be punished, and all virtues rewarded 183 Impuni^^e of offenses is
sometimes a reward p. 183 The vulga^s reward is money, a Noble man's honor 185
How rewards came to be altered 186 The same things are not in es^eeme every
where. 187 Nature desires that most which is most necessary. 187 Riches the
root of evil 188 Punishments changed by Tyrants 190 In what consists
reputation 191 Who are fittest to command 193 Coriolanus rejoiced to have his
mother hear of his worthy actions 194 Why another joy increases ours 195
Sannieticus King of Egypt 198 Coriolanus de^iring to be chosen Consul by the
people, puts off his Senatoriall Robes 201 Why he did so 202 To judge of virtue
truly, we must see it naked 204 Coriolanus termed proud and impatient, and
the cause of it 207 The virtue of choler in man 208 How humors in the body and
passions in the mind, may produce good effects 210 Wherein consists Patience
211 Women subject to impatience, as well as men, and the cause thereof 213 Why
women being wrathful, are not valiant 214 How the common wealth of Rome might
have made good use of Coriolanus his imperfections 216 Some defects are
tolerable in young men, and some virtues improper for them 218 Patience
vertually contains all other virtues. 222 A man's talents ought to be employed
in due time. 224 It is an unhappiness for a man of worth to be born under a
Tyrant, or in a corrupt common wealth 226 The Ostracisine hindered the increase
of the Athenian common wealth 227 The fortune of a Kingdom or common wealth
may be transferred to another, in the person of one man 228 A man's fortune
decays as his vigor 229 Coriolanus flies to the Volsci, and is entertained by
them 231 Man will give any thing, to attain his ends 231 Sometimes a man
seeks to oppress him, whom he has raised. p. 232. and undo what he himself
has done. 234 One contrary cures another, if the contrary be not mistaken
235 Compassion and envy are the two ordinary passions of great ones 236 Of
favorites 238 Some desire greatness for their own benefit, some for the good
of the common wealth 242 From different ends proceeds a different working
toward them 243 Some love the person, some its virtues 244 Man's life a warfare
248 Fortunes wheel cannot be fired 248 A stranger admitted in another common
wealth to high degrees is in great danger 255 Every man has a desire to his
own country. 255 No man can hate his own country, though he hate a
prevailing party in it 256 Diverse causes may provoke a man to bring in
strangers to oppress his native country 259 A man may rashly do his country
such a wrong as he cannot afterward remedy 265 Coriolanus more fit to be
compared with Cato then with Albiciades 268 Envy follows Humane glory 249 It
is a great fortune to dye when fortune is at the highest 251 How Sejanus gained
Tiberius. 240
The Translator to the READER.
HAving this void Page lef^, I thought good to set down therein this brief
explanation of the word Ostracisme, which thou shall find in several places
of it. The Greek word (...), is derived (...), which signifies shells: For the
Athenians intended to put it in use, the Citizens at the least to the number of
six thousand (for otherwise it was no lawful nor full Assembly) at a day
appointed, brought every man a shell, whereon was written the name of him, whom
he would have banished, and threw it into a place prepared for that purpose:
And the Magistrates telling the said shells, he whose name was found written
upon most of them, was proclaimed banished for ten years. Vale.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader, These Books following are Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and
are to be sold at his shop at the Princes Arms in St Paul's Churchyard
Various Histories, with curious Discourses in Humane Learning, etc.
1. THe History of the Banished Virgin, a Romance translated by I. H. Esquire; Fol.
2. The History of Polexander, Englished by William Brown Gent. Printed for T.
W. and are to be sold by Hum. Moseley, in Folio. 3. Mr James Howells History of
Lewis the thirteenth King of France, with the life of his Cardinal de
Richelieu, in Folio. 4. Mr Howells Epistolae Hoelianae, familiar Letters,
Domestic and Foreign, in six Sections, Partly Historical, Political,
Philosophical first Volume with Additions. in 8o. 1650. 5. Mr Howells New
vollume of Familiar Letters, Partly Historical, Political, Philosophical,
the second Volume with many Additions. 1650. 6. Mr Howells Third Volume of
Additionall Letters of a fresher date, never before published, in 8o. 1650. 7.
Mr Howels Dodona's Grove, or the Vocal Forest, in 120. with Additions. 1650.
8. Mr Howells, Englands Tears for the present Wars, in 12o. 1650. 9. Mr
Howell Of the Pre-eminence and pedigree of Parliament, in 12o, 1650. 10. Mr
Howells Instruction for Foreign Travels, in 12o. with diverse Additions. 1650.
11. Mr. Howels Vote, or a Poem Royal presented to His Majesty, in 4o. 12. Mr.
Howels Angliae Suspiria and Lachrimae in 12o. 13. Policy Vnveiled, or Maxims
of state, done into English by the translator of Gusman the Spanish Rogue in
4o. 14. The History of the Inquisition, composed by the R. F. Paul Servita the
compiler of the History of the Council of Trent, in 4o. 15. Biathanatos, a
Paradox of Self-Homicide, by Dr. Io: Done Deane of St Paul's London, in 4o. 16.
Marquis Virgillio Malvezzi's, Romulus and Tarquin, Englished by Hen. Earl of
Monmouth in 12o. 17. Marquis Virgillio Malvezzis, David persecuted, Englished
by Rob. Ashley Gent. in 12o. 18. Marquis Virgillio Malvezzi, Of the Success,
and chief events, of the Monarchy of Spain, in the year 1639. of the Revolt of
the Catalonians, Englished by Rob. Gentilis, 12o. 19. Marquis Virgillio
Malvezzi's considerations on the lives of Alcibiades and Coriolanus, Englished
by Robert Gentilis, in 12o. 1650. 20. Gracious Privileges granted by the King
of Spain unto our English Merchants, 4o 21. History of Life and Death, or the
Promulgation of Life, written by Francis Lord Verulam Viscount St Alban. in
12o. 22. The Antipathy between the French and the Spaniard, Translated out of
Spanish, in 120 23. Mr. Birds Grounds of Grammar, in 8o. 24. Mr Bulwers
Philocophus, or the Deaf and Dumb man's friend, in 12o. 25. Mr Bulwers
Pathomyotomia, or a Dissection of the significative Muscels of the Affections
of the Mind, in 12o. 26. An Itinerary containing a Voyage made through Italy in
the years 1646. 1647. Illustrated with diverse Figures of Antiquities, never
before published, by Io. Reymond. Genesis in 12o. 27. The use of Passions, written
by I. F. Senault, and put into English by Henry Earl of Monmouth, in 8o. 28.
Choice Music for three Voices, with a Thorough Base, composed by Mr Henry and
Mr William Laws Brothers, and Servants, to His Majesty, with diverse Elegies
set in Music by several friends upon the Death of Mr William Laws. in 4o.
29. Judicious and select Essays and observations written by the Renowned and
learned Knight, Sir Walter Raleigh with his Apology for his Voyage to Guiana,
in 80. 1650.
Choice POEMS, with excellent Translations, and Incomparable Comedies and
Tragedies, written by several Ingenious Authors.
1. COmedies and Tragedies written by Francis Beaumont and John Flesher Gent.
never printed before, and now Published by the Authors original Copies,
containing 34. Plays and a Masque in Folio. 2. Epigrammata Thomae Mori Angli,
in 16o. 3. Fragmenta Aurea, a collection of the Incomparable Pieces written by
Sir John Suckling Knight, in 8o. 4. All Iuvenalls 16. Satyrs, Translated by Sir
Robert Stapylton Knight, wherein is contained a Survey of the manners and
Actions of Mankind, with Annotations. in 8o. 5. Museus on the loves of Hero and
Leander, with Leanders Letter to Hero, and her Answer, taken out of Ovid, with
Annotations, by Sir Robert Stapylton Knight, in 12o. 6. Poems etc. written by
Mr. Edward Waller of Beckonsfield Esquier, in 8o. 7. Pastor fido, the faithful
Shepherd, a Pastor ill newly Translated out of the Original by Richard
Fanshaw Esquire; in 4o. 8. Poems, with a Discovery of the Civil Wars of Rome, by
Richard Fanshaw Esquire; in 4o. 9. Aurora Ismenia and the Prince, with Oronta the
Cyprian Virgin, translated by Thomas Stanley Esquire; the second Edition corrected
and amended, in 8. 1650. 10. Europa, Cupid crucified, Venus Vigills, with
Annotations, by Thomas Stanley Esquire; in 8o. 1650. 11. Medea, a Tragedy written
in Latin by Lucius Annaeus Seneca, Englished by Mr Edward Sherburne Esquire; with
Annotations, in 8o. 12. Senecas Answer to Lucilius his Quaere why Good men
suffer misfortunes seeing there is a Divine Providence, translated into English
Verse by Edward Sherburne Esquier. 8o 13. Poems of Mr John Milton, with a
Masque presented at Ludlow Castle before the Earl of Bridgwater then President
of Wales. in 8o. 14. Poems etc. with a Masque called the Triumph of Beauty, by
James Shirley. in 8o. 15. Steps to the Temple, Sacred Poems, with the Delight
of the Muses, upon several occasions, by Richard Crashaw of Cambridge, in 12.
16. The Mistress, or several Copies of Love verses, written by Mr Abra. Cowley,
in 8o. 17. Divine Poems, written by Francis Quarles Senior, in 8o. 18. The Odes
of Casimire, translated by George Hills, in 12o. 19. Arnalte and Lucenda, or
the Melancholy Knight, a Poem translated by L. Lawrence. in 4o. 20. The
Sophister, a Comedy, in 4o. 21. The Woman Hater, or the Hungry Courtier, a
Comedy written by Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher Gent. in 4o. 22. The
Tragedy of Thierry King of France, and his Brother Theodoret, written by
Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher, Genesis 4o 23. The Unfortunate Lovers, a
Tragedy written by William Davenant Knight, in 4o. 24. Love and Honor a Comedy
written by William Davenant Knight, in 4o. 25. Madagascar with other Poems
written by William Davenant Knight, in 12o. 26. The Country Captain and the
Variety, Two Comedies written by a Person of Honor, in 12o. 27. The Cid, a
Tragecomedy. in 120. 1650. 28. Coopers Hill, a Poem by John Denham Esquire; the 2.
Edition, in 40. with Adit. 1650. 29. Clarastella with other occasional Poems,
Elegies, Epigrams, and Satyrs, written by Robert Heath, Esquire; 1650. 30. The
Accademy of Complements, wherein Ladies, Gentlewomen, Scholars, and Strangers,
may accommodate their Courtly Practice with Gentile Ceremonies, complemental,
Amarous, high expressions, and Forms of speaking, or writing of letters, most
in fashion, with Additions of many witty Poems, and pleasant new Songs, newly
Printed. 1650.
Several Sermons with other Excellent Tracts in Divinity, written by some most
eminent and learned Bishops and Orthodox Divines.
1. A Manual of Private Devotions and Meditations for every day in the week, by
the right reverend Father in God Lancelot Andrews, late Lord Bishop of
Winchester, in 24o. 2. A Manual of Directions for the Sick, with many sweet
Meditations and Devotions, by the Right Reverend Father in God, Lancelot
Andrews, Lord Bishop of Winchester, in 24o. 3. Ten Sermons upon Several
Occasions, preached at St Paul's Cross, and elsewhere, by the Right Reverend
Father in God, Arthur Lake late Bishop of Bath and Wells, in 4o. 4. Six Sermons
upon several occasions preached at the Court before the Kings Majesty, and
elsewhere, by that late learned and Reverend Divine, John Done Dr in Divinity,
and Deane of St Paul's London, in 4o. 5. Precious Promises and Priveleges of the
faithful, written by Richard Sibbes Doctor in Divinity, late Master of
Katherin Hall in Cambridge, and Preacher of Grayes-Inne London, in 12o. 6.
Sarah and Hagar, or the sixteenth chapter of Genesis, opened in nineteen
Sermons, being the first legitimate Essay of the Pious labors of that learned
Orthodox and Indefatigable Preacher of the Gospel, Mr Josias Shute B. D. and
above 33. years Rector of St Mary W^^ln^th, in Lombard-streete, in Folio. 7.
Christ's tears, with his love and affection toward Jerusalem, delivered in
sundry Sermons upon Luke 19. v. 41, 42. by Ric. Maide^ B. D. Preacher of the
word of God, and lat. Fellow of Magdalen College in Cambridge, 4o 8. Ten
Sermons preached upon several Sundays and Saints days, by Peter Hausted M^
in Arts, and Curate at Vppingham in Rutland in 4o 9. 18. Sermons preached upon
the Incarnation and Nativity of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
wherein the greatest mysteries of godliness are unfolded, to the capacity of
the weakest Christian, by John Dawson, in 4o. 10. Christian Divinity, written
by Edmund Reeve, Bachelour in Divinity, in 4o. 11. A description of the
Newborn Christian, or a Lively Pattern of the Saint militant, child of God,
written by Nicholas Hunt, 4o 12. The Tyranny of Satan, in a Recantation Sermon
at St Paul's Cross, by T. Gage, in 4o 13. The True and absolute Bishop, wherein
is showed how Christ is our only shepherd, and Bishop of our souls, by
Nicholas Darton, in 4o. 14. Divine Meditations upon the 91. Psalm, and on the
History of Agag King of Amaleck, with an Essay of Friendship, written by an
Honorable Person, in 12o. 15. Lazarus his rest, a Sermon preached at the
Funeral of that pious, learned, and Orthodox Divine, Mr Ephraim Vdall, by
Thomas Reeve Bachelor in Divinity, in 4o. 16. An Historical Anatomy of
Christia Melancholy, by Edmund Gregory, in 80.

