A SHORT VIEW OF The Lives Of those Illustrious Princes, HENRY DUKE OF
GLOVCESTER, AND Mary Princess of Orange DECEASED: Late Brother and Sister to
his Majesty the KING of Great Britain.

Collected by T. M. Esquire To whom the same will serve a Rule and Pattern.

Ad exemplum totus componitur orbis
Plus valent exempla quam praecepta
LONDON: Printed for a Society of Stationer, 1661.

TO THE Right Worshipful SIR Robert Bolles Baronet; AS Also to his most
virtuous and worthy LADY.
Books have their fate as well as Cities and Kingdoms, and want their Patrons,
as Rome did her Tutelar Gods; And if he was such an one as Joseph was to Egypt,
they will be eternized, if not for their own merit, yet by the continued
freshness of his memory.

This has been the motive which induced me to this attempt upon your
goodness, not any supposition in my self of knowing or being known to you,
and such I believe is your Candor, that you will account the Authors being
unacquainted rather his own than his Books unhappiness, and therefore hope
you will own it, though not for it self, yet for the subjects sake on which it
treats, which yields matter both of joy and sorrow to the whole Kingdom,
wherein there were many overjoyed hearts for such hopeful living Princes, and
more weeping eyes for their sudden and too immature death.

I shall say no more, but recommend the work to your perusal, wherein as I
hope you shall receive satisfaction, so in behalf thereof I pray acceptance
both to it and

Yours to serve you T. M.
Feb. 4. 1660.
A short view of the lives of those illustrious Princes, Henry Duke of
Gloucester, and MARY Princess of Orange.
IT has been a rule commended unto us by ancient and foregoing times, Non
tutum est in illos scribere, qui possunt proscribere, and the reason may be
supposed for that the great ones of the World were for the most part so vicious
that it made the old Poet cry out, Difficile est satyram non scribere; but such
and so different is our present condition that we may venture to write, since
neither our greatest eulogyes can be styled hyperbolicall, nor our highest
applauses flattery; especially where the subject of the discourse are of the
most noble strain, as here issuing from the most royal Families of Europe, to
the greatness of which blood they have added a new and extraordinary luster by
the most eminent virtues wherewith they were adorned; for it may truly be said
of our late deceased Princes, as Ulysses boasted of himself, Deus est in
utroque Parente, there is scarce any Family of the World so highly and nobly
allied, for by birth they were the Son and Daughter of Charles the first, and
Henrietta Maria, he by his Father sprang from the ancient stock of Scottish
Kings, and by his Mother allied to the Danish blood. But she of the royal blood
of France, Daughter of Henry the fourth surnamed great, and from him claiming a
consanguinious relation both with the Germane, Italian and Spanish Scepters;
From this royal stock I say, issued the late illustrious Princess Mary,
Princess of Orange, being born into this World on the fourth day of November,
in the year 1631. The sixth of her Fathers reign, Lady Mary born.
and not long after with much state and solemnity baptized, being committed to
the ruition of a most honorable and religious. Lady who was to take care of
the tender infancy of the Princely babe.

In this unknown retiredness must we let her pass her childhood, although as
then it was especially in charge to every hand about her, that nothing tending
to the disadvantage of the Protestant religion should approach her ears a^
well knowing the certainty of that rule, Quo semel est imbuta recens seruabit
odorem Testa diu, and so indeed it proved; for the so early and even with her
milk imbibed the same reformed religion, that neither the subtilty of
temptation nor the power of malice could ever divert her or make her to deviate
therefrom; Nay so firmly was she fixed and grounded therein, that when the
Saternall love of her Father began now to cast his eye abroad to find a fitting
match for this his Peerlesse Daughter, she (though the small number of her
years did exact from her a submission to his will; yet) in a kind of womanly
resolve did in a manner declare her dislike to a contrary religion, and humbly
desired that her religion and affection might not countercharge each other;
Hereupon after many ediligent guests, at length the Prince of Orange is
propounded, and that for several reasons, first as being of the same religion,
secondly the next adjoining neighbor by whose conjoined supply of snipping the
English, would be the most formidable Masters of the Sea, and thirdly because
by that means both the Spanish and French were and would be in their designs
countermined, hereupon and for diverse other unknown reasons of state.

-- Suorum corda Britannum Cum socijs Belgis vindo propiore Liganda,
Treaty of marriage with Orange.
Firmandumque Vetus potiori pignore soedus.
A treaty is had about the same, and it was concluded that William the only
Son and Heir of the most noble Prince of Orange, should entermarry with the
Lady Mary, eldest Daughter to the King of Great Britain, according to which
agreement the young Prince the 20th. of February, Prince of Orange came to
London.
1641. arrived at London waited on by a magnificent train of the chiefest
Nobles of his own Country.

During this Intervall of time, and while these affairs were thus in managing,
was born the Kings youngest Son, entitled the Duke of Gloucester at Oatlands
in the month of July 1640. and in September following was baptized and called
Henry, Duke of Gl^cester born.
a Prince who from his birth bore the express Image of his Father, and not
only as at first in his person, but as after appeared in his virtues, and for
the more orderly proceeding toward his future education, he was committed to
the care of an honorable Lady.

He^ven having showered down his blessings on the Kings hopeful and numerous
Issue, from whom nothing might be expected but the future happiness of our
now long continued peace; behold on a sudden the Scots in a hot spurred zeal,
or rather in a fanatic fury envying so much prosperity to the King and State,
begin to harbor dangerous thoughts; yea and proceed to rebellious actions,
treacherously possessing themselves of Edenhorough Castle, which was delivered
to the General of the Covenanters without any shot or resistance made by the
treacherous Governor. What Bulworks, SCOTS troubles.
Fortresses or other defensive fortifications can retain or keep the possession
of a Kings right, when eminent Trustees, for hope, fear, or reward, betray
their charge and forfeit their fidelity. Dunoritton Fort, once reported
invincible, fell next into their hands, being in the custody of a person of
worth well fortified and weaponed, but through the ill victualling thereof,
lost with little noise and less resistance; puffed up with these successes the
Covenanters march on to Dalkeyth a House of his Majesty's, which they took into
their possession without any opposition, wherein as they expected they found a
plentiful store of Ammunition, and beyond their expectation, the Crown,
Scepter, and other Regalia of that ancient Kingdom, which they quickly removed
to Edenborough Castle, and there with great reverence and much care disposed
them to safe custody, pretending they were displaced before at Dalkeyth. The
news of these occurrences arriving fresh to the Kings ear (where affection
before would not make him harbor an ill thought of his Country men) now made
him change his opinion, and in the midst of all the pleasure and joy conceived
for his young Son Duke Henry, to leave both him and his Mother the Queen to
provide a remedy to prevent these threatening evils.

By this means was the infant Prince deprived of the right and knowledge of his
Father both at once, KING toward Scotland.
his rebellious Covenanting Subjects of Scotland calling him to their more
northern parts, where he resolved (if possible) by fair means to persuade them,
or else by repelling force with force to reduce them to their obedience.

While the King is raising force to march toward them, the Scots go to, and
against Aberdeen; restless natures are never out of action, and discontented
persons ever desirous of innovation, if the design be good they undertake,
they still pursue it with all diligence; if ill, they prosecute it with no
less industry, witness these men, who in their said march took 4000 arms
that were going thither to have put the City into a posture of defense, so that
now the Kings arms were carried against the Kings cause, there being no party
through the prevalency of the averse faction that durst appear for the King,
nay to such a height were these men grown, that they had an intention to have
surprised Barwick, but their intended attempt was not so closely carried and
resolved on amongst themselves, but that timely notice thereof was attained by
the English, and for prevention of the same, command was forthwith given for
some raisements of Foot, and Troop^ of Horse of the Bishop-prick; of Durham and
the northern parts to move with speedy marches thither, and there so to dispose
of their power as to be able to resist any offer from the Enemy, which was
effectually performed.

SCOTS manner of proceedings.
The Scots perceiving they were prevented in that design, fall to Council, and
knowing that there are two ways which infallibly make rich men potent, and
poor men rich, the first being great getting, and the latter, the keeping
things gotten, and that if there be a failing in either of these two, there
will be a sudden sense of the stand put to greatness, and of the estates
declining fortune) do cowardly make it their study to retain the Towns and
Forts they had gotten into their possession, and therefore with art and
expedition Leith must be fortified, so that it may oppose any power that should
present it self against in; and the like they also did in other place.

Notwithstanding all which prodigious acts of Treason, like the Adulterous
Woman spoken of by the Wise Man, they will not believe they have done amiss,
for as if they have been the truest Subjects in the world, on the fifth of June
the Earl of Dumfermeling presented to his Majesty a Petition at his Pavilion in
the Camp, which he graciously accepted and read, wherein the Scots humbly sued
for an accommodation, and his Majesty was thereupon pleased to enter into a
Treaty with them, the issue whereof was that the Scots should disband their
Forces, and surrender to the King all his castles, but the main matters to be
concluded by Parliament, which was to meet not long after at London, whither
the Scots sent their Commissioners, and made a full and final agreement.

By this means the King attended with all his Nobility made up to London,
where in November 1640. a black long Parliament (whose actions never had a
parallel) met, during the time of whose first sitting all things began to grow
out of order, yet they hearkened in some measure to the Kings desires for the
marriage of the Lady Mary to the Prince of Orange, Lady Mary married.
was with great state and pomp celebrated at Whitehall in May 1641. to the
great satisfaction both of Prince and people, as it then seemed, Laetior hac
nulla est unguam lux orta Britannis:
Vnus Hymen populo est: unumque agit Anglia festum.
Tot que dies nitet una dies, se latior ipsa,
Dum redit, et primi non cessant gaudia festi.
No day more joyful ere did Britain see,
Both King and people in their mirth agree,
Nor for a spurt does their grand feasting last,
But each new coming day outvies the Fast.


During all these solemnities, at the Court the English Parliament are driving
a contrary design, inciting tumults to cry down the Bishops, which was
prosecuted with such violence that the King was necessitated for security of
his Person to withdraw from London, Janua. 10. 1641.
and with the Queen, Prince, and Duke of York to retire to Hampton Court, from
whence in February following accompanied with the Queen and the Princess of
Orange, he went to Canterbury, and so to Dover, where the Lady Mary Princess
of Orange took leave of her Father and Mother and imbarqued for Holland, Lady
Mary to Holland.
the Prince her Husbands Country, where she safely landed and arrived but
never after that day saw ^he face of her beloved Father.

The Princess being now in the Low Countries, was received, by her Father in
Law the old Prince of Orange, as did become the Daughter of so great a King,
into whose presence he would never approach, but with a reverence more like a
subject toward his Sovereign then the freedom of a Father toward his Sons
Wife, by no means suffering either himself or his Son, much less his Servants
to come near the place of her residence but bareheaded, and to his dying day,
yea even in his deathbed maintaining the same as due to the greatness of her
birth, and excellent virtues.

And truly the Princes of Orange Father and Son did make it their study to
deserve well at the King of Englands hands to whom they ever continued fast and
true friends during all the time of his succeeding troubles, when by the
treason and sedition of his rebellious subjects he was hunted from place to
place like a Partridge upon the Mountains, til at last having taken the Lords
anointed in their pits, they destroyed the Father, expelled the Sons, and
endeavored to extirpate the whole royal Family.

When his Majesty was by tumults driven from London, he left his children
behind him, but afterward sent for the Prince and Duke of York to come to him
to Greenwich, which they did; but still there remained at Saint James's the
Lady Elizabeth one of the Kings Daughters who since dyed, and Henry Duke of
Gloucester, both of so tender years that they were neither sensible of their
Fathers sufferings nor capable to relieve them; so that their innocent
harmlessnesse on any account not only protected them from the malice of their
enemies, but proved to be a means to work on their evil minds to provide for
them not only an honorable sustenance, but a royal attendance.

He never knew his Father.
In this manner did the young Duke lead his life, almost ignorant that he had a
father, for he had never seen his face, so as to be able by knowledge to
distinguish the same from that of a stranger, being born in 1640. and his
father, mother and brothers forced to fly in 1641. so that he was a stranger to
his own kindred, and to them that kept him, in effect no better than a noble
prisoner; in all which time such was the seriousness of his tender age, as
wrought admiration in his attendants, for he proceeded in so sweet a method,
that he was able in point of Religion (wherein he was excellently well
grounded) to render an account beyond many whose years should have manifested
a surer and more certain judgment.

The heat of the war between the King and Parliament now growing more slack
by the weakness of the Kings forces, who were so over powered by their Enemies
that they utterly left the field, yea and upon sight of the other Army, quit
and surrendered their garrisons without any blow; the King himself fled to the
perfidious Scots Army then at Southwell, King to the Scots, and by them sold to
the English.
and shortly after, Oxford the chief of all his garrisons fell into the hand of
General Fairfax by composition, and with it the Duke of York, Duke of York
taken prisoner at Oxford, 1646
the Kings second son, whom the General sent up to the then Parliament, to
dispose of as they should see convenient; they to show him what he must expect
for the future, as a special mark of their favor, on the 9th of July 1646.
discharged all his servants, and thrust them away from him, D. Yorks servants.
whose fidelity could never be either reduced or frighted to leave him in times
of the greatest hazard and danger: By this means the young Duke has gotten
his brother for his co-partner, the same servants waiting on both, so that one
might truly see between them the old proverb truly verified, Amicorum omnium
communia.

This new society was exceedingly pleasing to the young innocent, who began now
to hearken to his brothers discourses with a manlike attention, imbibing from
his lips a new, though natural affection, toward his unknown and distressed
father, who about this time was sold by the Scots to the English, and by them
strictly guarded, conveyed as a Prisoner to a house of his own in
Northamptonshire called Holmby; King at Holmeby, and taken thence by Joyce.
where he had not long continued, before one Joyce, a fellow of desperate
principles, employed by a factious party in the army, came and seized his
person, and hurried it from place to place, till at last they brought him to
Hampton Court, At Hampton Court
from whence he was by persuasions deluded into the Isle of Wight, where he was
immediately secured and kept a strait prisoner in Carisbrook Castle.

The Duke of York seeing affairs to be managed in so rigorous a manner against
his father, began to think of providing for his own safety, Du. Yorks escape
from St. James's.
to which end, finding some honest and private correspondents in whom he might
put trust, he proposes his escape, whereunto by a mutual consent the engaged
persons undertook to provide conveniences for him, which they brought
effectually and with secrecy to pass in April 1648. so that on the 20th of
that month he left St. James's, and was not missed for several hours after
his his departure; by which means he clearly got away with safety, and retired
into France, leaving his enemies and pretended keepers to lament their own
misfortune, while himself rejoiced in his own security, and having stolen
himself from them.

This loss added new affliction to the Duke of Gloucester, not having lost
only a brother, but a comforter and instructor, so that he began to grow
melancholy, especially receiving daily intimation from that mirror of her age
his dear sister the Lady Elizabeth, of the hourly danger both themselves and
father stood in; and indeed it began to appear more and more every day, for the
Army under Cromwell had violated the treaty in the Isle of Wight, and once more
laid traitorous hands on the sacred person of over clouded Majesty, carrying
him first to Hurst, and at length brought him to St. James's near London, where
they most barbarously murdered him.

On the 29th of January, which was the day before he dyed, he desired he might
see and take his last farewell of his children, D. Gloucester comes to the
King, and his answer to him.
which with some regret was granted, and the Lady Elizabeth and the Duke of
Gloucester brought to him. The King taking the Duke upon his knee, said, Sweet
heart, now they will cut off thy fathers head, mark child what I say, they will
cut off my head, and perhaps make thee a King, but you must not be a King so
long as your brothers Charles and James be living, for they will cut off your
brothers heads (when they can catch them) and cut off thy head too at the last,
and therefore I charge you not to be made a King by them. At which words the
child smiling said, I will be torn in pieces first, which falling so
unexpectedly from one so young, made the King rejoice exceedingly.

The same day the King urged it again to the little Duke, that he might not
take the Kingdom if he regarded the good of his soul, and therefore commanded
him upon his blessing not to accept thereof, unless it lawfully redounded to
him: to whom he answered to this effect, that he hoped God would give him grace
to be more contented with the legal title of Gloucester, then the usurped
authority of that right which from God and nature belonged to another; and
after that day he never saw his fathers face more.

Near upon two years after this he continued at London, although the Juncto
had now ordered they should have no longer any honor used toward them, which
a little startled our young Princes, D. Gloucester and Lady Eliz. to Carisbrook
in the Isle of Wight.
but what a condition may we imagine them to be in when news arrived to their
ears that they were ordered to be carried Prisoners to Carisbrook Castle, the
same fatal place where their father had suffered so many indignities. This I
say did strike somewhat close to them, especially when on the 31 of July 1650.
they were necessitated to go thither with untoward attendants, and less
respect; which, together with the other sorrows that they had daily undergone,
wrought so on the spirit of the discerning, though disconsolate Lady, Lady
Eliz. dyed.
that she soon fell into a Consumption, and on the 8th of September in the same
year, dyed at Carisbrook, and on the 24th of the same was privately interred at
Newport in the Isle of Wight.

D. Gloucester ordered to be sent beyond Sea.
Now is the little Duke totally left alone, to take comfort only in his
solitary meditations, when those monsters at Westminster fell into
consideration what to do with him: after many various and unmannerly debates,
they resolve to ship him away beyond Sea, which coming to the Dukes hearing,
(being now about eleven years of age) he gave God thanks that he should be so
delivered, and that he had so restrained their malice, that though they had the
will, they had not yet the power to hurt him. My father told me (said he to one
about him) that God would provide for me, which he has abundantly done, in
that he deliveteth me as a Lamb out of the paws of the devouring Lion.

According to the said foretaken resolution, they order his going beyond Sea,
and send a Tutor along with him, giving him in charge, First, that he should go
and study at a Protestant School. Secondly, that he keep correspondence with
the Parliament by letters, and that his tutor should render them an account of
his progress and proficiency in learning. Thirdly, that he should not go near
his mother or brothers, or have any thing to do with them, but in all things
utterly disown them: and fourthly, that he shall immediately return upon notice
from the Parliament to him given to that purpose; and upon these and the like
terms he goes away, with an allowance of 3000 l. a year: but see the gallantry
of this young Princes spirit, he is no sooner at liberty, H^s allowance he
quits, and the reason why.
but, slighting all these propositions, he goes to France, visits his mother
and brothers, takes the blessing of the one, salutes the other, and after a
short stay, for the future improvement of his learning, he goes to Leyden, and
there settles to study.

While the Duke of Gloucester is thus preparing to fit himself to enter into
the world, Prince of Orange ^yes.
the Prince of Orange husband to the Lady Mary passes out of this world into
another by death, on the 8th of October in the year 1650. when he had brought
the stiff-necked Hollander to reason, who began to wince at his superiority,
and was in hopes to have seen issue of his own loins; for in November while
his funeral was not yet past, the Lady Mary Princess Dowager of Orange, was
delivered of a son, Princess Dowager (...) brought to bed of a son.
to the no small joy of his mother and all her relations, to whom this was
looked on as a prosperous Omen of future happiness, for that thereby was
settled a continuance of amity between the Hollander and English, on behalf of
the King of England, whose quarrel they shortly after endeavored to maintain,
in several sharp battles at Sea, though not with such success as was hoped,
and expected from such a powerful assistance.

When the Princess was well recovered of her childbed, the States of the
Country had taken order for the solemn funeral of their deceased Prince,
Prince of Orange interred solemnly.
which was with great state celebrated on the fifteenth day of March following,
being attended with a gallant number of Gentry, and followed with a noble
equipage of valiant soldiers, till he was interred among the rest of his
famous ancestors, whose worthy deeds when living, are a more lasting and
honorable tomb then ought can be inscribed on brass or marble.

The English rebels having as aforesaid murdered their Sovereign, and banished
his sons to seek their fortunes in foreign lands, the Scots who had betrayed
the father seek to make amends to the son, by restoring him to his paternal
inheritance; King C. 2. ^^th his ^ister of Orange at Bredah.
whereupon a treaty is had with the said Scots at Bredah, a town belonging to
the Princess of Orange, for there with most security he durst entrust his
person, well knowing he might cast himself into the arms of his dearest
sister, who had neither spared time, labor, friends or money, to advance his
interest, so trampled on by daring Treason.

We left the Duke of Gloucester at Leyden following his study, D. Gloucester at
Leyden.
being grown a most complete Gentleman, and rarely accomplished, of complexion
much like his father, his hair of a sad or dark brown, of a middle stature,
strong judgment, a deep and reaching understanding, and a most pleasing
affable delivery, so that it might truly be said of him Men's formosa tegi
formoso corpore gaudet. And indeed this made him be beloved and honored in the
fight of all men; His eanestnesse to attain learning.
for such was his forwardness and zeal to learning, and to attain the Arts,
that he would steal from his hours of rest to add to them of his study,
Iliad. 8.
taking that of Homer as if spoken to himself (...). id est,
Conciliarium non licet integram.
dormire noctem.
And Plautus says, In Ruden.
-- Vigilare decel hominem
Qui vult sua tempore conficere beneficia
Nam qui dormiunt libenter, sine Lucro
Et cum malo quiescunt. --
Striving to imitate that famous conqueror of the world Alexanander the great,
who being asked how in so short a time he had done such great things, which
another could revolve in his mind in the same time, answered, (...), noting
thereby a continued industry with which he did always follow his occasions,
and constantly persevere in the pursuit of his proposed end, letting no
occasion of well managing his his business, rashly or negligently slip out of
his hands. And indeed out Duke fell short in nothing of that Heathen, for he
never would contract or let fall his spirit, His industry.
so as he might seem to be overpressed, but rather would cheerfully and freely,
not as of constraint, meet occasions, and by all means endeavor to forward,
never with a fine-spun complement to delay or procrastinate any design.

Imbue Puerum, Pro. 22.6.
Instruct a child (says Solomon) in the way wherein he should walk, and when
he is old he will not depart therefrom, for as the teaching is, such will the
manners, according to that Morum quos fecit, praemia doctor habei. This rule
being closely followed by him in his childhood, was never after forgotren; for
he made it his chief work to satisfy his judgment in the controversies of
Religion, His religion.
as knowing that Principis est virtus maxima, nosce Deum. And herein certainly
he was so perfect, that all about him were admiting hearets of his profound
discourses, His Eloquence.
his words dropping from him in a mellifluous manner both to delight and
satisfaction. Mente valet, juncta est facundis gratia didit. Homer de Iliss:
His insight in humane learning was very great, so that he was courted by
foreigners as a son of wisdom, by whose example, the excess of his followers
was abated, for they did subire animos magno authori, tie their minds to his
rule, His mode ration.
to the perfect fulfilling that rule of the Poer, Si studia and mores populi
cognoscere curas
Rex facilis, vitam Principis inspicias.
The masters life did surely prove
A pattern to the servants love.
And as he inherited his fathers pourtraiture, His fathers imitator.
so likewise he owned his perfection, according to that of Isocrates, (...);
the roots of virtue were so deeply fixed, that they could not be pulled up by
any strength, nor by any means be removed: of such force is education, that
the sweet savor of Virtue first received, when the mind is yet tender, open,
and easily seasoned, is hardly ever to be extinguished.

The ancient Romans, when their voices were demanded at the Election of their
Emperor, used to cry out with one consent Quis melior quam literatus? resting
assured that Virtue and Learning were for the most part copartners, and
insinuating that he that wanted learning could never merit honor.

This made Licinius that was Colleague in the Empire with Constantine the great,
be recorded by all writers with Infamy, for that, (being incapable of learning
himself, by reason of the slowness and barrenness of his understanding) was
wont to call learning the very poison, and public plague that infected
Realms. The Roman Historians wholly applying this vanity of his to want of
judgment, and not being able to comprehend the benefit of Arts.

But our Royal Duke was of the Philosopher Aristippus his mind, being wont to
affirm, that it was better to be a beggar then unlearned, because the beggars
penury was but want of money, but he that was unlearned was void of humanity:
and therefore (says one) if a good man, Joach. Vag. in Anatol. dedic.
or a learned man would ever wish to live long, certainly it would be for no
other cause, but that they may do something worthy of living. This made
Scaliger cry out, Nothing is better than knowledge, nothing more noble than to
reach, nothing comes so near to true felicity, as to learn. But we cannot learn
but from others, we cannot teach unless we converse with others, and we can
learn little or nothing truly but what we learn from others; not by a continual
poring on the book, for that (says Socrates) weakneth the memory, but by
discourse, and public conversing with men.

This made the Duke of Gloucester, when he had thus truly laid the foundation
and ground work of his learning in his private study at Leyden, to return again
to the Court of France, there to study men, whereby to become more capable of
assisting his brother, the most incomparable King of Great Britain. He had
already seen the beauty of many cities, known the manners of the people of many
countries, through whom he had passed, and learned the language of those
Nations with whom he had been conversant, which served him not only for
delight, but ornament: nor rested he here, for observing that the greatest
ornament is the beauty of the mind, he made it his endeavor to attain that
which in moral Philosophy is called Cultus animi, consonant and agreeing with
those of his body, namely beauty, health and strength.

The beauty of his mind he shewin grateful and acceptable forms and
sweetness^ of behavior, which caused all men that had to do with him always
to go from him highly satisfied and contented. 2. The health of his mind
consisted in an immovable constancy and freedom from passions, which indeed
are the sickness of the mind. 3. The strength of his mind he demonstrated in
performing good and great things, the even temper of his mind keeping him from
evil and base things. Now the greatest part of men have none of these: some
have one and lack the other two, some few attain to have two of them, but this
most Illustrious Prince was the great Master of all three; which as it showed a
most deep understanding, so the means whereby be attained thereunto may well
deserve a memorial to be recommended to posterity for great men to imitate.

The first thing he endeavored was to attain experience of forms, which he
did, by making his mind expers rerum, for behavior is but a garment, and it is
easy to make a comely garment for a body that is well proportioned; whereas a
deformed body can never be helped by Tailors art, but the counterfeiting will
appear. And in the form of the mind it is a true rule that a man may mend his
faults with as little labor as cover them.

The second way he proposed to himself for the aforesaid end, was this, to wit,
imitation; and to that end he affected the worthiest, and did not think them
most worthy whom he most affected.

To obtain the health of the mind he used the same means which we do for the
health of our bodies, that is, to make observance what diseases we are aptest
to fall into, and to provide against them, for Physic has not more remedy
against the diseases of the body, than Reason has preservatives against the
passions of the mind.

This made him all the while he did abide in the Court of France, where he saw
infinite variety and behavior of men and manners, that he always followed and
imitated the best, not being caught with novelties, nor infected with Customs,
not given to affectation: three excellent virtues, that are seldom seen
concurring in a person of his quality.

Nor did he think it enough to have been in the court, unless he visited the
camp also, which made him go into the Army wherein his brother, the most
Magnanimous Duke of York had then a command against the Spaniard; with this
advantage, as also for many other strong motives, he laid aside the tenderness
of his birth and breeding, and conformed his natural courage to be fit to true
fortitude, thinking it better at the first to do a great deal too much, than
any thing too little; for he knew it to be an observation infallibly true, that
a young man, especially a strangers first actions, are looked upon, and
Reputation once gotten is easily kept, but an ev^l impression conceived at the
first is not easily removed; so that in short time his name and actions grew
both famous and honored.

But now, as if fortune had not already done her worst to these Royal Branches
of Great Britains Monarthy, by a forcible expulsion of them from their Native
Country by their unnatural Subjects, and setting up an usurping. Impostor in
the Kingly seat, she throws one stone more, as hoping abroad to accomplish
that villainy which by any means at home they were out of hopes ever to bring
to pass; for about November 1655. that devilish Rebel Cromwell having
engrossed into his own hands the reins of government, and brought the English
Nation to a slavish submission to his Tyrant^cal power, not only within his
own limits did what he listed, but quarrelled downright with foreign Princes,
especially the King of Spain, upon whom he had made a violent breach in the
Indies, by the assayling of Hispaniola, and surprising and taking of the Island
of Jamaica. And now finding the King of Spain enraged at the attempt, he
attaches him likewise nearer home, that is to say in Flanders.

To which purpose, by the assistance of the Cardinal of France, Mazarine, and
the help of money, in hopes to weaken the Spaniard, by strengthening the
French, he enters into a Treaty with them, and on a sudden, concludes a league
offensive and defensive; on the twenty eighth of November aforesaid, 1655. a
peace was solemnly proclaimed with France.

At the time of these transactions was the Duke of Gloucester in France,
accompanying his brother of York in the wars there, yet both still having an
eye to the King of Englands affairs, when upon the conclusion and proclaming
of the peace aforesaid, it was suddenly propounded, (although before it was
agreed) that they should all be gone from thence in a certain time; how great
an affront and indignity this was to such persons who had so highly and
eminently deserved at the hands of that people, I leave to all discerning
spirits to judge. The King therefore upon good advice, having considered the
nature of that rash and inconstant Nation, and minding how once they were like
to have served Henry the seventh, by delivering him into the hands of Richard
the third his messengers, was not minded either to run the hazard of his own
sacred Person, or of either of his brothers, the Dukes of York and Gloucester,
but by a timely retirement to make an absolute prevention, and so not only to
take away their power, but their hopes of doing him any inconvenience. Hereupon
they remove, not over hastily, as in fear, but as befitted their Grandeur,
scorning to be driven, they leisurely go into Germany, and for some time abode
at Colen.

Here the Duke of Gloucester again retired himself to a more melancholy life,
by his present reading, fitting himself for future employment. To this end he
was much conversant in Histories, thereby settling his judgment in matters
moral, politic and military, so improving that which they intended as a
dishonorable banishment, that it proved an advantageous retirement. Adversity
bends, but never breaks a noble and undaunted courage, he abandons not
himself, though all the world forsake him, but hopes that when Fortune is come
to the Brumal Solstice of her frowning, she will be Retrograde, and shine again
with the beams of better success: this made him therefore, though plunged to
the lowest deep of disasters, not to sink into the nethermost hell of despair,
whence is no redemption, but reserve himself to better fortune, according to
that of the Greek Historian and Philosopher, (...). Decet utrum vere generosum
far tum bona tum mala si lapsus fuerit.

During this time of abode at Colen, came thither the news of an
irreconcilable breach between England and Spain, as a certainty whereof, they
heard that the Spaniard at Dunkirk had proclaimed open war against the
English: this was taken as a fit and hopeful opportunity by our exiled
Princes, who not long after were very ceremoniously invited into Flanders,
where being come, and having received the first entertainment, as of strangers,
the next seemed to carry with it a friendship, which so encouraged our two
young Nobles of York and Gloucester, that intending a revenge upon France for
her unhandsome sending them away, with some new raised forces which they had
gotten together, they went into the Spanish Camp, and joined themselves to the
Prince of Conde, who was a Protestant Prince, of the blood Royal of France,
but now upon discontent in arms against the French King. To him I say they
joined, as assured to do more then if they were all Spanish, in regard the
secrets of the whole Kingdom were well known to him; and not only Conde, but
our English Princes by their long residence there, had observed both his
friends and confederecies, and upon what respects they leagued with him; they
knew his power and strength, both in regard of his Country and his forces,
being well acquainted (as having been trained up in Martial discipline) with
many of his chief Commanders; and in cruth they nothing failed of their
expectation, although the French by the conjoined forces of England, did things
beyond their accustomed manner, besieging and taking Mardike, Dunkirk, and
other forts from the Spaniard, although the Spanish forces did as much as could
be expected from men, and the English in the quarter where the Dukes of York
and Gloucester lay, acted wonders even against their own Countrymen; neither
would our Princes leave the Spaniard for the first loss, but continued helping
them with an undaunted courage, even till the happy restoration of the King of
England to his throne and Kingdoms.

In this military posture they made many intodes into the enemies country, and
that with such success, as made their valor applauded, and their judgment
admired.

We left the Princess of Orange newly out of chil^bed, and mother of a
Posthumus son, the tenderness of whose years had hitherto kept him, as to the
generality of the world, unknown, but now his years having made him seem
capable of a more discerning judgment, the States of the Country begin to
complement him, and by a serious endeavor strive to train him up in the
military art, that thereby he might in the future be able to do as his
forefathers, and not only imitate their virtues, but their valor: and to this
end there was a company of young Noble men and Gentlemen raised, of whom the
Prince was to the Commander in chief, the Lord Breherode Lieutenant, and the
young Lord Wassenaer Ensign. A good rule sure, so by custom and use in youth,
to enure to practice, that their most perfect age shall not scruple at the
toil, but rather count all difficult things pleasurable, as knowing that Ardua
virtutis est via. But it is often seen that men are weary of well doing, and so
were these Hollanders, quitting their widow Princess and her Son, and closing
with English factions against the King, which being seen by Prince William
Governor of Friesland, he, together with the whole Country, declared their
dissent against any such agreement, and stand highly on their punctilios for
their young Princes, and his mothers honor and right.

This gallantry and nobleness of the Frieslander, was highly commended by many
foreign Princes, especially the Brandenburgher, whose Electoral Princess with
all her train, came to give a visit to the Princess of Orange; whither also
came the Dukes of York and Gloucester, for whom there was a stately, and
Princelike preparation made for their entertainment; which the whole States
taking notice of, their stomachs also came down, and by their means the City
of Amsterdam invited the Princess of Orange to a magnificent feast in
remembrance of the great services performed by the house of Orange for them.

The Dukes in this interim were retired into Flanders, to their forces in the
Spanish army, wherein the Duke of York still continued an eminent actor, but
the Duke of Gloucester having as he supposed, seen sufficient of the wars,
and hoping that God at length would restore his brother the King, he intended
to apply himself to such a form of life, as that he might by his Counsel be
able to help him, knowing that most great men, Tacit. Annal.
plura Consilio quam ^vi perfecerent, have ever done as much by Counsel as by
force. 1 Com. C^vill. Bel^*
This made Caesar say, Non minus est Imperatoris consilio superare quam gladio,
A Princes conquests are gained as much by Council as by the sword.

We may justly say, that this young Duke did truly prove such a one as Basilius
the Emperor recommended to his son, (...), that is, Use such Counselors who
have counseled well in their own affairs, and managed the same well, not such
whose imprudence has made all things go to confusion, for they who through too
much carelessness neglect themselves and their own business, will never be a
good help or adviser to another: this I say, was so in him, for never was any
man more atrent to what he undertook, nor more careful either in his own, or
the affairs of others, by which means he hoped to shut out all foreiners from
counsel, lest they should attract envy to his Prince, because Consilia externa
sunt semper infausta.

That maxim in him was truly verified, Miseria Prudentiae bowa Matter, for
certainly his afflictions did infinitely refine him, He might say with David,
It is good for me that I have been afflicted, ^sal. 119.
for thereby I have learned not only they Law, but have gained an insight into
worldly Wisdom, nor are Counselors only bettered by troubles but even
Princes themselves are made excellent, whom a various fortune has sometimes
exercised, Charles the fifth of France was endued with an admirable Wisdom,
and gained the surname of Wise, but few men were ever so variously tossed up
and down even from his very childhood; his Father King John being lead away
Prisoner, and the Kingdom harrassed over by another Nation, So Lewis the
eleventh, a wise Prince, yet for diverse years driven both from his Father,
Friends, and Country, and forced to live as an exile with Philip Duke of
Burgundy, many others we might join in the same rank; but what need we go from
home, since we have among us the most religiously wise King in the World, whose
trials have exceeded all before going. Most true therefore is that saying of
the Greeks -- (...). a quibus laesus ab jis doctus -- In this condition we will
leave him at his serious studies, to see how the Princess of Orange his Sister
speeds with her pleased friends of Holland: the Sta^es having upon their second
and better thoughts reconciled themselves to the Prince and his Mother, as a
testimony thereof gave them a magnificent entertainment being welcomed by the
chief of the Town accompanied with many horses richly accoutred, and many
Coaches, the Burgomasters at their reception giging high thanks to the Princess
for dignifying them with her presence* As a recreation after the Feast, wa^
presented in various shows, the memorable Acts of the five last Princes of
Orange, the Emperor Adolp^ of Nassaw and others of that family, and in the
show was placed a representation of the present young Princ^ in the Arms of
Religion; nothin^ was wanting that might grace s^ solemn an accasion, but
only the Prince of Orange himself, the People longing with an unsatisfied
expectation to see his person, for now as he grew up apace, so he began to draw
the eyes and observation of most men in those parts toward him, as the person
ordained to reduce things to the ancient luster as they were wont to be in the
days of the Princes of Orange his predecessors. Which others of a more
factious and wicked nature murmured at, rather desiring that he might be laid
aside. This made his Mother to look about her and with care to keep
correspondencies especially with those Provinces that refused a confaederacy
with the English, like a good Prince minding Patriae beneficium the advantage
of the Country more then her own private ends: and that the world might take
notice thereof, she bore her Son company to Leyden when he went thither to be
instructed in the Languages and Sciences, and were by the Magistraces of that
City honorably received.

The Princess Royal being returned to the Hague and intending to go thence to
Bredah, her Son the Prince came thither for a few days from Leyden to take his
leave of her, and as soon as she was gone he returned back again to his studyes.

The Duke of Gloucester all this while remained private, only sometimes visiting
in public his Illustrious brothers, being grown famous by his retirement; and
his Councils looked on as Oracles, his knowledge being weighed not by the
length of his life, but the observations he made upon all occurrents, proving
thereby that he that lives long and sees much but observes nothing, shall
never prove any wise man.

There was not any the meanest action whereof he took not notice, weighing the
coherence of causes, effects counsels and successes, with the proportion and
likewise between nature and nature, fortune and fortune, action and action,
state and state, time past, and time present, thereby being able to render an
account both of the manners and customs both of the places and people wherein
he had resided.

The Princess of Orange was now at Bredah, where she was carressed and courted
by many foreign Princes and States, only the King of France, by what or whose
instigation is not certainly known, began to play foul, for while the old
Princess Dowager of Orange and she, were with some heat contesting about the
Guardianship of the Principality of Orange, the French King surprises the same,
takes into his own possession the Ammunition and Arms with all other strengths
thereof, and gives out that he will keep them all for the young Princes use
during his minority, and as a faithful Steward deliver them all up again when
he comes to full age. A fair pretense, but much to be feared that it will with
great difficulty be performed, it being too generally found true that Great men
many times do wrong, because they have a power in their hands, and so long as
that power lasts they will and do maintain the same by doing greater. But
although the Princess and all her friends did much both doubt and fear such an
event from so unhandsome a beginning, yet they for the present smothered the
same within their Breasts, doubting least by showing their fear, they should
cause a distrust, for as Seneca says Qui timet a nicum amicum ut timeat docet.
^en. Sent.
Whereas noble and generous spirits strive as much not to be overcome in
curtesy, as the valiant and courageous not to be overthrown in Battle. Hence
it is that nothing more obliges the promiser to an unfeigned and free
performance, then the free and confident assurance, which the promitter
professes to have in the word and offer made him, whereas on the contrary many
have taught others to deceive, while they have appeared too fearful and
jealous of being deceived.

The face of affairs both in England and other parts began now to be altered,
and that Royal family which had suffered so long and tedious an Eclipse began
again to be worshipped as Sol oriens as the rising Sun in our Hemisphears, in
so much that on every side it is courted and caressed, making good that saying
of the poet. All things concur with more then happy chance
To raise the man whom fortune will advance
and so indeed they did, for the Rebels of England being beaten at their own
weapon, the immediate finger of God appeared and infused a new spirit of
Loyalty into the hearts of the people which occasioned his Majesty accompanied
with his brothers the Duke of York and Gloucester, to come from Brussells in
the King of Spaines Country and under his command to Bredah under tuition of
his beloved Sister the Princess of Orange where they were recived with that
splendour as became such persons on all hands; she with joy to see the Sacred
Majesty of great Britain in such hopes of restoration, and they with
gratitude to heaven for so great and happy a change.

Here they continued until the English Parliament sent Commissioners to invite
the King and his brothers home into England, and as a particular testimony of
their true obedience and Loyalty, they sent to each of them several great
presents, and particularly to the Duke of Gloucester the sum of Ten thousands
pounds which was acceptably received and shortly after the said Duke waiting on
the King embarked in the good ship called the Nazby, but at that time new
Christened and named the Charles, in which by the good hands of God assisting,
he arrived in England and Landed at Dover on the five and twenty day of May and
from thence went to Canterbury. On the twenty eight he riding on the left hand
of the King came to Rochester and on the twenty ninth with a stately and
magnificent passage through the famous and ancient City of London the
Metropolis of the Kingdom, did arrive at Whitehall in the evening, which
Crowned the solemnity of the day with incredible demonstrations. After a day or
two respite and rest ^he Dukes of York and Gloucester went ^o the house of
Peers and their took their places, adding by their pre^ence two stars of the
first magni^ude to that sphere, which had of ^ate been wholly overclouded or
at ^est taken up by comets and meteors.

The King had not been above a fortnight in London but that he nominated a
privy Council, whereof the Duke of Gloucester was one of the chief, the King
having known by experience that Pa^vi sunt foris arma nisi sit consilium domi,
and therefore upon his former observa^ion of ^is rich endowments of mind, and
strength of judgment, which with happy success he had often made use of, he
made that choice, being well cautioned of the necessity of such counselors.
Salustius in his discourse to Caesar says, ego comperi omnia regna avitates,
nationes usque eo prosperum imperium habuisse, dum vera consili^ valuerunt; ubi
gratia, timor, voluptas e^ corrupere, post paulo imminutae opes^ deinde
ademptum imperium, postremo ser^ vitus imposita est, I have found (sait^ he)
all Kingdoms Cities and Nation^ so long to have prospered as the^ made use of
sound and wise Counsels* but where favor fear or partialit^ have prevayled,
they have soon decayed and at last been made tribu^aryes to their Enemies
Aristotle writing to Alexander uses these words (...). Arist. Rher. ad Alex.
Consiliari eorum quae inter ^omines, divinissinum est, that to give good
counsel is a thing more then ^umane. And in another place (...). Quiddam sacrum
^st consultatio. Good counsel has ^omething of god in it.

Heaven having thus propitiously ^etled the affairs of Government in (...)
good measure, lest so great excess should breed supinesse or neglect, gives
affliction, to moderate turgencies, by casting that most excellent Prince and
Counselor the Duke of Gloucester on his sick bed; the disease under which he
labored was common to this English Nation, and very ^eldom if ever mortal;
curble for the most part by the attendant care of some knowing Nurse, but
become mortal to the Duke by the over-nice and too severe rules of the Learned
Physician, who contra^^ to the nature of the disease di^several times let him
blood; for howsoever Rulandus Botallus, an^ diverse other good Physicians,
command Phlebotomy as an excellen^ means to cure many desperate di^ease, yet in
this our Northern Isle, or bodies being for the most part mo^ Phlegmatic and
gross then theirs t^ the Southward are by consequenc^ the better helped, by
dejectory diureticke and diaphereticall mean then by any effusion of blood, but
s^ prevalent was the Physicians cred^^ that their art was submited unto i^ all
things. The Duke as I said twi^^ or thrice let blood and by tha^ means
unfortunately in the prim^ of his years and beginning of hi^ strength, on the
thirteenth day o^ September 1660. was brought to his death, a day for ever to
be noted fatal and in the Calender to be nig^^ Carbone notatus that all the
world may know it be unlucky.

We may justly lament his loss as ^icero did the death of Sulpitius, Tul. Pist
lib. 11. ep 9. and 6.12. ep. 5.
^ervji Sulpitii morte magnum praesi^ium amisimus, amisso enim eo tan^um
detrimenti respublica acceperit ut ^unc autoritate and prudentia prospicere
^ortet ne inimici nostri consule sublato ^erent se convalescere posse. By this
^eath of the Duke, we lost one great ^iller of the Commonwealth, which ^hereby
has suffered so great da^age that it will ask our whole ^isedome and
authority to keep our ^nemies in a sure subjection.

While this sad face of affairs ^egan to appear and cloud the En^ish; The
Princess Royal desirous (...) give a visit to her brother in his ^^n Kingdom,
to congratulate with ^^m in the happiness of his miracu^s restoration,
acquainted the States (...) the Low Countries with such ^er intents, who being
highly sa^fied therewith, she further then ^mmended to their care and love, her
^ung Son the present Prince of Orange during the time of her absen^ in England,
which she said would be for some time: the States gla^^ to be so highly
entrusted, and wi^^ such a treasure, promised the utmo^^ of their care and
endeavor in the said young Princes behalf, who^ they then owned as their
Prince a^ promised to him all fidelity: a^^ as a testimony of their present
affection to her their Princes mothe^ they bestowed on her several gre^^ and
Princely gifts, together wi^^ an honorable splendid entertainment, waiting
upon her also to t^^ Sea side, where in a solemn a^ respectful manner they
took the farwell of her while she imbark^ on shipboard, and with a prospero^
gale of wind arrived at the Engli^^ shore, where being landed on t^ three and
twentieth day of September she was met and received by the King of great
Britain and the Duke of York, and with a Royal train a^ tended to the Court
at Whiteh^ where afterward she remained, being entertained with Royal
feastings and pleasures according to the laudable custom of ancient days, and
contrary to the P^anatick humor of these times. Where we may see some that do
avoid pleasure out of a pretense of danger, and dare not but abandon lawful
delights for fear (forsooth) of sin, these seem like jgnorant metallists which
cast away the precious Ore because they cannot separate the gold from the
dross; or some simple Jew that condemes the pure streams of Jordan because
they fall into the dead Sea; why do not these men refuse to eat because meat
has made many gluttons; how dare they cover themselves with clothes that know
there is pride in rags? These hard tutors if not tyrants to themselves while
they pretend a mortified strictness are injurious not only to their own
liberty, but to the liberty of their maker: wherefore has he given the
Commodityes of the earth if not for use? or why placed he man in Paradise not
in a desert? How can we more displease a liberal friend then to depart from
his delicate feast wilfully hungry: they are deceived that call this holiness:
It is the disease of a mind sullen, distrustful and impotent. There is nothing
but evil which is not from heaven, and he is none of Gods friend that rejects
his gifts for his own abuse: if God have mixed us a sweet cup, let us drink it
cheerfully commend the taste and be thankful, rejoicing in it as his. In this
manner and no other were the festivous celebrations given to this Illustrious
Princess; the same still continuing until the Queen Mother was coming out of
France, as to receive the benefit of the long detained Dowry so to give a visit
to her son now settled for whose hoped restoration, she had sent so many daily
Orasons to heaven: whereof the King having notice on the twenty seventh of
October went to meet ^her at her landing at Dover, and from thence with a
Princely equipage and royal attendance conducted her to whitehall after
ninetten years absence thence, with whom came the Illustrious Princess
Heniretta, (her daughter) and Prince Edward brother to the Prince Elector
Palatine; on the second day of November 1660.

Long had not this contexture of happiness lasted before a sad and sullen cloud
began to cast a dimnes over all these joys by the sudain falling sick of the
Princess Royal of Orange, into a like distemper with that which had so
immaturely robbed us of her incomparable brother the Duke of Gloucester; whereof
she had not lain sick many days but by the same hand using the same means of
blood-letting she was translated into another world, exchanging this life for a
more certain, and the transitory pleasures of earth for the never fading joys
of a more glorious Kingdom.

Her death was a new cause of sorrow to all faithful and Loyal hear^s which
made them express their various sadness in several sorts according to the
magnitude and excess of their grief, among whom give me leave (since the poor
widows mit^ bringing what she could and all tha^ she had was acceptable) to
add on tear to the general deluge of sorrow which covers the face of our
English world in this ensuing Elegy

An Elegy on the ever to be lamented death of the most Illustrious Princess
Mary Princess of Orange and Sister to the King of great Britain
WHen Gloucester died such was my inward grief
As made me speechless, knowing that his life
Was so profound a loss, that weeping were
A too too common tendant on his Beer:
That sorrow's weak that deluges the eye,
It Is grief indeed that turns to ecstasy.
But custom bates the greatness by degrees
None counts that strange which every day he sees:
Though then my grief's renewed, yet fashion will.
Break through and on this Hearse lament its fill
The Princess dead! What dismal sound is that
Which to my Soul such sadness does relate?
Surely the fatal Sisters are agreed
Always to cut never to spin a thread
Or if they will prolong, they then devise
To make Physicians (as that spirit of lies
Made Ahabs Prophets) erring and deceived
Whereby their words are not to be believed
(...) Christ^as.
Or if they may yet every one may see
Who walks thereby, lives but in jeopardy
Hence thence pretenders, from whose outside show
We have received a second dealy blow.
Fatal as that of Treason is the air
(As the late times) infected, thus to dare
Only at Royal Branches, or is this
Of latter plots the Metempsuchosis.
What will the Belgicke Lion think, when now
He hears of this, with corrugated browth
Inwardly curse the more then luckeless time
He spared his darling to our wretched clime
Tell me, ye fates did ye intend it thus
To bring a Gem and only show it us?
Why have you else so soon our blesses crossed
To let us know by seeing what we lost.
Bring her again, I Will search the dismal deep
For her lost shade, nothing shall hold or keep
My zealous spirit from an hourly quest
Until I find the place where she does rest.
Then on my knees I Will pray that she will tell
The cause and means how she so early fell,
But ah! it is to late, she is gone, and I
May melt my self to tears, disolve and dye
See how Great Charles himself does sadly shroude
His Kingly splendour in a mourning cloud
And how dark sable the whole Court benights
Which else had gloried in festivous rites
And all is but too little, when we mind
Our loss, for which such sorrow's left behind.
Hence forward I to Heaven will daily bow
That it will daigne with a serener brow
To smile upon the Rest, that years may bless
Their heads when hoary, with fresh happiness.
Now though condoling greatens but our loss
And sense thereof but adds to the cross
^vid. Act. lib.
Yet we must greive and make each sarfetch't groan
Niobe like turn us almost to stone
Or with Ciane let our discontent
Admit no comfort while we do lament
Our Princess rape, that every one that hears
Our sorrow, may with us dissolve to tears.
Or thaw with Arethusa to a spring
Nere to be drayn'd by all our sorrowing
December. 24. 1660. Sic maestissime plangit, T. Manley.

ON the 31 day of December following she was honorably though privately
interred in King Henry the seventh chapel at Westminster among her royal
ancestors. Her corpse waited on by abundance of the Nobility and Gentry, whose
inward sighs expressed their sorrow for so great a loss.

But alas, as we know that inevitable decree Semel statutum est omnibus mori,
and thereby may gather that though they be as terrestrial Gods, yet they shall
dye like men; so we must thereby conclude, Prove. 16.33.
good is the word of the Lord, since without his providence nothing can happen.
The Lot is cast, says the wise man, Pro. 16.33.
into the lap, but the whole disposition thereof is of the Lord, so as that
which seems most subject to chance is yet disposed by the Ordinance of God.
And hereof the wiser sort of philosophers were not Ignorant, as Cicero
witnesses for them in his collecting and comparing the opinion of Aristotle
and his sectators with that of Plato and the Academicks to this effect, that
the same power which they call Anima mundi was no other then that
incomprehensible wisdom, which we express by the name of God, governing every
thing in heaven and earth: To which also they sometimes gave the name and title
of Necessity and fate, because it binds by an inevitable ordinance; sometime
the style of fortune, because of many effects there appears unto us no certain
cause. To this effect St. Augustine in his question on Genesis lib. 1. St. Aug.
Quest. in (...)
And likewise Seneca, which was also the Doctrine of the Stoics, of which Sect
he was: for whatsoever (says he) thou call God, be it nature, fate or
fortune, all are but one and the same differenced by diverse terms according as
he uses and excerciseth his power diversely. Why then should we too
solliciously greive, since their virtues assure us they are possessors of more
then an earthly happiness, the sweet savor of their pius lives has not been
pleasing to God, but for the future will be an example to men, who shall record
their fame and eternize their memories, which the dust of oblivion or
ingratiude can never sully or cover, for in memoria aeterna erit Iustus. The
just shall be had in everlasting remembrance.

Thus have I brought you to the graves of these two unparalleld Princes, it
only remains now that I show you them in character tanquam in speculo,
severally by themselves.

Henry Duke of Gloucester born as aforesaid was of complexion and hair of a
dark color, but in face and nature much resembling his Father of glorious
memory.

Now although it be none of the least honor and happiness to be borne of Noble
and high parents, whose virtues have been more exemplary then their lives; so
it is also a great addition of felicity when Paternal virtue goes with the
descent, which very frequently happens ac, cording to that saying Est in
juvencis Patrum Virtus, or as the old Poet speaks more at large.

Fortes creantur fortibus et bonis
Horat. Ilb. ^. ode 4.
Est in juvencis est in equis Patrum
Virtus, nec imbecillem seroces
Progenerant aquilae columbam
By which means as also his other endowments of learning he became one of the
most rarely accomplished Gentleman of the world; in ^is behavior sober and
somewhat inclining to sadness; of a strong body and sound constitution which
were much bettered by a frequent and well displined exercise, whereby he became
a most absolute Master over himself, in the conquering all the passions and
affections of his mind, which otherwise might have misguided his youth; for
the better clearing whereof, we must take notice, that three sorts of actions
proceed from men's souls, some are internal and immaterial as the act, of our
wits or wills, two be more external and material, as the acts of our senses,
seeing, in hearing etc. Three other stand between these two extremes and border
upon them both, the discovery whereof is best found in Children, because they
lack the use of reason and a^^ guided by an internal imagination following
nothing else but that tha^ pleases their senses, no otherwis^ then Brute
Beasts. Aug. lib. 9. de civitate dei chapter 4. and Cicero quest Ruscul 3.
These action which as it were common to us wit^ Beasts are called passions,
affections perfurbations and are certain internal acts or operations of the
soule^ bordering upon reason and senc^ (prosecuting some good things or flying
some ill things) yet not equall^ observing both, for passions and sense, are
like two evil servant^ who bear more love to each other then either of them
to their Master, but reason as a Princess in her Throne sets bounds to those
several habits maintaining a continual conflict with them; which most men
finding and perceiving that by making peace with their sense, they should
receive ^reat pleasures, presently struck ^^ile thereto, and in despite of
reason, what curiosity the eyes will see, ^^ey yielded unto them, what dainty
^ates the palate requires they ^ever deny, nor savors or odors which ^ill
please the sent are restrained, ^or music to content the Ear is for^idden;
and finally there is nothing ^f that cost or rareness which iensu^lity can
request, but is presently by ^ll the endeavors of importunity, ^rayers and
riches sought for and at^ained, so that reason now being ^onquered and, drawn
to submit ^roves a better friend to sensuality ^hen the passions were before,
in^enting straight ways ten thousand ^orts of delights which the dullness of
^he passions could have reached to or ^nce imagined; so that if it should ^e
asked who was the first cause of ^o much profuseness and prodigality ^n meats
and drinks, clothing and attire, costly buildings and rich furniture, no better
answer can be give then this reason to please sensuality which made a religious
man one lamenting this ignominious industr^ of reason to sense, wish with all
h^^ heart, that godly men were but ha^ so industrious to please God a^ worldly
men to please their inordinate appetites.

Now although it be true as is before spoken, yet doubtless these passions may
be guided by virtue; and by good men so moderated tha^ they shall rather serve
for Instruments of virtue then fomenters ^^vice. And the reason commonly
allowed of Philosophers and divine^ most pregnantly proves this verity* for if
the motions of our wills be virtuous and directed by the square of religion and
prudence, certainly with the same if not much more ease^ pleasure and delight
virtuous actions are accomplished then vicious thereupon the Phiosophers and
fathers perceiving what commodities these passions afford to a virtuous soul
with diverse similitudes declared their service; Cicero 3. Tusc.
some (say they were sparks of fire apt to kindle virtue into a flame,
(others) that they were Soldiers to attend their Captains. Bas. Hom. contra
Irascentes
They be like water says St. Basil, that sustaineth oil about it that it may
run more purely and not be infected with earth. Bas. der Vi^gin^
They are also compared to Horses, which draw a Coach, so the passions draw the
soul to the fruition of her virtuous objects and indeed the passions of our
minds; are not unlike the humors of our bodies, Cicero. 4. Tusc.
whereunto Cicero well compares them, for if blood, phlegm, choler or
melancholy exceed the due proportion required to the constitution and health
of our bodies, presently we fall into some disease; so if the passions of the
mind be not mod learnedly teaeated according to reason and that temperature
that virtue requires, immediately the soul is molested with some malady, but
if the humors be kept in a due proportion they are the preservation of health:
hereby may be gathered that passions are not wholly to be extinguished (as the
Stoickes seem to affirm) but rather to be sometimes moved and stirred up for
the service of virtue as Plutarch learnedly teaches. This has many excellent
Captains in former ages whom the desire of glory and repute stirred up to
many honorable atcheivements, and if many rare wits had not been pressed with
the same affections we should neither seen Homers poetry, Platoes divinity,
Aristotle's Philosophy, Plinys History, nor Tullies Eloquence: It cannot but be
granted that shamefacedness retains from many offenses: fear of punishment
keeps from theft, and remorse of conscience calls many sinners to the grace
of God.

Now it cannot be denied but that the minds of all men are thus charged with
passions, and that those passions work diverse effects for their discovery,
according to that of the Poet, O quam difficile est crimen non prodere vultu.
And as Pliny also speaks, Plin. l. 11.
Frons hominis tristitiae, incaritatis, clementiae, severitatis Index est. Q.
Curt. l. 2.
Alexander the Great (as Curtius relates it) had experience hereof, who after
he had won the City of Tarson belonging to Darius, entering upon a hot Summers
day into the River Cidmus, and thereby catching so vehement an ague that
hindered his journey at present against his Enemies, which then began to draw
near to him, he resolved in himself for avoiding the threatened mischief to take
some very strong Medicine, that should presently either mend or end him; To
this purpose, Philip an ancient Physician who had constantly waited on him from
his youth was spoken with, who promised to prepare him a Potion according to
his desire: While Philip was making ready the Potion, Parmenio a Captain, whom
Alexander of all other most loved and trusted, understanding the King's
Determination, sent him a Letter, advising not to meddle with Philip's potion,
because he understood he was corrupted by Darius with promise of a thousand
Talents and his Sister in Marriage that he should kill him; Alexander was much
perplexed in his mind at this news and while he was debating with himself what
to do, his Physician brought him the Potion: when the King saw him he raised
himself upon his elbow, and taking the Letter in the left Hand, with his Right
took the Cup and drank off the Physic; which done, he delivered the Letter
to Philip to read, and looked earnestly into his Face as long as he was
reading, supposing that if he had been faulty, some token would have appeared
in his Countenance, imagining with himself that as the pulse declares the
operations of the heart, so the internal cogitations and affections of the mind
whether virtuous or vicious, no where sooner bewray themselves, then through
those living windows wherewith Nature has compassed the olosets of our fancy*
when Philip had read the Letter, he showed more tokens of displeasure then
fear, which together with the protestations of the Physician of his innocence,
assured Alexander so of his fidelity he not only rejected all fear of death
but conceived an extraordinary hope of amendment, as indeed not long after it
proved.

If it be so then, that the face may be called mentis speculum the minds
looking-glass, which discovers the heart to be the seat of our passions;
then hence may be deduced a most certain Conclusion, that according to the
disposition of the heart, humors and body, diverse sorts of persons be subject
to diverse sorts of passions, and the same passion affects diverse sorts of
persons in diverse manners; for as we see fire applied to dry Wood or Iron, or
Flax, or Gunpowder works diverse ways; for in wood it kindles with some
difficulty, and with some difficulties is quenched, but in flax is soon kindled
and quenched, in iron very hardly, but in Gunpowder in a moment, and can never
be quenched till the powder be Consumed: so some men you shall see soon angry
and soon pleased, others hardly offended and with as great difficulty
reconciled, others are all fire, and in a moment with every trifle will be
inflamed, and till their hearts be consumed almost with Choler will never
cease until they be revenged; which confirms that old saying to be true, Animi
mores corporis temperatum sequuntur. As then in Maladies of the body every man
feels best his own grief, even so in diseases of the soul every man knows
best his own inclination; Nevertheless (as Physicians commonly affirm) there
be certain General causes which incline our bodies to several infirmities, so
there are likewise that move our souls to sundry passions; for it cannot be
denied or doubted but that there are some affections in the highest and
chiefest part of the soul: for to God the Scriptures ascribe, Love, Hatred,
Anger, etc. although he cannot be subject to any sensitive operation.

But to return, the young Duke by a deep judgment having wisely foreseen this,
did for the better ordering of himself make use of that Golden Rule.

(...)
(...)
(...) --
Believe all this, and next these habits gain,
From wrath and sleep; and food, and lust refrain.
And looking at Religion as the chief point of true Nobility, according to that
in another place,

-- (...)
(...),
Be thou assured their Offspring is divine,
To whom things holy through clear nature shine.
It might truly be said of him which was spoken by Solomon in another cafe,
Pro. 31.25
that his lips dropped Wisdom when they opened; and what Job spoke of
himself, may be truly attributed to him, The young men saw him and hid
themselves, the Aged rose and stood up, the Princes refrained talking and laid
their Hands on their Mouths the Nobles held their peace; when the Ear heard
him, then it blessed him; and when the Eye saw him, it gave witness to him,
Job 30.8, 9, 10, 11.

To be short, his wisdom was great in that he was able to advise, and greater
in that he was willing to be advised; never so wedded to his own resolves but
on good ground he would be divorced from them; his temperance was great, his
diet sparing, sleep moderate, not to pamper nature but keep it in repair:
pleasures he rather did but taste or sip then greedily drink off, and that
sometimes more to content others then please himself. Of a quicker
apprehension, Eloquent tongue, and what was worthy of most repute; he was very
religious, well skilled in several Languages, and extraordinarily seen in
divine Sciences. To conclude, his soul was enriched with many Virtues, but the
most Orient of all was his humility which took all men's love and affections
without resistance, and made his death the more lamented, by which means we
doubt not his Everlasting bliss.

(...),
(...).
Now raised to Heaven, he from his body free,
A Death-lesse Saint, no more shall mortal be.
I shall only give you a few of his observations, which while he lived he was
known to have made, whereby his wisdom may be the better discerned; for if ex
pede Herculem, as by the bigness of Hercules foot, we may guess at the vast
dimensions of the other parts of his body, so the judgment of men's abilities
are to be learned by their sayings; as a touch whereof I shall in the way of a
Corollory add only these few of this most pious Prince as hereafter they
sufficiently follow.

1. It was an observation noted by him, That Good and Great men may secure
themselves from guilt but not from Envy; for the greatest in trust of public
Affairs are still shot at by the aspiring of those that think themselves less
in employment then they are in merit.

2. That oftentimes it is seen, that men's Consciences convincing them of
another man's desert and merit, they suspect opposition in them, whereby their
greatness may be Eclipsed, and therefore strive by all means to put disgrace
on his person and parts, thereby to hinder his rising; for whilst a man is out
of employment and finding that he cannot so publicly express his worth, they
still labor to keep him in obscurity to the end that themselves may appear
more glorious.

3. It was the practice of Constantine the Emperor when his Enemy Licimus began
his Wars with Exorcismes and Charms, he undertook all with prayer and holy
Meditations, and therefore the Lord of Heaven made him Lord of the Field: and
he found such comfort by prayer that he stamped upon his coin the image of
himself praying to God. The Duke inferred from thence this Conclusion, How
necessary this duty of prayer is for settling our affairs; my soul I am sure is
experimentally sensible, if we settle our Affairs right with God, he will
settle our business with man: is it not his own promise, Ask and it shall be
given to you.

4. This also was a similitude used by him. As a pot full of Water in the heat
of Summer is troubled and polluted with many flies, but if it be boiled upon
the fire they neither would nor durst come near it; so (says he) while our
souls in prayer are cold and livelesse, we are still perplexed and have no
relief from our troubles, whereas if our minds were inflamed with zeal, all
Vanities would be abandoned, and our prayers so rectifyed that we should not
offer the Sacrifice of Fools.

5. That there is no better mark of a true generous spirit then to attempt
things which are hard to be achieved: It Is in vulgar and adulterate spirits,
that the soul of motion is wholly derived from the livelihood of action: Noble
spirits court dangers. Avida est periculi virtus: Nec juvat ex facili lecta
Corona jugo.

6. He took great delight in that saying of Aristippus the Philosopher, who
was wont to affirm that it was better to be a Beggar then unlearned, because
the Beggars penury was only want of Money, but he that was unlearned was
destitute of humanity.

7. He was wont to Note that the Ladder of Jacob mentioned in Genesis is but a
Figure of Christ, which by his humane Nature touched Earth, and by his Divinity
Heaven; therefore if we or our prayers pass by this Ladder, we have the Father
at the top of the Ladder ready to receive us and our prayers.

8. He used to say, That it is familiar with fortune to do more harm in one
day, then she does good in many years, using in delight to raise up vain Men
for her glory, and on a sudden suffering them to fall with the weight of their
proper vanity and want of Government.

9. When he had read the Story of Archelaus King of Macedonia, who being
requested by a Minion of his Court to give him a certain cup of Gold, delivered
it to his Page, commanding him to bear and give it to one Euripides who was
there present; and then said to the other, As for thee, thou art worthy to ask
and to be denied also; but Euripides is worthy of gifts though he ask nothing.
Surely said the Duke, this was an excellent reward for an insinuating Parasite,
and a rare pattern for other Princes, who thereby may learn, that a deserving
Subject ought to be rewarded, though his own modesty withhold him from asking.

10. He always argued, that Faith and Obedience are to be persuaded, not
wrought by compulsion: our minds, like unto generous and Noble horses, being
best ruled with an easy bit; howbeit it is necessary not altogether to rely
on words, for two things do Establish a Kingdom, viz. Force and Virtue, which
between them produce that sinew of War, Money, according to that saying of
Themistocles going in Embassy to the Isle of Andros; for Money, he told them
that he came accompanied with two Goddesses, viz. Persuasion and Force.

11. He constantly affirmed; that they are much mistaken in their aim who
think to make a man infamous by Death: for there is no Life so odious, that
ending in public with constancy and modesty changes not hatred into pity,
pity into favor, and leaves not some favorable opinion of innocence behind it.

12. Another observation was, That a man should not derogate from himself,
there being two many ready enough for that office, at least to believe him as
one that best knows what he most wants; and certainly he that does censure
himself, has no color for an appeal, nor person to appeal to, unless it be
from his Words to his Deeds, which then must be very remarkable. Howsoever he
must acknowledge it to be great folly to have denied that ability in himself
which he desires to be much known, for thereby he is become a distroyer of his
own fame.

13. And other times he noted, That there is nothing more unjust then to
Condemn those things which our selves do not or see not, especially when whole
Nations agree in it: for when only time makes them please us; it is apparent
that in that they first displeased us, it was not their fault, but our
ignorance. And it is to be thought that all Countries have both Manners and
Habits agreeing to their Clime, which the Genius of the Country will infuse
into you if you stay long enough in it. Terram alienam perigrinus exigit and
sunm interdum alienum facit

14. He said, That the truest and securest precepts of policy are those which
either are drawn from the prudent resolutions or unadvised errors of great
Princes in the deliberations of their most important Affairs, or from the study
of policy: all consisting in a severe and judicious censure of the Actions of
the Great: and the studious in Histories, which have the gift to know how to
examine them, will draw out of them excellent Rules for the well governing of
many people.

15. He averred it to be an Observation as well known as true, That in the
Infancy of the Church, men thought nothing too dear for God or too good to be
imparted unto the Church; but now (said he) we are arrived to such times
wherein all are generally Church-robbers: but the Sacrilegious person and the
Simonist never yet did nor ever shall prosper to the third Generation: they are
the two profaners of holy things: But God has and will confound them in Jacob
and scatter them in Israel.

Thus have I given you a short view of the life of this most Excellent Prince,
together with a short character both of his person and virtues: and a
demonstrative appearance of a most eminent wisdom, all which notwithstanding
we must conclude all we can say, is too short; So that we must say of him as
Parrharius did when painting the Hoplitides, he could neither make him that ran
to sweat, nor the other that put off his Armor to breath, added, No further
then colors; so when we searched the depth of Invenction and strained
Rhetoric to her highest pitch of Eloquence to adapt words to set forth his
Eulogies, we must at last submit and confess they all fall short of the
reality that was in him; and with Alexander at the Tomb of Achilles, burst into
tears and cry: Haeccine Trophaea sunt? Are there all the Trophies, the world
could erect to the memory of thy virtues? mean thus, it is confessed, yet such
as shall eternize his Fame as long as there shall be a Tongue to speak or an
Ear to hear

I must not in this place forget the late deceased Princess of Orange, whose
Character I promised you, and here snall briefly insert it.

Her Birth, Breeding, Education, and Marriage, you have before at large
related; Her person was of a curious make, her Visage fair, whereto was added
a graceful bashfulnesse which gave a luster to her beauty; her every part being
decked with some particular Ornament; her mind richly Embellifyed with the
rarest qualities, and full of wit; her speech precious because not frequent:
her modesty without parallel, and her behavior serious, without either pride
or affectation; in short, she was such as we may rather admire, then praise
according to desert, and whose loss we may rather bewail and lament then
recover.

She was so well settled in the Principles of Religion, that she remained as a
Rock immovable, and as eminent for her courage therein, as those who in former
Ages did offer themselves to most grievous torments, and to death it self for
the love of the Truth; immitating therein her late Royal Father of Glorious and
ever Blessed Memory, who parted with his Life rather then he would his
Religion. And indeed seldom shall we see such a Father without such Children,
or such Children without such a Father; for the plant is known by the fruit,
and as is the Egg, so is the Bird that hatched it. And as it is thus in virtue,
so likewise it is in vicious offsprings, by which means in policy, we may
learn by the villainous and bloody carriage of such men's actions how to manage
a just and lawful cause to bring Execution upon Rebels and Traitors, that is,
to do nothing to the halfes, but when the Sword of Justice is drawn, to throw
the Scabbard into the fire, Toll omnes (says Seneca) nam profecto parents
libinque eorum qui interfecti, Sen. De Cle.
and propinqui and amici in locum singulorum succedunt: his paenam, si tuto
poteris, donabis: sic minus, Temperabis.

Her devotions were Frequent and Exemplary, not so much out of custom
performed as zeal, and that not with a cold carelessnesse but reverentiall
Humility, approaching to her God as a dutiful Child to a tender Father, whose
bowels yern to give a suitable answer to the humble address of his bowing
supplyant; being not only to her self, an inciter, but to all about her a
pious example.

In the choice of her friends she was very curious, choosing the best and most
Virtuous, though not Allied to her, with them conversing and exercising virtue,
as the Philosopher speaks: mdash; (...). And to the advice of such she yielded
consent, as being in her self sensible of those things that did concern her
honor or any way conduce to her advantage.

It is but a part of duty, in case one know better then another to impart it
for the common good; and for others mildly to obey such things as shall be
wisely represented.

Her patience was Admirable, bearing the many crosses of her Life, as the
Murder of her Father, and Exile of her Mother, and all her nearest Relations;
with a true Christian and more then Womanly Courage.

These indeed and the like, says a Wise Man, are very harsh and insupportable
to life, Hierocl.
but yet not really evil. So long as they occasion us not to layse into
wickedness: for if we can bear our Misfortunes moderately and with resolution,
as reflecting upon the Causes and Occasions of them, remedying as much as in us
lies, those accidents seem hurtful, but making profitable use of them, but
especially to aim by a perfection of virtue to become worthy to participate of
the Divine Happiness; In short,

Such and so Eminent were her many Virtues that we my justly say of Her as
Solomon of his Virtuous Woman; Favor is Deceitful, and Beauty is Vain, but a
Woman that Fears the Lord, she shall be praised. And many Daughters have done
Virtuously, but thou excellest them all.

In a word, to sum up all. As in things we have so in those we do, each has
his proper trial to prove the Excellency thereof in his kind; Gold by the Test,
The Diamond by his hardness, Pearl by his water; so the best discoverers of
the Minds of men are their Actions; which in the Lives and Characters of these
two Famous Dead Princes has been endeavored, with as much Candor as can on
any hands be expected.

Lastly, It shall be my prayer to God to send Health and Peace into the
Habitations of our Royal Sovereign, and that Heaven will be pleased to spare
Him and His in Mercy to this Kingdom, and Crown them with length of Days and
Happiness.

Seneca De Tranquilitate.

Non is solus reipublicae prodest qui tuetur nos, and de pace belloque censet,
sed qui juventutem exhortatur, qui in tanta bonorum praeceptorum inopia virtute
instruit animos, etsi nihil aliud certe, in privato dublicum negotium agit.

FINIS.
AN ELEGY On the Death of the most Illustrious PRINCE HENRY DVKE of GLOVCESTER.
SOme Princes lives, such cold affections bred,
That we do scarce repent their being dead.
And such indifferent griefs attend their rights,
As they were not their Funerals, but our sights.
Hearse, Scutchins, darkness, the pale tapers blaze;
All that invites our first, or after gaze;
The Nobles, Heralds, Mourners sable-clad;
These make a solemn pomp, but not a sad.
But to your Obsequies deer Prince! we come,
As they that would beg tenements in your tomb
And by your genuine sorrows seek to prove,
Those Indians wise that die with those they love,
And no less penance can these Nations shrive,
Which make thee dead so long, while yet alive.
And by as cruel method, as unjust.
Bury thee first in Exile, then in Dust.
Thy sufferings Inventary rose so high,
There scarce was other left thee, but to die.
And this was that in all his rage and storm,
Though Cromwell wished, he trembled to perform.
When pawzing here after thy slaughtered Sire,
He seemed to fear this was to murder High'r.
And bathing his black soul in the sacred flood,
He durst gorge Royal but not tender blood.
Where then shall innocence in safety sit?
When a disease it self does Cromwell it.
If a distemper our complaints may bear,
And we may fix a reverent quarrel there.
Nere to be reconciled, pursue we still
Thy fate, that did with more then slaughter kill
The sharp disquiets of an aching brain,
A heart in sunder torn, yet whole to pain.
Eyes darting forth dim fires, instead of sight;
At once made see, and injured by the light;
Faint pulse; and tongue to thirsty cinders dried
When the relief of thirst must be denyd.
the bowels parcht, limbs in tormenting throws
To cool their heat, while heat from cooling
Slumbers which wandering phansies keep awake,
And sense not lead by objects, but mistake;
Most fevers Limbecks though with these they burn
^hey leave the featured carcass to the urn,
But thine was born of that offensive race,
Armed to destroy, she first strove to deface.
And then to close her cruel tragic part,
She slew against the augury of Art.
No adversary could worse spite display,
Since it is less to Kill, then to betray.
'Twas savage beyond fate; for others lie,
Dead of disease, you of revovery,
All shipwracks horrid are; but yet none more,
Then that, which for its witness takes the shore.
Affronts, plots, scandals, false friends, cold Allys,
Exiles, wants, tempests, battails, rebels, spies,
Restraints, temptations, strange aires; in all these
Was there no Fever, no malignine disease?
The Royal line ( England this brand must wear)
Suffer abroad, but perish only here.
So to the Sun the Phoenix does repair,
Through each distempered Region of the Air.
Through swarms of Deaths she there victorious flies,
But in her cruel Nest she burns, and dies,
Had you resigned your late afflicted breath,
When life it self less lovely was then death;
When the kind graves did but receive our care
And the survivers only wretched were:
Our greedy interests might tempted be,
To call thy virtues back, but hardly thee.
But now when Vines drop Wine from every trunk
To cheer their owners, not make rapine drunk;
Our goods find out our unfrequented hands:
And crimes make persons guilty, and not lands.
When Widows houses are no more a meal,
And Churches spoils are sacrilege, not zeal.
When our beloved yet dread Sovereign Head,
Is Crown and Guard to all, but to the Dead.
What Niobe can wail our mournful fate?
Snatched from the best of Kings, and happiest state.
The public peace, and your own large content
In your just Brothers equal Government.
Had raised so rich an odor to your sense,
That growing time had taken you sated hence,
But to depart under four Months return,
To land in England, to prevent your Urne;
Seems their disaster, who a bliss might shape,
But loose their deer enjoyments, by a Rape.
And now, most wretched we! who state our woe,
By thy afflictions, and thy virtues too.
Thy Infancy our cruelty forbore,
Made thee an early Captive, and no more:
Kisses that had from Princely parents fell,
From servile lips seemed then supplied as well.
Nor could thy sufferings then excite thy moan,
Since sufferings are no sufferings when unknown.
Thy childhood, that their nobler cares protect,
Who strive to show, but are forbid respect.
While rude ones seek by a misbred resort
To raze out all thy lines of birth or Court.
That tutored out of Prince, you might be sent
Into a common people banishment,
But thrift reclames that project, eyes the heap
Of thy expense, and bids thee perish cheap.
Posts thee, ere least debasement could appear
A Gemme to Foreign states, a burden here.
So the rude ways, fraught with a costly piece
Of rich, but Sea neglected ambergris:
Do, rolling, drive that fragant billow thence:
A perfume to the ravished finders sense.
Abroad the wide improvement of thy parts,
Drew in so fast the dewes of tongues and arts;
That both in thy accomplishments were spent:
Arts were thy fortress, Tongues thy ornament.
Learned latin, graceful speech and high of Spain,
The courtly French, the clean Italian vain,
The uncouth Dutch, these langages were known
Indenizon'd as Natives with thy own.
Those arts where least advantages are found,
Even those you did descry, but would not sound.
Historians who record the life of Fame,
And register each good or vicious Name,
You from their sacred annals did resume
Great past examples, for your life to come.
Wise Navigators that disclose each creek,
And in the more known world, the unknown seek,
In their discoveries you imbark your Oars;
Because the seas do most concern these shores.
By your severer choice selecting thus,
What was most useful, not most Curious.
Amid'st your bright Imbellishments beside;
If truth or education were your guide,
Became a sifting Quaere: a dispute,
That will Afflict the world, but never confute.
Some to their climes belief, their faith do owe:
Which is to be persuaded; but not know.
You (at fifteen) this evidence did advance,
Religion was your Judgment, not your chance.
Ere eighteen, to Compagnes, your courage view
And Dunkirks fight: so famed for York, and you.
'Bout one and twenty we arrived see
Others at Age, You at Eternity.
FINIS.
AN ELEGY On the Death of the PRINCESS of AURANGE.
SAd Heaven of late has pail'd its smiling brow,
Wept much foreseeing this loss which hapen'd now.
The clouds so big with tears bewept the fate
To come, as well as that we suffered late:
Strong were heavens swelling sighs, and foreign shores
Heard it is Tempestuous groans as well as ours.
When Nature suffers thus the wandering Age
With expectation big waits the praesage:
And here it falls within this fatal Isle,
Adding fresh tears to those we shed e're while.
Hither great Aurange came; great dangers past,
To see her Royal brother Crowned at last;
To give him joy, and in his joys to share,
To lighten with her presence Crowned care;
But here she finds great Henry fled the stage
Of sinful Earth; the wonder of our Age:
She stays to see her Kingly brother fast,
To see Heaven all new plots, and dangers blast,
And fully now of Heavens care satisfied,
Took leave of him; to see great Henry died:
Such is her kindness, such her constant love,
She goes to give him joy, of's Crown above.
What raging Seas of dangers, and what storms,
What foaming billows of Tempestuous harms:
The Royal issue has escaped! then ar'
The Fates more cruel in their Peace, than War!
Come they but here to pay a debt to Fate,
Their lives in peace, and rest to terminate:
Not to triumph for all their travels past,
And crown their pains with Olive boughs at last;
This late received, as if content they yield
A willing conquest; gain a greater field.
Content and all her wishes answered now,
This Princess hasts to Heaven to pay her Vow.
FINIS.

