A MANIFESTO OR Declaration, Set forth by the Undertakers of the New Church Now
Erected in Boston in New England, November 17th. 1699.
INASMVCH as GOD has put it into our hearts to undertake the Building a New
Meeting House in this Town for His Public Worship; And whereas through the
gracious Smiles of Divine Providence on this our Undertaking, We now see the
same Erected, and near Finished: We think it Convenient, for preventing all
Misapprehensions and Jealousies, to publish our Aims and Designs herein,
together with those Principles and Rules we intend by GODS Grace to adhere unto.

We do therefore as in the Presence of GOD our Judge, and with all the
Sincerity and Seriousness, which the nature of our present Engagement Commands
from us, Profess and Declare both to one another, and to all the World, as
follows.

[I.]
First of all, We approve and subscribe the Confession of Faith put forth by
the Assembly of Divines at Westminster.

[II.]
We design only the true and pure Worship of GOD, according to the Rules
appearing plainly to us in His Word; Conformably to the known practice of many
of the Churches of the UNITED BRETHREN in London, and throughout all England.

We judge it therefore most suitable and convenient, that in our Public
Worship some part of the Holy Scripture be read by the Minister at his
discretion.

In all other parts of Divine Worship as (Prayer, Singing, Preaching, Blessing
the People, and Administering the Sacraments;) We conform to the ordinary
practice of the Churches of Christ in this Country.

[III.]
It is our sincere desire and intention to hold Communion with the Churches
here, as true Churches; and we openly protest against all Suspicion and
Jealousy to the contrary, as most Injurious to us.

[IV.]
And although in some Circumstances we may vary from many of them; yet we
jointly profess to maintain such Order and Rules of Discipline as may preserve,
as far as in us lies, Evangelical Purity and Holiness in our Communion.

[V.]
In pursuance whereof we further Declare, that we allow of Baptism to those
only who profess their Faith in Christ and Obedience to him, and to the
Children of such; yet we dare not refuse it to any Child offered to us by any
professed Christian, upon his engagement to see it Educated, if God give life
and ability, in the Christian Religion.

But this being a Ministerial Act, We think it the Pastors Province to receive
such Professions and Engagements; in whose prudence and conscience we acquiesce.

[VI.]
As to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, we believe that as the Ordinance is
Holy, so the Partakers in it (that it may not be visibly profaned) must be
persons of visible Sanctity.

[VII.]
We judge it therefore fitting and expedient, that whoever would be admitted to
partake with us in this Holy Sacrament, be accountable to the Pastor to whom it
belongs to inquire into their knowledge and Spiritual State, and to require the
Renewal of their Baptismal Covenant.

[VIII.]
But we assume not to our selves to impose upon any a Public Relation of their
Experiences; however if any one think himself bound in Conscience to make such
a Relation, let him do it.

For we conceive it sufficient, if the Pastor publicly declare himself
satisfied in the person offered to our Communion, and seasonably Propound him.

[IX.]
We also think our selves obliged in faithfulness to God, our own Souls, and
theirs who seek our Communion, to inquire into the life and conversation of
those who are so propounded; and if we have just matter of objection to prefer
it against them.

[X.]
But if no objection be made, before the time of their standing propounded is
expired, it shall be esteemed a sufficient Consent and Concurrence of the
Brethren, and the person propounded shall be received to our Communion.

[XI.]
If ever any of our Communion should be so unhappy as to fall into any
scandalous Sin (which God by his Grace prevent) we profess all dutiful
submission to those Censures, which the Scripture directs, and the Churches
here practice.

[XII.]
Forasmuch as the same power that Admits, should also Euclude, We judge it
reasonable, that the Pastor in Suspending or Excommunicating an Offender, have
the consent and concurrence of the Brethren.

[XIII.]
We apprehend that a particular Church, as such, is a Society of Christians by
mutual agreement, usually meeting together for Public Worship in the same
place, and under the same Ministry, attending on the Ordinances of God there.

[XIV.]
In every such Society, the Law of nature dictates to us, that there is implied
a mutual promise and engagement of being faithful to the Relations they bear to
each other, whither as private Christians, or as Pastor and Flock, so long as
the Providence of God continues them in those Relations.

[XV.]
We moreover Declare our selves for Communion of Churches, freely allowing our
Members occasionally to Communicate with other Churches of Christ, and
receiving theirs occasionally to the Table of the Lord with us. And in
extraordinary cases, when the Providence of God makes it needful, we conceive
that any Authorized Minister of Christ, may upon our request, Administer the
Sacraments unto us.

[XVI.]
Finally, We cannot confine the right of choosing a Minister to the Male
Communicant; alone, but we think that every Baptized Adult Person who
contributes to the Maintenance, should have a Vote in Electing.

Yet it seems but just, that persons of the greatest Piety, Gravity, Wisdom,
Authority or other Endowments, should be leading and Influential to the Society
in that Affair.

THESE are the Principles we Profess, and the Rules we purpose through the
Grace of GOD, to govern our selves by; and in some of these particulars only,
and in no other, do we see cause to depart from what is ordinarily Professed
and Practiced by the Churches of CHRIST here in New England.


