A DISCOVERY, OR CERTAIN OBSERVATIONS, CONCERNING The crafty and cursed
Proceedings of the Conspirators, or Rebbells of ENGLAND, against their own
King, Queen, Church, Government, then established; To wit 1639. And the
Liberty, Peace, Fafety, and Quiet-Beeing, of that our Nation, and other
Kingdoms thereunto belonging.

By whom the People of other Nations have been also Cheated and Troubled.

Observed by J. M.

Whose Heart has for many years together mourned in secret, for the Calamity
by the said Rebbels, brought upon his own, and other Nations.

1. Samuel Chap. 15. verse. 23. Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft.

They are enclosed in their own Fat: with their mouth they speak proudly,

Psalm. 17.10. They are waxen Fat: they shine, yea, they over-passe the deeds of
the wicked: they judge not the cause, the cause of the Fatherless, yet they
prosper: and the right of the needy do they not judge. Shall I not visit for
these things, says the Lord? Shall not my soul be avenged of such a nation
as this?

Ierem. 5.28.29. Printed in the year 1657.

To the Beloved, Discreet, and understanding Reader.
SIR, and SIRS;
MAY it please you with patience to Read, and consider according to wisdom:
and be not rash to judge, condemn, nor censure, as sometimes the humor and
custom of some is to do: even by my betters.

As it shall please God to permit, give your selves convenient time with
deliberation, to scanne and mark what you read: not only for what follows in
this small pamphlet, but for what it signifies, or further aluds unto: which
does consist of matter beyond the expression of any mortal man, as of
himself. And though I do most humbly confess, that I have neither the head
nor the mouth of the Learned, much less the Tongue of the Eloquent: neither
has my breeding been such, as to make me so capable for such a business, as
some other men. And however my infirm and weak disposition is known, and
seen to the world, or to many as well as to my self, yet it is possible, by
the gracious assistance of God Almighty, that, though this little Book comes
to be produced unto the veuw of the world, by so weak an Instrument from whom
it is not expected: yet I have some reason to conceave a possibility, and that
by the providence and power of God, that not only the wary Reader, but also
the Learned may find some thing in it, worth their notice. Though it does not
follow, that I shall be fully understood at the first reading of it. And this
I do mention from mine own experience, when I have read the works of other
men.

SIR, and SIRS, This may be intended for some such as do hold, or have held
little or much with Theefes and Murderers; who by disguising them selves, have
not been rightly known to be what they are: and it would be labor in vain
for to persuade those, who are resolved to cleave unto them, though the said
Conspirators have cast away the fear of the Lord: as may be well seen by
their continual presumption, flattering, reveylings, purgery, blasphemy,
witchcraft, and what so ever possible can be worse. For their disposition is to
delight in mischief as well as to flatter themselves with the ruin of others.
2. The desperate condition, the Rebbels of England have brought upon them
selves, does require them to persist, or continue in mischief, because it is
contrary both to their nature, custom, and safety, and all the like of them:
for to sease from doing of evil, nor will they sease from seducing of al
others, that they can possible provaile withal, for to make them even like
them selves, so long as they know of any righteous nation, who does fear the
Lord, and abhor such guilt, unless they be subdued: without which, not any
Nation in all Europe, shall long have rest, unless any should be found to be
like them selves; of whom there is little likely hood of escaping ous of the
snares of the devil: or as little hope as for a Woolfe to become a Lamb. 1.
Tim. 1.26.
As I have had more then ordmary Reasons, to think almost twenty years
together, and that to my exceeding great sorrow, and grief of heart. And
though some times I have hoped, by the help of the Lord, and from the
Confidence of other men: that the Rebbels should have been forced unto
obedience, or unto some thing like unto equity. But in all this time. I never
expected that the Rebbels would ever willingly yield unto any thing that was
righteous, just, or reasonable: because I constantly have had strong Reasons to
the contrary, unless they were thereunto forced.

These things are Remarkable. First, That they have hypocritically, contrary to
their own protestations, Usurped not only the Crown, and Revenues of the
King, but the precious Lafe of the King himself, and many other worthy
Persons, before and since, and that by secret forms of Petitions, framed by
them selves in private, and cunningly set the people a work by some of their
own Busi-bodies, to come unto Westmunster, from and about London, Ipswich,
Buckingam-Schire, and the like factious people, who in a clamerous manner came
crying Justice! Justice! For those very things that the Conspirators before
were resolved to do: namely, for the taking away of the Laves and Estats of
such, as were more blameless and honorable, then themselves, by a thousand
degrees. And they have Pressed, Imprisonned, Ba^^s^ed and Murdered many
thousands of their Equals at home and abroad: and they have made War with
several forrame Nations, without and against the consent of the King; and that
by the help of that cursed. Army of theirs, with which they compelled the
Country, to maintain against them selves: and how-ever they falsely pretend,
to represent the Body of the Nation, as may appear in all their Proceedings.
Seeing all their Actions have been contrary, and against the will and mind of
the Body of the Nations, as may appear by their unlawful choice of members,
like themselves, contrary to the Countries choice.

A DISCOVERY, OR Certain Observations, concerning the crafty and cursed
proceedings of the Conspirators, or Rebbels of England, against their own
King, Queen, Church and Government, etc.
SIR, and SIRS;
MY Reasons, why I, for almost these twenty years together, the Kings of
Spain and France: which, to my comefort, the King of Spain has often, and
ernestly desiered. And so has his Helynesse this present Pope: who under God,
is unto both Kingdoms, a Righteous Judge, A faithful Stuard, A Loving, and A
tender-harted Father. Who under God, and in the behalf of God, his Heavenly
Father, does very much desire the comfort, Peace, and Saffety of ther^ both,
they being two, of the most honorablest Kingdoms, of all the world: and the
ancientests for Christianety.

My Second Reason is, that seeing both Kings, do as Justly possess, each

Thirdly; Because it would be matter of gladness, and great joy of heart, 1.
Tim. 2.2.


Forthly: Because it is good, and acceptable in the sight of God our 1. Tim. 2.
nor the heart of the Pope, verse. 3.4.
be more greeved then when their Children Associate them selves, with evil
Contentious men. Therefore greeve not the holy Spirit of God, Ephe. 4.30.
by which you are sealed unto the day of Redemption.

For God is not the God of confusion, 1. Cor. 14.33.
but of peace. Wherefore, SIR: my heart does humbly pray your Majesty; to
propound Reasonable Conditions of peace, to your own Uncle, the King of
Spain; and to all other Christian, and Righteous Princes: who desire to live
at peace with you. And that, for to prevent the shedding of Christian, and
Innocent blood, in time to com. Thereby you shall exedingly obleage al
Christian, and Righteous Princes, and People; that live in the fear of God:
but especially, your own Cousin, the King, and his subjects of great Britain
and Ierland, who are greatly opressed by the Impudence of a generation of
Rebbells, and hyppocrits. And also the Duke, and the State of Venice, whose
endeavor has always been to live in amity, and frendshippe with the Kings,
and Nation of France: who is in great danger of an enemy that is much too
mighty for them. Wherefore SIR: if it may please your Majesty, by a speedy
cessation, from all hostillity of both sides; by which means, you will be the
better able upon occasion, to withstand your secret enemies; as also to help
your best Friends, in time of need: namely, your Cuzon, the King before said,
and his subjects: whose distressed Estate, and Condition, has been greevous
to me, and to diverse others, these many years. Likewise, the Duke, and the
State of Venice, shall the better obtain help, in their great distress from
your Majesty, or some other Christian Princes; or else, by Reason of the peace
a foresaid, the said State shall obtain the more honorable, and speedy peace,
with that enemy, who otherwise will be too mighty for them.

Neither can that at all be good, or safe for your Majesty, nor your subjects,
nor any Christian Prince. Neither can I possible think of any other persons,
who under God are more Indifferent, Just, and Impartial Mediators, Composors,
of all manner of differences, or any greevances, between such Christian
Princes, as your Majesty, and the King of Spain: or the like of you, then the
Popes Holiness, who is (under God) undoubtedly, for all such Princes and
people, as both You, and your Subjects are.

And for often I know, for all other who are unfeigned Christians, even as a
careful, and a natural Father for his own Children. And therefore an able,
emenant, and righteous Judge, fit for so weighty and necessary Employment as
that is.

Because he is one that fears God, and hates covetousness, who, in Gods
behalf, and in the place of Meyses, will provide reasonable, and able men, as
in Exodus, chap. 18. verse. 21.22.

And for the removing of all suspicion and scrupell, the said Pope, being of
late years Nuntius, for the late Pope at Munster: and by his great abillities,
and his Love unto Equity, through Gods assistance, made, and occasioned such an
agreement between the King of Spain, and the Lords the States General, of
the United Provences: as that neither parties does complain, but rather thank
him. And that because he knows, that he does not Judge only for man, but for
the Lord: who is whith him in Judgment. 2. Chron. 19.6.


With whom there is no respect of persons, nor iniquity with the Lord our God:
nor taking of gifts, for the gift does blind the eyes of the Wise. Deutro.
16.19.
And though I humbly show my weak Judgment, in that I conceave, the King of
Denmarks, and the State of Venice, to be emenent, and indifferent Judges,
which are needful for such weighty affairs: neither of them having any more
Relation to your Majesty of France, then to the King of Spain: or to be sure,
his Majesty of Denemarcke, has no more Relation unto the King of Spain, then
he has unto your Majesty, but rather less of the two: yet I remember, that
when the late difference was between the Lords the States General, of the
united Provences, and the Usurpers of Engeland: they chose for their
Arbitrators, the Lords of Switscherland, the Lords of Geneva, and of the
Kingdom of Sweaden; and therefore I humbly present unto your Consideration, and
the Advice of your most honorable Privy Counsel, together with the Advice of
your most Grave, Learned, and Reverent Clergy: whether the three Spiritual
Electors of Germany, be not nutrall, and indifferent Judges, for to give their
Advise and Assistance, in a buisenesse, which concerns all Catholics, in so
high a nature: the King of Spain, and your Majesty, being both Catholic
Kings; near neighbors, and near of Kin, he being bone of your bone, and
flesh of your flesh. Judges 9.2.


Why then will your Majestye be the Last, 2. Sam. 19. verse. 12.
that shall Resolve upon a happy Peace with the King of Spains, (who is one of
your best, and your nearest Friends?) Peace being a thing pleasing unto God, and
unto all that fear him in truth. It is no disparidgment to any King, or
Prince in the world: to follow the Example of Abraham, who was very Rich in
Cattle, Silver and Gould: yet for peace-sake, gave choice to Loath, Genes. 13.
verse. 2.7.
his brothers Son; who was the meanist and the joungest man. Either to go to
the Right hand, or to the Left: which he pleased, in the 8. and 9. verses of
the same Chapter you have it.

SIR: Abraham being the Eldest man, and the mightyest, might so much the better
have clamed some kind of prehemenence: yet the clean contrary appears in
Abraham, who was the first that prayed Loath, that there might be no striffe
between them, and that for these three Reasons.

First; his Love unto peace.

Secondly, because the Canaanites and the Perizzite, were in the land; which
was a people whom Abraham did not much Confide in: and who he was not willing,
that they should see striffe between them two, who wear so near friends.

And yet I do heartily wish that you had not in you Land for the most part, if
not continually, those who are far worsse unto your Majesty, and your best
friends and Subjects then ever either the Canaanites or the Perizzites where
unto Abraham in his days: I mean such, as are sent or employed by Crumwell,
or the like of him, and for him: for to corrupt the minds of your people, or
otherwise to work out their own ends, who will cause trouble in your Kingdom
at the last, and disturb your Majesty, and such as desire to live in peace.

And Thirdly: because they were brethern, that is to say, near of Kinn: yet
not nearer of Kinn, then your Majesty is unto the King of Spain. Wherefore
consider, whether it will not be the honor, wisdom, and saffety of your
Majesty, and your people, and the comfort of all good Christians upon the face
of the earth, for to Imitate so good and so holy a man as Abraham was, by
adhearing to peace with your nearest and best friends, and with all Righteous
Princes, States, and Cities; that desiers to be at peace with you.

SIR: It will not be hard to prove those to be the most eminent Kings and
Princes, 2. Chron. Chap. 20. verse. 7.
who are most in favor with the King of Kings; neither was any in those days
in higher esteem with the Lord, then Abraham, who was, and unto this day is
called The friend of God; because in all things he did that which was pleased
to God: Genesis 12.7.
As I. By helping the oppressed against Usurpers. II. By praying for the
sinful Cities of Sedom and Gemorr^. Genesis 13.4.
III. By obaying the Commands of the Lord, Genesis 18.17.19.23.24.25.26.27. To the
end of the 32. verse. ^^^. 4.^.9.
in being ready to offer his only Son Isaac. IV. By buylding of Altars for
the worship of God. V. By calling upon the name of the Lord. VI. In that he
believed the word and the promise of God, which was counted unto Abraham for
righteousness: and therefore his earnest entreating of Leth, for the
preservation and the continuation of peace between them, and their servaunts,
was First, because the God of Peace do delight in peace, Secondly, it seems
Abram conceaved it to be both disgrace and danger both to himself, and to
Loath, for to be at strife in the eyes of the Heathen, amongst whom they then
lived. Thirdly, because they were Brethren, who served one God, after one and
the same manner, and so does the King of Spain, and your Majesty. Fourthly,
they were near neighbors, and very near of Blood, and yet not nearer then
your Majesty, and the King of Spain.

SIR: a serious consideration heerof, is most needful, because the Lord our
God is worthy to be regarded and honored in these our days, as well as he was
by Abraham in his time.

SIR: it has been year after year, great admiration and grief unto me, that
the Kingdoms of France, and Spain, who are of one Religion, one Faith, one
Hope, of one mind, and of one Judgment, in matters concerning Salvation: and
the God of both Kingdoms, is the Lord of Heaven, and not the God of Rebbells.

And yet notwithstanding all this, such lamentable Ruings of the people of both
Kingdoms, to the destroying of so much blood, and Treasure, one of an other:
And that to the extreme weakening and disabeling one of an other? Seeing, it
is not unknown to the Lords, Clergy, and many other honorable Persons in
your Kingdom; that all are not friends to the King, and people of France, who
speak them fair: Revel. 2. verse. 2.9.
It is as well of some which pretend to be Christians, and are not: but by
their proceedings they rather seem to be of the Synagogue of Satan. And it
were to be wished, that this sort were not worse then some of those, which
do not profess them selves to be Christians at all: and that in matter of
fraud, deceat and violence, which the nations of Portugal, and of the United
Provences can witness, as well as the King of Spain, Philip. 3. verse. 2.
and his people: wherefore I say, Beware of dogs: beware of evil workers.

For First, those who has done so much mischieffe unto their own, and
several other Nations, by policy, and stite of hand; besides open violence:
will in the short or in the long, sinde a trick, to trouble you and your
people: First, either by stirring up some of your own people, against your
best friends.

And Secondly, against your own Person; and so cause Noble, and other Innocent
blood, to be shed in France, like as them selves, by the help of their wicked
Army, have done in England.

And I am of the mind of the Prophet Jeremiah, who said, Jerem. 13.23.
If a black More can change his skinn, or a Leopert his spots; then may they
do good, who are accustomed to do evil. It seems that it was falsely said
of the Apostell St. Paull, and some others; that they said, Let us do good,
that evil may come of it. Romans 3.8.
I wish that this may not be truly said to be the practice of Oliver
Crumwell, and some of his adherences.

SIR: It was the folly of Nahash, to be so unreasonable, as to require the
Right eye, of every man in Jabesh Gillead, as a Reproach, insufferable unto
Israel: which stird up in them such a spirit, that the wholle Army of Nahash
was so overthrown and scattered, that two of his men, 1. Sam. 11.2.11.
could not be seen to gether. And therefore, it will be honorable for your
Majesty, and your most faithful Counsel, before God and the world; to incline
unto peace, upon reasonable Conditions, such as may with honor be granted:
that it may not be said, that the King, and the Kingdom of France, is the
cause of trouble and terror unto all good Christians (who gladly would live at
peace). Wherefore your Majesty, and your Honorable Council, and reverent
Clergy, may be pleased, Numb. 16.24.25.26.27.30.
speedily to separate your selves from such an evil generation, in whom is
neither fear of God, love of Equity, nor of Christianity. And Saul said unto
the Kenites, Go, depart, get you down from amongst the Malakites, least I
destroy you with them: 1. Sam. 15.6.
for you showed kindness to all the Children of Israel, when they came up out
of Egypt. So the Kenites departed from amongst the Malakites: and Saul
destroyed the Malakites, Verse. 7.
for the cruelty which they had done long before, according to Gods own
command.

From whence your Majesty, and all the good People, may be graciously pleased
for to observe, that it is very dishonorable and dangerous for a Righteous
Prince, King, or Nation, to be in Company, or Combination, or Alliance, with
evil doers: who are so desperately wicked as the Rebels of Engeland, Jer.
17.9.
who by theft, murder, perjury and falsehood, do over-passe the deeds of the
wicked. Jer. 5.28.
They are waxen fat, they shine, yea they over pass the deeds of the wicked.
They judge not the cause of the Fatherless: yet they prosper. Verse. 29.
And the Right of the needy, do they not judge. Shall I not visit, for these
things, says the Lord? Shall not my soul be avenged of such a nation a,
this? A wonderful and horrible things, Verse. 30.
is committed in the Land; the Prophets profesy falsely, Izra 10.3.
and the Priests be are rule by their means, and my people love to have it so.
To wit, Crumwel and his Army, who lives upon the ruin of others.

Izra took special notise of the Counsel of those that trembled at Gods
Commandment: And the Propet Isaiah bid them, Hear the word of the Lord, Isai.
66.5.
that trembled at his word. And in the 2. verse of the 60. of Isaiah, God
says; But to this man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a
contrite Spirit, and trembles at my word. Which I hope your Majesty, and all
your good People of France, will do: and not like Crumwell, and his Company;
who have seduced and deluded many of the people of England; and caused them to
forsake the Lord God of their Fathers. 2. Chron, 28.6.
As for himself, and the rest of his Leadors, who are Arch-Rebells, it seems
they are the sons of Beliall, 1. Sam. 2.12.
or, like the sons of Ely, who know not the Lord. Wherefore I counsel your
Majesty, to take heed in time, least they lay stumbling blocks in your way,
Numb. 31.16.
as Balaam the Sorceror was unto Israel. Balaam taught, Balac to cast a
stumbling block before the Children of Israel, to do that which offended God:
Revel. 2.14.
for which they were punished. Therefore Remember: O King, and people of
France, and all others, high, and low, at home and abroad; whose hope is in the
God of truth: and that do tremble at his word. Remember what Balack, King of
Moab, consulted; and what Balaam answered: Micah. 6.5.
that you may Remember the Righteousness of the Lord. Consider seriously the
malicious council of Ahi^^phell to Abselom, to an ungracious Son, against so
good and so Godly a Father, as King David was: who contrived a difference so
foul; even past hope of reconcilement: purposed to make the King out of
measure odious unto all his people: 2 Samuel 16.21.
by defiling his Fathers Concubines, in the sight of the Son, that all might
see it; with an intent to make David to abhor Abselom; and that all Israel
might deride David beyond all possibillity, or hope of any agreement.

So have the Rebbells of England sought by all means possible, to make the
people abhor their Gracious King and Queen; and such others as were
faithful in the Land, and more Noble, and Righteous, then any of the said
Rebbells. How that they devised wicked devises, not only to smite with the
tongue the King and the Queen; but also the Lords of Canterberry, Strafford,
Caple, and many others: who had done no wrong to King nor people, Jerem. 18.18.
but their duty only, to which they were enjoined by the Law of the Land. Then
said they, Com, let vssmite him with the tongue, and let us not give heed to
any of his words. I had almost forgot the behavior of that Generation of
Separats, toward the Duke of Buckingham, and his mother; with Doctor Lamb. I
am loath to foul so much paper, and trouble the Reador with so many Lies as
they devised, and devoulged for many years together, both within and without
the Kingdom of England, purposly, to make all people to abhore them, because it
pleased God to give the Duke favor in the eyes of both the late Kings of
England. In so much, that I my self hearing daily the extreme slanders,
which was contrived and broached against them, by these foule-mouthed and
shamlesse people; was almost persuaded, that It was true that was reported of
them: and I I was so far deluded, that I thought, that whosoever should
destroy them, would do God and the Country good servis. But afterward, I came
to understand, that it was nothing else but the malice of such, who had
seduced many young, and other people, unto diverse sects, or new and strange
Religeons, by the help of whom Crumwell, and his Consorts, has murdered many
who were blameless and harmless of several degrees of people, both by Sea
and Land: who were without rebuke, Phil. 2.15.
in the midst of a perverst generation; who did shine as lights in the Land,
and after that the Duke and Lamb, were tyrannically murdered by lude fellows
with wicked hands, without any form of Judgment. Act. 2.23.
Next they fell upon the Bishop of Canterberry, with intolerable back-bitings,
and Revileings, saying, First, That he did intend to make the Land Popish.
Secondly: That he could not preach himhelse. Thirdly: That he persecuted Godly
Ministers: because Fourthly: That the Pope had sent him a Miter from Room:
which the Conspirators (it seems) Customhouse at London: so reporting it that
there was an agreement between the Pope and him, that he should Rain as Pope
in England. Fifthly: when they Sixthly, that the said Lord Bishop of Canterberry,
did accuse the Lord of Strafford; who was also a prisonner, and whom also they
did intend to murder, that the said Earl of Strafford, Lord Liftenant of
Ireland, was the cause of drawing the said Bishop into his troubles. And that
the said Earl should say, That the Bishop, was the cause of his troubles. And
that one, or both of them, should curse the day that ever they knew one
another; and that in reveyling terms, they should accuse one the other, as it
was reported by the Conspirators or their Adhearence. These notorious slanders,
they have not been a shamed for to bring, or to let come in print; for to make
those innocent persons exceeding odious to all people; to the end that few, or
none should question the cause, or the Reason of their taking away their lives.
But their design was only to murder them, because they were faithful to God,
the King and the Country; each in his several places, whereunto they were
lawfully called. Being both men of exellent Learning, Levit. 19.15.
and Wisdom, courageous, not fearing the persons of the mighty. They were men,
fearing God, and scorning Bribes. I observed that one of the greatest causes of
the inveterate malice of his enemies against him, Exed. 18.21.22.
next unto his, being an enemy unto rebellion: was, that he would not suffer
the meanor so^e of people to be oppressed by the mighty: and which were under
his Government in Ireland.

First, their blood-thirsty, and tyranny call proceedings against the said
EARL, when he was tried for his Life, does apparently show their prepared, and
abominable designs: Namely: a fixed and a firm resolution, secretly within
them selves, by force to take away the Life of the N^^e Earl, without any
regard unto Justice, Law or Equity, which shows the doge-like malice of the
Rebbels, against that worthy Person, who was preferred to a place of Quallity,
Trust and Power; who was both willing and able to resist the develish
Rebellion, then intended by the Conspirators against the King and his Subjects:
as appears by one that was convinced of Pergery: that came as a witness
against the noble Earl.

Secondly, they pretended to convince this Earl of some crime: by the
testimony of only one witness, who was known to be his professed enemy. Which
is contrary to the Law of God, for it is said, at the mouth of two or three
witnesses he only shall die that is worthy of death, Deuteronomy. 17.6.
but at the mouth of one witness no man shall die.

Thirdly, after they were shamefully worsted in their accusing this Noble
Person of high Treason, seeing they could prove no Treason at all against him.

F^^athly, after the cloase of the prosses, or his charge, given in before:
they alleged three new Artickles against him, with vnhuman Importunity, to
have the Earl presently to answer unto them: without any time to bethink him
self; though by Reason of the infirmety of his body, and his spirits being
much spent by pleading by way of answer unto their accusations against him:
did earnestly desire some few days time, to bethink him self: which the
Lords of the Vpperhouse thought to be but Reasonable, yet nothing would
content these shameless fellows, but a present answer from him.

Fifthly, the Ignorant people, being by false Reports, Inveteratly set against
him, by whom he was accused; that he caused a Horse to be stolen, and after
that, hanged the man that bought him, because he might enjoy his Estate after
his death: which thing proved so foull against them selves, that they did not
so much as mention it at the Bar.

Sixthly, they stird up base and unruly Raskalls, not only for to Importane,
but to compel the Lords of the house of Pears, to pas a Bill, for to take his
life, without Law, and contrary to Law, and against the will of the Lords.
Offering violence to their persons, in case they would not grant it;
notwithstanding they found nothing against him worthy of death: which the Lords
fully declared.

Seaventhly, when the Bill was past, it was still by the Law of the Land;

This ruyd multitude, being set on by the slye and secret Conspirators;

They pressed so hard upon his Majesty, neither would they leave him,

I have within my self, more then ordinary Reason, to think that if

Neither were they yet contented, because that they see, that what they had
done displeased the King, and the Lords of the house of Pears; to see so
Noble and so Innocent a person to loose his Life; as the said Earl of
Strafford was: contrary to Law and Conscience. Therefore this their impudence,
brought a necessety upon them selves; to have murdered the King: had he not
departed from London when he did: and yet they blamed him because he departed.

This is the Reason, that the Precedences and Princes of King Darius, sought
occasion against Daniell: because God gave him wisdom, Dan. chap. 6. verse.
4.5.6.10.12.
and an excellent spirit was found in him: and therefore the King thought for
to set him over the whole Kingdom; wherefore, like Balaam, his said enemies
conspired to make him cast off his duty to God, or to forfeyte his Life to the
King, because that the Lord gave him savor in the sight of the King: who
better deserved it, then the said Precedences or Princes. So because there was
found in the Earl of Strafford so much Courage, Wisdom, and the fear of the
Lord, as not to be a Rebbell like his enemies, therefore they, like unto the
Princes of Daryons, sought by all unlawful means their serpentlike heads
could possible devise to deprive the King, and the Nation of England, of a
Gentleman who was more noble, able, honest, and Righteous, then the best of
them selves, only because his works were Righteous, and the Intentions of the
Rebbells was then wholly or mischief, just like unto Cain, 1. Ioh. 3.12.
who was of that wicked one, and slew his Brother for no other Reason, but
because his own works were evil, and his Brothers good. They prepared a way
to destroy Daniell, saying; we shall find nothing against him, Dan. 6. verse.
5.
except it be concerning the Law of his God. And because Daniell durst not
neglect his duty, and so break his peace with his God: when he knew of the
conspiracy, contrived by his enemies, who had prevailed with the King to sign
it: he went into his house, and his windows being open toward Jerusalem,
Verse. 10.
he kneeled upon his knees, three times a day, and prayed, and gave thanks
before his God, as he did before time.

Here upon, Daniell was accused to the King by his said enemies, for breaking
the Kings Decree; Verse. 12.13.14.15.16.
thinking thereby to have taken his Life from him: Inciting the Law of the
Meades and Persians, which might not be changed.

Whereat the King Darius was sore troubled: but it proved to the destruction of
the conspirators them selves. From which I observe: that many times evil men,
brings good men into great trouble: as appears by the conspiracy of Hammon
against the Jews; which caused Mordicay ^o rend his Clothes, and put on
Sacke-cloath, with Ashes: and went out into the mist of the City, and cried
with a loud and a bitter cry.

From whence I conceave it to be a sad, and a dangerous thing, for good women,
and good men's daughtors, to be Married unto Rebbells; or into any Rebbellious
famely: Because often times, besides Bedding with those, who are defilled with
Theft, Lying, and many other crying sins, likewise their being known to be
gilty of shedding of innocent blood; to wit, those that are of such famelye,
come by that means, often times to be destroyed; Iosuah. 7.20.24.
and their Wives and Children with them. Joshua, as it apears by Akan and his
Children: who were stoned with stones, and burned with fire. So likewise Dathan
and Abiram, perished with their wives, their sons, and their little children:
When the earth swallowed them up, and their houses, and all that pertained unto
Kor^, went down alive into the pit: Numb. 16.27.30.31.32.33.34.
and the earth cloased upon them: and they perished, from among the
congregation. So that all Israel, round about, fled at the cry of them. And
there came out a fire from the Lord, which consumed the two hundred and fifty
men, Verse. 35.
that offered Incence. Partly, because they set them selves against Moses and
Aron; whom it had pleased the Lord to set over them: Take notice of this, O
as the Rebbells have done against the King, the Bishops, and others of the
Clargy of England. Therefore, it is needful, that all good men, separate them
selves from such wicked men, King of France, and beware in time.
as the said Rebbells be: According to the advice of God, and Moses, his
servant. And the rather, because the basor sort of their own adhearance, do
take upon them the places of Ministers: and those that are the true servants of
God, are despised, and rejected. And some slandered, imprisoned, Isa. 53.3.
and some of them murdered: with the cruel hands of Rebbellious Tyrants. And
therefore, they can endure nothing, but what is contrary to sound Doctrine:
neither will they endeavor to know sound Doctrine, but after their own lusts,
2. Tim. 4.3.
they heaped to them selves Teachers, who despise just Dominion, speaking evil
of Dignities, and of all others who are better then themselves; and of other
things, which they neither know, nor understand. Woe unto them, for they have
gone in the way of Cane, Jude. 7.8.9.10.11.
and ran greedely after the error of Balaam for reward. Who also will one day
perish in the like gainsaying of Core, without timely repentance, and
amendment. It is not the meannesse of the persons of the Rebbels that I mean,
but the baseness of their behavior toward God, their King, and Contry: nor
yet of the mean quallety, of Grooms, Coachmen, Cobblers, Soldiers, and the
like: that I disdain at. But because they presume upon that which belongs not
unto them: neither are they in any measure fit for it. By reason whereof, the
word, and the truth of God, is despised, and slighted, which is preached by
his own Servants, who were thereunto lawfully called: who, like the faithful,
and holy Prophets of the Lord, desiers to keep a good conscience toward God,
in the discharge of their duty, which is contrary to the procedings of the
Rebbells. Therefore it is, that these conseated, and busy fellows are not only
allowed, but colleaged with all, by the Conspirators; who had rather be
flattered to hell, in their wickedness, then to be justly reproved, by the
true Messingers of God.

Hence it is, that so many are persecuted and droveout of their livings, and
out of their native country, and which is worsse, diverse for a livelihood,
does suffer them selus to be persuaded, to preach contrary to their own
Consciences; without which they cannot subsist, nor be quiet in the Land, as
the case now stands.

Besides all this, I have great reason to conceave, that some of the chieffe of
the Rebbells of England, also some of Schorland, and some others else where, in
which three partys, was signefied and comprehended the body and foundation of
Rebbellion, before the Rebellion was known in the shape or likeness of a most
huge and mighty Cockatrice, having it seems, some relation unto the Prince of
darkness: To wit, Mark. 9.25
some foul spirit, powerful in strength, and wonderfully guarded for his own
defense: full of subtilty, Revel. 18.2.
and evil intention, and it seems had some relation to one of those great
Dragons whereunto Haman was likened, Hest. 11.6.
which you shall find mention made of in the History of Heaster, or unto the
great Red dragon, that fought against Michaell, ad his Angels. Who, for
defeat, rage, malice, Revell. 12.7.8.9.
and horrible mischief is in a great measure immetated by the Rebbells of
England: which, to the wonder of a great part of the world, shall by Gods
gracious assistance, more fully apeare here after, yet notwithstanding, the
truth of these Comparisons, whereunto I liken the Rebbells of England, yet
these fellows, like unto proud Senecharab, who is termed the great King of
Assiria, do boaste in an impudent manner, of their wicked and curssed
council; and usurped strength for war: Isa 36.4.
can find also a Rabshakeh, full of boldness against their Souveraine Lord,
and King, and many others of their betters. Who pretend, they do not all this
violence, without the Lord: Verse. 10.
that is to say, they pretend, that they Rebbell against their King, and
destroy their Nation, in the behalf of the Lord.

See their Serpentlike subtilty, resembling exactly that of Rabshakeh, when as
he said, Let not Hezekiah deceave you, for hac shall not be able to deliver
you. Neither are they less blasphemous then Rabshakeh, Isa 36.
in their several expressions against God: v. 14.15.
as well as presumptious and slanderers against their rightious King. Neither
do they come short of Rabshakehs rule, and boldness, in stirring up the
people to Rebbell against their King: but they exceed him in this, that they
compel, by force and violence, the people to Rebbell against their lauwfull
and righteous King.

Nay, the Traitors of England, do not only abhor, and scorn all those, who
do offer to mention, that by the help of God Almighty, the King of England,
and a righteous government, shall be again restored: but they pretend it high
treason for any man to say so, and upon this account, they murder many of the
Kings subjects, who are more Noble and Righteous, then themselves

Neither in their best discourses, will they be ashamed to say; Beware, least
the King deceave you, or any body for him, saying, the Lord is able, and will
restore us to our native country, and with our neighbor nations. All whom
has been wonderfully cheated, and abused by the hypocritical shifts and
fraud, of a generation of Jugglers.

Neither will they want brason and whorelike faces, to say to other honest men,
who are not under their power or Jurisdiction; Be not ye deceaved, to think
that the Lord shall restore again Charles Stuard, to the Crown, and Kingdom
of England: seeing we have conquered it, and we have forced the Portugal, and
the Hollanders to do what soever we pleased; Isa. 36.18.14.
and where is the Lord, that shall hinder us? And, who are the Gods of all
these Nations that have delivered their Lands, their Goods, 1. Sam. 22.23.
and their Ships, from being taken and spoiled by us? Or, their men from the
edge of our sword? Wherefore consider this, O King, and Nation of France, and
all other good people, both high and low, at home and abroad, in whom is
either courage, council for warrer, or the fear of the Lord; least that curse
come upon you, which came upon Meroz by the Angel of the Lord: Judge. 5.23.
not for any act that Meroz had done, but because the inhahitants of that
city, did not come forth, to the help of the Lord, against the mighty. This
was a double and a bitter curse, because the Righteous God, do count him self
to be slited, when men do forbear, or withould their help from the
distressed in time of need, when Oppressors are powerfully bent to mischief,
who make no difference between Right and wrong. Remember what is said of such
as steal, or join with theefs. Where God says unto the wicked, what have
thou to do, Psalm. 50. verse. 16.17 18.19.
to take my name in thy mouth, seeing thou hate Instructions, and casts my
words behind thee? when thou saw a thief, thou consentest with him, thou
give thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frames deceit. From hence we may
see, God will not own those, who consent or join with theefes. And a worse
forte of theefes cannot be, then the Rebbells of England: because no honest
man is ever the better by joining with such, but allways the worse. Remember
the Inhabitants of Seachem. And because God is silent, and seems to take no
notice, Judges 9.4.5.6.44.45
therefore they think that all is well: Supposing God to be like them selves:
who says: Now consider this, yethat forget God: Least I tear you in pieces,
Verse. 21.22
and there be none to deliver. So that you may see, that it is more dangerous,
in regard of the Judgments of God upon such, or as does hang over the heads,
or attend upon such, as this evil generation is: then the Infamy of the world
can be by far, in regard of men.

SIR: That which may the more, and the rather stir up the spirit of your
Majesty, and your good people, against the said Rebbells in England: Is this:

First, Because in former time, in the like case, the Kings of England 2.
Chron. 36 z 2.
and Money, from France, when the Relation between the Kings of France and of
England, was not so near as now it is. Ezra: 1.1.


Secondly, they that destroy with persecution and murder, your best friends

Thirdly, because it is said, that the Innocent shall stir up him self, Job.
17.8.
or any other that loves Equity, to have correspondence in the least, with the
throne of iniquity, that frames mischief by a Law? Psalm. 94.10.
Who gather them selves together, against the souls of the Righteous: Psalm.
94.20.21.
and condemn the Innocent blood.

Fourthly, that which makes my heart even tremble within me, is, that Sons of
Lucefer, have so contrived their villonous plots, as to cause your Majesty, and
the King of England, to fight one against the other: as I greatly fear they
will bring to pass, or that some one or other of his Fathers house: at the
fear thereof, I am greatly troubled. I have just cause likewise to think,
that they are also the cause of the continuation of the difference so long
between your Majesty, and your own Uncle the King of Spain, by which means
the Godly and Just endeavors of the Pope, and others, toward that needful
work, are from time to time blasted, and frustrated; even of the said Pope,
and many others, who are more Just in their Demands, and more Innocent in their
Actions, then the best of them: to wit, the Rebbels of England: because the
fear of God is with them: but the said Rebbells have fully, and long since,
many ways approved them selves, to be at the least, some of those, who God is
said to abhore, and to hate, which cannot clear them selves, of the gilt of
none of these six things, which God is said to hate in the 6. of the Proverbs
of Solomon. Neither can they ever clear them selves of the seventh: which is,
an abomination to the Lord. To wit, proud Looks, Lying tongues, hands that shed
Innocent blood: an heart that devises wicked Imaginations; feet, that be swift
in running to mischief, a false witness, that spaketh Lies. And him that
sows, discord amongst brethren, or emnety betwixt dear friends. And who so
near like to the devil, as the Robbels of England? who hasten them selves to
do all such things. Psalm. 5.6.
The Lord will abhirre the bloody and deceatfull man. David is against them
that flatter with their tounges, neither is it easy to prove, that such are
better then Traittors. Psalm. 35. verse. 19.20.
That same Holy King spoke, and prayed against such as hated him self without
a cause: who spoke not for peace; but devised deceatfull matters, against them
that wear quiet in the Land. Two very good Kings were blamed; 2. Sam. 19.
verse. 5.6.
the one, by the chiefest General of his own Army; that he hated his friends,
and loved his enemies

Now, it is most certain, that such as do so, do shame the faces, and weaken
the hands, and sorely greeve the hearts of all their best friends, and most
faithful servants as appears by Naball, 1. Sam. 25.10.
the Carmollite. Naball rayled at them which had shown kindness to him, and
his: And mark how his honest servants behaved them selves in this case, Verse.
14.
who by their relation of David, and his Men's behavior toward them in the
field, who wear a wall unto them night and day, together with the haste and
wisdom of Abygaile, their Mistres: prevented the destruction of all the
household of Naball, Verse. 16.17.18.
and of all that belonged unto him. For the prevention there of, David praised
and blessed the Lord God of Israel: and blessed the advice of she that
appeased his Anger, which kept him from shedding of blood, and from avenging
himself with his own hand. Had not Abygaill wisely hasted to meet David, who,
with terms of humillity apeased his anger, Verse. 31.33.34.
there had not one been left alive, that pissed against the wall.

The second, unto whom the Seer Jehuw, the son of Hannania said unto that good
King Jehosophat; should thou help the ungodly: and love or join with them
that hate the Lord? 2. Chron. 19 verse. 2.
Therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord.

O King of France! who has bewitched you; that you should Love and join, NOTA.
with the enemies of God, and your Majesty? who trouble those, that gladly
would live in peace; and deceave all such, as understand not their evil
Intentions, nor their divellish wiles? Who, like cunning Juggelors, secretly
work out their own ends, by slijte of hand; and will do by you, as the
Phillistens did by Sampson, Judge. 14: 17.18.
when they plowed with his heyffer. That is; the Rebbells of England, will be
exceeding vigelent, for to stir up, or procuer such as shall advise your
Majesty, and your Honorable and faithful Council, by such means, as none but
them selves, and such as are like them selves, do use to practice unto such
things as shall be contrary to equity, godliness, and honesty; because their
practice is, to bring those that are blamlesse, to be so wicked as them
selves: 1. Tim. 2.2.3.4.
and by that means, they will work out their own ends, or that which shall
tend to their own advantage, namely, that which shall be contrary to the
futor safty and peace of you, and your people: unless you, and your honorable
Council, be very careful to prevent the said Conspirators in time. And this
I mention from long experience of their evil example, toward our own, and
other nations: the truth whereof the world can witness with me.

Therefore, the advice of Ecclesiasticus, is very proper: namely, Chap. 6. verse.
6.
to have many friends, and but one Councellor of a thousand. It Is needful,
that one be wary of his secrets, as the apple of his eye. A faithful friend
in time of need, is a strong defense; and he that has found such a one, has
found a treasure. The whole chapter is worth the consideration of those, that
desire to be Rightly informed: Verse. 14.
which the Rebbells of England do strive to hinder all persons High and Low,
from being rightly Informed, by what soever means lies in them; therefore they
have caused many thousands of Bibles, to be printed in Holland, and else
where, within these thirty and odd years, leaving out all the books of the
Apocripha, and saying, London printed, whenas they were printed in other
places: before the beginning of the Rebbellion.

But the Lord, who frustrateth the tokens of the liars, who have been
employed, or encouraged by the Rebbels of England. Isai. 44.25
He will also direct all Righteous Princes, aright in their procedings, if
they constantly cleave unto the Lord their God, and his Servants: And take the advice only of those, who seek not great things for them selves. Amazia,
Jerem. 45. verse. 5.
being forbidden by a Man of God, to let Israel go with him to battle; chose
rather to loose an hundred Tallents of Silver, which he had paid unto them:
because the Lord was not with them. So he separated them, 2. Chron. 35 7.9.
because the Lord is able to give much more. From whence I infer, Verse. 10.
that God seldom or never, will have any good work done by evil men, neither
will God himself employ evil men about his work: which quiet overthrows the
doctrine of the Rebbells of England, who say, and would have all men believe,
that all their Rebbellious wickedness, which they have don, was and is, the
work of the Lord: as, Theft, Murder, Slander, and violence: so that there
need no Assirian Rabshakehs: So long as there is so many in England. Another
Reason, why it is dangerous for any Righteous Prince, or State, to have to do
with any such fellows, Is; because it is questionable, whether they have any
souls of their own, or none, to loose. Muchlesse have they any Crown, or
Crowns, to loose; or any thing else but what they possess by fraud,
false-hood, perjury, deceat, violence, murder, and the like: Wherefore it is of
great necessity that Righteous Princes, take heed in time how they meddle with
such Sophesters, who have their Spies and Spirits, in all places, where any
mischieffe is possible to be done: who do subsist, and stand, and still enjoy
what they have formerly stolen, by breeding and making Contention with, and
between all others, who are better then themselves: both of our own, and
other Nations. Wherefore my most hearty desire and prayer unto God is, that not
only your Majesty, but all other Righteous Princes, and States, with all other
people, of what degree soever they may be, that they may beware of following
such an ungodly multitude of evil doers; or their evil example, in any case:
but rather remember to keep them selves far from every false matter, and the
innocent and righteous slay thou not: Exodus 23.2.7.8.
for I will not justefie the wicked, and thou shall take no gift: for the gift
blinds the wise, and perverteth the words of the Righteous, being the Lords
own words.

SIR: therefore be pleased to Consider, whether such Servants, as was Eliezer,
who served Abraham, or Joseph, unto Pharow; or Daniell, unto Darias; or
Samuel, unto God him self, and unto the Israelits. It is worth observation,
to take notice of Abraham's Servant, what care he took, in the absence of his
master, and how he craved the Blessing, and Assistance of the God of his master
Abraham: that he might the better perform his oath unto Abraham, and his duty
unto Isaac; and before he had done praying, Genesis 24.13.14.15.
the damsel came, which God had appointed for his masters Son: namely,
Rebeckah: see Joseph's integrety, faithfulness, and honesty, toward Pottepher
his Master, who entrusted him with all that he had, and how God blessed the
Egyptians house for Joseph's sake. Genesis 39.4.5.6 7.8.9.10.11.12.13.
Yet as godly, as upright, and as innocent as Joseph was: that did not excuse
him, from being wrongfully Imprisoned: and as good a servant as he was, yet
his Masters wrath was kindled against him, Verse. 13. to the 19.
by misinformation.

It pleased Darius to prefer Daniell above the Precedents and Princes,
because an excellent Spirit was found in him: for which they sought occasion
against Daniell, but they could find no occasion, for as much as he was
faithful: Dan. 6.3.4.
neither was there any error or falsehood found in him. It were well, if every
one could make his Integrity, and his uprightness appear, as Samuel did his
in the presence of the Lord, and his Anointed. He called the people to
witness, saying, Whom have I defrauded? Whom have I oppressed? 1. Sam. 12.3.
or, of whose hand have I received any Brybe to blind mine eyes therewith?

Happy were it for all Righteous Princes, States and good People, that all
their Subjects and Servants could say so: it would shortly hereupon follow,
that the Reign of the Conspirators of England, would be of no long continuance.

Now, for to know who are most Faithful unto God, and their Righteous Who
walk constantly, Act. 24.16.
uprightly, and endeavor to keep a good Conscience toward God, and toward Men.

Secondly, such will do wrong to no man, neither are they proud, nor

Thirdly, they will Courteously, Wisely, and Kindly behave them selves

Fourthly, They which are so qualefied, will have a continual care to Tit.
2.12.
may be ashamed when they speak unvvorthyly as of evil doers. For it is
better, 1. Pet. 3.15 16.
if the will of God be so, that ye suffer for vvel-doeing, then for
evill-doeing.

It does exceedingly concern all Righteous Princes, to follow the Example of
David, King of Israel: both in respect of their own vvalking with God,
before whom they stand, as is specefied in the 101. Psalm, 1. Kings 18.15.
the three first verses.

It would be exceeding pleasing unto the King of Kings, Genesis 14.19.20.
who is the most High God. Therefore it is convenient for Kings to be
circumspect in all their thoughts, words, and actions. Ephesians. 5.15.
See then that you walk circumspectly; Redeeming the time, because the days
are evil. Verse. 16.
By this means God will make you able to quensh and resist all the fiery darts
of the wicked. Fphes. 6.6. to the end.


It is needful, that all Righteous Princes do often consider the Example and
Resolution of one of the best Kings that ever was in the world: not only to
Read, but warily and seriously consider how exactly David resolved concerning
those, who should serve him, or not come in his sight. Psalm. 101. included in
the five last verses.

The careful practice of this, will cause you, and all Righteous Princes, to
find favor with God, and all good men: which will be a means to make
Spies, or men who have evil Intentions of them selves, or sent by others,
shortly more and more to absent them selves from the presents of all such
Princes. Otherwise it will be hard to vvithstand their odarious boldness,
who are now adays grown more shameless then those were in the time of
Ahashueros the King. For though Hamons Wife, and all his Friends, were so
wicked as to advise him at his Complaint, tolet a Gallows be set up to hang
Mordicai, fifty Cubits high: yet with all, they wished himself to speak unto
the King, for his consent: by which it seems they were not so Impudent as to
send swarms of Rascallity, of their own adherence: 1. To the House of Commons.
2. unto the House of Pears, as the Rebbels of England did by threatenings, to
force them to pass a Bill against the Life of the Lord Liftenant of Yreland:
3. who presently after pressed into the Kings own House, by force against his
will, and by shameless importunity, got his Majesty to Sign the same against
Law, Custom, or Equity, for the taking away of the Life of so Noble a Person:
to wit, the Earl of Strafford, to the great grief of the King himself, and
against his will.
This was in the year 1641. to the sorrow of many of the Nation.

Much-lesse did Hamon, Esther. 5.14
or any of his Party, presume or intend to take away the Life of Mordica, 2.
Kings. 2.32.
or any of the Jews, without the consent of that King, as the fayd Rebbels
did after that: by the Lord Arch-Bishoppe of Canterberry, the Lord Caple, the
Earl of Darby, SIR Charles Lucas, and many others of our Nation: 2. Sam. 3.39.
who were more Righteous, and better then themselves. Wherefore I pray, as
sometimes King David did: the Lord reward the doers of such evil, according to
their wickedness, because thereby our present King is weak; (though a
Righteous, and anointed King) because the Usurpers of England are as yet too
mighty for him, merely by Reason of the differences between other Princes
procured or continued by the Contention, sown or occasioned by Crumwell, and
some of his party. As may partly apeare by that innocent blood, which was shed
in Portingall: who were the occasion that nation Revolted from the King of
Spain, as was mentioned by the Portingall Ambassador unto them selves in
England, not many years since: whereof I have been credeably informed.

For though the Rebbellion in England, was not then in its full strength and
Rigor: yet there was a resolution thereof in many of the Conspirators long
before: as by the help and the providence of the Lord, shall more fully
hereafter appear.

Therefore, in the behalf of God Allmighty, who some times takes the wicked
in their craftynesse. 1. Cor. 3.19
For the Wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. For it is written, he
takes the wise in their own craftiness. I do humbly Entreat your Majesty,
the Nobillety, and Godly Clergy, and all the good people of France; as all
other Righteous Princes, Republics, States, and Citys, at home and abroad:
That they would be pleased, seariously to consider the sad condition of our
present King, and of all his Fathers house. Psalm. 11.3.
For if the foundations be destroyed, what can the Righteous do? And therefore
I use part of the words of Mordica, unto Esther the Queen: Namely: 2. Pet.
2.2.
If you do the will of the Vsinpers before said, and let them go on in these
their pernisious ways.

Think not with your selves, that you, or your good people, Esther 4.14
shall escape free, or speed better then those of our own, and so many other
Nations has done already, to wit; England, Scotland, Ierland, Portingall, the
United Provinces of the Netherlands, and Spain. All these can witness by
experience, what kind of Apostels or Saints these Conspirators of England are.
Neither does it stand with their condition or safty, to leave off this their
trade, as long as they live: for fear least their own dogs, or Adherance,
should pluck the pray out of their teeth, and break their jaws in pieces. It
will be the wisdom of all them, which are not satisfied to search out the
truth of all this, like as Jobe in the like case, Job. 29.17. verse. 16.17.
says of himself, Because I delivered the poor that cried, and the
Fatherless, and him that had none to help him: and the cause that I knew not,
I scarced out: therefore the blessing of him that was ready to perish, came upon
jobe. Such helpers does the King, and the oppressed subjects of England, now
stand need of.

See the Example of Daniell, and those that were with him, that brought the
wickedness of the wicked, which they malliciously intended to their neighbor
upon their own head, and put them to death. Thus the Innocent blood was saved
the same day, in the 62. verse of the History of Susanna.

And I have with deliberation observed, that it has all ways been the custom
of the Righteous; to set them selves against oppressors; as may appear by the
example of Abraham; who, as soon as he heard that Loath, and the people amongst
whom he lyved, was taken, Genesis 14.14 15.16.17.
he presently Armed his Servants, and rescud them, without any Prophet to
himself. Secondly, Not the Soldiers of Crumwells Army, which take upon them
to preach: but the Priests shall make an atonement for the sins of Ignorance,
for the soul of the Ignorant, before the Lord.

But the soul that does ought presumtuously, the same reproacheth the Lord. And
that soul shall be cut off from among his people, and it follews: Numb.
15.28.30.31.
because he has dispysed the word of the Lord, and has broken his
Commandment, that soul shall be utterly cut off.

The Ephraemyts destroyed Oreb, and Zob: who were usurpers in Israel. Judges.
7.25.
Gideon, with his three hundred men, who desiered bread, to refresh his faint
and hungery men, were obrayded by the men of Sucooth, and Penuell: Jud. 8.
verse. 5.6.7.21.
yet persued, and slew Zebah, and Zalmanna. And Samuel said unto Agag the
Amallakite. 1. Sam. 15.33.
As thy sword has made women Childlesse so shall thy Mother be Childlesse
amongst women: and Samuel hewed Agag in pieces, before the Lord in Gilgall.

David's servants, whom he sent to comfort Hannan in kindness: 2. Sam. 10.
verse 6.
being reproched, and villenously entreated. For which David made them to
stink. And David slew the men of seven hundred Charrets, of the Assirians,
and forty thousand horsemen who helped the Amonits. Verse. 13.14 18.19.
By which you may see, that wicked men, and those that help them, are often
times distroyed to gether. Beware of false Prophets, Zachar. 13.4.
which come to you in sheeps Clothing, or wear a ruff garment to deceave. I
mean such, who oy crafty and subtle Arguments, seek to make difference
betwixt you, and your best friends: whose friendship you need, and they need
yours. Therefore, they seek to work out their own ends, by the ruying of
you, and your friends, who therefore by Christ are called Ravening wolves. And
Right well may you know them, if by the advice of your unfeigned Council, you
please to look back upon the fruits of them: Matthew. 7.15.16.
who unto England, and many other Nations, has proved the worst shepherds
that ever the world bred. Neither are they less slack, or negligent, in
following their hurtful designs, then the Pharisees were, who compast Sea and
Land, to make Procelites for their own use: which Procelites being prevailed
withal, and instructed by such Conspirators, they become two-fould more the
Children of hell, then themselves. Matthew. 23.15.
These are they, who smitte with their tongues, and partly murdered the King,
Queen, and others of the best of the Nation of England: as well of Low, Jer.
18.18.
as of High degrees of men: by their malicious slanders, with their tongues.
1. Kings 21.9.10.
These are those sons of Beliall, like those who boar false witness against
Naboth the Ieserellite, for the taking away his Life, and his Inheritance. Such
were they who by the Conspirators of England, and the false Prophets together,
were encouraged against the Duke of Buckingam, and his Mother: and it seems
were employed to murder Doctor Lamb by day, in the streets of London, Acts
7.52.57.58.59.60.
with stones, like Stephen the Marter. And the fore said Lords, Canterberry and
Strafford, these, and many others of the most emenent, and faithfullest of all
the Kings Subjects; were murdered, by the false Accusors. First, in their
Honor. And Secondly, their Lives, by wicked hands: by the contrivance of their
Leadors, which caused them to err; Iesa 3.12.
who distroy the way of their path. Neither will their conscience stick, to
make Merchandise of you, 2. Tim. 3.3.
and your people: if you take not heed in time, and make such a peace as you
can, with your own Uncle the King of Spain; these are the Men, that sell the
Subjects of their own gracious King, for handfuls of Barley, and pieces of
bread, to slay the souls that should not dye, for fear least they should
gather together, to call the Traitors in question for their Theft, Treason, and
Murder against the King, and the Nation of England; and they save alive the
souls that should not live, because in matter of trust, Ezekiel. 13.19.
they dare not confide in any other, but who are Children of wickedness like
themselves, and have made shipwreck of a good conscience, in some measure like
the Conspirators them selves.

Consider this, all ye who are Lovers of Equity, and do expect to find mercy
in time of need: who reverence the God of truth, who would not be as them
that mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his Word until the wrath of
God did arise, so that there was no Remedy lest. 2. Chron. 36.16.
For there shall be judgment mercylesse, to them that have shown no mercy.
Remember the dubble, and the bitter cursses of Meras, and the Inhabitants
thereof. 2. James 3.13.
Curse ye Meras (says the Angel of the Lord) Curse ye bitterly the
Inhabitants thereof. Because they came not to the help of the Lord, Judge. 5.23.
against the mighty. And that the King, and the Kingdom of France, and all
other Princes, States, and Cities, may prevent them selves, and their good
Subjects, from the like curse; it were an exceellent thing, 2. Chron. 20.3.
that your Majesty, your Nobillity, and your Reverent Archbishops, and the rest
of your Learned Clergy of France, would set them selves first to seek the
Lord, as Jehosophat set him self. And without delay, advise with others of
your Subjects, Friends, and Brethrem, whom God has been pleased to bless with
Courage, Wisdom, and Learning, the fear of the Lord, and with hearts that are
content, with what they Justly possess, and that such men may be forthwith
appointed by the King, Nobillity, and Clergy, as before said, diligently to
inquier, and search out the matter how, why and by whom, some of the Kingdom
of France have joined with the Oppressors, and Troublors of all good
Christians: and who are aproved enemies unto the King, and the best of his
people, and unto all his most unfeigned friends: and that they would make it
their business, to find our where this cursed Serpent lies hid: who has
procured all this mischief against those that gladly would live in peace. The
Righteousness of Jobe clothed him: and his judgment was as a Robe, and as a
Diadem; he was eyes to the blind, and feet to the Lame. Job. 29.13.14.15.
But wickedness proceeds only from the wicked.

Why then will the King of France, any longer be prevailed withal, to hunt,
and to hinder his best friends. 1. Sam. 24.13.14.
The Lord will one day be Judge betwixt you, and your friends, whom I have so
often mentioned.

SIR: Follow the Example of Daniell, and examine causes, that be difficult
with wariness, as it is in the History of Susanna, Verse. 51.52.
that the sword may be speedily called back, and not destroy any longer: and
remember that it will be bitterness in the latter end, as Ioab did at the
motion of Abnar: though he was both valliant, and victorious. 2. Sam. 2.26.27.
It were good to be known, what the Pope, the Kings of England, Denmark, the
State of Venice, and the like of them, what they have don against the King, or
Kingdom of France, that their Assistance nor their Advice, may neither be
desiered nor accepted: in the composing and ending of all the differences,
between the Crowns of Spain and France.

I dare not think, but that there is understanding, and conscinable men to be
found in all these, and some other States: who by Learning, and godly Wisdom,
may be able to decide such weighty matters, without consuming of any more Blood
or Treasure: the continuance whereof, is the ruing of your best friends, and the
endagering of your Crown and your Person. And remember that your Majesty has a
Crown, many good Subjects, a life, and your own soul, to take care of in
time: against that time to come fear and search: I do most humbly show, that
the reason wherefore I press this so far, and so high: is of great
necessety, for how can I enduer to see the evil that is come upon other
Nations, as well as England? How shall I be able to see or to hear the
mischief, that is like to come upon your Majesty, and your own people, as well
as upon some of your best friends already? neither is it any light affliction,
or terror unto my heart, that the contrivers of mischief, Esther. 8.6.
does cause the King of England, or some of his Fathers house, to be like to
come in Arms, against your Majesty: in the defense of those, under whom they
are compeld to shelter them selves for protection, and Subsistence. By reason of
the wickedness of the Conspirators, in their own Land; the like whereof was
never heard before.

I hope, that what I intend for good, shall not be understood nor Imputed unto
me as evil: Because I fear, or foresee dangers, by way of warning, which
are not so much discovered, nor feared, as they ought to be for timely
prevention. That makes me more earnest and plain, then otherwise I should
dare to be. Therefore

First, one extremity, forces another.

Secondly, how ever some may interpreate, that so mean a Man, takes so much
upon him, it is not in the behalf of my self, but in regard of the evil,
that is already come upon thousands of my betters: both of my own, and other
Nations.

Thirdly, For the prevention of the like in time to come, from your Majesty,
your people, and the like of you; and other Nations, who know not the crafty
proceedings of the conspirators of England, so well as my self: who in deceat
subtilty, and Cruelty exceed all others that I know in the world.

Fourthly, though a mean man, should be understood to rebuke, or to seem to
be too bold; Proverb. 23.24.
yet it is said, That such an one shall afterward with goodmen, find more
favor, then he that flattereth with his tongue: especially when affairs and
times requier it.

Holy King David, Psalm. 141.5.
was content the Righteous should smite him, and conceaved it a kindness to
be reproved; and called it an exellent oil, that would not break his head,
and he would pray for such in their Calamnityes.

Fifth Reason is, Because I have yet greater Reasons for all that I have said;
then any I have yet given: without which I should never have adventured, to
have undertaken the like of this: seeing I have neither the Head, the Tongue,
nor the Penn of the Learned, or Elloquent man, only the discarge of my own
conscience, betwixt God and my self, is the cause I dare conseale it no longer.

Sixthly, This is by way of Introduction, or alluding to some thing else: which
by the providence of God Almighty, I have conceaved or understood such things
concerning the Conspirators, and some of their helpers; about these seaventeene
years. Which out of a timorous, and fearful disposition, I have hitherto
forborne to publish this to the world. In all which time, I have unfeignedly,
and constantly longed, and hoped, for a Righteous settlement by other means:
without my declaring my self. As by Gods Grace, I hope in time to come, for to
do, If the Lord please for to give me Life and health: and where withal to
subsist by.

Seaventhly, because what I have to make known to the world, is not easily 1.
Cor. 3.19
by the wonderful works of the Lord: who in his own time reveals secrets,
and takes such as are worldly wise, in their own Craftiness.

But why I should come to conceave or understand such things, so long since;
more then any other mean man? I am able to give no other Reason for it; but
that it seems to me, that God Almighty was pleased to look upon my
tribulation: which I was in, at that time: To wit, Genesis 31.42.
Anno 1636. which great anguish of soul, had lain upon me two years before:
and ever since. But I understood not, that it concerned the Rebbells of
England: until the year 1639. And so at several times since. The particulars
whereof, and the Reasons for it, I shall by Gods Gracious Assistance more fully,
and clearly show, in time to come: if it shall please God to deal with me as
before said.

But for some Reasons known to my self, I shall omit them at present. I hope
that all such as have been deceaved, or drawn on by the wiles of the Rebbells,
and the cunning craftynesse of them, and likewise those that are free from
having any hand with them; will beware in time to come; how they give any heed
to them, or to any thing they say: further then to secure, or set them selves
against them. For these have been no light things, which have moved me, to
take more then ordinary notice of their ungodly proceedings, as well against
men of low, as of high degree: of our own, and other Nations. Therefore it will
be your Wisdom, to consider; that it is not a vainething; but it is your life
and safety to cleave unto those who fear the Lord, Deuteronomy. 32.29.47.
and beware of Intangling your selves with such Rebbells. So shall you, by the
blessing of the Lord, preserve your lives and Estates long in peace.

O you that may do good against the Oppressors; do it quickly, and with your
Might: For there is no work, nor devise, nor knowledge, nor Wisdom, Eccles.
9.10
in the grave: whether you go.

Now consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding to do that which
is good. For what can it profit a man, 2. Tim. 2.7.
though he should devide the spoil with them, or be enriched by brybes, or
gain the whole world, Mark 8.36.
and loose his own soul? Or, what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?
Let not him that is, or may be deceaved, trust in vanity: for vanity shall be
his recompense, and the congregation of hypocrites shall be dissolate: and fire
shall consume the Tabernacles of bribery. They conceave mischief, Job.
15.32.34.35.
and bring forth vanity, and their belly prepares deceat.

Wherefore I say again, beware of dogs; beware of evil workers; beware of the
Conspirators of England: and so I humly take my leave, for this time.

SIR, and SIRS: It is not for any thing that I have lost of my own, in
England: though I have suffered enough elsewhere: but it is chiefly to
disburden my Conscience, of what I have yet to say.

By this the world may observe, that the Usurpers of England, have by violence
removed such as were in power; so that no Justice can be done by them, though
they were lawfully called to the Government; neither will the Conspirators them
selves, relieve the Oppressed by Justice, though they be earnestly sought
unto. To do any thing that is good, they have neither will nor courage; But
their study is only for evil and mischief, wrong, and opression and that
continually: as may apeare out of what is before mentioned; namely, the
complaint which I made to the Protector of the Army, and some others in
England, in March last. Therefore it is of great necessity, that all men take
special heed, of these slye, secret, and cunning deceavors, because they by
misleading, and seducing the people of England, within it self: so by forms
and shows of hollynesse, as by plausable and fair pretenses, of indeavoring
that Justice and Judgment may take place, just like Absalom, 2. Sam.
15.2.3.4.5.6. Who seemed to be Religious, as they do, verse. 7. But it was to
Conspire against the King, and the Kingdom, as the Rebbels of England have
done. Then of a sudden, they set them selves against such as by the providence
of God, and the favor of the King, and the Law of the Land, were set over them.

First, by notorious slanders in private, against such as were far more
honest, and Emenent then any of them selves.

Secondly, in a more open, and Impudent manner, they stird up many of the meanor
sort of people, to be contentious and envious; like unto them selves: To wit,
the Absoloms, and the Achithophells, against those who it had pleased God to
set over them, so that their very name and savor, stanke in the nostrills of
all that first discovered their cursed plottings.

Thirdly, they have most grossly sedused and beguyld all other Protestants
abroad in other Nations: yet to my own knowledge, many whereof, namely, of
several other nations; are neither Cheats. Thieves, Juggelors, nor busy
bodies, as the Rebbells of England and some of Schotland are, as they for many
years together have been. Yet like Rabshekahs, with bold and whorelike faces,
they adresse or assotiate themselves, with all Protestants, who are Godly and
harmles, at home and abroad, as if there were no difference between the good
Protestants of other Contryes, and that Generation of Tyrants, Theeff, and
Murderors in England: yet by their fauning colloging together with their Lies;
they have misinformed and corrupted the minds of such, as would tremble to
think of doing such things, as the Rebbells of England have done; yet the
malice of them, have caused the other, that is to say, some Protestants
abroad, for to Judge amiss, of those who are fare more Righteous, and
harmless, then any of those: who are full of all subtilty, by whom, to the
great grief of my heart, many Protestants of other countries, have been
misinformed and deceaved. I dovnfainedly acknowledge my self to be a
Protestant, but my faith is not strong enough, to believe that the name of a
Protestant, can Justify me before God; if I conspire either against
Catholics, or Protestants: for to murder them, or to take away their Good
Names or Estates; all which the Rebbells of England have by fraud and
violence, done to both, and which is worsse, to my sorrow, I find my self to
be past hope, ever to see any remorce, or amendment in the said conspirators:
who accustom them selves, to contrive and delight in mischiefs; Who cause
strife and debate, between frind and frind; Isai. 58.4.
betwixt Parents and Children, and betwixt Man and Wife. Who fast for strife
and debate; and to smite with the fist of wickedness. Verse. 6.
The fast that I have chosen, says the Lord: is to loose the bands of
wickedness, to undo the heavy burden, and to let the opressed go free, and
to break every yoke. But the Rebbells of England, by fraud and strong
delusions, have Murdered their betters, with their tounges and wicked hands;
and taken away the Estates from the fatherless, and the Widows: unless some
small matter, they leave to some, yet hardly so much as will keep them alive,
in regard of the quallety in which they have formerly lived, and by the help
of their hypocritecall Army, who have been instructed, and bred by seditious
Parents, and by some other factious famelyes, as by some scismaticall
Ministers; who for their bellys, and filthy lucers sake, Romans 16.18
and by creeping, or sneaking into houses; have by fair speeches, or fanning
words, deceaved the hearts of the simple. Where they were not able to seduce
men, they would cast in their poison, where they found silly women; who by them
were lead away captive, 2. Tim. 3.6.
such as were laden with diverse lusts, and by their means become contentious
against their husbands. And these sedusors, and their followers, are they who
have constantly and wickedly, encouraged, and aplauded the said Army, who, like
Doeg the Edomite, serve the Conspirators even as Spies and Informors against
the peaceable and tender hearted men of England, 1. Sam. 22.9.18.
whose consciences serve them not to be Rebbells, against their lawful King
and Nation: because their souls abhor it, and so does mine. And by the help
of the said Army, have Crumwell, and his consorts, murdered the Fathers, and
the Pillars of our country; upon whom (under God) the peace and prosperity of
England rested: And by whose Industrons care, the lives, liberties and Estates
of our Nation, of all degrees; were in safety, 1. Pet. 2.13 14.15.
so long as God and the King, and those who were sent by him, were obayed:
according to the Laws of God, and our Land. But these dog-like Edomites, have
murdered the Kings subjects, by sea and land, at home and abroad, by selling
them unto Turks, or the like. And had Saull now 85. Priests of the Lord, that
he would have betrayed and murdered, though some refused it when time was; yet
he should not want such as would do it, so long as Crumwells Army, is in
arms in England: neither did Innocence deliver those in whom it was found,
neither persons of High or Low degree, who perished by the hands of a company
of villans and Tyrants; though Innocent, faithful, and blameless. 1. Sam. 22.
from the 13. to the 20. verse.

These troubellors of Christendom, has sent away many a thousand of our finest
jong men, as well of seamen as others; and jounge Children of honest parents,
as it is reported, both of late and long ago; by spirits of the Rebbells
Adherance, and by the means and consent of the Conspirators; some were slain,
and others never returned again: And some were hanged, because they refused to
bear arms against their King, and against their own Consciences. Not only
by the power of the Rebbells at home, but under the command of foraine Princes
abroad: who by the Rebbells, were sent away as captives, even as carried away
by the Turks, in time of war. And now their Army, which consists of
homebred vermon, by whose means all this, and much more evil has been
done unto out King and Nation; who are shamlesse busibodyes, 1. Tim. 14.1.
as well as seducing spirits: and do harden their faces, as it were with
steel: as apeares by their bold Intrusion, and their dogg-like Lurking, not
only in Germany, and all the Neatherlands, and many other places where Godly
Protestants do reside; But even in Catholic Contries, and they have the
Impudence to come into the Court of their own King; though they have murdered
his Father, and forced his Majesty out of his own Dominions. And they pretend
to be Prophets, and say, they are sent: and I believe they are sent by
Crumwell, or some of his prime Creaturs: they say, as Prophets, but I suppose
as Spies.

Wherefore I humbly, and earnestly entreat your Majesty the King of France;
Zach. 13.4.
and all good Christians, high and low, to beware of these false Prophets, of
Crumwells Army, or others of his creatures: though they should come unto you in
a ruff garment, 4. Cor. 11.14.15.
or in sheeps clothing, or how ever they may hyde their teeth, disguise, or
transform them selves, yet I am sure, it will not be easy for them, to remove
their ravening, and wolfe-like heart.

Therefore it is Requisite, that you be very circumspect how you have to do
with Crumwell; or any of his Impes: I say, remember their former fruits, and
take heed in time, least when it is too late, you wish that you had taken the advice of him, who desiers the continuation of your honor, peace and safty.

These fellows, do find them selves to be counted as dung, or as so many
stinking karings; and therefore are abhored by their own, and other nations,
which makes them continually vigelent, day and night, to aply them selves, unto
the art of subtilty: for to make parties for them selves, amongst your people,
and others, by corrupting their minds; by Lies, and other deceavings, which
will prove little to the comfort of you, and your friends, at the last.

It is not for any profit or reward that I have received from your Cuson, the
King of England; neither does he take any more notice of me, then of the
meanest person in all the world: neither does he know this day, the least of
my Intentions for his Majesty, and his Fathers house. Yet I cleave unto the
Lord our God, and unto all such who are opressed by usurpers. But I abhor the
policy, and the procedings of those, who are in combination with the devil.
But of this, by Gods assistance, more at large hereafter: In the mean time,
trust not in lying words, which cannot profit: abhor those that steal,
murder, swear falsely, and yet stand in the house, that is called by the name
of the Lord. As if it were possible, for serpents to become saints, whereas
they are undoubtedly, far worse then a den of Robbers. Jer. 7.8.9.10.11.
But remember you to look to your self, and your people in time; because the
eyes of the Lord, does runn to and fro, through the whole Earth: to show him
self strong, in the behalf of them, 2. Chron. 16.9.
whose hearts are perfect toward him.

Joab used strong, and as loving arguments as any friend or Subject could
possible do unto his Prince, for to persuade the King, from what he had
conceaved amiss, or from what he was resolved to do, contrary to the will of
God: but the King rejected the advyse of his Servant Joab, and shortly after
confessed it to be his folly, and cried out, That he was in a great straight,
God grant your Majesty do not so. See 2. Sam 24. verses 3.10. and likewise
the 14.

SIR, and SIRS, It does highly behove you, to stir up your selves warely and
diligently to resist and prevent the power and the hellish intentions of the
Conspirators of England, who are Sons of Beliall, 1. Kings. 24.9.10.12. and 13.
verses. 1. Sam. 2.12.
who know not the Lord: as were the Sons of Ely. Or like those false witnesses,
which accused Naboth the Iezreelite, of Blasphemy: as in other kinds the Sons
of Beliall did by the King, and others in England, neither do they seem
less, nor more holy, then Iesabell; for she proclaimed a Fast, as they use to
do when they intend mischief.

By which you may see it to be needful for you, to look to their Water in
time; otherwise know for certain, they will be unto your people, and to all
others who are not like them selves, as snares and traps, as scurges in your
sides, and thorns in your eyes. Neither will the Lord subdue them under you:
If you give them longer opportunety to inveagle, and defile the minds of your
people; with their poisonous leaven, because hardly a word passes from them,
but it is infectious.

Be pleased, to mark the 23. of Joshua 13. Give no heed unto any thing they
say, or pretend; but make Peace with your Uncle, the King of Spain. Consider
with your faithful Council and Clergy, who loves Justice, Equity and
Judgment; and so think of a way to comfort and releeve your Cuzon, the King
of England, and his Fathers House. This will prove unto your Majesty such a
degree of Wisdom, as will bring Honor and Praise unto all your good People:
and get you Favor with God, and all good Men.

By this, the ear that hears you, will bless you: and the eye that sees
you, will give witness unto you: because you will thereby cause the Widow to
sing for joy. Neither can any better employ his Monics, and his Endeavors, Job.
29.11.12.13.
then by exercising, and doing those things which are commanded, and best
pleasing unto God Almighty, who is abuntdantly able and willing to reward your
Majesty, and all that do so: wherefore I pray God, that the Consideration
hereof, may encourage and stir up the Spirits of your Majesty, and your
Honorable Counsel, with your most Reverent Clergy, and the rest of your
People; to break the yoke of these Usurpers, from off the necks of the King,
and the distressed Nation of England: as Abraham did, by the enemies of his
Brother Loath. And as the Lord stirred up the Spirit of Cyrus, King of Persia.
Genesis 14.14.15. 16.
Because not only they resolved to Spoil, Ezra 1.1.
Raven and Murder all such Catholics and Protestants as are more Religeous,
and more Conscientionable toward men, and more zealous toward God, then any
of the said Rebbells: as I have proved and found by long experience. For I have
often observed in several Countries, that some Catholics do worship God in
uprightness of heart, and in the beauty of holiness: as you may read at large
in the 1. Chron. chap. 16. verse. 29. And in that manner as is fully expressed
Psalm. 110.4. And this generation of Hypocrites and Iugglers, are a very great
disparidgement to all honest-harted Protestants, both at home and abroad; who
by the evil conversation of these English and Scotts Conspirators, are evil
spoken off without cause. For I do assure your Majesty, and all the world;
that how ever many Protestants are deluded, by these Lurking Curres; yet I do
know Protestants, both of my own, and several other Nations, Job. 1.1.
Who fear God, and eshew evil, and are harmless and upright men, John
4.23.24.
such as worship God in spirit and in truth, God is a spirit, and they that
worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth. And how ever these
desemblors in England, do Usurp the name of Protestants, to the great
disgrace of many thousands of honest and Godly men, both in England and elsse
where, who, to my knowledge, do fear the Lord: and serve him in sinserity and
truth, as it is said by Joshua in the 24. of Joshua 14. My Judgment is, that
neither Catholic nor Protestant, shall be able to lift up their heads without
spot; so long as they go in the ways of Caine, Baallam, Elemasse, Judas,
Crumwell, Isa 56.11.
or his adherance: yet these cunning Sophisters, who, like dogs, are greedy
after the pray; and that they may the better obtain it, they take upon them
the name of Protestants. And by giving to the Officers of his Army, and the
like of his own Creaturs, large Portions, out of the sweat of honest men's
brows, and the substance of those, who takes pains for their Living: these
are the Catterpillors, whose delight and Resolution is not only to destroy
those that are better then them selves; but even the way, and the means, by
which they should subsist in time to come. And these are esteemed (and found to
be, by all men that follow honest callings) like unto those dogg-fish at Sea,
which come into the Nets, and spoil abundance of Herrings, and the Net also;
and yet they are good for nothing them selves.

It seems to me a sad thing, that men that use great Industry, take pains,
and venture their lives, and Estates, night and day; and many times, after
long patience, and loss of time, when it please God to send them a scull of
Herrings; then coms the dogg-fish, and spoils the net; and a thousand times
more Herrings then would serve them to eat: and yet escapes from being taken
him self. So the Rebbells: though they have done much mischief, to their
betters; yet they sometimes, escape long from punishment therefore, Let them
be put to shame, Psalm. 83.
and perish. When it goes well with the Righteous, the city rejoices; Verse.
10.
and when the Rebbells perish, there shall be joy and shouting. Genesis 6.5.
Prove. 11. at the 10. verse. Because the thoughts of their hearts are for
wickedness and evil continually.

Neither is there any thing to be expected from these destroying Traitors; or
very littele: that justly belongs unto them selves. Yet the hastening of their
speedy being humbled, or distroyed, is very urgant, and of great necessety; for
the prevention of their suitor evil for they are so absolutely bent to continue
in their wickedres; that it seems they have sold them-selves, and delight to
do wickedly, against their own, and other Nations; to wit, Crumwell his Army,
and others of his chief Associates. And therefore it is, that they devise
mischief continually; and sows discord between loving, and dear friends:
Prove. 6.14.15.
and if they fall, they know it will be without Remedy. In the mean time,
Deuteronomy. 31.22.
they wax fat; and fill them selves, and such as help them. And like the Sons
of Ely, they make them selves fat, with such things, as are the chiefest of
England, and other Nations, belonging to others, which are their betters:
abroad and at home. Whereof God him self takes notice as in the 1. of Sam.
2.29. Because they can frame Railing, and Reviling Arguments against Papists;
they suppose that to be sufficient to justefie them in all their Treason,
Theft and Murder; wherein they are not ashamed to abuse the Truth: because
their discourse and behavior, is for the most part, if not all together,
contrary to Truth and Equity. By which means they cause many a good
Protestant, to think, and to do in some things; worse then ever they would
have done: and so stir up, and continue strife for the working out of their
own ends: neither can they any way better please the devil, their patron; for
by their own confession, they have some times set Catholics, and made use of
them against Drotestants; who were drawn to it.

By the importunety and impudency of the said Conspirators, at other times;
with no less brazen faces, they have provoacked, and stirred up Protestants,
against Catholics. So that first and last, these cursed, and dubble insinuators
have been the cause of great distress, trouble and bloodshed, unto both
Catholics, and Protestants.

But all you, that have yet hope to find peace unto your souls; and that you
may lift up your face, without spot in time to come, be sure to let no
wickedness, enequity, nor presumptuous persons, dwell in your. Tabernakle: nor
come near you, nor any body for them, that you may be steadfast, without
fear: and that your Age may be clearer then the Noonday. So shall you shine
forth, and be as the morning; and also secure, because there is hope. Job.
11.14.15.16.17.18.19.20.

It has been demanded of me, of what Religeon the Conspirators of England
are; and because I know not of any they have, I have been oftimes troubled,
what or how I should make answer: not only because they have so often changed
from one to another; but because all their proceedings, is so contrary to all
Religeons, that which I can most properly say, is, that if they had any
Religeon that had any Relation to God, or Godliness; they would never have
attempted, to have done as they have done. Therefore it seems to me, their
Religeon must be either dog like, or divelish: my Reason is, because the
Conspirators, or many of their ad-herance, do use or exercise them selves, to
speak Lies, in hypocrisy; having their consciences seared as it were with a
hot Iron. 1 Timothy 4.2.
As for pure Religeon, which is undefiled before God, even the Father, James
1.27.
is this; To visit the fatherless and the widows, in their affliction; and to
keep our selves unspotted from the world. But the constant course of Crumwell,
and his followers, have been to make Fatherless and Widows by pressing,
banishing and murdering their best friends, and taking their means, and
turning them a begging; whereby they have caused great affliction, where there
was none but Godly men, constantly endeavor to walk circumspectly, who strive
to Redeem the time, Ephesians. 5.15 1^.16.
and to understand what the will of the Lord is. But OLIVER, with his two
faces; and the Rest of his proud busy-bodyes, neither know the Lord, nor any of
his ways; unless it be to despise him, and scorn his Word: or it may be,
the sweetness of the pray has caused them wholly to forget him. But all that
know, and fear the Lord; will be constantly diligent in that which is good:
That they may be found of him in peace, 2. Pet. 3.14
without spot and blamlesse. As for Crumwell, and those that Protect him; I
leave them unto the Judgment of those, who are not gilty of the like crimes
that they are: But as for such, whose ways are upright in the sight of God,
and all good men, though they may something differ in judgment, about Religeon,
yet my belief and confidence in God, is, that such, who serve God, with honest
and good hearts, and consider his Word, Luke. 8.15.
and examine their ways, with an inward intent to do the will of God; shall
by his gracious assistance, be able to resist the wicked one; and all such
Traitors and others, who follow his evil example: or at least their Prayers,
Matt. 6.4.5.6.7.
Alms, and other Godly deeds, shall so come in remembrance before the Lord; as
that they shall find favor with him, in the world to come, what ever they do
in this. Neither dare I so condemn Catholics, nor Protestants, but that if
they truly fear God, and work Righteousness, Act. 10.3.4.34.
they shall be accepted with him. But if any shall seem to be contentious, I
delight in no such custom, neither do the Churches of God, 1. Cor. 11.16.
because they gender strifes. And the servants of the Lord must not strive, but
be gentle, unto all. As for Crumwell, and his Disputants; 2. Tim. 2.23.
let them contend with whom they will, and serve whom they will; if it shall
still seem evil unto them, to serve the Lord, and shall delay breaking of
their sins by Repentance, as for my self, and such as I can prevail with
all, Dan. 4.27.
we will serve the Lord. Jos. 24.15.


I do understand with Solomon, that it is a lamantable thing; that when the
poor by intrusion and craft, coms to bear Rule over the poor; their
opression is like a sweeping rain, which leans no food: yet such as forsake
the Law, and the oath of God, they do praise the wicked; and therefore it is,
that I contend with them: and so will all men that fear God, and keep his
Law. Woe unto the bloody City, it is full of Lies, and Robbery: their wound is
grievous; Nah. 3.1.19.
upon whom has not thy wickedness passed continually? Neither have they
spared to slay the Nations.

Wicked men understand not judgment; Hab. 1.17.
but such as unfeignedly seek the Lord, understands all things. He that
turns away his ear from hearing the law; even his prayers shall be an
abomination. Prove. 28. v. 3.4.5.9.6.7.9.10.
Who so causes the Righteous to go astray, in an evil way; at last him self
shall fall into his own pit. It is not the bare knowing, or talking of these
things, that can do much good; but it is Requisite, that honest men stir up
them selves, 2. Tim. 1.6.
by a constant, and a warye endeavor to discover Spies, Traitors, Job. 17.8.
and false Brethren, who hinder much good by their secret proceedings: besides
the evil that they do. Happy are those Princes, and people, who have such
friends and servants in their houses, and places of trust; who can unmask the
hypocrites, and who can pluck the Sheeps skin from of the Woolfs back: Into
which they do sometimes transform them selves: for to serve Conspirators. By
discovering the secrets, by deceaving, and by betraying of others, and who can
understand these things, and with patience long conseale them; seeing the
calamety is exceeding great; which such men, by continual vigelence, and by
their ungodly arts, and practices, have brought upon many others, who were
better by far, then them selves: and God, that sees in secret, does take
notice of what is in men, Revel. 2.2.
saying: I know thy works, and thy Labor, and thy patience, and that thou
can not bear them which are evil, and thou have tried them that say, they
are Apostles, and are not, and thou have found them to be Liers. It concerns
all Princes, and Righteous people, narrowly to prye into these things, for the
prevention of evil; for though Crumwell, and his Consorts, do presumptuously
take upon them, by fraud, and violence, to strive for Masteries, for the
Crowns of Righteous Princes; and the Estates of those, which neither do, 2.
Tim. 2.5.
not think any evil: but the Apostell St. Paull says; that no man ought to
be crowned, exept he strive lawfully. And therefore Crumwell, and his
Consorts, must be likened unto great dogs, that are mad: who are a terror to
the persons and Lives of such, as are near them, but the boulde temptations,
2. Thesa. 2.11.
Lies, and strong delusions of Rebbells, by their instangling, and engaging,
many others in their evils, and Rebbellion, whereby they do extremely
indaunger the souls, as well as the boys, of many other men, besides them
selves: so that, as it is greatly to be feared; they shall hardly escape the
damnation off hell. I am afraid, to specify the words, and do almost tremble,
to think of that passage, in the 23. of Matt. 33. which are Christ's own
words, which the Reador may be pleased to Read. If it wear suffiscient to
bear out Crumwell, and his consorts, to be counted Soldiers of fortune, as
they have been termed by them selves, and many of their own Creatures; who
pretend that to be a sufficient lustification for the said Traitors, not
withstanding all the Spoil, Villainy, and the Blood, and Treasure, by them
usurped, and destroyed: If the tittle of a Soldier of Fortune can be aproved
of in the Judgments of honest men; to Justify such Conspirators, in the
spoiling and Robbing of their own, and several other Nations; I wonder then,
why the same tittle, of being Soldiers of Fortune, should not Justify
Thieves, and rued fellows, which by night set houses on fire, Rob Churches,
Banks of Exchanges, the houses of Merchants, and others: for which Crimes, all
suth Thieves, that can be taken, are forced to suffer at the Gallows, and such
as Crumwel, and his Consorts, who has done a thousand times more mischief
against God, and man, then any such Thieves; and yet they escape. And it seems
the only Reason thereof is, because, their Party, with the help of that Army,
is so strong, that they can not be aprehended; which the Rebbells Compel the
Kindome to pay against the King, and them selves; and because the soldiers
shoud not in time set them selves against the Conspirators; therefore they, at
the charge of the Country, give them as good as dubble pay; ^ll things being
considered. Also the strength of their subtilty, is of such force; as that they
have, from time to time, not only prevailed with many, to Iustefie them, the
said Rebbells; But even to join with them against Opressed, Peaceable, and
Innocent men: so that, besides them selves, they have caused good men, to err
in helping them, in that which was evil. Therefore I say of them, as good old
Jacob said by his two graceless Sons; They are Instruments of Cruelty. Oh; my
soul! come not thou, into the secret of their Assembly! be not thou vnitted
unto such men, for in their woolfe-like anger, they have slain the King
himself, and many more; and that in their self will. Cursed be their anger,
for it was fierce for the spoil; Genesis 49.5.6.7.
and their wrath, which did, and does consist of Cruelty. Which has caused
many an honest hearted man of England and Schotland, to be Despised and
Reviled by other Nations, by Sea, and Land: who had no hand at all with the
Conspirators, but have been constantly grieved for their malicious tyrany. Yet
it is not ane asie matter to make those of other Nations to understand, who is
gilty, and who is free; wherefore, such as my self, continues subject to be
blamed, and some times, other ways troubled, for what the Rebbells have done;
namely, for killing the Just, and taking possession: who have also divided the
spoil among the Officors of the Army, and the like of them. 1. Kings. 21 19.
Neither will they ever cease from condemning, and killing the Just; until it
shall please God, to stir up men of Courage, to subdue them. For they have
killed, James. 5.6.
and Condemned the Just: and that in diverse kinds; neither are those that are
left, Ren. 9.18.
able to resist, because they have an Army of their own breeding, who, like
young Wolves, the oulder they grow, the more hard-hearted, and wicked they are:
especially the Officors thereof, and some others suchlike: who, like unto
Argile; some of the Leshlies, and others of Scotland, who for the greedynesse,
and the pride of their own hearts, has brought their several Nations into a
condition almost as if they were sold for slaves.

These things have grieved me long, and very fore, because the Lies, and
subtilty of these Murderors, should be of that strength, force, and long
Continuance, as yet still, so to blind the minds of some of our own, and
other Nations, that to this day, they do not understand the manor or way, of
their preparations unto the Rebbellion in England: at the beginning: nor the
Art of the proceedings of the said Conspirators, ever since. For besides their
pernicious pretenses, needless jealosies, slanderings, and backbitings against
those, who by God, the King, and the Staet, were Lawfully set ever them; as of
many of their hurtful Lies, which are yet unmentioned; they have done much
evil by this, which follows: to wit: The King of Spain, being destressed,
by Reason of a long war, with the high and mighty Lords, the Staets General
of the United Provences: and about twenty years a go, the King of France was
provoked, or moved to make war, against the King of Spanie, on the other side
of his Country, to wit, against Artoyes and West-Flanders; which were Invaided
by the Armies of the King of France, therefore the King of Spain was greatly
constrained to send a strong Fleet to the Coast of Flanders, for to Land there
Men and Money, for the preservation of those Contryes: which at that time were
in danger to be wholly lost. Which Fleet having had a long, and a sore fight,
with a considerable Fleet of the Lords, the States aforesaid. When they came
near the Length of Dover, there met them 10. or 12. more lusty Men of War,
belonging to the foresaid United Provinces, and the Spanish Fleet having many
hurt Men in their Ships, and their Powder and Shot being almost spent; were
there by necessitated to put into the Downs, from which the Conspirators of
England, who then lay in wait to make use of all Advantages, by the
suggestions, and lies, they caused many to believe, that the Spanish Fleet came
into the Downs, with an Intent to conquor England: and that by the Consent of
our own King. And by this malicious wild, they stird up selfe-ended Men, like
them selfs, and others, who understood not the business against the King, and
the State of England: for to make way for their cursed Rebellion, which they
then intended,

First, As it apeares by that their Calamerous Contention against the King and
the State, for punishing of those three presumptions Firebrands: to wit: Prin,
Burton, and Bastwicke: by whose pernicious Impudence, thousands were stird up
to trouble, and disturb not only the King, Church, and State; but also the
whole Nation.

Secondly, As it further apeares by that those Traitors of Scotland, which were
like unto those in England, who by a wicked, and a forced Combination, some of
that Nation were deceaved, and stird up, as Traitors, to Invade England:
without, and against the Consent of the King, and the State; and against the
Will and Consent of many of the Nation of Scotland, who would not make
Covenants, and swear falsely: as others that were Traitors, Hosea 12.5.
did: Who have caused Judgment to spring up as Hemlocke. Wherefore, such as
were unwilling, were threatened to be Plundered, and some of them have since
been Imprisoned and Murdered.

Thirdly, As the Marqueses of Huntly, Muntros, and others.
And that which should have been first: when those distressed Subjects of the
King of Spain, their Ships being suddenly, contrary to their expectation,
suncke, and fiered, who escaped drownding, and the Sword of the Hollandors: who
were then their Enemies in the year 1638. Being at Peace with us, they came
into the Downs to refresh, and to fit them selves, for the Reasons before said:
and in that their great destresse, by swimming, and other ways, made hard
shift for to get to shore, to save their lives: some of them, who were
Innocent, and harmless men, were by some of the Conspirators, or some of their
Adherance, Barbarously Murdered in time of peace, without any order, or consent
of the King, or any Minister of State. Which makes me greatly fear, 2. Kings
2.5.
that for that, and many other great evils, contrived by the said Conspirators,
against our own, and several other Nations: that yet a great judgment
hangs over the Nation of England; besides what they have already brought upon
it. And how-ever the evil doers may flatter them selves in their carnal
security, vainly presuming upon their Policy, and the strength of their Army,
which God is able to strike with terror and madness, as he has done the like
of them before. Agag supposed, that the bitterness of death was past; but he
proved to be mistaken, and as the sword of the Conspirators, has made many
women childlesse, of our own, and other Nations, so I have Reason to think,
that the Mothers of the Conspirators, shall be called Childlesse among Women,
as it is in the first of Samuel, Chap. 15. verse. 32.33. And which is worse, the
little Pigges are in danger to be beaton, for the faults committed by the
Boars, and the Sowes of these times in England. For which they know them selves
to be abhorred at home and abroad. And that they may still enjoy the Estates
of other men, and keep such of our Nation out; as well High as Low, who gladly
would be in their native Contry: therefore they take the course of Richard the
Third, and follow his evil Example, who was the bloodyest Tyrant that ever was
in England, before them selves: namely, in this, That such as join not with
them in their Treason, have been at several times (by wicked men of their
own ad-herance, who fained them selves to be for the King, and the Country)
drawn into plots of the Rebbells own devising: and then charged with Treason:
and thereupon took away their Lives, and their Estates. And others, who have
only been told of it, by notorious Rogues, sent out, and employed by some of
the Rebbells; and upon that they were taken, and hanged: although they never
meddled at all in the business. As Captain Thomas Collupp, who lived in
Wisbich, and many more in the County of Norfolk, and thereabouts: who were
taken, and hanged. And he who did pretend to know of a Commission from the
King, and told them of it, who flatly Refused to have any thing to do with
the business, yet they were Murdered, and the Rogue himself escaped: to wit:
Gregre Gamblin, who also lived in Wisbich: and many other such bloody plots
have been acted by these Rebbels, and their Ad-herance, by their Lucefer-like
Art, in, and about London, and elsewhere. An in this, and the like Courses,
does the said Bebbells intend to continue, until they have brought destruction
as well as great dishonor upon our Nation. Who stay always at home, to invent
mischief against our friends abroad, and at home: to do what evil they can,
and to hinder what good they can. And to Cologue with the seamen, they take
away other men's Estates, which connot spare it, but need it for their Wyves and
Children, them selves, and by this means they get the seamen to be more
willing, to go abroad, where they know they must be massacred, for fear,
least they should gather together, and more wisely set them selves against the
Conspirators at home, then here to fore: and how-ever they may Craftily pretend
to do some thing, which shall seem pleasing unto the several Countries;
whose neybours, and frinds they have ruined, destroyed, and murdered, all
England through.

Now, for their own ends, they will insinuate with them as the Devil did
with Eve. Genesis 3.1.4.5.
But when the Contry shall come to be Invaided, by foraine nations, who by
these Conspirators have been abused; then will they do a great-deale worse,
then Absoloms Mule did, for though the Beast left his master, 2. Sam. 18.9.
when he had most need of him, yet he took away none of his money, nor
Jewels, with him: But these Rebbells, will not only not leave them in their
greatest distress, but they will take all their Monys, and chiefest Treasure
of the whole Kingdom with them. In the mean time, their Continual endeavor
will be, to prepare, and instruct others abroad, in their evil devises, as
near as they can; to be like them selves; that they may the more willingly
receave the said Rebbells, and their stolen Treasure; and protect them, when
they dare stay in England no longer.

And for the present, many of the people of England; are by constraint forced
to cologe with the Rebbells, and give them good words; but it is, as them poor
people, in some part of the West-Indeans, does by the divill; namely: because
they should not be so mischevous to the Contry, as they are afraid of. And
whereas the said Rebbells, and their Adherance, by false Information, have
caused many good people of our own, and other nations; to think, that all who
follow and adheare unto the King; are ungodly sweators, proud, envious, and
Contentious persons: as well his Majesty's servants, as others: whereof my
self have been obrayded, that those were such, as I justified; and that by
such, and the like, of evil Conversation, the Kingdom should be governed, if
ever the King came to be Restored again to the Kingdom.

Unto which I answer, that if any thing of it be true, I believe they are
such, as may be secretly Employed by the Rebbells them selves: or at least
some, to make the rest worse then they would be. For my part, if there be any
such, I justify them not: but if I knew them, I should therefore abhor them:
because such can do the Rebbels far more service then they can do the King,
and I understand them to be worsse then the Plague in the Kings Court; and for
often I know, the cause of so much swearing, and other evil behavior, in the
Kings Army; pretended by the Rebbells, has been by Reason of such, that has
been sent to that purpose, by the Rebbells themselves.

First, to commit that which may offend God, and so to make our best

Secondly, to vex, trouble, and oppress the Country more then needs;

Thirdly, because the Rebbells might thereby take advantage, to Revile

By Reason of stubornnesse, and Rebbellious rysings of some, against

Because the Rebbells, by deceat, forged pretenses, and by violence usurped,

And for so much, as concerns the Kings Council, his Servants, and all others,
that pretend to adheare unto his Majesty; my prayers unto God Allmighty, the
desires of my heart, and the cryings of my spirit, not unto the God of Rebbells,
but unto the Lord of Heaven, is more then any man upon the face of the earth,
do know: as in Exodus 14.15. That every man, high and low, may aprove himself
before God, who knows the hearts of men: who sees, and takes notice of the
actions to be men that fear and serve God: such as love, and endeavor with
all their might to execute Justice and Judgment for all manner of persons, as
well for the small, as the great, as it is in the Word of the Lord. Deuteronomy. 1.17
And the Lord grant, that every one may be such, as to scorn and abhor
Flattering, Bribes, and Treason. Thou shall not wrest Judgment, Deuteronomy. 16.19.
thou shall not Respect persons, neither take a gift; for a gift does blind
the eyes of the Wise, and pervert the words of the Righteous. That which is
al-together Just, Verse. 20.
shall thou follow; that thou may live and inherit the Land, which the Lord
thy God gives thee. The Lord make all the Kings Subjects, mild, kind, and
courteous, one toward another, that the Rebbells may not be able to say any
thing that is evil against them: And the Lord give us all grace, and wisdom
from the highest to the lowest; that we may be wary, that neither Rebbels,
nor no man, deceave us with vain words: for because of these things, comes
the wrath of God, upon the Children of disobedience. Be not therefore
partakers with such, for the fruit of the spirit, is in all Goodness;
Righteousness and Truth. See then that you walk circumspectly, Redeeming the
time because the days are evil, Ephesians. 5.6.7.9.^0.15.16.
and never worse then now, and that by reason of Crumwell, and his Adherents,
who make the best men weary of their lives, whom the oppressed most stand need
of.

By this shall all men know, that ye who pretend to be for the King, and the
Country of England; do come out of an honest, and good Intention; if you
constantly love all men, who are of Godly conversation. For the King needs no
Desemblors, Cheats, Proud, Scornful, nor Contentious persons: neither can his
present condition despence with such: because, if any such should be in or
about his Court, or in his Majesty's Armies; Ezec. 3 20. as in the 2. Revel.
verse. 13.14
they will prove worsse then the plague or the canket in any man's body. And if
men prove constantly faithful to God, and their King; and delight to be
continually in Peace, Love, and good will, one toward another; and withal be
vigelent, and continually wachtfull, and beware of Lurcking or Sneaking Curres;
which the Rebbells have, or will send amongst you. Therefore you, that by
expeperience know the fidelety one of a another, associate your selves often
together; and take notice of such busybodies, as endeavor to make
differences, strife, and envy among men: and mark such, who falsely accuse any
person, whether he be of High or Low degree: and those, who endeavor to
discharge others, from cleaving unto the King, and serving his Majesty in this
his extremety. Neither will you find any better way to bring the Rebbells unto
despair, then by the means aforesaid, and by causing them to spend their
Labors, and Moneys, in vain.

Finally, My Brethren, farewell; be Perfect and Courageous; be of good
comfort, be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of Love and Peace shall
be with you. For if you should in the least give way, or any regard unto such
Spies, 2. Cor. 13.11.
as are employed by the Rebbells; whose custom have always been to sow
mischief, contention, and discord, amongst such as hate Rebbellion. And if
you, by their means, suffer your selves to be stired up, to unquiet or
disturb one another; take heed that you be not consumed one of another. For
this, would make the seducing spirits in England, who cleave unto the Rebbells
for Reward, or for a share of the pray; to blaspheame the Lord of Heaven to his
face in their Pulpits: and they will presumptuously pretend, the God of the
oppressed, to be the God of Rebbells.

And First, by the way, remember this; That if by any of the Kings Servants,
who have received Promotion, great benefit, Subsistence, and the Kings favor;
such Commanders and Soldiers, as have willingly upon their own charge,
ventured their Lives, and lost their Estates; or any such, as otherwise have
constantly, and with their whole heart and might, and that by their great
expense, and overthrow of their fortunes, and subsistence, and ever since the
beginning of the Rebbellion, by truth and experimental arguments, have
always stroven to defend, maintain, and Justefie the King, and all who were
faithful in Authority under him; to the vndeceaving, and Rightly informing, of
such as were by the Rebbells, and their Adherance, Malliciously stirred up
against the King, and such as were faithful in Authority: who in duty, and for
conscience sake, indeavored to do God, and the Kingdom, service. As also many
good men of Foreign Nations, have been from time to time, grossly, and
wonderfully deluded, and bitterly stirred up, by the Lies of the Conspirators,
against the King, and his best Subjects: whose slanderous reports, have been
constantly discovered and resisted by such as feared God, and utterly abhorred
Rebbellion, and falsehood, to the great satisfaction of many strangers, who
have been misinformed by the Conspirators, and their Adherants, concerning, or
against the Justness of the Kings cause. And if the Conspirators can by any
means prevail with such of the Kings Officors, or Servants, which are in
place; for to bring such Commandors, Soldiers, and such others, as is before
mentioned; wrongfully into disgrace, by falsehoode, and Lies, first devised,
and forged by the Rebbells or their Adherance, or if they can cause any such to
be scorned, slighted, or otherwise troubled by such as are in favor with the
King: this will cause the Rebbells to Insult and glory the more, though it be
their own shame, and a great mischief of their own contriving: this will
prove the fainting of all honest hearts, and the weakening of the hands of such
as have yet hope and courage: if they can by Brybes, secreat wickedness, or
other devellish arts; cause the Kings best Friends, and subjects, to be
loftily, or scornfully looked upon. And if such, who never received any
subsistence, reward, or benefit; shall for their good will, continual pains,
and expenses be Rewarded with evil for good: this will be next unto a
deaths-wound unto the King; and will make the hearts of all his most faithful
Friends and Subjects, far and near, to faint, mourn, and greeve, when they
hear of such things. And the Rebbells doc know, that there is no such way to
disharten, and dis-ingage the Kings friends, and cause them to leave him, and
all his Fathers house, in his greatest need; neither is there any such way, for
to stir up God and Man, to be the Kings enemies; then for to render evil
for good unto them, who have unfeignedly, served him: and made them selves
odious in the eyes of all the Kings professed and secraet enemies, for God,
Conscience, and his Majesty's sake, and the good of the Nation.

This caused King David to cry out, in the ears of Saul, his Master, in these
words: 1. Sam. 24.12.
the Lord Judge between me and thee, and the Lord avenge me of thee. No man
need to think, that the Rebbells will be so foolish, as to send any known,
or professed Rogue, for to work out their business in this kind, but they will
make use of some selfe-ended fellows, who one time or other, have pretended to
serve the King, and such who has the art to cut a man's purse, at the same
time when he laffeth in his face: or like Judas, when they seem to be most
zealous, and have the boldness, and the Impudence, to associate them selves
with such, as they certainly know to be the Kings friends: and by that means,
get what seacrets they can; not only to betray the Kings business, but also
their own friend, and brother, to the presumptuous enemies. And like unto the
old proverb; this wickedness proceeds from the wicked, 1. Sam. 24 15.
and hacht by the Conspirators in England: Though sometimes acted abroad, as
well as at home.

The Lord therefore be Judge, 1. Chro. 12.33.
and plead the cause between all those, who are not of a dubble heart against
those, who are proud, scornful, and false-harted toward those, The Tribe of
Zebalon.
whose hearts and Endeavors have ever been for the glory of God, the honor of
the King, and for the prosperity, peace, and safety, of all obedient subjects,
in whose eyes, a vile person is contemned, espesially Traitors, and notoroius
Rebbells: But honors them with his whole heart, Psalm. 15.4.
that fear the Lord.

Wherefore, be pleased to consider, how needful a thing it is for all such as
enjoy the Kings favor, who subsist, or get benefit by him; that they
carefully take heed to resist and avoid the stratagems of those, who secreatly
endeavor to provoke them to be a terror, and a burden unto those, who
ever-more have indeavored the honor of the King: by whom they subsist, as also
longed for their happy and prosperous return into their Native country. 2.
Sam. 22.28.
And remember, that the eyes of the Lord are upon the hauftie, to bring them
down; and who will save the afflicted people. My heart is not haufty, nor mine
eyes lauftie; says David in the Psalm. 131. verse. 1. Be sure, that all who are
bent upon mischief; will seek to cross others in any thing that is good:
scornful men, bring a City into a snare; but wise men, turn away wrath. The
blood-thirsty, hate the upright; but the Just seeks his soul. Forget not this
masterpiece of the Rebbells policy, that they will use all means possible to
get the Rulor, Proverb. 29.8.10.12.
and such as are in favor and trust, to harken to Lies: then they will declare
and publish that all his servants are wicked. Such are they, who to day, will
seem to power out their souls before you, and hug you as their
bosom-friend, and to morrow, will deride you, and lauffe you to scorn. Think
it not strange, that I mention such things unto you, seeing to my sorrow, I have
met with such my self.

Now, let the wisdom of the Reador be this, to avoyde and advise his friend to
stand clear in time, and shun such as cause divisions and offenses, Romans
16.17.
contrary to the doctrine that good men teach, be sure that you follow not the
evil example of those, that revyle the Gods; Exodus 22.28.
and who scorn and curse the Rulor of the people. But such as know, or
understand the wickedness of Rebbells, and yet faune and conceal it: that is
almost as bad as the former; Act. 23.4.
for if notorious Tyrants, who are known to the world, to be but Vsurpors at
the best: shall dare to take upon them, to murder men, for what they pretend
have been concealed, as intended against them, though it be every man's duty
for to bend his mind, and endeavor to discover what he can of the Intentions
and proceedings of such Opressors, as the Traitors (which now bear Rule in
England) are: who are nothing a shamed, all this while, of being Gods, and
their Countries, enemies.

A wise man scaleth the City of the mighty; and casts down the strength of
the confidence thereof. Proud and haufty scornor, Prove. 21.22.24.
is his name; who deals in proud wrath. Therefore, blessed is the man, that
walks not in the Council of the ungodly; nor stands in the way of sinners;
nor sits in the seat of the scornful: but his delight is in the Law of the
Lord. The lauftie and proud looks of men shall be humbled; and the
hauftinesse of men shall be bowed down. Jsa. 2.11.12.
And every one that is lifted up, shall be brought low.

One would think, that this were sufficient for every one that remembers his
latter end, or considers that he has a soul to save, Deuteronomy. 32.29.
that it is now high time to shun and abhor those, who have defiled them
selves, by treason, and the blood of Innocence: and yet bouldly stands out in
defiance of all those, whom they have most offended: to wit, the Lord of
Heaven, the King, and Country of England, and other Nations belonging
thereunto; besides Neighbor Nations, who also were our friends, even as now
they are.

And that the Conspirators have aproved them selves to be past shame; does
apeare by the odatious boldness of John Milton, in his answer unto the book
of the Learned Salmasius: which does consist of presumptions scornings, Lies
and revilings; and does (as it were) declare, that he had forgotten that there
is a Righteous God in Heaven.

For the said Milton, does show in that book; that there is no more fear of
God left in him: in that he has despised and controdicted the Word of the
Lord: for it is said, I Council thee to keep the Kings Commandment, and
that, in Regard of the oath of God. Be not hasty to go out of his sight,
stand not in an evil thing, for he does what soever pleases him. Where the
word of a King is, there is Power; Eccles. 8.2.3.
and who may say unto him, what do thou? unless it be such graceless
Rebbells; Pro. 20.2.
who will neither obey God, nor King, because it can not consist with
hypocresie, nor with violence, by the help whereof, they killed the Just, and
have taken their Estates, and the Army, who must protect them, are their Gods,
and their Confidence: because they give them Large pay out of other men's
Estates, by whom so many of our Nation must be murdered, at home and abroad,
as the Officors of the Army, and the like Conspirators please.

Wherefore, the Lord God furnish and supply the hearts of the King, and of all
his Fathers House; the Lords of his most Honorable Privy Council; his
Reverent and Learned Cleargye, and all his most faithful friends and helpers;
with the spirit of Understanding, Wisdom, and Courage, and especially; with
the knowledge and fear of the Lord: and with the Love of Equity, Justice, and
Judgment, where with the God of Just men, is well pleased. And I pray God,
unite the hearts of all the Kings unfeigned, well-wishing Subjects, and all his
Majesty's true-harted and faithful Attendance, unto him self, and to the
King, whom they seem to honor: and in a Loving, and Friendly behavior, one
unto another; that neither the secret, nor professed enemies, who every day
seeks the Ruying of both the one and the other, that they may henceforth be
able, to make no more breaches, nor prevail any longer, nor be able to stand
before the King; nor before such as are faithful under him.

The Lord give the King favor in the eyes of God and man, that his Majesty may
delight him-felfe in the Works, and the Will of the Lord; and that he may
obtain a deserving spirit, to discover and find our those, who henceforth
have any Intent to betray the trust imposed in them; and all those who any
wayed abuses his Majesty's favors, by proud Looks, or taunting Terms, or
other scornful Cariadge, toward those who desires the safety and prosperity
of his Majesty, and of all his Fathers House, as well as any of those who have
long subsisted by the Kings bounty and favor, and if such men be discouraged,
who in singleness of heart, and for love and good will to both King and
Country; who without any benefit, one way or other, none can do the enemy
better service, then to cause such men to be abused: because it seems the
Conspirators do conceave them selves to be in agreement with death and hell.
Who do not consider, that the hayle shall sweep away the Refuge of lies.
Therefore, they promise them selves, that the overflowing scorge shall pass
through, Jsa 28.15.17.18.
and not touch them, who have made lies their reffuge; and have hid
themselves under falsehood.

As I have often mentioned, so I still hope and resolve by the providence and
gracious assistance of God Allmighty; to declare a far greater Reason, for
what I have said, and what I have yet to say against the Conspirators of
England. If the Lord please to continue unto me health and subsistence, to the
further satisfaction of your Majesty, the King of France, all your good people,
and many others at home and abroad; and for the discharge of my own
Conscience, Psalm. 66.18
between God and my self. For if I Regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will
not hear my prayers: the Lord direct me in that which is according to his
will; and hinder me what soever is contrary to his will. Psa. 1. last verse.
For the Lord knows the way of the Righteous, but the way of the ungodly
shall perish. And thus I humbly take my leave at Present, and Rest, till the
Lord shall give me a further opportunity.

DISCREET READOR:
BE pleased to take notice, that some things more I have to say, concerning my
own sufferings, for the space of Three and twenty years together: which does
consist of diverse Artikles, which I presented unto the said Crumwell, and unto
Mr. Walter Streckland for him; to both whom, and unto others of their party, I
made my greevances known at large in Papers, bearing date the 20. of February:
and others of the third and fourth of March, in the year 1656. Stilo veteri,
from Middelborgh and Flishing. Which Papers were delivered to Mr. Strecklands
hand, the 12. of that instant March, for the said Crumwell, by one John Symons,
a shippe-Carpenter, who, as apeares by his own Letter, dated unto me from
London, the 13. of March last, wherein is signefied unto me, the delivery of
those papers aforesaid, to the said Mr. Streckland the day before: dwells
near Noah's Arc, close by St. Saveries Docke, not far from the Mill
stairres, over against the Armetage, at Horset-downe, in the Parish of St.
Madlen, London. I having used all means possibly, for the space of one year
and a half together, for the obtaining of Reparation toward my great
troubles, charges, disgraces, and much other prejudices, but in Feb. and March
last, to wit 1656. Stilo veteri, that seeing the power of the Kingdom of
England, being in the hand of the said Crumwell, and his Army: my desire from
him, and Mr. Streckland, was, that by his, or their means, the some of two
hundred pounds starling, might be paid me in Bridges, within thirty days
after the date of my said papers: or otherwise I would publish, or make known
unto the world such things, as the said Crumwell, and his party, would by no
means be willing to hear of. And that if the said 200. pounds were not paid
me, within the time aforesaid, I would cause the evil savor of Crumwell, and
some of his party, for to come abroad into the world, more then ever it was
yet: It being, according unto equity, and rather short then over. Also the
said Crumwell having done many things of greater consequence, but never any
thing with more equity, in this world. And that if by his means, the said
sum were paid me; I would be always ready to give an account of any thing
that I had mentioned unto any one, whom he would appoint in such a place where
we might be both free to speak our minds: and that I would make known unto
him whom the said Crumwell should appoint what I had further to say against
Crumwell and his Army, and some others of his party. And though it stands me
much in hand for to take care for my subsistence, I being in years: without
which this Pamphlet had been published more then ten years since: yet upon
condition, the said money had been paid me, I would have communicated the
business unto some of his apointment. First, in private: that they might the
better have made their peace with God, the King, and his Subjects. But least
any one, or more should think, that I upon any condition at all, did think or
ever intend, to be wholly silent, in what I mean by this; the clean contrary
may appear, as follows.

This is part of what I signefyed unto him, in the same papers, wherein I
expressed or specefied my greevances. I enclosed also to the said Crumwell, three
Copyes: one, of an Attestation, under the hand of Mr. Hengh Pieters. Minister,
dated the 17. day of June, 1634. For the clearing me of a false Accusation,
then laid to my charge; an other, was the Copy of an Act, under the hands of
the Lords of Rotterdam; to show that I was a free Broker: and the third, was a
Copy of an Act that I had from the Company, my Masters, to the intent, that
Crumwell might understand, that I desired nothing but what was as Just as the
Clothes on my back, and rather far shorter then one or two over.

I signefyed also unto the said Crumwell, that whether the money were paid or
not, that I expected nothing, neither would accept of any thing from him; or
any of his party: but from my Masters, aforesaid, under whom I had sufferd: and
to this purpose I wrote unto him.

SIR: I hope your Highness will grant, that though Power, and Impudence by
violence, There is a longer explication of this in Folio 58.
drive honest and harmless men from their Right, and quiet being; yet you will
not deny, but that it is lawful for men who are oppressed, and spoyld, for to
use the best means they can, toward the obtaining of Reparation, or
Restitution: as it shall please the Lord to give power, or opportunety. And I
do comfort my self in the Lord my God; as some times David did: who, I hope,
will graciously favor my Righteous cause: 1. Sam 30.6.
neither has he left me wholly without hope. Though I must confess, it
sometimes pleases God for to suffer lies, craft, tyranny and falshoode, to
prosper and to continue long. Da^. 8.25.


SIR: If I should make such a greevous complait, without Just and very extreme
cause; how should I then expect the God of equity, to be on my side? or, who
can I expect shall help me in time of need? I hope, the Lord will not suffer
vain thoughts, for to lodge with in me, nor any evil thing which I blame in
others. To my sorrow I know, that by violence framed, and shameless Arguments;
as by other unlawful proceedings; oft-times a bad cause, is kept too long on
foot: yet that does not make a bad cause good; because it is contrary unto
equity, and because the God of Just men, is of purer Eyes, then to behold
evil; and who can not look upon iniquity: unless it be in his good time, to
punish such as deal treacherously, Habak. 1.13.
and such as hold their tongue, when the wicked devoureth the man, that is
more Righteous then he.

SIR: seeing that my last hope I have left of ever Recovering the said sum of
Money; is only by the help of your Highness: my sufferinge, namely in my
person, and good name, as in matter of my subsistence, have been very great,
and of three and twenty years continuance. Wherefore blame me not, though I
earnestly seek Reparation by such means, or possibillities, as God is pleased
to aforde me. I do most humbly Confess, that I am very large and tedious,
and you shall do well to Consider the extremety of my being necessetated
hereunto. I further signefied unto the said Crumwell, besides my greevances at
large, comprehended in diverse Articles; as is a foresaid; that in case he did
not cause me to have Justice, as aforesaid, seeing that power is in his hand;
that he might perceave that I did intend, to do that which would be very
vnwelcom to him, and unto many of his Party, and I also added part of my
grounds, or Reasons, wherefore I would do it: as follows.

SIR: I do most humbly show unto your Highness; Verbatum.
that for these many years together, I have been very much greeved, at the
proceedings of your Highness, the Army, and others of your Party, against the
Word of God, the King, the Church, and the Laws and Nation of our Land. And
that ever since the troubles of England by the Conspiracy of you, and your
Party, as hereafter more at large first began; in which time many thousands,
of the best and most peaceablest famelyes are ruened: also by the slight of
men, and that long in secret my most beloved Nation has been in a most
wonderful manner stirred up, and set one against another: by such as were the
enemies, and troublers of our Nation, so at home, as from abroad: by which
Cursed means abundance of blood have been spilt: for which my soul has
constantly mourned in secreat. Jer. 13.12.


For which Cause, and for other Reasons, that I must as yet conceal; I have
spoken much against the Person, and Proceedings of your Highness, and some
others of your Party: which by the help of the most high God, shall be known
shortly in public, or in private; which I have intended this many years, but
hitherto I have kept it still private, unless upon occasion, some words
darkely have past from me, because I have greatly, and always longed, to see
or hear of a Righteous settlement in England; without discovering my self:
and as yet only my prayers to God Almighty, have been my best Endeavors to
that purpose.

And SIR, much at convenient time and place, I have to say, and without any
wrong or prejudice unto any others; also it will concern you, and many of your
Party, to know the same in private, before it comes in public to the world,
because thereby your evil savor will yet be much more known then ever it
was, or has been as yet.

This is the Copye of a Letter from me, to Crumwell: the Arch-Rebbell: being
word for word.

The Copye of another Letter, enclosed to the said MR. Streckland, for the
said Crumwell: Dated the 28. of March 1657. in Bridges, and sent by the
ordinary Post by way of Dunkirke.

For your Highness, to wit, the most vallient Oliver Crumwell; Lord Protector
of the Army, and some others, in great Britain and Jerland. This is also
verbatum.

SIR; I do humbly again give you notice, that I did write unto you, from
Middlebourgh and Flushing, in Zeland; by one John Simmons, a Shippe-Carpentor,
dwelling near Noah's Arc, not far from the Millstayres, in Horsydowne,
London. Certain papers of Consequence, bearing date the 20. of Feb: last. But
for want of a speedior passage, I dated other papers, the third and the fourth
of March, old style. Also I wrote unto Mr. Hugh Pieters, Mr. Walter Streckland,
and to Sir Henry Vain, all whom do know me, or some times have known me;
but MR. Pieters, Minister, best of any of them.

SIR: The Contents of the said papers, are as follows. I having served the
Company of Merchants Adventurors of England; some times Residing in Delfe and
Rotterdam; since the year 1634. and though I humbly do, and shall ever
Acknowledge many of my said Masters, both of the first and of the last of their
Worships, some were as good Masters unto me, as I could wish or desire them to
be, yet others of their said Worships, who were toward me disaffected, from
the beginning of 1634. have from time to time, caused my Life and Heart to be
very full of bitterness; which has been unto me exceeding prejudicial and
greevous: and does consist, not only of denying me of Justice upon several
ocasions, against several slanderous and abusive persons; who, by some of the
said Company were partly, or wholly, encouraged; if not from time to time
Employed, and set on against me: as also, I have been wonderfully blamed, as
a mallicious fellow, for suing for Justice: without which, I saw it to be
impossible, ever to be quiet. The want whereof, caused the evill-doers to be
the more Insolent, and many others afterward, by Reason of the evil example
of the first three; and I have often, by several of my said Masters, most
wrongfully been accused in the like kind, I say, by diverse of themselves,
though from the first to the last, never any thing at all has been proved
against me. Also, the Injurijs and violence has been so extreme, and
continual against me, as I shall humbly show, when it shall be Requiered of
me, that I went three several times to the Hage, to complain unto Mr. Olyver
Synjohns, Mr. Walter Streckland; when they were there as Ambassadors, for to
Entreat them, to move the Company in my behalf; but for fear of giving my
Masters great distaste thereby, and by Reason of some difference between Mr.
Streckland and my self, about the Engagement, which I refused in 1650, neither
was Sterckland content with me; and upon those two Considerations, I did
forbear, because I have since in sundry kinds been greatly abused: and all
other hopes of Reparation now failing, my humble desire is, that by the
Endeavor, and power of your Highness, I may have paid me by my said Masters,
Resedent now in Dordricht; the full sum, or value of 200. pounds starling: to
me, or my Assiges, in Bridges, within thirty days after the 10. of March
1656. old style, for the Reasons specefied at large in the said papers before
mentioned, sent by the said Simmons unto your Highness, who arived at London
the 11. day of this month of March.

SIR, this I entreat of you; because the power of our Land is now principally
in your hand, and because your Will and Word has been, as it were a Law in
many other things, of far greater consequence: but if you do it not to be
paid to me within the time mentioned; I intend by the help, and the Devine
Providence of that same God, Jsa. 1.4.
which it seems many of your party have forsaken. Or else they know him not:
1. Sam. 2.12. I shall (I say) by the special assistance before said, shortly
make such things known to the world, as that neither your Highness, nor some
of your helpers, will be at all willing to hear of; Concerning the
proceedings of you, and some of your Party in these last 20. years together,
against that part of our Nation, who most Inclined to peace, truth, and
meekness: and it may be, by the help before said, in short time, by my
means, some of the same Creatures, who have been begotten by the troublers of
England, and bred up under some of your own party, may happily come to byte
you, and some others. But if the said two hundred pounds starling, be paid
unto me, or my Assigns in Bridges, in Flanders, before the 10. of April
1657. old style: I shall not only defer the same, which I otherwise by the
grace of God intend, but also I shall by the help of the most High, endeavor
to show you, or some whom you shall be pleased to appoint for to hear me, the
best way and course to be taken toward your Honor, peace, and safty, to the
end that yet a far greater dissollation come not upon my beloved Nation, by
the means of your Highness, and some of your party: which I am afraid of, and
long have been: by Reason whereof, you may conceave the more, or better safety
for your selves, and yet be mistaken.

SIR, I humbly refer you to my former papers, wherein I wrote you distinctly,
the particulars of many of my greevances, also enclosed to you, and unto Mr.
Sterckland for you, besides Copyes of papers, presented at several times unto
my said Masters; as well to such as Reside now in London, and Hamborough, as
now Residing in Dordricht, wherein many particulars of my greevances were
especified. And so I took my leave.

Further: the Reador may please to consider, that Crumwell, and his Consorts,
have choice of two several Interpretations of that which is written in folio
52. and part of 53. by them to be understood out of those words: being proper,
as also truth both ways: namely, unto my long and many foulde or sundry
sufferings by mine own enemies, in 23. years: or as truly may the same words
be understood, to be the long and extreme sufferings of the King, and the
Nation of England, by Crumwell, and his Army, and some other Conspirators in
Combination with them.

Further: I did in my papers afore-sayd, allege unto Crumwell, and others;
that I neither would wilfully offend him, nor flatter him further then my
necessety did require for the clearing of mine own Conscience between God and
my self; in regard of what (long since) came to my knowledge, conserning the
Conspirators in England.

Secondly: I did therein reflect, upon what I then supposed would follow,
between the said Conspirators and my self: and the only means of my being
Righted, remained in himself, to wit, Crumwel. Therefore I could do no less,
then to give him some good words, by way of the Title, given him by the like of
himself, and some others; who loves him not: as himself well knows.

Thirdly, A woe!
There is a Curse pronounced unto such, as call evil good, and good evil,
Prove. 16.15.
which is, to Justify the wicked, and to condemn the Just.

Fourthly, Neither do I believe, that Crumwell desiers to be flattered;
unless it be by such, Jsa. 5.20.
as are engaged in Treason, as well as himself: without which, he will not
lightly put Confidence on any man.

These, and diverse things, being near to this purpose, I signefyed unto the
said Crumwell, and Streckland, and others of their Party; in March a foresaid:
who answered me not a word: which shows the heart of the said Crumwell, to
his own shame to be lifted up; and it may be to his own destruction. 2.
Kings. 14 10.13.
Who gloryes in his own shame, and who only minds earthly things. It seems
there is none in Power in England, that will do that which is good: no, Phil.
3.19.
not one: as apeares by Crumwell, and his Consorts, though they are sought
unto. Psalm. 14.3.


Wijse, and Righteous Reador, be pleased to take notice of the Conclusion.
These following Reasons, Read and Consider.

First: to my great disgrace and prejudice, my wrongs and sufferings in my
Person, and good name; has been in sundry kinds very extreme and of 23.
years continuance.

Secondly, This has caused me from time to time, to be bitterly revyled and
scorned by good men, as well as others, by mis-informations.

Thirdly, By reasonable Reparation given me; such as have abused me by
misinformation, and not wilfully, much less so Mallissiously as others, then
they would have understood that I was much wronged.

Fourthly, That those which are Impudent, will then see to their shame, that
they have often wronged me, without any cause at all in me.

Fifthly, That I may thereby live quietly, and in peace with all men, in time to
come.

Sixthly: that such, and the like, might see and consider the evil of their

Seaventhly, Because my self, and others; have found by long and woeful
therefore the hearts of the Children of men, has been fully set in them to do
evil. Eccles. 8.11 12.
Is it not a wonderful thing, that men should so despise the Word, and cast of
the fear of the Lord? like men who are so desperately wicked, as to tyrannise
so much over others, as to make them half or wholly distracted (as them selves
say) by exstreme violence, and grief, done by themselves and then Insult the
more over them, by taunting terms, Imputing such to be mad for the great
troubles, and ungodly dealings, brought upon the opressed, by them selves.
These do aprove themselves to be Lovers of wrong, more then of Right, neither
are they ashamed to condemn the Innocent, nor to Iustefye the ungodly. Eccles.
7.7.
These men seem to scorn Gods own Word, seeing it is said, that oppression
makes a wise man mad. Jeren. 17.9
A gift destroys the heart, and so does feasting too: when it is done to a
mischievous end.

Now, because the evil smell of their detestable projects is come abroad
Crumwell, and his Helpers, for to spuw up or leave the pray again, by them
unjustly taken from their betters, both of our own, and other Nations. And
this is the Reason that the Traitors of England first made use of Strangers
against their own King and Country; I mean such as were misinformed and
deceaved by the falsehood of the said Traitors.

Secondly, the strenght of their delusion, and the necessity of the said
Proverb. 6.19.
they year after year have made use of one Catholic to destroy another
Catholic: so that it seems their Trade and Profession is to sow and to make
discord, strife, and devisions amongst Brethren, Romans 16. verse. 17.18.19.20.
from whence comes desolation, ruying, and bloodshed, and they warm
themselves by the coals of other men's Houses, whom the said Rebbels set on
fire.

Thirdly, they have not only several times stirred up Protestants against
King of Spain, or some of them against the Lords the States General of the
United Provences, or against the peaceable Inhabitants. I confess, if they
speak truth, it is to themselves misfortune, Judges 9. verse. 2.3.4.5.6.
because their custom is constantly for lies: but if it be true, it is but
like as Abimolochs boldness. So that, if any of the King of Spaynes Subjects
were drawn thereunto, Nota 15.
it was by the shameless importunety, and strong delusions of the said
Rebbells. Upon which account they would have broken the Peace between the King
of spain, if the said States (before mentioned) had proved so wicked as
themselves. So that the Read or may understand, that by smooth words, fair
pretenses, and other ungodly shifres, there is no end of the hurtful ploddings
of mischief by the said Rebbels. For first, they will procure others to do
what is unjust, and then will be the first to stir up yet others against them
for it.

It were greatly to be desired that all people, especially Protestants, who
have been most deluded by the said Rebbells, did perfectly understand how much
the Conspirators have been beholden to slander, fraud, and falsehood; and
thereby have prevayled with several other Nations, for to condemn, and judge
wrongly of such eminent and innocent Persons at home and abroad, as were more
righteous then themselves. And sometimes they joined with Spain against
Portingall, and several times secretly as openly they jugled with Portingall
against Spain: and after that, the like again with Spain against France,
and now with France against Spain. Neither is it possible to mention halff
the mischiefs that the deceavors of England has practiced in their wicked
proceedings. But the Indifferent Reador may be pleased to remember, that when
I mention the Makebates, or Conspirators of England, I do not mean the
Oppressed, nor the deluded people of England; but I mean the present Traitor
Crumwell, the Officors of his Army, and such others of his Right Hand Mates, as
fell first from that Religion they first had, and since have changed their
Religion from Presbiterians unto Independants; then to Annabaptists, but what
Religion now they have, I know not. But this I am sure, that so by Antionomismi
Adamites, and Quakers Relligion, and others, which I can not remember; but I am
sure, they are all countenanced, if not first invented or devised by Crumwell,
and his chief Helpers: and by this means they keep the people of England, and
elssewhere, in continual contention, stryffe, and envye, one against another,
least by Love and Unity they should set themselves against the Rebbells, who
have brought dishonor, infamy, and distress upon the Nation.

And this is the Reason that the minds of many people abroad are corrupted by
the false Reports of those, who have done so much mischief, and do cause
good people to do much evil, by their bitter censurings and condemning not
only the King and Queen, the Bishops, and many a thousand others, who are
peaceable, quiet, and faithful in the Land; and that for some small punishment
inflicted upon 3. or 4 presumptious Persons, who, after several warnings,
continued to trouble the State, and disturbed the Church and the Commonwealth
also by Rebellious and false Doctrine, they declared their impudence, like
Rabsaketh, in their Books or Pamphlets, Sermons, Lybels, seditious Feasts, etc.
against the Government then Established. Which by Act of Parliament, to wit, the
Laws of the Land, besides the Proclamations of the King, the Bishops were
enjoynd and expressly charged and commanded to maintain, and to punish
Offenders, and such disturbers as by Lies, new Doctrines of their owne-framing,
stirred up part of the People to Rebellion against the King, the Church, and
the State, to the loss of many a thousand good men's Lives, besides many of the
Rebbels own adhearance. And therefore no wonder though the guilt of the
Rebbels make themselves afraid, who have caused so much innocent blood to be
spilled by Sea and Land, besides murdering of the Lords Anointed, and others,
whom under God, the Peace and the Welfare of the Land depends.

And this is the cause they used so many devices, policyes, and continual
importunities, not only to deceave many other Nations, especially Protestants,
with whom they prevail little or much to join with them in their most
abominable Conspiracy. Neither will they ever cease to provoke so many others,
as possible they can for to enter into Combination with them, because they are
continually in so much fear of the Gallows, as ever were any known Theefes
in this world. Therefore, though they be repulsed and rejected again and
again, yet like the Devil, with shameless faces, will still present
themselves for the procurement of their own ends, as it is in the first of
Job, verse. 9.10.11. and in the second of Job, verse. 3.4.5.6.7. And several
times in the fourth of Matheuw, verses 3.4.5.6.7.8.9.

Therefore all you, High and Low, who intend to keep your peace with the Lord
our God, delay no to break off Peace with the wicked Rebbels; therefore I say
unto you, Numb. 16. verses 2.26.27.31.32.33.34.49. etc.
as Moses said unto the people of Israel. I pray depart, and separate your
selves from these wicked men, least the good Spirit of God depart from you.
NOTA. You shall find in the same Chapter, that more then three times as many
thousands perished in that Rebellion, as there were hundreds of them, when they
first began, like as you may read verse. 2. and 49. in the 16. of the Book of
Numbers. 1. Sam. 16.15.


And though they will show themselves as bold and blasphemous as Rabshakeh,
as it is in the second of the Kings, Chap. 18. verse. 27.28.29. but especial
compare the Rebbells of England, with Rabshakeh, in the 30. verse. of the same
Chapter; and mind their impudence as was Rabshakehs, verse. 31. Wherefore say
unto them, as Christ said unto the Devil, get thee hence, Mat. 4.10.
Satan, for it is written, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. Therefore
you may see, though the Devil was rejected diverse times by our Savior, yet
he was so shameless as to renew his temptations again; even so is the
practice of the Rebbells of England, whose temptations are of no less force
then the Devils were: but you must answer them as Jehu answered Joram,
namely: Wat have thou to do with peace, 2. Kings. 9. verse. 22.
so long as the whoredoms of thy Mother Jesabell, and her witchcrafts, are so
many? That is you must call to mind the fruits, or the evil actions
committed by the said Conspirators, and throw them in their own faces, as
occasion shall be presented by them-selves. Or you must stir up your selves,
Genesis 15.11
and dryve them from you, as Abraham drove those devouring fowls from the
carkasis of his Sacrafice.

Now be pleased, O King of France, and all other Princes, States, Potentates,
Majestrates and Merchants, and all others whosoever, consider, foresee, and
mind your own honor and safety in time: for you will find many times that
the Lives and Estates, as well as the Honor of good and harmless men, 2. Kings
are many times destroyed and lost, because they have to do with evil men,
Chap. 10.
as you may see by the 42. men, which were slain by Jehu, only for that they
were going to visit the childeren of Ahab. Verse. 14.
Neither was any one of them spared or left alive.

And whereas the Rebbels, with whom you are (or may be) entangled, and by them
drawn into dishonorable and ungodly dissignes, and when afterward they shall
see that upon more serious consideration you begin to scorn and shake them of,
then will they pretend Artikles of Agreement, which themselves, or some others
for them, have by suttell policy obtained from you, by pretenses which bears a
doubble meaning.

Unto which I answer against these Sophisters, Esther 3.8.9.11.12.13. verses.
that though by the greediness, pride, and bloody mindedness of Hamon,
Ahasuerus the King was prevayld withal to give consent to destroy the Jews,
and to take all their goods: yet upon better deliberation and information, he
did not only revoke the Decree, Esther 7. verse. 9.10.
but caused him to be hanged for his impudence, by whom he was drawn
thereunto, and that after the writtings were signed, sealed, Ester 8. verse.
10.11
and sent away. Note here, how the King commanded by Letters, that for the
wicked devise, devised by Haman against the Jews, should return upon his own
head, Ester. 9.25.
and that he, to wit Hamon and his 10. Sons, should be hanged on the
gallows.

And if the Rebbells of England, who has approved themselves far worsse then
Hamon, were served so, it would be a piece of Service acceptabel unto God and
Man, and right honorable unto the Authors of it. By which the Reador, and all
men, may see and take notice, that it is far more pleasing unto the Lord, to
break of Agreements with such, as practice nothing but mischief, then it can
be to continue in a wicked League with such, as the Rebbells of England are. I
pray you all, High and Low, at home and abroad, Psalm. 26. verse. 4.5.6.
to consider the Resolution and Example of David: I have not (said he) sat
with vain persons, neither will I go in with dissemblers. I have hated the
Congregation of evil doers; and I will not sit with the wicked. I will wasch
my hands in innosency, and so will I compass thine Altaer, O Lord. Which no
man can do High no Low, Rich nor Poor, so long as his hand is with such
children of wickedness, as are the Rebbells of England. Who says further,
gather not my soul with sinners, nor my life with bloody men, in whose hands
is mischief, Verse. 19.
and the right hand is full of Brybes.

I am afraid of a perpetual desolation upon England, because the pride and
impudence of the Rebbells, who has reproached, cheated, dishoured, and spoyld
the Nation, as well men of ordinary quality, as the more considerabell; they
have also magnifyed them-selves against the Lord, and his people: and this
Assembly of Sycophants now in England, do Vsurp a rigorous Authority, and they
do insult over the meanor sort of men, as well as over the more eminent, who
cause diverse to groan from out of the City, and the soul of the wounded
cries out, Job. 24.12.
yet God lays not folly to them; neither can any in all the world more
presumptuously take upon them to collumniate, censure, and condemn all
Catholics, especially the Pope and the Iesuwytes: so that, besides variotye of
slanders, the Rebbells not only themselves, but all, or most of their
Creatours, do constantly pretend the Pope to be the son of perdition: 1.
Tessal. 2.4.
who (as they say) apposeth and Exalted himself, above all that is called God,
and that the Pope shows himself that He is God. Also Crumwell, and his
Army, and others of his Creatures, are always ready for to pawn all the Faith
and Throth they have: that the Pope is Antichrist, Revel. 11.7.
and the Beast that ascended out of the bottomless Pit. But the Scripture
says, That he is Antichrist that denies the Father and the Son. But the
Pope confesses both the Father and the Son: so that by te Rule of Scripture,
1. John. 2. verse. 22.
he can not be Antichrist: Neither do I know who should be Antichrist
unless the Devil, or Crumwell, or some such cursed Creature.

I confess it can not yet be said, that the Seven Hills of Rome, are in the
possession of this our Crumwell. Revel. 18.2.3.
But I have some Reasons with confidence; to think, that Crumwell, the
Sycofant, has seven soul Spirits about him, or that are his Associates, who
are yet more wicked then any can be about the Pope, or in Rome it self.
Neither do I suppose it will be hard for to disprove, but that the Rebbells
are Liars (like those false Apostels) who pretend to be Christians, and are
not, but are rather of the Synagogue of Satan: witness their troubling of all
Nations, Zepha 2.9.13.
who are good Christians, besides their own Nations, so many years together.
And mark their many alterations, and changes against Christianity in England,
and contrary unto all Christians of all other Nations.

And yet the future and evil intent of the Iugglers in England, does apeare
against Christians, in that they will neither assist the State of venice, in
their distress at all themselves, nor will they cease from hindering nor from
troubling of those, that gladly would help that State in their need, who are
an Honorable, Ancient, and Peaceable State, to wit, The Republike of Venice:
who are like to be forced unto a very dishonorable Peace, which can not but
prove very prejudicial unto France, and unto other several Christian Nations:
or else the said State may come to be greatly distressed by reason of the
Rebbells of England, which will be yet worse for other Christians; yet the
said Rebbells continue to press on their own ends, though they should bring
all Christendom in subjection unto those who are no Christians, and therefore
they will make no Peace, but break and hinder what Peace they can, unless it
be with such as are like themselves, who will shortly be found worse then
Turks: who by their dissimulations pretend to be what they are not, and it is
their chief joy to trouble the Christians, because they know it to be pleasing
to such as are no Christians. And this is the Reason they continue to renew and
stir up strife, contention, mischief, and bloodshedde, between Christians
and Christians, as aforesaid.

Wherefore they seem almost to burst with envy against the Iesuwyts, who
endeavor to keep the people in peace and unity, and from insurrections,
tumults, and Rebellion, against their several Princes or Magistrates, under
whom they do reside. Also their endeavor is, to save their people from being
spoiled, schattered, or deceaved by the Woofes or Rebbells of England, by whose
means (under God) the Lives, as well as the Estates of those people are
preserved, because they expel and frustrate the poison which ingenders or
breeds in the hearts of Rebbelles. And I would to God, all good Protestants,
and godly Ministers had taken heed in time, and had not bitten of the secreat
baytes where withal the Traitors of England have catched and drawn many into
Treason, and evil designs, as well as themselves. But such Protestants and
Catholics shall do well to free and cleanse themselves in time to come, and
to see that they be not defiled with the cages of these unclean Birds, 2.
Cor. 7.1.
and from being companions with a Den of Theefes. James 4.8.
And take heed of the said seducing Spirits, Revel. 18.2.
and of the habitations and of the doctrine of Devils, who speaks Lies in
hypocrisy, having their consciences seared with a hot iron.

I say, Mat. 21.13.
if the Lord please to cleanse your hearts and your hands from the evil fruit
and the poison of the said Rebbells, which the Lord will do, if you, 1. Tim.
4.1.2.
with your whole heart, desire it: so shall you be able to remove the
stumbling blocks, out of the ways of the Lords people, and to prepare for
them a good way, Ier 6.16.
which shall be pleasing unto God and good Men. Because Rebbells are resolved
to hold and practice the doctrine of Balaam, Esa. 37.14
who advised Balack to cast a stumbling block before the people of Israel.
So the Gardians of England makes use of such doctrines as is hateful to God,
Revel. 2.14 15.16.
and hurtful to all good men. And he that shall advise them to repent and
amend their lives, their advise does seem odious, or as idle tales unto them,
Genesis 1^.14
at the best. Who, like Sea-hounds, that do very much spoil by destroying
much fisch, so long as they live: which is the cause that large monye is given
for their heads, though they be good for nothing. But they that can obtain
the heads of such Rebbells, deserve much more money and favor both from God and
all good men: because the Rebbells neither do, nor will cease from destroying
abundance of good and honest men, of their own, and other Nations, so by Sea
as by Land, and had Knepperdolling, and Jan van Leyden, and their followers,
by whom it seems the Relligion and practice of Crumwell, and his Associates was
first composed and acted: several whereof had for reward each an Iron Basket,
and were naked noynted with honny, exalted to the top of the Steeple at
Munster in Westphalen, and stung to death with flies, without either meat or
drink, but only half a penny Loaf once for all.

And I partly perceave that Crumwell the Traitor, and some of his fellows, are
afraid of some such like reward; for what they have done unto the King and
the Nation of England, as well as to our friends and Neighbour-Nations, who
knows very well what became of Wat Teyller, and his Companions; and this is
the Reason that they keep a great Army of Soldiers in Arms, like unto
themselves, which are paid out of other men's Estates by force, against the
King, and the Country. Neither can they devise any better shifts for to color
and hyde their own Theft and Treason, then by Lies and forged pretenses
against the King, and such others, as were faithful in the Land, and more
righteous then themselves. And by the continuation of their fashood and
hypocrisy, by which they prevayle with some selfe-Ended-men, and some others,
who are deceaved by the same Rebbells, or caused to believe, that they had just
cause and reason for to rebbell against the King, and the government then
established.

It was lawful for such Servants of God, as came lawfully unto Authority, as
Moses, Josua, Jehosaphat, and more such, as were Righteous. Numb. 16.32.33.
But it was not lawful for Corah, Dathan, nor Abiarm, neither for Abimelech,
nor Achitophell, nor Sheba, nor for Judas, nor for Crumwell, Judge. 9.18.
or his Companinos, for such to conspire against them, 2. Sam. 20.1.
whom the Lord has set over them.

If there were any just pretense to be made for such a Rebbellion, as that of
England, never any had more cause then Joseph in Egypt, Genesis 39.19 20.
who was oppressed, though an Innocent Person. And David against Saull, for whom
he ventured his Life many times: yet Saull sought David's life, which was to
requite evil for good: yet David never offert to rebel against te King, 2.
Sam. 24.10.11.
though his mortal enemy: and God gave him several times into his hand: yet
David spared Saull himself, and killed him not, verse. 17.18 19.
and he did also restrain others, that would have killed him, as Saull
himself confesses. And David said unto Abishai, Destroy him not; 1. Sam. 26.9.
for who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed, and be
guiltless?

Obadia, who was Servant unto a badde King, who destroyed the Prophets of the
Lord, and did much evil, yet Obadia never offert to rebel against his Master;
but did good to the Prophets of the Lord privately. 1 King. 18.
No more would Crumwell, nor his Companions, verse. 3.4.5.6.7.8.
if the fear of God had been in them, as it was in Obadiah: I could name
Daniell, and many others, who were oppressed, and yet Innocent men, chose rather
to suffer, then to sti^^e up Rebbellion in the Kingdom.

Also much may be said of Simon Magus, Act. 13.8.10.
Elymas, and Alexander the Copper-Smith; but Crumwell, and his Companions,
exceeds them all. Therefore I say of them, 2. Tim. 2.
who are full of all subtilty, it seems to me almost like children of the
Devil, 4.14.15.
of whom I advise the Reador to be aware in time, for Reasons known to me,
which I reserve (God willing) until my next following. I have Reason to think
that none but the Devil can match Crumwell, or some of his Associates, who
delight in Treason, falsehood, and murder, so well as himself. I suppose
there is a hard Game betwixt the Devil and some of them, and I believe for the
first part they will put the Devil hard to it. Ezekiel. 33.11.
I wish they would bethink themselves, and presently turn from their evil
way, lest the Devil foil some of them at the last.

I cannot forbear but to touch once more upon those four shameless
Ringleadors, to wit, Prinne, Bastwik, Burthon, and John Lilborne, who, like
Firebrands of Hell, as well as seducing Spirits, encouraged and stirred up many
of the People of England to Rebellion, mingled with Blasphemy, slander, and
the spilling of much Nobel and other Innocent Blood. Who, though they were
favored long, and saved from being Hanged, which by the Law of the Land they
deserved; yet the said Rebbels, by their Adherants and themselves, have
maliciously and continually dispersed among all such Protestants upon whom they
have been able to fasten their Lies far and near, within and without
England: Namely, They have falsely reported that these unworthy Fellows, before
mentioned, were honest and godly men. Also these Sophisters have filled the
world with their clamerous Lies, who pretend their punishment was ten times
more then it was.

And it is mentioned in holy Scripture, that whosoever will not do or obey the
Law of God, and the Law of the King, let judgment be executed speedely upon
him, whether it be unto death, or to bannishment, or to confiscation of goods,
Mart. 9.25 26.
or to inprisonment, as it is in Esra Chap. 7. verse. 26. Therefore rebuke, and
drijve these Lying and foul spirits from you. And take notice of the place
appointed for such, Revel. 21.8. and Chap. 19.20.
and for the false Prophets: namely, the Lake that burns with fire and
brimstone. And for the Beast, and the false Prophet that wrought miracles
before him, which deceaved them that has received the mark of the Beast.
These are appointed for the same place: and so are all those who loves and
makes Lies. Revel. 22.15.


Therefore that the good Spirit of God, and my heart, may be united and knit
unto you; and I hope you will not blame me for this my advise, seeing there is
no wrong in my hands against any honest man. Genesis 49.6. 1. Chron. 12.17.
And so I humbly take my leave of your Majesty, the Nobillity, Clergy, and all
other good people of France, and all others, at home and abroad, who in the
Name of the Lord our God, stand for Love, Peace, Truth and Equity, with all
that aprove themselves reasonable men. Be pleased to consider what I say, and
do accordingly.

FINIS.

