ON The never too much lamented Death of the most Illustrious PRINCESS
HENRIETTA MARIA, Duchess of ORLEANS, etc.
AN ELEGY.
PRoud France! no more thy Flandrian Conquests boast,
They are but pebbles to the Gem thou'st lost.
No more, No more triumphant Arches raise,
To mournful Cypress turn thy joyful Bays.
England thy total dissolution fears,
Swollen big with Triumphs, now thou't burst with Tears.
Vaunt now no more what Conquering France can do,
HENRIETTA dead, you are a Low Country too.
The Flower de Luce is mantled now with night;
She Is set whose only Luster made it bright.
Against death bend all thy Forces, make him see
His Conquests too's naught but a Robbery.
Never with him be reconciled that dare
Against Law fall on, and never proclaim a War:
Few Thieves so cruel are in any Land,
Before they rob, they use to bid men stand.
Yet thus far in his Onset Death was wise,
He manacled not her Hands, but bound her Eyes:
For had she cast a look at him, his Arm
Had never been strong enough to do Her harm.
The stroke was sudden, or else doubtless She
With one sharp Look had stabbed the Anatomy.
What! snatched so quickly hence! Too clownish Fate!
The King of Terrors should have come in stare
To fetch a Princess; but by this we see
They who are in Love, forget their Majesty.
I Will scarce believe She Is dead, nor him that says,
Heavens Master Builder would a Structure raise
Costly, and curious, and at last to Crown
His skill, would quickly let it tumble down.
Whoever reared a stately Pyramid,
On purpose to have it quickly ruined?
Methinks I hear the loud-mouthed Cannons roar
Till they were hoarse, to welcome Her on Shore:
Methinks I see Cowes-Castle still on fire,
May 19th.
That day no common Bon-fire did require:
England then could not an Invasion fear,
What use for Castles, and our Goddess here?
France could not bear the absence of Her light,
And therefore craved She might be still in sight:
But when She saw how She was treated here,
Fearing She never would move more in that Sphere
In which She lately shined, sat pensively
Bewailing this but-fear'd Calamity.
At length She spies Her in the Arms of the Main,
And dandled on the Waves return again,
O'rejoy'd to see Her land, did hug Her so,
That striving to b' a Friend, She proved a Foe,
And thinking t'hold Her fast, forced Her to go.
Unheard of way, Friends thus to welcome home!
First to salute, next to prepare a Tomb:
This to Congratulate Her safe Return!
To lead Her from the Ocean to the Urn!
What! was She wasted only over for this?
To be Embalmed with Her Brother's Kiss?
To Her, Newborn, England a Cradle gave,
And must She go to France to find a Grave?
But She was like the Sun; and now in the close
'Twas fit She should not set, where She arose.
France! That were once the Garden of the World,
Art, now She Is cropped, into Confusion hurled:
Now She is withered, Methinks all things fade,
Paris a Paradise 'twas She that made.
Nothing looks lively now, we are drooping all;
Her Death has changed the Summer to the Fall.
The Golden Orchard of the Hesperides
In what was it richer than a Wilderness?
When those fair Apples all were stolen away,
It was not worth the Dragons while to stay.
She gone, France lay each Soldier now to sleep,
What have thou worth an armed Man's pains to keep?
Thy Sun is set, all those surviving Lights
Compared with Her, that they are but fair Nights
Is all that France can brag: this more I Will say,
France last Year won the Field, this, lost the Day.
Her fall has laid all the World's Wonders flat;
There Is nothing in it now worth wondering at:
Unless it be Her sad, untimely Fate,
Which Death too soon caused, I bewail too late.
-- Quis talia fando Temperet a lachrymis?

J. M.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1670. 66.


