Imprimatur

Ex Aedib. Lamb. March. 6. 1666/7
DIVINE Contentment: OR A MEDICINE for a Discontented Man: AND A Confession of
FAITH: And other POEMS upon several SUBJECTS.

By EDWARD MANLOVE of Ashborne in the County of Derby ESQUIER.

LONDON Printed, for Richard Mills at the Pestel and Mortar without Temple
Bar. 1667.

To the READER.
REad, and peruse, this Poem to prevent,
The prejudice, that comes by Discontent,
Which is a Sin not only Capital,
But Catholic, and Epidemicall,
Both to, and fro, man's tossed, with discontent,
Filld with disquiet, and distemperment.
He Is full of murmuring, nothing does him please,
His restless spirit's, like the rageing Seas,
Always tempestuous, full of rage and heat,
Often perplexed, with amazements great.
His troubled heart, is like a little Hell,
Where Is discontent; the Devil loves to dwell.
Then strive O man, against this mortal sin;
Prize contentation; Peace is found therein.
Peruse this Poem; dressed in mean attire,
Let true Contenment, be thy hearts desire.
EDW. MANLOVE.

A MEDICINE for a Discontented MAN.
By Edward Manlove of Ashborn in the County of Derby Esquier.
CAst off distrustful, and distracting care,
The love of Riches, brings a sudden snare.
If with thy Wealth, thou do dishonor God,
Twill surely hasten, his Correcting Rod,
Would thou be Rich? Paul for thy pattern take;
Learn thou Contentment, in a low estate,
Content's great gain, unto a godly soul,
Run fast, make have, to get this Glorious Goal.
Engrave this lesson on thy humble heart,
Lay out thy self, and labor for this Art.
The way to get it; may be best discerned,
By Gods good word, this lesson, there is learnd.
Then read, and hear, the Gospel full of Grace,
In this transparent glass, behold Gods face.
When read, and heard, remember this thing more,
Safe in thy heart, this sacred treasure store.
This truth's a treasure, all men cannot get;
Then lay it up, in thy chief Cabinet.
And prize it high, preserve it for thy need,
To curb thy sin, for thou art Adam's seed.
And many Lusts, from thy corrupted heart,
Wage daily war, against thy better part.
Then stoutly strive, the mastership to win,
Not by thy strength, thou art a sink of sin.
By prayers, and tears, seek thou for help to him,
That can both help, and pardon all thy sin.
O murmr not; but meekly walk with God,
Make bare thy back; if he lift up the Rod.
And be content; to (his) submit thy will:
For he can sweeten, every bitter Pill.
If thy condition, bitter seem, to thee,
Yet be content; it comes by Gods decree;
Who knows thy state; and eke this precept gave,
Content your selves, with such things as ye have.
Thou must obey Gods word, it is his will;
At his command, the rageing Sea stood still.
He is thy King; a Loyal Subject be,
Submit unto, his Royal Majesty.
If thou be poor, and pinched with Poverty,
Thy God is rich, and can provide for thee.
Have thou no moneys, goods, nor earthly soil?
God can sustein thee, with a Cruce of Oil.
Have no Estate, thy Children may possess?
God is a Father to the fatherless
Have nothing left, for thy beloved Wife?
Leave her to God, he can preserve her life.
Art thou in pain? thy God can give thee ease,
And in thy sickness, make thy sickness cease.
Art thou in Prison? God can thee release,
Art spoiled with War? thy God can send thee peace.
But for the present, learn to be content
Repine at nothing, Providence has sent,
Art thou placed in, a high, or lower Sphere?
It is God's Providence, that placed thee there.
If thou be placed, in the lowest Orb,
Submit with Patience, to the living Lord,
God sees it good, thou should be placed there,
Else he would place thee, in a higher Sphere,
The highest Orb, is not the safest state,
Low shrubs are quiet, when high Cedars shake.
Are many Rich, and no Affliction feel?
And thou but poor, observe the inner wheel.
Ezekiel minds thee of more wheels then one.
The inner wheel, turns all, or else turns none.
Gods providence, the inner wheel and best,
Does strongly move, and turns all the rest.
It is the Helm, that turns about the Ship,
The Universe, is overrul'd by it.
And yet its compass, it does not exceed,
But does concur, to perfect what is decreed.
Let thou, and I, this lesson learn from hence;
Strive not at all, against God's providence.
But be contented, with thy present lot,
The wheel may turn, although thou know it not
Let God choose for thee, be not over nice,
Lest ( Adam like) thou make an evil choice.
He had great choice, excepted was one tree,
He are of that, was cursed, and so were we.
Lot made his choice, he had his hearts desire,
He Sodom chose, which soon was burnt with fire.
Remember Rachel, blessed Jacobs wife,
Her choice was Children, one cost her, her life.
Take what God gives, let that give thee content,
God can supply thee, when thy store is spent,
If God give more, beware of wilful wast,
If God give less, praise God for what thou have.
By providence, man's life, preserved is,
More then by Wealth, which is the worldlings bliss
The quiet mind, in the contented man,
Yields more comfort, then his Riches can.
It makes him happy, cheatful, yea (content)
Makes Poor men Rich, when all their Treasures spen
But discontent disturbs, turns peace, to strife,
It does eat up, the comfort of man's life,
This inbred thief, does rob us, of no less,
Then all the Riches, that we do possess
This bitter Dram, imbitters all the cup,
This sour sop, all sweetness drinks up.
This fretting moth; does fret the purest part,
This eating Canker; eats the very heart,
Would thou have comfort? banish discontent,
^or it does cloud, thy comforts eminent.
But true content, does all to comfort turn,
This Oil keeps in the Lamp, and makes it burn.
Then pump thy heart, draw out all discontent,
Stop up the leak, the danger to prevent.
For troubled waters, if they do get in
May drowned thy ship, and sink thy soul in sin,
This discontent, the better to avoid,
Be humble (man) and eke beware of Pride,
With that condition, God has placed thee in,
Be thou content; for discontent is sin.
Keep to thy calling, think it not too low,
Tax not God's wisdom, he has made it so.
Art thou a Tradesman? follow then thy Trade,
Old Adam (he) despised not a spade.
Our father Jacob, kept his fathers sheep,
Where God has placed thee, there thou ought's to keep
But now a days, this discontent, and pride,
Makes many a man, his calling lay aside,
It is too low or he too high for it,
This Pride makes him, his lawful calling quit,
And strange Cameraes do possess his brain,
He seeks for something in a higher strain.
The Cobbler then; the Pulpit needs must climb,
His words are losty, and his thoughts sublime,
The Spirit moves him, how can he mistake?
His words are stiched well and well they take,
He is improved, and you shall hear anon,
He Is Pastor of, some Congregation,
His purblind brethren, love to hear him teach,
And this proud Patcher, he presumes to Preach.
And when he does, this new found way forsake,
It Is doubt he will, begin to Rant, or Quake.
Alas he is gone, so far beyond his Last,
He Is like to fall, by running over fast.
Pride puffed him up, the Cobbler climing high,
Ape like, has showed* his great'st deformity
Alas poor man! it is time that all lament,
It Is much ado* for man to be content.
If he be poor; then envious he will be,
If Rich, puffed up with his Prosperity.
With Jacobs Talent, learn to be content.
Praise God that has, thee, food, and raiment, sent
If thou be Rich, and yet do covet more,
It better is, to be content and poor.
Or if thy Riches, fill with worldly care,
Thy empty heart, thy riches are a snare,
Or if thy riches, cause thy discontent,
Thy riches are, an empty Complement.
But art thou rich; and godly, and content?
Thy riches are, a gracious suppliment.
If thou employ them, for Gods glory then,
God will thoe bless; thou will have praise of men.
Pray not for Riches, nor for Poverty,
But food convenient, that is best for thee,
A mean estate; may yield as much content,
As Riches great, or places eminent.
Sorrow sometimes, far better is then joy,
A low estate, far better then a high.
What greater Honor, can thou do to God,
Then with submission, humbly kiss his Rod?
Then be content, in want learn to abound,
This sweet condition, is with comfort crowned.
Contentment here, the first fruit of Heaven is,
But true content, is in eternal bliss.
But discontent, does discompose the heart,
Does gaul the spirit, vexes every part.
It is a Gangrein, and a festring sore,
^t turns both faith, and patience forth adore,
It is a breed bate, making jars, and fractions,
It fumes, it frets, it stirs up, distractions.
It hurts the body, it, disjoynts the soul,
It, makes ill, worse, it is a Kindle coal.
It makes repining, when we should rejoice,
It, always wants, it is full of avarice.
It, is a passion, that does often robb,
Man of his reason; makes him slight his God,
But true contentment, in the inner part,
Works trouble out, of every troubled heart;
As Physic does, Diseases purge away,
So does contentment, greatest gains alay.
It does refresh, and cheer, the fainting heart,
Of every one, that gains this godly Art.
It makes the Lame, to leap, the Sad, to Sing;
Divine Contentment, does sweet solace bring.
There is great Virtue* in Divine Content,
This Golden Shield, beats back discouragement,
This gallant ship, the heart from sincking saves,
And makes it Sail above the rageing Waves.
This true Content, does set man's heart in tune,
By fervent Prayer, his God to importune.
It brings the heart, into a holy frame,
For God accepts, no Sacrifice that is lame.
Content breeds courage, in a godly Saint,
He bears his burden, when the wicked faint,
If God command him, he takes up his Cross,
And by Contentment; he, makes gain of loss,
Impatience, and discontent, are Twins
But true Content, does banish these two sins.
But discontent, much murmuring does produce,
To let in sin, it, is the very sluice.
This murmuring sin, the Devils Music is,
He likes no Tune, so well, as he likes this.
This Discontent, a restless Spirit is,
That haunts so many, and so few does miss,
It makes a man, means indirect to use,
To get such things, as Nature bids him choose.
Contentment does, temptations strong prevent,
Though the World, and flesh, and Devil all do temp
But discontent, made Job's wife foolish be
Unto her Husband say, Curse God and die,
This discontent, a man an Atheist makes,
He turns Apostate, and his God forsakes.
He thinks that God, of man does take no care,
He Is not contented, with his Bill of Fare.
He nothing wants, and yet is discontent,
He has enough, and yet is indigent,
Out of the Blossom, of this discontent,
Grows bitter Fruit, an evil consequent,
But with content; a little, is enough,
This Anchor stays, the Ship; when storms are rough
This turns the bitter water, into Wine,
And makes it taste, the Nectar, from the Vine.
This Crosses great, to Comforts great, does turn,
And makes him merry, that before did mourn.
It makes his heavy burden, seem but light,
He hopes for Glory of a greater weight,
If this be then, the fruit of contentation,
O labor man, to get this consolation.
This Honey Comb, drops sweetness every where,
This comfort lasts, because content is there,
But discontent, a sour Leaven is,
Our greatest comforts, are Eclipst by this;
It lessens mercy, trebbles every Cross,
Turns sweet to sour, the purest Gold to dross.
But true contentment, waits on Providence,
And takes God's dealings, in a better sense.
If God send sickness, Pain, or Poverty,
All Is for the best, if thou contented be.
Does God Refine thee, in a Furnace hot,
To purge away thy dross, why should be not?
Thou art his Gold, he makes thee sparkle more,
Thou art made purer, then thou wast before,
He in his Wisdom, makes thy body smart,
To bring thee to, a better frame of heart.
Should thou be Rich, be sure that Christ be thine
Of Grace and Wisdom, he is the golden Mine.
He is a Pearl, a sparkling Diamond,
His worth, all worldly Treasure, goes beyond.
Sell all thou have, to get this precious prize,
And buy the Field, wherein this Treasure lies.
In Christ both Fullness and true Riches is,
By this enriching Pearl, comes glorious Bliss.
Enduring Riches, in this Treasury,
Are locked up, from all Eternity.
If worldly Wealth be wanting, live by Faith
He that has Christ; the greatest Treasure has.
This, richly decks, the Soul; with true content.
These are the Riches, that are permanent.
If thou be rich and yet thy soul be poor,
What art thou better for thy worldly store?
But if thy Soul bespangled be with Grace
Thou art prepared, for a better place,
The high Plantation, Heavens Paradise,
The glorious Heaven of Eternal Joys.
There are true Riches, there is true consolation,
There is full freedom, from all Reprobation,
All other things, are like the Butterfly,
Whose Wings are painted, very curiously,
Yet touch them, they thy fingers do defile,
All Earthly things, are apt thy soul to soil.
They do corrupt, they cannot long endure,
Fix not thy heart on things that are impure.
But be content, let God thy portion be,
He has a godly heritage for thee.
The world is empty, only full of sin,
In God is fullness, make address to him,
He can give Riches, he can make thee poor,
Job lost much wealth, yet God did give him more*
Then do not kick, against the Lords decree.
He knows thy state, and knows what is best for thee
Submit to God, embrace his blessed Son,
Pray as he taught, (O Lord) thy will be done.
God is well pleased, with his Children, when
They like that portion, he allots to them.
He has his end, in that they do submit,
To Providence, and Acquiess in it.
Then be content, to Satan do despite,
In discontent the Devil does delight.
All evil passions, labor to prevent,
Displease the Devil, learn to be content.
By discontent, the Devil's gratified,
And by this sin, thy Soul may be destroyed.
Take heed of discord, it is the Devils joy,
Fly discontent, it brings much misery.
Subdue thy self, strive for this Victory,
Keep down thy flesh, it is an enemy.
Art thou reproached, or in Prison cast?
Bear it with patience till the storm be past,
God can repair thee, and release thee thence,
But he is pleased, to prove thy Patience.
He knows what is in thee, but this exercise,
Will make thee learn, his mercy more to prize,
Job was corrected with a sharper rod,
Yet under sufferings, he did Worship God.
He lost both Flocks and Herds, and Children dear,
Yet in all this, he did God's Justice clear.
He was Divested, of a great Estate,
The Lord that gave, the Lord away did take.
His body suffered, in a high degree,
From Biles and Botches* there was no place free,
Then he a Potsheard, took himself to scrape,
And humbly he, down in the ashes sat.
O here behold; the fruit of true content;
Job suffered much, and yet was Patient.
He got much Gain, by this correcting Rod,
All works for good, to them that love their God.
God in his Wisdom; makes many times
Our Maladies, to be our Medicines.
Art thou then poor? are Earthly comforts gone?
God can make Physic, of Affliction.
Unto the Righteous; godly, and upright,
In greatest darkness, there arises light;
Afflictions great, may prove an excellent
Cathalicon against thy discontent.
And also teach thee, much Humility,
For much proud flesh, within thy heart does lie.
But sharp corrections, are Gods Corrowsives,
To eat it out; proud flesh is apt to rise.
Yea Gall and Wormwood, God does often provide,
To purge his Children, from the sin of Pride.
By Gods Chastisements, man is often brought,
To true Repentance, which thereby is taught.
Repentance, is the precious fruit that grows,
Upon the Cross, this Thorn does bear a Rose.
Afflictions do Gods children truly try,
They are the touchstone of sincerity.
They make them zealons when they pray to God,
They are most fervent? when they feel the Rod.
Jonah, securely, in the ship did sleep,
But Jonah prayed, in danger, in the deep,
Affliction sifts the soul of sinful man,
It tries his Faith, it is Gods refining Fan.
Faith propt with Patience, bears the greatest weight
This far shines brightest, in the darkest night.
It Is God that does our Graces often try,
Submit to him, much comfort comes thereby.
Do not withstand Gods way, which works out sin;
Thy heart's impure, much dross is found therein.
By Gods chastisements, man receives no loss,
This fiery furnace, purges out the dross,
Tho Shadrach, Mesach, and Abednego
Were in the Furnace hot; they felt no woe.
They were fast bound, and cast into the fire,
It burnt their bonds, it burnt not their attire.
So does the fire of our Afflictions try,
And burns the bonds of our iniquity.
We are Gods people, and his husbandry,
Within our hearts, the seeds of sin do lie,
He Ploughs them up, destroys the wicked weed,
And in our hearts, he sowes a holy seed.
He kills the Tares, he Harrowes every part,
Afflictions help, to make a holy heart.
True Faith put forth, most pure and noble acts,
In times of trial, faith beats fearing back.
The Torch that is beaten, gives the greater light,
Faith in affliction, shines far more bright.
The Bay, and Cipress, flourish in the shade,
But in the Sun, these fragrant flowers fade,
The shade of sorrow, more improves thy Grace,
Then shining solace, in a pleasant Place.
Then murmur not, submit to God most high,
Accept that well, which makes thee fructify.
By discontent, our Prayers we do confute,
We pray (thy will be done,) this is our suite.
And yet we murmur in Adversity,
Which shows our Prayers, are in Hipocrysy.
Have thou more sorrow, then some others have,
Then seek to God, and his assistance crave.
He can support thee in thy sorrows all,
And set thee free, from all thy Bonds and thrall.
The Prophet Daniel, was by wicked men,
Accused and cast, into the Lions Den.
Yet was preserved by Gods Almighty power,
The hungry Lions, did not him devour.
But his accusers, found them violent,
Their bones they brake, God saved the innocent.
Great sufferings are, the way to glory great,
God's blessed Son, did blood and water sweat.
He suffered death, and yet was free from sin,
He paid thy debt, will thou do naught for him?
O be content, do not thy case condole,
Afflictions help, to cure a sin sick soul.
But male content, of grief, and anger both,
A mixture has, and raises stormy wroth.
Within thy soul this spirit restless is,
It Is never quiet, something is amiss.
The man's not sick, and yet he is never well,
Ask what he ailes; alas he cannot tell.
What is the matter? his great discontent,
Has discomposed his heart, and made a rent.
There is no state can please his wavering mind,
In no condition, he can comfort find.
He runs the round, he ends where he begun,
Moves to and fro, dislikes both shade and sun.
Faith looks beyond, the help of earthly things,
And feeds upon, both hope, and promisings
Faith will trust God, where him it cannot trace,
And will adventure of his word, and grace.
But discontent, no reason will obey,
The rules of faith, it wholly casts away.
Great sinfulness, is found in discontent,
Both in the causes, and the consequent.
Pride, Envy, Avatice, and Unbeleif,
Of discontent, these are the causes chief.
Pride makes a man, too highly to esteem,
His own deserts, and others meanly deem.
His own condition, he conceives too low,
And so blames God, because he made it so.
And this proud man, presume to tax the Lord,
Because he placed him in no higher Orb.
So Envy is, a very divellish sin,
Adam was holy, Satan envyed him.
The sacrifice of Abel, was accepted,
Cain envyed him, because (his) was rejected
And Avarice, does cause great discontent,
It Is ever craveing, always indigent.
For Covetousness, contentedness, does thwart,
They cannot both, live in a holy heart.
Distrust's an evil, greater then distress,
It Is inconsistent with contentedness.
And discontent, it is a daily grief,
It is the Echo, of man's unbeleif.
And this distemper, causes such discord,
That man with gladness, cannot serve the Lord,
For discontent does always live in want,
Unthankfulness is its concomitant.
This discontent, made Ahab, Naboth stone,
That Naboths Vineyard, might be come his own.
And Absalom it caused to seek a Crown,
To raise himself, and pull his Father down.
This discontent does daily stir up strife,
It takes away the comfort of man's life.
I^ man has much, and yet do thirst for more,
He Is discontent, this makes the Rich man poor.
We naught deserve, and yet we much desire
If God deny us, we are full of ire.
When Ionahs Guard, (that withering vanity)
Was smitten, Jonah in a Pet would die.
All live in want, that live in discontent,
Rich men are robbed, by this distemperment.
Through discontent, some murmur, some do mourn
Which makes God, their mercies to adjourn.
Would thou have mercy, seek to God and pray;
This murmuring does God's mercy much delay.
When children struggle, they are beaten worse,
Our sinful passions, cause a heavy curse.
The Isralites, by murmuring discontent,
Procured from God, a heavy punishment.
They were rewarded, for their peevishness,
They wandered long, within the wilderness.
Then strive (O man) against thy discontent.
This evil spirit labor to prevent.
The world is such, that men the more they have,
Are less content, which makes them more to crave
Does Wealth increase? the worldly man's desire
Increases more; this Oil inflames the fire.
The heart of man triangular is found,
The world is very Circular and Round.
There is nothing, man's soul can satisfy,
But God, the Lord, the Holy Trinity.
Then covet not much wealth, strive for content
Life is a vapor, and is quickly spent.
Sometimes the Sun goes down* before noon day,
Before old age, grim death, takes life away.
Sometimes the Sun of life, sets presently,
Death does approach* the dawning Infancy.
Sometimes it is Eclipsed in the Womb,
The mothers belly does the babe intombe.
Man's here to day, to morrow he is gone,
Our winged Time, goes very swiftly on,
Life is uncertain, long it cannot last,
It is a wheel, that is running ever fast.
Man's life it is, compared to a day,
Or to a Post, that rides fast away.
Our life is short, long here we cannot stay,
And little will, our charges here defray.
It is not far, unto our journeys end,
And after death, we need no more to spend.
If Farmers should, great sums of money spend,
In Building; when their term is near an end,
They would be deemed very indiscreet,
For building where, they have no better right.
So he that does, immoderately give,
His mind to Wealth; and has short time to live.
May be accounted, for a carnal man,
That slights his soul, he is no Christian.
Then learn content, for wealth cannot delay,
The Pangs of Death, which take thy life away.
Sad thoughts and troubles, often here attend,
A great Estate, and terror in the end.
It Is not abundance, that a man enjoyes,
That is the thing, wherein contentment lies,
An evil spirit, haunts the Worldlings Chest,
So that the Miser, cannot be at rest,
His heaps of Gold, he strives to hide them sure,
He takes great care, his Riches to secure.
His worldly wealth, he labors to increase,
His anxious thoughts, destroy his inward peace.
The World affords many pleasant things,
This Be, gives Honey, but it often stings.
Within the Sunshine, is the pleasant seat,
Yet it is troubled, with the scotching heat.
Most men they do, delight in dainty fare,
The Rich man's table, often is his snare,
He quickly may, ingulf himself too deep,
And drowned be, within these waters sweet.
It Is difficult, to know how to abound,
Good Salve ill used, may make a greater wound.
So many times, man's great Prosperity,
Does make him Proud and cause security.
And yet abundance, few men's hearts does fill,
But many souls this Plurisy does kill.
Then with a little learn to be content,
Srive to be good, not to be eminent.
When Jacob, for his Pillow had a stone,
And when his body, lay the earth upon,
He sweetly slept, and did enjoy his rest,
For Food and Raiment, Jacob made request.
Does wealth increase? it does increase thy cares,
And may thee draw, into a world of snares,
Small Pinaces, ride safe upon the Sea,
When storms, and winds cast gallant Ships away.
Our Father Adam fell in Paradise,
Job from the Dunghill, had a glorious rise.
Strong Sampson slept, securely on the lap,
O Dalilah, that sought his life to trap.
The fawning world, is worse then when it frowns,
The greatest cares, attend the Richest Crowns.
When men grow rich, their hearts begin to swell,
The sin of Pride, in rich men's hearts does d^^^ll.
Observe how mad men, when the Moon declines
Are quieter; then, when it is in the prime.
When men's Estates, are low, and in the Waine,
They humble are, and less mind worldly gain.
Then be contented, with thy present lot,
If thou have less then others, envy not.
A great Estate, great envy to it draws,
Men hate Superiors, that is the greatest cause.
When David kept, his Father Iesse's sheep,
None did him envy, none his life did seek,
But when he did, enjoy a Kingly Crown,
Then envy sought, to bring his Honor down.
An envious man; he has an evil Eye,
He hates to see, good men's Prosperity.
Then be content, seek not too high to mount,
The more thou have; the greater's thy account.
Trade for Gods Glory, have thou less or more,
Lay out thy money, on this public score,
Cast in thy Mite, into this Treasury,
Improve thy Talent, for Eternity.
Art thou exalted, to a high degree?
Then in good Works, (man) labor Rich to be,
Remember that, thou art a Steward here,
Prepare thy self, and make thy reckoning clear.
Against thy Lord, and Master, call for it,
Thou must account, for this thy Stewardship.
And when this great account, is clearly past,
Then thou art free, this reckoning is thy last.
Then what if thou, some hardship here endure?
Death ends thy Hell, and then thy Heaven's sure.
Rich Dives did, poor Lazarus disdain,
Who craved crumbs, his life for to sustein,
And yet the dogs, some pity took on him,
As if those dogs; had his Physicians been.
They lickt his sores, when Lazarus did lie,
At Dives gate, to beg his Charity.
But Lazarus he, from sorrow soon was quit,
Here was his Hell, he was releast from it.
And was by Angels, carried clear away,
To Paradise, where he shall be for aye.
But Dives was, sent to the lowest Hell,
Where he with Devils shall for ever dwell,
And in his torments, in the flaming fire,
A little water, Dives did desire.
To cool it tongue, but could it not obtain,
The damned must, endure eternal pain.
He that would not, afford the poor a crumb,
For water cried; to cool his burning tongue,
Observe Gods Justice upon wicked men,
That have no mercy; he has none for them.
And seek by prayer, Gods Judgments to prevent,
Use well thy wealth, and learn to be content.
^t is a judgment, for a man to have,
A great Estate; and yet still more to crave.
The greedy man will never be content,
He cries give, give, he is always indigent.
He eats, and drinks, and yet's not satisfied,
This glutton has, a greedy appetite.
For avarice, does foster discontent,
^t, is a sin, it is a punishment:
It is accounted for a secret curse,
For goods ill gotten, makes the gainers worse.
The more they have, the less they are content,
The more they crave, the more's their punishment
For heaps of silver, cannot satisfy
Him that loves silver, here is his misery.
Then strive for grace, and greatness set aside,
Be not content, till sin be mortified.
Though sin, in the regenerate remain
Yet sin in them, does never rule not reign,
Be not contented, with thy natural state,
Gods Wrath pursues, the Unregenerate.
And how can thou, endure his wrathful ire?
Or who dwell with everlasting fire?
A natural man, is under Satan's power,
This roaring Lion, seeks to devour.
Be not contented, with thy wicked state,
Get true Repentance, ere it be too late.
He that's indebted, till the debt be paid,
May be Arrested, and in Prison laid.
Thou art indebted; man by Adam fell,
Thou may be carried* Prisoner unto Hell.
Thou can not pay, who will thy surety be,
There Is none but Christ, can undertake for thee.
O then Repent, lay hold on Christ by Faith,
O be contented, thou art under wrath.
Change thy condition, hasten out sin,
Thou will be damned, if thou die therein.
Lot Sodom quit, that City full of sin,
Was all destroyed, and all that stayed therein.
The longer man, continues in his sin
The stronger hold, does Satan get in him.
A Gartison that is strongly fortified,
And victuall'd well, soon cannot be destroyed.
A Plant that is young, soon plucked up may be,
But thou can not, pluck up a rooted tree.
If thou be rooted in the sin of Pride,
And unbeleif, and nature, be thy guide,
It Is hard to pluck up, those great roots of sin,
Which all thy life, thou have been rooted in.
Break off thy sins and choose the better part,
O man Repent, and get a broken heart,
Thou better had, abide the grief and pain,
Of setting bones, then all thy life be lame.
That trouble's blessed, that brings the soul to God,
With patience bear, the Lords chastising Rod.
A Conscience bad, and quiet; needs must be,
An evil state, a sinful Lichargy.
Let no condition, that dishonor brings,
Unto the Lord, who is the King of Kings.
Give thee content, therein's no inward peace,
And outward comforts, they will shortly cease.
Take heed of trading, in a course of sin,
God never called thee, for to trade therein,
Art thou a servant? labor speedily,
To get into some godly Family.
Continue not, be not content to dwell,
Within the Suburbs, or the smoke of Hell.
But hasten out, of wicked sinners tents,
Lest thou incurr their heavy punishments.
Or be infected, with the Poisoning sin,
Of ill example that abounds therein.
When Joseph lived, and greatest sway did bear,
In Pharohs Court, he learned there to swear.
An ill example, soon is sucked in,
Our eyes behold, our ears do let in sin,
Good men by bad, may sooner be perverted,
Then bad by good, to godliness converted.
A master bad, a servant bad does make,
Men by their Masters, do example take.
When Labans flock, the pilled rods did see,
Of Poplar, Hasle, and the Chestnut tree,
They did conceive and brought forth speckle Goa^
With white, Ring-straked, and with spotted coat*
Men quickly learn, the tune that others sing,
Examples draw, and are prevailing things.
In Kedars tents, then do not thou reside,
Lest with the wicked, thou should be destroyed.
If in a wicked Family thou dwell,
Thou do inhabit in a little Hell.
A good man's house with blessing is perfumed,
The evil man's, in wrath shall be consumed.
When on the head, the holy Oil of Grace,
Is poured out, it much perfumes the place.
And does diffuse it self, most pleasantly,
Upon the skirts, of all the family.
Then labor thou, to live in such a place,
Where (by Gods blessing) thou may get more Grace*
For good examples, are magnetical
But ill examples, do in danger all.
Be not contented, with a little grace,
But strive for more, be growing up apace.
It Is not enough, that thou have only life,
Grace is increased, by a holy strife.
Paul pressed hard, toward the Holy place,
Still striving for, a greater stock of grace.
Some Stars in brightness, others do transcend,
More Grace, more Glory, brings in the end
Then strive for Grace, but seek not for content
In worldly wealth, which is not permanent.
Let Holiness, then be thy hearts delight,
Of Holiness God is the Prototype.
He is the Pattern and Original,
Of Holiness; but we are sinners all.
Divine Contentment, is a happy thing,
From this sweet Root does consolation spring.
Contented Spirits, cheerful spirits are,
These Golden Shields, keep off distracting care,
A cheerful Christian, will himself submit,
Unto Gods dealings, and rejoice in it.
The inward joy of him, does not abate,
That is contented, with his present state.
He that is contented, has a thankful heart,
And all Afflictions takes in good part,
Sweet Contemplations, holy hearts do raise,
They strive to be, the patterns of God's praise.
To the contented nothing comes amiss;
In all conditions, he contented is.
Contented Christians, they are only those,
Who wholly do, submit to Gods dispose.
And will not run into a course of sin,
To rid themselves, from troubles they are in.
But are contented, willingly to wait,
Gods leisure; till he free them from their straight.
Disquietness, proceeds from unbeleif,
This want of Faith, does cause this inward grief.
Faith scatters fears, and doubtings puts to flight,
It stills the heart when passions would affright,
Faith chides down passion, and prevents that si^^
When reason sinckes, then Faith aloft does swi^^
Faith shows the soul, that all its trials are,
From God in love; who of the soul takes care,
Then humble be, and learn to be content,
If Crosses come, be not impatient.
Keep Conscience clear, indulge not any sin,
Guilt breeds disquiet, if it be therein.
When as the More is got into the eye,
It makes it sore, it makes it watery.
And so does sin, raise tempests in the soul,
And brings a curse, it brings a flying roll.
But if thou keep the eye of conscience clear,
This flying roll, can never enter there.
Then pray to God, invoke his holy name,
O get thy heart into a praying frame.
Prayer will prevail, against thy discontent,
In greatest grief, Prayer gives a holy vent,
The Key of Prayer, well oiled with bryny tears
Unlocks the heart, of its affrighting fears.
By Prayer to God, unbosome then thy soul,
And eke thy self, upon thy Savior roll.
Make known thy mind, unto thy faithful friend,
Who to thy heart, can ease and quiet send.
Unload thy soul, into thy Saviors breast,
Where it may have, all sweet content and rest.
Though (God) and (man) and both, (...)
Give true contentment to (...)
FINIS.
Poems of Praise, and Poems upon several other Subjects.
GOod Hezekiah, pleasant Poems sings,
To God the Lord, the only King of Kings,
Who heard his Prayers, and granted his request,
Who heald his Plague, and freed him from the Pest
A good example, from a godly King,
The godly ones; God's Praises ought to sing.
When they are cumbered, with the greatest fear,
Terrors, and troubles, of their Conscience: where
Can they have help, but from their gracious God
Who whips his Children, after burns the rod.
Both Rich and Poor, then pay your chief age to
The Lord of Lords, the Rent of Praise you owe.
Can you pay less, unto so good a Lord,
Who gave his only Son, his Holy Word,
To save his Saints, to free their Souls from pain
To die for them, that they might live again.
Who all were dead, by Adams sinful fall,
But now revived, by Christ's Funeral.
Who all were slaves, till Jesus made them free,
Till Christ did die, and climb the cursed Tree.
Praise God, praise God, praise God the Lord on high
Praise God the Lord; the Holy Trinity.
Christ has redeemed thee, and discharged thy scor^
Praise God the Lord, praise him for evermore.
Proverbs, Chap. 18. Ver. 14. Man's spirit, will, Infirmities sustein,
But who can bear, the woundea spirits pain.

Man's spirit that, is furnished with Grace,
And fortified with favor of God's Face
May pass the Pikes, and Conquer all his foes,
Why should he fear, when God keeps back the blow
If God be for us, who can us withstand?
Who can oppose Iehovah's mighty hand?
Whose mercy to his people, has no bounds,
Nor stint, nor limit, it is so profound.
The impetuous current, of the rageing Sea,
He made Recoyle, to make his people way.
He made the flames, of hot and burning fire,
From his three Children, swiftly to retire.
He made the Roaring Lions, couch and quake,
And change their natures, for his Daniels sake.
He made the Locusts, lice, and Froggs and Flies,
In battle ray, at his command to rise:
To save his people, from their cruel foes,
To curb proud Pharoh, that did them oppose.
He fed Elijah by the croking Crow,
When Iezebel, did seek his overthrow.
He made the Furnace, like a downy bed,
To blessed Bainham, that was Martyred.
When David hunted was, by wicked Saul, Acts and Monuments 1030

When robbed of his wives, and children all,
When Zigglag was, to ashes burnt with fire,
When David had, no place of safe retire.
When David's Soldiers, spoke of scorning him,
When Holy David was great troubles in.
Then in distress, poor David wept full sore,
Then David wept, till he could weep no more,
Then David did, unto Jehovah cry
Then David prayed, to God in misery.
Then David's courage, was (by God) stirred up,
Then to the sword, the Amalekites he put.
Then by the sword, he made his enemies fall,
Then by Gods help he did recover all.
Then all true Saints: take courage in the Lord,
Trust him in trouble, read his Holy Word.
By weak; without; against means; he can free
His Saints and Servants, from their misery.
Since a good Conscience and a stock of grace
Be'th only means t'incounter and out face, Poems. of reproof

Our grand opposer, and to draw the stings
Out of our sorrows, and our sufferings,
And in the dreadful day, so sovereign are,
To save the soul from sinking in despair.
Then be reproved, those that take no care,
But are secure and slight these Jewels rare.
Those Fools and Bedlams, that have such a price
Put in their hands, and yet are not so wise
It to improve, for their eternal bliss,
But all their life, and health employed is.
In sensual lusts, and on their Dunghill pleasures,
Whilst they neglect, rich and eternal treasures.
What do you think, to such poor souls belongs,
That pleasure take, in Satan's Siren songs?
And drink themselves drunk, with Prosperity,
And take no care about Eternity.
But swiming down, the current of the times,
Neglect Gods grace, and grasp at Golden Mines.
Abuse, misuse, unthankfully mispend,
Their time and Talents, to an evil end.
Neglect the Harvest time, of ining grace,
And all their lives, licentious tracks do trace,
For wealth and riches, run, and ride, and strive,
And sail a pace, at Honor to arrive.
Alas poor souls, they seek to bear great sway,
But will that help them in the evil day?
When the hot gleam of earthly glory's past,
Great Clouds of dismal darkness draw on fast,
The grisly King of terrors stops their breath,
And they are haled to the port of death.
Then fiery flames, shall make them fear and quake
They must be drowned, in the burning lake.
What will these sleepers in the Harvest say,
When they be waked at the dreadful day?
When guilty conscience, gnawing at the heart,
Like to a Vulture, fiercely plays his part,
What will become of all the wicked then?
What is portion of such wicked men?
O vile ungrateful wretch, then hide thy face,
God did capacitate thy soul, for grace,
Why then do thou so lull thy self in lust,
Self love and Pride, are not God's Judgments just?
Wast made for naught, but drink, and sleep, and eat?
Laugh and be merry, that is a vain conceit.
Is Conscience seard? then there is no more to say,
But to adjourn thee, to the dreadful day.
But yet I pray, thou may reform thy ways,
Redeem the time, the remainder of thy days.
Awake, awake, and strike upon thy thigh,
Wrestle with God, by servent Prayer and cry.
Faith and Repentance is the only way,
Against despairing in the evil day.
Of all bad men, Of the saving Light.
most pestilent are those,
That impiously, God's Ministry oppose,
And by their hatred, malice and despite,
Study and strive to quench the saving light.
All that oppose, the saving word of grace,
Do strike directly, at Christ's blessed face,
Who is as tender, of his Ministry,
As he is of the Aple of his Eye.
O then Repent, to God make thine address,
Wound not thy Conscience, with such wickedness.
The sin of Persecution lowdly cries,
At Gods Tribunal, makes a hideous noise.
For just revenge, the vengeance of Gods ire
For tempests great, for showers of flaming fire.
To be distilled, and poured down on them,
That are such cruel, and blood thirsty men.
How long O Lord? O holy just and true,
Avenge our blood, pay wicked men their due,
These spightful spirits heated with hell fire,
Flesht with the blood of Saints, do much desire.
To cloud the Sun, the Gospel of Gods Grace,
In which transparent glass, Saints see his face.
The Nature of a Wounded Spirit.
FRom wounded spirits, there arises fear,
A wounded Conscience, what proud heart can bear?
Man does conflict in this great misery
With God himself, a God of Majesty.
Can sinful man, contend with God most high?
Or dust and ashes, with eternity.
When God is angry, no poor soul can stand,
Against the fierceness, of his heavy hand.
Can stubble dried; repel the flaming fire,
No more can we, resist Iehovah's ire.
When we are whipped, and lashed with his rod,
And do behold the frowning face of God,
Then we like leaves, with wind soon shaken are,
And tertifi'd with flashings, of despair.
Our heavy hearts, for fear, both faint and fail,
Our silly souls will then our sins bewail.
Then with our selves, we are at enmity,
And do enlarge the rent most grievously.
For when our souls, are in this trembling case,
We love too much, in Satan's Glass to gaze.
Who labors much, by lying cruelty;
Our sins both to enlarge and multiply.
Of every Molehil, he a Mountain makes.
That wounded spirits, may no comfort take,
To every sin, he adds a bloody sting,
That he poor sinners, to despair may bring.
Then what they think, remember, see or hear,
Is turned to terror, and to hideous fear.
The dreadful fancy, then does bear its part,
By fained horrors, with the trembling heart.
Which is perplexed, with most grievous pain,
And restless anguish, does therein remain:
And brings the Patient into such a rage,
That he his present horror to assuage,
Would rather die then live, and choose to dwell,
With Hellish Furies, in the Pit of Hell,
Such are the terrors, of a troubled mind,
Bruised and wounded, in this woeful kind.
As may appear, both by the desperate cry
Of Cain, and Judas, damned eternally.
As also by, the mournful sad complaints,
Of Job and David, and such glorious Saints.
These flames of horror, how shall we endure?
What Balsome can, a wounded Conscience cure?
In friends, not Physic, nothing's to be found,
The Blood of Christ, An admonition to the unconverted.
can only cure this wound.
Ye unconverted, be persuaded then,
To turn to God; for unconverted men,
Though they awhile, in pleasant places dwell
They Will be transplanted, in the Pit of Hell.
Then it is too late, Repentance then is past,
Redeem the time; whilst thy short life does last.
Forsake not mercy, but thy sins forsake,
God freely offers Christ; his offer take.
If thou refuse, how will thou then avoid
The wrath of God which wicked men abide?
Art sick, and senceless; do thou feel no smart?
Thou have the symptom of a stony heart.
When Conscience stings, and sins in Battle ray,
Do set themselves then (in the evil day)
What will thou do? those Lions then will tear,
Thy trembling heart and thee, confound with fear.
Then subtle Satan, he will play his part,
And shoot tentations, at thy fainting heart.
He was thy Master, thou did him obey,
Thou did walk with him, in the damned way.
Now in thy sickness, thou would him forsake,
But now the Devil does advantage take:
And does indite thee, for thy evil acts,
And now thy Conscience, proves thy filthy facts.
Thou tookst full draught, of carnal peace and pleasure
Thou did carrouse, and tipple in great measure,
Thou did God's faithful Ministers despise,
And with thy tongue by slanders, scoffs and lies.
Did much abuse them, and with great despite,
Did labor much, to quench the ^^ving light.
Thou did thy will, and power, and purse employ,
God's faithful Saints, and servants to destroy:
Such crying sins as these, and many more,
Stand on the unconverted sinners score.
Ye that are washed from the filth of sin, An admonition to the Converted.

Freed from that damned state, your souls were in
Fly sinful Lusts, defile your souls no more,
By such Rebellion, as you did before.
Sin is most hateful, in the sight of God,
And does procure, his smart correcting rodd.
God loves all creatures, that he ever made,
But hates sin, with everlasting hate.
Sin wounds the soul, brings men to misery.
Sin was the cause, that God's dear Son did die,
Sin Satan made sin sunk him into hell,
Sin sunk the Pit, where all the damned dwell.
Sin God offends, sin is the greatest evil,
Sin damns the soul, sin is the rankest Devil.

In sinful ways? why does not sin affright
Them from pursuing, of their Carnal pleasures,
And make them strive, to get eternal treasures:

A seeming fairness, on a hellish face.
He paints this Harlott, in a handsome dress,
And souls to sin, draws by deceitfulness,
Were this deformed Hagg, without false hair,
And painted face, she could not scules ensnare.
The grisly face of sin would men affright,
But by false colors it seems fair and bright.
Thus Satan covers, sins deformity,
And makes it pleasant, to the sinners eye.
Though of it self it is filthy, foul and naught,
Compared to meat thrust out, into the draught.
All other filth, the body does defile,
but sin's contagious, and the soul does soil.
It Is most infectious, like a Leprosy,
Infects the walls, the clothes, Posterity.
The sin of Adam, to his seed remains,
Till Christ's warm Blood, does wash away the stains.
The misery of Man, not Reconciled to God in Christ.
O Wretched man; where shall my Muse begin?
To state the case that thy poor soul is in.
Who art condemned, to eternal death,
Adjudg'd to Hell, before thou drawest breath.
Thy Father Adam, was by God created,
In innocence, in Paradise, was placed,
That he and his Posterity might have,
^mmortal life, and conquer Hell, and Grave.
To him, all earthly Creatures, were made free,
For meat and use, excepted was one tree,
That was forbidden, under pain of Hell,
He ate thereof, and so thy Father fell.
Pride puffed him up, he did believe the Devil,
He tasted of, the Tree of Good and Evil,
By this foul fall, eternal misery,
Intailed was, on his Posterity.
And made them subject to sore punishment,
Whilst they like thee, remain impenitent.
Finis (...).
A DIVINE POEM. OR A Confession of FAITH:
Composed in Meeter, By E. Manlove Esquire
Of the Scriptures and Argments to prove them the Word of God.
BY God's good word; the way unto salvation,
Is truly taught, by holy Inspiration,
O then believe it, and the same obey,
Give no such credit to Appocrypha:
Nor to traditions, of the Romish See;
All saving truths in Scripture written be.
And are recorded for Divinity
By truth it self, the holy Trinity.
Depending not upon the testimony
Of any Church; the Pope of Rome, or any:
But God the Author; our most blessed Lord,
Receive them therefore, as his Holy word.
But we by witness, of the Church may deem,
The Scripture worthy, of a high esteem.
O prize it highly, it is a precious thing,
Sweet tidings of Salvation, it does bring.
The style and doctrine, challenge reverence,
The efficacy, gives great evidence,
Of Gods known will; it makes a full discovery,
And shows the way for sinful man's recovery.
Though mortal man, of Scripture was the writer*
Yet God's good spirit, was the sole Inditer.
Some Secretaries, God did set apart,
Who spoke and wrote, but he inspired the heart.
These Writers did, for Holiness surpass,
All Popes and Doctors, of the Romish Mass.
And by their works, such depth of wisdom sho^^
As learned men, could not attain unto,
Yet never trained up, in Learned Schools,
With them compared, Philosophers are fools.
The Prophet Amos, he did far surpass,
Some learned Rabbis; yet a Heardsman was.
And Peter, James and John but fishermen,
Admired by the Elders of Jerusalem.
Amongst the writers, there is a sweet concord,
Which proves the Scripture, is the Holy Word.
None disagree, at which we may admire,
For God (himself) the Penmen did inspire,
They wrote such things, as never wit could hatch
No History, this History does match.
And what they wrote was full of Majesty,
Profoundness, Wisdom, and Authority:
Commanding Credit, to be had to them,
Denouncing threats, against all wicked men.
The end and scope, of all the Scriptures be,
For God's great glory, and man's felicity.
The writers ancient, for Antiquity;
Aoses more ancient, then the Heathens be.
The deadly hatred that the Devils bear,
against the Scriptures, (yet believe and fear)
Do prove them plainly, to proceed from God;
Nor from the dictates of mere flesh and blood.
The preservation of them also may,
(Though none in time, so ancient be as they,)
^nduce us to believe, and eke accord,
That all the Scriptures, are God's holy word.
Experience shows, the power of God in them,
Even by their humbling and exalting men.
And when God's spirit shall our hearts incline,
For to believe these Mysteries sublime,
And also write them, in our inward parts.
We shall believe them, with beleiving hearts.
Of GOD.
GOd is most glorious, wise, and does excel,
All future things, he knows, and can foretell:
He sees into each corner of our hearts,
And knows the secrets of our inner parts.
This great Jehovah, is Omnipotent,
Yea good and gracious, and omniscient.
A God of love, his love, to (his) sincere,
More then their fathers, or their mothers were.
He loves all things, that he did ever make,
And loves his Son, and (his) for his Sons sake.
His mercy's great, he succors (his) in need,
He did Elisha, by the Ravens feed.
He is most just in works, in word and will,
Rewarding good, detecting what is ill.
Of the Trinity.
GOD is one perfect Essence; full of Bliss,
Whose being of himself eternal is.
Yet in this Essence, there are persons three,
Distinct subsistances, Singula sunt in singulis omnia in singulis and singula
in o^nibus and unum omnia Aug. lib. 6. de tri. cap. ult.
these persons be.
And yet in substance, all these three are one,
Gods Essence is, without distinction.
And yet the persons, in this Essence be,
Distinguished by, the Holy Trinity.
The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost Divine,
Names, Orders, Actions do them best define,
The first the Father's named, in respect,
Of Christ his Son, and then of his Elect.
The second person, then; the Son is named,
Because he is of his Fathers nature framed:
And of his substance, is by generation,
The Eternal Son of God, not by Creation.
The third, the Holy Ghost, who by spiration,
Receives his Essence, not by generation.
And is so called, both in this respect,
That he proceeds and sanctifi's the elect.
So by the order, several things we see,
The several workings of the Trinity.
The Father works byth' son, and holy spirit,
Yet each for dignity, of equal merit.
None first, none last save order, is excepted,
One God, all God, all equally respected.
The Glotious Essence; wholly in all three,
And in each perion of the Trinity.
And by the Counsel of Gods holy will,
He ruled the world, Kingdom of God his eternal decree.
and so does rule it still.
And has determined all things by decree,
From time to time, from all Eternity.
Some unto life, some unto death there be,
Predestined; by this great decree.
From hence we learn, and so all Christians may
God deals with Dust, as Potters do with Clay.
The Creation.
GOd did of nothing, all things fitly frame,
And made them good, for Glory of his name
For in six days, created were by him,
The world; and all things that were made therein
And when he had all other creatures made,
Man; Male and Female, he did then create,
And into them, immortal souls infused,
With Righteousness, and Holiness indu'd.
In his own Image, he did them create,
Both free from sin; and in a holy state.
And God was pleased, a Covenant to frame,
And tied them to, performance of the same.
And life to them, and their posterity,
Did promise, if they kept it perfectly.
They were indu'd with liberty of will,
And freedom had, his statutes to fulfill.
To them all earthly Creatures, were made free,
For meat and use, excepted was one tree.
That was forbidden, under pain of Hell;
They are thereof; The fall of man.
so Male and Female fell,
Pride puffed them up, they did believe the Devil,
They tasted of, the tree of good and evil.
And by this sin, eternal misery,
Intayled was; on their Posterity.
Three things, Gods Providence.
each Christian, may observe from henc^
God's Power, Wisdom, and great Providence,
Who ordered all; to Holy ends herein,
Yet was no Author, of this grievous sin.
By Adam's fall; all men have inclination,
To every sin, and all their Generation.
And are bound over, to the wrath of God,
Curse of the Law, and his destroying Rod.
Now see compassion, in this woeful case,
God offers Man, Of the Covenac of grace
a Covenant of Grace:
That all the elect by Faith might saved be,
Both Jew and Gentile none excepted he.
Believe and live God offers Christ to thee,
^f thou accept him, hel'e a Savior be.
A Prophet, Priest and eke a Royal King,
Right Heir of all things, is this Holy thing.
Head of the Church, Redeemer of the same,
judge of the world, Christ Jesus is his name.
Twixt God and man, he is the great Peacemaker,
^urely for Saints, the only Mediator.
Equal with God, yet did assume the nature
Of Adams seed (fallen man) a sinful creature.
Yet without sin, but not infirmities,
He had a sense of all man's miseries.
Conceaved by the Holy Ghost he was,
And through the Virgin Mary's Womb did pass,
And of her substance, also did partake,
And yet his Godhead, he did not forsake.
Without Conversion, or Confusion there,
Godhead and Manhood, both conjoined were.
And does remain, without a separation,
Both God and man, the God of our salvation.
Who was Anointed, with the holy spirit
That he might mediate, for man and merit.
He undefiled was, and full of grace,
And fitted for, a Mediators place.
And from his Father, he received command
Who put all power, and judgment in his hand:
To undertake, and execute the same,
For the good of man, and glory of his name.
That God and man, might reconciled be,
And Christ do all things that might make him fre^
Christ did this Office, freely undertake,
And did discharge it, for his servants sake.
Which none could do but he, he did fulfill,
The Law exactly, and his Fathers will.
His soul and body under sufferings were,
His blessed body, The Passion of Christ.
peirced with a Spear.
This blessed man, on'th Cross was Crucified,
And for our sins, our blessed Savior died:
To save the Saints, and free their Souls from pai^
He died for them; that they might live again.
Who all were dead, by Adam's sinful Fall,
But now revived by Christ's Funeral.
Who all were slaves, till Jesus made them free,
Till Christ did dye, and climb the cursed Tree.
When death dominion got, the power it kept,
Till the third day, Of Christ's resurrection and assention.
our Blessed Savior slept,
Without Corruption, then he rose again,
And conquered death and Hell, and deadly pain
And the same body, which in earth did lie,
Assended up, into the Heavens high.
And is exalted to the Throne of Grace,
By God his Father in a glorious place.
There to remain, until he shall descend,
To judge the world, when it shall have an end:
Our Savior was, a Holy Sacrifice,
One offered up to God, which satisfied
^^s Fathers justice, and has reconciled,
^im to the elect, by Adam's fall defiled.
^he woman's seed did break the Serpents head,
^he Lamb was slain for Saints and buried.
Christ has Redemption, purchased, for men,
and intercession he does make for them.
those he redeemed, to them he does apply,
^his purchase made (by him) effectually.
and by his word a perfect Declaration,
^eveal'd to them, of the mysteries of salvation.
and by his spirit, in their inner parts,
^oth work Obedience, and does guide their hearts.
And all their enemies, he does overcome,
By's Power, Wisdom, and Dominion.
Of Free Will.
MAn in the state of Innocence had,
A power to will, and do both good and bad.
He badly did, and he by doing ill,
Lost both the power and freedom of his will.
He disobeyed, and lost his happy station,
To will or do, what might obtain Salvation.
To what is good, he wholly is averse,
And also dead, in sins and trespasses.
Man of himself, thus merg'd in misery,
Can nothing do, for his recovery:
Till God convert him; and do him translate,
Into a godly and a gracious state.
Then he does free him, from his natural sin,
And from the bondage, he before was in.
And by his Grace, does give him power and skill,
Spiritual works, as well to do, as will.
Yet still the seeds, of unregeneration,
Remain in him, till death remove his station.
And when he comes, into eternal bliss.
Free to all good (and not till then) he is.
Of Efectual Calling.
ALL those that unto life by God's decree,
Predestined are assuredly:
His Heirs shall be, and Heaven shall inherit,
And shall be called, by his word and spirit.
Out of the state of death, and deadly sin,
In which by Nature, they were plunged in:
Into a state of grace, and of Salvation,
By Jesus Christ, and through his mediation.
And their blind minds, shall filled be with light,
To understand, the things of God aright,
From them shall taken be, their hearts of stone,
And hearts of flesh, infused in the room,
And in their wills, they shall renewed be,
To do what is good; then grace shall make them free
This calling is by special grace alone
And not for any thing foreseen or known,
That is in man: therein he passive is;
God by his spirit, freely calls (his)
And them enables, also to embrace
His gracious offer, when he offers grace.
Elected Infants in their Infancy,
Are saved by Christ, although the Infants die.
Persons elect, deprived of outward call
By The Ministry, yet they are saved all.
Men not elected, though they called be
By The outward call, of word and Ministry.
And have some operation of the spirit,
shall not be saved, by Christ Jesus merit.
And those that be not Christians they can never,
Salvation have, by any way whatsoever.
Though they their lives, do frame by natures light,
And keep that Law, wherein they do delight.
Of Justification.
ALL those that called are effectually,
The same God does most freely justify.
And into them, does righteousness infuse,
They are the Children, God does freely choose,
Their sins he pardons, and their persons takes,
As righteous all, for Christ our Savior's sake.
Not for the works or deeds, which they have done,
Their debts discharged, by Jesus Christ (his Son)
He by his sufferings. did acquit from sin,
All those that rest, and do rely on him.
By lively faith, his righteousness is theirs,
This Faith God gives to his Adopted Heirs.
And they receave the same beleivingly,
And by their faith, God does them justify.
All saying graces do attend this one,
Faith works by love, and never goes alone,
And for all those that are thus justified,
To answer Justice, our dear Savior di'd,
Man's justified, this done, by Gods free grace,
And yet observe, that Justice keeps his place.
That all the elect, for which our Savior died,
By Gods decree, were freely justified.
Yet though elected, they are not just men,
Till Christ by the spirit, be applied to them.
Man justified, can never lose that treasure,
Yet he by's sins, may suffer Gods displeasure.
And lose the favor of his countenance,
Till he be humbled by true penitence.
And do confess his sin, and pardon get,
Renew his faith, and so remove the let.
Believers under, the Old Testament,
(As under new,) herein is also meant.
And of God's mercy, freely did partake,
And justified were for our Saviors sake.
Of Adoption.
ALL those (by God) that justified be,
For his Sons sake, adopted are and free.
God for his Children, them does freely take,
They have access unto the Throne of Grace,
And Abba Father, they may boldly cry,
And he will help them in their misery.
He pities them, and them he does protect,
He is their father and will them correct.
Yet he his Children never will forsake,
Coheirs with Christ, he does his Children make.
Of Sanctification.
ALL the Elect, that are regenerated,
In them new hearts and Spirits are created:
And all such Saints are sanctified more
By God's good spirit, then they were before.
And they not only are more sanctified
But sins dominion, is in them destroyed.
And that dominion being so destroyed,
Their several Lusts, in them are mortified.
More quickening and more fading graces then,
Appear in all such sanctified men:
More power they have to practice holiness
Which brings them to eternal hapiness,
Yet notwithstanding; Saints proceed so far,
Still their corruptions, raise a dealy war.
The flesh and spirit, always are at strife,
Flesh fights for death, the spirit strives for life.
And in this fight, the flesh does many maime,
And then the spirit, conquer's it again.
And then the Saints, in saving graces grow,
More flesh does fight, more grace it self does show.
Of saving Faith.
By The word and spirit, saving faith is wrought,
In all the elect, and they thereby are brought;
Into the way that leads to perfect bliss,
And then their Faith, by Prayer increased is.
Then by the Sacraments, they get more strength,
By Faith in Christ, their souls are saved at length.
By this true Faith; all Christians do accord,
To all the truths, in the revealed word.
And square their actions, by the Rule and Line,
Of God's good word, as he does them incline.
Doing and suffering, what he does require,
Doing the same, with hearts that are entire.
Trembling at threats, the promises imbraceing
Resting on Christ our Savior, for salvation.
Of Repentance unto Life.
BY Gods good spirit, and by his Holy Word*
Which are as sharp, as any edged sword*
True penitence, may be so wrought in him,
That was defiled, by notorious sin,
That by Gods grace, and by the sense and sight,
Of sins defilement, he may grow contrite
And greatly greive, that he did ever sin,
Against the Lord, that suffered death for him:
And may endeavor, with a true intent,
To walk the ways of God's Commandments.
Man by Repentance, cannot pardon merit
And yet without it, cannot bliss inherit.
No sins so small, but it deserves damnation,
No sin's so great, but man may have salvation;
By true Repentance, but observe herein,
He ought t'repent, of all and every sin
And them confess to God, and them forsake,
And pray for pardon, for our Saviors sake
And if he does, his brother scandalize
Or the true Church in any wise,
He must confes't, and sorrow for the same
And reconcile himself, to them again.
Of good Works.
SUch works as God by's holy word commands,
Such he accepts, from all his peoples hands.
But such as be the products of blind zeal,
Or man's device, shall not a whit avail.
Good works by men, done in obedience,
To Gods commands, are fruits and evidence.
Of true and lively Faith, and manifest,
That they by Faith do in assurance rest:
And have a good and strong, and full persuasion*
Founded upon the promise, of salvation,
Men by good works their brethren edify
Adorn Profession and (God) glorify.
They by their works, show what they do profess,
Their faith produces fruits of holiness,
No man (good works) by his own power can do
The spirit does enable him thereto.
Yet must he not, be negligent and sin,
But must stir up the grace of God in him.
They that attain unto the greatest height,
Yet their obedience always wants weight
Man's short of duty, in a sinful state,
How then can any superorrogate?
No mortal man (for sin) can pardon merit,
Such Popish thoughts, proceed from no good spirit,
When he has done what ever he can do,
His duty he, cannot attain unto.
What good, man does, proceeds from the spirit,
What Is wrought by him, is staind, where is then the merit?
Yet as the persons, of beleivers be,
By God (through Christ) accepted, so does he,
Their works accept, yet still its all through him,
For their best works defiled are with sin.
But God accepts them, if they be sincere,
And them rewards, as if they perfect were,
God does not unbeleivers, works accept,
And yet they sin, if they good works neglect:
Their works proceed, from hearts not purified
Therefore by them, God is not glorified.
Of the perseverance of the Saints
Whom God accepted has, for his sons merit,
And called and sanctified by his good spirit
They never can, (that are in such a case)
Fall finally; from that good state of Grace,
But shall therein continue to the end,
And then their souls, to Heaven shall ascend
This perseverance, wholly does depend
On God's decree, which never has an end:
And not upon the free will of sinful men,
But the spirit's power, that inables them.
This flows from, the love of God so free
In Christ, that it, can never changed be.
Yet through corruption, man may sin commit,
And for a time, may take delight in it.
And may thereby, incurr the Lords displeasure,
And be deprived of comfort in some measure,
And conscience wound, and hardness have of heart
And eke of judgments, feel the weight and smart.
Of the Assurance of Grace and Salvation.
THough Hypocrites, and unregenerate,
May through false hopes, mistake their own estate:
And thereupon presume of their salvation,
When they are in, the state of deep damnation:
Yet true believers, may assured be,
Of their salvation, and felicity.
If for salvation, they on Christ rely,
By Faith; and love him in sincerity.
Endeavoring good, detesting every sin,
A happy state, are such beleivers in.
And of salvation, may themselves assure,
And happiness that shall for aye endure.
Men may have Faith, and yet may not attain,
To full assurance, nor perceive the same.
For many times, God makes his Children wait,
And suffer conflicts, ere they do partake
Of such assurance; yet the Lord takes care
For their support: and keeps them from despair.
And they that get assurance, of salvation,
Are not so sure, but that it may be shaken.
For God the same, does often intermit
When they are careless of preferring it.
Or do commit, some great and griveous sin,
When by temptation Satan draws them in,
Or if the Lord withdraw himself from them
They walk in darkness, like despairing men.
Yet when the Lord, thus for a time departs
He leaves his spirit, working in their hearts.
And he himself returns in his due time,
Then their assurance is revived again,
Of Religious Worship, and Rest on t^^ Lords Day.
THe light of nature, shows, there is a Lord,
That rules and reigns over all the world.
Good of himself, and does do good to all,
Unto this God, we ought to cry and call:
Fear him and love him, trust him day and night,
Praise him and serve him, with our hearts and mig^^


Not m^ns device, not man's imagination,
Nor the suggestions, that proceed from Satan.
But Gods good word, prescribes the ready way,
Walk in the same, Rest on the Sabbath day.
Religious worship's, due to God alone,
To Angels, Saints, and other creatures none*
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, then pay,
This Holy Tribute, and no other way.
And that thy service, may have acceptance,
Do all thou do, through Christ his mediation.
Prayer with thanksgiving, from a holy heart
Of this pure worship, is a special part:
By God required, from all sorts of men,
But that it may accepted be from them:
It must be made, through Jesus Christ the Son,
And by the help, of his good spirit done.
According to his will most reverently,
In faith and love with all humility.
And all such Worship, (vocal) must be done
Not in the Popish way, but in the vulgar tongue.
We ought to pray, for all the sorts of men,
But for the dead, we must not pray for them.
Nor pray for him, that does of malice sin,
Against the spirit, that enlightened him.
Read Holy Scriptures, with a godly fear,
Sound Preaching of the Word, eke gladly hear:
Perform these duties in Obedience,
Unto the Lord, with faith and reverence.
Singing of Psalms, with good and gracious hearts,
Receave the Sacraments, for they are parts.
Of that Religious Worship, God commands,
And does expect, at all his peoples hands.
Besides Religions Oaths, Vows, solemn Fasts,
And eke Thanksgivings, for deliverance past,
Religious Worship* will accepted be,
In any place, performed reverently,
And is not tied, to places here or there,
God may be truly worshipped every where.
In public, private, or in families,
But yet more solemnly, in Church Assemblies:
Which wilfully, must not neglected be,
When God calls us, to such solemnity.
One day in seven, wholly must be kept,
And for a Sabbath, must a part be set:
And solemnized, unto the living Lord,
According to his will and holy word.
The seventh day, the J with Sabbath was,
Till Jesus Christ, from death to life did pass.
Since on the first, it has been kept always,
And so is (now) the Christian Sabbath day.
This Sabbath, to the Lord is holy kept,
When as the people do, with due respect.
To his commands, fit and prepare their hearts,
And worldly business, wholly set a part.
And do observe a holy rest that day,
Not to their Recreations giving way:
Nor their own works, nor words, nor thoughts,
Works of necessity, and mercy yet we ought
To do: but we must always careful be,
In all we do, to act Religiously.
Of the Church.
ALL God's Elect that Heaven shall inherit,
And be by Faith, pertakers of Christ's merit
All those the unive^sal Church we call,
They are Christ's flock, and he the head of all,
Out of all Nations, is this flock selected,
Clens'd by Christ's Blood, and by himself accepted
And the whole number of th'elected ones,
That have been, are, or shall be he will own.
The Church of Christ, which visible we call,
And under the Gospel, is Catholicall
Consists of them and theirs, that do profess,
The true Religion, and true Holiness.
Out of this way, can no sure expectation
Be had by any, of their souls salvation.
Unto the Church, Christ gave the Ministry
Which by his spirit, works effectually.
For gathering, and for making perfect (his)
That are elected, to eternal bliss
And of this Church, Christ Jesus is the head,
And by his spirit, are his people lead.
The Pope of Rome, cannot in any sense
Be Head thereof, you may collect from hence*
That he is the Antichrist, and man of sin,
That does oppose Christ's holy Church, and him.
Of the Communion of Saints.
ALL Saints to Jesus Christ their head; are knit
By's spirit and faith, and have a fellowship
With him in's sufferings, death, and in his graces
His Resurrection; and in (happy cases)
Are all such Saints, and Heaven shall inherit,
And eke pettake of Christ and all his merits.
So all such Saints, to one another knit
In love, begets a holy fellowship.
They have Communion, in each others graces
Share in their Prayers, and in their hearts have places
And are obliged, such duties to perform,
Public and private, as may them concern.
And to their mutual good, conducing be,
Both to the outward man, and inwardly.
This fellowship, which Saints, with Christ enjoy,
In no respect, gives them equality,
With him, none of his Saints, or servants can,
Compare, as he, is either God or man.
Nor Saints Communion, never can destroy
In Goods or Lands, their sole propriety.
Of Baptism.
Baptism is a Holy Sacrament,
Which does to us, most lively represent,
The powerful washing of the blood and spirit,
Of Christ; that did for all beleivers merit.
Into the Church, they have initiation,
And signs and seals, of their regeneration,
Pardon of sins, is eke confirmed to them,
And into Christ, they are ingrafted then.
They sin that do, this Ordinance neglect,
Salvation yet, to it is, not so anext
But that without it infants may be saved,
And some into Perdition go, that have it.
Of the Lords Supper.
THis ordinance unto the soul is sweet,
Where there is faith, and where the Heart's upright,
What empty, poor, and barren things are then,
The Sacraments, to unbeleiving men?
Get faith, Repent, draw near to God and pray,
Use ordinances in a Holy way.
It Is great dishonor, to the God of might,
When men, his holy Ordinances slight,
O then call in for all the stock of grace,
Stir up affections, in this weighty case.
First get your sins, slain by the edged sword,
Of Gods good spirit in the Holy Word
Excite your faith, Repentance exercise,
Forsake all sins, and buy the Pearl of prise,
Faith is the Captain and the Master-grace,
Faith his our souls, our Savior to embrace.
Faith is a Jewel, faith does justify,
B^ faith on Christ, poor sinners do rely.
Faith gives us interest, in his benefits,
Faith, weary souls, for Grace and mercy fits.
Faith, gives us interest, in Christ's blood and merit,
Faith, makes Christ ours, both in his grace and spirit,
Faith makes the soul, his Savior apprehend,
The grace of faith, our souls to Christ commend.
By faith, we do, our Saviors body eat.
By faith, Christ's body, we receave for meat:
By faith, we drink our blessed Saviors blood,
Our Saviors Body, is his servants food
The matter of the Sacrament indeed,
Is Christ himself, whereon we chiefly feed.
By him, we nourished are, our sins are killed,
By Christ's warm blood, our souls with Grace are filled
O sin-sick soul, can thou more dainties wish
Then to be nourished, by this Princely Dish?
Has Christ provided, sinners such a Feast?
By which their graces are so much increast
O then praise God, fly evil, follow good,
Thy filthy sins, have shed thy Saviors blood.
All wicked persons and impenitent,
Partake not of, this blessed Sacrament.
For graceless persons, by the same grow worse,
Instead of blessings, they obtain a curse.
Grace in the Sacrament is never bred,
But grace by it is Increased and nourished
They that come graceless thither, g^aceless may*
Return from thence, and go much worse away,
The State of Man after Death, and of the Resurrection of the Dead.
WHen men are dead, their mortal bodies must,
Both see corruption, and return to dust.
And then their souls, which shall immortal be,
Return unto the Lord immediately.
The souls of Saints, that lived righteously
Are then received into the Heavens high,
Where they behold Gods face, in glorious light,
Ath' day of Judgment souls and bodies meet.
The souls of wicked men, are sent to Hell,
Where they in pain, and utter darkness dwell.
And are reserved unto the judgment day,
Then to receive their dreadful doom for aye.
Two places, only God, for souls created,
When souls and bodies should be separated,
At'h day of Judgment, such as lite enjoy
Shall all be changed: but they shall not die.
And all the dead, that day shall raised be,
With the same bodies, not such qualities
And to their souls, united be again,
Some doomed to bliss, some to eternal pain.
Of the last Judgment.
GOd has appointed, Jesus Christ his Son,
To judge the World; and to pronounce the doom
Of wicked Angels, and all earthly men,
Who shall appear, and shall be judged then,
By Jesus Christ, who shall in glory sit,
Condemn the wicked, and the Godly quit.
This day of Judgment, it shall surely come,
God knows the time, and none but he alone.
O Watch, and Pray; then night and day,
God's Laws obey, that Christ may say,
Thou have done faithfully:
Thou have well done: O therefore come,
And enter into Joy.
POEMS Against POPERY: COMPOSED

By Edward Manlove of Ashborn in the County of Derby Esquier.

LONDON Printed, for Richard Mills at the Pestel and Mortar without Temple
Bar. 1667.

To the READER.
PEruse these Poems, dressed in mean attire,
Love truth, hate error heartily desire,
To follow Peace, and worship God aright,
Observe the Scriptures, Romish errors slight.
The Roman Church, did Christ her Spouse forsake,
And to her Idols, did her self betake.
She is unclean, defiled with spots and stains,
Unsound, corrupt, but yet a Church remains.
Therefore beware, of utter detestation,
Of all her doctrine, all is not Innovation.
Truth's fundamental, which themselves descrie,
By their bright luster do not thou deny,
But them embrace, and shun what is unsound,
Coin current is, that is in a channel found,
Refuse the Chaff, do not the Wheat reject,
Hate Heresy but wholesome Truths respect.
They hold three persons in the Trinity,
We hold the same, and do them deifie.
But for their error, and their false Tradition,
They do deserve our utter opposition,
Regard them not, believe not Romish Fables,
Abhor their Idols, Crosses, Beads, and Bables.
Their Agnus Dei, which Pope Urban tells
Will work strauge feats, and evil sprights dispel,
Their creeping crouch, their kissing of the Pax,
Their Medals, Roses, and such Romish knacks.
Their hallowed swords, their false equivocations,
In sacred Oaths, their mental reservations,
Their worshipping of wooden stock and stones,
Their Adoration of old rotten bones.
Their Altars Vestures, Images and Tapers,
Their Censings, Offerings, Shrifes, and holy Waters.
Their new found Faith, of Transubstantiation,
Their Prayers to Saints a Popish Innovation,
Their Cancelling Christ's Will and Testament,
By mangling of the Holy Sacrament.
Their Bulls their Pardons and their Purgatory,
Their Latin service and such Ceremony,
Their Pilgrimage their Merits and Processions,
Their five new Sacraments, their forced Confessions,
Their deifying of the Romish Whore,
Vain sacrifice and many errors more.
These Popish errors, totally discard,
These Apish toys* (good Reader) disregard,
And so farwell, what follows now peruse
Embrace the Truth, my errors all excuse.
POEMS Against Popery.
Composed by Edward Manlove Esquire
I. Against the Popish Tenent of Justification by inherent Righteousness
INherent Justice no man Justifies,
Our Righteousness, in Christ our Savior lies,
And his, made ours, by faith it does suffice,
To make us Righteous* in Gods Righteous Eyes.
And all his Members clearly will acquit,
A'^h Judgment sear, when Jesus Christ shall sit,
The Romish Whore, a Bastard brood did nurse,
Who blast this truth, with a tridentine curse,
Christ's righteousness, (imputed) must give pla^^
To righteousness, by our inherent grace,
This horrid point, Pelagius, did invent,
And 'twas confirmed, at the Council Trent.
Till then, this point of Faith, did not intrude,
Till then, this error, Councels did exclude.
Also Chrysostom, Ambrose, Bernard, Gregory, Jerome.
Which now for truth the Romish Church reteit
This new sound faith, does still at Rome remain,
But Austin does, this Popish point deny,
Inherent justice cannot justify.
In vain the Papists wrangle and dispute,
This Popish point, which Scripture does confute
We are unjust, our hearts are all unclean,
Our righteousness, Ec. 7.20 Pr. 20.9 Es. 64.6. To. 7.23*
as filthy rags remain.
And in our members, are the law o^ sin,
Which leads us Captain, waging war therein,
In many things, all mortal men offend
We sinners are, James 3.2. Joh. 1.8. Act. 13.39. Rom 3.24. Ephesians 8.9 2 Cori.
5.21.
till sinful life do end.
We are deceived if we do deny,
This sacred truth, and full of falcity,
Through faith in Christ beleivers are made just,
By his free grace, to works we dare not trust.
Our blessed Savior, was for us made sin,
And we the righteousness of God, in him.
Can filthy rags poor sinners justify?
Or save them from eternal misery?
Repent, believe, to God for mercy pray:
Christ's blood alone, can wash thy sins away.
Against the Doctrine of Merit
HOw can man merit? all that he can do,
Is less then duty, strictly ties him to.
And half done duties, how should God respect?
Or what reward is due for such neglect?
Eternal death, is wages due for sin,
Neglect of duty needs must fall therein.
Through Jesus Christ, God gives eternal bliss, To. 6.13

Salvation comes, no other way but this.
God, works accepts, if faith do them evert,
And them rewards, but not for their desert.
These merit-mongers, therefore much mistake
That look for Heaven, for their merits sake.
Against the Doctrine of Transubstantiation.
THe Romish Prelates, labor by coertion,
To make men own, this mavelous conversion
Have Priests such power, by words of consecration,
Of Bread and Wine, to make such transmutation?
A point Prodigious, that a Popish Priest,
Can make his God, or re-create his Christ,
This Novelty, of Transubstantiation,
At Lateran Council, An. dom 1215 500. years before.
had its confirmation.
But Protestants, may Pope Gelasius quote,
Who long before, against this error wrote.
This Cockatrice, was hatched in latter time,
Nursed up at Rome, by such as Bellarmine.
This Monstrous Bratt, the Roman Church begot
The Greeks abhorred it, Ancients owned it not.
Augustine he, does learnedly maintain,
That Bread and Wine substantially remain.
The Scripture says, 1. Cor 11.26.
that after consecration,
The bread is bread, where is then this transmutation
How can Christ's body, crucified for thee,
At once, Acts 3.21. Binius
in many thousand places be?
If thou remain in Christ, and Christ in thee,
Thou have received this sacred Mystery.
Against the Doctrine of the Half Communion.
THis Romish error, Anno 1453
lately started up,
The Council Constance* took away the Cup.
And thus they then, presumptuously did wrent,
Our Saviors blessed will, and Testament.
By Christ's Example, they will not be lead,
They to the Laics, only give the bread.
Though Christ himself all Christians do enjoin
To eat the Bread, and also drink the Wine.
Yet Popish Prelates, 1 Cor. 11.28.
Christ's Commandment slight
And rob his people of a holy right.
By this Presumption, all may plainly see,
How Sacriledgious, Popish Prelates be.
Against Missal Sacrifice.
OUr Blessed Savior, Heb. 10.10.11.12.13.14.
on the Cross,
A sacrifice for sin,
His body offered, once, for all,
For such as trust in him.
There needs no further sacrifice
Our sins to do away.
Vain is the Missal sacrifice,
That Is offered every day.
Against Image Worship.
THis Worship well deserves the name,
Of gross Idolatry,
God's holy word's, against the same,
And all Antiquity.
Lev. 26. ver. 1. Deuteronomy. 16.22. Esa. 42 17, and 45 16. Deuteronomy. 27 15. Mic. 5.13.
Ye shall your selves no Idol make,
Nor Graven Image rear,
Nor bow to it, nor Worship give,
The Scripture makes it clear.
Against Papal Indulgences and Purgatory.
THe Romish Clergy, labor much,
This error to maintain,
This fire does make their Kitchins smoke,
This crast, brings in their gain.
This brings their Pardons into play,
This puts them off, with speed.
To all such silly souls as do,
Believe the Romish Creed.
This dreadful Doctrine, makes men's hearts
To tremble and to fear,
Away for Pardons then they pack,
Although they buy them dear.
Yet there is no torment after death,
To those that faithful be,
Their sins dispersed as a Cloud,
And their iniquity
They into judgment shall not come,
Their souls are free from pain.
And in eternal peace and joy,
For ever shall remain.
Against Divine Worship, in an unknown Tongue.
BArbarian like, those Bablers are,
That Service say, o^ Cant
In Greek or Latin unto those,
That understanding want.
This profits not, it is not the way,
God's Glory to advan^e,
This Romish practice in the Church,
Produces Ignorance.
1 Cor. 14, 5, 6, 9, 11, 13 14, 23.
Five words with understanding spoke,
More profits people then,
Ten thousand words, in unknown tongues
Spoke to unlearned men.
Against forced Sacramental Confession.
BOth good, and beneficial use,
There may be of Confession,
By such as burdened are with sin,
And grieved for great transgression.
But setting them upon the rack,
And straining them so high,
As strict confession of all sins,
Is Romish Tyranny.
No such Confession, is required,
As does to sin invite,
And nameing fleshly pleasures does,
Much move the Appetite.
For who can tell how often he sins?
Or gives to God offense,
He always sins that so presumes,
Upon his innocence.
As that he can enumerate,
His great transgressions all,
For he that thinks them less then great,
Does into greater fall.
Christ did not to the sinner say,
That had Faith and Contrition,
Thy sins must numbered be, or else,
Thou can have no remission,
He Absolution freely gives,
Unto his children dear,
Mar. 9.2
Thy sins forgiven are says he,
My son be of good cheer.
Against Invocation of Saints.
1 Kings 8.39. Eccl. 9.5.6 Esai. 62.16. Ps. 7.10.44.20. and ^.9.4.11. Prove.
15.10 and 17.3. and 24.12. Jer. 21, 20, and 87 10, and 10 11. Psalm. 50, 14,
Against Ephesians, 2.8
THe Saints in Heaven do not know,
Our hearts they cannot hear,
Our Prayers, or supplications,
Made in this lower Sphere.
Our God alone, our Prayers does hear,
Prayers made to Saints are vain,
God knows the secrets of our souls,
And tries all our Reins.
Call on the name of God the Lord,
For ease in pain and grief,
And in thy greatest troubles he,
Will send thy soul releif.
Against the seven Sacraments.
OUr blessed Savior, none but he,
Could make a Sacrament,
He made but two he made no more,
Is very evident.
1 Cor. 10 1, 2, 3 4. St. Austin.
Baptism, the Supper of the Lord,
These flowed like a flood
Out of the side of Jesus Christ,
In Water and in Blood.
The one it is the Sacrament,
Of our Initiation,
The other Sacrament is for,
Our holy confirmation.
Against the Doctrine of Tradition.
THe Law of God's, a perfect law,
And needs no supply,
What Is needful to salvation,
Is fully taught thereby.
In vain do many worship God,
Matthew. 15.9.
And teach for doctrine sound,
Commandments o^ wi^ked men,
Thus errors do abound.
Against the Universal Headship, of the Bishop of Rome.
POpe Gregory the great, Inveighs,
Against this Lordly name,
As insolent, the Churches plain
As wicked and Profane.
A great corruption of the faith,
To God a great abuse,
Against the Canons of the Church,
Against The Apostles use.
Whosoever use this lo^ty style,
And glory in the same,
Forerunners are of Antichrist,
And glory in their shame.
Against Challenged Infallibility.
THis Arrogation does appear
A Paradox to be,
For former Popes, have fowlly fallen,
Into flat Heresy,
And Councels have condemned them,
For errors manifest,
The Council held, at Basil take,
Multi poncifices errores and he resies lapsi esse leguntur. Consi. Basil in
Ep. Sinod.
For one among the rest.
Against the Popes Superiority to General Councels.
Well near a thousand Fathers of
The Romish Church did Vote,
Against this Dommineering Power,
Pretended by the Pope.
And in the Council Constance thus,
Determined punctually.
An. 1415
If General Councels make Decrees,
The Pope is bound thereby.
Against the Presumption of Papal Dispensations.
POpes had no power, in former time,
To grant a Dispensation,
against Decrees, by Councels made,
This comes by Usurpation.
These boundless Dispensations, are,
A wicked Innovation,
This great Presumption plainly shows,
The Popes degeneration.
Against the Popes Domineering over Kings and Emperors.
Po. Gregory said thus Mauritius vobis Obedientiam prebere desidero.
THe Pope to Theodosius came,
With Cap and bended knee,
^ut now the greatest Monarch must
Stoop to the Romish See.
Now Popes their lawful Sovereign slight,
These Prelates greater be,
Then all the Princes of the World,
In Power and Dignity.
Now Popes pretend a lawful power,
Their Emperors to dethrone
And of their Empires to dispose,
As if they were their own.
The Emperor like a Serving man,
When as the Pope commands,
Must hold a Basin, whilst that he,
Does wash his Holy Hands.
And sometimes like a Stable Groom
His Horse, must lead and guide,
And hold his Stirrup, whilst that he,
On Horsback, gets to ride.
And sometimes like a Porter must,
Upon his Shoulder bear,
His Holiness (the Pope forsooth)
And Homage to him swear.
This domineering over Kings,
And Emperors does show,
How Pontificial Prelates have,
Robbed Caesar of his due,
These Romish Tricks, in former times,
Nor better were then Treason,
Against God's holy Word, they are,
Against both right and reason.
All Christian Kings, and Princes great,
Abhor the Romish Whore,
Break off her Bonds, cast off her Yoke,
And never own her more.
A form of Prayer Composed in Meeter,
By Edward Manlove Esquire
O God most great, whose Glorious seat.
Is in the Heavens high,
^t thy command: both Sea and Land,
Obey thy Majesty.
and at thy will, the Seas stand still,
And neither rage nor foame,
from side to side, to Winds and Tide,
Thou make thy power known.
Thou glorious art, in every part,
Thou art Omnipotent,
Be It far or near, thou dwell there,
Thou art Omniscient.
The Heavens high, nor lofty sky,
Thy Glory can contemn,
Thou raign'st on high, thy Majesty
Does Winds and Waves restrain.
To those that do, by shipping go,
Into the Waters deep,
By works of wonder, and words like thunder,
Thou show thy power and might,
And thou the Storm, turn'st to a calm
And then the Waves are still
Thou make glad, them that were sad,
And sav'st them from all ill,
We therefore all, may fear to call,
Upon thy dreadful name.
For our vile lips, they are unfit,
To nominate the same.
We here abide, the stubble dried,
Thou art consuming fire,
Thou might's us burn, and make us turn,
To ashes in thine ire.
In our own eyes, we all are vile,
Our ways are very wicked,
Then in thy sight, whose eyes are bright,
How shall we be acquitted?
We are unfit, to kneel or fit
Before thy gracious Throne,
Or to draw nigh, thy Majesty,
To make our cases known.
But Lord we come, to thee alone,
For Jesus Christ his sake,
Accept our Prayers which we present
And through thy spirit make.
We are unworthy to be called
Thy sons, or have the name,
Of any of thy servants; yea
The meanest of the same.
Our duties unto thee, and man,
(O Lord) we have neglected,
And not obeyed thy Holy Word,
But have thy Laws rejected.
We have not honored thee (O Lord)
With fear and reverence,
But sinned against thy just Precepts
By disobedience.
O Lord we have not Worshipped thee,
According to thy will,
Nor in our hearts, have had delight,
Thy statutes to fulfill,
But we confess, we have abused
Thy great and glorious name,
And also we, irreverently,
Have often used the same.
We have Profaned the Sabbath day,
In whole or else in part,
By needless thoughts, and words and works,
We all have carnal hearts.
By murderous thoughts, and wicked words,
We have our neighbors wronged
Our wicked words, have cut like swords,
We all have evil tongues.
We have not sought, our neighbors good
Nor had a tender heart,
To our poor brethren in distress,
Nor pleaded on their part.
We have not visited the sick,
We have not clothed the naked,
We have not log'd the stranger, nor
Him compassionated.
Our souls and bodies are unclean,
By thoughts, and words, and actions.
We have defiled our sinful souls
We have corrupt affections.
And rotten speeches do proceed
From our corrupted hearts,
Our eyes and ears do let in sins,
Which poison every part.
We have not made a Covenant,
With hearing sight and senses,
We have not watched* and prayed and fasted,
We have not shunned intemperance.
We have not used all good means,
To further the estate,
Neither of our selves or neighbors, but
Have been inordinate,
We have not labored to maintain,
Or justly to defend,
Our neighbors credit or good name,
For any holy end.
We have not been contented with,
Our Callings and Estate,
But have unjustly coveted,
Our selves to elevate.
Now Lord since we have sinned so,
And done so wickedly,
We justly merit, to inherit
With Dathan's family,
Eternal pain and misery,
Within the pit of Hell,
And with the Devil, and the damned
We do deserve to dwell.
For if thou did, not Angels spare,
Which had such glorious stations,
But hurl'st them down, from Heaven high,
And from their habitations.
Into the place, and pains of Hell,
In darkness there to lie,
Who sinned once, and sinned but once,
Against thy Majesty.
And our first Parents did expel,
From pleasant Paradise.
Who broke one law, and them to that
The Devil did entice:
What vengeance then, may we expect,
For all our filthiness?
Who daily sin, like water drink,
And daily do transgress.
And have not broken only one,
But all thy Laws most holy,
Thy Precepts, Statutes and Commands,
We have neglected wholly.
Sin upon sin we heaped have,
And do deserve the sentence,
Due unto those, that thee oppose,
And sin without Repentance.
We all are vile, and wretched men,
Thy Law our souls condemns,
Yet Lord thy Gospel us assures,
Thy Grace thy Law transcends.
Thy goodness does delight to reign,
Where sins do most abound,
Thy mercies master all thy works,
Thy mercy wears the Crown.
O therefore Hallowed be thy name,
Who of thy self art holy,
Thy judgments just, do show the same,
Thou art a God of Glory.
Thou art Jehovah, Lord of Hosts,
Thy power is very great,
Thou Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
We humbly thee entreat,
Give us such knowledge of thy self,
And of the Trinity.
And of thy word and works, that we
Thy Name may glorify.
Good Lord let us, thy word believe,
And fear thy dreadful name,
Good Lord grant us fidelity,
To Sanctify the same.
O Lord make us, fear thee alone,
Give us Humility,
And Patience, that we from hence,
May yield most willingly.
And may submit our selves unto,
Thy just correcting rod,
Who do in love, correct the elect,
And art a gracious God.
O give us Grace, that we may praise,
And hallow thy great name,
And by our Conversations may,
Give Glory to the same.
Lord let not sin, nor Satan reign,
But let thy Kingdom come,
And let thy spirit, in our hearts,
Strive for Dominion.
Abolish Satan's Kingdom Lord,
And from captivity,
Enlarge thy Saints, and break their bands,
And set thy servants free,
Collect and gather thine Elect,
O, do it speedily,
And to that end do thou set up,
A faithful Ministry.
And let the blessing of thy spirit,
Accompany thy word,
O slay the sins of all thy Saints,
By that two edged Sword.
And daily more, increase the gifts,
And graces of thy spirit,
In all thy Saints and servants that,
Thy Kingdom shall inherit.
And by thy word and spirit rule,
The hearts and lives of them,
Kill their corruptions, curb their lusts,
And make them watchful men.
Raise up Religious Magistrates,
That truly may adore,
The Beauty of the Spouse of Christ
And hate the Romish Whore.
Root out dumb dogs, and purge the Church,
From all impurity,
Remove those Rocks that give offense,
Root out Idolatry,
Root out all greedy Wolves, O Lord,
Root out those Currs with speed
That fleece and fley, and snarle and bite,
And take no care to feed.
O finish (Lord) with have and speed,
The Kingdom of thy Grace,
Call all th'lect, that are uncalled
Give thine a glorious place.
Come quickly Lord, dissolve the world,
Destroy this earthly station,
Show thy respect, to thine elect,
O hasten their salvation.
Stir up thy strength, and come at length,
Thy deadly foes destroy,
Who do oppose, both thee and those,
That love thy Majesty.
On thee we rest, thy time is best,
Thy blessed will be done,
O grant we may, from day to day,
Obey thee every one.
And that we may, thee so obey,
Lord grant that we from hence,
May willingly, submit to thy
Good will and providence.
And all at once, may now renounce,
Our evil inclinations,
The World, the Flesh, and Satan's will,
And labor for Salvation.
And may the Angels imitate,
And Saints that are in Heaven.
And such obedience yield to Christ,
As should to him be given
Give us this day our daily bread
O Lord we thee entreat,
Give life and health, and clothes and wealth,
And food for us to eat.
And give us grace, on thee to place,
Our trust and confidence,
Till life does end, let us depend,
Upon thy Providence,
Forgive our debts, as even we,
On debtors pity take,
Remit our sins and blot them out,
For Jesus Christ his sake,
And lead us not into temptation,
But free us from all evil,
And grant to us thy preservation,
From World, and flesh, and Devil.
Now unto thee, all praises be,
O Lord that did elect,
Us to salvation, before Creation,
And others did reject.
Lord thy free Grace, in this great case,
Most plainly does appear,
That such as we, should saved be,
And Christ our scores should clear.
O blessed Son, thou have well done,
To die for thine Elected,
For thou wast slain, and sufferedst pain,
That we might be protected.
Great was thy merit, with holy spirit
Thou fully wast anointed,
And full of Grace, fit for the place,
Thy Father had appointed.
To mediate and undertake,
For us poor sinful creatures,
Thy Fathers will thou did fulfill,
And did assume our natures.
And in due time the Cross did Climb,
And suffered'st grievous pain,
Wast after dead and buried,
And then did rise again.
And through the sky to Heaven high,
Unto a glorious place,
Then did thou go, and mount up to,
Thy Fathers Throne of Grace.
And reconcile that bloody broile,
That Adam's sin procured,
Which being done, by Gods own son,
His Saints are all secured.
Thou art indeed, the woman's seed,
That broke the Serpents head,
And with a flood, of thy own blood,
A Pardon purchased.
Thy sacrifice, did pay the price,
For us poor sinful creatures,
Lord thou did dye, and satisfy,
Sin suffered in our natures.
O blessed son, since thou have done,
This mighty work of merit,
The same apply effectnally,
By thy most holy spirit.
That thy redeemed may be esteemed,
By God and godly men,
Thou blessed son, O still go on,
And interceade for them,
In thy good word* thou do record,
A perfect Declaration,
To all thy sons, and chosen ones,
Of 'th mysteries of Salvation.
Now in their hearts, and inner parts,
Work by thy spirit in them,
Obedience, that they from hence,
May live like holy men.
By thy Dominion overcome,
Their Enemies O Lord,
And to that end, be pleased to send,
Thy spirit with thy word.
To good and bad, we freewil had,
But now since Adam's fall,
It is not so, to will or do,
We are unable all.
We are both dead and buried,
Till thou shall us translate,
Till thou convert, and bring the heart,
Into a gracious state.
Then shall we be, for ever free,
From our old natures clogg,
And from the sin that we are in,
And freely serve our God.
And in a case, that (by his grace)
We shall have power and skill,
Both readily and spiritually,
Good works to do or will,
Yet still the breed, of the old seed,
Of Unregeneration,
In us remains, till mortal pains,
Remove our earthly station.
And we enjoy in heaven high,
The Saints felicity,
Then we shall be, made fully free,
To do good perfectly.
In the mean time, those that are thine,
And Heaven shall inherit,
O gracious Lord, call by thy word,
And by thy holy spirit.
Out of the sin, that they are in,
Into a state of grace,
Through Christ thy Son, let it be done,
For thy own mercies sake,
O Lord give light, to blind, give sight,
Remove their hearts of stone,
And hearts of flesh, good and upright,
Lord give them in the Room,
Renew their wills, and give them Grace,
By'd them renewed be,
Lord give them grace, to grow apace,
For Lord thy grace is free.
And there is none, but thee alone,
Can give this special grace,
Thou offerest it, and make us fit
Thy offer to embrace,
This is our case, it is thy free grace,
And thy free grace alone,
It Is not for any grace in us,
That was foreseen or known.
Lord pierce our hearts, and inner parts,
We are but passive all,
Let thy good spirit, for thy sons merit,
Give us an innward call.
O Lord accept, (us) thine elect*
Lord freely justify,
Us thy poor Saints, Lord hear our plaints,
Thy son for us did dye.
He paid the debt, removed the let,
He suffered for our sin,
O for his sake, Lord pity take,
We do rely on him,
Lord we believe for sin we greive,
Lord help our unbeleif.
Let thy free Grace, good Lord take place,
Thou sav'st the sinful theif,
Adopt us sons and set us free,
(Us for thy children take)
Not for the works that we have done
But for Christ Jesus sake.
Give us access, to make address,
Unto the Throne of grace.
Let us repent, cry and lament,
Our sad and sinful case,
O Lord accept, do not reject,
Our Prayers, and tears and cry,
Adopt us Heirs, for thy sons sake,
Who for our sins did die.
Give us new hearts, and better parts,
Then ere we had before,
Let sins dominion in us all,
Be weakened more and more,
Our several lusts, destroy in us,
Corruptions mortify,
Let us more practice Holiness,
And daily sin destroy.
Let saving faith, in us be wrought,
(Good Lord) most perfectly,
Let us into, the way be brought,
Of true felicity.
Increase this grace, in us apace,
O multiply it more,
This master grace, deserves the place,
Increase it (Lord) therefore.
And let it work, by love always,
In us, and every one,
Producing fruits of Holiness,
Faith never goes alone.
By word and Prayer, and Sacraments,
Let it increased be,
Let us be justified by it,
And saved eternally,
O Gracious Lord, let us accord,
To all the truths that be,
Revealed in the written Word,
For all Posterity.
Lord let our hearts, and inner parts,
By faith be purified,
And by that Sword, thy Holy Word,
Let sin be mortified.
Give us desire, with hearts entire,
To love thee cordially,
O give us grace, that track to trace,
That leads to bliss and joy.
Some crumbs of comfort, Lord we crav^
Our faith is very weak,
We almost are brought to despair,
O let thy spirit speak.
A word of comfort to our hearts,
In this our misery.
Let us from hence, have perfect sense,
Of our felicity.
We ( Agar like) have lost our sight,
And now are in distress,
Remove the scales, Lord give us light
To see our happiness.
Lord we Repent, and do lament,
Our infidelity,
O make our faith more evident,
Remove our malady.
The well of life it open lies,
Yet we no comfort find,
We water want, for want of Eyes,
Our fears* our Faith do blind.
Therefore O Lord, grant unto us
Assurance of Salvation,
O clear our states, from all mistakes,
And free us from Damnation.
And when we such assurance have,
Grant we may carefully,
Preserve the same, and praise thy name,
And live Religiously.
Thy Church and People, Lord protect,
From all their Enemies,
Be graci^^s is Lord, to thine Elect,
Hear their complaints and cries.
O bless the King and council him,
His Royal Spouse direct
And in her heart, and every part,
True Holiness erect.
Lord bless Duke James, let all his aims,
Be for thy Glory bent,
Bless all the Royal Family,
And guide the Parliament.
Remove the wicked from the King,
His godly Council bless,
Establish Lord the Throne of him,
And (his) in Righteousness.
O fit us all both great and small,
To meet our Blessed Lord,
When he shall come, and justly Doom
And sentence all the world.
When he shall sit, let us be quit.
And cleared from damnation,
By Faith in him, that died for sin,
To purchase our salvation.
Lord, when this dreadful day will come,
To us it is unknown,
^ts by decree, and known to thee,
And unto thee alone.
Let Us watch and pray, both night and day,
Therefore most fervently,
That Christ may say at that great day,
You have dealt faithfully.
You have well done, O therefore come,
And enter into joy.
Receive a Crown, with great renown,
Bliss and Felicity.
Lord hear our Prayers, accept our Tears,
And pity on us take,
Not for our worth, which merits wrath,
But for Christ Jesus sake.
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
By Angels, and by men,
All Power and Glory be ascribed,
For ever more, Amen.
An Epitaph upon the death of the Right Worshipful Anne Cokaine Widow, who
Dyed the 29th. of August 1664.
By Edward Manlove Esquire
HEre lies interred, one that deserved,
Great Honor, Praise and Fame,
Who comely was, and did surpass,
Most of her Noble Name.
In liberallity, and Hospitallity,
This Lady did delight,
O Muses rise, do not despise,
Her praises to indite,
Yea ring her knell, her praises tell,
She humble was, though great,
Her comely parts, and humble heart,
Her praises may complete.
A comely Creature for form and feature,
Proper and tall of stature,
Noble by Birth, lies in the earth,
Death conquered comely nature.
This Flower was, cut down like Grass,
Which flourished many a day,
She quit the Stage, in her old age,
Grimm Death, took life away.
God called for her, she made no stir,
But yielded patiently,
She knew full well, none need her tell,
All mortal men must die.
To Rich and Poor, respect she bore,
She did no sort despise,
She patiently did live and die,
And so she closed her eyes.
Now in the Dust (as all we must)
Ere long interred be,
This Lady is, Lord bring to Bliss,
Her whole Posterity.
An Epitaph upon the Death of Mr. William Waine, Vicar of ASHBORN.
Composed by Edward Manlove Esquire
SInce that pale death, has stopped the breath,
Of Learned William Wain,
Friends and Allies, dry your wet eyes,
To Weep it is in vain.
He Is in the Dust, where all men must,
Ere long interred be,
Whilst he lived here, he did appear,
A Learned man to be.
Of judgment great, tho not so neat,
In words, as many are,
But for his parts, in learned Arts,
With most, he might compare.
Yet they can tell* that knew him well,
He was not puffed with Pride,
Nor soared high, ambitiously,
But humbly lived and died.
And in his Grave, as in a Cave,
This learned Rabby lies,
Where he must stay, till that great day*
That Christ shall say arise.
Then Learned Wain, must rise again,
From dusty earth and Clay,
To judgment just, (as all men must)
And after live for aye.
Books newly Printed for Richard Mills at the Peste and Mortar without Temble
Bar.
PAndion and Amphigenia, or the History of the Coy Lady in large Octavo.

Divine Contentment, or a Medicine for a Disconted man, in small Octavo.

FINIS

