The MANNER of the CORONATION Of the PRESENT Pope ALEXANDER VIII. And the
Ceremonies thereunto belonging: TOGETHER WITH The Order of the Procession.
In a LETTER from a Gentleman, then residing in ROME, to his Friend at LONDON.
Licensed according to Order.

J. F.
1689.
SIR,
AS concerning the manner of creating the Popes, it has been different, in
diverse times; for in the Primitive Church only the Clergy of Rome had power to
make the Election; but this right afterward descended to the Emperor and the
People: In the Year 684, the Emperor Constantine the IVth. parted with this
Power, and the Clergy alone and the People created the Pope: but in the Year
963, Pope Leo the VIII. being driven from his Seat by the Roman people, who
bore, in those days, so little Respect to the Popes, that they used to Treat
'em very evilly, and sometimes banish 'em, and sometimes even put 'em to death;
as they did Pope Leo the III. Benedict the VI. and Pope John the XIV. Then did
the Emperor Otho the II. reassume the Right and Power of Electing the Popes,
which Constantine the IV. had surrendered to the people, as aforesaid. The
Exarchs of Ravenna, Lieutenants for the Emperor in Italy, and the Roman people
had often great Disputes together for the Elections, the which caused Schisms;
such as was that of Innocent the II. against Anaclete the II. the which obliged
Victor the IV. to assemble a General Council at Rome, at St. John of Lateran's;
where it was ordein'd, That the Clergy alone should give their Suffrages; and
Pope Celestine the XXI. was the first that was created after this manner. But a
little while after, this Right and Propriety was conferred upon the Cardinals
only; and in the Council of Lateran following, assembled by the Pope Calistus
the III. it was then ordein'd, That two thirds of the Suffrages should be
requisite and necessary for the Creation of a Pope: And in the end, at the
second Council-General held at Lions, under Gregory the X. it was concluded
upon, amongst the Rules and Canons that were there and then made touching the
Ceremonies of Electing and Creating a Pope, That the Cardinals should be shut
up in a Conclave; from whence they should not come forth until the Election was
ended; which is performed after this manner following.

He that ought to be chosen is proposed in the Conclave; upon which
proposition, the Cardinals go to the Scrutiny, and finding the number of
Suffrages requisite, the Masters of the Ceremonies go to the Cell of the
Cardinal that is Elected, and declare to him the News of his Exaltation; after
which they conduct him to the Chapel of the Conclave; and being there Vested in
his Pontifical Habit, he there receives the Respects which the Cardinals are
wont to render to the Sovereign Highpriests: After which, one Cardinal, with
one Master of the Ceremonies, go to the House of Benediction, and there declare
to the people his Exaltation: and thereupon immediately are heard the
Acclamations of Long Live POPE Alexander; all the Artillery being discharged,
with the Chiming of all the Bells in the City.

Then the Pope being set in his Pontifical Chair, is carried to St. Peter's
Church, and is there placed upon the Altar of the Apostles, whither all the
Cardinals go a second time to do him Homage; and from thence his Holiness is
reconducted to his Apartment, after having given his Benediction to the people:
and some few days after, the Ceremonies of his Exaltation and Coronation are
performed in the same Church of St. Peter, after this manner following.

Upon the day of his Holiness's Coronation, all Cardinals, Ambassadors of
Kings, Princes, etc. and the pri^cipal Lords about the Court, wait upon him at
his Apartment; from thence they accompany him to the Church, and even into the
Sacristy; into which he is carried in a Chair; and there his Holiness is Vested
in his Pontifical Habit; and when he comes from thence he ascends a portable
Theater, on which stands his Pontifical Chair, and is so carried up to the
Altar across the Church, then very full of people, being assembled to see that
Ceremony: and in some parts of that Church there are Scaffolds set up for the
chief Lords and Ladies, and persons of Quality. He is preceded by the Cardinals
and Ambassadors; while all the people kneeling, Echo forth their Acclamations
of Long Live Pope A. At his coming out of the Sacristy and his going to the
aforesaid Theater, is performed the Ceremony of setting Fire to Flax, being
fastened to the end of a Stick, and held up as high as his Holiness's person,
these words being pronounced* Sancte Pater, sic transit Gloria Mundi: That is,
Holy Father, thus does the Glory of the World pass away. Being as an
Advertisement to him, that he suffer not his heart to be surpised with Vanity
at the Exaltation, whilst he sees the people under his Feet. The same Ceremony
is reiterated in the midst of the Church; and again a third time performed when
he is come up to the Altar.

Then is his Holiness, after his Coronation, to (...) in Procession and take
possession of the Popedom, which is (...)* John Lateran's Church; for to
perform which he (...) what d^y (...) thinks convenient. (...) which day, the
trees through which he is to (...) are ^ll hung with (...) apistry; and there
(...) the most remarkable Actions of his Holiness's Life and the Order of the
Cavalcade (at which Ass^^^ all the Ambassadors and Princes, and Lords on
Horseback, all most Richly Apparaled) was in this manner following:

The first that march are the Pages of the Guard-Robes of the Cardinals, with
their Valises; then the Sergeants and Mace-bearers; then the Gentlemen
belonging to the Ambassadors and Cardinals, with the principal Lords and Barons
of Rome; and these go in an Irregular and Disorderly manner, because they will
avoid all disputes of Precedence that may happen.

Then follow next his Holiness's Esquires, as also his Tailor, and the Barber
that carries his Valise; then come twenty Hackneys, four Mules, three Litters,
with the Master of the Stable, and his Holiness's six Trumpeters: then follow
after the Adjutants of the Chamber, and the Chamberlains, extra nutros: then
the Consistorical Advocates; the Officers of the Palace, with the Commissary of
the Chamber, and the Attorney General: After whom follow the Chamberlains of
Honor, and the Popes Secret Chamberlains; four of which carry four of the
Popes Hats, with Staves covered with Red Velvet: then come sixty Roman
Gentlemen, in Antic Bonnets and Habits. The Prelates follow these, who are the
Abbrovi^tors di parco Maggiore, i. e. the Auditors of the Rota and the Master
of Sacred Palace on the left hand of the Dean of the Rota, and the Ambassador
of Bologn. After these march the Magistrate of the Roman people, being preceded
by four young Gentlemen, named Mareschals: then thirteen Captains of the
several Quarters of Rome; and their Prior, between the two Chancellors of Rome.

And after these the three Conservators, that is to say, the chief of the
Family of the Colonnes; the chief of the Family of the Vrsins; and the Nephew's
and Brothers of the Pope.

Then the Ambassadors of Republics, the Embasasadors of most Serene Dukes; the
Ambassadors of Kings; and after these the Governor of Rome. After these come
the Popes Masters of Ceremonies, and after them the Bearer of the Cross: then
the two Cardinal Deacons, with their Red Caps and their Pontifical Hats; who
are immediately followed by the Pope, having on each hand his Chamberlain, and
his Transcriber; with a great number of Pages and tall Fellows, that wait upon
their Masters* called, Estaflers. Then follow all the Cardinals on their Mules,
two by ^wo ^^ they being likewise followed by other Prelate assisting: as also,
Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, Protonotaries, and last of all the Popes
Guard of Light Horse.

When the Pope is come to St. John Lateran's, then the Archpriest of this
Church, presents him with two Keys, the one made of Gold and the other of
Silver; and then all the Canons render him their Obedience, by kissing his
Feet: And then after all is ended, his Holiness gives his General Benediction;
and so the Ceremony is ended.

FINIS.
Printed for J. Millet, next door to the Flower-de-Luce in Little-Britain. 1689.


