The Manner of the KING's TRIAL at Westminster Hall, by the High Court of
Justice, From January the 24th, to January the 27th, 1648. Also the Manner of
His being put to Death at White Hall, near the Banqueting House, on the 30th
Day of January, 1648; with His SPEECH made upon the Scaffold before He was
Beheaded.
To the Tune of, Aim not too high, etc.


KIng Charles was once a Prince of a great state,
But yet he died a Death unfortunate;
Oh he is gone, and now has l^st us here.
And God does know what courses we shall steer.
Now my sad Story to you I Will Relate,
At Westminster was called a Court of State,
Where Serjant Bra^shaw was Lord President;
The Court being full, then for the King they sent.
There to the Bar a Guard did him convey,
In Januarys Month the Twentieth day,
Whereas Soliciter Cook did Read at large,
The Order and the manner of his Charge.
The KING's Charge.
Charles Stuart, once admitted Englands King,
Which did such woes upon the Kingdom bring,
In setting up the Standard in the Field,
Which was the cause that so much Blood was Spilt.
Whereas thou did Raise Arms within the Land,
Also against the Parliament did stand:
The Peoples Rights and Liberties enthral,
All these and were thou did Tiranical.
Therefore you Guilty are of these sad times,
As Treason, Murder, and of such like Crimes,
For which at Bar a Prisoner you are,
And in this Court you shall have Trial fair.
Here is your Jury, for it must be so,
Yov'e heard your Charge, Plead Guilty, Ay, or no.
What is it thus, then answered the King,
Was it for this you did me hither bring?
The King's Answer to the Charge.
As for your Charge a Rush I do not care,
I do desire those things are right and square;
It was for my Peoples Freed in I did stand,
The Liberties and Laws of all the Land.
I do desire to me you would unfold,
By w^os^ Commission you this Court do hold,
To whom the President did straight Reply,
Sir you shall know by whose Authority.
This Court-Prerogative whereon we stand,
Ordained is by the Commons of this Land;
It is not for Prisoners to dispute the same:
Answer to that for which you hither came.
Then their Authority he quite Denied,
And said by them he meant not to be Tried.
At which the Court their Verdict then did pass,
Not answering, that he then Guilty was.
Then by the Clerk his Sentence there was Read,
Saying, Charles Stuart, Thou must lose thy Head
For Murder, Treason and for Tiran^y,
And to the Land a Public Enemy.
Being Condemned one thing he did Crave,
That Doctor Juxon 's Presence he might have,
To Pre^ch, and the Communion Him to give:
And see His two sweet Babes while He did Live;
The which was Granted, all Performed and done,
And he did see his Daughter and his Son:
It would have Grieved a Stony Heart to see
The weeping Joy that was between those Three.
He blessed them both, and for them he did Pray,
Mourning at Parting, then they go their way;
Father from Children, 'twas a Grief full sore,
Each other in this World to see no more.
Tuesday the Thirtieth of January last,
He from St James's unto White Hall past;
Having a Guard of flying Colors spread,
And Rattling Drums as to a Battle led.
With cheerful Countenance and Courage Bold,
He said, March Faster, for the Day is Cold,
Then to the Scaffold he was straight Conveyed,
The which with Mourning Cloth was overlaid.
The King's Speech upon the Scaffold.
Mounting the same, quoth he, I Will little say,
For in this World I have not long to stay:
It is my Duty first with God to clear,
My Conscience free, next to my Country Dear:
Unto the Parliament I never thought ill,
Their Privilidges never thought to spill;
Ill Instruments on both sides bred the strife,
Which was the cause so many lost their Life.
The greatest Enemies that sought my Death,
I do forgive, before I lose my Breath;
I wish the Kingdoms Peace and Churches Bliss,
For now Religion out of Order is.
Lawful Succession I do hope shall be,
Granted by Parliament now after me:
And for my Conscience and Religion,
I dye a Protestant and a Christian.
To Doctor Juxon then his George he gave,
Willing Prince Charles his Son the same might have,
His walking Staff unto himself did give,
And for his sake to keep whilst he did live.
Likewise he gave the Duke of Richmond then
One Watch, another to a Gentleman;
With Eyes lift up to Heaven he made a Prayer,
And then for Death did instantly prepare.
Saying, My Earthly Crown I here must leave,
Hoping a Heavenly Crown I shall receive,
Then on the Block his Neck there he did lay.
And to the Headsman then these Words did say,
When as my Hands and Arms I open stretch,
Strike Home, besure that thou a right Blow fetch,
I come, I come Lord Jesus, then he cried,
One Blow his head and Body did Devide.
Thus like a Lamb his Death he there did take,
And presently this World he did forsake:
Whose Soul I trust is with the Lord on high,
And thus I end my Mournful Tragedy.
Printed by and for C. B. and sold by J. Walter


