A DISCOURSE SHOWING That the Exportation of Wool is destructive to this
KINGDOM.

WHEREIN Is also Showed the absolute necessity of promoting our Woollen
Manufacture, and moderating the Importation of some Commodities, and
Prohibiting others.

With some easy Expedients tending thereunto.

By Thomas Manly Esquire.

Licensed March 8. 1676. To. L' Estrange.

LONDON. Printed for Samuel Crouch 1677.

Reader,
Although the Opinion debated in the following Papers be frequently found among
worthy men, and such who truly love their Country, yet I shrewdly suspect it is
of Foreign Original cunningly introduced and trimmed up like a Native, the
easier in such a disguise, to cajole men of no ordinary circumspection, and who
in truth aiming only at the common welfare of their Country, would abhor
(whatever other men may do) to betray it to the interest of a stranger.

That it is of Foreign production may modestly be presumed from the necessity
the Forreigner has for our wool to mix with theirs, and without which they
can scarce make a tolerable piece of Drapery, from their subtle contrivances
to purloyn it from us, even at any expense and hazard, and from the superlative
advantages they may gain by Commerce, and employing their people if once our
Laws were repealed, which render it hazardous, scarce and chargeable to them:
so that you see what ever gaudy disguizes for our advantage, forsooth, the
Adjutators have clap't on the design, do but snatch off the Vizard, and
presently a Forreigner appears in Masquerade: who (kind man!) designing our
good equal to the rest of his Neighbors, and fearing other operations may work
too slowly, prescribes us this infallible Dose; -- from which good Lord deliver
us.

The rest I leave to be discharged by the following Papers, which aiming only
at the honor and welfare of my King and Country, may be, I hope, as heartily
accepted.

J. M.

Exportation of Wool Destructive to this Kingdom.
HAving lately in discourse with some persons of Quality, observed an Opinion
favoring the repeal of the Laws now in force restraining the Exportation of
Wool, (a discourse of harsh sound to my old English understanding) I could not
then refrain from offering such Reasons as then occurred against a matter of
such pernicious consequence, however the contrary may be understood by
Gentlemen who truly love their Country; what through incogitancy, or want of
time, I then omitted, I now in love to my Country, offer to consideration.

I will, to proceed clearly, set down, in the first place, the reasons alleged
for Repealing those Laws, so far as I can collect from the favorers of that
Opinion, and then briefly give my reasons to the contrary; modestly submitting
my self to the Judgment of Reader.

1. Our store of wool (say they) is so great, that we have sufficient both for
our selves and Neighbors. 2. Its free and unrestrained Exportation will
occasion a great increase in its price, which will sustain our drooping Rents,
and draw considerable sums of money from abroad, for so desirable a Commodity.
3. That tho we use all care imaginable to prevent its Exportation, yet our
Neighbors, by means of our own people, draw great quantities from us. 4. It Is
to small purpose to keep our wool at home, for that Ireland supplies our
Neighbors therewith to a great degree. 5. This prohibition of wool is a new
practice, unknown to us till within these twenty years, and yet before that
time, both wool and Drapery yielded the best Rates for above 60 years last
past.
To the first I Answer.
1. That I conceive our yearly increase of Wool is now no greater than when
the Rates were double, nay treble, to what they now are; and if so, the fall
and meanness of the price proceeds purely from the loss of foreign Markets for
our Drapery, and from our own forsaking the wear of it, and not from the
quantity above what we had 30 or 40 years ago.

2. It Is very manifest how the Rates of Wool these last 15 or 16 years, have
gradually fallen from bad to worse, and how as by degrees we have increased in
the wearing of Silk, Camlets, and frowsie French Druggets, and as our
Neighbors, especially the French, have enlarged their woollen Manufacture by
means of our wool, which they mix with theirs, just so have the Rates of this
Commodity with us sunk almost beyond belief.

3. That seeing we have a multitude of people, who for want of employment, want
bread, and that the price of Wool here is so low as to tempt us to let out
that commodity, which the wisdom of this Trading Age has hitherto secured
under Public Prohibitions, as being the prime fund of our Trade and Navigation,
and which is so necessary to our active Neighbors, that no Laws, how Penal
soever, have yet totally debarred them from it, what do we else by such a
design, but declare that henceforth, being not able to manage that Manufacture,
we abandon all thoughts of an advantageous commerce, necessitate our people to
live on us, or dye at our doors, and surrender to our Neighbors that
Manufacture for which we were once so notorious? is not this, at once, to cast
the Childrens bread to strangers; and to remain for ever without hopes to
maintain, after such a dereliction, any Manufacture which our Neighbors may
have a mind to snatch from us?

4. If our Neighbors could have Wool as good to all intents and purposes, and
as plentiful and cheap from other Countries, it might peradventure, be
advisable, how far we ought to keep ours at home; but the case being
otherways, and they (our Rivals) being not able to carry on that Manufacture
effectually without it, it seems a great mistake and dangerous to spare it on
any terms.

To the second Reason; That it will occasion the Rates of wool to rise, and
thereby sustain our drooping Rents, etc. I Answer.
1. The wear and use of Silk, Camlets, etc. have so far supplanted that of
Drapery in Europe, that we must never rationally expect those Rates for Wool
which were usually given 30 of 40 years ago.

2. If we find bad markets for Drapery now Wool is cheap, it is very improbable
our Neighbors will take so much Wool from us as to raise the price thereof to
that degree as may sustain our falling Rents; for the dearer we fell them our
Wool the dearer they must sell their Drapery, and consequently sell so much
less; or else it will be our shame or ill fortune that they shall vent much
Drapery made of dear Wool, and we vent little or none, now wool is cheap.

3. The more Markets our Neighbors supply with Drapery, by means of our Wool,
the less Drapery we must Export; the reason is, because there is a certain and
determined quantity of Cloth consumed by the Trading world; whence it must
necessarily follow that so much wool as they receive from us, so much less
Drapery we our selves shall Export, and consequently the price of wool remain
the same it was before those Laws were repealed.

4. Upon repealing those Laws we may bid adue to the Exportation of Drapery;
the reason is, because our Neighbors live, work and Navigate cheaper than we;
and having once our wool in common, must necessarily undersell, and beat us
out of Trade: it being a great mistake to imagine that the Exportation of our
wool and Drapery may consist together; and as great a mistake to suppose that
the pretended increase of the Rates of wool occasioned by an allowance of its
Exportation, may balance the mischiefs accrewing thereby; because a pound of
wool Manufactur'd and Exported, is of more worth to us by employing our
people, than ten pound exported raw at double the present rate; unless, which
is not reasonable to imagine, we could introduce some other better employment
for them.

5. If our Neighbors tread on our heels in this Manufacture, begin to supply
us with their Drapery at home, and to supplant us therewith abroad, having
only their own corse wool; which they mix with ours obtained at dear rates
(by reason of secrecy and many chargeable contrivances always attending a
prohibited traffic) there is no doubt, when once the prohibition is removed,
and they by that means plentifully supplied therewith (which in an open and
allowed commerce is always cheapest) but that they will soon beat us wholly
out of that Trade, and by consequence e're long out of all other Commerce and
Navigation to boot.

6. Every pound of our Wool now worth five pence (and which makes about a yard
of broad Cloth worth 8 or 9 s.) being Exported, and mixed with our Neighbors
coarse Wool, helps them to make 3 or 4 yards of Cloth, which probably hinders
us of all that advantage, which by employing our people, would otherwise
accrue to us, besides the benefit of Commerce and Navigation; which must
decline as our Drapery lessens, and as we languish by sending out our Treasure
to Import Apes and Peacocks: what the consequence thereof may be, when the most
formidable and daring Nation is visibly seizing on Trade, and the Ocean, is
obvious to every reasonable man; and how His Majesty's Revenue may be supplied,
when our Manufactures are lost, our Treasure wasted, and Rents subdued, by our
excess in Foreign Commodities, is worthy of consideration.

7. The Exportation of our Wool will be so far from sustaining our drooping
Rents, that tho we may Export the whole yearly growth thereof, yet I conceive
it will not answer the value of our Drapery, which hitherto we have yearly
Exported, and by consequence, so much loss must redound to us, as the wool
Exported may be of less value than our Drapery; without any consideration had
to the want of employment for our people, or to the insignificant Navigation
which the freight of wool will occasion, compared with that of Drapery; and
how Politic it may be to lessen the value of our Exits, which already are so
trivial and so exceedingly Overballanc'd by importations to foment our luxury,
I leave to the judgment of every man, who considers that it is the Exportation
of the Growth and Manufactures which deserve the name of Trade, and makes a
Nation rich.

8. But suppose that by repeal of the Laws the value of our Wool should rise
considerably (which for the reasons already given is very improbable) whereby
our Neighbors should be enabled to manage that important Manufacture, which
otherwise they could never effect, must it not necessarily follow that as they
enlarge their Drapery so ours must lessen, and gradually shrink to nothing, our
Navigation decline for want of so staple a Commodity wherewith to Traffic, our
Treasure yet more conveyed abroad to manage a wanton and Luxurious Commerce,
multitudes of our people who subsisted by that Manufacture Exposed to ruin,
and as many in every Age, thereby becoming useless and poor, must become
chargeable, and may become dangerous to the Kingdom: all which must and will
inevitably subdue our Rents to a degree far beyond any relief or benefit we
may reasonably expect from any increase of the price of wool, occasioned by
the repeal of our Laws: hence an experienced Merchant, who in other
Commodities was himself a great smugler, used to say, that the offense of
exporting wool was like the sin against the Holy Ghost, not to be forgiven;
can the injury then be less to the Commonwealth if it go out by a Law?

The present Parliament has had right sentiments in this matter, when (as by
the Preamble of the Statute may appear) for the better setting on work the
Inhabitants of this Realm, and to the intent that the full and best use and
benefit of the principal native commodities thereof, may come unto the Subjects
of the same, and not unto the Subjects of Foreign Realms as heretofore, they
prohibited the Exportation of this Commodity: the like care and good meaning
did also appear in them (however perverse and silly people have hitherto
rendered it useless) when for the encouragement of our woollen Manufacture, and
prevention of the Exportation of our moneys for the buying and importing of
Linen (the very words of the Preamble) they enacted, that none should be
buried in other than woollen: Now he that should Vote for the Exportation of
wool and censure the Act for burying in woollen, must invert every period of
these most excellent Preambles, and say, That for the better employing the
Subjects of Foreign Realms, and to the intent the best use and benefit of the
principal Native Commodities of this declining Kingdom may come unto the
Subjects of Foreign Countries, as one, two, or 300 years ago it did, and be no
longer continued unto the people of this Realm, as has been used by the space
of 60 years last past; and to the intent that the woollen Manufacture may be
discouraged, and the Exportation of Moneys increased to buy and import Linen
from our trusty Neighbors, especially the French, let wool be freely
exported, and none buried in woollen, except such as dye of cold diseases.

To the third Reason for repealing our Laws; That our Neighbors with the help
of our people get great quantities of our wool daily from us notwithstanding
those Laws to the contrary. I Answer.
1. That such practices are shrewd evidences of what esteem that commodity is
among them, and that what is thus purloyn'd cost the Receiver dear, by reason
of secrecy, subtle contrivances, etc. as has been already hinted, (for who
will venture hanging for nothing?) which upon repealing those Laws will come
freely to them without any such encumbrances, and consequently cheaper, whereby
they may be enabled to contest with us in this important Manufacture on even
terms.

2. Our Neighbors by these undue practices either have or have not sufficient
of our wool already; if they have, there will be no need of repealing those
Laws, and we may justly charge the present dullness of Foreign Markets for our
Drapery upon the export of our wool by these vile practices; which must needs
grow worse when those Laws are repealed; but if they have not enough by reason
of the prohibition, let us thank the Laws for it; and yet observe that it is a
pregnant argument that by our wool, thus unduly obtained, they manage a
considerable Manufacture, for it seems they get great quanties from us; and
that if they had more they would enlarge their commerce, which must necessarily
undermine and lessen ours.

3. It is better particular persons do acts hurtsul to the Public against Law,
than for want of a Law, because this latter would reflect on the wisdom of the
Government.

4. Should we repeal the Laws against the Exportation of wool, because against
Law wool is Exported we should transcribe their wisdom that would repeal Laws
against felony, because ill men contrary to Law commit Robberies; or imitate
those who will not shut their doors because Thieves sometime break in at the
windows.

To the fourth reason, That it is to small purpose to keep our wool at home,
for that Ireland supplies our Neighbors therewith, etc. I Answer.
1. If this be true, it is to small purpose to permit its Exportation in hopes
to put a better value on it, which is the most avowed reason for the repeal:
for if our Neighbors be plentifully supplied therewith from Ireland, where
it is much cheaper at present then with us, (and probably ever will) there is
small reason to expect better Rates for Ours: for who will give us six pence
for that pound of wool which in Ireland may be had for four pence? unless it
may be granted that ours is better than that of Ireland; which few of the
Adjutators will, for certain Reasons, be willing to confess.

2. If the Irish wool enables the Forreigner to carry on that Manusacture to a
degree hurtful to us, we have small reason to assist them further therein by
assording them ours, seeing they enjoy advantages too many already; least we
immitate those good men, who break the pot because their wives break the
pitcher; ruin our selves because Ireland hurts us.

To the last reason, that the prohibition of wool is a new practice unknown to
us till within this twenty years, and yet before that time both Wool and
Drapery yielded the best Rates, for above 60 years last past. I Answer.
1. That it is very true, but it does not follow that the prohibition was
therefore unnecessary, or that the same brought a prejudice upon either; but
that other reasons already given, must be assigned for the fall and meanness of
the Rates of those Commodities; it being no ways questionable, but that the
exportation of our Drapery had long since expired, had not the prohibition of
wool interposed.

2. Statutes are provided to answer the present emergencie and reason of
Affairs, and adapted to the occasion and Interest of the Age wherein they are
made, so that what was judged unnecessary in former Ages, may be of superlative
use in this; and if the reason thereof again cease, may be as insignificant in
the next.

3. We had no need of such restraining Laws long before they were enacted; for
till the peace of Munster, England alone enjoyed almost the whole Manufacture
of Europe: But France (who then also received woollen Drapery from us) agitated
since that peace by a most sagacious Counsel (who understands the advantages of
Manufactures and Navigation) and filled with an active and enterprizing people,
'has unhappily added that Manufacture to the many other advantages they enjoy
for commerce, above most other Nations; and has all things propitious for the
managing thereof except fine wool, such as ours is, to mix with their own:
Must our Ancestors proceedings then who were governed by reasons far
different from ours, be presidents to us? or is it not rather high time to
employ our utmost skill to retain so necessary a Commodity at home.

I have lately met with one Merchant of no small pretenses to the intrigues of
Trade, who, although he will not allow that the Rates of wool may increase
upon the repeal of our Laws, (which is the prime reason alleged for repeal
of the prohibition) yet affirms that if the prohibition were removed and due
Imposts charged upon wool, it might thereby, better than by the prohibition,
be either retained at home, or rendered so chargeable to our Neighbors that we
might have sufficient advantages over them in that Manufacture. To which, I
answer.
1. That he which affirms all this, must maintain that either his Majesty's
Officers of His Customs will be more industrious to collect the Duties, and
Imposts so to be charged on this Commodity, than they were to make Seizures of
it by virtue of the prohibition, tho they had a Moiety of the Seizure, or that
the Exporters will be more conscientious in paying His Majesty's Imposts, than
they were in obeying His Laws which prohibited the Exportation, tho they
ventured their necks into the bargain, or that the Forreigner may be less
desirous of it after the repeal than before.

2. The Imposts must be either much, or little; if much, it may be worth
venturing to save the payment; as is too frequently practiced in payments of
the like Nature; but if they be little; the payment of them will be easily
balanced by the advantages our Neighbors have over us in cheap diet, labor,
etc. as has been already showed.

If, to what has been said, it be replied that it is better export wool, then
neither wool nor Drapery. I Rejoyn.
1. That it is so, were it true that we exported no Drapery, and remained
without hopes of ever sharing again in Foreign Markets: but thanks be to God
matters are not yet arrived to so ill terms, and probably never will, unless
some aspiring Neighbor (who may design to engross all Traffic) beat us out of
the Mediterranean Sea, or that we let out our wool by a Law.

2. If we do yet more effectually provide to keep our wool at home, it is a
thousand to one but our Drapery will off: but if once we export our wool by a
Law (charge it with what Impost, and confine it to what Ports and seasons you
please, as some vainly or slily propose) we may bid an Eternal adieu to the
Exportation of our woollen Manufacture.

Who will buy our wool, seeing we slight it our selves? will the French? to
what end? to employ their people, and carry on a Manufacture as universal as
their other designs, have they not of late charged our Drapery with heavy
impositions, merely to discourage its coming among them, the better to employ
their own people? and must we then return the civility with such advantage to
them?

4. And lastly, to export our wool because at present we want vent for our
Drapery, is for ever to confirm in that want; and is a choice like pulling down
my house for fear it may be burnt, or like hanging my self least any other kill
me.

If I be asked what we shall do with our wool seeing its Exportation is of
such dreadful consequence, and our Drapery so neglected at home, I Answer.
1. That tho we cannot impose our Drapery on our Neighbors, yet we might
easily nick some of them in their Wines, Brandies, and Bawbles, which are as
necessary for them to vent as Drapery is for us, and are as unprofitable for us
to receive. And surely we might also provide yet better to keep our wool at
home.

2. And Secondly, seeing the generality of Mankind pursues rather vain examples
than rules of Reason, and wants judgment to discern things hurtful to the
Public Authority, has frequently prescribed the Subject in point of Clothes:
and he that considers the habit of our people at this day, might suppose silk,
and not wool the native commodity of this Kingdom.

I therefore humbly propose.
1. That the Laws against the Exportation of wool be consulted, and if upon
enquiry they appear too short to reach all the tricks and contrivances of the
enormous Exportors, to provide yet further remedies against them: proposing
especially large rewards and Characters of esteem to those who shall, at any
time, discover the Managers of so ruinous a Commerce; the punishing of whose
Estate (if they have any) and not the persons, being possibly the most
effectual means to animate informations; because most men would rather make
dicoveries, in this case, for gain to themselves, than only bring corporal
punishment on others; and where the Criminals have no Estate, and are not
apprehended to receive due punishment, the Division, or Hundred, as in cases of
Robberies, ought to be fined to pay the Informer; it being certain, the
Neighborhood knows the Criminals and their Intrigues, and might without much
difficulty either apprehend or drive them out of the Country: and it is worth
enquiry how sarre some of those very persons commissionated to prevent these
practices, are themselves guilty of somenting them, as some do report: and then
besides, the ways and methods to pursue these offenders and recover the Fines,
ought to be as plain, short, and easy, as the wisdom of a Counsel can
contrive: and where the discoveries are made by any one Employed in these
practices, Indemnity and Rewards ought to be provided-for him also; and that
such a Discoverer, or other single witness (tho he has profit thereby) ought
to be sufficient evidence, because it is a work of Darkness, and more
distructive than Robbery; it being better for us to run the harzard, that one
man in seven years be injured by the perjury of an Informer, than that so many
vile Offenders escape for want of witness, who have no benefit by the Seizure
and evidence.

2. That a Law might pass that every man using any Manual Occupation, Trade or
Mystery, Inholders, Mariners and Masters of Ships, and every person of like
quality, not having an Estate, Real and Personal to such a value, and the wife,
widow and children of every such, and the Child of every person not having an
Estate Real and Personal, to be limited by the Statute, being under eighteen
years of Age, (the Estates to be proved upon Oath) who shall wear any manner of
Garment or Stockings made of other then wool, flax, hemp, Cotton or Callico,
shall for every offense forfeit to the Poor of the Parish where the offense
shall be committed, valuable Sum; and every Servant (other then the Domestics
of some Peers of the Realm) offending in the premises, shall forfeit the like
Sum: unless it appear upon Oath that the Garment etc, so worn, was either made
before the Statute, or since given by his or her Master or Mistress: all which
Forfeitures upon the Oath of one credible witness, to be levied by warrant from
two Justices of the peace upon the offender, their husbands, Parents etc. and
for want of such Distress, Imprisonment without Bail, etc. And for the more
vigorous execution of so necessary a work, the two next Justices under some
penalty yearly to nominate and swear two or more honest Inhabitants of every
Parish to execute the said Act; who for their greater encouragement may receive
some part of the Fine. And if any one pretend this Law may prejudice some
thousands of Silkweavers, some Mercers, etc. I more truly affirm the same will
be abundantly recompensed by raising the Rates of Wool, which will refresh our
Rents by providing Employments for four times that number of Breakers, Kembers,
Carders, Spinners, Weavers, Fullers, Shearmen, Clothiers, Drapers, etc, and by
reducing an extravagant People to a decent and modest Apparel: And if His
Majesty, by passing such a Bill, may possibly loose something at present in His
Customs, it will be happily supplied by the glory redounding thereby to His
Government, by the hearty thanks and prayers of His intelligent Subjects, for
so gracious an Act, and by continuing us in a condition to make good and
sustain so splendid a Revenue; which will be impossible to do, if we still
forsake and disuse our Growths and Manufactures, and continue to consume so
much of the Ferreign.

3. And Lastly, whereas the late Statute for burial in VVoollen has not
wrought the intended good effect, for want of Officers to inspect its
execution, I humbly propose that some one honest Inhabitant of every Parish be,
by the two next Justices of the Peace, under some penalty, yearly nominated and
sworn to inspect the Corpse the Morning before interrment, and certify the
Minister under his hand that the defunct is wrapped according to the Statute; for
which Certificate the searcher shall from the Executor, etc. (in case the
defunct paid scot and lot) receive some small see: and without which
Certificate, the Minister under some penalty, may not inhume the Corpse: a
penalty payable to the poor of the Parish, and teniably by warrant from two
Justices of the Peace, being also laid on those who shall not comply with the
said Statute, or shall disturb the Officer in doing his duty.

A Law on each of these Subjects, with right placed penalties, must necessarily
quicken the consumption of our Drapery at home, enlarge our Markets abroad, and
put a better value on our wool, than spare it on such destructive and ruinous
terms. And if my Arguments have been too frivolous to prevail on the Judgment
of any man, who yet may remain dissatisfied in the point, I heartily desire him
to believe, the same proceeds purely from the incapacity of the Undertaker;
being confident that tho my self may not have been so lucky to draw out such
conquering Arguments as the subject may afford, yet arguments there are,
invincible in the case; -- and that we must by all the Mothods imaginable,
promote the Manufacture and wear of our own woollen, moderate the consumption
of Wines, Silks and Camlets, prohibit Brandy, Coffee, and other idle and new
fangled liquors, which hindering the expense of our own wholesome drinks, subdue
our Rents, prevent the importatation of a thousand trifles, which draw our
Treasure from us, obviate Foreign Designs, and keep our Wool at home, or
perish.

FINIS.

