A JVDICIOUS SPEECH MADE By the Right Honorable the Lord KIMBOLTON, in
Parliament, January 3. 1641.

Concerning the Articles of high Treason exhibited against his Lordship, Sir
Arthur Haslerig, M. Pym, M. Stroud, M. Hollis, and M. Hampden, by His Majesty.

Declaring 1. The Cause of their Accusation. 2. The Authors that procured it.
3. The effects likely to follow upon the same,


Printed at London for I. W. 1642.

A Judicious Speech, MADE By the Right Honorable the Lord Kimbolton in
Parliament. Ian. 3. 1641. Concerning the Articles of high Treason, exhibited
against his Lordship, Sir Arthur Haslerig, M. Pym, M. Stroud, M. Hollis, and M.
Hampden, by His Majesty.
M. SPEAKER,
THere has already been so much spoken by the other Gentlemen, concerning
this accusation of high treason, even sufficient, as I conceive, to clear us
all that are impeached, that I know not what to say more touching the same:
Only under favor give me leave, to speak what I conceive of the cause of the
procuring of this accusation, the Authors that procured it, and of the effects
which I perceive will follow upon the same.

M. Speaker, It is not long since this Honorable House accused of high Treason
the twelve Bishops, for their illegal and traiterous attempt in their petition
and protestation against the King and Parliament. These Gentlemen with my self
and others, having the prosecution of that business, and other charges of
great Crimes against them committed to our trust, did unanimously with one
consent follow the same, bringing to a period our debates and disputes
concerning their crimes, what we conceived they were guilty of upon their
several charges, and what guilty of for framing and preferring their petition
and protestation to his Majesty, that they were guilty of misprision of treason
upon their former accusations, and guilty of high treason upon this their last
design: And these our votes and and conclusions (grounded and warranted, not
only by the Common laws of this land, but by diverse Acts of Parliament, and
presidents) we presented to the whole house for consideration and confirmation
of the same by general vote, with whom we again agreed by our public
votes, and thereupon they were impeached and committed; this I conceive
provoked their malice against us, and was the principal cause of this their
plot in drawing an Accusation against us for the same crime of treason, thereby
to make us seem as vile as themselves, and to take away our votes at their
trial. And thus I have joynd together both the cause and Authors of this
accusation.

The effects I conceive will be dangerous, and cause great trouble in these
respects.

1 In turning the Current of the Parliaments proceedings against them upon us,
by which devise they shall have further time to put in practice their plots,
and bring to perfection their purposes against the Parliament.

2 That being busily employed concerning this business, in their disputes
about breach of privilege of Parliament in illegal accusing the members
thereof, in drawing a declaration to his Majesty concerning the same, in
appeasing him, by showing the sincerity and integrity of the Parliament toward
his Majesty and other things pertinent thereunto, this high Court may lay
aside their procceding, and avert their purposes touching the Irish affairs,
whereby the Rebellion there may increase; and foreign aid brought to them,
to the utter losing of that kingdom.

3 Many fears and troubles will arise in the Citizens concerning this
accusation, of desperate and devilish stratagems in agitation, as well against
them as the Parliament by disconsolate and disaffected persons, to the safety
and security thereof, causing their continual watching and guarding by their
trained bands, which will be to them a great charge and molestation.

4 It will encourage ill affected and pernicious Cavaliers, and commanders
about Court, to attempt any mischeife against both houses of Parliament or
particular members thereof upon the Least opportunity, that shall be offered
them, thinking thereby they shall do the King good service, which otherwise
they dare not adventure, to put in practice.

5 And lastly; It will provoke and stir up a dislike of these designs in the
hearts of all his Majesty's subjects, and disaffection to his sacred person,
cause great uproares, and tumults of the Citizens; yea, and I fear a general
insurrection in the kingdom, if not suddenly prevented, which God forbid.

And thus Master Speaker, having nothing more to say concerning these Articles,
I humbly crave of this Honorable house, that I may have expedition in my
trial, upon the same; and that all things done by this wise Council may tend
to the Honor and glory of Almighty God, the peace and safety of his sacred
Majesty and all his kingdoms.

FINIS.

