THE LOST LOVER; OR, THE Jealous Husband.

THE LOST LOVER; OR, THE Jealous Husband: A COMEDY.

As it is Acted at the THEATER ROYAL BY His MAJESTY's Servants.

Written by Mrs. Manley.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bently, in Covent Garden; F. Saunders, in the
New-Exchange; J. Knapton, and R. Wellington, in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCXCVI.

THE PREFACE.
THis Comedy by the little success it met with in the Acting, has not at all
deceived my Expectations; I had ever so great a Distrust, and so impartial an
Opinion, that nothing but the flattery of my Friends (and them, one would
imagine, Men of too much Sense to be so grossly mistaken, and without whose
persuasion I never designed publishing of it) could in the least have held me
in suspense of its good or evil Fortune: and to confess my Faults, I own it an
unpardonable one, to expose, after two years reflection, the Follies of seven
days, (for barely in that time this Play was wrought) and my self so great a
Stranger to the Stage, that I had lived buried in the Country, and in the six
foregoing years, had actually been but twice at the House. The better half was
cut; They say, 'thas suffered by it, though they told me, 'twas possible to have
too much of a good thing, but I think never too little of an ill.

That knowledge I had of the Town was the gentile part, which does not always
afford Diverting Characters; My design in Writing was only to pass some tedious
Country hours, not imagining I should be so severely repaid. I now know my
Faults, and will promise to mend them by the surest way, not attempting to
repeat them.

I am now convinced Writing for the Stage is no way proper for a Woman, to whom
all Advantages but mere Nature, are refused; If we happen to have a Genius to
Poetry, it presently shoots to a fond desire of Imitation. Though to be lamely
ridiculous, mine was indulged by my Flatterers, who said, nothing could come
from me unentertaining: like a Hero not contented with Applause from lesser
Conquests, I find my self not only disappointed of my hopes of greater, but
even to have lost all the glory of the former; Had I confined my Sense, as
before, to some short Song of Phillis, a Tender Billet, and the freedom of
agreeable Conversation, I had still preserved the Character of a Witty Woman.

Give me leave to thank the Well-natur'd Town for Damning me so suddenly; They
would not suffer me to linger in suspense, nor allow me any degrees of
Mortification; neither my Sex, Dress, Music and Dancing, could allow it a
three Days Reprieve, nor the Modesty of the Play it self, prevail with the
Ladies to Espouse it: Here I should most justly reproach my self, if I did not
make all due Acknowledgments for Sir Thomas Skipwith's Civility, his Native
Generosity, and Gallantry of Temper, took care nothing on his part should be
wanting to make it pleasing.

Once more, my Offended Judges, I am to appear before you, once more in
possibility of giving you the like Damning Satisfaction; there is a Tragedy of
mine Rehearsing, which it is too late to recall, I consent it meet with the same
Fortune: 'Twill for ever rid me of a Vanity too Natural to our Sex, and make me
say with a Grecian Hero, I had been lost, if I had not been lost.

They Object the Verses wrote by me before Agnes de Castro, where, with Poetic
Vanity I seemed to think my self a Champion for our Sex; some of my Witty
Critticks make a Jest of my proving so favorable an Enemy, but let me tell
them, this was not designed a Consequence of that Challenge, being writ two
years before, and cannot have a smaller Share in their Esteem than mine: After
all, I think my Treatment much severer than I deserved; I am satisfied the bare
Name of being a Woman's Play damned it beyond its own want of Merit: I will
conclude with Dionysius, That Plato and Philosophy have taught me to bear so
great a Loss (even of Fame) with Patience.

PROLOGUE,
Spoken by Mr. Horden.
THe first Adventurer for her fame I stand,
The Curtain's drawn now by a Lady's Hand,
The very Name you will cry boads Impotence,
To Fringe and Tea they should confine their Sense,
And not outstrip the bounds of Providence.
I hope then Critics, since the Case is so,
You Will scorn to Arm against a Worthless Foe,
But curb your spleen and gall, and trial make,
How our fair Warrior gives her first Attack.
Now all ye chattering Insects straight be dumb,
The Men of Wit and Sense are hither come,
Ask not this Mask to Sup, nor that to show
Some Face more ugly than a Fifty Beau,
Who, if our Play succeeds, will surely say,
Some private Lover helped her on her way,
As Female Wit were barren like the Moon,
That borrows all her influence from the Sun.
The Sparks and Beaus will surely prove our Friends,
For their good Breeding must make them commend
What Billet Deux so e're a Lady sends.
She knew old Threadbare Topics would not do,
But Beaus a Species thinks it self still new,
And therefore she resolved to Copy you.
EPILOGE,
Spoken by Miss Cross.
KInd hearted City Wives, if any here,
Was not Oliva's Virtue too severe,
To baulk your Expectation at that time,
Kind tender Citts would be a Mortal Crime;
Our Gallants were undone, should you but prove
Her Apes in Virue, as you are theirs in Love.
But for our Poetess -- Lard, no Virgin ever
Resigned so bashfully her darling Treasure,
She sweats and reddens, then turns pale for fear,
See what disorders you can give the Fair;
Should I ask never so much to make you kind,
You Would damn or pity as ye are inclined,
Though each in private would be sworn her Lover,
Scarce one true Friend the Public will discover.
Our Beau was writ at least two years ago,
See how rank Weeds in Foppish Countries grow,
Now so Diminutive a Spark, alas,
He scarce can serve to show you what he was;
Should the next two increase as these have done,
The Babel Beau might hope to touch the Sun.
Did but sound Sense and Reason thrive as fast,
The Coming Age might profit by the past.
Persons Represented.
Sir Rustic Good-Heart, an Ill-bred Country Gentleman, Mr. Johnson. Wilmore,
his Son, Mr. Verbrugen. Wildman, his Friend, Mr. Horden. Sir Amorous Courtall,
Mr. Powell. Smyrna, a Turkey-Merchant, Mr. Cibber. Pulse, a Physician, M.
Penkethman. Knowlittle, a Fortune Tellers, Mr. Haynes. Timothy, his Man, Ready,
Servant to Wildman,
WOMEN.
Lady Young-Love, an Old Vain Conceited Lady, Mrs. Kent. Marina, her Daughter,
Mrs. Rogers. Belira, Secret Mistress to Wilmore, Mrs. Knight. Orinda, an
Affected Poetess, Mrs, Cibber. Olivia, Smyrna's Wife, Mrs. Verbrugen. Isabella,
Woman to Lady Young-Love, Mrs. Cole. Phaebe, Olivia's Maid, Mrs. Mills. Page.
Servants.
SCENE in London.

THE Lost Lover, etc.
ACT I.
SCENE I. The Lady Young-Love's House.
Enter Wildman and Ready. Wild. I Will stay here till Mr. Wilmore comes in; do
you go and see what is to be done at Old Smyrna's; Deliver this Letter to Mrs.
Phebe, for her Lady: Ready, thou do not want Arguments to corrupt a Waiting
Woman's Fidelity, all the difficulty lies in Olivia's nicety, but I should have
reason to have an ill Opinion of my self if I don't prevail, when I Have a Friend
in her Bosom that speaks for me, and only an old jealous Husband to oppose me.


Ready. Mrs. Phebe says Madam Olivia has the same kindness for you as before
she was Married; but her Husband is so Jealous of her, he will not suffer her out
of his sight Day nor Night.


Wild Poor Olivia; Thy Beauty nor Merit could not make thee happy, since
Fortune was wanting in her favors: Thy Father buried thee in a Rich Old
Merchant's arms, and it is my part to try to revive thee in mine.


Exeunt severally. Enter Marina, and Belira, Marina in a Travailing Dress. Bell.
Without repeating further Welcome to you: My Dear Marina, How have you spent
your time in the Country?


Mar. 'Twas rough cast, and hung heavily upon every Spoke; neither Park, Play,
nor Basset-Table, to call rugged Time along; sometimes indeed, when
disburthen'd London, wanted new Air and Complexion for her Female inhabitants,
I had the Diversion of seeing how well they could relish Country Sparks, after
being cloyd with Town Beaux.


Bell. Nature is no Idler; the Fruitful Dame loves Employment; but pray what
could she find out in your part of the World, for nice, well-dress'd
distinguishing Town-Ladies.


Mar. The thing with all the World, is being pleased, not who pleases; my
pretty young Lady Made, her Lord leaving her in a Barren, wild unfurnished
World of Sparks, cast her Eyes upon so near a Relation of his, that she mistook
the West Country for Flanders; when undistinguishing Night had reduced the
Sense of Seeing, into that of Touching.


Bell. Doubtless some believe it a Satisfaction, to prove the Difference between
Town-Art, and Country-Nature; but how does Mrs. Conceit.


Mar. I sent a handsome Footman of mine, to make her a Compliment, and she
interrupted him in the midst, to tell him he had a Pretty Mouth, which could be
better employed, than in delivering his Ladies Message.


Bell. But what of that Ill natured, False, pretended piece of Virtue, my Lord
Rural's second Daughter.


Mar. Married, long since; found a Fool to uphold her ill Nature, in railing at
Mankind, and cloak her Pleasure in using them.


Bell. She did my Brother the Honor of taking that foolish Toy a Maiden head
from him; he courted her for a Wife, and she wantonly asked him, if they could
not love without Marrying.


Mar. Since that, she granted her favors in an open Calash, whilst her Husband
drove it.


Bell. 'Twas the boldest bravest Lover I ever heard of.


Mar. The Glory is due to her; for when he objected her Husband, she said his
back had been turned a thousand Minutes, and 'twas hard if Fortune would not
take care securely to allow her one of them.


Bell. Yet none pretends more to Virtue, nor will sooner swear her Neighbors
wants in Uncharitableness to others; and count it as a certain (...) of Defect
in our selves.


(...) ^ut all this time I forget; where is my Mother.


(...) (...) to an Indian-House with young Wilmore, her Spouse that (...) for
new Furniture, she means every thing (...) Gay and I^^^^ng as her Lover.


(...) (...) it enter into a Woman's head of fifty, to look back (...) ^ellow of
Twenty, whose first contrivance will be how to ge^ (...), her Money excepted,
and that once secured she may (...), what separate maintenance he is pleased
to allow her, and he contented to starve all her life after, for having once
made too la^^e a ^^ast.


(...) If I mistake not, she intrudes a little upon your right; you have not
(...) all your inclination for Mr. Wilmore.


Mar. They indeed prepare me toward making him a very Obedient Dutiful
Daughter-in-Law.


Bell. Well, We'll spare your Modesty a farther Confession, and let you know to
morrow is the Wedding day; but there is a Misfortune untold to you, nor could
your imagination guess at it, Sir Rustic Goodheart has got my Lady Young Loves
consent for Marrying you.


Mor. I see absence has not made my Mother better natured; but i^ she plays the
Fool, I shall be wiser than to imitate her; besides, mine would be so much
worse, as an Old Man is always less inviting than a Young.


Bell. Mr. Wilmore has showed himself so generous, that till you were sent for
he refused to Marry your Mother, and then too but conditionally she should
secure your Fortune to your self.


Mar. It Is surprising in a Father-in-Law; but is he in Love with her, (for I
can wonder at nothing) or the Match imposed by his Father, for his Age scarce
allows him to know the Value of Money enough to part with his darling Liberty
for it.


Bell. She has made advances to him beyond belief; his good breeding received
them Civily; whereupon she has forgot nothing that could make her less Ugly,
though Age did not fail to o'er-top it all; Nature here was so unkind a
Mistress, as to prevail in spite of Art.


Mar. I should never have guessed other; for when we are once arrived to a
certain Point of time, we may even lay aside Pig-water, Patches and Curls, and
be contented with less Admiration, so we meet but with more Esteem; but if he
loves her not, what can provoke him to Marry her.


Bell. Gratitude and a Necessitous Fortune; besides, she has almost pucrhased
him with rich presents, which has more Eloquence in them than all the Old
Women's Tongues in England.


Mar. Presents! Sure you forget your self.


Bell. I know what I say; besides, where have you lived not to know, Money
speaks for an Old Woman, when her Eyes no longer can: But to entertain you till
my Lady Young-Love comes in, my Page shall sing you the last new Song.


SONG.
AH Dangerous Swains, tell me no more,
Thy Happy Nymph you Worship and Adore;
When thy filled Eyes are sparkling at her Name,
I raving wish that mine had caused the Flame.
If by your fire to her you can impart
Diffusive heat to warm another's heart:
Ah dangerous Swain, what would the ruin be,
Should you but once persuade you burn for me.
Enter Lady Young Love, Wilmore. Lady Young. Bid the Coach set up, and let the
things be brought in here My Daughter come! God bless you!


Mor. I am over joy'd to see your Ladyship, and to see you look so well.


Will. Your Ladyships most humble Servant.

Salutes her.
Lady Young. Belira, How do you like these figured Velvets; this I design for
the Bed and Hangings; this Violet color suits agreeably with this Buff.


Bell. Most extremely well, Madam; does your Ladyship design a Mixture?


L. Young. I had thoughts of Paining and Bordering it with this Crimson and
Green; but that sort of Furniture has been my aversion, ever since I saw my
odious Lady Junkers Appartment set forth with Scotch Plad and Damask.


Bell. aside.] Confusion! How his Eyes are fixed on her, as if his Soul received
her Charms, and wanted power to hide it!


L. Young. I don't look well to day, Mr. Wilmore.

Looks in her Glass.
Will. Your Ladyship can never look other.


L. Young. Belira, thou will not flatter me; I have not red enough have I?


Mar. aside.] But from the Eyes to the Chin, and looks like the Raddle upon a
Sheep's Back.


Bell. Your Ladyship is mistaken, I never saw you look better; there is a Curl
indeed out of order with the motion of the Coach; Hold, incline your Head: So,
very well, that Pink-colour'd Riband suits agreeably with your Complexion.


L. Young. But do you really think, Mr. Wilmore, I look so well to Day.


Mar. He has reason to hope, Madam, that your Ladyship may look better to
morrow Night.


L. Young. Have you caught hold of that report, who made you so wise?


Mar. Him that is to make your Ladyship so happy.


L. Young. Indeed, indeed, Mr. Wilmore, it derogates from you to talk with
Girls. When I had a Mother, I durst never think of approaching her without Fear
and Trembling. Now a Young thing as soon as ever she has bid farewell to Bibs
and Aprons, is ready for a Love, and thinks her self with Noise and Impudence,
better to be liked, than her Mother with all her Experience.


Enter Page. Page. Sir Rustic Goodheart desires to know if your Ladyship be at
leisure.


L. Young. Always to him; I shall be glad of his Company Daughter, I have taken
that care of your Fortune, as deceives not the Trust my late Lord reposed in
me, Sir Rustic Good hear: and I, have agreed upon your Marriage; my Authority
secures your Consent.


Mar. Marriage, Madam, is a thing I have not thought on, y^^ it is a Journey for
Life, and that once considered, we ought to do every thing to make it as easy
to us as possible.


Enter Sir Rustic Good Heart, Wildman. L. Young. Sir Rustic. your Servant;
where have you been since dinner?


Sir Rustic. Be Dad, taking a Glass to this pretty Lady's health, Madam your
Servant.


Wild. Your most humble Servant.

[They salute her.
Wilmore, a very pretty Lady.


Will. I could think so to, if 'twere not of the latest.


Sir Rustic. Give me thy Hand sweet heart, you are welcome to Town, be Dad
with all my heart.


L. Young. What think you of a Walk in the Garden; the Lovers are engaged, and
we would leave them together.


Will. We wait upon you.

[ Manet Sir Rustic and Mar
Sir Rustic. Which do thou like best, my dear, the Town, or Country.


Mar. The Town, Sir, beyond Comparison, all good Judges are of my Opinion, I
hope you are one of them.


Sir Rustic. Before George not I, yet if it had not been for me you had been
there still; I persuaded my Lady to send for you up, and have provided a
Husband for thee, Girl, what say thou to a Husband, heigh.


Mar. It Is a sort of Creature, has not yet fallen under my Consideration.


Sir Rustic. All in good time, Child; I like thee never the worse for that.
You don't look like the forward things of the Town, that Marries a Man only to
Cuckold him, Ods bobs thou will not do that, I hope, Child.


Mar. I don't understand you, Sir.


Sir Rustic. Come, we will be better acquainted, and then thou shale
understand me, heigh: to say truth, the way of making Cuckolds is soon
understood.


Mar. Pray, Sir, at once forgive, and satisfy my curiosity; have you spent
your time mostly in the Town or Country.


Sir Rustic. Be dad, Child, the Country; I never came to London but in times
of Parliament, which thank Heaven were not very frequent in our late Reigns; do
I look Wine your Sickly Londoners, the dregs of nothing but Pox and Wine, Hemh,
-- Hemb, -- show me any young Fellow of them all, that can match me in Health
and Vigor; neither Stone, nor Gout, nor the relicts of any Distemper, but love
of thee, Child.


Mar. Love of me, sure you mistake your self, one would have imagined it, any
other under the Sun at your Age.


Sir Rustic. Why there, be-dad you are out, there is none Lovers but us old
Fellows, the Young ones don't think it worth their time; show me such another
as Old Sir Fair-Love Fondling; why Child he does nothing but look Babies in her
Eyes all day, but bedad I believe he sees but in Imagination, unless he borrows
the assistance of Spectacles: He sets her, before George, in a great Chair in
the very middle of a Chamber, and himself for hours together at her Feet, upon
a Footstool, in admiration of her; there is encouragement now.


Enter Belira. Bell. My Lady Young-Love and her Counsel are in the Parlor, Sir,
looking over the Writings, she desires your Company.


Sir Rustic. I come, I come; Sweet Mistress your Servant, till I see thee
again.


[ Exit Sir Rustic. Bell. I came Marina to your deliverance, I imagined how you
were teiz'd.


Mar. O hideous! Belira, did I think in Nature, there had been such an ill
bred, awkard thing; why he is so great a Mouster already, Horns cannot make him
worse.


Bell. And yet my Lady Young-Love says you must Marry him.


Mar. What with twelve thousand Pound, a great deal of Youth, no contemptible
stock of Beauty, besides an untainted Reputation, that out-weighs them all;
believe me, Belirs, I Am not so far ignorant of my own worth, to bury it in him.


Bell. I wish you don't ruin your self by the Refusal.


Mar. That Marriage is the greatest, and you must use all your Interest with my
Mother to prevent it; or resolve to make me the most unhappy Creature breathing.


Bell. All aids that are in my power you may command: But has not your Journey
tired you, you will not be for the Park this Evening.


Mar. The Name has unwearied me; I Will but change my Cloahts and be ready for
you.


Bell. My Lady Young-Lous has tired poor Wilmore; he has left her to her Bonds
and Conveyances, and is gone to the Park before; would not you wish to meet him
there?


Mar. Why thy question? He is my Mothers, and never can be mine; but we trifle:
will you favor me with your Company, whilst I am Dreffing?


Bell. I Will follow you.

[ Exit Marina. Yes, Marina, my Interest pulls too strong against you, to leave
you a Moment to your self till I have put it out of Fortunes power to injure me,

Who trusts the fawning Jilt, must first believe,
I trust her not, and cannot be deceived.

[Exit Omnes. ACT II.
SCENE I. St. James's-Park.
Enter Smyrna and, Olivia. Smy. PRay, Gentlewoman be pleased to wear your Mask,
till we are got out of this Road of Foppery; I had better have gone Ten Miles
about.


Oliv. Lord, Mr. Smyrna, it is so hot, my Mask stisles me; but where are you
going? I am sure Walking is not your Business, especially in this place.


Smy. Yes, Wife, to choose, that you may have the pleasure of comparing your old
damned Jealous Husband, to these Gay fluttering Fops, that sail along by us;
Here Is your Gallant, Mr. Wildman, coming, put on your Mask, I say; Not for the
World, I warrant you.


Enter Wildman. Oliv. It Is too late, he has seen me, Husband, 'twill be uncivil.


Wild. Mr. Smyrna, your Servant; The fair Olivia here! Since when is it, Sir,
you have been for far reconciled to our Lewd end of the World, to trust this
Lady amongst us.


Smy. Hum, Sir, not too much of trusting neither, but yet, as you say, it is a
dangerous place, for an old Fellow, that has an Handsome Wife; Have not you that
Opinion of her, Mr. Wildman?


Wild. All the World must allow her that Character, but Faith, my Friendship to
you, hinders me to think of her, as I would, if she were not thy Wife.


Smy. And you, forsooth, Have not you a just Esteem of Mr. Wildman's Merit?


Oliv. As I ought, I know my Duty to you, Husband, and never had a thought
against it.


Smy. Why, very well, since you are both so indifferent, 'twere no great harm,
if you never see one another again. As to you, Gentlewoman, it is Mortifying you
too much, to suffer the Visits of a Man, who has not Sense to know your Worth;
And, let me tell you, Mr. Wildman, I Love my Wife, and don't like People that
slight her Charms, and prefer my Friendship to her Beauty, therefore till you
come better prepared to do her justice, your Visits will be but offensive, and
if ever you make another, I shall conclude you have taken a Friends Advice.
Come, wife.


Ex. Smy. and Oliv. Wild. Go thy ways, for an old Jealour, I wish be-gad, I
could say, Cuckold, but my honest Endeavors shall not be wanting to make thee,
that thou believe thy self.


Enter Wilmore. Will. Thank God for my deliverance, I Am got into the open Air
again, without the encumbrance of an old Woman, who is not satisfied, unless
you confine year Eyes to the Curse of meeting none but hers.


Wild. If thou art weary already, what will thou be when the Noose is fixed, and
no kind relieving Hand can do thee the curtesy of unslipping it.


Will. I confess, I have given the Town reason to believe, I could allow May and
December the two ends of time, to meet in our expected Wedlock.


Wild. The Opinion of thy Sense was not forfeited by that, we always believed,
thou had enough to distinguish between the glittering Metal and the Allay;
But are you not resolved to Marry my Lady Young-Love.


Will. So far from it, that I would run my self into any other Noose in
Christendom, to avoid hers; Marina is the Goddess here; You have doubtless
heard her Father left her a Fortune of 12000 l. on Condition she Married with
my Lady Young-Love's Consent, else Shame and Beggary to be her Portion.


Wild. That any Man should be so far wedded to the Follies of his Wife to
desire the entailing of them upon his Posterity.


Will. I have held a long Age of Dissimulation with her Mother to permit her
return to Town, and get her Fortune secured, engaged my Father with the hopes
of Marrying her, and doubtless I should prevail over the old Lady, if it were
not for another; but this is the hardest part of my Confession, for I think,
whatsoever Custom can persuade, that Man's a Villain, who boasts a Lady's
Favor.


Wild. Begad if our Town Ladies come to know how well thou art principled, thou
may even make thy own Markets amongst them, it is not to be matched in thy
green years, which commonly reckons the pleasure of telling as the foremost
delight in an Amor.


Will. I am not Beaux enough for that yet. To be short then, Beliria who you
know lives with, and governs my Lady Young-Love, did me the honor to like me,
and I had reason to believe my self Master of her first Favors, I could not
shake off her fondness, though all mine was secretly addressed to Marina, for whose
sake I was forced to dissemble with Belire.


Wild. Begad that was slavery enough, for the trouble of getting hand somly rid
of a Mistress, is ten times more than what it costs to make her such.


Will. She caught the discovery from my Eyes, and unknown to Marina persuaded
lier Mother to send her into the Country, then to confound me further, the old
Lady grew fond of me, Belira putting it into her Head, that it would Marry her,
by which means, she constantly secured her self of seeing me, being in the same
House, and reasonably thought, the interest she had in my Heart, ran no hazard,
by bestowing my Person upon an old Woman.


Wild. Then how comes in, she has suffered Marina to return, for I perceive she
manages at pleasure,


Will. 'Twas conditionally, I Married my Lady Young-Love to morrow, and
consented that Marina should be bestowed upon my Father.


Wild. And how do you think to evade either.


Will. It Is for that reason I make this discovery to engage your assistance,
Belira will not suffer her to sign for her Daughters Portion, till the moment
of Execution, but my present uneasiness is to entertain Marina, I have ordered
Music and Dancing after Supper, if possible engage Belira in your Affairs,
that she may not concern her self with mine.


Wild. You have ordered your own without considering my applications to Belira
may ruin me with Orinda.


Will. Quite contrary, that Coquet never likes a Man so well as when he does not
seem to be fond of her, trust my Opinion; besides 'twere no Obligation if you
did not run a little hazard for your Friend.


Wild. You shall command me, and now I consider, I Will bring Sir Amorous
Courtall, who is Fop e^ough, to think all Women that have fine Clothes
Beauties; him I design for the old Lady, if she should happen to like him
'twere no ill way of getting rid of her.


Will. That will be admirable, but be sure ply Beliria close, she is handsome
enough to reward your pains, and because of her interest with my Lady
Young-Love, the only Enemy I can apprehend, -- They are come into the Walk,
we'll meet them at the next turn.


Ex. Will. Wild. Enter Marina and Belira; meeting Orinda they salute. Ori. Your
Lad'ships most joyful humble Servant, you are welcome to Town; how long have you
done it the honor to grace it with your presence.


Mor. But to day, Madam, I Am pleased at the good fortune of meeting you so soon.


Ori. Beliria your Servant, O Good I Have been at the Playhouse, where there has
been the odiousest Play, so dull, that of my Conscience, I shall not abide to set
my foot in it again this Twelve Month.

Take snuff this time.
Bell. I believe there was very little Company there this Weather; how come you
to prefer that Diversion to Hide-Park?


Ori. O Good, you may very well ask Beliria, for 'twas no choice of mine, an
Alderman's Wife and Daughter did me the displeasure to Dine with me, and
pressed me beyond decency to go with them; O Jesu, what a vexation it is to be
with those precise sort of People, that would not go out of their Road, though to
be less odious.


Mor. They were famously set out, I warrant you.


Ori. O most unsuitably, the very sight of their Trappings would have made you
died of heat, of all things I hate Winter Clothes in Summer; what say you
Beliria?


Bell. That there are a sort of People that think Finery never out of season.


Orin. Lard, Marina, I finished a Copy of Verses last night, which I have sent
to half a score of my Friends for their approbation, I bestowed the last upon
admirable Sir Amorous Courtal, but I Will send you one of them.


Mor. You Will not fail.


Ori. Lard, Madam, what do you take me for? Beliria must come in too for a
Judge.


Bell. Pray, what was the Subject?


Mor. I know none so Entertaining as her self.


Ori. O, Madam, your most grateful Servant, 'twas upon the different Addresses
I have had made to me of late; O Jesu, such a glut of Foppery and Mankind; I
long to breath a little of the Country Air, that I may get rid of this Town
Lumber, and entertain my Muse alone with the reflections of what she has left
behind.


Mor. But, who is that Sir Amorous Courtall, he is sprung up since my reign.


Ori. O Good, a very pretty Gentleman, Marina, so Airy, so well Dressed, so
Handsome.


Bell. See how Opinions differ, if you will take mine, Marina, he is the most
outcast Fop in Nature, he once made the Campaign, but all he remembers of it,
is running to Breda, which has given him fears enough to keep at home all his
life after.


Mar. Orinda, Will you favor me with your Company to night, we have Music and
Dancing?


Ori. I Will wait upon you anon, it is my Lady Junket's Visiting day, and she will
never pardon me, if I omit my Devoir.


Bell. O, that old Gossipping thing, she will never have lost the relish of youth,
but wishes so well to it, she will bring young loving things together in spite of
their Hearts.


Ori. Fie Beliria, Good I hate you, for being so censorious, because she allows
the freedom of her Apartment to Quality of both Sexes; A Lady of her age cannot
be friendly or so, but presently she is thought procurish.


Bell. O, very friendly, and then so grateful, one Treat shall make her yours
all her life after.


Enter Sir Amorous Courtall, Wildmore, and Wildman. Will. Ladies, your humble
Servant, it is a delicate Evening.


Mar. Sir, your Servant, see Beliria, Orinda is stealing away, go after, and
bring her back.


Bell. I have ill Nature enough to break an Appointment, and I fancy here is one.

Ex. after Orinda.
Will. To Mar. I have that to say which it concerns you to know, favor me but
with an opportunity after Supper, and let Beliria know nothing of it.


Mar. In the Garden l'le expect you.


Will. Ten thousand ages, till then, O Marina, do not fail me, my Heart will
suffer unspeakably if you should.


Mor. No more, take my word I Will be there.


Enter Orinda and Beliria. Ori. O Jesu, sure Beliria you have lost your senses,
who would be seized thus.


Bell. Together, and so thoughtful, I see the growing evil.

Aside.
Sir Am. Let me be nothing, Madam, if ever I saw any thing so killing as your
Eyes, they have Charms, my Heart never understood before.


Mar. Yours is a general gallantry to the whole Sex, Sir Amorous.


Orin. Lard, Sir. Amorous, what a loss should we have had, if you had made the
Campaign.


Sir Am. I must confess I staid in pure Charity to the fair Sex, to expose
them, by my absence, was an inhumanity my Heart could not agree to.


Mar. I fancy, Sir Amorous, you are very fortunate in Amors.


Sir Am. Let me expire, Madam, if I have any reason to complain, but those fair
Eyes, makes me forget, every thing but themselves.


Bell. I swear Mrs. Wildman, you talk pleasantly, come Marina, shall we not be
going?


Mar. When you please; Orinda we must not leave you behind.


Will. You Will give me leave to wait on you to your Coach, Ladies.


Wild. Sir Amorous, not so fast, come back, [ Ex. Monet. Wild. Sir Am] I Have a
word with you.


Sir Am. Pax on you, let me go, I must wait upon the Ladies, it is such an
omission, that I shall never be pardoned, nor deserve the Esteem of a Gentleman
amongst them.


Wild. You may appologize for that anon, I called you back, to give you a
little Advice.


Sir Am. Be sudden then, I cannot live, divided from Marina.


Wild. The old fire, that flames upon sight of every new Face, but I design you
for another, who exceeds her in advantages, as much as you do all the
Playhouse Beaus in Dress and Gallantry.


Sir Am. No ill Comparison; who is it? I dye to know.


Wild, First then, she is prodigious rich, wears extravagant fine Clothes, and
has the best way of putting them on.


Sir Am. O, of all things, I love a Lady well Dressed, let me be nothing, if one
that is other, does not look mean, and as if she were to be loved according.


Wild. Then she is Amorous, and will no doubt be presently taken with you.


Sir Am. 'Pshaw, Pax, so they all tell me, I could have bated her that part of
the Character, it is surfeiting.


Wild. Her Fortune however is enviting, if you apply your self to her, she is
rich enough to reward your labor.


Sir Am. Let me expire, if thou do not talk scandalously, I hope it is not
Matrimony thou hint'st at.


Wild. Why, you're too much a Man of Mode, to make the burden uneasy to you;
a Civil Husband, and so forth, is all that a Wife can rationally expect from
you.


Sir Am. Gad, now I think on it, Cold Civility to a Wife, gives one a good air,
let me dye, if I could be fond of an Angel that I was once Married to, but to
be seen abroad with her, were an extravagance, I should never forgive my self
for.


Wild. Or if it should happen, once in an Age, I fancy, you you would make just
such mien, as my Lord Stately, and his Lady, when they are together in one
Coach at Hyde-Park.


Sir Am. Just for all the World, or let me expire, let me never breath, if I
have not been passionately in love with her uneasy Frowns, and even ravished
to find during the whole Park time she had not bestowed one word, nor look,
upon her Lord, one would have sworn, but by her Frowns, she had not known him
to be so near her.


Wild. Gad, I think he matches her, his lolling back in his Coach, without
glance or motion, speaks as much mortification as her sulleness, the best we
can conclude is, that they are heartily weary of one another.


Sir Am. Show me that Married Couple who are not, but then there is good
Management in those Affairs, as in all others; Is it reasonable to disgust one
self with a Wives Company, only to oblige the Town with Matter for remark, let
her take her Coach, and leave me the freedom of my Chariot, I Will give her the
Ceremony of the Glass as we meet, pass on and make no uneasy reflections of
the heavy load entailed upon Mortal life.


Wild. Besides, my Widow will set all uneasiness aside, and repair the breach
you have made in your Estate.


Sir Am. The Campaign, the Campaign Charles, let me be nothing, if I did not
loose Baggage to the value of 1500 l. all my Dressing Plate, Wardrobe, and
Military Accoutrements, and was glad to secure my self at Breda, with only the
days Provision upon my Back, thou art my Friend, to whom I may own such a
Misfortune, let me expire, if ever I was in such a Consternation since I was
born into the World.


Wild. It Is now Eight a Clock; do you know my Lady Young-Loves here in the
Square, any body will tell you the House, I Will meet you there at Nine.


Sir Am. Adieu; I Will walk over the Park to my Lodgings, write an Excuse to an
Expecting Lady, who does my Company the Honor to sigh for it, and then I Will be
certain to wait upon you.


Exeunt severally. ACT III.
SCENE I.
Enter Knowlittle, and his Man Timothy. Know. WHy truly Tim. we have had but a
sorry Day on it.


Tim. Indifferent, Master, besides those that came to inquire after Stolen
Goods; the Party that would know the Cause why she did not conceive, paid us
notably.


Know. Look out some body knocks, Tim.


Tim. O Gemini, Master! It Is Mr. Smyrna, the Turkey Merchant, and Madam Olivia
his Wife; I am very well acquainted with her Maid, Mrs. Phaebe.


Know. Peace, we must not pretend to know them till the Stars have been
consulted: I Will to my Study, mind your hits, Tim. and get what intelligence you
can.


Exit. Enter Smyrna, Olivia, and Tim. Smyrn. Where Is your Master, Friend, I
hope it is not too late to speak with him.


Tim. In his Study, Sir; I Will go and acquaint him with your being here; He does
not use to appear after Sun.


Exit Tim. Oliv. Lord, Husband, you are the strangest Man in the World, what
will People think of you?


Smyrn. What, Mistress, you are afraid the Devil should speak Truth, and discover
your Abominations.


Oliv. The Devil's the Father of Liars, how should he speak Truth.


Smy. You are the Mother of Liars, and that Cuckold maker Wild-man, one of your
vile Disciples.


Oliv. Because you heard he courted me before I was Married, you think I must
needs be naught with him.


Smy. No, no, very Good in your sense, I warrant; Naught, why thou art not a
Citizen's Wife for nothing; thou have more grace I trust in the Lord, than not
to think Cuckolding thy Husband a good honest practicable Thing; those are
naught who do it so awkardly that the World is acquainted with it; nay their
very Husbands, who are always the last in knowing the Favors that are done
them.


Oliv. But sure, you don't believe, that an ignorant block-head of a
Fortune Tellers, should speak any thing like Truth.


Smyr. I Will tell you what I believe though, Mistress, in my case of Enquiry
your Ladyship can exceed all the Cunning men in England, and read our Fortunes
to a Tittle; but the Devil's in it, you will not make me as wise as your self, but
put me here upon unlawful means, the Sin will lie at your door, Wife, you would as
good confess, and save charges into the Bargain.


Oliv. If I should, I Am sure you would not believe me.


Smyr. The Devil take me then; Come be quick, before Master Astrologer comes.


Oliv. Lord, Husband, what do you take me for? Why, if it were so, do you think
I Would be such a Fool to confess.


Smyr. No; You Are wiser of my Conscience, but be sure you are as trusty to
other Folks; you Women have she Friends that you discover your failings to, and
that way the Secret comes about; it is for your Interest, as well as mine, to
keep the matter private, if 'twere but for the sake of preserving your Lovers;
they are squeamish amongst such a glut of Women's Flesh, and are disgusted by
that which has been blown upon; but see the Devil appears to decide our
Controversy.


The Scene Opens and discovers Knowlittle behind a long Table; Books, Globes,
Compasses, Pen, Ink, Paper, etc. Know. Is your business with me, Friend.


Smyr. Yes, Mr. Knowlittle, I Have a doubtful Question to be resolved, therefore
there is something by way of Encouragement, only whether my Wife do me Justice,
you understand me Friend; I Am plaguily afraid of being a Cuckold, an ignorant
Cuckold, Sir, for that is all; Pray consult the Stars, that I may come to the
knowledge of my good Fortune.


Know. We'll erect a Scheme, or as the Vulgar term it, cast a Figure, and give
you the Opinion of the Stars thereupon.


Smyr. He Is Conjuring; we shall immediately see the Devil in the Circle.


Oliv. Are you so silly to believe it, he seems to be a sorry ignorant Knave,
that has more Will than Power to do Evil.


Smyr. They say a Woman can out-wit the Devil, and I believe Outface him too
-- Well, Mr Knowlittle, have you done? What do the Stars say, am I represented
with Horns like Capricorn, with a certain Tall-young Gentleman in my Figure,
who does my Wife the Honor to Love her, better than she can her Husband.


Know. Your Wife, Sir, looks like a good Virtuous Lady, and your Figure speaks
you to be a mighty dissatisfied Person, a little troubled in your Brain with
Jealousy; but either my Skill deceives me, or you have no occasion for it.


Smyr. How say you Master Knowlittle, do you like my Wife too? does the Stars
denote me for further Cuckoldom, what encouragement do they give you, to take
her part for she is so bad, not one Devil in Hell dares do it without a Bribe.


Know. Is that one question all you would have resolved.


Smyr. Ay Friend, and I see it is more than thou can do, thou art going to
convince me of the Vanity and Folly of all those who have helped thee to
deceive themselves.


Know. How, Sir, do you undervalue my Profession?


Smyr. O no, Sir, Your Profession is a very Learned Profession; but I much
doubt the Skill of the Professor:


Know. Were it not for this Virtuous, Good Lady, I could show you a Proof of my
Art would make you tremble; yet verily it may be a means to acquit her; how say
you, Sir, if you dare stand it, I Will raise a Familiar to convince you, and
protect your Wife near me.


Smyr. Would you frighten me into an Opinion of your Art, you that cannot tell a
Man whether, or no, he is a Cuckold; I have no Faith in you, and therefore dare
stand the Worst.


Knowlittle takes Olivia behind the Table and whispers her, turns over his
Books, uses postures of Conjuration, stamps with his Foot; then Tim arises,
dressed like a Fury, with a Wand in his Hand, strikes Smyrna thrice over the
Head with it, Oliva shreeks, Smyrana trembles, looks affrighted, and sinks down
as sueh in a Chair. Tim. From Hell's deep Center, hither am I come,
To warn thee, Mortal of thy heavy doom;
Thy Wife is Chaste, yet shall thou not believe,
Thy Visionary Doubts, thy Mind deceive;
Therefore remain accursed, and may thou find,
Thy constant plague, in thy suspicious Mind.
Descends.
Oliv. Mr. Knowlittle, accept of this Gratuity; my Husband faints! Lord, I wish
his fears have not taken away his use of Hearing, He Will never remember what the
Devil said to him.


Know. Sir, Sir; How fares it with you?


Oliv. Lord! How do you do, dear Husband? I Am frighted out of my Wits; I Will
never venture to the Devil again with you, you shall even go by your self, next
time for me.


Smyr. Ay poor Wife; as thou say thou will, I believe, for sake me in all
Perils; but is he gone are you sure.


Know. Gone; Yes, Sir, what do you think; by virtue of my Art I can lay as well
as raise -- This 'twas to be incredulous, and undervalue the Mysteries of
Knowledge; I was sorced to use extraordinary means to convince you: O the
Blindness snd Stony-heartedness of the Ignorant.


Smyr. Pray let a Coach be called -- I Am very ill -- but Master Fortune Tellers,
your Skill in the Black-Art, shall not make me believe my Wife the Fairer.


Oliv. It Is the Capricio of all Old Men, Jealous of every thing that is Younger
than themselves.


Know. Ay, poor Lady; Heaven endow you with Patience* -- There Is a Coach, Sir.


Smyr. Is there, come Wife; good Night Friend.


Know. Sir, your Servant; Madam your Servant: Tim. wait upon the Gentry to the
Coach.

Ex. Smy. Oliv. Tim. Verily this Evening has helped the Morning, and both
together made a good Day, few better. --

Enter Tim. Now, Tim. thou did it admirably.


Tim. Ay, Master, did not I; He little thinks, that from my hiding place, I
overheard all he said; but how did the Habit set upon me.


Know. As like as the Devil could be, every one in there way, Tim. all Trades
have their Cheats, and this is to be said for ours, we do it with their own
consents.


Tim. Ay, Master, better this than worse, every thing would fain live, and we
do but our honest endeavors thereto.


Know. Come, let us go in and pray, to morrow may but prove as good a Day.


Exeunt Omnes. SCENE II. Lady Young Loves House.
Enter Sir Rustic, Wildman, and Belira. Wild. TO Morrow, Sir Rustic is the
happy day.

Sir Rus. Be-gad, I long for the Sack-posset, and throwing the Stocking; that
was the Fashion when I was Married, and a good Sociable one too; I mean to make
use of it still. He, he, he! I have bin telling her, how eager all the young
Fellows will be of hitting the Bride in the Face; but be-dad, I hope I shall
hit her better somewhere else; before George, I Will try to get a Nap in this
Chair, and Dream of to Morrow, before to Morrow comes.


Bell. Sir Rustic is falling asleep over his Wooing. When we force Nature
beyond her self, she must return for a recruit.


Wild. Be-gad Madam! You don't know what an Insipid Fellow I am this way; I
never Love taking fruitless pains: If I had not a real Inclination for you; the
Devil take me, I if would pretend it: For where is the satisfaction of
dissembling; when that, which should be a reward to our endeavors, disgusts
our Inclinations.


Bell. You Men of the Town, never value a Woman for her self; it is only to
increase the Wretched number, though your selves are never the better for it.


Wild. That Is only seen amongst the Loose, Idle part of Mankind; who not
setting a value upon their own Reputations, think it no fault to Expose a Lady.


Bell. Well, not disputing any further your Talent of Secrecy, what Security can
you give of your Sincerity?


Wild. Your Charms, and the opinion the World has of my Sense: Be-gad, would
you have a more undoubted one? If a Woman be very handsome, and meets with a
Man who has Wit enough to know and value it; the Consequence speaks it self,
and needs no Corroborating Evidence.


Bell. Well, enough of this to Night; I receive you for my Lover, and as such,
you must do me what Service I desire. Wilmore and you, are mighty Friends. Has
he told you nothing of his concern for Marina?


Wild. He Is to Marry her Mother -- Besides Child! I never care to hear those
sort of secrets, for fear they should expect mine in return.


Bell. However indifferent your are, I Will tell you one; though the Report runs of
to Morrow. Wilmore, must Marry my Lady Young Love privately this Night, and if
you please, you shall have the Honor of bestowing her upon him.


Wild. Your Commands would make greater difficulties easy; but Pox, why this
haste, to bring a young Fellow into slavery? Does he know the Design?


Bell. She carried him hence to tell him: I cannot imagine how she will bring it
about; for I fancy, one must be a good deal out of Countenance, to let a young
Fellow know, one has a mind to lie with him, one Night sooner than he designed.


Wild. Ay, or desired; for if I were to be Mr. Bridgroom, that would be my Case
always with an old Woman: But where is he now?


Bell. Shut up with her in her Closet; if you will stay a Moment, I Will go see
what is become of 'em.


Exit Belira. Bell. If we don't take care, this Gipsey will be too cunning for
us all; Pox take Sir Amorous; Where can he stay?


Enter Isabel. Isa. Is Madam Belira here? My Lady Enquires for her.


Wild. No Child, she is just gone; but here is a Friend of yours, would be glad
to see you at my Lodgings.


Isa. I assure you Mr. Wildman, you are mistaken in me; I would not be a Whore,
if you would keep me a Coach and Six Horses, to tend me all days of my Life.


Wild. Nay, now I Am sure you lie.


Exit Isabel. Enter Wilmore. Will. Pox take all old Amorous Women; I stinck of
Petter as bad as her self: I fancy it to be like our Perriwiggs, that retain
the scent of Tobacco, after being in a City Coffee-House. Belira has told you.


Wild. Yes, yes -- Have you seen Marina?


Will. Where should I see her, in her Mother's Closet? Be-gad, you would have
laughed your self to Death, to hear her break the business to me. She was in so
good a Humor, that had I not wanted Witnesses, she would have signed, without
consulting her Oracle, Belira.


VVild. It Is pity, the Poor Lady should be disappointed of a Husband; Sir
Amorous shall Marry her.


VVil. But how? I don't think it feasible.


VVild. We'll try to turn our Modern Comedy-Plots into good, sober, earnest,
and make her Marry one for another.


VVil. Impossible! Belira is her shadow, and not to be deceived. They stay
Supper for us; my appointment holds with Marina; the Music will amuse the rest
of the Company; if possible, don't let Belira follow us.


VVild. If she follows you, I Will follow her, I assure you, for I Have talked my
self, into a kind of liking of her; but we must not leave the old Gentleman
behind us. Sir, Sir! How sound he sleeps? He Is taking up his Rents beforehand,
and providing for to Morrow Night, which he Fancies will be no good one of rest
to him: They stay Supper for you Sir Rustic.


Sir Rus. Supper, why, what is a Clock?

Yawns and wakes.
VVil. Near ten, Sir: Shall we wait upon you down?


Sir Rus. I had rather you should wait upon me up, Sir, a good Bed in my
Country is worth ten Suppers; but be-dad, I must not tell my Mistress so till I
am her Master. Come along.


VVil. We wait upon you Sir.


Exeunt omnes. ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Lady Young Loves House. The Scene opens, and discovers Lady Young Love,
Marina, Sir Amorous Courtall, Wilmore, Wildman, Orinda, Belira. Song and
Entertainment of Dancing. L. Y. L. Where Is Sir Rustic, that he has not
honored us with his Company?


VVil. I left him taking a Grace-Cup with your Ladyships Chaplain. Mr.
Priestcraft will be too hard for him, they are so used to their Sanctified
Wine they can swallow a large share of our unhallowed Juice of the Grape. Be
pleased to know my Friend, Sir Amorous Courtall.


Exit after Marina. L. Y. L. As such I must ever value and esteem him.


Sir Am. Your Ladyship 's most Obedient Servant; let me Expire, if ever I saw
any thing so taking as your Ladyship 's Civility.


L. Y. L. Lard Sir Amorous! Do you consider whose in the Company? These young
Ladies will have reason to Quarrel at your Judgment, or rather I should be
displeased at your insincerity.


Sir Am. Let me expire Madam, if ever I saw any thing so engaging as your Air.
O that Dress, that Dress Madam! The Devil take me if the Drawing Room in all
its Birth-night finery, can show us any thing equal to it.


L. Y. L. I wish I had but as good a Title to the rest of your Commendations;
but time was, when they might have passed upon me with less injustice.


Sir Am. Be-gad Madam, no time like the present: The Sun is not in his glory
till he is mounted to the Meridian, let me dye; if I can imagine your self,
could ever exceed your self.


L. Y. L. Lard, Sir Amorous, your'e extreme Courtly! How unfortunate have I bin
till now, in wanting your Acquaintance! I never had so sudden an esteem for any
one. O! I Love a well bred Man, in my Soul -- Good Breeding -- There Is no Charm
exceeds it. Pray Sir Amorous have you not bin abroad?


Sir Am. Yes Madam, I have fetched the Tour of all the Courts in Italy, made
some small residence in Spain, but their Gravity disgusted me, and therefore
made haste to pass into France, which had every thing that a well bred
Gentleman could desire, either to Instruct or Entertain.


L. Y. L. Lard, it is strange! I durst have sworn that very thing by your Air,
your janty, way of Dress, your Perriwig. Oh Jesu! How ravishing the Curls fall
to cover your Face, and leave us almost nothing besides to Contemplate. Ah! how
far you exceed all that ever I saw in the Art of Powdering. Belira, don't you
think Sir Amorous Dresses extremely well?


Bell. Undoubtedly, Sir Amorous, I beg your Pardon I did not see you sooner --
Heigh, this is Gallantry indeed! What a new Dress!


Wild. The Devil take thy Foppery; was it for this, thou made us stay for
thee?


Sir Am. I had a Misfortune, just as I was crossing to my Lodging, a filthy
Carman dash't me most intolerably, a just reward for being on foot in the dirty
Street; I was forced to change my Clothes before I was fit for this shining
Assembly.


Orin. Sir Amorous, your most devoted, Admirer -- Lard, my Lady Young Love, did
you ever see any Steenkirk have that Air? Never could Madam, the Princess de
Conty, have hoped a Copy, so transce^^^ng the Original.


L. Y. L. It Is all of a Piece, all Sir Amorous, in a word; all that can be
named, the fine Gentleman, the Courtier, the Something beyond all, the Modern
expressive word of Beau.


Sir Am. Let me expire, if your Ladyship has not the best Judgment. is not my
Sword-knot extremely fine and just?


Orin. O, of a most ravishing length -- What is Fashion, for well bred People,
If, as Mr. Bays says, we don't top our parts?


Wild. Your Ladyship 's unacquainted with one Sir of Amorou's Excellencies; he
Dances to a Miracle, and carried it from all the Quality at the last Court Ball.


Sir Am. A Corant or Minuet, Madam, I am no higher Dancer: Will your Ladyship
do me the Honor of a Minuet?


L. Y. L. Sir Amorous, I must beg your Pardon, if I share the Dance, I shall
lose the entire Prospect of your Person; Belira, if she pleases shall oblige us.


VVild. Nay, be-gad Madam, you shall not go till Sir Amorous has done with you.


Bell. Eternal Impertinence, they are both missing, and undoubtedly together.
Sir Amorous, I Am not in Humor, and shall make but an ill Figure, Orinda will
do much better.


Sir Am. Let my be nothing, Madam, if she has not ten times more Chagrin in her
Looks than your Ladyship. I must not be refused.


L. Y. L. Sir Amorous Dances in Perfection.


Dance. VVild. I told your Ladyship his Talent, I was sure you would not find
me in a mistake.


The Dance done, Belira goes out. Wildman follow her. Orin. So slighting, she
has Debauched him from me. O I cannot hold my Muse! Muse go Lament the
Misfortune.

For to Love is Noble frailty; but Poor sin,
When once we fall to Love, unlov'd again.

Exit Orinda. Sir Am. O your Ladyship flatters me, or let me dye! But to say
what has bin said before, Blows from hands so soft, who would not bear!


L. Y. L. Sir Amorous, you are a Judge of Decorum and Decency; what say you to
walking in, and seeing the Bridal Bed?


Sir Am. I Will follow your Ladyship through the World; but I shall expire in
seeing the place where my Happiness is to be Sacrificed.


L. Y. L. O Jesu! It Is a thousand pities so pretty a young Gentleman should
have an uneasy Moment.


Exeunt. SCENE Changes to the Garden.
Wilmore, and Marina. Mar. GRant, I dispense with that one Form of our Sex,
disbelieving a Lover, when he first tells us he is such; how can you avoid my
Mother, or delay her expectations? Belira, whose reasons I could not comprehend
before; will do all that is necessary to ruin our intelligence.


Will. If nothing else can secure me, your Denial must.


Mar. Twelve Thousand Pounds is a Forfeiture too great to oblige an Enemy with.
I hear Belira's voice, she must not see us together.


Exit Marina. Enter Belira, followed by Wildman. Bell. But why do you follow me?


Wild. But why do you fly me?


Bell. Marina shot that way. I see VVilmore at the bottom of the Walk, I have
business with him; oblige me, and leave us together.


VVild. You Command me.


Exit. Wildman. [Wilmore comes forward.] VVil. Here so late Belira?


Bell.. I come in search of you, the Bride expects you.


Will. To Night! It must not be.


Bell. The same thing as to Morrow, the sooner it is over the better; for in
these cases our fears are the worst part of our punishment. Was not Marina with
you? she is wanted. Sir Rustic has drank himself into a Matrimonial Temper,
and Mr. Priestcraft Swears twelve at Night, is as Canonical as that at Noon.


Will. Belira, have you Loved me!


Bell. Has not my Ruin told you?


Will. Then do you Love me?


Bell. Yes, to see you happy -- But the Mask is off, and thou can Cheat no
more, and I no more believe.


Will. You never Loved, but now abhor me.


Bell. You reproach me with what I would be; do not, do not rouse the Woman in
me, I would be Calm to Night and see you Married.


VVil. Rather see me Buried.


Bell. Perhaps so -- Could the remembrance of my Wrongs but sleep with thee, I
would not Envy thee a quiet Grave.


VVil. Farewell, we part for ever, I Will leave the Town this Minute.


Bell. At least, Sir, if you will not Marry your self, but unkindly leave your
Bride thus in the longing Moment; do your Father the honor to grace his
Marriage.


VVil. What have I done, that you should wish to make me Wretch'd?


Bell. What have thou left undone to make me such?


Will. Your Reputation yet stands fair, and uless your own Indiscretion betrays
you the Secret shall be such, with me for ever.


Bell. But thy heart, Traitor, thy perjured Heart; tell me, how shall I get it
back?


Will. Never this way, I assure you.


Bell. It Is given for gone then -- Go -- Live as Wretch'd as I can make you,
I Will think no more upon you.


Will. Where, Madam, are you going?

going.
Bell. To a Wedding, Sir, Marina's Wedding; you say we must not Dance at yours.


Will. Rather of the two Belira, but why to Night?


Bell. All Bridgrooms are not as backward as your self; your Father has the
start of you, in desire as well as years, he is impatient of his Happiness.


Will. You are Peevish Belira; does your Love make you Jealous?


Bell. I have none, the Moor has taught me better; no longer doubting, away at
once with Love and Jealousy.


Will. Then it is Spite disturbs you: In what have I deserved it?


Bell. Look in thy false perfidious Heart, and take my Answer thence.


Will. That speaks of nothing you can quarrel with.


Bell. Then I will stay and argue with thee, how often have thou told, thou
coud'st for ever Love me?


Will. I told you that I could, not that I would.


Bell. Poor Caviller, those who can jest with Oaths, can play with Words --
You Will come after and wish the Bride Joy.


Will. We must not part thus, you were not used to fly my Arms.


Bell. By all that is good, he has got the sorry cunning of our Sex; just so does
a Wife when her Husband has caught her false, the gilting Creature cries, Do
you believe it Spouse? you do not use to be so unkind -- Ha, ha, ha -- Let me
Laugh, though it is maliciously; go on, I Am in the Vein of Audience; let me hear
some disagreeable Truths, and how well thou can turn Woman; Marina is at
stake before you, do it handsomely; I would be fortified in my Aversion, and
have my hate implacable.


Will. It Is Barbarous to insult, where you should rather pity.


Bell. I do, let all the World be judge else; nay, do more than Pity, I would
prevent your Ruin, and stop the Passage up to your undoing, would save you from
the Ills, nay, Scorns of Poverty, keep your Friends such, and put it in your
Power to be one by still Preserving you: The Worlds opinion, who judge of Merit
but by Fortunes Favors.


Will. We know the Extent of your Generosity: But serve me as I would be served,
Belira.


Bell. I thought this was your way: I mistook you for him that was to Marry my
Lady Young Love -- But I Will go look for certainties within.

Going.
Will. Come back Belira, it is my last Call: I would satisfy thy Womanish
Revenge, and let thee see me Cursed by any other way than Fatal Marriage -- Take
my Sword -- Thy Malice can supply thy want of use, despite can furnish
strength, and too often thou have found the way to my unhappy Heart to miss it
now.


Bell. Ha, ha, ha, in Love to dying! By all that is good, turned Hero: Your
Mistress, Sir, is much obliged -- Keep your Sword, it may be a Fortune better
worth than all your Fathers Lands; there is Wars abroad, you may employ it in,
'twill keep your Wife from wanting here at Home.


Will. Am I indeed your Scorn, Proud, Fantastic Woman; thy liking was foul
Lust; not Love: That gentle Name brings Happiness, but thou -- Let me not think
upon thee, for fear it force my Tongue to something worse, than should be said
of Ladies; I Have served it seems, as long as you could like, and now you choose
another.


Bell. Would it were come to that, I would exchange thee, for the last of Men,
and think the Bargain Cheap, would part with all that goodly Form, for honest
Ugliness, and think it fairer; thy Youth for Age, and Dote upon his Doatage --
So in return I found but Truth, mark well that word, that word has Charms thou
never knew, and which out-weighs thine.


VVil. Belira, thou have power to read my Soul; thy Magic Spells are
irresistible. How have thou found this Failing in my Virtue, which I not
knowing of, my Wants could never miss till now?


Bell. Thank my Wit, Natures best Gift -- I Have seen your shunting poor designing
Arts, to wave this Marriage and promote another. Your care too, of Marina's
Fortune falsely gilded with the weak pretense of Generosity; 'twas not doubled
thick enough for me: But because Doubts never should condemn the Man I Loved, I
would not seem to doubt till I was certain; therefore no more dissembling, it is
vain, Marina never shall be yours; and if you could not think it an
unhappiness, I fain would keep you mine.


VVil. Give me this Night to think in, I Will promise nothing, but this: I Am
Grateful where I am obliged.


Bell. To show your Power, I will; my Lady Young Love through my persuasion
designed this the Marriage Night; I Will excuse you to her, but not one word or
thought of Marina, for in that Moment she shall be bestowed upon another; I
would divide the World, rather than you should meet; I hope to Morrow, we may
give you joy; this Night I find but little.


Exit Belira. Will. Less thou have left behind, O the curse of Lewdness! What
Woman 's Fair after we find her Faulty? What Lady Innocent, when no longer
Chaste? Or who so vain to hope for Honor, or for Pity from that Soul who wants
it for her self?


Enter Wildman. Wild What I hear it is deferrd, there is no hopes of Posset.
Be^ria has dissmiss'd me till to Morrow, she is gone to your Bride; by this time
Sir Amorous has supplanted you, he is shut up with her, and has impudence
enough to bid fair for it.


VVil. They talk of Eating against ones Stomach, but no Surfeit is so nauseous,
as what I Am in danger of, Belira caught me in the A^^ion; and Faith, a sinner
must have more impudence than I, who (...) deny matter of Fact.


Wild. Be gad, I have Pimpt to a fair end: What to let a Woman outwit thee? How
could you once think of being sincere to one, whose Interest runs counter to
yours? I would have dissembled as much Love as I had Aversion; nay
Counterfeited my first desires, and suffered her, to believe she had preserved
the Conquest of me now, that I might have Triumphed over her all my life after.


Will. Very well, I am railed at on all sides.


Wild. Thou have this Moment in thy Face, all the Mortification of poor Lenten
Penitents, and lookst more akin to the Spirit than the Flesh. I believe thou
art not in the condition of Wedlock. Confess your Misfortune to my Lady
Young-Love, I know no reason, why a Man should pretend false Courage, when by
it he runs himself into an inconveniency, he might have otherways avoided.


Enter Sir Amorous. Am. Faith, if lying, dissembling and flattering, can
deserve her, I have done it. After we parted, I underwent the Mortification of
an Arrest, which has the better fitted me for that of Matrimony; 'twas
necessary for me, to have just got out of the Baliffs hands, to be able to go
through with her, or else let me expire, if I could have done it.


Wild. But what is the Consequence, Sir Amorous?


Sir Am. No more, than deferring the Marriage. The Duce take me if I don't
think it Exceeds all Hercules's Labors, to be able to persuade a Widow to lie
alone, when she is resolved to have a Bedfellow.


Enter Ready. Wild. The next Affair shall be resolved in your Chamber, where
I Will wait Sir Amorous and you in a Minute.


Will. Nay if you would be private, I Am discreet.


Sir Am. Let me be nothing, if he has not some melting Billet, I know it by his
very Air. Good Fortune to thee Charles.


Exeunt Sir Amorous, Will. Wild. Reads, Hum! to Morrow Morning like a Phisician.
Ready, where had you this Letter?


Ready. Mrs. Phoebe brought it to your Lodgings. She says her Master has bin at
the Fortune Tellers, to Enquire, whether your Honor had made him a Cuckold.


Wild. I am sorry, the Devil could not answer him in the Affirmative: She
writes me word that Symrna's sick with his fright, and that I may pass upon him
for a Physician; however, I believe my skill lies most Olivias way. Ready, go
and knock up my Apothecary; borrow his Velvet Coat with the great Gold Buttons.
A few hard words, of Plebotomy, Purgative, Laxative, and I shall be set up in
my Profession, and look like any Collegiate Doctor of them all -- Why then, the
Devil take me if I don't go -- Now the matter's brought to Perfection, I Will not
fall asleep over the Brazen Head, when it should answer me. Yes.

I Will watch the falling of the Golden Shower,
And reap my Harvest in the shining Hour.

Exeunt omnes. ACT V.
SCENE I.
Olivia 's Chamber. Olivia and Phoebe. Phoe. BY my Troth, Madam, if all Ladies
should follow your Example, Solitude would make them soon turn honest; and then
where were the Employment for Wit and Scandal? You need not be in such a Terror
of my Master, he sleeps as sound as a Top; and should Mr. Wildman come in the
Interim, we might introduce him to your Ladyship without his being the wiser.


Oliv. I hear knocking at the Gate; go see if your Master be awake. Why do I
tremble thus? I neither distrust my Virtue, nor his Care of it. Yet a secret
Guilt condemns me, because I exceed in Form. If the Shadow of an Injury gives
such Uneasiness, what do they suffer by Remorse who actually offend?


Enter Wildman like a Physician, Phoebe. Wild. My Life! my charming, bright
Olivia!


Oliv. Alas, Mr. Wildman, these Transports are not my Due; you know I am
honest; neither my Husband nor you can make me otherwise: Therefore urged by
your Thousand Importunities, I have indeed sent for you, but it is to forbid any
more Billet Douxes, not one Love Letter more, as you hope to have all those
kindly received which you shall dispatch to your next Mistress.


Wild. You amaze me, Madam!


Oliv. Secondly, no Corrupting Presents to my Woman; no attempting her weak
Virtue, in hopes to prevail upon her Ladies; for the first moment I suspect it,
I shall be offended at you, and send her packing, to carry you the News of it.


Phoe. I was afraid I should suffer as an Accomplice.


Oliv. Thirdly, no extravagant Civilities to Mr. Smyrna; no returning cold
Affronts with fond Caresses; no carrying him to the Tavern, and paying his Club
there, as if that were to be the Price of his Wife at home; nor vain Hopes of
having the Proverb of your side, That Cuckolds are kind to those who make them
so.


Wild. 'Twas something indeed, he was always so damned jealous of me; had he
had but the Title, I would not have questioned the Benefit of the Proverb, his
Horns would have blinded him.


Enter Doctor Pulse. Pulse. Madam, a good Morning to you.


Oliv. My Husband's Physician unsent for! What Is to be done?


Pulse. I have been at Mr. Simpler's your Apothecary, who told me Mr. Smyrna
was taken dangerously ill; whereupon I thought it my Duty to visit him: But,
blessed be God, he is in a fine breathing Sweat: When he has taken what I shall
prescribe, I hope he may be better.


Oliv. Indeed, Dr. Pulse, he has had a very bad Night.


Pulse. By his Habit, I should guess this Gentleman to be of the Faculty. Pray,
Sir, if it may be without Offense, what are you called? I do not believe you to
be of the College; I never saw your Face before, to my knowledge.


Wild. My Business, Sir, is with my Patients, and not to answer impertinent
Questions.


Pulse. Cry you mercy, good Mr. Mountebank; a Stage, I suppose, is your
Occupation. Madam, since you have employed this Quack, even make use of him for
good and all. A lawful Consultation I should not have refused; and so much good
may do you with your Merry Andrew.


Exit Pulse. Oliv. I Am glad he is gone. Mr. Wildman, you know your Doom; we must
part upon it.


Wild. Prithee, dear Olivia, have more good Nature: Do I deserve no Reward for
all my unwearied Hours of Love? No soft Compassion due for all I have suffered?
This is mortifying one beyond any thing.


Oliv. They say Revenge is natural. For your Comfort then, you have yours upon
me, since I cannot punish you, but I must share in it my self.


Wild. Were that true, Olivia, you could not use me thus. That Kindness you
once flattered me with, though it were but a Name, has now lost that. You tell
me, I am to be sacrificed to your Virtue -- but I Am afraid it is to some more
happy Lover.


Oliv. Why, I have never enjoyed you. If Love were my Business, might I not
find it with you? I never heard before, that any thing besides Possession
brought Satiety.


Will. Did you never stay so long for your Dinner, that your A petite was lost
when you came to it? methinks I see you reasoning with it, then surveying me --
And crying 'twon't do, it this the Treat I longed for?


Oliv. Your comparison might hold indeed, if you could prove I had stayed my
Stomach before I came to Dinner: But my Husband 's no such inviting Dish, and I
can assure you, too provident, to allow me much variety.


Enter Smyrna sick in his Nightgown, led by Pulse. Pulse. He Is a mere Quack,
and so you will say when you see him; if you make use of him, he will certainly be
the Death of you.


Smyr. Ay Doctor Pulse, not unlikely.


Oliv. Oh Heavens defend me, here is my Husband! Lord, Mr. Smyrna you have
affrighted me out of my Wits, my very Heart beats in my Body. Doctor Pulse
said, you were all in a Sweat, and I Am afraid you will catch your Death, by rising
in the Cold.


Smyr. 'Twill be very well Mistress, if I find your Heart agree with your
Tongue. But what Quack have you brought me here -- Nay, face about Doctor, I
don't doubt your Experience, nor Murdering by the Rules of Art -- Mercy on us
-- Ay marry Sir, this is like a Wife indeed -- What, Mr. Wildman turned
Physician! Friend Pulse, you need never have troubled your head about this
business, my Wife meant to keep this able Doctor to her self; this Gentleman's
design lay in supplanting me, not you.


Will. Impudence must carry me through, aside. Doctor, your Patient is certainly
Distracted, a mere Frenzy has seized him -- Feel but his Pulse, ay he is fitter
for his Bed than any place else; I cannot commend your Judgment in suffering him
to rise in this desperate Condition, let us force him back to his Chamber.


Smyr. If I am mad, it is horn mad; you would carry me to my Chamber, that you might
Iye with my Wife in hers -- Pray Doctor Wildman be pleased to march, I shall be
able to wait upon you down, and secure the Doors after you. Be pleased to lead
the way without further Ceremony -- I must own it is uncivil, but I make bold by
your own example, for I fear, you have bin more so than welcome, with a certain
Acquaintance of yours.


Oliv. It Is as I say, Doctor, retrieve your blunder, or I am lost.


Pulse. Never fear it, Madam.

apart to Pulse.
Wild. Brother Doctor, will not you assist me? The Gentleman's unruly, see how he
struggles. O Sir, if you did but understand your own good you would to go Bed, else
you're a lost Man.


Smyr. Pulse, Pulse, Friend Pulse, I say, will you let me be murdered by this
Rogue, this Villain Wildman -- I Am almost strangled, help, help there, I say, I
will not be carried from my Wife -- Wife -- Wife -- Where are you? Pray Sir be
satisfied, and think me Cuckold enough for the first time.


Oliv. O dear Husband, be persuaded and go to Bed, you look strangely wild.


Phoe. Ay Master, if you did but see your self, what an altered Man your are;
bless me one would not know you again.


Smyr. Thanks to honest Whoring, Mr. Wildman -- I always thought Horns would
bring a strange Alteration.


Pulse. Good Lord, what a Frenzy is this, to mistake a Physician for a Lover --
To bed with him, by all means, and let him have some Cooling Tysans, and
refreshing Juleps to allay the heat of the Distemper, perhaps a little sleep
may restore him -- Your Hand, Master Doctor.


Smyr. Nay, if you are in the same Song too, I must be mad indeed -- When a man
is to be made a Cuckold, nothing can prevent it -- But pray, let Master Doctor
with the Whoring Countenance be dismissed.


Phoe. He has never bin well since that Rogue of a Fortune Tellers bewitched him.


Pulse. Nay, if that be his case, it may be beyond our Art, Brother; best send
for some godly Divine to Pray over him.


Oliv. That shall be my Care -- God restore him, Doctor Pulse. Phoebe, lend
your Hand, he will struggle: But we must prevail, it is for his good.


Smyr. What Is the Devil in you all? I am no more mad than any of you; only a
Cuckold, and a little troubled at that Calamity; no further Frantic I profess.


Pulse. That Is enough, of all Conscience. In, in with him.


Smyr. Murder, help, Murder, Murder.

They carry him off struggling.
Re-enter Wildman. Wild. I have enough of the sport, and had much rather see
Olivia return.


Enter Phoebe. Phoe. My Lady Sir, desires you would please to be gone; she is
resolved to stay by my Master for the better quieting of him -- But don't let
this dishearten you, your affairs shall go better than they have done, or I Will
lose my Place, and my Reputation too.


Wild. No, I Am at length convinced, Olivias Virtue should be rather Cherished
than Seduced, though I see whose ever Title we have to it, we can be no more sure
of Love, than Money; it is not ours till we have it in Possession.


Exeunt omnes. SCENE II.
Lady Young Loves House. SONG and MUSIC.
TO Love and all its Sweets adieu,
To glittering Hopes, and glowing Fires;
To Eyes that Swore she would be true,
And yield Philander his Desires.
Those Dear, those faithless persur'd Eyes,
Those Fatal, sweet deluding things,
The Shepherd now forgiving Dies,
And dying, mournfully he Sings.
Kinder Death, than Cruel she,
Haste, oh haste to set me free.
Enter Sir Amorous, who throws down his Hat, unbuttons his Coat, crosses his
Arms, hangs down his Head, and walks despairingly; then enter Lady Young Love
and Marina. L. Y. L. They have given us but a Melancholy Song Daughter upon our
Wedding day. None here but Sir Amorous! Lord Sir, what can be the reason of
this disorder? Jesu forbid, that so handsome a young Gentleman, should have as
much despair in his Heart as Person -- Marina, go and bid Isabel be sure to
mind what I told her.


Mar. Yes Madam.

Well done Mother, get as large a share of the Sex as you can, I Will not stay to
dispute your Title.


Exit. Marina. L. Y. L. What don't you know me Sir. Amorous -- Bless me, what
not answer me?


Sir Am. Too well Madam -- I know you as the cause of all my ills, the glorious
cause of my undoing.


L. Y. L. Lord, my mind misgave me when I heard that mournful Song.


Sir Am. I must confess 'twas dull, unfit for Brides, and could but dead your
thoughts.


L. Y. L. But Sir Amorous, what is the real occasion of this Sadness?


Sir Am. Let me dye, Madam, if your Ladyship does not ridicule my sufferings.
Have you forgot what I told you last Night; that and a thousand times more lies
heavy on my Heart to day; and unless you resolve to see me dead, you must not
marry Mr. Wilmore --

He a Wretch insensible of all your Charms,
And who seeks his Happiness in another Arms.

L. Y. L. He Lord, he is the Modestest Gentleman; so Civil he never pressed for
the least Favor, no not for a Kiss; and that you will says but a small one; but
when he could not decently avoid it.


Sir. Am. A Wretch, is it possible Madam, that the Transports of a Man, when
alone, with so fine a Woman -- Oh Madam! Were it but permitted me -- But why do
I vainly meditate on any thing but Death!


L. Y. L. Death, Heaven forbid: Indeed I am very sorry, I was not acquainted
with you, before things came to this extremity -- But as to Mr. Wilmore, he is
so bashful, and so modest, Lord, you would not believe any thing else in him.


Sir Am. All that a Rival can say, will be suspected: But say I cleared it to
you, what then shall be my reward?


L. Y. L. Indeed I should be furiously angry to find him so cold only to me.


Sir Am. If your Ladyship will let me wait upon you to the Garden, I Will clear
the matter to you.


Exeunt Omnes. SCENE Changes to the Garden.
Wilmore, Belira, meets him. Will. DO you remember, our last Discourse Belira?


Bell. Can I ever forget any thing where you are concerned.


Will. Then I must tell you, I Am resolved to Marry where I best can like, not
for convenience alone, it is sinful, and you, and I, and all must live to dye.


Bell. So godly, one would think your Time were come: You have forgot sure,
Marina is to marry your Father.

Sir Amorous and Lady Young Love appear absconding.
Will. She never will Belira, therefore if you have Loved, show it in this only
proof, I ever ask't, and let me marry her.


Bell. How dare you think the question, much less to ask it? I only live for
you, in hopes of you; and when those hopes are gone, I Have done with life, the
heavy load will not be worth the bearing, the very thought has loosn'd it, and
I want power to answer.


Will. No Tears Belira, we will be always Friends, your Honor shall be safe,
and you my chiefest care.


Bell. What can pay Love, but Love? Marinas Arms will make you cold to mine; nor
can I stoop, to share your hurt. O yet consider! e're it be too late, think on
the Wreck, the ruin of your Fortune, the flowing Tides of Poverty, that ruins
all it covers; and lastly, think on an unhappy Wretch, whose only fault is
desperate Love of you.


Will. I Have thought on all, and nicely weighed the Sense; the consequence is
this, I Love Marina, and rather than not marry her, would be undone; therefore
if you can save me 'twill be Noble, and like the Love you promised.


Bell. What Generosity can thou hope to find, where only injuries are given?
what suffering, tame, deluded Monster do thou think me? My Wrongs have waked
that Rage, which Wonder had be-calm'd, and I am now prepared to dash thy hopes,
and prove thee Traitor to thy Vows and me.


Will. Be wise Belira! We live not now in those Romantic constant days, where
their first Mistress was their last. I liked you once, and still esteem you,
but Vows that are made in Love, are writ in sand: It Is impossible to recall a
Lovers Heart, when once it is made a Present to another; should it return,
'twou'd sooner Love a third.


Bell. Thou needst not seek for Arguments to kill my Hopes; thus I blow them
from me: Farewell for ever, both to thy Love and them; thou have Loved me
little, but thou know me less: Vengeance is due to thy mistake; I only live
to wish, and hope to see it take your Minion: Love her as long as you are used
to Love a Woman, and then let want of Wealth and Liberty pursue you: Be poorly
Wretched, and Wretched Poor; and may you hate the cause as bad as I do Curse
for her sake, the very name of Woman; yet think on me and sigh for such a
Friend -- But may no Friend be found, till scorned at home thou seek abroad,
some Wretched Death unknown.

Going to Lady Young Love, Sir Amorous meets her.
L. Y. L. What have I heard and seen Belira? Is it possible it should be you?


Bell. Villain, have thou betrayed me -- Madam, I warn you from that Traitor
Wilmore,


Exit Belira. L. Y. L. Mr. Wilmore, I am sorry I was so long your pretense, Sir
Amorous. This discovery has done me mighty Service, and I am sorry I cannot
express my Gratitude to you.


Will. I have too justly offended your Ladyship, ever to hope Forgiveness: I
only beg your Anger may not fall upon Marina, she is an Innocent cause.


L. Y. L. The Age is quite Debauched, Jesu! who shall we trust after this?
Belira naught, and with modest Mr. Wilmore, I am in such amaze, I cannot recover
my self.


Enter Wildman and Marina. Wild. What Is the matter? I met Belira in a mighty
rage, she ran to this Ladies Chamber with a drawn Sword? 'twas lucky I was in
the way, else she had murdered her.


Mar. I shall not recover the fright this month! Mr. Wildman has saved my life.


Will. He shall always command mine for it, but what is become of her?


Mar. When she saw her self Defeated, she sent for a Chair, and went away in
it; I have not yet troubled my self to know where.


L. Y. L. No it is no matter, since my House is rid of her. I shall take care
who I entertain a good opinion of again.


Wild. Prithee Wilmore, no Chagrin. This was my Plot, I durst not trust thee
with it; and therefore advised thee to meet her in the Garden, I knew thy soft
Nature, would not suffer thee, to Expose an ill Woman, though to make thy self
happy in a good.


Will. If you had, 'twou'd never have come to this; my Pity is due to an unhappy
Woman, who had never bin such, if She had not known me.


Wild. You Will make Marina Jealous,


Will. I hope not, she would not have me Barbarous:


Enter Sir Rustic Good-heart. Sir Rus. Where are ye all? Before George the
Canonical hour will be past; yonder is the other Young Gentlewoman gone away
Distracted.


Wild. Sir Rustic, here is a new Scene of Affairs; Marina Swears, She has more
mind to be your Daughter, than your Wife; and that it is better to Drink Caudle
by a young Fellow, than be obliged to make it for an Old.


Sir Rus. Be-gad, I don't believe a word of this: You are not of his mind
Sweetheart, Mr. Priestcraft is ready to spoil your sport Sir, and begin ours.


L. Y. L. Indeed Sir Amorous, you have convinced me of the reality of your
Passion, and were it not for the talk of the Town, you should find me, not so
insensible as you imagine.


Sir Am. Let me be nothing Madam, if this unexpected Marriage will not put them
all out of Countenance, and baulk their Spleen; they are prepared by Mr.
Wilmore's concern for your Daughter, to laugh at your Ladyship. No Wedding --
Let me expire, if it would not be a good way, to prevent his refusal by yours,
and before he asks you to make him happy with Marina, to make me so in your
self.


L. Y. L. 'Twere a good Jest indeed, I think we must not spoil the Conceit --
But then, Sir Amorous, will you be constant?


Sir Am. As your own Charms, which can never admit of a Decay.


L. Y. L. Indeed, Sir Amorous, I have Compassion upon your Sufferings, and a
just Resentment of Mr. Wilmore's Ingratitude: Therefore, Sir Amorous -- but
Lord! what was I going to say? -- Jesu! -- will not you think me quickly won?
-- But indeed, my Charity to you is the chief Inducement; therefore to morrow,
Sir Amorous, if you please --


Sir Am. To morrow will not prevent Mr. Wilmore: Give me leave to declare my
Happiness, and to hope you will immediately confirm it within.


L. Y. L. Lard, Sir Amorous, you overcome me every way; I leave it to your
Discretion.


Sir Rus. Before George, not I. Good Mr. Son, no coguing nor dissembling with
me: I love the Lady my self, and have her I will, or some shall smart for it.
My Lady Young Love, here is Felony, Conspiracy, and Treason against you; they
would cheat me of my Wife, and you of your Husband.


L. Y. L. That they will hardly be able to do; I have made my Choice, Sir
Amorous can tell you.


Sir Rus. Hey day! Here Is fine juggling indeed! Before George, I don't
understand these London Contrivances. Shall I have your Daughter?


L. Y. L. Sir Amorous, you rule me. Marina, I have too long, won by Bellaria's
Pretenses, denied you the Affection of a Mother; but I Will make amends for all,
and leave you the Liberty of your Choice.


Sir Rus. Nay then, before George, it is still well enough -- Give me thy Hand,
sweet Mistress, it is a Match, Bedad.


Mar. I am afraid, Sir, you will find me good for little, but to bring the
Addition of Jealousy to the rest of your Distempers.


Sir Rus. That is in plain English, Madam, that you would make me a Cuckold --
Would you so? -- Nay, like enough Bedad -- Your Eyes have a plaguey Lear that
way -- Hey! [calls within there] Bid Ralph saddle the Horses, and bring my
Boots; I Will not stay to see the end on it.


Exit Sir Rus. Wild. No matter, let him go; as I take it, he has Signed.
Wilmore, thou have nothing to do now, but to make thy Claim.


Will. I have so true a Sense of my Villainy to this Lady, that I dare not
address for Pardon, much more the unvaluable Blessing of her Daughter.


L. Y. L. Sir Amorous has prevailed for you, Sir. I forgive you, and have left
Marina the Liberty of her Choice. But might I persuade her, it should not be
Belira's Lover, he has too many Faults.


Mar. I Will take them all upon my self; and if your Ladyship would consent, I
should not think my self unhappy with Mr. Wilmore.


Wild. 'Twill be generous, like your self, Madam; and show the Town, the little
Concern you have for Mr. Wilmore.


Sir Am. Let me expire, Madam, if I can cease my Entreaties.


L. Y. L. You command me, Sir Amorous. Take her, Mr. Wilmore; and if possible,
make amends for your Faults to me.


Will. This Goodness confounds me more -- My whole Life shall be one constant
Study to deserve your Generosity, and Marina's Kindness.


Wild. Why so? matters are brought to Perfection. I find I am a Master in the
Art. But, Begad, Pimping here, I have ruined my own Affairs with Orinda. Will
she not be at the Wedding?


Mar. She keeps her Bed very ill, and has sent an Excuse; but I believe,
Belira's Absence will be the best Spell to draw her thence.


Wild. That shall be my business, after the Chaplain has done his: I Will visit,
and persuade her to come and wish you Joy.


Will. I am impatient till you have the occasion. Sir Amorous, lead the way with
your Bride.


Wild. I think Fortune has not one other Trick to disappoint you with; but it is
best to take her when she is obliging, for such all People that are going to be
married think her.


But Time will show the Cheat, and you shall find
The Goddess is as fickle as she is kind.
FINIS.
HAles's Contemplations in three Parts, the third Part never before Printed; to
which is added his Life, by Gilbert Lord Bishop of Sarum.

The whole Works of that Excellent Practical Physician, Dr. Thomas Sydenham;
wherein, not only the History and Cure of Acute Diseases are Treated of, after
a new and Accurate Method, but also the shortest and safest way of Curing most
Chronical Diseases. Translated from the Original Latin; by John Pechey, at the
College of Physicians.

Mrs. Behns Novels, are this day Published.

All three are Sold by R. Wellington at the Lute in St. Paul's Churchyard.

THE Artificial Clock-maker. A Treatise of Watch, and Clock-work: Wherein the
Art of Calculating Numbers for most sorts of Movements, is explained to the
capacity of the Unlearned. Also the History of Clock-work, both Ancient and
Modern. With other useful matters never before Published. By W. D. M. A.
Printed for James Knapton at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1696.


